T100 7944665 40648
TACHMAS PRINCE of PERSIA: AN Historical NOVEL, Which happen'd under the SOPHY SELIMAN, Who Reigns at this day. Render'd into English by P. Porter, Esq LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey. 1676.
TO THE Right Honourable, THOMAS Earl of Ossory, AND Lord Baron of MOOR-PARK, One of the Lords of His Majestie's most Honourable Privy Council; AND Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, &c. My Lord, PRINCE Tachmas, (as will easily appear by viewing his Story) was a Person so full of all sort of
Virtues, and especially of that of Fortitude and Courage, That finding his Life to be so near a Draught of Your Lordships Perfections (as it is possible for any man to have approach'd to, but Your self) excepting in his Misfortunes; I thought I should have injured him as much as his Enemies had done, should I have dedica∣ted his History to any other but Your self. And yet, My Lord, I must freely confess, 'Tis not altogether for this
Prince's sake I make You this Present, but likewise for my own. For being one of that numerous Body of men, that by their own Experience have been taught to know Your Lordships worth, and consequently to venerate it; I was willing to seize upon this occasion, to inform the World that I am wary e∣nough to make choice of an Excellent Patron; and to assure Your Lordship, That You have not confer'd Your Favours upon any man that
can have more grateful Sen∣timents' of them, than I have; or would with a more ready Zeal, be glad to imbrace all opportunities cordially to approve himself, My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted, obliged, and humble Servant, P. Porter.
THE PREFACE. THis History was related one day by a young Persian in company; and it was thought by several worthy the publishing in the French Tongue, so that it was resolved to make an Essay how it would take: and as Truth is ne∣ver more lovely then when she ap∣pears all naked; We have indu∣striously avoided all those foreign Ornaments with which she is used to be clouded in these kind of mat∣ters; not but that we might add several likely circumstances which could not be contradicted: the ob∣scurity with which all things are
transacted in the Palaces of the Sophies of Persia, might afford a Field large enough to Lye with im∣punity. But we chose rather to of∣fer nothing more than the true and faithful Relation as we received it. We have likewise wilfully affected a grave Stile, and altogether dif∣ferent from that they call the Ro∣mantick. And we thought it enough to make a decent Connection of all the transactions together, and from time to time to make some Reflections upon them.
TACHMAS Prince of PERSIA: AN Historical Novel. THere is nothing so dangerous for a Sub∣ject, as to set too high a value upon his own Merit from his Soveraign; and to acquire to himself so much re∣putation of Virtue and Bravery,
as may give his Prince any um∣brage of danger: This is a Crime that Policy never pardons; e∣specially when Love, that believes it may do any thing, joyns its jealousie to that of a Throne, in the apprehension of a Monarch that wants no power to crush his unfortunate Rival. The Sophy Chabas, who was poysoned by some whose Trea∣son was never yet found out, left two Sons, whereof the eldest cal∣led Seliman, immediately suc∣ceeded his Father, and fills at this day the Throne of Persia. It is not to be doubted but that Heaven, which destined him for the greatest Monarch of Asia, did adorn him with vir∣tuous
qualities suitable to the Grandeur of so great a King; but it should have made his bro∣ther Tachmas less aimable, and brought him into the World with fewer perfections; since in a Subject, all qualities that may seem worthy of the Diadem, are as so many Allarms in the heart of a Soveraign, and create as many secret Enemies against him that possesses them. It is hard to guess whether Tachmas was more obliged to Nature for the Per∣fections of his Body, or the Ex∣cellencies of his Mind, since both these parts of him, so far different the one from the other, equally gained him the admi∣ration of all mankind.
The Stature of his Body wa Noble and disingaged, his Port Majestical, his Gesture grave without affectation, the Linea∣ments of his Face bold, his Eyes quick, with a mixture of Fierce∣ness and Sweetness: he had a freedom and assurance in his Speech; and all his actions were very natural; his Understand∣ing was deep and piercing: He was quick-sighted even in the most intricate matters: He was read in the Sciences; a great States-man; his conception of all things was quick and discreet; his discerning-faculty was Judi∣cious; his prudence perspicati∣ous: he had a Soul worthy of his blood: his humour was War∣like,
abhorring idleness: his Courage lofty; he subjugated all his thoughts to the interest of his Glory; but would not be dazled with the splendour of Greatness: he was as temperate in the use of Pleasures, as he was constant in suffering Ad∣versity; he was merciful to the oppressed, and kind to all peo∣ple; and, what prov'd his ruine, he was susceptible of Love. The King his Brother had always a jealous Eye over him; but he wanted a pretext to colour his hatred. Persia was then in a pro∣found peace; and this sweet tranquility gave the Court op∣portunities to taste the pleasures
of Innocent Love. Amongst all the Beauties that adorned that Court, Negara was the chief: This Princess, as well as Tachmas, revived in Ispaham the Accomplishments and Gallantry of the Ancient Persians. She was of the Illustrious blood of the Sophies; but that was the meanest of her quali∣ties: Nature had adorned her with a thousand other Perfecti∣ons far more commendable than her Birth. Besides the Beauty which she possessed in a sublime degree, there was something in her Countenance, in her Speech, and in all her Actions, so Charm∣ing, that it was impossible not
to be surprized with it. Her Wit gave a particular grace to all she said: She was in the good esteem of every body; and what commended her Conver∣sation more, and made it to be earnestly desired, was the Gai∣ty of her Humour, alwayes pleasant, and free from all that was morose or reserved. She had a great Soul, an absolute Empire over all her Desires, excepting those that caused her misfortune. She believed a long time, That Ambition was the most predominant of her Passi∣ons; but she was undeceived by a cruel Experience, and found there was something else that always had possessed the
first place in her heart. We are so unequal in our Affections, and so unlike our selves, that one only object is able to make several diffe∣rent impressions upon us, ac∣cording to the diversity of the times, and dispositions of our Soul. Negara appeared for a long time at Court, before Tachmas had any other inclination, than an indifferent esteem for her: though she was every day in his sight, and entettained by him, all her Charms could draw no tri∣bute from Tachma's heart, but a Civil complaisance, and that respect which he owed to her Sex and Merit. But the fatal
moment was come, wherein Love resolved to subjugate this Prince to his Empire, to aban∣don him afterwards to the perse∣cutions of Fortune, which made him her Victim. It was upon a day, as he entertained the Prin∣cess alone in the Appartments of Begona the Sophie's Mother, where she was bred, and where she passed the most part of her time, Tachmas fancied a more than ordinary briskness and fire in the Eyes of Negara; her Words more graceful, and her Wit more acute; he felt secret motions, which until then had been unknown to him; and his heart shew∣ed its disquiet, by the often
changing of his Countenance; his Looks grew passionate; his Discourses wild, and interrupt∣ed with sighs; and it is not to be wondered, if his Conversati∣on was not so divertising at that time, since he was now no more his own. He leaves Negara's company much in disorder; this sudden change surprised him so much the more, because he always had enjoyed a great tran∣quility of mind; but when he considered the object of his Passion, with the eyes of a Lover; when he represented to himself that confused and flat∣tering Idea of Beauties, Ver∣tues, and Perfections; he found this his bondage more pleasing
to him, than his former indiffe∣rence. He resolves to declare himself to the Princess upon the first opportunity he should meet with: which happened the next day. Finding her in a Room accompanied with one of Begona's slaves, (who out of re∣spect withdrew) he endeavou∣red several times to discover his passion to her; but was hinde∣red still by a kind of secret ti∣morous diffidence which stop∣ped the passage of his speech; all he could do, was to let his Eyes speak some part of the Sen∣timents of his heart. When he was returned to his own Ap∣partment, he condemned his fears; and foreseeing no reason
that might hinder the Princess from giving him a favourable hearing, he took a strong reso∣lution not to let slip the next occasion of discovering his pas∣sion to her; he went therefore the next day to visit her, and finding her alone, he spoke to her after this manner: I come, Madam, to confess a fault to you, for which I hope you will easily grant me your pardon; which is, That I have lived so long without being in love with you; but what I have suffered since we last entertained one another, is so strong, and so far beyond what all other Lo∣vers endure, that the excess of my Love ought to repair the
time of my indifference. I of∣fer you neither Crowns nor Scepters; I have no other Em∣pire to give you but that of my Heart: If a Passion that shall ever inviolably burn for you, and which shall never fix upon any other object, what∣ever Liberty, my Blood, or our Laws may give me: If a Com∣plaisance which I shall ever ob∣serve to you: If an unblemish∣ed Faith may win you, I am ready solemnly to swear it to you at the foot of our Al∣tars. Though Tachmas had not u∣sed much action in the delivery of these words, yet the Eloquent language of his Eyes and his
sighs, were persuasive enough to evince them. It is so sweet a triumph for a Woman to see the grandeur of a Prince humbl'd at her feet; and to disarm with the Charms of her Beauty, a Cou∣rage that no dangers or perils of War could shake; that there is no Vertue so austere, that would not relent when the Que∣stion is to preserve such a Cap∣tive. Though Negara were descen∣ded from the Blood of the So∣phies, yet she was much infe∣riour in Quality to Tachmas. She was pleasingly surprised with the Prince's Discourse, not to be∣tray her Joy: she thought it not enough to receive the Prince's
offers in the most obliging man∣ner imaginable; but she as∣sures him, That she ever had a secret tenderness for him, which she should have endeavoured long since to make him sensible of, if the rules of Modesty and Decency had not hinder'd her: and that she would most wil∣lingly shut her Eyes to all the Crowns upon Earth, to open them to his Virtues alone. Negara in that very instant believed that her Heart disown∣ed her words: and that it was the desire she had to see her self suddenly, if not the Queen, at least the first Subject of Persia, that drew from her this decla∣ration: but she was ignorant
of her own thoughts, since her Tongue was then the faithful interpreter of them: this Dis∣course was followed with kil∣ling-looks, wherein Love ap∣peared with all its Charms. We all have a natural bent to believe what we passionately desire: and this blind propen∣sity is no where more impetu∣ous than in the heart of a Lover: one little favourable word would suffice to convince Tachmas of the sincerity of Ne∣gara's Love: insomuch that he abandon'd himself to all the excesses of Joy which the ima∣gination and assurance of an approaching felicity can raise in the soul of a passionate Lover.
To hasten the accomplishment whereof, he told the Princess, as he took his leave of her, That he would go immediately to Allagolikan to charge him to acquaint the King his Bro∣ther with this Affair. It was with this precipitancy this un∣fortunate Prince run to his utter ruine, when he hoped to raise himself to his greatest happi∣ness. Allagolikan was a man that wholly swayed the Heart of Seliman: though the Power of the Persian Ministers be ex∣treamly limited; and that, to weaken their Authority, those Kings distribute the manage∣ment of their Affairs into ma∣ny
hands: Yet this Favourite had suprised the affections of the young Sophy with so much address, he had insinuated him∣self into his very soul with a Zeal so passionate, such flat∣tering submissions, that he was the only Ruler and Director of all his Councels: He was like∣wise indued with all the accom∣plishments of a perfect Cour∣tier: He was full of dissimula∣tion: and his intentions and his words were seldom or ne∣ver of one accord. He had a servile Complacency with all the desires of his Prince: He patiently bore with all his con∣tempts and indignities; but was above measure insolent
to all other people. He was a man of no Faith, seldom kept his word with any man. He willingly sacrificed Inno∣cence to Treachery, and belie∣ved Virtue the greatest of Crimes, when it stood betwixt him and his Designs. His aim was to remove from Court all those whose Virtue or Under∣standing might render necessa∣ry or acceptable there; for he held it for an infallible Maxim, That two Favourites, no more than two Kings, can never sub∣sist in one Sphere. Although Tacbmas's birth seemed to place him above the reach of his Jealousie; Alla∣golikan was infinitely pleased
to find that the Sophy had ve∣ry sinister intentions towards his Brother. He made use of all his Craft to maintain him in his wicked inclinations. But there was yet a particular rea∣son that made Allagolikan a sworn Enemy to the Prince. This imperious Minister had one day spoken insolently to Tachmas, whereof he com∣plained to his Father Sophy Chabas, who confined Allago∣likan to a streight Prison, where he continued until Se∣liman came to the Empire. Tachmas, who being naturally Good and Generous, went of∣ten to see him in Prison, to testifie how much he was sorry
that he had acquainted his Father with the difference that hap∣pened betwixt them, who could never be brought to hear any thing in favour of Allagolikan during his life. After the death of Sophy Chabas, Tachmas thought it not enough to express his Joy for Allagolikans liberty, but honoured him also with many other testimonies of his Love and Friendship. Allagolikan answered the Prince's Caresses with the fairest appearances of gratitude that might be: but following the inclination of the generality of the Persians, He was impla∣cable in his Enmity; he al∣ways kept in his heart an immor∣tal
hatred against him; in which Tachmas is to be bla∣med for his want of prudent conduct upon this occasion, and for having forgotten this Maxime, That Reconciled E∣nemies ought alwayes to be sus∣pected. This wicked Minister, ha∣ving had Order to acquaint his Majesty with Tachmas's Re∣quest to be permitted to Marry Negara, undertook it for no other end but to destroy this unfortunate Prince; and to car∣ry on his purpose, he made use of a most subtil Machi∣nation: He took his time when the Sophy was in a plea∣sant Humour, in order to his
Design: He Approaches him with his accustomed Submissi∣ons, and usual Cringings, and dexterously brings on the Dis∣course of Love; and tells the King, That he admired that among so many Beauties for whom his Majesty had shewed an inclination, he had never ta∣ken notice that he had any for Negara. He represents to him, That besides the spendour of her Birth, she was enriched with so many rare Qualities, that she deserved something more than a cold indifference: That there never did shine so many Virtues, nor so much Wit, in so beautiful a Body; that it should seem that For∣tune,
which refused to place a Crown upon her Head, had reserved the Empire of all Hearts as a due Sacrifice to her Eyes alone: That there was none so hard and stony, that could resist her natural Sweetness and Goodness: and, That there was none more wor∣thy his Love and Tenderness, than her. Allagolikan commended Ne∣gara with so much Zeal and Earnestness, that Seliman felt a strong Curiosity to take a more attentive view of her, and to have some particular Discourse with her: He promised his Favourite to follow his Ad∣vice, and to try how sensible
her heart should prove when he spoke to her next. Sometime, afterwards Begona the Kings Mother, who of late had been again received into favour; after some disgusts that had passed betwixt them, came into his Chamber to see him, followed by Negara, as the first person of the Court, and who always went with her e∣very where: when Begona was ready to take her leave of the King; he made a sign to Ne∣gara, to let her know, that he desired to speak with her in secret; He had her unto his Closet, where the better to disguise his Design: He en∣tertains her upon a Subject that
was very different from what had obliged him to stay her; He asked her, as she was pri∣vy to all Begona's thoughts, Whether she did believe, that all Begona's Resentments against him, were quite vanished out of her mind? and whether he might confide in the outward appearances, of her Love and Caresses? Whether it was that Seliman was prepossess'd by his Favou∣rites Discourses; or that it was a pure effect of Negara's Charms, which he had but su∣perficially consider'd before that time; besides the agreeable surprises the Princess's Beau∣ty caused in him; all her an∣swers
seemed to him so just, and so expressive, and so full of Wit, that she left him Char∣med, and even angry with himself that he had not lo∣ved her sooner; He left her however without saying any thing to her; and because he would not derogate from the pride of his Diadem, he chose to send her the tender of his Heart by another hand. An Eunuch had order to wait upon her, and to ac∣quaint her with the Love the King had conceived for her: He told her, the Kings passion was attended with so much respect, and esteem for her, that he would not only place
her the highest in his favours, but that he would bestow upon her the title of Queen; in assu∣rance of which he would plight her his Faith before the Altars of his gods. The differences of Rank and Blood is wonderful: and there is little less distance betwixt a King and his first Subject, than betwixt something and nothing. Negara before this o∣verture, would have thought her self highly Honoured to be in the Arms of Tachmas; and as she durst not carry her Ambition higher, she looked up∣on that Prince as upon an Object whose enjoyment was great e∣nough to fill all the Desires
of her Soul. But assoon as she had been informed of the Sophies favourable intentions towards her, the glorious Hopes of seeing her self placed up∣on the Persian Throne, so fill'd this young Heart with vanity, that she forgot, or at least believ'd she had, all thoughts of Tachmas: that pompous and dazling Image of all-ruling Power, made her pre∣sently swallow up the Scep∣ter; and all that granduer which she admired in her first Lover, appeared to her then but like a shadow, or some faint glimmerings, which bor∣rowed their light from the Diadem. She had so little
power over her self, that she could not conceal her Trans∣ports from the Eunuch; she tells him with an affected Mo∣desty, more becoming a Slave than a Princess, That if what he had told her was true, that she had gained favour with the Sophy, she would re∣ceive all his Orders with all the Submissions, and Joy she could express. In the mean time, Tachmas desires to know of Allagoli∣kan, whether he had acquit∣ted himself of the Commissi∣on he gave him? He replies, That he had not yet found a fit opportunity of doing it; but that he would watch the
first occasion to perform it. This Traytor that sought to involve this poor Prince into an inextricable destruction, be∣ing afraid that he might stifle his passion as soon as he should hear of his Brothers preten∣tions, begun to him a long Discourse of Negara's Excel∣lencies: Applauds Tachmas's Choice, and tells him, That if he were a Prince born, he should consecrate all the mo∣ments of his life to so fair an Object: Nothing so feel∣ingly touches a Lover as to hear what he loves praised by the mouth of a Stranger; nor nothing more convincingly per∣swades him that his Love is
grounded upon Reason. All Allagolikans words were as ma∣ny Arrows that made fresh wounds in the heart of poor Tachmas, and wounded so much the deeper, because this Dis∣course proceeded from a man in appearance altogether dis∣interessed. The Prince having recom∣mended to this pernicious Con∣fident to speak to the King as soon as he might, goes to visit Negara. He tells her, That he came from Allagolikan, who had yet no opporunity to speak to the Sophy; but if that within two days he had no Answer, he would pass by all Formalities, and go him∣self
to speak to his Brother; and that his impatience was so much the greater, because he was sure the Vows of this Princess agreed with his own. We strive in vain to resist our selves, and endeavour to oppose the bent of Nature, which is so powerfully attra∣ctive in us: when the Heavens have given our affection a pro∣clivity to any one Passion, all the rest are not powerful e∣nough to draw us from it: All the faculties of Negara's Soul were in distraction at Tachmas's sight and Discourse: Her Ambition to no purpose shews her the Charms of a Throne; and tells her, This
tenderness which began to make a revolt in her heart, was but a shameful weakness, which she ought to stifle and sacri∣fice to her Glory: The Empire has no more that lustre, when she considers she cannot at∣tain to it but at the price of her Faith; the despair into which she saw her inconstancy must throw this poor Lover, touched her with pity, and repentance, to have so rashly precipitated her Resolution in declaring so inconsiderately in favour of the Sophy. Love at that instant dispelling with his flambeau the beams of Supream Majesty, left her nothing now to see but the Thorns that en∣compass
the Crown; and for a solid Good, she sees nothing but a Phantasm, and a vain il∣lusion. All those tumultuary insults of Pride, Ambition, and Vanity, vanish out of the heart, with the same promptness they had been raised. The Imagi∣nation of all the Excellencies that were in Tachmas, offers it self with more endearing luster than ever; and as the Virtues appear unto us quite diffe∣rent in those we love, than in those who are indifferent to us; Those which were common to them both, seemed in Tach∣mas a glorious Body, of which the Sophy possessed but the sha∣dow. She was a long time
without being able to make any other answer than by her sighs: but as he pressed her with much impatience to in∣form him of the causes of her sadness; She related to him what the Eunuch came to tell her from the King. Tachmas at this news, as if he had been Planet-struck, stood like a Statue; As soon as he recover'd himself, he resolved to run transported as he was, back to this perfidious Minister, to pu∣nish him for his Treachery: But Negara foreseeing the dan∣ger he was going unseasona∣bly to expose himself to, threw her self in his way, and with the Eloquence of her
sighs and tears, allay'd the heat of his fury. The Princess being igno∣rant of Allagobikan's bad incli∣nations towards Tachmas, en∣deavoured to justifie him; al∣ledging, That perhaps this Fa∣vourite might know nothing of the Kings passion, or that he had not concealed it from Tachmas, but out of a just apprehension to hurry him in∣to some rash undertaking, that might be of very funest in∣consequence; That taking the proceedings in the stricctest sense, he could be accused of nothing but too much Zeal to∣wards her, by desiring to see her upon the Throne. She
added, That it was prudence, carefully to conceal their Love from the Sophy: That it was necessary he should go imme∣diately to Allagolikan, to de∣sire him to keep their secret, and to engage him by all manner of Endearments to make him employ all his Credit, and Address to draw the Sophy from his Design: That Seli∣man's Love might happily be but a slight Flame, which might be as quickly smother'd as it was kindled: That she would avoid his sight as much as it was possible for her; and that nothing but force should ever trample over her constancy, and fidelity to him.
There is no Passion predo∣minant in mans Soul, that so often makes Storms and Calms succed one another in us, and agitates our minds with so many contrary motions, as Love. Tachmas, who before this Dis∣course was all Fury and Rage against Allagolikan, is now of a sudden all Love and Kind∣ness towards him: and his Bad Genius utterly blinding his Reason, had now as favour∣able thoughts of his intenti∣ons, as the Princess had. He goes to him, and by an im∣prudence, which nothing but Love could excuse in a Prince so Judicious; He furnishes him with Reasons to excuse his
Treachery. He told him, He very well knew that he had not concealed the Sophies Love from him, but through his excess of Zeal towards him; and that he entreated him for the future, to give him a faiht∣ful account of what should happen, by which only means he should be convinced of his fidelity to him. Allagolikan, after a thousand frivolous protestations, swears by the Heavens, and all that was Sacred and Holy, that he would not fail to give him a true Account, of whatever came to his knowledg with∣out delay. As he was endow∣ed with a piercing Wit, he
quickly found that this un∣happy Lover had let his flame encrease to that degree, that there was no possibility for him ever to be able to quench it. He thought it to purpose to embroil him with Negara, to inspire him with so much the more hatred against his Bro∣ther, because he endeavoured to rob him of his Princess's Heart, as well as of the en∣joyment of her Person. Feign∣ing of a sudden to repent him of his Oaths and Promises, lets Tachmas know, That he had a secret of Importance, which he should be glad not to be ob∣liged to declare; but after shifting for a long time the
Prince's importunity, to raise in him a greater desire of knowing it; at last told him, That Negara's inconstancy ought as much to be apprehended as Seliman's Love; That he had been certainly informed, that she received the news of the King's passion with so much Joy, and shewed so much rea∣diness to comply with his De∣sires, that he did not doubt but the lustre of the Diadem had dazled her Eyes. Tachmas returns presently to the Princess all distracted; tells her the cause of his sighs, and the occasion of his Jea∣lousie. Negara, that naturally loved sincerity, ingenuously
confesses to him, That when the Sophy had sent her a De∣claration of his Love, she had received it favourably in re∣spect of what he was; and she regarded more his Quali∣ty, than his Person; so that when an Eunuch came to flat∣ter her with the Hopes of be∣ing the Sophie's Queen, she still followed the impulse of her Ambition; and she could not defend her self from the attractive Charms of a Throne; but that the presence of Tach∣mas had in a moments time dissipated all that Ambitious pride; and that those Tears she had shed, and those sighs which stole from her when
she saw him enter, ought not to be attributed to any thing else, but the regret she had for shewing the Eunuch her Joy, and her submission to the King's Order. That since he left her, her Ambition stri∣ving to rebel against her Love, she had suffered all the Con∣flicts that those two Impe∣rious and Tyrannical passions can raise in a Soul. That her Heart, after being rent by their Cruel insults, and divided be∣twixt these two Objects, had at last stifled all the Flames of Ambition, with intent for ever after to feed those of Love only. That now she began to acknowledg the truth
of the first words she had spo∣ken to him; which were, That she would shut her Eyes to all the Crowns of the Earth, to open them to his Virtues. That he needed no other tryal of her Love, than that sincere Confession she had made him, which was the greatest proof she could give him of it. And that she did call the Holy Prophet to wit∣ness, That neither the offers of the Throne, nor the per∣secutions of the Sophy, should ever be able to overthrow that Empire which Tachmas had acquired over her Heart. Though these Discourses and others might re-assure the
Prince; Yet he could not wholly suppress his Jealousie; for he judged, That as Negara had eloped from Ambition to Love, she might with the same easiness return from Love to Ambition. At that very instant Seli∣man, whom Allagolikan had ac∣quainted with what passed be∣twixt Tachmas and him, came rushing into the Chamber, and commanded Tachmas to go out; after forbidding him up∣on pain of Death never to see, nor speak more to the Princess, whom he designed for his own Bed. He re∣proached her with the want of affection for him; telling
her, It was an odd way of deserving the Honour he was going to do her, by suffering any other to entertain her be∣sides himself: That all the Beauties of Persia would most earnestly wish, not only for the Rank he intended for her, but even for the least particu∣lar favour of their King: That she deserved to be used like the meanest of his Slaves, were it not for the respect he had for her Blood. He was not satisfied to have for∣bidden her for ever the sight of her Lover, but commands an Eunuch to wait close in her Chamber, to spy all her actions, and to give him a
faithful account of them. He told her, as he was going a∣way from her, That she should prepare her self to receive his Faith the next morning. Whatever has been said of the strength of our mind, it must be allow'd, that all its facul∣ties are very weak, since they are not able to support the violence of our passions: ex∣tremity of Grief, and excess of Joy, make us insensible as Statues: they must abate of their force, to make us sen∣sible of them. The Sophies Discourse left Negara without sense or motion; and she was a long while before she could re∣cover her self, or consider the
state she was reduced to. When she came to her self, and was able to open her Eyes, she could see nothing but an A∣byss of Miseries. As our De∣sires commonly encrease by Ob∣stacles, and are irritated so much the more, by how much the possession of their Object is difficult: so the Princess felt her Love to Tachmas grow so much the greater, by the re∣flexion she made, that she was going eternally to lose him. The Minutes seemed to flye fa∣ster, and the Sun to precipitate his course, to advance that fatal hour, which was to deliver her a Victim to the Sophies will. In vain she look't a∣bout
her for Relief; she could find nothing that could ease her grief. The very liberty of complaining was forbidden her: she durst not so much as let fall a tear, nor breathe out a sigh, lest if the Sophy should know it, he should pour down all his vengeance upon her Lovers Head. In the mean time, Tachmas being instructed by Allagoli∣kan, of Seliman's Resolution, was no less perplexed. What∣ever project this great Soul could set on foot, he saw him∣self shut up in a Palace full of Eunuches and barbarous Slaves, all devoted to the So∣phies Will; all his hopes rest∣ed
in Allagolikan; it was from him alone he expected some solace in his Despair. Knowing then that he was all powerful in the Palace; He entreats him to facilitate his Access once more to the Princess, before that fatal hour, wherein he was for ever to be banished from her sight. Allagolikan opposed him for a great while, representing to him the impossibility, and the hazard of what he desired; That the Discovery would ex∣pose both theirs, as well as Negara's life, to inextricable de∣struction. At last, seeing himself more and more pressed by Tachmas,
he seemed to yield to his Pray∣ers: and told him, If any mischief followed, he should in no ways attribute it to him. He pre∣tended to the Prince, That he was going to give Order to a trusty Slave, to come to give them sudden notice if the So∣phy were coming out; but it was indeed to let the Sophy know, that the Eunuch whom he left in Negara's Chamber, was corrupted. Allagolikan re∣turns, and leads him to speak to another Eunuch that was bro∣ther to him that watched in the Princess's Chamber: The Prince followed him, and the door was opened as soon as the Eunuch made his voice be
heard. Negara was not a little surprised to see the Prince once more; Love, Fear, Joy and Grief confusedly agitate her Soul. These ill-Starr'd Lovers scarce had time to mingle tears, and to inform one ano∣ther of their mutual tender∣ness, by their passionate looks, when of a sudden they heard a great noise of many people coming hastily that way: the Eunuch all in confusion run to a back-door that opened in∣to Begona's Appartments, to let the Prince slip out that way: but was furiously pushed back by the Sophy himself that en∣tred that way, and caused him immediatel to be run
through by another Eunuch that rushed in at the other door, without giving the poor wretch the time to justifie himself. He Commands them likewise to strangle Tachmas; who heard this Cruel sentence without the least concern; and who would have made them sensible of a more undaunted Courage, if a man that is passionately in Love, could resolve to dye without regret. The Princess hearing this bar∣barous Command, threw her self prostrate at Seliman's feet, and with her tears and repeat∣ed Cryes stopped, or at least suspended the execution of this severe Order, which those bar∣barous
Eunuchs were upon the point of executing. Begona at the same instant came running in, and would have joyned her supplications with Negara's: but the Sophy, who had always observed, that she had a more tender affecti∣on for Tachmas, than for him∣self, which had been indeed the cause of their falling out; believed that she was of intel∣ligence with them, and there∣fore would not hear her. He did not then push matters to the extremity: but gave all sufficiently to understand, by the severity of his Counte∣nance, by the flaming of his Eyes, all full of fury, and by
the often shaking of his Head, that the punishment he in∣tended to inflict upon these Lovers, was but defer'd. He caused Tachmas to be clap∣ped into a dark Dungeon: and placed at Negara's door, those of his Eunuchs in whom he most confided, with strict Order to let no Soul enter, upon pain of falling into the same disgrace with their dead Companion; and so goes a∣way: and shutting himself with Allagolikan into a Closet, tells him what happen'd, and asked his opinion of what should be done to Tachmas. Allagolikan shewed a feign∣ed tenderness, that he might
strike his blow home: told Seliman, That the Laws of Nature would never permit him to use the rigour of his Justice in this rencounter. But the Sophy pressed him to deliver his opinion without respect or regard to persons: and told him, That the Throne was a∣bove the tyes of Blood: and that Nature must be silent, where the interest of the So∣veraign was in question. This perjured Traytor here, calling Heaven, and their holy Prophets to witness, That he was going to declare his sense with∣out preoccupation, or preju∣dice to one side or other; represents to Seliman, That it
was of the last importance to him, not to let Tachmas his of∣fence go unpunished. That the least Revolt in a Subject against the will of his Prince, deserved Death: That as the passion which Tachmas had for Negara, could never be extin∣guished, so he would never leave trying all ways possible to satisfie it: That Tachmas was of a daring Spirit, and ca∣pable of undertaking any thing: That he might seek his Bro∣thers Death, as the best ex∣pedient to set the Crown up∣on his own Head, and secure∣ly bring his Mistress into his Embraces: That the executi∣on was not difficult: That
having already seduced one Eunuch, he might do the like to many more: That perhaps Tachmas came to Negara for no other end, but to concert the Design how he might rid himself of his Brother: That the example of the Sophy Cha∣bas, yet fresh in memory, ought to strike a terrour into him, and make him sacrifice to his own security all that was sus∣pected to him. That he ought to look towards his Neighbors the Ottomans, whose custom it was to Ciment their Thrones with the blood of their Bro∣thers. This venomous Discourse of Allagolikan, had too strong an
impression upon a Heart that was already too prone to such barbarous inclinations. Seli∣man tells his Favourite, All he said was very just: and that he was resolved to fol∣low his Advice. He added, That although the Wills of the Sophy's had always been a Soveraign Law to their Sub∣jects; he was resolved, the better to avoid the peoples murmuring, not to rid himself of his Brother, without keep∣ing some formality in putting him to death: and to streng∣then this Resolution, with the opinion and assent of some Judges. Allagolikan did not oppose
the King's Will, because he knew there were but too ma∣ny corrupted persons to be found in the Court: He makes choice of Six, who with a sor∣did and blind Zeal, had sold their Souls, and condemned poor Tachmas as Siliman desi∣red. The noise of this fatal Sentence was soon spread a∣bout the Palace: and some months after, all the Town of Ispaham heard, that the unfor∣tunate Tachmas was to be put to death by the hands of the Executioner, for some secret and important Reasons. A Scaffold for this Execu∣tion was erected in one of the great Halls of the Palace,
where the Sophy himself re∣solved to be, to feed his cruel Eyes with this so Tragi∣cal a Spectacle. Allagolikan op∣posed a great while this Reso∣lution, fearing what afterwards happen'd; but all his Remon∣strances to the contrary, did but irritate his Desires the more. The Queen Begona run to Se∣liman's Door, to conjure him by that life she gave him, not to sully his Glory with so base a Parricide; but he was so far from letting her in, that he com∣manded his Eunuchs to shut her up, fearing her lamentati∣ons and cryes might soften his heart, or bring it to re∣lent. The time of this black
Sacrifice being come, they led forth Tachmas out of his Dun∣geon, to expiate the Crime of his Love and ill-policy. How strong is the voice of Nature in mans heart? How difficult a matter is it to lay aside all sense? How powerfully does the presence of a sad Object move us? When the Sophy beheld his Brother loaden with Chains, his Eyes languishing, his Face pale and disfigur'd; not for fear of Death, but through the violence of his passionate Love: It was too late to call back all his hatred and Jealousie; there was no resisting of that melting tenderness with which
he felt himself suddenly seized; and if he had any malice left in him against Tachmas, it was because he found him too innocent. He suspends the Execution, and orders the Prince to be confined to a lar∣ger Prison, where he might have more Light and Ayr. The major part of the Judges there present were not sorry for this sudden Change, because they had no hand in the Judg∣ment given against the Prince. But Allagolikan was so nearly touch'd, that his displeasure was seen in his Countenance; Tachmas perceived it, for his Eyes, that hitherto had been darkened with the Clouds of
Love and Friendship, let fall that mist, to shew him a Tray∣tor that had sworn his Ruine, in the man he believed his most faithful Friend. And one of the Eunuchs that waited upon him back to prison, see∣ing the sentence of Death re∣called, helped fully to disa∣buse him, thereby hoping to gain his affection; and told him, That it was Allagolikan's advice that hurried the Sophy to this Extremity. In the mean time Negara's heart was rent with many mor∣tal Disquiets: she was tossed betwixt a thousand apprehen∣sions; and gave her self over as a prey to all the vexati∣ons
that could perplex a Soul. Death represents many violent expedient to her troubled I∣magination, whereby to free her self from this Abyss of Misery, into which she saw her self plunged; but she durst not dispose of her self without knowing Tachmas fate. So true it is, that amongst sincere Lovers, the interest of what they love, is dearer to them than their own. She draws one of the Eunuchs a∣side: and pressing him to let her know what he heard was become of the Prince, shows him a Diamond of great va∣lue, which she wore upon her Finger; which she promi∣sed
should be the reward of his Service. This man, won partly by the hope of the Re∣ward, and partly softened with the fight of the Princesses miseries, resolved to betray his trust for this one time; as he did believe he should give some ease to Negara's af∣flicted Soul, if he drew her out of the uncertainty she then was in: He confessed to her, That Tachmas was con∣demned to lose his Head up∣on a Scaffold, and that, per∣haps, that was the very mo∣ment of his Execution. We have naturally a great Aversion, and Horror for any thing that torments us: and
we bear all our grievances with so much impatience, that we always fancy them in the last extremity, and that no new Event is capable of adding to them: but we are not long in this Errour; for Experi∣ence often convinces us of the contrary. Negara believed she should suffer less by knowing Tach∣mas's doom; but she soon was convinced, that her doubts were preferable to so dismal a knowledg: When she re∣presented to her self those terrifying Idea's of his murder; She fancied she saw the Prince all cover'd with blood; and that Face, and those Eyes,
wherein she had been so of∣ten pleased to read the marks of a sincere and passionate Love, now buried in an eter∣nal Night; she could no lon∣ger support the weight of her sorrow. But as she had yet so much sense left, to think, that perhaps there was yet time enough to rescue her di∣stressed Lover; She conjures the Eunuch to run and tell the King, That she had some∣thing of great moment to im∣part to him before he should carry Tachmas to be execu∣ted. The Eunuch could not be won by any promise to sa∣tisfie her Request, knowing his Head would be the price
of his Complaisance. So that Negara was forced to address her self to another, from whom she concealed her know∣ledg of Tachmas's Doom; on∣ly prays him to acquaint the King, that she desired to speak with him. Seliman at any o∣ther time would have caused all the Eunuchs that were in Negara's Chamber to be put to death, because he strictly charged them to conceal from her those violent Resolutions he had taken against his Bro∣ther. But the emotions which his Brothers presence had rais∣ed in his Soul, would not suffer him to reflect upon the breach of his Commands.
As soon as the Princess saw him enter into the Chamber, she threw her self at his feet: and told him, That his own interest must perswade him to let Tachmas live; That she would not now speak of the Seditions and Revolts that might be stirred up amongst a people, that would not quietly bear the loss of a Prince that was so dear to them, condemned upon the suggestion of an imaginary Crime. That History was full of Examples of these kind of Disorders, raised upon such oc∣casions: But, laying aside all these considerations: If it were true, that he had any kind∣ness
for her, he ought to grant her this favour; and in re∣turn, she promised for ever to bury all thoughts of that kind∣ness she formerly had for Tachmas; and to answer all his designs with so perfect an obedience and intire resigna∣tion, that he should even doubt whether ever she had setled her inclinations upon any other but himself: but, that if he would push his ri∣gour against his Brother to the utmost extremity, she durst not promise him that she should have so much com∣mand over her self, as not to hate mortally that man, who all cover'd over with the blood
of him she had once loved, should force her to marry him, to make her against her will a Complice to his Crime. The Princess found little difficulty in obtaining her Re∣quest of Seliman; and Love happily concluded what Nature had begun. But as the Sophy was infinitely Jealous, he told Nega∣ra, That though he had granted her Tachmas his life, it should be upon those Terms she her self proposed: that is, Upon condition She should for ever smother all thoughts of Love or Tenderness towards him; and that the least Sigh that should escape from her, should be the infallible and irrevo∣cable
decree of his Death. That she had his Doom in her hands: That she must look well to her hits, and take her measures, so as she desired he should live or die. He ad∣ded, That he gave her Fif∣teen days to conquer this her Passion: and to facilitate her victory over her Love, she should see Tachmas no more; because he well knew how forcible the presence of the once beloved Object, was to re-inflame a Love that had been quite extinct. After this Discourse he left her; and causing his Brother to be brought before him, he commanded his Chains to be
taken off, and outwardly made a shew as if he had been per∣fectly reconciled to him: though in his Heart he nourished still a secret Jealousie of him. Tachmas now was restored to his pristine Liberty, and was forbidden nothing but the sight of Negara. In the interim, Allagolikan knowing that Tach∣mas well understood the hatred he bore him, doubted not but he would study a Revenge: Wherefore he resolves to de∣clare open War against him, and to suggest new Crimes a∣gainst him to the Sophy, to ruine him: And to make his Ac∣cusation less suspected, He contrived to make Negara the
Instrument of it, and to make this unfortunate Princess the chief promoter of her Lovers Death. Therefore he found out an Invention that had but too Tragical a success. There was a She-slave in the Princess Begona's Retinue, cal∣led Sunamire, one of the best accomplished Women in all the Court, excepting Negara: she was transcendently beautiful, and she had a vivacity of Wit, surpassing her Beauty. As Tachmas loved the conversation of those sparkling Beauties, he had for∣merly made his Addresses to Sunamire, as well as to Negara, with much assiduity. This Ambitious Slave had
made such use of it, that she imagined, with a little Address, the Prince in some short time might infallibly become her Conquest. But though she made use of all the little necessary Arts for her purpose, by soli∣citing the Prince's tenderness by her repeated sighs; whether Tachmas not yet well acquain∣ted with the intrigues of Love, did not understand them; or that he did purposely despise them; he returned nothing but indifference: And the gay hu∣mour of Sunamire was the on∣ly thing that drew him to her conversation. But when she saw that after being so long blind to her Caresses, he had
settled his Affections upon Ne∣gara, she abandon'd her self to all sorts of Resentments; and by a change which is very common in the hearts of that Sex, she let the desire of Revenge succeed her Love, in the most violent manner ima∣ginable. She conceived a most malignant Joy, when she un∣derstood that those Lovers were crossed in their Designs, when they believed themselves upon the point of perfecting their happiness. However, as it is very hard to wish the utter ruine of what we once loved, when we see them upon the brink of the precipice; our first flames which we thought
extinguished, easily take fire a∣gain in their favour, and re∣bel against those motives of hatred which did animate our vengeance. As soon as Suna∣mire heard that Tachmas was in danger of his life, she used all her endeavours for his de∣livery; without taking notice that in so doing, she discover∣ed her passion to her Rival. She conjured Negara with tears in her Eyes (who was but too well inclined of her self), to make use of all her power and interest with the Sophy to a∣vert the storm that threatned Tachmas's life. This Prince, since his being reconciled to his Brother, as
was said, was no more at liber∣ty to see Negara: not but that he had the freedom to come into the inner part of the Pa∣lace; but the Princess was locked up in a little particular Appartment, whither none but Seliman, Begona, Sunamire, some Slaves, and a few Eunuchs, could have ingress. Tachmas came often to visit Sunamire; but it was only to entertain her with talking of Negara, to express to her by the most ten∣der and sensible Requests he could, the greatness of his Passion for that Princess; and the despair he was like to fall into, as soon as he should know that Seliman were possessed of
her. Sunamire was upon the Rack to hear every day a Dis∣course that pierced her very Soul; but she had still so much power over her inclina∣tions, to conceal her Jealousie from the Prince. She dexte∣rously eluded all the Questions that Tachmas asked about the disposition of Negara's mind; or when she found her self hard pressed, she would tell him, That Negara had resolv∣ed to satisfie the Sophy in all his Desires, since she had no∣thing else left in her Choice. She advised him for his part to take other measures, since there were in Ispaham, and within the Court it self, per∣sons
no way inferiour to Ne∣gara, either in Beauty or Wit, that would count it their chiefest Glory to possess Tach∣mas's Heart. The Prince, that too well understood the drift of these Discourses so often reiterated, had much ado to endure them. At last one day, being no longer able to con∣tain himself, told Sunamire, That he saw well enough what she would be at: That he al∣ways believed his silence had been enough to quell her as∣piring thoughts to let her know his mind: but that since she forced him to explain himself, he gave her to understand, That his Visits to her were but
to receive the consolation from her, of hearing some news of his Princess, and not to wrong her by so base an inconstancy: and he should always hold them for his greatest Ene∣mies, that should advise him to such an infidelity. After these words he withdrew, and left her full of shame and con∣fusion. It was then that this fierce Slave smothered for ever all the flames of Love, to kindle those of Fury and Revenge; and armed her self with all that hatred and spight could sug∣gest to ruine Tachmas. Allagolikan knew all that pas∣sed within the inner part of
the Palace, by the intelligence he kept with some of the Eunuchs, whom he won with Rewards for that purpose; a∣mongst others, one called Me∣tardaout, in whom he put an intire confidence, and to whom he used to impart all his se∣crets. This Metardaout was a witty man, a Dissembler; and his Genius much like to that of Allagolikan, and had the Com∣mand of several other Eunuchs; being very officious and com∣plaisant, he had gained the good opinion of the Ladies. Sunamire above all other, gave him marks of her kindness, and suffer'd him freely to discourse with her.
This Eunuch had heard from a place where he had hid him∣self, all the passages that hap∣pened betwixt Sunamire and Tachmas: he had confidence enough to tell her of it, and to offer his service to her in her Revenge. Sunamire could not deny what he said to be true, and accepts of his offers. Metardaout told her, He would acquaint Allagolikan with all, whom he knew to be an ir∣reconcilable Enemy to the Prince. Allagolikan was extream glad to hear that Sunamire would joyn in the Plot to ruine Tachmas. He sends the Eunuch to acquaint her with a Project to that purpose: but
as Negara was not to be destroy∣ed as well as Tachmas (for she hated her to the death), she would give no Ear to this Pro∣position. Allagolikan willing to make use of this occasion; and being fearful that Sunamire would not continue her hatred long, was very angry with Me∣tardaout; and said, He had not given her a right information: and had much ado to forbear run∣ning into the inner part of the Palace to speak to her himself; but knowing that all his favour would not protect him against the Sophies Rage, if he should transgress against his Orders; and that the going into that place was death to all others
but to the Princes of the Blood, contented himself to send Me∣tardaout once more to tell her, That the course he intended to stear, was the ready way for destroying Negara as well as Tachmas: and the only means to draw her into the snare, was by making her believe that Tachmas was false to her. Sunamire having heard the Rea∣sons the Eunuch gave, consent∣ed to joyn with Allagolikan in this Plot. Metardaout, the better to bring the Princess to his bent, hearing her one day steal a sigh: told her in the Ear, That she ought not to lavish away so many Tears to lament the
loss of an inconstant Lover; and that Prince Tachmas, see∣ing her designed for the Sophy, had turned all his Thoughts and Vows towards Sunamire. Jealousie is a strange passion; and it must be allowed, That when it infuses its poison into a Soul, it makes it produce most dismal Effects. Reason to no purpose tells Negara, That since the Prince could be no more hers, it was just he should look out for some o∣ther; since if he should remain indifferent, it would give new Allarms to the Sophy. She could not endure that another should enjoy a Heart she could not possess. This information
struck her to the Heart: and she thought it the more likely, because she knew that Tachmas, who heretofore delighted to be in Sunamire's Company, begun of late to renew his Visits to her with more Assiduity than ever. This wicked Maid came the next day into Negara's Chamber, who feeling her passion, mo∣ved by the presence of an Ob∣ject that was so odious to her, could not forbear telling her, That she was very happy to be Mistress of Prince Tachmas's Affections. Sunamire replyes, That she ought not to be con∣cerned at that, since she no longer could pretend an in∣terest
in him, being she must now live for Seliman alone. She utter'd these words with a forced malicious smile, and goes presently out of Negara's Chamber. The unfortunate Princess, could no longer doubt of her Lovers infidelity, and begun to repent to have saved that life, which she never believed he would have made use of to her prejudice. Some time af∣ter, an Eunuch one of Allagoli∣kan's and Metardaout's Creatures came into her Chamber with a paper in his hand. Negara desiring to know what he meant by that paper: He told her, He was looking for Su∣namire,
to give it her from Prince Tachmas. The Princess prays him to shew it her, which he refusing to do, that she might suspect nothing; she snatched it out of his hand, and suddenly shuts her self in∣to her Closet to see what was in it. It is easie to guess how unpleasant the Contents of that Note was to her, which was as follows: I Chose rather to write to you, than to come to see you, be∣cause I fear that my too frequent Visits may be taken notice of. Sunamire, Resist no longer the Proposition I made you, To place the Crown of Persia upon your
Head, if you will but make use of a Project I shall tell you, to rid us of Seliman. And do not apprehend that I retain any lon∣ger the least thought of Negara; since I must utterly forget a Per∣son that took pains to preserve my life for no other end, but that I might have the displea∣sure to see her in the Arms of another. Prince Tachmas. There was a thousand things that might make Ne∣gara doubt of the truth of this Writing; and she might easily judg, that the Prince had too much prudence to
commit such an important and dangerous Design to a frail paper, and the faith of an Eunuch, though his Virtue had not retained him from it. But she was too much blinded with her Jealousie, to open her Eyes to such Considerations. She followed all the Trans∣ports of this Venomous pas∣sion. Therefore to break the Prince's Design, and hinder her Rival from the enjoyment of a good she thought due to her self: She sent to adver∣tise Seliman, That she had something of high Importance to communicate to him. As soon as he came, she shewed him this Note: Seli∣man
at the sight of it was transported with Rage; He commands Sunamire, whom the Princess would charge with part of this Accusation, to be called before him. He reads this Note to her. But this cunning Slave confessed it was true, That Tachmas had ac∣quainted her with his bad in∣tentions against the Sophy; but loudly protested, That she always had resisted them, as might appear by the Note it self, which if the Eunuch had brought to her, she would im∣mediately have given the King notice of it. So that Seliman, that still hated his Brother, and would be sorry to be un∣deceived,
turned all his Fury against him. He leaves the Note with Negara, that it might help totally to subdue her pas∣sion, if there yet remained any parts of it unsmothered: and goes away with Terror and Fury in his Countenance. He sent for Allagolikan, and tells him what he had learnt: the Favourite seeming to be much surprized, said, He must blame his own lenity in pardon∣ing his Brother. Upon which Seliman swears the second Crime should not go unpunished, as the other had done. In the mean space, Tachmas being ignorant of the Conspi∣racy that was formed against
him; but very well knowing Allagolikan's nature, and not doubting but that Sunamire provoked by his last words, would plot some ill Design a∣gainst Negara and himself; thought fit to give her a pre∣caution against Sunamire's plots. He sent to her the same Eunuch that discover'd to him the Fa∣vourites hatred: The Eunuch comes into Negara's Chamber, a moment after Seliman left it. He drew her aside, and cun∣ningly slipped a paper into her hand, which he told her, Tach∣mas had commanded him to bring her. Negara presently steps into her Closet, all her thoughts were discompos'd:
and going to read the Note, she felt her Curiosity power∣fully opposed by a secret Re∣morse, and Cruel apprehensions of finding in it the Sentence of his Death. She had scarce opened it, when she prensently found it writ by the Prince's own hand, and in his own usual Character: She draws out of her pocket that Note she had shewed to Seliman; and having compared them together, she found so much difference betwixt the writing of the one and the other, that she could no longer doubt of the Cheat; but she was fur∣ther convinced when she read these words:
I Have found out, that Alla∣golikan, whom I believed a fast Friend to all my Interests, to be my mortal Enemy. Where∣fore, if you retain yet any Re∣membrance of unhappy Tach∣mas, beware of letting any sign of it appear before his Crea∣tures: and always suspect what∣ever comes from him, as well as from Sunamire, who wishes us ill for Reasons that are not fit to be told: but which you may easily guess. Prince Tachmas.
The Princess had scarce ended reading this Note, but she swooned away, all her senses having left her: a mor∣tal Horror had frozen up her Heart: Her Face was Vailed with the pale shades of Death; and her Eyes wanted even Tears, to shew they yet had any life left. She lay a long while in this insensible con∣dition; and it was the hap∣piest state that she ever after saw, during the rest of her life. When she had recover∣ed sense enough to feel her sorrow, she made several vain efforts to call out: but her voice remained still intercluded and stifled by the violence
of her grief. Her imagination was clouded with sad and ter∣rifying Objects: She fancied Tachmas's Ghost all bathed in blood, comes to Reproach her with his Death, and the dis∣mal effects of her blind and ill-grounded Jealousie. She re∣turns into her Chamber, and with a Voice interrupted with Sighs, she prays the Eunuch that brought her the Note to, run to the Sophy, and to tell him that she had something to acquaint him with of no less Consequence than what she had already told him. Seliman returns to Negara; but as soon as he perceived she intended to justifie the
Prince, he attributes this pre∣cipitated change to her Love, and would not hear her; but said abruptly as he was going out, That though Tachmas had not been guilty, these apparent Signs of a passionate affection towards him, were cause enough to ruine him. He commands the Eunuchs not to let her come out of her Chamber, nor the Princess Be∣gona, who was then just en∣ter'd. He caused Tachmas to be clapped in a dark Dunge∣on, and left Allagolikan to see it done. The Prince not knowing what his Accusation was, per∣ceived all was the Favourites
contrivance, and therefore gave him some reproachful hints of it: But this Traytor insolent∣ly answers him, That he only executed the Sophie's Orders: to whom he returns. Seliman calls for some of his Council, to advise with them what was to be done with Tachmas. Allagolikan, who spoke first, opined his Death; Some were of the same opinion: but others, with so much force and Eloquence represented to the Sophy the danger of putting the Prince to Death; That it was suffici∣ent to keep him in safe Cu∣stody. It was carried in spight of all the Favourite's Animosi∣ty,
that Tachmas should live. But Seliman would have a Corporal punishment inflicted upon him: And as he was considering of the kind, Al∣lagolikan proposes to have his Eyes pluck'd out: Alledging, That as by the sight of Ne∣gara, he became the King's Rival, so this was the best Expedient to Revenge both his Love and his Throne; and to take away from Tach∣mas all means of attempting for ever any thing against the one or the other. Cruel Se∣liman approves of this Advice. And this barbarous Sentence was pronounced against the unhappy Prince: And the Fa∣vourite
had Order to see it put in Execution, the King himself refusing to be pre∣sent, fearing lest in seeing him, he should be moved to pity, as before. Allagolikan being impatient, until he made Tachmas feel the effects of his Rage; comman∣ded a Stage to be erected in the Hall, wherein this Illustri∣ous Blood was to be spilt be∣fore. Then it was that this Prince, who under Sophy Chabas his Father, had carried the Ter∣rors of his Arms through all Asia, and made the Ottomans tremble for fear of his Va∣lour, even at the Gates of
their Seraglio. This Prince that had a million of Souls at his Devotion, and whose Virtue as well as Power was cherish∣ed by all the Army: This Prince, in fine, for whom all his Souldiers would have ta∣ken pride to shed the last drop of their bloods, saw him∣self abandoned to the Fury of a Traytor, without finding one man that durst attempt any thing in his Defence. So true it is, that Fortune rules the friendship of the major part of Mankind. Yet no degenerate Voice, no weak or base Com∣plaint falls from him: only when he desired to know his Accusation, and that it was an∣swered,
It was for conspiring gainst the King; He beseech∣ed Heaven quickly to make his Innocence appear, and not to leave so foul, and so black a Treason unpunished. In the mean time, the Princess Negara delivered up her Soul to all the Cruel stroaks of an unconsolable grief; and the most pleas∣ing of Objects that can offer themselves now to her Imagi∣nation, were those of Despair. She heard from all hands, that Tachmas was in the hands of the Executioner; and there were some of the Eunuchs who by mis-information, assured her that he lost his life. Then
she thought it time to have recourse to the last Remedy, and put an end to her mise∣ries by Poison, by the Ex∣ample of Princess Begona, who was there with her. The Sophy being distracted with several Remorses, thought to retire into the inner part of the Palace, that by the con∣versation of the Ladies he might dissipate that black Hu∣mour with which his Soul was agitated. He was scarce got within Negara's Chamber, when he saw his Mother pale and ghostly; her Face all cover'd with the cold sweats of Death: As he went to help her, turning his Face towards some
noise he had heard, he saw the unhappy Princess grovelling in the same state with Bego∣na; and making her last Ef∣forts, to dispose of the remain∣ing moment of her life: she expired, uttering with her dy∣ing breath the Name of Tach∣mas. At the same instant, Suna∣mire presented her self to Se∣liman, and assured him that Tachmas was Innocent; and that the Note which was gi∣ven him, was contrived by Allagolikan, with whom she had been of Intelligence: and that she well knew what she deserved for such a Treason; and with that, drew out a
Poiniard she had under her Garments, and therewith stob∣bing her self in the breast, fell down bathed in her own blood by Negara's side. The Sophy sent presently to stop the Execution, but it was too late: for this Traytor was too eager to quench the thirst of his insatiate Revenge. The unfortunate Tachmas, having understood what befel in the inner part of the Pa∣lace, wept with Tears of blood the loss of his Mother and his Mistress: and never did Love and Nature draw so many moving Complaints from any man before, as Tachmas utter∣ed upon this fatal Occasion.
Seliman, whose Jealousie was now extinguished by so many Tragical Events, fell in∣to a furious Rage against Al∣lagolikan; He caused him to be strangled before his Face, there∣by making this Traytor at his turn to suffer the just punish∣ment of all his Crimes. FINIS. Errata. Page 25. l. 17. r. into. p. 33. l. 4. r. his. p. 37. l. 15. dele in. p. 40. l. 7. r. faithful. p. 52. l. 5. r. starr'd. p. 66. l. 3. r. expedients.
