T1765A 99833018 37493
A DEFENCE OF THE PARLIAMENT of 1640. And the PEOPLE of ENGLAND, AGAINST King Charles I. And his ADHERENTS; CONTAINING A short Account of some of the many Illegal, Arbitrary, Popish and Tyrannical Actions of King CHARLES I. unjustly called the Pious Mar∣tyr; together with the following Tracts, &c. 1. The Pope's Letter to King Charles. 2. K. Charles's Letter in Ans. thereunto. 3. The Articles of Marriage made in Favour of Papists) with France. 4. King Charles his Commission to the Irish Rebels, And 5. Philem, O Neal and Rorie Macquire's Declaration to the Irish thereupon. 6. King Charles II's Letter to the urt of Claims of Ireland, in behalf of that great Rebel, the Marquess of An∣m, to restore him to his Estate; for t the said Marquess, had made it ap∣r, That what he acted in that Rebel∣, was done by the Express Orders,  Commands of Charles I. his Father. . King Charles I's Warrant by Secre∣ Nicholas, to the King's Printer, manding him to Print no more  40 of those Proclamations, that claim'd the Irish Rebels. An Abstract of those strange Arti∣ of Peace, King Charles I. made with rish Rebels. 9. King Charles his two Letters to the Protestants of Rochel, wherein he assur∣ed them of Relief against the French K. 10. The Misérable and Deplorable Remonstrance those poor Protestants made to him, upon his Sacrificing them to the Mercy of the French King. 11. The Earl of Anglesey's Memoran∣dum. Dr. Anthony Walker and Mrs. Gau∣den's Proofs, That Eicon Basilice was not Writ by King Charles, but by Dr. Gau∣den, Bishop of Exeter. 12. A Copy of the Kings, and Pame∣lia's Prayers, taken out of Eicon Basilice, and Sir Phillip Sydny's Arcadia (which agree almost in every Word.) 13. Twenty Articles against that wicked Prelate L. 14. To give a clear Demonstration of this holy Martyr's Religion and Piety, see his Declaration for the Lawfulness of Sports and Pastimes on the Lord's Day, Printed at large in this Book. LONDON, Printed, 1698.
TO THE READER. IT is not the least of Man's Unhappiness, that he is the grea∣test Enemy of his own Interest, having Opportunities for his own Advantage, he lets them slip, and by Brutish In∣cogitancy, rather than Natural Impotency, (as our Parents at first) he is soon cheated into his own Misery; his present Con∣tentment is his chiefest Atchievement, and he will have his Will tho' it be his Woe. He is apt to kill his Friends, (as the Jews did Christ) for their Endeavours to Save him, and to Court his Enemy (as Eglon did Ehud) whose Design was to Slay him. The great Controversy (between the Advocates for King Charles the First, and his wicked Favourites, and the Friends of the Parliament and People, that were necessitated to Resist him, could never have been spun out into above 40 Years length, had the dim Eyes of dull People been clear'd up to a true discerning of their Friends from their Oppressive Foes. How apt have the Idolizers of King Charles the First been, with the Army of the Assyrians, to travel to Samaria instead of Dothan, and with the Jews to gratify Caesar, in Crucifying their Saviour? Whereas heretofore they generally reputed for
Saints those faithful and couragious Barons, who lost their Lives in the Field, making a glorious War against Tyrants for the Common Liberty. Such as Symon de Mamfort, Earl of Lei∣cester, against Henry the Third; Thomas Platagenet, Earl of Lancaster, against Edward the Second, &c. I cannot willingly ascribe the Love of Tyranny and Oppres∣sion, to the Natural Disposition of an English Man, but rather to two other Causes; the first is the Clergy of all Ranks, whose Pulpit Stuff from before 1640, till now, hath generally been the Doctrine, and perpetual Infusion of Servility and Wretch∣edness, to their Hearers, and their Lives most commonly the Types of Worldliness, with a slender Pattern of Vertue, Righteous∣ness and Self-Denial, in their whole Practice. The Second is, I attribute it to the factious Inclination of most Mendivided from the Publick Interest of their Country, by several Selfish Ends and Humours of their Own; who may truly be call'd Sacrificers of the Common Welfare of Mankind, to their own private Ad∣vantage, that they might thereby attain to their Ambitious Purposes. Dryden (as I am inform'd) gives this true Cha∣racter of these Sort of Men, viz. Mark those which Dote on Arbitrary Power, and you'l find them either Hot∣brain'd-Fools, or Needy Bankrupts. 'Tis a wonderful and amazing thing, to find so great a part of Mankind fondly and foolishly Doting, nay, which is more Unchristian, with a sort of Idolatry, Idolizing this Prince, when they are not capable of giving to the World a clear De∣monstration of one good Act he did designedly for the Benefit of his People: Certainly if his Virtue and Piety towards God, and his Country, had been in the least conspicuous, his mighty Adorers have been defective in their Panegerical En∣comiums of him; for I must with the greatest Assurance de∣clare, that neither by reading the Defences of him, or Con∣versation with the greatest of his Advocates, could I find the least Cause to Esteem him a Saint, or to clear him from the
Tyrannical Oppression, nay, from the Blood and Misery of Eng∣land, so justly laid to his Charge by the Parliament of 1640, and those worthy Patriots that join'd with them. Let the Advocates for Tyranny and Arbitrary Power say what they will to the contrary, I am confident the People of England have a great Esteem and Value for a King that Governs ac∣cording to Law, and, in all his Actions, aims at his People's Good equal with his own; and if at any time they betake themselves to Arms against their Prince, 'tis his, and not their Fault: Neither is it rational to believe, that the Generality of the Nobility, Gentry and Commonality of England, would, without an apparent Cause and Necessity, engage in a Bloody Civil War, and thereby run the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes: And he that shall consider impartially, in a Civil or Religious Sense, the Quality of those that espoused that King against their Native Country, will find the Parliament, and those that joined with them, did infinitely exceed, in all respects, the Party that assisted that King. For it is notori∣ously known, that the Popish and Superstitious People through∣out the Kingdom, were united, as one Man for the King against the Parliament; and if we consider them in a Civil respect, were not all the Pattentees, Monopolizers, Cruel Usurping Op∣pressors, but Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, the Pillars of the Star-Chamber, Councel-Table, High Commission Court, &c. were not these the great Abettors, and Supporters of that Bloody War, against the Parliament and People of England. Were not his Clergy, for the generality of them, a wretched Parcel of Court Sycophants, that gave vent to those Plaguy-Doctrines of Non-Resistance, Absolute and Arbitrary Govern∣ment (after the Mode of France) in Loans, Free-Quarter, Ship-money, Monopolies, &c. during the Oppressive Ministery of Buckingham, Stafford, and Laud, that countenanced those two Court Parasites and Ear-Wiggs, Mountague and Man∣waring, who poysoned the Ears of King Charles the First,
with such infectious Doctrine that proved to be fatal to the King and Kingdoms. 'Tis true indeed, both Montague and Manwaring were doom'd and condemn'd for the same in open Parliament, Sentenced and Fined, and made incapable of all Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions. But King Charles was so much in Love with these two wicked Levites, and their Doctrines, that soon after the Par∣liament was dissolved, he punished them with two Fat Bishop∣ricks. That the World may know for what Manwaring was thus Rewarded by the King, I shall produce three of his pernicious Assertions out of his two Sermons before the King, Printed under the Title of Religion ond Allegiance. 1. That the King is not bound to observe the Laws concerning the Subjects Rights, but that his Will in Im∣posing Loans and Taxes without consent in Parliament doth oblige the Subjects Conscience, Upon Pain of Eternal Damnation. 2. That they who refused the Loan, did offend against the Law of God, and against the Kings Supreme Authority; and thereby became Guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty, Rebel∣lion, &c. 3. That Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising of Aids and Subsidies; and Dr. Sibthorp, Vicar of Brackley, printed a Sermon, which he Preached at the Assizes at Northampton, and Dedicated to the King, where∣in he Poysons his Country with these vile Positions. 1. That it is the Prince's Duty to direct and make Laws, (his Text, by the way, was Rom. 13. 7. Render therefore to all their Dues) he justified this by that Opposite Proof;
Eccles. 8. 3, 4. He doth whatsoever pleases him.—Who may say unto him, what doest thou? 2. That all Antiquity is absolutely for absolute Obedi∣ence to Princes, in all Civil and Temporal Things. 3. That if Princes command any thing which Subjects may not perform, because against the Laws of God, of Nature, or Impossible, yet they are bound to undergo the Punishment, without Resistance, and so to yield a Passive Obedience, where they cannot Exhibit an Active One. P—g, Sh—k, and others, have largely since that time, obliged the World with these Enslaving Doctrines. As this King took great care to Reward such Ministers as these, so he was resolved to make Examples of those Pious and Worthy Clergy-men, that stood up against the Oppressions of those Times; for Brevities Sake, I shall instance but two of the many that might be Named. The first was, that Good Man Dr. Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, because he could not in Conscience comply with the King, who with Menaces re∣quired him to License that abominable Sermon of Sithrops, (before mention'd) and thereby make that Good by Di∣vinity, which had been done against the Laws. And when the Lord Conway, Secretary of State, was sent with a threatning Message from the King to him, this good Old Man persisted in his Refusal, saying, with the Psalmist, I shall not be affraid of any Evil Tydings, for my heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. The King instantly Suspended this Archbishop, and also confined him, and committed the Archiepiscopal Jurisdicti∣on to five Bishops, all of the New Church of England, and Sibthorp's Patrons, viz. London, Durham, Rochester and Oxford, and honest Laud of Bath and Wells.
The second was Dr. Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, who also felt the heavy Oppression of this Protestant King. In the first Year of his Reign, he was Lord Keeper of the reat Seal but upon his appearing in Parliament against the King∣doms great Grievance, the Duke of Buckingham, he was Disgraced und-Sequestred from the King's Presence, and Coun∣cil Table. In his second Year, he was accused for speaking publickly against the Loan, and also for refusing to give way to proceedings in his Courts against the Puritans. The King Imprison'd him in the Tower, but this good Bishop, out-li∣ving his Imprisonment, upon the King's throwing the Gauntlet, he came to a Tryal of Skill, for the Old English Liberties, and he resolutely said, Nolumus Leges Anglia: Mutari, and took Command in the Parliament's Army, and bravely asserted his Country's Liberties with his Sword. If I should proceed to relate how this King dealt by the No∣bility and Gentry; both Lawyers and others that stood up for the Laws of the Land, and Liberties of the People, this Tra∣gical Story would swell to too great a Bulk for a Preface; I shall therefore give a short Account of the matters contain∣ed in the following Treatise, viz. that He Favoured, Pro∣tected, and was Ruled by, the worst of Men, both Clergy and Laity; Secondly, That He highly favoured Papists; Third∣ly, That He Govern'd by an Arbitrary Power, and raised Money upon his Subjects without Act of Parliament, which is directly against the Constitution of the Government of Eng∣land, and of a most dangerous Consequence to the People of England; for when ever such a Power is Established in these Kingdoms, the People may bid a sad farewell to all their Fe∣licity, for they would soon undergood the same Miserable Fate, the poor People of France have done ever since that King vio∣lated their Magna Charta, call'd, the Edict of Nants, &c. which is to be Taxed according to that Prince's Will and Plea∣sure; Fourthly, That he was not that Pious Prince the mad
World without reason would represent him to be; of all these, you have too many Instances in the following Treatise, which for the satisfaction of Mankind, contains not onely 26 Articles, or Charges against this King, but also the following Tracts, all of which were never Printed at large in any one Book be∣fore, viz. The Popes Letter to King Charles I. and King Charles his Letter in Answer thereunto, calling the Pope Most Holy Father, &c. The Articles of Marriage made (in Favour of Papists) with France. King Charle's Com∣mission to the Irish Rebels, and Philem Oneles, and Rorie Macquire's Declaration thereupon. King Charles II's Let∣ter to the Court of Claims of Ireland, in behalf of that great Rebel, the Marquess of Antrim, to restore him to his Estate, for that the said Marquess had made it appear, that what he acted in that Rebellion, was done by the Express Orders and Commands of Charles I. His Father King Charles I's Warrant by Secretary Nicholas, to the King's Printer, Commanding him to Print no more thn Forty Proclamations that Proclaimed the Irish Rebels. An Abstract of those Strange Articles of Peace, that King Charles the First made with the Irish Rebells. The two Letters he writ to assure the Rochellers of his re∣lieving them, and the miserable and deplorable Remon∣strance those poor People made to him upon his Sacrifi∣cing them to the Mercy of the French King. The Earl of Anglesey's Memorandum. Dr. Anthony Walker, and Mrs. Gauden's Proofs, that Eicon Basilice was not Writ by King Charles, but by Dr. Gauden Bishop of Exeter. That Copy of the Kings, and Pamelia's Prayers taken out of Eicon Basilice, and Sir Philip Sydneys Arcadia, will agree almost in every Word. Twenty Articles against that wicked Prelate Land, and to give a clear Demonstra∣tion of this Holy Martyrs Religion and Piety. His De∣claration for the lawfulness of Sports and Pastimes on the Lord's Day is printed in this Book at Large.
To conclude, If all these and many more sad matters of Fact, already in this, and other Books produced to the World, will not be of force enough to satisfie the generality of Man∣kind, that they have been most notoriously imposed upon, by the Clergy, and some of the Laity, in their Defence of King Charles I. against the Parliament of 1640. and People of England. I shall conclude, that nothing but the coming down of an Angel from Heaven, will be able to convince them of their Error; I shall, therefore leave them to God, and end all with this hearty Prayer, That he would be pleased so to open their Eyes, that they might see what will make for the Peace and Happiness of these Kingdoms, and no longer promote and keep up those Unhappy Divisions, that are yet a∣mongst us, after above 40 Years Controversie on this Melan∣cholly Subject. ERRATA. PAge 2. line 5. read Immerited. p. 4. l. 11. r. Gorges. p. 4. l. 15. r. Desert f. Defect. p. 4. last line r. Coat. p. 5. l. 24. r. that. p. 6. l. 12. r the King. p. 6. l. 25. r. Bath. p. 9. l. 13. r. Prins. p. 10. l. 25. Dele and also King Charles II's De∣claration after his Restoration. p. 12. l. 23. r. Papists. p. 14. l. 10. r. things f. time. p. 15. l. 10 r. proportion. p. 18. l. 5. dele it. p. 18. l. 9. incert (to) after Relations. p. 21. l. 21. r. Wentworth. p. 21. l. 28. r. Suspiria. p. 23. l. 3. r. dismiss. p. 27. l. 25. r. have done. p. 28. l. 27 r. Zyons. p. 37. l. 18. r. alia p. 39. l. 21. after imaginable . to enslave his people. p. 44. l. 25. r. Article. p. 46. l. 12. r. therein. p. 48. l. 12. r. irreconcilable. p. 50. l. 29. r. have. p. 51. l. 34. dele not. p. 54. l. 19. r. cordially f. Cardinals,
ENGLANDS Black List; OR, A short Account of some of the many Il∣legal, Arbitrary, Popish and Tyrannical Actions of King Charles I. falsely and unjustly call'd the Pious Martyr of ever Blessed Memory; I shall not pre∣tend to describe them Gradually, or Annually, but as they Occur. 1. HE took in the Duke of Buckingham to be one of the chief Conductors of all his Affairs, not∣withstanding the said Duke was impeached for a very suspicious Playster and Portion administred to King James the First. See the Earl of Bristols, and Sir Dudley Digg's Speeches against him in Rushworth. The Duke's Mother, and many near about him, were Papists, and ad∣vanced Men popishly Devoted, to places of the chief Command in the Court and Camp. Three Parliaments in the beginning of this Reign, found and declared this Duke the cause of all their Miseries and Disasters, the Grievance of Grievances; yet King Charles would against all Justice protect him.
2. He made that wicked Bishop Laud (who was after∣wards deservedly beheaded) another of his Favourites, by whose precious Councils poor England hath notoriously suffer∣ed; to write his Life according to his Actions, would suf∣ficiently darken the Lustre of those immerite and impious Encomiums given by that Notorious Jacobite Mr. Wharton. The Pious Dr. Abbatt, then Arch Bishop of Canterbury, hath in his Writings given a sad account of him. 'Tis said that Archbishop Sancroft had a great hand in putting forth this Book. 3. His Marrying Heneretta Maria of France, a violent Papist, and agreeing to private Articles in favour of Papists, viz. That those who had been Imprisoned, as well Eccle∣siastical as Temporal, should be Released: That Papists should be no more molested for their Religion; by which means the Papists grew impudent, and Scoff'd at Parlia∣ments and Law. Read the Articles at large in this Book. 4. That received a Letter from the Pope, and writ him an Answer, saluting Antichrist with the Title of Sanctissi∣me Pater, Most Holy Father. That Procured the Pope's Dispensation for his Marriage, which was solemnized by Proxy, according to the Ceremonies of the Romish Church. See the Pope's and King's Letter at large in this Book. 5. That pursuant to his Private Article with France, immediately Granted a special Pardon to twenty Popish Priests for all the Offences they had Committed against the Laws, and Built a Chapel at Somerset-House, with Conveniencies for Fryars which were permitted to walk abroad in their Habits. Baker the Jesuit, was one of many that was Par∣doned after the Lords and Commons had sent a Petition to him for advancing the True Religion, and suppressing of Papery. He made Weston (who died a Papist) his Lord Treasurer, and preferred so many Papists to places of great
Trust, as Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, &c. That the Commons of England, complain'd by their Petition, of near One Hundred of all Ranks, he re∣strain'd the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts from inter∣medling with Papists, which was little less then a Tollera∣tion. He not only Schreened, but Pardoned Mountague his Chaplain, whom the Commons had Voted, had endeavoured to Reconcile England to Rome, and instanced, that he main∣tain'd these Positions. That the Church of Rome is, and ever was, a True Church; That Images might be used for the instructions of the Ignorant, and for Exortation of Devo∣tion; That Saints have a Memory, and a more peculiar charge of their Friends; and that it may be admitted, that some Saints have a peculiar Patronage, Custody, Protection and Power, as Angels also have over certain Persons and Countrys by special Deputation; That impiously and prophanely scoffed at Preaching, Lectures, Bibles, and all shew of Religion; and though the Commons prayed, that for these and other matters, Mountague might be Punished, and his Books Burnt, yet the King would do neither, but Pardon'd him as aforesaid; being incensed at the Commons prosecuting a Man after his own Heart. 6. That to the great Dishonour of England, the Scan∣dal of the Protestant Religion, and the great Weakening of the Protestant Interest abroad, Did lend Eight Ships (E∣quip'd with the subsidies given for the relief of his distressed Protestant Sister, the Electress Palatine, and the poor oppres∣sed Protestants of the Palatinate) to the French King, to fight against the miserable Protestants of Rochel. Captain Pe∣nington in the Vantguard went Admiral; the Commanders and Mariners protested against the Service, though temp∣ted with Chains of Gold, &c. Declaring they would sink rather then fight against their own Religion. The Duke of Rohan, and the French Protestants, sollicited the King not to let the Ships go again, and had good Words and Hopes▪
Nevertheless, Ordered Pennington by Letter, Dated the 28th. of July, 1625. without Delay, to Consign the Vant∣guard into the Hands of the Marquess de Effiat for the French King's Service, and to require the seven other Ships in his Name, to put themselves into the Service of the French, Commanding Pennington to use all Force, even to sinking in case of Refusal. Hereupon Pennington put his Ship into the Absolute Power of the French King, and Commanded the rest to do so; But the honest Sea-men refused to be slaves to the French, and fight against the Protestant Religion, till forced by Shots: But Sir Ferdinando Gerges, to his Eternal Honour, brought away the Neptune with Detestation of the Action. All the English, Men and Boys, except (one Gunner who was slain in Charging a piece of Ordnance, according to his defect) declined the Service and quitted the Ships, re∣fusing to serve against the Rochellers. In September follow∣ing, these seven Ships were actually imployed against the Ro∣chellers, almost to their utter ruin. The French boasted that the Vantguard mow'd the Hereticks down like Grass; by these wicked means, were these good People wholly lost: They held the Town till the Year 1628. but were reduced to incredible Misery, having lived long upon Horse Flesh, Hides, Leather, Doggs and Cats, &c. There were but Four Thousand left of Fifteen Thousand Souls, many dyed with Famine, and they usually carried their Coffins into the Church-yard, and there laid themselves and Dyed. A Sad Story, that ought never to be forgotten in the History of Our Blessed Martyr's Reign, (as wickedly call'd.) 7. That in Civil Matters, took his Peoples Goods from them against their Wills, and their Liberties against the Laws; that pluck'd up the Root of all Property; that acted almost like the Turks, who send their Janizaries, and place their Halbards at the Door, and then are Masters of all; for in the very beginning of his Reign, he levied twelve thousand Soldiers contrary to Law, and then required the Country to       ▪
8. That appointed Commissioners to Try, Condemn and Execute those he unjustly call'd Delinquents by Martial Law, directly against the Laws of the Land, and some were Executed thereby. 9. That struct directly at the Property of the Subject's Goods, by issuing out Commissions (contrary to many Laws) for Raising Money by way of Loan, and the Commissi∣oners were ordered to certify to the Council Board, the Names of all Refractery Persons; particularly, he Demand∣ed One Hundred Thousand Pounds of the City of London, and upon their Refusal, he threatned them, saying, He would frame his Councils as appartained to a King. 10. That against all Law, required, the Londoners to set forth Twenty Ships Manned and Victualed for three Months, against which the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council Petition, but to no purpose: Being answered, That Peti∣tions and Pleadings were not to be received, and that the Precedents of formers Times were Obedience, not Direction. The Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace of Dor∣setshire, being Commanded to set forth Ships, insisted, That the Case was without President, for which, they were severely checked, and told, that State Occasions were not to be guided by Ordinary Presidents. Those Persons of Quality, that refused to subscribe to the Loan, were turned out of the Commission of the Peace and Lieutenancy. Sir Peter Hayman, upon his refusal of the Loan, was commanded against his Will, to go upon the King's Service, beyond the Seas; others of meaner Rank, were either bound to appear before the Leiutenancy of the Tower, to be Enrold for Soldiers for Denmark, or were impressed to serve in the  ▪
Sir Randolph Crew, the then Learned Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, for Declaring against the Loan, and not giving Judgment, that the King might Imprison, du∣ring Pleasure, was turned out, and Sir Nicholas Hide put in his Room, who presently complyed with the King. Sir Thomas Darnell, Sir John Corbet, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Hevingham, Sir Edward Hamden, five of the Gentle∣men Imprisoned for Refusing the Loan, brought their Ha∣beas Corpus in Michaelmas Term, in the third year of his Reign. The Warden of the Fleet made his Return, that they were detained in his Custody by the special command of King; and Sir Robert Heath, then Attorney Generral, justi∣fied this sort of Imprisonment, though no special Cause was assign'd, and the Lord Chief Justice Hide (who was made on purpose for it) did singly give Judgment for remanding the Gentlemen to perpetual Imprisonment. 11. That Billotted Soldiers (many of which were Pa∣pists) upon whom he pleased for Punishments; these Soldiers committed so many Disorders, mastered the Peo∣ple, and disturbed the Peace, that there was a General Out∣cry against them, many being undone by them: Yet this was not redressed. 12. That in the year 1627. Issued a Commission under the Great Seal to several Temporal Lords, with Neal' and Laud, Bishops of Winchester and Bath and Wells, and others to Raise Money by way of Excise, and to enforce the Pay∣ment (and which is very probable) to awe the Parliament, which was to Assemble the 17th. of March; He 13. Upon the 13th. day of January, 1627. sent a private Seal to the Lord Treasurer, to this Effect: We command you forthwith to pay to Philip Burlemark, Merchant, Thirty Thousand Pounds, to be paid by him over by Bill of Ex∣change
into the Low Countrys and Germany, unto Sir Wil∣liam Balfoure, and John Dolbier, Esq (who was a Pa∣pist) for Levying and Providing certain Numbers of Horse, with Arms for Horse and Foot, to be brought o∣ver into this Kingdom, for our Service, &c. Burlemark being afterwards call'd into the House of Commons, and examin'd about this matter, Declared, That he received the Thirty Phousand Pounds; That one Thousand Horse were levied, and these Horses and their Riders were to come over, and Arms were to be provided for them in Holland, but heard a Countermand was gone to stay them. 14. That caused Mr. Chambers, a Merchant, to be fined two thousand Pounds, to be committed to the Fleet, until he made his Submission, for saying, That the Merchants in no part of the World are scrued and wrung as in England; and that in Turkey they have more Encouragement. 15. That Oppressed and Imprison'd all Rank or Order of Men, viz. The Earl of Bristol was two Years confined with∣out being charged with any Accusation, or brought to Try∣al, or permitted to Answer for himself for offering to accuse the Duke of Buckingham. He Committed the Earl of Ar∣rundel to the Tower, in time of Parliament, without ex∣pressing any cause of his Commitment, which was a mani∣fest violation of the Privileges of the House of Peers; and though the Lords presented a Remonstrance, yet this Lord was long detained Prisoner. 16. That sent a threatning Message to the House of Com∣mons, That if he had not a timely Supply, he would be∣take himself to New Councils. Which could only mean the putting an End to the use of Parliaments. That at a∣nother time, said to the Lords and Commons, Remember that Parliaments are altogether in my Power, therefore as I find the fruits of them, Good or Evil, they are to continue or not to be.
17. His shameful betraying the poor Protestants in the Palatinate, and using the Money (given by the charitable Protestants of England for their relief) in Equipping Ships to be sent to the Assistance of the French King, a∣gainst the poor Protestants of the Isles of Rhee and Ro∣chell. 18. That without doubt, had a great hand in the No∣torious Irish Rebellion, wherein above 150 thousand poor Protestant Souls were most Barbarously Murthered, and this will more plainly appear by reading the Commis∣sion given by this King in the 17th. Year of his Reign, dated from Edinborough, and also the Commission thereupon of Peilem Oneale, and Rorie Macguire to all the Papists, both English and Irish, within the Kingdom of Ireland; both which for the Readers better satisfaction, are Printed at large in this Book; and also a sheet of Paper, call'd, Murther will Out, containing King Charles II's Letter to the Court of Claims in Ireland, 1663. Requiring the then Commissioners to restore the Earl of Antrim to his E∣state, for that he had made it appear, he had acted no∣thing but by Order and Commission from King Charles I. read the Letter at large. Take notice this Earl of Antrim had been a very great Rebell, yet restored for serving that King, in murthering his Protestant Subjects; neither can any impartial Men think that King Innocent of this Wicked Act, if they consider how Treacherously and Basely he delt with the Protestants of England, of the Palatinate, of the Isles of Rhee and Rochell. What Articles he made with France in favour of Popery upon his Match; what a mighty Influence his Popish Queen had over him; how he employed in great Places of Trust, not only great Favourers of Popery, but also many profest Papists, and was very much Advised and Govern'd by their Counsels to the great Sor∣row and Misery of his por Protestant Subjects; as also that in the Summer before that dreadful October 1641. a Com∣mittee of the most Active Papists, all afterwards in the head
of the Rebellion, were in great favour at White-Hall, and admitted to many private Consultations there with the King in the Queens Presence; and those Irish Priests depar∣ted not thence till within two Months before that Bloody Re∣bellion and Massacre. It was at that time, I morally be∣lieve, that King Charles favoured the Irish Massacre, and the Irish Papists were so well assured of it, that they call∣ed themselves the Queen's Army, and said they had good Warrant in Black and White for their Proceedings, and cryed out against the Parliament of England, as the King's Enemies. He that has a desire of being satisfied how great a favourer King Charles was of Papists, let him read Mr. Pinn's Book, called, The Royal Court Favou∣rite. He was very much advised by the then Parliament, to send early Relief to the poor Protestants of Ireland, but it is notoriously known, how backward he was therein, and that he suffered them to be Sacrificed to the cruel Mercy of the Irish Cut-Throats. It is also plain, that the Parlia∣ment had long and often requested the King to Declare the Irish, Rebels; yet was this rare Protestant Martyr so Tender of the Poor Catholicks Reputation, for Acting ac∣cording to his Commands, that no less than three Months past, before he would gratifie the House of Commons with Proclaiming them Rebels, and when he had against his real inclination thus done, he was resolved; That but a small number should be Printed and Published, and in order there∣unto, the following Warrant was sent to the King's Printer from his Secretary of State. IT is His Majesty's Pleasure, that you forthwith Print, in very good Paper, and send unto Me, for his Majesties Service, Fourty Copies of the Proclamation inclosed, leaving convenient space for his Majesty to Sign above, and to affix the Privy Signet underneath: And His Majesties Express Command, is, That you Print not above the
said Number of Copies, and forbear to make any further Publication of them till his Pleasure be further Signified, for which, this shall be your Warrant. White-Hall, Jan. 2. 1641. Edward Nicholas. See here what special care was taken, that a few only should come to the knowledge of this Proclamation, when at the same time it was well observed, he dealt far other∣wise by the Scots, for they were more sharply Proclaimed, and those Proclamations with great care and dilligence, dis∣persed throughout the whole Kingdom, and ordered to be read in all Churches accompanied with Publick Prayers and Execrations. But his Aversion to the Proclaiming and Proceeding against the Irish Rebels, is not to be much wondred at; for they call themselves The Queen's Army, and declared that they Rose to maintain the King's Pre∣rogative, and the Queen's Religion, against the Parlia∣ment; much more might be collected from divers Au∣thors, of this Tragical Story, which for Brevity Sake, I shall now omit. 19. That to his Eternal Infamy against all Laws, both Humane and Divine, caused A Declaration to be Pub∣lished concerning the Lawfulness of Sports, Pastimes, &c. on the Lord's Day, and gave Archbishop Laud an Order, under his Hand, to see that this Declaration was Printed. Read the Order, and Declaration Printed at large in this Book; and also King Charces II's Declaration after his Re∣storation. It is a wonderful and amazing thing, that there can be found amongst us, such Clergymen and Gentlemen, that against all Reason and Truth, shall make a Saint, nay, a Martyr, of this (as you see) Pious King: How these Men at the Great Day of Judgment, will be able to Answer for the many abominable Lies, and Blasphemies they
have been Guilty of, in Defending this King's Tyrannies and Oppressions, and Deifying him after a most scandalous Rate, is a Mystery to me: The Publication of this Licentious Book, was so apparently destructive to Religion, and so dishonourable to God, and the King, That the Pious and So∣ber Clergy of that time, absolutely refused either to Read it, or to permit it the said abominable Declaration to be Read; and how barbarously, and unchristianly they were used for their Refusal, is too well known. 20 That gave Wicked, Arbitrary and Tyrannical Or∣ders, Instructions and Commissions to the Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; all which, the said Earl, took such care to Execute, that the Parliament which was made up of Grave, Able, and discerning Persons, fell so severely upon him, that they caused him to be Committed to the Tower, Impeached him, and soon after caused him to be according to his deserts, Beheaded. He pleaded the King's Authority for what he had done, but the Commons saw no reason to acquit him. 'Twas observed, that tho the King and Queen would not publickly Solicite for his Relief, yet several secret Instances were made by them both, to save him that had obeyed their Commands, &c. But the just Cries of the People, &c. necessitated the King a∣gainst his Will to sign the Warrant for his Execution. And having now given a short account of the Earl of Strafford, I think it proper for the satisfaction of all those good Peo∣ple, that desire to be rightly informed, for what Laud Arch∣bishop of Canterbury was most justly Beheaded. The House of Commons having proof, that he had a great Hand in all the Arbitrary Proceedings and Dealings with Rome, De∣cember 18th. 1640. they Voted him to be a Traytor; and Mr. Hollis was sent to the Lords, to Accuse him of High-Treason, which he did immediately; assuring the Lords, that in convenient time, there should be a charge put in against him, to make Good the Accusation, desiring that he might be sequestred from the House and Committed, which
was forthwith done by the Lords. The Articles where∣with he was charged, consist of these Heads, &c. 1. For that he had Treacherously endeavoured to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom of England; and instead thereof to Introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law. 2. That he had laboured to Overthrow the Authority of Parliaments, and the Force of the Laws of the Kingdom of England. 3. That he had laboured to corrupt and pervert the Mi∣nisters of Justice. 4. That he himself had corruptly bought and sold Justice in his Seat. 5. That he had put a New Book of Cannons in Execution against Law. Vide 2 Vol. 2d. Part of Rushworth's Hist. Collect. Fol. 1365. & sequent. 6. That he had Traytorously assumed to himself a Pap̄al and Tyrannical Power, both in Ecclesiastical and Temporal Matters. 7. That he had laboured to subvert the Protestant Reli∣gion, and instead thereof, to set up Popish Superstition and Idolatry. 8. That he had prefer'd notorious Papist to Places of Dignity. 9. That he had chosen to himself a Chaplain Popishly affected. 10. That he had kept Confederacy and Intelligence with Popish Priests and Jesuits. 11. That he had cruelly persecuted Godly Ministers. 12. That he had laboured to make Divisions and Discord between us and other Churches. 13. That he had stir'd up War and Enmity between his Majesties two Kingdoms of England and Scotland. 14. That he had Slandened, and Incensed His Majesty against Parliaments.
15. That he had laboured to slander Parliaments with the Nick Name of Puritans, and commended the Papists for harmless and peaceable Subjects. 16. That he had Traytorously indeavoured to advance the Power of the Council Table, the Cannons of the Church, and the King's Prerogative, above the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. 17. That he had Wittingly and Willingly, Harboured, Countenanced and Relieved, divers Popish Priests and Jesuits: and particularly one call'd, Sancta Clara alias Damport a dangerous Person, and Franciscan Fryar; and did also provide Maintenance, and Entertainment for one Monsieur St. Gyles, a Popish Priest at Oxford, knowing him to be a Popish Priest. 18. That he had threatningly said, there must be a Blow given to the Church, such as had not been yet given, before it could be brought to Conformity. 19. That he punished divers Ministers in Prosecution of the last Cannons, made by himself. 20. That he had wickedly and malitiously Advised His Majesty to dissolve the last Parliament, and presently after it was Dissolved, told His Majesty, That then he was absolved from all Rules of Government, and left free to use all extraordinary Ways for his Supply. These were the chief Heads of the Charge against that Proud, Popish, and Arbitrary Prelate, for which he was sent Prisoner to the Tower. After some close Inquiries and Examinations taken from the Informations of the late Lord Deputy of Ireland; it was sufficiently known, that the Archbishop was the Conduite Pipe, through which the Popish Party, made the pernicious Seed of Division run so smoothly; that he was the Wicked Instrument they made use of to stir up the Division between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and between the Protestants of the Church of England and the Presbyterians.
These heavy charges being made good against this Bishop, and he most righteously executed for these his notorious Evil Actions, Why are most of our Clergy, and some of our Laity so wicked, as to vindicate him, and without the least Reason, or shaddow of Truth, cry him up for a Blessed Martyr, that had violated all the Laws of the Land, and was so great a Cause of most of the Miseries of England? That to prevent the Peoples being too Religious, advised and highly promoted the Declaration of Sports on the Lord's Day; a time so odious in the sight of any thing of a Christian, that it ought never to be forgotten. 21. That after he had compleatly acted the part of a great Tyrant, and thereby had justly lost the general Love, Esteem, and Affection of the best Protestants of the three Kingdoms. He willingly consented that Bishop Gauden, Bishop Duppa, &c. should compose a Book, and call it, His Portraicture or Picture; and this Book the King was to own as his, that it was composed by him, when God knows he had neither so much Piety, nor Capacity, as that Work re∣required, though as a Noble Peer lately said, Let that Book be Written by the King, on by any body else, there is little in it that deserves Esteem. The design of this Book was three-fold; the first was, By the Lies thereby, to ju∣stifie the King's Arbitrary and Illegal Actions; secondly, Heavily to load the People of England with Rebellion, &c. for standing up for the legal Liberties and Properties be∣longing to them, though absolutely forced thereunto, to prevent the Inundation of Misery and Popish Slavery, that the King and his wicked Court Favourites were then bringing on the three Kingdoms; thirdly, The cunning drift of the Factious and Defeated Party, design'd to make the same Advantage of his Book, as they did before of his Regal Name and Authority, and intended it, not only for a Defence of the King's former Actions, but also for promo∣ting their own future Designs. As for the Book, who ever is the real Author, has no occasion to value himself for
that Work, two things being with the greatest ease to be prov'd upon him. First, That he is a most Notorious Lyer, both as to his Assertions of the King's Innocency of those sad matters justly laid to his Charge, and also of his many unjust Accusations of the People of England; and secondly, That he was a Thief, and had so much Piety, as to have recourse to the famous Sir Philip Sydney's Arcadia (a Ro∣mance) in the time of his Troubles, and from thence to steal the Prayer of Pamelia (to an Heathen Diety) being under Imprisonment; not finding a suitable Form in the Liturgy, Psalms of David, or any other places of the sa∣cred Scripture. And that the Reader may be satisfied of the Truth of this Piece of Thievery, I have thought fit to Print both Prayers in Collums one against the other. That of Pamelias may be found in Pembrook's Arcadia, p. 248. 13 Edit. Printed 1674. That of King Charles I's, is call'd a Prayer in time of Captivity, Printed in a Great Folio, call'd, the Works of King Charles, and also in his Eicon Basilike. The King's Prayer. Pamelia's Prayer to the Heathen Deity. O Powerful, O Eternal God, to whom nothing is so Great, that it may resist, or so Small, that it is contemn'd; look upon my Misery with thine Eye of Mer∣cy, and let thine Infinite Power vouchsafe to limit out some proportion of Delive∣rance unto me, as to thee shall seem most Convenient. Let not Injury, O Lord, Tri∣umph ever me, and let my O All seeing Light, and Eternal Life of all things, to whom nothing is either so Great, that it may resist, or so Small, that it is contemn'd; look upon my Misery, with thine Eye of Mercy, and let thine Infinite Power vouchsafe to limit out some proporrion of Delive∣rance unto me, as to thee shall seem most Convenient. Let not Injury, O Lord, Tri∣umph over me and
Faults by thy hand be Cor∣rected, and make not mine unjust Enemies the Minister of thy Justice. But yet, my God, if in thy Wisdom, this be the aptest Chastisment for my unexcusable Folly; if this low Bondage be fittest for my over high Desire; if the Pride of my (not enough humble) heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto thy Will, and joyful∣ly embrace what sorrow thou wilt have me suffer; only thus much let me crave of thee (let my craving, O Lord, be accepted of thee, since even that proceeds from thee;) let me crave e∣ven by the Noblest Title, which in my greatest Affli∣ction, I may give my self, that I am thy Creature, and by thy goodness which is thy self; that thou wilt suf∣fer some Beam of thy Maje∣sty to shine into my mind, that it may still depend con∣fidently on thee; let Cala∣mity be the Exercise, but not the overthrow of my ver∣tue; let their Power prevail, but prevail not to Destructi∣on; let my Greatness be their Prey; let my pain be Faults by thy Hand be Cor∣rected, and make not my un∣just Enemies the Ministers of thy Iustice. But yet, my God, if in thy Wisdom, this be the aptest Chastisment for my unexcusable Transgression; if this ungrateful Bondage be fittest for my over high Desires if the Pride of my (not enough humble) heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto thy Will, and chearfully em∣brace what sorrow thou wilt have me suffer; only thus much let me crave of thee (let my craving, O Lord, be accepted of, since it even proceeds from thee) that by thy goodness, which is thy self, thou wilt suffer some Beam of thy Majesty, so to shine in my mind, that I, who in my greatest Affliction, acknow∣ledge it my Noblest Title to be thy Creature, may still de∣pend confidently on thee; let Calamity be the Exercise, but not the overthrow of my Ver∣tue; O let not their prevail∣ing Power be to my Destru∣ction; and if it be thy Will that they more and more vex me with Punishment, yet, O Lord, never let their wicked∣ness have such a hand, but that I may still carry a pure
mind and stedfast Resolution, ever to serve thee without fear, or Presumption, yet with that humble confidence, which may best please thee; so that at last I may come to thy E∣ternal Kingdom, through the Merits of thy Son our alone Saviour. Iesus Christ. Amen. the sweetness of their Re∣venge; let them (if so it seem good unto thee) vex me with more and more Punishment; but, O Lord, let never their Wickedness have such a hand, but that I may carry a pure mind in a pure Body; and pausing a while, O most gracious Lord, said she, whatever becomes of me, preserve the vertuous Mu idorus. Having now given an Account of the design of Pub∣lishing this special Book, and also what it is composed of, I shall now produce divers Reasons (enough I think to convince any rational Man that will not be willfully blind. And first, I shall give you the Noble Earl of Anglesey's Memorandum, perfixt before the Book reputed to be King Charles I's, called, Icon Basilice, and found by Edward Millington, who sold the said Earl's Library, all Written with the Earl's own Hand, in these Words: King Charles the Second, and Duke of York, did both (in the last Session of Parliament, 1675. when I shew'd Them in the Lord's House, the Written Copy of this Book, wherein are some Corrections, and Alterations written with the late King Charles I's own Hand, Assure me, That this was none of the said King's Compiling, but made by Dr. Gauden, Bishop of Exeter; which I here incert for the undeceiv∣ing others in this Point, by attesting so much under my Hand. ANGLESEY.
This Noble Earl's Advertisement, or Memorandum, must have the greater Weight, for that he concealed it (for ought I can hear) from the Publick, which doubtless he would not have done, if he had had any design to carry it on by making it Publick. This Memorandum being true, the World has the Words of two Kings, that Bishop Gauden, and not King Charles, Composed this lying Book: For further proof, that Dr. Gauden writ this Book, take a Summary Account of some Papers relating, Eicon Ba∣silice, now, or lately in the Hands of Mr. North, Merchant, living on Tower Hill, London; whereby it appears that Dr. Gauden, late Bishop of Exeter, and afterwards of Worcester, was the Author of that Book, and not King Charles I. as the World hath for above Forty Years been imposed upon to believe. Mr. North is a worthy Person, and a Member of the Church of England; he, and Mr. Charles Gauden (the Bi∣shop's Son) married two Sisters, and Mr. Gauden dying about Ten Years since, all his Papers were left with his Widow, and Mr. North having occasion to look them o∣ver, for some relating to his Sister-in-laws affairs, found these relating to the Eicon Basilice, carefully tied up to∣gether. Mr. North, by reason of his Marriage, had many years acquaintance with Bishop Gauden's Family, and knows that the Bishop's Widow, at first gave them to her Dar∣ling Son, John Gauden, and upon his Death, they came to Mr. Charles Gauden. And further, that in his ma∣ny years knowledge of that Family, it hath constantly, and without any manner of doubt, been declared, that the Bishop was the Author of the Book. There are seve∣ral Letters and Papers, I shall briefly give the Contents of them, for the truth of which, I shall refer to the Ori∣ginal Papers, and to those many reverend and worthy Persons, who have Read, or been at the Reading of them.
Bishop Gauden, at the time of King Charles the Second's Restauration, was incumbent of Bocking in Essex, and from that fat Parsonage was promoted to the Lean Bishoprick of Exeter, which he complain'd was not sufficient to keep up the Port of a Bishop, and thought that by his Merits he might lay claim to a better; and the Death of Dr. Duppa, Bishop of Winchester, being daily expected, he ap∣ply'd himself to the King, with great Importunity, to be translated thither; pleading his Desert, which, as is evi∣dent from the Papers I mention, could be no other than that of having written a Book which did such great Ser∣vice to the Royal Family, that King Charles the 2d. thought himself oblig'd to promise him that Bishoprick, tho' when it became Void gave it to an other. 1. There is Letter from Sir Edward Nicholas, Secretary of State, to Dr. Gauden, dated January 1660, wrote by the King's Command, intimating the King had received his Letter, and that he should not have Cause to complain of his removal from Bocking. 2. In the Bishops Letter to Chancellor Hide, dated 28. December 1661, and his Petition to the King, the Bishop sets forth, That he had an high Rack [The Bishoprick of Exeter] but Empty Manger; and declares what hazards he had run of Life and Estate; and what great Advan∣tage had accrued to the Crown by his Service: That what he had done was for Comforting and incouraging of the King's Friends, Exposing his Enemies, and converting, &c. He pleads that what was done like a King, should have a King∣like Retribution; and Instances in the Cases of Joseph, Mordecai, and Daniel, who were Honoured and Rewarded for the Service they did to the Respective Princes, (tho' as he observes) they were Captives in a strange Land. 3. The Bishops Letter to the Duke of York, dated the 17th of January 1661: Strongly urges the great Services he had done, and Importunately Begs his Royal Highness, to intercede for him with the King.
4. There is an Original Letter from the Lord Chan∣cellor Hide (all of his own hand writing) to the Bishop of Exeter, dated 13th. of March 1661, importing, that the Chancellor had received several Letters from him: That he was uneasy under the Bishop's Importunity, ex∣cuses his not being yet able to serve him; Speaks of an∣nexing a Commendum to his Bishoprick; and towards the close it hath this remarkable Expression, The Particu∣lar you mention, has indeed been imparted to me as a Se∣cret; I am sorry I ever knew it, and When it ceases to be a Secret, it will please none but Mr. Milton. This is Subscribed, Edw. Hide, C. 5. Mrs. Gauden after the Death of the Bishop, writes to her Son Mr. John Gauden, That she had sent him an Hogs∣head of Cyder, and Orders some Pictures to be sent her by the same Man. In this Letter she speaks of the Book commonly call'd the Kings; she calls it the Jewel; and tells her Son, that her Husband hoped to make a Fortune by it, and wonders it should be doubted whether her Husband wrote it; but says, She has a Letter of a very Great Man's that will clear it up. 6. There is also a long Narrative of Mrs. Gauden's Hand-writing, shewing, that her Husband wrote the Book. This she sent to her Son, with the Letter, wherein she said, She had sent it that she might be a Clavis to him. The Narrative sets forth, That after her Husband had wrote the Book, He shewed it to the Lord Capel, who ap∣proved it, and was for the printing of it; but wished the King might have a Sight of it. That an Opportunity was taken to Convey it to his Ma∣jesty by the Lord Marquiss of Hertford, when He went to the Treaty at the Isle of Wight. That the Marquiss after his Return from thence, told her Husband, that he gave the Book to the King; and his Majesty did not like it, but was for putting it out, not
as his own, but another's. But it being Urged, That CROMWEL, and others of the Army, having got a great Reputation with the People, for Parts and Piety, it would do best to be in the King's Name. His Majesty took time to consider of it. That the Marquiss told her Husband, He knew not what was become of the Papers; and said, God knows what will become of the King. That her Husband not hearing the King's pleasure a∣bout it, and finding Danger hastening on him, he having kept a Copy by him, sent it by one Mr. Symmonds, a per∣secuted Minister, to the Press, together with a Letter. That Mr. Royston was the Painter, but did not know but the King wrote it: That part of it was seized in the Press, together with her Husband's Letter, and Mr. Sym∣monds was taken. Nevertherless the Work was carried on, and finished a few days after his Majesty's death: That when it was published, the Parliament was Enraged; and her Husband conceiving his Life and Estate to be in danger, fled to Sir John Wennworth's, near Yarmouth, intending thence to pass the Seas: But Mr. Symmonds falling sick, and dying soon after, not having been Examin'd, and it not being discovered that her Husband was concern'd in it, (the Letter which had been taken having no Name to it) he altered his purpose, and returned home. That there was an Epistle at first intended: That the first Title was Suspisia Regalia, but changed to Eicon Ba∣silice; and that there were two Chapters added. That the Marquiss of Hertford, the Lord Capel, Bishop Duppa, and Bishop Morley, were at first the only Persons privy to it. That after the King's Restoration, Dr. Morley told her Husband, That his Merit was such, that he could Ask nothing but he could receive it.
That Duppa, Bishop of Winchester, being very sick, her Husband went to the King, and acquainted him that He was the Author of the Book; and for the Truth thereof ap∣pealed to Bishop Duppa, his Majesty's Tutor, who was yet living; and made an Apology for printing it, without his Majesty's Father's Order, or his; but pleaded the Circumstances of Time, and the King's danger. That His Majesty told her Husband, That till then, He never knew that he wrote it, but thought it was his Father's; yet wondred how he could have time: And ob∣served That it was wrote like a Scholar, as well as like a King; and said that if it had been published sooner, it might have saved his Fathers Life. That at the same time the King gave him a Promise of the Bishoprick of Winchester. That when he afterwards acquainted the Duke of York That he was the Author of that Book, yet went under his Father's Name, the Duke answered, He thought his Fa∣ther Wrote it. That her Husband then told his High∣ness, that the King had promised him the Bishoprick of Winchester; and that his Highness assured him of his Fa∣vour. That Bishop Duppa dying, her Husband apply'd to the King upon his Promise; but Dr. Morley, (who had told her Husband that he might have what he would ask) got it; and her Husband was made Bishop of Worcester; but having enjoy'd it but about half a Year, fell Sick and Dyed. That She Petitioned the King; setting forth. That her Husband left her a Widdow, with four Sons and a Daugh∣ter: That it cost her Husband 200 l. to remove from Exeter to Worcester; and pray'd his Majesty to bestow the half Years Rents upon her, which he denied, and gave them to another. Reader, take Notice, This is the Substance, tho' not perhaps the Express Words of Mrs. Gaudens Papers, and it
could be wished, that the Papers themselves were made Publick, then this short account would be fully justified. I cannot dismish this matter without admiring the re∣markable Providence of God, in the several steps towards the Discovery thereof, which was the interest of so great a number of Men, to have for ever Concealed and Buri∣ed. And 1. Had not Dr. Gauden been disappointed of the Bisho∣prick of Winchester, we should never have heard of his compiling the Icon Basilice; nor would he ever have bragg'd, That he had done like a King, if he had had a King∣like Retribution. 2. Had Mrs. Gauden but been made Bishop of Worcester for half an Year, she would probably have robb'd her Husband of the Glory of this Book, and suffered it to have been for ever a Jewel of the Crown. That the World may have a further satisfaction in this matter, I shall give a short account of what the Reve∣rend and Pious Dr. Walker, lately Rector of Feyfield in Essex, hath Written and Published a short time before he died, in Answer to the Ignorance and lying Impertinence of Dr. Hollingworth, Dr. Anthony Walker, in this Book call'd the True Account of the Author, of a Book Entitled, Icon Basilice, &c. gives the Reason of his Writing on this Subject. It was occasion'd by Dr. Hollingworth's Reproach∣ful Charge on him, for declaring, That King Charles I. was not the Author of that Book. He secondly, solemnly appeals to the Searcher of Hearts, Avenger of Falshood, and Revealer of Secrets; that he will write nothing for Truth, that he was not thoroughly perswaded of, and that by as full Evidence as he judged such a matter of Fact wanted, and at such distance of Time, is capable of. Thirdly, that he will with undisguised openness, pro∣duce the means of his Knowledge, the reasons of his Be∣lief, and the probable Arguments upon which his opini∣on is Grounded. His Word are these: Fol. 3. Sect. 11.
I know and believe the Book, whose Author is enquired after, was Written by Dr. Gauden, (except two Chapters Writ by Bishop Duppa) so far as the subjoined means may produce such Knowledge, and the Reasons may induce such Belief. First, Dr. Gauden, sometime before the Whole was finish∣ed, was pleased to acquaint me with his Design, and shewed me the Heads of divers Chapters, and some of the Discourses written of them, and after some time spent in persual, he vouchsaft to ask my Opinion concerning it, and after some consideration, I told him, I supposed, it would be much for the King's Reputation, Honour and Safety: But I expresly added, I stuck at the lawfulness of it, and modestly asked him, how he satisfyed himself, so to impose upon the World? To which he so readily replied, that I concluded he had thought on it before, viz. look on the Title, 'tis the Portraicture, &c. and no Man draws his own Picture, which satisfyed himself; and that he perfectly remembers, that in the 2 Chapter of the Earl of Strafford, in the first Edition, p. 8. l. 18, 19, 20. he explain'd, that he meant Dr. Juxton, then Bishop of London, in the following passage, viz. He only hath been least vext by them, who counsel'd me, not to consent against the Vote of my own Conscience. Secondly, That some good time after, what had passed as now related, we being both in London, and having dined to∣gether, Dr. Gauden in the Afternoon desired me to walk with him to a Friend; when we were gone part of the way, he told me he was going to the Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. Duppa (whom he had acquainted with his design) to fetch what he had left with his Lordship to be perused, or to shew him what he had further Written, desired me after a little Conversati∣on, to with-draw and leave them two alone, which I did, and after they had been some considerable time together, Dr. Gau∣den returned, and in the street gave me this Account of their Conference. My Lord of Salisbury told me there were two subjects more, he wished I had thought on, and propound∣ed
them to me, viz. The Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book, and the denying His Majesty the Attendance of his Chaplains (which are now the 16th. and 24th. Chap∣ters in the Printed Book, and desired me to Write two Chap∣ters upon them, which I promised, I would. But before we parted, he recalled that request, and said, I pray go you on, to finish what remains, and leave these two to me: I will per∣pare two Chapters upon them, which accordingly he did, as Dr. Gauden owned to me and others whom he had made privy to the whole, and never pretended to have Written these, as he did to have done all the rest. Thirdly, Sometime after the King was Beheaded, I asked Dr. Gauden, whether the King had ever seen the Book? he gave me this Answer, I know it certainly, no more then you; but I used my best endeavours he might, for I delivered a Co∣py of it to the Marquess of Hartford, when he went to the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, and intreated his Lordship, if he could obtain any private opportunity, he would deliver it to His Majesty, and humbly desire to know His Pleasure con∣cerning it. But matters running then high against the King, he had no answer by that Lord. Fourthly, After he was Lord Bishop of Worcester Elect, I asked him in private, whether that King Charles II. knew that he wrote it? He gave me this Answer; I cannot possi∣tively and certainly say, he doth, because, he was never pleas∣ed to take express notice of it to me. But, I take it for gran∣ted, he doth; for I am sure the Duke of York doth, for he hath spoken of it to me, and own'd it as a seasonable and ac∣ceptable service, and he knowing it, I question not but the King also doth. Fifthly, Mrs. Gauden his Wife, Mr. Gifford (who, if I am not mistaken, Transcribed that Copy that was sent to the Isle of Wight) and my self, believed it as much as we could any thing, and when we spake of it in his Presence, or Absence, did it, without the least Doubt of his having Writ it; and
we should be imposed upon to the highest degree imaginable, if Dr. Gauden wrote it not. Sixthly, Dr. Gauden delivered to me with his own hand, what was last sent up (after part was Printed, or at least in Mr. Royston's hand to be Printed) and after he had shew'd it me, and sealed it up, gave me strict caution, with what wa∣riness to carry and deliver it, and according to his Directi∣on, I delivered it, Saturday December 23d. 1648. in the Evening to one Peacock (Brother to Dr. Gauden's Steward or Bayliff) who was instructed by what hands he should trans∣mit it to Mr. Royston, and in the same method, a few days after the Impression was finished, I received six Books by the hand of Mr. Peacock, as an acknowledgment of that little I contributed to that Service; one of which I have still by me, and to justifie this matter against the ignorant impudence of Dr. Hollingsworth, he Declares Fol. 15. That he is ready to confirm his Knowledge and Belief herein with a Solemn Oath. Mrs. Gauden, Widow, residing at Gloucester, and often Declaring that her Husband had writ that, call'd, the King's Book, it coming at last to the knowledge of Dr. Nicholson then Bishop of Gloucester, who desiring to be fully satisfied in that point, did put the Question to her, upon her receiving the Sacrament, and she then affirmed, that it was wrote by her Husband. This, Persons of un∣doubted credit now living in Gloucester, can affirm for a Truth; and it is not question'd, but the present Bishop of Gloucester, will acknowledge that those Persons have related this matter to him, that it is well known to Mrs. Gauden's Brother, and several of her Relations, that Mrs. Gauden constantly in her Conversation, Declared, That her Husband was the Author of this Book. I could, if necessity requird, produce a great many Arguments more out of Doctor Walkers, or other Writings, to prove the Truth of this matter, but shall conclude it with this one
of the Doctors, in reference to the Providence of this Dis∣covery. Though God had many Holy, Righteous and Gracious ends to serve his Providence by, in the Publication of this Book; yet as I find it expressed in this very Book, Chap. the last p. 262. of the first Edition. God's wise Providence (we know) oft permits many Events, which his revealed Word, in no sort approves. And, I confess, I have many cogent reasons to persuade me, that God was not well pleased with Dr. Gau∣den, others, or my self; for what we contributed to it. And though for the aforesaid ends, he suffered it to succeed, yet I know not but he may have other ends now to serve, by suffering this Discovery to be Wrung, and rested from me, (I had almost said) by some Bodies (viz. Hollingworths) Impertinent Affectation, to meddle with what he understands not. Thus spake that good Man. I had not enlarged so much on this 21st. Article, but that I was desirous of giving full satisfaction to the World, of the Real Author of Eicon Basilice. That Posterity might not be deceived by the many Impudent, Ignorant, False, and Scandalous Assertions of most of the Clergy, and too many of the Laity, who to their Eternal Shame have taken more care and pains to defend that Book, and its pretended Author King Charles I. than they done to Vindicate the Holy Bible, and the Truth of the Christian Religion. 22. That caused the Star-Chamber and High-Com∣mission-Courts to be made Use of, to the general Grie∣vance of the People of England, and was unwilling to part with them, till he found these Courts were highly offensive to the Parliament, and that it was not Season∣able to displease the Kingdom at that time, for which Reasons at last he pass'd the Bills to take them away: And indeed there were many, and great Reasons, why those abominable oppressive Courts should be pull'd down,
and taken away. For that Old Serpent Arch-Bishop Laud, and divers of his Brethren, had cast off all Humanity, and were metamorphosed into Ravenous Wolves, and these Courts were under their Management. The Star-Cham∣ber had abounded in Extravagant Censures, whereby the Subjects were oppress'd by Grievious Fines, Imprison∣ments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations, Whippings, Pillories, Gags, Banishments, &c. And the High Commission Court, was grown to such Excess of Sharpness and Severity, as was not much less than the Spanish Inquisition. To re∣peat two or three of the many Instances of the Horrid Oppressions, and barbarous Cruelty, exercised in these Tyrannical Courts. Upon the 17th. of February, 1629. Dr. Leighton com∣ing out of Black Fryers Church, (it seems then he was no Conventicler) was seized by a Warrant from the High Commission Court, and dragged to Bishop Laud's House; from thence without any Examination, he was carried to New-gate, and there clapt into Irons, and thrust into a Nasty Hole, where he continued from Tuesday Night, till Thursday Noon, without Meat or Drink: They kept him in that loathsome Place, where Snow and Rain beat in upon him Fifteen Weeks, not permitting his Wife, or any Friend, to come near him, and denyed to give him a Copy of his Commitment; then they brought him into the Star-Chamber Court, where an Information was Exhibited a∣gainst him, for Publishing a Book, call'd, Lyon's Plea against the Plates. Dr. Leighton confess'd, that in 1628. He drew up the Heads of that Book, and having the approbation of five hundred Persons, under their hands, some whereof were Parliament Men. He went into Holland, and got between five and six hundred Printed for the use of the Parliament; but they being Dissolved, he returned home, not bring∣ing any of them into the Land, but made it his special care
to suppress them. In the same information, the Doctor was charged with these Words in the said Book; He do not read of greater Persecutions of God's People in any Nation professing the Gospel, then in this our Island, especially since the Death of Queen Elizabeth. He confessed the Words, and Answered, That the thing was too true, as appeared by the Prelates taking away Life and Livelihood from many Ministers and private Men; of whom, many were pined to Death in Prison, and many wandred up and down, their Families being left desolate and helpless: That besides this, the Blood of Souls had been endanger'd by the Removal of the Faithful Shepheards from the Flock; this was a cutting Truth. And Wicked Laud, being enraged, Desired the Court to put the highest Censure that could be put upon him; which they did to his Content, Condemning him to have his Ears cut, his Nose slit, to be Branded in the Face, Whipped at a Post, to stand on a Pillory, to pay Ten Thousand Pound fine (tho' they knew he was not worth so much) and to be perpetually Im∣prisoned. This Hellish Sentence being past, that vile Wretch Laud was so well pleased with it, that he pull'd of his Cap, and holding up his Hands, gave thanks to God who had gi∣ven him Victory over his Enemies. This Sentence being so miserably severe, the Execution thereof was little expe∣cted. But, Laud had his design; for upon the 26th. of November, 1630. The Censure was Executed in a most cruel manner, His Ears were cut, his Nose slit, his Face Branded with burn∣ing Irons, he was tyed to a Post, and Whipped with a treble Cord, to that cruel Degree, that he himself Writing the History thereof Ten Years after, affirmed that every lash brought away the Flesh, and that he should feel it to his dying day. He was lastly, put into the Pillory, and kept there near two hours in Frost and Snow; and then, after this most barbarous Usage, not permitted to return to his Quarters
in the Fleet Prison, in a Coach provided to carry him, but compelled in that sad Condition, and severe Season, to go by Water. After this, was kept Ten Weeks in Dirt and Mire, not being sheltered from Rain and Snow; They shut him up most closely, Twenty Two Months, and he remain'd a Prison∣er Ten or Eleven Years, not suffered to breath in the open Air, until that Noble Parliament of November, 1640. most hap∣pily delivered him. When he came abroad to prosecute his Petition, in that Parliament, he could neither Go, See, nor Hear. This Dismal Story, will be an Eternal Blot, not only on Laud, who was the chief Instrument in that sad Oppression, but also upon the pretended Martyr King Charles, for per∣mitting such Barbarous, and inhumane Cruelties to be ex∣ercised on his Subjects. I shall shew you something more of this Bloody Villains Barbarity, viz. That upon the first of February, 1632. Laud procured Mr. Prin, to be sent close Prisoner to the Tower, there he lay till the 21st. of June, 1633. when an Information (with∣out mentioning any particular Passages in his Book) was exhibited against him, in the Star Chamber Court, for Publishing a Book concerning Interludes, intitled, Histrio∣mastix, which was Licensed by a Chaplain of Dr. Abbatts, Archbishop of Canterbury. Upon the 17th. of February, 1633. notwithstanding his Book was Licensed, yet he had this heavy Sentence passed upon him, viz. To be Im∣prisoned for Life, pay Five Thousand Pounds Fine, be Expell∣ed Lincolns-Inn, Disabled to Exercise the Profession of a Barrister, Degraded by the University of Oxford of his Degrees there taken; and that done, to be set in the Pillory at Westminster, and have one of his Ears there cut off, and at another time, to be set in the Pillory in Cheap-side, and there to have his other Ear cut off.
Though many of the Lords never dreamt of the Exe∣cution of this Horrid Judgment, nay, though Queen Hen∣rietta Maria, (which deserves an Honourable Mention) and she shall have it, for She was the present King's Royal Grandmother, earnestly interceded with the Biggotted, Cru∣el, and Merciless King, (who was an abominable T—) to remit its Execution; yet on the 7th. and 10th. of May, it was fully Executed with great Rigour, and Mr. Prin remain'd Sundry Years in the Tower upon this censure. Mr. Burton, and Dr. Bastwrick, were also without the least just cause violently prosecuted after the same man∣ner; it will be too tedious to relate theirs and others un∣christian uses; when Tyranny and Arbitrary Power were Rampant. 23. That against the Law of Nature, against the Rules of Iustice, falsely charged those Innocent Men, the Noble Lord Mandeville, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Strode, and others, with Treason, for which in the Face of the Highest Iudicature in the Kingdom, they were most unjustly Imprisoned, the King denying them the Names of their Accusers; and which was an Act of Tyranny beyond Parrallel, He accused them, and yet would produce no Witness, he confessed them clear in his own Iudgment, yet they must not profess their own Innocen∣cy for fear of wounding his Honour. 24. That was not satisfied with Imprisoning and Op∣pressing some of the Parliament Men, but tempted and in∣couraged his English Army, with no less than the Spoil of the City of London, to come up and destroy the Parliament. He in an Hostile and inexcusable manner, made a most high In∣vasion upon the Priviledges of both Houses; Hereupon ma∣ny Citizens unarm'd, resorted to Westminster to present their Petitions, and express their stedfastness to the Par∣liament, whose Lives and Safety, by more than slight Ru∣mours, they doubted to be in Danger; the King having fortified White-Hall, and entertained Armed Men, not a
few, planted them at the Gate of his Palace. ['Tis remark∣able, the first Blood that was drawn in this Cause, was in that very place where the King's own Blood was after∣wards shed, 1 K. 21. 19.] where they Reviled, Menaced, and with drawn Swords, actually Wounded many of the Citizens, as they passed by in a peaceable manner, where∣of some dyed. Nay, they went farther, and were come to that height of Boldness, as to give out Insolent and Me∣nacing Speeches against the Parliament it self, and to im∣brue their hands in the Blood of the King's Subjects in West∣minster-Hall, and at the Doors of the Parliament, as well as at his own Gate. And when the Parliament and People complain'd, and demanded Justice for those Assaults, the King justified and abetted his own Crew in what they did. Nor can the passing by of a multitude of the King's Subjects, armed with no other Weapons then Petitions, be justly call'd Tumults; neither could the Parliament have for∣bid them, without the Breach of the Peoples Freedom. Unarmed Petitioners surely could not le formidable to any; and it must not be forgotten, that a very short time before His Majesty pretended to dread these Tumultuary Citi∣zens, the City Entertained, Feasted, and Conducted him to White-Hall, with as pompous Sollemnity, and costly Expres∣sions of Love and Duty, as ever had been known. Nay, af∣ter he had highly exasperated the People by his Irruption with the House of Commons, he went in his Coach un∣guarded into the City: He received not the lest Affront, much less, Violence in any of the Streets, but rather hum∣ble Demeanours and Supplications. He knew the Peo∣ple so full of Awe and Reverence to his Person, as to commit himself single amongst the thickest of them, at a time when had most provoked them: This shews be∣yond doubt, That all his fear of Tumults, was but a meer pretence, and occasions taken for his resolved Absence from
the Parliament, that he might turn his slashing at the Court Gate, to slaughtering in the Field. In order thereunto, the King retires first to Hampton Court, com∣manding his Servants, who were then Members of Parliament, to leave their service there, and to give their Attendance upon his Person. Soon after, his Popish Queen passes into Holland, carrying with her, all, or the the greatest part of the Crown Jewels, which she immedi∣ately Pawn'd, and with the Money bought Arms and Ammunition for the War which was not yet begun. Upon the 1st. of March, 1641. Both Houses called upon His Majesty, by their Petition presented at Theobalds; That for the Dispatch of the great Affairs of the Kingdo, the safety of his Person, the Protection and Comfort of his Subjects, he would be pleased to continue his abode near the Parliament, and not to with-draw himself to any of the re∣moter Parts, which if he should do, must needs be a cause of great danger and distraction; and they pray'd him to accept this humble Counsel, as the Effect of that Duty and Allegi∣ance which they ow'd unto him, and which would not suffer them to admit of any thoughts, intentions, or endeavours, but such as were necessary and advantagious for His Majesties Greatness and Honour, and the Safety and Prosperity of the Kingdom. These are Expressions surely, that did not in the least favour of that Sedition and Rebellion, with which our wicked Clergymen, charge the Memory of this Great and Noble Parliament. The King willingly giving himself up to the Conduct of Evil Counsellors, was deaf to the importunate suppli∣cation of the Lords and Commons for his Return; they therefore called again upon him more earnestly, and sent after him a Declaration to New-Market, by the Earls of Pembrook and Holland, and a Committee of the Commons, wherein they laid before him the Causes of their own Fears and Jealousies, in these particulars:
1. That the design of altering Religion, had been potent∣ly carried on, by those in greatest Authority about him; the Queen's Agent at Rome, the Pope's Nuncio here, are not only Evidences of this Design, but have been great Actors in it. 2. That the War with Scotland, was procured to make way for this Intent, and chiefly fomented by the Papists, and others Popishly affected, whereof we have many Evidences. 3. That the Rebellion in Ireland, was framed and contri∣ved here in England; and that the English Papists should have risen about the same time: We have several Testimo∣nies, &c. The Irish Rebels affirm, That they do nothing but by Authority from the King; they call themselves the Queen's Army; the Booty which they take from the English, they mark with the Queen's mark, and it is proved, that their purpose was to come to England, after they had done in Ire∣land. 4. The labouring to infuse into Your Majesties Subjects an evil Opinion of the Parliament, and other Symptons of a dis∣position of raising Arms, and dividing your People by a Civil War, in which Combustion, Ireland must needs be lost, and this Kingdom miserably wasted and consumed, if not wholly ruined and destroyed. 5. That Your Majesty sent away the Lord Digby by your own Warrant beyond Sea, after a Vote had passed in the House of Commons, Declaring, That he had appear'd in a Warlike manner at Kingston upon Thames, to the terror of your Ma∣jesties good Subjects; that he being so got beyond Sea, he vented his traiterous Conceptions, that Your Majesty should declare your Self, and retire to a place of Strength, and inti∣mated some service which he might do in those parts, whereby, in probability, he intended the procuring of some Foreign Force to strengthen Your Majesty, in that Condition into which he would have brought you; which malicious Counsel, we have great cause to doubt, made too deep an Impression in Your Maje∣sty,
considering the course you are pleased to take, of ab∣senting your Self from that Parliament, and carrying the Prince with you, which seems to express a purpose in Your Ma∣jesty to keep your Self in a readiness for the Acting of it. 6. The manifold Advertisements which we have had from Rome, Venice, Paris, and other parts, That they still ex∣pect that Your Majesty has some great design in hand, for the altering of Religion, the breaking the Neck of your Parliament, and that you will yet find means to compass that design; that the Pope's Nuncio hath sollicited the Kings of France and Spain to lend Your Majesty 4000 Men a piece, to help to maintain your Royalty against the Parliament. These are some of the grounds of our Fears and Jealousies, which made us so earnestly to implore your Royal Authority and Protection for our Defence, and security, in all the ways of Hu∣mility and Submission, which being denyed by Your Majesty, We do with sorrow apply our selves to the use of that Power [viz. the Militia] which by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, resides in us; yet still resolving to keep our selves within the Bounds of Faithfullness, and Alle∣giance to your Sacred Person and your Crown. And as to the Fears and Iealousies which His Majesty seem'd to have Entertained of them. The Lords and Commons thus Answered. We have according to Your Majesties desires, laid our hands upon our Hearts; we have asked our selves in the strictest Ex∣amination of our Consciences; we have searched our Affections, our Thoughts; considered our Actions, and can find none that can give Your Majesty any just Occasion to absent your self from White-Hall, and the Parliament; but that you may with more Honour and Safety continue there, than in any other place. Your Majesty lays a great Charge upon Us; if you will gra∣ciously be pleased to let us know the Particulars, we shall give a clear and satisfactory Answer: But what hope can we have of ever giving Your Majesty satisfaction, when those particu∣lars
which you have been made believe were true, yet being produced and made known to us, appeared to be false; and Your Majesty notwithstanding, will neither Punish, nor Pro∣duce the Authors: But go on to contract new Iealousies and Fears, upon general and uncertain Grounds, affording Us no means or possibility of particular Answer, to the clearing of our selves. We beseech Your Majesty to consider in what state you are, how easie and fair a way You have to Happi∣ness, Honour, and Greatness, Plenty and Security, if you will joyn with the Parliament in the Defence of the Religion, and publick good of the Kingdom; this is all we expect from you. And for this we return to you, our Lives, Fortunes, and ut∣most Endeavours to support Your Majesty, Your just Power and Soveraignty over us; but it is not Words that can secure us in these our humble Desires. We cannot, but too well and sorrowfully remember, what Gracious Messages we had from You this Summer, when with your Privity, the bring∣ing up the Army was in Agitation: We cannot but with the like Affections recall to our Minds, how, not two days before your own coming to the Commons House, You sent a Gracious Message, that You would always have a care of their Privi∣ledges, as of your own Prerogative; of the safety of their Per∣sons, as of your own Children: That which we expect, which will give us Assurance, that you have no thought but of Peace and Justice to your People, must be some real effect of your Goodness to them, in granting those things which your present necessity of the Kingdom do inforce us to desire; and that you will be Graciously pleased to put from you those Mis∣chievous Counsellors, which have caused all these Dangers and Distractions, and to continue your own Residence and the Princes, near London and the Parliament, which we hope will be an happy beginning of Contentment and Confidence be∣twixt. Your Majesty and People, and be followed with many succeeding Blessings of Honour and Greatness to Your Majesty, and of Security and Prosperity to them. These are brief
Heads of the Declaration, to which the King Answered: Have I violated your Laws? To which both Houses made this pertinent Reply. We are heartily sorry We have such plentiful Matter of an Answer to that Question, Have I vio∣lated your Laws? I must also take Notice, that in the beginning of the Year, 1642. a time when the King was in appearance transacting matters amicably with the two Houses, and we seemed to be in a deep Peace; a time when he Decla∣red, That he had received no other Carriage from his Par∣liament, than what he professed himself satisfied with; and that if the Bills he had past, were again to be offered, he should cheerfully and readily Assent unto them. Even then, he dispatch'd away Letters, and an Agent to the King of Denmark, complaing of the Parliament, and asking Sup∣plies from thence, AD PROPUL SANDOS HO∣STES, you know the English of that is, to Subdue his E∣nemies, and declared himself in these Words; Ad allia Consilia Animum Convertendum Duximus: We resolve to be∣take our selves to new Counsels. The very Words he used to that Parliament in the Year, 1628. Further, upon the discovery of his Plot to bring up the English Army against the Parliament, he turn'd to the Scottish Army then at New Castle, and baited his Tempta∣tion with a rich Reward, not only to have 300000 l. in hand, and the spoil of London, but four Northern Counties to be made Scotists. Moreover, to encourage them to joyn with him, he Declared to them, That he was to have Money and Horse from Denmark, and that he would make York the place of his Residence, for the better accommodation of both Nations, or fuller Revenge upon London. He also gathered Men in London, under pretence of raising Forces for Portugal, who were to possess themselves of the Tower. The Queen in Holland was buying Arms, and His Majesty had actually raised Forces in divers
Counties. The Parliament was all this time Petitioning in Peace; and for the Reasons now assigned amongst ma∣ny others, They humbly besought him, that he would be plea∣sed to put the Tower of London, and the Militia, into the Hands of such Persons, as should be recommended unto him by both Houses of Parliament. The King seemed to comply herein, and by his Answer promised them, That the Mi∣litia should be put into such Hands, as they should approve of, or recommend to him; hereupon both Houses nominated Persons of the greatest Honour, as fit for that Trust. I shall give you the Names of some of them; The Earls of Holland, Rutland, Bedford, Bullingbrook, Salisbury, War∣wick, Pembrook, Leicester, Stamford, Essex, Clare, Nor∣thumberland, Lincoln, Suffolk, &c. Lords, Paget, North, Strange, Roberts, Grey of Werk, Chandois, Dacres, Man∣deville, Wharton, Spencer, Brook, Herbert, Fielding, Lit∣tleton, Lord Keeper, &c. Men Eminent in all Qualifica∣tions of Honour and Sufficiency were recommended for several Counties, and the King was desired to agree there∣unto, as he had promised; upon his delaying to give a sa∣tisfactory Answer, they again Petition, setting forth, That nothing could enable them to suppress the Rebellion in Ireland, and secure England, but the granting of their Humble Peti∣tion, which they find so absolutely necessary for the pre∣servation of the King and Common-wealth, that the Laws of God and Man injoin them to see it put in Execution. They followed him to Theobalds, and his several removes to York, but he having Abdicated the Parliament, and being deaf to all their Importunities, they declared, That there had been of late a most desperate Design upon the House of Com∣mons, which they had just cause to believe was an effect of the Bloody Councels of Papists, and other evil affected Persons, who had already raised a Rebellion in Ireland, and by rea∣son of many Discoveries, They could not but fear they would pro∣ceed, not only to stir up the like Rebellion and Insurrection in
this Kingdom, but also to back them with Forces from A∣broad; and thereupon, both Houses made an Ordinance for the ordering of the Militia of England and Wales, there ap∣pearing an urgent and inevitable necessity for putting His Majesties Subjects in a posture of Defence for the Safe∣guard of both His Majesty and his People; and they re∣solved, That in this Case of extream danger, and of His Ma∣jesties Refusal, the Ordinance agreed to by both Houses for the Militia, doth oblige the People, and ought to be obeyed by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. They further a∣bout that time Resolved, That the King's Absence so far re∣mote from his Parliament, was not only an Obstruction, but might be a Destruction to the Affairs of Ireland. These (and many other) Reasons that may, with the greatest ease be given, 'tis notoriously manifest, That King Charles began, and carryed on, that Bloody Civil War against his poor Subjects without the least Colour of Reason and Iustice, for which wicked Acts, God justly suf∣fered him to be brought to that shameful and untimely End. This King studdying and endeavouring by all ways imagina∣ble, as he lived without the Love, so he died without the Lamentation of most People, but those Villains, that had been large instruments, in bringing him, and his People, into that miserable War and Division. 25. That after he had taken God to Witness of his rea∣diness to Treat at Uxbridge with the Parliament for avoid∣ing of Blood-shed (as pretended) he took the advantage of a Mist, the fittest Weather for Deceit and Treachery, and followed at the Heels, those Messengers of Peace, with a Train of Covert War, and with a Bloody surprise falls on the Parliaments secure Forces, which lay Quartering at Brentford, in the thoughts and expectation of a Treaty. He gives his Reason why he seemed for Peace, in a Let∣ter to his Queen, which was, That She must know as a certain Truth, That all, even his Party, are strongly impati∣ent
for a Peace, which oblidged him so much the more to shew on all occasions his Intentions to Peace; but tells her, no dan∣ger of Death shall make him do any thing unworthy of her Love. An excellent Resolution no doubt, for the pre∣serving the Protestant Religion, made to his Popish Queen. At the very instant of this Treaty, which was in 1644. the King used all imaginable meams to bring not only Foreign Forces, but the Irish Cut Throats, against the Parliament. To clear up this point, and also to shew how insincere he was in his pretended Intentions of Peace, I will briefly pre∣sent his Underhand Transactions, as well with Foreign Princes, as those Rebels; and in the first place, I shall take notice of some passages between Him and the Queen, in relation to this, and other Treaties. In a Letter to Her of January 9th. 1644. he Writes thus: The Scots Commissioners have sent to me to send a Com∣mission to their General Assembly, Which I am resolved not to do, but to the end of making some use of this occasion, by sending an honest Man to London, and that I may have the more time for a handsome Negative, I have demand∣ed a Pasport for Phil. Warwick, by whom to return my Answer. At another time the same Month He tells Her, That as for my calling those a He had agree to Treat with them as a Parliament, the Queen upbraided him for so doing, and he thus vindicates him∣self. Parliament, if there had been but Two of my Opinion, I had not done it; the calling did no ways acknow∣ledge them to be a Parliament, upon which condition and construction I did it, and ac∣cordingly it is registred in the Council Books. Nothing is more evident, than that the King was steered by the Queen's Council, in the manage∣ment of this Uxbridge Treaty, and that which is call'd the Church of England [The Bishops] was greatly her care. By Letter in January 1644. before the beginning of that Treaty, She instructs him not to abandon those who have served
him, lest they forsake him in his need; that She hopes he will have a care of her, and her Religion; that in Her Majesties Opinion, Religion should be the last thing upon which he should Treat; for if he do agree upon strickness against the Catholicks, it would discourage them to serve him, and if after∣wards there should be no Peace, he could never expect succours from Ireland, or any other Catholick Prince. In another of her Letters, we find her writing thus: January 17. 1644. It comforts me much to see the Treaty shall be at Uxbridge.—I received Yesterday Letters from the Duke of Lorrain, who sends me word, if his service be agree∣able to you, he will bring 10000 Men.—Above all, have a care not to abandon those who have served you, as well the Bi∣shops, as the poor Catholicks. By the King's Letters to the Queen in February, when the Treaty at Uxbridge was depending, He Stiles the Par∣liament, Unreasonable, Stubborn, Perfidious Rebels, pres∣ses her to hasten all possible Assistance to him, particular∣ly that of the Duke of Lorrain. He tells her, That, the limitted days for treating are now almost expired, without the least Agreement upon any one Article, wherefore I send for enlargement of days, That the whole Treaty may be laid open to the whole World, and I assure thee, thou needst not doubt the Issue of this Treaty; for my Commissio∣ners are so well chosen, (though I say it) that they will neither be Threatned nor Disputed from the Grounds I have given them, which (upon my Word) Is according to the little Note thou so well remembers.—Be confident, that in making Peace, I shall ever shew my Constancy in adhere∣ing to Bishops, and all our Friends, (which could be meant of no other than the Catholicks; for the Queen in her Letter before mentioned, had given him Charge of both together) and not forget to put a short Period to this per∣petual Parliament.
We find in another Letter, Dated the 5th. of March, ex∣pressing himself in these Words: I have thought of one means more to furnish Thee with my assistance, than hitherto thou hast had; it is, That I give Thee power to promise in my Name, that I will If this were so good a King, Why so much clamour against King James the II. for design∣ing the same thing. take away all the Penal Laws against the Roman Catholicks in Eng∣land, as soon as God shall enable me to do it. In relation to Ireland, he wrote to the Marquess of Ormond to this Effect, Jan. 7. The Rebells here have agreed to Treat, and most assured∣ly one of the first and chiefest Articles they will insist on, will be, To continue the Irish War, which is a Point  popular for me to break on, of which you are to make a double use; First, To hasten with all possible diligence the Peace there, the timely conclusion of which will take off that Inconvenience, which otherwise I may be subject to, by the Refufal of that Article upon any other Reason; Secondly, By dexterous conveying to the Irish, the danger there may be of their Total Exclusion from those Favours I intend them, in case the Rebells here clap up a Peace. Not doubting of a Peace, I must again remember you, to press the Irish for their speedy Assistance to Me here, and their Friends in Scotland.—I desire that the Irish would send as great a Body as they can, to Land about Cumber∣land, which will put those Northern Counties in a brave Con∣dition. Upon the 14th. Ianuary, he Writes thus to the Queen: As for the Peace of Ireland, to shew Thee the Care I have had of it, and Fruits I hope to receive from it, I have sent Thee the last Dispatches, I have sent concerning it.—For God's sake, let none know the particulars of my Dispatches. [Some secret piece of Villany against his Pro∣testant Subjects no Doubt, that he was so affraid of having it Discovered.]
Another Letter to Her of the 20th. of March, hath this Expression: I find that thou much mistakes me concerning Ire∣land, I desire nothing more than a Peace there, and ever for∣bid thy Commerce there. By another Letter, he commanded Ormond to Dispatch the Irish Peace out of hand, and thereby promises, that the Penal Laws, against the Roman Catholicks, Shall not be put in Execution: The Peace being made, and that when the Irish give him that Assistance which they have promi∣sed for the suppression of this Rebellion, then he would con∣sent to the Repeal of them by a Law; and Concludes, Re∣commending to him again, the speedy dispatch of the Peace of Ireland. Another Letter to Ormond, upon the 27th. of February 1644. was, That he thought himself bound in Conscience, not to lose that assistance which he might hope from his Irish Sub∣jects, for such scruples as in a less pressing condition might rea∣sonably be struck at by him, and therefore Commanded him to conclude a Peace with the Irish whatever it cost; so that his Protestant Subjects there might be secured, and his Regal Au∣thority preserved.—If the present taking away the Penal Laws against Papists will do it (said he) I shall not think it a hard Bargin, so that freely and vigourously they en∣gage themselves in my Assistance against my Rebells of England and Scotland, for which no Conditions can be too hard, not being against Conscience or Honour. By another Letter to the Marquess of Ormond, in the same Month, he Writes thus: Now again, I cannot but men∣tion the necessity of hastning the Irish Peace, for which, I hope, you are already furnished by Me, with Materials sufficient. But in case (against all Expectation and Reason) Peace cannot be had upon those Terms, you must not by any means fall to a New Rupture with them, but continue the Cessation.
There was at this time high Di∣vision in London, be∣tween the Presbyte∣rians and Indepen∣dants; therefore to in both, by fo∣menting misunder∣standings between them, the Indepen∣dants are to be Ca∣oled; a thing wor∣thy remembrance in all times. He wrote to the Duke of Richmond, one of his Com∣missioners for the Uxbridge Treaty, To re∣member to Cajole well the Independants and the Scots; nay, he instructed Secre∣tary Nicholas to bribe the Commissioners for the Parliament, with the promise of Security, Rewards and Places. Now upon the whole matter, let any impartial and unbyassed Person tell me, whether he doth not in his Conscience believe, that the Parliament were far more sincere in making an Honourable Peace for poor England, than this apparently, False, Popish, and tricking King, whom the wicked part of Mankind so madly cry up for a Martyr. 26. That for many Reasons it was concluded, That King Charles had no small share in the abominable Act of Poysoning his own Father, King James I. and that Good Man, Prince Henry, his Son. It being very plain, divers Parliaments were but short lived; if they did but mutter, that an Enquiry should be made of their untimely Ends, and that the Duke of Buckingham was protected for that, and other Villanies. And that I may Demonstrate to the World more fully than I have already done in the 6th. Articles, That King Charles I. did most Dishonourably and Persidiously Betray the poor Protestants of the Isle of Rhee and Rochel. I shall produce Copies of two of his Letters to them.
LETTER I. The King of England's Letter, Directed to the Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers, Burghers, and Inhabitants of the City of Rochell, dated 19th. of May, Old Stile 1628. Gentlemen, BE not Discomforted, though my Fleet be return'd, hold out unto the last, for I am resolved, that all my Fleet shall Perish, rather than you shall not be Relieved, and to this end I have Countermanded it, and have sent Ships to make them change their Design, that they had taken to come back: I shall shortly send you some number of Ships to re∣inforce it, and with the help of God, the Success will be hap∣py for that Deliverance. Your Good Friend, CHARLES R. And on the 21st. in the Morning, there came to Rochell from England, a Soldier bringing another Letter from the King, Dated 27th. of May Old Stile, sealed with the Arms of England, which was as followeth: Gentlemen, I Have been troubled to here that my Fleet was upon the Point of Returning, without Answering my Commands, which were to force the Entry of your Provisions, whatever
came of it, and have given it new Orders to Return into your Road, and not stir untill it hath relieved you with Victuals, or that I have sent them an Additional strength, for which I have caused Men to work with all Diligence; Be assured that I will never Abandon you, and that I will imploy all the Force of my Kingdom for your Deliverance, untill it please God to bless Me with giving you an assured Peace. Given at Our Palace at Westm. May 27. 1628. Old Stile. GENTLEMEN, Your Good Friend, CHARLES R. Whosoever shall carefully Read, and Consider these two Letters, and the Sollemn Declarations there, and observe how contrary to his Royal Word, he Sacrificed these Poor Protestants, will have cause to harbour the worst of thoughts of this King, and to blush at the horrid Impudence and Im∣piety of those Wicked Wretches, that would make a Saint and a Martyr of him. And to demonstrate this Treachery, I shall incert a Copy of the Remonstrance made by one of the Deputies of the City of Rochel, because it will very much illustrate the Subject, and be as an Eternal mark of Infamy to the Memory of that Prince, and deserves to be Engraven on Brass, and Wrote on Marble, that so the Re∣membrance of it may never be lost; it is as followeth.
A Copy of the Remonstrance of the Sieur Vincent, to the King of Great Britain, drawn out of his own Journals. SIR, THE Grief which obliges us to fill the Ears of Your Majesty with our Cries, and to Reiterate them so often, ought to be extream to the last Degree. Behold us now, Sir, prostrate at your Feet, to Wash them with our Tears, and God Almighty Grant, that we do not in a little time, come to Sigh out our last Breath, with the News of the Desolation of our City. We know not how, Sir, to conceal it from You, the Sence we have of Her being at Her last Gasp, puts us into Despair; seeing the Succours which Your Majesty hath made us hope would be ready, hath been deferred from day to day for many Weeks together. SIR, the City of Rochell did by us beg of You, with all the Humility they were capable of Expressing, to receive them into your Protection, and You as Solemnly agreed to it; since they have had at divers times, all the Assurances possible, as well from your own Month, as under the Hand of Your Majesty, that you would never abandon them: Whereupon by a Miracle of Constancy, they have held out hitherto firm a whole Year, contending with the Horrours of a most gastly Famine, that thereby they might give Your Majesty, full leisure to send them the Succours You were graci∣ously pleased to promise them; and thus constant and unshaken were they, even when all Europe, believed they ought to have despaired, in that after they had Relief, as they thought seve∣ral days in their sight, it returned without effecting, or attempting any thing. And though our Enemies have from
thence taken occasion to make them divers Overtures of Ac∣commodation, which their extream Necessities seemed to Counsel them to hearken unto; yet they chose rather to run the Hazzard of their utter Destruction, then to be wanting in the least to the Promises we had Sworn for them to Your Majesty, or to shew they had the least Diffidence of your Pro∣tection. After all this, Sir, shall it be Recorded in the History of Your Reign; That they perished in your Hands without having reaped any other Fruit of the Good Will Your Majesty hath professed towards them, and of the Assurance they have therein relied upon; then the rendring them irrecountable to their King, from whom otherwise they might have hoped to have found Grace and Favour! Pardon, Sir, this, from a People who see themselves upon the very Threshold of their Sepulchers, if they cannot avoid Sighs which may seem undecent in your Royal Presence. It is common for those that are near their End, to finish their Lives with Groans. In the Name of God, Sir, so long as there remains any Breath in us, and before we do quite Ex∣pire, command your Succours to hasten to our Assistance; pro∣vided that diligence be yet used, we will remain Caution to Your Majesty with the Peril of our Heads, that they will ar∣rive time enough to save us. As to the Impossibilities that some may be willing to find in it, permit us to tell You freely, Sir, That those are only founded, either in their fear, or their very little Affection for us; and that besides the Report which some Persons unsuspected, have made to Your Majesty, we beseech You, be You judge, whether our City, which is within sight of the Digne and Pallisade, and carriage of her Cannon, would send time after time to implore Your Assistance, if they thought it would be unprofitable to them, and if having every day offers of Capitulation upon advantagious Conditions, if they would hearken to it for themselves alone, they would be so imprudent to neglect the opportunity. But we are ready if
it shall please Your Majesty to permit it, to take upon us the first Risques and Hazzards of the Execution, to the end that we may be justified to all the World in the sincerity of our Pro∣ceeding; and that it may not be imputed to us, that we are prodigal of the Blood of Your Majesties Subjects to ill purpose, to be sparing of our own: No, Sir, there is no such impossibi∣lity as what some would pretend. The only Cause of our Fears, comes from the slowness and continual neglects from one Day to another, and one Week to another, which makes our hopes Recoil. After the Return of your Fleet, we comforted our selves with the Promise that was made us by Your Majesty, That it should depart again within fifteen days; but when after twenty were past, there were added fourteen more to them: And after that, we found divers other neglectful Disappointments, that have now taken up two Months compleat; Good God, Sir, How long has that time seemed to those miserable Wretches that have not Bread! We know very well the good Inclinations Your Ma∣jesty hath for our Weal; as also we have had most certain Proofs of the Duke of Buckingham, your high Admiral, his passionate applying himself for us, as also the same of the Lords of your Council; but shall we not be excusable, if seeing the Effects thereof crossed, by all these Delays? We entertain Iea∣lousies, that Your Majesty is not well served, and that there is some secret Hand, which clandestingly obstructs, that which the Zeal of others endeavours to advance. It is ordinary for Men in misery to be suspicious, and possibly here we are not injurious∣ly so; indeed we do not know any Person on whom to deter∣mine our Diffidence, nor have we any intention to call to mind any thing that is past; may that, Sir, remain buried in Eter∣nal Oblivion, and for the future at least, let those to whom Your Majesty shall give your Commands, answer so well your kindness to us, with their Affection and Diligence, that with∣out any farther delay, your Fleet may put to Sea, and deli∣ver us yet out of the Cruel Arms of Death.
If, Sir, upon this occasion, you will please to Discern those who serve you Faithfully, from other Men (if there be any such) let Your Majesty be pleased to hold it indubitable, that all those who under any pretext whatsoever, shall Counsel the least Delayings, do it from an ill Intention, there being none can pretend ignorance of the dreadful Necessities to which our City is reduced, and that one single days delay more, may be the cause of its ruine. Have therefore some considerati∣on of it, we beseech You, by the Tears and pitiful Cries of more than Twelve Thousand poor languishing Souls, whom Hunger devours, and who are all ready to Perish, by the Interest of above a Million of others, who without doubt will see themselves▪ Buried under our Ruins, and who will find the Knife at their Throats, the very next day after we are lost. By the Glory of your Scepter, under the Sanctuary of which we are come to put our selves, and which it hath pleased you to tender us for our Security; by the Magnificent Title of De∣fender of the Faith, which obligeth Your Majesty to relieve those that are Oppressed for that very Reason; in short, by the Faith and Word of a King, which it hath pleased You of your Grace to Engage us, permit not, Sir, our Innocent Blood to reflect upon your Crown, to stain it to Ages that shall succeed us, and at present to cry against Your Majesty before God and Man. This is that, Sir, which our Consciences, and the Duty we owe to our Afflicted Fellow Citizens, oblige us to come and represent a new to Your Majesty, in whose Charity, Magna∣nimity, Piety, and inviolable Fidelity, we hawe such Confi∣dence, That we assure our selves, God will take this in good part, and in convenient Consideration: And since that all our Supplications tend to make You be pleased, to cause your Fleet to set Sail with all possible Diligence, and to afford your Pre∣sence at Portsmouth, where it is so absolutely necessary, that without it, we can scaree hope for any success.
We therefore do in all Humility supplicate Your Majesty, immediately to put in Execution the Resolution you have ta∣ken of going thither; and here, Sir, we fall upon our Knees before Your Majesty, with most Ardent Prayer to God, that it will please him to make us find more and more Favour in your Sight, that even we, who now Supplicate You, may come a∣gain to render to You, our most humble and grateful Acknow∣ledgments, as to our Great Deliverer, from whom, next to God, we shall hold our Estates, Honours and Lives, and the memory of so signal a Deliverance, we may leave to our Children, to the end that they may Celebrate it after us. Yet, all these Sufferings, and the lamentable Estate of the Rochellers, nor the sad and pressing Remonstrance of their Deputies (enough to melt the Heart of any One, but a Cruel faithless Tyrant) were Efficatious enough to oblige that Wicked Court, to let this third Fleet set sail before September following, under the Command of the Earl of Lindsey, who arrived before Rochell towards the latter end of the said Month; but instead of succouring the City, breaking the Digue, and opening the Passage, to get in Provisions, which the King had made them to expect, and which they had already almost swallowed in their hopes. That Commander had set on Shore the Lord , (unknown to the Deputies that were on Board, and to the Duke of Soubize) who went straight to the French King's Camp, where after some Conferences with the Car∣dinal, with whom (as was then reported) he had con∣certed the Delivery of the City to the King, which was very far from giving it any Succour. He went Post for England, to give an Account of it to his Master. After the English Fleet had been a Month in the Road without doing any thing, and without sending the Besieged Army any manner of Victuals, which were on Board: Then the poor Rochellers, who were not able to hold out no longer, saw plainly how they were Abused and Betrayed; so
hereupon they resolved (no more to expect the Illusory Succours of the English, and the vain Hopes of assistance from them, to deliver up the City; and whilst the Lord Montague was going for England, and to return to the French King with the Effects of his Negotiation, they re∣solve to throw themselves into the Arms of the King, their Sovereign, in hopes after all, by their Repentance for their so long Obstinancy, to obtain his Grace and Fa∣vour. And about the end of October, their Agreement was made among themselves, and Signed: And the first of November, the King made Entrance into Rochell, where he found the Inhabitants more like Skeletons, than Men and Women. And this King had more compassion than the hard-hearted Oppressor of England, for he was so sensi∣bly touched with that sad Sight, that he could not refrain letting fall some Tears. On the 5th. of November, the English Fleet, after ha∣ving been a Month and six days in the Road, and seen from thence the Reductien of Rochell to the Obedience of the King, set sail, carrying a long with them a great par∣ty of French, as well as Victuals, they had brought from England. 27. That was an Exorbitant and Outragious T—up∣on the People of Scotland, as appears in many particulars; to recount some of them Briefly, 1. In overturning their Church Government, Establish∣ed by many Acts of Parliament, and obtruding upon them Laud's Liturgy, and Popish Ceremonies, after that wicked Bishop had sent his Liturgy to Rome to be approved there. 2. In denying them (the undoubted Right of all Sub∣jects) to Petition for Redress of their Grievances. 3. In dissolving their Synod and Parliament, Burning the Pacification made with them, by the Hangman's hands;
and Imprisoning the Lord's sent by them, to Petition him to perform his Sollemn Promises, and Redress their Grie∣vances. 4. In levying Doctrines against them, and raising a Ci∣vil War, to justify himself in the Violation of their Laws. A Civil War it was, said the Great Lord Digby, seeing we are of the same Religion, and under the same King. And 5. In attempting to make use of the Love and Affecti∣on of the English, to Enslave and Ruin the Scotish Na∣tion. It is not improper here to observe. 1. That the Scotish Covenant was not a new Invention or Innovation, but Established by the Law of Scotland, and taken by King James the First, seventy Years before King Charles the Second took it. 2. That Bishops and Clergymen in Conjunction with Pa∣pists, abetted and assisted this T—in the violation of the Laws, when the Bulk of the Nobility, Gentry, and Peo∣ple of England, appeared undauntedly in Defence of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. 3. That Popery hath greatly spred in Scotland ever since Laud's Superstition was introduced here, the Number of Papists not exceeding 600. And therefore Presbetery be∣ing now restored by a Law, it may be reasonably hoped, that it will reduce many who have been deluded into that Idolatry. 4. That Princes are not always to trust to the Insinua∣tions and Suggestions of Scotish Bishops; seeing that when they instigated King Charles I. to Dissolve the Synod and Parliament, he was seduced by them into a belief, That the Scotish Covenanteers were a contemptible Number, and their Party in Scotland was sufficient to deal with them. 5. That the Scots were not Rebells in taking Arms to Assert their Rights, and Vindicate the Laws and Liberties of their Countrey.
That the horrid Imposition of Laud's Popish Liturgy, did occasion the Troubles of Scotland, is very manifest from Dr. Burnet's (now Bishop of Salisbury) his Memoirs of Duke Hamilton, for he saith, Page 30. The Liturgy had some Alterations from the English, which made it more Invi∣dious and less Satisfactory.—The Imposing it, really va∣ried from their former Practices and Constitutions.—Pag. 33. The Lords Petition'd, complaining against the Liturgy, and Book of Canons; offering under the highest Penalties, to prove they contain'd things both contrary to Religion, and the Laws of the Land, pag. 36. The Earls of Traquaire and Roxbourgh, by Letter to the King, advised him to secure the People of that which they so much apprehended, the fear of Innovation of Religion, saying, that they found few or none well satisfied, pag. 33. The Earl of Traquaire went to Court, and gave Account, that all the Troubles were occasi∣oned by introducing the Liturgy; with which, scarce a Mem∣ber of Council (except Bishops) was well satisfied: Neither were all these Cardinals for it, for the Archbishop of St. Andrews, from the beginning, had withstood these Designs, and the Archbishop of Glascoe, was worse pleased. Their Commissioners in their Charge against Laud, ex∣hibited to the Parliament of England, 1641. say, pag. 11. &c. This Book inverteth the Order of the Communion in the Book of England, of the divers secret Reasons of this Change, we mention one only: In joyning the Spiritual Praise and Thanksgiving, which is in the Book of England, pertinent after the Communion, with the Prayer of Consecration before the Communion; and that under the Name of Memorial or Ob∣lation, for no other ends, but that the Memorial and Sacrifice of Praise, mention'd in it, may be understood according to the Popish meaning; Bellarmin de Missâ. Lib. 2. Chap. 21.  of the Spiritual Sacrifice, but of the Oblation of the Body of the Lord.
The Corporal Presence of Christ's Body, is also to be found here; for the Words of the Mass-Book, serving to this purpose, which are not to be found in the Book of England, are taken  here: Almighty God is incall'd, That of his Almighty Goodness, he may vouchsafe so to Bless and sanctifie with his Word and Spirit, these Gifts of Bread and Wine, that they be unto us the Body and Blood of Christ.—On the one part, the Expressions of the Book of England, at the delivery of the Elements: Of feeding on Christ by Faith, and of Eating and Drinking in Remembrance, that Christ died for thee, are utterly Deleted. To prove that Laud did send this Liturgy to Rome to be approved of; Read a Book of Good Credit, Entitled, New Survey of the West Indies, Wrote by a Reverend Di∣vine of the Church of England, Mr. Thomas Gage, Minister of Deal in Kent, 'tis in pag. 280. in the Folio Edition; He there tells you, That being a Fryar, he went to Rome with Letters of Recommendation to Cardinal Barbarini, the Pope's Nephew, Entituled, The Protector of England: That com∣ing acquainted with Father Fitzherbert, of the English Col∣ledge of Jesuits, he highly praised Archbishop Laud, and said, That he not long since sent a Common Prayer Book (which he had composed for the Church of Scotland) to be first viewed and approved by the Pope and Cardinals; and, That they liked it very well for Protestants to be Trained up in a Form of Prayer and Service; yet the Cardinals (first giving him thanks for his Respect) sent him word that they thought it was not fitting for Scotland; that Father Fitz∣herbert told him, he was Witness of all, this being sent for by the Cardinal to give him his Opinion about it, and of the Temper of the Scots. And that Laud hearing the Censure of the Cardinals, concerning his Intention and Form of Pray∣er, to ingratiate himself the more in their Favour, Corrected some things in it, and made it more harsh and unreasonable for that Nation.
This Good Man, Mr. Gage, after he had here related the matter as above, expresses himself thus: This most True Relation of Archbishop Laud, I have oft spoke o in private Discourse, and publickly in Preaching; and I could not in Conscience omit it here, both to vindicate the j Censure of Death, whih the Parliament gave against him, and to reprove the ungrounded Opinion and Error of some Ignorant Spirits, who have since his Death, highly exalted and cryed him up as a Martyr. 'Tis worthy of Notice, that these Passages (making Laud to appear a great Villain) were by the means of Priest Craft left out of the Impression in Octavo. Something like this of Mr. Gage, may be found in Bi∣shop Burnet's Memoirs of Duke Hamilton, fol. 83. he re∣lates, That in the Year 1638. one Abernethy, who from a Jesuit, turned a zealous Presbyterian, spread a story in Scotland which took wonderfully, of the Liturgy of that Kingdom, being sent to Rome to some Cardinals to be Re∣vised by them; and that Seignior Con, (the Popes Nun∣cio to the Court of England) had shewed it to Abernethy at Rome, and though Con denied it afterwards, as is pre∣tended, yet it doth not follow that what Abernethy asserts, was false, for it is well known, that Con being a Jesuit, might Lye for the Holy Church. If I had time, and that this Book would not be too large, I could produce very many more instances of King Charles his Tyrannical Oppressing his Subjects of England, Scotland and Ireland. I shall end this Melancholly Story with the Heads of the many Articles of Mis-government of that Prince, viz. His taking Buckingham, Laud, and many more Evil Counsellors into the highest Favour, and being Govern'd by them. His Popish Match, and Private Articles, in favour of Popery.
His receiving a Letter from the Pope, and sending him  Answer, calling him most Holy Father, &c. His Pardoning 20 Popish Priests, &c. pursuant to the Private Articles of Marriage. His most unchristian like Betraying the Isle of Rhee and Rechell, a sad Story. His plucking up the Root of all Property, by taking the Peoples Goods against their Wills, and their Liberties a∣gainst Law. His giving Commissions to Try and Execute his Subject by Martial Law. His Raising Money by Loans against Law. His requiring London, and other places, to set out Ships  him at their own Charge. His Billotting Soldiers (many of which were Papists) on his poor Subjects. His giving Commissions to several Lords to raise Money by way of Excise. His ordering his Treasurer to pay 30000 l. to buy a large number of German Horse, with Arms, both for Horse and Foot, to be brought to England against the Parliament. His causing Mr. Chambars, a Merchant, to be fin'd 2000 l. for complaining of the hard Usage the Merchants of Eng∣land had. His oppressing, and Imprisoning all Ranks and Orders of Men Unjustly. His threatning the House of Commons, if they would not give Money. His shameful betraying the Palatinate, and keeping the Charity of England from them. His having, without doubt, a great Hand in the wicked Irish Rebellion. His large Demonstration of his Piety, by ordering a De∣claration of Sports on the Lord's Day.
His giving Wicked, Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Orders, Instructions and Commissions to the Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and endeavoured to save him from the Parliaments Just and necessary Prosecution. His suffering the Bishops, Gauden and Duppa, to com∣pose a lying Book, call'd, Eicon Basilice, and to put it out in his Name, the better to justify his evil Actions against his People. His causing the Star-Chamber and High Commission Courts to be made use of, to the great Grievance of the People of England. His falsely charging with Treason, and unjustly impri∣soning the Lord Mandevil, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Strode, and many others, and would produce no Witness against them. His Tempting and Incouraging his English and Irish Ar∣mies to come and Destroy the Parliament. His dealing most Basely and Treacherously with the Par∣liament whilst Treating at Uxbridge. His having a hand in the untimely Deaths of King James the First, and Prince Henry. His being an Exorbitant and Outragious Tyrant upon the People of England.
