T2207 12657986 65424
I Do appoint Thomas Simmons to Print the Trial of Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farwell, and that no others presume to Print the same. July the 8th. 1682. FR. PEMBERTON.
THE TRYAL OF Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, AND John Farwell. Upon an Information exhibited by the Kings Attorny General against them, for Writing, Printing and Pub∣lishing Libels, by way of Letters and other Prints, reflecting upon the Justice of the Nation, in the Proceedings against the Murderers OF Sir EDMOND-BƲRY GODFREY. At Guild-hal on Tuesday June the 20th. 1682. Where after a full hearing they were Convicted. Together with an accompt of several AFFIDAVITS read in His Majesties Court of KINGS BENCH and other matters at the time of their receiving SEN∣TENCE. To which is added by way of Appendix, Several other Affidavits which further confirm the Testi∣mony of Mr. Prance, given upon the Tryal of Green, Berry and Hill about that Murder, with some Obser∣vations touching the said Thompson, Farwell and Pain. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Lud∣gate Street, 1682.
THE TRYAL OF Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, AND John Farwell. Trinity Term, XXXIV. Caroli Secundi Regis. On Tuesday the 20th. of June 1682, before the Right Ho∣nourable Sir Francis Pemberton, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesties Court of Kings Bench, by Nisi prius in the Guild-Hall of the City of London, came on the Tryals of Natha∣niel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farwel, upon an In∣formation brought against them for several Trespasses and Mis∣demeanours in Writing, Printing, and Publishing Letters Im∣porting that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey murdered himself, as also for several Falsities relating to the said matter Printed in several Papers, called the Loyal Protestant Intelligence. And the Jurors Names, were as follow, Jur. Peter Houblon. John Ellis. William Barret. Joshua Brooks. Gervas Byfield. Jonathan Lee. George Widdowes. William Sambrooke. William Jacomb. John Delmee. Samuel Bayly. Samuel Howard.
The INFORMATION was in the Attorney Gene∣ral's name. FOR that in Hillery Term, in the 30th. and 31th. years of this Kings Reign, in the Court of Kings Bench at Westminster, by a Jury of the County of Middlesex were indicted, Robert Green,  Gerald, Clerk, Henry Berry, Lawrence Hill, Dominick Kelly and Philbert Vernatt; for that they by the Instigation of the Devil, &c. The 12th of October in the 30th year of this Kings Reign, at the Parish of St. Mary le Strand in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex aforesaid; with Force and Arms, in and upon Sir Edmond∣bury Godfrey Knight, in the Peace of God and the King, then and there being, feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, did make an Assault, and kill and murther him in this manner, viz. Green did fold and fasten a Linnen Handkercheif about his Neck, and therewith choaked and strangled him, of which choaking and strangling he instantly died: And the others, viz. Gerald, Berry, Hill, Kelley and Vernatt were present, aiding, abetting, comforting, assisting and maintaining the said Green to kill and murther the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey in form aforesaid; and so they the said Green, Gerald, Berry, Hill, Kelly, and Vernatt in manner and form aforesaid, him the said Sir Edmonbury God∣frey feloniously, willfully, and of their malice aforethought, did kill and murther, against the Peace of our said Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity: To which Indictment afterwards, the said Term, the said Robert Green, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill severally pleaded, Not Guilty, and put themselves upon the Country; and after in the said Term of St. Hillary, in the said Court of Kings Bench at Westminster, for the Felony and Murther aforesaid, by a Jury of their Country, in due manner were tryed, and thereof law∣fully convicted and attainted, as by the Record thereof in the said Court of Kings Bench at Westminster remaining more fully appears; which said Robert Green, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill were after∣wards executed and suffered Death according to the form and effect of the Judgment and Attainder aforesaid: And whereas one Miles Prance upon the Tryal of the Indictment aforesaid, was produced a Witness and sworn for the King, and gave material Evidence against the said Green, Berry and Hill to prove them guilty of the Felony and Murther aforesaid: And one William Bedloe, John Brown, Elizabeth Curtis, Zachary Skillarne and Nicholas Cambridge upon the Tryal aforesaid, were Witnesses in like manner produced and sworn for the King, and gave diverse material evidences against the said Green, Berry and Hill to prove them guilty of the said Felony and Murder: And whereas also the said  Gerald, Robert Green, Lawrence Hill, Dominick Kelly and Philbert Vernat at the time of the Felony and Murther aforesaid were Papists, and Maintainers of the Romish Superstitions; And the said Gerald, Dominick Kelly and Philbert Vernatt have fled and not yet ap∣peared to the said Indictment; And whereas also by the Coroners Inquest taken upon the view of the Body of the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey lying dead, before John Cooper Gent. one of the Coroners of the said County of Middlesex by the Oaths of honest and lawful men
of the the same County above the number of twelve persons, it was found that certain Malefactors unknown, Feloniously and of their malice pre∣pense him the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey did strangle and choak, of which he dyed: The said Nathaniel Thomson, William Pain and John Farwel, well knowing the premises, and being persons Devillishly af∣fected, devising, practising, and with all their strength intending the peace and common Tranquillity of their Kingdom of England to di∣sturb, and as much as in them lay the due course of the Law to destroy, and subvert and elude, and the Justice of this Kingdom of England to defame and scandalize, and as well the said Miles Prance, William Bedloe, John Brown, Elizabeth Curtis, Zachary Skillarne, Nicholas Cambridge, as the said John Cooper, and the honest and lawful men Sworn upon En∣quest aforesaid, upon view of the body aforesaid, to bring into the grea∣test hatred, contempt and vile esteem with all the Kings Subjects, and to deter the Kings Subjects from finding detecting and proving the designes of Papists against our Lord the King and the true Re∣ligion now by Law established, and impiously and wickedly devising, and intending them the said  Gerald, Dominick Kelly, and Philbert Vernat, from undergoing the pains and sentence; by Law upon them to be inflicted, for the murther aforesaid, and to aid and assist them (altho' they be Guilty) to be found Not Guilty thereof; And to deceive and beguile the King's Subjects in the premisses with their false Affirmations and Arguments, and cause and procure that it should be believed and esteemed, that the said Green, Berry, and Hill, the per∣sons for the Murther of the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey as aforesaid, convicted, and executed, had been convicted and executed unjustly, and that the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was felo de se, and himself had fe∣loniously murthered. They the said Thompson, Pain, and Farwel, their most impious wicked and diabolical intentions to fulfil and perfect af∣terwards, to wit the 23th. of February, in the four and Thirtieth year of the Raign of our now Soveraign Lord the King, at the parish of Saint Mary le Bow, London, with force and arms, &c. falsly, unlawful∣ly, unjustly, wickedly, and diabolically, made, composed, and caused to be printed, a certain false scandalous and defamatory Libel, Enti∣tuled a Letter to Mr. Miles Prance in relation to the Murther of Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey: In which said Libel amongst other things, it is con∣tained, as follows, And hearing that the Coroners Jury or Inquest were first of Opinion, and accordingly declared, he was felo de se, and that there was much Art and Skill used to procure their Verdict to the contrary, more particularly the refusing of the body at their instance and request to be o∣pened: And in another place of the same Libel, it is further contained, as follows, They say, that if a Man or any other Creature, be strangled or hang'd, and his body cold, and the blood setled in the Veins (as he must needs be if your Evidence be true) (meaning the Evidence of the said Miles Prance) run twenty Swords through such a body, not one drop of blood will come out, but on the contrary, his body when found was full of blood in so much that (over and above the Cakes or great Gobbets of con∣gealed putrified blood found afterwards in his Cloths) the Constable when he pulled the sword out of his body, it crashed against his back bone, and gob∣bets of blood and water gushed or gubled out of that wound in abundance, not only in that very place where the sword was pulled out, but in all his pas∣sage to the White house: especially, there where his body was lifted over two
high sumps, and also when he was laid upon the Table, the blood and water so issued out of that wound, that it ran from off the Table upon the Floor, and from thence into the Cellar; so that they do averr, that that wound that he received by that Sword must of necessity be the Cause of his Death: And in another part of the same Libel it is further contained as follows, They observe that Bedloe's before the Committee of Lords, and your Evidence in relation to this Gentleman's Death, are as different as the East is from the West; for you dogg him out of St. Clements, the other decoys him from Charing Cross; you swear he was strangled with an Handkercheif near the Stables going to the Water-side, Bedloe that he was smothered with a Pillow in a Room in the great Court in Somerset house; you say that he took Horse at Sohoe, Bedloe says he took Coach at Clarendon-house, with many more such like contradictions; and considering the old Proverb, fore-warned fore∣armed; a further and fuller accompt of the whole matter expect. And that the said Nathaniel Thompson, William Paine and John Farewell, their most impious, wicked and diabolical intentions to fulfil and perfect, afterwards, to wit the third day of March in the said four and thirtieth year of the Reign of the said late Lord the King, at the said Parish of St. Mary le Bow London aforesaid, with Force and Arms, &c. falsly, unlawfully, unjustly, evilly, maliciously, scandalously and diabolically, made, composed and caused to be printed, another false, scandalous and defaming Libel, intitu∣led a second Letter to Miles Prance, in reply to the Ghost of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. In which last mentioned Libel amonst other things, it is further contained as follows, Next whereas my Letter saith (and that truly) that the Coroners Jury were first of opinion, and accordingly declared he was felo de se, and that much Art and Skill was used to procure their Verdict to the contrary. And in another place of the same last mentioned Libel amongst other things it is further contained as follows; And it would be ve∣ry material, if the Coroner would declare what he received for that Job, and of whom; and what Evidence he had to induce the Jury to find (as the Inqui∣sition imports) that he was strangled with a Linnen cloth, a matter of fact never so much as spoken of until you came in with your Evidence, which was not in some weeks after; And I do again averr, that the Body was required by the Jury to be opened, and was refused; and if the Body was in their and the Coroner's power (as the Ghost insinuates) such power was concealed from and denied the Jury. And in another place of the same last mentioned Li∣bel, it is amongst other things contained as follows: He is to under∣stand, that Mr. Brown, the two Chirurgions, (meaning the said Zachary Skillarne and Nicholas Cambridge) and Mrs. Curtis are no competent (nor can be material) Witnesses in this Case. And in another place of the same last mentioned Libel, it is further contained as follows; But Mr. Prance, it will be fully proved that the Body was full of Blood, and that there was Cakes or Gobbets of dry Blood found in his Cloaths, which with his Body stunk extreamly: And it will be also fully and effectually proved that his Eyes, Nostrils and Corners of his Mouth were Fly-blown. And in another place of the same last mentioned Libel amongst other things it is contained as fol∣lows: And as to the seventh and last Paragraph, which relates only to the dif∣ference betwixt you and Mr. Bedloe's Evidence, I must take notice that what you and and he swears is very contradictory.: And in another place of the same last mentioned Libel, amongst other things it is further contain∣ed as follows, But I cannot omit to take further notice of Mr. Curtis's Affi∣davit, in relation to the Wax found upon the Cloths, in which I cannot say,
but she may swear true; but this I do averr, that if it be so, those drops were put upon the Cloths long after he was found. And after the Jury had set on the body; for there was no such thing then on the Cloths. And, I sup∣pose, this was some artifice used by those, who either out of interest or de∣sign, were desirous to comfirm his being murthered at Somerset house. And the said Attorney General for the same Lord the King, gives the Court here to understand and be informed: That the said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farwell, in their further prosecution aforesaid, fals∣ly, wickedly, and maliciously, their contrivances and intentions afore∣said, afterwards to with the 7th. day of March, in the four and Thirti∣eth year of our said Lord the King, at the Parish of Saint Mary le Bow, London, with force and arms, &c. falsly, unlawfully, unjusty, wickedly, maliciously, scandalously, and devillishly, composed, made, and caused to be printed, a certain other false, scandalous, and defamatory Libel, Entitu∣led, The Loyal Protestant and True Domestick Intelligence, or News both from City and Country. In which last mentioned Libel it is contained, as follows, that there is not in the said Letter, (meaning the said false, scandalous, and defaming Libel,) Entituled, a Letter to Mr. Miles Prance, in relation to the Murther of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, before first mentioned, the least item or circum∣stance, but what will be by undeniable Evidence made out to be the truth: So the said Mr. Prance, having not as yet vouchsafed an Answer to that Letter, he will speedily receive a further Letter relating to that Murther, wherein the fur∣ther truth will not only be fully set forth, and other Circumstances set out: And further, that the said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farwell, in their further prosecuting, falsly, wickedly, and maliciously, their contri∣vances and intentions aforesaid, with force and arms, &c. falsly, unlaw∣fully, wickedly, maliciously, and devillishly, composed, and caused to be Printed, a certain other false, scandalous, and defamatory Libel, Entitu∣led, The Loyal Protestant Intelligence, &c. In which last mentioned Libel amongst other things, it is contained, as follows, Whereas Dick Janeway in this dayes Mercury, promises an Answer to the late Letter to Mr. Prance, &c. This is to give him, and all the world notice, That such an An∣swer is impatiently expected by the Author of that Letter, who questions not but to prove every Tittle of that Letter, to the satisfaction of all mankind; And besides, he is very desirous that the Courantier (according to his last Pac∣quet of Advice to Rome) would go on, and use his Interest, to procure the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council of London, to inspect the Truth of that Letter; whereby it will appear inevitably, that there is not one Papist or Popishly affected person concerned in that Letter, or in the proof of the particulars thereof; but the same (with divers other material circum∣stances relating to the Murther of Sir E B Godfrey, and the Fraud and Blind put upon the world in relation thereto) will be more fully, plainly and mani∣festly proved, without giving ill Words, or scurrilous Language or Reflections to any persons that really are, or supposed to be therein concern'd in any circum∣stance whatsoever. And that the said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farwell, in their further prosecution aforesaid, falsly, wickedly, and maliciously, their contrivances and intentions, after, to wit: The first day of April, in the four and thirtieth year of the Reign of our said Lord the King, with force and arms, &c. at the Parish of Saint Mary le Bow, London, aforesaid, falsly, unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, maliciously, scan∣dalously, and devillishly, made, composed, and caused to be Printed, a certain other false, scandalous, and defamatory Libel, Entituled, the Loyal
Protestant Intelligence, &c. In which last mentioned Libel amongst other things it is contained as follows; Last Wednesday, Nathaniel Thompson vpon Summons appeared before the Lords of his Majesties most honourable Privy Council, about the Letters to Mr. Miles Prance concerning the Death òf Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, where he justified the matter, and produced the Authors, who are ready to prove (by undeniable and substantial Witnes∣ses, not in the least accused or suspected of Popery, as the malicious Party do suggest) that every Tittle and Iota of those Letters are true. And that in another part of the last mentioned Libel, amongst other things it is con∣tained as follows; Mr. Thompson and the Gentlemen his Friends are to attend the next Wednesday at Council, where they do not doubt, but that Honourable Board will put them into à Method to prove the whole, or any par∣ticular which their Honours in their great Wisdom shall think convenient to be brought to the Test or Examination. And further that the said Nathaniel Thompson &c. the Twenty-third day of February in the abovesaid Thirty-fourth year of our said Lord the King; and divers other days and times betwixt the said Twenty-third of February and the aforesaid Thirty-fourth year, and the day of the exhibiting of the said Information at the Parish of St Mary le Bow, London aforesaid, knowingly, and every of them knowing the said several Libels to be false, malicious, scandalous and seditious, with Force and Arms, &c. falsly, unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, maliciously, scandalously, seditiously and devillishly the said false, malicious, scandalous and seditious Libels uttered and published, and each of them uttered and published in manifest contempt of the Laws of this Kingdom of England, and the Scandal and Defamation of the publick Justice of the same, to the evil Example of all others in like Case offending; and against the Kings Peace, his Crown and Dignity, &c. Then Proclamation for Information being made, Mr. Thompson acquainted my Lord and the Jury with the effect of the Information as follows: Mr. Thompson. My Lord and you Gentlemen of the Jury, This is an Information against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farwell, and it is for writing and printing several Scandalous Libels about the the Death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey: In which we set forth, that Green Berry and Hill were indicted for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and thereof convicted and attained, and that the said Green, Berry and Hill were executed for it; that upon their Tryal for that Matter several Witnesses were examined, namely Mr. Prance, Bedloe, Curtis and several others to prove Sir Edmondbury Godfrey murthered at Somerset-house; and before the Tryal there was an Inquest taken by the Coroner of Middlesex, by which it does appear, that Sir Edmond∣bury Godfrey was murthered by several Persons unknown, and that the Defendants to reflect upon the Justice of the Nation, and scandalize the Witnesses produced at that Tryal, and to make it believed that these Persons died Wrongfully, did write and print several scandalous Libels and Letters, one of them intituled a Letter to Miles Prance concerning the Murther of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and in these Let∣ters did suggest as if he had been felo de se, and do reflect upon every
one of the Witnesses, as if they had contradicted themselves, and also do reflect upon the Coroner as though he had bribed the Jury, and do undertake by these Arguments and several others (that you will hear) to prove that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey murthered himself; And that in another Libel that Thompson printed called his Loyal, Protestant Intelligence, he says he will make it out by a Cloud of Witnes∣ses: This we say is against the Peace of the King, and defaming of the Justice of the Nation: If we prove this matter upon them, you are to find them Guilty. Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, The matter which you have now before you, is as impudent a thing as ever was done. Gentlemen, Sir Edmondbury God∣frey was murthered, and Green and the Contrivers of it have been executed for it; the matter hath passed the Examination of the Parliament, and the King and Council and all; Now this Thompson is a Prin∣ter, I may as well say a Printer of Libels, for he does constantly print Libels against the Religion esta∣blished, and the Justice of the Nation; The Jury that were impannelled upon the Coroners Inquest, he says of them that they at first did agree that he murthered himself, and afterwards did return and find that he was murthered by others: Gentlemen 'tis plain that he was murthered by others, and the particular persons have been tryed for it and found guilty. Now this person after all this, what does he do? He takes upon him to write a Letter to Prance; (Prance was one of the Witnesses in that Case) he writes it by the name of a Letter, but it is a foul and wicked Libel; and therein ('tis too long for me to mention the particulars) he scandalizes the publick Justice of the Nation, he undertakes to vindicate the Murderers, and to accuse the proceedings of the Nation. But Gentle∣men, we will prove these Men guilty of framing and publishing of these wicked Libels, and that is all that is needful to be done upon the point of Evidence. We will call our Witnesses.
Then Mr. Clare was sworn, and produced a Copy of the Re∣cord of the conviction and attainder of Green, Berry, and Hill, for the Murther of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. As also a Copy of the In∣quisition, taken by the Coroner of Middlesex upon the view of the Body of the said Sir Edmonbury Godfrey, whereby it is found that he was Murthered by them, Strangled with a Cord by persons un∣known. Both which (Mr. Clare having sworn to be true Copies) were read. L. Chief Just. This matter of his being thus strangled, was found before it was discovered who did the Murder. It was upon the sight of the body, and they supposed it to be done by a Cord, but afterwards it came to light that it was done with an Handkerchief. Mr. Thomps. (To the Counsel of the Defendants) If you will put us to prove all, we must prove that these men were executed. Then Captain Richardson was sworn. L. Chief Just. Were these men Executed for this Murder? Capt. Rich. Yes, I saw them Executed. Then Mr. Prance was sworn. Mr. Thomps. Did you give Evidence upon the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill, for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey? Mr. Prance. Yes. Mr. Thomps. Do you remember that Brown was a Witness too? Mr. Prance. Yes, Brown was. Mr. Thomps. Was Curtis a Witness, and Mr. Bedloe? Mr. Prance. That Curtis was, I don't remember, Mr. Bedloe was. Then Curtis was sworn. Mr. Thomps. Were you a Witness at the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill? Mrs. Curtis. Yes, I was. Then Sir John Nicholas and Sir Philip Lloyd, and William Bridg∣man, Esq were sworn, and the two Letters in the Information were shewed to them L. Cheif. Just. Were these shewed to the Defendants, Thompson, and Pain, and Farwell, at the Council? Sir Phil. Lloyd. These were the same, I know because they are en∣dorsed by my hand; Thompson owned the Printing of both, and one other of the Defendants owned the writing of one of them, and the other of the other. L. Chief Just. But Thompson owned the Printing of both? Sir Phil. Lloyd. Yes, my Lord. Mr. Sol. Gen. Did Pain and Farwell own the bringing of both to Thompson to Print? Sir Phil. Lloyd. One owned the one, and the other the other.
Then Sir John Nicholas and Mr. Bridgman testified the same. Mr. Saunders of Council with Pain, said to Sir Ph. Lloyd. Did Pain or Farwel own that they brought both, or one the one, and the other the other? Sir. Ph. Lloyd. One the one, and the other the other. Mr. Saunders. Then pray Sir, which was that Farwel did own? Sir Ph. Lloyd. My Lord my own memory does not tell me which, but here are Notes say that Farwel owned the first, and that Pain owned the second. L. Chief Just. Do you beleive them to be true? Jo. Nicholas. Yes Sir I took the Notes. Mr. Yalding. Did he readily discover his Authors? Sir Ph. Lloyd. Yes he did. Associat. The Title is thus a Letter to Mr. Miles Prance in re∣lation to the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. Shall I read it all? L. Chief Just. All of it. Associat. Read it in these words. Mr. Prance.
A LETTER TO Mr. MILES PRANCE, in Relation to the Murther of Sir EDMOND-BƲRY GODFREY. Mr. Prance, PErceiving by some late Pamphlets several Rumors rais'd, as if there were endeavours us'd to asperse your Evidence in Relation to the Death of Sir E. B. G. and to lay that Murther upon Himself. And remembring the Consternation which then was in all peoples minds by the discovery at that time of a Dreadful and most Horrid Popish Plot, which occasion'd divers to report, and most to believe (even several days before the dead Body was found) That he was Murder'd by the Papists at Somerset-house. And hearing that the Coroners Jury or Inquest were first of Opinion, and accordinly declar'd he was Felo de Se; And that there was much Art and Skill us'd to procure their Verdict to the con∣trary; More particularly, the refusing of the Body (at their Instance and request) to be opened; and opposing the Assistance of the Coroner of Westminster, (who is taken notice of to be a Knowing and Impartial Man in the Execution of his Office;) who was desir'd to, and did at∣tend for that purpose, but was dismist with a Guiney; telling him, they had no need of his Service. I made it my business, partly for Yours, but chiefly for the Truths sake, to make a strict Enquiry into the far∣ther Causes of the aforesaid Rumours, and do find these particulars very much urg'd, and discours'd of, (viz.) I. In oppsition to the Evidence of his being dog'd up and down, and lodg'd in a great House at St. Clements on Saturday the 12. of Octo∣ber 1678. (being the day he was first missing.) It is affirm'd he went out of his House that very Saturday morning about nine a Clock; (which is the last time he ever returned thither;) And about 10 that Forenoon was in the Fields walking towards Marybone, (in which Parish his dead Corps was afterwards found,) And was there met by a Brewer in St. Giles's, who discoursed with him; And about a 11 of the same day he was seen passing by the Lady Cooks Lodgings near the Cock-pit; After which, he was seen in St. Martins-lane, went by the Church, and down Church-lane into the Strand; About 1 passed by the door of one Mr. Rat∣cliff an Oyl-man in the Strand, And soon after was met in the back Court of Lincolns-Inne by two Gentlemen, who observed him to make a sud∣den turn, and to go out at the back door; They went out at that door also, and did see him turn the corner Wall; between which place and Turn Stile, he was met by a Barrister at Law; And that a person living near Primrose-Hill, declared before divers persons, that he saw him a∣bout
3 that Saturday in the Afternoon walking in those Fields, his usual Walk being that way. II. They say, the place where, and the posture wherein he was found, are very remarkable. As to the place; It was in a Ditch on the South side of Primrose-Hill, surrounded with divers Closes, Fenced with high Mounds and Ditches, no Road near, only some deep dirty Lanes made only for the conveniency for driving Cows and such like Cattle in and out of the Grounds; And those very Lanes not coming near 500 yards of the place, and impossible for any Man on Horse-back with a Dead Corps before him at Midnight to approach, unless Gaps were made i'th Mounds, as the Constable and his Assistants found by Experience when they came on Horseback thither. As to the posture, his Breast was Un∣buttoned, his Wastcoat and Shirt put by, his Sword run in under his left Pap next his Skin, the Point coming out at his right Shoulder about six Inches, his left Arm doubled under him, (on which his Head seemed to lean,) and his right Arm stiff, stretcht out upon the Bank, his Belly and Breast being supported by the side of the Bank, his Knees knit together, and with his Hips a little bending or doubling under him. And they infer from thence, that he being a tall raw bon'd Man, (after he had been several daies dead,) could never be crooked so as to be cram'd into a Sedan, (which are very low built, and difficult to be carried with proper Braces, much more as You Evidenced with Cords) then straight∣ned, and his Legs opened, and mounted on Horse-back, and then put into the posture he was found in, and stiffened again. III. Now altho the Matters aforesaid may be said to be only circumstan∣tial, Yet they produce undeniable Arguments against your Evidence, (viz.) They say, that if a Man, or any other Creature be Strangled, or Hanged, and his Body cold, and the Blood settled in the Veins, (as he must needs be if Your Evidence be true,) run 20 Swords through such a Body, not one drop of blood will come out: But on the contrary, his Body when found, was full of Blood, insomuch, that (over and above the Cakes or great Goblets of congealed putrified Blood found afterwards in his Cloaths) the Constable when he pulled the Sword out of his Body, it crashed against his Back∣bone, and Gobbets of Blood and Water gushed or gubbled out of that Wound in abundance, not only in that very place where the Sword was pulled out, but in all his passage to the White-house, especially there where his Body was lifted over two high Stumps; and also when he was laid up∣on the Table, the Blood and Water so issued out of that wound, that it ran from off the Table upon the Floor, and from thence into the Cellar; So that they do aver that that wound that he received by that Sword must of necessity be the cause of his Death. And they take notice, that so much of the Sword as was in his Body, was discoloured and blackish; and that part that came out at his back was of a dullish colour, and the Point thereof was rusty; Also, that the Cloaths, Belt and cabbard were weather-beaten to rags; his body stunk extremely; his Eyes, Nostrils, and corners of his Mouth were Fly-blown; all which must naturally be by his being so long in the Air. IV. They say, That when a Man is Strangled or Hanged, his Eyes will be extorted, his Face will be swelled and black; Whereas his Eyes were shut, his Face was pale, only the left part of his Chin, with his breast and belly being next the Earth, were putrified, and looked of a blue and gree∣nish colour, more especially about the wound; For that the blood, when
hot, running to the wound, caused the greater putrefaction in that place; whenas, if the wound had been made after he was Dead, and Cold, the rest of his body would have putrified as soon, and as much as there. V. They say, That the cleanness of his Shoes makes against Your Evidence; For his Shoes were cleaned or rather glazed on the very bottoms of the Soles, occasioned by his walking in the Grass, and Grass-seeds were observed to stick in the Seams of his Shoes; And besides, there was not one speck of Dirt on his Cloaths, or Legs, not so much as a Horse-hair sticking thereon; Whereas, the Constable, and those that went with him, were dirty'd and moil'd up to the very Saddle-skirts, and not easily to be cleaned; And Mr. Prance, you know that a tall Dead Man on Horse-back, cannot lift up his Legs to save them from the Dirt. VI. As to the looseness of his Neck, and the Rim or green Circle about it, they say they are Ridiculous and Impertinent Arguments against so ma∣ny Demonstrative ones; especially, when there is not a Nurse, or any Wo∣man of Age, that hath buried any Relations, but will tell you it's very common for people to die with Necks as loose as his was. And the Rim a∣bout his Neck was so far from being like one made with a Cravat or Hand∣kerchief, that it seems to be occasioned by the great height and stifness of his Collar, which was fast Buttoned about his Neck, and on which his Head rested, and was unbuttoned about 10 of the Clock the next day, before the Coroner or Jury came. But if that Rim, or those Bruises, that Your Evidence seems to make the cause of his Death, were really so; Then they alledge, that in such case, the whole Mass of Blood would have set∣led there, and his Neck and bruises would have swelled, and have been perfect black, which was not in His Case. VII. They also say, That all these Matters are Notorious, and will be proved by divers credible and undeniable Eye and Ear Witnesses; And besides, They observe, that Bedlow's (before the Committee of Lords,) and Your Evidence in Relation to this Gentlemans Death, are as different as the East is from the West; For you Dogg him out of St. Clements; the other decoys him from Charing-Cross: You Swear he was Strangled with a Handkerchief near the Stables going to the Water-side; Bedlow, that he was Smothered with a Pillow in a Room in the great Court in Somerset-House. You say he took Horse at So-ho; Bedlow says he took Coach at Cla∣renden-House, with many more such like Contradictions; And considering the Old Proverb, fore-warn'd, fore-arm'd. A further and fuller account of the whole matter expect, I being loath at present to exceed the bounds of a Letter, I am, Sir, Your very Loving Friend, TRƲMAN. Cambridge, Feb. 23. 1681. London, Printed for M. G. at the sign of Sir E. B. G's. Head near Fleet-bridge. Sir. Francis Win. Now read the other Letter. Associat. This is intitled a second Letter to Mr. Miles Prance in reply to the Ghost of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.
Mr. Prance, SInce my last to you of the Twenty-third past, I have seen a pro∣lix, railing, and impertinent Phamphlet, intituled, Sir E. B. G's Ghost, and pretended to be an Answer to my said Letter. And conceiving You are better acquainted with Ghosts than my self, I thought fit to direct my Answer to that Ghost to You, and thereby shew the ridiculousness thereof, as also vindicate the Truths conteined in my said former Letter, and shew You and the World further circumstances to justifie the same, and therefore, according to the method of my former Letter, I shall proceed by these Heads. And first, not understanding what the Ghost means, by arraign∣ing the Justice of the Nation, unless he would assert that all that are legally, (are likewise justly hanged;) and so consequently, that the Mother and her two Sons were justly hanged in Glocestershire, for the Murder of the Lady Viscountess Campden's Steward, though he afterwards appeared alive; And I do not find that ever his appearance arraign'd the Justice of the Nation. And remitting the consideration of Mr. Browns, the Chyrurgions, and Mrs. Curtis's Evidence in relation to the Blood, to its proper place; and affirming, (as the truth is,) that Mrs. celliers, Mrs. Mary Gibbon, the Newgate Priests, James Magragh, and all other Irish men, or Irish Evidences, or other Papist or Papists, or Popishly affected persons whatsoever; as also those concerned in the late Sham of his having hang'd himself, are strangers to, and had not the least knowledg or intimation of the Contents of my said for∣mer Letter, nor any way concerned therein, or in or with any part thereof; (as the said Ghost most falsly and maliciously insinuates.) I take notice that the said Ghost seems to admit so much of the Truth of the said Letter, as that it was reported divers dayes before the dead Body was found, that he was murdered in Somerset-House by the Pa∣pists, and which report was made even the next morning after he was missing, (being Sunday 13 Octob. 1678.) Now I would fain have this Ghost to inform the World who first raised that Report: But as to Mr. Dugdale's Letter of it, I cannot give it any better Answer, than that as his Evidence hath since been disbelieved in matters of greater con∣sequence, so he not producing any such Letter, you must give me leave also to suspect him in this. But as to the other Evidences of Mr. Birch and the rest. Theirs I believe to be very true; for it's no miracle that a Report so cunningly raised, (without any ground) might as industriously be promulged to most parts of the Kingdom before the respective days they speak of, especially when the Plot had filled all mens heads with Fears and Jealousies, without which it had not been in the power or art of the Ghost, or any of his Tribe, to have suggested the least Surmise to contradict his being Felo de se. Next, whereas my Letter saith, (and that truly) that the Coro∣ner's Jury were first of opinion, and accordingly declared, he was Felo de se, and that much Art and Skill was used to procure their
Verdict to the contrary. This Ghost, instead of contradicting that Truth, would insinuate, as if that Letter reflected upon the Reputation of the Jurors, when as there was no such thing imployed or inten∣ded, they being known to be honest men, of good Reputation, and free from Fraud or Guile, and consequently the easier to be over∣reached, by the Cunning of those and that Party, whose interest it was to deceive them, and who never leave any stone unturned to at∣tain their designes. And I cannot but observe how skilful and in∣dustrious these People still are, to hide and prevent the truth of that man's Death from clearly appearing and shining forth, as without doubt it would, and must do, was not the matter now (as formerly) puzled with Legends, and long Stories, nothing to the purpose. And as to the Coroner's Warrant for burying the Body, and recited in the Ghost, it's Notorious they are common Tricks, used by men of his Profession, who (if any money is like to come) will usually ad∣journ the Jury, and then make such Warrants, (they knowing, that if the Verdict be Felo de se, it's then out of their power to give leave to bury the Corps.) And it would be very material, if the Co∣roner would declare what he received for that Jobb, and of whom, and what Evidence he had to induce the Jury to find (as the Inquisition imports) that he was strangled with a Linen Cloth, a matter of Fact never so much as spoken of, until You came in with your Evidence, which was not in some weeks after. And I do again aver, That the Body was required by the Jurors to be opened, and was refused; and if the Body was in their and the Co∣roner's power, (as the Ghost insinuates) such power was concealed from, and denied the Jury. And it's very probable the Coroner of Westminster's assistance was refused, for some such indirect doings, for that there was not the least difference betwixt the Coroners in relation to their Jurisdictions; and the Westminster Coroner came not Vo∣luntarily of himself, but was importuned to be there by Mr. Wigg, and divers others of the chief Inhabitants of St. Martyn's Parish. And parti∣cularly, the Reverend Dr. Lloyd (who Preached the Funeral Sermon) spoken to the Coroner of Westminster before he went, so that it had been proper to have given the matters mentioned in that Sermon in evidence before the Jury. And it's observable, the Person mentioned to give the Information to the Doctor of the two wounds in the Bo∣dy, and that two hours before it was found, was never produced; For if he had, and that Sir E. B. G. had been murthered, such person might have been secured, and thereby the Murderers detected. But I suppose the Ghost will not pretend either that Sermon, or the Pam∣phlet printed by Nat. Thompson to be legal, or (indeed) any Evidence at all. And now Mr. Prance, being come to the several Paragraphs of my Letter, I shall take them in order as they are placed, and give the Ghost particular Answers accordingly. I. As to Sir E. B. G.'s Perambulations therein mentioned to be on
the Saturday he was first missing, they are true in every particular; and will be proved by divers able, credible and undeniable Witnes∣ses. And how vain it is for the Ghost to ask, Why these Witnesses did not come in sooner at the Tryal of Green, Berry, and Hill, do you judge, when all the World remembers the great Torrent that carried all before it in favour of the Plot, and the murder of Sir E. B. G. by the Papists, without which (as T. O. was heard to say) his Plot had failed; And when it is duly considered, that the two persons that first found the Body, (for no other cause) suffered much in their Persons and Estates, by a long and chargeable Imprisonment. And all others that then seemed to doubt of the truth of that mans being murdered by the Papists, were stigmatized with the odious Names of Papists, and Discouragers (if not promoters) of the Plot; It will appear no wonder, if people were unwilling to discover their know∣ledges, or to come voluntarily (without process) to give their Evi∣dence. And how can it be imagined those three unfortunate men, being kept close Prisoners, could make enquiry after proper Evi∣dences, or (against the common Vogue) draw into suspition the as∣sertion of his being murdered by the Papists. II. The Ghost hath so much ingenuity to grant the 2d. Paragraph of my Letter, as to the place and posture he was found in, but would avoid the inaccessableness of the place, pretending a Lane near, when as that Lane is, in effect, unpassable, with two on a Horse, and comes not within 500 yards of the place, and the Mounds thither very high, and the Constable and his Assistants, (though they lived in the Parish, and well knew the way) were forced to break a Gap in the Mounds, though they were singly Hors'd. And whereas the Ghost alledges, That you do not depose he was carried to the place wholly on Horseback, he hath run himself into a worse Dilemma, having made no provision of men (either as to strength or number) to carry so great and weighty a Corps, in the dead of the Night, over such Mounds and Fences; but let all inquisitive People, desirous of Truth, take the pains but to go to the Place (and that without any bur∣then on their backs) they will soon be convinced of the Assertion of the difficulty (if not impossibility) of the bringing a Dead Corps thither, either on Foot or on Horseback. And the Pretensions of the Ghost's, as to the limberness of the Body and Joynts, does not answer that part of my Letter which relates to the impossibility of his being put into a Sedan. For his Body, when found, was stiff; so that what limber∣ness happened or appeared afterwards, hath no relation to the Questi∣on. For it's a certain Maxim, a dead limber Body cannot be stiff'∣ned. And pray Mr. Prance, give us an account what became of the Sedan, and the Cords? and how you could carry it with Cords; for the meanest Sedan-man in Town will tell you it is impracticable, or rather impossible; And you may, if you please, make an experi∣ment with a Cord.
III. As to the Body being full of Blood, when found; the Ghost endeavours to disprove that Assertion, by the Evidence of Mr. Brown the Constable, the two Chyrurgeons and Mrs. Curtiss, and produceth the Evidence given at the Tryal of Green, Berry and Hill, and an extrajudicial Affidavit since made by Mr. Brown, and another by Mrs. Curtiss, to countenance such his denyal. But, Mr. Prance, (when you see the Ghost) tell him the matter of the Blood will (and I as∣sure you and all the World it will) be proved by divers credible and undeniable Evidence; And that I may pacifie the Ghost in the mean time, he is to understand that Mr. Brown, the two Chyrurgions, and Mrs. Curtiss, are no competent (nor can be material) Witnesses in this case. For Mr. Brown; as he did a rash and unaccountable act (to give it no worse name) in removing the Body before the Coro∣ner and Jury saw it, (which hath occasion'd all this despute); so he must not think to help himself by Affidavits, or to justify one Ill Act by another; And besides, as he unadvisedly (and contrary to all Law and Practice) removed the Body before the Coroner and Jury came; so he did the same in the dark, (about Eight a clock at night) when the Candle was blown out; whereby it was impossible for him to look for any Blood, so as to find it; And neither he or the Chyrurgeons (by any day-light) saw the Place where the Body was found, or where the Sword was pulled out, until after 10 a Clock the next day, before which time much of the Blood was taken up, and the rest trampl'd out of sight by the great concourse of the People which came thither. And as for Mrs. Curtiss, she only saw the Body after it was brought home, when as the Body was stript at the White-House, and a Blanket borrow'd there to wrap the Body in. So the World may judge of the Truth of her Affidavit. (But Mr. Prance) it will be fully proved, that the Body was full of Blood; and that there were Cakes or Gobbets of dry Blood found in his Cloaths, which (with his Body) stunk extremely. And it will be also fully and effectually proved, that his Eyes, Nostrills, and Corners of his Mouth, were Fly-blown; tho the Ghost (with∣out the least colour of reason) pretends it to be contrary to Nature and Reason; when as common experience daily evinces the con∣trary. And I do observe, that the Ghost omits to take notice of Two material Circumstances in this 3 d. Paragraph. (viz.) The first as to the Swords crashing against the Back-bone: The second, as to that part of the Sword which was in his Body being discoloured. And pray, Mr. Prance, do You (or the Ghost) give the Reasons thereof, and of its point being rusty; As also, what was, or could be the cause of the Spots in the Shirt, Wastcoat and Drawers, of Greenish Colour, mentioned in Mrs. Curtisses Affidavit. IV. As to the 4th. Paragraph of my Letter, I perceive the Ghost admits, that when a man is Strangled or Hanged, his Eyes will be
extorted; and admits that Sir. E. B. Godfrey's Eyes (when found) were shut; only he seems to quarrel with the colour of his Face; And, seeing he admits his Face not black (as all Hanged mens are, when cold) I care not to contest, whether his Face was Pale or Rud∣dy, or a little Swell'd, or not, those being very inconsiderable Cir∣cumstances. But his denying the putrefaction charged in that Para∣graph, and the consequences deduced from thence, is not only a great untruth, but is directly opposite to the evidence given by Mr. Skil∣lard, at the Tryal before mentioned. Page 37. 38. V. As to the 5th. Paragraph; the Ghost is so far from answering the Assertions therein, as that he only quibbles at words; and beg∣ging the Question; deduces thence impertinent and ridiculous Argu∣ments. For it will be proved, that his Shoes were glazed at the bot∣tom of the Soles, and which must of necessity be occasioned by his walking on the Grass. And (Mr. Prance) if you and the Ghost will walk thither, you will easily experience it, and so may any body else satisfie himself in this speculation; As also, as to the grass-seeds that stuck in the seams of his Shoes; which is so far from being impossible at that time of the year, (as the Ghost would argue) as that it will be proved by undeniable Evidence. But (Mr. Prance,) pray ask the Ghost how he came there without a speck of Dirt; and who pick'd the Horse-hairs off his cloaths; and let him contrive (if he can) a probable or rational way for a Dead man on Horse-back, to hold up his Legs, or to save them or his cloaths from the dirt: For though a man may walk thither very clean, yet it's impossible at that time of the year to ride, either without being dirtied, and some Horse hairs sticking on his Cloaths: But perhaps the next account from the Ghost will be, that he either rid with Gambadoes, or else a pair of Fisher-mens Boots. VI. As to the 6th. Paragraph, Pray Mr. Prance tell the Ghost, his railing against Popish Nurses, and Popish Midwives, is no answer to the Assertions in that Paragraph: for all the women in the Town are competent Judges thereof, and I hope the Ghost will not say they are all Papists. But pray tell the Ghost he takes no notice of the height of the Collar, and its being fast button'd about his Neck when found. Nor the conclusion of that Paragraph; and therefore I sup∣pose he admits it to be all true. VII. And as to the 7th. and last Paragraph, which relates only to the difference betwixt Yours, and Mr. Bedlow's Evidence; I must take notice, that what you and he swear, are very contradictory, and much more than I hinted in my said Letter: And though part
of it be as He and you were informed, yet you and he swear the Informations were received from the Persons actually concerned in the Murder, and who had confidence enough in Mr. Bedlow (though he refused 4000l. to help to kill him, and 2000l. to help carry him away,) as to shew him the Dead Body, and so were under no temp∣tation of mis-informing either him or your self. And pray Mr. Prance, will you let the World know what reward you were to have for that Job: For certainly you deserved as much as Mr. Bedlow, and need∣ed more, you having a Wife and Children, and he a Batchelor. Thus, Mr. Prance having gone through each Paragraph of my Let∣ter, and answered the Ghost to your satisfaction; I should leave here, fearing I have been too tedious already: But I cannot omit to take further notice of Mrs. Curtis's Affidavit, in relation to the drops of Wax found upon the Cloaths, in which I cannot say but she may swear true; but this I do aver, that if it be so, those drops were put upon the Cloaths long after he was found, and after the Jury had sat on the Body; for there was no such thing then on the Cloaths: And I suppose this was some Artifice used by those, who, either out of Interest or Design, were desirous to confirm his being murthered at Somerset-house, and to carry on the great lie, and impertinent sto∣ry then invented, and given out (amongst others) that he was laid under the High-Altar there; And if my Information fail not, there were other such like tricks used, which I shall make bold to acquaint those more nearly concerned therein, than your self; and shall give them to understand, that it's no wonder a Man in Sir E. B. G's cir∣cumstances, should kill himself, such accidents being no News to that Family, wherein Melancholly and Distraction (that often produces such effects) hath been predominant, and might occasion the words he spake to Sir. Tho. Robinson, as to his being the first Martyr. And now, Mr. Prance, for a Conclusion, If you were guilty of the murder of Sir. E. B. G. how durst you (as you did) on the Fry∣day after he was found, go to Primrose-Hill to see the Body, and not be afraid it should at your approach have bled afresh? And how came you (after Green, Bury, and Hill were hanged,) to declare in an∣swer to a solemn question, that you knew nothing of the death of Sir. E. B. G. Pray remember me to your old Friend and Lodger Mr. Renn, my respects also to your Wife, not forgetting your little Daughter, who gave you so good advice before you took your Journey into Nottinghamshire, and help'd to take Beddingfield, who was bury'd 14. Months. I am Your Loving Friend, Trueman. Cambridge, March 13. 1681. LONDON, Printed for N. Thompson. 1682.
Then the Associate Read out of a Paper, Intituled, The Loyal Prote∣stant Intelligence, &c. Number 125. Tuesday, March 7. 1681. the following Paragraph. March 4. 1682. WHereas the Mayor of Gotham, in his pretended True Pro∣testant Mercury of Saturday last, seems mightily offen∣ded with a Letter therein mentioned to be sent to Mr. Prance, con∣cerning the Murther of Sir E. B. Godfrey; and endeavours to avoid the examination of the truth of the matter of Fact contained in that Let∣ter, by his old way of railing, and stigmatizing all honest Church of Eng∣land Men, with the Name of Papist, or Popishly affected: He, and his Whiggish Tribe, are hereby desired to take notice, that there is not in the said Letter the least Item or Circumstance, but what will be by undeniable Evidence made out to be the Truth. So, the said Mr. Prance having not as yet vouchsafed an Answer to that Letter, he will spee∣dily receive a further Letter relating to that Murther; wherein the further Truth will not only be fully set forth, and other Circumstan∣ces set out; but also it will thereby plainly appear, that the Repu∣tation of that Dead Knight is so far from being therein Murthered, or the Justice of the Nation from being Questioned; as that it will con∣cern Mr. Prance, Mr. M. G. and all Parties on that side, to lay their Heads together more effectually than they did on Wednesday Morning last: For Truth seeks no Corners; and, were it not for a Vitious and Unsanctified Generation of Vipers, need to require an Advocate. For, though a Lye may prevail for a time, and eclipse the Truth, yet at length Truth will shine forth, with the assistance of that God, who is the Author of Truth it self. Then a Paragraph out of another of the like Intelligences, was Read. The Intelligence was Number 127. Saturday, March 11. 1681. March 9. 1682. WHereas Dick Janeway, in this days Mercury, promises an Answer to the late Letter to Mr. Prance, &c. This is to give him, and all the World, Notice, That such an Answer is im∣patiently expected by the Author of that Letter, who questions not, but to prove every Tittle of that Letter, to the satisfaction of all Man∣kind; And besides, he is very desirous that the Courantier (according to his last Pacquet of Advice from Rome) would go on, and use his Interest, to procure the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Com∣mon-Council of London, to inspect the Truth of that Letter; where∣by it will appear inevitably, that there is not one Papist, or Popishly affected person concerned in that Letter, or in the proof of the parti∣culars thereof; but the same (with divers other material Circumstan∣ces relating to the Murther of Sir E. B. Godfrey, and the Fraud and
Blind put upon the world in relation thereto) will be more fully, plainly, and manifestly proved, without giving ill Words, or scur∣rilous Language or Reflections to any persons that really are, or supposed to be therein concern'd, in any circumstance whatso∣ever. Mr. Serj. Maynord. You see what they have done, They say, what was Testified against the Murderers of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, they say was a Lye. They go over all the Evidence given against these Fellows, and undertake, by undeniable Witnesses, to prove the contrary. L. Ch. Just. To the Defendants Councel, What say you to it? Mr. Saunders. I am of Council for Paine, My Lord, The Charge a∣gainst Paine is, That he should own, that he did bring one of these Letters to be Printed; I have forgot whether Sir Philip Lloyd said the First or the Second. L. Ch. Just. The Second he says. Mr. Saunders. If Paine did own it, I think he did more ingenuously, than when he did make it, or bring it to the Press: But My Lord, it was a rash unadvised Act; but not out of any Malice: My Lord, we will prove that Paine was not a Papist, nor any of his Family. My Lord, this cannot justify or excuse them, it will only extenuate their Fault. We will call some Witnesses. L. Ch. Just. I will hear any thing in this Case, be as large as you will, you shan't say you are stinted; for it is a Business of Mighty Concern. Mr. Gooding. I am of Council, My Lord, for Pain: My Lord, We have made Application to Persons to Intercede for us; we are sorry for what we have done, and have offered to give any Satisfacti∣on. L. Ch. Just. To me he said, he would make it out by Five Hundred Witnesses: They would make it as plain as the day. Mr. Thompson. Since the last time that was appointed for the Try∣al, they have Printed, That they would prove it by Threescore Wit∣nesses: and was very sorry it did not come on. Mr. Yalden. I am of Council, My Lord, for Thompson, who, I think, was unfortunately drawn into the business; and that by Pain and Fare∣well, though they turn all upon him now. It was a great piece of Inge∣nuity for him to discover his Authors; and it had been very Mische∣vious if they had not been discovered. L. Ch. Just. What say you to the two Protestant Intelligences? Mr. Yalden. They are as much the Author of them, as of the o∣ther. Thompson says, the Authors would be able to prove it by unde∣niable Witnesses: Thompsons Intelligence is open to any Man that will put any thing into it, and he is paid for his Pains. Mr. Osborne. I am of Council for Farewell, My Lord: It was a Foolish thing to do as we have done: But that is no Satisfaction, my Client says, he hath several Witnesses.
L. C. J. Call them they shall be heard. Mr. Farewell. I begin with Hazard my Lord, he and I went to the place. Then Hazard was sworn. Mr. Hazard. I went along with Mr. Farewell. He was at the Rain∣bow Coffee-house, it was in the Morning, and he desired me to go to the place where Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey was found. L. C. J. What day was it. Mr. Hazard. I can't tell I went along with him, and stay'd as long as he did. I saw Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey lying upon the Table his Shoos were clean as if he had been on an Hay-mow, and his Eyes were closed. L. C. J. Where was he? Mr. Hazard. Upon a Table in the White-House▪ There was Gob∣bets of Blood (that I will aver my Lord) by the Ditch-side, and like∣wise at a place where there were two or three things to go over, there was more Blood, I can't tell how he was carried, or how he came there, but I saw him at the White-house. Mr. Williams. Who went along with you, besides Mr. Farewell? Mr. Hazard. No body. Mr. Williams. Did he bring you to the place where the Body lay? Mr. Hazard. Yes. Mr. Ser. Maynard. What did Farewell tell you when he desired you to go with him? Mr. Hazard. Why, word was brought by one Hancock a Wood-Monger, to the Coffee-honse, some would not believe him, but sent a Porter to Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey's House, and then when the Porter came and said the Body was found and carried to a White-house on Primrose-Hill, he spake to me to go and see the Body, and I fetched my Coate and was there quickly. Mr. Williams. When you came near the Ditch did Farewell shew you the place. Mr. Hazard. He and others that were there. Mr. Williams. I ask you this, did any Body shew you the place where the Body lay besides Farewell? Mr. Hazard. No, Mr. Osborne Did he go to the place directly, or about over Ditches? Mr. Hazard. Truely, I know the way to Primrose-hill as well as he. We went as direct a way as we could. Lord Chief Justice. The straitest way to the places. Mr. Hazard. Yes. We went over several Ditches. Sir F. Win. As you were going over several Ditches, there was no body with you, but Farewell was there? Mr. Hazard. No. Mr. Williams. Did you enquire of any body as you went along? Mr. Hazard. I can't remember such a small circumstance. Then William Batson was sworn. Mr. Osborne. What do you know about the blood that wasin the Ditch▪ where Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey was found? Mr. Batson. The morning after the Murther was discovered, and that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was found in the Fields, I went with two or three Neighbors, and went to the White-house, and saw him lie upon
the Table in the White-house, and coming back again, they shew'd me in a Ditch, where they said he lay, some blood, I cannot say it was his blood, and going a little farther, I saw some more whitish blood, and this is all I can swear. Lord Chief Justice. Was it Frosty weather? Mr. Batson. My Lord, I can't tell whether it was, but Il'e assure you the blood looked to me like blood that was laid there, then any thing else. One Fisher sworn. Mr. Farewell. Was you there when Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was stripp'd? Mr. Fisher. Yes, I stripped him of his Clothes, pulled off his Hose & Shoes, I was Carpenter to my Lord Wooton, and I was sent for in Octo∣ber a day or two before, and I came to get the house covered up, and to take Order with my Partner: and as I went, there was a Report, that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was found and laid up in the White-house, and when I came, the Coroner and the Jury were there, and I got in∣to the Room where Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey lay upon the Table and took his Hatt off; and I saw two Wounds within an Inch and an half one of another, one went no further then his Bone, and the other went through his back. And my Lord, immediately there was an Or∣der come down from the Coroner, to get him stripp'd. They ask'd me if I would give an hand, and I told them yes. I pull'd off his Shoes and they were clean, and I pulled off three pair of Stockings and a pair of Socks, his black Breeches and his Dravvers, and they came off very well. There was a man in the Company, that desired to help, so I got upon the Table, and set him upright with his breach upon the Table and his Feet hanging down, we unbuttoned his Coat, and pull'd it off, I came to his Flannel-Shirt, and when I come to his Back there vvas blood. But I did not see any Blood till I came to his back-part. About his Throat there vvas somthing that had girt him. Lord Chief Justice. He looked as if he vvere strangled, did he? Mr. Fisher. Yes, and his Neck vvas so vveak that you might turn it any vvhere. Lord Chief Justice. To the Defendant Farewell. Hovv do you pretend he murthered himself? that he ran himself through? Mr. Farewell. I make no inference my Lord. But I would only prove that what I write true. is I writ only the first Letter, and there are three Heads I am charged with, upon that Letter, and that about the Blood is one. My Lord, I was concerned they should pretend there was no blood at all, When I came there, there was near my Hat full of blood. Lord Chief Justice. Can you tell who laid it there? Mr. Farewell. My Lord, if you will hear two witnesses more, I will satisfy your Lordship who laid it there. My Lord, this man was one of them that helped to remove the Body out of the Ditch. Another Witness, John Rawson called by Mr. Farewel and sworn. Rawson. My Lord, I was there taking him up we fetched the Con∣stable, and pulled him out of the Ditch, and when we had done we pulled the Sword out and removed him to the House, and there was blood upon some Posts (explaining himself to me, on a couple of stumps to go over upon) and going into the Door, his Back did sweep a little
against the side, and there vvas some vvater and blood lighteD there, and likevvise lay upon the Table vvhere he lay, and upon the Floor. Mr. Farewell. Did the blood of his body fall upon the Floor, and go through the Floor, into the Cellar? Mr. Rawson. Some drops vvere there, I vvon't svvear vvhether it vvere blood or no my Lord. Mr. Farewell. My Lord I desire the same question may be put to Mrs. Rawson. Mrs. Rawson svvorn. Mrs. Rawson. My Lord if you please I have not a vvord to say, but there vvas blood and vvater, ran through the Table, that is all I can say. Mr. Farewell My Lord as to the difference betvveen Mr. Prances Evidence and Mr, Bedloes, I desire I may prove the difference betvveen them. L. C. Justice. You shall make any proof you vvill. John Stanley, called by Mr. Farewell and svvorn. Mr. Farwel. I call him to prove the Copies of the Journals of the House of Lords. L. C. Justice. What would you infer from the Journals? Mr. Farewell. My Lord they charge me that I should say there is a great deal of difference between the Evidence Mr. Bedloe gave in the House of Lords and the Evidence that Prance gave at the Tryal of Green, Berry and Hill. L. C. Justice. Would you prove any Evidence, given by Bedloe out of the Journals? Mr. Farewell. I can prove he gave that Evidence before the House of Lords. But Mr. Farewell afterwards went off from that Proof, and called Mr. Hobbs, Mr. White, Mr. Chase the Father, and Mr. Chase the Sonn, and Mr. Lazingby who were sworn. Mr. Farewell. I ask Mr. Chase, what he observed about Sir. Edmoud-Bury Godfrey. Mr. Chase the Sonn. My Lord, on Fryday Morning the day after the body was found, I went to Primrose-Hill, in company with my father, to see the body which they said was found, I came into the Field where the company in the Field said, the body had been laid, the body had been then carried into the house, I looked into the Ditch where they said the body was laid, I could not see blood in the Ditch, but four or five Yards aside off the Ditch, there seemed some blood to me, which the Constable said, followed thesword when it was pulled out of the body I saw the body in the House and saw the two wounds, he had a great Contusion on the left Eare, and his whole Face was very much bruised. L. C. Justice. Do you believe there was anyi Volence offered to him? Mr. Chase. My Lord, I believe he was Strangled, for I don't believe those Injuries that were offered about him, could be after he was dead. L. C. Justice. What say you Mr. Hobbs? Farewell. I desire he may be asked, whether he did not propose to Mr. Godfrey. that the body might be opened, that any doubt may be laid aside, concerning his being Murdered, in that Place? Mr. Hobbs. My Lord? L. C. Justice. Had you any doubt, whether he was Murdered or not? Mr. Hobs. Indeed my Lord I thought he was Strangled, that was my
Opinion, I cant tell whether I was mistaken. I said to Dr. Goodall it would be very well if Mr. Godfrey would send for a Chirurgion and a Physitian from the Court and others from the City to satisfie all persons. Mr. Farewell. What Colour was his face? Mr. Hobbs. My Lord it was bloted. L. C. Justice. Did it look as if Violence had been used to him? Mr. Hobbs Ay my Lord and the bloody Vessels of his Eyes were so full as if he had been troubled with sore Eyes. Mr. Farewell. Did you observe any Fly-Blows in his face? Mr. Hobbs. No my Lord, not that I know of. L. C. Justice. What say you Mr. Chase? Mr. Chase. My Lord on Fryday when I came to see the body at the White House I found a great Contusion, and two wounds one yielded to∣wards the right. The other went into the body. I troubled my self no more at that time, but the nex day I was desired by Dr. Lloyd that I would go to his House and see the body again, and there I found a selling upon the left Eare as if a knot had been tyed, there I found him beaten from this place to this (pointing to the Neck and Stomack) I never saw any man beaten so in my life. Before this business was broached Mr. Farewell did take me aside at Mans Coffe-House, and did tell me what proof he could make of this business, I told him Mr. Farewell I love you well, don't medle with the business, for I know it is impossible any thing can be said against it that hath the face of truth, I did so a second time (my Lord) when the book came out I found one before I went to New-Market, and the other at New-Market I was very much troubled to see them. The Night before Easter, the Eve of Easterday, I meet with Mr. Farewell at an House where I had been with a good friend of his and mine, and Farewell came and asked for me, and he came up to the Room as they called for another Bottle of Wine, I told them it was needless, only since Mr. Farewell is come up said I, I will drink one glass with you And he told me then that 6 Months before I had given him good Coun∣cil if he had taken it. Mr. Farrwell. My Lord, I desire M. Smith to be called. L. C. Justice. Let him. But he came not then. Mr. Brown is called by Mr. Farewell and sworn. Mr. Farewell. I desire Mr. Brown may be asked whether his Eyes were not fly blown? L. C. Justice. Tis proposed to you by Mr. Farewell, whether the Eyes of Sir. Edmond-Bury Godfrey were not fly-blown. Mr. Brown. No my Lord, I did not see any fly-blows. Mr. Farewell. Whether there were any specks, that one might call fly-blows? M. Brown. My Lord, I did not see any specks that one might call fly-blows? Mr. Farewell. I desire that I might call two Witnesses to prove that he said so. L. C. Justice. What will you get by that, Mr. Farewell, to disparage your Witness. Mr. Brown. My Lord, Mr. Farewell would have had me said so, but I never said so. Then Smith came. L. C. Justice. What do you ask Smith?
Mr. Farewell. Only about the blood. Mr. Brown, My Lord he came to me another time, and told me I was wrong in my Affidavit, as if he knew what I could make Affidavit of better then my self. Mr. Farewel. My Lord I was not the party that told him so. Mr. Brown. He was at my house twice, at Mary-bone at the sign of the Sun. L. C. Justice. Was Paine with him there? Mr. Brown. My Lord, there was a man with Plate buttons with him there. I don't knovv Paine. Mr. Smith Svvorn. L. C. Justice. Well vvhat say you Mr. Smith it is required of you by Mr. Farewell, here to dcelare vvhether you took up any of Sir▪ Edmond-bury Godfreys blood, and brought it home in your handkerchief. Mr. Smith. No my Lord I knovv nothing of that. Mr. Farewell. I desire Rawson and his vvife may be called again. Rawson appears. L. C. Justice. What say you, tis required by Mr. Farewell whether you savv any fly-blovvs in Sir. Edmond-bury Godfrey's Eyes. Mr. Rawson There was some thing like fly-blows, but I cant say they vvere fly-blovvs. L. C. Justice. Did you observe the flys vvere busie at that time of the Year? Mr. Rawson. My Lord I did not see them. (Then the people laughed) Mr. Farewell I desire Rawsons wife may come. Mr. Rawson I must fetch her then. Rawsons Wife appears. L. C. Justice. Look you, Mr. Farewell requires of you to tell us whe∣ther there was any fly-blows in the Eyes of Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey. Mrs. Rawson. If it please you my Lord, there was a great many peo∣ple said there were fly-blows, I took no great notice of them, L. C. Justice. He asks you what you say to his Mouth, and his Nostrels, were there fly-blows? Mrs. Rawson. If it please you my Lord, I cant say nothing to it, for I did not much mind it, but they seemed fly-blows. L. C. Justice. Have you any more Witnesses Mr. Farewell? Mr. Farewell. I pray Mr. Lazingby (my Lord) may be asked whether men that kill themselves look as Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey did. L. C. Justice. Mr. Lazingby, Mr. Farewill requires of you, whether you have seen men that have killed themselves, look in such a manner about the Neck and Face. Mr. Lazingby. My Lord, he appeared to me to be strangled, and that which strangled him was kept about his Neck till he was cold. My Lord, People that are hanged & let down while warme, the blood draines a∣way by the Vessels that are broaken, and their Faces are rather less, and their Faces become very pale; but the thing Wherewith he was strangled remaining about his Neck, the blood could not draine away, but it made his Face look bloody. The two Mr. Chases, the Kings Apothecary was there when I was there, and the blood that was some four Yards from the Ditch, I put my finger in it, and smelt to it and it smelt like that which comes from a body after a sortnights time dead, rather then a weeks; my Lord, it was blood and water. The water will seperate from the blood.
Sir Frances Winn. But you believe he was strangled? Mr. Lazingby. Yes his Neck from this place hither, (pointing to the upper part of his Neck, and then to his Stomack and Breast) was very much discoloured and black, and his mouth was discoloured. Now when ever a man is bruised whilst he is alive or whilst he is warme that part after the person is dead will soonest corrupt. L. C. Justice. It stands to reason that the bruised part will first corrupt. Mr. Lazingby. My Lord after Mr. Chase the Apothecary and I had seen him at the White house, I went up to drink a Glass of Beer, and Mr. Chases sonn unbuttoned Sir Edmond-bury Godfreys Coller which was more then I saw, when I was come in, and unbuttoning the Coller there vvere 2 great creases both a bove and belovv, so they sent for me dovvn to come and see it, so I put the Coller together and I percieved the Coller, made the mark like a straight Ring upon a finger, the Neck being svvelled above the Coller and belovv, by the strangling vvith a Cord or Cloath. Sir Frances Winn. Do you think he killed himself novv Mr. Fare∣well? Mr. Lazingby. There vvas somthing in the Cover of his Eyes like matter, but I can't say it vvas fly-blovvs. His Eyes vvere open, my Lord, and his Eyes vvere Blood-shed, as Mr. Hobbs hath given you an account, as if he had an extraordinary great cold, or a man that had a blovv up∣on the Temples or Forehead. Mr. Farewell. Whether vvere his Eye-lids closed? Mr. Lazingby. My Lord, his Eyes vvere open vvhen I savv him. Mr. Farewell. When I savv him about 6 a Clock in the morning his Eyes vvere shut. Mr. Lazingby. I felt upon his Cloaths. I admired that his Cloaths vvere not vvet, there having been so great a storme the afternoon be∣fore? L. C. Justice. And his Cloaths vvere not vvet? Mr.. Lazingby His Cloaths vvere as dry as mine. Mr. Farewell. My Lord they made a great fire there and dryed his Clotahs. L. C. Justice. Come Mr. Farewell. there is no man so blind as he that vvon't see. Will you call any more Witnesses? Mr. Farewell. I vvill call no more Witnesses; but I suppose they vvill Offer against me that I am a Papist. Mr. Serjeant Maynard No, no. L. C. Justice. Truly your Religion is not vvorth the enquireing into, Tis not much to the purpose vvhat Religion you are of. Mr. Serjeant Maynard. Gentlemen you hear he hath been able to make no defence for himself, but for the satisfaction of the World, my Lord, hath taken great pains in hearing him. I shall speak but very fevv vvords, and call a Witness or tvvo, of some nevv matter; that if it be possible to covince him vve vvill do it. We need not do it because his ovvn Witnesses tell you of the several bruises and Wounds he had, that there vvas no fly-blovvs, no putrified matter. Hovv can a man that Stabbs him sef, bruise and beat himself in the manner that you have heard. There is never a Witness that hath spoken on his side, but hath spoken against him, to prove himself as malicious a fellovv as can be. What had he to do vvith this? Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey vvas murdered, Was
found, inquiry made after it, and prosecution thereupon, now comes this fellow and permits several Arguments against it, every one of them from matter of fact, that is false and yet publishes it to the World, that he will prove it by 500 undeniable Witnesses. We will now call some Witnesses to prove him as Wicked a lyer as lives. I say what had he to do with it, only meer malice. He would have me ask him what Re∣ligion he is of. I shall not ask him, for I don't think he is of any, none of any Religion can be so Wicked to own such a thing. We shall desire the favour to call a Witness or two, to prove somthing more then hath yet been proved in this Murder tho' there was Evidence enough up∣on the Tryal to prove it. Mr. Sol. Gen. Gentlemen. Mr. Farewell does pretend that he hath only told so many Lies, and hath left the World to make use of it. And hath brought Witnesses to Colour this matter over, and in hopes to make you believe the matter is true. But Mr. Farewell hath forgot himself, his Paper is quite otherwise, for he hath argued upon it, and made In∣ferences, that therefore Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey murdered himself, there∣fore he is guilty of the highest malice in the World. He tells a great many falsities, and from those falsities, hath inferred others. The Paper is full of Arguments. L. C. Justice. Gentlemen, I did give him leave to go into what Evi∣dence he would in this Case, not hat I thought it material for if he could have proved never so much, yet his malice had never been the less to have gone and aspersed the Government. What had he to do to meddle with it? To what purpose should he Write Books, concerning the matters of Government to Traduce the Justice of the Nation? The people had suffered as Malefactors, and what had he to do with it? If they had suffered Innocently, he ought to have done no such thing as this is. Mr. Serjeant Maynard., My Lord but one Witness. L. C. Justice. Pray call whom you will. Mr. Serjeant Maynard. John Okely, We will prove that he was way-layed that very day he was strangled. Mr. Sol. Gen. We have no need to call any Witnesses now, to over do a thing. We may leave it here. Jury-Man. Pray my Lord if they have any more Witnesses let us hear them. L. C. Justice. Tis nothing to this purpose to call any for the King, nor hath Farewells Evidence signified any thing to this. He did design and would (no doubt of it) have been very much satisfied if he could have made but some probable Evidence that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey killed himself, and I was desirous to hear what they vvould say for them∣selves. But you hear vvhat a kind of Evidence it is, not a Witness he hath called, but is as much against him as can be, and does evince it plainly that the man vvas killed, and that he vvas killed by strangling, and so the Evidence vvas upon the Tryal of Green, Berry, and Hill. If he could have raised a doubt about it, yet his Offence had not been miti∣gated by it, for a private person is not to arraign the Justice of the Nati∣on, but I vvas vvilling to hear vvhat could be said in the Case, vvhether a doubt could be made in the World, that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey vvas not murdered. And you see hovv his very Evidence hath in all things confirmed the Evidence Prance hath given, that he vvas killed, and that
he was killed by strangling. I must leave it with you Gentlemen, they are all 3 in this mischief, tis a Combination of them to affront the pub∣lick Justice of the Nation, and what is the end of it, the end of it is to make people believe there is no Popish Plot, but it is plain he was killed by the Popish party; as Prance, upon his Evidence against Green, and the o∣thers attested. But if they could have made it out that he killed him∣self, all of them would have cryed out the Popish Plot was a sham, no∣thing but a thing raised by the Protestants against the Papists, and all the Plot must have gone for nothing. Gentlemen, I do leave it to you, whether upon this Evidence you do not believe them all to be Guilty of this design, of Traducing the Justice of the the Nation. The Jury thereupon, without going from the Barr sound them all three Guilty, of the Information. And the people gave a great Hum.
Monday July 3. 1682. NAthaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farwell, were brought up by Rule, to the Bar of the Court of the Kings Bench to receive their Judg∣ment: Mr. Thompson the Counsellor moved for Judgment, and particularly prayd they might have some corporal punishment, acquainting the Court that since their Tryal (tho they had as much time and liberty given them by the Lord Chief Justice to call their witnesses, and examine whom the would as they could desire,) the very next News Book Thompson put out, he took upon him to give an Accompt as tho' Justice had not been done him; and further said, if there was any doubt of the Fact with Mr. Thompson, or Mr. Farwell, or Mr. Pain, there were Affida∣vits to satisfie the world about it. Then Mr. Spences Affidavit was read. Richard Spence Citizen and Upholder of London, living in Arundel Street in the Strand in the Parish of St. Clements Daen, in the County of Middlesex, having been twice sub∣paena'd to give Evidence for the King, upon an Informa∣tion, exhibited in the Crown-office against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farwell, and not being called at their Trial to give Evidence in open Court, ma∣keth Oath that upon Thursday the Tenth day of October 1678. it being the Thursday before Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was missing from his own House in Hartshorne Lane in the Strand, as he this Deponent was coming from St. James's Mar∣ket to go to his own House, about Seven of the clock at night, there were then at the Water Gate of Somerset House, five or six men standing together, who layd hold on this Deponent as he was passing by them, and they taking hold of both this Deponents Armes, dragg'd him down about a
yard within the Water Gate of Somerset House, it being dark; but one of the said Men, which this Deponent be∣lieves to have been Hill, (for that this Deponent knew Hill very well, as also his Master Doctor Godwyn,) cryed out and said this is not he, upon which they immediatly let this Deponent go. RICHARD SPENCE. Jurat. the 10th. July, 1682. Coram me, W. Dolbin. Whereupon the Clerk of the Crown sayd, that it was one Captain Spence, whom he knew very well, and that he was a Tall black Man and like Sir Edmondbury God∣frey. Then John Oakely's Affidavit was read. John Oakely, of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields in the County of Middlesex, Servant to Mr. Robert Breedon of Hartshorne Lane in the said Parish and County Brewer, maketh Oath that on Saturday the 12th. day of October, in the year of our Lord 1678, about eight or nine of the clock in the Evening, he was in the City of London, in the Company of his Father Robert Oakely of Bissiter in the County of Oxon Maulster, and his Father came with him so far as Ludgate, where they parted. And this Deponent going homewards to his Master Breedns House, coming by Somerset House in the Strand, when he came near the Gate of that House which leads down to the Water-side, commonly called the Water Gate, which was about Nine of the clock at night, he there saw Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and past close by him and put off his Hat to him; and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey put off his Hat again to him, and af∣ter that this Deponent had passed beyond Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, he this Deponent turned about and looked upon him again, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey stood still, and there was a Man or two near Sir Edmond. And this De∣ponent further saith that he knew Sir Edmondbury Godfrey
very well, for that he saw him almost daily pass by his Ma∣ster Breedons House in Hartshorne Lane, going or coming from his own dwelling House, which was also in Harts∣horne Lane. And this Deponent further saith that about two or three days after when the Rumor was that Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey was missing, he acquainted his fellow Servant Elizabeth Dekin, that he saw Sir Edmondbury Godfrey near the Water Gate at Somerset House in the Strand, that very Saturday night that he was reported to have been missing from his House in Hartshorne Lane. And this Deponent further saith that he told the same thing to his Uncle Ralph Oakely of the Parish of little Saint Bartholomew, about a week after the time that Sir Edmondbury Godfreys body was found, and also that he told the same thing to his Father the afore∣said Robert Oakely, and to several others in a short time after. JOHN OAKELY. Jurat. 22 die Junij 1682. Coram me, John Moore Major. Sworn to again the 1st. July, 1682. Before Judge Dolbin,Examinat. and is left filed up in the Crown-office. Vide Green, Berry and Hills Tryal, folio 16, as to the time of Sir Edmondbury Godfreys being at Somerset House. After which the Court consulted together, and Mr. Justice Jones having first set out the greatness of their Crime, gave the Judgment of the Court, which was, that Thompson and Farwel, should stand upon the Pillory, in the Palace yard, the last day of the Term, between the hours of Ten and One of the clock, for the space of an hour, and each of them to pay an Hundred pound Fine, and to be Imprisoned till they had paid it. And as for Pain, he told him because the Court did not conceive him altoge∣ther so guilty, they would inflict no corporal punish∣ment
on him, but did adjudge him to pay an Hun∣dred pound Fine, and to be Imprisoned till he payd it. Afterwards the Court was moved to explane their Judg∣ment, it being apprehended that it was pronounced up∣on the Pillory; and the Court did declare that their in∣tention was (and so the expression upon the Pillory was to be understood) that they should stand in the Pil∣lory. Accordingly Wednesday the 5th. July, 1682. Thompson, and Farwell stood in the Pillory in the Old Palace-yard at Westminster, with this Writing over their Heads, For Libelling the Justice of the Nation, by mak∣ing the World beleive that Sir Edmondbury God∣frey Murdered himself. The End of the Tryal.
AN APPENDIX Containing Several other Affidavits, Which further confirm the Testimony of Mr. Miles Prance; Given upon the Tryal of Green, Bury, & Hill, For the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey: WITH Some Observations touching Thompson, Pain, and Farewell. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, 1682.
AN APPENDIX Containing Several other Affidavits, Which further confirm the Testimony of Mr. Miles Prance, &c. AS it hath been of late by many Learned Pens, made appear, That the Papists do justifie and countenance, nay, esteem Meritorious, Rebellions, Murders, and Massacres, against any Protestant Prince or People (whom they reckon Hereticks) for the Advancement of their Reli∣gion; so 'tis as well known, that if those Rebellions, Murders, and Massacres, be Discovered, they can (if they shall think them needful) have Dispensations to Forswear, Lie, Equi∣vocate, do any thing to make the world believe that they are Innocent, or make Protestants themselves appear Guilty of them. That there hath been a Popish Plot, (and a despe∣rate one too) in England, for the Subversion of the Prote∣stant Religion, and Established Government, I think no man doubts, only some persons whose Interest it is, may deny. And amongst the several concurring Evidences of this Popish Conspiracy, the Murder of that worthy Gentleman and Ma∣gistrate by that Party, hath not been the least. That which induced the Papists to this Murder, (as well as can be guessed by those who are Strangers to that Wicked Action) was one or both of these Considerations; namely, the hopes of
finding and seizing the Examination of Dr. Oats about the damnable Popish Plot which he had taken, and used to carry about with him, by which they thought to stifle the Plot: Or else they thought, by this Murder, to affrighten all active Magistrates from being Vigorous in the future Examina∣tion, and further prosecution of their Horrid Conspiracy, though (through God's providence) they have been very much Disappointed in both these Ends. And the Papists are so sensible how much this Murder pinches them, that after the Conviction and Execution of the persons for that Murder, no discouragements or dan∣gers they incur (by affronting and arraigning the pub∣lick Justice of the Kingdom) hath been able to Deter them from impudent Attempts (impudent I may say, the rather, because done under a Protestant-Government) to sham off that Murder from themselves, and making the whole Prosecution to be only a Design and Contrivance of the Protestants against them. Witness first, that noto∣rious Sham of James Magrath an Irish-man, who (being assisted by the Popish Priests in Newgate, Mrs. Cellier, and Mrs. Gibbon, and others) pretended there were those that could make it appear, and prove, That Sir Edmond-Bury-Godfrey Hanged himself, and that one Moor, who was Clerk to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey Cut him down, finding him Hanging. Which matter being Examined at the Council Board, and appearing to their Honours to be a false and malicious Contrivance, the said Magrath was dismissed with Security for his Appearance, and that Pro∣ject fell to the ground. But for the further Satisfaction of the world (though I think no body did believe that Idle Story) I shall here insert Mr. Moors Affidavit. The Affidavit of Henry Moore. HEnry Moore, late Servant and Clerk to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, Deceased, maketh Oath, That upon Saturday the 12th. of October, 1678. his said Ma∣ster having Persons come before him about Justice-business, till about Nine of the Clock in the Forenoon: when the
Company were gone, he bade me help him on with his Coat, which I did; and immediately he made me pull it off again, and give him another Coat, which I did; and then he girt his Sword about him, and went out from his House, which was the last time I saw him, till after he was found Dead in the Fields, which was the Thurs∣day following. The Constable of St. Giles in the Fields, and several others with him, came to my Master's House, and told us, that Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was found Dead, and laid in a Ditch at Primrose-Hill, and a Sword thrust through him; and said, he had caused him to be carried to the White-House: This being late at Night, the next Day my Masters two Brothers, and Sisters, and my self, went thither; and then I saw him lye upon a Table in the House where the Constable had laid him, which was the first time that I saw him, after he went out of his own House, on Saturday the 12th of October, 1678. And then we brought him Home to his own House; And as I am Informed that there are several Scandalous Papers, and Words given out, That Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey Hang∣ed himself; and that they do Affirm, That I, the said Henry Moore, should say that I Cut him down; I do here∣by Depose, That the said Report is utterly false; and that I did not Cut him down, nor ever said any such words to any Person whatsoever; or ever said that Sir Ed∣mund-Bury-Godfrey made away himself, or words to that Ef∣fect: Which said Scandals are all False and Notorious Lies, Henry Moore. June the 28th. 1681. HEnry Moore of Littleport in the Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, made Oath before me William Balam, one of His Majesties Justices for the said Isle; that this, which is contained in the above written Affidavit is true, and nothing but Truth. In Witness whereof, I have here∣unto set my Hand and Seal, the Day and Year above Writ∣ten, William Balam.
Yet, though this Matter had proved so unsuccessful, they could not be quiet, but must make one Experiment more, and that is contrary to the former: For now they Declare, that he made away himself (so far they agree with Magrath) but it was by running his Sword through his own Body. And Thompson, Farewell, and Pain, are the Men that are to Manage this New Invention; and they Write and Print the Scandalous Letters and Libels you find in their Trial: And lest any one should dare to Question the Truth of them, they boast, they can prove their Assertions by Five Hundred Witnesses. Every Body thought the Murder sufficiently proved upon the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill, and were amazed to hear such a Declaration, thinking it hardly possible for Men to be so Impudent, publickly to declare, they had Five Hundred Witnesses to Prove a Matter, when they had not one, as may be seen by their Trial; for every Witness made against them; and further proved, that he was Murdered, and that by Strangling. But for these Scandalous Libels, they were brought before His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, who (upon their owning those Libels) com∣mitted them to Newgate, and ordered the Attorny General to Prosecute them; and accordingly you find by the Tri∣all he did; and they were Convicted, and have since re∣ceived Judgment, and that Judgment hath been Execu∣ted. But though the Murder was clearly proved at the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill; and though after all these Brags, that Thompson, Farewell, and Paine, made, That they could prove so much at their Trial, they could make out nothing; and so it was not necessary to call any more Witnesses for the King then; yet for the further Satisfacti∣on of the World, it hath been thought fit to Print (be∣sides what is Printed with the Trial, upon giving Judg∣ment) the following Five Affidavits all agreeing with Mr. Prance's Testimony upon the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill; and as to the first Four of them, see John Oakly's Af∣fidavit, Printed in the Trial, at pag. 35.
The Affidavit of Elizabeth Dekin. ELizabeth Dekin, Servant to Mr. Robert Breedan, of Harts-horn-Lane, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Brewer, maketh Oath, That about two or three Dayes after the Rumour was Pub∣lished, That Sir Edmund-Bury was missing, her fellow servant, John Oakely, told her, this Deponent, That he saw Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, near the Water-gate at Sommerset-House in the Strand, about Nine of the Clock that very Saturday Night that he was first Missing, from his House in Harts-horn-Lane; and that there was then a Man or two near the said Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey: And this De∣ponent further saith, That her said Master, Robert Bree∣dan, asking her (before the Body of Sir Edmund-Bury-God∣frey was found) what News there was about Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey? She, this Deponent, told him, That she heard no News of him, but that her Fellow Servant, John Oakely, had told her, That he met Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey near the Water-gate at Sommerset-House, the very Saturday Night he was first Missing from his House in Harts-horn-Lane. And this Deponent further saith, That she then asked the said John Oakely, If he was sure it was Sir Ed∣mund? And he replied, he was very sure it was he, for he put off his Hat to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, as he pas∣sed by. him; and Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey put off his Hat to him again: And he also told her, That when he had past Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, he, the said John Oakely look∣ing back again, saw Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey stand still, and a Man or two hard by him, Elizabeth Dekin. Jurat 22 Die Junij. 1682. coram me. John Moore, Mayor.
The Affidavit of Robert Breedon. RObert Breedon of Harts-horn-Lane in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Brewer, maketh Oath, That one Night, betwixt Saturday the 12th Day of October, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred and Seventy Eight, and before the Body of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was found, he coming Home to his House about Nine of the Clock at Night, asked his Servant Maid, Elizabeth Dekin, If there were yet any News of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey's being found? or words to that purpose: who replyed, That she heard nothing of his being found; But told him, That her Fellow Servant, John Oakely, did positively Affirm, That he met Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey near the Water-gate at Sommerset-House in the Strand, that very Saturday Night about Nine of the Clock, being the same Saturday that he was first Missed from his House in Harts-horn-Lane; to which this Deponent replied, Sure John is mistaken: To which Elizabeth Dekin answered, John Oakely said, he was sure it was he; for when he met him, he put off his Hat to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, and Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey put off his Hat to him again. Robert Breedon. Jurat. 22. Die Junij. 1682. coram me. John Moore, Mayor.
The Affidavit of Ralph Oakeley. RAlph Oakeley, Citizen and Skinner, maketh Oath, That he was an Inhabitant in the Parish of Little St. Bartholomews, Lon∣don, in the Month of October 1678. and that John Oakely his Nephew, was then and is now a Servant to Mr. Robert Breedn, of Harts-horn-Lane in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Brewer. And this Deponent farther saith, that soon af∣ter that the dead Body of Sir Edmond-Bry Godfrey was found his said Nephew, John Oakely, came to this Deponents House in a Visit, being as this Deponent believes, about the Sunday after that Sir Edmond-Bury Godfreys Body was found. And they falling into dis∣course of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey's being found murdered, his said Nephew John Oakely then told him this Deponent, That as he was going home to his Mr. Breedons in Harts-horn-Lane, after that he had parted with his Father Robert Oakely, about Ludat, he met Sir Edmond-BuryGodfrey about nine of the Clock at night, near the wa∣ter-Gate of Somerset-house; that Saturday night that he was first missing from his House in Harts-horn-Lane, and that he then, pas∣sed close by Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, or words to that purpose. Whereupon this Deponent asked his said Nephew, are you sure that it was Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey that you then met near Somerset House? how did you come to know him? to which his said Ne∣phew made Answer, I know him very well, for I saw him almost daily pass by Mr. Breedns house, and he lived in Harts-horn-lane a little below my Masters Brew-house, or words to that purpose. Ralph Oakeley. Jur: 4. die Julij 1682. Coram W. Dolbin. The Affidavit of Robert Oakeley. RObert Oakely of Bisseter, in the County of Oxon Maulster, ma∣keth Oath, that he being in London, on Saturday the 12th of October 1678 with his Son John Oakely, servant to Mr. Robert Bree∣den of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex Brewer, that this Deponent did then accompany his said Son John Oakely without Ludgate, and there parted with him about Nine a Clock at Night, and this Deponent went out of Town on the Thursday following; before the Body of Sir Edmond-BuryGodfrey was found. And this Deponent further saith, that some short time af∣ter, he coming to Town again, the said John Oakely his Son, then told this Deponent that upon Saturday the 12th day of October, 1678. Af∣ter
he had parted from this Deponent upon Ludgate-Hill, as he went home to his said Masters House in Hartshorn-Lane, he saw Sir Ed∣mond-BuryGodfrey; near Sumerset-House in the Strand, and then put off his Hat to him, and the said Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey thereupon put of his Hat to the said John Oakeley again, all which this De∣ponent hath declared to several persons since that time. Robert Oakley. Jurat 22. die Junij 1682. Coram me, John Moore Mayor. The Affidavit of John Brown and William Lock. JOhn Brown and William Lock, both of the Parish of Maribone in the County of Middlesex, having been since subpaened to give Evidence for the King upon an Information in the Crown-Office, exhibited against Nathaniel Thomson, William Pain, and John Far∣well, and not being called at their Tryal to give Evidence for the King, in open Court, each of them severally for themselves maketh Oath, that upon Thursday the 17th of October, 1678. The said John Brown, being then Constable of Maribone aforesaid, word was brought to him, that there was a man found dead in a Ditch near Primrose-Hill, whereupon this Deponent John Brown, charged this other Deponent William Lock, and several others to go along with him thither; and when they came to the place where the Body lay, the said Deponents John Brown and William Lock, went into the said Ditch, as also some other persons, which were then with them, some of which are since deceased. And the said Deponents viewing the Body in what Posture it lay, and finding a Sword thrust tho∣row the Body, they each of them, the said Deponents, did feel un∣der the Body, and found that the Pummel of the Sword-Hilt did not touch the Ground by a handfull; but not knowing whose Bo∣dy it was, they the said Deponents and others that were then with them, pulled the Body out of the Ditch, and found that it was the Body of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, with whom they were very well acquainted in his Life time. The mark of William W. L. Lock. John Brown. Jurat 30 die Junij 1682. Coram me John Moore Mayor.
The Affidavit of Benj. Man. Benjamin man of London, Gent. having been twice subpaened to give Evidence for the King upon an Information Exhibited in the Crown-Office against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farewell: And not being called at their Tryal to give Evidence in open Court, maketh Oath, That about the time Green was Charged with the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey, This Deponent coming to the Gate-House in the Morning, found the said Green about to be put in Irons, and Asking the Turn-Keys What was the matter? They told him that Green was Charged with the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey. And then the said Deponent called to see his Warrant, and this Deponent read∣ing of it, turn'd to Mr. Green and said I did not think to have found you such a man, whereupon Green replyed, I am a Dead Man, or Words to that purpose. Benj. Man. Jur. 3. die Julii, 1682. Coram me W. Dolben. The Affidavit of Robert Forset. Robert Forset of Maribone, in the County of middlesex Esq having been twice Subpaened to give Evidence for the King, upon an Information exhibited in the Crown-Office against Nathaniel Thomson, William Pain and John Farewell: And being not Called to give Evidence in open Court, maketh Oath, That Tuesday the fifteenth of October, 1678. being the Tuesday after that Sir Ed∣mond-berry Godfrey was missing, he this Deponent was a hunting with his Pack of Hounds at the very place where the Body of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey was afterwards found, and beat that very place with his hounds, and the Body was not then there, nor any Gloves nor Cane thereabout. The said Deponent further saith, That the same day Mr. Henry Harwood, requested him this Deponent that he would let him have his Hounds the next day after being Wednesday, and he would find that Hare which they
could not find on Tuesday, or words to that purpose. And this Deponent further saith, That he the said Harwood, hath several times since affirmed, That he did accordingly hunt in the same place and beat the same Ditch, and said that the Body was not there that Wednesday at Noon, which said Henry Harwood is now newly dead. W. Dolben. Jur. 1. die Julii, 1682. coram me Robert Forset. Vid. Green, Berry, and Hills Tryals, fol. 19. 20. As to the time of removing the Body and the Gloves, and other things upon the Bank. But because it may be thought strange that Protestants should Espouse the Cause of the Papists, it may be fit to give some Account what these Persons are, who have so zealously ap∣peared in this matter; It is to be supposed (not without some ground) that Thompson (notwithstanding his pretence that he was drawn in) knew those things he Printed in the Letters or several of them to be falsities, for Mr. George Larkin does swear as follows: The Affidavit of George Larkin. George Larkin of London Printer, maketh Oath, That having heard the Body of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey was found, this Deponent on the Eighteenth of October, 1678. went to see the said Body, which then lay at the White House near Primrose-Hill, and there met with Nathaniel Thompson, of London also Printer, who then proposed to this Deponent the writing of a Narrative thereof to Print, wherein he desired this Deponents Assistance, and therefore wished this Deponent to take good notice of the Body and Circumstances, and promised to do the like himself, and this Deponent staid there with the said Thompson till the Coroners Jury sate on the said Body, and did see the said Body stripped. And this Deponent having conferred with the said Thompson, and agreeing with him in the circumstances; the
said Narrative, the same day was written in part in the said Thompson's house, and being finished, was read over by this Deponent and the said Thompson, who agreed with this Depo∣nonent in the truth thereof▪ George Larkin. Jur. 22. die Martii, 1681. coram me J. Moore, Mayor. And upon this sight of the Body, and comparing of Notes with Mr. Larkin, he puts out a little Pamphlet intituled, A True and Perfect Narrative, &c. in which there is a Paragraph or two quite contrary to what he Prints in the Letters, pray take it in the words of it. A True and Perfect Narrative of the late Terrible and Bloody Mur∣ther of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey, &c. (with Allowance.) Printed by N. T. 1678. ON Friday the Eighteenth of this Instant, Mr. Cooper the Coroner of Middlesex impannell'd a Jury at the White-House to Enquire about the occasion of the Death of the said Sir Edmond-berry: and two Chirurgions (having been first Sworn) removed the Body in the presence of the Coroner and Jury, and found the Wounds about it, which one of the Chirurgions searched with his Probe, and found one of them not above an Inch deep, the Probe going against one of his Ribs, but the other being a little below the left Pap, went quite through the Body, his Face was of a fresh colour, tho' in his Life time very pale, somewhat swelled, and a green Circle about his Neck, as if he had been strangled, his blood being setled about his Throat, and the upper part of his Breast, the Chi∣rurgions having reviewed the Body, delivered their Judgments, That the Wounds they found about him were not the Cause of his Death; but that he was Suffocated before the Wounds were made. And that which may fully persuade any person of the Truth hereof is, That there was not one drop of Blood to be found in the place where he lay, nor the least appearance of any such thing, tho' the Ditch was dry, and it might have been easily seen if there
had been any. Another thing was, that the very bottom of the soles of his Shoes were as clean as if he had but just come out of his own Chamber, which was an evident sign that he was carried thither. A third thing very remarkable is, That one of the Jury Af∣firmed that a Servant of his Mothers (who is owner of the ground were the Body lay) with a Butcher and two Boys made a very strict and narrow search in all parts of that ground for a Calf that was missing upon Monday and Tuesday last, and at that time there lay no dead Body, Belt, Gloves, Stick, or other thing there. And notwithstanding he gives himself the Name of the Loyal Protestant Printer, this is not the first time he hath been charged wlth Printing Popish. Books, (I take still these Letters and Libels to be a Limb of Popery) for Wednesday the thirtieth of October, 1678. he was Committed to the Gatehouse at Westminster, by the House of Lords for that very matter. As for Mr. Farewell, he was mightily afraid he should be taken for a Papist, Mr. Ser∣jeant Maynard declared he thought he was of no Religion: but if he be, I know which is most like to justifie such Practises. But tho' I cannot say any thing as to his Religion, yet I have rea∣son to think the Papists had a great kindness for him, for (not to mention other things) he was Trustee for Fenwick the Je∣suite that was Executed, and that I think will appear by the following Affidavit, and also a kind of Will made by the said Fenwick.
The Affidavit of John Richardson. John Richardson of the Parish of St. Clement Danes in the County of Middlesex, formerly Clark to Richard Langhorn Esq executed (aged 36 years or thereabouts) Deposeth, that in or about the year 1670. Mr. John Farwel lately deputy Bayliff of Westminster, was employed by the said Mr. Lang∣horn, in the cause between the Jesuits, Whitebread Poulten, and others, and one Mr. John Savage in a sutie in Chancery; Concerning Newenham Abby in Bedfordshier. And that in the year 1678. About Michaelmas day, there having for some time before been another suite in Chancery depending between one Mr. Goodlad, and the Jesuits executed and others, all the papers in the said cause being removed by the said Mr. Langhorns order, (before his Imprisonment) out of his Chamber. Mr. Farwell met this Deponent, and said to him, where are the papers in the Cause between the Jesuits and Mrs. Goodlad. The Deponent told him in the Temple, Mr. Farwell said he must have them brought to him, (to follow the suite that Mr. Langhorn had begun, So the Deponent carryed them to him the next day, and within some short time afterwards, the said cause was finally ended, as the deponent hath been since informed, Mr. Farwell was also Concerned for the Jesuits, as a Trustee for five hundred pounds of Fenwick's mony, in Benjamin Hintons hands, found by a Jury and given as the Deponent is informed to the Sheriffs of London, Notwithstanding which he being Summoned on a Commission of Enquiry to Guildhal, about May last, and there examined if he had never been a Trustee for any of them, he said on his Oath No, yet after being charged with his being proved a Trustee for this Five Hundred Pound, (before the Jury) he then confessed he had forgot it: And owned he was a Trustee for the Five Hundred Pound before mentioned. John Richardson. Jur. 3. die Aprilis, 1682. Coram me John Moore, Mayor.
Fenwick the Jesuit that was Executed, his Will. I had taken from me when I was Apprehended and brought to Prison, two Goldsmiths Notes, one of 400 l. another of 100 l. the Money is in Benjamin Hinton's hands at Birchin-Lane End in Lumbard-street. There were also two Bonds, each of 126 l. due to me from Mr. Samuel Tyrril, but the Bonds are made payable to Mr. John Farwell, and Mr. William Brewe. There was also a Bill of 50 l. due from Mrs. Olympia Wray. Of this I owe to Mr. Hamerton of Mark-road 100 l. which I had received from him with Order to pay it to another Gent. but had not paid it: also 40 l. to Mr. Edward Stockton, which I Received for him and had not paid it: also 10 or 15 l. (truly I rather believe 15 l.) which I received for Mr. Tho. Pordage, (who lives now beyond Seas, and had an Estate in Kent of 1000 l. a Year since the Kings Restauration, and is now reduced to that Poverty that this 20 l. is all he has to live on) from Mr. Tho. Lushington in Kent, by five or ten pound at a time, it being in part of an Annuity of 20 l. a year to be paid Quarterly. Also 15 or 20 l. to Alice Kettlewell, who lives with the Lady Petre, for which she has my Note. There are also several Deeds and Bonds betwixt the late Lord Widdrington, and George Collingwood of Eshington in Nor∣thumberland, Esq which the said George Collingwood Ordered me to deliver to Capt. Ralph Widdrington, upon the payment of 100 l. but the money not being paid, I desire the Writings may be restored to the said Mr. Collingwood, or his Heirs. These several Sums being paid, the rest of the money belongs to the House of St. Omers, for which I was employed. I desire what money is paid in satisfaction of the Sums above∣said, may be paid into the hands of Mr. John Farwell, Attorney at Law of Covent-Garden, who will take care to pay it to the persons to whom it belongs. I hope care will be taken to pay my Landlady my Chamber-Rent since my Imprisonment, also half a Year or three quarters of a Years Rent, which I was owing at the time of my Appre∣hension, since all is taken from me and I cannot do it my self, she will tell you exactly the time, for I cannot.
As for Mr. Pain, I shall only say this, that he is brother to Nevill alias Pain, a man famous for making the Traytor Cole∣man's Elegy, and for being an Agent and Scribler for Mrs. Cellier and the Papists, yet that I may do him right, I must tell the World since the prosecution of him for this matter, he hath declared himself sorry for what he hath done, and not carried it so impudently as the others. Thus I hope by Printing these Affidavits, the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey by the Papists, does appear so clear and unquestionable, that no Persons (for the future) can assume the impudence to attempt any further Shams upon it, but at the same time must proclaim their Folly in so vain an Under∣taking. THE END.
