T2239 16263941 105168
THE TRYAL OF WILLIAM VISCOUNT STAFFORD FOR HIGH TREASON, In Conspiring the Death of the KING, The Extirpation of the PROTESTANT RELIGION, The Subversion of the GOVERNMENT, and Introduction of POPERY into this Realm, Upon an IMPEACHMENT BY THE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, In the Name of Themselves and of All the COMMONS OF ENGLAND: Begun in Westminster-Hall, the 30. day of November 1680. and continued until the 7. of December following, on which day Judgment of High Treason was given upon him. With the Manner of his Execution the 29. of the same Month. Dublin, Reprinted by Jos. Ray, at College-Green, and are to be sold by S. Helsham, Job. North, Jos. Howes, and the rest of the Booksellers of Dublin. 1681.
The TRYAL of William Viscount Stafford, Begun in Westminster-Hall, November 30. 1680. The First Day. WIlliam Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford; Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, having been formerly impeached in the House of Lords, of High Trea∣son, and other high Crimes and Offences, by the House of Commons, in the Name of Themselves and of all the Commons of England. And the House of Commons having sent a Message to the Lords, to acquaint them with the Resolution of that House, to proceed to the Tryal of those Lords then in the Tower, and forthwith to begin with the said Viscount Stafford▪ and to desire their Lordships to appoint a convenient day for the Tryal of the said Vis∣count Stafford; their Lordships did thereupon appoint the 30. day of November, 1680. for his Trial; And a place in Westminster-Hall▪ having been (for that pur∣pose) erected, the same was as followeth, viz. Therein were both Seats and Wool-packs, correspondent in all points to those in the House of Lords; as also a State placed at the upper end thereof, with a Cabinet for the King (and whom His Majesty should think fit to attend him there) on the right hand the State, and the like on the left hand for the Queen and her Followers. As also Galleries over head, for Ambassadors and others. And to the end that the Commons might be fitted with Seats upon this great occasion, there were erected for them, on each side divers Benches, on several degrees, extending to the utmost Walls of the Hall. At the lower end the Bar, (whereunto the Prisoners were to be brought) being placed; on the right hand thereof was a place raised about five Foot, wherein the Witnesses were to stand; and on the left hand a convenient Room for those parti∣cular Members of the House of Commons, which were to manage the Evidence. And the Right Honourable Heneage Lord Finch, Baron of Daventry, Lord High Chancellor of England, being by His Majesties Special Letters Patent, bearing date the 30. of November, 1680. Constituted Lord High Steward for that present occasion; upon Tuesday the said 30. of November, the Lord High Steward was honorably attended from his House in Queen-street, by all the Judges of His Maje∣sties Courts in Westminster-Hall in their Robes; as also by Garter Principal King of Arms, in His Majesties Coat of Arms, and the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, unto whom His Majesty had the day before delivered the White Wand, to be carried before his Lordship; and about nine of the clock in the morning set forwards in his Coach towards Westminster, sitting at the hinder end thereof; Garter and the
Gentleman who bore the Great Seal sitting both uncovered at the other end; one of the Setjeants at Arms, with his Mace being placed on the right side the Coach, and the Usher of the Black Rod carrying the VVhite VVand on the left side; the Judges and his Lordships Gentlemen in several Coaches following after. Being thus come to the Stairs-foot ascending to the House of Peers, the Judges went up two and two together (the Juniors first) next the Lord High Steward's Gentlemen: after them the Serjeant at Arms with his Mace, and the Seal bearer; and lastly the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, bearing the VVhite VVand; Garter principal King of Arms, going on his right hand. Then his Lordship alone; his Train born by one of his Gentlemen; in this manner entring the House of Peers, he found all the Lords in their Scarlet Robes; also the Bishops in their Rochets, and took his place upon the uppermost Wool∣sack. This done and Prayers ended, his Commission for Lord High Steward was read, And then the Bishops receded, and the Lords Adjourned themselves into the new erected a Court in VVestminster-Hall. All things being thus in readiness, and a large Door-place broken through the upper end of VVestminster-Hall, into that Room which was heretofore the Court of VVards. Their Lordships passed from their House first into the Painted Chamber, then through that called the Court of Requests: Thence (turning on the left hand) into that called the Court of VVards, then entred at the Door (so broke down as afore∣said) into VVestminster Hall, and passed through a long Gallery, (placed between the King's Bench and Chancery Courts) into this New erected Court in VVest∣minster-Hall, and proceeded after this manner, viz. First the Assistants to the Clerk of the Parliament. Then the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, and Clerk of the Parliament; af∣ter them the Masters in Chancery two and two, and the King's Attorney Gene∣ral, alone. Then the Judges of all Courts in VVestminster-Hall, by two and two. Next to them Noblemens Eldest Sons. After them Four Serjeants at Arms, bearing their Maces. Next the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod. Then all the Noble Men according to their respective Degrees, the Juniors first, viz. Barons. Viscounts. Earls. Great Officer, viz. Lord Chamberlain of the Houshould. Marquesses. Dukes. Great Officers Lord Privy Seal. Great Officers Lord President of the Council. Then Four more Serjeants at Arms bearing their Maces. After them, the Gentleman carrying the Great Seal.
Then one of His Majesties Gentlemen Ushers, daily-waiters, carrying the White Wand. Garter Principal King of Arms going on his right Hand. Then the Lord High Steward alone, having his Train born, and after him his Highness Rupert Duke of Cumberland, a Prince of the Blood. This done, and the whole House of Peers having taken their Places according to their Degrees, the Commons being also Seated on each side, and the Mana∣gers in the Room appointed for them▪ the Commons being all bare, The Lord High Steward (after obeysance made towards the State) took his place upon the uppermost Wool-sack, and thereupon receiving the VVhite VVand from Garter and the Gentleman Usher upon their Knees, delivered it to the Usher of the Black Rod, who held it during the time of Sitting there; Having so done, his Lordship said, Cryer make Proclamation of Silence, Then the Cryer (a Serjeant at Arms) made Proclamation thus, All manner of Persons are straitly commanded to keep Silence upon pain of Im∣prisonment. God save the King. Lord High Steward. Make Proclamation for the Lieutenant of the Tower to bring the Prisoner to the Bar. Cryer, Oyes, Oyes, Oyes, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, bring forth thy Prisoner, William Viscount Stafford, upon pain and peril shall fall thereon. God save the King. Whereupon the Lieutenant of the Tower brought the Prisoner to the Bar. Usher of the Black Rod. My Lord Stafford must kneel, which he did. Lord high Steward. Rise my Lord. Then he Arose and stood at the Bar, and the Lord High Steward spake to him as followeth, My Lord Viscount Stafford, THE Commons of England Assembled in Parliament have Im∣peach'd your Lordship of High Treason; and you are brought this Day to the Bar to be Tryed upon that Impeachment: You are not Try'd upon the Indictment of Treason found by the Grand Jury (tho there be that too in the Case,) But you are Prosecuted and Pursued by the Loud and Dreadsul Complaints of the Com∣mons: and are to be Try'd upon the Presentment which hath been made by the Grand Inquest of the whole Nation. In this so Great and Weighty Cause, you are to be Judg'd by the whole Body of the House of Peers, The Highest and the Noblest Court in This, or perhaps in any other part of the Christian World. Here you may be sure no False Weights or Measures ever will, or can be found; Here the Ballance will be exactly kept, and all
the Grains of Allowance which your Case will bear, will certainly be put into the Scales. But as it is impossible for my Lords to Condemn the Innocent; so 'tis equally Impossible that They should clear the Guilty. If therefore you have been Agitated by a Restless Zeal, to Pro∣mote that which you call the Catholick Cause. If this Zeal have Engaged you in such Deep and Black Designs as you are Charged with, and this Charge shall be fully Prov'd, Then you must Ex∣pect to Reap what you have Sown; for every Work must, and ought to Receive the Wages that are due to it. Hear therefore with Patience what shall be said against you, for you shall have full Time and Scope to Answer it: Aud when you come to make your Defence, you shall have a very fair and equal Hearing, In the mean time, the best Entrance upon this Service will be to begin with Reading of the Charge. Lord High Steward. My Lord, if your Lordship find your self infirm and un∣able to stand, your Lordship may have a Chair to ease your self whilst the Charge is Reading, and a Chair was brought accordingly, and his Lordship sate thereon. Clerk of the Parliament, Read the Charge. Articles of Impeachment of High Treason, and other high Crimes and Offences against William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, and Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis now Prisoners in the Tower of London. 1. THat for many years now last past, there hath been contrived and carried on by Papists, a Trayterous and execrable Conspi∣racy and Plot within this Kingdom of England, and other places; to Alter, Change, and Subvert the Ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom and Nation, and to Suppress the True Religion therein Established, and to Extirpate and Destroy the Professors thereof; which said Plot and Conspiracy was contrived and carried on in divers Places, and by several ways and means, and by a great number of Persons of several Qualities and Degrees who Acted therein, and in∣tended
thereby to Execute and Accomplish the aforesaid Wicked and Traiterous Designs and Purposes. That the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, together with Philip Howard, commonly called Car∣dinal of Norfolk, Thomas White alias Whitebread, commonly cal∣led Provincial of the Jesuits in England, Richard Strange, lately called Provincial of the Jesuits in England Vincent commonly called Provincial of the Dominicans in England. James Corker, commonly called President of the Benedictines. Sir John Warner, alias Clare Baronet, William Harcourt, John Kenis, Ni∣cholas Blundel,—Poole, Edward Mico, Thomas Beding∣field alias Benefield, Basil Langworth, Charles Peters, Richard Peters, John Conyers, Sir George Wakeman, Thomas Fenwick, Dominick Kelly, Fitzgerald, Evers, Sir Thomas Preston, William Lovel Jesuits, Lord Baltamore, John Carrel, John Townely, Richard Langhorn, William Fogarty, Thomas Penny, Matthew Medbourn, Edward Coleman, William Ireland, John Grove, Thomas Pickering, John Smith; and divers other Jesuits, Priests, Fryers, and other Persons, as false Traytors to his Majesty, and this Kingdom, within the time aforesaid, have Traiterously Con∣sulted, Contrived, and Acted to, and for the accomplishing of the said wicked, pernitious and Traiterous Designs, and for that end did most wickedly, and Traiterously agree, Conspire, and resolve to Im∣prison, Depose and Murder his Sacred Majesty; and to deprive him of his Royal State, Crown and Dignity, and by malicious and advised speaking, writing, and otherwise, declared such their Purposes and Intentions. And also to subject this Kingdom and Nation to the Pope, and to his Tyrannical Government. And to seize and share amongst themselves the Estates and Inheri∣tances of his Majesties Protestant Subjects. And to Erect and Restore Abbeys, Monasteries, and other Con∣vents and Societies, which have been long since by the Laws of this Kingdom suppressed for their Superstition and Idolatry, and to deli∣ver up and restore to them the Lands and Possessions now vested in his Majesty and his Subjects, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm:
And also to Found and Erect new Monasteries and Convents, and to remove and deprive all Protestant Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons from their Offices, Benefices and Preferments. And by this means to destroy his Majesties Person, extirpate the Pro∣testant Religion, overthrow the Rights, Liberties, and Properties of all his Majesties good Subjects, Subvert the lawful Government of this Kingdom, and subject the same to the Tyranny of the See of Rome. 3. That the said Conspirators and their Complices and Confede∣rates, Traiterously had and held several Meetings, Assemblies, and Consultations, wherein it was Contrived and Designed among them what means should be used, and what Persons and Instruments should be Employed to Murder his Majesty; And did then and there resolve to effect it by Poisoning, Shooting, Stabbing, or some such like ways and means, and offered Rewards and Promises of advantage to seve∣ral persons to execute the same, and hired and imployed several wick∣ed persons to go to Windsor and other places where his Majesty did reside, to murder and destroy his Majesty, which said persons or some of them accepted such Rewards, and undertook the perpetrating there∣of, and did actually go to the said Places for that end and purpose. 4. That the said Conspirators the better to compass their Trayterous Designs, have Consulted to Raise, and have procured and raised Men, Money, Horses, Arms and Ammunition, and also have made Appli∣cation to, and Treated and Corresponded with the Pope, his Cardi∣nals, Nuncioes and Agents, and with other Forreign Ministers and Persons to raise and obtain Supplies of Men, Money, Arms and Am∣munition therewith to make, levy and raise War, Rebellion and Tu∣mults within this Kingdom, and to Invade the same with Forreign Forces, and to surprize, seize, and destroy His Majesties Navy, Forts, Magazines and places of strength within this Kingdom, where∣upon the Calamities of War, Murders of Innocent Subjects, Men, Wo∣men and Children, Burnings, Rapines, Devastations, and other dreadful Miseries and Mischiefs must inevitably have ensued to the ruine and destruction of this Nation. 5. And the said Conspirators have procured and accepted, and de∣livered out several Instruments, Commissions and Powers made and granted by, or under the Pope, or other Ʋnlawful and Ʋsurped Au∣thority, to raise and dispose of Men, Moneys, Arms, and other things
necessary for their wicked and traiterous Designs, and namely a Com∣mission for the said Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour to be Lord Chancellor of England, another Commission to the said William Earl of Powis to be Lord Treasurer of England, another Commission to the said John Lord Bellasis to be General of the Army to be raised, ano∣ther Commission to the said William Lord Petre to be Lieutenant Ge∣neral of the same Army, and a Power for the said William Viscount Stafford to be Paymaster of the Army. 6. That in order to encourage themselves in Prosecuting their said wicked Plots, Conspiracies and Treasons, and to hide and hinder the Discovery of the same, and to secure themselves from Justice and Pu∣nishment, the Conspirators aforesaid, their Complices and Confederates, have used many wicked and diabolical Practices, (viz.) They did cause their Priests to Administer to the said Conspirators an Oath of Secrecy together with their Sacrament, and also did cause their said Priests upon Confessions to give their Absolutions upon Condition that they should conceal the said Conspiracy. And when about the Month of September last Sir Edmundbury Godfrey a Justice of Peace, had according to the Duty of his Oath and Office taken several Examinations & Informations concerning the said Conspiracy and Plot, the said Conspirators or some of them by Advice, Assent, Counsel and Instigation of the rest, did incite and procure di∣vers Persons to lie in wait and pursue the said Sir Edmundbury God∣frey divers days, with intent to Murder him, which at last was perpe∣trated and effected by them, (for which said horrid Crimes and Offences Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill have since been Attainted, and Dominick Kelly and Girald and others are fled for the same) After which Murder, and before the Body was found, or the Murder known to any but the Complices therein, the said Persons falsly gave out, that he was a∣live and privately Married; And after the Body found, dispersed a false and malitious Report, That he had Murdered himself. Which said Murther was committed with design to stifle and sup∣press the Evidence he had taken and had knowledge of, and discourage and deter Magistrates and Others, from Acting in further Discovery of the said Conspiracy and Plot: For which end also, the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, while he was alive, was by them, their Com∣plices
and Favourers, threatned and discouraged in his proceedings a∣bout the same. 7. And of their further Malice, they have wickedly contrived, by many false Suggestions, to lay the Imputation and Guilt of the afore∣said Horrid and Detestable Crimes upon the Protestants; that so thereby they might escape the Punishments they have justly deserved, and expose the Protestants to great Scandal, and subject them to Per∣secution and Oppression in all Kingdoms and Countries, where the Ro∣mish Religion is received and professed. All which Treasons, Crimes and Offences above mentioned, were Contrived, Committed, Perpetrated, Acted and done by the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, William Lord Petre, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, and John Lord Bellasis, and other the Conspirators aforesaid, against our Sovereign Lord the KING, His Crown and Dignity, and against the Laws and Sta▪tutes of this Kingdom. Of all which Treasons, Crimes, and Offences, the Knights, Citi∣zens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, do in the Name of them∣selves, and of all the Commons of England, Impeach the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, William Lord Petre, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, and John Lord Bellasis, and every of them. And the said Commons by protestation, saving to themselves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Accusations or Impeachments, against the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, William Lord Petre, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, and John Lord Bellasis, and every of them; And also of replying to the Answers, which they, and every of them shall make to the Premises, or any of them; or to any other Accusation or Im∣peachment, which shall be by them Exhibited (as the cause according to Course and Proceedings of Parliament shall require) do pray that the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, William Lord Petre, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, and John Lord Bel∣lasis, and every of them, be put to Answer all, and every the Premi∣ses; And that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials and Judg∣ments, may be upon them, and every of them, had and used, as shall be agreeable to Lv and Justice, and Course of Parliament.
The Humble Answer of William Viscount of Stafford, now Prisoner in His Majesties Tower of London, to the Impeachment of High Treason, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors, exhibited against him and others, to the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament, by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in Parliament assembled, in the name of them∣selves and of the Commons of England. THe said Viscount saving to himself all advantage and benefit of Exceptions to the generality, incertainty and insufficiency of the said Impeachment, most humbly beseeching their Lordships thereof to take due notice, and thereunto at all times, to have a just regard; He answereth and saith, That he is not Guilty of all or any of the Offences charged against him by the said Impeachment, and for his Tryal humbly and willingly putteth himself upon his Peers: no ways doubting but that by the Grace of God, and their Lordships impartial Justice, he shall make his Innocence appear. All which he most humbly submitteth unto their Lordships further Consideration. Stafford. Lord High Steward. Gentlemen of the House of Commons be pleased to proceed. Then Mr. Serjeant Maynard one of the Committee appointed to manage the Evidence, began as followeth; My Lords, MAy it please your Lordships: By the Command of the House of Com∣mons, who have imposed upon Us this Task, we are here to Prosecute this great Charge against the Prisoner the Lord at the Bar. My Lords, There are two Parts that are in this great Charge, there is a General, which is the Subversion of the whole Nation, the King Himself to be Murdered, the Pro∣testant Religion to be Suppressed, War to be introduced, and those other things that are expressed in the Articles. This General is charged in particular upon this Lord; And my Lords, it was in consideration how far it was fit to meddle with this General at this particular Tryal. For if this Lord be guilty of such Crimes, it will prove well enough that there was such a Plot; but, my Lords, withall we did consider when the first Discovery of this Plot was made, how
afterwards it took cold, how rumors were raised against it, how there were endea∣vours to suppress the belief of it, and therefore my Lords, we do conceive that it is fit we should first settle that, that there was a general Plot, a Plot of such a Na∣ture as the Articles express. Some Objections we thought there might be raised, because it hath been so long in the World, some years now since the Discovery of it, some persons, that is some ten or eleven Prosecuted and Atatinted for it, and therefore that might have been satisfaction enough that such a Plot there was; besides, that there have been publick Declarations of the Particulars to the World; But being now to proceed before your Lordships in a judicial way; We did think fit, and we hope your Lordships will approve of it, to spend some time in the Proof of the general Plot, which we hope will be to the satisfaction of your Lordships and the whole World; for we do not think that England only looks into this days Tryal, but the whole World one way or other, the whole Christian World is concerned in it. My Lords, after the Publication of these things, (which were not judicial) how far your Lordships will believe them as Judges, we know not, we will prove it now, that their Policies and Contrivances may be laid open to the World; And first we offer it to your Lordships, because we have made it part of the Charge: And secondly we shall do it, because we think your Lordships are not obliged to be∣lieve things that are in Print, till we prove them by Witnesses judicially before you. But the main Reason why we do it is, because we would touch upon those Endea∣vours that have been used to make this seem as if it were a kind of State Plot, I know not what to call t, a Chimaera, an Imagination, and not a real thing. This they laboured many ways to effect, but we shall prove that it is a very real and a ve∣ry true one, When that Oats first made a Discovery, it seems it had not that weight, that we think now it will clearly have with your Lordships; and had not the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey followed in the Neck of it, the World as it was asleep would have lain so, but that awaked us. My Lords, it fell out in this Case as it did in another, when Cateline the Traytor was a great way off Rome, and four other Lords with him, Cassius, Cethegus and others, five in all, it came to pass, that as the great Orator that was at that time said, Many were so ignorant that they would not think it, many were so unwise they would not believe it; some so ill that they would favour it; & some so much worse that they did Foster it: but all of them in not believing it, gave strength to the Conspiracy & the Treason. And so it did here, for we look not upon our selves as discharg'd from the Treason when Discover'd, but when Prevented. My Lords, another Reason to induce us into the Proof of the main Plot is this, We do not look upon it as a particular Offence, as if one Lord was only to be que∣stioned and appear before your Lordships judicially for it; he is indeed only before you at this time to receive his Tryal, and your Judgment: But my Lords, this is a
Treason of a Faction, and of a general Party in the Nation, 'tis not this or that Lord, but a great number; 'tis not this or that Lord that is mentioned in the Ar∣ticles, but the Conspiracy is of a great Faction. This we do think, and this makes us so earnest to press the general before your Lordships, that we may give satisfa∣ction to your Lordships and the World what this Plot hath been; and how carried on every where. My Lords, The Consequence of that is very great; for my Lords, if there were a general Design, and a general Plot, as clearly there was, for some were to act in Spain, and some in France, some in other places, some in Ireland, Scotland and England; and a great number of Jesuits, (we have a matter of Thirty in Chase a∣bout this business:) I say my Lords, if it be so, if one Action be in one place, and another in another, yet if there be a common Consent to accomplish this Plot, then what the one does, is the Act of All, and the Act of All is the Act of every one. My Lords, The Persons were many, and the Places and Times many they acted in, and the Designs which they were to accomplish, and the means where∣with they were to accomplish them were many too: Great, and wicked were their Designs to destroy our King, to take him out of the World; and why? upon hopes of better times to them under him that should succeed him. Another part of the Design was, to destroy, not this or that man that stood in their way, but the whole Body of the Protestants here in England; not a Murder, but a Massacre and a Slaughter of all whosoever they were that came near them, and none were to escape, for if any meant to flee, they would be sure to cut them off; nay, not only to destroy our King, though that be the greatest Offence that our Law can take hold off, but to destroy our Religion, and to destroy us, because of our Re∣ligon. To accomplish this (that we may open the generals of it) Arms were to be pro∣vided, Men to be raised, an Army was formed in effect, and who to Lead, and who to Command, and who to pay; But my Lords, not only were Arms to be had here among our selves, but a French Aid must be fetch'd in, Assistance from France must come too, Intelligences and Letters are written, and Correspondencies had, and Aids promised by the Ministers from thence. My Lords, 'Tis a strange thing that English men should contrive to have an Invasion of Strangers upon their own Country, and surely they are the worst Big∣gots in the world that were so zealous to destroy their own Nation, and they were not wise sure, to think, that if the French did come in, they should continue great Lords or great Men, and yet thus it was in general; It is very strange that it should enter into the heart of any man to destroy so many persons: But my Lords, if we look upon what did incourage them, and what confirmed them in this Design, and what they have published to the world about their Religion, we shall not wonder at it, since they tell us 'tis lawful to kill an Heretick King, and the
King of England is an Heretick they say, and so declared, so that whosoever would Kill him, did a lawful and pious piece of Service to God; Nay, not only so, but a Meritorious and Glorious one too, for which they may be Canonized for Saints. My Lords, we find it is no new thing, look into all the Nations where the Pope hath any Power, or a possibility of hope to gain a Power, nothing hath been able to stand in their way, but they have broken through all the Bonds of Nature, and other Obligations to attain their Ends. Look into Spain, King Philip there removed his own Son, by what means the Story tells us, he was Heir apparent, but he was a Protestant: and there also the Father puts Fire to his own Daughter because she was a Protestant, there a Spaniard goes from Spain into Germany to murder, and did murder his Brother for no other cause but because he was a Protestant. Leave Spain and go into France, what Massacres have been committed there under the colour of a Marriage in Queen Elizabeth's time, and before that how many hundred Albingenses and Waldenses have been put to the Sword for Religion. Come we to our own Country, and look into England what hath been done here, when Queen Elizabeth had a Successor of another Religion, how many Attempts were there made upon her Person to bring that Successor in? When King James came to the Crown let us remember the Gunpowder Treason, wherein all the Nation was to be destroyed, King, Lords, and Commons toge∣ther, and in Parliament assembled were then to be a Sacrifice, a Burnt-offering, though they might call it a Peace-offering: for these Gentlemen are for Sacrifices of Blood as Peace-offerings, to reconcile us to the Pope. If this be made out, we think, their Principles having produced these fruits in other Ages, we may believe they would do so now. What has been said as History of former times is not offered as Evidence of Fact to the present Case, but induces a probability that what hath been done by such persons may be done by them again. But, my Lords, we shall make it clear, and bring it home to this Lord, that he hath had his Head, his Tongue, his Hand, his Heart and his Purse in this damnable and horrible Contrivance and Treason for the destroying of the King, the Government, our Religion, and our Nation. We shall bring it home to him: But my part is only to open the general Conspiracy. And indeed my Lords, it is an heavy burden on my aged Shoulders, considering that the Winter of Infirmity and Age is growing so fast upon me. My Lords, the particulars concerning this Noble Lord, because the Credit of it rests on the Testimony only of one man, viz. Mr. Oats, whose Testi∣mony being taken by Sir Edmunbury Godfrey a Justice of Peace, and kept in writing by him, then Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was way-laid, and murdered by men of the Popish Religion, thereby to suppress the Examination that he had taken. This startled and opened the eyes of the world to look about us for farther Dis∣covery,
lest we should be led as Oxen to the slaughter not knowing whether we went. Afterward it pleased God to bring some of their own Religion and party to make farther Discovery. Whereupon several Jesuits Guilty of the Plot were therefore Prosecuted and brought to Judgment and Death. After the Murder of Godfrey several Fables were spread abroad, as if he were alive and Married, as was declared to several Lords, others of the party Reported he had Murdered himself; but his Body being found; it was hard for the party to invent or tell, whether he first strangled himself, and then run himself through, or first run himself through, and then strangled himself; that was a Dilemma to disprove their Fables touching Godfrey's Murder. It then fell out, that Mr. Bedlow came as a second Discoverer, whose Testi∣mony Concurred with Oats. And then there being two Witnesses, as is neces∣sary in case of Treason, the Design was to take off Bedlow that there should re∣main but one, a single Witness. In order to which Reading tempts Bedlow with Rewards to lessen his former Testimony, and qualifies that which he had deposed positively was but matter of hear say; For which Reading the Instrument in that Design and Attempt, was Indicted and Convicted by three Witnesses, and suf∣fered accordingly. But then this Attempt upon Bedlow failing, the next Attempt was to take off Oats his Testimony, by charging him with an Infamous offence; for which pur∣pose one Knox is imployed, who Suborns Lane and Osborn, and they Swore it a∣gainst Oats. But on Re-examination Confess the Subornation and Falshood of their Design: and Knox and Lane are therefore Indicted and found Guilty. Thus when the Treason was discovered, the Murder of an Officer of Justice is made the means to hide it, and then False and Infamous stories set on Foot of that Officer to hide that Murder; and Perjury and Subornation the means to blast the Discoverers. These wicked and ill practices we take to be a second reproof of the Plot both in general and particular, the Records of which Convictions are here before your Lordships ready to be proved. For Cui bono? none would do such wicked pra∣ctices but to hide a greater Sin and worse Designs if possible will be opened, and proved by one to whom that is particularly appointed. My Lords, we speak this that the World may receive Satisfaction we will let our Evidence be all open and publick in the face of the Sun, and shew we go not about by private Subornations, though there are endeavours to encounter us by such. My Lords, If we make out these things, here is Matter enough for the Satis∣faction of the World as to the general Contrivance; But my Lords, As you sit here as Judges of this Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, we must bring it down to particular Persons, and we shall do it even to him that those things which were mentioned in General were his Contrivance at least-wise, as a man highly▪
deeply guilty of Conspiring the Kings Death, and in order to that, of raising an Ar∣my, and the other things that have been opened. My Lords, I beseech you to pardon me if I have troubled you too long; The Particulars were many, and I have had little help to prepare it from any body but my self, but I submit my self to your Lordships, and hope that what is wanting in me will be supplyed by others that follow; and I also hope you will find no defect in our Evidence at all, whatsoever may have been in the opening of it. Then Sir Francis Winnigton another of the Committee appointed for the Management of the Evidence, began as followeth; My Lords, I Shall begin where Mr. Serjeant Maynard ended, and confine my self to this Case as it stands before you, and to open the particular Evidence relating to the Lord, the now Prisoner at the Bar. My Lords, I look upon the Cause of this day to be the Cause of the Prote∣stant Religion, and I doubt not but that Plot which has alarm'd all Christendom, will be so clearly made out in this Tryal, that the most malicious of our Enemies will henceforth want Confidence to deny it. That the Religion of the Papists does countenance and encourage the Mur∣dering of Princes, the Massacring of such as they miscall Hereticks, and the com∣mitting of all sorts of Impiety in order to promote their Superstitions, and Idola∣tries, has been mentioned by the Gentleman who spoke before me, and I should mispend time to say more of a truth so well known in so great and so learned a Presence. I will therefore directly apply my self to the Business of the day, to represent to your Lordships our Evidence of the Plot in general, and of the Guilt of this Lord at the Bar in particular. In order to which, I shall crave your Lordships leave that I may use this me∣thod; First, To shew what advantageous opportunities the Papists had to enter into, and undertake this great and detestable Conspiracy. Secondly, To prove the reality of the Plot in general, which I look upon as a very easie undertaking. Thirdly, To state the particular Evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar by which he will appear to have been one of the principal Conspirators in this horrid Design, to murder our Soveraign, (whom God preserve) to extirpate the Pro∣testant Religion, and to subvert totally the Government and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. My Lords, To shew what extraordinary Advantages the Papists had to en∣ter upon this Conspiracy, will very naturally lead us into our Proof of it, and therefore I shall speak somewhat to that in the first place. It is not unknown
to your Lordships, or to any others who have in the least degree inquired into Affairs, that His Majesty has been so unhappy as that (unawares to him) some Ministers who have been Papists at the Bottom, and others that have drove on their Interest, have crept into his Councils, and thereby gave great opportunities to advance Popery. 'Tis most true, that as soon as these ill Ministers were detected, and their ill Designs discovered, His Majesty did discharge them. But to the misfortune of the King and his People, as ill men have been recommended to succeed them, and came into their places. In the next place, my Lords, There did appear in some men too easie and favourable a disposition towards the Papists. They were grown strangely mo∣derate towards these old Enemies of our Church and State. New Projects of Reconciling us were set on foot, and Books were written to distinguish the Church of Rome from the Court of Rome. One of those Books, which was printed the year before the Discovery of the Plot, pretends, That there ought to be a Diffe∣rence made between Papists of Loyal and Disloyal nciples. This Book, as it was written more artificially than the rest, and published in so critical and dangerous a juncture, deserves, and I doubt not in time will have, a particular Consideration. 'Tis easie to believe how great Encouragement this must give to the Romanists, to see how very willing men were to meet them, and how freely the Pen was drawn in their favour. Another great Encouragement, my Lords, which the Papists had, was, That by the means of those Ministers who were secretly of their Faction, whensoever His Majesty was pleased to command the Laws made against them in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James, to be put in due Execution, his good In∣tentions were frustrated, and the Severity of those Laws was turned upon the Pro∣testant Dissenters. This was a Masterpiece of Rome, not only to divert from themselves the edge of those Laws which were designed against them; but to turn them upon the Protestants, and to make them useful to advance the Romish Interest. And when they had thus divided and distracted us, then was the fairest time for them to attempt to destroy us utterly, and to make sharp their Weapons in order to a Massacre. But, my Lords, That which gave the Papists the greatest encouragement to enter into this detestable Conspiracy, was, that they had (to the great unhappiness of this Kingdom & the Protestant Religion) the expectation & hopes of a Popish Successor. This was an opportunity not to be lost. They had abundant Experience of His Majesties Firmness in the Protestant Religion, both during his Exile and since his happy Restauration, and how resolutely he had kept that Promise which he made in his Letter from Breda, That neither the Unkindness of some Protestants, nor the Civilities of some Papists should in the least degree startle him, or make him swerve from his Religion.
They therefore could have no hopes of arriving at their Point, the Re-establish∣ment of their Church, whilst the King liv'd; and it was too great a hazard to ex∣pect His Majesties Death by the Course of Nature: And therefore, like true Pa∣pists that would stick at no wickedness to accomplish their Designs, they threw off all Bonds of Loyalty and Allegiance, and resolved to destroy our Soveraign, whose Life was the only Obstacle in their way. This was the last and most wicked part of their Plot, which though it consisted of very many parts, yet this was the prin∣cipal; and our Evidence against the Lord at the Bar will chiefly run to this part of the Design. I have only mentioned some of those Encouragements which the World plainly saw the Papists had, before the Plot was detected: But since the Discovery, it has been abundantly prov'd, that it had been carrying on for many years, and that so universally, that it is a wonderful thing it appeared no sooner. My Lords, I come now to our Evidence; and though it may seem unnecessary to prove to your Lordships general Plot of the Papists, who are so well satisfied of it already, and have more than once declared so to the world; yet because it is the most natural method for us, first to prove that there was a Conspiracy, before we attempt to prove this Lord to have been one of the Conspirators, we shall beg your leave as to that particular; and as we shall be careful not to take up too much of your time, so we well know your Lordships will allow us all the time necessary to give our Evidence. We have many Records, things reduced to Judgment, whereby the Plot is most undoubtedly proved, and which are legal Evidences before your Lordships. The Attainders of several Jesuits and Priests, the Attainder of Langhorn and of Coleman, whom I should have named in the first place. We have also the Con∣viction of those that were prosecuted for the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and there is a Conviction, though not for Murder, yet for cutting the Throat of Mr. Arnold. 'Tis true he is not dead, yet, as to the publick, I count him murdered by the Papists, though he be alive in the world. My Lords, we have Convictions not only of Treasons, Murders and cutting of Throats, but of almost all other Vil∣lanies whatsoever. As of Attempts to suborn Witnesses, and to scandalize the Kings Evidence; and to that we shall produce the Record concerning Readings attempt upon Bedlow; that concerning the Suborning of Knox and Lane to Swear Buggery against Dr. Oats: and the Conviction of Tasborough and Price to corrupt Dugdale, a principal Witness as to this Plot. I only mention these particulars, my Lords, and certainly as you are a great Court of Record you will take notice of them. It would be a hard thing perhaps to spend the time in reading all, since all of them are made known to the world already, but we shall in the course of our Evidence produce them, and you may read such of them as you please. All the use we make of them is for the proof of the
general Plot, which is requisite to be done, for it will be hard to believe the Prisoner Guilty of the Plot, if there were no such Plot at all. My Lords, we shall make appear to you things which have not yet been brought into Judgment. In the year (76.) we shall prove by a Witness that was then a∣broad, and discoursed with Anderton, Campion, Green, and several other Priests and Jesuits, that they did acquaint him that there would be great alteration in England ere long, that the King was a Heretick and Excommunicated, and might be de∣stroyed; and this Doctrine they continually and industriously preached. And they further said, if once the King were removed, (who alone stood in the way) their Religion must needs flourish; for this Reason, (as the Witnesses will speak) that the Duke of York was on their side. My Lords, We shall prove, that they had in England men no less industrious a∣mongst them, some whereof have been Executed; Gavan by name, who made it his business to go up and down in several Counties of this Kingdom, to prove by Scripture, Councils, and Examples, That it was a lawful undertaking to kill His Majesty. These things I name, as necessary in order to introduce our particular Evidence, I am unwilling to dwell longer upon this point of the general Plot. I shall produce the Records, and produce our several Witnesses, Mr. Oats and o∣thers that will give you a full and plain Account of it. My Lords, Having done with the general Plot, I come now to open the par∣ticular Evidence against my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar. As to him, my Lords, our Evidence stands not upon Conjectures, or upon meer Probability, because this Lord is (as we well know) a zealous Papist, and hath owned himself so, but we have express particular Proofs against his Person. My Lords, we have one Wit∣ness to produce to your Lordships who will prove, that in September (78.) there was a Consult of some Priests and other Conspirators at Tixall in Staffordshire, my Lord Aston's House, for killing of the King, where my Lord Stafford was pre∣sent. And by a Discourse in the same month, we shall prove what reasons this Lord did give, why he and their Party undertook the Murdering of the King, be∣cause he said, That he and many Catholck Families had no Recompence for their Loyalty▪ but if any thing fell it was disposed of to Rebels and Traytors. This he resented deeply; but above all, the Obligation of his Conscience and of his Religion persuaded him to it, and confirmed him in his resolution to go on in this horrid Design. My Lords, we will go farther, and prove that this Lord offered 500l. out of his own Purse to carry on the Plot, and particularly this part of it for killing the King. We shall produce to your Lordships a Witness to whom he made this offer, as looking upon him to be a faithful man, and having received so great a Character of him from one Evers a Priest, that he thought he might safely communicate the matter to him, and the Argument he urged to persuade the Witness, besides the 500l. which he said upon his application to Harcout and
Ireland they should pay him, was this, that others as well as he was employed in the same Design, that it was the only way to establish the Romish Religion in England, that he would lay an everlasting obligation upon all the Persons of that Persuasion, and that he should not only have his Pardon, but be Canonized for it. My Lords, This is the substance of the Testimony of the first Witness which we shall produce against my Lord Stafford, and that is so express as I think it can hardly be answered. My Lords, Our next Witness says thus; (for I shall but open the substance of what they say) In June or July 1678. there were several Letters from this Lord at the Bar, to the Jesuits in London, in which his Lordship did declare, his rea∣diness to serve them in their great Design; and in June (78.) the latter end of the month, my Lord Stafford came to Mr. Fenwicks Chamber in Drury-Lane, (he went not then by the name of my Lord Stafford, but by the name of Mr. How∣ard of Effingham) and there he did receive a Commission from Fenwick to be Pay∣master-General of the Army which was to be raised for the carrying on the Plot. His Lordship told them he was then going into the Country, but he hoped he should soon hear from them, that they had done the business, at least, that it would be done before his Lordship did return. To which Fenwick made answer; Your Lordship must look after the business as well as other Persons, and there will be need of some to Countenance it in Town; thereupon the Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, said, That they had been often deceived by this Prince and been patient with him, but they would bear no longer, but were now resolved to do the Work without delay, for their patience was worn out. Several other particular Circum∣stances the Witnesses will acquaint your Lordships withal, which I shall not take up your time with. My Lords, We have a third Witness as considerable and particular as any of the rest, one that lived three years in the Lady Powis House, had his Education there, and was persuaded by that Lady and by one Morgan a Jesuit to become a Fryer, and to that end was sent to Doway; But not liking to continue at Doway, (he will tell you the reason why) he escaped to France, and at Paris came to his Brother, a Benedictine Monk there, who advised him to go for England. But whilst he staid at Paris, this Gentleman, by the means of his Brother and other Priests, grew into a great samiliarity with my Lord Stafford, who was then in France, and who at last came to have such a great Confidence in him, that his Lordship could not hold, but told him, that though he had disobliged all his Friends by his going away from Doway, yet he had something to propose to him which would be a means to reconcile him to hs Friends, and bring him into pre∣serment, and into the friendship of all good Catholicks, whom he would oblige by it. The Gentleman was willing to embrace so happy an opportunity, and de∣sired to know what it was, could procure him so great a good; My Lord Stafford, the Prisoner at the Bar, told him, It was a thing of very great Importance, and,
after having required from him all possible obligations of Secrecy, he told him plainly what great benefits would accrew to himself, and what advantage to the Catholick Cause, if he would make himself and the Nation happy by undertaking to kill the King of England, who was an Heretick, and consequently a Rebel to God Almighty. My Lord Stafford did believe the Witnesses did embrace this proposal warmly, and therefore directed him to prepare to go for England, and to go before hand from Paris to Deep, where he would meet him, and go over with him. But it seems my Lord Stafford met with some diversion, for he did not keep his word with him in coming, and so this Gentleman, being disappoint∣ed, went over without him; but fearing to be called upon to the same Service, he returned back again suddenly, and went into the French Army. My Lords, We shall produce these Witnesses against the Lord at the Bar, and when they have proved to your Lordships what I have opened, any one, who was not acquainted with the Popish party, would believe they would be at a loss how to acquit themselves from this Charge. All manner of foul and indirect practices have been used by them to Terrifie, to Corrupt and to Scandalize our Witnesses; all manner of Objections have been made to our Evidence. If the Witness does not come up to speak directly to every Point, we are told, he says nothing at all; if he speaks directly, they cry, he is not to be believed. Thus they have a rea∣dy answer to every Witness that has been, or ever shall be produced, either that he says nothing Material, or that nothing that he says ought to have any Credit. But we doubt not, by this Tryal before your Lordships, if we cannot stop their mouths, at least to convince all the World besides, of the reality of this Plot. It will be no wonder if their Confidence goes on still to frame Cavils, They are used to scandalize the Government, and they cannot give it over. How often has His Majesty under his Great Seal, published and declared this Conspi∣racy? How often has he press'd His Parliaments to go on to bring the Conspi∣rators to Punishment, and at the opening of this very Parliament, he says plainly, That he does not believe himself safe from their Designs. Your Lordships also have Voted the unquestionable Truth of the Plot, and so have the Commons; yet these men are so hardy, as still to deny the plainest Truth so confirm'd as this hath been. Nay, My Lords, Their Malice goes yet farther, for they have been so Bold as to whisper up and down, and industriously to spread Reports before the Trial, as if this Lord at the Bar, and the rest who are Impeached should certainly be ac∣quitted. We do hope to be able to detect the Authors of this great Scandal, and the Commons doubt not of your Lordships Concurrence to assist them in bringing them to their deserved Punishment. This is sure, the first time that ever any sort of men presumed to Reflect upon the Justice of this High and Noble
Court. Your Ancestors, my Lords, did by their Honour, Courage, and Ju∣stice, preserve our Ancestors: The advantage of which, We, who are descended from them, do now enjoy, and We shall never have occasion to doubt in the least, but that your Lordships will tread in their steps. You have in your hands a great Opportunity to make your Zeal for Truth, and for the Protestant Religion famous to Posterity. No Artifice or Malice can Create the least Jealousie in us, that ever your Lordships should shew any Partiality or Injustice to the Commons of England, To your Judgement this Cause is submitted, and when we have your Judgement, we doubt not but we shall drive Popery out of this English World. My Lords, We shall go on to the proof of our Cause, and I hope this will be a happy day to us and the whole Protestant Interest. Then Mr. Treby also one of the Committee appointed for the Management of the Evidence, began as followeth; My Lords, THese two Learned Gentlemen have fully discharged their Province. I shall proceed to call our Witnesses to give their Testimony. But before we produce them, your Lordships will be pleased to take notice, that our Evidence will consist of Two Parts; general and particular; the general, to shew the Universal Conspiracy; the particular, to shew what special part this Noble Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar had in it. And though in the first part my Lord Stafford may not be particularly named, yet that Evidence will be pertinent and proper for us to give, in this Trial of my Lord Stafford; for, we charge him not with the Private Treason wherein he with his immediate Complices only might be concerned, but it is a Treason of the Popish Faction, or at least, the Principal and Active Papists. We lay it in our Articles of Impeachment. That there was an Execrable Plot contrived and carried on by the Papists, and that the Conspirators acted diverse Parts, and in diverse places beyond Sea, as well as here. It was a Treason that did bestide two Lands, England indeed was the thing aimed at; the destruction of the Religion, Government and Liberty of England was the End; but the Means and Instruments were not Collected here only, but part of them were to be brought in from abroad. This is an Enterprise too extensive to be intirely manag'd by a Single Noble∣man, And though we look upon my Lord Stafford as a great Malefactor, yet we cannot think him so great a Man as to be able within his own Sphere to compass this whole Design.
Should we not take this course of Evidence first to prove the General Plot, it might be a great and just objection in my Lords mouth to say, You charge  with a Design of Subverting the Kingdom, how is that possible to be under∣taken by me, and those I have had opportunity to converse and confederate with? a mighty part of the Catholick World had need be engaged for such a purpose. My Lords, If this would be a material Objection from this Lord, then will it be requisite for us to obviate and prevent the Objection by shewing first, that there was such a grand and universal design of Papists, in which this Lord was to co-operate for his distinct share; though perhaps when we descend to our particu∣lar Evidence it will appear, that his part hath been great, and manag'd with ma∣lice as great as any. My Lords, We shall begin with a Witness, a Gentleman whose Education has given him the opportunity of knowing the inside of their Affairs, and we presume he will give you a satisfactory account, his name is Mr. John Smith. Lord High Steward. What do you call him to, Gentlemen? Mr. Treby. To the General Plot, my Lords. Lord Stafford, May it please your Lordships, I know not who he is, nor his Name, I humbly beseech your Lordships that this Witness, who ever he be, and all the rest that have any thing to witness against me, may look upon me face to face, according to the words of the Statute. I humbly beseech your Lord∣ships to grant me this, which I take to be according to Law; and that each may give his Evidence alone, and that both against me and for me, one may not know what the other says. Lord High Stew. My Lord, You shall have all the fair proceeding that can be. Lord Stafford. The Law says, my Accusers must look me face to face. I de∣sire to have the words read. Lord High Steward. Your Lordship may see him there where he stands up. Then Mr. Smith turned, and looked upon my Lord Stafford. Lord Safford. I do see him, but do not know him. Lord High Steward. Swear him. Clerk. The Evidence that you shall give in the Tryal of William Viscount Stafford, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God, and the Contents of this Book. Lord High Steward. Your Lordship observes he is not brought as a particular Witness against your Lordship, but to prove the general Design of your Party. Lord Stafford. 'Tis still concerning me. Lord High Steward. Look upon my Lord Stafford (which he did) and now tell your Evidence. Mr. Treby. This is Mr. Smith, my Lords. And that which we would examine this Witness to, is the general Design of the Plot, what knowledge he hath had of it here or beyond Sea, the Gentleman is able to understand the general Question.
Mr. Smith. My Lords, I remember very well, when I went first into France, I came acquainted with Abbot Montague, Father Gascoyn, and several other Po∣pish Priests and Jesuits, who often discoursed with me, and told me, if I would make my self a Catholick I should have an Employment amongst them there, and afterwards in England; for they did not doubt but the Popish Religion would come in very soon; upon which I asked his Lordship the Abbot one day, what reason he had to believe it? he told me two reasons; first, that they did not doubt but to procure a toleration of Religion, by which they should bring it in without noise; and secondly, that the Gentry that went abroad did observe the novelty of their own Religion, and the Antiquity of theirs, and the advantages that were to be had by it. These Reasons Abbot Montague gave me. There was one Fa∣ther Bennet and others, that told me the chief reason was, their party was very strong in England, and in a few Years they would bring it in right or wrong. All this would not prevail with me to turn Papist, and I lived among them several Years. At last I had a design to go to Rome, and as I went I had a design to go to Provence, (and so into Italy) where there was one Cardinal Grimaldi coming tho∣rough the Town, and the Jesuits having a great School there, I was curious to go to the School, and they were very desirous I should tarry for some time in the Town; I did, and they made much of me, and told me much to the same substance, what assurances they had of their Religion coming into England. At last they had a desire I should discourse with the Cardinal, which I did, and he made much of me, and he it was that perverted me to the Romish Religion; upon this the Cardinal shewed me a pair of Hangings that were in his House, which he said did belong to the Queen Mother, and were bought in Paris, and he told me he was acquainted with many of the Nobility in England, and that he had great assurance the Popish Religion would prevail, and he told me there was but one in the way, and though that man was a good natured man, yet they could not so far prevail upon him, but that to accomplish their designs they must take him out of the way; but at last I left this place and went to Rome, where I lived some years in the English Jesuits Colledge there, and when I had lived there five years, I came to be Prefect of several Rooms there which are the Scholars Lodgings and places of Study. I have heard it there often disputed in their own Colledge, both preach'd and privately exhorted, that the King of England was an Heretick, and that there was no King really reigning, and who ever took him out of the way would do a meritorious action. Lord High Steward. Who was that that said so? Mr. Treby. Name the persons. Mr. Smith. Father Anderton, Rector of the Colledge, who was a very good Scholar, Father Mumford, and one Father Campion, but chiefly one Father South∣well, one of the chief of the Jesuits. And I doubting of the truth of that Opinion, they did shew me several of their Books there, and directed me to some passages of
Mariana, Vasquez and Bellarmine, which I have since published to the world, wherein they did assert it as a true Doctrine, and as Christian Doctrine, what the Fathers told me; and this was never condemned at Rome. Besides, my Lords, when I was coming from Rome, with my Faculty and License signed by Cardinal Barberino, who generally conducts, or causes to be conducted all Papists to take their leave of the Pope; and before we came away (for there were five or six of us together) for a whole month these Fathers were exhorting us, That we were not obliged to obey the King of England, and that in all private Confessions we were to instruct all persons that we thought were capable of any design, That they should use all their endeavours for promoting the Popish Religion. I com∣ing into England, made my application to Dr. Perrott, who belonged to the Por∣tugal Ambassador, and was chief of the Popish Clergy in England: I was kept there some months, to say Mass in his Chappel; and afterwards I was sent into the North, (where there were abundance of Jesuits and Fryers) to one Mr. Jenison's House, where knowing the Principles of these people, I made it my business to rout these Jesuits away, especially out of Mr. Jenison's House, who had a Kinsman of his own that was a Jesuit, and used to serve him in his House, and great com∣plaint was made against me; and there was one Mr. Smith, otherwise Serjeant, in the North, who gave me intimation of it; ond to whom I wrote to satisfie him and the Clergy, of the grounds and reasons why I routed them away; which if he be in England now, he can justifie. Upon this, I received a smart Letter, as a kind of Reprimand for my doing so; and he told me, That though they did a∣gree with me in Doctrine, yet they would endeavour what they could to bring in the Popish Religion. And taxed me sharply for appearing against it. I told him how the Jesuits perverted the Duke of York; and that by that means they would be the chief men in England, though there were none of their Order till Queen Elizabeths time. Besides, My Lords, in Rome I saw Coleman's Letters, and read them once a month, as I believe; wherein he gave us intelligence of several pas∣sages that happened in Court; how the Duke and the Queen, and the chief of the Nobility were of their side; how they carried matters several times; the ways my Lord Clifford did use, and Sir William Godolphin, to effect the work; and that they did not question but they should get my Lord Treasurer Danby on their side too. This was in Coleman's Letters, and he had so much allowance for his In∣telligence. These Letters of his I read several times in the Colledge. My Lords, afterwards when I came from Rome, I saw Abbot Montague again, and he said he was very glad to see me, and that I was a Priest; well but, said I, what am I the better? where is the Employment you promised me when I should come into England? He told me I should have it very soon, and he was very glad that I had not made my self a Jesuit; and he recommended me to Dr. Goffe, Confessor to the Queen Mother; who said, he would do any thing in the world for me, and he did not doubt but he should get a preferment for me; which Dr. Goffe is now
living. Truly when I came into England I found all the Popish Clergy of Eng∣land, that I discoursed with, of the same opinion, that they did not doubt but the Romish Religion would soon come in. And besides, in the North there was gathering of Money, in which I was ordered to be one of the chief men; but I was against it: I told them I would do nothing in it, I thought it was illegal to send any Money beyond Sea: they told me it was charity only to repair the Col∣lege at Doway: I told them it was strange that there should be so much Money raised only to repair one College which would serve three or four Colleges; and I perswaded Mr. Jenison and all other persons I had to do with, not to med∣dle with it. As to this raising of the Money, I conceive it may be inferr'd, it was for some other private business; and I believe, was for the carrying on the de∣sign. As for the Gentleman at the Bar, my Lord Stafford, I know nothing of my own particular knowledge, but only this, Therewas one Thomas Smith, Sir Edward Smith's Brother, that lived at a place not far off the place where I lived, who was one that contributed in paying the Money that was then Collecting: he was the man that writ a Letter up to my Lord Stafford, to complain of two or three Justices of the Peace that were active against Popery, upon which there was one that was turned out, that I think is now of the Honourable House of Commons— Mr. Treby. Name him. Mr. Smith. Sir Henry Calverley. The other was not turned out. So I asked Smith, when I was lately in the Country, about it, for I heard a rumor, that there was a Letter of this Mr. Smiths found in my Lord Staffords Chamber, and I was told it by a Parliament Man, one Collonel Tempest: So said I to him, now you will be concerned in the Plot. No said he, I care not for that Letter, it will signifie nothing; for my Lord won't keep by him any thing of any moment. I asked him what he knew about my Lord; he told me he writ another Letter to my Lord to know whether he would make a conveyance of his Estate away, and whether he apprehended they were in danger: And he told me, his Lordships answer was, that several did so, but he would not, for he expected some sudden change or alteration: I asked him what change or alteration he understood by it. Sir, said he, what can be understood by it, but an alteration of the Government and Religion? I am sure said he, my Lord is so wise a Man, that he would not write so without some ground. This is all I can say to the Gentleman at the Bar, and this is true by the Oath I have taken. Mr. Treby. My Lords, I did observe Mr. Smith in the beginning of his Testi∣mony (speaking of the Discourse he had at Rome) said, they told him there was one in the way; I presume 'tis not uneasy to conjecture who was that one. Lord High Stew. It was surely the King. Mr. Treby. But we would rather have it explained by him himself.
Mr. Smith. Father Anderton, and Father Southwell, did say that the King was a good man, but he was not for their turn, and he was the only man that stood in the way. Mr. Treby. Did they name the King? Mr. Smith. Yes, it was the common Discourse all over the Country. Mr. Treby. My Lords, I desire Mr. Smith in the next place may give an ac∣count of the methods they were to use to accomplish this design, the firing of the City, and the rest. Mr. Smith. As to the burning of London I heard nothing beyond Seas at all but this, it was discoursed that the Papists did it, and the like, but they denied it, and they said it came accidentally in a Bakers House; but this I have often heard them say that it was no great matter if it had been all burnt. Lord High Stew. Will you ask him any more Questions yet? Mr. Treby. No, we have done with him. Lord High Stew. Have you concluded your Evidence, Sir? Mr. Smith. Yes. Lord High Stew. My Lord Stafford, will your Lordship ask him any Questions. Lord Stafford. I desire to know how long ago it was, my Lord, since he was made a Priest. Sir Fran. Winn. My Lords, with your Lordships leave, no man is bound to answer a Question whereby he shall accuse himself; therefore under favour the Question is somewhat harsh, and we demand your Judgment in it. Lord High Stew. What is the Question your Lordship would have asked him. L. Stafford. I will not ask it since 'tis an offence, but did not he say he said Mass, pray how long ago was that? Lord High Stew. I will ask him a Question, Are not you a Protestant? Mr. Smith. Yes, my Lord. Lord High Stew. How long have you been so? Mr. Smith. I have been a Protestant near upon two Years. Lord High Stew. How long ago before were you perverted? Mr. Smith. Some six or seven Years. Lord High Stew. That is nine Years. That was I suppose about (71.) Mr. Smith. I was always bred a Protestant, and was so abroad till I went to∣wards Rome. Lord High Stew. It is not criminal to have been a Priest, if he have con∣formed. L. Stafford. I have no more to say to him. Lord High Stew. Have you any more Questions to ask him? L. Stafford. No, I never saw him before, he may be as honest a Gentleman for ought I know as any one here.
Mr. Treby. Then if your Lordship have no more Questions to ask him, he may withdraw. My Lords, The next Witness we produce is to the general still, and that is Mr. Stephen Dugdale. Lord Stafford. Is he only to speak to the general, or to me? Mr. Treby. To the general, we shall tell your Lordship when we come to the particulars. Sir Franc. Winn. My Lords, with your Lordships favour, we have opened our Case, first, that we would go on with the general, while we are upon that head we will only call those that speak to the general, but it may happen that one Wit∣ness may speak to both; but we shall divide his Testimony when we come to ob∣serve upon it. Mr. Treby. My Lords, I take leave to acquaint your Lordships, that Mr. Dugdale hath but a low voice, and your Lordships will not hear him without a Command of Silence, (which was done by Proclamation, and Mr. Dugdale sworn.) Mr. Treby. Mr. Dugdale, take notice, We call you now only to the gene∣ral part of the Plot, what Discourses you have heard from Priests in general concerning any part of the Plot. And you are not to give your particular Evidence against this Noble Lord, my Lord Stafford, till we call you there∣unto. Lord High Stew. What say you Sir? Mr. Dugdale. About fifteen or sixteen Years I have been acquainted, that there was a Design carrying on for the bringing in the Romish Religion. I have at several times, by the means of my Ghostly Father, that was Mr. Evers, been acquainted, that there were several Lords, and several Priests in several places in England that were to carry it on, that is, they were to have Mony and Arms ready for those that wanted against the death of the King. I have seen several Letters which have come from Paris, Rome, and St. Omers, all relating to this, to incourage Mr. Evers. and that he should go on to incourage the rest that were ingaged. For that purpose I read some of them, and intercepted them, be∣cause they were all directed to me. Mr. Evers hath sent me upon Messages, sometimes by Letters, and sometimes by word of mouth, and all tended for the introducing of their Religion, that all should be ready with Money and Arms a∣gainst the Kings Death. For I did hear nothing till of late about the killing of the King. In particular, there came one Letter to Evers, from my Lord Stafford, to shew that things went on well beyond Sea, and hoped they did so here. I saw another time some Letters which were also transmitted to my hands by a Mes∣senger that came from Boscobel, which did come from Paris, and so to St. Omers, from whence they came to Harcourt, and Harcourt had delivered the Letters to have the opinion of some Lords: All which contained advice which they had re∣ceived from Paris, which they counted extraordinary good. The purport of
these Letters were to shew there was no way could be more likely to do their Work, than if any sudden death should happen to the King then to throw it upon the Presbyterians, who had killed the old King, and were likeliest to be thought to have done this, and so they might easily get the Protestants, those of the Church of England, to join with the Papists against the Presbyterians, who would by that become odious, and so should weaken the party the more easily to accom∣plish their design. I have of late several times been in company with Priests and other Gentlemen in the Country, when they have had Consultations both for the introducing their own Religion, aud taking away the Kings life, which they did always intend to be about November, December, or January (78.) It was late in the Year, but all that Year (78.) this was their Consultation. I have been sent to the Jesuits, some of them, particularly to Mr. Vavasor and Mr. Gavan for some Moneys, for there was a general Collection, and there was the sum of five hun∣dred pounds at one time which I received, and gave to Mr. Evers, and he return∣ed it to London for the carrying on this design, and for discharging an account of Arms and things received from beyond Sea. And it was agreed that my Lord Aston, Sir James Symons and others, should go in October 1678. to dispose of the Arms which they had so received, some here, and some beyond Sea, to the value I heard say of 30000. Moreover I did hear that they were to have men raised there as well as here. So I have heard from Mr. Evers, and Mr. Gavan and o∣thers, and I have been also by when it hath been discoursed that the King of France was acquainted with all these Designs, and that he would furnish us with men, and should not be wanting with all other aid and assistance, if there should be any alteration, if the King should die or be taken away, or to that purpose: I have been several times put upon to make Foot-Races to draw people together, that they might the better have Discourses together without suspicion. I was likewise put in trust by the Jesuits all the while the Plot was carrying on, and parti∣cularly for two years, all the Letters relating to the Plot came to my hand, some of which I opened, and some I kept in my own hands, and particularly I had one that came to my hands which was about the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, for when I carried it to Mr. Evers, he said, There was one of our Enemies taken out of the way; and it was contained in the Letter, This night Sir Edmondbury Godfrey is dispatched; which by the date of it was the 12. of October 1678. I told him that that would prove a discouragement to us, and would be the ruine of all the Design; he said, not so, it would rather prove otherwise, for he was one that was active in punishing lewd and debauched persons, and it would rather be put upon them than us, as done out of Revenge. Mr. Treby. Pray Sir speak the particular time when that Letter came into Staffordshire. Mr. Dugdale. The 14. of October, 1678. which was Monday. Mr. Treby. The date of it pray tell us.
Mr. Dugdale. The 12. of October 1678. Mr. Treby. The very night that it was done. Mr. Dugdale. Likewise when I did hear there was like to be an alteration in the Government, and having such fair promises, I was incouraged to it, and was very willing to contribute to the Design, and I did then make over an Estate which I had of four hundred pound value for that purpose, and for the praying for my Soul. And when my Lord Aston and I should come to Account, as there was money over and above due to me, I did likewise promise, because I saw money would be wanting, I would give them a hundred pound more. There were se∣veral other Gentlemen, as Mr. Heveningham, Sir James Symons, my Lord Aston, Mr. Draycott, Mr. Howard, and Mr. Gerard, who did to my knowledge contribute towards the carrying on of this Charge, for defraying of Money and raising Arms, and paying for them. And I have seen Letters from beyond Sea, that have been to Mr. Evers, that all things have been ready as to the Arms, and there only wanted Orders how they should be disposed of, and I have been several times brought to the Oath of Secrecy for fear I should disclose it, and particularly that time that I went away from my Lord Astons, which was on a Monday morning, Mr. Evers gave it me about the 18. or 19. of November, 1678. And I did then promise by all the promises I could make, and upon the Sacrament in his Chamber, that I would not disclose it; but having others to advise me in it, such as could better do it, that told me such Oaths were better broken than kept, and thereupon I came to discover the thing, which I have done to the best of my knowledge. I am very loath to charge my memory in particular, about times, or how many were in company, but those that I am sure of; but there hath been in company at the Consultation seve∣ral times, Mr. Heveningham, Sir James Symons, Mr. Vavasor, Mr. Petre, Mr. Howard, and my Lord Aston himself; when there hath been speech about the Design, for the introducing of Religion, and for taking order about money to buy Arms, and particularly when my Lord Stafford was by about the Death of the King, and that was about September 1678. Mr. Treby. Mr. Dugdale, you speak of leavying Arms, and of the Oath of Se∣crecy that was given you, were there not other Spiritual Weapons used? Was there not an Indulgence, or such a thing? Mr. Dugdale. There was an Indulgence about 78. or thereabouts, which came through Irelands hands, transmitted from beyond Sea, and so to Mr Evers, and Mr. Gavan was put on to publish it, which he did one time at Boscobel. And it was likewise at all private Chappels, that whosoever, was active for the intro∣ducing the Romish Religion, or killing the King, should have a free Pardon of all his sins. Mr. Foley. Pray declare what Arguments have been used by your Priests, to induce you to this Design? Lord High Steward. Raise your voice, that we may hear what you ask.
Mr. Foley. We would know what Arguments have been used to perswade to this design? Mr. Dugdale. They have told me in their Meetings, the King was an Ex∣communicated Heretick, and he was out of the Pale of the Church, therefore it was lawful to kill him, and it was no more than the killing of a dog. Sir John Trevor. My Lords, I desire to ask him one Question further, what he hath heard about a Massacre that was intended? L. H. Stew. Have you heard of any Massacre that was to be? Mr. Dugdale, I have heard that about the time the King should be killed, seve∣ral should be provided with Arms, and such Instruments, and rise all of a sudden at an hours warning, and to come in upon the Protestants, and cut their Throats; that was one proposal: and if any did escape, there should be an Army to cut them off in their flight, Mr. Treby. My Lords, I desire to ask him one Question further, whether he ever knew or heard of Mr. Oates and Bedloe till the Plot was detected? Mr. Dugdale. I have heard of them from Priests, as messengers intrusted by them, but no otherwise. L. H. Steward. When did you hear that? Mr. Dugdale. I have formerly declared it. Mr. Treby. Ay, when? L. H. Steward. Before the discovery or after? Mr. Dugdale. Before the discovery. Mr. Treby. My Lords, the reason of the Question, and the use we make of it is this, We charge the Papists with the Conspiracy of a Plot, and they charge our Witnesses with a Conspiracy to accuse: Now it appears, that Mr. Dugdale had not any knowledge of the other Witnesses, and only had heard of them as persons concern'd; so it could not possibly be a joint contrivance amongst them. Sir John Trevor. My Lords, I desire to ask this Question, Whether Mr. Dug∣dale hath seen any Letters from Whitebread to Evers, and what instructions were in those Letters to Evers, about the persons to be concerned, and what kind of Creatures he was to imploy in this great Design of theirs? Mr. Dugdale. I saw a Letter from Whitebread, to give Mr Evers a caution who he did employ or trust in the Design; for he told him there had been good care taken therein hitherto; and it were no matter whether they were Gentlemen of Quality or not, so they were stout and trusty, or to that purpose. L. H. Steward. What should they be trusty for? Mr. Dugdale. For the killing the King. L. H. Steward. Was that said plainly in the Letter? Mr. Dugdale. To the best of my remembrance in those very words. L. H. Steward. Was there no Cypher or Character? Mr. Dugdale. There was no Cypher or Character that I know of, nothing but two letters for his Name.
Mr. Treby. My Lords, I desire Mr. Dugdale may give an account of those Papers he speaks of; What became of them, and tell us the reason why they were not produced. Mr Dugdale. My Lords, when I was by the instruction of Mr. Evers, to take my flight, I conveyed all my Papers, that either belonged to him or my self, for the carrying on of the Plot, and carryed them to an House not far remote from my Lord Aston's, and by the help of two Maids— Mr. Treby. Name them. Mr. Dugdale. Elizabeth Eld, and Anne Eld. And they two did prepare a Fire in their Chamber for that purpose, and they assisted me to burn them. I was in a great consternation, and great fear, in regard I must fly and abscond my self; and indeed I did it with Tears in my Eyes. And whilst we were burning of the Papers, one of them spy'd a little Paper-book, by chance, and she asked me, whether that should be burnt; I told her, no; burn not that, for there is no Treason in it. With that one of them ask'd me, is there any Treason in the rest? and I put them off, to the best of my knowledge, and would not give them a direct answer. Sir John Trevor. Why did you consent to burn them? Mr. Dugdale. Because I knew they would discover me, and others that were concerned in the Plot. Sir Fr. Winn. Your Lordships will be pleased to observe the burning of the Letters was before he discovered the Plot, or any thing. Mr. Sacheverell. My Lords, We desire he may be asked one Question, he told your Lordships of the Letter that came into Staffordshire about the Death of Sir Edmonbury Godfrey, but he hath not told you of the reason why he was to be tak∣en away. We desire he will let your Lordships know what reasons they gave for it? Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I was desirous to know how things went, being con∣cerned as well as Mr. Evers; and I asked what the reason was they took away his life? Mr. Evers told me, that there was a Message sent to Mr. Coleman, to desire him that he would not reveal what he knew concerning the Plot, or any thing of that nature. Mr. Sacheverell. From whom was that Message sent? Mr. Dugdale. From the Duke of York. And Coleman did send word back a∣gain, What was it the nearer? for he had been so foolish as to reveal all to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, who had promised to keep it all as a secret. But upon the Examination of Oates, before Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, as a Justice of Peace, he was afraid he would come in an Evidence against him; and had shewn himself a little too eager, which made Coleman afraid he would witness against him. And the Duke of York did send word back again, That if he would take care not to reveal but conceal it, he should not come in against him, or to that purpose: And the next news we heard was the Letter that he was dispatched.
Mr. Foley. I desire he may give an account what assistance the Pope gave for the carrying on of this Design. Mr. Dugdale. I heard the Pope had out of his Revenue promised several sums of money for the carrying on this Plot; and particularly that he would assist the poor distressed Irish, with both Men and Money; and there should not be any thing wanting on his part. Lord High Stew. Have you done with him, Gentlemen? Mr. Treby. Yes, I think we have done with him as to the general. Lord Stafford. I desire to ask him then what sums of money did the Pope con∣tribute to it. L. H. Steward. What sums of money did the Pope contribute to this Design? Mr. Dugdale. I have heard of several sums in general that he was to contribute for the carrying on of the Plot. L. H. Steward. Did you hear of any sum certain? Mr. Dugdale. I do not know, but I think I have heard sometimes of ten thou∣sand Pound, or some such sum. I have been told by a Servant, that formerly belonged to my Lord Stafford▪ That the Popes daily income was twenty four thousand Pounds a day; and that if he would do as he had promised, he was able to do very much. L. H. Steward. They told you so, you do not know it otherwise. Mr. Treby. We have done then with him: We call Mr. Prance next. (Who was sworn.) Mr. Treby. My Lords, I desire Mr Prance would give us an account of what discourse he had with one Mr. Singleton a Priest; and when? Mr. Prance. I went to one Mr. Singleton, a Priest, at one Hall's in the year (78.) and he told me, That he did not fear but in a little time to be a Priest in a Parish Church; and that he would make no more to stab Forty Parliament Men, than to eat his Dinner vhich he was at, at that very time. L. H. Steward. Where was that? Mr. Prance. At one Hall's, a Cook in Ivy-lane. L. H. Steward. Will you ask him any Questions, my Lord? Lord Stafford. No, my Lord? Mr. Treby. Then call Dr. Oates. (Who was sworn) L. H. Stew. Do you examine Mr. Oates upon the general Plot, or the particular. Mr. Treby. Only to the General now; and we desire him to take notice he is so to speak, and to confine himself to that at present. Dr. Oates. My Lords, in the year (76) I was admitted into the service of the Duke of Norfolk, as Chaplain in his House, and there I came acquainted with one Bing, that was a Priest in the House. And being acquainted with him, there came one Kemish very often to visit him, and one Singleton, who told me that I
should find that the Protestant Religion was upon its last legs, and that it would be∣come me, and all men of my Coat (for then I professed my self a Minister of the Church of England) to hasten betimes home to the Church of Rome. My Lords, hav∣ing had strong suspicions for some years before, of the great and apparent growth of Popery; to satisfie my curiosity, I pretended some doubts in my mind. My Lords, after some time had passed over, & I had some conversation with these men, I found they were not men for my turn, because being regular men, they were not men that had any great degree of Learning. Afterwards, my Lords, I met with one Hutchinson; I found him a Saint-like man, or one that was Religious for Religion sake; and him I found not for my turn neither: For, my Lords, my design was to deal with their Casuists; that is, those of the Society. After that I had ob∣tained the favour from him, to have some Conference with one of the Society, I found they were the men for my turn, because I found they were the cunning politick men, and the men that could satisfie me. After that I had some Dis∣course with them, I pretended to be convinced by their Arguments. And, my Lords, after that I had thus acknowledged my Conviction, I desired to be re∣conciled; and accordingly on Ash-wednesday, 1676. I was reconciled. And soon after my Reconciliation, Strange, who was then Provincial of the Society, did tell me much after this way; Mr. Oats, you are now reconciled to the Church of Rome, and you must lay down your Ministry, for your Ordination is invalid, and you must look upon your self as no more than a Layman. Pray, says he, now what course do you think to take? I told him, I did desire to be one of their Society, and to be admitted a Novice into their Order. He said, it was a very honest request, and a very honest desire; and he said, he would take some time to consider of it, and he would take till the Saturday following. Saturday follow∣ing I was sent for, by one Fenwick: I lodged then in Barbican, and Fenwick came to me, and told me, the Fathers were met at Wild-House, and would speak with me. And he also told me, they had granted my request, and I should be admit∣ted. After I was admitted, they told me, I had some years upon me, and I could not undergo those burdens they put upon younger men. But what did I think of travelling, and going beyond Sea to do their business? I did agree to it, and in April (77.) I went aboard one Luke Roch, Master of the Bilboa Merchant, bound for Bilboa, having their Letters of Recommendation. After I arrived there, which was on a Sunday, in May or June, )I can't tell which) I went the Friday following for Validolid in Castile, and I got thither the Tuesday following▪ but by the way I opened certain Letters, wherein was made mention of a distur∣bance designed in Scotland. And the Letters did express what hopes they had to effect their Design in England, on the carrying on (as they worded it) the Ca∣tholick Cause, and for the advancement of the interest of the Bishop of Rome. My Lords, after I had arrived at Validolid, there were Letters there got before me, which were dated in May, wherein was expressed news, That the King was
dispatched, which was the cause of great joy to the Fathers there; and afterwards Letters dated in May too (but towards the latter end of May) came, That they were mistaken, and desired the Fathers there, to stifle that news. My Lords, there came Letters dated in June, wherein they did give an account, That they had procured one Beddingfield to be Confessor to the Duke of York; which Bed∣dingfield by his interest might prevail much with the Duke, in order to this De∣sign. Letters came also in June from St. Omers, which gave them an account, That Father Beddingfield had assured them of the Dukes willingness to comply with them, for the advancement of the Catholick Religion, My Lords, after I had stay'd some time there, and had passed through the Country for the bu∣siness of the Society; I found that in the Court of Spain some Ministers of that Court had been very ready to advance Money, which Money was returned for England; and that the Father Provincial of the Jesuits of Castile, by his care and industry had advanced Ten Thousand Pound, which was promised to be paid in June following, within a Twelvemonth after. My Lords, in July I re∣ceived Letters out of England, wherein an account was given there, to the Fathers in Spain, That they were sending them a Mission of Twelve Students, Four whereof were to go to Madrid▪ and Eight to Validolid: the Conductors of these Twelve Students were, one Father Crosse (that was his true Name) and one Fa∣ther Mumord, whose true Name was Armstrong. These Missioners arrived in December, where they had a Sermon preached at their coming, by this same Armstrong, wherein the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were declared to be Antichristian, Heretical, and Devillish; in which the Kings Legitimacy was vilified and abused; and that his Religion did intitle him to nothing but sudden death and destruction, in that he appeared an enemy both to God and Man. These were the Contents of that Sermon, as near as I remember. My Lords, after the meeting with several Letters there, in July, August, and September, in the Kingdom of Spain, it was ordered, I should return for England; and in the month of November I came for England, at which time I had Letters from the Provincial of Castile, called by the Name of Padre Hieronymo de Corduba, who did in his Letter assure the Provincial in England, and the Fathers here, That the ten thousand Pound should be paid (as I said hefore) in June following. When I came for England, at London I was lodged at one Grigson's, that lived in Drury∣lane, near the Sign of the Red-Lyon, and there I lay till I went to St. Omers; and by the Provincial and the Consultors of the Province, I was ordered a maintenance, and it was paid to this man for entertaining of me. I went and brought these Let∣ters to this Strange, and there was Father Keins, lying ill upon Strange's Bed, and Keins was saying, he was mighty sorry for honest William, (so they called the Rus∣sian that was to kill the King) that he had missed in his Enterprize: But, my Lords, this I think good to tell your Lordships, they were not so zealous for the destruction of the King, till the King had refused Coleman the dissolving of the long Parliament▪
Then they were more intent upon it, though they had several times attempted it ever since the Fire of London: but when Coleman was refused the Dissolution of the Long Parliament, then were they more zealous for the Destruction of the King; but the Design for the introducing the Popish Religion, they have been car∣rying on some years before the Fire, by those instruments some of whom are yet alive. My Lords, I left England in November old stile, and December new stile; for when I came to St. Omers it was (as near as I can remember) the 9. or 10. of December according to the stile of the place. I carryed with me a Packet of Let∣ters from Strange the Provincial, and other Fathers that were of the Consult for the Province of England to the Fathers at St. Omers, wherein Strange did tell them, that they had great hopes of their Design taking effect the next year, but as yet it would not be effected; he said, therefore they at London thought it fit to suspend it till they saw what the Parliament would do. And he did in the same Letter declare, That the Parliament would be about a long Bill that had been brought into the Commons House some Sessions before, but he did not Question but that the Catholick Party would evade that Bill. And My Lords, in that year some time after, we had a Letter from our New Provincial, whose true Name was Whitebread, and his counterfeit Name White. This Father writes to the Fathers at St. Omers, and therein he does order one Conyers to preach upon St. Thomas of Canterburies Day, and he did therein also tell them, that he would be as zealous for the carrying on of the Design as his Predecessor had been, and a Sermon was accordingly preached at the Sodality Church, wherein after he had commended the Saint whose Day they celebrated for his great Vertues, de∣claring how unworthily he was sacrificed, he did inveigh against the Tyranny (as he called it) of temporal Princes, and particularly of the King of England, and when he came to speak of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, he de∣clared, that he looked upon them as Antichristian and Devillish, and that it was fit to destroy all such as would countenance them. We have done with the year (77.) and we come now to January 1678. Lord High Stew. You speak of one Keins, who (lying upon Stranges Bed) said he was sorry honest Will had missed his Enterprize: You have not explained who that honest Will was: explain that. Dr. Oats. It was Grove. Lord High Steward. But about what did he say he was sorry for him? Dr. Oats. That he had missed his Design. Mr. Foley. What was that missing of his Design? Dr. Oats. That he had not killed the King. My Lords, in January (78.) Lord High Steward. You mean according to the Foreign stile? Dr. Oats. Yes, according to the Foreign stile, My Lords, we received Letters out of Ireland, and there, my Lords, we found by the Contents of those Letters, that they were as busie in Ireland as we were in England. We found there that the
Talbots and other persons were very zealous in raising of Forces, and were resolved to let in the French King, provided that the Parliament should urge the King to break with France. My Lords, likewise in January (as near as I can remember) Morgan was sent into Ireland, as a Visitor (which is something a better place than a Provincial, but only it is but temporary for the time he visits) and he returns in February or March, and gives an account how ready the Irish were to vindicate their freedom, and their Religion from the oppression of the English as they called it. My Lords, in February some were employed to go into some parts of Ger∣many, to Liege, and to some parts of Flanders, to see how the affairs there stood, and how their Correspondencies stood, to see whether there was not an inter∣ruption in the Correspondencies. My Lords, upon their return they found, that the Fathers at Ghent were inclined to take into this business the secular Clergy, but the Fathers of St. Omers, together with the Provincial, did refuse the motion, because the secular Clergy were more cowardly, and sought themselves and not the Interest of the Church, or to that purpose. My Lords, in March we received Letters, that there was a very shrewd attempt made upon the person of the King, and that the Flint of Pickering's Gun or Pistol was loose, and his hand shaking, the King did then escape, for which he received a Discipline, and the other a severe chiding. Lord High Steward. You explain not the meaning of what you say; that was not honest William, for he you say was Grove. Dr. Oats. I mean Pickering received the Discipline, and William was chid; for it was Pickering's Flint that was loose. My Lords, this was in March, and at the latter end of March, there comes a Letter from London, in which there was a Summons to a Consult here in London, and being summoned, there went over eight or nine from St, Omers, Liege, and Ghent, to this Consult, and I did attend then in their journey. Lord High Steward. When did that Summons come? Dr. Oats. The latter end of March, or the beginning of April, as I remember; they had notice of it in England before, but we had notice of it just when we were to come. I think it was in April, as near as I can remember, I cannot be certain in that, my Lord. We did come to Town in April, there the Consult was held, it begun at the White Horse Tavern, where they did consult about some things of the Society, and afterwards they did adjourn into particular Societies, where they did debate and resolve on the Death of the King, and that Grove should have fif∣teen hundred pounds for his pains, and the other being a Religious man should have thirty thousand Masses said for him. My Lords, after staying in Town a while we returned to St. Omers, and after I had staid there some few days the new Provincial did begin to visit his Province, and comes over to St. Omers, where after staying some six days he goes over away from thence to Wotion. But whilst he staid at St. Omers, I was ordered to go into England to attend the Affairs here
and for to do some other Services that they should imploy me about. My Lords, accordingly I did come over, and it was on the 23. new stile, as near as I remem∣ber, I got to Calice, the 24. I got to Dover, on the 25. I got to Sittenburn, but between Dover and Sittenburn we had some Boxes seized; for at Dover we met with Fenwick, who is since executed, who went by the name of Thompson, and carried a Box with him, and a little on this side Canterbury it was seized by the Custom-House Officers, and several little Trinkets in it which were seized as French Goods, and he did desire the Searcher to stand his friend, and he would give him something for his pains, and told him where he should write to him in London. There was a Superscription on the Box to one Blundel, but he should write to him by the name of Thompson, at the Fountain Tavern neer Charing-Cross. We arrived in Town the 17. of June, which is the 27. new stile; it was upon a Monday, and there were Letters which did follow us, wherein were pro∣posals to be made to Sir George Wakeman for the Poisoning of the King, and that the Ten Thousand Pounds which the Spaniards had promised in January before, and was accordingly paid in London at the time, should be proposed to Wakeman, to poison the King; I found that Coleman did look upon it as too little, and he thought Fifteen Thousand Pound should be given to him. I found that Langhorn thought it too much, and that he ought to do so great a piece of Service for no∣thing, and told us he was a narrow-spirited man if he would not ingage in such a thing. My Lords, there was Five Thousand Pounds, as the Books told me, paid, but I did not then see it paid, because I was then ill and not fit to stir abroad. My Lords, we are now past June (78.) In July Father Ashby comes to Town, who did revive the Proposal to Sir George Wakeman, but being sick of the Gout, he hastened down to the Bath, and when he came there, as soon as he began to be well, he was advised by the Fathers to see how the Catholicks stood affected in Sommerset shire; for they had had an Account in March (78.) by Letters from Berkshire, Oxfordshire and Essex, that the Catholicks stood well affected, and Sir William Andrews did secure that the people of Essex should stand to their points; and so several men did secure that they would have them in readiness. My Lords, In August (I cannot remember every particular, but refer my self to the Records of the House) about the 26. of August, I find that Fenwick went to St. Omers, and there he was to attend the Provincial home, and to give the Provincial an Account of the Proposal accepted by Sir George Wakeman, but in July (if your Lordships please to give me leave to go back again) Strange comes to Town, and falling in discourse about the Fire of London, and the Rebuilding of it, he very frankly told me how it was fired, and how many of those concerned were seized, and among the rest told me that the Duke of York's Guard, as by his order, did receive them, and afterwards willing to discharge them, which I for∣got to mention before, but upon review of my Papers, I do find, that it was told me his Guard did release the Prisoners that were taken as suspected about the
Fire, and that all the Order they had for it they pretended was from the Duke. But now, my Lords, We return to August again. Upon the 3. of August, I find, Ireland did pretend to go to St. Omers, and a Letter came from him as directed from thence; but we find by his Tryal and other things since, that he went into Stafford shire; and about the 12. of August (as I remember) he was here in Town. The latter part of July I communicated with Dr. Tongue, and gave him some particular account of Affairs, I desired him to communicate it to some that might make it known to the King; the King had notice the 13. of August, or the 14. as I remember, and by the 3. of September I was betray'd, and was exposed to the vengeance of these men whose Contrivances I had thus discovered. So my Intelligence did cease wholly the 8. of September; Then was I forced to keep private, and upon my Examination, what Information I gave before the Lords and Commons, I refer my self to them. Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, will you ask him any Questions? Lord Stafford. No, my Lord, I am not at all concerned in his Evidence. Lord High Steward. You say you were betray'd, can you tell how or which way you were betray'd? Dr. Oats. My Lord, I will give this Honourable House what light I can in it, but I desire then to be excused from my Oath, for I can't speak it of my own knowledge. Sir John Trevor. Then the next Witness we desire may be called, is Mr. Ber∣nard Dennis. Mr. Serj. Maynard. This Witness we call now is to confirm what Dr. Oats hath said, that he was at Validolid, and other places in Spain: he will be short. Lord High Steward. Call you Oats again? Sir Franc. Winn, No, my Lord, We call Dennis to confirm what Dr. Oats hath said. He hath given your Lordship an account that he was in Spain, we now pro∣duce one that saw him when he was there, and so confirms the Evidence given by him. (Then Mr. Dennis was sworn.) Mr. Treby. Mr. Dennis, Do you give their Lordships an Account of your Dis∣coursing with Dr. Oats in Spain, or any where else abroad, and where. L. H. Steward. Stay a little, Do you know Mr. Oats? Mr. Dennis. Yes, my Lord. L. H. Steward. How long have you known him? Mr. Dennis. I knew him in the year (77.) L. H. Steward. Where? Mr. Dennis. At Validolid. L. H. Steward. Did you see him there, was he a Student there? Mr. Dennis. Yes, my Lord. Lord High Stew. Was he known by the name of Oats? Mr. Dennis. Yes, my Lord, he was.
Sir Franc. Winn. My Lord, We desire he may tell his knowledge of Mr. Oats, what conversation he had with him in Spain. Mr. Dennis. My Lords, I was in Spain in the City of Victoria, and leaving the City of Victoria in the month of June, I took my course to Madrid, and passing through the City of Validolid, going into the Convent of the Dominicans, there came an Irishman, a Priest of Ireland, out of the City to seo me, and there he told me, there was a Student of the Jesuits, by name Mr. Oats, an Englishman, and I understanding this, went into the Colledge of the Jesuits to see Mr. Oats, and there had conversation with Mr. Oats, and in the conversation I had with him there he told me that he was a Vicar in Kent, and that he was Chaplain to a great Nobleman in England, by name Howard, and that he went out of England by the consent of the Jesuits in England, being converted by them to the Roman Ca∣tholick Faith, and that his going into Spain was to fit himself for the Society of the Jesuits, and understanding my resolution was to go to Madrid, he did desire me to carry a Letter to the Archbishop of Tune, one James Lench an Irishman, who lived at Madrid; and further, he lent me four pieces of Eight to defray my Journey to Madrid, and desired me to pay the money to the Procurator of the Je∣suits at Madrid, and in carrying this Letter to the Archbishop, when I came there I got a Dominican Fryer of Ireland, by name Humphry Delphin, to go with me and see the Archbishop at his lodging, and going in, I delivered him the Letter in the presence of the Dominican, and he perused it in my presence, and in the presence of a Priest that waited upon him, and finishing the Contents of the Let∣ter, as I suppose, with a smiling Countenance he turned about, and said, Sirs, the Contents of this Letter is, that Mr. Oats is desirous to receive the Order of Priest∣hood from me, or at my hands, and if it be so, it will be much in our way, and this man will be a fit man for our purpose; for said he further, Dr, Oliver Plunket, Primate of Ireland, is resolved this year, or with the next Convenience, to bring in a French Power into Ireland, and thereby to support the Roman Catholicks in England and Ireland, and if it please God, I my self, without any delay, will go into Ireland to assist that pious Work. All this Discourse between us and the Archbishop, and between Oats and me, was in July (77.) And there I did speak and converse with Mr. Oats. All this I can testifie for truth on the behalf of Mr. Oats, who was then a Student in the Colledge of Validolid, and had no other name nor title. Mr. Foley. I desire himself may tell your Lordships what Religion he is of. Lord High Steward. What Religion are you of? Mr. Dennis. I am a Dominican Fryer, my Lord. Lord High Steward. Are you? Mr. Dennis. My Lords I am. Lord High Steward. At this time? Mr. Dennis. Yes, my Lords.
Mr. Serj. Maynard. He hath a Pardon, my Lords. Mr. Treby. This hath been controverted, my Lords, whether Mr. Oats ever was in Spain, we desire to make it out plain to the world, for the Confirmation of his Evidence. Therefore we ask him again, Do you know the person of Mr. Oats? Mr. Dennis. Yes, I do. Mr. Treby. Is this person that gave Evidence last before you, the same person you saw at Validolid? Mr. Dennis. Yes, it is. Mr. Sacheverel. My Lords, we desire to ask of him, why he had the four pieces of Eight of Mr. Oats. Lord High Steward. Why had you that money of Oats? Mr. Dennis. For to defray my Journey to Madrid. Lord High Stew. Was that all you had? Mr. Dennis. Yes, my Lords, Mr. Sacheverel. We pray he may be asked how he came to be so needy. Mr. Dennis. My Lords, I was not altogether needy, but it is very certain, Re∣ligious persons, especially of my Order, cannot carry any money about them but what is requisite for their Journey, and that which may be removed from place to place. Sir John Trevor. I desire to ask him, did he see any more money that Dr. Oats had. Mr. Dennis. I did see Dr. Oats in his Chamber in the Colledge at Validolid, when he delivered me the four pieces of Eight, to draw out a Drawer of a Table in his Chamber, and out of the Drawer he pulled a Bag of money, which was a very considerable Sum of money▪ and I am certain he did not want money there then. Mr. Treby. My Lords, I think we have done with him, if my Lord please to ask him any Question he may. Lord Stafford. But only one Question, for I never saw the man in my life. I desire he may be asked, whether he be still of the Romish Religion. Sir John Trevor. My Lords, We have not yet done with him, the Question we would ask him, is this, whether he hath heard of any money that was gathered in Ireland for the support of this Plot? Lord High Stew. The Question asked of you, have you heard of any money gathered in Ireland for the support of this Plot? Mr. Dennis. I have both heard and seen of it. Lord High Steward. When and where? Mr. Dennis. My Lords, in the year (68.) I entred into the Order of the Do∣minicans in Ireland, and in the same year there arrived at Dublin a Franciscan Fryer, Brother to the late Earl of Carlingford, and arriving there he made se∣veral
Collectors for the levying a competent sum of money out of every Con∣vent and Religious House. My Lords, the Collectors were by name John Reynolds alias Landy, and John Berne, and arriving at the County of Sligoe in the month of May. Lord High Stew. What year? Mr. Dennis. (68.) And when the Collectors came to the Convent of our Fry∣ers in Sligoe, all the Fryers gathered together into a room, and these Collectors coming in did read their Commission given them from one James Taaffe, as they said, and I was there personally present, though a Novice, and upon reading their Commissions, they said Forty Shillings was to be paid by the Prior, and the Fryers of that Convent, and the Provincial of the Order of the Dominicans questioned the Power of the said Reynolds and Berne, and so did the Prior; and I asked why the money was levyed? they gave answer, That that levy and several other levyes was to encourage the French King, in whose Kingdom were several Bishops of Ireland, Clergymen, and others, whose business it was to provoke the King to bring an Army to invade Ireland, when ever time should serve. Lord High Stew. Have you done with him now? Mr. Treby. Yes. Lord High Stew. Will your Lordship ask him any Questions? Lord Stafford. My Question is only whether he profess himself of the Church of Rome, or a Protestant? Mr. Dennis. I am a Roman Catholick still, my Lord. L. High Steward. Are you? Mr. Dennis. I am, my Lords. Lord Stafford. Then I have no more to say. Sir John Trevor. Then we call Mr. Jenison. (Who was sworn.) Mr. Treby. Mr. Jenison, you have been among the Papists, and you have had great confidence among them; pray declare what you know of their Designs for the Destruction of the Protestant Religion, or the means of doing it, whether by the Murder of the King, or what other means, tell your whole knowledge. Mr. Jenison. My Lords, In the beginning of the year (78.) I have heard Mr. Ireland, and Mr, Thomas Jenison, both Jesuits, speak of a Design they had to gain a toleration of Conscience for their Party in England; and the way then design∣ed to get it was, by procuring a great Sum of Money from their Party, and by bribing the then Parliament. I have heard them likewise discourse of securing the Duke of York's Succession, and that (they told me) was to be done, by procuring of Commissions to be granted to those of their Party to be ready to rise upon the Death of the King. I likewise have heard them discourse of the necessity and usefulness to their Party of the Alteration of the Government established, and that their Religion could never flourish till that was done, and this Kingdom altered
according to the French Model. In the month of June (78) I was at Mr. Ireland's Chamber, and there happening a discourse, that the Roman Catholick Religion was like to come into England, Mr. Ireland did then say, there was but one that stood in the way, and that it was an easie thing to Poyson the King, and that Sir George Wakeman might easily and opportunely do it. I asked Mr. Ire∣land, whether Sir George Wakeman was the Kings Physician? His answer was, No, but he was the Queens, and so might have an opportunity to do it. In the month of August the same year, the day that I came from Windsor, I went to Mr. Ireland's Chamber, and I found he was newly come from Staffordshire, and was drawing off his Boots on the frame of a Table: he asked me, whence I was come? I told him, from Windsor: He inquired of me about the Diversions of the Court, I told him, I understood His Majesty did take delight in Hawking and Fishing, but chiefly in Fishing; and that he went accompanied only with two or three, early in the morning. Then Mr. Ireland replyed, He were ea∣sily taken off, or removed: to which I answered, God forbid, being surprized at that time; O said he, I say not that it is lawful. Then there happened some in∣terruption to our Discourse about Staffordshire; then we fell into a Discourse of their Religion that he said was suddenly to come into England, and he asked me, if I would be one of those that would go to Windsor to assist to take off the King: I told him no; then he told me, he would remit the 20 l. I owed him, if I would go to Windsor to be one of those that were to take off the King. My Lords, I told him, I would have no hand in any such matter, and that I would not for twenty times 20 l. have any hand in the Death of the King; said he, Would you do nothing for the bringing in of our Religion? I told him, I thought it would never come in by blood: I told him further, God forgive me, if the King were taken off, so, well and good, but I would have nothing to do with it. He left not the Discourse there, but asked me, if I knew any Irishmen that were stout and couragious: I told him, yes, I did, and named Captain Levallian, Mr. Karney, Mr. Broghall and Mr. Wilson, all Gentlemen of my acquaintance about Grays-Inn. When I named these he asked me if I would go along with them to Windsor, to assist them in taking off the King, I told him I did not think any man of Estate would ingage in such a matter, that I was Heir to an Estate, my Brother being a Priest, and that Captain Levallian was Heir to a very good Estate, and therefore I did believe he would not do such a thing, unless the Pique which he had to the King or Religion might move him to it. My Lords, be approved of these persons, and said, he knew the first two of them, Levallian and Karney; and he set down, as I remember, the other two Names in writing. He told me he was going to the Club, to Mr. Coleman, and Mr. Levallian, and Mr. Karney at that time, and then asked me for the Money, the Twenty pounds that I owed him. He told me he wanted Fourscoure Pounds, and he desired me that I would return it as soon as I came into the Countrey. Now my Lords,
the same day that I received this Twenty pound of Ireland, I went with Mr. Tho∣mas Jenison the Jesuit, to Harcourts Chamber to give the Fathers thanks for the Loan of the Money, and there Mr. Jenison falling into Discourse on that common Topick of their Religion coming into England, he did then use that Expression which Dr. Oats hath in his Narrative. If C. R. would not be R. C. he should not be long C. R. And he did interpret it thus in Latine. Si Carolus Rex non esset Rex Catholicus non foret din Carolus Rex. And he did add, my Lords, up∣on the Discourse, that if the King were Excommunicated or Deposed he was not longer King, and it was no sin, or no great sin to take him off, and if it were discovered who did it, two or three might perhaps suffer, but denying the Fact the matter soon would be blown over. My Lords, about two Months after the Mustering the Forces upon Hounslowe-Heath, Mr. Thomas Jenison did tell me he had a matter of great Consequence to impart to me, that there was a Design on foot so laid as that it could not well be discovered, and that the greatest Papists, the greatest Catholicks in England were in the Design, That the Queen and the Duke were in it, and that several Lords, by name my Lord Bellasis, my Lord Pow∣is, my Lord Arundel of Wardour and others, I believe my Lord Stafford was named, but I cannot be positive in that. At that time my Lords, I did wish I had had a Commission in the new raised Levies that were Mustered on Hounslowe-Heath, he told me he would procure me a Commission from the Duke of York, and that there was a new Army to be raised to bring in the Catholick Religion, but he did say he would tell me more particulars after my receiving the Sacrament of Secresie, and I did understand by him that that Commission was not to be sent till the taking off the King was effected; but being I was surpised at it, he would not tell me the whole matter, but he desired me to come and receive the Sacrament at Sir Philip Tyrwhytts in Blomesbury, and then he would acquaint me with the whole Affair. My Lords, being in Berkshire about the Month of December (78) at Madam Halls in Shinefield Parish, one Mr. Cuffil a Jesuit came into our Com∣pany. It was about the Tryal of Coleman, and Mr. Cuffil did then say, That he thought Mr. Coleman was infatuated upon the Discovery of the Plt, to give no∣tice to Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Ireland, and Mr. Fenwick, and the other Jesuits to burn or secure their Papers, and yet not to secure his own. My Sister Hall was present at this Discourse, and Mr. Cuffil did then further say, that Bellarmine did draw a Sentence out of the Scripture, to favour the Popes Authority of Excommunicat∣ing, Depriving, and Deposing Temporal Princes, and the saying was this, Quòd Papa habeat eandem Potestatem super Reges, quam Jehoiada habuit super Athaliam. And that there were other corroborating Testimonies among the Fathers for it. Mr. Treby. My Lords, we desire to ask him whether ever he heard of Mr. Oats being in the Plot, or being thought Trust-worthy among them. Mr. Jenison. Yes, my Lords, I did. L. H. Stew. When did you hear it, and of whom.
Mr. Jenison. Of my Brother Thomas Jenison the Jesuit. L. H. Stew. When did he tell you so? Mr. Jenison. About the latter end of July (78.) when there was a Discourse of a Design, and that the greatest Papists were in it; he said Mr. Oats a Parson newly come over to them was in that Design, I answered, I did wonder that he would trust a reconciled Enemy; he answered, That being once reconciled, they were more Zealous and Trusty: I submitted to his Opinion, and instanced in Dr. Godwyn and Dr. Bayley that were Protestants▪ and afterwards came over to the Church of Rome. Mr. Treby. We have done with him my Lord. L. H. Stew. Will your Lordship ask him any Questions my Lord Stafford? L. Staff. No my Lord. Sir Fr. Win. My Lords, I would only observe the time when he says, his Bro∣ther told him of the Design, that it was about the time of the Mustering of the Forces upon Hounslowe-Heath, and that he was then told Mr. Oats was in the Plot; I only observe it now for the end of the Case in point of time. L. H. Stew. He says it was in July. Mr. Jenison. It was two Months after the Mustering of the Forces, about the latter end of July. L. H. Stew. Before the Discovery. Mr. Jenison. Yes. L. H. Stew. Did you know Oats at that time? Mr. Jenison. No, my Lords. I was not acquainted with him. Sir John Trevor. Did you not see him then? Mr. Jenison. Yes, I saw him at Irelands Chamber. Sir John Trevor. When was that? Mr. Jenison. The latter end of April, or the beginning of May. L. H. Stew. You say you did not know him in July; How then can you say you saw him before? Mr. Jenison. I did not know him, I only saw him come into Irelands Chamber and whisper for sometime, two or three minutes, and then they told me, that that was Mr. Oats, a Parson newly come over to them, a brisk jolly man, and worthy my acquaintance. L. H. Stew. Is this the same man you saw there? Mr. Jenison. My Lords, I can't remember his face, for he was gone out when I was told of him. L. H. Stew. Why, you know Mr. Oats now? Mr. Jenison. Yes, I do. L. H. Steward. Do you know him to be the same man that you saw then? Mr. Jenison. I can't tell that. Sir John Trevor. My Lords, he says Mr. Oats only came in for three or four minutes and his back was towards him, and his Brother told him when he was gone, who it was.
Mr. Jenison. I only knew his Name from my Brother. Mr. Treby. And I presume your Lordships will observe this was at the very time of the Jesuits Consult. Sir John Trevor. We desire this Gentleman may tell your Lordships who his Brother is, and what Profession he is of. Mr. Jenison. My Brother was a Jesuit brought up at St. Omers. L. H. Steward. Your Brother is dead, and died in Newgate? Mr. Jenison. Yes, he did so. L. H. Steward. Pray recollect your self again, When was it that you saw the man they called Oats at the Jesuits Chamber? Mr. Jenison. My Lords, It was in the year (78) the latter end of April or the beginning of May. And I will tell you why I apprehend it to be that time; My Brother being a Priest lived with Sir Phillip Tyrwhitt in Lincolnshire, and in that year in Lent he came to Town with my Lady and that Family, and he and I used to Dine together at the Fish Ordinary at Pedleys. And about three weeks or a month after that time when he came to Town I was at Mr. Irelands Chamber, and there was a Gentleman whom they told me was Oats. L. H. Stew▪ This you say was the latter end of April, or beginning of May (78) for the time is material, upon your Oath you say it? Mr. Jenison. Yes, my Lords, I do. L. H. Stew. You say it was at Ireland's Chamber? Mr. Jenison. Yes, my Lords. Sir Fr. Win. My Lords, will you give us leave to ask him one short Question, because some of the Gentlemen doubt of it, we would ask it again, what his Bro∣ther was, whether he was a Jesuit or no? Mr. Jenison. I have heard him own it my Lords. L. H. Stew. Whom do you call next, Gentlemen? Mr. Treby. If it please your Lordships we shall in the next place produce our Evidences that are matters of Record and we desire your Lordships advice and direction how we are to minister the same, whether your Lordships will have them all read,  of them, and let them be left with your Lordships. L. Records are they? Mr. are the Records of the Attainder of Coleman, Ireland, and the other Conspirators. L. H. Stew. The Fact is so notorious that they were Attainted and Executed, That the reading of a word will serve the turn. Sir John Trevor. Then we desire they may be produced here, and the Copies proved upon Oath, and then we shall leave them upon your Lordships Table. And my Lords we desire likewise at the same time to save another trouble, there may be delivered in the Convictions of Reading, Lane, Knox, and others.
Then Mr. Clare was Sworn, and delivered in the Copies of the Records, L. H. Stew. What Record is that? Mr. Clare. It is the Record of the Attainder of Coleman for high Treason. L. H. Stew. Did you examine it? Mr. Clare. I did examine it. L. H. Stew. Is it a true Copy? Mr. Clare. To the best of my understanding it is. Here is likewise a Copy of the Record of the Conviction of Ireland, Pickering, and Grove for high Treason. L. H. Stew. Is there Judgment of Attainder entred upon Record. Mr. Clare. Yes my Lords, there is Judgement entred. Here is a Copy of the Indictment, Conviction, and Attainder of Whitebread, Fenwick, Harcourt, Gavan, and Turner for high Treason. Here is a Copy of the Record of Attain∣der of Richard Langhorn for high Treason. Here is a Copy of the Attainder of Green, Berry, and Hill for the Murder of Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey, Here is a Copy of the Conviction of Mr. Nathaniel Reading, for endeavouring to Suborn Mr. Bedlow, to retract his Evidence against some of the Lords in the Tower, and Sir Henry Tichbourn, L. H. Stew. What is the Judgment there? Mr. Clare. The Judgment is entred upon it, and 'tis to pay 1000 l. Fine, and to be put in, and upon the Pillory in the Palace▪Yard Westminster for an hour, with a Paper upon his head written in great Letters, For endeavouring Subornation of Perjury. Here is a Copy of the Record of the Conviction of Tasbrough and Price, for endeavouring to Suborn Mr. Dugdale, and Judgment entred upon it. And here is a Copy of the Record of Conviction of Knox and Lane, for Conspiring to asperse Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow. Here is the Record of the Conviction of John Giles for barbarously attempting to Assassinate John Arnold Esq one of His Majesties Justices of the Peace; and the Judgment entred thereupon is, To stand three times on the Pillory, with a Paper on his Hat declaring his Offence, to pay 00 l. to the King, to lie in Exe∣cution till the same be paid, and find Sureties for his Good Behaviour during life. L. H. Stew. Deliver them all in. And if my Lords have occasion to doubt of any thing, being left in the Court they will be there ready o be used. (All which were then delivered in.) Mr. Treby. My Lords, we humbly desire that the Record of Coleman may be read, because there is more of special matter in it than any of the rest, and your Lordships may dispose of the others as you please. L. H. Stew. Read the Record of Coleman. Then the Clerk read (in Latin) the Record of the Attainder of Edward Cole∣man, formerly Executed for high Treason, by him Committed in this horrid Popish Plot, which in English is as followeth, viz.
Of the Term of Saint MICHAEL in the Thir∣tieth Year of the Reign of King CHARLES the Second, &c. Middle∣sex. AT another time, (to wit) on VVednesday next after eight days of St. Martin, this same Term, before our Lord the King at VVestminster, by the Oath of Twelve Jurors, honest and lawful Men of the County aforesaid, Sworn and Charged to Enquire for our said Lord the King and the Body of the County aforesaid, it stands presented, That Edward Cole∣man late of the Parish of Saint Margaret VVestminster in the County of Middle∣sex Gentleman, as a false Traitor against the most Illustrious, most Serene and most Excellent Prince, our Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. and his Natural Lord, not having the Fear of God in his Heart, nor weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, but by the instigation of the Devil mov∣ed and seduced, the cordial Love, and the true, due and Natural Obedi∣ence which true and faithful Subjects of our said Lord the King towards Him our said Lord the King ought and of right are bound to bear, utterly with∣drawing, and devising, and with his whole Strength intending the Peace and common Tranquility of this Kingdom of England to disturb, and the true Wor∣ship of God within this Kingdom of England practised, and by Law established, to overthrow, and Sedition and Rebellion within this Realm of England to move, stir up, and procure, and the cordial Love, and true and due Obedience, which true and faithful Subjects of our said Lord the King towards Him our said Lord the King should bear, and of right are bound to bear, utterly to withdraw, blot out, and extinguish, and our said Lord the King to death and final de∣struction to bring and put, the 29th. day of September in the 27th. year of the Reign of our Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scot∣land, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. at the Parish of St. Margaret VVestminster aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsly, maliciously, sub∣tilly and traiterously proposed, compassed, imagined and intended Sedition and Rebellion within this Realm of England to move, raise up and procure, and a miserable Slaughter among the Subjects of our said Lord the King to procure and cause; and our said Lord the King from his Kingly State, Title, Power and Government of His Realm of England utterly to deprive, depose, deject and disinherit, and Him our said Lord the King to Death and final Destruction to bring and put, and the Government of the same Realm and the sincere Reli∣gion of God in this Kingdom, rightly and by the Laws of this Realm establish∣ed for his Will and Pleasure to change and alter, and the State of this whole Kingdom in its universal parts well instituted and ordained, wholly to subvert
and destroy; and War against our said Lord the King within this Realm of England to levy: and to accomplish and fulfil these his most wicked Treasons and traiterous Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid; The same Edward Cole∣man afterwards, to wit, the said Twenty ninth day of September, in the above∣said Twenty Seventh year of the Reign of our said Lord the King, at the Parish of Saint Margaret VVestminster aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex a∣foresaid, falsly, subtilly and traiterously devised, composed and writ two Let∣ters to be sent to one Monsieur Le Chese then Servant and Confessor of Lewis the French King, to desire, procure and obtain to the said Edward Coleman and other false Traitors against our said Soveragin Lord the King from the said French King, his Aid, Assistance and Adherence, to alter the true Religion in this Kingdom then and still Established, to the Superstition of the Church of Rome, and to Subvert the Government of this Kingdom of England: And afterwards, to wit, the said Twenty Ninth Day of September, in the abovesaid Twen∣ty Seventh Year of the Reign of our said Lord now King of England, &c. at the aforesaid Parish of Saint Margaret VVestminster in the County of Middlesex afore∣said, falsly, and traiterously devised, composed and writ two other Letters to be sent to one Monsieur Le Chese then Servant and Confessor of the said French King, to the intent, that he the said Monsieur Le Chese should intreat, procure, and obtain to the said Edward Coleman, and other false Traitors, a∣gainst our said Soveraign Lord the King, from the aforesaid French King, his Aid, Assistance and Adherence to alter the true Religion in this Kingdom of England then and still Established, to the Superstition of the Church of Rome, and to Subvert the Government of this Kingdom of England; And that the aforesaid Edward Coloman, in further prosecution of his Treasons and Traiterous Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid afterwards, to wit, the same Twenty Ninth Day of September, in the abovesaid Twenty Seventh Year of the Reign of our said now Lord the King, the aforesaid several Letters from the said Parish of Saint Margaret Westminster in the County of Middle∣sex aforesaid, falsly, subtilly, and traiterously did send into Parts beyond the Seas, there to be delivered to the said Monsieur Le Chese; And that the a∣foresaid Edward Coleman, afterwards, to wit, the First Day of December in the Twenty Seventh Year of the Reign of our Soveraign Lord CHARLES the Second now King of England, &c. at the aforesaid Parish of Saint Mar∣garet Westminster in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, one Letter from the a∣foresaid Mounsier L Ches, (in answer to one of the said Letters (so by him the said Edward Coleman writ, and to the said Monsieur L Chee to be sent) first mentioned) falsly, subtilly, and traiterously received, and that Let∣ter, so in answer received, the Day and Year last abovesaid, at the aforesaid Parish of Saint Margaret Westminster aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex afore∣said, falsly, subtilly and traiterously did inspect and read over, and that the afore∣said Edward Coleman, the Letter aforesaid so by him in answer received in his custody and possession the day and year last aforesaid, at the aforesaid Parish of St. Margaret Westminster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, falsly, subtilly and trai∣terously detained, concealed and kept; By which said Letter the said Monsieur Le Chese the day and year last abovesaid, at the aforesaid Parish of St. Margaret West∣minster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, signified and promised to the said Edward Coleman, to obtain for him the said Edward Coleman and other false Traitors
against our said Lord the King, from the said French King, his Aid, Assi∣stance and Adherence; And that the aforesaid Edward Coleman, afterwards, to wit, the Tenth day of December in the abovesaid Twenty seventh Year of the Reign of our said Soveraign Lord Charles the Second now King of England, &c. at the Parish of St. Margaret VVestminster aforesaid, in the County of Middle∣sex aforesaid, falsly, maliciously, subtilly and traiterously did relate and declare his traiterous Designs and Purposes aforesaid, to one Monsieur Rovigni, (then Envoy Extraordinary from the French King, to our said most Serene King, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, residing) to move and excite him the said Envoy Extraordinary with him the said Edward Coleman, in his Treasons a∣foresaid to partake: And the sooner to fulfil and compleat those his wicked Trea∣sons and traiterous imaginations and purposes aforesaid, he the said Edward Coleman, afterward▪ to wit, December 19. in the abovesaid 27th. year of the Reign of our said Lord Charles the Second now King of England, &c. at the aforesaid Parish of S. Mar∣garet Westminster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, advisedly, maliciously subtilly and traiterously did devise, compose, and write three other Letters to be sent to one Sir William Throgmorton Knt. then a Subject of our now Lord the King, of this King∣dom of England, and residing in France, in Parts beyond the Seas, to sollicite him the aforesaid Monsieur Le Chese to procure & obtain of the said French King his Aid, Assistance and Adherence aforesaid. And those Letters last mentioned, afterwards, to wit, the day and year last abovesaid from the aforesaid Parish of St. Margaret West∣minster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, to the same Sir William Throgmorton in France aforesaid, falsly and traiterously did send, and cause to be delivered, against the duty of his Allegiance, and against the Peace of our said now Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute in such case made and provided. Wherefore  was commanded the Sheriff of the County aforesaid, that he should not omit &c but that he should take him, if &c. to answer &c And now, to wit, on Saturday next after eight days of St. Martin this same Term, before our Lord the King at Westminster, came the aforesaid Edw. Coleman under the Custody of Will. Richardson Gent▪ Keeper of the Gaol of our said Lord the King of Newgate, by vertue of the King's Writ of Habeas Corpus ad Subjiciend &c. (into whose custody be∣fore then for the cause aforesaid he was committed) to the Bar here brought in his proper person, who is committed to the Marshal, &c. and presently of the Premisses to him above imposed, being asked, how he will thereof be acquitted? saith, that he is in no wise thereof guilty, and thereof for good and evil doth put himself upon the Country. Therefore let a Jury thereupon come before our Lord the King at West∣minster on Wednesday next after fifteen days of St. Martin; and who &c. to recognize &c. because &c. the same day is given to the said Edward Coleman &c. under the cu∣stody of the said Keeper of the Gaol of our said Lord the King of Newgate aforesaid in the mean time committed to be safely kept until &c. At which Wednesday next af∣ter fifteen days of St Martin, before our Lord the King at Westminster, came the afore∣said Edward Coleman under custody of the aforesaid keeper of the Kings Gaol of Newgate aforesaid, by vertue of a Writ of our Lord the King of Habeas Corpus ad Subjiciend▪ &c. to the Bar here brought in his proper person who is committed to the aforesaid Keeper of the Kings Gaol of Newgate aforesaid; And the Jurors of the Jury aforesaid, by the Sheriff of the County aforesaid, hereunto impannelled, being called, came, who being chosen, tryed and sworn to speak the Truth upon the Premisses, say upon their Oaths, that the aforesaid Edward Coleman is guilty of the High Treason aforesaid, in the Indictment aforesaid specified, in manner
and Form as by the said Indictment above against him his supposed; and that the aforesaid Edward Coleman at the time of perpetration of the High Treason aforesaid, or at any time afterwards had no Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements to the knowledge of the Jurors aforesaid; And the aforesaid Edward Coleman being asked if he hath any thing, or knows what to say for himself, why the Court here ought not to proceed to Judgment and Execution of him upon the Verdict aforesaid, saith nothing, but as before he had said: And hereupon instantly the Attorney General of our said Lord the King, according to due form of Law, demandeth against him the said Edward, Judgment and Execution to be had upon the Verdict aforesaid, for our Lord the King. Whereupon all and singular the Premisses being viewed, and by the Court here understood: It is considered, That the said Edward Coleman be led by the said Keeper of the Gaol of Newgate aforesaid unto Newgate aforesaid, & from thence directly be drawn to the Gallows of Tyburn, and upon those Gallows there be hanged, and be cut down alive to the Earth, and his Entrals be taken out of hi Belly and be burned (he still living:) and that the Head of him be cut off▪ and that the Body of him be divided into Four parts; and that those Head and Quar∣ters be put where our Lord the King will assign them, &c. L. Staff. I do not hear one word he says, my Lords. L. H. Stew. My Lord, this does not concern your Lordship any further, than as to the generality of the Plot. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we have now done with our Proofs for the first general head that we opened, which was to make it out, that there was a Plot in ge∣neral. We now come to give our particular Evidence against this very Lord, and before we do begin, we think fit to acquaint your Lordships, that our Evidence will take up some time, if your Lordships will have the patience to hear it now, we will give it; but if your Lordships will not sit so long till we can finish it, it may be some inconvenience to us to break off in the middle. And therefore we humbly offer it to your Lordships consideration, whether you will hear it now or no. L. H. Stew. If it cannot be all given and heard now, it were better all should be given to morrow. Sir Will. Jones. If your Lordships please then, we will reserve it till to morrow. L. Staff. My Lords, I would only have your directions, whether I shall answer this General first, or stay till all be said against me? That which I have to say to this General, will be very short. L. H. Stew. My Lord, you are to make all your Answer entire, and that is best for you. L. Staff. I am very well contented, that I may be the better prepared for it. L. H. Stew. Is it your Lordships pleasure, that we should Adjourn into the Par∣liament Chamber? Lords. Ay, Ay. L. H. Stew. Then this House is Adjourned into the Parliament Chember. And the Lords went away in the same Order they came. The Commons returned to their House, and Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair, and then the House Adjourned to eight of the clock the next morning.
The Second Day. Wednesday December 1. 1680. A Message was sent from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sir Samuel Clark. Mr Speaker, The Lords have sent us to acquaint this House, That they intend to proceed to the Tryal of William Viscount Stafford, at ten of the clock this morning in Westminster-Hall. Mr. Speaker left the Chair, and the Commons came into Westminster Hall in the new erected Court. And the Managers appointed by the Commons went into the Room prepared for them in that Court, to proceed to the particular Evidence against William Viscount Stafford. About ten of the clock in the morning the Lords came into the said Court in their former Order, and Proclamation being made of Silence, and for the Lieu∣tenant of the Tower to bring his Prisoner to the Bar, they proceeded. L. H. Stew. My Lords expect you should go on with your Evidence, and proceed in the Tryal of this Noble Lord. L. Stafford. My Lords, if your Lordships please, I humbly desire that my Counsel may be near me for the Arguing of what is fit to them to speak to, as to points of Law, for points of Fact I do not desire it. L. H. Stew. My Lord, you have an Order for your Counsel to attend, and they must and ought to attend. Mr. Serjeant Maynard. The Counsel must not suggest any thing to him while the Evidence is giving, they are not to be heard as to matter of Fact. L. H. Stew. It is not intended to make use of Counsel, as to matter of Fact, but they may stand by. Mr. Serjeant Maynard. My Lords, they may stand within hearing, but not within prompting. L. Staff. I assure you, if I had all the Counsel in the world, I would not make use of them for any matter of Fact. Mr. Treby. My Lords, will you please to order them to stand at a convenient distance, that they may not prompt the Prisoner. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, I hope your Lordships will consider, that a man in a Capital Cause ought not to have Counsel to matter of Fact. 'Tis true, he may advise with his Counsel, I deny it not; but for him in the face of the Court
to communicate with his Counsel, and by them be told what he shall say, as to mat∣ters of Fact, is that which (with submission) is not to be allowed. If your Lord∣ships order they shall be within hearing, I do not oppose it, but then I desire they may stand at that distance that there may be no means of intercouse, unless points in Law do arise. L. H. Stew. You were best make that exception when there is Cause for it, in the mean time go on with your Evidence. Sir Franc. Winn. We did perceive his Counsel came up towards the Bar, and very near him, and therefore we thought it our duty to speak before any inconveni∣ence happened. This Lord being accused of High Treason, the allowing of Coun∣sel is not a matter of Discretion. If matters of Law arise, all our Books say, that Counsel ought to be allowed. But we pray that there may be no Counsel to advise him in matter of Fact, nor till your Lordships find some Question of Law to arise upon the Evidence. L. H. Stew. When there is Cause take the Exception, but they do not as yet misbehave themselves. Mr. Treby. My Lords, we presume your Lordships did, from the strength and clearness of yesterdays Evidence, receive full satisfaction concerning the ge∣neral Plot and Conspiracy of the Popish Party. It being an Evidence apparently invincible; not out of the mouths of two or three Witnesses only, but of twice that number (or more) credible persons. Upon which we doubt not but your Lordships who hear, and Strangers and unborn Posterity when they shall hear, will justifie this Prosecution of the Com∣mons, and will allow that this Impeachment is the proper voice of the Nation crying out, as when the knife is at the throat. By the Evidence already given, I say, it is manifet that there was a general grand Design to destroy our Religion, our King, and his Protestant Subjects. And 'tis even impossible that this Design, so big, could be conducted without the concurrence of such persons as this Noble Lord at the Bar. It could not be carried on by less and lower men. And it were a wonder, that a person so servently affected and addicted (as this Lord is) to that Party, should not be in, at so general a Design of the Party. But this indeed is but presumptive Evidence which will induce a moral persua∣sion. We shall now produce such positive Evidence as will make a judicial certainty; and will abundantly suffice to convince your Lordships and convict this Lord. The Particulars you will hear out of the mouths of the Witnesses, whom we shall call: They will testifie what share this Lord had in (almost) all the Parts and Articles in our Charge; contriving and contracting for the Murder of the King, levying Arms, &c. And first we call Mr. Dugdale. L. Stafford. My Lords, I conceive I have good ground to except against this man for a Witness; for my own particular, I know myself as clear nd
free as any one here, but I will not except against him now, but reserve it against the time when I come to make my Defence, and therefore admit him to be sworn, provided, my Lords, that he look me full in the face. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, what is your Exception against this man that he may not be a Witness? L. Stafford. I do admit him to be sworn, I say nothing now against him. Mr. Treby. He is sworn already. L. H. Stew. You swore him to give Evidence as to the general Plot; you did not swear him as to the particulars against my Lord Stafford. Sir John Trevor. We are content he shall be sworn again, we pray he may be sworn. Sir Will. Jones. 'Tis true, my Lords, we did divide the Evidence into two parts, but his Oath was not divided; if your Lordships please you may swear them all over again, if it may be any satisfaction, but I think it was never seen before. Then Mr. Dugdale was sworn. L. H. Stew. There is Mr. Dugdale, come Sir, what say you? L. Staff. Really he is so changed I do not know him. Mr. Dugd, My Lord, I have Witnesses to prove that you know me, L. Staff. I beg your Lordships that he may look me in the face and give his Evidence, as the Law is. Sir John Trevor. My Lords, if this Noble Lord the prisoner at the Bar will have this Witness to look him continually in the face, the Court will not hear half his Evidence; We desire he may address himself as the Law is to your Lordships and the Judges. L. Staff. I desire the Letter of the Law, which says, my Accuser shall come face to face. Mr. Dugd. My Lords, I am willing to do as your Lordships shall order. L. H. Steward. My Lord, you do see the Witness, that is enough for face to face, and you make no legal exception against him, why he should not be heard. L. Staff. Very well my Lord, I submit. Mr. Dugd. My Lords, I have for some years past whilst I was a Servant with my Lord Aston, been acquainted and frequently had Discourses with my Lord Stafford, before we came to discourse any thing concerning the Plot on foot. Late∣ly in (78.) my Lord coming down into the Countrey, it was either in August or September, the latter end of August or the beginning of September— L. Staff. I beseech your Lordships he may name the times. L. H. Stew. My Lord, if your Lordship please do not interrupt the Witnesses, but wherein he is short, do you ask him the Question when it comes to your turn, I will bring it to as much certainty as I can. Mr. Dugd. There was a meeting at Tixal, where there were several present—
L. H. Steward. When? Mr. Dugdale. It was in September or the latter end of August. L. H. Stew. What year? Mr. Dugdale. (78.) My Lords, I had then by Mr. Evers means, admittance to hear, because of my incouragement, what the Discourse was at that time. It was to debate and determine upon the former Resolutions both beyond Sea and at London, before both to take away the life of the King, and to introduce their Religion, of which I was then one. My Lord Stafford was there present, and did with the rest consent to it. Afterwards my Lord Stafford being at one Mr. Ab∣nets of Stafford one Sunday morning in September, came to my Lord Aston's House to Mass: I met with my Lord Stafford at some distance from the Gate, and my Lord speaking to me when he alighted off from his Horse, told me, it was a very sad thing they could not say their Prayers, but in an hidden manner, but e're long we should have our Religion established; which was much to my joy at that time. After that time my Lord Stafford was sometimes at Stafford, and sometimes at Tixal, I will not b positive as to a day, but I think it was about the middle of Sep∣tember: My Lord Stafford sent for me to his lodging Chamber, as he had several times before sent for me: and said, he had had great Commendations of me from Mr. Evers that I was Faithful and Trusty. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I desire I may have Pen, Ink and Paper allowed me. L. H. Stew. Ay, God forbid you should be denied that; Give my Lord Pen, Ink and Paper: I hope your Lordship hath one to assist you that takes Notes for you, if you have not, you have lost a great deal of time already. L. Staff. There was one all day yesterday my Lords, I desire he may speak his Evidence over again. L. H. Stew. Let him begin his Evidence again, for my Lord had not Pen, Ink nor Paper, which he ought to have, to help his memory. Mr. Dugdale. I may miss as to the words, but the matter of Fact I shall repeat; my Lords I have been frequently acquainted whilst I was a Servant at my Lord Aston's with my Lord Stafford, coming to my Lords House in the Counrey, and my Lord being several times there I came to that Intimacy by Mr. Evers means, that my Lord would frequently discourse with me. About the latter end of Au∣gust or some day in September, my Lord Stafford, my Lord Aston and several other Gentlemen, were in a Room in my Lord Aston's House, and by the means of Mr. Evers I was admitted to hear for my incouragement; and there I heard them in that Debate at that time fully determine a Resolution upon all the Debates that had been beyond Sea and at London before, That it was the best way they could resolve on to take away the life of the King, as the speediest means to intro∣duce their own Religion. After sometime my Lord being at Stafford at Mr. Abnets—
L. H. Steward. Was my Lord Stafford at that meeting, where they debated to kill the King? Mr. Dugdale. My Lord was there. L. H. Steward. Was he consenting to that Resolution? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I heard every one give their particular full assent. (At which there was a great Hum:) L. H. Steward. What is the meaning of this? For the Honour and Dignity of publick Justice, let us not carry it as if we were in a Theatre. Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, Some times in September, my Lord Stafford being at Mr. Abnets House in Stafford, came once upon a Sunday morning to hear Mass: I meeting him at the outward Gate of my Lord Aston's House when he alighted off his Horse, after some Discourse he turned to me, and told me, It was a sad thing we could not say our Prayers but in an hidden manner, but e're long if things took effect we should have the Romish Religion established. And I at that time did seem to be, and really was as glad as any person could be. After some time, I think it was about the 20. or 21. of September my Lord Stafford sent for me into his lodging Room, I think it was by his page, or him that waited upon him in his Chamber: and he told me I must come to my Lord, and I immediately went to his Lordship, he was just then arising and dressing, he sent his men out, and told me, he had had a good Accompt from Mr. Evers and other Genlemen that I would be faithful and true to their Intentions about the introducing their Reli∣gion. He told me, he was likewise concerned himself, and that in a very high degree: and for taking away the Life of the King, he offered me at that time for my Charges and Encouragement 500l. and that I should go in October after to London with him (my Lord Stafford,) and that I should be with him some∣times at London, and sometimes at an House of my Lord Aston's about twenty five miles from London, and that I should be under the care of him in London and Mr. Ireland, and in the Countrey, of one Mr. Parsons that knew of the De∣sign. I did then shew as much resolution to be faithful to my Lord as I could, and that I would be true to what my Lord then engaged me. I after went to Mr. Evers and communicated to him what my Lord Stafford said, and was something in admiration at my Lord's offering me such a Sum of Money, for I doubted of my Lords Ability to make good Payment. He told me, that I need not sear it, for Mr. Harcourt and Mr. Ireland had Money enough in their hands to defay that and other Charges, and I should not want Money for the carrying it on. My Lords, I remember that at another time there was a meeting, where∣in there was a Debate about my going up, and other businesses; my Lord Staf∣ford was present, and there were several there besides, I did not knw them all then; but in the first place they told me I should be made equal with one Captain Adderly that is since dead, and that I should have a Reward in London: I understood that the Duke of York, my Lord Arundel and my Lord Bellasis
and others were to give me it; and speaking of the Rewards to those that were ingaged, they said▪ there would be Land enough from the Protestants to satisfie all that acted in the Design. Another time my Lord Stafford discoursing in a Dining Room in my Lord Aston's House, did express his great Zeal, and the rea∣son why he was such an Enemy against the King: he said, both he and my Lord Aston had been great Sufferers for the King, and for his Father, and that my Lord in particular his Grandfather or his Father had spent 30000 l. in the Kings Service, and had no Recompence, that he had always shewed himself Loyal to the King, but whenever there came any place of Preferment to be disposed of, it was rather given to such as had been Traytors and Rebels to the old King, and likewise to the King himself than to any that had been had Loyal. He said, this was his chief Motive, if there were not Religion in the Case, which was of an higher nature, or to that purpose. L. H. Stew. When was this last Discourse? Mr. Dugdale. In September (78.) as near as I remember, for we had several Discourses. L. H. Stew. This was not the time you were at my Lords Chamber. Mr. Dugdale. No it was in my Lord Aston's Dining Room. L. H. Stew. No, nor when he sent for you to offer you the 500 l. Mr. Dugdale. No, not at that time, it was another time. L. H. Stew. What Month and Year? Mr. Dugdale. September (78.) my Lord. Mr. Foley. I desire he may give your Lordships an account what assurance he had of Pardon, if he did succeed. Mr. Dugdale. I was told I need not fear, and particularly my Lord Stafford told me, I should have a free Pardon for it, for the King had been Excommuni∣cated, and was likewise a Traytor, and a Rebel, and an Enemy to Jesus Christ. L. H. Steward. But how could you be Pardoned? From whom were you to have that Pardon? Mr. Dugdale. I was to be Pardoned by the Pope. L. H. Stew. That was for your Sins? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I expected no other if I had gone on. Mr. Treby. Were you promised nothing else but a Pardon from the Pope? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I was to be Sainted. Sir Will. Jones. Will his Lordship please to ask him any Questions, we ask him no more. Mr. Foley. Yes, I desire another Question may be asked him, that he would give an account of the Letters my Lord Stafford writ to Evers about the Design. L. H. Stew. What say you to that Question? Mr. Dugdale. There came a Letter to Evers from my Lord Stafford, I knew it to be my Lords hand, some might counterfeit his hand, but as near as a man
can swear to the hand of another in a Paper he did not see written, that was my Lords-hand; That things went all well beyond Sea, and so he did hope they did here for the carrying on of the Design, it was to this purpose expresly. Mr. Treby. We have done, my Lords, with him. Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, will you ask him any Questions? L. Staff. My Lords, I have divers Questions to ask him, very many, but I humb∣ly crave your Lordships Directions, if I ask him any Questions now, whether I may not ask him some afterwards. L. H. Steward. My Lord, you may ask Questions of the Witnesses as often as you please, and when ever you find it useful to you, God forbid there should be any time to foreclose a man from asking a Question that may save his life. L. Staff. I pray he may be asked how long before this time he knew of the Plot. L. H. Steward. How long have you known this Plot? Mr. Dugd. In general, for the introducing of the Popish Religion, and the in∣couragement to it by the Duke of Yorks being Successor, I have known it 15 or 16 years by the means of Mr. Evers. L. Staff. My Lords, I understand him, he says, he knew of the Plot 15 or 16 years ago, if I be not mistaken, he says so. Mr. Dugd. My Lords, if your Lordships please to give me leave to explain my self further, it was not for taking away the life of the King, but for making ready a∣gainst the King died with Men and Arms. L. Staff. My Lords, he says, in the latter end of August, or beginning of Sep∣tember, I told him such and suc things, I desire he may name the day, that may be many days, and I may prove I was not there, and I can prove for all August, and a good while in September, therefore I desire he may name the day. L. H. Steward. My Lord Stafford, I come thus near on purpose to serve your Lordship, that you may not strain your voice too much, but I am not so happy as to apprehend what it is you say. L. Staff. My Lords, I say, he speaks of the latter end of August, or beginning of September, which is too great a latitude, and I conceive more than ought to be given in such a matter of importance as this is to me; I desire he may name the day, for he may name days perhaps that I was not there. L. H. Steward. Look you, Mr. Dugdale, my Lord does desire, if you can, you would be a little more particular than about the latter end of August, or the be∣ginning of September, if you can remember the day tell it us. Mr. Dugd. I cannot remember particular days, it being a thing I then took no account of, only this I do remember by a remarkable circumstance, that one time was either the 20. or 21. of September (78.) L. H. Stew. That was the time of your coming into his Chamber, and his of∣fering you five hundred pound? Mr. Dugd. It was so, but other meetings I dare not charge to a day.
Lord Stafford. How then can I make my Defence? Mr. Dugdale. I will stand to that time. Lord Stafford. How, my Lords, can I be able to give an account of it? I shall prove to your Lordships, that he once said it was in August, now he says it was in August or September. I beseech you, that he may positively stand to the month, if not to the day. Mr. Dugdale. I speak as neer as I can. Lord Stafford. But he says the 20. or 21. particularly. Mr. Dugdale. Thereabouts I am sure it was. Lord Stafford. Look you, he will be positive in nothing. Mr. Dugdale. I will stand to that time. Lord Stafford. If he swears false in one thing, I hope upon proof of that your Lordships will believe he may be false in all. I pray he may be asked what hour of the day it was, whether it was morning or afternoon. L. H. Steward. He is positive only to the 20. or 21. of September, the time when he says you called for him into your Chamber, and offered him five hun∣dred pound to kill the King; would your Lordship ask him whether it were in the forenoon or afternoon? Lord Stafford. Yes, my Lord, I would. Lord High Steward. Was it in the forenoon, or in the afternoon? Mr. Dugdale. It was in the forenoon; for I did formerly speak of that, he was dressing himself when I came in. L. H. Steward. Then that is answered positively. Lord Stafford. My Lords, he says one Sunday morning I came to my Lord Astons to Mass, I desire you would please to ask him, whether ever he saw Mr. Evers and me in his life alone together? L. H. Steward. Have you seen my Lord Stafford and Mr. Evers, ever together alone? Mr. Dugdale. Several times I have seen them walking together in the Garden, and in the Walks at my Lord Astons; and I have been with them my self when there hath been only them two besides. L. H. Stew. That is answered fully; will your Lordship ask him any thing else? Lord Stafford. He says he was to go to London in October with me, I stand not upon that till I come to make my Answer; but I take it, he says, the 20. or 21. of September, when I offered him five hundred pound, in my Chamber, to kill the King, that he went presently to Evers to speak with him about it. Lord High Stew. As doubting the payment of the money, and he told him, that Harcourt and Ireland would pay it. Lord Stafford. Was it the same day, pray ask him, my Lords? Mr. Dugdale. I do not say it was the same day, but it was the next time I could come to speak with him.
Lord High Steward. He tells you it was as soon as he could speak with him. Lord Stafford. He said before it was presently after he went from me. I de∣sire your Lordships would take notice how he contradicts himself in every cir∣cumstance. Lord High Stew. What say you, did you go presently to Mr. Evers after my Lord Stafford had made the offer? Or was it the same day or the next day? Mr Dugdale. To the best of my remembrance it was the same day; I can't say positively. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I have no other Questions with Dugdale. Sir John Trevor, Then my Lords, we will call another Witness. Lord High Steward. Have you no more to say to Dugdale, my Lord? Lord Stafford. Not at present till I come to make my defence. Lord High Stew. God forbid, but you should have leave to say all that you can for your self. Mr. Treby. Then set up Dr. Oats. Do your Lordships require that he should be sworn again? Lord Stafford. I desire nothing, nor propose it, if he will declare upon his Oath that he took yesterday. Lord High Stew. Heark you Dr. Oats, This is but a continuation of the Pro∣ceedings yesterday, you are upon the same Oath now that you were then, and what you say this morning will be taken to be upon the same Oath. Mr. Treby. Dr. Oats, upon the Oath you have taken yesterday— Lord High Stew. Pray swear him again, (which was done.) Mr. Treby. Dr. Oats. Pray speak your knowledge of my Lord Stafford's be∣ing ing aged in the Design. Dr. Oats. I desire I may be left to my own method. L. H. Steward. Go on in your own method. Dr. Oats. My Lords, in the year (67.) there were divers attempts upon the life of the King as the Jesuits told me, and in the year (74.) there was an attempt upon the account of the Kings withdrawing the Indulgence in (74.) and (75.) in the year 1677. whilst I was in Spain I met with several letters signed Stafford, wherein my Lord Stafford did assure the Jesuits in Spain, that were of the Irish Nation, how zealous he should appear in the promoting of the Catholick De∣sign. My Lords, in the year (77.) I went to St. Omers, and I came there in De∣cember. My Lords, in that year I being ordered to look over the Papers and put them in order; I found several Letters signed Stafford, wherein my Lord Stafford did intimate to the Fathers that whereas there had been some difference betwixt him and the Society for several years, the business was reconciled by one Seignior Con, who came over into England in the year (76.) to reconcile the great Difference that was betwixt the Jesuits and the secular Clergy, and between the Benedictine Monks and the Jesuits. My Lords, my Lord Stafford upon the per∣swasion
of this Seignior Con, as he does intimate in his letter, does assure the Je∣suits of his fidelity and his zeal. My Lords, in the year (78.) I found letters from my Lord Stafford wherein he does blame Mr. Coleman's openness, and his being too publick in the great Affair, and that Mr. Coleman was pleased to communi∣cate several great secrets to men, of whose Fidelity his Lordship was not secure. My Lords, in the year (78.) in the month of June, my Lord Stafford, the Prisoner at the Bar, came to Mr. Fenwick, and there received a Commission from him to pay an Army that was to be raised for the promoting of the Catholick Interest, and he did assure Mr. Fenwick that he was going down into Staffordshire, and there he did not question but he should have a good account how the Catholicks stood affected, and he did not question but to give a good account how Affairs stood in Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Lancashire, and this Commission to my Lord Stafford was, as neer as I can remember, to be Pay-Master-General of the Army. My Lords, among other Discourses with my Lord at the Bar, he was discoursing about my Lord Duke of Norfolk, and my Lord Arundel his Son, and after several other passages, he (Fenwick) was asking of him how my Lord Arundel came to have a Jesuit in his House. My Lord Stafford did say, that my Lord of Peterborough, his Father in Law, was instrumental in it on purpose to oblige the Duke of York; for my Lord Arundel, as I have been told, kept Father Symonds in his House, who to my knowledge was a Jesuit. But▪ my Lords, he came to Mr. Fenwicks (my Lord Stafford did) by the name of Mr. Howard of Effingham. L. H. Steward. Were you at Fenwicks when my Lord Stafford came to his Chamber? Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Steward. Look upon my Lord Stafford, is that the same Person? Dr. Oats. It is the same Gentleman that came there by the name of Howard of Effingham. L. H. Steward. And he took the Commission? Dr. Oats. Yes, he did so. L. H. Steward. And he promised to effect it? Dr. Oats. Yes, And he said that he was then going down into the Countrey, and he did not doubt but at his return Grove should do the business. L. H. Steward. Who said so, Fenwick? Dr. Oats. No, my Lord Stafford. And, says Fenwick to my Lord Stafford again, Sir, tis fit that some should be here present least you fail of your Expecta∣tion, or to that purpose. 'Tis two years since, and I cannot remember the words, but my Lord Stafford did say, he was of necessity to go into the Country at that time. And there he did write a letter to St. Omers, in which he did excuse him∣self about a young man that was to be sent to the Jesuits Colledge, whom he had taken care of another way. And he desired their excuse, but he would be as faith∣ful to them as any body for all that. And the same hand that wrote that letter,
by all the comparing I could make in my thoughts, wrote all the other Letters that I saw at St. Omers, and in Spain. My Lords, I saw my Lord Stafford at Dr. Perrotts, I think verily it was in June or July (78.) it was before the rising of the Parliament, that sat that Summer, and my Lord Stafford was discoursing of a Son he was to send over to Lisbon, and he went over by the name of Sir John Stafford. And after this Discourse was over they fell into a Discourse of the Affairs in hand, and my Lord was mighty glad there was so good a Correspondence and Concord; though my Lords, it was not very great for the Jesuits have an irre∣concileable Quarrel with the rest of the Clergy. But my Lord did hope that their fair Correspondence might tend highly to the advancing the Catholick Cause. But my Lords, I have one thing more to speak as to the Discourse at Fenwicks Chamber, speaking of the King, he said, He hath deceived us a great while, and we can bear no longer. Lord High Stew. Who said so? Dr. Oats. My Lord Stafford, the Gentleman at the Bar. Lord High Stew. When was that? At Dr. Perrotts? Dr. Oats. No, I speak of a passage at Fenwick's, which I had forgot. My Lords, this is all I can remember at present. M. Foley. My Lords, I desire he may give an Account what letters my Lord Stafford sent to Fenwick and Ireland, to pay money? Dr. Oats. There was some money returned, but it was no great Sum, and it was about private business; Mr. Morgan was to receive it; I chanced to have the money in my own keeping; Mr. Fenwick gave it me to pay to Mr. Morgan, and the letter in which the Sum was mentioned did give them an Account (for it was out of Staffordshire) that he found things stand in a very good state there; but I being not within, Mr. Morgan called on Mr. Fenwick for the money, which I returned to him when he had paid it. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I do in the first place desire to know where Mr. Fenwick lived. Lord High Stew. Where did Mr. Fenwick live when you saw my Lord at his Chamber, and the Commission delivered? Dr. Oats. His Lordship, I suppose, knows very well where he lived, he lived in Drury-lane. Lord Stafford. I will submit to any thing, if I ever saw the man or heard of him till the Discovery of the Plot. Dr. Oats. He came to him by the name of Thompson. Lord High Stew. Your Lordship does not observe, your Lordship says that you never knew any Fenwick, but your Lordship knew one Thompson, and that Thompson was Fenwick. Lord Stafford. I did know one Thompson, but that Thompson I knew, was an nglish Merchant in Brussels, and not a Jesuit.
Dr. Oats. I can't say what my Lord knows, that he knew Fenwick to be a Je∣suit, but he knew one Thompson that was Fenwick the Jesuit. Lord Stafford. I never heard of the Name till this Plot. Dr. Oats. But, if your Lordships please, I will give you a reason why I be∣lieve he knew him to be a Jesuit, because the Society was very often in their mouths in their Discourses, which gives me a ground to believe he knew him to be what he was; but my Lord, he took his Commission from him. Lord Stafford. I desire he may be asked— L. H. Steward. Good my Lord raise your voice, for I am come half way to hear you. Lord Stafford. Pray my Lords give me leave to ask him whether Dr. Oats hath not said several times since I was first imprisoned, that he never saw me in his life. I think I was imprisoned the 21. of October (78.) Dr. Oats. I never said any such thing. Lord Stafford. I will willingly dye if ever I saw this Doctor in my life. Dr. Oats. I excuse my Lord for that, for I was in another habit, and I went by another Name, and your Lordships do remember I came in another habit to make the first Discovery. Lord Stafford. My Lord, I never saw his face, nor know him, nor Fenwick, or Thompson, otherwise than one Thompson, a Merchant at Brussels. Dr. Oats. But, my Lords, I have one thing more to say of my Lord Stafford; my Lord Stafford went into France, I can't say the year, but I believe it is within the term of 6 or 7. but he went over to France, and it did appear by letters from him, that Seignior Con was made choice of to heal the Difference between the Regulars and the Seculars, and Seignior Con did come over in the year (76.) and there did make a kind of a peace among them, which lasted whilst Con stayed here, and Con did bring over Messages, to which my Lord Stafford (if he tells any truth in his own letter) did return answers. Lord Stafford. For the present all I say to it is this, I never writ any one letter this 25 years, nor had any correspondence with any Jesuit. Lord High Steward. I beseech your Lordship make me capable of serving your Lordship, by letting me hear what you say. Lord Stafford. My Lord, I have a great Cold, and can speak no louder, I de∣sire to ask this Witness no more Questions at present; but I say I never writ any letters to any Priest this 25 years. Mr Foley. Then, my Lords, if my Lord hath done, we will call another Wit∣ness, and that is Mr. Edward Turbervile. (Who was sworn.) L. H. Steward. Look upon the Prisoner. Do you know my Lord Stafford. Mr. Turbervile. Yes, my Lord. L. H. Steward. Raise your voice, and speak deliberately. Mr. Treby. Give an account of your knowledge, and use your own method.
Mr. Turbervile. My Lords, in the year 1675. I was perswaded by my Lady Powis, and one Morgan that was Confessor to the Family, to go to Doway, in or∣der to take upon me the Fryars Habit. When I came there, instead of Religion, I found nothing but Hypocrisie and Villainy among them, and quickly grew wea∣ry of staying there, and with much difficulty I escaped thence to go for England; when I came into England, I did not think that my Friends would look unkindly upon me, because I refused to live in that way that they proposed to me to live in. I used all the means I could to have them reconciled, and made applica∣tions to them, that since I could not bear with the life they would have had me lived in, they would contrive some way for me, being a younger Brother, that I might live in the world; but they were so averse and inveterate against me, that they told me, instead of doing any thing for me, they would do me all the mischief and prejudice they could; and having lived all my time among them, I thought the World would receive a Character of me from them who were my Rela∣tions, as they would please to represent it; so having no hopes in England I took a resolution to go into France, where I had a Brother that was a Benedictine Monk, and I hoped that he being in good repute amongst them, might be able to do me some service there. When I came to Paris, my Brother used all the endeavours imaginable to get me to be of that Order; but I having so ill a conceit and opini∣on of the Order that I was in before, and thinking all the rest were the same, I was unwilling at all to enter into it. And after I had staid there a while I resolved to come over into England. My Brother used all the means he could for my accom∣modation, and recommended me to this Noble Lord the Prisoner at the Bar, who lodged then at a corner house in a Street which, as I remember, bears the name of La Rue de Beaufort, where I was several times with him in order to come over with him in the Yaught for England. After I had been there for a fortnight with this Lord, he understanding my condition, by my Brother, and by the other Fa∣thers of that Convent, and imagining I was a fit instrument to be employed on such an occasion, propos'd to me a way whereby, as he said, I might not only retrieve my Reputation with my Relations, but also make my self a very happy man; and after having exacted from me all the obligations of secresie which I could give him, he at length told me in direct terms, it was to take away the life of the King of Eng∣land, who was an Heretick, and consequently a Rebel against God Almighty. I looked upon it as an extraordinary attempt, and desired time to consider of it before I would undertake it. And I gave him this answer, I would give him my resolution at Diep, where we were to go on board for England. And when I came to take my leave of this Noble Lord at the Bar, he was sitting upon a bench, and he was troubled with the Gout in his foot at that time. And he told me he had some business to go to Versailles, and that he should not be in six or seven days at Diep, where I was to wait for him. After a while I received a letter at Diep from his Lordship, wherein he writ word, That he had altered his resolution,
and would go by the way of Calice, and that I should hasten to wait on his Lord∣ship at London. I have one thing more to observe to your Lordships, when I got passage from Diep, in a Fisher-boat for England, I never came neer my Lord Stafford, because being not willing to undertake his proposal, I thought my self not safe, even from my own Relations, and therefore I made my applications to the Duke of Monmouth, and his Grace was pleased by letter to recommend me into the French service, and by that means I avoided his Lordships further impor∣tunity. Lord High Steward. You say my Lord did propose to you the Killing of the King; did he plainly make the proposal in direct terms to kill the King? Mr. Turbervile. Yes, he did, my Lord. Lord High Steward. What did he offer you to do it? Mr. Turbervile. Nothing, for I would not accept of it. I told him it was a matter of great concernment, and I ought to consider of it, and I took time to think of it, and would give him my answer at Diep, which he came not to; and so there was an end of it. Lord High Steward. What ingagements of secresie had you given my Lord be∣fore he opened himself so plainly to you? Mr. Turbervile. I gave my Lord my word and my promise that I would not discover it to any person directly nor indirectly; my Lord had nothing of an Oath from me. L. H. Steward. Will you ask him any more Questions, Gentlemen? Sir Will. Jones. No, my Lords. L. H. Steward. Will your Lordship ask him any Questions, my Lord Stafford? Lord Stafford. My Lord, I never saw the man before in my life. I will ask him one Question since he hath been pleased to swear against me. Mr. Turbervile. My Lords, I had no reason but the truth to do it, for I never received any injury from his Lordship in my life. L. Stafford. It seems I had ill luck to choose this man for an attempt to Kill the King, who was such a Coward he ran away from his Colours. and was to have been shot to death. Mr. Turbervile. Ask the Duke of Monmouth what Character he received of me. L. Stafford. He says in the year, (75.) he went from London to Doway, and staid some time there, and then came back to England. I beseech your Lord∣ships to ask him what time he went back to Paris. L. H. Steward. What time was it that you went back to Paris? Mr. Turbervile. Truly, my Lord, I cannot be punctual to a fortnight, but I be∣lieve it was the beginning of June. L. H. Steward. What year? Mr. Turbervile. (75.)
Lord Stafford. My Lords, I would know who recommended him to me to go over with me into England. Lord High Steward. Who recommended you to my Lord Stafford to go into England? Mr. Turbervile. My Lords, it was Father Sherborn who was then Prior of the Benedictine Monks in Paris, and Father Nelson Sub-prior of those Monks, and my Brother who is a Monk in the same Convent. Lord High Steward. He says, that there were three persons that recommended him to your Lordship. Lord Stafford. I never saw them in my life. Mr. Turbervile. Your Lordship that says I was a Coward, and run away from my Colours, will say any thing. Lord Stafford. I not only say it, but will prove it by two Witnesses. Mr. Turbervile. Do it if you can. Lord Stafford. He says in the beginning of June (75.) he went into France. I desire to know of him when it was he spoke to me. Mr. Turbervile. In November 75. Lord Stafford. He says in November. Mr. Turbervile. Yes, my Lord, about the beginning of November. L. Stafford. I beseech your Lordship, where was it he spoke to me? L. H. Steward. Turbervile, where was it you spoke to my Lord? Mr. Turbervile. In Paris. L. Stafford. Whereabouts in Paris? Mr. Turbervile. It was the Corner-House of the Street, which Street faces Luxenburgh House, the Prince of Conde lodges on the right hand in that Street, I take it to be so, and you lodged at the Corner-House, I think the Name of the Street was La Rue de Beaufort. L. Stafford. Which if the Prince of Conde did—I will say no more. Mr. Turbervile. I cannot be upon my Oath in such cases, but I think he does, I take it so. L. Stafford. He says, he was with me a fortnight, what does he mean? Mr. Turbervile. I came to my Lord several times in the space of a fort∣night. L. Stafford. I desire to know who brought him to me. Mr. Turbervile. Father Sherborn, Father Nelson, and my Brother Father An∣thony Turbervile; and sometimes I came alone. L. H. Steward. He says, those three Fathers recommended him to your Lord∣ship, and he came himself several times. Mr. Turbervile. Yes, my Lords, it is true. L. Stafford. I beseech your Lordships, did he come directly to my Chamber, or where?
Mr. Turbervile. Sometimes to my Lords Chamber, and at other times I met him in a lower Room. L. Stafford. It concerns me much, my Lords, and though they be foolish Questions, yet I hope your Lordships will pardon me if I ask them. Where was this Discourse about killing the King? L. H. Steward. Was this Discourse in the Chamber, or in the lower Room? Mr. Turbervile. In the lower Room. L. Stafford. He says, I think, that he hath been in my Chamber. L. High Stew. Have you been in my Lords Chamber as well as in the lower Room? Mr. Turbervile. Yes, my Lords, I have. L. Stafford. What kind of Room is it? Mr. Turbervile. I cannot remember that. L. Stafford. No, I dare sware you can't. Mr. Turbervile. I can't tell the particulars; what Stools and Chairs were in the Room. L. Stafford. My Lords, I have no more to say to him at present. L. H. Stew. Mr. Turbervile, How long have you been in England? Mr. Turbervile. I cannot answer punctually; I have been in England near four years. L. H. Stew. How came it to pass that you never discovered this sooner? Mr. Turbervile. I had no Faith to believe that I should be safe if I did it, but my brains might be knocked out; and that kept me off from doing that service which I might be better able to do if I did deser it. L. H. Stew. How came you to discover it now? Mr. Turbervile. The Kings Proclamation, and some Friends that have per∣swaded me I may do it with safety; who will give your Lordships an account of it. L. Stafford. I desire he may attend when I make my defence. Mr. Turbervile. Yes, I shall. But I am sorry that his Lordship hath so ill a memory as to what passed between us. I shall be very unwilling to do his Lord∣ship, or any body else, any injury, but I must tell the truth. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, We shall call no more Witnesses, unless my Lord, the Prisoner, give us an occasion. If he shall make any Objections to any of our Witnesses, I hope we shall have liberty to call Witnesses to support them; but we give over at present, and expect his Lordships Answer. L. Stafford. May it please your Lorships, I beseech your Lordships, before I say any thing, that I may know if they have any more Witnesses to examine. Lord High Steward. They say they will call no more Evidence unless your Lordships Answer do give them occasion to fortify their Witnesses you except against.
Lord Stafford. My Lords, it is now about two years that I have had the misfortune to be accused of this detestable Treason. I have been several times in those two years a close prisoner, that my Wife and Children were denyed to come neer me; and hardly a Servant permitted to ask how I did, but at the door of my Prison. My Lords, This was a great and an heavy afflicti∣on to me; and, my Lords, it was so great an affliction to me, that truly I did not know how to bear it. 'Tis true, I had that comfort, that I did hope I should soon come to my Tryal, and before your Lordships make my inno∣cency appear. In order to which, I did all I could, having heard this Hall was provided for it; and I did expect in a very few days to clear my self be∣fore your Lordships and all the World. When I had settled my mind, and did not foresee any greater affliction that could befall me, I had on the sudden by some of my friends a sad Message sent me, That the House of Commons had impeached me of High Treason. My Lords, I looked upon the House of Commons then (as I do now) as the great Representative Body of the Com∣mons of England; and I confess, my Lords, to be accused by them was a load, especially being added to what lay before upon me, more especially to my eak Body, and weaker mind, that I was so afflicted with it, and have so continued, that I am scarce able to bear up under it. For I look upon the House of Commons as the great and worthy Patriots of this Kingdom: I ever held them so, and I hold them so still. My Lords, These things be∣ing such great afflictions to me, and some other accidents, which I shall not trouble your Lordships with the telling you of, have so much disordered my sense and reason (which before was little) that I scarce know how to clear my self to your ordships, as I ought to do; or which way to go about the doing of it: therefore I do with all humility beg your Lordships pardon if I say any thing that may give an offence, or urge that which may not be to the purpose: All which I desire you would be pleased to attribute to the true Cause, my want of understanding, not of innocency, or a desire to make it appear. My Lords, These Gentlemen the Managers of the House of Commons, who are great and able men, some I am sure▪ if not all of them, very well read, and have understanding in the Law, have set forth to your Lordships Treason in an horrid shape; but I confes, my Lords, if they had made it never so much worse, it cannot be so horrid as I have often fancied it my self: for my Lords, I do, and did ever hold Treason to be the greatest sin in the World, and I cannot use words enough to express it, and therefore I hope you will give me leave to clear my self of it, and I shall give you one No∣tion of it which I heard at your Lordships Bar some years ago, where you were pleased to here several people of several perswasions give you some reason
why Liberty of Conscience should be allowed them. And I remember one of them, an Anabaptit, I think, did tell you, that they held Treason to be the sin of Witchcraft, and so do . And next to Treason I hold Murder to be the worst sin. But the Murder of the King, I looked upon to be so, above all others, that it is not to be expressed by words. My Lords, I have heard very much of a thing that was named by these Gentlemen of the House of Commons, and that very properly too, to wit, of the Gun-powder Treason. My Lords, I was not born then, but some years after I heard very much Discourse of it, and very various Reports; and I made a particular inquiry, perhaps more than any one person did else▪ both of my Father who was aive then, and my Uncle and others; and I am satisfied, and do clearly believe, by the Evidence I have received, That that thing called the Gun-powder Treason, was a wicked and horrid Design (among the rest) of some of the Jesuits, and I think the malice of the Je∣suits, or the Wit of man, cannot offer an excuse for it, it was so execrable a thing. Besides, my Lords, I was acquainted with one of them that was concerned in it, who had his pardon, and lived many years after, I discoursed with him about it, and he confessed it, and said, he was sorry for it then; and I here declare to your Lordships, that I never heard any one of the Churh of Rome speak a good word of it: it was so horrid a thing that it cannot be ex∣pressed nor excused. And God Almighty shewed his Judgments upon them for their wickedness; for hardly any of the Persons or their Posterity are left that were concrned in it; and even a very great Family too, that had collaterally something to do in it, is in the Male line extinct totally; and I do think God Almighty always shews his Judgments upon such vile Actions. And I have been told, all those persons that were engaged in this wicked Act, were all hear∣tily sorry for it, and repented of it before they died, without which I am sure there is no Salvation. And therefore I think it was not the Interest of Religion, but a private Interest put them upon it. My Lords, As to the Doctrine of King-killing, and Absolving persons from their Allegiance, I cannot say the Church of Rome does not hold it, I never heard it did hold it, it may be it does, it may be not, I say not one thing or other, but my Lords, there was an English Colledge of Priests at Rhemes, that translated the Bible, and printed it with Authority according to their Translation, and in their Annotations upon the fourteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, they do declare their dislike and detestation of that Opinion. They say all Subjects ought to obey their Kings as the  mitive Christians did the Heathen Princes of the Empire; and the learned Doctors of the Colledge of Sorbonne, did upon an occasion administred to them about that Opinion, declare the mistakes that were in it, and owned
it to be a damnable Principle. My Lords, I have an Authentical Copy of that Decree of the Sorbonists, whether it be here or no, I can't tell—Yes, here it is, which does declare that, a damnable Position; and there is lately come out a Book, written by a Priest of the Church of Rome, tryed for his life for being in the Plot, but acquitted of that, in which he says, that that Opinion of killing Kings is damnable and herettical, and declared so by the Council of Trent. My Lords, This gives me occasion to believe that the Church of Rome holds it not. I do not say that it does not, but some particular persons do abhor it which are great in that Church, and which weighs far with me; but that which further most of all confirms me in my ill Opinion of it, is the words of our Saviour, when not only he commands us to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, but asserts our Obedience to our Governours in many other passages of the Ho∣ly Scripture; and what I find there, the whole World is not able to alter my Opinion of. I do assure your Lordships in the presence of Almighty God, That I do ex∣treamly admire when I hear of any thing like it, and I did read with great horror what I found the other day in the Gazette, of some imprudent people in Scotland, and of their wicked Principles and Practices. My Lords, I do in the presence of Almighty God, who knows and sees all things, and of his Angels, which are continually about us, and of your Lordships who are my Peers and Judges, solemnly profess and declare, that I hate and detest any such Opinion, as I do damnation to my self. And I cannot be more desirous of Sal∣vation to my self, than I am cordial in hating this Opinion. My Lords, I know no person upon Earth, nor all the persons in the world put together, nor all the Power they have, can in the least absolve me of my Allegi∣giance. And I do acknowledge the King is my Soveraign, and I ought to obey him as far as the Law of the Land obliges any Subject of his to obey him; whether I have taken the Oath of Allegiance, I appeal to your Lordships to be my Witnes∣ses; and if I did not take it a thousand times for my Allegiance to the King, if re∣quired, I think I should deserve a thousand Deaths, and all the Torments in the world for refusing it. My Lords, These Gentlemen here did begin their Charge, Serjeant Maynard, and Sir Francis Winnington, with telling your Lordships there was an horrid Design to murder the King, to alter the Government, and introduce the Po∣pish Religon. This they say was ingaged in by the Roman Catholicks, that all the Church of Rome were the Contrivers of it; for they tell your Lordships, the whole Body hath been ingaged in it, and they have given you many Proofs by Witnesses examined the first day, of a General Plot; what Credit you will give to them I leave to your Lordships in the end of the Case, but still they said it
was the Body of the Roman Catholicks in England, or the Papists, or what they call them, that were the Plotters in this Design. But I beseech your Lordships, how am I concerned in it? for I must say to your Lordships, they have not of∣fered one proof that I am of that Religion. So that though any of you should have seen me at the Exercises of that Religion, or otherwise know it of your selves, yet if there be no Proof judicially before you, you are not to take notice of it. I have heard if a man be accused of a Crime, and be to be tryed, and no Evidence come in, if every man of the Jury were sure that the Fact was done, yet they must go upon the Evidence produced to them, and not upon their own knowledge. So then no Evidence being produced before your Lordships, about my being a Papist, you are not to take me for such an one. But, my Lords, if I were of that Church, and that were never so well proved too, I hope I have an advantage in it, that I have kept my self from being poysoned with so wicked a Principle, or in∣gaged with the rest in so ill a thing. My Lords, I am here accused of having endeavoured to kill the King. I find by the Law, upon reading Sir Edward Coke, since my Imprisonment, That all Accusations of Treason ought to be accompanied with Circumstances antecedent, concomitant and subsequent; but I conceive, my Lords, there is no tittle of any such thing proved against me. The whole compass of my life from my infan∣cy hath been clear otherwise. In the beginning of the late unhappy times, the late King of happy and glorious memory, did me the honour to make me a Peer; and thinking that my presence might rather prejudice him than serve him, my Wife and I settled at Antwerp when the War begun, where I might have lived, though obscurely, yet safely; but I was not satisfied in my Conscience to see my King in so much disorder, and I not endeavour to serve him what I could, to free him from his troubles. And I did come into England, and served his Majesty faith∣fully and loyally, as long as he lived. And some of your Lordships here, know, whether I did not wait upon the now King in his Exile, from which he was hap∣pily restored, which shews I had no ill intention then. My Lords, I hope this I have said does shew, that my life hath given no coun∣tenance to this Accusation, but clear contrary to what these (I hope I may call them so, and doubt not to prove them so) perjured Villains say against me. My Lords, After I had this misfortune to be thus accused, about a month or six weeks after, your Lordships were pleased to send two Members of this ho∣nourable Body to me. I do not see them at present here, to examine me about the Plot, (they were my Lord of Bridgwater, and my Lord of Essex) if they be here, I appeal to them what I did say. These two, after they had examined me told me, they did believe, and could almost assure me, That if I would con∣fess my Fault, and let them know the particulars of it, your Lordships would intercede with the King for my Pardon; but I then, as I ought, asserted my own
Innocency. Not long after, the King out of his Grace and Goodness to me, sent six of the Council to the Tower to offer me, That though I was never so guil∣ty, yet if I would confess, I should have my Pardon. I did then consider with my self, I could not imagine what ground there was to believe your Lordships could have Evidence of what there was not, to bring me in Guilty; and there∣upon I was so far from being able to make a Discovery, that I could not invent any thing that might save my life if I would. My Lords, I was seven days in the Countrey after I heard of the Plot; if I had known my self guilty, I should surely have run away. As I came to London, when I was at Lichfield there met me two of my Lords; They told me, and so did a Gentleman of the House of Commons, how much there was in the Plot, which if I had had an hand in it would certainly make me fly for it. I have ever heard when a man is accused or suspected of a Crime, Flight is a great sign of Guilt, and that it is often asked of the Jury, though there be no certain posi∣tive Evidence of the Fact, Whether a man fled or no? As that is a sign of Guilt, so Remaining is a sign of Innocency. If then after Notice, I come to Town, and suffer my self to be taken, if after Imprisonment and Accusation I refuse my Pardon, and yet had been Guilty, I ought to die for my Folly as well as my Crime. My Lords, 'tis a great Offence to commit Treason, and a great Addition to continue obstinate, when upon Acknowledgment a man can save his life; nay, my Lords, if I should have refused these Offers, and yet known my self Guil∣ty, I had at the same time been guilty of one of the greatest Sins in the world, as being the cause of my own Death. And as I hold, next to Treason, Murder the greatest sin, so I hold of all Murders Self-murder to be the greatest: nay, I do not think any man living can pardon that Sin of Murder. And I do profess to your Lordships in the presence of Almighty God, that if I could immediately, by the Death of this impudent Fellow Dugdale, who hath done me so much wrong, make my self the greatest man in the world, that is or ever was; I profess before God I would not; I cannot say my Charity is so great, but that I should be glad to see him suffer those Punishments the Law can inflict upon him for his Crimes, but his Death I would not have. Blood is so great a Crime, and I know every man is careful of giving his Voice in the Case of Blood, I should be very cautious my self; and if I were a Judge I would rather save twenty Guilty, than condemn one Innocent. I bless God I have not the least desire of the Death of any man, and would not for all the world have the innocent Blood of all the word lye upon me. I beg your Lordships pardon that I have troubled you thus long: I shall now as well as I can, apply my self to my particular Defence. I do, my Lords be∣fore I can go on to it, desire I may have such Depositions as have been taken
against me; and the liberty to look on your Journal Book, when I have occasion. I do particularly desire the Depositions of Oats, upon which I was committed, by my Lord Chief Justice; the two Depositions of Stephen Dugdale, taken at Stafford before two Justices of the Peace, Mr. Lane and Mr. Vernon; I de∣sire the Depositions taken before, I think it was Mr. Warcup and Sir William Poultney, or some other two Justices▪ which was made by Turbervile, and then I shall compare their Testimonies together: And I hope shall give you a clear account that they are perjured persons. How without these to go on to my just Defence I cannot well tell. Lord High Steward. What do you say to it, Gentlemen, you hear what my Lord prays? Sir Franc. Winnington. The Witnesse are here, and have been heard viva voce. As we cannot use any of the Depositions of which he speaks, so no more can they be used by him. Lord High Steward. If I understand my Lord aright, this is the thing he desires▪ says he, You have brought Witnesses against me viva voce, they have been ex∣amined here, and they have been examined elsewhere, and their Depositions are upon Record, I desire to confront what they have said here, with what they have said contrary in other places. Mr. Serj. Maynard. If there be any thing expressed by my Lord, wherein they have contradicted themselves, and produce that Deposition, he may do that; but to desire to have all the Depositions that have been made by our Witnesses is a strange request. When there is occasion to use them upon any particular point, he may produce them if he can. Lord High Steward. Can you object why my Lord should not have Copies of any thing that is upon the Journal, and Depositions that are sworn before a Magistrate which may be of use to him? Sir William Jones. My Lords, We do not object against it; but, my Lords, I think it is out of time of to desire it. What was sworn, and is entred in your Lord∣ships Journal, was sworn above two years since. My Lord, or any man else might repair to them, they are matters of Record, and for ought we know were never denyed to any, especially if they desired it in the House; but after two years time, and after three weeks time given to prepare for this Tryal, when my Lord could not but know what Witnesses would be examined before your Lordships, for him to come now and desire such and such Depositions may be produced, which if by Law he might be allowed to do, he might have done before, is to no other purpose, under favour, but to gain time, and to cause our Evidence to be forgot∣ten. And therefore we must humbly pray it may not be admitted: My Lords, I think it is an unusual thing, My Lords the Judges are neer your Lordships, I suppose they will inform your Lordships. If a man be tryed at the Assizes, for
him to desire a Coppy of the Informations remaining in Court, by which he may except against the Witnesses, is what the Court does not use to grant: But if your Lordships proceedings vary from the common proceedings of other Courts, then I resort to what I said before. Whether your Lordships will think this a proper time when he might have had it in the Parliament that was first Dissolved, and then in the Parliament that was last Dissolved. Now to desire those Copies at this time, is to put off the Cause, for that which perhaps he cannot be furnished with in a day or two. Sir Fr. VVin. I would add but one word, if your Lordships please to give me leave. My Lords, you have the Learned Judges near you, who will inform you Whether ever, when a man was accused of a Capital Offence, and the Evidence against him had been fully heard, by the Court and by himself, he was admitted to require from the Prosecutors, the Copies of Examinations formerly taken be∣fore other Persons? Does my Lord intend to have time to peruse those Exami∣nations, and to have the Copies of them, that he may consult in private with his Counsel to find out Exceptions, and with his Witnesses to make them good? My Lords▪ I must say that in my short Experience (and I have attended a con∣siderable time upon the greatest Court for Trial of Offenders) I never heard such a thing asked by a Prisoner, either at the Bar of the Kings Bench, or at the Assizes. I speak with all the tenderness imaginable, because we are in a matter of Blood, and God-forbid but the Lord at the Bar should have true and equal Justice done him. But if I take my Lord right, this seems but an Artifice to delay the Trial, of which it is our duty to be very cautious. Indeed I have seen the Judges, upon trial of a Criminal, call for the Depositions, or Informations from the Clerk, or the Justice of the Peace who took them, and caused them to be read; but for a Prisoner to call for Examinations at the Bar from the Prose∣cutors, Et ex Debita Justitia, to demand them, is a thing, which as it never has been, so I think will not be admitted at this time, especially when we are now almost at the end of the Cause, and with all Modesty and Submission to your Lord∣ships, I look upon it as a very strange and unreasonable Demand. L. H. Steward. My Lord Stafford, What is the reason your Lordship had not, all this while, Copies of the Journal, which is that you now ask? L. Stafford. I shall not undertake that I am able to give your Lordships a rea∣son for it, because I think wherein I have been mistaken as to point of Time; your Lordships will not tie me up to that. But this Gentleman that spoke last is not acquainted with me, and does not know me; for I have no desire to go back, or to put off this Trial: But if it cannot be done to Day, I am as guilty to Mor∣row as I am to Day; and I desire no more than what he says hath been done in the like Cases. I do desire, my Lord, the Informations and Depositions of Dugdale, Oates, and Turbervile, may be produced and read, and I will make
Observations upon them in my Defence. I desire those Affidavits may be brought. L. H. Stew. Affidavits taken, When, and where? L. Stafford. Of Dr. Oats, that was read in your Lordships House, I heard it. L. H. Stew. Let us understand your Lordships demands, that when my Lords are withdrawn, I may know what Questions to put to them, and acquaint them with your desires: The one is the Journal of the Lords House, which is always before their Lordships, and you might have had Copies long since. The next thing you ask is an Affidavit of Dugdale, if this Affidavit is entred into the Jour∣nal, that supplies your Demands, if it be not entred there, where shall we find it? L. Stafford. I do not know. L. H. Stew. Does your Lordship think all this matter must stay till we can find a loose Affidavit, that we know not where 'tis filed? L. Stafford. I know it was before the Council, and I believe my Accusers have it; I desire the Gentlemen of the House of Commons may produce it. Sir John Trevor. I have seen none, nor have none. L. Stafford. The one was taken the 24. of December this time two year, and the other the 29. L. H. Stew. My Lord, will your Lordship give me leave to tell you, you ought to be provided with some particular exception, and not to make your demand in general. If your Lordship will say Dugdale did swear such and such things, which are contrary to what he now affirms, we know what to make of it; but to hunt after an Affidavit, that we know not where to find, to pick something out of it, that I do not understand. L. Stafford, I appeal to my Lord of Essex, and my Lord Bridgewater, whe∣ther they did not examine me the first time upon one or two Affidavits of Dug∣dale. L. H. Stew. Suppose it be not to be found my Lord? L. Stafford. Then I must have patience and submit. L. H. Stew. Can you tell wherein he swore quite blank contrary to what he swears now? L. Stafford. My Lord, I conceive it was never denied before, but your Lord∣ships may do what you please. L. H. Stew. Well, my Lord, let us go on to the next. The Affidavits of Dug∣dale, if they be entred on the Journal, may be ready, if not, then shall acquaint their Lordships, and they will direct what is fit in the case. L. Stafford. Then there is the Affidavit of Oats before my Lord Chief Justice, upon which I was committed; the next day, which was Friday, it was read in your Lordships House. L. H. Stew. I believe that is entred upon the Journal, and so will be ready to be used.
L. Staff. I do hope to make it evidently appear thereby that he is forsworn. I desire two Affidavits more that were taken before the Justices of the Peace of Middlesex, who examined Mr. Turbervile twice. L. H. Stew. What Justice of the Peace? L. Staff. Mr. Warcupp, Sir William Poultney, and Sir Thomas Stringer. I desire I may not be misunderstood, I do not desire to have them to instruct my Counsel, or advise with them upon them, but I cannot make my Defence without them. L. H. Stew. Those are voluntary extrajudicial Affidavits, that no body is bound to keep. L. Staff. They were spoken of in the Votes of the House of Commons. L. H. Steward. What say you Gentlemen to it? Sir Fran. Winn. My Lords, because my Lord at the Bar is pleased to insi∣nuate, as if we knew where those Affidavits are which he seems to desire, and because your Lordship was pleased to say that the Commons in Parliament are the Grand-Jury of the Kingdom, I desire to say one thing; That certainly it will not be required from us to produce and publish the several Facts and Circum∣stances that induced us to impeach him, if it shall be demanded by the Prisoner at the Bar. L. H. Steward. I wish you would answer the Question, and not argue upon it, whether those Affidavits of Turbervile may not be produced; for 'tis my Lords Exception against your Witnesses, that he swears several ways; and by those Affidavits of Turbervile, he intends to disprove him in what he hath said to day. Sir Fr. Win. My Lords, the House of Commons never administer an Oath, and therefore it is not to be said to us, but my Lord Stafford must go to the par∣ticular Offices where they are to be found. L. H. Stew. I do not ask you where my Lord should find them, but whether, if they can be found, you can object any thing why they should not be produced and read. Mr. Serj. Maynard. When they are produced we will give an Answer. L. Stafford. My Lords, I am informed this is the substance of the Affidavit, That Turbervile did swear before two Justices of the Peace, whether they be of the House of Commons, or no, I cann't tell, that he spoke with me at Doway, and in Paris, in the years (73.) and (77.) and now he says (72.) and 75.) I am informed, my Lords, and I appeal to the House of Commons, they are all Persons of Honour and Worth (if my Information be mistaken I beg their Pardon, and yours for't) whether he did not mend it after he had sworn it. L. H. Stew. Are these all you do demand? L. Stafford. Yes, my Lords. Whether this was true or no, I don't know,  is what I have been told, I appeal to the House of Commons (who are all wor∣thy
persons, I do not believe I have an Enemy among them) they know whether I speak true or no. L. H. Stew. When will your Lordship be ready to make your Defence? L. Stafford. As soon as ever I have them, I will not stay a minute, a moment, an instant, I desire not to shew my Counsel, nor any one; for my Tryal is a thing that I have long desired. Therefore I would not be mistaken, as if I would put off the Cause. I am innocent, and shall be so while I live, and hope I shall make it appear so. I beg if this be a matter of Law, whether I may have them or not, that my Counsel be heard to it. L. H. Stew. This is a matter of Fact. L. Stafford, I insist upon it as things without which I cannot make my De∣fence; I am innocent, and I suppose not one of the House of Commons, nor one of your Lordships, will debar me of that by which I may make my Innocency appear. Lord High Steward. You cannot know my Lords pleasure till they are with∣drawn. Sir William Jones. Before your Lordships withdraw, I hope you will please to hear us a few words, which we think may be for the Service of this Court. My Lords, what Evidence is before your Lordships, 'tis in your Lordships pleasure what of that you shall please to communicate to my Lord Stafford; but for this Evi∣dence he speaks of as remaining in our hands, and which he takes upon himself to appeal to us for, admits of another consideration. My Lords, if we were con∣scious of any thing in these Affidavits that were for my Lords Advantage, and knew where they were, we would redily produce them; but for my self, I must answer, and I think my Companions will say so too, that we do not know where these Affidavits are, nor of any Variation in those Affidavits from what is now sworn, but whatever they were, they were taken for the Information of the House of Commons, who are the Prosecutors in this Cause, and who are no Judges. Now if my Lord will bring any Witness that will say this Witness of ours did before a Justice of Peaee depose so and so, and says the contrary now, there might be then just reasons to look after these Affidavits and to have them produced, but upon a bare imagination that there is a Variance where in truth there is none, and the Truth may otherwise be known; to desire that these Affidavits that never were before you should be produced, whether such a Suggestion is to be admitted, I humbly submit it to your Lordships Conside∣ration. L. Stafford. My Lords, if these Gentlemen that are the Managers for the House of Commons will aver to your Lordships, that there is no Variation in them, I will submit to them and be quiet; if they will say it was not debated in the House, whe∣ther he should amend or no. L. H. Stew. Look you, he puts it upon you so far Gentlemen, that if you will
take it upon you to aver that there is no Variation between those Affidavits upon which you grounded your Impeachment, and the Evidence you have given upon the Trial of your Impeachment, he will not give you the trouble. L. Stafford. I beseech you let me say one word, my Lords, I have been thus long a Prisoner, I was as far from being proceeded against now, as any of the rest of the Lords in the Tower, till Turbervile came in with his Discovery, and I be∣lieve I am now called the sooner (which I am glad of, and I give the Gentlemen thanks for it) upon the Affidavit of Turbervile, I desire that Affidavit; and though it be true the House of Commons give no Oath, yet they appointed two Mem∣bers of the House that were Justices of the Peace of Middlesex to take it upon Oath, and he desired the next day to amend it; and I put my self upon them, whether this be not true. L. H. Stew. What say you, Sir, to it? Sir W. Jones. My Lord, I cannot answer, because I don't hear. L. Stafford. My Lord, I say this, I do observe that Mr. Turbervile (whose face I never saw in my life, that I know of, till to day, nor never spoke a word to him, and I shall prove that no Servant that ever I had see him) did de∣pose (for the purpose) to day, that he was in the Years (73.) and (76.) in such and such places, and that he did speak with me at Doway and Paris, and to Morrow recollecting his Notes, he found he was mistaken in his Affidavit that he had made before, and desired to mend it, and brought it to the Years (72.) and (75.) there was some Debate in the House about it, whether they should permit him to mend it; I appeal to all the Gentlemen, whether it were not so. L. H. Stew. Your labour is to have two Affidavits that you do presume will do your business in order to the finding out a variety of time of his being at Doway or at Paris: That which does press your Lordship we know in Turbervile's Evi∣dence, is, That at Paris in the Room below of your Lodging, you encouraged him to kill the King, and you were to have met him at Diep to know his mind, but you came not, and he went away; if you have it in the Affidavit quite contrary to this, you say somewhat. L. Staff. My Lords, I beseech you, it presses me, and every man in England, not to be run down by a Fellow that forswears himself; for him to swear one thing to day, and another thing to morrow, is Perjury. L. H. Stew. What say you to it Gentlemen? Sir W. Jones. What was done in the House of Commons, it does not become a∣ny of us that are Members to disclose: But I have heard, and will admit it, that in the Depositions, the Witness made before a Justice of Peace, there was a year put down, which he going home, and upon sight of Letters and Papers, found it to be mista∣ken, he comes the next day and desires to alter it, if this be for my Lords Service▪ we shall grant it.
Mr. Serj. Maynard. 'Tis on or about too. L. H. Stew. What say you my Lord now? L. Staff. I do say, my Lord, I am informed by what I have heard cursorily; for I have not seen one of the House of Commons before the day of my Tryal, that though in his second Deposition he named the years (72.) and (75.) yet I can prove him perjured as to what he hath sworn here to day. L. H. Stew. Since 'tis insisted upon Gentlemen, that there is a Variety in the last Deposition from what he swore at first, what can you say why he should not have the avail of his Exception? Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, whether your Lordships will think fit to consider by what ways and means the House of Commons informed themselves, in order to Impeachments, I submit to you; and for those things that still remain in the hands of the Commons, I suppose you will be pleased to consider how you can send for them to inform you. We would not be mistaken in the matter; let not any one that hears us think that we are conscious there is the least Variation, nay we are confident, if the thing were produced, it would turn to my Lords pre∣judice; but what is done in this Case, may be a President for the future; and there∣fore we cannot without resorting to the House, consent to deliver any thing the House took for their Information. Therefore if your Lordships stand upon it, and incline to have it done, we must resort to the House to ask their leave whe∣ther we shall do it or no. L. H. Stew. I cannot tell what my Lords will incline to do; but I desire when you are gone back, you will consider how far it will make the matter easie to my Lord. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we can give no Answer to that till we have attend∣ed our House. Mr. Serj. Maynard. I desire your Lordships to consider what a piece of cunning he hath put upon both Houses, to pass by his villifying our Witnesses, which I may say was not comely. But if he makes any Question, it must be put to the Houses upon supposition to be a Question, and so he would bring things only to this issue to put off the Cause for to day. He ought to put that which might pro∣bably be something of a Question. Let him instance in particulars, and make out his Evidence, not seign things to put off the Cause; for ought I see 'tis to no other end, and 'tis a Jesuitical trick I think. L. Stafford. I feign nothing, I have been told this that I speak here, and I de∣sire it may be proved. Lord High Steward. If you are bound up so that you cannot consent, I can▪t help it. Mr. Serj. Maynard. Let him put the Fact, my Lords, and not suppose, and imagine Things, and then raife Questions. L. H. Stew. It is usual in these Cases for the Gentlemen of the House of
Commons to stay till the Lords are withdrawn, and expect their Lordships Reso∣lution; perhaps they may so order it that you need not go back. Sir Will. Jones. I desire before your Lordships withdraw, that it may be taken notice of by your Lordships, that for the matter of the variation of the year we do admit it. My Lord is not pleased to mention any other particular matter of the Affidavit, but only says in general that it is contrary to what he says to day; if my Lord would tell us wherein, perhaps we should admit it, or answer it, or take it into further consideration; but to make so general an Allegation, and give your Lordships no particular account, we submit whether such a suggestion ought to be regarded. Lord High Steward. Is there any further variation, besides the variation of the year? L. Staff. I cannot say there is my Lord, I do not know it; but I do really be∣lieve in my Conscience there is, from what I have heard; but however I insist up∣on it, and demand your Judgment. Sir Fr. Win. My Lords, I humbly desire one word as to the Objection that hath been made, that he hath prayed your Lordships to grant him the sight of such and such Papers. The nature of this Cause, my Lords, we know is such, that there was never the like number of Papers known, as to the General Plot; and my Lord, that is the Prisoner at the Bar, may as well demand to morrow such a particular Paper, and the next day another, that he hath heard of in the General Plot; and where will the end of this be? So that if the thing be granted upon the variation of the time that it was immediately rectifyed, and he cannot produce any grounds that may satisfie your Lordships why he should have that Paper, you may as well suffer him to demand any other Paper after, and so never end the Cause. L. H. Stew. Your Lordship hath been told, and you shall find it, that you shall have as fair and equal an Hearing as is possible, and nothing shall be denied you that is just and reasonable to safe your Life, or make your Defence. But pray, my Lord, for so much as is upon the Journal, which you may resort unto, you may easily know what answer my Lords will give to that; but for this other thing, if it be only the variety you alledge of the Time and the Year, and you do desire it to look for other Exceptions, and you pray the help of the Lords to see such a Paper, that you might make inquiry after other varieties, Do you think they are to help you to find out Exceptions to the Witnesses? L. Stafford. I do not desire their Lordships to help me to find out Exceptions; but I have told your Lordships of one Exception to the Affidavit which these Gentlemen acknowledge to be true, and the other Affidavit is, that he Swears I spoke to him at Doway in the year (72) or (73) which I can disprove; and then I say he Swearing several things false, he is no credible Witness. L. H. Stew. 'Tis admitted to your Lordship that he did mistake the time.
L. Stafford. It is admitted that he said he spoke to me at Doway. L. H. Stew. How very an easie matter were it to expedite this Process, by al∣lowing the Prisoner his demand in this particular. Sir Will. Jones. I never saw it, and a great many of the Managers say they ne∣ver saw it. L. Stafford. These Gentlemen say I did it to put off the Cause, I am far from it: for though I am in a condition very unfit to manage my Defence, faint and weak with speaking so long, and hardly able to speak any more, yet I desire to finish this night, and if I see it now, it will be enough, I shall not desire to have a Copy to advise with my Counsel, or any body else. L. H. Stew. Pray Gentlemen of the House of Commons will you observe, my Lord, as weary as he is, would make an end of the matter presently, if you would but send for the Affidavit, Mr. Foley. My Lords, it is not in our hands here, if the House of Commons will order it, it may be done, we cannot order it of our selves. Mr. Powle. My Lords, this is a Paper that does properly belong to the House, and I do think, that none of us here that are Managers for this Trial, will under∣take it shall be delivered without resorting to the House for their Opinion; for though I do verily beleive, and am fully persuaded, that what this Noble Lord at the Bar does object, will not appear to be so; For I think there is not any thing of my Lord Staffora's speaking with this Witness at Doway mentioned therein; yet how far the Presidents of this may reach in other Cases, I think, is worthy the Consideration of the House. And we cannot presume to offer any thing in it to your Lordships, until you be pleased to give us leave to go and resort thither. Then the Lords withdrew, and after an Hours and an Halfs space returned, and Proclamation was made for Silence. L. H. Steward. My Lord Viscount Safford, my Lords have considered of the Demands you made; and my Lords, upon the Debate of the Reasons of your Demands, are come to this Resolution. Your Lordship did demand in the first place, that you might have a sight of the Journal, and have the Papers lodged in the House of Peers: My Lords take notice that this Demand which your Lordship now makes, is a Demand that was granted you long ago, a∣bout two years since; you have an Order entred upon the Books, that your Lordship should have Copies of every thing in that House, and if your Lord∣ship have not taken out Copies, and if any thing is missing to your Lord∣ship that is yet there extant, 'tis your Lordships fault. However, my Lords will command their Journals to be brought hither, that your Lordship may make that use of them that may be of most profit to you. For the other
Demand touching the Affidavit supposed to be taken from Turbervile by the Ju∣stices of the Peace, that my Lords upon Consideration had, do find that there is no Obligation at all upon them as a Court, to concern themselves in that Mat∣ter. And therefore my Lords have made no Order in that Point, but your Lord∣ship must come provided as well as you can, and the Court can do no more to help you in it. For the rest, my Lords did take notice that your Lordship said before they were withdrawn, That you found your self very Faint and Weary, and that you were much spent in Discourse, and Tired with what already you have done. My Lords are extreamly willing to give your Lordship all the Favour and Accom∣modation possible, for the Recollecting your self, therefore my Lords will not now put you upon it, to go on to make your Defence, but will give you time till to Morrow. L. Stafford. I humbly give your Lordships thanks for your kindness and Fa∣vour to me; but here I profess, and call Almighty God to witness, rather than I would have it thought I am willing to put it off, I would have sunk down Dead at the Bar. But, my Lords, there was another Demand that I made: Your Lord∣ships say, I shall have Copies of all the Journals, and that you cannot help me to the Affidavit of Turbervile, I submit to it without saying one word more; but I desire that I may have brought hither to Morrow the Journals, and other Papers in the Lords House, but I desire also the two Affidavits of Dugdale, taken the one the 24. the other the 29. of December following, which Depositions were taken before Mr. Lane, and Mr. Vernon, in Stafford Town, when Dugdale was in Prison. L. H. Stew. Look you my Lord, This is all under the same Rule: What Evi∣dence soever there is before the Court of Peers, that you shall have; whatsoever Evidence is not in that Court, you ought to come provided of; the Court is not to stay, nor to help you to Evidence. L. Staff. My Lord, I beg your pardon, Dugdale made an Affidavit then, and says the clean contrary now; I desire nothing but Justice, and I am sure I shall have all Justice from your Lordships. L. H. Stew. Produce it, and alledge what you will for your self, it shall be heard. L. Staff. How then shall I be able to make my Defence, if I have not those Papers, which I humbly concieve by the Law, ought to be brought? These Gentlemen of the House of Commons say, That I could not have Turbervile's Affidavit because it was in the House, and they could not give it without consent of the House, but this was examined before a Justice of Peace, and returned to the Council: Sure I shall have that? I was examined by my Lord of Essex, and my Lord of Bridgewater, upon that Affidavit twice I think, therefore that is ma∣terial and necessary; and I know your Lordships would not have me come to de∣fend my self without Weapons.
L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, I do beseech your Lordship to be a little better informed in your own Business. You have leave to make use of the Journal, and all Papers that are entred there; the Clerks say, Dugdale's Oath is entred there. L. Stafford. Is the 24. of December there? Clerk. It is there. L. H. Stew. Pray, my Lord, do not put the Court upon Interrogatories, but come provided as well as you can. L. Stafford. If it be entred on the Journal Book, I desire not the Original, I am very well satisfied. L. H. Stew. Will you be ready to go on to morrow, my Lord? L. Stafford. I will withall my heart. L. H. Stew. 'Tis too late Gentlemen to go on to Night, we must Adjourn till to Morrow. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I had so much to write last Night, that I had very little sleep; I desire I may not come till Ten. L. H. Stew. My Lord, I am not able to hear you, I take as much pains to come near you as I can. L. Stafford. I had a great deal to write last Night, I say, and I want some sleep; I desire I may not come till Ten. L. H. Stew. Will you be ready by Ten a Clock to Morrow? L. Stafford. I will be ready by Ten. L. H. Stew. I will move my Lords when they are withdrawn, to Adjourn till Ten to Morrow. But my Lord Stafford, I do not know how your Lordship is provided, or how you look after your own Business. If you have not had Copies of the Journal all this while, 'tis you are in the fault. A great deal of it is in Print, you may send your Solicitor to the Clerk of the Parliament, and take Copies of what you have need of. I give you notice of it, that if you come unprovided, you may know it is your own fault. L. Stafford. I do acknowledge I have Copies of the Journal Book, I think of all; but I do not find any thing of Dugdale's second Deposition there. L. H. Stew. Here is that of the 24. of December, that you ask after, send your Solicitor and then you shall have a Copy out of the Journal of it. L. Stafford. I assure your Lordship I will be ready to morrow, if I can get those Copies. Lord High Steward. My Lords will give you as much Ease, and all the Accom∣modations that are fit. L. Stafford. Then to morrow I will be ready by Ten a Clock, if your Lord∣ships please, only I would desire your Lordships to take notice, that these Gentle∣men of the House of Commons do acknowledge that Turbervile swore one day to one year, and the next day to another.
L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, you say you can be ready to morow at Ten a Clock, Are you sure you can be ready then? L. Stafford. I say, my Lords, this, I shall not be so ready as I shall be next day; but I assure your Lordships, I will rather sink down in the place where I am, if you think fit, than put off the Tryal. L. H. Stew. Look you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, in a Case of this consequence, and of this Vital Importance to a Man as this is, where is the in∣convenience if there should be a days respite, and the Court should Adjourn till Friday, if my Lords be moved in it, I make no direction, but what inconvenience will be in it? Will it not be every way as well? Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, your Lordships does not expect from us to give our consent to put off the Tryal. L. H. Stew. I ask only what inconvenience it is? Sir Will. Jones. Your Lordships are the Judges, and will do as you find it rea∣sonable; but this I say, it is very unusual, and scarce to be Presidented, that when the Prosecutors have given an Evidence, the Prisoner should have time, a further considerable time, to give his Answer to it; the Prisoner knows before▪hand the general Scope and Drift of the Evidence; therefore for him to have time till to morrow is a favour; but to have more than that, even a whole day to intervene, is very unusual. L. H. Stew. If that be all, and the matter depend upon what is usual, I do ven∣ture with my Lords leave, to inform you, that my Lord of Strafford had two days time after the Prosecution to give his Answer to what was said against him. Sir William Jones. That was an Evidence upon Twenty Eight Articles, this but upon Two Heads; and that was after a long Examination of many days. L. Stafford. My Lords I had prepared my self for my Tryal as well as I could, and had written down a few things that I intended to say; and I profess before God as I am a Man, and as I am a Christian, of all I intended to say I have in a manner made use of very few words; but as to what I had to say upon the Evi∣dence I was forced to lay all aside, because I wanted these Papers; I have not eaten to day, and being forced to lay aside all that I had written, I shall need a whole day to write; however I submit my self to your Lordships in that matter. Lord High Steward. My Lord, if it be equal to your Lordship, and your Lordship will be as ready to morrow as another day, this Court will be more ready. L. Stafford. I assure your Lordships, if your Lordships do give me another day, I will not debate with my Counsel any one thing upon the Papers I have asked. Lord High Steward. Pray, my Lord, will you be pleased to make your de∣mand to my Lords, who are your Judges, by what time you will be content to be foreclosed.
Lord Stafford. My Lords, if you will give me till Friday, I shall be ready to give my Evidence, and I will bring Witnesses sufficient I hope to prove my Innocency. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we do not presume at all to offer our consent to what time the Court shall be Adjourned— L. H. Stew. No, we do not ask your Consent. Sir Will. Jones. And I hope your Lordships will not ask the Prisoners consent, nor do it by his direction. L. H. Stew. De morte hominis non est cunctatio longa. Sir Will. Jones. But we must desire your Lordships, as we are entrusted by the House of Commons, to Manage this Tryal, to take notice, that as we do not expect your Lordships should take the Measures from our Desires, much less do we expect you should do it at the only instance of the Prisoner. 'Tis a great advantage to this Lord to choose his own time when he will please to answer our Evidence. We do know very well, that in this Case there have been Attempts to Suborn Witnesses, and that we shall prove in due time, and Attempts to destroy Witnesses too; So that there hath been too much time lost already, and I think to morrow is a very convenient time for him to make his Answer. And I must observe to your Lordships, that the Prisoner hath gained his end of not making his Answer this day by raising an Objection, which in my Thoughts car∣ried no great weight in it, though when it was made, your Lordships were pleased to Adjourn upon it: But seeing he hath got his Point of deferring the making Answer till to morrow, there can be no reason he should gain a further day, since the Depositions may be ready by to morrow as well as by the next day. And therefore we desire your Lordships will be pleased to go on in the Tryal to morrow. L. H. Stew. You shall know their Lordships pleasure when they are withdrawn. Is it your Lordships pleasure that we should Adjourn? Lords. Ay, Ay. L. H. Stew. This House is Adjourned into the Parliament Chamber. So the Lords withdrew in their Order, and the Commons went back to their House, and Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. A Message was sent from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Sa∣muel Clark. Mr. Speaker. The Lords have sent us to acquaint this House, that they have ordered the Prisoner William Viscount Stafford to be brought to the Bar in West∣minster-Hall to morrow morning at Ten of the Clock. And then the Commons Adjourned to Eight of the Clock next morning.
The Third Day. Thursday, December 2. 1680. AT the Hour of Ten in the Morning the Lords Adjourned into Westminster-Hall, and returned in their former Order into the Court there erected; and Mr. Speaker having left the Chair, the Commons were seated as before: The Court being sat, Proclamation for Silence was made, and the Lieutenant of the Tower commanded to bring his Prisoner to the Bar, which being done, the Lord High Steward spake to him as followeth: L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, this is the time appointed to hear what your Lordship hath to say in your Defence, and to call your Witnesses. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, yesterday my Lord Viscount Stafford was pleased to make mention of an Affidavit of Mr. Turbervile taken before two Justices of the Peace, wherein he was pleased to say there was some Amendment made, and so indeed we did then acknowledg there was. But he had a desire to see it notwith∣standing our acknowledgment, because he was informed that that which Turber∣vile swore then, differed from what Turbervile swore yesterday. My Lords, at that time we had not the Affidavit, nor was it proper for us to produce it, for indeed it remained in the Justice of Peace's Hands that took it; but now that his Lordship may have full satisfaction, and not only his Lordship, but also all that are present at this Tryal. I do inform his Lordship, that the Affidavit is in the hands of a Member of the House of Commons, Sir Will. Poulteney by name, and if his Lordship please, he may have it produceed, and make what use he can of it. L. H. Stew. 'Tis extream Honourably and Worthily done of the House of Commons, and my Lord hath no manner of Exception left him. L. Stafford. My Lords, if I shall have occasion to use it, I shall call for it; but I would first say something to your Lordships; My Lords, I first give your Lord∣ships thanks, for granting me the liberty to come so late to Day, I have had a little sleep upon it. Your Lordships heard yesterday, when you had Dr. Oats at the Bar, the first thing that he said, as I remember, was to desire you would be plea∣sed to leave him to his own method; I beg of your Lordships the same favour, that I may begin with the one or the other Witnesses, or with matter of Law, as I please. L. H. Steward. God forbid but you should take your own Method in your De∣fence.
L. Stafford. In order to which, I desire first Mr. Turbervile may come to the Bar. L. H. Stew. Do you call Turbervile, my Lord? L. Stafford. Yes, my Lord, I do. L. H. Stew. He is there, what say you to him? L. Stafford. My Lords, I will ask him but one Question, and I hope I shall have occasion to ask him no more: When was the last time that he spoke with me? L. H. Stew. Mr. Turbervile, I think I hear right, I do not know: My Lord Stafford asks when was the last time you spoke with his Lordship? Mr. Turbervile. It was in November 1675. L. Stafford. I have very much to say against his Evidence; but I hope your Lordships will not think him any Evidence against me, or any body else. But I desire your Judgment, whether I be not within the compass of the time limited by the Statute. Mr. Serjeant Maynard. Express your self, my Lord, for we do not under∣stand you. L. Stafford. I cannot say more than I do; the time which the Statute limits is six months, but this is five years; I desire the Statute may be read. L. H. Stew. What Statute, my Lord? L. Stafford. The Statute of the 13th. of this King. L. H. Stew. If your Lordship pleases you shall have it read, But your Lord∣ship does not observe, you are prosecuted and impeached of High Treason upon the Statute of the 25th. of Edward the 3d. not upon the Statute of the 13th. of this King, made for the Safety of the Kings Person, which limits the Prosecution of some Offences to be within six months; but the Prosecution for Treason may be at any time. L. Staff. Does your Lordship say it may be at any time? Lord High Steward. Yes, my Lord. L. Stafford. This truly does very much surprise me, though I am wholly ig∣norant in matters of Law. My Lords, I have ever heard that no man can be pro∣secuted by that Statute but within so many days, in one part of it Thirty Days, in another six months; and I desire your Lordships that the Statute may be read. L. H. Stew. If your Lordship please, the Statute shall be read; if your Lord∣ship desires the Clause of the Statute of the 13th. of this King, which limits the Prosecution to be within six months, that shall be read. But I conceive your Lordship is not accused upon that Statute. Lord Stafford. I beseech your Lordships, I may know whether I am prosecuted upon the Statute of the 13th. of this King, or upon what other Statute.
L. H. Steward. What say the worthy Gentlemen of the House of Commons; Is my Lord prosecuted upon the Statute of the 13th. of this King? M. Serj. Maynard. Not at all, my Lord▪ he is not prosecuted upon that Statute, but upon the Common Law, and the 25th. of Edward the 3d. which was only Declarative of the Common Law. L. Staff. This is a point of Law. Sir Will. Jones. What is the point of Law. L. Staff. Whether I can be prosecuted after so many days? L. H. Steward. The Law is very clear. If you were prosecuted upon the 13th. of this King for any less Offence than Treason, you could not be prose∣secuted after six months, but if you be prosecuted for Treason either upon the 25th. of Edward the 3d. or 13. Car. 2d. there is no time limited, and God forbid there should. L. Stafford. I beseech your Lordships Judgment, whether there be not a Sta∣tute, I think 'tis in the Reign of Edward the 6th. that sets the time, after which no man shall be prosecuted for any thing of Treason; I desire a quarter of an hours time to look into the Statute. L. H. Stew. What say you, Gentlemen? L. Stafford. Pray my Lord, let me read the Statute of Edward the 6th. Mr. Serj. Maynard. We know not of any such Statute. L. Stafford. I will not say there is, but I will say, I cannot read if there be not. L. H. Stew. Pray Gentlemen of the House of Commons, my Lord does sup∣pose he hath some kind of Objection in Law to make, which he cannot make out of himself; will it be amiss to let his Counsel make and propose the Question for him? Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we rather would have my Lord propose the Ob∣jection; for your Lordships know, till a matter of Law is proposed, he cannot be admitted to have Counsel. If he desires time to recollect himself about the Objection, we can't oppose it. But we desire that he may propose the Objection, and after if it be any doubt in matter of Law, your Lordships will assign him Coun∣sel to be heard to speak to it. Sir Franc. Winn. This would be a way for a Prisoner to have the Advantage of Counsel, when they ought not to be allowed; for 'tis but to say, he hath some doubt which he cannot propose himself, and so let in his Counsel to make Ob∣jections for him. If any Question of Law do arise, and that Question is stated, you will allow the Prisoner Counsel to argue it, but at this rate he may make the like pretences in every part of his Defence, and so obtain that Counsel shall manage his whole Defence for him. L. H. Stew. I suppose my Lord does intend an Objection as to the time of the Prosecution, but he does not know how to make it. He supposes he is prose∣cuted
after the six months, which he thinks is the time limited for the Prosecu∣tion. But I pray, my Lord Stafford, will your Lordship take time to recollect your self, and make an Objection fit for Counsel to be heard upon, and you shall have it. L. Staff. I beseech you, I may have the Statute-Book with me, for I have none my self, my Lord. Sir Will. Jones. With all our hearts, we do not oppose it. Then my Lord withdrew into the Room provided for him, and within a quar∣ter of an hour returned. L. H. Stew. Say, my Lord. L. Stafford. My Lords, I do confess I have been very much mistaken ever since I was first committed to the Tower: For I did conceive that they would have proceeded, as I thought, I was impeached upon the Statute of the 13th. of this King. I humbly desire your Lordships Judgment, whether I ought or no, to be prosecuted upon that Statute? L. H. Stew. The Gentlemen have told you already: They prosecute you upon the Statute of 25th. of Edward the 3d. and upon the Common Law. L. Staff. And they lay aside that Statute? L. H. Stew. What Statute? L. Staff. The 13th. of this King. L. H. Stew. What say you, Gentlemen, once more? Sir Fr. Winn. My Lords, we have declared already to his Lordship, and if my Lord had looked well upon the Articles of Impeachment, he could not have put that Question, but would have found himself impeached for Treason at the Com∣mon Law, declared by the 25th. of Edward the 3d. L. Staff. So then they lay that aside of the 13th. of this King. Mr. Serj. Maynard. We do not mention any Statute, but we mention the Crime, and that Crime is against the Common Law declared by the Statute, to wit, The attempting the King's Death, and the Subversion of the Govern∣ment. L. Stafford. My Lords, There is no doubt but the attempting the King's Death is a great and hainous Crime, but, my Lords, I do not find that in the Impeachment, there is any Overt Act at all. And whether I shall answer to a Treason not proved by any Overt Act sworn by two Witnesses, I submit to your Lordships. But, my Lords, because your Lordships and the House of Commons, may not think that I propose these things out of a desire of delay; if your Lordships please, it may be saved to me with all other points of Law, I will go on to my proofs. L. H. Stew. Yes, all these things shall be saved to you, pray let us hear your E∣vidence.
L. Staff. Since your Lordships hath granted me that, be pleased to give me leave to go to my Evidence, and I begin with Stephen Dugdale. L. H. Stew. Set up Dugdale. L. Staff. Will your Lordships please I may have Pen, Ink and Paper? L. H. Stew. By all means, my Lord. (Which was given him.) L. Staff. May it please your Lordships Stephen Dugdale said, if I understand him aright, (and I ask him again) that he knew something of the Plot, 15 or 16 years ago. L. H. Stew. What say you, Mr. Dugdale, you hear the Question. Did not you say you knew of the Plot 15 or 16 years ago? Mr. Dugdale. I did say it, and did explain my meaning in it. I did say there was among us such a preparation to be made against the King died, of Arms and Money, that neither should be wanting. L. Staff. I beseech your Lordship to ask what proportion of Arms was to be provided. L. H. Stew. What proportion of Arms was to be provided? Mr. Dugdale. I never heard it nominated how many absolutely. I have heard of some Numbers. I heard of late of 30000. that were to be raised beyond Sea, what the whole number in England was, I have forgot, but I think I have heard Mr. Gavan, and some of the Priests say, That if there was occasion, they should have at least 200000 to assist them, that was of Men, and I suppose they had Arms as well as Men. L. Stafford. My Lords, If this were true which he says Mr. Gavan said, that they were 200000, I desire to know what Men he ment, what Religion they must be of. Lord High Stew. What Religion were they of that were to come in and help? Mr. Dugdale. He did not name them at that time, but I understood them, and so I apprehend the Company would, that they were Roman Catholicks. L. Stafford. 'Tis a strange thing that there should be 200000 Catholicks rais∣ed, when there are not 2000 in England that can bear Arms. L. H. Stew. Good my Lord, They might come from beyond sea, and so they might be so many Roman Catholicks, though there were not so many in England. Mr. Serj. Maynard. And he says not they were Roman Catholicks, but he heard so. Mr. Treby. There might be so many Roman Catholicks, and such as should be with them. L. Staff. Did he hear 15 or 16 Years that I was one to be among them? L. H. Stew. Answer that Question: Did you hear then that my Lord Stafford was to be one among them? Mr. Dugdale. I cannot remember it that I did, my Lord.
L. Stafford. Then, my Lords, I make this use of it: He tells you of a Plot 16 Years ago, that 200000 Men in Arms were ready against the King's death.— Mr. Dugdale. I did not say so, my Lords, I desire I may be understood a∣right.— L. Stafford. You say you heard so. Mr. Dugdale. I speak as to the number of Men what I heard of late at the Consults and Meetings within these two Years. L. Stafford. But I speak of 16 Years ago, what Number of Men was there to be raised? Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, it was a general word that was amongst us, That we must be provided against that time, against the Death of the King, but no Number at all. L. Stafford. This, my Lords, under favour, I conceive does not concern me. He tells you there was such a thing, it might be so, or it might not be so, I am not concerned in it, then 'tis out of Doors as to what concerns me: I conceive o∣therwise, if the Gentlemen conceive otherwise they will say so. Then, my Lords, the next thing is, How long ago it is since I first spake to him about this Plot, and I beseech your Lordships he may mention time and place. L. H. Stew. You hear the Question, Mr. Dugdale. Mr. Dugdale. The first time, to my best remembrance— L. Stafford. I beseech you, my Lords, let us have no remembrance, but let him swear positively. L. H. Stew. There is no mortal Man can swear otherwise than according to his Remembrance. L. Stafford. When a mans Life and Honour, and all he hath is at stake, and in∣deed in Consequence every man in England is concerned if they swear not positive∣ly, but still say as I remember, who can make a Defence? L. H. Stew. Mr. Dugdale, Go on and say as near as you can, and be as particu∣lar as you can, upon your Oath. Mr. Dugdale. That which I can positively affirm, is, It was about August▪ or September (78.) L. Stafford. He said yesterday it was in the latter end of August, or the begin∣ning of September, which are two Months. I beseech you what does he mean by the latter end of August, how long before the end of August? L. H. Stew. How long was it before the last day in August? Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I will not be positive, but it was either in one Month, or the other, I did not keep a Diary, or else I would give your Lordships satisfaction. L. Stafford. I beseech your Lordships he may positively say whether in August or nor in August, or whether in September or not in September. Mr. Dugdale. I dare not venture to swear that, I dare not do it.
L. Staff. Then saving my Exceptions to the incertainty of that afterwards, I would ask him what day was it in September that I spoke to him. Mr. Dugd. I remember one was either the 20. or 21. of September (78.) L. Staff. My Lords, he says the 20. or 21. does he say that was the first time he spoke with me? Sir Jolm Trevor. No, no. L. Staff. I beseech you my Lords, they may not answer the Questions, but the Witnesses; they cry No, no. L. H. Stew. My Lord, you shall certainly have an answer to all the Questions you will ask. L. Staff. But when I ask they answer for them, I would know whether that is the Course or no. L. H. Stew. Do not disquite your self for any thing that is said about you, you shall have a fair hearing. L. Stafford. But, my Lords, I cannot but be disquieted when I hear these learn∣ed Gentlemen make Answers to my Questions for the Witnesses. L. H. Stew. Mr. Dugdale, Was the 20. or the 21. of September, you speak of, the first time you spoke to my Lord Stafford? Mr. Dugdale. No, my Lords, it was not. L. Stafford. Pray, my Lords, what day was it then I spoke first to him? L. H. Stew. What was the day you first spoke to my Lord? Mr. Dugdale. Truly my Lords I cannot remember so well as to tell you. L. H. Stew. Do you remember when my Lord came to Tixal? Mr. Dugdale. I remember one Sunday in particular, but I cannot tell what day of the month it was. L. H. Stew. Do you remember my Lord Stafford at Tixal in company of my Lord Aston, and Father Evers? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I do. L. H. Stew. Do you remember that any discourse passed between them? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I do. L. H. Stew. Was that before or after the 21. of September? Mr. Dugdale. Both before and after. L. Stafford. My Lords, he says there was a Consult at Tixal, where such and such were present, and the Kings Death determined, I ask when was that? Mr. Dugdale. That was in September, I cannot say positively the day, but in September, or the latter end of August. L. Stafford. My Lords, I must acquiesce and submit to your Lordships to do what you please; but if he does not name times nor places, how can I make my Defence? I desire he may say positively within five days of the one or of the other; and, my Lords, I will put it upon that, if he say five days before the end of August, or five days in the beginning of September, which one would think is space enough, that is ten days time.
L. H. Steward. My Lords do observe how far Mr. Dugdale goes, and that he is no further positive than he does express himself. L. Stafford. I beseech your Lordships, I press this, because it concerns me very much, that he may be positive within five days over or under. Lord High Steward. Can you remember whether it were within five days of the one, or of the other? Mr. Dugdale. Truly my Lords, I cannot be positive, if I had not made a par∣ticular Remark upon that of the 20▪ or▪ the 21. I could not have remembred that; for I did not then intend to reveal the Plot, or else I could have given you satisfaction in that. Lord High Steward. My Lord, your Lordship hath an answer to it, he cannot speak more positively to it than he does. L. Stafford. I beseech you then how is it possible I can make my Defence? Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I kept no Journal: if I had I would be more positive. L. Stafford. He says it was the latter end of August, or the beginning of Septem∣ber, I desire he will say whether it was the last week in August, or the first week in September. L. H. Stew. He answers he cannot tell, your Lordship must make what advantage you can of that Answer. L. Stafford. I can make no advantage of it unless he does speak positively to the time. My Lords, I beseech you, I may know what is the end of August and the beginning of September? L. H. Stew. My Lord, I hear you not. L. Stafford. If a man says the beginning of June I was at such a place, how ma∣ny days is the beginning, and how many days the end of a Month? How much time will your Lordships understand the meaning of that to be? I am concerned extremely in the point of time, for it is that which the whole Business depends upon, I mean as to this man. L. H. Steward. My Lord, go on with your Evidence, I know not how to give you an Answer, what Judgment my Lords will make of it, or how much they will understand by it, till they are withdrawn, they observe how much you Lordship in∣sists upon it, and will hear what the worthy Gentlemen of the House of Commons will answer to it. L. Stafford. My Lords, my whole business with this Fellow is concerned in a positive Answer to this Question, I give him I think reasonable time to confine himself to. L. H. Stew. What say you to the 20. or 21. of September, my Lord? L. Stafford. My Lords, I shall give a clear Answer to that anon; but I am ex∣tremely concerned in this to know whether it was in August or September. L. H. Stew. My Lord, if your Lordship be concerned never so much at that, the Witness can swear no more than he can swear. He says about the latter
end of August, or the beginning of September; will your Lordship stand still for that? L. Stafford. Well then I will go on as well as I can; as for the matter of the 20. or 21. of September, I beseech your Lordships I may ask Dugdale one Que∣stion, whether at the Tryal of Sir George Wakeman, or the Five Jesuits he did not say the Consult was in August, if he deny it, I shall prove it. Lord High Stew. Mr. Dugdale, my Lord asks whether at the Tryal of Wake∣man, or of the Five Jesuits you did not say it was in August. Mr. Dugd. My Lords, I did name there was a Consult at Boscobel in August, but I do not remember that I did name my Lord Stafford in any Consult in August po∣sitively; but as I say now, the latter end of August or the beginning of September. But I did name that there was a Consult at Boscobel in August, (78.) L. Staff. My Lords, He did say I was at the Consult in August. Mr. Dugd. I did not say my Lord Stafford was there, I don't charge him in it, and if any such thing was printed I have wrong done me. L. Staff. Then he says he had nothing to do with me till the latter end of Au∣gust or the beginning of September. My Lords, I beseech your Lordships to ask him whether in Sir George Wakeman's Tryal he did not say, he was to receive Or∣ders from me in June or July, when I came into the Country. L. H. Stew. Did not you say at Sir George Wakeman's Tryal, that you were to receive Orders from my Lord Stafford in June or July, when he came into the Countrey? Mr. Dugdale. My Lord, I submit to your Lordship and the rest of my Lords here, whether when that Question was asked by my Lord Stafford, I did not say, That the first time I entred into correspondency with the Consulters, they told me, my Lord was to come down then, and I should receive Orders from him? I had heard of my Lord Stafford before, but not to enter into any Consults with him, till he came down, the latter end of that Summer. L. Staff. I beseech your Lordships pardon me, I desire him to answer positive∣ly, whether at the Tryal of Sir George Wakeman, he did not say, he was to receive Orders from me in June or July, when I came into the Country. L. H. Stew. Did you say so at Sir George Wakeman's Tryal? Mr. Dugdale. I believe I did say so, for I had it from others, and not my Lord Stafford himself. L. Staff. My Lords, in June or July I was not in the Country. L. H. Steward. He says, You were to come down, not that you did come down. L. Stafford. If you will let him do thus, there is no man safe, I shall begin the Tragedy and millions will follow. He swore at the Tryal of Sir George Wake∣man, or that of those other persons, That there was a Consult at my Lord Aston's at Tixal, where I was one, in August.
Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I did not swear so; but in August or September, or one of them, as now I swear. L. Stafford. I shall prove it by the Book, and Witnesses that were there. Mr. Dugd. Then they did me wrong by printing it, for I never said of your Lordship otherwise than I do now. L. Stafford I desire my Witnesses may be called to prove it, for I conceive it is very material. My Lords, does he deny it? Mr. Dugd. I do say there was a Consult▪ at Tixal in August, but I did not charge your Lordship positively to be there then, nor with more than I do now. L. Staff. I think you did, and I have witnesses to prove it. And 'tis impossible for any man living to defend himself, if persons shall swear as they suppose, think, or remember. I tell your Lordships, I was not there in all the month of August▪ L. H. Stew. Does your Lordship intend to call any Witnesses? L. Stafford. My Lords, I thought I had more Witnesses than I have. But I have two here, if your Lordships will hear them, that he did swear I was at Tixal in August. L. H. Stew. Who are they? L. Stafford. My Daughter Winchester for one, and a Lady that is my Kinswo∣man for another. L. H. Stew. Let them stand up, they are not to be sworn. You don't except against them, Gentlemen? Sir Will. Jones. No, let him prove what he can. Lady Marchioness of Winchester. He did swear that he was to receive his Or∣ders from— L. H. Stew. Madam, your Ladyship is not upon your Oath; but you are un∣der all the obligations of Truth and Honour in the world. Lady March. Winch. My Lords, by the Grace of God I will not speak an un∣true word. Sir Will. Jones. We desire to know this Ladies Name? L. Stafford. It is my Daughter Winchester. Lady March. Winch. This Stephen Dugdale, did say, at the Tryal of Sir George Wakeman, That he was to receive Orders from my Lord in June or July, when he was to come down; and that my Lord was at a Consult at Tixal in Au∣gust. L. H. Stew. Did he say positively in August, or in August and September. Lady March. Winch. No, he did not name September. Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I might say my Lord was to come down then, but not that ever I said he was there but as now. L. H. Stew. But she says, you did not name September. L. Stafford. Here is another Lady. Sir Will. Jones. Who is she, my Lord?
L. Stafford. Mrs. Howard, Daugher to Sir George lount, and married to Mr. Howard, a Kinsman of mine; she is now a Widow. Mrs. Howard. My Lords, at the Tryal of Sir George Wakeman, Dugdale was asked to be positive in the Month my Lord Stafford came down. And he said, he came down in June or July; but he said the Consult was in August, wherein my Lord Stafford was. L. H. Stew. That Lady likewise says the same, That you would not be positive as to June or July; but as to August you were positive that my Lord was there. Mr. Dugd. No, my Lords, I only said, in August there was a Consult, and in June or July my Lord was to come down. Mrs. Howard. I do assure you we came to that Tryal on purpose to observe every word he said about my Lord Stafford, and we have kept it in our memories ever since. L. H. Stew. What do you say, Mr. Dugdale, to it? Mr. Dugd. I suppose there was a great many more at that Tryal than these two worthy Ladies, and I suppose some of them may remember, I said no more than I do now. I said then, my Lord was to come down at that time, and so I said several times, but not positively that he was there till the end of August or the be∣ginning of September. L. Stafford. My Lords, I do positively averr, here are two Witnesses, that say, he swore, I was there at the Consult in August. Now it concerns me to prove, that I was not there in August, since he said absolutely I was there in August; and I as∣sure you I can prove I was not there not all the whole Month. In the beginning of August I came from London, from my own House; on Tuesday or Wednesday the 6. of August, I went to my Lord Bellasis's, and that night I went to George Por∣ters, the next night I went onwards towards Bath; when I was there I went over and staid with my Noble Lord, the Marquess of Worcester, there I staid two or three days, and I went thence to another place hard by there, and then I came back a∣gain to Bath, and went back again afterwards to my Lords House; and the first or second of September, I went from my Lords House to London. Then it this be acknowledged, I need say no more; if not, I'll prove it by sufficient Witnesses: So then I was not there the whole Month of August, and the beginning of Septem∣ber he says he spoke with me. I was not there till the 12. of September. Now I beseech your Lordships how that could possibly be the beginning of September. I submit to you, whether then he be a Witness fit to be heard, that shall sweat posi∣tively what hath no colour of truth in it, I also leave to you. And if they object I was not where I say I was in August, I will prove it. And for the 20. and 21. of September, I do own something of that, and I shall prove to your Lordships what it was. L. H. Stew. Call what Witnesses you please my Lord. L. Stafford. My Daughter proves when I went out of Town.
Lady March. Winch. My Lords, it was on a Tuesday my Father went to my Lord Bellasis, he dined there and then went on to George Porters. L. Stafford. That I was at Bath I shall call Witnesses. L. H. Stew. My Lord, you should prove when you first came to Tixal, my Lord Aston's. L. Staff. Will that satisfie your Lordship? L. H. Stew. Me; 'Tis not me you are to satisfie, but my Lords, and the Gen∣tlemen of the House of Commons. L. Staff. Then I do own to your Lordships, I came the first time the 12th. of September to Tixal. L. H. Stew. That was the first day you were there? L. Staff. That Year, my Lord, it was. Sir Will. Jones. Prove it. L. Staff. Does he deny that, my Lords? L. H. Stew. Do you deny that my Lord came first to Tixal the 12. of Septem∣ber? Or do you know he was there before? Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I have positively spoke to no day, but only to the 21. or 20. of September. L. Staff. Where is my Lord Marquess of Worcester's Servant? L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, it will be best for your Lordship to produce all the Witnesses you have, and not to leave any thing undone that you can prove. L. Staff. But I beseech your Lordships, I may ask one Question, if I shall name any of the House of Peers as my Witnesses, does that exempt them from being Judges? L. H. Stew. No, my Lord. If your Lordship have any Witnesses among any of my Lords here, they may very well testifie for you, and yet remain still in the capacity of your Judges: for my Lord of Strafford had a great many Witnesses that were Peers. Sir John Trevor. We do not oppose it, my Lords. L. H. Stew. My Lord call your Witnesses. L. Stafford There is no place appointed for them, and therefore I could not have them ready here; I have sent for them; I have a throng of them. L. H. Stew. They will open the way, and we will stay for them. L. Stafford. My Lords, I desire, that as Yesterday, when the Witnesses were sworn against me, mine did not hear what they said, so I desire when my Witnes∣ses come, theirs may not be present. L. H. Stew. My Lord, with your Lordships Pardon, it was not well done that your Witnesses were not there; but if Witnesses be to confront one another, shall they not hear what one another say? L. Stafford. My Lords, I am so clear in every thing, I will dispute no little mat∣ters. Then my Lords Witness stood up. Lord High Steward. What is this mans name you call now, my Lord?
L. Stafford. Indeed my Lord I▪don't know. Witness. My Name is Bonny, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Does your Lordship call this man? L. Staff. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. You are not upon your Oath, but you are to look that a strict ac∣count will be taken of what you say. Mr. Foley. My Lords, we desire to know where this Witness lives? Bonny. I live in Exeter-street, by Exeter Exchange. L. Staff. I declare it, I know him not, but I am told he can witness for me. L. H. Stew. Your Christian Name? Bonny. Thomas. L. H. Stew. What Profession are you of? Bonny. I live as Clerk of the Kitchin to my Lord Marquess of Worcester. Mr. Foley. What Religion are you of? Bonny. A Protestant, one of the Church of England. L. Staff. My Lords, I humbly move your Lordships, When I asked Mr. Smith the first day, where he was made a Priest, a Gentleman said, he was not bound to answer any thing against himself that might make him Criminal. I desire that the Question may not be put to my Witnesses what Religion they are of. L. H. Stew. The Gentleman will not offer to ask any Question that may make a man accuse himself; but my Lord, a Papist or not a Papist is not so penal as a Priest or no Priest. Mr. Foley. To acknowledge a mans self a Papist, is not to make him a Criminal. L. H. Stew. What does your Lordship call this Witness for? L. Staff. To prove when I was at my Lord Marquess of Worcesters. L. H. Stew. What say you, when was my Lord Stafford at my Lord Marquess of Worcesters? Bonny. In August (78.) L. H. Stew. Do you remember it perfectly? Bonny. Very well. L. H. Stew. What day of August? Bonny. The 17. of August, which my Lord Marquess keeps as his Wedding Day every Year, and the Gentlemen of the Country are invited thither. My Lord Stafford was then at Bath, and my Lord Marquess was pleased to send his Coach for him to be present there that day; there he staid that day and the next day, and then returned on Monday. And in the same month, the 31. of August, my Lord came again from Bath to Badminon, my Lord Marquess of Worcester's, and upon the Monday after returned for London. L. H. Stew. That was the beginning of September? Bonny. Yes, the 2. he went to London. L. H. Stew. Will you ask him Genlemen any Questions? Managers. No, my Lords. Lord High Steward. Call another Witness then. (who stood up.) L. H. Stew. What is this mans Name? Witness. Thomas. Witness. Thomas White. L. H. Stew. Thomas what?
L. H. Steward. Where do you live? White. I live with my Lord Marquess of Worcester at Badminton. L. H. Stew. What do you say? White. My Lords— Lord Marquess of Worcester. My Lord Steward, I have only this to say▪ my Lord Stafford desired that his Witnesses might not be asked what Re∣ligion they were of, but I desire all my Servants may be asked, for I keep none but Protestants. Lord High Steward. What Religion are you of? White. A Protestant. L. Stafford. My Lords, I did not require it for them; I know my Lord keeps none but Protestants, but I asked it for others of my Witnesses, that may come and be startled at it. L. H. Steward. What say you, when was my Lord Stafford at my Lord Mar∣quess of Worcester's House? White. The 17. of August (78.) I fetched him from Bath, being my Lords Wedding day. L. H. Stew. You fetched him? White. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. What place do you serve my Lord Marquess in? White. As Coachman. L. H. Stew. Was he there afterwards? White. Yes he was, but I can't remember the day, only this being a remark∣able day I can remember it. L. H. Stew. Did you carry my Lord from thence towards London? White. Yes, I did. L. H. Stew. When was that? White. The second of September to the best of my remembrance. L. H. Stew. Gentlemen, Will you ask him any Questions? Managers. No. L. Stafford. I think this is so clear, I shall not need to trouble your Lordships further with more Witnesses. L. H. Stew. Call whom you please, my Lord, and as many as you think fit, they shall be heard. L. Stafford. One more then, my Lords. (Who stood up.) L. High Stew. What is your Name? Witness. Richard Bevan. L. H. Stew. Who do you live with? Bevan. I am Groom to my Lord Marquess of VVorcester. L. H. Stew. What Religion are you of? Bevan. A Protestant.
Lord High Steward. Do you remember when my Lord Stafford was at the Marquess of Worcester's House? Bevan, Yes, I do. Lord High Steward. What time was it? Bevan. The 17. of August. Lord High Steward. Do you remember any other day? Bevan. No, my Lord, but he was there that day. L. H. Steward. Will you ask him any Questions? Managers. No, my Lords. L. Stafford. My Lords, if your Lordships please, I desire my Lord Marquess of Worcester may tell your Lordships, whether his men have said true or no. Lord Marquess of Worcester. My Lords, I do remember, that my Lord Staf∣ford was pleased to do me the Honour, to come upon my Wedding day from the Bath, and dine with me, as most Persons of Quality that are of my acquaintance, and happen to be at the Bath at that time, are pleased to do. And as most of the Gentlemen of the Countrey, within such a distance do also. (And that day is the 17. of August) I think he was there once or twice after, from the Bath, but I cannot tell precisely the days; but that particular day I remember, because it was my Wedding day. L. H. Steward. Can your Lordship remember when my Lord Stafford went to London? Lord Marq. of Worcester. Truly I cannot tell that, my Lords. L. H. Steward. Did you not after that, lend my Lord your Coach? Lord Marq. of Worcester. Yes, I did, to carry him as far as Sandy-lane, on the Road to London; but the particular day I remember not; but one of the persons examined (who was then my Clerk of the Kitchin) must needs know, because he books every day, who is in the House, and therefore I believe what he has said is true. L. Stafford. Stephen Dugdale I desire may come again. I conceive I have made it plain to your Lordships, That Stephen Dugdale did swear, that in August there was a Consult at my Lord Aston's, where I was, and I conceive it is also clear that in August I was not there; and then if it were the beginning of September, that could not be neither, for I came not down to Tixall till the 12. I beseech you to ask him when I offered him the Five Hundred Pounds to kill the King, I think he says it was the 20. or 21. Lord High Steward. What was the time my Lord offered you the Five hun∣dred pound? Mr. Dugdale. It was about that time, the 20. or 21. of September to my re∣membrance. Lord Stafford. He said positively before, it was one of those two days, I be∣seech your Lordship to ask him where it was?
L. H. Steward. Where was that offer made? Mr. Dugdale. In my Lords lodging chamber at Tixall. L. Stafford. Then one Question more, I desire you Lordship to ask him, what day the Race was at Etching-Hill, between Sir John Crew's man and Lazinby? Mr. Dugd. If it please your Lordship, I do conceive it was about that time. L. Stafford. I pray he may answer positively, for if you please I will tell you how it was. It is very true the 20. of September this fellow was in my chamber, and I shall trouble your Lordships with some little discourse about it, and my rea∣sons why: First, I beseech your Lordships to permit me to let you know, that this fellow did serve my Lord Aston in the quality of a Bailiff. And I never thought him to be an honest man, he was a mean Servant, and when the other Servants waited but till the second Course came in, he staid till the Coach-man and the Groom went to Dinner, and eat with them. I profess before God it is true as that the Sun shines, I have often and often, I cannot tell how many times, when I have been very dry at my Lords Table, and seen him by me, not called for Drink, I did detest him as so mean a Knave, that I often refused to take Drink at his hands. And now for me to offer this fllow five hundred pounds— L. H. Steward. I think your Lordship says he was Bailiff to my Lord Aston. L. Stafford. But I knew him to be an errant Knave, and a great Gamester at Races and such things. L. H. Steward. My Lord, would you have offered five hundred pounds to an honest man to kill the King? Mr. Serj. Maynard. You said you never saw him. S. Stafford. I said I had seen him, but now I did not know him by his Peruke. Lord High Stew. Did you not know him, my Lord? L. Stafford. No, my Lords, I profess I did not. L. H. Steward. Why your Lordship was a going to shew that the Race at Etch∣ing-Hill was upon the 2. of September, and your Lordship confesses, that he did speak with you on the 20. of September in your chamber; and Dugdale says, this day was the very offer made him of five hundred pounds to kill the King. What do you say Dugdale, were you at the Race? Mr. Dugd. Yes, I was with my Lord at the Race. Lord High Stew. Did my Lord speak with you before he went or after? Mr. Dugd. Before. L. H. Steward. That morning in his chamber▪ Mr. Dugd. Yes, it was that very morning, before he went to the Race. L. Stafford. I do own, my Lord, thus far, he was in my chamber that morning; but, my Lord, I can prove what I say to you. My Lords, that 20. of September in the morning, I was in my bed, and there comes a Servant of mine that hath served twelve or fourteen years, and he comes in to me, and says, Yonder is Stephen Dugdale very desirous to go to this Race; it seems he says he went along with me to this Race.
Mr. Dugdale. I say I went either before or after, or when you went to the Race, for I was with you at the Race. L. H. Steward. Whether he went with you, or no, is not the point, but whe∣ther he was in your chamber at that time. Lord Stafford. 'Tis the point, for he said just now, he went with me, as I apprehended him. But I tell your Lordships, my Servant came and told me, Stephen Dugdale desires that you will ask my Lord Aston leave that he may go before to the Race, my Lord is angry with him already for his medling in Races, and he dare not ask himself. My Lords, I was a little concerned in the Race, for I had betted some money, and I thought with my self, should I ask my Lord Aston leave for him to go▪ my Lord will not deny me, but perhaps will take it ill to be asked; so I was not over willing to do it. But I bid my Servant call him in, and when he came, I asked him some foolish Questions about the Race, as who he thought would win, and the like; but I told him I would get leave of my Lord for him. My Lords, I did go to my Lord Aston, and told him, My Lord I am sending my Servant before to the place of the Race, but I am afraid he does not well know the way, shall Stephen Dugdale go along with him? My Lord gave him leave to go; but, my Lords, I dressed me, and did not speak one tittle more to this Dugdale, but he went away before, and I was hardly or but just drest when he was gone. L. H. Steward. I pray, my Lord, was your Lordship at no time alone with him in your chamber? L. Stafford. No, never since I was born, never in all my life. Lord High Steward. No, my Lord! L. Stafford. He says my Servants use to come for him, I profess it is all false. Lord High Steward. What say you to that, Mr. Dugdale? Mr. Dugd. My Lords, I was in my chamber, and busie when my Lord sent for me that morning; and it was either by his Page or one that waits on him in his chamber; I went to my Lord, and the Page was in the chamber, and he ordered him to go out. L. Stafford. I declare and averr to your Lordships he was in the Hall or the next room and desired to come in. Lord High Steward. Where is the Page? L. Stafford. This fellow was but a poor Boy found at the Door, then he was a Thresher, and now a Witness for the King. (Then my Lord Stafford's man stood up.) L. H. Steward. What is your Name? Witness. My Name is Furnese. Lord High Stew. Do you remember the day of the Race at Etching-Hill? Furnese. Yes, I do, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Do you remember Dugdale was in your Lords chamber that morn∣ing. Furnese. Yes, I do.
L. H. Stew. Do you remember whether your Lord did bid you go out or no? Furnese. No, he did not. L. H. Steward. Were you there all the while Dugdale was there? Furnese. Yes, my Lords, I was. L. Stafford. Pray, my Lords, ask him whether I sent for Dugdale, or he desired to speak to . L. H. Steward. Did my Lord send for Dugdale, or did he come to you to speak to my Lord for him? Furnese. No, Dugdale spoke to me first. L. H. Steward. What did he say to you, pray? Furnese. My Lords, about eight or nine of the clock in the morning, I came to go to my Lords Chamber, and I came through my Lord Aston's Hall, and coming through, I met Mr. Dugdale coming to me, and said, he had one favour to desire of me. He said, he would fain go to the Race, but, said he, I do not know how to go, for my Lord is very angry with me, and if I should ask him, he would be worse, for he is displeased that I have medled so far in these matters already: Therefore I desire some means may be used that I may go, and I desire that you would speak to my Lord, to get leave for me to go; for Mr. Fox is there, and hath a great deal of money in his hands, and divers people will give mony to bett; and so it will be a great loss and prejudice to me not to go. So I did promise him, my Lords, and went into my Lords Chamber, and told him; and when I had spoke to my Lord, my Lord bid him come in, and when he came in, my Lord asked him several Questions about the Race; my Lord asked him what hopes he had, for he said, a great deal of money was laid by several people; he replyed, he could win, but he wanted money to bett; says my Lord, I will bett Twenty pound for Staffordshire sake though I were sure to lose. And then after some discourse to that purpose, my Lord told him, he would speak to his Lord. After my Lord was drest, he went out of his Chamber, and went to my Lord Aston, to ask him leave for Dugdale; and my Lord bid me make my self ready to go to the Race. About nine or ten of the clock I was ready to go, and coming down the back stairs, my Lord met me; go, says he, to Etching-Hill, and see what Bets there are, and take Stephen Dugdale with you to shew you the way, for I have asked his Lord leave for him to go. So Stephen Dugdale went along with me to the Stable, and took out his Horse; mine was not ready, but I over∣took him in half a mile, and it was eleven of the clock ere we were at Ridgley. I asked some questions about one Mr. Gerard; and I think about Twelve of the Clock we were at the Race, and I staid till One with him, and Mr. Fox, who was a party concerned in the Race, and there were several Betts laid; I was watchfnl when my Lord should come, lest he should want me: So I left them, and went to the Room where my Lord was to dine; and when I went to my Lord I left him betting. About 2 of the Clock the Lords and Gentlemen all went to Dinner (that were there) and when we had half dined,
betwixt two and three, Dugdale came in, and we ask'd him how the wagers went? he said he would bet Gold to Silver if he had it, but he had betted away all his Money. I know not how much. So there was a Gentleman that was Servant to my Lord Aston, one George Hobson by name, he lent him two Guineys and odd Money, and I lent him some forty or fifty Shillings out of my own Pocket, which I told him I would not lend unless he would give it me at the Hill again, before the Race began, because I was fearful my Lord should go to Stafford again, from my Lord Aston's that night. About 4 or 5 a Clock I went up to the Race, and demanded my Money, and he paid it me before the Race begun, and after the Race was done I lost him. My Lord went home, and I waited on him. This was about 5 or 6, and about the mid-way towards my Lord Aston's House he went into the Coach, and I got on Horseback, and we got home about 6 or 7 of the Clock as I suppose. But at night after Supper I enquired for Dugdale, how he took his loosings, and how he did after it? They told me he was gone to Bed, so I saw him no more that night. The next morning my Lord bid me come be∣times, for he would go to Stafford that morning, where we dined, at Mr. Abden's, and from thence took our way to go to my Lords own House. L. Stafford. Now, my Lords, if you please to ask this Boy, whether I bid him go and call Dugdale to me, and leave him there. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford did bid you, Mr. Furnese, go and dress your self, and make you ready for the Race, did you not leave Dugdale behind you in the Chamber when you went to dress your self? Furnese. No, my Lord, Dugdale was gone thence, and my Lord was gone too, before me to my Lord Aston's L. H. Steward. I still ask you the Question, (you are upon an Obligation ve∣ry great, as much as if you were upon your Oth) whether you were in my Lords Chamber before Dugdale came in, and staid till after he went out? Lord Stafford. And whether I bid him go out or no? Lord High Stew. Were you there before Dugdale went in? Furnese. He went along with me in, I conducted him in. Lord High Stew. Did you stay all the while Dugdale was there? Furnese. As near as I remember I staid there all the while. L. Stafford. Ask him positively, Furnese. Yes, my Lords, I was there all the while Dugdale staid, but I can∣not say positively how long it was. L. H. Steward. Mr. Dugdale, you are upon your Oath, he says he came in a∣long with you, and you went out of the Chamber before him, and he was there all the while you were there. Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I am not positive which of my Lord's Servants it was that came for me, but one it was. But when I came into the Chamber to my Lord, my Lord was getting up, and he charged them both to go sorth, and the Room was clear, and I saw no body.
L. Stafford, My Lords, ask my man. Furnese. My Lord never bid me go forth that day, nor any else in my life when any was in the room. Mr. Dugd. My Lords, if it please your Lordships, Mr. Furnese was pleased to say, I would bett Gold to Silver, but in that he was mistaken, for the odds was quite six to four against us. L. H. Steward. Well we are not upon the Race now, or the Wagers laid there. But, Gentlemen of the House of Commons will you ask this man any Questions? Sir Will. Jones. No, my Lords, we have none to ask. Sir Tho. Lee. We desire to know where he lives now, what Country-man he is, and what Religion he is of? L. H. Stew. Whom do you serve now? Furnese. My Lord Stafford. L. H. Stew. Do you live with him still? Furnese. Yes, I do, and have done this fourteen years. L. H. Stew. What Country-man are you? Furnese. A Dutch-man. L. H. Stew. Where born? Furnese. At Brussels. Sir Franc. Winn. We would ask him what Perswasion or Religion he is of. L. H. Stew. You may be sure of what answer you shall have. Furnese. I am a Roman Catholick. L. Stafford. That is as good as a Jew. Mr. Treby. The Question is not intended for any harm, not with any purpose to criminate him, 'tis only in regard of his Credit in this matter. L. H. Stew. Call another Witness, my Lord. L. Stafford. Where is George Leigh? (Who stood up) L. H. Stew. How old are you? Leigh. I am about fifteen or sixteen. L. Stafford. My Lords, I believe he is eighteen or nineteen. Mr. Treby. Whose servant is he? L. Stafford. He is my Servant, he hath served me seven or eight years. L. H. Stew. What does your Lordship call him for? L. Stafford, To tell you, whether I bid my Servants to go out when Dugdale came in, and whether ever he saw Dugdale and I alone. L. H. Stew. George Leigh, How long have you lived with my Lord Stafford? Leigh. Seven years the 10. of June last. L. H. Stew. Why then you were but nine years old when you came to him? Leigh. No, my Lords, I think I was not. L. High Stew. Do you remember when my Lord Stafford was at Tixall? Leigh. I do not remember the month very well. L. H. Stew. Do you remember the time of the Race at Etching-Hill? Leigh. I do not remember the day, but I was at it. L. H. Stew. Did Mr. Dugdale come into your Lords chamber that morning? Leigh. I do not remember he was there that very morning. L. Stafford. Be pleased to ask him, whether ever I bid him go out of my cham∣ber when Dugdale was there.
L. H. Steward. Did you ever see Dugdale any other morning in your Lords Chamber? Leigh. My Lords, I think not, I am not certain, he was there one morning and it was about a Race, but I am not certain what Race it was, whether it was two Boys ran or two Men. L. H. Steward. Did your Lord bid you go out of his Chamber? Leigh. No, my Lords. L. Stafford. Dugdale says, I often sent him for him, pray ask him that Question. L. H. Stew. My Lord, this Boy does not remember that Dugdale at all was at your Chamber that time of the Race at Etching-Hill; so that it is not material to the thing in question. L. Stafford. Yes, my Lords, Dugdale told your Lordships yesterday, that I sent this Boy often for him. L. H. Stew. Did ever this Boy come for you? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, he hath I am sure come to my Chamber for me to go to my Lord. L. H. Stew. Were you sent for by my Lord more than once? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, several times. L. H. Stew. Before or after the Race? Mr. Dugdale. Both before the Race and after the Race. L. H. Stew. By whom were you sent for? Mr. Dugdale. Sometimes by the Gentleman that was last examined, and some∣times by this Boy. L. H. Stew. Did you ever come from my Lord Stafford to bid Dugdale come to him? Leigh. My Lords, I do not remember that ever I did. L. H. Stew. 'Tis an hard thing to remember so long. L. Stafford, If ever he came once to me, and was alone with me, I will be content to acknowledge all this to be true. Pray ask the other man, if ever I sent him for him. L. H. Stew. He did testifie before, that he came with him that day to your Lordships Chamber. L. Stafford. That day, my Lords, But he says other days I sent for him. L. H. Stew. Call Furnese again. (Who stood up.) Furnese, did my Lord Staf∣ford ever send you for Dugdale, either before or after the Race? Furnese. Never, my Lords, to his Chamber. Lord High Stew. Did he ever in his life send you to Mr. Dugdale to speak with him as you remember? Furnese. Never, my Lords. L. Stafford. He was, my Lords, such a Fellow I could not endure he should come near me, such an Impudent lying Fellow. L. H. Stew. Have you any more Witnesses, my Lord. L. Stafford. Yes, a great many. L. H. Stew. Call them all, I pray. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I hope you think I would not be so great and im∣pudent a Fool to employ such a Fellow as this, who not long after run away from my Lord Aston's.
L. H. Steward. Who did? Lord Stafford. Stephen Dugdale. And for that, if you please, I would call some Witnesses. L. H. Stew. Call Furnese again. (who stood up.) Did you ever see Dugdale and my Lord Stafford together? Furnese. Never in my life. L. H. Stew. Why, you saw them together that morning you brought him to the Chamber. [Then the Auditory laughed. Furnese. Never alone. L. Stafford. I did not think I was in a Cock-Pitt, or a Play-House. But if your Lordships please to let me call my Witnesses to prove, That Dugdale ran a∣way from my Lord Aston, I shall call for that Thomas Sawyer. (Who stood up.) L. H. Stew. What is your Name? Witness. Sawyer. L. H. Stew. Your Christian Name? Witness. Thomas. L. H. Stew. Who do you live withall? Sawyer. My Lord Aston. L. H. Stew. Where do you live? Sawyer. At Tixall. L. H. Stew. Are you my Lord Aston's Servant? Sawyer. Yes. L. H. Stew. How long have you been so? Sawyer. Six years and ever since Michaelmas. L. H. Stew. What have you to say? Sawyer. As to Dugdale's reputation, I have this to say, How that he went from my Lord Aston's for debt, and was taken by the Watch at Heywood. L. H. Steward. When was that? Sawyer. The latter end of November or the beginning of December. L. H. Steward. What Year? Sawyer. (78.) L. H. Stew. Then the Family broke up. Sawyer. And coming thither, and being taken by the Watch, he was brought by the Justices to Tixall; and after the Justices had been with my Lord, their resolution was, to carry him to the Gaol. So coming to Tixal where Dugdale was, at an Ale▪house, he desired me to go to my Lord, and desire him that he would own him as his Servant, for he was so much in debt that he should else be un∣done for ever. In the mean time Mr. Philips the Parson of the Town had been with my Lord (for Dugdale had desired him to go to him also) and he asking me whither
I was going, said I, I am going to my Lord, from Dugdale, to desire him to own him as his Servant, said he, I have been with my Lord just now, and he said, he will not own him as his Servant; it was his own act and deed. So Mr. Philips and I came back to him, and told him. So he sat down in the Chair, and then rose up again, and swore, He would be revenged of my Lord Aston if ever it lay in his power. Lord High Steward. You never heard him say, he would be revenged of my Lord Stafford, did you? Sawyer. No, of my Lord Aston. Then another time, being at Stafford, he owed me Twenty nine Pounds, and he was under the Serjeants hands, and then he promised me from time to time he would pay me, and did not keep his word. This was three or four days before he begun to peach. He bid me come such a day, and he would pay me part of the money; and when I came thither, he told me, it was reported, That he should be a Peacher; and that there was a speech, how that he should have two hundred pounds for informing, that there were Fourteen Priests in the Country; but he takes a Glass of Drink, and Tho∣mas, says he, by God, I wish this may be my Damnation and my Poison, if I know of any Plot, or any Priests. L. H. Steward. Was not he a Papist then? Sawyer. I cannot absolutely tell that, whether he was or no. L. H. Steward. Do you know one Father Evers? Sawyer. My Lords, I have seen him. Lord High Steward. Hath he never been at Tixal? Sawyer. Yes My Lords, I have seen him there. L. H. Stew. And have not you seen Dugdale in his Company? Sawyer. Yes I have. L. H. Stew. Did not you at Tixal think Dugdale a stout able Fellow? Sawyer. No, he never was accounted to be so. L. H. Stew. Then I ask you, if you thought him an honest man, or a rich man? Sawyer. No, my Lords; for I'll tell you more than that, my Lord Aston em∣ployed him to be his Bayliff, and receive his Rents, and to pay Workmen their Wages, which he received every Saturday; aud my Lord Aston did Accompt with him, where he did set his hand to receive the poor Workmens Wages ac∣cording to their Bills, when they had not been paid some of them whole years, and half years, and quarters. And they came and cryed to my Lord, that they were not paid; and thereupon Dugdale did say, That one of them had demanded more of my Lord than was his due; for he said he had reckoned such a day with him, and paid him so much money; which man said he was not that day at Tixal, and so he hindred him of part of his money. L. H. Stew. Did you ever know that Dugdale did forswear himself? Sawyer. That I do not know, my Lords. I did hear he was concern'd in a
Race, about which there was a Tryal and a Dispute which had won. (This  have heard by report.) Sir Fr. Winn. Speak your own knowledge, not Reports. L. H. Stew. I ask you; do you remember the day when my Lord Stafford came to Tixal? Sawyer. He came on the 12. day of the month. L. H. Stew. What, September? Sawyer. Yes, the 12. of September. L. H. Stew. Did you ever see Dugdale in the Company of my Lord Stafford, while he was at Tixal? Sawyer. No, never in the House, but at the Race, he hath come into the Par∣lour. Mr. Treby. You had Discourse with Dugdale; you say he took a Glass and drank, and wished it might be his Poyson. Was not Father Evers that time at my Lord Aston's? Sawyer. Not as I know of, my Lords. Mr. Treby. Was he not commonly there? Sawyer. Yes. Mr. Treby. If he were, Mr. Dugdale must know it; and how then could he take a Glass and wish it were Poyson if he knew where any Priest was, since it was apparent he knew where that Priest was? 'Tis most improbable Mr. Dugdale should say thus! Sawyer, My Lords, this was three or four days e're he confessed any thing he knew of his knowledge. Mr. Treby. What Perswasion of Religion are you? Sawyer. Of the Church of England. Mr. Serj. Maynard. Pray, my Lords, ask him one Question; he says Dugdale went away from my Lord Aston's: was not there a speech of a Plot (at that time) that was discovered? Sawyer. Yes, that I heard. Sir Fr. Winn. My Lords▪ I would ask him one Question more: Was there no discourse of the Death of a Justice of Peace that was said to be killed in London about that time? Sawyer. To my best remembrance, as I heard, there was. Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, if your Lordships please that I should call Witnesses to confront him now, or afterwards? Sir Will. Jones. Not now; stay till your time comes. L. Stafford. Then call Philips. (who stood up.) L. H. Stew▪ What is your Name, Sir? Witness. Ralph Philips. L. H. Stew. What are you, a Clergy-man?
Mr. Philips. Yes. L. H. Stew. Are you beneficed? Mr. Philips. Yes, my Lord. L. H. Stew. Where? Mr. Philips. At Tixal, my Lord. L. H. Stew. You are a person that knows the Obligation that lies upon you to give a true Testimony; what can you say of Mr. Dugdale? Mr. Philips. My Lords, I have very little to say concerning Stephen Dugdale as to any thing of the Plot, but in reference to what he should relate concerning Mr. Sambidge and me in the Narrative which he deposed upon the Tryal of Sir George Wakeman: He said then he did receive a Letter concerning the death of Sir Ed∣mundbury Godfrey, which was dated the 12. of October, as I remember; and that he did communicate the Letter to Mr. Sambidge and me immediately the next Tuesday: Whereas I will assure you, my Lords, I never heard neither by Letter nor word of mouth from him nor any other, till it was publickly known. L. H. Stew. You did not live in my Lord Aston's house, did you? Mr. Philips. No, my Lords. Sir Will. Jones. We know not what he says; we desire to understand what he means. L. H. Stew. He takes notice that Dugdale at the Tryal of Sir George Wakeman did depose touching a Letter dated the 12. of October, which should come down to Tixal, intimating the death of Sir Edmnndbury Godfrey, and that he did com∣municate that with the Parson of Tixal and another; which Parson comes now to say, He did communicate no such a matter to him. Sir VVill. Jones. We desire to ask him whether he was present at that Tryal, and heard him say so? Mr. Philips. I was not present at the Tryal; but if the Narrative of the Tryal be truth, he did say so. L. H. Stew. So then you only come to disprove what is printed that Dugdale should say. Mr. Philips. Then I leave it to your Judgments, whether what he said in the Narrative of that Tryal, do concur with the Truth. L. Stafford. I desire then to ask him whether Stephen Dugdale did not run a∣way from my Lord Aston's, and would have him go to my Lord to own him for his Servant. L. H. Steward. What do you know of Dugdale's running away? Mr. Philips. I know nothing at all of that, my Lords. L. Stafford. Whether he did speak to him for his Servant when he was in the Justices hands. L. H. Stew. Can you say any thing touching the Credit of Dugdale? Mr. Philips. I have nothing to say concerning Dugdale's Credit.
L. H. Stew. Did you know him? Mr. Philips. Yes, ever since I came to Tixal? L. H. Stew. How long is that? Mr. Philips. About fourteen years. L. H. Stew. What Reputation had he in the Country? was he looked upon as one that would perjure himself? Mr. Philips. I never knew any thing of that. Lord High Steward. Was he thought a stout man? Mr. Philips. He was in good repute with some, and indifferent with others. L. H. Stew. Will you call any more Witnesses, my Lord? L. Stafford. I would only ask him one Question; Whether he did go to my Lord Aston from Dugdale, to know if he would own him for his Servant? Lord High Steward. What say you, Sir, did you? Mr. Philips. Yes, my Lords, he knows very well I did; he did request me to go to him. My Lord Aston I was loth to go to, because I had no familiarity with him, nor Interest in him; but he did request and urge me so much, that I did go by much motives and persuasions from him, and I did speak to my Lord; so I told him the Message I had was from Mr. Dugdale, who would request of my Lord that he would own him for his Servant; for if he did not, he knew not what to do with himself: but if he did, he might be free from the Gaol and from the Oaths, and escape the Troubles that were upon him. So my Lord replyed to me, 'Tis his own act and deed, and I have nothing to do with him, and let the Justices do what they will with him; which were Sir Walter Bagott and Mr. Kinnersley. Mr. Foley. We desire to know whether he heard any discourse about a Plot at that time, or no. Mr. Philips. Truly, my Lords, I heard a talk of a Plot, but not at that time. Mr. Foley. My Lords, I desire to know if he took Mr. Dugdale for a person that might be in the Plot, if there was any such thing. Mr. Philips. I cannot tell how to answer that, 'tis an hard Question; I am not so intimately acquainted with persons whose secrets are not reposed in me. L. Staff. The next Witness I desire may be (with the leave of the Gentlemen of the House of Commons) Sir Walter Bagott, I did desire him to be here. Sir Will. Jones. There he is, we do not oppose it. L. H. Stew. Is it your Lordships pleasure that Sir Walter Bagott be heard in his place? Lords. Yes. Sir Walter Bagott. L. H. Stew. What would you ask Sir Walter, my Lord? L. Staff. My Lords, I desire to ask Sir Walter Bagott, whether he did not ap∣prehend Dugdale, and upon what account it was? L. H. Stew. Sir Walter Bagott, my Lord desires to know of you, whether you did apprehend Dugdale, and upon what account?
Sir Walter Bagott. My Lords, Mr. Dugdale was taken at an unseasonable time of night and brought to me the next morning by the Watch, as the other Witnesses have told your Lordships, and I took him away to Stafford, where there were several other Justices of the Peace; there we offered him the Oaths of Allegiance and Su∣premacy, which he took. After the taking of these Oaths, we told him, that he was a likely man to know something of the Plot, and it was a very proper time for him to discover it to us that were Justices: he at that time did deny the knowledge of it, that is all I can say. Lord Stafford. I desire Sir Walter Bagott may be asked whether he did not go to my Lord Aston, to see whether he would own Dugdale as his Servant. L. H. Stew. Did you ask my Lord Aston to own him for his Servant. Sir Walt. Bag. Yes, I did: for my Lords house being in the way to Stafford, whi∣ther I was going, I called upon him to know if Mr. Dugdale were his Servant: he told me he was no servant of his, and he would not receive him: Upon which I and another Justice of the Peace that was with me, took him to Stafford. The occasion of our meeting there, was to summon in the Militia, upon an Alarm of the Papists being risen in Derbyshire. L. Stafford. I make this use of it, my Lords, that my Lord Aston would not re∣ceive him: and if my Lord Aston had known he had been in the Plot, and could have discovered him, he would not have disobliged him. L. H. Stew. Nay, he says more then that, which you don't hear, he says when they examined him, they gave him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and then told him he would do well to discover his knowledge of the Plot? and then he did not own any thing he knew? nay, he denyed it. Mr. Foley. Did he deny the knowing of it. Sir Walter Bagott. Yes, he did then. Sir Fran. Win. He was not resolved to discover at that time. Mr. Serj. Maynard. We desire Sir Walter Bagott may be asked whether he ex∣amined him upon his Oath or no. Sir Walter Bagott. No, I did not. Mr Serj. Mayn. But had they then just given him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? Sir Walter Bagott. Yes, my Lords, we gave him those Oaths, and those only. L. Stafford. Then Mr. Kinnersley, if you please, (who stood up) Be pleased to ask this worthy Gentleman what he knows about Dugdales going from my Lord Aston. L. H. Stew. First let us know this Gentleman. L. Stafford. His name is Kinnersley. Mr. Kinnersley. What Questions would your Lordship ask me? L. Stafford. What you know about Dugdales going from my Lord Aston. L. H. Stew. Mr. Kinnersley, we must know your Christian Name. Mr. Kinnersley. Thomas.
L. H. Stew. Do you know Mr. Dugdale? Mr. Kinnersley. My Lords, I was not acquainted with Mr. Dugdale, till Sir Brian Broughton, Sir Walter Bagott, and I and others gave him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, the latter end of November, or the beginning of December; I did not take notice exactly of the time. L. H. Stew. What year? Mr. Kinnersley. (78) L. H. Stew. Well, Sir, go on. Mr. Kinnersley. When he had taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Suprema∣cy, I asked him if he knew any Treason or Conspiracy against the King, tel∣ling him it was a seasonable time to declare it. He told me he knew of none. This is all I know, and all the discourse that I remember we had with Mr. Dug∣dale. Mr. Serj. Maynard. Pray why did you ask him that Question? Mr. Kinnersley. The Plot was then newly broken out. Mr. Serj. Maynard. Why did you ask him so particularly? Mr. Treby. Why did you think Mr. Dugdale concerned in it? Mr. Kinnersley. Because we heard he was a Papist, and my Lord Aston's Ser∣vant. L. Staff. Then I desire Sir Thomas Whitegrave may be examined. (Who stood up.) L. H. Stew. What say you to Sir Tho. Whitegrave, my Lord? L. Staff. Will your Lordships please to ask Sir Tho. Whitegrave, whether he did not examine Dugdale about the Plot, and what he said at that time? Sir Tho. Whitegrave. My Lords I came to Stafford the latter end of Novem∣ber, or the beginning of December, I am not certain which, but I think it was this time two years. The Deputy-Lieutenants met about the Militia of the County. They told me that Mr. Dugdale was in Town, and was under an Arrest: the occasion of his coming to Town, was his refusal of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy▪ which he had since taken. I proposed to them the sending for him, for I thought this was a fit opportunity to get something of him about the Plot. They seemed to approve of what I said; but withal, I told them it was not good to send for him till the Evening late, that the people of the Town might not take notice of his coming. At night we did send for him, and the Gentlemen desired that I would examine him at the end of the Table: so I cal∣led him up, and told him, I was sorry he was fallen into that misfortune to be Arrested, and that Mr. Mayor had not dealt well with him or us to take that ad∣vantage of him: that now he had taken the Oaths, I looked upon him as one of us, and would do him any kindness I could. He said, truly for his part, he was born a Protestant, and of Protestant Parents; and it was his misfortune to fall into the Houses of Papists, but he never liked their Religion. I then told him, Sir you may do your self a kindness, serve God and oblige your King and Country: I
am very confident you know of this horrid Plot; pray do not stifle your Conscience with any Oath of Secrecy, but let it come out. Many I told him, strained their Consciences to serve their Interests, but you may clear your Conscience, and at the same time promote your true Interest. He replyed, as he hoped to be saved he knew nothing of it. And this is as much as I know of the matter. L. H. Stew. Do you ask him any Question, Gentlemen? Managers. No, my Lord. L. Staff. My Lords, I shall humbly move your Lordships now, that you will please to take notice, this fellow, Dugdale, hath endeavoured to perswade peo∣ple to Swear against me falsly, and offered them money for it. In order to the proof of which, I desire your Lordships would call John Morrall, Samuel Holt, and William Robinson. Then Robinson stood up. L. Staff. This man I never saw before in my life. L. H. Stew. What is your name? Witness. Robinson. L. H. Stew. What is your Christian Name? Robinson. William. L. H. Stew. Where do you live? Robinson. In Worcestershire now. Lord H. Stew. With whom? Robinson. With my self now. L. H. Stew. Do you know Dugdale? Sir Fr. Winn. We desire he may give you an account what Profession he is of. Robinson. An Upholster. Sir Fr. Winn. How long he hath lived in Worcestershire, and in what place there? Robinson. I have lived half a year in Worcestershire half a mile beyond Worcester. Sir Franc. Win. And whether he follows that Trade or Profession now or no? Robinson. No, I do not follow it now. Sir Fr. Winn. What do you live upon, and how? Robinson. I live of my self now. L. H. Stew. How is that? Robinson. Of my own Money. Mr. Hambden. We desire to know whether this man was a Servant to my La∣dy Gerard or no. Robinson Never. Mr. Hambden Or to my Lord Gerard of Gerards Bromley. Robinson. Never, not an hired Servant, my Lords. Mr. Foley. Were you a volunteer Servant, or what were you? Mr. Treby. Did you work at any time there for my Lord or Lady Gerard? Robinson. No.
L. H. Stew. How came you to live there? Robinson. I went over from a Cocking out of Cheshire. L. H. Stew. How long were you there? Robinson. Three weeks or a month. L. H. Stew. What was your Employment there? Robinson. Nothing at all, I followed no Employment. Mr. Treby. What kind of servant were you then? L. H. Stew. Come, do you know Dugdale? Robinson. Yes. L. H. Stew. How long have you known him? Robinson. I have known him about five years. L. H. Stew. What say you to him? Robinson. I say, I met Mr. Dugdale about Midsummer was twelve-month in London, about Charing-Cross, and he carried me to the Harp and Ball, and gave me Beer and Mum, and such as the House did afford, and treated me, and asked me what made me so dejected and cast down. I told him I was not well, I was poorer than I used to be. He told me again, I should not want any money that he had; and if I would please to be ruled by him, and do what he would have me, he would furnish me with money. And he took his Handkerchief out of his pocket, and bid me, if I wanted, take money there. I took none, but told him, I would not meddle nor make with any thing that night. Then he told me he could furnish me with money, and put me in a way to get money, if I would come in as an Evidence against my Lord Stafford. L. Stafford. Be pleased to ask him, for I never saw the man before, nor heard of him till last week, what he should say against me, and whether he knew me or not? L. H. Stew. Did he tell you what you should say against my Lord Stafford? Robinson. Nothing at all, my Lords. L. Staff. Did he say any thing or nothing? Or did he ask whether he knew me or not? L. H. Stew. Did you tell him you knew my Lord Stafford? Robinson. No, if it please you, I told him I did not know him. L. H. Stew. And after you said you did not know him, he offered you money to swear against him. Did he? Robinson. Yes, my Lords, he did so, to come in as an Evidence against him. L. Staff. Will your Lordships please to ask how much money there was in the Handkerchief? L. H. Stew. How much money was in the Hankerchief? Robinson. I believe there might be eight, or nine, or ten pounds. L. H. Stew. Did he offer you all the money, or bid you take some? Robinson. He bid me take some.
L. H. Stew. Did he make any agreement with you for what yon should take? Robinson. No, not at all, my Lords. Mr. Foley. Did he see Dugdale any more, or was there an end of it then? Robinson No, I saw him no more. L. H. Stew. Will you ask him any more Questions? Sir W. Jones. We shall have occasion to speak of him (we desire he would not go away) when our time comes. (Then another Witness stood up.) L. H. Stew. What is your Name? Witness. John Morrall. L. H. Stew. What are you? Morrall. A Barber. L. H. Stew. Where do you live? Morrall. At Ridgley. L. H. Stew. Where is that? Morrall. In Staffordshire, within six miles of Stafford. L. H. Stew. What do you ask him? L. Stafford. Whether Dugdale did not perswade him to swear against some of the Lords in the Tower? L. H. Stew. Do you know Dugdale? Morrall. Yes, my Lords, I have known him twelve or thirteen years. L. H. Steward. What can you say against him? Morrall. My Lords, this Mr. Dugdale, the 6. of August last was twelve-month, sent for me to the White Horse in Ridgley, and there when I came to him, he told me I knew as much of the Plot as he. I told him I was innocent of the thing; he swore God damn him, that I knew as much as he: Then I told him, if he knew no more than I did, he knew no more than my Lord Mayor's great Horse did. Then he took me aside; Come, says he, you are a poor man, and live poorly; I can put you in a way whereby you may live gallantly; I will give you 50 l. in hand, if so be you will do so and so, and 50 l. more when the thing is done. L. H. Stew. What do you mean by so and so? Morrall. To swear against Mr. Howard, Sir James Symons, and several other Gentlemen of the Country. L. H. Stew. Did he offer you any mony to swear against my Lord Stafford? Morrall. No, I did not hear him mention any thing of him. L. H. Stew. But he offered you mony to swear against Symons and Howard? Morrall. Yes, my Lord; and Herbert Aston my Lord Aston's Kinsman. L. H. Stew. What were you to swear? Morrall. That they were at such a Meeting at Mr. Herbert Aston's upon the Conspiracy of the Plot. L. H. Stew. Will you ask him any thing? Managers. No, set him by.
Then another Witness stood up. L. H. Steward. What is your Name? Witness. Samuel Holt. L. H. Stew. What Profession are you? L. Stafford. Pray, my Lords, ask him whether Dugdale would perswade him to swear that which he knew not. L. H. Steward. What Profession are you of? Holt. A Protestant of the Church of England. L. H. Stew. What Trade? Holt. A Blacksmith. L. H. Stew. Where do you live? Holt. At Tixal. L. H. Stew. Are you my Lord Aston's Servant? Holt. No, my Lords. L. H. Stew. What say you? Holt. My Lords, he sent a man and a Horse for me to Stafford to the Star.— L. H. Stew. Who did? Holt. Mr. Dugdale did. And there I waited upon him a good while. At length he came and told me he must speak with me privately; so he told me if I would swear that VValter Moor carried Evers away, he would give me 40 l. And he bid me not be afraid to swear for fear of my Lord Aston; for he would hire me an Horse and get me to London, and place me, that where I got one shilling I should g et five. L. H. Stew. Did you know Evers Holt. Yes, my Lords, I have seen him. L. H. Stew. Do you know when he went away from Tixal? Holt. No, my Lords. L. H. Stew. What else can you say? Holt. Nothing else, L. H. Stew. Will you ask him any Questions, Gentlemen? Managers. No. L. Stafford. T' e next thing I go upon is, that Stephen Dugdale at the Tryal of the five Jesuits, swore, That he acquainted Sambidge with the Letter about the death of Sir Edmundbury Godsrey the Munday or Tuesday after; which Mr. Sam∣bidge denies. And in order to that, I call Mr. Sambidge; but if your Lordships please, I shall first prove that h swore it then. Where is Mr. Lydcott? (who stood up.) I desire to ask him whether Dugdale did swear at the Tryal of the five Jesuits, that he acquainted Mr. Sambidge with the Letter about the death of Sir Edmund∣bury Godfrey. L. H. Stew. You fellow. Witness. My Lord.
L. H. Stew. What is your Name? VVitness. John Lydcott. L. H. Stew. How do you live? Lydcott. I am a Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge. L. H. Stew. What do you come to say? Lydcott. I don't know, my Lords; what my Lord will ask me. Sir VVill. Jones. My Lords, before you enter into the examination of this man, we desire to ask him a Question or two. Mr Serj. Mayn. Whose Servant are you, or were you lately? Lydcott. I am Fellow of Kings Colledge. Mr. Serj. Maynard. But whom did you serve lately? were you never Secretary to a Lord? Lydcott. Yes, I was. Mr. Serj. Mayn. To what Lord? Lydcott. To my Lord Castlemain, Sir. L. H. Stew. What Religion are you of? Lydcott. Of the Church of England, and always was; nay I can't say always, for I was bred up a Presbyterian: my Father was a Colonel under Monk. L. Stafford. Mr. Lydcott. I ask whether you did not hear Mr. Dugdale swear at the Tryal of the five Jesuits. Mr. Serj. Mayn. I desire one favour, my Lords; my Lord Stafford asks Que∣stions to lead the Witness; pray let him ask his Questions more generally. L. H. Stew. You say you are a Protestant. Lydcott. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. When did you last receive the Sacrament? Lydcott. When I was last at Cambridge.—No not so; for it is not above a year ago that I was there. L. H. Stew. When then did you receive the Sacrament? Lydcott. I do not exactly remember, my Lords. L. H. Stew. My Lord, I would be glad to know what is the Question your Lordship calls him for, that your Lordship may not ask the Question but by me. L. Stafford. My Lords, I desire to know (for my part I know not what his Answer will be) whether he did hear at the Tryal of the five Jesuits, Dugdale swear he had communicated the news of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's death, which was on the Saturday, on the Tuesday after to any people, and to whom. L. H. Stew. Were you at the Tryal of the five Jesuits? Lydcott. Yes, I was. L. H. Stew. Did you hear Dugdale swear there, and give his Testimony? Lydcott. Yes, I did. L. H. Stew. Do you remember what Dugdale swore then? Lydcott. Very well.
L. H. Steward. What was it? Lydcott. My Lords, Mr. Dugdale spoke of a Letter that came down to my Lord Aston's on the Munday, and he imparted it on the Tuesday after, at an Ale∣house, to one Mr. Sambidge and Mr. Philips; This was also at Sir George Wake∣man's Tryal, which I took notice of more particularly, because I had occasion to take some Notes there. L. H. Stew. What use do you make of this, my Lord? L. Stafford. If that be allowed to be so, then I will call no more Witnesses, o∣therwise I have more. L. H. Stew. Call them all. Lord Stafford? Then call Mr. Charles Gifford. Mr. Serj. Mayn. Pray, my Lords, give me leave to ask this young Scholar one Question before he goes; By whose commendation or means did you come into that Colledge? Lydcott. By Election from Eaton. Mr. Serj. Mayn. Who promoted you? Lydcott. One Mr. Doyley, now Senior Fellow of Kings Colledge; it was his Election. Sir Fran. Winn. My Lords, I would ask him one Question. He says he went to take Notes; by whose direction did he go to take Notes at Sir George Wake∣man's Tryal? Lydcott. It was for my own curiosity. L. H. Stew. Friend, 'tis all one as if you were upon your Oath, and as penal to you; by whose direction did you go? Lydcott. It was partly my own curiosity, and partly to see what Evidence was against my Lord; for my Lord Castlemain thought himself concerned as well as others, and therefore desired me to go. Sir Fr. Winn. Now it is out. Sir W. Jones. It was done like a Secretary. L. H. Steward. Had you ever that curiosity before? Lydcott. Yes, I'll assure your Lordships, I had a great curiosity to hear it. L. H. Stew. Were you at any other Tryal? Lydcott. Yes, at the five Jesuits Tryal, and Langhorns. Then another Witness stood up. L. H. Steward. What is your Name? Witness. Charles Gifford. L. Stafford. Ask him whether he did not hear at the Tryal of the five Jesuits, or Sir George Wakeman, Dugdale say, that he did communicate that Letter to some people, I name not who, the Tuesday after? L. H. Stew. Were you at the Tryal of the Five Jesuits? Gifford. Yes, my Lords.
L. H. Stew. Did you take Notes? Gifford. Yes, my Lords, I was summoned there as an Evidence; I had occasion of being there, both at the Five Jesuits Tryal, and VVakemans and Langhorns. L. H. Stew. You took Notes you say? Gifford. Yes I did. L. H. Stew. What do you remember that Mr. Dugdale did then swear? Gifford. I remember at the Five Jesuits Tryals, he did swear he received a Let∣ter sent to Evers which he intercepted, and it spoke of the death of a Justice of Peace; and he returned Answer to Evers again, he would be hanged if it did not spoil the business. And he said farther, he could not hold, but went to an Ale∣house, and there he did impart it: but then he did say there was one that could te∣stifie and make out what he said; upon which, he called Mr. Chetwyn, who de∣posed much to the same purpose. And then at Sir George VVakemans Tryal he did positively declare, that he spoke of it at an Alehouse to a Minister, Parson Phi∣lips, and my Lord Aston's Kinsman. L. H. Steward. What is his Name? Gifford. Mr. Sambidge. L. Stafford. Well, my Lords, I have no more to say to him; but I conceive by this 'tis plain that Dugdale did then say, he had communicated it to Mr. Philips and Mr. Sambidge. I shall call Mr. Sambidge to g ve you an account. Mr. Sambidge stood up. L. Stafford. Be pleased to ask him whether he did hear Mr. Dugdale say on the Tuesday, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered the Saturday before. L. H. Stew. You hear the Question▪ answer it. Mr. Sambidge. Who must I speak to? L. Stafford. He is very deaf and very old, my Lords. Then the Black Rod was sent to be near him, to put the Question to him. Black Rod. What would you have hm asked my Lord? Lord Stafford. Whether Mr. Dugdale did tell him on the Tuesday, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered the Saturday before. Black Rod. Did Mr. Dugdale tell you of the Tuesday, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered the Saturday before? Mr. Sambidge. No, my Lords, he never told me any such thing, I take it upon my salvation. I never heard it till Friday or Saturday he was found at Bury hill. Lord Stafford. Ask him if he were with Dugdale at the Alehouse the Tuesday before. Mr. Sambidge. Dugdale never spoke any such thing to me. L. H. Stew. Were not you with him at the Alehouse? Mr. Sambidge. No. L. H. Stew. Not on Munday? Mr. Sambidge. No.
Lord H. Stew. Nor on Tuesday? Mr. Sambidge. No. L. H. Stew. Nor Wednesday? Mr. Sambidge. Not as I know of. Sir W. Jones. We shall prove he was. L. Stafford. Pray ask him what Reputation Dugdale hath in the Country? Mr. Sambidge. Oh the wickedst man that ever lived upon the face of the earth; I know great part of it my self, and a hundred and a hundred of people will say as much. L. H. Stew. What Religion are you of? Mr. Sambidge. I was never a Papist in my life, nor ever a Phanatick. L. H. Stew. What do you know of Dugdale in particular that is ill? Mr. Sambidge. Yes, my Lords, I'll tell you, he was a very abusive man, espe∣cially to the Clergy and most especially to Mr. Philips, with whom I boarded. My Lord Aston that is dead, came and told me of it. Said I, You are misinformed, for this Dugdale is a Knave & a Rogue, and all the Countrey ring of him for his wicked∣ness; upon which he cites me into Litchfield Court for defaming him, and he en∣tertains all the Proctors, that I could not get one to put in my Answer: but be∣fore the day came he discharged the Court, and never appeared; for we had that against him that he durst not appear. L. H. Stew. What particulars do you know? Mr. Sambidge. He said the Clergy of England was a lewd Clergy, and a pack of Rogues. L. H. Steward. Gentlemen of the House of Commons, will you ask him any Question? Managers. No. L. H. Stew. Hath my Lord no more to say to him? L. Staff. No, my Lords. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, go on; hath your Lordship done with Dugdale, or have you any more Witnesses? L. Staff. No, my Lords, I have a great deal more to say to him. L. H. Stew. Go on then. L. Staff. My Lords, I conceive by this, 'tis proved to your Lordships, that Dugdale did at that Tryal declare, he had acquainted Mr. Sambidge and Mr. Phi∣lips with the Letter about the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, the Tuesday af∣ter he was murdered. And I conceive I have proved to your Lordships, by their denying it, that he did not tell them so; and so he is forsworn in that. I should now have humbly desired your Lordships, that you will please to call William Day: but upon asking the Question, I find he is not yet come to Town, and so I shall not trouble your Lordships with him, I desire that Thomas Sawyer may be called again. (Who stood up.)
L. Stafford. Pray be pleased to ask him, whether he did not hear Dugdale wish he might be damned, if he knew any thing of the Plot. L. H. Stew. He said that before. L. Stafford. Then I beg your Lordships pardon, I shall not call him again. L. H. Stew. Go on, my Lord. L. Stafford. My Lords▪ there are a great many other Witnesses which I could call; but it is to no purpose, and so I shall call no more as to Dugdale. I conceive upon the whole matter, his Reputation and Credit are gone, for he is forsworn be∣fore the Justices of Peace, in that he said there was no Plot, and wished he might be damned if he knew of any Plot. I conceive 'tis also proved, that upon the Twentieth of September, when, he says, I did communicate with him about the Kings Death, he was only then with me upon his own desire, and my servants were by; there was nothing discoursed of, but about the Foot-Race. And likewise as to what he swore in August, that I was at such a meeting at Tixal, he is forsworn, for I was not there; and so I hope that Witness is laid aside, no Creature will give any Credit to him, neither your Lordships, nor the House of Commons. L. H. Stew. Have you done with Mr. Dugdale? L. Stafford. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Whom will you proceed against next? L. Stafford. Dr. Oats. L. H. Stew. Call Dr. Oats. L. Stafford. Only give me leave to say one thing, my Lords, that you were pleased to say, I should have Copies of the two Depositions of the Twenty fourth and Twenty ninth of December. And I had one to inquire, but can't find that of the Twenty ninth. Then Dr. Oats stood up. L. H. Stew. What say you to Dr. Oats, my Lord? Lord Stafford. This Dr. Oats▪ if your Lordships please, I desire may be asked when was the first time he ever saw me in his life. L. H. Steward. When was the first time, Dr Oats, you saw my Lord Stafford? Dr. Oats. My Lords, the first time I saw this Gentleman at the Bar, was, as near as I remember, at Mr. Fenwicks. L. H. Stew. That was in Drury▪lane? Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. When was that? Dr. Oats. That was, as near as I remember, in June? L. H. Stew. Was it that time the Commission you spoke of was delivered? Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Did you see that Commission? Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Did you read it?
Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. From whom was it? Dr. Oats. I cannot be positive as to that; but as near as I remember, it was signed as the rest was signed. L. H. Stew. How was that? Dr. Oats. Johannes Paulus Oliva. L. H. Stew. You read it? Dr. Oats. Yes I did, my Lords. L. H. Stew. It was a Commission to be Pay-Master of the Army, was it not? Dr. Oats. Yes, it was. L. H. Stew. And it was delivered to my Lord? Dr. Oats. Yes, it was. L. H. Stew. By the Name of Mr. Howard of Effingham? Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. What says your Lordship to this? L. Stafford. What is it possible for me to say against this? I declare to your Lordships in the presence of God, I never saw the man in my life; I never went by any Name, since I had the Honour of being a Peer, but by the name of Staf∣ford; I never heard of Mr. Fenwick the Jesuit, nor by the name Thompson, till this Plot was discovered, and he taken. This you may believe, or not, if you please; but this is as true as I am alive. My Lords, I desire I may have out of the Journals the Deposition on which I was committed. L. H. Stew. Turn to the Journal. L. Stafford. It was read, as I remember, Friday 25. Octob. (78.) Then the Clerk turned to the Journal, and read. Die Veneris 25. die Octobris, 1678. THe Lord Viscount Stafford acquainted the House, That he was in∣formed that there was a Warrant issued out from the Lord Chief Ju∣stice of England to apprehend him; which he thought fit to acquaint their Lord∣ships with, and submitted himself their Lordships Judgment. The Lord Chief Justice (being present) was commanded to give the House an account of the business; who said, That last night about nine of the clock he re∣ceived a Letter from the Speaker of the House of Commons, dated from the Speak∣ers Chair, to come to the House of Commons about business of great concernment. Accordingly he attended the House of Commons; where the Speaker told him, that the House of Commons had receiv'd Accusations of High Treason against five Lords and some Gentlemen, and desired him to issue out his Warrants for their
Apprehension. The Persons were, the Earl of Powis, Viscount Stafford, the Lord Arundel of Wardour, the Lord Petres, and the Lord Bellasis. And upon this he issued out his Warrants for their Apprehension, having taken the Exami∣nation of Titus Oats upon Oath. That the Earl of Powis and the Lord Arundel were brought to him this morning in custody, and he advised them to render them∣selves to the Gatehouse, where now they are. Upon this the Examination of Oats was read; whereby it did appear, That the Lord Viscount Stafford was charged to be in a Conspiracy of Treason against the King. The Lord Viscount Stafford denyed the Fact, and after this, withdrew. And after a while the House was informed that his Lordship would render himself to the Lord Chief Justice. L. H. Stew. This is all that is in the Journal. L. Stafford. Then my Lords, if your Lordships please to remember, all of you that were there, that I was accused by Dr. Oats, whose Depositions I desire to see, taken before my Lord Chief Justice, that he had seen Letters of mine written to Fenwick, Harcourt, and some others, three or four Jesuits, in which I was consenting to the Plot, that I had sent my Son to Lisbon, yet I would be as kind to the Jesuits as before, though there was some difference between us. These Affidavits I desire to see, which as I take it were read before your Lord∣ships that day. L. H. Stew. The Affidavit was taken by my Lord Chief Justice in the House of Commons, where he did attend them upon their Summons: I know not if the Original were read in the House of Lords or the Copy; but it seems it is not entred into the Lords Journal, but your Lordship had an Order to take Copies of all things you would have demanded, and if you would not, I cannot tell what to say to it. L. Stafford. Truly I could not take a Copy, because I did not know where it was. I desire my Lord Chief Justice may be asked where it is, that is all I desire, and I will then go on. L. H. Stew. I think Dr. Oats does say at this time, that he had seen Letters of your Lordships, offering your Correspondence and Assistance. L. Stafford. If Dr. Oats will own he said no more than is in that Affidavit, I am content. Lord High Steward. Have you any Copy of your own Examination Doctor Oats? Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lords, I think I have it here. L. H. Stew. Marry, that is very well, produce it then. Do you oppose it Gentlemen? Managers. No, we agree, we desire the Truth may come out. Then Dr. Oats looking amongst his Papers drew out one, and offered it to the Court.
L. H. Stew. Is that a true Copy of your first Examination? Dr. Oates. My Lords, I will not swear it, but it was given me for a true Copy. L. H. Stew. By whom was it given you? Dr. Oates. I can't remember now, 'tis two years ago. Sir W. Jones. Unless we know whence it comes, or what authority it hath, we cannot consent it should be read. L. H. Steward. Had you it from my Lord Cheif Justice, or any servant of his? Dr. Oates. I can't tell whether Sir Charles Harbord gave it me or no. Sir Fr. Winn. My Lords, Sir Charles Harbord might be of the Committee of Examinations, but the Examination for which my Lord asked was not in the Committee nor before the house. My Lord chief Justice retired out of the house & Virtute Officii took it. Now it was very fair in Mr. Oates to produce it, but yet in point of Evidence, if he will not swear it to be a true Copy, or give an account how he came by it, we cannot allow it to be read. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, 'Tis you that want this Paper, you desire to have the benefit of the Examination that was taken of Mr. Oates, and therefore you must produce a Copy of it. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I could never get it. L. H. Stew. 'Tis not entred in our Journal, nor is it to be traced, we know not where it is. You have had time enough to look after it. You are now offered by Oates himself a Copy that was given him for a true Copy, though he can't swear by whom. Are you content that shall be read, if the Gentlemen will admit it? Lord Stafford. By what I guess of Dr. Oates, (I know him not) he would not give in a Copy of an Examination unless it were true, if it be true I know not what should hinder the reading of it; but as far as concerns me I desire it may be read. L. H. Stew. You do Consent, and will you Gentlemen permit it? Mr. Serjeant Maynard. We do not know whence it comes, we can't admit it unless Oates says 'tis true. Sir William Jones. My Lords, it hath been long in the Doctors possession, he hath read it over, he can't say 'tis a true Copy, but I desire to ask him whether all in that writing be true? and whether he did swear what is in that writing? L. H. Stew. If your Lordships please thus, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons: The best way to have an answer to this Question is, that it may be read de bene esse. Sir Fran. Winn. Pray my Lords, let him read it over to himself privately, and then let us know whether he can swear the same things that are in that Pa∣per. (which Dr. Oates began to do.) Dr. Oats. Your Lordships ask only as to my Lord Stafford?
L. H. Stew. My Lord desires no more, but pray read it over all, and give your Answer to all; for that Question, may be, will be asked in other Cases, and 'tis fit you should be provided for it. (which he did.) L. H. Stew. What say you Doctor? Dr. Oats. My Lords, I do verily believe I did swear the Contents of that Paper. L. Stafford. My Lords, I do not oppose the reading of that Paper, but I have here a Copy of something in the Journal, and do not stand upon my memory; but I think upon the viewing of it now, there is something in the Copies of the Journal. Clerks. We cannot find it. L. Stafford. Then read this Paper. L. H. Steward. Will you have this Copy of the Examination read, or not? L. Stafford. Yes, my Lords. Clerk. The Examination of Titus Oats Clerk, taken before us— L. H. Stew. When was that? Clerk. The 24. of October 1678. L. H. Steward. That was read the 25. the next day in the House of Lords. The Examination of Titus Oats Clerk, taken by us the 24. of October 1678. THis Examinant saith, That in the Month of May last, this Examinant saw a Patent under the Seal of the Father general of the Society of Jesus at Rome, called Johannes Paulus Oliva, at the Chamber of Mr. Langhorn, wherein it was expressed, That by vertue of a Breve from the Pope, he did Constitute the Lord Arundel of Wardour Lord High Chancellor of England, which Patent was sent to the Lord Arundel of Wardour by a Messenger, who was the Son of Mr. Langhorn; And this Examinant saith, That he saw a Letter subscribed by the Lord Arundell of Wardour as he believes, wherein the Lord Arundel did acknowledge the receipt of the said Patent, and accepted of the same, and promised to answer the expectati∣on of the Society. This Examinant saith, That in June last he saw the like Patent, wherein the Lord Powis was Constituted Lord Treasurer of England, which Patent was car∣ried by one Parsons Secretary to the Lord Powis from one Saunders House in Wild∣street to be delivered to the Lord Powis, and at the delivery of the Patent 3001, was paid by Parsons to Fenwick and Ireland to carry on the design of the Jesuits, which was to raise a Rebellion in the three Kingdoms and to destroy the King. In the Month of July this Examinant saw a Letter subscribed Powis, and di∣rected to Fenwick, wherein his Lordship did acknowledge the receipt of the said Patent, and did accept of the same, and said he had 300 Men and Horse rea∣dy for the Design, and that his Lordship would venture his life and fortune in the Affair.
In the month of August last, this Examinant saw a Letter directed to Mr. Lang∣horn by the outside, but within to the Society of the Jesuits, wherein Sir William Go∣dolphin acknowledged he had received the like Patent to be Lord Privy Seal, and had accepted thereof, and in July 1677. this Examinant saw the same in the hands of the Archbishop of Tuam, at Madrid in Spain. This Examinant saith, that in July last Mr. Coleman ackowledged and con∣fessed to Fenwick in this Examinants presence, that he had received the like Patent to be Secretary of State, and that it was a good exchange. This Examinant saith, that in May, June, July and August last, this Exami∣nant saw several Letters signed Stafford, whereby it appeared that the Lord Stafford was in this Conspiracy against His Majesty, and that he had returned se∣veral Sums of Mony to the Jesuits to carry on the Design, the Letters were di∣rected to Fenwick and Ireland, and in August last this Examinant saw another Letter directed to the same persons signed Stafford, wherein my Lord writ, that although he had sent his Son to Lisbon, yet he would be ne'r the worse friend to the Jesuits, and this Examinant conceiveth the Reason of that Letter was, because there was then a difference between the English Colledge at Lisbon and the Jesuits; in July last this Examinant saw in the hands of Fenwick a Commission directed to the Lord Bellasis from the person aforesaid, to be Lord General of the Army to be raised in England against His Majesty, and in July this Examinant saw a Letter from my Lord directed to Fenwick, wherein his Lord∣ship acknowledged the receipt of the Commission, and thanked the Society for the same, and that he accepted the same, and would do what in him lay to an∣swer their expectations. In May last this Examminant saw a Patent in the hands of Mr. Langhorn to make my Lord Petres Lieutenant-General of the Army, and in June last, this Exami∣nant did hear my Lord Petres in the presence of Mr. Longworth his Confessor ac∣knowledge the receipt of the same, and that he accepted thereof, and his Con∣fessor wished him much joy thereof. Lord Stafford. My Lords, if this be owned for truth that he swore, then I pro∣ceed upon the Evidence of that. L. H. Stew. Without allowing it to be a true Copy, Dr. Oats at the Bar does swear, what is said there is true. Lord Stafford. Then he says there, he saw Letters signed by me to Fenwick and others, I do humbly desire to know whether that be Evidence or no, that a man says he saw Letters, and does not say he knew them to be my hand, nor what the Letters were in particular, nothing that he did prove of it. I must ap∣peal to your Lordships, to all my Lords, to my Lord High Steward, and the rest that were of the Council at that time; whether Dr. Oats did not positively name some, and left ne out at the Council Table? And whether Dr. Oats did not say there was no Lord concerned in the Plot, and whether some of my Lords
did not say so, and told some other Lords of it, from whom I had it? And in or∣der to this desire Sir Philip Lloyd may be examined, and if he did not know of my being in it, then he hath since forsworn himself. L. H. Stew. My Lord, I know not where you are, nor what you are about, are you objecting against Oats upon any Evidence out of the Journal? Lord Stafford. My Lords, I go upon this that hath been read. L. H. Stew. Pray my Lord produce your Witnesses that did hear him say any thing, and take your advantage of it. Lord Stafford. I call Sir Philip Lloyd. L. H. Stew. Where is Sir Philip Lloyd? L. Stafford. My Lords, I do not know, I think he is here, I hope he will come. Then he appeared amongst the Members of the House of Commons, and was called to the Bar amongst the other Witnesses, and stood up. L. H. Stew. What does your Lordship ask Sir Philip Lloyd? L. Staff. Whether he was not by when Dr. Oats was asked, if there were any Lords concerned in the Plot, and he said no; and whether he did not tell me so a day or two before I was committed in the Pinces Lodgings. L. H. Stew. What say you Sir Philip loyd did you ever hear Dr. Oats de∣ny upon his Oath, that ever he heard of any Lords that were concerned in the Plot? Sir Philip Lloyd. My Lords, Truly I cannot remember any such thing. If my Lord put me in mind of any particular Circumstance or time, I may recollect it; I must confess I think I have heard such a thing rumor'd, but I am so unfortu∣nate I cannot remember any thing positively of it. L. Stafford. He did tell me so I am sure. Sir Philip Lloyd. Truly, my Lords, I would be glad to remember any thing to justifie the Truth, but I can't remember this. L. Stafford. But whether it were so or no, your Lordships that were of the Council can tell. L. H. Steward. My Lord, I do not know. Your Lordship cannot be refused if you press it, to ask any of the Lords of the Council, if they remember any such thing that did pass there; but if I were there or in the Council, I deal plainly with your Lordship, I cannot say that there was any such thing said. L. Stafford. If there be any here that were there besides, I desire they may be asked. L. H. Stew. If your Lordship will call upon any other of my Lords that were there, they will tell you. Lord Stafford. I do not know who were there, I can't call them. L. H. Stew. You may ask any of the Lords of the Council who were there that time Dr. Oats was examined.
Lord Marquess of Worcester. My Lords, I was not at the Council then, but I heard it, not there indeed, but as a general Report abroad. L. Stafford. I desire my Lord Privy Seal may tell what he knows of it. Lord Privy Seal. What is it your Lordship would know of me? L. Stafford. Whether Oats did not say, he had no more to accuse? Lord Privy Seal. Where my Lord? L. Stafford. At the Council Table. Lord Privy Seal. 'Tis a very hard thing for me to charge my memory with all the Questions at an Examination, we use to refer to the Examinations themselves; I have seen some Examinations, I wish all were so, wherein the Questions are put down as well as the Answers, and I cannot charge my memory that he said, he had no more to accuse. L. Staff. I desire then all the Lords of the Council that are here to say whether or no he was not asked this Question particularly by my Lord Chancellor, (and I desire particularly his Lordship would say, whether he can't remember it) whe∣ther he had any thing to say against some Lords, and he answered, they were to know of it, but God forbid he should accuse them! L. H. Stew. When should that be? L. Stafford. My Lords, I can't say the day, for I was not in Town. But I desire to ask whether you did not ask him upon the first Discovery of the Plot, whe∣ther he had any thing to say against some Lords? L. H. Stew. Do you desire to know whether I asked him this Question, if he had any thing to say against some Lords? L. Stafford. I do not say positively your Lordship, but whether that Questi∣on was not asked him? L. H. Stew. Certainly I should never ask any such Question of any man alive. I might ask in general of any Lord, but not of some. L. Stafford. Some or other Lords it was. L. H. Steward. I don't remember it, and 'tis impossible for any man living to remember, what Questions he did ask two or three years ago upon an Exami∣nation. L. Stafford. I desire I may have leave to ask the Earl of Berkley a Question. L. H. Steward. What is it you would ask him? L. Stafford. My Lords, I humbly ask his Lordship, whether he did not hear Dr. Oats say, after he had accused some persons before the Council, that he had no more to accuse? Earl of Berkley. My Lords, I had the Honour to be of the Privy Council about the time of the Discovery of the Plot, but I do not remember that I heard Dr. Oats say any such thing there. L. Staff. Or, in the House of Lords, for I may mistake. And therefore I desire my Lord of Berkley would declare what he heard Dr. Oats say before the House of Lords.
Earl of Berkley. Yes, my Lords; in the Lords House I will tell your Lord∣ships what I remember. My Lord Chancellor, to the best of my remembrance, did ask Dr. Oats at the Bar of the House, this Question—My Lords de∣sire to know if you can accuse any other Person or Persons of what Quality soever, and you are incouraged by their Lordships to Accuse them: His Answer was—My Lords, I have no more to accuse in relation to England, but in relation to Ireland, I have. L. H. Steward. That was after he had accused your Lordship, my Lord Stafford. Sir W. Jones. We pray, my Lords, we may have the favour to ask that very Honourable Lord, at what time Dr. Oats said this, for the satisfaction of those that are present. Earl of Berkley. My Lords, it was after Dr. Oats had accused my Lord Stafford, but before he had accused the Queen. L. Stafford. I beseech you, my Lords, to mark it (and I am very glad of it) he said he had no more to accuse in relation to England, and yet after that he ac∣cused the Queen. L. H. Stew. My Lord, then the best account of it will be on the Journal, the Question and Answer is entred there. Die Jovis 31. die Octobr. 1678. Post Meridiem. TItus Oats being at the Bar, is directed to proceed in giving an Account of the Commissions given to several Lords, and other Persons for Offices Civil and Military. Upon which he proceeded in a particular Narrative thereof, with some Cir∣cumstances tending to make out the truth thereof, and then was commanded to withdraw, but stay without. Then upon Consideration had hereof, the Lord Chancellor by directions of the House caused him to be called in again, and told him, that the Lords expect not his entring into particular Circumstances, but if there be particular Persons con∣cerned, of what Quality soever they be, the House expected he should name them, but he named none but those he had mentioned in his Narrative, nor could name no other Person. Lord Stafford. Then, my Lords, he said, He knew no Persons more than he he had discovered: and after, did he not accuse the Queen and several others? if he said true, then he knew no body more, if not, he is Forsworn.
Sir VVill. Jones. Pray prove he did Accuse the Queen. L. Stafford. He did so in the Council, and he is clearly Perjured in that, and so not to be believed. And I say besides, after that Dr. Oats had consulted with himself and possibly with some others what his Narrative should be, and what he should accuse Persons of, and did only accuse me of seeing some Letters signed Stafford, and now he comes to give Evidence he knows more, of my having a Commission: After this rate, it may be he may know a great deal more to mor∣row, when he hath invented it: And 'tis a great sign he did not know of any more, if he did know of that; for I never had any Correspondence with the Jesuits, nor any business transacted with them these twenty four or twenty five years. In∣deed at Ghent the English Jesuits were desired to do a little thing for me, and they refused it me: it was to send over a man that was to be a Witness in a Suit I had beyond Sea. And I never writ one Letter to a Jesuit since, nor he to me that I know of, nor never had to do with them that I know of: I never heard of Fen∣wicks Name nor Harcourts till I heard of the Plot, nor of Johnson nor Thompson Jesuits: and if any can prove it, I will acknowledge my self guilty of all that is said against me. And for that Dr. Oats at first said, He only saw Letters of mine, and after comes and accuses me of a Commission, I appeal to your Lordships if there can be any truth or belief in him. I cannot say more than what I have said already, and I do challenge Dr. Oats at the day of Judgment to say, if ever he saw me in his life till I was committed, or if I did ever go by any Name, but that of Stafford, I will be content to dye immediately. If I had gone by the Name of Howard I need not be ashamed of it, for 'tis a Name good enough to be owned. I know there is a worthy Gentleman that bears the Name of Howard of Effingham, but I never did. If your Lordships please to let me ask Mr. Dugdale one Que∣stion. L. H. Stew. Call Dugdale again, (who appeared.) What say you to him my Lord? L. Stafford. I desire to ask Dugdale, whether he did not in his Depositions be∣fore Mr. Lane and Mr. Vernon swear, that the 20th. of October, I offered him 500 l. to kill the King? Mr. Dugdale. No, September L. Stafford. Ay, September? Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I think I did make that Deposition before Captain Lane. I am certain I did that, my Lord Stafford the 20th. or 21th. of September offered me 500 l. L. Stafford. Then did not he say presently upon this he went to Mr. Evers Chamber? L. H. Stew. He says so now. Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I am not certain it was the same day, it was assoon as I could have opportunity, it was presently after.
Lord Stafford. Did he not say he told Erers what I said to him, and he did not understand the meaning of it? Mr. Dugdale. I did say so to Mr. Evers, I did ask Mr. Evers what my Lord Stafford's meaning was, whether his intention was true or no to do as he said, and whether my Lord was in that Condition as to be able to perform his promise, for I feared payment of the mony, and he told me Harcourt and the rest of the Jesuits would furnish it. L. H. Steward. So he said Yesterday. L. Staff. Then ask him if he did not say, the beginning of September I met him at Tixal, and I spake to him about such a business. Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, I did say to the best of my Remembrance it was a∣bout that time, the latter end of August or the beginning of September, I would not be positive, nor could not to five days. Lord Stafford. No I think not to 5000. Then I askt him this Question whe∣ther he did not presently upon that, when I told him about the Design, go to Mr. Evers, and ask what it meant. L. H. Steward. He said so but now, he went to Evers and asked what you meant. L. Stafford. I beseech you I may be understood, whether he did not say in the beginning of September, which was before the 20. or 21. in the Journal. L. H. Stew. Is it in the Journal? L. Stafford. Yes. L. H. Stew. Why then, read it. Die Sabbati 28. Decembris, 1678. The Earl of Essex acquainted the House, that he had received an Informa∣tion out of the Countrey of very great Concernment, which was read as fol∣loweth. Staffordsh. December 24th, 1678. The Information of Stephen Dugdale Gent. late servant to the Lord Aston of Tixal, concerning the Plot against our Soveraign Lord the King, as followeth. 1. THis Informant saith, that presently after one Howard Almoner to the Queen went beyond the Seas, he was told by George Hobson (Servant to the said Lord Aston) that there was a Design then intended for the Reformation of the Government to the Romish Religion. 2. He informeth that in the beginning of September 1678. he met in Tixal, nigh the Lord's Gates, the Lord Stafford, who said to this Informant it was said
that they were troubled for that they could no say their Prayers but in a hid man∣ner, but suddenly there would be a Reformation to the Romish Religion, and if there was but a good Success they should enjoy their Religion. And upon the 20th. day of September last, the said Lord Stafford told this Informant that there was a Design in hand, and if this Informant would undertake the Design, he should have a good Reward, and make himself famous. 3. Upon the aforesaid day immediately after, this Informant went into the Chamber of Mr. Francis Urie alias Evers (a Jesuit) in Tixal-Hall, and asked him what the Lord Stafford meant by those words, and after he had made him to swear secresie upon his knees, he told him he might be a person imployed in the work, and have a good Reward that would make him famous: and then he told him he must be instrumental with others in taking away the Kings life; and that it should be done by shooting or otherwise. And that this Informant need not to fear, for the Pope had excommunicated the King, and that all that were ex∣communicated by him were Hereticks, and they might kill them and be cano∣niz'd for Saints in so doing. 4. The Informant saith, that the said Evers and Hobson both said, that the De∣sign was as well to kill the Duke of Monmouth as the King. 5. That George North (Nephew to Pickering, and Servant to the Lord Aston) lately told this Informant that they had taken his Uncle (meaning Pickering) and put him into Newgate, and thought the King deserved such an execrable death as was intended him, because of his Whoring and Debauchery. 6. That Mr. Evers said Mr. Bennyfield had a packet of Letters delivered to him from the Post-house, which he feared the Lord Treasurer had notice of, and therefore he delivered them to the Duke of York, and the Duke delivered them to the King, and that the King gave them to the Treasurer, after he had read them, but that the King did not believe them, and therefore it was happy, or else the Plot had been discovered. 7. That he had received many Packets of Letters for Evers, some of which this Informant broke up, and found them to be, and tend to the Establishing of the Romish Religion, &c. 8. That he had received several Sums of mony himself, and knew of divers others that were imployed to put forth mony, which was and is for the Jesuits use. Stephen Dugdale. Taken upon Oath the 24th. day of Dcem∣ber, 1678. before us. Tho. Lane, J. Vernon.
L. Stafford. My Lords, I find by this here, that presently after one Howard Almoner to the Queen went over, George Hobson Servant to my Lord Aston told Dugdale there was a Design to Reform the Government, &c. I beseech your Lordships I may ask him, how long after he went over, this Discourse was. Mr. Dugdale. I do not say I knew George Hobson before he came to be a Ser∣vant to my Lord Aston, which was in the year (78.) but that this was only a Dis∣course to me, that the Plot had been so long carrying on. L. Stafford. He says upon his Oath presently after the Almoner went over, he told him so. Now the Almoner went over; years before that, when the Pro∣clamation came out to Banish the Queens Servants for being Papists. Mr. Dugdale. I heard it there, I never knew George Hobson before he came to be Servant to my Lord Aston, but I did not tell it as a Discourse at that time, or that it was more than what I had from him, that there was such a Design so long before. Lord Stafford. He says presently after the Almoner went over, in his Oath, which was I think in the year (72.) or (73.) or rather in the year (75.) about the end of the year (74.) as I remember, and he says presently, three years after; is that presently? E'n now the end of August was the beginning of September, and how long that was we can't tell, and now three years is pre∣sently after. Sir W. Jones. He is telling of anothers Discourse with him. L. H. Stew. My Lord, you must observe that Dugdale says, that he did hear it from Hobson after he came to my Lord Aston's Service. Lord Stafford. But he says presently after the Almoner went over, and 'tis impossible, for he did not say it till three years after, and so there is no truth in him. Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, it was that Hobson told me that presently after the Al∣moner Howard went over, there was such a Design carrying on. L. H. Stew. You distinguish not, and therefore don't comprehend. 'Tis one thing if Dugdale had said, that presently after there was such a Design, Hobson told him so. L. Stafford. I beseech you, it is said, That presently after the Almoner went over, Hobson told him so. L. H. Steward. But it is not that presently after he heard the Discourse, but George Hobson told him, that presently after the Almoner went over, there was such a Design. L. Stafford. 'Tis said he was told presently after. Then the Information was read again. L. H. Stew. Do you know when Howard the Almoner went over? Mr. Dugdale. No, my Lords, but by report I heard when he went: But I do not make that part of my Oath, for I cannot absolutely remember it.
Lord. High. Steward. My Lord, you must not make a Strain to to make a mi∣stake. Lord Stafford. Gods Life, is three years a Strain? Mr. Dugd. I never did mean so, nor never did intend so, for I never knew him till he came to my Lord Aston's, but he told me then this Discourse. L. H. Stew. My Lord, this is only a Question of Grammar, how it can be construed. L. Stafford. My Lords, I beg your pardon: 'tis to my little Reason a Que∣stion of Sense, and it is plain to me it can have no other sense, but I submit it to your Lordships, whether this be not the true Construction. L. H. Steward. Go on, my Lord, with your Evidence, notice will be taken of your Objection: you shall see what they say to it, if they do not give it an An∣swer, it will have its weight. Sir William Jones. We will give that an Answer in due time. L. Stafford. Then next he says, I talked with him at my Lord Aston's the be∣ginning of September, where he met with me at Tixal at the Gate. And I said, it was sad we could not say our Prayers, but in private. Truely my Lords, I cannot say, I did not say this to him; but if I did say it, I do not remember it, or that ever I thought so much; for I was so much of a contrary Opinion, that I thought those of that Religion said their Prayers too openly, and have chid them for it. And why should I speak it to him whom I did not know what Religion or what Profession he might be of? And presently after I spoke of these things, he says, he went to know what the Design was, and then Mr. Evers told him of the Plot, and yet yesterday he said he knew it sixteen years ago. How can all this be true? And besides, it seems I could have no great power with him to persuade him, for it seems he mistrusted my ability to pay, and he had reason, for I should hardly have parted with 500l. in the Condition I was then in to any one, but I have no more to say to him now. There is a third Witness, one Tur∣bervill, I desire to ask him a Question. L. H. Stew. Call Turbervill, (who stood up.) Lord Stafford. I desire to know what time he came to serve my Lady Moli∣neaux, (for it is in the beginning of the Information in the House of Commons, that he came in the year 73.) and how long he staid with her? L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, if your Lordship please, there was an offer made to you, that those Affidavits should be produced if you desired to see them. L. Stafford. I think I shall have no occasion as yet, it may be I may by and by: But I desire to ask him this Question first, whether he did not say he came in the year (73.) into my Lady Mary Molineaux her Service, and staid with her about three years. L. H. Stew. Did he swear in the year (73.( he came?
L. Stafford. 'Tis so in his Narrative in Print. L. H. Stew. Do you own that Narrative in Print for true? Mr. Turbervill. No my Lords. L. H. Stew. How can you challenge him then with a Narrative he does not own? L. Stafford. Then what can a man do if he must not go according to what is Printed? Mr. Turbervill. There is a mistake in the Printing of it, there is a mistake of (73.) for (72.) L. Stafford. I now desire that Affidavit may be produced. L. H. Steward. Pray let him have the benefit that was offered him of the Af∣fidavit. Mr. Turbervill. Besides, I declared I could not be positive to a year, I own any thing else in it. L. Stafford. Then my Lords, if I shall have fellows that will not swear to Months nor to years, I beg of your Lordships to know whether these be legal Witnesses. Managers. The Affidavit is in the Custody of Sir William Poulteney a Member of our House. Sir Will. Poulteney. My Lords, I have the Affidavit, if you please I shall give you an account what I did upon it, and Sir Thomas Stringer another Justice of Peace. My Lords, after that Mr. Turbervill had given his Evidence to the House of Commons Vivavoce, he tendred to them this Information that I have in my hand, The House of Commons after it had been read thought it might be con∣venient to have it sworn to before two Justices of Peace. Whereupon Sir Thomas Stringer and my self withdrew into the Speakers Chamber, Mr. Turbervill came to us, we read over the Information to him again, and after we had read it over it was signed and he swore it. In this Information when we then took it he decla∣red there, that he came to my Lord Powis in the year 1673, and came into Eng∣land 1676. After we had sworn him, we carried this Information into the House again. The next morning, my Lords, he came to me, (I being one of the Justices that had sworn him) and told me that searching among his Papers the last night for a Letter, which he had said he had received from my Lord Stafford sent to Diep, though he could not find the Letter he looked for, yet he found that the precise time that he went to live with my Lord Powis was 1672, and the precise time of his coming into England was 1675. And he desired me to acquaint the House of Commons with it, that this Circumstance of time might be altered. Whereupon my Lords, I did acquaint the House of Commons with it, how he was mistaken in that point of a Circumstance of time, and that he came of his own accord and desired me to move the House in it; I moved the House, and they did direct we should withdraw again, and take his Information again, and that he
should amend it, he amended it, and made the (73) (72) and the (76) (75) and then afterwards we swore him to it again de novo, and this is the matter of Fact con∣cerning the Affidavit. L. H. Stew. Sir William Poultney, Did Mr. Turbervill correct the mistake him∣self first, or was it found and altered by others? Sir William Poultney. My Lords, he came to me, for I did not know any thing of it that he was mistaken, but he came to me the next morning assoon as ever I came to the House, before indeed I entred into the House and told me of the mistake and told me the reasons how he came to recollect himself, and find out the mistake. L. H. Stew. Mr. Turbervill I would ask you the Question, how came you to be informed that you had mistaken your self. Mr. Turbervill. My Lords, I'll tell you, I was searching for a Letter which I received from my Lord Stafford, and missing that, I found my Discharge I had from the French Army, wherein I saw my mistake as to the time, and that I have to produce. L. H. Stew. I ask you again, by the Oath you have taken, did you correct it of your self, or by information from any other? Mr. Turbervill. By the Oath I have taken I did correct it of my self, and no body moved it to me. Mr. Serj. Mayn. It was but a Circumstance of time. Sir Fran. Winn. And corrected by himself the very next morning my Lords. L. Stafford. He does acknowledge he did forswear himself once, and did make himself an honest man the next day, when he was a perjured Villain the day before. And now he tells your Lordships that he was searching for a Letter that I sent to him, but he cannot find it. Mr. Turbervill. No, my Lords, I thought I had it, but I cannot find it. L. Stafford. No I'le swear thou canst not. But then he does say that he had a Discharge from the French Army. Mr. Turbervill. Yes 'tis here my Lord. L. H. Stew. Is that the Paper of your Discharge? Mr. Turbervill. Yes, it is. 'Tis worn out a little and torn, but the Seal is pre∣served, I did not know that ever I should have occasion to make use of it, but my Lord Challenging me for a Coward, and a Deserter of my Colours— L. Stafford. I say so still, for I have heard so. L. H. Stew. Your Honour is not in question, Mr. Turbervill. Mr. Turbervill. The Title is a little torn, and if your Lordships please I will read it (which he did being in French, and is rendred in English in these words.) THis certifieth to all to whom it shall appertain, that I have given an absolute Discharge to the Sieur Turbervill a Cavalier of my Company, after having served the space of six months with all Honour and Fidelity. Therefore I desire
those that are to be desired, to treat him Civilly, and let him pass and re-pass without doing him any Injury or giving him any hindrance; But on the contrary to afford him all Aid and Assistance where it shall be necessary, promising the like upon all occasions that shall require it. In Confirmation of which I have for him signed this present Discharge, and thereto put the Seal of my Arms to serve him in case he shall need it. Made at the Camp before Air this 4. of August, 1676. Sheldon. L. H. Steward. What is the date of that Discharge Turbervill? Mr. Turbervill. 'Tis in August (76.) L. Stafford. May I see it, my Lords? L. H. Stew. Yes, deliver it to my Lord, (which was done, and he looked upon it.) L. Stafford. The thing looks like truth, but there is no proof of it. Mr. Turbervill. The Seal is a little broke, but the Name remains perfect. L. Stafford. He says here is a dismission from the Army in (76.) how will that rectifie this mistake about (73.) I understand not that. Then the Court called for the Paper, and it was looked upon by the Duke of Mon∣mouth and some other Lords. L. H. Stew. My Lord, this Paper hath been looked upon, the Hand is well known by those that should know it. L. Stafford. I do not say the contrary. L. H. Stew. Whereabouts are you now my Lord then? L. Stafford. I am extreamly faint and weary, that I am sure of. This Gentle∣man told you yesterday, that he spoke with me several times in France, and that he was conversant with me for a fortnight together, that he visited me, and I proposed the Killing of the King to him, and that he refused to give me an Answer then, but told me he would give it me at Diep; This he said yesterday, as I re∣member: And afterwards when he was gone down, he came up again, and de∣sired to put your Lordships in mind of a particular Circumstance which he said he did remember, That when he came to me I had the Gout, and was in a lower Room of the House, in such a Street which faced Luxenburgh House, all which I stand not upon: and that the Prince of Conde lived in the same Street▪ on the left hand he said first, and after on the right hand, and after he knew not where, and that I did lodge in the same Street. Mr. Turbervill. I did say I believed the Prince of Conde lived there, but was not positive. L. Stafford. No, but first he swears a thing, and then only believes it. Be pleased to call my Servants, to know if ever I had my Foot ill of the Gout in my life. Mr. Turbervill. Your Lordship told me it was the Gout.
Lord Stafford. If ever I put my Foot on a Stool, or was lame there, I will own all that he says. But when a man swears his Evidence, and goes down from the place, and then invents and comes up again to tell new stories, who shall believe such a man? Mr. Turbervill. I never went from the Bar. Lord Stafford. I do say, y went down and had given all your Evidence, and came up again and told this Circumstance: I have not been lame not one moment these forty years, and yet this Fellow, this impudent Fellow, to say, that I was lame and put my Foot on a Stool. He does not, my Lords, swear positively in any thing but this, and this I can easily disprove in him. L. H. Steward. What say you to this particular, Turbervill? Had my Lord Stafford never the Gout while he was in France? Mr. Turbervill. He told me it was the Gout, my Lords: He had a great lame∣ness, he could not go from one place to another: Here are several people to give Testimony, that my Lord was lame within less time than he says. Mr. Foley. Hold, hold Turbervill, you must not give that Evidence now. L. Stafford. Call Nicholas Furnese again. L. H. Steward. What do you call him for? L. Stafford. Ask whether ever he saw Mr. Turbervill with me in France? L. H. Stew. Were you with my Lord Stafford all the while he was in France? Furnese. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Did you never see Turbervill there? Furnese. No. L. H. Stew. Pray did you never see Father Anthony Turbervill there? Furnese. No, my Lords, I never heard of his Name. L. Stafford. Was I ever one moment lame while I was in France? Furnese. Not, that I remember. L. H. Stew. How long was my Lord there? Furnese. About three Months. L. H. Stew. What time of the year? Furnese. At Paris in October and November, in December at Rohan, in January we came over into England. L. Stafford. Ask him if ever I put my Foot upon a Cushion, or upon a Stool for lameness. Lord. High. Steward. Mr. Turbervill did you ever see Furnese when you were in France. Mr. Turbervill. This Man my Lords. L▪ H. Stew. Yes. Mr. Turbervill. No, not that I remember. L. H. Stew. In what quality did you serve my Lord in France, Furnese? Furnese. My Lords, I waited on him in his Chamber.
L. H. Stew. Do you remember any other Servant of my Lords, that you did see there? Mr. Turbervill. Truly, my Lords, I don't remember, I might forget him. Lord Stafford. So I believe thou dost me too. Mr. Turbervill. Your Lordship, that could call me Coward may say any thing. L. Stafford. You shall be as valiant as Hector, if you will. Pray call my other Boy. (Who stood up.) L. H. Stew. You little Boy, were you all the while with my Lord that he was in France? Leigh. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Did you ever see Turbervill there? Leigh. No, my Lords, not that I know of. L▪ H. Stew. Had my Lord the Gout in France? Leigh. No nor never had since I have been with him. L. H. Stew. That is six years. Leigh. Seven years almost my Lords. L. H. Stew. Are you sure of that? Leigh. I am sure of it. L. Stafford. Now, my Lords, Mr. Turbervill says I writ him a Letter to Diep, which Letter he can't find. I beseech you what were the Contents of the Letter? L. H. Stew. What were the Contents of the Letter my Lord sent you? Mr. Turberv. The Contents of the Letter were that I should not stay at Diep in expectation of him; for he had appointed a Yatcht to come to Calice, but I should make what haste I could to London▪ and there I should meet with him. L. Stafford. I desire to ask whether I sent him word that Count Gramont came over with me? Mr. Turbervill. Yes, my Lords, to the best of my remembrance. L. Stafford. I shall now bring Witnesses that I did not come by Calice, but by Diep, and Count Gramont came not with me. L. H. Stew. Mr. Turbervill, which way came you, from Diep, or from Calice? Mr. Turbervill. From Diep, my Lords. L. Stafford. And I came from Diep too. L. H. Stew. My Lord came that way too, he says. Mr. Turbervill. I know not of it, he sent me word otherwise. L. Stafford. I shall now prove what I say, pray call Mr. Wyborne. (VVho stood up.) L. H. Stew. What do you ask him, my Lord? L. Stafford. Whether he did not see me at Diep, and embark from thence for England. Mr. VVyborne. My Lords, I▪will give you an Account as well as I can. In the year (75.) in December I had occasion to go over into France upon my own Con∣cerns;
and enquiring where there was a conveniency to go over, I heard that a Yatcht was sending to Diep for my Lord Stafford, and Mr. Henry Sidney His Ma∣jesties Envoy Extraordinary now in Holland, I took that occasion, and we weigh∣ed Anchor on Friday the 24. of December; and it being foul weather, and we be∣ing tossed long upon the Sea, we did not come to an Anchor before Diep till Sun∣day was sevennight, at Two a Clock in the Afternoon, which was January 2. Then I came with the Captain immediately ashoar, to enquire for my Lord and Mr. Sidney, I enquired for my Lord, and they told me, he was at Rohan, ex∣pecting to hear of the arrival of the Yatcht; upon which the Captain desired me to write a Letter to my Lord, and I did so; upon sight of which Letter he came to Diep on Tuesday in the Afternoon, which was as I take it, the 4. of January, and we were at the Bastile there then together, when he came that evening; and the next day I went on my own occasions to Paris, and my Lord and Mr. Sid∣ney did come over together in the Yatcht. L. Stafford. If you please I will call my two Servants again to this matter. Lord. High. Steward. Call them, my Lord. Then Furnese and Leigh stood up. Lord High Steward. Which way came my Lord Stafford out of France into England, by Diep or by Calice? Furnese. By Diep. L. H. Steward. What say you Boy, which way came my Lord? Leigh. By Diep, my Lords. L. H. Steward. You came with him? Leigh. Yes, we did. L. H. Stew. My Lord, The Question is not whether you came by Calice or no, but whether you writ a Letter to him to Diep that you would go by Calice. Lord Stafford. He swore yesterday that I did come by Calice. L. H. Stew. Do you say my Lord came by Calice? Mr. Turbervill. My Lords, I had a Letter from his Lordship, which he wrote to me, that he would come by Calice. L. Stafford. He did not name the Letter yesterday, nor is't in the Infor∣mation. L. H. Stew. Read the Affidavit.
The Information of Edward Turbervill of Skerr, in the County of Glamorgan, Gent. WHo saith, That being a younger Brother about the Year 1672, he became Gentleman Usher to the Lady Mary Molineaux, Daughter to the Earl of Powis, and by that means lived in the House of the said Earl about three Years, and by serving and assisting at Mass there, grew intimate with Willi∣am Morgan, Confessor to the said Earl and his Family, who was a Jesuit, and Rector over all the Jesuits in North-Wales, Shropshire, and Staffordshire: And he, during the three years time, often heard the said Morgan tell the said Earl and his Lady, that the Kingdom was in a high Fever, and that nothing but Blood-letting could restore it to Health▪ and then the Catholick Religion would flourish. Whereunto the said Earl many times replied, It was not yet time, but he doted not but such means should be used in due time, or words to that effect. And he heard the Lady Powis tell the said Morgan, and others publickly and privately, That when Religion should be restored in England, which she doubted not but would be in a very short time, she would persuade her Husband to give 300 l. per annum, for a Foundation to maintain a Nun∣nery; and this Informant was persuaded by the Lady Powis and the said Mor∣gan to become a Fryar, the said Lady enouraging this Informant thereunto, by saying, that if he would follow his Studies, and make himself capable, she que∣stioned not but he might shortly be made a Bishop by her Interest in England, because upon Restauration of the Catholick Religion, there would want People fit to make Bishops, and to do the Business of the Church, and thereupon she gave this Informant Ten Pounds to carry him to Doway, where this Informant en∣tred the Monastery, and continued about three weeks; and with much difficul∣ty made his escape thence, and returned for England; for which the said Earl and his Lady, and all the rest that encouraged him to go to the Monastery, became his utter Enemies, threatning to take away his Life, and to get his Brother to disinherit him, which last is compassed against him. And Father Cudworth, who was than Guardian of the Fryars at Doway, some days before his escape thence, told this Informant, That if he should not persevere with them, he should lose his life and friends. And further added, That this King should not last long, and that his Successor should be wholly for their purpose. And Father Cross, Provincial of the Fryars, told this Informant, That had he been at Doway when this Informant made his escape thence, he should never have come to England: And this Informant finding himself friendless, and in danger in England, went to Paris, where one of his Brothers is a Benedictine Monk, who persuaded this Informant to return for England; and in order thereunto,
about the latter end of November 1675. he was introduced into the acquain∣tance of the Lord Stafford, that he might go for England with his Lordship, and three weeks he attended his Lordship, and had great access and freedom with his Lordship, who gave him great assurances of his Favour and Interest to restore him to his Relations esteem again. And said, That he had a piece of service to propose to this Informant, that would not only retrieve his Reputation with his own Relations, but also oblige both them and their Party to make him happy as long he lived. And this informant being desirous to embrace so hap∣py an Opportunity, was very inquisitive after the means, but the said Lord Stafford being somewhat difficult to repose so great a Trust as he was to com∣municate to him, exacted all the Obligations and Promises of secresie, which this Informant gave his Lordship in the most solemn manner he could invent: Then his Lordship laboured to make this Informant sensible of all the advantages that would accrue to this Informant, and the Catholick Cause, and then told this Informant in direct terms, that he might make himself and the Nation hap∣py, by taking away the Life of the King of England, who was a Heretick, and consequently a Rebel against God Almighty. Of which this Informant de∣sired his Lordship to give him time to consider, and told his Lordship that he would give him his Answer at Diep, where his Lordship intended to ship for England, and to take this Informant with him; but this Informant going before to Diep, the Lord Stafford went with Count Gramont by Calice, and sent this Infor∣mant orders to go for England, and to attend his Lordship at London, but this Informant did not attend his Lordship at London, but went into the French service, and so avoided the Lord Stafford's further importunities in that Affair. And this Informant further saith, That one Remige a French woman, and ve∣hement Papist, who married this Informants Brother, lived with the Lady Powis all the time this Informant resided there, and some years since, and was the great Confident of the said Lady; and the said Remige was for the most part taken with her Ladyship into Morgan's Chamber when the Consults were held there, where he hath often seen Father Gavan, Father Towers, Father E∣vans, Father Sylliard, Roberts, White, Owens, Barry, and the Earl of Castlemain, and other Priests and Jesuits, meet and shut themselves up in the said Morgan's Chamber, sometimes for an Hour, sometimes for two Hours, more or less; and at the breaking up of the said Consults, have broke out into an extasie of joy, saying, They hoped ere long the Catholick Religion would be established in England, and that they did not doubt to bring about their De∣sign notwithstanding they had met with one great Disappointment, which was the Peace struck up with Holland; saying, that if the Army at Blackheath had been sent into Holland to assist the French King, when he was with his Army near Amsterdam, Holland had certainly been conquered, and then the French King would have been able to assist us with an Army to establish Religion
in England. Which expressions, with many others, importing their confidence to set up the Romish Religion, they frequently communicated to this Informant. And the said Morgan went several times into Ireland, to London, and several other parts of England, as this Informant hath just cause to believe, to give and take measures for carrying on the Design, and the said Remige and her Husband having first clandestinely sold their Estate, and fled into France about May or June last, for fear of discovery. This Informant by many Circumstances, being assured that the said Mrs. Remige was privy to all or most of the Transactions of the Plot. And he saith, that about May last was two Years, he was present at Mass with the Lord Powis in Verestreet, when the Earl of Castlemain did say Mass in his Priestly Habit, after the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome. EDWARD TƲRBERVILL. Sworn the 9th. day of November 1680. before Thomas Stringer. William Poulteny. Edmund Warcupp. L. H. Steward. My Lord, this Affidavit is to the purpose to which you call for it; this does say that your Lordship did go by the way of Calice, it does ab∣solutely so. L. Stafford. Now whether he be forsworn or no, your Lordships may judge by these three Witnesses. Mr. Turbervill. My Lords, that which I grounded my belief of his going to Calice upon, and so consequently that Affidavit, was the Letter which I received from my Lord, which I have looked for, but cannot find. L. H. Stew. This Affidavit does not say you went from Calice to England, but you went with Count Gramont to Calice. L. Stafford. I conceive, my Lords, this Affidavit, and his Narrative are word for word the same, only that Amendment of (72) for (73) upon which I observed before, he was forsworn once. I cannot tell what to say if this man can be believed. And Count Gramont came by Diep too; but besides, my Lords, in this Affidavit he does not say he believed so, by the Letter, tho' now he speaks of one. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, was Count Gramont in your Lordships com∣pany when you came to Diep? L. Stafford. No, my Lords, he was in England before me a month; but, my Lords, I cannot deny, but I had one recommended to come over with me, that
pretended himself to be a French Count, but the man was as errant a Rascal as this that swears against me, and that was one that called himself Count de Brienne, whom all the world knows to be a Cheat. L. H. Stew. Call your other Witnesses, my Lord. L. Stafford. Where is John Minhead? (Who stood up.) L. H. Steward. Who do you belong to? Minhead. My Lord Powis. L. Stafford. My Lords, Mr. Turbervill, he says, by the persuasion of my Lady Powis, went to Doway, and he staid in the Monastery three weeks, and not liking that life, he came away (this may be true, I say nothing to it:) But that which I take Exception at, is this, He says, for this the Earl of Powis and his Lady, when he came back from Doway, were very angry with him, and so were all his Relations, and he stood in fear of his life from them. Surely when Mr. Tur∣bervill knew he was in such danger, he would not have come near them. Pray ask this Gentleman whether he was at my Lord Powis's, and how he was en∣tertained. L. H. Steward. Do you know Turbervill? Minhead. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Have you seen him at my Lord Powis's? Minhead. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew▪ How was he received there? Minhead. Very well, my Lords. L. H. Stew, When was that? Minhead. In the year (75.) L. H. Stew. Was that before or after he came back to England? Minhead. It was after he came from Doway. L. H. Stew. What Country man are you? Minhead. A French man. L. H. Stew. What Religion are you of? Minhead. A Roman Catholick. L. Stafford. Pray ask him whether he lay in my Lords house. Minhead. Yes, my Lords, he lay with me in my lodgings. L. Stafford. And yet he says he was afraid of his life. L. H. Stew. Did my Lord know he lay there? Minhead. Yes, he must needs, because he came through the Room to go to Bed. L. Stafford. May it please your Lordships, he says he was threatned that he should have his Brother disinherit him, and which afterwards was compas∣sed. Now I shall shew that this is impossible, for he had no Inheritance to lose, nor was to have none; for his Brother, who is elder than he, this man
being by a second Venter, hath Children, as I shall make appear by another of his Brothers, who is here. And this not being settled upon him who was by the second Venter, could not come to him, but for want of Issue of that Brother, must go to the Uncle. So he swears he was disinherited of an Estate when he was to have no Estate▪ nor could have. Call Mr. John Turbervill (who appeared.) My Lords, I desire you to ask him whether he knew that upon his coming back to England, he was ill used? Mr. J. Turbervill. I never knew any unkindness from my elder Brother to him. L. H. Stew. Are you his Brother? Mr. J. Turbervill. Yes, my Lords, by the Father, not by the Mother. L. H. Stew. Well, what can you say? Mr. J. Turbervill. I never heard any thing when he returned from Doway, that he was ill received by my Lord Powis, but in a few days after my Brother and Sister came to Town, we went to Bloomesbury, and there we met together; and my Brother complaining that he was unfortunate in that he had undertaken what he could not perform in going beyond Sea, and now wanted a Livelihood; my eldest Brother told him he had done as far as his Ability was, he could do no more, it was his own Choice, and he had no more to say. L. Staff. Had he any money from his Relations? Mr. J. Turbervill. He made intercession by Friends to my Sister, and she told me that she gave him 7 l. to bear his Charges to Paris, with that Proviso that he would never trouble them more. L. H. Stew. But were they not angry with him? Mr. J. Turbervill. Here he is, he cannot say they ever gave him an angry word in their days, I'm sure, I never did. L. H. Stew. Did you not forbid him the House? Mr. J. Turbervill. No. Mr. Edw. Turbervill. These are people that take not the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and therefore are not fit to be Witnesses. L. Stafford. Now your Lordships see what a Villain he is. Mr. Serj. Maynard. You must give good words, my Lord, for none but good words are given you. Lord Stafford. I must call them Villius, or my self Traitor. L. H. Steward. You say they gave him 7 l. upon condition they should never see him more. Mr. J. Turbervill. I did not say, my Sister said upon condition she would give him 7 l. he would never trouble us more, it was his Declaration. Lord Stafford. One thing I wld ask Mr. Turbervill more, and that is about this man's being disinherited: Whether he could, or whether he was Heir to any Estate or not?
L. H. Steward. What say you to it? Mr. J. Turbervill. By all the Information of our Relations, the Estate was made by my Grand-father to my Father for life, and after my Fathers life to my Mothers, and after my Mothers life to my Eldest Brother, and the Heirs males of his Body; and for want of such, afterwards to me, and the Heirs males of my Body; and in case I had none, then to my Fathers Brother, and his Heirs males: and if he had no Heirs males, then after that to the right Heirs of the Grand-father. This was before my time. L. H. Stew. Well then, that Remainder to the right Heirs, might come to him; and so there was some Estate for him to lose, and that Remainder might be docked by the Tenant in Tail. I would ask, Was there any Recovery suffered to bar that Intail? Mr. J. Turbervill. Yes, I think there was one upon my Brothers Marriage. L. H. Stew. Mr. Turbervill, Were you told you should be disinherited? Mr. E. Turbervill. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Who told you so? Mr. E. Turbervill. My eldest Brother. L. H. Stew. What did he tell you? Mr. E Turbervill. He told me it should not come to me. L. H. Stew. How should it come to you? Mr. E. Turbervill. I am not so good a Lawyer as to tell that, whether it could or no, but I thought by Succession. Lord Stafford. Then he says he came to serve my Lady Mullineux in (72.) it may be it is so as he says, I don't know it of my own knowledge; but I pray he may answer, whether it was in (71) or (72.) Mr. J. Turbervill. In January or February (71.) Mr. Treby. That is the beginning of the year (72,) according to the Al∣manack. L. Staff. My Lords, for the present I do not remember any thing more—Oh, yes, my Lords, he says he was at such a time at my Lord Powis's, when my Lord Castlemain was at Powis-Castle, which must be either in the year (72) (73) or (74.) Now I desire you would ask Mr. Lydcot whether my Lord Castlemain was there, or could be there in any of those years. (Then Lydcot stood up.) L. H. Stew. What do you ask him, my Lord? Lord Stafford. I desire to ask him, whether in the year (72,) (73,) or (74.) which are the years Turbervill says he was at my Lord Powis's at Powis-Castle, whether my Lord Castlemain was at Powis-Castle, or could be there at that time. L. H. Stew. Was my Lord Castlemain there in any of those years? Lydcot. My Lords, I can prove he was not, as much as I am capable of
proving a Negative. I was with him in the years 72, 73, and 74. L. H. Steward. Where? Lydcot. He was in England in 73. I was with him all the while; and I am sure since I knew him he was never in Wales, and I was never absent from him since I knew him (which is nine years) not four months in all. I have travel∣led with him, and been abroad with him. L. H. Stew. Turbervill, When do you say my Lord Castlemain was at Powis Castle? Mr. Turbervill. I think it was in the year 73. L. H. Stew. By what Token do you remember him there? Mr. Turbervill. He was arguing with my Lord Powis about Religion, and se∣veral times he did so; I believe it was in the year 73. L. H. Stew. What say you to that? Lydcot. I can assure your Lordships he was not there then, I was always with him that year; he had many times a design to go there, but he could not but put it off, and the last time he was there, I can prove it was fifteen years ago. L. H. Stew. I desire to know of you this, Friend, can you take it upon you to affirm upon the Faith of a Christian, that you were never from my Lord Castle∣main all the year 73? Lydcot. I can give an account to half a week where he was. And when I was absent from him, it was beyond Sea, and all that while I kept Correspon∣dence with him every Post, and received Letters from him constantly once a week dated from Liege.: This was in the time of my absence. L. H. Stew. Were you at Liege when my Lord was in England, or were you with him all the time that he was in England? Lydcot. My Lords I was with him all the time he was in England, and was never absent from him all that compass of time, but when he sent me into Eng∣land from Liege. L. H. Stew. Then he was at Liege himself? Lydcot. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Was that in the year 73? Lydcot. Yes, my Lords, I was then in England. But, my Lords, I can give you an whole account, for my Lord and I never made any Journeys, but I put them down. L. H. Steward. You say you can give a particular account of the whole year 73. even to the compass of four days in that year at most. Lydcot. No, my Lords, I do not say so, but I say I can give an account of the whole time I have been with him within four months. L. H. Stew. Were any of those months within the year 73? Lydcot. No, I was with him all the year 73. L. H. Stew. Will you take it upon you to say, That every day in 73. you were with my Lord?
Lydcot. Every day, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Every week? Lydcot. Yes, I do not think but that I was. My Lord did me the honour to make me as it were his Companion. Mr. Serj. Maynard. No, you do your self the honour to make your self his Companion, he made you his Servant. L. H. Steward. Come, where are your Notes you pretend to speak by? your Diary, or your Journal? let us hear a whole account of the year 73. for you come to testifie as if you could give an account of every day. Lydcot. I did not think any Question of this Nature would come on the stage, there is my Lords Steward can give a very good account of this by his Ac∣count Books, which are all ready to be produced; he can tell where my Lord was, by laying out such and such moneys. And 'tis an hard thing to give a Testimony after so many years, of a thing that we thought not would ever be a Question. L. H. Steward. Let us see your Notes. Lydcot. My Lords, I will read it to your Lordships. L. H. Steward. When was this written? Lydcot. I took this out of another Book. L. H. Steward. When? Lydcot. Lately, since Mr. Turbervill's Narrative came out. Sir Will. Jones. Oh, I desire that may be observed. L. Stafford. If your Lordships please, I desire that he may bring his Books, Oh, oh, will not condemn me, but Law and Justice. I am not to be run down with Oh, oh, or what such impudent Villains as these say. L. H. Stew. Read what you have there. Lydcot. From Liege we set forth to Paris, January 1. 72. where we staid three weeks, and arrived thence at London January 24. there we staid till May 73. and from thence we went to Liege again in June, and from Liege we set forth to London in August, and returned October the 3d. 73. L. H. Stew. Were you all the while between August and October in London? Lydcot. I am morally certain, that I did not go from my Lord all that time. L. H. Stew. Where were you after October? Lydcot. Which October, if your Lordship please? L. H. Stew. October, 73. Lydcot. At Liege, for we returned to Liege at October the 3d. and then after this my Lord sent me into England. I left him at Liege, and from thence I set out for England, and in January I returned to Liege, which was the greatest part of time that I was ever absent from him. L. H. Stew. And was he at Liege, are you sure, all that time from October to January?
Lydcot. Yes, except he fled: For I sent Letters by the Foreign Post, and re∣ceived Letters by the Foreign Post every week. And his Account-Books will speak it. Sir W. Jones. My Lords, we desire to ask him one Question (since he can give so exact an account) whether my Lord Castlemain was in England (72) and how much of that year? Lydcot. Yes. Sir W. Jones. How many months of the year (72) was he in England? Lydcot. I read it before. We arrived from Liege to London, January 24. (72.) and staid at London till May (73.) L. H. Stew. But where was my Lord all the year (72?) Lydcot. Pray, my Lords, do you mean New stile, or Old stile? L. H. Steward. When I speak of his being at London, I mean the stile of the Countrey. Sir William Jones. Then under favour, he speaks of the latter part of the year: I desire to know, whether my Lord for all the former part of the year was in England. L. H. Stew. Where was my Lord in December (72.) and in November before that, and in all the year up backwards? Lydcot. My Lords, I have told you the whole year. L. H. Steward. But where was my Lord from January 71. to January 72? Lydcot. In 71. June 19. New stile, we came to London, and returned in Sep∣tember to Liege; from Liege we set forth to Paris January 1. 72. and arrived at London January 24. L. H. Stew. He runs past the time. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we ask him a plain Question, but he does not answer it; he slips over the time that we desire your Lordships to ask him about L. Stafford. I beseech your Lordships that it may be made plain, that there may nothing be said afterwards that it was not plain. Lydcot. Sir, Do you propose any thing to me, and I will answer it. Sir Will. Jones. Answer not us, answer my Lords. Lydcot. I desire any body may peruse my Notes, if they please. L. H. Stew. Pray, Sir, answer the Question, whichin very short terms is this, where my Lord Castlemain was all the whole year 72. Lydcot. Well, my Lords, I will: I can but read it over again. From Liege we set forth to Paris, January 1. 72. L. H. Stew. Are not you a rare Fellow now? Lydcot. My Lords, I understand it according to the stile of that Country when I am there, and of this place when I am here L. H. Stew. Answer me according to our stile. Lydcot. This that I have written here, in the Book out of which I took it,
hath been written ever since that time; and I did not think I should er'e be called to account about it. L. H. Stew. Begin January the 1st. 71. Lydcot. We went from Liege to Paris, where we staid about a week, or such a time, and we arrived at London, January 24. that is the Old stile, and staid at London till May 8. 73. L. H. Stew. That is impossible, for you 'scape a year and a half to together. Lydcot. My Lord was here in England in January. L. H. Stew. You begin very gravely with January, stylo veteri, that you came from Liege, and so January 24. stylo veteri, you came to London. Lydcot. When I speak of any style, I understand it according to the style of the Country. L. H. Stew. But in your account, what is become of all the time from January 71. to January 72. say and swear, if you can, where my Lord was all that time. Lydcot. He must be in London. L. H. Stew. Can you take it upon your Oath, that my Lord was in London from January 71. stylo veteri to May 73. stylo veteri? Lydcot. I cannot know how to count better than I have done. L. Stafford. Mr. Turbervill. says, my Lord Castlemain was in 73. at Powis-Castle; I beseech your Lordships this man may be asked, and that without any interruption, where my Lord was that year. Sir Will. Jones. With your Lordships favour, I must desire your Lordships to ask Mr. Turbervill whether he did say positively the year 3. for if my Ears and my Notes do not fail me, he said, As he remembred, and that is the reason why we ask about the year 72. Mr. Turbervill. My Lords, I do not say positively, nor cannot, which year it was. Lydcot. My Lords, I do stand upon it that he was in London January 72. and went away May 73. L. H. Stew. What becomes of the mean time, between January 71. and May 73? Lydcot. My Lords, I explain my self as well as I can. L. H. Stew, My Lord Stafford, will you call any more Witnesses. L. Stafford. Yes, my Lord. L. H. Stew. Call them then. Earl of Shaftsbury. My Lord High Steward, I desire my Lord Stafford may be asked how many Witnesses my Lord hath more, for it now grows late. L. H. Steward. My Lord, I desire to know how many Witnesses you have more? L. Stafford. Three or four, I can't well tell how many.
Lords. Adjourn, Adjourn. Lord. High. Steward. Is it your Lordships pleasure that we do Adjourn? Lords. Ay, Ay. L. H. Steward. Then this House is Adjourned into the Parliament Chamber. Then the Lords returned in their former Order to their House, and the Commons went back to their House. Mr. Speaker, resumed the Chair, and a Message from the Lords was sent by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Samuel Clark. Mr. Speaker, The Lords have sent us to acquaint this House, that they have Ordered the Prisoner William Viscount Stafford to be brought again to his Tryal at the Bar in Westminster-Hall to morrow morning at Ten of the Clock. The Fourth Day. Friday, December 3. 1680. ABout the Hour of Ten in the Morning the Lords Adjourned into Westmin∣ster-Hall, and returned in their former Order into the Court there erected; and Mr. Speaker having left the Chair, the Commons were seated as before mentioned. The Court being sat, Proclamation for Silence was made, and the Lieutenant of the Tower commanded to bring his Prisoner to the Bar, which being done, the Lord High Steward spake to the Prisoner as followeth. L. H. Steward. My Lord Stafford, your Lordships Defence took up yester∣day; All the day was employed in hearing your Lordships Witnesses to impeach the Credit of the Testimony that hath been given against you. Your Lordship hath excepted against Dugdale, because you were not at Tixall, as he says you were; neither the latter end of August, nor the beginning of September till the Twelfth; and when you were there, you never sent for him to your Chamber, but your Man upon his own desire brought him, and when he came there, the business was to desire you to get leave that he might go to the Race; and there was no opportunity of private Discourse, because your Men were in the Room all the while; That Dugdale hath often said he knew nothing of the Plot; that he swore falsly when he said he told of the Letter about the death of Sir
Edmunbury Godfrey before it was known he was killed; and when he said, that Hobson told him presently after the Almoner went over, which was three years before Hobson came to my Lord Aston's Service. Your Lordship hath likewise objected, that he hath corrupted persons to swear falsly against you, and others, as Robinson the Upholsterer, against your Lordship, Morrall the Barber against Sir James Symons, and Holt the Blacksmith to swear that one Moor carried away Evers. Your Lordship hath endeavoured to discredit Oats, by his saying he knew nothing of any other persons that were concerned in the Plot, and after accusing the Queen: Your Lordship hath Impeached the Credit of Turbervill, by proving, that you came home by Diep, and not by Calice, as he says you did; That you had never the Gout while you were in France, nor, as your Page says, for these seven years; That my Lord Castlemain was not at my Lord Powis's in the year 73. and there you left off. This I take is the Sum of what your Lordship says, if I do you any wrong, your Lordship will put me in mind of it. L. Stafford. I thank your Lordship, you have done it with great Equity and Truth. L. H. Stew. Then go on. L. Stafford. The next Witness that I call, is one John Porter. (Who stood up.) L. H. Stew. What is your Name? Witness. John Porter. L. H. Stew. What Profession are you of? Porter. A Butler. L. H. Stew. To whom? Porter. To my Lord Powis. L. Stafford. My Lords, I desire your Lordships would ask him what Mr. Tur∣bervill said about the Plot. L. H. Stew. I will ask him all the Questions your Lordship desires I should ask him. Mr. Foley. We desire to know what Religion he is of? L. Stafford. I desire your Lordships would ask him that Question, and not the Managers. L. H. Stew. They will tell me their Questions, my Lord, and I will ask them. L. Staff. They ask him, my Lords, and not you. L. H. Stew. What Religion are you of? Porter. A Church of England man my Lords. Mr. Serj. Maynard. The Popish Church of England, I believe. L. Stafford. Pray, my Lords▪ let not this be, when my Witness says he is of the Church of England, they cry he is of the Popish Church of England. Mr. Serj. Maynard. Pray, good my Lord, we are silent when you ask him
proper Questions, and make no Remarks, we do not speak it to the Court, we may say what we will among our selves, I hope. L. Staff. I may ask impertinent Questions, because I do not understand so well as these Gentlemen. But I pray they may not deal thus with me. L. H. Stew. My Lord, you shall ask what Questions you please. L. Stafford. Pray ask him what Mr. Turbervill said to him about his knowledge of the Plot. L. H. Stew. What did Turbervill say to you about his knowing of the Plot? Porter. About a year since, when I served my Lord Powis, as Butler there, he was used to come and see me, it was not at my Lords House, but he sent for me to a Victualling-House— L. H. Stew. That was the last year? Porter. Yes. L. H. Stew. What time of the Year? Porter. It was about Twelve Months ago, I cannot say positively the time. L. H. Stew. Was it Winter or Summer? Porter. He hath been both, I can't be positive which; I believe he hath been there 40 times. L. H. Stew. In the year (80) or (79?) Porter. In the year (79.) L. H. Stew. What did he say? Porter. He came there, and asked me how my Lord Powis did, and said he was extremely troubled that he was in that Affliction, for he did verily believe, that neither he, nor the rest of the Lords were in the Plot, and the Witnesses that swore against him, he believed were perjured, and could not believe any thing of it. L. H. Stew. Have you any more to say? Porter. Yes, my Lords, I told him if there were such a thing as a Plot, he having been beyond Sea, must certainly know of it; he told me, as he hoped for Salvation, he knew nothing of it, neither directly nor indirectly, against the Kings Sacred Person, nor the Subversion of the Government. And he further said; Although I am a little low at present, and my Friends will not look upon me, yet I hope God Almighty will never leave me so much, as to let me swear against innocent Persons, and forswear and damn my self. L. H. Stew. Where was this said to you? Porter. At the Ship Alehouse in Lincolns Inn Fields one time, another time at the Kings Head Tavern in the Strand, and another time at the Golden Ball in the Strand. L. H. Stew. Was any body by, besides your self? Porter. Not at that time, but there is a Gentleman in Court, that can testifie that he said such things at other times.
L. H. Stew. What say you to this Turbervill? Mr. Turbervill. I say 'tis all false. But if your Lordships please, I'll tell you what I said once, I did conceive my Lord Powis was the least concerned of any, I thought, and I hoped it would prove so. I can take all the Oaths in the world I said no more. L. H. Stew. What else do you know? Porter. Only such things as these he hath often said. Earl of Shaftsbury. Pray, my Lords, ask him how came Turbervill to talk of Witnesses about the Plot. L. H. Stew. Upon what occasion came Turbervill to talk of these matters? Porter. It was only voluntary of himself, it was speaking of my Lord Powis, and the rest of the Lords in the Tower. Earl of Shaftsbury. My Lords I mean of his own being a Witness. L. H. Stew. How came Turbervill to say, he hoped God Almighty would never forsake him so far, as to let him swear against innocent Persons, he was never called to be a Witness? Porter. But, my Lords, some of his Friends did say they were fearful of him, in regard he was reduced to poverty; His Friends were fearful. L. H. Stew. Who were fearful? Porter. His Brother and Sister, Mr. Turbervill and his Wife. L. H. Steward. Did he take notice to you that they were afraid he would come in? Porter. Yes, Mr. Turbervill did tell me himself, that they heard he would come in? L. H. Stew. Have you said all you have to say? Porter. My Lords that is all I have to say. L. H. Stew. Then call another, my Lord. L. Stafford. Where is Mr. Yalden? (Who stood up.) L. H. Steward. What is your Name? Witness. Yalden. L. H. Stew. Your Christian Name? Witness. John. L. H. Stew. What is your Profession? Yalden. A Barrester at Law. L. H. Stew. How long have you been called to the Bar? Yalden. I was called to the Bar last Trinity Term 12 months. L. H. Stew. What House are you of? Yalden. Grays-Inn. L. H. Stew. Are you a Practiser? Yalden. Yes, my Lords.
L. H. Steward. What Religion are you of? Yalden. Of the Church of England. L. H. Steward. Well, what can you say? Yalden. I am summoned to appear by Order of this House, and I desire to know of my Lord what he is pleased to examine me about. L. Staff. What Mr. Turbervill hath said in his hearing about the Plot. L. H. Stew. What Discourse hath passed between you and Turbervill about the Plot? Yalden. My Lords, in February or March last, I was walking in Grays-Inn-Walks with Mr. Turbervill, and Mr. Powell and he dined with me a day or two after, and there Mr. Turbervill and I were talking of the Distractions of the Times, how Trade was ruined, how the whole Kingdom was out of order, and he was a little touched at some things, and cryed out, Go! Dam me, now, there is no Trade good but that of a Discoverer, but the Devil take the Duke of York, Mon∣mouth, Plot and all, for I know nothing of it. L. H. Stew. That is odd, that he should say it was a good Trade to be a Disco∣verer, and at the same time say, he knew nothing of the Plot. Yalden. This I understood to be his meaning; he cursed himself and them, because he knew nothing of the Plot to discover, for he would have got money by it (as I understood) as well as others. Mr. Turbervill. My Lords, Mr. Yalden did declare yesterday, he was summoned in by my Lord Stafford the last night, and that he had nothing to say but what was by Hear say. Mr. Yalden. My Lords, I do declare what I say is true; and yesterday Mr. Powell gave me a Caution to take heed what I did, and swore, by God, it would else be the worse for me. L. H. Steward. Who did? Yalden. Mr. Powell. L. H. Steward. Who is that? Yalden. Mr. Turbervill's Friend. And I said I do not appear here as a vo∣luntary Evidence, but by an Order of the House of Lords; I do not know what weight my Evidence may have, for I can say nothing but what I heard him say, and so perhaps it will be taken but for an Hear-say. Mr. Turbervill. You said you knew nothing but by Hear-say. L. H. Stew. Will you ask him any Questions Gentlemen? Managers. No, my Lords. L. Stafford. My Lords, I shall not trouble your Lordships with any more Wit∣nesses as to these Points; I have here a Copy of the Warrant for the Yaught to go to Diep; and if there be any Question whether I did come over from Diep at Christmas 75. if you please the Book may be searched. L. H. Stew. My Lord it is all lost, for I hear not one word.
L. Stafford. I say, my Lords, if it be fit to trouble your Lordships with it, I can prove that I did come over in the Yaught from Diep at Christmas 75. Here is the Copy of the Warrant for it to go for me. And whether you will have it proved that I did come over thence, I submit to you. L. H. Steward. I suppose that is fully proved already, that you did come by Diep. Managers. We do not deny it. L. H. Stew. You do not stand upon it, Gentlemen, do you? Managers. No, no, my Lords. L. H. Stew. 'Tis admitted to you, my Lord. L. Stafford. My Lords, when I went from your Lordships Bar last night, I had no thoughts of examining any Witnesss, but what I have already done: But, my Lords, since I was here, there hath something happened, about which I de∣sire Dr. Oats may be called again, (I shall give you the reason why I move it af∣terwards,) upon something I heard yesternight. L. H. Stew. Call Dr. Oats again. (Who appeared and stood up.) L. H. Steward. My Lord, what does your Lordship call him for? L. Stafford. He did say, that he being a Minister of the Church of England, did seemingly go over to the Church of Rome, or some such words; I desire he may answer that first. L. H. Steward. What say you? Dr. Oats. Yes, I did say, I did but seemingly go over. L. Stafford. I desire to know, whether he was really a Papist, or did but pre∣tend. Dr. Oats. I did only pretend, I was not really one, I declare it. L. H. Stew. What do you make of that? L. Stafford. I desire to know how long Dr. Oats was in Spain. Dr. Oats. My Lords, I came into Spain in May, and I came home again in November. L. H. Steward. That is six months. L. Stafford. He is called Dr. Oats: I beseech your Lordships to ask him, whether he were a Doctor made at the Universities here, or abroad. Dr. Oats. My Lords, if your Lordships please, any matter that is before your Lordships, I will answer to it, but I hope your Lordships will not call me to ac∣count for all the Actions of my life, whatever Evidence is before your Lordships, I will justifie. L. H. Stew. The Doctor hath never taken it upon his Oath, that he was a Doctor, and why do you ask it? L. Stafford. He is called a Doctor, and I would know whether he did never declare upon his Oath, that he took the Degree at Salamanca? Dr. Oats. My Lords, I am not ashamed of any thing I have said or done.
I own what is entred as my Oath before your Lordships, and am ready to answer it; but I am not bound to say, what does not at all concern this business. L. Stafford. I say, my Lords, 'tis entred upon your Lordships Books, that he did swear at the Council, he was at Madrid with Don John of Austria; I would know of him whether he did so. Dr. Oats. My Lords, I would have my Lord to propose the Question to the Court of Peers. L. H. Steward. Have you sworn any thing of Don John of Austria? Dr. Oats. My Lords▪ I refer my self to the Council Book. L. Stafford. I beseech your Lordships, I may have that Book. L. H. Steward. I believe it is in the Narrative, turn to the Journal, you have that mentioned there. To which the Clerk turned, but it could not be sound. L. H. Stew. If you will not acknwledge it, we must stay till the Book be brought. Dr. Oats. My Lords, if your Lordships please, I will repeat, as well as I can, what was said at the Council Table, but I had rather the Council Book were fetch∣ed, because I am upon my Oath; but, my Lords, I always thought the Council Book is no Record upon any man. L. Stafford. I desire it may be produced, or he own that he said so. Lord High Steward. What you said at the Council Table, you said upon your Oath, and 'tis lawful to lay it before you. Dr. Oats. But, if your Lordships please, as to what was said at the Council Table, if my Lord will bring any one Viva voce, to swear what was said by me there, that will make something. L. H. Stew. That may be material, as he says, That your Lordship should bring some body to swear he said so; for the Clerks may mistake him. L. Stafford. If your Lordships please that the Book may be sent for, I will make it out. Sir W. Jones. It could not be read if it were here. L. H. Stew. If the Clerks will swear what is in the Books, it may. Sir W. Jones. But whether the Clerks will take that upon them or no, may be Question. Lord. High. Steward. Go on in the mean time. L. Stafford. I cannot conclude with him without it. L. H. Stew. Where is the Council Book? For the Clerks inform me 'tis not in their custody; but the Gentlemen of the House of Commons have been at∣tended with the Book, and other Papers relating to it. L. Stafford In the mean time, give me leave to say something; though per∣haps
it may be nothing to the purpose; Mr. Yalden was just now going down' and Turbervill threatned to lay him by the Heels. L. H. Stew. If he did so, 'tis a Misdemeanor, and he must be punished for it. Call Yalden and Turbervill. L. H. Stew. Mr. Turbervill, Have you dared, or threatned Yalden the Witness, to lay him by the Heels? Mr. Turbervill. I did not speak any such words to him, Mr. Dugdale was just by me all the while. L. Stafford. I tell you but what he said, and what I can prove by Witness; pray call Yalden. Mr. Turbervill. This Gentleman, Captain Scudamore, stood by me too. L. H. Stew. But I ask you upon this Misdemeanor, Whether you threatned Yalden to lay him by the Heels? Mr. Turbervill. My Lords, I stood by Mr. Dugdale till he was gone down. L. H. Stew. How could he lay him by the Heels? By what Authority could he do it? Mr. Turbervill. I did not speak such a word, upon my Oath. L. Stafford. Ask Yalden, I am told he did. L. H. Stew. I am afraid you are misinformed, my Lord, for he could not do it, 'tis not in his power. L. Stafford. He threatned he would Goal him, but if you won't Examine it, I submit to you. Dr. Oats. My Lords, Yalden, it seems, calls us a Pack of Rogues, that give Evidence for the King; and here are Witnesses of it. (Yalden stood up.) L. H. Stew. Yalden, were you threatned by Turbervill? Yalden. Yes, I will tell you how I was threatned, my Lords, Mr. Turbervill pulls me by the Arm, when I had given my Evidence, and asked me if I knew him, and bid me take care. L. H. Stew. Do you call that a threatning? Yalden. My Lords, I did not make this Complaint, nor did I desire it should be made; but speaking this in the Room, some body carried it to my Lord. Mr. Turbervill. My Lords, now he hath done, let me speak, I pray; Mr. Yalden did say in the hearing of Captain Scudamore, who is here, he had got a great many Clients here, but you, says he, have got nothing but a pack of Rogues. Yalden. That is a mistake. L. H. Stew. This is fine work. But, Gentlemen, will you call Captain Scudamore now, or will you stay till afterwards? Sir Fr. Winn. My Lords, Mr. Turbervill desires it may be now, and we do also desire it upon this occasion, Captain Scudamore is a man of Quality, and will
give you a true account. We did not think to have interposed in my Lord Staf∣ford's Evidence, but he having impeached our Witnesses of a Misdemeanor, we conceive it fittest to clear it at this time. Then Captain Scudamore was sworn. L. H. Stew. Mr. Scudamore, what are you called for? Can you say any thing that happened between Turbervill and Yalden? Captain Scudamore. The Gentleman that is here, that said he was one of Grays-Inn, I do not know his Name— L. H. Stew. 'Tis Yalden. Captain Scudamore. I heard a Gentleman ask him, if he came there to get Cli∣ents? And he said, I know nothing among you but Roguery. L. Stafford. Whereabouts did this Gentleman stand? Captain Scudamore. In the Passage. Mr. Turbervill. Here are five or six more that heard him say so. Yalden. That which I said, was this, That I might come hither for Practice, but I did not come hither for Roguery. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, until such time as the Council-Book comes, which may be sent for: Will your Lordship proceed to something else? L. Wharton. My Lord Steward, I humbly conceive, That it was resolved in the Lords House, the day before yesterday, that no Book should be sent for out of the Court, and it was done upon the Judgment of all the Judges of England. Yalden. My Lords, They will not permit me to go down. L. H. Stew. There is a strange Quarrel between you Witnesses, and an Af∣fectation of complaining one of another. Let Mr. Yalden go down. Sir W. Jones. My Lords, I would only acquaint your Lordships, that the Coun∣cil-Book, that my Lord does make mention of, was in the hands of our Clerk, we did not know of it when it was first discoursed of; but now understanding that here it is, we desire it may be delivered in to any body that hath occasion for it. L. H. Stew. Hand it in. (Which was done.) L. H. Stew. What day does your Lordship speak of? L. Stafford. The 28, 29, or 30. of September. Clerk. Then this is not the Book, for this is for January. L. Stafford. My Lords, Is it your Lordships pleasure I may have Pen, Ink, and Paper allowed me? L. H. Stew. Yes, yes, give my Lord Pen, Ink and Paper, (which they did.) Then the Lord High Steward looked upon the Council-Book. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, In this Council-Book, as far as we can inform our selves by the Table of it, there is nothing at all of it; it must be the Council-Book in September.
Sir Will. Jones. We have no other Book but that. L. H. Stew. Why did not your Lordship send all this while to the Council Table for any thing that was material, but give the Court the trouble to be in∣terrupted upon your Inquiries? L. Stafford. My Lords, you may do what you please, I did not know any such thing would have needed to be urged. I have proof enough without the book; The use I should have made of it, is this, I do appeal to some of your Lordships (you that were of the Council) I do appeal to which of you that were by, whether Dr. Oats did not say at the Council Table, he had been at Madrid, he went from Vallidolid to Madrid, and there did preach something at the Jesuits Colledge at Madrid, (what it was I cannot tell) when Don John of Austria was by. L. H. Stew. If any of my Lords of the Council do remember it they may Testifie. L. Privy Seal. My Lords, I shall tell your Lordships as much as I remember of it: Dr. Oats was examined about his Journey into Spain, and (amongst the rest) some Question hapned to be asked, whether he had seen Don John of Au∣stria, he said he had seen one that was called so, that he knew him not, but he was pointed to one that they said was Don John of Austria; that I heard. L. Stafford. My Lord, I thank you. L. H. Stew. You hear what is said, Dr. Oats. Dr. Oats. My Lords, suppose I did say so, I think there is no crime in it. L. H. Stew. 'Tis not objected against you as a Crime, but as a mistake in your Oath, there was no such man there. L. Privy Seal. My Lords, I would not be misunderstood in the Evidence I give; I did not say that Oats said he knew him, but that he knew him not, and only was told such a man was he. Dr. Oats. It was made apparent, that I did not know him, because I mistook his Person. L. Stafford. I do stand upon it, That upon his Oath, (and I have reason to believe he did so, because I am so informed) he said it was Don John of Austria. L. Privy Seal. No, my Lord, Dr. Oats said he was a tall lean man, and it seems he was a little fat man. L. Stafford. If any man would shew him a man to counterfeit Don John of Au∣stria, he would not shew him a lean man for a fat. L. H. Stew. Go on, my Lord. L. Stafford. I shall now put your Lordships in mind that he swore, but my Memory is bad, and my Eyes much worse, that he saw me receive a Commission, and it seems he saw what it was too: Now it is strange, that amongst so many Commissions that were given, none should be extant; I desire him to shew the Commission he saw me receive.
L. H. Stew. Would your Lordship have him shew the Commissions which he saw you receive? L. Stafford. I do not believe he can shew my Commission; for I am sure there was none; I desire him to shew any one of my Letters he talks of. He says, he came over, feigning to be a Papist, when he was not, and that they shewed him presently all my Letters, and now he is come to discover the Plot; I ask him, did he keep any one of my Letters? L. H. Stew. Have you any of any Lords Letters by you? Dr. Oats. My Lords, I could not keep any Letters sent to the Fathers, I had a fight of them, but none of them to my particular use. L. Stafford. Does he know my Hand? did he ever see it in his life? Dr. Oats. Yes, I do know his Hand, I believe I have a Letter of my Lords by me, but not about me, 'tis of no Concern; I'm sure I have one of my Lord Arundel's. L. Stafford. But he says he hath a Letter of mine; let him shew one of my Letters. Dr. Oats. He writes a mixt Hand, I think 'tis but an indifferent one. L. Stafford. So many Comissions, and so many Letters, as are spoken of, and not one to be found or produced. L. H. Stew. Can you send for the Letter? Dr. Oats. My Lords, I am not certain of that. L. H. Stew. Where did you see my Lord write? Dr. Oats. At Fenwick's, my Lords, when I carried the Letter to the Post. L. Stafford. How often hath he seen me at Fenwick's? Dr. Oats. My Lords, not above twice, if twice. L. Stafford. My Lords, I cannot say I did not see him there, but I can say I don't know the place, nor that ever I was there. Dr. Oats. My Lords, will his Lordship say I never saw him at Dr. Perrots? L. Stafford. Who? Dr. Oats. My Lord Stafford. L. Stafford. Where did he live? Dr. Oats. In Dukes-street, going into Lincolns-Inn-Fields; he is the Arch-Priest of the Seculars, that is, the Principal of the Secular Clergy; and he hath the care of the English Colledge for the sending of Scholars to the Colledge. Mr. Fisher, my Lord Stafford, and Dr. Perrot were together discoursing about sending his Son thither, and Mr. Fisher would have one sent with him that was Dr. Perrot's Man. L. Stafford. I do profess before God, I was never at Dr. Perrot's in my whole life. L. H. Stew. Did not you send your Son abroad? L. Stafford. No, my Lords, not I.
L. H. Stew. Had he a Servant at Dr. Perrot's to attend him? Dr. Oats. No, my Lords, not that I know of, I cannot say he had not. L. Stafford. I tell you positively, as I am a Christian, my Lords, I did not send my Son to Lisbon, he went against my Will. I told him I had an aversion to it, but said I will not lay my Commands on you not to go, but he would go, I could not help it; I told him, Do you mean to go into the Colledge? he would not tell me. L. H. Stew. Pray, my Lord, does not your Lordship know Dr. Perrot? Lord Stafford, Yes, my Lords, I do. L. Stafford. Were you never with him at his House in Duke-street. L. Stafford. No, my Lords, never in my life, nor saw that Fisher he speaks of, ever in my life. Dr. Oats. My Lords, 'tis against the Rules of that House, that any be admit∣ted of that House (if their Parents be Catholicks) without consent of their Pa∣rents. L. Stafford. If he be admitted there, I know it not. Dr. Oats. He lives there. L. Stafford. But I protest before God, my Lords, I asked him that Question, Will you go to the Colledge? No, says he, I will go to lie at the Bishops House; but as for Dr. Perrot, I never was at his Lodgings in my life, and I never knew where he lay; he hath been with me sometimes, but I knew not that he was a Doctor. But, my Lords, I desire I may not be ran down by these Fellows, who do not speak a word true, nor one tittle. My Lords I have Witnesses in whose House Fenwick lay. Call them and ask them if ever they knew me in their lives. L. H. Stew. What kind of man was he? Dr. Oats. My Lords, he is an ancient man he wears his own Hair. L. H. Steward. Is he a tall man, or a low man? Dr. Oats. A lusty man. L. Stafford. Truly, my Lords, I never was at his house since I was born. Dr. Oats. My Lords, I'll tell your Lordships a Circumstance, That Summer Don Francisco de Melos, the Ambassador here was sick, and I think he died of the Sickness, Dr. Perrot was his Father Confessor; I was waiting for Dr. Perrot some time, for he promised to meet me at his Lodgings, and this Gentleman the Priso∣ner at the Bar did come in there. L. Staffo rd. Where? Dr. Oats. Into Dr. Perrot's Lodging. Dr. Perrot had a Kinsman there that waited on him; and when my Lord came in, he was in haste to speak with Dr. Perrot, and he offered me half a Crown to fetch Dr. Perrot to him, and I made him this Reply, I was no Porter. L. Stafford. If ever I saw this man in my life since I was born, or heard of
his Name till the Plot, then I will confess my self guilty of all. Indeed, when first I heard of the Plot (they said) there was one Mr. Oats discovered it, but I did not know any such man. Dr. Oats. I went by another Name, and went in another Habit, and my Lord Stafford, though his memory be bad, yet it can't be so bad, but that he must re∣member something of me. L. Stafford. I don't remember you, I never saw your face in my life. L. H. Steward. You would have given him half a Crown to have fetch'd Dr. Perrot. L. Stafford. It seems then at that time, I took him for a poor Fellow, that I should offer him a shilling or two. Dr. Oats. It is like I was, but I refused your half Crown, and told you I was no Porter. L. Stafford. My Lords, I shall give you Evidence that he was a poor Fellow, since he gives me occasion to prove it, nay, that he was so poor, that he was brought down to accept of 6 d. I will prove it by the party that gave it, now he puts me upon it: But, my Lords, this Doctor Oats says he saw some of my Letters, I desire to know what was in them; Did he take any Notes? What was in them? L. H. Stew. Did you when you had a sight of these Letters at St. Omers, take any Notes out of them? Dr. Oats What Notes I did take, if I did take any, I have not now in being, but I do not remember that I did take any. Besides, my Lords, we could keep no Papers by us, but what we communicated to our Superiours, and therefore it was still their care to look after their Papers themselves; and in that Circumstance of time, if they had known I had taken Notes out of their Papers, it would have been prejudicial to me, and indangered my life. L. Stafford. My Lords, I infer this one thing further, upon what this Doctor Oats tells you, He did seemingly profess himself of the Catholick Religion, and I do stand upon it, that hereupon he is no competent Witness in that which he offers against me: For he being of the Church of England, (for I think he pro∣fesses himself so, and wears that Habit) I say, any man, let him be who he will in the world, Church of England man or other, that shall pretend himself to be a Papist, for what end soever it be that he so pretends, and dissembles with God Almighty, which he must do to a great height, in receiving that Sacrament, which is by your Lordships and the House of Commons declared to be gross Idolatry, is not easily to be esteemed a Witness. I appeal to your Lordships, to the House of Commons, and every body, whether such a Fellow, that will abhor his Religion, let him do it for any ends in the world, be a man to be credited; and especially ingaging in such a way, to such an height, in that which his Con∣science tells him is idolatrous, is not a perjured Fellow, and no compleat Witness? No Christian, but a Devil, and a Witness for the Devil. And I appeal to the
whole Christian World, if a Protestant of the Church of England should come to be a Servant to a Catholick and pretend himself a Papist, and were not so, whether he were fit to be countenanced; as it did once happen to me at Brussels, fore the King came in, one that was a Protestant came to be my Footman, and he professed himself afterwards to be a Catholick; and when I found he was not so, I told him what a Villain he was, and he ought to be punished severely. I detest such dissembling with God, and I think by the Laws of God and Man, and the Holy Scriptures, such a perjured man is no Witness. I am sorry I have troubled your Lordships so long. But now if you please to give me leave, my Lords, I will give you my Reasons why I called him now: when I did remember how he had dissembled with God Almighty, as I said be∣fore, I did consider with my self, sure this Dr. Oats must have been, ever since he hath returned, of a very severe, strict and sober life; for a man that hath so dis∣sembled with God, ought to shew himself of an exemplary, peaceful, pious, civil life, to testifie the truth and reality of his Repentance. But last night when I came home, and was siting by the fire side extreamly weary, my Daughter here comes in, and asks me if I had heard what had passed between Dr. Oats and the Lieutenant; how he called the Lieutenant Rascal and Goaler: sure then, said I, to my self, this is not the quiet, civil, sober man, that such a one that hath lived as he hath done, ought to be. And this is the reason I speak of it, that he should call him vile Names, Goaler and Rascal; it did not become a man of his Coat to do it: whether it was so or no, I do not know, but Mr. Lieutenant, I suppose, will satisfie your Lordships. L. H. Steward. What did Oats say to you, Mr. Lieutenant? Mr. Lieuten. My Lords I was desiring Mr. Oats that he would keep the people down, because there was a great croud; and seeing a great many people come in, he told me, they were Witnesses that were to come in: said I, I believe half of these are not Witnesses; and the door opening so often, I could keep this place in no order; so I desired they would stand away that were not Witnesses: why, says he, you are but a Goaler; then I told him, if it were not for his Coat, and I were out of this place, I would break his head. Then he called me Raskal. L. Stafford. My Lord Steward, I desire to know whether this be a Witness fit to be believed against any man. L. H. Stew. Mr. Oats, this does not become you; 'tis very ill manners in you. Dr. Oats. My Lords, the Lieutenant of the Tower hath the Law; and I re∣fer my self to the Law, if I have done him any wrong. Mr. Serj. Maynard. It did not become Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower to tell him he would break his head. Mr. Lieutenant. Why? if any man out of the Court, or in another Habit, should tell me I was a Goaler, I think I should not deserve to be the Kings Lieutenant, if I did not break his Head.
Mr. Serj. Maynard. Pray tell the Court so. But yet, under favour, you ought not to threaten him for a word to break his head. L. Stafford. My Lords, I do say this to your Lordships, a man that hath dis∣sembled with God Almighty in so high a nature, as he ackowledges himself to have done, ought to be a man of a very severe life afterwards, and not so passi∣onate and cholerick, as it seems this fellow is. L. H. Stew. Will your Lordship proceed? L. Stafford. For this man, truly, I shall say no more; I think I have said enough to make him appear a person not fit to be believed. I would only ask Stephen Dugdale a Question, if you please; 'tis but a little, I won't hold you long. I only ask, and if he deny it, I'le prove it, whether he was not a Prisoner at Stafford for Debt, when he made the first Affidavit? L. H. Stew. Were you a Prisoner for Debt at Stafford, when you made your first Affidavit? Mr. Dugdale. In the Serjeants hands I was, my Lords. L. Staff. For a very great Debt, my Lords, some hundreds of pounds, and he was a fellow not worth a Groat: And, my Lords, Dr. Oats says I offered him half a Crown, and he refused it. I call Ellen Rigby to prove he was so poor he begg'd for six pence. Dr. Oats. I will save my Lord the trouble of proving any such thing. My Lord Stafford says I was a poor man, and had not six pence in my pocket; I can make it appear to the House of Lords, that sometime since I came in upon this Discovery, I have not had two pence in my pocket, and sometimes I have not had six pence: but a mans Pȯverty is no objection against his Honesty. L. Stafford. Where is Ellen Rigby to prove, whether she did not give him six pence? But then, my Lords, pray ask him whether he did not swear at a for∣mer Tryal, he had spent six or seven hundred pounds more than he got? L. H. Stew. Did you say at a former Tryal, you were five or six hundred pound out of purse? Dr. Oats. My Lords, I will satisfie this House what I said; what folks write after me, I am not to justifie. But, my Lords, I had a Friend of mine presented me with 100 l. I name not his Name; but if that be questioned, he is a Peer of this House, and will justifie it. I had 100 l. for my Narrative. I had 100 l. for taking some Jesuits; which is 300 l. I had for some other Copies that I printed, a matter of 50 or 60 l. And now I can make it appear, that as to those Sums which I received in gross, I have spent them all, and more in this Service, for I have none of the money now by me. L. Stafford. He makes out but 350 l. and he swore he was out 700 l. but he does not swear one true tittle, nor is any whit to be believed. Dr. Oats. If you expect I should prove it, I can prove it now. Managers. Be quiet Dr. Oats, we will do you right anon.
L. Stafford. My Lords, I do not know for the present that I have any thing else to trouble your Lordships with. I remember these Gentlemen when I asked them if they had any more Evidence to give in, said No, unless I should give them some occasion; and now I desire your Lordships, if they bring any new Evidence, that I may have time to answer it. L. H. Stew. God forbid but you should have liberty to answer any Objection. Sir W. Jones. My Lords, before we go about to sum up our Evidence we shall have occasion to call some Witnesses, and that will be to fortifie what our Witnes∣ses have said, to discover what kind of Witnesses have been made use of against them, and to falsifie what my Lords Witnesses have said in some particulars. These will be the three Heads for which we desire to call Witnesses. And because (my Lords) we will not trouble you with making one intire Narration of what they can say, or to what purpose we call them before they come, we desire the favour that we may acquaint your Lordships with it, still as we call them; for that we think will be the way more clearly to be understood. My Lords, we shall begin to make good by other Witnesses, some things said by Mr. Dugdale, (for he was our first Witness, and therefore in order of time we will first begin with him.) My Lords, the Prisoner at the Bar was pleased to object— L. Stafford. My Lords, I would not interrupt him; but I would ask whether there were more than two heads that he proceeds upon to fortifie their own Evi∣dence, and to falsifie mine. Sir W. Jones. My Lords, I think we may comprehend all under those two heads: But, my Lords, you observe, one great matter my Lord did insist upon yesterday, was this. That he, it is true, hath seen Mr. Dugdale at my Lord Aston's (though by the way I must say this, my Lord at the first did not seem to know him.)— L. Stafford. I did not know him in his Peraiwig. L. H. Stew. Do not interrupt them, my Lord, for they must have the same li∣berty that you had, to go on without interruption. Sir Will. Jones. We must have the same freedom my Lord had. I will do his Lordship that right, he did afterwards recollect himself, and say, His Perriwig had made that alteration in him, that he did not know him. But my Lord was also pleased to say yesterday, That though he did know him, yet he looked upon him as so mean and inconsiderable a fellow, that he did purposely avoid all discourse with him; and that sometimes when he was a dry at my Lord Aston's he would not speak to him to help him, nor to call one to help him to drink. My Lord, was pleased yesterday also to deny that ever he had any Converse with him but only that one time, when indeed Mr. Dugdale did desire to make use of my Lord, that by his interposition he might have leave to go to the Foot-Race. My Lords, your Lordships very well perceive we are now going about to prove a matter most∣ly arising within my Lord Aston's Family; and what Witnesses we shall have from thence, your Lordships may easily imagine will not be very favourable to us: and if
we have not many to this point, your Lordships will take into consideration, that those who can give the fullest proof here, must be those of the Family, and the Religion of the Family. But, my Lords, we will call one or two that I believe will give you satisfaction that my Lord the Prisoner was no such stranger to Mr. Dugdale; that they have been seen together, and alone together; and that is the first thing we desire to call Witnesses to. Call Mr. Ansell and William Hanson. Mr. Hanson was sworn. L. H. Steward. Where do you live? Whose Servant are you? Mr. Hanson. At Wilnal in Stafford shire. L. H. Steward. What do you ask him? Sir Will. Jones. I desire, if you be satisfied where he lives, that he will tell you whether he hath been at my Lord Aston's, and seen my Lord Stafford there. L. H. Steward. Have you seen my Lord Stafford at my Lord Aston's? Mr. Hanson. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Steward. When? Mr. Hanson. A little above two years ago. L. Stafford. Be pleased he may name the time positively. Sir Will. Jones. My Lord Stafford is not so well versed in prosecutions of this nature, as to know that he is not to interrupt us while we are examining our Wit∣nesses. L. H. Steward. My Lord, your Lordship received no interruption, nor must give none. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we desire this Witness may be asked, whether or no he hath seen Mr. Dugdale and my Lord Stafford at any time together. L. H. Steward. What say you? Mr. Hanson. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Steward. When, and where? Mr. Hanson. I cannot justly tell the time. L. H. Stew. Can you tell the place? Mr. Hanson. Yes, at my Lord Aston's. L. H. Stew. Whereabouts? Mr. Hanson. In my Lord Aston's Parlour. L. H. Stew. And were they alone? Mr. Hanson. Mr. Dugdale fetched me to my Lord Stafford. L. H. Stew. And was no body in the Parlour when Dugdale fetched you to my Lord? Mr. Hanson. No, my Lords, I think there was not. L. Stafford. He thinks there was not. Mr. Hanson. There was not, to my best remembrance. Sir W. Jones. My Lords, will you be pleased to ask him the Occasion why Dugdale fetched him to him.
Mr. Hanson. My Lord had a mind to have a Boy, L. H. Stew. What was the occasion that Dugdale did come to fetch you to my Lord Stafford in the Parlour? Mr. Hanson. To bring the Boy, my Lords, Yong Hawkins. Mr. Dugdale fetched me and the Boy to him; it was a Boy that my Lord would have to live with him. Sir Will. Jones. Can you tell what time of the year it was? whether Winter or Summer as near as you can? L. H. Stew. Aye, What time of the year was it? Mr. Hanson. Indeed, my Lords, I cannot tell. Sir Will. Jones. I desire to ask him, whether, when he went away, he left them together? L. H. Stew. Did you leave them together? Mr. Hanson. To my best remembrance, my Lords, I did. The Boy and I went away together, and we left them at my Lord Aston's Parlour-door. Sir Will. Jones. Call James Ansel. L. H. Stew. Nay, if you have done with him, my Lord Stafford may ask him any Questions. L. Stafford. My Lords, I shall tell you how this thing is. There was a re∣port that this Hawkins was a very good running Foot-boy; and this was spoken of at my Lord Aston▪s at Dinner or Supper, I don't know which, nay severall times about that time; it was when my Lord of Danby was Treasurer, and his Son my Lord Dunblain was much for Foot-matches, and I had a minde to have a Foot-boy to make a match with him; and I believe Dugdale at Dinner or Sup∣per did say that he was a good running Lad, and I might desire to see him, and Dugdale did bring him to me I believe into my Lord Aston's Parlour; but there was at least six or seven in the Room besides. L. H. Stew. My Lord Stafford, Was this at that time when your Lordship was at Tixal the 12 of September? L. Stafford. Pray, my Lords I desire to ask him that Question; I would know what year it was. L. H. Stew. He says it was above two years ago, L. Stafford. I profess I believe it was one or two years before I was taxed with this Plot. I did never think I should be questioned about this, or I could easily have brought witnesses that were by at that time. It is true he did come to me, but pray what time of day was it? Mr. Hanson. In the morning I think it was. L. Stafford. I profess to God, it was after Supper; as I hope to be saved, it was as we were going to bed, to the best of my remembrance. Sir Will. Jones. Did you come into the Parlour after Supper? Mr. Hanson. I am not sure what time it was.
Sir Will. Jones. If his Lordship please to ask him any more Questions, if not, we will call another. James Ansell. (who was sworn.) L. H. Steward. What is your Name? Witness. James Ansell. L. H. Stew. Where do you live? Mr. Ansell. At Heywood in Staffordshire. L. H. Stew. Did you live with my Lord Aston? Mr. Ansell. I have been at my Lords House at Tixal. L. H. Stew. But you are not of the Family? Mr. Ansell. No. L. H. Stew. How far is Heywood from Tixal? Mr. Ansell. A Mile. L. H. Stew. Have you seen my Lord Stafford at Tixal? Mr. Ansell. I have seen a man they called my Lord Stafford. I did not know him, but as they told me. L. H. Stew. Did you ever see Dugdale in the company of a man they called my Lord Stafford? Mr. Ansell. Two years ago I was at Tixal, and there I saw one that they said was my Lord Stafford walking with Mr. Dugdale, whom I did know. L. H. Stew. Where was it? Mr. Ansell. In the Court at Tiaxl, walking together. L. H. Stew. Were they alone? Was there no body else in company? Mr. Ansell. None that I saw; there might be more company, but I saw no more. Sir Will. Jones. Pray, my Lords, ask how long ago this was? Mr. Ansell. About Summer was two years. Sir Will. Jones. If his Lordship will ask him any Questions now we have done, he may; otherwise we will call another. L. Stafford. My Lords, I have recollected my self as well as I can in so short a time, and all I can say is, some of my Servants were by, I suppose; and I do as∣sure your Lordships, the other business was above three years ago; so the fellow does not know what he does say. L. H. Stew. Will you ask him any Questions? L. Stafford. Pray ask him how long he saw me in the Court with Dugdale. L. H. Stew. How long was it? Mr. Ansell. I cannot tell. I did but walk through the Court: I came to speak with Mr. Dugdale, and he was with my Lord. L. Stafford. Did he hear us discourse, or any word we said? Mr. Ansell. No, I did not. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, if you please, before Ansell go away, we would ask him a Question to another point; and that is, For what reason Dugdale was se∣cured, whether he went away for Debt or no?
L. H. Stew. Do you know wherefore Dugdale was secured, or why he went from my Lord Astons. Mr. Ansell. I can't tell why he went away; whether for fear of the Plot, or no, I can't tell. Sir VV. Jones. What discourse was between you and Dugdale about it? Mr. Ansell. Where? There was a discourse at Stafford when he was there. Sir VV. Jones. But before he went away? Mr. Ansell. I came to my Lord Aston's one day, and told Mr. Dugdale I heard say he was concerned in the Plot; for I told him I was amongst some people, and they say you are concerned in the Plot. And this was about a fortnight after the News was hot in our Country. L. H. Stew. What said he? Mr. Ansell. He laughed at it, and said, God blast him if he knew any thing of it. L. Stafford. So he denied it then. Sir VV. Jones. Pray, Sir, at that time did he say he knew any thing about my Lord Aston, and why my Lord Aston did use him ill? Then my Lord Stafford objected Mr. Dugdale was too near the VVitness, and desired he might go down; and it was ordered accordingly. Sir Fr. VVin. My Lords, we would ask this man what does he know of Dug∣dale's concealing himself after he had heard of the discourse about the Plot. Mr. Ansell. I know not that, my Lords; he was fearful of coming in company: what his discourse was, I do not know. Sir VV. Jones. My Lords, now if it please your Lordships, we will go to a∣nother particular. Yor Lordships will please to remember, that yesterday there were two Witnesses called by my Lord Stafford, that is Sambidge and Philips; Sambidge was the old Gentleman that was deaf, and a little passionate too, be∣cause he was once summoned to Litchfield Court. Mr. Philips was the Minister of Tixal. And both these did testifie, That whereas Mr. Dugdale had sworn at a former Tryal, that he did give notice before them of the death of Sir Edmunbury Godfrey upon Monday, which (as I take it) was the 14. of October, there was no such notice given in their presence. Mr. Dugdale did affirm, they were by, and that he gave notice before them & others. This was made use of by my Lord to invalidate the Testimony of Mr. Dugdale, that he should go and affirm at a for∣mer Tryal, that he did give notice of the death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey with∣in two days after he was killed, before any one knew of it; and Dugdale must needs know it from the Jesuits: and both of these Gentlemen being now in Court, do deny that they heard of it at that time. My Lords, we shall prove to you here, that he did give notice of it at that time, and that they were both pre∣sent. For Mr. Sambidge, it is not so strange he should not observe it, he was very deaf, and he could hardly hear yesterday; and as he was deaf, so he was ve∣ry passionate. As for Mr. Philips, I cannot say that as to him, but perhaps he
cannot at that distance of time remember; but we will prove by undeniable Wit∣nesses, that notice was given that Munday, and that these persons were by when it was given. Sir Fran. Winn. This Witness we use to another purpose besides this; but we will ask him only to this now. L. Stafford. I desire the Witnesses may stand by themselves. L. H. Stew. Let them take care that there be but one Witness at a time, and that no body approach them while they are giving their Testimony. Sir Will. Jones. We did not make the like desire as to my Lords Witnesses. L. Stafford. In troth you might with all my heart, if you would. Sir Will. Jones. It may be so; but we did not fear them so much. Swear Wil∣liam Goldsmith. (which was done.) Sir Will. Jones. I would begin with James Ansell. (who appeared and stood up again.) Sir Fr. Winn. If your Lordships please, we would ask him what he knows of a discourse about the Justice of Peace's death; to tell the time, and what it was that was said. We only ask general Questions. L. H. Stew. What discourse did you hear of the murder of a Justice of Peace, and when? Mr. Ansell. My Lords, I heard it at Tixal. L. H. Stew. When did you hear it first? Mr. Ansell. The 14. of October. L. H. Steward. Who did you hear it from? Mr. Ansell. From Mr. Dugdale. L. H. Stew. The Letter was dated the 12. Where did you hear of it? Mr. Ansell. It was at one Elds House, an Alehouse in Tixal. L. H. Steward. Where? Mr. Ansell. At an Alehouse hard by my Lords. L. H. Stew. Who was by? Mr. Ansell. When that was spoken, there was I, and VVilliam Hanson, and Mr. Sambidge, and Mr. Philips. L. H. Stew. Did Dugdale speak with them at that time? Mr. Ansell. Yes, he was with them at that time, but he spoke with me at the Parlor; for he sent for me into the Parlor. L. H. Stew. Then at the same time he spake it to you, and they were in the House. Mr. Ansell. Yes, he came from them to me into the Parlor, and went to them again. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, I hear him speak to the day of the Month; if you please to ask him, if he can tell what day of the Week it was? Mr. Ansell. It was on a Munday.
L. H. Stew. That is right, the Letter was dated on Saturday the 12. of October. Sir Fr. Winn. I would ask him, whether afterwards he came into the Room where Mr. Philips the Parson was? Mr. Ansell. Yes. Sir Fr. Winn. Was there any discouse after you came in, about the Death of  Justice of Peace? Mr. Ansell. I cannot tell that. L. H. Stew. Will you please to ask him any thing, my Lord? L. Staff. Indeed, my Lords, he says nothing concerning me; therefore I say only this, I desire to know, if he can tell, what time of day it was? Mr. Ansell. It was the Forenoon. Sir W. Jones. Then call Will. Hanson again. (who appeared.) Sir Fr. Winn. We call him to the same Question. Do you declare to my Lords what you know of Mr. Dugdale's acquainting you with the Death of a Justice of Peace, and when it was. Mr. Hanson. I heard Mr. Dugdale say at Old Elds house at Tixal, There was a Justice of Peace murdered, that lived at Westminster. L. H. Steward When did he tell you so? Mr. Hanson. The day that I went to run the Race, the 14. of October. Sir Fr. Winn. Can you remember what day of the week it was? Mr. Hanson. It was Munday. L. H. Steward. Was it the Forenoon or Afternoon? Mr. Hanson. The Forenoon. L. H. Stew. What Company was in the house when he told you of it? M. Hanson. Old Mr. Sambidge, and Mr. Philips the Parson of Tixall. L. H. Steward. Were they in the House at that time? Mr. Hanson. Yes. L. H. Stew. Were they by when the discourse was? Mr. Hanson. Mr, Sambidge was going to drink a Bottle of Ale, as he said, at my Lords Bowling Green; and for a while he sits down, and presently Mr. Phi∣lips comes in and sits down, and Mr. Dugdale came out of the Parlour into the Room where we were come; said I, What News? said he, They say there is a Justice of Peace murdered at Westminster. Sir Fr. Winn. Was Philips in the Room? Mr. Hanson. Yes, he hath forgot it, but he was there. L. H. Steward. Did Philips hear it? Mr. Hanson. He might have heard it if he would. L. H. Stew. Had you any discourse with Philips about this since? Mr. Hanson. No, my Lords. Sir Fr. VVinn. He is positive both as to the day of the month, and as to the week, and that both of them were present.
Sir W. Jones. My Lords, e shall prove to you now, That the Post which comes out of London on Saturday, comes to this place on Munday morning; and those which goes out of Tuesday, come there on Thursday morning; and the Post which goes out of London on Thursday, comes to this place on Saturday morning. L. Stafford. He says the Post comes such and such days, I own it, and in the morning too. Sir Will. Jones. Then I go on, my Lords, to another point, which will be a farther Confirmation of the matter. For, my Lords, we will prove to you, and that by men of Quality, that the noise of the Murder was in that Countrey the Wednesday and Thursday following the Murder. Your Lordships please to ob∣serve, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was killed the Twelfth of October; he was found the Thursday following, which was, (as I take it) the 16. or 17. of October. We will prove now, that the noise and knowledge of the Murder was in the Countrey about Tixal, before he was found here near London. Now we only bring this as a Confirmation of this matter, that it was revealed at the Alehouse, and so it went about the Countrey. And for this we call Edward Birch Esquire, and John Turton Esquire. Sir Fr. VVinn. Before we examine them, I would state the time: Sir Edmund∣bury Godfrey was missing on Saturday, which was the 12. of October; his Murder was not discovered till Thursday. We call these persons to a double purpose; the one to fortifie what our Witnesses have said, and the other to shew, that this man was dispatched by these Mens Confederates, because they knew it so soon; which could not have been, but that they were in the Conspiracy themselves. L. Staff. I desire only that he may say whether he means me among the rest. Sir Fr. Winn. My Lord, I will do you no wrong, I speak of those at Tixal. (Then Mr. Birch was sworn.) L. H. Steward. When did you hear of the death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, Mr. Birch? Mr. Birch. My Lords, I did not hear any thing of the death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, till the Saturday-Post; but I presume that which these Gentlemen call me for, is this: I did hear before Thursday, I think Tuesday was the first day, that there was a Justice of Peace of Middlesex killed, and it was thought the Papists murdered him; and this on Tuesday and Wednesday was all over the Countrey, that is, Tuesday after his death: for I'll tell your Lordships how I came to take notice of it; for hearing such a report in the Countrey, I did not so much take notice of it, but being at the Kings Bench Bar, at the Tryal of Green, Berry and Hill, for the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, I found upon the Evidence that the Body was not found till the Thursday after he was killed; that made me recollect my self as to what I had heard in the Countrey: and as I stood at the Bar, I told several Gentlemen that I did perfectly remember, before Thursday it was
discoursed of in the Countrey by several Gentlemen where I lived. Sir Will. Jones. Call John Turton Esquire. Sir Fr. Winn. Some of my Lords here, I perceive, desire he should be asked a more particular Question. L. H. Steward. I desire to ask him this: You heard of it you say on Tuesday, that a Justice of Peace of Middlesex was killed; I desire to know who you heard it from. Mr. Birch. Truly, my Lords, I can't tell. For I'll tell your Lordships, I have some certain days that I constantly appoint to be at home in, when people come about business to me. Among these people, several came that asked me what news I had from London. I told them, I had received a Letter or two by the Post, and I shewed them those Letters, there was little or nothing in them. Thereupon they asked me if I did not hear of a Justice of Middlesex that was killed, No, said I. How come you to hear it, says one, I come through Cank, (which is within half a mile of mine own house) and as I came through, there came a person from Hey∣wood, that said 'tis all the news about Tixal and Heywood, and that part of the Countrey. And this was said to me in my own House. Sir Fr. Winn. How far is Heywood from Tixal? Mr. Birch. About a mile. Sir Fr. Winn. Now, my Lords, I would ask Mr. Turton to the fame business. (Mr. Turton was sworn.) L. H. Stew. Mr. Turton, pray hear: When did you first hear in Staffordshire of the death of a Justice of Peace of Middlesex? Mr. Turton. My Lords, there are two Races in that Countrey, at a place near Lichfield, and they are about the middle of October; the one that year was the 15. the other the 18. the one the Tuesday, and the other the Friday. I was at both of them; and one of the days, which I cannot be positive in, there was one Mr. Whitehall, a Justice of Peace in Staffordshire, called me from the company, and de∣sired to speak with me by my self. Said he, Do you hear any news? No, said I. Do you hear nothing, said he, of a Justice of Peace that is murdered? (I then had not heard of Sir Edmundbury Godfreys being missing.) No, says he, don't you hear he is murdered? Do you know him? Yes, said I, how do you hear it? says he, 'tis a report about us; but I did not then believe it; but the next Post-day, which was Munday, I did hear it; it was either Tuesday or Friday, one of those days. Sir Will. Jones. If it were either one or 'tother, 'tis as strange, and the Evidence as strong; for his Body was not found till Thursday. Sir Fr. VVin. And will your Lordships please to observe, that by that time the report had got the name of Godfrey too, when at that same time we in London did not know what was become of him. Mr. Turton. He asked me if I knew Sir Edmundbury Godfrey: said he, I hear he was an active Justice of the Peace against the Papists; and he made this infe∣rence,
We had need have a care what we do, for we shall be all sacrificed. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, will your Lordships be pleased to observe, that yesterday there was some Witnesses called to disparage Mr. Dugdale. And the first man as I can remember, was a very substantial Gentleman, called Mr. Robin∣son; I think he was not able to give an account of his Employment, but he was a Gentleman that lived upon his Money; I remember those were his words. My Lords, we shall call (without telling you what they will say) some Witnesses to prove the Condition of this Gentleman, what Reputation he is of, and what is his Conversation. And we first call my Lady Gerard. L. Stafford. My Lords, pray give me leave to say one word,—but 'tis no great matter, 'tis not worth the speaking. L. H. Stew. What can you say, my Lord? L. Stafford. It was only a thought of my own, not worth troubling your Lord∣ships with. (Then the Lady Gerard appeared, and was sworn.) L. H. Stew. Does your Ladyship know one William Robinson? Lady Gerard. No, my Lords. Sir W. Jones. He hath several Names, we desire he may be called. L. H. Steward. Call Robinson the Upholsterer. (He was called, but appeared not.) Sir W. Jones. I perceive we mistake one Lady for another. We desire Mr. Booth, a Member of the House of Commons, may be Sworn. (VVhich was done in his place.) L. H. Steward. My Lord Stafford, send for Robinson your Witness. L. Stafford. I believe he is here; but if he be not, one that belongs to me I have sent to see for him; whether he be a good or a bad Witness, I do not know personally. Sir VV. Jones. Mr. Booth knows him very well, he saw him yesterday, and so we may venture to ask him the Question. L. H. Steward. Did you see Robinson the Witness yesterday? Mr. Booth. Yes, my Lords, I did. L. H. Stew. Do you know him? Mr. Booth. My Lords, I do know him very well, though I have not seen him often: for indeed, my Lords, he behaved himself so the first time that I saw him, that I believe I shall never forget him. My Lords, I am better acquainted with his Character than his Person, though I know the man very well; and truly the first time that ever I was in his company, he gave me no incouragement ever to desire it again; for if you please, I'le tell you how I came to know him. He told your Lordships that he came into Cheshire at a Cocking; it was at that time that I saw him, for upon the Sunday after the Cocking, I was invited to a Neighbours, about two miles from home. We were set down to Dinner, and we had not sat
long; but this man comes into the Room where we were; there was an empty place at the lower end of the Table, and he sits him down, and began a discourse to ridicule the Lords day, in such a manner as I never heard the like. And the rest of his discourse was full of a great deal of Contempt of God Almighty, and all that was sacred. All his discourse at Dinner was very prophane. It was not in mine own House; and because it was not taken notice of by the Master of the House, and he coming under the protection of a young Gentleman, I did not what else I should, for I should have made him hold his tongue, or have used it to better purpose. The whole of his discourse was so Atheistical and prophane, that I never heard the like in my life. When dinner was done, he used a great many intice∣ments to draw the Company into play, by asking what would they say if they should see such and such things to be done; and at length he pulls out a great many Dice out of his pocket, and behaves himself in that manner, as people do that would draw in others to play; and they that had better skill in it than I, said that they were all false. When I saw this, I desired him to leave our Room, or to forbear; for, said I, if this be the entertaintment of the day, I must leave the Company: then they commanded him to desist. This is all that I do know of my own knowledge. But I shall acquaint you what I believe, for I have heard it from very considerable persons, whom I dare credit; for the man run much in my mind, because I never saw so ill a man in my life. Coming home, I was speak∣ing to some of my Family: says I, Yonder I met with the strangest fellow that I ever saw in my days, he is fitter to be hanged than any thing else. Oh, Sir, said they, there is such a fellow hath cheated I know not how many at the Town where the Cocking was. The next day, I think it was, or shortly after, I had occasion to go to that Town; and many people came and complained to me of his Cheats, to a very great degree. They asked me what they should do: said I, you have nothing to do, but indite him for a Cheat. Why, said they, will you take no course with him? Said I, What course can I take? I am turned out of the Commission of the Peace, else I know enough to bind him to the good behaviour. After this I had occasion to go into Lancashire, and there I found he was better known than trust∣ed. There were very loud Complains against him, and some would have given Twenty pound to meet with him. I heard afterwards, he went into Staffordshire, and he changed his Name where ever he went: but he soon discovered himself, and all thereabouts he goes for a notorious Cheat. This is all I can say of him. L. Stafford. My Lords, Be pleased to give me leave to say one word: I assure you, if I had thought this man had been such a fellow as now he proves, I would not have brought him before you. I never knew what he was in my life, nor heard of his Name till Saturday last. L. H. Stew. It may be so, my Lord. But your Lordship must take notice, that this is the man that gave the most important Evidence, that Dugdale should corrupt him to swear against you for money.
L. Stafford. Give me leave to observe upon that, my Lords, That if Dugdale knew him to be a cheating fellow, he might think him the liker to take money to forfwear himself. Sir Will▪ Jones. My Lords, we shall not reply now, but observe anon, how this cheating fellow comes to swear for my Lord at this time. But we desire an Ho∣nourable Peer of this House may give some account of him, and that is, the Noble Lord the Earl of Maclesfeld; I think he may be known to your Lordships. Then the Earl of Maclesfeld stood up. L. H. Stew. Pardon me, my good Lord, my Lord must be sworn. E. of Maclesfeld. Before I am sworn, I would know of your Lordships whe∣ther I should be sworn or no; for your Lordship shall not make me be sworn, un∣less my Lords say I should. L. H. Stew. I would not offer it, if there were any colour of doubt in it. (Then my Lord was sworn.) E. of Maclesfeld. My Lords, I have nothing to say against this man but what he said to me, and before a Justice of Peace too; for I did take this man when he had run away from my Lord Gerard. He had cheated many of his Servants; I catched him on the way running to play his tricks somewhere else, and I inter∣cepted him; but though I was a Justice of Peace there, yet because it was in a manner my own case, I would not commit him, till I had carried him before ano∣ther Justice of Peace. So the man comes up to me, says he, My Lord, have you a mind to have your Son-in-law bubbled? I have been only teaching him how to avoid being cheated: I acknowledge my self to be a Cheat, and I would teach him to avoid them. I am going now into Staffordshire, and that was all I intend∣ed to his Lordship. I am a Rogue I confess it. And upon this a Justice of Peace comes in, and while they were examining of him, we bid some that were by to search him, and they found in his pocket false Dice; and truly the Justice nor I did not know whether they were true or false. Says he, You don't know what to do with these, but I do. This is all I can say; but in all the three Counties of Staf∣fordshire, Cheshire, and Lancashire, there are several men that I see here, that know his Life better than I do; for 'tis his common practice: and I believe, my Lords, the Judges must know him, for it was his common practice at all Assizes and great Meetings to play these pranks. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we will not trouble your Lordships any further as to Robinson: if he were here, perhaps my Lady would know him; but having two such Witnesses, I think we need not trouble our selves nor you any more about him. L. H. Stew. Have you done with my Lady Gerard? Sir Will. Jones. Yes, and we beg her pardon for this trouble. My Lords your Lordships will be pleased to remember, there was one Holt was produced as a Witness by my Lord Stafford; and your Lordships, when you look on your Notes, will remember, he testified to this purpose, That Dugdale sent an Horse
for him to Stafford-Town; which Horse brought him to the Star-Inne, and there Dugdale did offer him Forty pounds to swear, That one Mr. Moor carried away Evers the Jesuit, My Lords, we will call some Witnesses to this Mr. Holt; you will find him to be something akin to Mr. Robinson, and, as we suppose, of nothing a better Reputation than he. The Witnesses will give you an account of his pranks. Call Sampson Rawlins and Lander. Rawlins stood up, and was sworn. L. H. Stew. What is your Name? VVitness. Sampson Rawlins. L. H. Stew. What do you ask him? Sir William Jones. We desire▪ to ask him if he knows Samuel Holt the Black∣smith. L. H. Stew. Do you know Holt? Rawlins. Yes. Sir Fr. Winn. Acquaint my Lords what Reputation he is of, where he lives, and what he is. Rawlins. He is counted to be a very lewd loose fellow. L. H. Stew. Why so? Sir Will. Jones. What hath he done? Rawlins. He is counted a drunken lewd fellow. Sir Will. Jones. Is he of an ill Reputation in the Countrey where he lives? Rawlins. Yes, he is so. L. H. Stew. For what? Rawlins. 'Tis said in the Town he keeps another mans wife. Sir Will. Jones Is there any other fault he hath? Rawlins. He said there were none but Rogues would take Mr. Dugdale's part; whereas I never knew any harm by Mr. Dugdale, and I have known him this four∣teen or fifteen years: I dealt with him, I was Taylor to the Family, and he ever paid me very honestly and well. Sir VV. Jones. Have you heard of Mr. Holt any other ill thing besides what you speak of? Rawlins. He broke open my Lord Aston's Wine-celler, and stole several bot∣tles of Wine, wherefore my Lord Aston bid Mr. Dugdale send him to the Goal: but he curryed favour with Mr. Dugdale, and so kept in with him, that he afterwards begged for him of my Lord to forgive him. And now he comes to Evidence against Mr. Dugdale, that was his sure stedfast friend, and saved him from the Goal. L. Stafford. I would ask this Witness a Question.— Rawlins. And because I took Mr. Dugdale's part, saying, he was an honest man (and he was so to me and all others, as far as ever I heard) he met me and would have murdered me.
L. H. Steward. When was this? Rawlins. Since last Term, when I was up here. And likewise Sawyer took a pot, and would have dong'd my brains out. Sir Fr. Winn. My Lords, I think this man was summoned as a Witness, to attend at my Lord Aston's Tryal. What occasion brought you to London at that time? Rawlins. I was subpoena'd up. And when I came home to my Wife and Chil∣dren, they grosly abused me, and said I was a Rogue, because I came up upon His Majesties Service. L. Stafford. Pray, my Lords, ask him whether Holt was my Lord Aston's Ser∣vant or no. L. H. Stew. Was Holt a Servant to my Lord Aston? Rawlins. He was a Smith hard by his Gate, and he worked to the Family. L. H. Stew. Were you subpoena'd up to the Tryal of my Lord Aston? Rawlins. Yes. L. H. Steward. And it was for coming to that Tryal he offered to murder you? Rawlins. Yes, I have several Witnesses of it. And by the blow that Thomas Sawyer gave me, for a good while I could not lay my head on the Pillow. Sir Will. Jones. Call Thomas Launder, (but he did not appear, being gone a∣way sick.) Sir Will. Jones. Because we would not lose your Lordships time, seeing the man we call for, is gone away sick, we will call a Witness as to another of my Lords Witnesses, John Morral. Call Thomas Thorne. (Who was sworn.) Sir Fran. Winn. My Lords, if that other man come by and by, we hope your Lordships will give us leave to ask him a Question, to the point which we are now gone over. But my Lord Stafford did produce one John Morral a Barber that lived at Ridgley, who said, that money was offered him to swear against Sir James Symons, and Mr. Howard, and others. We call this Witness to give your Lord∣ships an account what this Morral is, and how he hath behaved himself in this business. Sir W. Jones. What do you say about John Morral? Do you know him? Thorne. Yes. L. H. Stew. What do you know of him? Thorne. I know he is a man that use to come often to my Lord Aston's to Tixal, to trim him, he is a poor fellow that walks up and down the Country, and hath little or nothing to live on. L. H. Stew. Is he poor and needy? Thorne. Yes, he hath been sued for money, and I have been contributory to keep him out of Prison. Sir W. Jones. I ask you in general, is he of a good or bad Reputation?
Thorne. Indifferent. Sir Will. Jones. 'Tis modestly said. My Lords, your Lordships have heard what kind of Witnesses have been brought against us. For two of them, you have had particular matters; for a third, our Witness speaks modestly, that he is a man of indifferent Reputation. But now, my Lords, we must prove what endea∣vours have been used to get other Witnesses against our Witnesses; and for that. I desire to call one Simon VVright, to tell your Lordships what hath been offered him to swear against Dugdale, and by whom. (VVright stood up and was sworn.) Mr. Foley. My Lords, we desire this Witness would give your Lordships some account, what endeavours have been used by offers of money, or otherwise, to make him swear against Dugdale, and by whom. L. H. Stew. Hath any body endeavoured to perswade you to swear against Dugdale? VVright. Yes, my Lords. L. H. Steward. Tell your whole story, who it was, and what was offered you. VVright. The first time I was employed was presently after the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and it was by one Mr. Plessington, that was in custody about that matter. And he sent me on Sunday morning, to the Marquess of VVinchesters, to desire him, to consider what a charge he lay at. And my Lord did send him word, he could not expect to be discharged so soon. The Tuesday after he was discharged. And afterwards coming unto me, I told him, I was glad he had so good friends to get out so soon. He told me, were I in the same condition, I should have as good or better. Whereupon Mr. Plessington and I were as good friends as any about the Town. I was his Barber, and Barber to Mr. Dugdale, and we were all great cronies. And Plessington told me, if I could find a way to take off his Evidence, or destroy him, I should have seven hundred pounds. I went to inquire out where I might have a security for the Money. And Mr. Reeves, an Apothecary in Chancery-lane, did profer me his Note, and so did Mr. Dewy the Scrivener. But I did not, nor had the Money. And several times, particularly at the Tryal of Mrs. Price, and Mr. Tasborough, they would have had me sworn quite blank, That he would have hired me to have sworn against them. And afterwards they would have had me own I was forsworn, and they would get me a Pardon. L. H. Stew. What had you sworn? VVright. What I heard Mrs. Price say at the Horse-shoe in Chancery-lane, as to the blasting of Dugdale, as may be seen in the Tryal. L. H. Stew. Who offered you that Seven hundred pounds? VVright. My Lord Bellasis's Steward. L. H. Stew. What is his Name?
Wright. Plessington. Sir Fr. Winn. My Lords, I think he says he was to swear against Mr. Dugdale, I desire he would explain himself more particularly, and tell who it was that offered him any money to swear against Dugdale? VVright. Mr. Plessington, my Lords. And since the Tryall of Mrs. Price, they did persuade me to write a Paper for the blasting the reputation of Dugdale, and to shake his credit by it. And that they carried to Mr. Drayton, and Sir James Symons, and they being satisfied, would have me write again to those Gentlemen, and they framed a Letter for me to write. And thereupon Mr. Longmore (I know the Gentleman if I see him again) told me that Sir James Symons was better able to perform than Dugdale was to promise; and if I would stand by it, I should be an happy man. L. H. Steward. What had you said in that Paper? VVright. I had said according as they directed me, that Mr. Dugdale, would have given me money to swear against Sir James Symons, and Mr. Gerard. L. H. Steward. Did you swear that? VVright. No, I did not, but I was to have done it. L. H. Steward. How came it to pass you did not agree with them? VVright. My Lords, I have had Four pounds in hand, and that I had by reason poverty came upon me. And my Lord Bellasis's Steward came and lay with me, and spent Twenty shillings upon me; but finding that I was not absolutely true to them, nor like to go through, they distrusted me; and I borrowed an Horse of Captain Chetwin, and got down into the Country, where I have been since July last, till I was fetch'd up by a Messenger to come and give Evidence for the King. And there I received a Letter from my Lord Aston's Agent, That if I would call at Stafford and come up with my Lords Witnesses they would bear my charges up to London. I have the Letter in my Pocket. L. Stafford. If it please you, he may shew the Letter, (which he did.) Clerke. This for Simon Wright, a Barber at  deliver with care. Subscribed, Your Loving Friend  Abnett. Symon Wright, I Have just now received a Letter from the Lord Stafford, wherein my Lord men∣tioned Wright to be one of his VVitnesses, and desired me forthwith, to give Wright notice, That if possible, he should be at London on Saturday night next, his Tryal be∣ing to be on the Tuesday after; therefore if he pleased to come to him, he should give him Money to bear his charges up, and he should come up with my Lords VVitnesses. Abnett. (This is the substance of the Letter as it was taken.)
Sir W. Jones. I presume your Lordships will be pleased to take notice, he was intended a Witness for my Lord, and it was supposed then that he was able to say something, but he was not produced by my Lord yesterday. L. Stafford. Pray, my Lords, give me leave, as to this Witness, I desire if you please, I may have time to prove something against this man till to morrow. I have enough against him. Mr. Serj. Maynard. You will find another Witness, I suppose, by that time. L. Stafford. No, I will not find him, I have him already, I have enough against this Fellow. L. H. Stew. You shall have time to say what you will, my Lord. Mr. Serj. Maynard. I would my Lord would name his Witness. L. Stafford. I will name him to you since you ask it, 'tis Dodd, he knows what I mean well enough. VVright. I don't know him, my Lord, I'le assure you. Sir VV. Jones. My Lords, We will go on now to another matter. My Lord Stafford was pleased to object, That Mr. Dugdale did talk much of Letters, and proceedings, but was able to shew none of them. My Lords, we will give an account how that comes about. Mr. Dugdale as in part hath been proved already, was apprehensive of being accused for the Plot; nay I think we shall prove, he was afraid he had been in the Proclamation against those Traytors and Jesuits that were fled; We shall prove, that Mr. Dugdale to secure himself, and his then friends (for he was not then come over to make any discovery) did burn a great many Letters and Papers that did relate to those proceedings, and did not leave any thing remaining, hoping thereby to prevent a discovery. We will call Wit∣nesses that were by when it was done, and I think that will be some answer to this objection. Call Elizabeth Eld, and Anne Eld. Elizabeth Eld sworn. Sir Fr. VVinn. My Lords, if your Lordships please, we would ask her this ge∣neral Question, What she knows of Mr. Dugdale's burning a great many Letters and Papers, at what place, and about what time. Elizabeth Eld. I cannot possibly say to the time, I burnt some Writings for him when he went away, he desired me to burn them, he did not tell me what Writings they were. He said, the times were troublesome, and if he should be sick upon the Road where he was going, he would not have all his Papers seen, but he desired me to burn them. And I took and burnt them all but one Book; and my Sister asked if that Book should be burnt, he said, no, there was nothing of Treason in it; I asked him if there were any thing of Treason in the others, and he said, Do you think there was? Sir VV. Jones. How long was this before he went away? Elizabeth Eld. That morning when he went away. Sir W. Jones. How many Papers were there?
Elizabeth Eld. I cannot say how many. Sir Will. Jones. I do not ask you the number, but the quantity, was there a bushel? Elizabeth Eld. I cannot say, they were roll'd up, and put in his Pockets and his Breeches. L. H. Steward. Were they Parchments or Papers? Elizabeth Eld. They were Papers. L. H. Steward. Were they Letters? Elizabeth Eld. I did not see what they were, but they were wrapt up together, they might be the Accompts of the House for what I know. Sir Fr. Winn. But she says, as I take it, that Mr. Dugdale said there was Trea∣son in them. Elizabeth Eld. No, he said, Did I think there was? He said, it was no matter for burning that little Book, there was no Treason in that, and when I asked him if there was any in the others, he said, Do you think there was? L. H. Steward. Was it one or two bundles? Elizabeth Eld. There were several bundles, they were not tyed up, but taken in handfuls and thrown into the fire. Mr. Foley. If my Lord Stafford will ask her no Question, we will call up ano∣ther. Elizabeth Eld. My Lords, I did see Mr. Dugdale take a glass of Cyder, and I heard him say, and wish it might be his Damnation, and he might sink in the place where he stood, if he knew any thing of the Plot. Sir W. Jones. I pray what Religion are you of? I don't ask you to disparage you. Elizabeth Eld. A Roman Catholick. L. H. Steward. When was it that he said that? Elizabeth Eld. When he was in Staffordshire. Anne Eld was then sworn. Mr. Foley. Tell my Lords what you know of any Papers that were burnt by Mr. Dugdale, or by his direction, and at what time. Anne Eld. Mr. Dugdale came to my Fathers house over night, and the next morning (before he went away) he brought a great many Papers he had in his Breeches, and in his Pockets, bundled together, and he desired us to burn them in the flame of a Candle. L. H. Stew. Why did he desire you to burn them? Anne Eld. He said, the times were troublesome, and being to travel, he was to go to diverse places, and if he were taken, people would think him a Plotter, hav∣ing all those Papers about him. L. H. Stew. Did he burn the Book at that time? Anne Eld. No.
L. H. Stew. Why not? Anne Eld. I found that Book, and asked him if that should be burnt, he said, no' lay that by, it may do good seven years hence, there is no Treason in it; says my Sister to him, Is there any Treason in the rest? says he, Do you think there is? that was all. Sir Will. Jones. Not to trouble you longer (my Lords) upon this, your Lord∣ships will be pleased to remember, yesterday my Lord Stafford was pleased to of∣fer by way of Evidence, as if Mr. Dugdale was a man of an ill Reputation in these particulars, That he had defrauded my Lord Aston, that he was a mean man, run in arrear to my Lord; and that being in necessity, he became a fit instrument to give false Evidence. We shall shew, That Mr. Dugdale was a man of Estate; that both before, and since he came away from my Lord Aston, he hath made it his business to desire my Lord to come to Accompt; that he hath pressed him, and that he does believe, and hath reason so to believe, that there is Money com∣ing from my Lord Aston to him, and that a considerable sum. Now, my Lords, if we shall make it appear, that he hath made it his business to come to Accompt with my Lord, I hope it will not be supposed that he is afraid of it, or so needy, or so mean. For this we call Michael Noble and Stephen Colledge. (Michael Noble sworn.) Sir John Trevor. What do you know of Mr. Dugdale, and my Lord Aston? Mr. Noble. My Lords, I can say little or nothing as to Mr. Dugdale, for that I have never been acquainted with him, but since the Plot, and he came to be an Evidence; but Mr. Dugdale desired me to assist him as much as I could, to make up his Accompts with my Lord Aston. And we were twice at the Tower, one time we spoke with my Lord with great difficulty, another time we could not see him. There were three Books of Accompt, two my Lord would let us see, but the third, wherein all the Discharges were, as Mr. Dugdale said, he would never let us see, that is all I can say. Then Stephen Colledge was sworn. L. H. Stew. What is your Name? Witness. Stephen Colledge. Sir Will. Jones. Declare to my Lords, what you know concerning Mr. Dug∣dale's pressing my Lord Aston to accompt with him. Mr. Colledge. In January last, I went along with Mr. Dugdale, at his request, to the Tower, with one Mr. Noble a Barrester of the Temple, and one Mr. Boson of Lyons-Inn, in order to the making up Accompts between Mr. Dugdale and my Lord Aston; for he told me he was going thither for that end: When we came thither, we met with one Captain Hawley, who belongs to the Lieutenant of the Tower, and we desired him to go to my Lord Aston, and tell him, Mr. Dug∣dale was there, in order to make up his Accompts with him. He went and brings an answer back again, That my Lord was not at leisure to speak with Mr. Dugdale
then, nor none of us from him. And Mr. Hawley said, he was then going up with the Lords to Nine-pins. Mr. Dugdale faid, he was very ill used, for he had been several times there before, and he could not be admitted to speak with him. He hath a little Book says he (meaning my Lord) wherein there is an Accompt made up under his own hand of almost Two or Three hundred Pounds, which sum I cannot say, but one of them I am certain of, which he hath de∣nyed several times that he had it, (but I can prove that he hath it) if he will be pleased to produce that Book, we need not be a quarter of an hour in making up the Accompt. He did speak of some other sums he had to place to Accompt too, but so much was made up already. But Captain Hawley saying he would not speak with him, nor any of us from him, I did take the liberty to say to Cap∣tain Hawley, That it was hard his Lordship and his party should abuse Mr. Dug∣dale at that rate, to make him his Debtor: for now I understood by what Mr. Dugdale said, my Lord was his Debtor. And said I, if I can perswade Mr. Dugdale he shall publish his Case, for the Protestant Interest suffered by it, That he should be made a Debtor to my Lord when he was not so. And I believe Capt. Hawley told my Lord Aston what I did say, for when he came back again from my Lord Aston, he said my Lord did acknowledge he had that Book, and it was ready to be produced, but he would stay till a Councellor of his came out of the Country, and till he had spoke with the Lieutenant; for he would not speak with Mr. Dug∣dale unless the Lieutenant were by, and in three or four days time he would send for him; but I never heard that he sent for him ever since. If it please your Lordships, I have one thing more that I remember: There was a young man that belonged to my Lord Aston's Family, that heard Mr. Dugdale was at Captain Hawley's Chamber, and came to see him, and paid a very great respect to him, and would stand bare to him, though Mr. Dugdale desired him to put on his Hat several times. Some of us asked him, whether Mr. Dugdale was thought to be such a Knave, when he lived with his Lord, as they would have made him since. No, said he, Mr. Dugdale was as honest a Gentleman as ever lived in our Family. I remember my Lord Aston's man said this to us then. L. Stafford. My Lords, Will you be pleased to give me leave, if I speak im∣pertinently I am under your correction, I conceive I shall have something to an∣swer this, but I would first know whether I may desire of your Lordships, that I may have my Lord Aston here to give an account of this matter. Sir Will. Jones. If he were here he could not be heard, being a person accused for the same offence. L. H. Stew. My Lord, he stands Indicted for the same Treason, and cannot be a Witness. L. Stafford. I beg your pardon, my Lord. Nicholas Boson was sworn. L. H. Stew. What is your Name?
Witness. Nicholas Boson. Sir VV. Jones. Declare to my Lords what you know concerning Mr. Dugdale's pressing my Lord Aston to come to an accompt. Mr. Boson. In January last, I met with Mr. Dugdale, and one Mr. Noble, and one Mr. Colledge. And Mr. Dugdale desired us to go down with him to the Tower. He said he had an Order of the Council to pass his Accompts with my Lord Aston; and when we came there, we enquired for Captain Hawley, and desired him that he would acquaint my Lord Aston, that he was there to accompt with him. Captain Hawley went up to my Lord Aston, and brought word back again, my Lord was not at leisure, or would not speak with him, or to that ef∣fect: whereupon Mr. Dugdale said, it was very hard that he should be aspersed to owe my Lord Mony, and he would not come to accompt with him. For my Lord Aston had a Book or Books in his custody which he would stand by, and they would determine the business between them; that my Lord Aston was almost Two hundred pounds in his debt. And pray, says he, Captain Hawley, do me the favour to go to my Lord Aston again, and desire him that he will be pleased to produce that Book or Books. If I owe my Lord any money I am ready to pay him, and if he owe me any, I hope his Lordship will do the like by me; as I am sure he does. Two hundred Pounds. Captain Hawley went away, and brought this Answer, That his Lordship would send for him in some short time, assoon as a Conellor did come out of the Country, whom he had entrust∣ed with his Books; and that was one Birch, as near as I remember. Sir Will. Jones. We have done with this Witness. And because we desire to conclude as to Mr. Dugdale, we shall call some persons of Quality as to his Repu∣tation, my Lord having gone about to make him a man of no Reputation. Mr. Boson. I can speak too about the Boy that came in. Sir VV. Jones. There is no need of that now: we shall trouble you no further, Sir. Your Lordships will be pleased to observe, That Mr. Philips, the Minister, that was one of my Lord Stafford's Witnesses, did say, Mr. Dugdale was a man of whome many spoke well, and some indifferently, and perhaps that is the case of most good men; for scarce any are so good that all speak well of them; but that many should speak well and some indifferently of him, may be the lot of a very good man. We shall call some Witnesses, and begin with Mr. VVhitby a Justice of the Peace, that will tell you he hath known Mr. Dugdale long, and what Reputation he is of. Thomas Whitby Esq sworn. Sir John Trevor. My Lords, We desire your Lordships would be pleased to ask him what Reputation and credit Mr. Dugdale was in, in my Lord Aston's Service. Mr. VVhitby. My Lords, I have known Mr. Dugdale to be a Servant to my Lord Aston this nine or ten years; he was Steward to him, and there was no other
person between my Lord and him; he received my Lords Rents and Debts for him, exchanged his Lands for him in forty places, I exchanged some Land with my Lord my self, and he was the man that did it. He was very hard for my Lords advantage, and did what he could for my Lords profit. Sir John Trevor. What do you know more as to his dealing? Mr. VVhitby. He was a person that was next to my Lord, and did rule and go∣vern the rest of the Family. All the Servants were under him. Sir John Trevor. Was he looked upon to be an honest man in his dealings? Mr. VVhitby. As to what I had to deal with him he was an honest man, I never heard the contrary. I have heard some Tradesmen complain that he hath put them off without Money, would not pay them what my Lord ow∣ed them. L. Stafford. I desire that Mr. VVhitby may be here when I shall have occasion to say something to him. Sir VV. Jones. That will be, I hope, by and by, for we have almost done. Call Mr. VVilliam Southall. (VVho was sworn.) L. H. Stew. What is your Name? VVitness. VVilliam Southall. Mr. Foley. Give my Lords an account how long you have known Dugdale, and what you know of him. Mr. Southall. My Lords, I have known Mr. Stephen Dugdale about eight years. Mr. Foley. How hath he behaved himself? What Reputation hath he born? Mr. Southall. Truly he hath always had a good repute, not only with my Lords Tenants, but also with the Workmen, and those people that had depen∣dance on the Family, and truly I never heard any ill report of him, but only what is spoken of now of late. Sir Fr. VVinn. Were you very well acquainted with him? Mr. Southall. Yes, but never had any business with him. Several discourses I have had with him about the Popish Religion. Sir John Trevor. My Lords, I only observe this, This Gentleman is Coroner of the County, and hath a general knowledge of the County, and must know most men there. Sir Fran. VVinnington. You are Coroner of the County of Stafford, Sir, I think? Mr. Southall. Yes, I am one of them. Mr. Foley. What was he in my Lords House? Mr. Southall. Bailiff, and a kind of Governour, providing meat, and paying Workmen, most of the things of the Family went through his hands. Sir Fran. Winn. My Lords, This Gentleman is a Coroner of the County,
and can speak materially to other particulars besides this of Dugdale's Reputation▪ for he was a person who was present when he made his first discovery of this Plot, and was very instrumental in prevailing with him to do it. He will give your Lordships an account of the whole business, and I would rather he him∣self should relate all the progress of it, than take upon me to recite any of the passages. Mr. Southall. There was the latter end of November (78.) a Report that Mr. Dugdale was gone away from my Lord Aston's, suddenly and strangely, and it was the common report in the Country that he was in the Plot, and was fled for it. In the beginning of December I went through a Town called Great Heywood, a Mile and a half from Tixal, where my Lord Aston and Mr. Dugdale dwelt. I called at Mr. Thomas Whitby's House, the Gentleman that was up here lately, and he was telling me, Dugdale was come again and apprehended by the Watch at Heywood upon suspicion. He told me further, he would make no confession of the Plot, though he had been under Examination before Sir VValter Bagott, Mr. Kinnersley, and I think he said Sir Thomas VVhitgrave. But he told me divers passages by which we both suspected he might be concerned and know of the Plot. We thought so from the various reports and rumors we had heard in the Country, and from those great grounds of suspicion that were given us. As I returned from Heywood, I resolved I would speak with Dug∣dale the first opportunity, for I had a strong perswasion I could prevail with him to make a discovery of the Plot, but before I did speak with him, there was one Goldsmith my Kinsman, had some difference fallen out between him and Mr. Ansell, and Mr. Dugdale, touching a Deed, the deciding of which they had re∣ferred to Mr. Dugdale. And he desired me to go to Mr. Dugdale to Stafford with him, I was very glad of the opportunity. Ansel was to bring one Hanson, Mr. Goldsmith was to bring me, and Mr. Dugdale was to bring one Mr. Gerrard, that was concerned in the Premortgage, that we might all have discourse to∣gether. I promised to meet them at the time appointed, and accordingly the 23th. of December, two days before Christmas-day, I came to the place in Stafford, where Dugdale was, about Ten a Clock in the Morning, where they met according to their promise. We had not been in the House longer than a quarter of an hour, but the Kings business, which I thought was a business of greater weight than any particular business, did stick much upon me, and I resolv∣ed before I spoke to the particular business about which we all met, I would first speak to Mr. Dugdale to put that in execution which I had resolved. After a short space of time I desired Mr. Dugdale that I might speak with him in a Cham∣ber privately between him and me; he told me, if I would go into the next Chamber to his, he would come to me. Accordingly I went, and staid a short space of time, and Mr. Dugdale came to me. I desired him to make the Door to, which he did, and I began thus with him. Mr. Dugdale, id I,
for some Years last past, since I came to be acquainted with you, I have always had a good esteem of you, and you a good report in the Country where you live, and now there is an opportunity put into your hands to serve his Majesty and his Protestant Subjects, if (as an honest man ought) you will discharge your Duty. Mr. Dugdale replyed, Sir, what do you mean? Why said I, I mean this in a few words, Here is a Plot discovered in London, and if it be in London, I conceive it hath been in part acted at Tixal, and if there, of necessity, you having such a Government and Rule over that House, it is impossible but you must know it. He looked upon me very earnestly, and gave me a smile, but answered me not; I replied to him again thus, said I, There is a natural Allegiance which every Subject owes to his Soveraign, and by that it is required, that if any Subjects know of any Plot or any Conspiracy against his Person and Government, they ought in Conscience to discover it, therefore Mr. Dugdale, said I, discharge a good Conscience, and tell what you know, for it is commonly suspected you are concerned in the Plot. He answered, I have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. When and where said I? Before his Majesties Justices of the Peace at Stafford, said he. Then said I, there is not only that natural Allegi∣ance which every Subject owes to his Prince, but the Oath of Almighty God lies upon your Conscience, therefore discharge a good Conscience; and tell your knowledge. He stood pausing a little while, and by and by, said he, If I should make any discovery, how should I be secured of my Life? You need not Question that, said I, nor his Majesties Gracious Pardon which he hath promised in his Proclamation; Have you seen the Proclamation? Yes, said he. Said I, you have but a short time, a day or two to discover in, for this is the 23th, and as I do conceive, you ought to discover before the 25th; he stood pausing a while about the time, said I, you need not question his Majesties Gracious Promise, and to incourage you thereto, there is not only an assurance of Pardon, but a promise of Reward of Two hundred pounds. Said he, if I do discover any thing of my knowledge, I matter not, nor de∣sire (I don't know which it was) his Majesties Money, so I may be secured of my Life. Upon this, my Lords, said I, Sir, you need not question his Ma∣jesties Gracious Promise, my Life for yours, if you have not his Pardon, but I will take special care about it, for I will send up a Letter to London, directed to some of the Lords (which I accordingly did) and I will also speak to Captain Lane, who is a worthy Gentleman to interpose in it too. Then said he, I will make a discovery of the Plot. Then, my Lords, he told me first some particular passages relating to this Lord at the Bar, and also concerning Mr. Evers and Mr Peters, now in Custody, and some other particulars; I wished him that he would speak no more at that time. And when I parted with him, forth∣with I consulted with my self what I ought to do, in point of Law; I knew, I must discover, that a further discovery might be made of what had passed be∣tween
us. Then I went to Mr. Freek, who was either Mayor or Justice of Peace in Stafford, and told him he must come with me to Serjeant Par∣ry's. He asked me what to do. I told him when he came he should know: he accordingly came, and took short Notes of a further Discovery, and Mr. Freek he certified it up to Mr. Chetwyn, who was then at London. Upon the day following the 24th. I rose and went to one Mr. Vernon, one of His Majesties Justices of the Peace, and told him what had happened, and he sent for Captain Lane another of His Majesties Justices of the Peace, and they took an Examination of him. I have done, my Lord, with reference to his Dis∣covery, and the time. L. H. Steward. Do you remember what he mentioned of my Lord Stafford? what he said of him? Mr. Southall. Truly, my Lords, I can only tell what he said at the first Exami∣nation, he told me the first time my Lord Stafford spoke with him was at Tixal-Hall, nigh to the Gate-House, betwixt the Gate and the Hall. My Lord was going into the Hall, and my Lord Stafford told him, it was a very hard thing, or to that purpose, that they could not say their Prayes but in private, and after told him the same day or night t'one, that they had some work to do, and he might or must be instrumental in it. This was the effect of what he told me passed the first time. Another time I think he told me he was to have five hundred pounds to kill the King. Lord High Steward. When did he tell you so? Mr. Southall. Not till Captain Lane examined him, which was the second time he was examined; which was about the 26th. L. H. Stew. Did he swear that before Vernon and Lane? Mr. Southall. Yes, he did, I could give your Lordships a Breviate of what he swore then. L. Stafford. I desire he may give that Breviate. Mr. Southall. I took some Notes of what he swore then. L. H. Stew. Have you them by you, or about you? Mr. Southall. Yes, my Lords, I have. L. H. Stew. Produce them. Mr. Southall. I took this upon some Paper I had in my Pocket, and is the substance of what he swore. (Which he delivered to the Clerk.) Clerke. December the 24th. 1678. Mr. Dugdale informeth, That in Septem∣ber last, he met in Tixall, the Lord Stafford, nigh to the Gates, who said, That it was sad they were troubled they could not say their Prayers, but in a hid manner, but suddenly there would be a Reformation to the Romish Religion,
and if there be a good success we shall enjoy our freedom. And that upon the 20th. day of September, 1678. the said Lord Stafford told this Informant, That there was a Design in hand, and if he would undertake in it, he should have a good Re∣ward, &c. and make himself famous. The same day this Informant went up into Mr. Francis Evers Chamber to know what my Lord Stafford meant by his words; and he first made him swear secresie upon his knees, and then told him, That he might be a person employed, and have a good Reward, and make him∣self famous, if he would stand instrumental with others in taking aatay the Kings Life, by Shooting or otherwise, and need not fear, for that the Pope had Excommunicated the King, and that all that were Excommunicated by him were Hereticks, and they might Kill them, and be Canonized for Saints in so doing. And that the Design was as well to Kill the Duke of Monmouth as well as the King. December the 29th. 1678. This Informant saith, That since the 20th. day of September last, the said Lord Stafford did promise him Five Hundred Pounds as to the carrying on of the Plot, and that Mr. Evers should give him instructions about the same. And that the Lord Stafford told him, he did not doubt of his fidelity, for Mr. Evers had given him a good character to be trusty. And that the Lord Stafford told this Informant, That there was a Design to take away the Life of the King, and the Life of the Duke of Monmouth, and that seve∣ral others were to be imployed in the Design besides this Informant. And that this had been throughly considered of to be the fittest way for the establishing of the Romish Religion. And that at the said time, the said Lord Stafford laid his hand upon his head, and prayed God to keep him in his good mind, and to be faith∣ful to what he had intrusted him in, &c. And this Informant further saith, That he doubting of the Lord Stafford's payment, the said Mr. Evers promised him the making good of my Lord Stafford's promise, &c. And further saith, that he saw a Letter directed from my Lord Stafford to Mr. E∣vers, and he read the same, and knows it to be my Lord Stafford's writing, and that therein was written, that things went on well beyond the Sas, for the carrying on the Design, and so he hoped it did do here in England, &c. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we will examine no further as to Mr. Dugdale: But will conclude with this Witness, and I think he speaks fully to him. The next Witness we called was Dr. Oats, and your Lordships have been pleased to observe, That what Exceptions have been made against him, have not been so much by Witnesses produced, as by opposing one part of his Testimony to ano∣ther, what he swore at one time to what he swore at another, to which we shall give an Answer when we come to sum up our Evidence; for there will be no need of Witnesses to what is objected against Mr. Oats, but only of Observations; but as to the third Witness Turbervill, we have something to answer of Witness, and someing by way of making Observation. We will first call our Witnesses.
Then Mr. Southall desired his Paper again, which the Court told him he should have a Copy of from the Clerk. Sir W. Jones. And our first Witness is to this purpose, It was objected against Mr. Turbervill— L. H. Steward. Have you done with Dugdale? You have forgot to give an Answer to the objection about the point of time when Hobson told him of the De∣sign. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, That will be when we come to make our Obser∣vations, we shall not answer that by Witnesses; when we come to sum up our Evidence, I doubt not but we shall give a sufficient Answer to that Objection. But to go on with what is to be answered by Testimony, your Lordships will be pleased to remember, That Turbervill did inform your Lordships, That he had some converse with my Lord Stafford at Paris, being introduced by some of the Fathers. My Lords, we shall call a Gentleman that had happened to be there at that time, that will tell you though he did not know my Lord Stafford, yet he knew that Turbervill did converse much with an English Lord in that place where my Lord does acknowledge his Lodging to be. He will give you some further account how Turbervill went to Diep in expectation of my Lord, and how he had a Message from the Lord, though he did not know my Lord Stafford. He will give you a further account how Mr. Turbervill was earnest with him to go to Ca∣lice, and then told him, he might go over with my Lord at that time. The use we make of these particulars we will forbear to mention till we sum up our Evi∣dence. We desire to examine Mr. Thomas Mort. (Who was sworn.) Sir Will. Jones. We desire to ask Mr. Mort, whether he knew Mr. Turbervill at Paris, and at what time. L. H. Steward. What say you, Sir? Mr. Mort. Yes, my Lords, I knew him, it is now five years past since we were in Paris. He and I had been intimately acquainted, before we lived in the same Family. I was several times in company with him, and many times in his Bro∣thers company, which was a Monk, and I heard him say his Brother had an in∣tention he should be of the same Order. And some time after that he altered his resolution, and designed for England, and I had such a design too to go from Paris, where I was an Apprentice. And being acquainted with him I resolved to go over with him, and he told me, his Brother the Monk had introduced him into the favour of a Lord, as I take it, it was my Lord Stafford, as well as I can re∣member. And that there was a Vessel to come to Diep, a Yaught, and we should go thither to go over with my Lord. And Mr. Turbervill told me, we must make as much hast as might be, for it were better to be there a day or two too soon than too late. We went to Diep, and when we came there, the Vessel was not come. And when we had been there a fortnight, or thereabouts, we were
put to a great deal of inconveniency by reason of our long stay there, and, I think, if I mistake not, I or some of the Company said, Cursed is he that relies or de∣pends on a broken Staff, alluding, as I believe, to my Lord Stafford's Name. Mr. Turbervill told me, if we did go to Calice, we might go over with my Lord; but how or by what means he understood the Vessel would be there, and my Lord go that way, I know not. But we did not go thither, we had another oppor∣tunity; there was a small Vessel whether a Fish-Boat, or a Coal-Vessel I can∣not tell, a very little one it was, but we took the opportunity, and came over in it. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we shall make use of it in due time, we only call him now to prove his converse with a Lord at Paris. L. H. Steward. Did you ever see Turbervill at a Lords House in Paris? Mr. Mort. No, my Lords, not that I can remember; but I think as near as I remember, I will not be positive, I walked about Luxenburgh House while he went, as he said, to the place where the Lord lodged, I was thereabouts till he came. L. Stafford: In what Street was it? Mr. Mort. Indeed I cannot tell. Sir W. Jones. This man is very cautious. L. H. Steward. Can you tell the Lords Name? Mr. Mort. I do not remember his Title, but I think it was my Lord Stafford. Sir William Jones. Pray who were you Servant to? Who were you bred under? Mr. Mort. My Lord Powis. I served as Page to him, when Mr. Turbervill was Gentleman-Usher to the Young Lady, one of his Daughters, since mar∣ried to my Lord Molineux. Sir Will. Jones. Will my Lord please to ask him any Questions? if not, we will go on. L. Stafford. No, not at present. Sir Will. Jones. Well then, my Lords, we desire to call one Mr. Powell, a Gentleman of Grays-Inn, to tell you when he first heard Mr. Turbervill speak of this Evidence he hath now given. Mr. Powell was sworn. Sir W. Jones. Pray will you give an account what discourse you had with Mr. Turbervill about the Plot, and when. Mr. Powell. About this time Twelve-month we discoursed about it, and he told me, that he had much to say in relation to the Plot; but truly he did not name any particulars to me at that time. Sir Will. Jones. Where was this, we desire to ask him? Mr. Powell. It was at the Kings-head Tavern in Holborn.
Sir William Jones. Are you sure it was a year ago? Mr. Powel. It was about this time Twelve-month. Sir Will. Jones. What was the reason he did not think fit then to reveal it? Did he tell the reason? Mr. Powel. I think he gave me a reason, That he was something cautious, be∣cause he feared he might disoblige his Brother at that time. Sir VV. Jones. Did he give you any further reason? Mr. Powel. I think he said he was afraid he should not have incouragement e∣nough, for he said some of the Witnesses had been discouraged, and he was afraid he should be so too. Sir VV. Jones. Now we shall call a few Witnesses to Mr. Turbervill's Reputa∣tion which have known him a good while. Mr. Hobby. L. H. Stew. Was this time that Mr. Powel speaks of, that he did discourse with him, before or after that of Yalden? Sir W. Jones. My Lords, We do not know of any discourse with Yalden, nay we believe none such was. This Witness speaks of a Year since. L. H. Steward. What time does Yalden speake of? Sir VVilliam Jones. February or March last, and this was a year ago. L. H. Steward. This was then before that certainly. Sir VVilliam Jones. We desire Mr. Arnold a Member of the House of Com∣mons may be sworn. (which was done in his place.) Sir VVilliam Jones. Do you know Mr. Turbervill? Mr. Arnold. My Lords, I do know him very well, and I have known him these two years, he came recommended to me from his Grace my Lord Duke of Buckingham; My Lords, presently after the breaking out of the Plot, he was sent down into our Countrey, by the Lords of your Lordships House that were of the Committee, and a particular recommendation from the Duke of Bucking∣ham to me, to give him direction and assistance to find out a Priest, one Charles Prichard, and I think also if I mistake not, one Morgan, my Lord Powis's Priest. I spoke with him before he went, I sent Letters down with him, I spoke with him afterwards, he hath been in my family some time; he hath behaved him∣self very well there, and in several other sober families nearly related to me. I have not heard a better character of any man from all sorts of people, than of him in my life. Sir VV. Jones. Did he tell you any thing of the Plot, Sir? Mr. Arnold. My Lords, I did several times find by him, that he knew much; having conversed both in France and here with Jesuits and Priests. I pressed him oftentimes to discover his knowledge, and to come in to the Council; but he gave me such Answers why he did not, that I could not answer. Sir VVilliam Jones. What were they Sir? Pray tell us
Mr. Arnold. That the Witnesses that were come in, were in danger of their Lives; that they were discouraged, that they were discountenanced; and as long as the Duke of York had that power in the Conncil that he had, and my Lady Powis's Brother had that power over those Countreys where he lived (which his Lordship is often pleased to call his Province) he durst not do it for his Life. Then Mr, Hobby was sworn. Sir Will. Jones. Do you know Mr. Turbervill, and how long have you known him? Mr. Hobby. My Lords, I have known Mr. Turbervill near four years. L. H. Steward. What account can you give of him? Mr. Hobby. My Lords, my first acquaintance with him, was at my Brothers House in Glamorganshire. When I came there, my Brother shew'd him me, and told me he was a very worthy man, but his Friends had cast him off, because he would not take Orders in the Romish Church. He lived at my Brothers a∣bove a year; and when he came thence, my Brother writ a Letter of Recom∣mendation to my Father to receive him there, and do him all the kindness he could. He came to my Father's, and stay'd there near half a year, or thereabouts, I cannot tell to a Month or so. Since, I have known him often in this Town, and been in his company; and I never knew, nor heard, but that he behaved himself like a worthy honest Gentleman; but as to any thing of the Plot, I know nothing. Sir VV. Jones. We ask you not to that: Where is Mr. Matthews? Then Mr. Matthews a Divine was sworn. Sir VV. Jones. Mr. Matthews, pray tell my Lords, Whether you know Mr. Turbervill, and how long have you known him? Mr. Matthews. Yes, My Lords, I have known Mr. Edward Turbervill for about four years last past. L. H. Steward. Go on, what do you know of him? Mr. Matthews. My Lords, he lived some time in my Neighbourhood; I never knew him guilty of any ill action at all, but a person of a very fair Reputa∣tion. He acknowledged himself a Roman Catholick, and was pleased to give me the liberty to talk to him. I found him inclinable to hearken to me, and to those Reasons I offered to him; and I found he had a mind to quit that Religion, being convinced by the Arguments I gave him, and as several times he hath since told me, those were some of the great motives of his coming over from the Ro∣mish to the Protestant Communion. L. H. Stew. What were the Motives? Mr. Matthews. One was the hazard I told him of, in his living in the Roman Communion as to Salvation; another was the excellency of the Doctrines of our Church, its Principles and Practices.
L. H. Steward. Did he acknowledge to you he knew any thing of the Plot? Mr. Matthews No, not a syllable of it. Sir Will. Jones. We don't call him to that purpose. Then another Witness was sworn. L. H. Steward. What is your Name? Witness. William Seys. Sir W. Jones. Pray will you acquaint my Lords, what you know of Mr. Tur∣bervill. Mr. Seys. I have been acquainted with him this two or three years, and I ne∣ver knew him guilty of any ill action my life. I never heard of any body that could asperse him, but he hath behaved himself like a very honest, civil Gentle∣man. Sir Will. Jones. Where were you acquainted with him? Mr. Seys. Here in London. Then Captain Scudamore stood up again. Sir Will. Jones. He was sworn before, we desire he may speak to Mr. Turber∣vill's Reputation. Capt. Scudamore. My Lords, I have known Mr. Turbervill for these three quarters of a year, I have been acquainted with him in London, he hath been much at my House, and all that while I saw nothing in him, but that he is a very honest Gentleman. Sir William Jones. My Lords, I think we have but one matter more, which we should have mentioned before, but that our Witness was not come: but I hope we shall have the favour of some Honourable Lords that do know the thing, and I think there are many more that can prove it. My Lord Stafford who is very an∣cient, it may be, may not remember matters exactly, I blame him not; Oblivion is the great infirmity of old age. He was pleased to say Yesterday, he had so good health, that he had not been lame, I think he said for these Forty years; but at last his Page said for the last Seven years; and I shall confirm our proof to that time. My Lords, I think there are some Honourable Lords here, that have seen this Noble Lord, that says he was not Lame in so many years very near about the time he was confined and imprisoned, go Lame and come Lame to the House, and ease himself by holding up his Legg sometimes. My Lords, I do not say, the Circumstance is very material, but only to shew my Lord may for∣get himself, which I shall impute to his old Age. L. Stafford. I will acknowlede it, if your Lordships please, I did say I had not been lame with the Gout so long, no more I have not. I was troubled with the Sciatica many years, but 'tis above eight or nine years since that, and I took so much Opium that that and my going to the Bath cured me. I have often come lame to the House out of weariness and old Age, but if ever I put my Foot upon a Stool for the Gout, or was ever so lame as to put my Foot upon a Cushion to
ease it, I will admit what he speaks to, I'll acknowledge thus much to save time. Sir Will. Jones. Seeing my Lord is pleased to go off from it, I'll call no Wit∣nesses to it. L. Stafford. I go off from nothing, I was lame three or four years when the King came in: I went to the Bath, and afterwards into Germany, and what with Opium and the Bath I was cured, and I have not been lame these eight or nine years. I have not had the Gout in my Foot for these many years, and I never was so lame to put my Foot on a stool to my remembrance. Sir VVill. Jones. I do not think we shall need to trouble your Lordships more with this matter, that my Lord was lame sometime he is pleased to confess. One Witness says that he put his Foot on a Cushion, my Lord does not acknowledge that. L. Stafford. I was never lame at Paris. Sir VVill. Jones. That a man that is lame does sometimes ease his Foot is no hard Consequence I think. L. Stafford. I deny I was lame then, I walked about the streets of Paris, I de∣sire I may not be misunderstood. Sir VVill. Jones. I must then desire under his Lordships favour, if he will not ac∣knowledge it to be within seven years, that we may prove it, and falsifie his Wit∣ness, the Page. L. Stafford. I have gone with a stick to the House, I acknowledge it, and been lame with weariness. Sir Fr. VVinn. The Objection went to the Credit of our Witness, and there∣fore we desire to answer it: my Lord was not lame, as he says, for so many years, but if we prove that within less time my Lord hath been lame, it will take off that Objection from our Witness. And we desire a Noble Lord or two of this House may testifie what they know. And first the Earl of Stamford, (who was sworn.) Earl of Stamford, My Lords, I think I have not had the honour to sit in this House much above seven years, but long since that time I have seen my Lord Stafford come lame into the House of Peers, and that is all I can say. L. Stafford. I have come lame with a stick to the House I say. Sir Fr. Winn. My Lords, we desire that Noble Lord, my Lord Lovelace may be sworn, (which was done.) Lord Lovelace. My Lords, the Account that I can give your Lordships is this, I cannot ascertain any time, but I am sure, and I do declare it upon my Honour, and the Oath I have taken, that I have seen my Lord Stafford lame in the House of Lords within less than this seven years. L. Stafford. If he goes home to the Tower he may see me lame, but never put my Foot upon a stool.
Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, your Lordships will be pleased to remember we did call a Witness, one Thomas Launder, and the account we had of him was he was gone sick from the Bar, he was very sick indeed, but being just now brought, we desire he may be heard though it be out of time, we call him to the Reputation of Holt. Thomas Launder was sworn. Sir John Trevor. Do you declare to my Lords whether you know Samuel Holt? Launder. Yes my Lords, I do. L. H. Steward. What do you know of him? Launder. He is a Smith, my Lords. L. H. Steward. What Reputation is he of? Launder. Indifferent, my Lords. Sir William Jones. What do you mean by that, good or bad? speak plainly. Launder. A Drunken Sot, a man that will Drink and Rant and Tear the Ground, and sing two or three days or a week together, and lose his time. Sir Fr. Winn. I would ask this man whether he was summoned as a Witness upon any Tryal in relation to the Plot? L. H. Stew. Were you ever summon'd as a Witness about the Plot? Launder. My Lords, I was summon'd concerning my Lord Aston's Tryal, and I came up with my Lord Aston's people as an Evidence. Sir W. Jones. Had you any offer of money, and what sum? Launder. Yes, my Lords. Sir Fr. Winn. Acquaint my Lords with it. L. H. Stew. Who offered it you? and when? and for what? Sir Will. Jones. For what was that money offered you? Launder. The money was not absolutely offered me, but I was to have an Horse to ride on, and money in my Pocket if I could take off James Ansel, Dugdale's Evidence. L. H. Stew. Who came and offered it to you? Launder. I was sent for by Mr. Fox to Tixal Hall, and there was my old Lords Brother for one, and Mr. Thomas Aston that is this young Lords Brother, and Mr. Francis Aston who is my Lords eldest Son were in a Room together, and this Thomas Sawyer that was here, and more were in the Room when they promised all these things. L. H. Steward. If you would do what? Launder. If I would take my Oath that this James Ansell was a Perjured Rogue. L. H. Stew. Did all they make you this promise? Launder. Yes, my Lords.
Mr. Fotey. It was a Consult together about taking off the Evidence. Sir Will▪ Jones. My Lords, we have done with our. Witnesses, if my Lord Staf∣ford please to conclude we are ready to do so too. L. Stafford. What should I conclude? about those Witnesses you have now brought in? Sir W. Jones. Your Lordship may please to conclude your Evidence, we are ready to conclude on our part. L. Stafford. These new Witnesses, must I say what I can say against them presently? I cannot do it, I know very few of them. L. H. Steward. Have you any Witnesses here, my Lord? L. Stafford. I cannot possibly have any. For I did not know nor guess these people would be brought against me. They are persons I know nothing of. An∣sell I have seen four or five times, I may have seen the rest, but I do not know them to be able to give an accompt of them. L. H. Stew. If you have any Witnesses here to support the credit of your own Witnesses that have been impeached, you may call them. L. Stafford. I have none, my Lords. L. H. Stew. Will your Lordship recapitulate the material parts of your De∣fence, that the Process may be closed? L. Stafford. I am very unready for it, my Lords. Let me ask Mr. VVhitby a Question, if I must have no more time. Mr. Whitby stood up. L. H. Stew. There he is, what would your Lordship have with him? L. Stafford. I do not know the Gentleman. Mr. VVhitby. Nor I your Lordship. Lord Stafford. I ask him upon the Oath he hath taken, I know he will speak truth, whether he did not some years ago tell my Lord Aston that is dead, this Lord's Father, That Dugdale was a Knave, and persuaded him to turn him away, (I say not it is true, but I have heard so) and desired him to tell his Son so, that he might quit himself of him? L. H. Steward. What say you, Mr. VVhitby? Mr. VVhitby. My Lords, about three or four years ago my Lord Aston that is dead (I believe it may be two years last April) sent for me to dine with him, and when I came thither, he told me, says he, Mr. VVhitby I have sent to you to acquaint you with a thing, but I do not believe it before I tell it you. What is it, said I? said he, Stephen Dugdale hath acquainted me, that you have employed persons upon the Water to destroy my Water; said I, my Lord I never endeavoured it; he said, he did believe me; then I told my Lord; said I, Mr. Dugdale is a disho∣nour to the Family, upon this accompt, because many times people come for mo∣ney and he will not let them have it, but puts them off and makes them com∣plain; says my Lord, my Son is now at Standall, but I will tell him as soon as he
comes home, and if you will bring the persons that have waited so long for their money, and made so many journeys, you shall hear what he will say to it. With∣in a while my Lord Aston that now is, came down, and I went thither to see what became of it. And I went to the Bwling. Green where my Lord and his Son were; but my old Lord said nothing to me of it, nor his Son neither. Within a few days my old Lord Aston's Gentleman came down to my House (one Mr. Ashley,) said I, I wonder whether my Lord Aston hath acquainted his Son with what I told him; says he, he hath, but it signifies nothing, for he will hear nothing against Mr. Dugdale. This I speak upon my Oath, 'tis true. L. H. Steward. Your Lordship sees what this Gentlemans Opinion was of Dugdale then, he would hear nothing against him. Will your Lordship con∣clude? L. Stafford. My Lords, I am mighty unready, and know not which way to turn my self, upon those new things they have brought, for I knew nothing of it, nor expected any such thing. But will you be pleased that I may call Simon Wright again. (VVho stood up.) L. H. Stew. What would your Lordship have with him? L. Stafford. I have nothing to say to him, but to desire him to seé this Letter, whether it be of his own Writing or no. L. H. Stew. Look upon that Paper, shew it him, (which was done.) L. H. Stew, Is it your hand? Wright. This is my hand. 'Tis part of that I was hired to do. There is ano∣ther of a great deal more consequence than that. L. H. Stew. Deliver it in, and read it. Clerk. June the 14. 1680. Sir, I Can I bless God with a safe Conscience declare upon Oath, that Mr. Dugdale hath been unkind to me in taking his opportunity of my Pover∣ty by reason of a private meeting of us two by his appointment, he did that time proffer if I would swear against You and Mr. Gerard, he would protect me as one of the King's Evidence, and I should not want Money; and in the Hall at Westmin∣ster he said, if I did discover it that day at Mrs. Price's Tryal he would set me in the Pillory: This I have owned to his face, and shall not go back from this and more, neither for fear nor favour. So I rest as you shall find by your Servant, Sim. Wright.
L. H. Steward. Is this your hand? VVright. Yes my Lords, this I was advised word for word to write. L. H. Stew. Who pen'd this for you? Did you pen it your self? VVright. No, my Lords, they penn'd it, and a great while I would not set my hand to it, but Jermin Drayton said I need not fear, I was not to swear against the King, L. H. Steward. Who is that? VVright. He is Butler to Mr. Heveningham. L. Stafford. See what you have under his hand, I have no more to say to him. VVright. But by their perswasion at last I did wright it, and a great deal more then that. Sir William Jones. I desire to ask Mr. VVright whether they would have had him swore this. L. H. Stew. Were you desired to swear this? VVright. No, my Lords, they never put me to swear it; for they told me I was not to swear against the King; but if I would be so kind to make an Affidavit before a Justice of Peace, I might then go where I would into the Country, and I should have money to bear my charges. Sir VVilliam Jones. Who would have had you swear it before a Justice of Peace? Wright. Jermin Drayton and Mr. Longmore, where he is I can't tell, but he told me that Sir James Symons was better able to perform than Dugdale was to promise. Mr. Serj. Maynard. The same thing that was done by Redding, he was con∣victed for it, and stood in the Pillory. Sir Will. Jones. We desire to know whether he was ever with Sir James Sy∣mons himself, and what he offered? Wright. I was once with him at the Kings Bench, I dined there: after I had written the Paper that was read, he gave me 20 s. and said, he hoped I would not go off from what I had said, and he hoped I was sensible his gratuity would not be wanting, and was sorry he had not occasion to use me. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we have done with him; I only observe that my Lord Stafford was pleased to produce this Paper; he was Master of it, and had it in his keeping. Sir Fran. VVinnington. Wright says, there is another Paper of more Conse∣quence; I wish his Lordship would produce that also. L. Stafford. I did not know of this till just now it was delivered into my hands. Did you see Mr. Longmore before this Letter was writ? VVright. Both before and after, to the best of my remembrance, and at the time when Sir James's Tryal should have been, at the Sign of the Crown in Kings∣street in Bloomsbury.
L. H. Steward. My Lord, will you conclude? L. Stafford. My Lords, I desire your Lordships Pardon; I do not know how really to go about it to night. I will obey your Commands, though I fall down at the Bar. I protest before God, I was all night so ill of the Cramp, that I had no repose. If you will have me go on, I will, if you will give me but a little time to recollect my self. L. H. Steward. God forbid, when your Lordship is to speak upon so great a Concern, and a matter of that importance as this is to you, you should be put at the end of the day, and in the midst of all your thoughts, to sum up your Evidence. I do believe, if you do desire time till to Morrow, my Lords will give it you: And if you would have me move my Lords in it, I will. L. Stafford. One word, I beseech your Lordships— Sir VVilliam Jones. We do not oppose it. L. Stafford. My Lords, I desire one thing, I am very ignorant in this matter, and do not understand it; I would desire your Lordships directons to know in what method I must proceed. L. H. Stew. Your Lordship is to proceed thus if you please; Your Lordship is to recollect and recapitulate all the Proofs you have made; and you are to enforce them as well as you can, and make such Observations upon them as are for your own advantage: and this your Lordship must do for the Fact: If there remain a doubt in Law which you may have occasion to move, Coun∣sel may be demanded; and if it be considerable and worthy of debate, you may have Counsel heard to speak to it. But the Process is closed, no more Wit∣nesses are to be heard: There remains only Observations upon the Fact or Law to be made. L. Stafford. Are no more Witnesses to be heard? L. H. Steward. No, I think not: 'tis agreed on both sides, all is done: But my Lord, I would not have your Lordship to understand me so, that if so be you have yet any material Evidence, that you think it does concern you to produce, and you have it ready to Morrow, before you sum up the Evidence; I believe then, if you move my Lords, they will let it be heard: Otherwise I think here is an end of Witnesses. L. Stafford. I desire the Paper I gave in, may be returned me. L. H. Steward. But in order to this, my Lord, if your Lordship does think, you shall use or produce any other Witnesses, it would be of importance that you would name them now. L. Stafford. Truly, my Lords, I will go hunt for none; and I think I shall have none: only one thing I must beg your pardon in; which is the only thing I must have Witnesses to, to answer what they have said, that my Lord Aston would not come to accompt. My Witnesses are very near me, Mr. Lieutenant, some in the Tower, and one Mr. Birch.
L. H. Steward. My Lord Stafford, bring those to morrow that you name to night. L. Stafford. If you please that I may have that Paper, Wright's Letter. E. of Shaftsbury. My Lord Steward, I desire that Letter may be kept. L. Stafford. It is a Paper that was given me, and I would return it: if you won't allow me it, I can't help it. L. H. Steward. 'Tis desired it may remain where it is: But your Lordship may have a Copy if you please, attested by the Clerk. Is it your Lordships plea∣sure to Adjourn? Lords. Ay, Ay. L. H. Steward. This House is Adjourned into the Parliament Chamber. Then the Lords withdrew in their Order, and the Committee of Commons returned to their House, where Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. A Message was sent from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Samuel Clark. Mr. Speaker, The Lords have sent us to acquaint this House, That they have Ordered William Viscount Stafford to be brought to his Tryal at the Bar in Westminster-Hall to Morrow morning at Ten of the Clock. The Commons Adjourned to Eight of the Clock the next Morning. The Fifth Day. Saturday, December 4. 1680. ABout the hour of Ten in the Morning, the Lords Adjourned into VVest∣minster-Hall, going thither in their former Order into the Court there erected, and Mr. Speaker having left the Chair, the Commons were seated as before. The Court being sat, Proclamation for silence was made, and the Lieutenant of the Tower commanded to bring his Prisoner to the Bar, which being done, the Lord High Steward began as followeth. L. H. Steward. What says your Lordship my Lord Stafford? My Lords are pepared to hear what your Lordship can say in the summing up of your Defence.
L. Stafford. My Lords, I must needs say to your Lordships, That you have given me Favour and Time all that I could demand. But I am a very unfortu∣nate man in many things, unfortunate in being brought hither upon this Ac∣compt, and truly, my Lords, I am very unfortunate, That I had not yesterday, before I went away, the Names of some material Witnesses, and some that I did not know of, till within this half quarter of an hour; I humbly offer this to your Lordships consideration as the state of my Case. 'Tis true, my Lords, I acknowledge I was bound up to Mr. Lieutenant, and some others that I named, but I humbly tell your Lordships this, That I am Informed of some material Wit∣nesses more this morning. L. H. Stew. Are the Witnesses you speak of, any of the Witnesses you named last night? L. Stafford. No, my Lords, 'Tis one of my Lords, a Peer of this House. L. H. Stew. How many more have you? L. Stafford. Five or six. L. H. Stew. To what Point? L. Stafford. To discredit the Witnesses that have been brought against me, both some of those that have discredited mine, and some that have sworn against me particularly. L. H. Stew. There is no End of this way of proceeding. L. Stafford. My Lords, I profess to your Lordships, in the presence of God, I do it not for delay, nor did I know of them then. L. H. Stew. What say you to it Gentlemen? Sir VVill. Jones. My Lords, I am afraid this proceeding at this rate will never have an end. If his Lordship have any Witnesses to any material part of his Defence, though he hath bound himself up, I should not be against hearing of them. But if his new Witnesses are only to the Reputation of our Witnesses, then perhaps we must have some other Witnesses brought to discredit his, and we not knowing who these new Witnesses of his would be, may need perhaps ano∣ther day to bring Testimony against them, so that I know not when the matter can have an end. Your Lordships know, there is a Rule in the Civil Law, In testem, testes, & in hos, sed non datur ultra; And I hope beyond that you will not go; Truly, for my own part, I did not expect any other Witnesses, but those he was pleased to name last night, in relation to the matters of Accompt; If he please to call them, we shall hear them; but for any other, considering it would prolong the Tryal to another day, and this Cause hath had four days already for Hearing, we hope they shall not be admitted. L. Stafford. My Lords, I profess to your Lordships, if I were alone concerned in it, I should not have moved it, but when I consider my Wife and Family are concerned, I hold my self bound by the Duty I owe to God and them, to propose this to your Lordships; I am pressed to it by my Wife just now, since the House
came in. I protest before God, for my self, I can look Death in the face without being afraid, but when I consider in what condition I shall leave my Wife and Fa∣mily, it moves me. (Then he wept.) I am not concerned at it for my own part, for I know I am innocent, but I can∣not forbear Tears when I consider them; 'tis not for my self, I take God Almighty to witness that I weep, I could be content to speak a few words to your Lordships, and submit to your Judgment, and take my death, if you decree me to it, and not defer it till Munday; But I cannot forbear shewing my Grief when I consider my Wife and Children. L. H. Stew. Pray, Gentlemen, consider, whether it be not a saving of time to let my Lord examine his Witnesses, else my Lords must withdraw to consider of his desire; 'Tis true, in the practice of Chancery we do examine to the credit of Witnesses, and to their credit, but no further, but what my Lords will do in this Case I know not till they are withdrawn. Sir VVill. Jones. My Lords, we have that Opinion of our own Proofs, and are so desirous of an End of these Proceedings, that rather than we will give your Lordships the trouble to withdraw, if my Lord will please now to tell us the num∣ber and names of his Witnesses, we shall not oppose their being heard. Sir Fr. Winn. If your Lordships please, one word further; We know well of what Concern this is to my Lord, and no body desires to have him crampt in his Evidence. The Objection did lie fair on our side, it looking like a designed de∣lay, and yet we are willing to comply with this Reservation, that if there should be any such Witnesses produced now, as may require an Answer, that we may not be foreclosed of advising with one another about it. L. H. Stew. No, by no means. My Lord Stafford, your desire is consented un∣to upon these Terms, That your Lordship will now name the persons and num∣ber of the Witnesses you will call. Mr. Hambden. And the Points to which you will call them. L. Stafford. I humbly thank your Lordships for the favour, but it is an impossi∣bility for me to do it: If your Lordships will give me a quarter of an hours time, I will name them, I cannot name some of them, one is my Lord Ferrers, another is one Dr. Taylor, Dr. Watson, Dr. Elliot, and one William Dale. L. H. Stew. Now to what Points will your Lordship call these Witnesses? L. Stafford. My Lord Ferrers is to speak his knowledge of Southall the Coroner, and that is as to Dugdale, my Lord knows that person Dr. VVatson, and they are to invalidate the Testimony of Dr. Oats, and there is another mans Name, I for∣get what it is. Sir Will. Jones. To what Point is he to be a Witness? L. Stafford. 'Tis to Dr. Oats, and the Evidence against me. Mr. Serj. Maynard. So there will be pretences made every moment of some new Witness to put off this Cause.
Lord Stafford. Under your Lordships favour, I scorn to make any delay. If you think this may not be material, or not fit to be done, I will quit it. L. H. Stew. Go on my Lord. L. Stafford. Will your Lordships be pleased to begin with my Lord Ferrer s (who stood up in his place.) L. H. Stew. My Lord Ferrers, your Lordship is called upon by my Lord Staf∣ford, and you being a Witness for the Prisoner, and against the King, your Lord∣ship is not to be sworn. Lord Ferrers. My Lords, what I have to say concerning that person my Lord named, Southall, is only upon Hear-say, and upon the Reputation he hath in the Countrey; for I have no acquaintance with him, nor do know him at all: But the Reputation that hath been given me of him in the Countrey, is, That he hath been a very active man in the late times against the King, and is counted to be a very pernicious man against the Government. Lord Stafford. Call Dr. Taylor. Servant. I know not where he is, he can't be found at present. L. Stafford. Then call VVilliam Dale in the mean time. My Lords, This same Southall I never heard of, the other man that drew up the Affidavit, that is Feake, I know, he was named by Southall to joyn with him in the Examination, I can tell what he was, I can prove that he is an Attorney, that he was Mayor of Stafford, and proclaimed the King Traytor. L. H. Steward. Who was that? Lord Stafford. One that drew up the Affidavit of Dugdale, Feake mentioned by Southall. L. H. Steward. Who is your next Witness, my Lord? L. Stafford. One VVilliam Dale (who being called appeared.) L. H. Steward. What is your Name? VVitness. VVilliam Dale. L. H. Stew. What do you say? L. Stafford. About Dugdale, my Lords, what he knows about his offering him any money. Sir VVill. Jones. We desire to know where he lives? Dale. Dugdale never offered me any money. L. H. Stew. Where do you live? Dale. At Owseley-bridge. L. Stafford. Pray ask him whether Dugdale persuaded him to swear against my Lord Aston something he knew not. L. H. Stew. Did Dugdale ever hire you to swear against my Lord Aston? Dale. No, he never hred me. L. H. Stew. Do you know that he ever hired any body else to swear false? Dale. I do not, my Lords.
L. Stafford. My Lords, I most humbly thank your Lordships for your favour in giving me the liberty of examining these other Witnesses, I shall trouble you no further, nor give no more Evidence, only one Witness, my Lords, I shall trouble you no further, and that is Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower to this point, whether my Lord Aston did refuse to come to accompt with Dugdale. L. H. Steward. Come, Mr. Lieutenant, do you know any thing about Ac∣compts between my Lord Aston and Mr. Dugdale? Mr. Lieutenant, My Lords, last Summer was 12 month Dugdale came to the Tower, but my Lord Aston would not speak with him, unless I were by; so they brought him to my Lodging, and he shewed me the Books of Accompts, Itold them I did not understand Accompts, but if they would have me be by I would get some body to be present that did, and have them adjusted. Mr. Dug∣dale said he whould come another time, but from that time to this I never heard of him. L. Stafford. My Lords, I shall not trouble you with any more Witnesses. My Lords, I have now done my Evidence. I shall as well as my weak memory and old Age will give me leave sum it up, something (as well as I can) of the Evi∣dence given against me, and for me. Truly, my Lords, I am able to do it very imperfectly for want of understanding, and truly for want of sleep, but I do not doubt, but that according to the Law, as I am informed it is, since I can have no Counsel in matter of Fact, or to advise me in any thing of that nature, yet I am also informed by the Law, your Lordships who are my Judges, are my Counsel. And I do not doubt but your Lordships, when you take it into con∣sideration, will supply any defects which I shall commit, which I believe will be many, I shall spend your Lordships time as little as I can, though these Gentle∣men of the House of Commons believe I desire to protract it, yet I profess be∣fore God I do not. And I declare before them all, and your Lordships, I am so satisfied of my own Innocency that I would never beg a moments time of delay; and I know your Lordships will take care of the Life of the meanest Subject; and though I have had the honour to sit among your Lordships as a Peer, yet I ask not for your favour, but with your justice too; I shall therefore sum up my defence as well as I can. For the first Witness Dugdale he swore I was at a Consult at Tixal in the end of August or the beginning of September, I have sufficiently proved that in all August I was not there, nor till the 12. of September. I have proved that his first Oath was, I was there in August, and a man that will swear false in one thing is not to be credited in any▪ I have made it appear to your Lordships, that upon the 20. of September, when he says he was in my Chamber and I sent the Page to call him, that it is false, it was only he desired he might come to me to get leave that he might go to the Race, my Lord Aston being angry with him for it. This I conceive is proved sufficiently by two Witnesses, my Man and my Boy, and this I think I have
proved as positively as can be done. My Lords, 'tis true, 'tis objected against me, That I had said Dugdale was never seen alone with me in my life, 'tis true, and 'tis true Ansell swears he brought a Footman to me, but he swears it was in the Morning when it was at Supper, and does not say that he was alone with me. My Lords, Dugdale swore that he told Mr. Philips and Mr. Sambidge of the death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey on the Munday, some swore he said it was on the Tues∣day, but they deny that ever he told it them, and so he is forsworn in that. And my Lords, whether he be a man of any great Credit I think I have proved enough to your Lordships. 'Tis proved by two Witnesses Holt and Morrall that he of∣fered them money to swear, as likewise he did to another, one Robinson, whom I do believe by the Information that was given of him to be a wicked ill man and not to be credited, but being so, my Lords, he was the fitter for Dugdale's turn. And yet he had so much Conscience, though he was a poor and needy fellow, he would not swear a mans Life away for money, the other two are without ex∣ception, the one they say is an idle fellow, and t'other a man but of an indifferent Reputation, how far that will move with your Lordships, I submit it to you. I suppose 'tis also clear by my Witnesses that Dugdale is a man of no Reputation, having forsworn himself in several particulars, and I submit the Credit of all he says to your Lordships upon that. The next Witness, my Lords, is Mr. Oats, whether he be a Doctor or no I know it not, he would not own it here, he, my Lords, swears that he saw a Com∣mission delivered to me to be Pay-master of an Army to be raised, God knows when, I never heard when, or where, I suppose it was in the Clouds, for I ne∣ver knew where else. Mr. Oats all along before swore only that he believed I was in the Plot, now he swears I was in it, at Mr. Fenwicks Chamber a man I never saw in my life, nor heard of till this discovery. And that he saw Letters subscribed by my Name; but that, my Lords, I conceive is no Evidence at all, for he never saw me write nor does know my Hand, nor does he pretend to know me then, and when he had told your Lordships he had a Letter of mine, he pretended to look for it, and then said he had lost it, that is, never had it. But besides, my Lords, his Evidence now does not agree with his former, for I do appeal to your Lordships that were in the House then, that he swore the first time, He only saw my Name to Letters, afterwards he swore (that is some days after he had ended all his Evidence, and knew no more than he had put down then, afterwards he remembers what he knew not before, and swears) a Commission he saw delivered to me: So his Memory increases as he hath time to invent, and perhaps by another time it might be much more. But, my Lords, I think that one particular, his swearing before your Lordships, as 'tis entred in your Journal, that he had no more to say against any body, and after∣wards naming the Queen, and now me to have a Commission, I conceive is per∣fect Perjury. My Lords, Mr. Oats told your Lordships, That he had never
been a Papist in his Heart but ever feigned it; truly my Lords I cannot possibly give over that point, That a man that feigns himself to be a Papist or any thing that in the opinion of Protestants is so wicked a thing as that, is fit to be believ∣ed, if he shall not heartily repent himself, and own it to God and Man as an ill thing to dissemble so. But yesterday he with a smiling Countenance, and as it were in derision, owns that which must be a very great offence to God Almighty to pretend to be of an Idolatrous Church. I appeal to your Lord∣ships whether he be a fit Witness, I conceive he cannot be thought a Christian, nor to believe in God. I know many wicked and infamous persons have done many wicked things, and yet have been Witnesses, but never did any wicked man own a wicked thing, that he might have concealed, with boasting of it, that ever was credited in any thing; for if he had said I do acknowledge I did dissemble with God and my own Conscience, but I ask God forgiveness, it was for a good End and a good Intention, it had been something (though that could not have atoned for so ill a thing) but shewing no Repentance, but ra∣ther an impudent affronting of God Almighty, I think he is not a fit Witness, I appeal to your Lordships and the whole Christian World if he be. I cannot believe your Lordships will condemn me for an Opinion which I will go to my death with, and it stands upon me so to do. The last Witness, my Lords, is Turbervill, and he says, in the year (75) he often discoursed alone with me for a fortnight together at Paris. My Ser∣vants he owns he never saw them, and how he could come for a fortnight together, and not see my Servants, I refer it to your Lordships consideration whether it be possible. For I'le tell your Lordships, when I had been a few days at Paris my Landlord came one day to me, and said, You do not do well to suffer any body to come to you without your Man be by, for there came yesterday a Frenchman to speak with you, and I do not know him, and he went strait up to your Chamber without any body with him, 'tis a dangerous thing, said he, for I know that Frenchmen and people have come up, and been alone with persons, and put a Pistol to them, and made them deliver their mo∣ny for fear of their Lives, therefore pray, said he, do it no more. From that time, which was a few days after, I came to Paris the latter end of October, or the beginning of November, no Christian Soul was permitted to come to me without my Servants, how then could he come to me for a fortnight to∣gether and none of my Servants see him? My Lords, this Gentleman very ci∣villy the next day after he had made an Affidavit against me would needs mend it, and Sir William Poultney did acknowledge that he made Affidavit one day, that he came to my Lord Powis's in the year (73) and the next day amended it to (72.) Now I humbly conceive, my Lords, a man that swears one thing to day, which he forswears to morrow is not to be believed; And the truth of it is, as his Brothers prove to your Lordships, he came to my Lord Powis's in
the year (71) and so he forswears himself in every thing, and is in no wise to be believed. He swears to your Lordships I writ a Letter to him to acquaint him that I would go by Calice, and not by Diep; but I have proved I went by Diep, and I assure your Lordships I have not been at Calice, I think, these twelve or fourteen years. I conceive these things are very manifest and clear proofs against him that he hath not swore one true word. He swears that my Lord Powis, my Lady Powis, and his friends, perswaded him to go to Doway to to be a Frier, but not liking it he came over again and was in danger of his life by them; but the Evidence is sufficiently strong in proof that he afterwards was at my Lord Powis's and was well received, that he lay in the House, and was not in the least injured by them. And for his other Relations his Brother proves he was not ill used by them. They gave him Seven Pound to be gone and trouble them no more. He says, I said, he was a Coward, and I'le tell you why I said so, because a Captain, that is now out of England, told his Sister so, who told me, But that is not very material. My Lords, there is one Witness more, John Porter that swears to your Lordships this one thing, That this Turbervill swore to him at such an Alehouse, he knew nothing of the Plot. And then my Lords there is Mr. Yalden, and he is a Gentleman of Reputation, he said in his company, there was no Trade good but that of a Discoverer, God damn the Duke of York, Monmouth, Plot and all, for I know nothing of it. Truly, my Lords, whether he got no money by it or is known since he hath been a Discoverer, telling what he knew not so many Months ago; and therefore I submit it to your Lordships what he is. My Lords, these people that swear against me, there is not one of them a per∣son of any Quality or Condition, and whether they have not rather sworn for money than the truth, by things that are known, and need no proof, I shall ob∣serve when I come to it to argue that point in Law; Whether a man that swears for gain is a credible Witness or no? My Lords, I have as well as I can summed up that little Evidence that was given against me, I cannot better do it in so short a time, for indeed I had but a very short time last night, and I have not slept, I had the Cramp so much in ex∣tremity that my next Neighbour heard me roaring out. My Lords, I submit my self to your Lordships, and doubt not but that the matters charged upon me will appear to your Lordships sufficiently answered. And I beseech your Lordships well to consider that one thing against Dr. Oats, his dissembling with God Almighty, and his impudent owning of it. This I do insist upon, and I protest before God Almighty, if I were a Judge, I would not hang a Dog upon such Evidence. My Lords, I have many points in Law to offer to your Lordships, and when you please I should do it, I'le name them to you. L. H. Steward. Name them, my Lord, if you have any Doubts in Law pro∣pound them.
Lord Lovelace. My Lords, I would not interrupt my Lord, but I think in∣deed it is no interruption, since his Lordship broke off and was going on to ano∣ther point. But I think I see one of the impudentest things that ever was done in a Court of Justice; Whilest we are Trying a Person here for a Popish Plot, I do see a prosessed Papist standing in the Body of your House, and that is Sir Bar∣nard Gascoyne. (Who thereupon went out of the Court.) L. Stafford. My Lords, I do conceive I have cleared my self to your' Lordships of what I am accused of. My Lords, The Course of my whole Life hath been otherwise, I defie any Creature in the World to say, That I ever used one disobe∣dient or disloyal word of the King, or did any such Act. I waited on the King that now is in the Unhappy War that is passed, when I was in a low condition enough as to Fortune, and my Wife and Family were thereby reduced to great Streights, for my Wife and Children lived some five or six years upon some Plate and Jewels that we had, whereas if I would have come, and been at Lon∣don, and joined with that party, I could have saved my Estate, and lived quietly as others did. But my Conscience told me, I ought to wait upon the King, and offer him my personal Service, when I could do him no other. I have shewn how the Witnesses have forsworn themselves, I shall now, if your Lordships please, desire your Opinion in some points of Law. And though perhaps I may name to your Lordships many things that are impertinent, or not to the purpose, I beg your Lordships pardon, 'tis out of the weakness of my Under∣standing, and I hope you will not think ill, neither your Lordships, nor the House of Commons, if I should, through Ignorance, move things impertinent. The first Point of Law is this, First, I conceive there is no Example or President for it, That Proceedings Criminal ever did continue from Parliament to Parliament, and this is continued to three. L. H. Steward. Speak out my Lord, and go on L. Stafford. Secondly, my Lords, I do not question the power of the House of Commons in the least, but, my Lords, I know they Impeach when they find Grounds for it without dispute, but I question whether any man, by the known Laws of this Kingdom, in Capital Cases, can be proceeded on, but by Indictment first found by the Grand Jury, and not by Impeachment by any Person, or other body of Men. L. H. Steward. Say on my Lord. L. Stafford. Thirdly, my Lords, I conceive there are many defects in the In∣dictment or the Impeachment (Indictment there is none) There is no Overt Act alledged in the Indictment or Impeachment, I know not well what it is called. And, my Lords, by the Act of Parliament in 1 H. 4. c. 10. nothing from thence∣forth is to be Treason, but according to the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. which includes an Overt Act.
Fourthly, my Lords, I desire that I may prove that by Law they are not com¦petent Witnesses, for they swear for money. But my Lords, I forgot one thing to say to Your Lordships as to the Evidence, that these Gentlemen did endea∣vour to prove (I do not speak whether they did or not) a general Plot of the Papists, whether they did not, I am not concerned in it, for I say they have not proved me a Papist, which I submit to Your Lordships; and though any man may know me so in his private knowledge, yet they having not given any proof of it, 'tis not to affect me. Fifthly, There is is one Point of Law more, That no man can be condemned for Treason, as I conceive by one Witness, and there are not two Witnesses to any Point. These are the Points of Law, I humbly beg your Lordships pardon for the trouble, and desire your Opinion in them. Sir William Jones. My Lords, Before we make answer to what my Lord hath said, I do humbly desire, That for the Objection which he hath made against Mr. Southall, proved by a Noble Lord of this House (though I must observe it was not of his own knowledge, but by Hear-say, and that matter of Hear-say contrary to the Act of Oblivion) to the end there may no doubt remain of Mr. Southall's Credit, that a Noble Lord of this House, and a Gentleman of the House of Commons (who both know Mr. Southall) may be heard to his Reputation. Sir Fran. Winn. My Lord Ferrers knew him not himself, but my Lord Brook and Mr. Gower will give a better account of him. (Then the Lord Brook was sworn.) Lord Brook. My Lords, What I have to say concerning this Mr. Southall is, That he hath been often employed both by my Brother and my Mother, and they have so good an Opinion of him, that they employ him still, and therefore we take him for an honest man, and an able man, or he would not be so much trusted and employed, and I take him to be a very good Churchman, for if he was not I would not employ him. L. H. Steward. An honest man, an able, and a good Churchman your Lord∣ship says. Lord Brook. He receives the Sacrament four times a year. Sir Will. Jones. Then swear Mr. VVilliam Leveson Gower, a Member of the House of Commons. (which was done in his place.) Mr. L. Gower. My Lords, I have been near 7 years of Staffordshire, but did not know Mr. Southall till this Popish Plot was discovered. After that I came ac∣quainted with him (being a Justice of the Peace in that County) in Court, where I found him to be the most zealous Prosecutor of the Papists in that Country, no man like him. I likewise found several Popish Priests, had by his means, been apprehended, and imprisoned, and one of them since convicted, who by the way still remains unexecuted in Stafford Goal. What Opinion some may have
heard or had of him formerly, I cannot tell, but this I know, that he hath more than once come to desire my Assistance, that he might prosecute the Papists the most effectual way upon the Statutes made for that purpose, and that he did com∣plain to me that he had not met with good usage elsewhere. My Lords, I take Opinion to be grounded upon Principles, and I do observe that those of this Country, who do believe this Popish Plot, and know Mr. Southall, and are principl'd for the Preservation of the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Government, do at this time speak well of him, and those who are not so prin∣cipl'd speak otherwise. My Lords, I was surpris'd when I heard my Name mention'd upon this occa∣sion, I have told your Lordships all the matter of Fact that upon the suddain occurs to me, (with my own Opinion, which I offer with all submission) and had I had notice, I might possibly have recollected more, which I would freely have declared to your Lordships, but this is all that I can now say. L. Stafford. My Lords, if your Lordships please, I would say one word, if you will give me leave, I am very ignorant, and beg your Lordships pardon for troubling of you, I humbly desire to know, whether after the Points of Law are argued, I may speak something not concerning the Evidence of the Plot, but concerning my self. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, we shall not oppose the saying any thing he can for himself, but we must conclude, and have the last word. L. H. Steward. My Lord, the Gentlemen that are for the House of Commons must conclude. My Lords will give you all the favour they can, but they must have the last word. L. Stafford. I do not oppose it. L. H. Steward. Therefore you will do well to say all you have to say together. For the Points of Law, my Lords will give no Judgement till the Commons have answered them, and they I suppose will first sum up the whole Proofs, then you may say what you have to say, for they must make an end. Gentlemen, will you speak first to the Law? Sir Will. Jones. No, my Lords, first to the Fact. L. H. Steward. Go on then. Then Sir William Jones, One of the Committee appointed to manage the Evidence, began to sum up the same as followeth: MAy it please your Lordships, We have now done our Evidence, as to mat∣ter of Fact, and that which I have in Charge at this time, is to remind your Lordships of our Proofs, to answer the Objections that have been made against them, and to make some Observations upon the whole. My Lords, The Members of the House of Commons that were appointed for
the Service of the Management of this Tryal, those of them (I mean) who began the first day, made a Division of our Evidence into two parts, the one, that which concerned the Plot in general, and the other what related to this Lord in parti∣cular. My Lords, as to the Plot in general, we did call six Witnesses, I know some of your Lordships have taken Notes, and you have their Names, they were Smith, Dugdale, Prance, Oats, Denis and Jenison. My Lords, because I will save as much of your time as I can, I will not take upon me to repeat what each Witness said as to the Plot in general; but when I come to the▪ Evidence which immediately concerns my Lord, I must beg your favour that I may be more particular. I will say thus much for the Proofs of the Plot in general, That there was by those Witnesses so much fully proved, that made it most apparent, That there was a general Design amongst the Roman Catholicks to introduce their false Religion into this Kingdom, That the Jesuits had several Meetings to that end, That they endeavoured to do it by several ways, by raising of Armes, by collecting of Monies, and by de∣signing against the Kings Life; nay, they had so far advanced their Designs, and were in so much readiness, as they thought it time to appoint Officers not only for their Army, but for the Civil Government, as if the Work were al∣ready accomplished. Your Lordships were told by one of the Witnesses of a Lord Chancellor, and of a Lord Treasurer, (Lords now in the Tower yet to be tried) and you were told also of Officers for the Military part, a General, a Lieutenant-General, and this Lord at the Bar to be Pay-Master of the Army. I shall, my Lords, desire to take notice to your Lordships, That this De∣sign, though it was to be finally acted by other Hands, yet was it first con∣trived, and afterwards carried on by the Priests and Jesuits. You will find them preparing for it, by making Sermons to justifie that Doctrine (which I confess this Noble Lord denies) of the lawfulness of killing Kings. You will find the Priests and Jesuits, in their Discourses as well as Sermons, urging and incouraging their Disciples and Votaries, to go on with their Design of killing our King, and giving that common Reason for it, That He was an Heretick, and it were meritorious to take him out of the way. My Lords, I take notice of these particulars in the general Plot, because it may give great light to, and add much to the Confirmation of the particular Evidence. And, my Lords, (I think) I may take leave to say, That the Plot in general hath been now sufficiently proved. And if we consider what hath been proved at former Tryals (upon which many of the Offenders and Traytors have been executed) what hath been published in Print, and above all Coleman's Letters, written all with his own hand, and for that reason im∣possible to be falsified; we may justly conclude, that there is not a man in
England, of any understanding, but must be fully convinced of the truth of the Plot in general. I shall spare to mention the Resolutions and Declarations of Two Parliaments, and of both Houses in those Two Parliaments without (as I remember) one dissenting Voice, expressing their full satisfaction of the Reality of the Plot; so that I think now none remain that do pretend not to believe it, but two sorts of persons, the one those that were Conspirators in it, and the other those that wish'd it had succeeded, and desire it may so still. But, my Lords, I will be the shorter on this part; For perhaps it will be ob∣jected, You have offered a fair Proof of a general Plot, here are Records, Votes of both Houses, Papers and Evidences printed, and Witnesses Viva voce to prove it; but what is all this to my Lord Stafford? My Lords, it goes a great way to him; I do not say to be a convincing Evidence, but to make the particular Evi∣dence against him highly credible. Your Lordships cannot imagine, That there are such a store of Lords and great Men amongst that Party (though there be too many) that they should have great Choice for great Offices. Your Lordships hear how the other great Of∣fices were disposed of, and truly I think the Merit of this Lord amongst that par∣ty might very well intitle him to an Office as great as this of Treasurer of War, or Pay-Master to the Army. But what is the Evidence of the general Plot (may some still say) to my Lord Stafford? what do you mention the raising an Army? what do you mention the collecting of Money? what do you mention the providing of Arms for? Yes my Lords, they are very useful, for they give a a fair Introduction to prove against this Lord that he was to have this Office. If it be proved by other Witnesses than those who swear directly against this Lord, That there were Arms provided, that there was an Army to be raised, and the rest; It proves at least that there was Occasion for such an Officer as the parti∣cular Witness proves my Lord was to be. My Lords, For the other matter that relates to the Consultations of the Priests and Jesuits, and their Sermons and Discourses; I desire your Lordships to observe that also, which if you do, your Lordships will easily perceive what a great influence even that matter hath upon the particular Evidence, and how credible it renders the Testimony of the particular Witnesses. Your Lordships will find, when my Lord was at Tixal (as Dugdale gives you an Ac∣compt) there was Evers the Jesuit, and other Priests still at my Lords Elbow, and egging him on to this business. Your Lordships will find where Oats speaks of him, it is at Fenwick's Chamber, who was a Jesuit, giving him ghostly Coun∣sel. Your Lordships will find, that at Paris, where Mr. Turbervill speaks of him, there were Father Sherborne, Father Nelson, and Father Anthony Turber∣vill. Still the Priests are about my Lord; and when my Lord is among them, or but newly come from them, then he utters the Treason of killing the King. And doubtless this trayterous purpose of his did arise from their Counsels. So that
though our Witnesses speak of my Lords Discourses at several times about killing the King, yet they make them flow from one and the same Fountain, the instiga∣tion of the Priests and Jesuits. But now, my Lords, to come to the particular Evidence, I think I may say, if ever Evidence was convincing, this is so. We have brought three Witnesses which speak each of them that which is sufficient to prove my Lord Guilty, and they speak of Overt Acts too, as I shall observe anon. His Lordship was pleased at the beginning of our Evidence to desire that the Witnesses might look him in the Face, and for that he cited two Statutes, I sup∣posed he intended the Statutes of 1. & 5. of Edw. 6. which Statutes, or at least one of them, do say, That there shall be in Case of High Treason two Witnes∣ses to accuse, and those two Witnesses brought face to face at the time of the Tryal. And my Lord hath had the benefit of those Laws, he hath had two, nay three Witnesses to prove him Guilty, brought face to face before your Lordships, and if these three, or any two of them, deserve to be credited, my Lord in this Case is Guilty of High Treason. My Lords, I must beg the favour of looking upon my Paper of Notes, for the truth is, the Witnesses are so many, and the proceeding hath held so long, that it is impossible for my weak memory to retain all that was said. My Lords, the first Witness we began withall was Dugdale. And I know your Lordships did take notice what he swore, but it will be my Duty to re∣mind your Lordships, That he tells you, That he had heard of a general De∣sign of making preparations to be ready against the Kings Death, and this for several years past. But as to the matter of hastening the Death of the King, that was but a late Counsel. He tells you, I think, that about the latter end of Au∣gust, or the beginning of September, 1678. Evers and other Jesuits were at Tixal, That there was a Consult then about the Kings Death, and that (by the means of Evers, who was a very great Man among them, but since fled, and is mentioned in the Impeachment) he was admitted to that Consult, and heard particularly what every man said; and he does take upon him to say, That at that time the matter of taking away the Kings Life was propounded, and that my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, did consent to it. My Lords, He tells you further, That upon a Sunday Morning my Lord came from Stafford to Tixal to Masse; my Lord was pleased to observe that we do not prove him a Papist, but we prove my Lord came to Masse, and that I think is one good Proof of his being a Papist. Besides, Dugdale swears my Lord did then complain, That they had not the free Exercise of their Religion, that they could not say their Prayers openly; What were they? Not the Prayers of Protestants, not those contained in the Liturgy of our Church. He could not complain of any restraint as to them, but complain he did that they had not the free Exercise of their Religion, but he did hope, if things succeeded well, in a short time, it would be otherwise. This is particularly sworn by Dugdale.
My Lords, His Lordship was very much unsatisfied, That Dugdale was not particular in point of time, he did talk of some matters to be in August or Sep∣tember, but could not fix to any day. But your Lordships will remember, that as to one particular, and which mainly concerns his Lordship to answer, he comes to a day, or within a day, for he swears positively, That upon the 20. or 21. of September he was sent for to my Lords Chamber, the Servants were put out, that there my Lord did propose to him in express terms, the matter of Killing of the King. He would have him be an Actor in it, and he offered him a Re∣ward of 500 l. to perform it. For this which is the most material part of his par∣ticular Evidence against my Lord, he is certain 'twas either on the 20. or 21. of September; and he tells your Lordships how he comes to remember the time, by a good Token, by the Foot-Race that was then to be run; and I do not per∣ceive that my Lord does deny, but rather acknowledge that Dugdale was in his Chamber at that time. 'Tis true, he does deny some other Circumstances which I shall answer anon. And here I do think Dugdale undertakes to swear to that which will amount to an Overt Act, and a damnable one too, that is the offering 500 l. to kill the King. But Dugdale, it seems, was not willing to depend upon the promises of my Lord for so much money, his Lordship had not that credit with him; he re∣pairs to Evers, and desires to be satisfied from him whether he might rely upon my Lord for so much Money, Evers told him he might be sure to have the Money, and that there was enough in Harcourts and other mens hands for the carrying on that blessed design, and that he should have it thence. I might, my Lords, remember to your Lordships how Dugdale does particularly swear concerning another discourse he had afterwards with my Lord. That my Lord complained of the great losses that had been sustained by him and his friends for the King, how in particular my Lord Aston's Father had lost 30000 l. and what resentments my Lord had of it; he said that places of profit were rather be∣stowed upon those that disserted the King, and were Rebels and Traytors, than on those that did him faithful Service; and what does he conclude from thence? He is very angry with the King, and does say that next to the Cause of Religion (which was the strongest motive with him to take away the Kings Life) the Kings ingratitude to his Loyal Subjects was that which did most offend him. I shall not trouble your Lordships with other particular matters which were to serve as incouragements to the Design, as that there was to be a Pardon from the Pope; that my Lord did write a Letter to Evers, which was shewn to Dug∣dale, wherein he says, That things did succeed very well abroad, and he hoped they would do so at home. I shall only observe that Dugdales Evidence, as to my Lords damnable Design of killing the King, is positive and full. And if this be to be believed (as I hope we shall shew there is no reason but it should
be) then here surely is one sufficient Witness to prove my Lord guilty of the High∣est Treason. My Lords, The next Witness we called for against my Lord was Dr. Oats; and I think Dr. Oats is not only positive, but he is positive in that which most certainly will amount to an Overt Act, nay I think to more Overt Acts than one. The Doctor tells your Lordships, That having been at St. Omers and in Spain, he saw several Letters that were subscribed Staf∣ford; he did not then know my Lords Hand, but he saw the Letters, and he tells you the effect of those Letters. And I remember in one of them there is this Expression, That my Lord (the Prisoner at the Bar) does give Assurance to the Fathers that he is very zealous and ready to do them service. Doctor Oats tells you, my Lords, That afterwards coming into England, my Lord Stafford did write a Letter, I think it was to his Son, but sure I am the Doctor said, he had the carriage of it to the Post-house, that he saw my Lord write it, he read the superscription, and he swears that the Hand which writ that Letter was the Hand which subscribed to all the former. And so then joyning the one to the other it amounts to as good an Evidence as if he had known my Lords Hand from the beginning. But that which comes home to my Lord, is that which Doctor Oats saw, and that which Doctor Oats heard; and they are these particulars which I now mention. First, he saw a Commission directed to my Lord to be Pay-master of the Army, he saw it delivered to my Lords own Hand and my Lord accepted it. Doctor Oats read the Commission, and he tells you by whom it was signed Johannes Paulus Oliva, a person substituted by the Pope to issue out Commissi∣ons; he tells you the Contents of it, and of this he swears he was an Ocular Witness. He tells you of another Matter he heard my Lord say, as considerable as the other, That when my Lord had received the Commission, my Lord declared that he was to go down into Staffordshire and Lancashire, where he was to put things in readiness. What were those things? He had now a Commission by vertue of which in Lancashire, and the other places, h was to prepare and gather Monies for that Army which he was to pay. So much Doctor Oats doth swear he heard from my Lords own mouth. But there is one thing further which I had almost forgot. He doth swear that my Lord was privy to, and approved of, the Matter of killing of the King. For he doth swear he did hear my Lord say at that time, He hoped before he returned, Honest William (who was Grove that was executed for this Attempt) would have done the business. And what that business was every
man who hath heard of Groves Treason must needs understand. There is but one thing more that I remember of Doctor Oats his Testi∣mony. Your Lordships that have a better advantage to write than we, who are crowded together, may have taken Notes of more; but this one thing I do observe, Doctor Oats doth expresly swear, that my Lord bore a very ill mind towards his Majesty; for my Lord did in his hearing complain, That the King had deceived them a great while, and that they would bear with him no longer, he should deceive them no more. My Lords, Our third Witness was Mr. Turbervill, who doth give you an account, that he being first sent to Doway, and intended to be entred there in one of the Societies, (he was sent by my Lord Powis and my Lady Powis, and some of his Relations of that Religion, for that purpose) he did not like the Company, he was not pleased with the Exercises of that Religion, and that with much difficulty he escaped thence and came for England: But finding he was not well look'd upon here, nor well received by his Re∣lations, he went over to France. That being at Paris he came into the com∣pany of the three Fathers I named before, Father Sherborn, Father Nelson, and Father Turbervill, the last whereof he tells you was his own Brother. That by the means of these Priests he was brought acquainted with my Lord Stafford, and doubtless they were able to make him intimately acquainted with my Lord. And it did prove so; for he tells you, after some time, that in a lower Room of my Lords Lodging my Lord proposed to him the business of killing the King. That he did not at all like it, was very unwilling to under∣take it, but my Lord bid him consider of it, and that he should give him his Answer at Diep, having enjoyned him secrecy; but my Lord after sent him word he would go by Calice; and the Witness afterwards went into England, and from thence into the French Army. And this is the substance of what Turbervill deposeth. And, my Lords, I think it will not be doubted by any man that will consider these three mens Testimonies, but that here are two Witnesses, if not more, to prove my Lord Guilty of Treason. But my Lord has been pleased against them to make several Objections; some have been by Witnesses which he hath produced to incounter the Proofs that we have offered; and some of them have been by Observations that he hath made upon what hath been said by our Witnesses and his. I will keep to Order as much as I can not confound the Order and Method of his Defence. The Witnesses he first brought were against Dugdale, and of them his Lordship was pleased to begin with his Daughter, the Lady Marchioness of Winchester, and his Niece Mrs. Howard. Your Lordships, I presume, are pleased to observe what they were called to. They did testifie, that, being at
Wakeman's Tryal, they did hear Dugdale swear (says my Lady Marchioness of Winchester) that my Lord Stafford was to come down into Staffordshire in June or July, and Mr. Dugdale was then to receive Orders from my Lord, and he swore (as she was pleased to say) that there was a Consult in August at Tixall, and my Lord Stafford was there present. Mrs. Howard, for I put them toge∣ther, was pleased to say that she was present at that Tryal, and there Dugdale swore my Lord Stafford did come down in June or July, and that my Lord was at the Consult in August. My Lords, I will not make Objections neither to the Religion of these La∣dies, nor to the Relation to my Lord, though those be matters that are to be considered. But that which I shall observe to your Lordships, is this, That they do not agree one with another; For my Lady Winchester says, Dugdale did swear that my Lord was to come down in June or July, and Mrs. Howard says, that he swore he did come down then. Now there is a great difference betwixt swearing an intention that a man was to come down, and swearing the very Act that he did come down at that time. By which your Lordships may observe how hard a matter it is for Witnesses that are present at a Tryal (especially at a Tryal which did not directly, though it might in consequence concern another Person of their Relation) to take notice exactly of things. And truly, my Lords, these Ladies being of that Religion might have so much concern upon them for Sir George Wakeman, the Popish Physician, and in him for other their friends of that party, that they might not have so much liberty of thought as to observe exactly all circumstances sworn to by the Witnesses, and therefore it is no great matter if they are mistaken in them. But I believe if any one do con∣sult the Print (though it be no Evidence nor offer'd as such) he will find no such thing was at that time sworn, for it is not so printed, and those that took notes did not understand it so. My Lords, The next Witness my Lord is pleased to bring is his Servant Fur∣nese; and what is it that he testifieth? He saith, that he was with my Lord the whole time that Dugdale was in my Lords Chamber, and he doth not remember that ever Dugdale was there but once, and he doth not remember that ever my Lord bid him go out of the Room. My Lords, it is a very hard matter for a man to come thus in the Negative, to remember how often Dugdale was there, especially there being no more occasion to take notice of it then, than here appears to be, and that after so long a time. And it is a very hard matter for a Servant to gain Credit, by saying his Master never bid him go out of the Room in his life. These things may be done or said, and yet escape the memory of a Servant of more Age and of less inclination to favour his Master then this person appears to be of and to have. Therefore I think there will be but a very small matter made of what he said, no force at all in it, and I believe your Lordships will give very little regard to it, but rather believe
those Witnesses that swear positively, that they have seen him with my Lord and speak to a familiarity at that time between them. This young man Furnese was my Lords Servant, and of his Religion; and it is considerable whether we have not reason to be afraid that more than ordinary Practice has been used to prepare Evidence on my Lords behalf, which I shall have occasion to speak to when I come to the other Witnesses. His next Witness, my Lords, was his Boy George Leigh, who is Fifteen years of Age now, and was Eight years old when he came to my Lord Seven years ago. And he attests the same thing, and to the same purpose with the other. And I think I may leave him with the same Answer, for we are nothing more concerned with him than we were with the other. Only one thing I would observe, to shew that his Memory was imperfect, he doth not remember that Dugdale was with my Lord at all that day, which my Lord himself doth acknowledge he was, and the other Witness agrees. So that there cannot be any great weight laid upon what he saith. My Lords next Witness was Thomas Sawyer, and he is one of my Lord Aston's Servants, that I desire to observe of him first. And what does he say? He saith, That Dugdale went away for Debt. The contrary to which was ap∣parently proved, for we, by our Witnesses, made it manifest, that Dugdale went away for the matter of the Plot; the fear and dread he was in upon that score: and the circumstance of his being apprehended by the Watch at Night in his Flight, and how he was put to take the Oaths, do manifestly prove this. But he says another thing, which I desire may have no weight with your Lord∣ships, that Dugdale should threaten, that because my Lord Aston would not own him for his Servant, he would be revenged of him. Truly, if my Lord Aston were here to be tried, it would have some weight. But to think if it were true, that he had so sworn, that therefore he would be so wicked as to do mischief to another man, that he would be revenged of every man of that Religion, or of every man that came to my Lord Aston's House; That cannot be imagined. So I cannot see what great stress, my Lords, the Prisoner can lay upon it, as to the present Tryal, which concerns my Lord Stafford. But, My Lords, I desire to observe, that he says further, That when Dugdale went away there was a discourse of a Plot; (this he helps out Dugdale in;) and that there was a discourse of the killing of a Justice of Peace. So that certainly it does shew, that Dugdale was apprehensive of the Plot. And as to that which he is pleased to say, That Dugdale should deny his knowledge of the Plot, and take Drink, and with Execrations forswear it; it will be no man∣ner of Objection at all. For I shall have occasion to shew hereafter, that Dugdale at that time was very far from revealing the Plot, he had been so long ingaged in, he was in apprehension of the danger of his own life, and Southall
tells you how and when he revealed it, and by what inducements he was prevailed upon to do it. The next Witness my Lord called was Philips, the Minister of Tixal; and truly all that I can accuse him of, is, want of Memory, and that is no fault in a man, that perhaps is very studious and careful in his Imployment as I hope he is. He tells you, that whereas Dugdale swore at a former Tryal, that he ac∣quainted Mr. Philips with the death of a Justice of Peace of Westminster on the Munday, that he did not acquaint him with it, that is, he does not remember it, for no man that swears a Negative, can swear more. But whether Mr. Philips Evidence be of any consequence to us, we submit to your Lordships considera∣tion; when we oppose to his want of Memory, two Witnesses that swear he was by when this News was told; and we are told likewise, as a confirmation of that, by two Gentlemen of Quality, that the report of such a thing was spread abroad all over that Country; before it was possible for it to come by the way of ordina∣ry Intelligence, whether therefore what Mr. Philips testifies proceeds from any other cause, than want of memory in Mr. Philips, I must leave to your Lordships consideration. But this I would observe to your Lordships, that when Mr. Philips was asked by my Lord, whether or no Dugdale were a person likely to perjure himself, he could not say so: Nay, being asked of what Reputation he was of, he said, by some, he was very well spoken of, by some but indifferently; but I do not remember, that he said, he was ill spoken of by any. So I think Mr. Philips has rather advanced than prejudiced Mr. Dugdale's Reputation and Credit. My Lords, I think I may lightly pass over the three Justices of Peace that were brought to give an Account of Dugdale's behaviour before them, and not men∣tion them distinctly, because they swear all to the same purpose, That Mr. Dug∣dale was apprehended upon suspition of the Plot, that he took the Oaths, that he was invited and urged by them to make a discovery of the Plot, which he then denied to have any knowledge of: For all this will be answered, when we come to re-mind Your Lordships of Mr. Southall's Testimony. His Lordship was pleased in the next place, to offer to prove Dugdale an ill Man, by endeavouring to suborn Witnesses: And in the first place he called Robinson, who testified a very unlikely thing, that Mr. Dugdale should call him in the Street, and bring him to an House, and offer him Money to swear a∣gainst my Lord Stafford; which Money he had in an Handkerchief, but did not tell him what particulars he should swear to: Nay, and this after he had told him he could swear nothing. And it does not appear, that Dugdale had any manner of knowledge of him, or that this Gentleman, Robinson had any know∣ledge of my Lord Stafford: So that it was a very rash and presumptuous thing, that Dugdale should attempt a man that he knew not, and a very imprudent thing,
that he should suborn a Witness, to swear against a man that the Witness to be suborned did not know. But I shall say no more of him, because I think upon the Account that has been given of him by a Noble Earl of this House, and an Ho∣nourable Member of the House of Commons, if he had said things in themselves probable, he deserves not in the least to be believed. My Lords, next Witness upon the same Head of Subornation was one Morral, a poor Barber; and what says he? He testifies that Mr. Dugdale did offer him 50 l. to swear against Sir James Symons and some others. My Lords, whether this be probable or no, we must leave to your Lordships. We have called Witnesses that prove him a man of no Reputation, one that runs up and down the Countrey, a kind of Vagabond, and I think, (upon the Endeavours that have been proved to have been used as to others) it is no very hard matter to bring a man of his Condi∣tion to say as much as he hath done. The next Witness is Samuel Holt the Blacksmith; and he tells such a Story, that if it were true, would be some Disparagement to Dugdale, and what is that? He says that Dugdale sent a Man and a Horse for him, to bring him to the Star in Stafford; and there offer'd him 40 l. to swear that one Moore carried away Evers. My Lords, how this Story comes in I cannot imagine, why Mr. Dugdale should bear any ill will to Moore, or what should induce him to intice this man to swear against Moore, or what else was in it, it doth not appear. But no matter what it is for; we prove against this man by two Witnesses, Rawlins and Lander. By the First, that he is a man of ill Reputation, very zealous to support the Plot, and cry down Mr. Dugdale, saying, that he was a Rogue and all they were Rogues that took part with him. And by the other Witness Lander, that Holt did make an Assault upon him, and would have killed him for being ready to appear against my Lord Aston at his intended Tryal. So that he is a man that has more Zeal than Honesty. Zeal in no good matter, namely to hinder the Truth from coming out against my Lord Aston; and therefore we have little reason to wonder: Nay, all the reason in the world to believe, that he says that which is untrue about Mr. Dugdale. My Lords, There was another Witness, Mr. Lydcott, that said, he was a Fellow of King's Colledge in Cambridge. He has offered no proofs that he was so; and truly it is very improbable he should be so: For I hope Fellowships in the University, especially in one of the chief Colledges (as this is) are bestow∣ed upon more deserving, and less suspitious Persons than he appears to be: A Man that owns himself the continual Companion and Secretary of one so famous in the Popish Party as my Lord Castlemain is: A Man that pretends he was ne∣ver out of his Company; and a man that owns, that two years since, he was taking of Notes at a Tryal for this Plot, not only for his own curiosity, but for the service of his Lord, who was concerned in the Accusation. That this Man should be a Fellow of King's Colledge, seems strange, and till it be better proved
will hardly be believed; nor will he deserve any Credit. It is true, he doth acknowledge himself a Protestant, and to be of the Church of England, and edu∣cated as he says a Presbyterian; but when he was asked when he received the Sacra∣ment last, I do not remember, that he gave your Lordships any Answer. This Witness says, that he was at the Tryal of the Five Jesuites; and there Dugdale did swear, that he gave notice to Mr. Philips, and Mr. Sambidge of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Death: And this they would make to be a great Fault in Dugdale, because neither Philips nor Sambidge remember it. Now whether Dugdale swore true in that or no, does not depend upon Dugdale's own Credit alone; but you have heard other Witnesses have made it appear, that he did swear true: So that we need not say any thing more to this Witness, nor to Gifford, who testifies to the same purpose; because that point, as to the report of the death of the Justice of Peace is by other Witnesses clearly proved. And as for Mr. Sambidge, I do not wonder much, that he should say, he did not hear it, because he could hardly hear what was said to him by the Court, or any of the Officers set near him on purpose. But, My Lords, I desire your Lordships to take notice, that he was a very angry Witness; he said, he had for∣merly had a Controversie with Dugdale, that Dugdale had cited him into Litch∣field Court, and had there a Suit against him for Defamation; and he said that a∣gainst Dugdale, which, unless better proved, must needs make Sambidge much suspected: He said, that Dugdale was the wickedest Man on Earth; but what proof he offer'd of that, or whether he did instance in any one particular, I leave it to your Lordships Memories. My Lords, There is another Proof relating to Mr. Dugdale, not out of the mouth of a Witness, but out of a Paper, which I desire to give an Answer to. It was an Objection, the Prisoner at the Bar was pleased to make to Dugdale's Information, taken the 24. of December 1678. before the Justices in the Coun∣trey, wherein he had said to this purpose; Presently after one Howard, Almoner to the Queen, went over, he was told by George Hobson, that there was a Design, &c. This, saith my Lord, is most impossible to be true: For you say, that immedi∣ately after the Almoner was gone away, Hobson told you this, whereas Hobson went away with the Almoner; and he came not to live with my Lord Aston till many years afterwards. This my Lord is pleased to offer as a falsification of Dugdale's Testimony; but, my Lords, I do desire to observe that this is an Information taken before two Justices of Peace in the Country; and if you look upon it, you will see it was written by a Country Clerk, and not very skilfully done. 'Ts rather short Notes of an Examination, than a compleat Examination. And your Lordships will please likewise to observe, that this is not really an Expression that is clear one way or th'other, but capable of two Senses, that is to say▪ either it may im∣port Hobson told him there was a Design ever since the Almoner Howard went
away; or it may import Hobson told him presently after the Almoner went away that there was a Design. Read but the words with a different Comma, and it makes the Sense one way or t'other. Now it is plain Dugdale could not intend that Hobson told him so as soon as the Almoner went away, because Hobson went away with the Almoner. And it was better to his purpose, that Hobson should tell him so after his return than before, for that shews the Design had been long a carrying on. Therefore it being a doubtful Expression that may refer either to the Time he told it to him, or to the Matter he told him of, and being taken in the latter Sense, the Objection faileth: I think this Matter can have no weight at all in it to falsifie a positive Testimony. My Lords, the next Witness we did call, and which was objected against by my Lord was Dr. Oats; and truly I must observe, that his Lordship was not pleased to call any one Witness materially to falsifie Dr. Oats his Testimony; and I must likewise observe, that Dr. Oats is in the material part of his Evidence supported by other Evidence. When Dr. Oats gave Evidence at former Tryals, it was the common Dis∣course of the men of that Religion, that Dr. Oats had never been in Spain, nor had ever any Credit with the Priests or Jesuits, but was a mean contem∣ptible person, and that all he said was improbable. But now your Lordships have heard that Dr. Oats, even by the Testimony of Dennis a Popish Priest (that is so to this day) was in Spain, was according to what he saith, brought up in the Colledge of the Jesuits, that he was in such esteem there, that the Archbishop of Tuam commended him very much in the presence of Den∣nis, and spoke of what expectation there was of him. So that Dennis the Priest doth support Dr. Oats in some parts of his Evidence. I do not speak of that part of it which concerns this particular Lord, but of his Testimony touching the general Plot. There is another thing wherein Dr. Oats is supported by another Witness, and that is the Esteem and Intimacy he had with the Jesuits. For Mr. Jeni∣son swears, that Dr. Oats was a man in esteem among them, that he was at Ire∣land's Chamber, and had discourse with Ireland, and did appear to be fre∣quently imployed by them. And I take these two Witnesses to be a great support to Dr. Oats, as to the General Matters which he evidenceth of the Plot. What now doth my Lord object against Dr. Oats? He call'd no Witnesses against him, but only an Honourable Earl of this House, I think I may name him, the Earl of Berkely: And that which his Lordship was pleased to testifie against him was, Object. That being examined at the House of Lords after he had given a long Evidence against many persons, he was asked this Question, whether there
were any more Persons of Quality he could speak against, or could accuse, and he said no. Answ. First, your Lordships will be pleased to observe, that this was after he had accused my Lord Stafford, my Lord was secured in the Tower long be∣fore that upon Dr. Oats his Testimony, and so he could not exclude this Lord. But that which it is brought for (I suppose) is to make him a person of no Credit; For after he had said this, he proceeded to an Accusation of the Queen. My Lords, I humbly conceive this may receive a very fair Answer. For, First, my Lords, I appeal to your Lordships Memories (for, I think, the Matter was before you all, or at leastwise before some of your Lordships) that the Accusa∣tion which Dr. Oats made of the Queen was not positive, nor of his own certain knowledge, but Words which he heard spoken in a Room in which he was not himself, but coming in afterwards, he saw the Queen was there. So it was not positive, but circumstantial proof, and questionable whether what he testified would amount to the proof of one Witness. And I must observe in the second place, it might not be so clear to Dr. Oats, whether the Queen were a Person capable of an Accusation, so as to be pro∣ceeded criminally against, the King and the Queen are to some purposes but one Person in Law. 'Tis true, some Queens have been tryed for Treason; but whether Dr. Oats understood that She might be brought to a Tryal may be a Question. But, that which I rely upon as an Answer, and which I desire may be con∣sidered, is, that Dr. Oats had given an Accompt of a great many persons, and a great many things he had sworn against several persons, some of which were executed, some to be tryed, and his Narrative against them, and of the whole Plot consisted of a great number of particulars. Here is a Question comes to the Do∣ctor on a sudden, Have you any more to say, or can you speak against any other? 'Tis possible a man that had said so much, and of so many, might not upon an instant recollect whether he had said all, or against all that he could say: Nay, 'tit easily to be imagined he could not on a sudden comprehend all he had said or could say. Therefore that the Answer of a man to such a Question put sud∣denly to him, having so much in his mind, and having said so much, should be taken so very strictly, and to hold him as perjured, because he did not at that instant time remember this particular of the Queen, I think is a severe Con∣struction. His Lordship is pleased further to object against Dr. Oats, that he is of no Credit; why? Because he went to be of the Romish Religion, and so was of that Religion which is Idolatry: I suppose his Lordship will not call that Religion Idolatry at another time, and in another place; but it serves his Lordship upon this particular Occasion, to call it so; but suppose Doctor Oats did, out of Le∣vity, or for want of being well grounded in his own, turn to another Religion,
he is not the first man that hath done so: There have been Men of great Fame in our Church, and of great Learning too, that have changed their Religion more than once. I think he that knew that Famous Man Mr. Chillingworth, could not but know he was first a Protestant, and afterwards a Papist, and afterwards a Protestant again: So that unless my Lord could accuse the Doctor of some great Crime, or Immorality, it will be hard, that the matter of chang∣ing his Religion, should hurt his Testimony. I am sure, it was happy for us he did change; without that, we had not had the first knowledge of the Plot, nor of many particulars which he could not come to know but by occasion of that Change. My Lord was pleased to object, that the Doctor was a man subject to Pas∣sion; and he brought in the Lieutenant of the Tower, to speak of some hot Words that passed between them. My Lords, I will allow the Doctor to be a Man of Passion: Nay, if my Lord please, a Man that is not of the deepest reach; but your Lordships will observe, that Passionate Men are not often malicious; and that a Man who is not of a deep Judgment, could never have contrived and invented a Narrative consisting of so many particulars, and they so coherent, if they were false: And if his Narrative be not true, he must be indued with more Subtilty and wicked Policy, than upon Tryal we can find in him: So that what my Lord hath objected as to his Infirmities, is no diminution to the truth of what he says, but rather a Confirmation of it. My Lords, The last Witness whom my Lord endeavoured to impeach is Mr. Turbervill; and against him my Lord thinks he hath a great advantage: But, my Lords, by that time I have re-minded your Lordships of what hath been al∣ready said, and what was before proved in Answer to my Lord's Objections a∣gainst him, Mr. Turbervill will stand as clear in this Court, as any of the former Witnesses. Your Lordships will be pleased to take Notice, That Mr. Turbervill was at the beginning, when he came to the House of Commons, a little uncertain, as to matter of Time: For when he had made in his Affidavit, the times to be (73) and (76) he craved leave to alter it to (72) and (75.) Surely, my Lords, this will be far from being any Imputation to Mr. Turbervill; because, First, he gives the Reason how he came afterwards to understand the Time bettter, by viewing his Papers and Letters; he likewise gives you an Account, and so did Sir William Poultney, when he did this, the next Morning, before any Man in the World had questioned him upon it: So that it shews the Man's Care and Conscience both, when he is so careful, even in matters of the smallest Moment to set things right. There is no Man that knows the Practice of the Court of Chancery, but knows, that for a Man to mend his Answer after it is sworn in a point of Time, or other Circumstance, is no disparagement to him: Nay, to do it before the
other Party did except or take notice of it, is no Objection, but rather a Reputa∣tion to him: And your Lordships will be pleased to take notice, that one of the times rectified, is of 7 or 8 years, the other of 4 years standing. And I do not think the worse of a Witness that is not positive, in a time, when that time is so far elapsed. The next matter is, That this man was never with my Lord; how was that proved, for 'tis a Negative? Why, my Lord is pleased to call his own Servants, Furnese and the Boy Leigh, and what say they? they never saw any such man. My Lords, I desire your Lordships to observe, That Mr. Turbervill was intro∣duced by greater Confidents than either of these Servants. Mr. Turbervill came in the company of the Priests, and you hear the Boy deny that he knew Anthony Turbervill, but not that he knew Father Turbervill, nor doth my Lord himself deny it, nor doth either Master or Man deny my Lords correspondency with the other two Fathers. And it might be very easie for Mr. Turbervill to come in the company of the Priests, and the Boy not take particular notice of him. And 'tis as little an Objection what my Lord says, that Turbervill himself said he did not know the Boy; how many are there that come to the Houses of another; and unless they Lodge there or dine there often, do not remember the Servants of the House: And 'tis no greater an Objection, to say, the Servants did not know him: The Priests they knew him; they were his Guides; they were the like∣liest to gain him Admittance, not only into my Lord's House, but into my Lord's Heart. My Lords, Your Lordships will be pleased likewise to observe, They have also gone about in very little matters, to disprove Mr. Turbervill, as that where∣as he says, he was not well used by my Lord Powis and his Lady, when he re∣turned from Doway; that he was very well used; and as one Witness (I think Minhead) says, he was permitted to lie in a Room near my Lord's Chamber. My Lords, Mr. Turbervill does not pretend to say, that my Lord Powis shut him out of doors; but what Reproaches or unkind Words might pass between them in private, Minhead might not hear: So that to say, that he lay in my Lord's House, is no Answer to this Matter. And for the other Witness (his Brother) that speaks of his Kindreds being kind to him, that, under favour, does not at all disprove him; for, what was the kindness? His Brother and Sister were so kind as to give him Seven Pounds never to see him more; a great mat∣ter when a younger Brother lies upon a Family, that the trouble of his stay there is redeemed at the price of Seven Pound. This was a very great kindness, a kind∣ness indeed that one would scarce deny to a Stranger, if in Poverty. I men∣tion the least matters I can remember, because I would have nothing stick with your Lordships. Then Secretary Lydcott (the Fellow of Kings Colledge) was called again; but indeed, my Lords, he was so out in his Arithmetick, so mistaken in the
Year; and used the New Stile (the Romish) so much more than ours, that it makes me suspect he is not so great a Protestant as he pretends to be. He pro∣mised us his Book, which he was not then prepared to produce; but because we do not hear of him, nor of his Book since, we say no more of him. My Lords, John Porter my Lord Powis's Butler comes next, and what does he tell your Lordships? Why, that Mr. Turbervill came not to Powis's House (it seems he did not appear there) but that he came to a Victualling House hard by; and he telling Turbervill he must know something of the Plot, he denied that he knew any thing. To the same purpose, or rather to less, and more im∣probably, does Yalden (the Gentleman of Grays Inn, as he calls himself) testifie, who says, that walking in Grays Inn Walks, he had discourse with Turbervill; and that he then swore, there was no Trade good now but that of a Discoverer; and damned himself because he could make no Discovery. Truly, my Lords, this looks in it self to be something prepared for the purpose: It is not probable, that a Man that should use those horrid Oaths, and should have such a mind to be a Discoverer, should disable himself ever to be so by swearing he knew nothing. But I will not only answer that matter, with saying 'tis improbable; but I shall desire Your Lordships to remember, that Mr. Powel, a Gentleman of the same House, and of good Reputation, does swear, that Turbervill did acquaint him, that he could discover a considerable matter; and this was above a year since. And Mr. Arnold, a Member of the House of Commons does confirm it, that he did several times acquaint him, that he could make an important Discovery; and gave him several reasons, why he thought not fit to do at that time, because of the Dangers which might arise from some Great Men; and therefore till he had a more convenient Opportunity, he would not discover. But as soon as the Parliament sate, very early he did begin to discover: So that I shall oppose the Testimony of Mr. Powel and Mr. Arnold, to the Testimony of my Lord Powis's Butler, and Mr. Yalden; the latter of whom, speaks so improbably, and of a Discourse half a year ago; whereas Mr. Powel speaks of what Mr. Turbervill said above a year since, and Mr. Arnold of a long∣er time. My Lords, It hath been sometimes objected, that Mr. Turbervill was a Stran∣ger to my Lord; and it was too great a Trust to commit to a Stranger; too great a Secret for a Stranger to be acquainted with: My Lord's design of the King's Death was too great a matter to lodge with one, with whom my Lord had no more Acquaintance than he had with Turbervill. Your Lordships will be pleased to observe who they were that did intro∣duce him, and who probably gave the best Character of him: they were the three Priests; and I do not wonder when these Priests had brought my Lord up to such a purpose, that they should prevail with his Lordship to give Credit
to, and deal with a Man that was not very unlike in his Circumstances to at∣tempt such a business▪ For your Lordships will observe, he was a man that was very stout; for against my Lord's reflection upon him as to Cowardise in deserting the Army, Mr. Turbervill hath produced the Certificate of his dismis∣sion, which gives him a very good Character. Besides, he was a man indigent, and therefore I think there could not be a fitter man chosen for the purpose, if he had been so void of all Grace as to undertake it. And that Priests having gotten a man so qualified, as they thought him, were not likely to let slip such an opportunity. But, My Lords, to come to that which is the sum of the business, and which my Lord lays more weight on than all the rest; and that is the Affidavit which Mr. Turbervill swore before the Justices of the Peace (which was in effect what he informed the House of Commons) and in that Affidavit, besides his alteration of Times (which I have spoken to already) it is objected that he does say that which is manifestly untrue: For he says my Lord came by the way of Calice with Count Gramont, neither of which my Lord did do. My Lords, I will not mention the Master of the Yacht, nor the Witnesses from the Admiralty which make out that my Lord came from Diep, and not from Calice. Nor do I deny that my Lord came by himself, and not with Count Gramont, and therefore 'tis most certainly true, that what Turbervill swore, as to those two particulars, was not true. Yet if your Lordships please to observe the Circumstances, tho' what he swore herein was not true, it will appear a very innocent mistake. For in Turbervill's Affidavit he tells your Lordships, that he came away with∣out my Lord to Diep, and came from Diep to England before my Lord Staf∣ford left Paris. Mr. Turbervill tells you, afterwards my Lord came from Ca∣lice with Count Gramont; Mr. Turbervill could not possibly be thought to speak this of his own knowledge, because he does in the same Affidavit tell you too, that he came away before my Lord, and had not his passage with him. So that, my Lords, I desire you would observe, it could be no design of his to af∣firm this of his own knowledge: For if it were, he took a very ill course to disclose in the same Affidavit that he was absent, and so could not speak of his own knowledge. And, my Lords, suppose a man did swear such a man and he were in such company, and that he came home and left the man there, and that afterwards the man said such and such things in that company, what should I say of this Oath? I might well say the words of his Oath were not proper, or that he was unweary in expressing himself; but I could not say, nor would any man justly be able to say he had a design to make the World believe he heard him say so, because he swears in the same breath he came away before the Words were spoken. If Mr. Turbervill had understood how strict and nice a man ought to be in expressing himself in an Affidavit, he would have said (as he
had been told) my Lord ame by Calice, and that Count Gramont came with him, as he understood. 'Tis true he hath not put in those words, but I beseech you, when the matter it self will bear it, nay, when 'tis most apparent that Mr. Turbervill could have no other meaning than to relate what he was in∣formed by others, and what he could not know himself, what corruption, what obliquity can there be in this Oath? All that can be said is, it was not cautiously worded; but it does certainly disclose so much in it self, that every one that hears it must say, That he did not take upon himself to swear it as of his own knowledge, because he tells you he was not there, so that it was rather want of knowledge how to express himself properly, than any corruption in his Oath, or forswearing himself. But says my Lord, how should he come to know this? Why Mr. Turber∣vill said he had a Letter whereby he knew my Lord would come by the way of Calice, but where is that Letter? Is it necessary to keep, or does any man almost keep Letters of no greater concernment than this, that my Lord writ him word how he would go by the way of Calice, and this after five years, and after he was in the Wars, and where I have heard he was taken Prisoner. To be sure he was much tumbled up and down from place to place. And under all these Circumstances might not such a Letter be lost? But, my Lords, I beseech you, are there not some Proofs that look much this way, made out by another Witness? Does not Mr. Mort tell you something of this Nature? First he agrees as to the matter of an English Lord lying about such a Street in Paris, he tells you he was with Mr. Turbervill, and that he himself walked about Laxenburgh House whilst Mr. Turbervill went to speak with that English Lord: he does say he believes his Name was my Lord Stafford, but he is not positive; and the times which he speaks of do agree with what Mr. Turbervill de∣poseth. And there is one thing, which tho' I should not mention upon any other occasion, because it was but a foolish Joke, yet I shall crave leave to speak of it now. He tells you, That one day, while they were at Diep in expectation of my Lords coming, and hearing that he went another way, they had this piece of minute Wit upon it, Cursed is he that relies upon a bro∣ken Staff: whereby he thinks was meant the Name of Stafford. So then,  beseech you, if Mort say true, are not here footsteps, and a foundati∣on whereon to ground a belief, That there was a Correspondence between Turbervill and my Lord, and that Mr. Turbervill had an Information that my Lord would come by the way of Calice. And one thing more Mort says, that Turbervill told him, if he would make haste to Calice, he might go o∣ver with my Lord. And here I would observe, how should Mr. Turbervill come to know that my Lord went that way? and how should he tell Mort that he might go over with my Lord from Calice, unless he had receiv'd some such Information? Therefore, my Lords, taking into Consideration what is
confirmed by Mort, and taking into Consideration the whole scope of the Affidavit, I cannot see that there can be any material Objection against Mr. Turbervill for saying, That my Lord came by Calice in the Company of Count Gramont. My Lords, I have done now with the Witnesses, and I told you as I went a∣long (because I would not trouble you with a double Repetition) what Evidence we have given in contradiction to those Witnesses which my Lord hath brought in order to defame our Witnesses. But, my Lords, I am to acquaint you, That besides these particular Answers, your Lordships have had men of very great Credit brought to te∣stifie the Reputation of Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Turbervill. As to Mr. Dug∣dale we have brought men that have known him a great while; one hath sworn what Opinion even my Lord Aston himself had of him: for it seems he lived with so much Credit there, that he would not believe any ill of him. You have heard from other Witnesses how he did behave himself. It was objected sometimes Tradesmen were not paid; but what then, can a man pay without Money? I believe there are some Lords here, whose Stewards are very ho∣nest men, and yet the Tradesmen such Lords deal with, are not always rea∣dily paid. He was, as you observe, believed to be in the Plot, and my Lord's Ser∣vants say he seemed much troubled about it, he went away upon that Ac∣count, and was so much concerned, that he burnt his Papers, which I make use of for two Purposes, The one to shew that he did apprehend he was in great danger; the other to shew what was the Reason why the Letters and Papers he speaks of are not now produced, because he looked upon himself, and them who were then his Friends, to be in such danger by them, that he burnt them. My Lords, I know your Lordships will take notice that there hath been a very good Account given you, how it was that Dugdale came to be pre∣vailed upon to make a Discovery of the Plot, it was with great difficulty; there were indeed persuasions used by some of his Friends to bring him to it. The Justices, as they themselves have sworn, endeavoured the same thing, but all without success. Then the Coroner Mr. Southall (who tho' he was no great, yet seems to be a very understanding man) takes him in hand, and he had the good Fortune to succeed. I call it Good, not only for Mr. Dugdale, but for the Nation. I shall not trouble your Lordships with the particu∣lars of the Arguments Mr. Southall used to him, but 'tis plain (if you believe Mr. Southall, whose Credit is now supported by an Honourable Lord, and by a Mem∣ber of the House of Commons) that Dugdale did at the first time that he did make a Discovery, depose as much in substance against this Lord, as now he does. And from thence I desire to make one Observation, and that is this:
'Twas impossible it could be a Contrivance among the Witnesses themselves to depose the same Crimes against this Lord; for Doctor Oats never knew Mr. Dugdale till Dugdale was brought up, which was long after Doctor Oats his Accusation of this Lord; nor could Dugdale know what Evidence Oats had given here, for Dugdale was a close Prisoner in Stafford Gaol before Oats accused this Lord, and long after. And yet the first Evidence Dugdale gives against this Lord doth in substance concur with that given by Doctor Oats. So that since there could be no Intercourse nor Conference between them, but as much distance as from the Prison Doors in Stassord to London, there could be no Contrivance between them for both of them to accuse this Lord of the same Matters. And this I desire may be looked upon by your Lordships as a Matter of great Weight to support the Credit of the whole Evi∣dence. And Dugdale does seem to be a person of an unquestionable Credit, and every one that hears him must observe, he does give his Evidence with great Mc∣desty, and all probability of Truth. There is another thing, my Lords, that I would pray your Lordships to ob∣serve; These Witnesses, Mr. Dugdale and Doctor Oats, do give such an E∣vidence as is impossible to be given, unless it were true; for other Witnesses when they are put out of the Road, and asked Questions they did not expect, are commonly to seek, and must pump for an Answer, and then answer with great difficulty and wariness. But these two Witnesses do not only answer with readiness when you ask them any Questions, but what is contained in every new Answer doth add a further probability and confirmation to what they said before. And I must needs say of them, I think it were impossible for any men in the World to contrive a Story of so many particulars, and so consistent in every part of it, and yet the same should be false; and, which is more, after so many Tryals, not one material Circumstance of what they say contradicted by any solid proof. My Lords, There may be other particulars which I may have forgot∣ten, I know not whether I observed that my Lord objected that we do not prove him a Papist, I hinted something before about his coming to Mass to my Lord Aston's at Tixal, which is one sort of proof of his being of the Ro∣mish Religion. Besides his perpetual Conversation with that Party, and his Endeavours to promote their Religion and Designs, all which have been ful∣ly proved: I think also my Lord deserted the House of Peers, for that he would not take the Test appointed by the late Act, your Lordships best know whe∣ther he did so or no. But, my Lords, let him if he will be a Protestant, for this time, let that be supposed: If he were a Protestant, and should be guilty of the Offences proved upon him, he would not deserve the more Favour from your Lordships. My Lord hath been likewise pleased in further proof of his Innocency to
alledge that after the Plot was discovered, he had seven Posts time to have escaped, and yet never fled. My Lords, 'Tis true, he might have fled, so might Coleman too, that Coleman that left so fatal an Evidence against himself and all his Party under his own hand, and for that had reason to believe him∣self very Guilty, and so might the Jesuits have escaped too, but that they had hopes the Oath of Secresie and the means they had used to conceal their damnable Designs would have been a sufficient Security against revealing it. They had that opinion of their Priests, and of the Fidelity and Constancy of those that had been seduced by them, and recommended by them, that they apprehended nothing less than a Discovery. And those other persons that were executed did all stay about the Town after the Plot was discovered, as well as this Lord staid in the Countrey. My Lord did very much complain, That our Witnesses were not positive in point of Time, I think Dugdale was positive enough as to the time of the Offer of 500 l. but for other matters he would not confine himself to a Month, he talk∣ed of the latter end of one Month, and the beginning of another, I think he is the more to be believed; for I conceive unless a Witness hath some notorious Cir∣cumstance in his memory to satisfie him about the certainty of the time (such as was that of the Foot-race as to the time of the Offer of 500 l.) it is rather a mark of presumption than of sincerity for a Witness to be too positive as to the time. And is there so great a distance between the latter end of one Month, and the be∣ginning of another, that a Witness need to be positive as to the very day? but says my Lord, you talk of the beginning, it was the 12th. of September ere I came thither; Does not every man count that till the middle of a Month, 'tis the beginning of a Month sure, in common speech it is so. Therefore I look upon that as a matter scarce worth the mentioning, I am sure not worth the serious An∣swering. But, my Lords, I must observe thus much, That what my Lord complains of as a fault in our Witnesses, his own Witnesses are guilty of. For I appeal to your Lordships, when they came to speak of Times, whether they did not talk at the distance of a Month, or Months, and sometimes of Years, and less certain in point of Time than ours. But, says my Lord, (for I am still answering his Objections, and you must take them as I find them) here is mention made by Dr. Oats of Letters, of many Letters, shew me some of those Letters? shew me the Letter you carried to the Post-house? My Lords, were those Letters written to Dr. Oats? Did they belong to him? Or is it possible that my Lords Letter delivered by the Doctor to the Post-house, should now be shewn by the Doctor, or that the Let∣ters writ to the Superior of the Society of the Jesuits should be produced by one that was a Novice of that Society? Does Dr. Oats talk of any one Letter written to himself? You will then, I suppose, see no reason to expect those
Letters should be produced by him that were not written to him, and the custody whereof belonged to others. My Lords, I must observe to You, that there have been great Endeavours used to Invalidate our Testimony, we have had Witnesses called against Wit∣nesses, and my Lord hath had that Advantage to do it, which perhaps was never given in any Case before, and which I hope will never be again. The Evidence hath been Printed and Published to the World before it hath been given. I say not that it was not necessary in this Case, which was a National Cause, and the Cause of our Religion; but I do say it would not be fit to be done in other Cases, for the notifying of the Evidence is the way to have it falsi∣fied and corrupted. But notwithstanding all these Advantages, my Lords, I appeal to your Lord∣ships Memories what considerable contradiction hath been given. It is true some Witnesses to that end have been brought before your Lordships, but those Witnesses have been rendred incredible, by more credible persons; and I would desire your Lordships to observe, That tho' my Lord hath failed of proving any Subornation in our Witnesses, yet we have proved much Subornation endeavour∣ed by his Agents. Your Lordships have the Record against Redding before you, and what Re∣ference that hath to the Lords in the Tower, every one does remember, and my Lord is mentioned in that Record. And I might likewise mention the business of Cellier, and what therein related to the Lords in the Tower, and I'le name but two Witnesses more that have been attempted upon this Nature: There was Wright the Barber, all the Applications were made to him that could be, Money given, Letters writ, Insinuations that he was not to Swear, he was but to Write, and that was easily done: or if he would be so kind to Swear it, he should never come into open Court, only go before a Justice of Peace. So that your Lordships will observe by what steps and degrees men were endeavoured to be Suborned. And then Launder tells you what was offered to him to perjure himself, how he was brought to Tixall, and what endeavours were used to make him Swear against our Witnesses. These things are plain, both by Records and particular Proofs upon Oath. But, my Lords, lest we should want proof of all, This very Lord (I pity him for it) hath been so unfortunate as to bring that Paper out of his Pocket, which Wright says he had money to frame, and was to Swear to. It seems my Lord had the Command of it, it seems to have been prepared for such a good time as This, and the producing of this Paper is as full a Confirmation of this point as can in reason be expected. My Lords, I have been I fear too long already, and yet I fear, I have omitted as many particulars as I have mentioned. My Lords, The Evidence is so strong, that I think it admits of no doubt,
and the Offences proved against my Lord and the rest of his Party are so foul that they need no aggravation. The Offences are against the King, against His Sacred Life, against the Protestant Religion, nay against all Protestants, for it was for the Extirpation of all Protestants out of these Three Nations. I mean not of every one that is now so, but of every one that would have con∣tinued so, every one amongst us (if these Designs had been accomplished) must either have turned his Religion, or turned out of his Countrey, or have been burned in it. 'Tis a Design that appears with so dreadful a Countenance to Your Lordships, to this great Assembly, and to the whole Nation, that it needs not any words I can use to make you apprehend it. If the matter be fully proved (as I see no reason to doubt but that it is) I am sure your Lordships will do that Justice to Your King and Countrey as to give Judgment against these Offenders, which will not only be a Security to us against them, but a Terror to all others against comitting the like Offences. L. Stafford. I beg of your Lordships to know whether you will give me leave to speak a word. And my Lords, I shall not speak any thing but as to a mistake, Sir Will. Jones hath made in two or three things. Pray, my Lords, may I put you in mind of them? Sir William Jones. If there be any mistake pray tell us what it is? L. Stafford. First, My Lords, he did omit telling you that Mr. Turbervill's Brother did say he came in (71) to my Lord Powis's. Secondly, He says I have proved my self a Papist because I have not taken the Test. My Lords, the Test was since I was in the Tower, and whether I will take it or not, I do not yet know till it be offered me. The Third is this, That this Letter was in my Pocket which I produced to you, my Lords, I knew nothing what was in it, it was given into my hand as I stood here at the Bar. Fourthly, He said Hobson did go out of England with the Almoner, he did not so. Another thing he says, that I said Oats was an infamous person because he went to a Church that I said was Ido∣latrous, I only said it was so adjudged by Act of Parliament. I find, my Lords, these things he is mistaken in, and that, my Lords, made me very willing to put You in mind of them. L. H. Steward. Gentlemen, I would ask you whether you take any Notice of the Points in Law? Sir Fran. Winn. After the Fact is stated, my Lords, we shall. Then Mr. Powle, also one of the Committee appointed to manage the Evidence, proceeded further in Summing up of the same. Mr. Powle. My Lords, the Learned Person that spake last, hath left very little for me to say in the Summing of this Evidence; But because this Noble
Lord hath been pleased to alledge several Reasons, from whence he would infer at least a great improbability that he should be guilty of the Treasons whereof he stands Accused, I shall crave your Lordships patience, that I may give Three or Four words in answer to those particulars. My Lords, In the first place this Noble Lord was pleased to begin, and afterwards to continue his Defence with making protestations of his own In∣nocency; We very well know your Lordships sit now in the Seat of Justice, and whatsoever credit or regard your Lordships please to give to the Protesta∣tions of a Peer in another Case, your Lordships will proceed here only accord∣ing to your Proofs and your Evidence (secundum allegata & probata) and therefore all we shall say to this, is, that we hope our Proofs are so clear and evident, as will leave no room to your Lordships to believe this Noble Lords Protestations. In the next place, my Lord is pleased to alledge, and withal to lay some weight upon it, the voluntary surrendring of himself to Justice, and he laid it down as a Rule, that as Flight is an argument of Guilt, so the Surrendring of a mans self to the Trial of the Law, is an argument of Innocency. My Lords, We admit the Rule generally to be true; but in some parti∣cular Cases it may be otherwise; for a Man that is not very confident of his own Innocency, may yet be very confident of the strength of his Party; and whether the consideration of the circumstances of Affairs, as they then stood, and the power and prevalency of the Popish party at that time, might not reasonably create such a confidence in this Noble Lord, we must leave to your Lordships Judgment. My Lords, We do conceive that those Persons who contrived Sir Ed∣mundbury Godfrey's Murder, had so great Confidence in the favour and prote∣ction of some of their Party, that they thought themselves able to out-face Justice. And we verily believe, they intended it as an example to deter all Men from medling so much as with the taking an Examination concerning this Hor∣rid Plot. My Lords, I desire to be understood aright in this, I lay nothing of the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey to the Charge of this Noble Lord, I only use it as an Argument of the presumption of the Popish party at that time. My Lords, In the next place, my Lord Stafford did observe from my Lord Coke, that in the Tryals of Treasons we ought very much to guide our Judg∣ments by the Nature and Circumstances of the Fact (the Concomitants and subsequents, as he termed them) with Reference to the Person accused, whether they were likely to induce or deter him from such an Attempt, and here he was pleased to raise some Arguments from the whole course of his Life, and did desire your Lordships to consider those Circumstances therein that
might make it improbable or impossible, that he should commit a Treason of this Nature. He desired also your Lordships to remember that he was descended from an Honourable Family, and that his Ancestors were very worthy and very deserving Persons, and such as had often ventured their Lives in defence of their Coun∣try; And here he did likewise mention his own Services to the last King, and our present Soveraign, in the late Wars. It is not my part, nor will I derogate any thing from the Merits of this Noble Lord, much less from the Honour of his Family; but in Answer to this we shall desire your Lordships to consider, that this Noble Lord (how∣ever he is pleased to disown it at present) is notoriously known to be a Ro∣man Catholick (as they call themselves) and such we conceive we have sufficiently proved him to be, in the course of our Evidence: And as there is nothing in the World so much as a misguided Conscience that can in∣gage the best of Men into the worst of Actions, so we think the Prin∣ciples of that Religion are such, as are more likely to pervert Men from their Duty and Allegiance, than any other Religion or Perswasion whatsoever. And if the Zeal of this Noble Lord did engage him to endeavour the esta∣blishment of that Religion in this Kingdom, we may easily believe that his Reason did suggest to him, the means by which it must be effected, which could be no other but Blood and Confusion. My Lords, The last thing I shall take notice of, is, what my Lord Stafford was pleased to say in General as to the Doctrine of Killing and Deposing Prin∣ces, which his Lordship was pleased to call a private Opinion, and not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. But by the way, my Lords, give me leave to observe, that this Noble Lord did upon this occasion fully own (and I much commend his Inge∣nuity in it) the reality of the Gun Powder Treason, since we know, how much that Party have endeavoured to render it Incredible; and as length of time hath so fully manifested the particulars of that Execrable Design, that it hath brought such as are of that Perswasion to confess the truth of it; so, we hope, this days Tryal will convince both the Age we live in, and all Posterity of the Truth and Reality of this present Conspira∣cy. But to go on with that Point from which I did digress, I am not I confess much versed in the Canons and Councils of the Church of Rome, but, my Lords, this I know, the most famous and celebrated Writers of that Church, especially of the Society of the Jesuits, have publickly avowed and main∣tained this Doctrine; And we know in all times, when there hath been occasion to put it in practice, it hath never failed to have been attempted; and we likewise know that the Church of Rome and the Pope have
always avowed the Acts when they have been done: From all which we might very reasonably conclude, that it is the Doctrine of that Church so to do. But, my Lord is pleased to say, and admit for Truth, That a great ma∣ny private Writers do hold the contrary, I believe it to be so, but I do also believe, that it is the Policy and Artifice of the Church of Rome, to leave this Point of Doctrine in some measure undetermined, that so they may make use of it as the occasion serves; For if it succeeds, then it is owned and justified, if it miscarry, then the Doctrine is but a private Opinion, and the Plot but the Practice of particular Persons that are either desperate or discontented. And I am fully of Opinion, that This Horrid Conspiracy which is brought this day in Judgment before your Lordships, wants nothing but Success to ca∣nonize it. My Lords, As to what concerns the Evidence, it hath been so fully stated to You, and the Objections that were raised to invalidate it, so well answered, that I will not trouble your Lordships with any Repitition of what hath been said already: All we have further to desire, is, That your Lordships will please to take our Evidence into your Consideration, and to do thereupon what shall be agreeable to Justice. Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lords, as to Matter of Fact I shall say nothing but only this (and I wish it may be spoken with Gratitude to Almighty God,) that the Discovery of this Plot is rather the Work of God than Man. It was first his Act in prevailing upon Oats to make the Discovery; and when he stood single almost, what came to support his Credit but the Letters of Coleman, which were like a Tally to what Oats had said, for what Oats informs is in a great part made good by his Letters. Then when Godfrey was murther'd, how came that Dis∣covery out, but by the voluntary Confession of one engaged in the whole Plot, I mean Bedloe? So that though these men had engaged themselves by wicked Oaths, yet their own Consciences witnessing against them in themselves, they could not forbear coming in to testifie against themselves. I shall say no more, than that we ought to acknowledge the Hand of God in the Discovery with great Thankfulness; for it is He and He alone that out of his own Grace and Goodness hath done it, and thereby preserved the Life of our Prince to us, and in Him us too. But as to the Matter in Law. My Lord has been pleased to mention first this, That there is no Overt Act. I wonder that my Lord should be so much mistaken. When it is charged in the Articles, and proved to his Face he received a Commission,
Is not that an Overt Act? He is charged in the Articles of Impeachment with Contriving the Death of the King, and being at several Meetings and Consults about the King's Death, and Hing Persons to Kill the King; And are these no Overt Acts? Therefore as to that my Lord is mistaken. My Lords, another Exception that is taken, is, That there is no Indict∣ment. I conceive that an Impeachment of the House of Commons is more than an Indictment. And there cannot be any doubt of that, the Impeachment of the House of Commons having always been received and proceeded on by your Lordships. But that which is most insisted upon, is, That this Charge that is made against this Lord was presented in another Parliament. It is true, but under favour, what is once upon Record in Parliament may at any time afterwards be pro∣ceeded upon. It is a sudden Objection, but I conceive it hath been done. How∣ever in a Case of this Nature, when the Life of the King, when our own Lives, and our Nation, and our Religion lies at stake, if there were not a Precedent, I hope You would make a Precedent. But under favour, Reason is for it, the Charge is before You, the Proof is made, and we pray You will judge accord∣ing as the Evidence hath been. Sir Will. Jones. My Lords, as to these Matters of Law, I think they are of so little difficulty, that my Lord will not desire to have Counsel assigned him, I am sure his Counsel will not desire to speak to them. For this last Matter which Mr. Serjeant spoke of, and which was first named by the Prisoner, I desire your Lordship to consider what it is. Says my Lord the Prisoner, there was an Impeachment begun in the Long Parliament, and this is now the Third Parliament in which I am brought to my Tryal. It is very true, there was a General Impeachment in the Long Parliament, the par∣ticular one was in the last, and this Lord was pleased to plead in the last. It may be he was not so well advised then as he is now. But my Lords, How can this be a doubt, when your Lordships have resolv'd, and have sent it down to the Commons; and it is there entred in their Book, as the Law and Constitution of Parliaments, that not only Impeachments but all Judicial proceedings continue from Parliament to Parliament, in the same state that they were in at the Rising of the last Parliament. This is now become the Law of Your House, and it is under favour, being so, the Law of the Kingdom; and You having thus declared it, and sent it to the Commons, I hope the Commons had very good reason to proceed upon this Im∣peachment at this time. The next matter is concerning the Overt Acts, I think there are suffici∣ent Overt Acts in proof and sufficient in the Impeachment. Will any man
dey tha te Receiving a Commission to be Pay-master of an Army is an Overt' Act? Will any deny that the sending for the Witness and offering him money in order to hire him to kill the King is an Overt Act? and (which answers to all) will any man deny that the meeting and consulting of several men together, about killing the King and changing the Government is an Overt Act. My Lords, These are all Overt Acts, and I cannot but think it was without advice of my Lords Counsel that he made these Objections; for indeed these several Overt Acts are laid in the Impeachment as fully as they are made out in proof. My Lords, there is another Objection that my Lord is pleased to make, and that is, that there is but one Witness to a particular Fact. L. H. Steward. Ay, What say you to that? Sir Will. Jones. That, my Lords, is of little weight, with submission; for our Impeachments, and our Proofs run to this, that my Lord had a Design and Intention to destroy the King, this was to be done by Force, and this was to be done by secret Assassination. Now if several Witnesses come and prove each a distinct Act, under this Head of killing the King, it is so many Proofs or Wit∣nesses to the Treason. For, my Lords, if a man shall intend to kill the King, and shall buy a Knife in one County at one time, and send for a man out of another County at another time, whom he shall hire to kill the King, and these distinct Acts are proved by several Witnesses, if they concur to the same general Treason, they are all but parts of that, and so are so many Witnesses to the whole. And so I am sure it was resolved in the Case of others of the Conspirators in the Old Baily, and before that in the Case of Sir Henry Vane. But, My Lords, in this Case here is first a Proof, that he accepted a Commission, which I do not use as an Act for the levying of War only, but as a Design to change the Government and destroy the King. Here is meeting and consulting how to do this wicked Work, I mean, to kill the King, that is another Overt Act; Here is offering money to one of the Witnesses for that end, that is a third Overt Act; and there is attempting another of them though not with Money yet with Promises of Reward in general, that is another Overt Act, all which are to this end, the Killing of the King. And I am sure of it your Lordships cannot but receive satisfaction from my Lords the Judges, that it hath always been so held, that though there need Two Witnesses to prove Treason, yet there needs no more than one to one Act, and another to another, if the several Acts fall under the same Head of Treason. Sir Franc. Winn. My Lords, I crave your patience but for a word or two, and this Noble Lord will have little Reason to say his Objections in point of Law are
of any weight. I confess he had said a great thing, if it were true, that the Articles of Impeachment did not alledge an Overt Act; for then indeed they had been appa∣rently defective. But under his pardon, that is not a point of Law but a point of Fact. Let us therefore resort to the Articles themselves. In the 2d Article it is alledged that he with the rest did most wickedly and traiterously agree, conspire, and resolve to Imprison, Depose and Murther His Sacred Majesty, and to deprive Him of his Regal State and Government. And then the same Article alledges farther, that they did contrive and consult to effect the Murther of the King, by Shooting, by Poison∣ing, and by Stabbing. All these particulars are expressed, so that when my Lord said the Articles were therein defective, all we can say, is, that he was misinform'd. My Lords, there was another Exception taken, that this is the Impeachment of another Parliament. I must not now repeat how this Point was agreed by both Hou∣ses at a Conference. But it was then declared upon search of Precedents in all ages, that it was the Law of Parliaments, which is the Law of the Land, that if once an Impeachment by the House of Commons were lodged in the House of Lords, tho' that Parliament were dissolved, the Impeachment remained in the same state. It was the Cause of the Commons of England, who only change their Representatives in a new Parliament. It has been also objected, that this Prosecution ought to have been upon an Indictment. As if an Accusation of the House of Commons, who are the grand Inquest of the Nation, were not as effectual to bring Offenders to Justice as the finding of a particular Jury. My Lords, I should wonder to hear this Obje∣ction made, were not my Lord to be easily excused for his knowing the Law no better. None who know any thing in the Law would have urg'd such a thing. His Counsel, I dare say, did not suggest this matter to him. It is true, my Lords, when a Peer comes to be Tried by way of Commission, or in Parliament when it is not at the prosecution of the Commons, there an Indictment is first found in the proper County, and brought up before the Peers by Certiorari, and upon that they proceed. But whether the Party be Peer or Commoner, if he be Im∣peach'd for any Crimes, surely no one can deny, but that by the constant use of Par∣liaments, the Lords have proceeded to Trial, and have given Judgment thereupon without an Indictment found. So that this Exception will be of no force at all. As for the remaining Objection, that there are not two Witnesses to prove any one Overt Act, the Kings Person would be in no manner of safety, if that Doctrine should be once allowed. Conspiring to kill the King is the Treason laid in the Im∣peachment, and the several Overt Acts are so many several Evidences of that Trea∣son. Words themselves if they signifie an intention to do an Act, and express some∣thing to be done in futuro are a sufficient Overt Act, & a legal Evidence of Treason. Then we prove by another Witness, not words of encouragement only but offers of money, and they are both to the same kind of Treason tho' not to the same Act and at the same time. And if there must be 2 Witnesses to every single Act the King of England is not only in a far worse condition than any other Prince, but than any one of his own Subjects, Treasons may be committed every day with Impunity,
and unless the Traytors be as great Fools as Villains, he shall never be safe from them, nor capable of punishing them. I must say it, and I say it with commiseration to the Condition of this Noble Lord, that his Exceptions in Law are as weak as the Answers he has given to our Evidence. We hope no doubt in Law remains with you, and that we have given your Lordships full satisfaction of the reality of the Plot, and a convincing Evidence of the great share which my Lord Stafford had in it, and we humbly pray your Lordships Justice. Lord High Steward. You do not take notice of one thing that my Lord Stafford said this morning, That is, that the Witnesses are not competent Witnesses because they swore for Money, and that is fit to be spoken un∣to, not for the Weight of the Objection so much as for the Satisfaction of the Auditory. Sir Francis Winnington. My Lords I had taken a Note of that, but forgot to mention it. If my Lord at the Bar will say they have taken Money to swear, that is purely a Matter of Fact, which he ought to prove, and that which is said and not proved ought to go for nothing; let him prove his Case to be so, and then we will give him an Answer. Lord High Stward. My Lord Stafford, if your Lordship can prove that they have had Money to swear, your Lordship urges that which will be material; but if it were only Money to maintain them, that sure will amount to no Ob∣jection. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I submit it to your Lordships whether Dr. Oats and the rest have not had great Sums of Money besides their Charges, 10 l. a week a piece. But I desire your Lordships to consider, and I appeal to many of your Lordships, whether it has not been said, that it was a defect in Coleman's and Langhorn's Trials, that they did not plead that, and if they had pleaded it, they must have been acquitted, I will name no body, but I appeal to your Lord∣ships, whether some of you have not said so. But I desire your Lordships to ad∣mit me to plead by my Counsel; if not, I submit to you. I confess here is a piece of Law that I never heard of before, that the House of Commons and your Lordships at a Conference, have adjudged it to be the Law of Parliaments, that Impeachments shall continue from Parliament to Parliament. If you will please to hear my Counsel for me, so, if not I submit. Lord High Steward. What would you, or can you prove? Lord Stafford. My Lords, Those things that I have given in to your Lordships, I desire my Counsel may be heard to. Lord High Steward. Gentlemen, what can you object why he should not have Counsel to argue his Objections in Law? Sir William Jones. My Lords, I do think under favour, if a Prisoner in a Ca∣pital Cause do desire Counsel, he must not only alledge matter of Law to intro∣duce
that Desire; but that which he doth alledge, must be also a matter of some Doubt to the Court: For if he do alledge matter which in it self is not Dispu∣table, he shall have no Counsel allowed him. If your Lordships are not satisfied that it is the Law of your House, that Proceedings upon Impeachments do con∣tinue from Parliament, we cannot answer that, it lies in your Lordships breasts, it is not what we are to argue. because it is a matter that concerns the Law and Rules of Parliaments. Is there, my Lords, any doubt of any other Point that is urged? Is there any doubt of this thing, whether if one Witness speak to one point of Fact and another to another upon the same sort of Treason, but that these be two such Witnesses as the Law requires? I pray then, my Lords, con∣sider the consequence of that doubt: A man shall talk with twenty Persons about a Design to kill the King in one and the same Room one after another, by taking them into a Corner singly, and if ten or all twenty come to prove it, here is but one Witness to each Discourse. This would be a matter of dangerous Con∣sequence, but I hope will remain no manner of doubt with you, nor is it fit to be argued. As to the Hiring of Witnesses to Swear, I think that can be no point of Law till it be so proved in Fact. Doth his Lordship think, that when His Majesty out of His Grace and Bounty allows a Maintainance to His Witnesses, that that is an Objection to their Testimony. Doth not every man allow his Witnesses a a Maintainance, and yet it never was thought a thing to take away their Evidence. It may be every one doth not give so large an allowance as the King, because his Dignity is not so great. But can it be an Objection to the House of Commons? Have we that are the Prosecutors maintained them? If His Majesty have been bountiful to His Witnesses, what is that to this Cause of the Commons? If my Lord can prove any thing of Bribery in us, as he has proved for us against himself, it may be an Objection. But till that Fact be proved, I hope there is no ground for a Question in Law; and if there be no doubt in Law, I hope there will be no need of Counsel. Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, What are the Points you would have Counsel too? Lord Stafford. To all of them, my Lords. Lord High Steward. Would you have Counsel to the first Point, to argue what the Law of Parliaments is concerning the continuance of Impeachments from Parliament to Parliament. Lord Stafford, My Lords, if you will declare the Law to be as these Gentlemen say, I must acquiesce. Lord High Steward. Pardon me, my Lord, I do not declare the Law, but ask you whether you would have Counsel to argue that Point. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I do say there is no Example of it, I know there have been Impeachments, but no Examples of Impeachments continued from Parliament to Parliament.
Lord High Steward. Then in the next place, for I shall propose your Objecti∣ons to their Lordships by and by, and desire their Judgment in them; Do you desire to argue by your Counsel, that every Overt Act ought to be proved by two Witnesses? Lord Stafford. I do, my Lords, I desire my Counsel may be heard to all the Points I mentioned to your Lordships. Lord High Steward. Have you Counsel ready to speak to these Points now? Lord Stafford. Yes, my Lords. Lord High Steward. Are they prepared to speak to them now? Lord Stafford. They are, my Lords. Lord High Steward. If they be so, what hurt will there be in hearing of them? Sir William Jones. My Lords, Whether you will hear an Argument from Counsel about the Law of Parliaments, I hope you will please well to consider. Sir Fran. VVinnington. My Lords, We in the House of Commons do never suffer any Counsel to tell us what is the Course of our House and the Law of Par∣liaments; if your Lordships think fit to allow it, 'tis in your own power, but we who are intrusted with the Management of this Cause by the House of Commons have no direction to consent to such a thing. Lord High Steward. We will hear Counsel to save time upon that Point, whether in proof of a Treason for killing the King, every Overt Act ought to be proved by two Witnesses. Sir William Jones. If your Lordships make a doubt of it. Sir Fran. Winnington. And if the Prisoner desire it. Mr. Serjeant Maynard. My Lords, We shall not oppose it, but I shall wonder if any Counsel do maintain it. Lord High Steward. Are your Counsel ready to speak to that Point? Lord Stafford. Here they are, my Lords. Mr. Wallop of the Middle-Temple, Mr. Saunders of the same Society, and Mr. Hunt of Gray's-Inn appeared by the Prisoner at the Bar as his Counsel. Mr. Wallop. May it please your Lordships, we are here commanded by your Lordships to Attend, that if any matter of Law do arise upon a Case prov∣ed, agreed, and judged by your Lordships debateable, then in due time we are to conform our selves to your Lordships command, and argue those Points for my Lord the Prisoner at the Bar. But if your Lordships do think that the Points urged by my Lord are not debateable in Law, I have so high an Opinion of your Lordships Judgment, and such a mean opinion of my own Talent, that I shall not undertake to Argue Extempore in this great Assembly, in a Cause of so high a Nature. Lord High Steward. Look you, Sir, you are of my Lords Counsel.
Mr. Wallop. I am, my Lords, and by the Order of your Lordships do at∣tend here. Lord High Steward. If you think it an arguable Point, you will have the Judg∣ment of my Lords afterwards. Will you argue it now? Mr. VVallop. My Lords, I always thought if a Point be stirred in any Court and thought disputable, it should be stated and agreed before it be argued. Lord High Steward. You are to argue for my Lord, and to know the Judgment of the Court afterwards: would you know our Opinions before hand. Mr. VVallop. We would know what it is we are to argue if your Lordships please. Lord High Steward. Why, if you are provided for it, you are to maintain that by Law every Overt Act ought to be proved by two Witnesses, if you are pre∣pared speak to it and my Lords will hear you. Mr. VVallop. It is true, my Lords, there have been some publick Resolutions concerning that Point, therefore I shall be the warier what I say in that; But, my Lords, it is a matter that has been thought of great import one way or other, but I do profess at this time I am not able to undertake a Solemn Argument upon that Point. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I am so far from delaying this Cause, that I desire it may be argued now. Lord High Steward. Then you are not ready to speak to it. Mr. VVallop. No, my Lords, I am not for my own part at present, for it is impossible we should foresee what would be the Point, and to apply our selves to study an unforeseen Case before it be agreed, stated, and judged worthy of Ar∣gument, cannot be expected from us. I have always observed it in the King's-Bench. If the Prisoner urge any thing and the Court think it debateable, they first agree and state the Case, then Assign Counsel, whom they do not urge to deliver an Opinion presently, but give them time to prepare for it. Lord High Steward. Mr. VVallop, it is not believed that this Point is moved, but by your Advice that are of my Lord's Council, and you should be ready to maintain the Advice you give, therefore if you are so, speak. You have the Protection of the Court for the Counsel you give in matter of Law, and whatever Advice you give you should maintain by Law. Mr. VVallop. Truly, my Lords, it is a Point that has, as I said before, received some Settlement, but whether ever in this Court or no, I cannot tell. There∣fore I did discharge my thoughts of providing any Argument till your Lordships should have determined whether you will take the Point upon the Resolutions in the Courts below to be finally settled and determined. Sir William Jones. So then it is agreed to be settled in the ordinary Courts. Lord Stafford. I desire also it may be argued, whether words are an Overt Act.
Sir Francis Winnington. It seems the Law is with us in case of a Commoner, but whether it be so for a Lord is the Question. Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford; How comes it to pass that your Lordship came prepared with Objections, but not with Counsel ready to ar∣gue them. Lord Stafford. Mr. Wallop has given you an Answer, I must stand by that. Lord High Steward. Is it your Lordships pleasure that we Adjourn? Lords. Ay, Ay. Lord High Steward. This House is Adjourned into the Parliament Cham∣ber. Then the Lords returned to their House in their Order, and the Committee of Commons staid in their Places to attend their Reso∣lutions. In one hours time the Lords returned, and my Lord High Steward being seated upon the Woolpack, Silence was proclaimed. Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, My Lords, since they have been withdrawn, have considered of one Point, of that point chiefly which your Lord∣ship did move touching the necessity of two Witnesses to every Overt Act al∣ledged as Evidence of High Treason, that is the point you have desired Coun∣sel to speak to, and that is the point your Counsel desired to know whether it was a doubtful or debateable point before they would argue it, and here∣upon my Lords did withdraw to consider it. And my Lords have directed, that all the Judges that assist them, and are here in your Lordships presence and hearing, should deliver their Opinions, whether it be doubtful and disput∣able or no. Then all the Judges consulted privately together, and afterwards gave their Opinion Seriatim, beginning with the Lord Cbief Justice North, the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs being absent. Lord Chief Justice North. My Lords, I do here deliver my Opi∣nion, and I am cleàr in it, That if there be several Overt Acts or Facts which are Evidences of the same Treason, if there be one Witness to prove one such Overt Act at one time, and another Witness to prove another Overt Act at another time, both the Acts being Evidences of the same Treason, these are two sufficient Witnesses of that Treason,
and will maintain an Indictment or an Impeachment of Treason. I never knew any doubt made of it in any Inferiour Court of Justice, and I have known it often resolved. Lord Chief Baron Montague. My Lords, where ever Treason is to be proved to every Overt Act, two Witnesses, as I conceive, are not required. If so be there are two Witnesses to several Overt Acts conducing to a proof of the same Treason, I think they are Witnesses in the Judgment of the Law such as the Statute requires. Mr. Justice Windham. I am of the same Opinion with my Lord Chief Justice North, and my Lord Chief Baron, That if there be several Overt Acts done at several times tending to the same Treason, these several Acts being severally proved by several credible Witnesses, though but by one Witness at each time to each Act, the said several Acts being Evi∣dences of the same Treason; these are sufficient Witnesses of that Trea∣son so proved, and will maintain an Indictment or (as I conceive) an Impeachment. Mr. Justice Jones. My Lords, if several Witnesses speak to the same kind of Treason, although they speak to several Overt Acts and give Evidence of several times, the one of them speaking to one time and the other to another time, yet keeping still to the same kind of Treason, they are such two Witnesses as are required by the Statute of Edward the 6th, and this I do take to be the constant Opinion of the Courts below. Mr. Justice Dolben. My Lords, I am of the same Opinion, and I know it hath been many times so resolved, I have been present when Sentence hath passed upon Persons by whom the same Case hath been urged, and it hath been so resolved. And it hath been moved in Westminster-Hall, and that was the con∣stant Opinion of the Judges there; particularly in the Case of Sir Henry Vane. It was upon solemn Debate resolved, and divers times it hath been held, that the same Treason may be proved by two Witnesses to several Overt Acts, though one speak of Words or Actions that were spoken or done at one time and in one place, and another speak of Words or Actions at another time and in another place, those are two good Witnesses in Treason within the intent of the Law, and if the Law were otherwise 'twere scarce possible to convict any man of Treason, and therefore I take it to be very clear. Mr. Justice Raymond. I am of the same Opinion, That where several Cir∣stances are brought to prove the same Treason, one Witness to each of the seve∣ral
Circumstances is sufficient, and this, I conceive, hath been always the Opinion of the Judges. Mr. Baron Atkins. My Lords, I am of the same Opinion, That there must be two Witnesses in the Case of Treason is a matter without Que∣stion, but there are several Overt Acts that may contribute to the effect∣ing of that Treason. If a man designs to kill the King, and buyes Pow∣der at one place at one time, and a Pistol at another place at another time, and promises a Reward to one to assist him to do the thing at a third place and a third time; these are several Overt Acts, but if the Law requires that each be proved by two Witnesses I do not well see how any man can be Convicted of Treason. In the Case of Sir Henry Vane and others, this very Question was started but was not thought worthy of Debate, if it should be otherwise it would touch the Judgments which have been given upon this kind of Proof, and what would the Consequence of that be, but that those persons who were Executed upon those Judgments have suffered illegally; And therefore I am of Opinion that it is not requisite there should be two Wit∣nesses to every Overt Act. Mr. Baron Gregory. My Lords, I am of the same Opinion, it is Trea∣son to Conspire the Death of the King; Now each of the Witnesses is a Witness to prove that Treason, the one says he offered him such a Reward, in such a place, that is one Witness to prove that he Conspired the Death of the King, and another says, that he offered him such a Reward in another place, that is another Witness that he Conspired the Death of the King. For the Party is indicted upon one particular Overt Act, but he is indicted for Trea∣son in Conspiring the Death of the King, and each of th Witnesses being to prove that, though they speak to several Acts they are good Witnesses according to the Law. Mr. Baron Weston. My Lords, I am of the same Opinion with my Reve∣rend Brethren who have spoke before me. Mr. Justice Charlton. My Lords, I am of the same Opinion, and I think truly it would be the easiest matter for a man to Commit Treason, and escape without questioning, if it should be otherwise. But this is the first time that I have heard it hath been made a Question, that to the same Treason there must be two Witnesses to every Overt Act. It hath been adjudged always accord∣ing to the Law, that to prove Treason there must be two Witnesses, but to any Overt Act there needs but on.
Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, By the uniform Opinion of all my Lords the Judges, there is no colour to doubt the Law in that point which you desire to argue; So that as to that point you must rest satisfied, you are not to have Counsel to speak to it. For the rest I have no Commission yet from my Lords to say any thing. Lord Stafford. Will your Lordships give me leave to say one thing to what I have heard, I would answer, if I might, only to one Judge, I think they call him Judge Atkins. Lord High Steward. Your Lordship may say what you please. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I hear a strange Position, I never heard the like before in my life, and 'tis what he said, if I am in the wrong I beg your Lordships pardon and his too. He told your Lordships the Reason why the Law should be so, was because else a great many of those persons that have already been Executed must have been acknowledged un∣justly cut off and put to Death, that is an Argument I hope will not weigh with your Lordships or any body, for 'tis better that a Thousand persons that are Guilty should escape, than that one Innocent person should die, much more then that it should not be declared, that such a Judgment was not well given. Lord High Steward. Look you, my Lord, where many Reasons are given 'tis easie to make a Reply to one of the least among many, that was one Reason given, but the true Reason is this, if the Law were otherwise there would be great safety in Conspiring the Death of the King. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I say nothing further as to the rest, but this stuck with me. I am sorry to hear a Judge should say any such thing, and though I am in such a weak and disturbed Condition, I assure your Lordships my Blood rises at it. Lord High Steward. Is it your Lordships pleasure that we should Ad∣journ? Lords. Ay, Ay. Lord High Steward. Then this House is Adjourned into the Parliament Chamber. The Lords withdrew in their Order, and the Committee of Com∣mons went back to their House. Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. A Message was sent from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sir Samuel Clarke.
Mr. Speaker, The Lords have sent us to acquaint this House, That they have ordered William Viscount Stafford to be brought again to the Bar in Westminster-Hall, on Munday morning next at Ten of the Clock. After which the House of Commons Adjourned to Eight of the Clock on Munday morning. The Sixth Day. Munday, December 6. 1680. ABout the hour of Eleven in the morning, the Lords being Adjourned into Westminster-Hall going thither in their former Order into the Court there Erected; and Mr. Speaker having left the Chair, the Committee of Commons were Seated as before. The Court being Sate, Proclamation for Silence was made, and the Lieutenant Commanded to bring his Prisoner to the Bar, which being done, the Lord High Steward began. Lord High Steward. Read my Lord Stafford's Petition. To the Right Honourable the Lords in Parliament Assembled, The humble Petition of William Viscount of Stafford. Humbly shewing unto your Lordships, that he hath some things to offer unto your Lordships in order to clear himself, which he hopeth to do. Your Petitioner doth therefore with all humility, most humbly beseech your Lordships to give him leave to offer some things unto your Lordships Consideration, And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c. Stafford.
Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, my Lords have been willing upon your Petition to come and hear what that is that your Lordship hath to offer: And they would know whether it be matter of Fact or matter of Law. For your Lordship must know, that as to Witnesses the Process is closed. Lord Stafford. I do not pretend any more Witnesses, my Lords. Lord High Steward. Then my Lord what is it that you would say? Lord Stafford. My Lords, I did Yesterday receive an Order from your Lord∣ships, and upon that and some other things that I have to trouble your Lord∣ships with, I did petition for this favour, which I humbly thank your Lordships for granting. If I be impertinent I shall beg your Lordships pardon, and I hope you will be pleased to consider my Weakness at all times, especially in this condition I am now in, but I hope by your Lordships favour to be in an happier one quickly. For the matters of proof I shall offer not a tittle, but, my Lords, this Order which I received does say, That the Lords Assembled in Parliament have ordered, that my Counsel shall not be heard touching the continuance of Impeachments from Parliament to Par∣liament; but I hope my Lords, you will please without Offence, to let me offer to your Lordships my own Conceptions about it, which I shall do as briefly as I can. My Lords, I do not conceive by this Order, That your Lordships say it does or it does not continue: You have given no Judgment as I know of in it, when you have I shall acquiesce, but I hope your Lordships will resolve that it does not. And, my Lords, my reasons for it are two; the first is, because one of the Managers for the House of Commons, as I take it Sir William Jones said these words, and your Lordships may remember them, That if there were no such President your Lordships would make a President, whether you will or no that I must submit to your Lordships, but then there is none yet. The next thing is, my Lords, this, whether an Impeachment be to be prose∣cuted in Parliament without an Indictment: this, my Lords, I humbly hope your Lordships are resolved, it ought not: For I see not how truely, my Lords, it can be, by the little reading which I have had in the Law, I never found any man prosecuted in a Legal way but by an Indictment, I may be mistaken, and I beg your Lordships pardon for troubling you with my mistakes, but I ne∣ver read of any that were prosecuted upon an Impeachment; so then the Le∣gal usual word being Indictment, I hope your Lordships will not alter the form, for I hope you will keep that great Maxim of your Noble Ancestors, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare, and whether this be a Change of the Law or no, I submit it to your Lordships. A third thing is this, Your Lordships do not think fit that my Counsel shall plead to that Point, whether Words do amount to an Overt Act, for hear∣ing my Counsel to that likewise I do not pretend, but I hope your Lordships
will give me leave to say this, I never heard that Words did amount to an Overt Act, if your Lordships judge otherwise, I submit, but till then I hope it shall not conclude me. There were some other Points which I did offer to your Lordships, and I humbly beseech you to know, whether my Counsel shall be heard to them; 'tis true, one of them, which was, whether two Witnesses in several places did a∣mount to a legal Testimony or no, your Lordships did not declare one way or a∣nother: If you say you acquiesce in the Opinion of the Judges, I must submit, but till Judgment is given, I beseech your Lordships to give me leave to tell you my weak thoughts about it. I did not hear what the Judges said all of them, but as I apprehend they were all of one Opinion; 'Tis true, one of them that spoke last, I think it was Judge Atkins, did say it did amount to a legal Testimony, be∣cause else those Juries that have found some Guilty upon the same sort of Evidence should be perjured; but if this were not so, then upon the same grounds, under your Lordships favour, those Juries that acquitted some upon such Testimony were perjured, but I must believe it to be otherwise till your Lordships have declared it as your Opinion, for that reason will not hold, for the same reason will be for the perjuring the one, as for the perjuring the other. And the same Juries for the most part tryed those that were found guilty and those that were acquitted. Lord High Steward. Is this all your Lordship will please to say? Lord Stafford. No, my Lords, if you would give me leave I would trouble you a little farther, if it were an Offence I would not say a word. My Lords, I do conceive I am not concerned in the general Plot of the Papists; for I am not proved to be so, and whatsoever I may be in my self, as I conceive, or whatso∣ever there is of hearsay, I hope your Lordships will not go upon that, but upon what is proved Secundum allegata & probata, and that common Fame will condemn no man, if it do, then no man is safe, but I must say there is not one word of proof offered that I am a Papist. I hope, my Lords, I have cleared my self to your Lordships and made my Innocency appear, by making appear the perjury of the Witnesses, and the fals∣hood of those things they said against me. Against Dugdale I have proved it by two of his own Witnesses, the one was Eld the woman that swore for him, That he took up a Glass of Cyder and wished that it might be his Poyson if he knew any thing of the Plot, the other was Whitby, who says, he had given my Lord Aston's Father warning long ago what a Knave he was. So 'tis clear, for Dr. Oats I hope from his Contradictions against himself as well as Dugdale, who does contradict himself, at one time August, at another time the latter end of August or the beginning of September: And I hope your Lordships will give no credit to Oats's Testimony, for he said before your Lordships he had declared all he knew, ('tis true I was then accused, but not for having a
Commission as he now swears) and afterwards he accused the Queen, so here is Oats against Oats and Dugdale against Dugdale; and for Turbervill I have proved by his Affidavit, first he swears one thing and then another, and the truth of it is, his Brother proved him false in his last Oath, that it was (7) and not (72.) My Lords, 'Tis not my part to make any Question, nor do I, whether a Plot or no Plot; for I am not concerned in it: If what I shall say now be impertinent, I humbly beg your Lordships pardon. My Lords, I have been by the most of my Friends, at least every one that came to me, particularly by my. Wife and Daughter that is near me, persuaded to tell all that I knew, and I do here in the presence of Almighty God declare what I know to be true. Lord▪High Steward. What says my Lord? Speak out. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I do believe since the Reformation from the Church of Rome to (what it is now Established) the Church of England, those of that Religion have had several wicked and ill Designs and Plots: I do believe they had a Design in Queen Elizabeth's time, Babbington's Plot, (that is a long time ago) how far it was to take away the Queens Life I can't tell, but a Plot it was: I do believe there was another in her time, called, Earl of Westmorland's Plot, where∣in there was a Rebeion in the North, for which some fled and some were Exe∣cuted, that was a very ill design: As for those poysonings of her Saddle and the like, I take them to be but stories. In King James's time, in the first year of his Reign, there was a wicked Plot composed by Actors, some of one Religion, some of another, there was my Lord Grey, my Lord Cobham, my Lord Brooke, and others such, they were condemned all of them, some fled, as Markham and Bainham, those Lords and Sir Walter Raw∣leigh were Reprived and kept long in the Tower. But Sir Walter Rawleigh was afterwards upon that same Judgment Beheaded, and the Lords dyed in the Tower. My Lords, Next to that was the Execrable Treason that I spoke of at▪ first, the Gun-powder-Treason: And I protest before Almighty God, I did from my Infancy detest and abhor those men that were engaged in it, and I do think, and always did think, the Wit of Man nor the Devils Malice, can't invent an Ex∣cuse for it: For the men concerned they all acknowledged it, confessed it▪ and beg'd pardon of the King and God, and all good men for it, that is all I shall say to that now. My Lords, Since his Majesties happy Restauration I do conceive, and I think I may safely say it, (for you all know it, he was gracious and good to all Dissentersd particularly to them of the Romish Church, they had Connivance and Indulgence in their private Houses, and I declare to your Lordships, I did then say to some that were too open in their Worship that they did play foul in taking more Liberty upon them than was fitting for them too, and that brought the misfortune upon me which I will not name.
My Lord, it was not long ago that your Lordships at your own Bar did allow all the Dissenters from the Church of England to give some Reasons to your Lord∣ships why those Laws that were against them should be repealed, as well Protestant Dissenters as those of the Church of Rome, and why they should have some kind of Toleration; among whom you did permit those of the Romish Religion to ap∣pear too, I forget their Names. And I remember particularly one of the forts of them, an Anabaptist I think, did urge for a Reason, that which is a great truth, that they held Rebellion to be the Sin of Whitchcrast, I believe it is as bad as any Sin can be. My Lords, that came to nothing at that time, but, my Lords, I believe that after that all of all Religions had Meetings among themselves to endea∣vour to get that Toleration which they proposed humbly to your Lordships, there I will never deny, my Lords, that my Opinion was, and is, that this Kingdom can never be happy till an Act of Parliament pass to this Effect; it was my Opinion then, and I did endeavour it all I could that the Dissenting Protestants might have a Comprehension, and the other a Toleration; I ac∣knowledge it to be my Intention, and I think it was no ill one; for if that be a true Copy of the Commons Votes which is in Print, there is some such thing designing there as a Comprehension; and I was of Opinion that it were sufficient that such as were of the Church of Rome might by Act of Parlia∣ment serve God in their own Houses, and privately in their own Way, not in publick, and that for it they should pay something to the King out of their Estates, but truly not much; That they should be severely punished if they or any of them did endeavour to persuade any Subject to their Opinion, or did come to Court, or enjoy any Office whatsoever, though it were but that of a Scavenger, but that they should pay their proportion to all chargeable Offices; That I profess, my Lords, was my Opinion, and I confess to your Lordships 'tis so still. I was in some hopes that it would have been done in that Sessions, because I was afraid it was unlikely to be done at any time else. I confess to your Lordships I was heartily and cordially against the Test, because it hindred those just and honest things that were for the Good of the Kingdom. My Lords, there was the first or or the second Day brought into your Lord∣ships House, the Record of Mr. Coleman's Tryal, and for the Letters in it, I do my Lords, declare to your Lordships, I never read of one of them before, but I have read them since they have been in Print; And when I read them first cur∣sorily over, my Opinion was, and is, That Coleman's endavouring by Money out of France, and keeping off the Parliament to get a Toleration, was that which he could not justifie by Law, how fat it was Criminal, that I do not know, I am not so skilled in the Law, I think it was not justifiable, but he hath paid for it se∣verely since.
My Lords, I do declare that ever since I had the Honour to fit among your Lordships, which is now 40 Years (for in the Year 1640. I was by His Ma∣jesties favour called up a Peer) I have valued my self upon the Honour of sit∣ting with you; and I do declare when I have sat in this House, when your Lord∣ships have desired the King when it was hot weather and unseasonable, to put off the Sitting of the Parliament, I was never glad of it, but sorry when they were prorogued but for a short time. This I profess is true, and I hope I am no Cri∣minal in it; for I do value the Parliaments Sitting to be the only means to keep this Kingdom quiet. My Lords, 'Tis very true by Coleman's Letters, and what I have seen in print since, I do believe there have been some Consultations for a Toleration; and if I had known as much then as I have since I have been in the Tower, I had perhaps prevented many things; for, my Lords, I hold England to be a great and an happy Body; but it is as other great Bodies are, it may be now, as you know before it was, over-grown or sick; it was then, and I pray God it be not now, but I hold nothing can cure it but that old English Physician, the King, your Lordships and the Commons in Parliament assembled. But if I had known any such Design, as Coleman's Letters do hint, I would not have continued in England. My Lords, For that damnable Opinion of King-killing, if I were of any Church whatsoever, and found that to be its Principle, I would leave it. My Lords, this is as true as I can speak any thing in the world, I beg your Lord∣ships pardon for troubling you with my impertinencies, and hope you pardon it to my weakness. My Lords, I do profess before Almighty God, and be∣fore your Lordships my Judges, I know no one tittle nor point of the Plot; and if I did I hold my self bound to declare it. For the present I shall say little more, unless the Managers give me occasion; if they will reply, and make any Objections I desire I may answer them. I know the great disad∣vantages I am under, when these Gentlemen, who are great Scholars and Learned Men, reply upon me, who have those great helps of Memory, Parts, and Understanding in the Law, all which I want. And therefore I hope your Lordships will dot conclude me upon what they or I have said, but will be pleased to debate the matter among your selves, and be as well my Counsel as my Judges. My Lords, when I offer to your Lordships matter of Law, I did in no wise ad∣mit the matter of Fact.— Lord High Steward. My Lord, I cannot hear you. Lord Stafford, My Lords, if your Lordships please, that Paper may be read. Lord High Steward. Deliver your Paper in, my Lords cannot hear. Lord Stafford. I cannot eny to your Lordships, that what happened to
me on Saturday night, disturbed me very much. Every day since I came ther, there hath been such shouting and houting by a Company of bar∣barous Rabble, as never was heard the like, I believe, but it was at a distance most of the time, and so it did not much concern me. But Saturday night it was so near and so great, that really it hath disturbed me ever since; it was great to day, but at a distance; if it were not thus, I should not offer a Paper to be read; I scarce know what I do or say considering the Circumstances▪ I am in. Lord High Steward. Take my Lords Paper and read it. Sir Thomas Lee. My Lords, I desire you will please to consider whether this may not introduce a new Custom by reading of this Paper. As to what my Lord is pleased to say, I am sorry for the occasion that any disturbance should arise to my Lord, from the Rabble, or any one else; I hope his Lordship be∣lieves we cannot help, nor do we contribute to that disturbance. But we desire your Lordships to consider whether this practise of having things written down for the Clerk to read, may not introduce a Custom, which may in time grow inconvenient for future Example. I see no great danger in the particular Instance before your Lordships now, but it is dangerous in such Cases to do any thing that is new in this Court. Lord High Steward. All the matter is, whether it be read by my Lord, who cannot be heard, or read by the Clerk. Sir Thomas Lee. We only oppose it out of fear of making a President, which may be of ill consequence. Lord High Steward. Read it, my Lord, and raise your voice, for it concerns you to speak out. Lord Stafford. (Reading out of his Paper.) My Lords, when I offered Matter of Law to your Lordships, on Saturday last, I did in no wise admit the Matter of Fact to be true that was alledged against me, and so I desire to be un∣derstood. And I hope your Lordships will not lay the less weight upon the Te∣stimony of my Witnesses because they are not sworn; for the Law does not suf∣fer them to be sworn, which is no fault of mine, nor ought not to turn to my Prejudice. I must appeal to your Lordships Judgments in point of Fact, how far the Kings Witnesses are to be believed against me, considering the whole matter, and my Counter-proof. Next I submit to your Lordships Judgments this point, That the Impeach∣ment being founded upon the Common Law, and the Statute of 25th. Edw. 3. and not upon the Statute of 13th. of this King, two of the Witnesses, Dugdale and Turbervill, do only swear Treasonable words spoken by me, and not my Overt Act; for they swear only that I promised them Money and Rewards to kill the King. Now I humbly pray your Lordships Judgment, whether bare
speaking of words be an Overt Act, and Treason at the Common Law, or upon that Statute; and whether there be more than speaking of Words in a Consult, or otherwise proved by Dugdale and Turbervill, I appeal to you; then the other Wit∣ness, Oats, is but a single Witness, who speaks of the receiving of a Commission. This is that I offer to your Lordships now for your Judgments, and then I desire I may have your Opinion in other things. Lord High Steward. Is this all your Lordship hath to say▪ Lord Stafford. For the present, my Lords. Lord High Steward. You must say all you have to say now. Lord Stafford. Is it your Lordships pleasure to hear Counsel to nothing at all? I did likwise alledge to your Lordships th' other day, that People that swear for Money, are not competent credible Witnesses; how far that was proved, or I may prove by my Counsel, I submit to your Lordships. Lord High Stewared. Look you, my Lord, you have so far received already the pleasure of the House: You have raised several Questions of Law, whether every Overt Act require two Witnesses to prove it. You have had the Opinion of the Judges, and there is no more to be said in it. As to that, whether Impeach∣ments continue from Parliament to Parliament, and the other thing, whether Proceedings may be upon an Impeachment without an Indictment; these are matters of the Course and Constitutions of Parliaments, my Lords will consider of them by themselves, and will permit no Counsel to argue them. For the other Point, That words are no Overt Act, that rests for their Opinion in another Case, when it shall come, for they have now no such Case before them. Lord Stafford. Thumbly conceive there is. Lord High Steward. There is a great difference between bare words being an Overt Act, and perswasion by Promises of Money and Rewards to kill the King, which is a very great Overt Act. Lord Stafford. Is it possible to do an Act by Words? If it be so, I never heard it before. Lord High Steward. Otherwise men may promise Rewards to 0 several per∣sons to kill the King, and then say 'tis all but Words. Lord Stafford. I say it not, but I humbly conceive the Law says it. Lord High Steward. What say you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons? Lord Stafford. My Lords, I have something to say, which I desire to speak first: My Lords, I hope I have cleared to your Lordships, that all the Witnesses have swore false against me, and this I have made out by Proofs; I say not much to that.—(My Lord was searching for his Papers) Truly, my Lords I am con∣founded with the Noise and other Circumstances, but my Lords, I shall, if your Lordships please to give me leave, humbly represent my Case to you, how I take it to be in matter of Fact as to my own Condition not any thing, but how I am now before your Lordships.
I was, my Lords, committed by my Lord Chief Justices Warrant, on the 20. or 21. of October, (78.) Friday, the 25. of October, I was brought to your Lordships Bar, I was Impeached; I do not remember the day, my Lords, the beginning of December, in one Parliament Articles exhibited a∣gainst me, in another Parliament I was brought upon these Articles exhi∣bited, and being called to your Lordships Bar, the Articles were read to me, and I gave in my Answer, that was sometime in May (79.) and in the end of May the 27. (if I mistake not, if I do, I desire it may be rectified by your Books) I with the other Lords, were brought to this place in order to our Trial. We staid some time there, and then were remanded by your Order to the Tower, where I continued till November twelve month after, without having heard any thing concerning it; so that I was first Impeached in one Par∣liament, Articles brought against me and pleaded to in a second, and now brought to my Trial in a third; and what your Lordships will say upon this, I submit to you, and whether these be Proceedings according to Law, your Lordships will judge. My Lords, I humbly conceive that Magna Charta says, That Justice shall be denied nor delayed to no man, whether it hath not been delayed to me, let your Lordships judge. If you say the Prorogation of the Parliament is the cause of that delay, I hope your Lordships will give me leave to say, That from the 5. of December to the 30. when the first Parliament was Prorogued, or during the Session of the other Parliament, there was time enough sure wherein I might have been brought to my Trial; and if these proceedings be lawful and just, there is no man living, but may be kept off from time to time, till some Acci∣dents happen that their ends may be gained. I leave it to your judgment, whe∣ther it may be only my Case now, or of some of your Lordships in future Ages, to be accused of things that you never heard of before, and not brought to justifie your selves, but kept in Prison. My Lords, There is a Statute, I have forgot where it is (but such a one I have read) that though the King by his great Seal, or little Seal, command that Justice should be delaid or denied, yet however the Judges shall not obey it, but proceed. So I hope there is no pretence of delay on my part, and the benefit of that Statute shall not be denied me. And that Statute of the Great Charter, which cost so many of your Ancestors their Lives to maintain, I hope you will never go from. Now, your Lordships Noble Ancestors amongst other things, took great care that Justice should be denied or delayed to none; and this I desire you to take into Consideration. I am in your Lordships Judgment either to be Acquitted or Condemned. I hope your Lordships will, and I know you will lay your Hands upon your Hearts, consult your Consciences and your Honours, and then you will do what is Just and Equitable I doubt not.
My Lords, Mr. Oats said I came by the name of Mr. Howard of Essing∣ham, but that I did to my Letters sign Stafford; surely, my Lords, if I was ashamed to own my Person, I should have been as much ashamed to have owned my Name. He says he saw me take a Commission, and whether that be an Overt Act, your Lordships are to determine. Upon the whole matter, I conceive, there is nothing proved against me, but words, nor pretended to▪ but only by Oats. And whether you will credit a man that so dissembles with God, as I have told you, I appeal to your Lordships, and beg you to consider of it. That these Witnesses have sworn for Money, if you send to the Ex∣chequer Office and see what Money they have received, you will find by the great Sums that 'tis so, and then I hope you will not allow them to be heard, nor credit any that swear for gain. I had a Suit in Westminster-Hall, that had like to have gone expresly against me, only because one of my Witnesses was to gain 8 l. if the Suit went for me. But pray consider how much these men have had. And for the point that there are not two Witnesses, I beseech your Lordships, give me leave to put you in mind, That not many Years ago, you passed an Act against Frauds and Perjuries, wherein you were so careful to preserve mens Estates, that you required three Witnesses to prove a Will of Goods or Lands, above 100 l. and will you allow but one Witness to take away a mans Life for Words? Though your Lordships will never commit Treason, yet no man can preserve himself from the Misfortune that happens to me, of being falsly accused. 'Tis true, my Lords, the Managers have given an Answer to the Business of the Money, by saying, The King may give as liberally as he pleases, but to give so great Sums, whereby Men Poor before, are now become Rich, I think will be an Objection against their Credit. My Lords, I have said what I do think convenient, though I think much more might be said by an abler man to your Lordships, for the clearing of him∣self. I hope I have done it, nay, I am confident I have; and this I have done for the Memory of that Great and Blessed King, who first made me a Peer, that it may not be said, He did me the Honour Forty Years ago to call me up to this Dignity, and I should fly in the Face of his Son in so horrible a manner as these men would make me. I do owe it to the Honour of my Father and Mo∣ther, who, I think, I may safely say, were both Honourable and Worthy Persons: My Father was a learned man, and a wise man, as I may appeal to some of your Lordships who knew him well; I say, I owe it to their Memory, and to the Ho∣nour of the Family from whence I sprang, which all the world knows what it is. And I should be an infamous man to dishonour them so much as to bear their Name, and commit Treason. My Lords, I owe it to my Wife, who hath been a very kind Wife to me as ever Man had: She is Heiress at Law to the great
Estate of that great and unfortunate Man Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, who was cut offin the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and all his Estate, if it were not for that Attainder, would have come to her. I may be impertinent in telling your Lordships what it was, but I do not over∣say it, when I reckon it would have been at this day Two hundred thousand pounds a Year, for it was Seventeen thousand pounds a Year in those days Penny Rent, besides other Emoluments. This is an extravagant thing to say, but 'tis true, something thereof does▪ remain to her, which I now enjoy. I owe it to all my Children, especially to my Eldest Son, who is a young Man, and I may say of far better Parts and Hopes than his Father, and whom, I hope, will serve his Coun∣try. I owe it to all my Friends and Relations, for I would not have it said after-my Death, my Wife was the Widow of a Traytor. I owe it to all these, but above all I owe it to God Almighty, then when I come to be judged by Him, I may give a good account of what he hath intrusted me with, that I may not appear as an infamous Man who knows he hath a Body, but not his own, and yet should throw it and his Soul away together. And if I should have committed this Execrable Treason, I should have been Guilty of my own Murder: First, in the committing a Crime worthy of Death; and then in not Confessing to save my Life. I hold Murder an extraordinary Crime, the worst next to Treason: And I know, if I should not prevent my Death by confessing all I knew, I should have been guilty of Self-Murder, the worst of Murders. I know your Lordships will lay to Heart, what an execrable thing Murder is and the Blood of Innocents; and I hope there is none of the House of Commons, but after this Evidence, will clear me. I am sure none of them would have me punished for that I am not Guilty of. I do not blame these Gentlemen of the House of Commons for Prosecuting, nor the first for Impeaching; for they had, with∣out all doubt, Reasons great enough for it upon what Evidence they had before them, before they knew what the Witnesses were. I know your Lordships will not in the least point vary from Justice, or the Law of the Land, and I desire you to lay the whole matter to your Hearts; I have not the least sus∣picion of the Partiality of any Man in the House, nay, I profess, if I had an Enemy and he were not here, I would beg of you that he might come. I have cleared my self before your Lordshships, and I hope I shall not be run down by the wicked Rabble, which where it will end, God knows. It began in the late times against my Lord of Strafford, and so continued till it ended in that most Execrable Fact, one of them that ever was done. A wick∣ed beginning it was, and it had a wicked end. For since our Saviours Death and Murder by the Jews, never was so execrable a Murder in the World; and whoever had an hand in it without an extraordinary Repentance, can have no thoughts of Salvation. I never could serve the King, 'tis true, but in my desires, and I never disserted him in Thought, Word, or Deed to
my knowledg in my life, much less did I ever contrive or consent to his Death. I do in the presence of God, Angels, your Lordships, and all Men, declare, I do know no more of the Plot, or any such thing than any one here does. That those of the Romish Religion had meetings, I believe, to obtain those ends that I spake of before: Coleman went too far, how far he was Criminal in it I cann't tell. Meetings, I say, there were, but I was never at one of them, nor do I know what was done there. I do leave it to your Lordships to do Justice, as I know you will, and with all submission I resign my self up to you. Lord High Steward. Have you done, my Lord? Lord Stafford. If your Lordships will not allow me Counsel to argue those Points, I have done. Lord High Steward. What say you Gentlemen of the House of Com∣mons? Mr. Serjeant Maynard. My Lords, some thing that my Lord hath spoken hath been resolved against him, that is about two Witnesses to each Overt-act; some things are not to be disputed about the Law and Course of Parliaments, some things were not to be said now, because he had said them before. My Lords▪ we had concluded our Evidence, and he is pleased to take up the time with repeat∣ing what was said before. For the other matters that my Lord is pleased to discourse of, all he says is but his Obligations, and how unreasonable it were for him to do it; the Question is whether he hath done it or no; if he hath, his Obligations are an Aggravation of his Crime, not an Excuse. His Relations, his Family, and other things are nothing before your Lordships now in point of Judgment, nor is there any thing new said to day, that was not said before. Sir William Jones My Lords, I should not add one word▪further, were it not that this Noble Lord is pleased upon his Memory, or rather without, to say something of me, and that was, that speaking of the Continuance of Procedings I should say, if your Lordships had no President I hope you would make one; My Lords, I do appeal to your Lordships Memory whether I said any thing like it, I utterly deny it, nor was there any occasion for it. For there was no need of urging Presidents, when your Lordships upon a Conference with the Commons, did declare it to be the Law of Proceedings in Parliament, and did then fortifie i with many Arguments. I know my Lords Memory is not very good; I'm sure in this he is very much mstaken. My Lord hath been pleased to complain he hath received much disturbance, and that the Noise and Shouts have been so great that they have occasioned some lstraction in him. My Lords, I am sure his Lordship cannot mean us; for I appeal to your Lordships, and all that have heard this Tryal, whether he hath received the least disturbance or interruption from us, or whether we have
not treated him with that respect that becomes his Dignity, and the Discretion that ought to be in the Managers of the House of Commons. But I must needs say, that his Lordship hath received distraction from those Friends or Counsel of his that put those many Papers into his Hand; for he hath read one after another that do contain the same matter over and over again. These I confess were sufficient to distract him, or any other that should make use of them. His Lord∣ship hath been pleased to go off from the matter of Law, to the matter of Fact, and backward and forward, so that it is impossible to follow him: And as to the mat∣ter of Fact we shall decline to follow him; for though we have not given his Lordship any disturbance, yet we submit to your Judgment whether it be Regular, or according to the Course of Proceedings, when his Lordship hath sum'd up his Evidence, and we that are the Prosecutors have concluded ours, he should begin that work again, which if it should be admitted we were to reply, and he might rejoin upon us, and so there would be no end of Proceedings. And, my Lords, I hope, though this Lord hath had the favour to do it, yet it shall not for the future be brought into Example, for it will make Tryals endless. My Lords, for the matter of Law, there is nothing that deserves an An∣swer, for though the Law does admit the Prisoner Counsel in matters of Law, yet it must be in things doubtful: And if there be any thing of that in our Case, I submit it to your Lordships. I am sure I have heard nothing new but what hath been over-ruled already, unless it be a matter of Law which rises upon a matter of Fact, and that not proved, to wit, the Corruption of Witnesses. The last day all was said by his Lordship he could say, and all said by us that we thought fit to say, and now to begin the same matter again, I think ought not to be ad∣mitted. We shall not follow his Lordship in that way of Proceedings, and hope it shall never fall into Example. Sir Francis Winnington. My Lords, I have only one word to say to your Lordships, and that is in relation to the Proceedings of the Commons in this Cause; for if the Cause had not been of an extraordinary nature, we should have stood upon it, that the Prisoner ought not after the Prosecutors had con∣cluded to have taken a liberty of reading and repeating what we had said over and over again. We know, my Lords, there are are a sort of men in the world, who are willing to lay hold of any pretences to cavil at our Proceedings, and therefore we have let my Lord take all this liberty, that so his Party might have no colour of Complaint. His Lordship was pleased to say the last day, that he had not a Witness more to produce, nor a Reason to give, as I understood him; and there∣fore he must own that we have been very tender to him in all our Proceedings. One thing my Lord insinuates to day, which I cannot forbear taking notice of,
as if we had delayed him, which is without cause; we had used all diligence in preparing our selves, and were soon ready when the King was pleased to let the Par∣liament sit, and therefore it can be no imputation on us; and truly if my Lord considers the weight of the Evidence, I fear he will think his Tryal comes soon enough now. Lord Stafford. My Lords, I desire to be rightly understood in one thing, and 'tis only this, I did not say the House of Commons shouted at me, but the Rabble. Lord High Steward. Is it your Lordships pleasure to Adjourn? Lords. Ay, Ay. Lord High Steward. Then this House is Adjourned to the Parliament Chamber. Then the Lords withdrew in their former Order, and the Com∣mittee of Commons went back to their House. Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. A Message was sent from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sir Samuel Clarke. Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to acquaint this House, that they have ap∣pointed William Viscount Stafford to be brought to the Bar in Westminster-Hall to morrow morning at Ten of the Clock to receive Judgment. The Commons Adjourned to Eight of the Clock the next Morning.
The Seventh Day. Tuesday, December 7. 1680. ABout the hour of Eleven, the Lords Adjourned into Westminster-Hall, going thither in their former Order into the Court there erected; and Mr. Speaker having left the Chair, the Committee of Commons were seated as before. The Lords being sate, Proclamation was made for Silence; and the Lord High Steward being seated on the Wool-pack, with Garter Princi∣pal King of Arms, the Usher of the Black Rod▪ Nine Maces attend∣ing him, with all the rest of the Solemnity, as was at first expressed, took the Votes of the Peers upon the Evidence, beginning at the Puisne Baron, and so upwards, in this Order, the Lord Stafford being (as the Law requires) absent. Lord High Steward. My Lords, I am an humble Suitor to your Lord∣ships, That you will give me leave to collect your Votes as I sit, for I am not able to stand. Which being granted, the Lord High Steward pro∣ceeded. Lord High Steward. My Lord Butler of Weston, Is William Lord Vis∣count Stafford Guilty of the Treason whereof he stands Impeached, or Not Guilty? Lord Butler. Not Guilty upon my Honour. The same Question was put to the rest, whose Names and Votes follow. Lord Arundel of Trerice. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Crewe. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Cornwallis. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Holles. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Wootton. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Rockingham. Guilty upon my Honour.
Lord Lucas. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Astley. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Ward. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Byron. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Hatton. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Leigh. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Howard of Escrick. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Maynard. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Lovelace. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Deincourt. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Grey of Wark. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Brook. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Norreys. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Chandos. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord North and Grey. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Pagett. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Wharton. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Eure. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Cromwell. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Windsor. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Conyers. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Ferrers. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Morley▪ Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Mowbray. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Viscount Newport. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Viscount Faulconberge. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Conway. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Berkley. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Maslesfield. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Hallifax. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Feversham. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Sussex. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Guilford. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Shaftsbury. Guilty upon my Honour Earl of Burlington. Guilty upon my Honour.
Earl of Ailesbury. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Craven. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Carlisle. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Bath. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Essex. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Clarendon. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of St▪ Albans. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Scarsdale. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Sunderland. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Thanet. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Chesterfield. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Carnarvan. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Winchelsea. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Stamford. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Peterborough. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl Rivers. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Mulgrave. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Barkshire. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Manchester. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Westmorland. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Clare. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Bristol. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Denbigh. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Northampton. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Leicester. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Bridgwater. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Salisbury. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Suffolk. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Bedford. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Huntingdon. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Rutland. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Kent. Guilty upon my Honour. Earl of Oxford. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Chamberlain. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Marquess of Worcester. Not Guilty upon my Honour. Duke of Newcastle. Not Guilty upon my Honour.
Duke of Monmouth. Guilty upon my Honour. Duke of Albemarle. Guilty upon my Honour. Duke of Buckingham. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord Privy-Seal. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord President. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord High Steward. Guilty upon my Honour. Prince Rupert Duke of Cumberland. Guilty upon my Honour. Lord High Steward. My Lords, upon telling your Votes, I find there are Thirty one of my Lords that think the Prisoner Not Guilty, and Fifty five that have found him Guilty. Serjeant make Proclamation for the Lieutenant of the Tower to bring his Prisoner to the Bar. (which was done, and his Lordship came to the Bar.) Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, I have but heavy tidings for you, your Lordship hath been Impeached of High-Treason, you have pleaded Not Guilty, my Lords have heard your Defence, and have considered of the Evidence, and their Lordships do find you Guilty of the Treason whereof you are Im∣peached. Lord Stafford. Gods Holy Name be praised, my Lords, for it. Lord High Steward. What can your Lordship say for your self, why Judgment of Death should not be given upon you according to the Law? Lord Stafford. My Lords, I have very little to say, I confess I am surprized at it, for I did not expect it; but Gods will be done, and your Lordships, I will not murmur at it: God forgive those that have sworn falsly against me. My Lords, I conceive I have something to say for respit of Judgment; I have been at many Tryals in my Life, but I never saw any Tryal where the party tried did not hold up his Hand, which I was never asked to do; I thought it had been a very material point in the Law, That by the holding up of the Hand he might be known to be the Person. I have read, lately, since I had the misfortune to be thus accused, Sir Edward Coke upon the Pleas of the Crown, and he says that Misnomer, the not giving a man his right name, or addi∣tion, is likewise a just Cause to arrest the Judgment. There is likewise a∣nother Question how far it may be valued I know not, I submit it, as I do all, to your Lordships. Though I am tried upon the Act of 25 Edw. 3d. yet there is nothing more in that Act, than what is included in the Act of the 13th. of this King: And I humbly conceive, my Lords, by that Act, and the last Proviso in it, a Peer that is accused and found Guilty of the Crimes therein men∣tioned, is to lose his Seat in Parliament; those are the words, and since 'tis so put down in the Act, it is so to be understood, and that is all the punishment. And I humbly demand your Lordships Judgment upon these points, whether it be so or no?
And humbly demand your Lordships Judgments upon these Points, whether it be so or no? Lord High Steward. Has your Lordship any more to say? Lord Stafford. No, my Lords, I submit to your Lordships, and desire your Judgment in these Points. Then the Lords adjourned into the Parliament Chamber, and the Committee of Commons returned to their own House; and the Speaker having reassumed the Chair, the whole Body of the House went with their Speaker to the Bar of the House of Lords, to demand Judgment of High Treason against William Viscount Stafford, upon the Impeachment of the Commons of England in Parliament, in the name of the Commons in Parliament, and of all the Commons of England. The Commons, with their Speaker, went back to their House. Then the Lords took into consideration what Judgment was to be given upon William Viscount Stafford, and it was moved that he might be beheaded. Af∣ter some debate, the Judges were asked, whether if any other Judgment than the usual Judgment for High Treason were given upon him, it would attaint his Blood? The Judges were of opinion, that the Judgment for High Treason appointed by Law, is to be drawn, hanged, and quartered, and in the Courts and Proceedings below, they can take no notice of any Judgment for High Trea∣son, but that. Then Sir Creswell Levinz, the Kings Attorney-General, desired to be heard on his Majesties behalf, which the House gave leave for him to be; who said, he knew no other Judgment by Law for High Treason, but Drawing, Hanging, and Quartering; if any other Judgment were given, it would be prejudicial to His Majesty, and be a Question in the inferiour Courts as to his Attainder of High Trea∣son. Whereupon their Lordships ordered, That the Lord High Steward do pro∣nounce the ordinary Judgment of Death upon the Lord Viscount Stafford, as the Law hath appointed in Cases of High Treason. And a Message was sent to the House of Commons from their Lordships, by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sir Samuel Clark. Mr. Speaker, We are commanded by the Lords to acquaint this House, That their Lord∣ships are going presently into Westminster-Hall, to give Judgment against William Viscount Stafford. Mr. Speaker left the Chair. The Committee of Commons appointed for the Management of the Evi∣dence against the Prisoner, with the rest of the Commons, went into Westminster-Hall, to the Court there erected, to be present when the Lords gave Judgment of High Treason against him, upon the Impeachment of the Commons of Eng∣land.
After a short time their Lordships were adjourned into Westminster-Hall, coming in their former Order into the Court there erected, where being seated, and the Lord High Steward being on the Wool-sack, attended by Gar∣ter principal King of Arms, the Usher of the Black Rod, Eight of the Serje∣ants at Arms kneeling with their Maces, the Ninth Macer making proclamation for Silence; which being done, the Lord High Steward gave Judgment upon the Prisoner as followeth. Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, THat which your Lordship hath said in Arrest of Judgment, hath been found by my Lords upon due Consideration had of it, to be of no moment at all. It is no Essential part of any Trial, That the Pri∣soner should hold up his Hand at the Bar; there is no Record ever made of it when it is done; the only use of it is to shew the Court who the Prisoner is, when that is apparent, the Court does often proceed a∣gainst him, though he refuse to hold up his Hand at the Bar; there∣fore the omission of that Ceremony in this Case is no legal Exception, as all the Judges have declared. And as to the Proviso's in the Statute of the 13th. year of this King, their Lordships do find that they are in no sort applicable to this Case, forasmuch as the Proceedings against your Lordship are not grounded upon that Statute, but upon the Statute of the 25. E. 3. And yet if the Proceedings had been upon the latter Statute, the Proviso's therein could have done your Lordship no service at all. My part therefore which remains, is a very sad one: for I never yet gave Sentence of Death upon any man, and am extremely sorry that I must begin with your Lordship. Who would have thought that a person of your Quality, of so Noble an Extraction, of so considerable Estate and Fortune, so eminent a Sufferer in the late ill Times, so interested in the Preservation of the Government, so much obliged to the Moderation of it, and so personally obliged to the King and his Royal Father for their particular Favours to you, should ever have entred into so Infernal a Conspiracy as to contrive the Murder of the King, the Ruin of the State, the Subver∣sion of Religion, and, as much as in you ly, the Destruction of all the Souls and Bodies in three Christian Nations.
And yet the Impeachment of the House of Commons amounts to no less a Charge, and of this Charge their Lordships have found you Guilty. That there hath been a General and Desperate Conspiracy of the Papists, and that the Death of the King hath been all along one chief part of the Conspirators Design, is now apparent beyond all possi∣bility of doubting. What was the meaning of all those Treatises which were publisht about two years since against the Oath of Allegiance, in a time when no man dreamt of such a Controversie? What was the meaning of Father Conyers's Sermon upon the same Subject, but only because there was a Demonstration of Zeal, as they call it, intended against the Person of the King? which the scruples arising from that Oath did somewhat hinder. To what purpose were all the Correspondencies with Foreign Na∣tions? The Collections of Money among the Fathers abroad and at home? What was the meaning of their Governing themselves here by such Advices as came frequently from Paris and Saint Omers? And how shall we expound that Letter which came from Ireland, to assure the Fathers here, that all things were in a readiness there too, as soon as the Blow should be given? Does any man now begin to doubt how London came to be Burnt? Or by what ways and means poor Justice Godfrey fell? And is it not apparent by these Instances, that such is the frantick Zeal of some Bigotted Papists, that they resolve, No means to advance the Catho∣lick Cause shall be left unattempted, though it be by Fire and Sword? My Lord, As the Plot in General is most manifest, so your Lord∣ships part in it hath been too too plain. What you did at Paris, and continued to do at Tixal in Staffordshire, shews a settled purpose of mind against the King; and what you said at London touching Ho∣nest Will, shews you were acquainted with that Conspiracy against the Kings Life which was carrying on here too: And in all this there was a great Degree of Malice; for your Lordship at one time called the King Heretick and Traytor to God; and at another time you revil'd him for misplacing his Bounty, and rewarding none but Traytors and Rebels.
And thus you see that which the Wise man forewarn'd you of is come upon you, Curse not the King, no not in thy heart: for the Birds of the Air shall reveal, and that which hath wings will de∣clare the matter. Three things I shall presume to recommend to your Lordships con∣sideration. In the first place, Your Lordship now sees how it hath pleased God to leave you so far to your self, that you are fallen into the snare, and into the pit, into that very pit which you were digging for others. Consider therefore, that God Almighty never yet left any man, who did not first leave him. In the next place, Think a little better of it than hitherto you have done, what kind of Religion that is in which the Blind Guides have been able to lead you on into so much ruin and destruction as is now like to befall you. In the last place, I pray your Lordship to consider, That true Re∣pentance is never too late. A devout penitential sorrow, joyn'd with an humble and hearty Confession, is of mighty power and efficacy both with God and man. There have been some of late, who have refus'd to give God the Glory of his Justice by acknowledging the Crimes for which they were condemned; nay, who have been taught to believe, that 'tis a mortal Sin to confess that Crime in publick, for which they have been ab∣solv'd in private; and so have not dar'd to give God that Glory which otherwise they would have done. God forbid your Lordship should rest upon Forms; God forbid your Lordship should be found among the number of those poor mistaken souls whom the first thing that undeceives is Death it self. Perhaps your Lordship may not much esteem the Prayers of those whom you have long been taught to miscal Hereticks: But whether you do or no, I am to assure your Lordship, That all my Lords here, even they that have condemned you, will never cease to pray for you, that the end of your life may be Christian and Pious, how Tragical soever the means are that must bring you thither. And now my Lord, this is the last time that I can call you My Lord; for the next words I am to speak will Attaint you.
The Judgment of the Law is, and this Court doth Award, That YOU go to the place from whence you came; from thence you must be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of Execution; When you come there, you must be hang'd by the Neck, but not till you are dead; for you must be cut down alive; your Privy-Members must be cut off, and your Bowels ript up before your Face, and thrown into the Fire; Then your Head must be severed from your Body, and your Body divided into four Quarters; and these must be at the dis∣posal of the King. And God Almighty be merciful to your Soul. Prisoner. My Lords, I humbly beseech you give me leave to speak a few words: I do give your Lordships hearty Thanks for all your Favours to me. I do here in the presence of God Almighty declare, I have no Malice in my Heart to them that have condemned me; I know not who they are, nor desire to know; I forgive them all, and beseech your Lordships all to pray for me. My Lords, I have one humble Request to make to your Lordships, and that is, my Lords, That the little short time I have to live a Prisoner, I may not be a close Prisoner, as I have been of late, but that Mr. Lieutenant may have an Or∣der that my Wife and Children and Friends may come at me. I do humbly beg this Favour of your Lordships, which I hope you will be pleased to give me.
Lord High Steward. My Lord Stafford, I believe I may, with my Lords leave, tell you one thing further, That my Lords, as they proceed with Rigour of Justice, so they pro∣ceed with all the Mercy and Compassion that may be; And therefore my Lords will be humble Suitors to the King, that He will remit all the Punishment but the taking off your Head. Prisoner (Weeping) My Lords, your Justice does not make me cry, but your Goodness. Then the Lord High Steward broke his Staff, and the Lords adjourned into the Parliament Chamber, and the Com∣mons returned to their House, and the Prisoner with the Ax born before him with the Edg towards him (it being carried contrarily during his Trial) was sent back to the Tower. His Majesty afterwards ordered the Lord High Chancellor to issue out under the Great Seal of England the following Writs for Executing the said late Viscount Stafford; the first being to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to deliver him on the Twen∣ty ninth of December 1680. between Nine and Eleven a Clock in the Forenoon, at the usual place without the Tower-Gate, to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex; and the other being for them then and there to receive him into their Custody, and to lead him to the usual place upon Tower-Hill, and there to cause his Head to be cut off, and severed from his Body: Which Writs were in Form following.
CAROLUS Secundus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Rex, fidei defensor, &c. Locumtenenti Turris nostrae London salutem; Cum Willus Vicecomes Stafford, per Communes Regni nostri Angliae in Parliamento assemblat', de alta proditione, necnon diversis aliis criminibus & offensis per ipsum perpetrat' & commissis, impetit' fuit; Ac superinde per Dominos Temporales in praesenti Parliamento nostro convent', triat' convict'; & debita juris forma attinct' fuit; & morti adjucat' existit: Cujus quidem Judi∣cii executio adhuc restat facienda. Cumque praedictus Vicecomes Stafford in Turri nostra London, sub custodia tua detent' existit: Precipimus tibi & per presentes firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod in & super vicesimum nonum diem instantis mensis Decembris, inter horas nonam, & undecimam, ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, ipsum Vicecomitem Stafford, usque locum usualem extra portam Turris predictae ducas; ac ipsum, Vicecomitibus Civitatis nostrae London & Middlesex, adtunc & ibidem deliberes: Quibus quidem Vi∣cecomitibus, nos per aliud breve eis inde direct', precipimus pre∣dictum Vicecomitem Stafford adtunc & ibidem recipere, ut fiat executio Judicii predicti, modo & forma prout dictis Vicecomi∣tibus London & Middlesex, per aliud breve nostrum predictum precepimus: Et hoc nullatenus omittas, sub periculo incumben∣te, Aliquo Judicio, Lege, Ordinatione, seu Mandato praeantea habit', fact', ordinat', seu dat' in contrarium non obstante. Teste me∣ipso apud Westm. decimo octavo die Decembris, Anno regni no∣stri tricesimo secundo. BARKER.
CAROLUS Secundus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Rex, fidei defensor, &c. Vic. London & Vic. Middle∣sex salutem: Cum Will. Vicecomes Stafford, per Communes regni nostri Angliae in Parliamento assemblat', de alta proditione, necnon diver∣sis aliis criminibus & offenfis per ipsum perpetrat' & commissis impe∣tit' fuit; Ac superinde per Dominos Temporales in presenti Parlia∣mento nostro convent', triatus, convict' & debita juris forma, attinct' fuit, & morti adjudicat' existit: Cujus quidem Judicii executio ad∣huc restat facienda; Precipimus vobis, & per presentes firmiter in∣jungendo mandamus, quod in & super vicesimum nonum diem hujus instantis Decembris, inter horas nonam, & undecimam, ante meridiem ejusdem diei, dictum Vicecomitem Stafford, extra Portam Turris no∣strae London, vobis tunc & ibidem deliberandum, prout per aliud breve Locumtenenti Turris nostrae London directum, precepimus, in custodiam vestram adtunc & ibidem recipiatis, & ipsum sic in custo∣dia vestra existentem, statim usque usualem locum super le Tower∣hill ducatis; Ac caput ipsius Willi. Vicecomitis Stafford, adtunc & ibidem amputari, ac a corpore suo omnino separari faciatis, aliquo Ju∣dicio, Lege, Ordinatione, seu Mandato praeantea habit', fact', ordinat', seu dat' in contrarium, non obstante: Et hoc (sub periculo incumben∣te) nullatenus omittatis; Teste meipso apud Westm. decimo octavo die Decembris, Anno regni nostri tricesimo secundo. BARKER. There were two Writs to the Sheriffs both alike verbatim, one delivered in London, the other in Middlesex. Whereupon the Sheriffs doubting whether that was a sufficient Authority for them to execute the Prisoner by Beheading only, the Sentence of Death being otherwise given, petitioned the Lords in Parliament to take the Premises into consideration, and to make such Order as should be agreeable to Right and Justice, as by the following Petition appears.
TO THE Right Honourable the LORDS TEMPORAL in PARLIAMENT Assembled; The Humble Petition of Slingsby Bethel Esq and Henry Cornish Esq Sheriffs of London and Middlesex. Sheweth, THAT your Petitioners have received a Writ under the Great Seal of England, Reciting, that Judgment had been given by your Lordships against William Viscount Stafford, for High Treason, and diverse other Crimes and Offences, upon the Impeachment of the Commons in Parliament Assembled, and commanding your Petitioners to cause the said Viscount Staffords Head to be Severed from his Body upon the Twenty Ninth Day of this instant December, notwithstand∣ing any Judgment, Law, Ordinance, or Command to the contrary. That your Petitioners have not as yet Received any Command from your Lordships for Executing the said Judgment. May it therefore please your Lordships to take the Premisses into Consideration, and to make such Order therein as shall be agreeable to Right and Justice. And your Petitioners shall always pray, &c. Upon which Petition the Lords did Declare as followeth:
Die Martis 21 Decembris. 1680. UPon Application from the Sheriffs of London and Middle∣sex, making some Scruples concerning the Execution of the late Lord Viscount Stafford, which were sound by this House to be unnecessary, This House do Declare, That the Kings Writ ought to be obeyed. The said Sheriffs likewise made Application to the House of Commons upon the aforesaid matter, who made the following Resolve. Die Jovis 23 Decembris. 1680. REsolved, &c. That this House is content that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex do Execute William late Viscount Stafford, by Severing his Head from his Body only. Wednesday December 29. 1680. ABout the hour of Ten in the Morning, the Sheriffs received the Prisoner, according to the Command of the Writs, from the Lieutenant of the Tower, and brought him upon the Scaffold, which was erected on Tower-Hill. The Prisoner took a Paper out of his pocket, and (putting off his Hat) read it as his Speech, (which the very same day, before Two of the Clock, came out in Print as his Speech) and he delivered divers Co∣pies signed by himself, to Mr. Sheriff Cornish, and other Gen∣tlemen about him. He then desired he might have liberty to pray in his own way; which being granted, he kneeled down by the Block, and taking out of his pocket another Paper, he read a Latin Prayer; which done, he gave the Paper to Mr. Sheriff Bethel; and then spoke to the People about the Scaffold
to this Effect: God bless you all, Gentlemen; God preserve His Majesty, He is agood a Prince as ever govern'd you; Obey Him as faithfully as I have done; and God bless you all, Gentlemen. Then he stripp'd himself to his Wastcoat, and after some ew short pri∣vate Discourses with his Friends, he laid down his Neck on the Block, and stretched himself. The Executioner being demanded by the Sheriffs whether he had any Sign; he answered, No. Then the Prisoner raised up his Head, and said; He had no Sign to give, but the Executioner might take his opportunity; and laid his Neck on the Block again. After which, in a short time, the Executioner did his Office, by Severing his Head from his Body, and holding up the Head in his Hand, carried it about the Scaf∣sold, shewing it to the People, and saying, Here is the Head of a Traitor. The Body was put into a Coffin, and conveyed to the Tower. FINIS.
