T3382AA 99832326 36798
The PROTESTANT Martyrs: OR, THE Bloody Assizes, Giving an Account of the Lives, Tryals, and Dying Speeches, of all those Eminent Protestants that suffered in the West of England, by the Sentence of that Bloody and cruel Judge Jefferies; being in all 251 Persons, besides what were Hang'd and destroyed in cold Blood. CONTAINING ALSO, The Life and Death of James Duke of Monmouth; His Birth and Education; his Actions both at Home and Abroad; his Un∣fortunate Adventure in the West; his Letter to King James; his Sentence, Execution and Dying-Words upon the Scaffold: With a true Copy of the Paper he left behind him. And many other curious Remarks worth the Reader's Observation. portraits of the executed LONDON: Printed by J. Bradford, at the Bible in Fetter-Lane,
The Protestant Martyrs Or, The Bloody Assizes, &c. THE most Illustrious Prince James Duke of Monmouth is not, for the Illustriousness of his Descent, inferiour unto any Prince in Europe, being descended from the Loins of the most Renowned Monarch, King Charles the Second; and also his Eldest Son: By which Royal Extraction he is descended from the incomparably wise and vertuous Prince, the Royal Martyr Charles the first and his Illustrious Consort Henrietta Maria de Bourbon Daughter of the Great King Henry the Fourth of France: From which two ancient and Illustri∣ous stocks, he was ingrafted into all the Royal Families of Europe, and hath concentred in his Princely Veins some of their Royal Blood; being thereby allied to all those great Personages that are of the most high and Illustrious Quality in Europe; viz. James Duke of York, William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, the Lady Madamoiselle Queen of Spain, and her Sister Madame de Valois, Daughter of the Duke of Oleance, and the late Princess Henrietta; also to Charles Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine: His Highness Rupert, Lewis the fourteenth King of France, now reigning; and many other Princes and Potentates of Europe; which is abundantly sufficient to demonstrate the Nobility of his Birth, and the Illustriousness of his Extraction. But to render him yet more Eminent, it pleased his Royal Father to dignifie him with severel Magnificient Titles, and to con∣fer upon him the several Great Offices following, vz. Duke of Monmouth and Bucclugh, Earl of Doucaster and Dalkeith. Lord Scott of Tindale, Whin∣chester and Askdale, Lord Great Chamberlain of Scotland, Lord Lieutenant of the East-Riding of Yorkshire, Governour of his Majesties Town and Cittadel of Kingstone upon Hull, Chief Justice in Eyre, of all his Majesties Forrests, Chaces, Parks and Warrens on the South-side of the River of Trent. Lord General of all his Majesties Land-forces, Captain of his Ma∣jesties Life-Guards of Horse, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Master of the Horse to his Majesty, one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council, and Knight of the most noble Oder of the Garter. All which Places he discharged with so much Honour and Fidelity, that the most inveterare and implacable of his Enemies not∣withstanding all their noise and clamour against him, were not able to pro∣duce one single instance wherein he acted otherwise. Besides his honour at home, he had likewise been highly honoured abroad, by having the Honour to command an Army in Flanders as Lieutenant-General under the French King, whose continual success and numerous Victories in Flan∣ders may be chiefly attributed to the Conduct and Valour of the Great Monmouth. He was born at Rotterdam, April 9. in the year 1649. in the very heat of our unnatural Broils. About the year 1656. his Mother was sent a Prisoner to the Tower of London, as appears by a Warrant from the Protector, July 12. 1656. to Barkstead, then Lieutenant of the Tower, whereby he discharged Mrs. Lucy Barlow from her Imprisonment. The Officers found a Grant when she was apprehended, signed Charlet R. by which she had an Anuity or yearly Pensiod of five thousand Livres granted
to her for her Life, with an Assurance to better the same when it should please God to restore him to his Kingdom, and it was subscribed by his Majesties command Edward Nicholas. During her abode about London, the Cavilears as the Loyalists were then call'd, carried themselves towards her with a profound Reverence and awful Respect, treating her  Person serving her on the Knee. An English Nurse was provided  and both for privacy, Lodged at the House of Mr. Claes Ghysen a Mer∣chant living at Schiedam about a Mile from Rotterdam, his Mother lodging at the same time at the House of Mrs. Harvey, Mother to the famous Doctor Harvey, and lived in abundance of Pomp and Splendor, having a Gentleman and other Servants to attend her. Some time after he had been there at Nurse, his Mother being desirous to see him, took her Gentleman with her, who at a place where she called by the Way to, to pay a Vi∣sit, desired to be excused for some small time, from attending on her, till he had dispatched some extraordinary Business which he pretended, pro∣mising to return again immediately, and having obtained her Permission, away he went; but like an ungrateful and treacherous Villain, repaired immediately to Mr. Ghysens at Schiedam, where the Princely Babe was nur∣sed, and pretending to be sent for that purpose to his Mother, carried him and the Nurse both away. His Lady waited his coming with abundance of patience, but at length Night drawing on, and no Gentleman appear∣ing, she began to suspect her self to be abused, whereupon a Gentleman offering to wait on her thither, she presently posted away, and being ar∣rived, and finding her Son gone, I want Words wherewith to express her grief, and surprize; she rent her Apparel, tore the Hair from off her Head, and with whole showers of Tears bewailed the greatness of her Loss, and the deplorableness of her Condition, yet suffered not Grief to prevail so far, as to make her uncapable of endeavouring to Right her self; whereupon she presently gave order for the providing Horses, which being ready, she presently posted away to Maesland-Sluce, riding all Night, she suspected that he was carried thither, in order to be transported to Eng∣land, there having been some inquiry made after him, she arrived there early in the Morning, just as the Sieur Newport, one of the Lords of the State, and the Maesland were taking Boat for the Hague, those that were with her, advised her to make her Application to him as the likelieft Per∣son to assist her, telling her that he could English, whereupon she addressed her self to him in that Languish, discovering to him the Condition of her self and Son, and the Relation they stood in to the King of England, with the Circumstances of his stealing away, and pulling out a handful of Gold, If Money will do it, said she, I will spare for no Charges; imploring his help and assistance for the recovery of that Royal Treasure; this occasioned a∣bundance of People flocking about them to learn the occasion of her Ad∣dress, wherefore he advised her to go into some House and make no noise about it, lest she thereby prevent the accomplishing her desire, which she did, and he presently ordered a general search to be made, and that no Ships should go off till they were searched, notwithstanding which they could make no discovery of him till about 10 or 12 days after, when he was found at Loesdymen, where he had been all that time concealed, and having to her inexpressible Joy recovered him, she took a stately House at Boscal, where they resided for some time. Upon his Majesties going for Scotland, in June 1650. he was committed by his Majesty to the care of his Illustrious Grandmother, who lived then
at the Par-le-Roy in Paris, and was by her committed to the care of one Goff belonging to her Majesty, charging him to provide a good careful Nurse for him, which he did accordingly, commending to her Majesty one Mrs. Miles▪ a Gentlewoman that belonged likewise to her Majesty. The Beauty and Make of his Person, and the Majesty of his Port and Cer∣riage, even whilst an Infant, plainly discover'd the Greatness of his Birth, and the largeness of his Soul, and every succeeding Year of his Childhood, and afforded new Promises and Hopes that he would prove an Illustrious Branch of growing Honour; making an Early Discovery even at that tender Age, not only of a Great and Princely Spirit but also of an extraordinary Goodness and Sweetness of Nature, seeming to have that even and well-biassed Temper of Mind radicated in his very Nature, which other Men with extra∣ordinary Industry and help of Philosophy and Religion hardly acquire, when arrived at Years of Maturity. Nor were his Inclinations to Vertue more admirable than the desire he had to learn useful and solid Arts, his Genius rendring the Study and Exercises thereof, far more acceptable to him, than the Vanity of the most exquisite Divertisements. Wherefore when he was about 8 or 9 Years of Age, he was taken from Goff, and committed to the Care of Mr. Ross, a Gentleman, who after His Majesty's Restauration, went Secretary to the Honourable Henry Coventry Esquire, (in his Embassy to Sweden) and sent to Julen, a Place a∣bout 7 Leagues from Paris, there to be accommodated with Learning, and fitted for those great Employments which God and Nature as well as His Ma∣jesty had designed him for, in the future part of his Life. He went there by the Name of Mr. Crossts Soon after His Majesty's happy Restauration▪ he commanded Mr. Ross to turn away all his former Servants, and entertain new ones more suitable to his Quality; and to demonstrate his Paternal Love, and to render his own Happiness the more compleat, ordered him to be brought to Court, that so he might always have him in his Royal Presence; whereupon he was provided with Gentlemen and Pages to wait on him, together with a rich Coach and 6 stately Horses, a Coach-man, Postillion, Groom, and Foot-men in good Li∣veries, wherewith he set forward towards England. About July, 1662. he came to Calis, where he imbarked for England; he Landed at Dover from whence he came by Land to London, and not finding his Majesty there, he presently repaired to Hampton-Court, where His Mejesty then resided, by whom he was received and imbraced with all the Demonstra∣tions of Joy imaginable; and about the middle of August, he came with the Court to White-Hall, where His Majesty was pleased to appoint him his Lodg∣ings in the Privy Gallery. Soon after His Majesty was pleased to make him a Peer of this Realm, by Creating him Duke of Arkeny, which Title was after changed for that of Monmouth; and the Cap and Robes being presented to him, in the ensuing Parliament he took his Seat in the House of Peers. In April, 1663. he was with the usual Solemnity installed Knight of the Garter at Windsor. This was followed by that which made his Happiness yet more full and com∣pleat, His Majesty being pleased to consent to a Contract of Marriage be∣tween his Grace and the only surviving Child, and sole Heir of the late Earl of Bucclugh, a Lady reputed to be the greatest Fortune, and to have the larg∣est Dowery in the Three Kingdoms, her incomparable Vertues, and surpri∣sing Beauty, being no way inferior to (but rather exceeding) her Portion;
her Mother, the Countess of Wembs, being consulted about the Match, ha∣ving received satisfaction from His Majesty in whatsoever she proposed, she willingly gave her Consent, and the Marriage was speedily Celebrated with extraordinary Pomp and Splendor, to the great Content of His Majesty, the Queen's Mother, and the whole Court. Soon after this, upon the Resignation of the Lord Brandon Gerard, his Fa∣ther King Charles, created him Captain of his Life-Guard, and admitted one of his Majesty's most Honourable Privy-Council. In the Year 1672. the French King Lewis XIVth. made great Preparations for a War against the Datch, in which King Charles engaging, the Duke was sent to Command the English, whose Gallantry and Bravery was sufficiently admir'd by all present, where was the French King himself. He was attended by a numerous Train of English Volunteer Gentlemen. With this vast Army the French sat down before Orsoy and Rhinberg, which presently surrender'd: From thence they march'd to Wisel, accounted an Invincible City, which after 4 Days Siege was deliver'd up; also Duysbury surrender'd, without venturing the Brunt of a Storm. This Success of the Frenh so terrify'd the Hollanders, that they a∣bandon'd their Towns as fast as the Enemy approach'd to take Possession of them; nay, and of some they invite them to be Masters; for the City Ʋ∣trecht, with the whole Province, in which were Nine Fine Cities besides Ʋ∣trecht it self, receiv'd a French Garrison: Zutphen and Arnheim follow'd the same Fate; and such a rapid Progress was made by the Arms of France, that by the 28th of June, they were advanc'd within 4 Leagues of Rotterdam, and the same distance from Amsterdam. Never was any State nearer Ruin than that of Holland at this time; and where the Policy of England could be to assist them in such an Expedition, has I believe been dearly experienc'd since; for it was no small Assistance they receiv'd from the Succours under the D. of Monmouth, which will more particularly appear in another Campaign; for this being ended, the Duke took his Leave of the French King, who highly extoll'd his Conduct and Personal Bravery, and passing through Flanders, ar∣riv'd safely in England, and was joyfully receiv'd, especially at Court; but he was in solemn manner welcom'd home by his Dutchess, who was soon after, August 26h. happily brought to Bed of a Son, which was Christened Charles, and died soon after. About November following, having taken Leave of the King, he set out a∣gain for France, where he was received in a very splendid manner by the French King and the Nobility; and being arriv'd at Calais, Dec. 18th. he sent an Express to his Majesty, to acquaint him that the Prince of Orange was on the 15th sat down with his Army before Char eroy, and that there was great Expectation in those Parts, what would be the Issue of that Enterprize. The Duke was highly welcom'd in all the Places through which he pass'd, and return'd to England again before the opening of the Campaign; at what time he attended the King of France into the Field, and is remarkably distin∣guish'd in History for his Conduct and Valour at the Siege of Maestrich, and came into England afterward with great Applause. But the next Year the Scale turn'd, and the Duke (as General of his Father's Forces) commanded a∣gainst the French in Conjunction with the Dutch, always behaving himself with singular Conduct and Personal Bravery. What happen'd otherwise concern∣ing him, is hardly Material. He grew into Love and Favour with the People, which appear'd in the Business of the Walisea Race, for which he was taken in∣to Custody; he was also Banish'd; but we shall pass over all these things, and come nearer to the Design in hand, which is the Business of the West, in which we shall comprehend his Death.
King James IId. being ascended the Throne, and the Duke of Monmouth then abroad, and being sufficiently stunn'd with the unexpected News of the Death of King Charles, having enter'd into a League with the Earl of Ar∣gyle, putting great Confidence in his own Courage, and a vain Assurance of a Popular Affection and Assistance, bore up himself against all pretended Dif∣ficulties, and with three small Ships, and between Threescore and Fourscore Men, landed about the 12th of June at Lyme in the West of England, while the Parliament was sitting: A Romantick kind of Invasion, and scarce paral∣lel'd in History; yet with this handful of Men, and afterward with the com∣mon People that join'd him, without Arms, Provisions, Martial Discipline, Money, or any one place to retire to in case of Accidents, did this Brave un∣fortunate Man bid fair for a Crown. He landed, as was said before, at Lyme in Dorsetshire, where he increas'd his Number to One hundred and Fifty, from thence he march'd to Taunton, where he was Proclaim'd King, and Men flock'd to him, and Listed under him as fast, as if he had already been Master of the whole Country. After staying there a while, he marched in some kind of Order to Bridgwater, still increasing his Numbers; from thence to Bath, where he was denied Entrance, the Train'd-Bands still flying two Days March before him, by Order from the Court, to give pretence to the King to raise more Forces. At Philips Norton, by a Surprize or Ambush, he cut off the best part of a Troop of Horse, the Duke of Grafton narrowly escaping with his Life. With this Success he marched within 2 Miles of Bristol, where a Consult being held, he was advised not to enter that City, but to retreat back to Bridgwater; which was the first thing that dishearten'd his Party, and hinder'd many from joining with him: Whereas if he had entred Bri∣stol, where there was no Force to oppose him but the Train'd-Bands, and the generality of them for him, not only in their Hearts, but in open Discourses and drinking his Health, he might have furnish'd himself with Men, Arms and Money, to have enabl'd him to march into Gloucestershire among the Clo∣thiers, where great Numbers, and some of Quality, waited to join him, and by this means might have kept up the War till he had shak'd King James's Throne, if not overturn'd it. In this time the King had sent an Army into the West against Monmouth, under the Command of the Earl of Feversham as General, who incamp'd up∣on Sedgmore, not far from Bridgwater, where the Duke of Monmouth and his Party were Quarter'd; and the Duke seeing his Men daily Desert in great Numbers, it was agreed to make one Push for all, and to that purpose issu'd out of Bridgwater by Night; but his Guide mistaking his way in the Dark, the Duke's Ill Fate lead him upon a Battallion of Dumbarton's Regiment plac'd in his way; who encountering him, alarm'd King James's whole Army, with whom engaging he was Routed; or in all probability he had surpriz'd the King's Army in their Camp, and perhaps at that single Blow decided the For∣tune of England for once. Yet however, tho' he came too soon, before Mat∣ters were Ripe, by King James's setting up for the open Establishment of Popery and Arbitrary Power, yet he may be said to have pav'd the Way for a Nobler Change in the Throne, by leaving King James at Liberty through this success, to act without Controul, which at length made him Abdicate the Go∣vernment. Monmouth paid the Price of his Rebellion with his Blood, being on the 15th of July, 1685. Beheaded on Tower-Hill, by vertue of an Attain∣der pass'd upon him in Parliament soon after his Landing.
An Account of what passed at the Execution of the late Duke of Monmouth, on Wednesday the 15th. of July, 1685. on Tow∣er-Hill. THE Duke of Monmouth came from the Tower to the Scaffold, attended by the Bishop of Ely, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Tenison, and Dr. Hooper; which four the King sent him, as his Assistants, to prepare him for Death: The Duke himself entreated all four of them to accompany him a the Place of Execution, and to cantinue with him to the last. The two Bi∣shops going in the Lieutenant's Coach with him to the Bars, made Seasonable and Devont Applications to him all the way; and one of them desired him not to be surprized, if they to the very last upon the Scaffold, renewed those Exhortations to a particular Repentance, which they had so often repeated before. At his first coming upon the Scaffold, he looked for the Executioner; and seeing him, said, Is this the Man to do the Business? Do your Work well. Then the Duke of Monmouth began to speak, some one or other of the As∣sistants during the whole time, applying themselves to him. Monmouth. I shall say but very little; I come to die; I die a Protestant of the Church of England. Assistants. My Lord, if you be of the Church of England, you must ac∣knowledge the Doctrine of Non-Resistance to be true. Mon. If I acknowledge the Doctrine of the Church of England in general, that includes all. Assist. Sir, it is fit to own that Doctrine particularly, which respects your Case. Here he was much urged about that Doctrine of Non-resistance; but he repeated in effect his first Answer. Then he began as if he was about to make a premeditated Speech, in this manner. Mon. I have had a Scandal raised upon me about a Woman, a Lady of Ver∣tue and Honour. I will name her; the Lady Henrietta Wentworth. I de∣clare, That she is a very Vertuous and Godly Woman. I have committed no Sin with her; and that which hath passed betwixt us, was very Honest and Innocent in the sight of God. Assist. In your Opiuion, perhaps, Sir, as you have been often told; (i. e. in the Tower) but this is not fit Discourse in this Place. Mr. Sheriff Gostlin. Sir, were you ever Married to her? Mon. This is not a time to Answer that Question. Sher. Gostlin. Sir, I hoped to have heard of your Repentance for the Trea∣son and Bloodshed which hath been committed. Mon. I die very Penitent. Assist. My Lord, it is fit to be particular; and considering the Publick Evil you have done, you ought to do as much Good now as possibly you can, by a Publick Acknowledgment. Mon. What I have thought fit to say of Publick Affairs, is in a Paper which I have Signed; I refer to my Paper. Assist. My Lord, there is nothing in that Paper about Resistance; and you ought to be particular in your Repentance, and to have it well grounded. God give you True Repentance. Mon. I die very Penitent, and die with great Chearfulness, for I know I shall go to God.
Assist. My Lord, you must go to God in his own way. Sir, be sure you be truly Penitent, and ask Forgiveness of God, for the many you have wronged. Mon. I am sorry for every one I have wronged, I forgive every Body; I have had many Enemies, I forgive them all. Assist. Sir, your Acknow∣ledgment ought to be particular. Mon. I am to die; pray, my Lord—I refer to my Paper. Assist. They are but a few Words that we desire: We only desire an Answer to this Point. Mon. I can Bless God, that he hath given me so much Grace, that for these two Years last past, I have had a Life unlike to my former Course, and in which I have been happy. Assist. Sir, was there no Ill in these two Years? In these Years, these great Evils have happened; and the giving Publick Satisfaction is a necessary part of Repentance; be pleased to own a Detestation of your REBELLION. Mon. I beg your Lordship that you would stick to my Paper. Assist. My Lord, as I said before, there is nothing in your Paper about the Doctrine of Non-resistance, Mon. I Repent of all things that a true Christian ought to Repent of. I am to die; pray, my Lord— Assist. Then, my Lord, we can only recommend you to the Mercy of God; but we cannot Pray with that Chearfulness and Encouragement, as we should if you had made a particular Acknowledgment. Mon. God be praised, I have Encouragement enough in my self; I die with a clear Conscience, I have wronged no Man. Assist. How, Sir, no Man! Have you not been Guilty of Invasion, and of much Blood, which hath been shed, and it may be, of the Loss of many Souls that followed you? You must needs have wronged a great many. Mon. I do, Sir, own that, and am sorry for it. Ass. Give it the true Name, Sir, and call it Rebellion. Mon. What Name you please, Sir; I am sorry for Invading the Kingdom, and for the Blood that has been shed, and for the Souls which may have been lost by my means; I am sorry it ever happened. Mr. Sher. Vandeput. He says, he is sorry for Invading the Kingdom. Ass. We have nothing to add, but to renew the frequent Exhortations we have made to you, to give some Satisfaction for the Publick Injuries to the Kingdom. There have been a great many Lives lost by this Resistance of your Lawful Prince. Mon. What I have done, has been very ill; and I wish with all my Heart it had never been: I never was a Man that delighted in Blood; I was very far from it; I was as cautious in this as any Man was; the Almighty God knows how I now die, with all the Joyfulness in the World. Ass. God grant you may, Sir; God give you true Repentance. Mon. If I had not True Repen∣tance, I shonld not so easily have been without the sear of Dying: I shall die like a Lamb. Ass. Much may come from Natural Courage. Mon. I do not attribute it to my own Nature, for I am fearful as other Men are; but I have now no fear, as you may see by my Face; but there is something within me that does it, for I am sure I shall go to God. Ass. My Lord, be sure upon good Grounds; do you Repent you of all your Sins, known, or unknown; confessed, or not confessed; of all the Sins which might proceed from Error in Judgment? Mon. In general for all, I do with all my Soul. Ass. God Almighty of his Infinite Mercy forgive you. Here are great Numbers of Spectators, here are the Sheriffs, they represent the Great City, and in speaking to them, you speak to the Great City; make some Satisfaction by owning your Crime be∣ore them—He was exhorted to Pray for the King; and was asked,
whether he did not desire to send some Dutiful Message to His Majesty, and to recommend his Wife and Children to His Maiesty's Favour. Mon. What harm have they done? Do it if you please: I pray for him, and for all Men. Ass. (At his Undressing) My Lord, you have been bred a Soldier; you will do a generous Christian thing, if you please to speak to the Soldiers, and say, That here you stand a sad Example of Rebellion, and en reat them and the People to be Loyal and Obedient to the King. Mon. I have said, I will make no Speeches; I will make no Speeches; I am come to die. Ass. My Lord, Ten Words will be enough. M. (Then calling his Ser∣vant, and giving him something like a Tooth-pick Case) Here, said he, give this to the Person to whom you are to deliver the other things. (To the Executioner:) Here are six Guinea's for you; pray do your Business well: Don't serve me as you did my Lord Russel. I have heard, you struck him three or four times. Here (to his Servant) take these remaining Guinea's, and give them to him if he does his Work well. Exec. I hope I shall. Mon. If you strike me twice, I cannot promise you, not to stir. During his Undressing, and standing towards the Block, were used divers Ejaculations, and much of the 51st Psalm, and particularly, Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, O God, Thou God, &c. Then he lay down; and soon after he raised himself upon his Elbow, and said to the Executioner, Prithee let me feel the Ax. He felt the Edge, and said, I fear it is not sharp enough. Execut. It is sharp enough, and heavy enough. Then he lay down again. During this space, many pious Ejaculatious were used by those who assisted him, with great Fervency. God accept your Repen∣tance, God accept your Repentance, God accept your imperfect Repentance; My Lord, God accept your Repentance; God Almighty shew his Omnipotent Mercy up on you: Father, into thy Hands we commend his Spirit, &c. Lord Jesus receive his Soul. A Brief Abstract of the Paper left behind him. I Repent in general of all my Sins, and am more particularly concern'd for what Blood hath been spilt on my Account, and the rather, seeing the issue is such as I sear will prove of Fa∣tal Consequence to the Reformed Protestant Religion. Instead of being counted Factious and Rebellious, the very opposing of Popery and Arbitrary Power, now arising and appearing plain enough, would sufficiently have protected my Cause; besides, several other most heinous and notorious Crimes (such as the unhappy Fate of the Earl of Essex, and my Father of ever bles∣sed Memory, and others now covered over with Jesuitical Policy) should have been detected and avenged. I have lived, and shall now die in the Faith of this, That God will work a Deli∣verance for his People; and then will be discovered the great, and horrid, and scarcely to be parallell'd Villanies our Enemies have heen guilty of; but now you see my Case is desperate, yet know, that I die a Martyr for the People, and shall rather pity the State, that their false and covetous Minds have brought themselves and me to, than discover who are the Persons concerned in my Overthrow; and I heartily forgive all that have wronged me, even those that have been Instrumental in my Fall, earnestly praying for their Souls. And I hope King James will shew himself to be of his Brother's Blood, and extend his Mercy to my Children, even as he was wont to his greatest Enemies, they being not capable to Act, and therefore not conscious of any Offence against the Government. A Copy of the Duke of Monmouth's LETTER to the King, Dated from Ringwood the 8th of July, 1685. YOUR Majesty may think, it is the Misfortune I now lie under, makes me make this Ap∣plication to you; but I do assure your Majesty it is the Remorse I now have in me, of the Wrongs I have done you in several things, and now, in taking up Arms against you. For my taking up Arms, it never was in my Thoughts since the King died. The Prince and Princess of Orange will be Witness for me, of the Assurance I gave them, That I would never stir a∣gainst
you; but my Misfortune was such, as to meet with some Horrid People, that made me believe things of your Majesty, and gave me so many false Arguments, that I was fully led a∣way, to believe▪ That it was a Shame and a Sin before God not to do it. But, Sir, I will not trouble your Majesty at present with many things that I could say for my self, that I am sure would move your Compassion; the chief end of this Letter, being only to beg of you, That I may have that Happiness, as to speak to your Majesty: For I have that to say to you, Sir, that I hope may give you a long and happy Reign. I am sure, Sir, when you hear me, you will be convinced of the Zeal I have for your Preservation, and how heartily I repent of what I have done. I can say no more to your Majesty now, being this Letter must be seen by those that keep me. Therefore, Sir, I shall make an end, in begging of your Majesty to believe so well of me, That I would rather die a thousand Deaths, than excuse any thing I have done, if I did not really think my self the most in the wrong, that ever any Man was, and had not from the bottom of my Heart an abhorrence for those that put him upon it, and for the Action it self. I hope, Sir, God Almighty will strike your Heart with Mercy and Compassion for me, as he has done mine with the Abhorrence of what I have done. Therefore I hope, Sir, I may live to shew you how Zealous I shall ever be for your Service; and could I say but one Word in this Letter, you would be convinced of it; but it is of that Consequence, That I dare not do it. Therefore, Sir, I do beg of you once more, to let me speak to you, for then you will be convinced how much I shall ever be Your Majesty's most Humble and Dutiful. MONMOƲTH. There was also a short Paper Printed at that time with his Speech wherein he declares, That his Father had told him in his Life-time, that he was never Married lo his Mother; which he hop'd would be a means for King James to use his Children with the more tenderness. We shall now proceed to give an Account of the Persons that suffer'd for the sime Cause, some of the more principal of which (whose Essigies are hereunto affix'd) 'tis thought worth the while to Treat distinctly of; giving an Exact List of the other, and the Places where they suf∣fer'd; and First, of those remarkable Brothers, Mr. Benjamin, and Mr. William Hewling; the Elder was a Captain of Horse, and the Younger a Lieutenant of Foot in the Duke of Mon∣mouth's Service: They got on Ship-board after the Defeat at Sedgmore, but were Cast away on the Coast again, and so taken: The last, William, was Executed at Lyme, where just be∣fore he went to die, he said to one of his Fellow-Sufferers, Here is a sweet Promise for us; I will not leave you comfortless. I will come unto you. One taking Leave of him, he said, Farewel till we meet in Heaven; presently I shall be with Christ, O! I would not change Conditions with any that stay behind for ten thousand Worlds: Pray remember my Dear Love to my Brother and Sister, and tell them I desire they would comfort themselves that I am gone to Christ, and we shall quickly meet at the Glorious Mount Sion above. Afterwards he Prayed for near half an Hour with great Fervency, Blessing God earnestly for the Blood of Jesus Christ, Praying for the Peace of the Church of God, and of these Nations in particular. When he was going out of the World, with a Joyful Countenance he said, Oh! now my Joy and Comfort is, that I have a Christ to go to; and so gently resign'd his Spirit to God the 12th of Sept. 1685. As to the Elder Brother, when he had receiv'd the News of his Brother's Death, and that he died with so much Comfort and Joy, he replied, We have no cause to fear Death, if the Pre∣sence of God be with us; and added, Perhaps my Friends may think this Summer the saddest Time of my Life; but, I Bless God, it has been the sweetest and most happy time of all. Speaking of the Disappointment of their Expectations in the Work they had undertaken, he said, With re∣ference to the Glory of God, the Prosperity of the Gospel, and the Delivery of the People of God, We have great cause to lament it, but for that outward Prosperity that have attended it, it's but of small Moment, and Death would have ended i. The Day of his Execution, with others, be∣ing come, it is remarkable that they sat in the Sledge near half an Hour before the Officers could make the Horses draw: at which they were greatly enrag'd, there being no visible Ob∣struction from either Weight or Way; but at last the Mayor and Sheriffs hawl'd them forward themselves, Baalam like, driving the Horses. Being come to the Place of Execution, and ha∣ving embrac'd his Fellow-Sufferers, he desir'd of the Sheriff that he might Pray particularly, but he could not grant it; only ask'd him, if he would Pray for the King? He answer'd, I Pray for all Men. He then desir'd he might sing a Psalm; but the Sheriff told him, it must be with the Halters about their Necks: To which he replied, With all his Heart; and then Sung with such Heavealy Joy, that many present said, it both broke and rejoyc'd their Hearts. In the midst of which he clos'd his Eyes on a vain World Sept. 30th. 1685. The next was one William Jenkin, Condemn'd at the Bloody Assize at Dorchester, Sept. the 29th, at Night. After he had heard he must die the next Day, he was exceedingly compos'd and chearful, expressing his Satisfaction in the Will of God. He us'd many Excellent Speeches be∣fore, and at his Death: Among the rest he said, This manner of Death hath been the most ter∣rible thing in the World to my Thoughts, but I bess God, now am I neither afraid nor asham'd to die. When the Sheriff came to perform his Execution, he was still as Compo'd as ever,
and had the same Chearfulness and Serenity of Mind in taking Leave of his Friends; and like∣wise in the Sledge; insomuch that some of his Friends, who had before Censur'd him, thinking he had been unmindful of his Death, by being so Chearful, now profess'd they were rather A∣stonish'd to see so young a Man leave the World, and go through Death as he did. We come now to the most moving Scene of this horrid and barbarous Tragedy, in the Death of the Lady Lisle, above 80 Years of Age, for only Corresponding with one Nelthrope, and Dr. Hicks; for which she was Beheaded at Winchester. Her Speech made at her Execution is as follows. The Last Speech of the Lady Alicia Lisle. GEntlemen, Friends and Neighbours, it may be expected that I should say something at my Death; and in order thereunto, I shall acquaint you, That my Birth and Education was both near this Place, and that my Parents instructed me in the Fear of God, and I now die of the Re∣formed Protestant Religion; That if ever Popery should return into this Nation, it would be a very great and severe Judgment; That I die in Expectation of the Pardon of all my Sins, and of Acceptance with God the Father, by the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ, he being the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes: I thank God, through Jesus Christ, that I do depart unto the Blood of Sprinkling, which speaketh better things than that of Abel; God havng made this Chastisement an Ordinance to my Soul. I did once as little expect to come to this Place on this Occasion, as any Person in this Place, or Nation; therefore let all learn not to be High-minded, but fear. The Lord is a Soveraign, and will take what way he sees best to glorifie himself in, and by his poor Creatures; and I do humbly desire to submit to his Will, pray∣ing to him, That I may possess my Soul in Patience. The Crime that was laid to my Charge, was for Entertaining a Nonconformist Minister and others i my House; the said Minister being sworn to have been in the late Duke of Monmouth's Army; but I have been told, That if I had deied them, it would not at all have affected me; I have no Excuse but Surprize and Fear, which I be∣lieve my Jury must make use of to excuse their Verdict to the World. I have been also told, That the Court did use to be of Counsel for the Prisoner; but instead of Advice, I had Evidence a∣gainst me from thence; which though it were only by hear-say, might possibly affect my Jury; my Defence being but such, as might be expected from a weak Woman; but such as it was, I did not bear it repeated again to the Jury; which, as I have been informed, is usual in such Cses. However, I forgive all the World, and therein all those that have done me wrong; and in ti∣cular, I forgive Colonel Penruddock, although he told me, that he could have taken these Men be∣fore they cme to my House. And I do likewise forgive him, who desired to be taken away from the Grand Jury to the Petty Jury, that he might be the more nearly concerned in my Death. As to what may be objected in reference to my Conviction, that I gave it under my Hand, that I had Discoursed with Nelthrop; that could be no Evidence against me, being after my Conviction and Sentence. I do acknowledge His Majesty's Favour, in Revoking my Sentence; I pray God to preserve him, that he may long Reign in Mercy, as well as Justice, and that he may Reign in Peace; and that the Protestant Religion may flourish under him. I also return Thanks to Gd and the Reverend Clergy, that assisted me in my Imprisonment. ALICIA LISLE. One Mrs. Graunt was the next that suffered in this Cause; it was for harbouring one Burton, his Wife and Family, for which she was Sentenced to be Burnt, and was accordingly so Executed on the 23d of October, 1685. at which time she left her Murderers the following Memorial. Mrs. Graunt's Speech, written the Day before her Sufferings. NOT knowing whether I should be suffered or able, because of Weaknesses that are upon me through my hard and close Imprisonment, to speak at the Place of Execution; I writ these few Lines to signifie, That I am well reconciled to the Way of my God towards me, though it be in Ways I looked not for; and by terrible Things, yet in Righteousness; ha∣ving given me Life, he ought to have the disposing of it, when and how he pleases to call for it; and I desire to offer up my All to him, it being but my reasonable Service; and also the first Terms that Jesus Christ offers, that he that will be his Disciple, must forsake all and follow him; and therefore let none think hard, or be discouraged at what hath happened unto me; for he doth nothing without Cause, in all he hath done to us, he being holy in all his Ways, and righteous in all his Works; and 'tis but my Lot in common with poor desolate Sion at this Day. Neither do I find in my Heart the least Regret for what I have done in the Service of my Lord and Master Jesus Christ, in succouring and securing any of his poor Sufferers, that have shewed Favour in his righteous Cause: Which Cause, though now it be fallen and trampled upon, as if it had not been anointed, yet it shall revive, and God will plead it at another Rate than ever he hath done yet, and reckon with all its Opposers and
malicious Haters; and therefore let all that love and fear him, not omit the least Duty that comes to Hand, or lies before them, knowing that now it hath need of them, and expects they shall serve him. And I desire to bless his holy Name, that he hath made me useful in my Generation to the Comfort and Relief of many Desolate Ones, and the Blessing of those that are ready to perish has come upon me, and being helpt to make the Heart of the Widow to sing. And I bless his holy Name, that in all this, together with what I was charged with, I can approve my Heart to him, that I have done his Will; tho' it does cross Man's Will, and the Scriptures that satisfie me are, Isa. 16. 4. Hide the Outcasts, bexray not him that wan∣dereth. And Obad. 13, 14. Thou shouldst not have given up those of his that escape in the Day of his Distress. But Man says, You shall give them up, or you shall dye for it. Now who to obey, judge ye. So that I have Cause to rejoyce and be exceeding glad, in that I suffer for Righteousness sake, and that I am accounted worthy to suffer for Well doing, and that God has accepted any Service from me, which has been done in Sincerity, tho' mixed with mani∣fold Infirmities, which he hath been pleased for Christ's sake to cover and forgive. And now as concerning my Fact, as it is called, alas it was but a little one, and might well become a Prince to forgive; but he that sh ws no Mercy, shall find none: And I may say of it in the Language of Jonathan, I did but taste a little Honey, and lo I must die for it. I dd but re∣lieve an unworthy, poor, distressed Family, and lo I must dye for it. Well, I desire in the Lamb-like Gospel-Spirit to forgive all that are concerned, and to say, Lord, lay it not their Charge; but I fear he will not: Nay, I believe when he comes to make Inquisition for Blood, it will be found at the Door of the furious Judge; who, because I could not remember Things through my Dauntedness at Burton's Wife's and Daughter's Vileness and my Igno∣rance, took Advantage thereat, and would not hear me, when I had called to mind that which I am sure would have invalidated their Evidence; tho' he granted something of the same Nature to another, yet denyed it to me. My Blood will also be found at the Door of the un∣righteous Jury, who found me Guilty upon the single Oath of an out-lawed Man; for there was none but his Oath about the Money, who is no legal Witness, though he be pardoned, his Out-lawry cannot be recalled; and also the Law requires two Witnesses in point of Life: And then about my going with him to the Place mentioned, 'twas by his own Words, before he was Out-lawed, for 'twas two Months after his absconding; and tho' in a Proclamation, yet not High Treason, as I have heard; so that I am clearly murdered by you. And also Bloody Mr. A. who has so insatiably hunted after my Life; and though it is no Profit tlo him, through the ill Will he bore me, left no Stone unturned, as I have ground to believe, till he brought it to this; and shewed favour to Burton, who ought to have dyed for his own Fault, and not bought his Life with mine; and Capt. R. who is cruel and severe to all under my Circumstances, and did at that time, without all Mercy or Pity, hasten my Sentence, and held up my Hand, that it might be given, all which, together with the Great One of all, by whose Power all these, and a Multitude more of Cruelties are done, I do heartily and freely forgive, as against me; but as it is done in an implacable Mind agaigst the Lord Christ, and his righteous Cause and Followers, I leave it to him who is the Avenger of all such Wrongs, who will tread upon Princes as upon Mortar, and be terrible to the Kings of the Earth: And know this also, that though ye are seemingly fixt, and because of the Power in your Hand, are writing out your Violence, and dealing with a despightul Hand, because of the old and new Hatrred; by impovering and every way distressing those you have got under you; yet unless you can secure Jesus Christ, and all his Holy Angels, you shall never do your Business, nor your Hands accomplish your Enterprizes; for he will be upon you e'er you are aware; and therefore, O that you would be wise, instructect and learn, is the Desire of her that finds no Mercy from you, Elizabeth Graunt. The Earl of Argyle. WE must now take a Step over into Scotland, that poor Country, which has been harass'd and tired for these many Years, to render them perfect Slaves, that they might help to enslave England, to prevent which, and secure the Protestant Religion, which 'twas grown impossible to do, but by Arms; this good Lord embarkt from Holland about the same Time with the Duke, and arrived in Scotland with what Forces he could make; to which were ad∣ded some others who joined him; which after several Marches and Counter-marches, were at length led into a Boggy sort of a Place, on Pretence, or with Intention to bring him off from the other Army then upon the Heels of 'em, where they lost one another, dispersed and shifted for themselves; the Earl being taken by a Country-man, and brought to Edinburgh, where he suffered for his former unpardondable Crime—requiring Care should be taken of the Pro∣testant Religion, and explaining his taking the Test conformable thereto; for the Legality of which he ha the Hands of the most eminent Lawyers about the City. He suffered at Edin∣burgh the 30th of June, 1685. His Speech has a great deal of Piety and Religion, nor will it be any Disgrace to say, 'twas more like a Sermon.—'Tis as follows.
The Earl of Argyle's last Speech, June 30. 1685. JOB tells us, Man that is born of a Woman, is of few Days, and full of Trouble; and I am a clear instance of it. I shall not say thing of my Sentence, or Escape about three years and a half ago; nor of my Return, lest I may thereby give Offence, or be too tedious: Only be∣ing to end my Days in your Presence, I shall, as some of my last Words, assert the Truth of the Matter of Fact, and the Sincerity of my Intentions, and Professions that are published. That which I intend mainly now to say, is, To express my humble, and (I thank God) chear∣ful Submission to his Divine Will; and my Willingness to forgive all Men, even my Enemies; and I am heartily well satified there is no more Blood spilt, and I shall wish the Stream may stop at me: And that (if it please God) as to Zerubbabel, Zech. 4. 6. Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts. I know Afflictions spring not out of the Dust: God did wonderfully deliver and provide for me, and has now by his special Providence brought me to this Place; and I hope none will either insult or stumble at it, seeing they ought not; for God Almighty does all Things well, for Good and holy Ends, tho' we not always un∣derstand it. Love and Hatred is not known by what is before us, Eccles. 9. 1. & 8. 11, 12, 13. Afflictions are not only foretold, but promised to Christians; and are not only tolerable, but desirable. We ought to have a deep Reverence and Fear of God's Displeasure; but withal, a Hope and Dependance on him for a blessed Issue, in Compliance with his Will; for God chastens his own, to refine them, and not to ruin them, whatever the World may think, Heb. 12. 3. to 12. Prev. 3. 11, 12. Mat. 10. 18. to 40. Mat. 16. 24. to 28. We are to imitate our Saviour in his Sufferings, as x Pet. 2. 23. and 1 Pet. 16. to 20. We are neither to despise our Afflictions, nor to faint under them; both are Extreams. We are not to suffer our Spirits to be exasperated against the Instruments of our Trouble; for the same Affliction may be an Effect of their Passion, and yet sent to God to punish us for our Sin: Though 'tis a Comfort when we may say to them with David, Psal. 59. 3. Not for my Transgressio, nor for my Sin, O Lord. Nor are we, by fraudulent, pusillanimous Compliances in wicked Courses, to bring Sin upon our selves: Faint Hearts are ordinary false Hearts; chusing Sin rather than Suffer∣ings, and a short Life with eternal Death, before temporal Death and a Crown of Glory. Such seeking to save a little, loses all; and God readily hardens them to proceed to their own De∣struction. How many, like Hazael, 2 Kings 8. 13. run to Excesses they never thought they were capable of! Let Rulers and others read seriously, and weigh Prov. 1. 10. to 20. 2 Chr. 28. 6. to 17. Prov. 24. 11, 12. and Prov. 28. 10. and avoid what is bad, and follow what is good. For me, I hope by God's Strength to join with Job, Chap. 13. 15. and the Psalmist, Psal. 22. 4. and 16. 7. and shall pray, as Psal. 74. 19. to 24. and Psal. 122. 6. to 9. and Luke 1. 74. 75. and shall hope, as Psal. 94. 14, 15. I do freely forgive all that directly or indirectly have been the Cause of my being brought to this Place, first or last; and I pray God forgive them. I pray God send Truth and Peace in these Three Kingdoms; and continue and increase the Glorious Light of the Gospel, and restrain the Spirit of Prophanity, Atheism, Supersti∣tion, Popery and Persecution, and restore all that have back slidden from the Purity of their Life or Principles; and bless his whole People with all Blessings, spiritual and temporal, and pnt an End to their present Trials. And I intreat all People to forgive me wherein I have offended, and concur with me to pray, Toat the great, good, and merciful God would sanctify my present Lot, and for Jesus Christ his sake pardon all my Sins, and receive me to his Eternal Glo∣ry. It is suggested to me, That I have said nothing of the Royal Family; and it remembers me, that before the Justices at my Trial about the Test, I said, That at my Death I would pray, That there should never want one of the Royal Family to be a Defender of the True, An∣cient, Apostolick, Catholick, Protestant Faith, which I do now: And that GOD would enligh∣ten and forgive all of them that are either luke-warm, or have shrunk from the Profession of it. And in all Events, I pray GOD may provide for the Security of his Church, that Antichrist, nor the Gates of Hell may never prevail against it. Colonel RƲMBOLD. AT the same place died Colonel Richard Rumbold, June 26, 1685. most of what occurred con∣siderable in his Defence and Speech, you have had already in the Business of the Assassinati∣on. Two or three Passages more there are worth Remarks in the same, as Arguments of his Sense and Courage. For this Cause, he says, wee every Hair of his Head and Beard a Life, he'd joyfully sacrifice 'em all. That he was never Antimonarchical in his Principles, but for a King and Free Parliament: the King having Power enough to make him great, and the people to make 'em happy. [That he died in the Defence of the just Laws and Lib rties of the Nations.] [That none was marks by God above another; for no Man came into the World with a Saddle on their Backs, nor others booted and spurr'd to ride upon't.] And being askt if he thought not his Sentence dreadful? Answered, [He wisht he had a Limb for every Town in Christendom.] The next Place was Lyme, where many of Note died, particularly Col. Holmes, who was the first of those there executed, near the same place where they landed, when they came a-Shoar with the Duke of Monmouth, being brought to the Place after some Difficulty; for the Horses that were first put into the Stedge would not stir, which obliged those concerned to get others,
which they did from the Coach-man, who had that Morning brought them to Town; when they were put into the Sledge, they broke it in pieces, which caused the Prisoners to go on Foot to the place of Execution; where being come, as I told you before, the Colonel began thus at the Foot of the Ladder; He sat down with an Aspect altogether void of Fear, but on the contrary with a kind of smilin countenance, so began to speak to the Spectators to this purpose. That he would give them an Account of his first Undertaking in the Design, which was long before in London; for there he agreed to stand by, and assist the Duke of Monmouth, when Opportunity offered; in order to which, he went to Holland with him, and there continued until this Expedi∣tion, in which God had thought fit to frustrate his and other good Mens Expectations: He be∣lieved the Protestant Religion was bleeding, and in a Step towards Extirpation, and therefore he with these his Brethren that were to suffer with him, and thousands more, had adventured their Lives and their All to save it; but God Almighty had not appointed 'em to be the Instruments in so glorious a Work; yet notwithstanding he did verily believe, and doubted not, but that God would make use of others, that should meet with better success, though the Way or Means was not yet visible▪ but of this he did not doubt: He also was satisfied of the Duke's Title, so that Matter did not afflict him on account of his engaging on his Score: And going on further with a Discourse of this Nature, he was asked by a Person, Why he did not pray for the King? He with a smiling Countenance answered, I am sorry you do not yet understand the Difference between speaking and praying. And having ended his Discourse, he then prepared himself by prayer for his Dissolution, which was very devout and pious for half an hour. Col. Holmes in his Prayer not mentioning the King, he was charged as before; to which he re∣plied, He prayed for him in general, praying for all Mankind. Thus fell the valiant and good Christian, Col. Holmes; his dying Words we have now found come to pass, he was much la∣mented by all that saw him, except by some, that 'tis feared, are delivered up to a feared Conscience. The Last Speech of Dr. Hicks. I am now going into that World, where many dark Things shall be made perfectly manifest and clear, and many doubtful Things fully resolved, and a plenary Satisfaction given concerning them; all Disputes and Mistakes concerning Treason, Rebellion, and Schism, shall be at an End, and cease for ever: Many Things that are innocent, lawful, and laudable, which have soul Marks and black Characters stampt and fixe upon 'em here, they shall be perfectly purified, and fully cleansed from there; where at one View more shall be known of them, than by all wrang∣ling Debates and eager Disputes, or by reading all Polemical Books concerning them here. I greatly deplore and bewail the greedy Appetite and insatiable Thirst, that professing Protestants have after the Blood of their Brethren, and the high pleasure they take in the Effusion thereof. But what will not Men do, when they are either judicially blinded, or their secular worldly Interest insensibly insinuates and winds it self into their Religion, is so twisted and incorporated with it, that it animates and acts it, is the Life and Soul, the vital Form and Power, and made wholly subservient thereunto. My Lord Jefferies, after he had left Bristol, being come to the King to give an Account of his Affairs in the West, the Great Seal being to be dispo∣sed of, by the Death of the late Keeper, he kiss'd the King's Hand for it, and was made Lord Chancellour, which was only an Earnest of his Desert for so eminent and extraordinary a piece of Service; so now that which remains, is to give an Account of divers that had fled, and hid themselves up and down in Holes and Privacies, whose Friends made all Application to some great Men or other to procure their Pardons; some to this, and others to such as they thought Favourites of the King; but the Rewards must be as∣certain'd before any Application could be made: Divers Lists being sent up, and the Rewards ascertained, which amongst many of them put together, did amount to considerable; so that it was now who could find a Friend to re∣lieve his distressed Relations, which were forced to wander up and down in Caves and Desarts for fear of being taken: But this Misfortune attended the Agents, that unless my Lord Chancellour were used, by his Creatures, that were allowed by him so to do; other Applications commonly met with Dis∣appointments, which caused an Emulation among the great Men; one suppo∣sing to have deserted the King's Ear as well as the other, which caused other Measures to be taken, though some were wheedled out of their Money. At last came out a General Pardon, with Exceptions, very few, if any of those
that were sollicited for, not being excepted, were of Course pardoned; but however, divers Sums of Money having been paid, no Restitution to be had, for from Hell is no Redemption. A Western Gentleman's Purchase came to fif∣teen or sixteen hundred Guineas, which my Lord Chancellour had. Amongst the Exceptions were a Parcel of Yaunton Girls, some of which were Children of eight or ten Years old; however something was to be made of them, if these Ladies were judged guilty of Treason, for presenting the Duke of Mon∣mouth with Colours, &c. and for to preserve these from Trial, they were given to Maids of Honour to make up their Christmas▪Box; so that an Agent of theirs was sent down into the Country to compound with their Parents, to preserve them from what might after follow, if taken; so that some, accord∣ing to Ability, gave 100 l. others 50 l. all which however did not answer the Ladies first Expectations; yet it did satisfie, and they were accordingly par∣doned. Thus we have given you an Account of what hath happened on this Occasion, being in every Point Truth: We might have farther enlarged, but that would have spoiled the Design, and swoln our Pocket-Companion to a Volume too big. We shall therefore next proceed to give you a true and exact List of all them that were condemned, and suffered in the West, and the Year 1685. under the Sentence of my Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys, with the Names of the Towns where every Man was executed. Lyme 12. COl. Holmes, Mr. Batiscomb, Mr. William Hewling, Mr. Sampson Lark, Dr. Temple, Capt. Madders, Capt. Matthews, Mr. Joseph Tyler, Mr. William Cox, &c. Bath 6. Walter Baker, Henry Body, Gerrard Bryant, Thomas Clotworthy, Thomas Collins, John Carter. Philipsnorton 12. Robert Cook, Edward Creaves, John Caswell, Thomas Hayward, John Hellier, Edward Beere, Henry Portridge, George Pether, Thomas Peirce, John Richards, John Staple, John Smith. Froome 12. Francis Smith, Samuel Vill, alias Vile, Thomas Star, Phi∣lip Usher, Robert Beamant, William Clement, John Humphrey, George Hasty, Robert Man, Thomas Pearl, Laurence Lott, Thomas Lott. Bruton 3. James Feildsen, Humphrey Braden, Richard Bole. Wincanton 6. John Howel, Richard Harvey, John Tucker, William Hol∣land, Hugh Holland, Thomas Bowden. Shepton-Mallet 13. Stephen Mallet, Joseph Smith, John Gilham, Jun. Giles Bramble, Richard Chinn, William Cruise, George Pavier, John Hildworth, John Ashwood, Thomas Smith, John Dorchester, Sen. John Combe, John Groves. Hensford 12. Roger Cornelius, John Starr, Humphrey Edwards, William Pierce, Arthur Sullway, George Adams, Henry Russel, George Knight, Robert Wine, William Clerk, alias Chick, Preston Bevis, Richard Finier. Wrington 3. Alexander Key, David Boyss, Joshua French. Wells 8. William Mead, Thomas Cade, Robert Doleman, Thomas Durston, John Sheperd, Abraham Bend, William Durston, William Plumley. Ulvelscomb 3. William Ruscomb, Thomas Pierce, Robert Combe. Tuton upon Mendip 2. Peter Prance, William Watkins. Chard 12. Edward Foote, John Knight, William Williams, John Jervis, Humphrey Hitchcook, William Godfrey, Abraham Pill, William Davy, Henry Easterbrook, James Dennett, Edward Warren, Simon Cross. Creokern 10. John Spore, Roger Burnoll, William Pether, James Evory, Robert Hill, Nicholas Adams, Richard Stephens, Robert Halfwell, John Bushel, William Lashly.
Somerton 7. William Gillet, Thomas Lissant, William Pocock, Christopher Stephens, George Cantick, Robert Allen, Joseph Kelloway. Yeovil 8. Francis Foxwell, George Pitcher, Bernard Devereux, Bernard Thatcher for concealing Bovet, William Johnson, Thomas Hurford, Edward Gillard, Oliver Powel. Netherstoe 3. Humphrey Mitchel, Richard Culverell, Merrick Thomas. Dunster 3. Henry Lackwell, John Geanes, William Sully. Dulverton 3. John Basely, John Lloyd, Henry Thompson. Bridgewater 12. Robert Fraunces, Nicholas Stodgell, Joshua Bellamy, Wil∣liam Meggeridge, John Hurman, Robert Roper, Richard Harris, Richard Eng∣ram, John Trott, Roger Guppey, Roger Hore, Isaiah Davis. Ratcliffe-Hall at Bristol 6. Richard Evans, John Tinckwell, Christopher Clerk, Edward Tippot, Philip Cumbridge, John Tucker, alias Clover. Ilminster 12. Nicholas Collins, Sen. Stephen Newman, Robert Luckis, William Kitch, Thomas Burnard, William Wellen, John Parsons, Thomas Trooke, Robert Fawne, Western Hillary, John Burgen, Charles Speake. Stogersey 2. Hugh Ashley, John Herring. Wellington 3. Francis Priest, Philip Bovet, Robert Reed. South-petherton 3. Cornelius Furfurd, John Parsons, Thomas Davis. Porlock 2. James Gale, Henry Edny. Glasendury 6. John Hicks, Richard Pearce, Israel Briant, William Mead. James Pyes, John Broome. Taunton 19. Robert Perrot, Abraham Ansley, Benjamin Hewling, Peirce Murren, John Freake, John Savage, Abraham Matthews, William Jenkyns, Henry Lisle, John Dryer, John Hucker, Jonathan England, John Sharpe, William De∣verson, John Williams, John Patrum, James Whittom, William Satchel, John Trickey. Langport 3. Humphrey Peirce, Nicholas Venton, John Shellwood. Arbridg 6. Isaac Tripp, Thomas Burnell, Thomas Hillary, John Gill, Senior. Thomas Monday, John Butcher. Cutherston 2. Richard Bovet, Thomas Blackmore. Minehead 6. John Jones, alias Evens, Hugh Starke, Francis Bartlet, Peter Warren, Samuel Hawkins, Richard Sweet. Evilchester 12. Hugh Goodenough, Samuel Cox, William Somerton, John Masters, John Walrand, David Langwell, Osmond Barret, Matthew Cross, Ed∣ward Burford, John Mortimer, John Stevens, Robert Townsden. Stogummer 3. George Hillard, John Lockstone, Arthur Williams. Castlecary 3. Richard Ash, Samuel Garnish, Robert Hinde. Milton-port 2. Archibald Johnson, James Maxwel. Reinsham 11. Charles Chapman, Richard Bowden, Thomas Trock, Lewis Harris, Edward Halswell, Howel Thomas, George Badol, Richard Evans, John Winter, Andrew Rownsden, John Phillebey. Suffer'd in all 251. Besides those Hanged and Destroyed in cold Blood. This Bloody Tragedy in the West being over, our Protestant Judge re∣turns for London; soon after which Alderman Cornish felt the Anger of some Body behind the Curtain. FINIS.
