W225 R217110 99828811 33243
The Widdows Mite cast into the Treasury of the Lord God, and given forth to the Ʋpright-hearted. THe Power of God is with them that trust in him, that have no other to leane unto, nor depend up∣on, but himself alone, whose power hath overcome my heart, that I can even say, It is good to be here, in the power of God, not in any thing below. I am not to stay, for the Word saith and cryeth aloud, Come out of Babylon stay not in all the plain, but hasi, hast, and come to Mount Zion the City of the living God, in it is safe dwelling, in the power of God; the mu∣nition of Rocks, thy bread is sure, and thy waters shall never fail. It is the desire of my heart, that God would establish every upright, honest, naked, simple heart upon this Rock of Ages, the everlasting salvation of many generations, that the Lord God may take delight to dwell in us, and to walk in us, that he may not be unto us any longer as a waifering man, that tar∣rieth for a night, that this immortal life of God (which dwelleth in the Light) may so affect our hearts, that we may even be delighted to lye down in his Will, that the Lord may delight in us to do us good, so we may come to love God with all our hearts, and our Neighbour as our selves, which indeed is the sum of all. Then shall the Captivity of Israel be returned, and thou shalt discern between him that feareth God (in thy self) and him that serveth him not, that the life
of God may be brought forth in his creature, that so all things may be again in their right place. And Friends, the Power that now is made manifest, I mean the power of God, it will make manifest who they are that have sought the Lord in uprightness of heart, and them that have followed for the Loaves. I say, The power of God will try foundations whether they are upon the Rock or no. The true Mother will be known, even she that hath the living Child, seeing that one over-laid it; for wise Solomon hath taken his Sword into his hand to divide and to judge. The li∣ving Child all feel brought forth in your selves, that you may feel the overshadowings of the Almighty that generateth, and that bringeth it forth. It hath a dependance only upon God, and cryeth unto him, and God heareth it; it reacheth unto heaven, and like a mighty Prince wrestleth with God, and will not let him go, till it hath prevailed with him; it hath no other in Heaven nor in Earth to cry unto but God. It hath its dependance upon God alone, and God looked down from heaven, and saw that there was none to help; mark, none to help. Then, and not till then did his own arm bring salvation, and he was cloathed with Zeal as with a Cloak. Well, sure God is risen, methinks I feel his power over all. It is even that will rule and reign, and of the Encrease of his Government there shall never be any end. Surely he is the Anoynting, that we that have sought the Lord in upright-heartedness, have found within us; he is the Mighty God, the Prince of Peace. Surely he is strength to them that have no Might, he is sight to the Blind, and Wisdom to the simple-heart∣ed.
Surely he is all to them that have only sought him. And Friends, he is the true Vine, know him to be your own, and sit down under him: mark, under your own Vine, not under anothers, there none can make affraid. And this is the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, gathering all his Lambs and Babes that have been scattered upon the barren Mountaines, like Sheep without a Shepheard, and saying, Let them return every man to his own Tent. This Tent or Tabernacle that God hath pitched is with men, and he will dwell in them, and walk in them. And he will establish his everlasting Covenant with them, even the sure mercies of David. And he is come to whip out them that have made hast to defile his Temple, and to overthrow the earthly Tabernacles that man hath builded in his own will (and lived in.) Then shall the clear day spring from on high, that many souls have breathed for, and Nations have desired: wherein Ʋnity and Amity shall be further manifested, and lived in, even when man shall cease from his own building. In a word, he will overturn and shake and throw down all that is builded and not upon the Rock. For thus saith the Lord, I will once more shake not the Earth only, but Heaven also: And the old Heavens, and the old Earth shall pass away, and the new Heavens shall remain, wherein dwelleth righteousness, Peace, Ʋnity and Amity; and he will rend the vail from off all faces, and all false coverings shall not any longer he able to hide, for the Light doth now so clearly shine, and the day is dawned which is to the Adulterer as the shadow of death; yea verily, the Sun is risen which shall never set. And this charitable Life, that thinketh no evil, shall prosper and out live all that
is of a contrary nature: The mouth of the Lord hath spo∣ken it. And this is the matter now in Controversie, Except ye eat My Flesh, saith Christ Jesus, and drink My Blood, you have no Life abiding in you. My friends, friends of God, you must all come into his Life, and speak the word from his mouth, and, the words that he speaketh, they are Spirit and Life; and you must speak it in faithfulness, and not add nor diminish. And it shall no more be said, The burden of the Word of the Lord; but, The burden of Babylon. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and the Spirit resteth where it pleaseth; That which pleaseth him, is a naked Heart, that sitteth and waiteth at the feet of Jesus (and heareth the Word from his mouth) rather than Marthas great bulk of ser∣vice. This manifestation of the Spirit of God, is to help man to find the Rock in this weary Land, that ye may have Oil of your own, for anothers will not serve you. For the time is come wherein you must cease from man, and you must have the Word of God abiding in you, or be separated. And this is the end of my writ∣ing to you, to press you to your own; there cannot any thing else stand in this day of winnowing and sift∣ing, that is come and coming to try all Nations, People, Kindreds and Families. And this is my Testimony for the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, he doth in them ac∣cording to his good pleasure. And thus said the Lord, the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, I will arise up, as in Mount Perazzim, and I will scatter mine Enemies before me, I will hurry them hither and thither, and I will terrifie them in my sore displeasure, The mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it. Therefore, yea simple ones, arise, arise, and shake
your selves from the dust (Serpents Meat) for this birth bindeth Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron. And Friends, let us have care how we stand in any thing below the Life and Power of God; do not stay any where before thou come to the Mountain Remem∣ber Lots Wife. The seed is a travelling; yea my soul saith, Who is this that cometh from Bosrah, with his dyed garments? it is the Mighty God, a wonderful Councellor, ready to save; he travelleth on like a migh∣ty Man, like a Giant to run his race, he skippeth as with Hindes feet, surely he is near. Gods everlasting Sabbath is known, the day is come wherein man must cease from all his labours, for God is risen, and he will work, and none shall let. Man is to be silent, peace and be still all ye that are come to the ends of the earth; for as I said before, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is risen, and he will tread the Wine∣press alone, therefore are his garments dyed red; now it will be known who they be that can live with ever∣lasting burnings, and with devouring fire, even he that hath clean hands and a pure heart, without which no man shall see God. And without this Charitable life, if a man could give his goods to the poor, and his body to be burned, he is but a sounding brass, or a tinkling cym∣bal. I mean that Life that suffereth long, and hath not envy in the heart, nor double mindedness in all its deal∣ings, that preferreth anothers good before his own, that thinketh no evil, that is not peevish nor froward, nor hasts to judge of any thing before its time; that can wait till he that is the Judge of all things doth arise in him, then shall his enemies be scattered before him like dust before the whirlwind. And that that stayeth or
Centureth in any thing below the Life and Power of God, is that which tendeth to Division: for the Captain of our salvation (as I said before) travelleth, and we are to follow here, and be like him in all things. The Year of Freedome is come, the Everlasting Jubile is witnessed, wherein God hath redeemed them that have sought him, onely from under the Bondage of Egyptian dark∣ness, and from all the sore Taskmasters that have dealt subtilly with his Israel; and the Ishmaelitish Merchants shall no longer make merchandize of his little children, for he is come to lead and to teach them himself, and he will bring them to the Mountain of the house of Da∣vid, which is established above all the mountains, and exalted above all the hills of imitation and imagination, and hills of strife; and Nations shall flow thither and say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lords house, and he will teach us of his wayes, and we will walk in his pathes, and every child shall be as Da∣vid, and David shall be as God, and here is no need of mans teachings, neither is there any need of the Sun by day, nor the Moon by night, for the Lord God is the light of them, and the Lamb that is in the midst of them, shall and hath wiped away all tears from all faces (that are come hither) there shall not be a place for a cunning Workman, nor a Hammer to be heard in all Gods holy Mountain, The mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it. And thus is the Lord God of Heaven and Earth a do∣ing his own work himself, and man is to be silent, and stand still, and see Gods salvation, which puteth an end to those earthen tabernacles, which in the imaginary part, some that were Christs friends, would have build∣ed in the Mountain on which he was transfigured before
them. And this manifestation of the Spirit, is the sub∣stance of what then was figured forth, when he was taken out of their sight. And thus are all the works of God wonderful, and of great and weighty concern∣ment: Yea, surely his Wisdom is passed by, and gone be∣yond the wisdom and comprehensions of wise men, for that was too short and too narrow to contain his mighty incomprehensible fulness, which cannot be li∣mitted nor likned to any thing, time, or place; for his wayes are unsearchable, and his Judgments past finding out; praises endless be to his holy Name for ever, who is King of Zion, he siteth upon the Cherubims of Eterni∣ty, and he will bow down the high thoughts of man, be they never so much exalted. And one thing I charge you to have care of, that you do not hide any sweet morsel, nor a Babylonish wedg (though it may be of gold) under your Tents, for the Lord God of Heaven and Earth will find it out; we must all be tryed by the Refiners fire, and washed as with Fullers sope, that we may have our garments clean, that we may not longer lye among the pots, nor seek the living among the dead. For he is arisen, therefore let him be your Head in all things; for if any thing else be chief that will betray him. Therefore let us be dili∣gent and willing to follow the Lamb, and not froward and angry as Jonah was, when God prepared a worm to destroy the gourd that had covered his head in the night, wherein he had rested, and was so exceeding glad of it. So in the Innocent Life of the Lamb, the Lord God preserve you and me faithful unto the end, that we may finish our course with Joy, and we may stand upon Mount Zion with the Lamb, and sing his Song for
ever, which cannot be sung in Babylon, because it is a strange Land. Thus in Obedience to the Spirit of God, I have born a faithful Testimony for the Lord, and in it let me be received. Richard Waite. Postscript. THe Woman, while her Husband liveth, is bound by the Law to her Husband (and not one jot nor tittle of the Law shall pass, till all be fulfilled) but when he is dead, she is free from the Law, the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Iesus hath made me free from the Law of sin and death; and thou to hate what he controuleth, is the fulfilling of the Law, and the answering of him love for love, by Obedience, which is better then sacrifices; So shalt thou be Married unto him in the Word of his Pow∣er, which will make thee willing: And so he maketh of twain one new man. And this is that ministration of Life and Salvation, which hath exceeded and outshined that of condemnation, which was glorious in its time, but this hath and shall exceed it in Glory. By one who hath a portion in the Man of sorrows, in whom was no form nor comliness, yet his Mercies indureth for ever, and of his loving-kindness there shall never be an END R.W.
