W235 R34697 14563281 102606
Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus, [A Continuation of the Present State of the Controversie between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome.] Junii 7. 1688. H. Maurice RR. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
A CONTINUATION OF THE Present State OF THE CONTROVERSY, BETWEEN THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, AND THE CHURCH OF ROME. BEING A Full ACCOUNT of the BOOKS that have been of late Written on Both Sides. The Second Edition. LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXXVIII.
TO THE VERY REVEREND and WORTHY THE AUTHORS OF THE DISCOURSES here Collected, IN Defence of the Church of ENGLAND. GENTLEMEN, AFter so much Pains as you have taken, and so much Good as by the Blessing of God on your Endeavours you have done to that Church of which I esteem it my happiness that I am a Member, may it be permitted to a private and obscure hand to return you this small Tribute, in acknowledgment of that Sense which not my self alone, but I dare say every single
person of our Communion has of what we all owe to your Learning and your Inte∣grity. I present you here with a short view of your own Labours; or rather, I offer to the World a small Collection of those Discourses you have written in Defence of our Religion. And how unsuitable soever it may appear to usher a few Titles of Books into the World under the protection of so many great Names, yet I am confident the Consequence of this Undertaking cannot but be as Ho∣nourable to you all, as I heartily wish it may, and as I am sure it ought to be: When it shall be consider'd how vast a Number, and of what acurate and learned Discourses is here comprised, and for almost all which we are in the compass of about Three Years indebted to you. It is indeed a matter of just wonder to all those who are acquainted with your me∣thod of living here, how persons engaged not only in a laborious attendance on their Pa∣rochial Cures, and a constant return of pain∣ful and acurate Preaching; but almost ut∣terly
distracted with that multitude of other Business which in these last Years has taken up the greatest part of your time, should yet find leisure to discharge all these, and at the same time to adorn the Press with so many Books as might alone have seemed more than enough to have employ'd your whole In∣dustry. But blessed be God, who has raised you up against such a time as this, and given us so great an Earnest of his Favour to us, that as we had never more need of Able, and Honest, and Firm Guides, than at this day; so I may venture to challenge any Age of the Church, to shew such a Number of truly Learned, and Pious, and constant Pastors, as the Church of England, and especially this City, do's now abound with. May your Labours and your Examples al∣ways find such a success as they deserve, and as they have of late met with amongst us. And since we cannot now have any excuse for our Apostacy should we renounce our Holy Pro∣session, after so much as you have done to convince even the most ignorant Persons a∣mongst
us of the Truth and Purity of it; may we ever firmly adhere both to you and it: That when we shall appear before the Great Bishop and Pastor of our Souls, we may all of us give up our Accounts with joy. This, as it is my hearty Wish, so I am per∣swaded it is the sincere Resolution of every one of those whom God has committed to your Care. And that in this Firmness we may be all of us established more and more, shall be the continual Prayer of him who in all thankful Duty will ever remain, GENTLEMEN, Your Most Humble, and Obedient Servant
TO THE READER. AS for those who shall please to peruse this Treatise, I have but very little to premise to them. They will here see an Exact Col∣lection, as far as I was able to make it, of the Con∣troversie on both sides between our Divines, and those of the Church of Rome. And in that, the Victory of Truth over Error. Never certainly was any Cause more entirely baffled than the Popish is at this time. Never was a Controversie more fully handled, and that in such a manner as to instruct even the meanest Capacities, than This has been in these last years. Insomuch that now there is scarce a person a∣mongst us so ignorant, that is not able to make a Stand against the rudest Attacques of our Adversaries. Nay, our very Footmen esteem themselves, (and I think have satisfied the World that they are not mistaken) an equal match for Jesuits, i. e. for those who would at least be thought the most able Men of their Party, and dropt down from Heaven on purpose to oppose the Growth of Protestant Heresie.
What others may judg of this, I cannot tell: But, for my part, I cannot but from thence conclude, That certainly the Hand of God is with us for Good. And that He who has given us this Opportunity to under∣stand the Weaknesses and Deceits of our Enemies; and endu'd us with so great and general a Resolution, never upon any Account whatsoever, to depart from our most Holy Religion, will also crown all our future Endeavours with such a Success, that the Generations to come shall rise up and call us Blessed; When they shall see our Firmness and our Labours in the Lord, and receive from our hands that pure and uncorrupted Truth, which I am persuaded those excellent Trea∣tises I here mention, shall deliver down even to the very End of the World.
THE CONTENTS. THE Occasion and Design of this Continuation. Page 1 The Whole Divided into II. Generals. Page 2 FIRST PART. Of the Cases against Popery, begun in the late King's Time. ib. The Catalogue of them reduced to the following Heads. 1. Preliminary Discourses. Page 2, 3 2. Of the Church. Page 4 3. Of the Rule of Faith. Page 5 4. Of Particular Points. ib. An Account of the Disputes that have arisen, on the Occasion of the Discourse against Transubstantiation. Page 8
SECOND PART. Of the Discourses that have been publish'd in De∣fence of the Church of England, since the Time of His Present Majesty: With an Ac∣count of the Popish Treatises that occasioned them. Page 9 These reduted to the several following Heads. SECT. I. Of the REPRESENTING Controversie. The Papist Represented and Misrepresented. Page 10 The Bishop of Condom's Exposition. Page 12 Good Advice to the Pulpits. Page 16 And the Disputes occasioned by these Treatises. SECT. II. Of the pretended Agreement between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. Page 17 SECT. III. Of the Disputes concerning the Holy EUCHARIST. 1. Real Presence. Page 19.
2. Communion in One kind. Page 20 3. Transubstantiation. Page 22 SECT. IV. Of the Disputes concerning the CHURCH. Page 25 1. Of the Notes of the Church. Page 26 2. Of the Unity and Authority of the Church. Page 27 3. Of the Infallibility of the Church. Page 29 SECT. V. Of the Prerogatives of St. Peter, and the Popes as his Successors. Page 31 SECT. VI. Of the Reformation of the Church of England, and the Imputations of Schism and Heresie laid against us on the account of it. Page 34 SECT. VII. Of the Disputes concerning the Rule of Faith: And in particular, 1. Of the Holy Scripture. Page 38 2. Of Tradition. Page 39
SECT. VIII. Of the Disputes concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. Page 49 1. In General. Page 50 2. In Particular. Worship of Images. Page 51 Invocation of Saints. Page 52 SECT. IX. Of the Disputes concerning the Validity of Orders, In the Church of England. Page 54 In the Church of Rome. Page 55 That the Papists are upon their own Principles, uncertain whether they have any true Priests in their Church. ib. SECT. X. Of other Particular Points in Dispute betwixt us. Popish Treatises. Page 56 Discourses of the Church of England. Page 57 A full Account of what pass'd on the occasion of the Con∣ference between Dr. Tenison, and Father Pulton the Jesuit. Page 60
SECT. XI. In which the several Treatises before mention'd are reduced to their distinct Arguments, for the dire∣ction of those who would fully satisfie themselves in any Particular Point in Dispute betwixt Ʋs, and those of the Church of Rome, viz. Page 63 1. General Discourses. Page 65 2. Of Religious Worship. Page 66 3. Of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. Page 66 4. Of the Invocation of Saints. Page 66 Particularly of the B. Virgin. 5. Of Images and Reliques. Page 67 6. Of Idolatry. Page 68 7. Of Merits, Satisfactions, Purgatory and Indulgences. Page 68 8. Of the Sacraments. Page 68 9. Of Confession and Penance. Page 69 10. Of Extreme Unction. Page 69 11. Of Orders. Page 69 12. Of the Real Presence. Page 70 13. Of Transubstantiation. Page 70 14. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Page 71 15. Of the Adoration of the Host. Page 71 16. Of Communion in Both Kinds. Page 71
17. Of the Rule &c. of Faith. Page 72 18. Of the Holy Scripture. Page 72 19. Of Tradition. Page 73 20. Of the Church. Page 73 21. Of St. Peter and the Pope. Page 74 22. Of the Reformation. Page 74 23. Of Schism and Heresie. Page 74 24. Of the Celibacy of the Clergy. Page 75. SECT. XII. In which the whole is closed, with an Account of the Present Undertaking, to examine the Texts of Scripture alledged in favour of the Popish Errors. Page 75
A CONTINUATION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Controversie. IT is now some time since it has been very much desired, That a Full Account might be given to the World, of the several Tracts that have these late Years been publish'd on the Points in Controversie between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. The Present State of the Contro∣versie, set forth about two years since, being become very Imperfect; and serving rather to raise Mens expectations of some further Account to be given of this matter, than to satisfie their desires with what is there offer'd. I will not pretend to have been so diligent an Observer of these Things, as not to have let many Discourses slip, in such a num∣ber as have appear'd on both sides: And must, therefore, humbly entreat the Representer's favour to me, if He find some defects in my present Undertaking; and that he will not impute that to a spirit of Misrepresentation in me, which really proceeds only from my Ignorance or Inadvertency. What Discourses have come to my Hands, I will faithfully give an account of; and if He, or any other for Him, will put forth an Appendix of what is want∣ing here, it will be much more to the satisfaction of the World,
than to run over once more,The Cases against Po∣pery. his Common Place against me, as a New and Ʋpstart sort of Misrepresenter, and fancy that the Eyes of all the World are set upon him, to chastise me for my Unsince∣rity. The present State of the Controversie gives an Account how the Divines of our Church, at the time of the late King's death, were engaged in a Design of publishing some Discourses on the several Points in Controversie between Ʋs and the Papists; correspondent to what they had done, not long before, with reference to our Disputes with our Brethren the Dissenters. And how the favou∣rable Reception their former Attempt had met with from these, encouraged them to hope their Labours would not be altogether unacceptable to those. But the Catalogue of what they have done in pursuance of this design, is imperfect; and it may not be amiss, before I proceed any farther, to give a more compleat one here. A Full Account of the Cases that have been published on the Points disputed between the Church of En∣gland, and the Church of Rome. I. PRELIMINARY DISCOƲRSES. 1. A Preservative to an Ingenuous Tryal of Opinions in Religion. 2. The difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 3. A Preservative against Popery: Being some plain Directions to unlearned Protestants how to dispute with Romish Priests. In Two Parts. By the Re∣verend Dr. Sherlock, Master of the Temple.
I place this Discourse here, because I do not see to what other Class it could more properly have been reduced, thought it is but just now publish'd, and perhaps, was never design'd by its learned Author, to add to the number of this kind of Treatises: But that which is more pertinent for me here to observe, is, That the former part of this Undertaking soon met with such an Answer as is now commonly given to our Books, when any at all is given, viz. one single Sheet from Father Sabran the Jesuit, and who is now well known by his late little Encounters of this Nature. It was called, 4. An Answer to Dr. Sherlock's Preservative against Popery, &c. To this an exact and solid Answer was return'd by a Protestant Footman, one W. Giles; and who may justly be offer'd to the World as an Instance of what use our late Discourses have, or might have been, for the Instruction even of the meanest Persons in the matters in Controversie between Ʋs, and the Church of Rome. The knowledge which this ingenious and diligent Man obtain'd, being entirely due to them; and yet how considerable it is, I shall leave it to any one to judge, that will but have the Curiosity to examine his Performance. It is called, 5. A Defence of Dr. Sherlock's Preservative against Popery, in Reply to a Jesuit's Answer: By W. Giles, a Protestant Footman, living with Madam H. in Mark-lane. This Defence, and the Preface of the Publisher of it, did put the Jesuit quite out of all Patience, and Decency; and made him for∣get himself so far, as once more to provoke the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, by publishing an Answer to both Parts of the Preservative against Popery, and to the Footman's Defence of the first, under this Title:
6. Dr. Sherlock's Preservative considered, First Part, with its Defence, &c. By Lewis Sabran of the So∣ciety of Jesus. This Answer was writ in such a violence of Passion, and does charge the Reverend Master of the Temple at such a rate with Ig∣norance, Calumny, and God knows what, that he hath at last condefcended to chastise this ignorant Jesuit himself; and the World will very speedily see, that never Man set Pen to Paper with such a stock of Ignorance and Considence together, as this Father Sabran. After which, if he shall still continue to write in spite both of good Learning, and of good Manners, it is to be hoped, that at least we shall be excused by all those who have a∣ny share of either, if we do not give either our selves or them the trouble of any farther Replies to him. A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative against Popery: In Answer to the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. By William Sherlock, D.D. Master of the Temple. II. Of the CHURCH. 1. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the Church of England. 2. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of England, made by the Pa∣pists, asking of us the Question, Where was our Re∣ligion before LUTHER? 3. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to three Questions:
1. How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true Sense of Scripture? 2. Whether a Visible Succession from Christ to this day, makes a Church which has this Visi∣ble Succession, an Infallible Interpreter of Scripture? 3. Whether the Church of England can make out such a Visible Succession? 4. Two Discourses concerning the Necessity of Refor∣mation, with respect to the Errors and corrupti∣ons of the Church of Rome. There was a Third Part intended by the Reverend and Learn∣ed Author of these two Discourses, which we have hopes that it will be published ere long under the same Title. III. Of the Rule of Faith. 1. A Discourse about Tradition; shewing what is meant by it, and what Tradition is to be received, and what is to be rejected. 2. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith, with respect especially to the Romish pretence of such a one as is Infalliable. IV. Of Particular Points. 1. A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Wor∣ship; or a Scripture-proof of the unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any other Being besides the Supreme God. 2. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church
of Rome, especially as compared with those of the Church of England: In which it is shewn, that whatsoever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among them, nor such rational pro∣vision for it, nor Encouragement to it, as in the Church Establish'd by Law amongst us. 3. A Discourse concerning the Invocation of Saints. 4. Of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. 5. Of Auricular Confession as it is prescribed by the Council of Trent. 6. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. 7. Of the Adoration of the Host. These are the several Discourses mention'd in the formerPresent State, pag. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ca∣talogue; to these I must add several others that have since been publish'd. 8. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead. To which I may subjoyn a Discourse just now publish'd, viz. 9. Purgatory proved by Miracles, &c. 10. A Discourse concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass. 11. Of Extreme Unction. And here it may not be improper to observe, that the Author of this Accurate Discourse, thought fit to premise to it an Ad∣dress to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom, upon the occasion of some things just then publish'd by him in his Reply to our Ex∣positor, relating to this Argument; but especially concerning Cardinal Cajetan's confessing that their only Text for this preten∣ded Sacrament, that of St. James, made nothing for it. To this the Vindicator gave a half-shee Reply, called,
A Letter from the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom, to the Author of a late Discourse concerning the Sa∣crament of Extreme Unction. And this produced another Letter in Reply to it, Intituled, A Second Letter from the Author of the Discourse con∣cerning Extreme Unction, to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom. Which put an end to this Debate: Though the Vindicator made us hope for a Reply to that Excellent Discourse; but I presume will not esteem himself obliged to be as good as his word. 12. A Treatise in confutation of the Latin Service pra∣ctised, and by the Order of the Trent Council con∣tinu'd in the Church of Rome. 13. Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. 14. Of the Celibacy of the Clergy. 15. Of the incurable Scepticism of the Church of Rome. 16. A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works. 17. An Historical Discourse concerning the Necessity of the Ministers Intentions in administring the Sacrament. I shall perhaps be look'd upon to have referr'd many Tracts to the number of these Discourses against the Papists, that did not en∣ter into the first design that was laid for them. But I know not to what Head I could so properly refer them, as to this; and if they help to make up the Collection of Particular Points in Debate betwixt us, it matters not by what Occasion, or with what De∣sign they were first composed.
I do not know that any more of these Treatises have been par∣ticularly attack'd by those of the other Communion, except that one only against Transubstantiation: which having, after some years being let alone, given at last occasion to a formed Controversie, yet in agitation, I will, before I go any farther, remark what has hitherto passed concerning it. The first that appear'd in Answer to it, was a Hot New-Convert, under the Glorious Title of, Reason and Authority; or the Motives of a late Pro∣testant's Reconciliation to the Catholic Church; together with Remarks upon some late Discourses against Transubstantiation. But the Performance was so mean, so disproportion'd to the Strength and Merits of the Discourse he had undertaken to attack; that it is to be presumed, the weakness of the New Convert obliged some more able Controvertist to appear as his Second; and to pub∣lish not long after a new, and better Answer, call'd, Transubstantiation Defended; and proved from Scrip∣ture, in Answer to the First Part of a Treatise Intituled, A Discourse against Transubstantiation. And to make all sure; a Third about the same time undertakes the same Cause, in a Discourse which he calls, An Answer to a Discourse against Transubstantiation. It is no part of my Design to give any Character of these Treatises; I will only observe, that the Second, which seems to have been written with the most care, continues still unfinish'd; the Author (whoever he be) having not yet thought fit to pub∣lish his 2d Part. Now this I the rather remark, to satisfie those who have long expected our Reply to these Treatises, what has been in some measure the Cause of the deferring it: tho the multitude of
other Discourses that have since been published on this Subject, may well excuse so small an Omission: However, since after almost a Years attendance, there is now but little Hopes of any thing more to be expected from this Antagonist, I may venture to promise the Reader that he shall not continue much longer without the Answer that has been prepared to what is already published; and which might long since have been finished, had not the Re∣verend Author desired to acquit himself of all his Task at the same time. And this may serve in short to have been remarked concerning the first Part of this Design, of the Discourses which our Divines began to publish in the late King's time upon the Points in Contro∣versie between us and the Church of Rome. We must now pass to a more troubled and perplex'd Under∣taking; and endeavour to reduce to the clearest Method we can, those many Tracts that have since come out in Answer to one ano∣ther on both sides; and the number of which is now so great, that it is no easie matter to give an exact Account of them. And for the doing of this, I shall consider them not in the Order of their coming out, but reduce them as near as I can to the several distinct Subjects to which they refer. Now the first Thing that began all our Late Disputes, was the Pretence so much insisted upon, of our MISREPRESENTING the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome: And it shall therefore be the first kind of Discourses I will here consider. SECT. I. Of the Treatises that have been Publish'd on the Representing and Expounding Controversie. I. WHAT the Occasion and Design of this Uundertaking was,Present State, p. 10. has already been remarked in the First Part of the Present State: and therefore I shall not need to say any thing to it here. The Treatises that have passed on both sides, may be consulted in this following Order.
I.The Repre∣senting Con∣troversie. A Papist Misrepresented and Represented. R. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented; in Answer to a Book in∣tituled, A Papist Misrepresented and Represent∣ed, &c. II. Reflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misre∣presented, &c. R. A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants; being a Reply to the Reflections, &c. III. Papists protesting against Protestant Popery; in Answer to a Discourse intituled, A Papist not Mis∣represented by Protestants. R. An Answer to a Discourse intituled, Papists protest∣ing against Protestant Popery; containing a par∣ticular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux's late B. of Condom's Exposition of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, in the Articles of the In∣vocation of Saints, and Worship of Images. IV. An Amicable Accommodation of the difference between the Representer and the Answerer, in re∣turn to his last Reply. R. An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the difference between the Representer and the Answerer. V. A Reply to the Answer to the Amicable Accom∣modation. R. A View of the whole Controversie between the Representer and the Answerer, with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply. And here the matter rested when the first State of the Contro∣versie was published; and it was then generally believed would
have done so. But the Representer had by this time got too much assurance to be easily put out of Countenance; and tho by the longer time he took in his Answer to this last Treatise, than to either of the foregoing, and which his Performance sufficiently shews was not for any extraordinary pains he resolved to take in his Reply to it, he seems to have struggled a little with himself, before he could get the better of his Conscience, in going on at so pitiful a rate of Vindicating his pretences, yet at last there came out something that was to be called an Answer to our last piece, in a Preface to a further Continuation of his unjust Pretences against us, viz. VI. The Papist Misrepresented and Represented; 3d part; with a Preface containing Reflections upon two Treatises; the one, the State, the other, The View of the Controversie between the Represen∣ter and the Answerer. But to this too, the worthy Author of the View of the Controversie soon returned such an Answer as I find has not a little discomposed the Representer: and I believe no less troubles the Vindicator too of the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, viz. R. An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the Controversie, &c. To this the Representer has now satisfied us, that he never intends to reply: for having lately set out an Answer to another Discourse of which we shall speak hereafter, viz. The Apology for the Pulpits: he adds triumphantly in the Title, that it is not only an Answer to that Discourse, but also, A Vindication of the Representer against the Stater of the Controversie. But such a Vindication as this, could certainly never have come from any other Pen but the Representer's: and is by the same figure a Reply to this Treatise, by which he heretofore told us, that his Papist Represented and Misrepresented was enough to answer not only all our late Discourses against Popery,Papist Misr. part. 3. Pref. but a great part of all the Books and Sermons that had ever been writ or preached
against them. The truth is, I can hardly forbear here to leave a while my design of pursuing the Treatises that have been Published on this Controversie, to expose the Confidence of this vain Man: But since the worthy Author of that Book which he pretends to answer, has thought fit to give him up as a Priviledged Person, who is past either sense of Modesty, or hopes of being reclaimed, I shall pay that deference to his Judgment, as not to trouble my self with any Vindication of his Discourse against so trivial and occasional an attempt against it. But if there be any of this Author's Communi∣on who shall think fit in good earnest to attack this, or any other of those Discourses which he has published against them, I will then take the liberty to promise, That tho to our great regret, the incomparable Author of them be now in his Grave,Dr. Claget. and no longer in a state to vindicate his own Works, yet neither his Labours nor his Memory shall want a Defence, and let his Ad∣versaries whenever they please begin the experiment. And here I suppose we may now take a final leave of this first Controversie; The Papist Represented and Misrepresented. I will only add, That since this first attempt of his began, he has carry'd it on in two other parts, under the Title of the catholick Representer. The second of which coming out weekly in several Chapters, has received a very full, and I suppose a satisfactory Answer; there being no care taken to reply to what our Divines have with great care and learning return'd to it. The third has been consider'd, as far as was thought necessary, by the Late Worthy and Learned Author of the Defence of the State and View of the Controversie be∣fore mentioned. II.The Ex∣pounding Controversie. It was not long after the beginning of this, that the bet∣ter to promote the same design, another Engagement of the like kind was set on foot, under the Title of An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholick Church in matters of Controversie. I need not say that this piece was Originally written in French, and published many years since by the Bishop then of Condom, now of Meaux. The prosecution that has been made of this matter in the Books that have been published on both sides, have given a
very large Account of this to the world; and what is farther ne∣cessary for the understanding of the design of it, may be seen al∣ready set down in the former part of thePag. 15, 16. Present State of the Contro∣versie. I will therefore only perfect the catalogue of what has past in this Enterprize also on both sides, by adding to that already given, those other Treatises, that have been publish'd since the former State was sent abroad. 1. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, &c. with Reflections upon his Pastoral Letter. And concerning which I shall observe only, what was before remarked, That to this day no attempt has been made of return∣ing one word in Answer to it. 2. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several Articles proposed by the Bishop of Condom, in his Exposition of the Do∣ctrine of the Catholick Faith. To this in a little time came out an Answer Intituled, 3. A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom's Exposi∣tion, with a Letter from the said Bishop. And to that not long after, a Reply, called, 4. A Defence of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England against the Exceptions of the Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. And here this Controversie rested for some time, and it was by many supposed would have ended. But at last both the Bishop and his Vindicator resolved once more to venture into the world;
and so after a long expectation, an Answer was published to this last Treatise, viz. 5. A Reply to the Defence of the Exposition of the Do∣ctrine of the Church of England; With a Second Letter from the Bishop of Meaux. To this there have been two Treatises already returned, and we may in some time expect a Third to be added to them, as soon as the Author has discharged himself of a newO. W's Ap∣pendix in an∣swer to the Discourse of the real Pre∣sence, and A∣doration of the Host. Adversary, which has since attacked Him on another account. The Vindicator it is hoped will not think much of a little delay in this matter; espe∣cially since I am Commissioned to promise him, that let Him make what hast he will, the last Part shall be got ready for Him, before He has finished any reasonable Answer to those already published. If it be enquired here, Wherefore this last Defence was divided into so many Parts; I presume this account may be given of it; That the Vindicator having run his Answer into a greater length than the ordinary rate of these Discourses usually allows of, either no just Reply must have been made to it, which our Expositor was unwilling they should be able to object to Him; Or if there were, He thought it would be much more acceptable to the world, as well as less burdensome to Himself, to publish his Answer at seve∣ral times, than to be opprest with so large a Volume, as it would have amounted to all together. What is already finished will be found under these Titles: 6. A Second Defence of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, against the new Ex∣ceptions of Monsieur de Meaux and His Vindica∣tor. Part I. In which the Account that has been given of the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vin∣dicated; the dictinction of Old and New Po∣pery, Historically Asserted; and the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome in point of Image-Wor∣ship, more particularly consider'd. Part II. In which the Romish Doctrines concerning the Nature and Object of Religious Worship: Of the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Ima∣ges and Reliques, are consider'd, and the Charge of Idolatry made Good against those of the Church of Rome upon the Account of them. And thus far our Expositor has carried his Reply: whilst the Se∣cond of these Parts was writing, the Vindicator attacked the First ac∣cording to their Modern way of Controversie, in a sheet and half; yet call'd it, A Full Answer to the Second Defence of the Expositi∣on of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in a Letter to the Defender. But the Author of the View of the Controversie being at that time engaged in a Reply to the Representer, and finding some congrui∣ty that the Answer to both of them should come out together, for the reasons given in the Preface to His Treatise; the Defender was left at liberty to go on with his design, and yet the Vindicator not suffered to complain for want of Consideration: The Reply I have in part mention'd before, but I will now give the Title of it at its full length: An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the Controversie. With a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer; shewing, That the Vin∣dicator has utterly ruined the new design of Ex∣pounding and Representing Popery. III. Having now given account of those two principal Contro∣versies that have of late been carried on among us, of Expound∣ing and Representing the Points in debate betwixt us and the Church
of Rome; I cannot better close this Point, than with this remark, That in a very little time after the Bishop of Condom's Exposition was set forth by the Vindicator, we were also obliged with the Translation of another of that Prelate's Pieces, called, A Pastoral Letter to the New Converts of his Diocess. It is not necessary to say that the Bishop in this Piece pursued still the design of his Exposition. That has been already shewn in the Answer to it, which I before remarked, at the end of the other Reply that was made to His Exposition, and which still continues Unanswered. That which has made more Noise is his open declaring to the New Converts of his Diocess, that they knew there had been no such thing as a Persecution in France. And the falseness and unsince∣rity of which declaration has been sufficiently exposed, both in the former part of thePag. 22. Sec. Defence, Answer to the Bishops Let∣ter. State of the Controversie; and in the second Defence of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England: And thither I shall remit those that desire to inform themselves more particularly of this matter. IV.Good Advice to the Pul∣pits. I should here have dismissed this Argument, had not the great Misrepresenter that began this Point, lately pursued it in a new Undertaking, and of which I cannot better give an Ac∣count, than in this place. It is not long since, that with the old design of exposing the Ministers of the Church of England to the Censures of the World, as Men who made it their Business, at any rate, to run down Popery, he set forth a malicious Discourse, call'd by him, 1. Good Advice tu the Pulpits, &c. In which he rakes together out of the Sermons published in the last years of the late King's Reign, whatever he thought would serve to make them odious. The Design was
well enough laid; and the Circumstances of the Times consi∣der'd, it were not to be wondred if some things should have pass'd more hot against those of the Church of Rome, than was to have been wished. But either our Ministers were then, as they have always been, very moderate; or this Author has been a very careless Examiner of their Excesses. However his Attempt soon met with a solid Confutation, in an excellent Treatise, En∣tituled, 2. An Apology for the Pulpits. And in which our Divines are fully justified against his Ex∣ceptions. To this he has lately set forth an Answer, called, 3. Pulpit-sayings; or the Characters of the Pulpit-Pa∣pist examined. To which there is an Answer called, 4. Pulpit-Popery, True Popery. And hitherto has this first sort of Controversie been carried on: A second thing which has given occasion to some Disputes these late years, and which, for the Affinity it has to the foregoing, I chuse next to mention, is, SECT. II. Of a pretended Agreement of the Church of England with the Church of Rome. AND this too the Representer is reported to have had a prin∣cipal hand in. It is no very long time since a Book was published in order to this end, and called in express terms,
An Agreement between the Church of England and the Church of Rome.Agreement between the C. of E. and the C. of R. I think I needed not have made any change of my former Head for this Treatise; there being perhaps not a more foul Misrepre∣sentation in the World, than what the great Chastiser of Misre∣presenters has made here in such a pretence as this. But tho his Title be General, yet the main design of his Book was to expose a particular person of our Church,D. Sherlock. and whom indeed they have all the reason in the world, if they can by any means, to run down; for I know no man that does the and their Cause more mischief, by those excellent Treatises which he continues still to publish against them. However both the general and the particu∣lar design of this new Contrivance, has been effectually answered in the two Replies that have come forth to it, viz. 1. The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in Opposition to a late Book, intituled, An Agreement, &c. 2. A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholick-Communion; from the charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. By Dr. Sherlock. But what this Author attempted in a more general manner, the Publisher of Discourses against us at Oxford, more particularly en∣deavoured with reference to the Holy Eucharist; in which, as he pretends, there is little or no difference between the true Sons of the Church of England, and those of the Other Communion: And which therefore shall be the next General Head of Controversies, to which I will now pass, viz.
SECT. III.Of the Real Presence. Of the Disputes which have passed these last years, concerning the Holy Eucharist. And here, I. Concerning the REAL PRESENCE. THis is the Point in which Mr. W. would fain piece up a kind of Agreement betwixt us, though all the World sees no∣thing can be more different than the Doctrine of the Real Pre∣sence as taught in the Church of England, and that of Transub∣stantiation, which is the Real Presence believed in the Church of Rome. But however it be, Mr. W. doubts not to make it appear, That our Divines have asserted the very same Presence of Christ, in effect, in the Eucharist, that the Romanists maintain; in a Trea∣tise, called, 1. Two Discourses concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Saviour in the Eucharist. And the former of which wholly pursues the pretended Agree∣ment I have now been speaking of. To this there came out first a London Answer, in which his Quo∣tations were fully examined, his Pretences considered, and the whole matter largely stated: And in return to his Allegations of some of our Church that believed their Real Presence, an Account was given of several that have lived and died in their Communion, that neither did nor could believe any such thing. The Title of it is, 2. A Discourse of the Holy-Eucharist in the Two great Points of the Real Presence, and the Adoration of the Host.
Not long after this, a Person of great Worth at Oxford pub∣lish'd a second Confutation of the same Piece, but with this dif∣ference, That whereas the former Discourse examined at large his Quotations, this chiefly consider'd the Principles on which he pro∣ceeded, and the Arguments he brought to justifie his Pretences. It is called, 3. A Reply to Two Discourses lately printed at Ox∣ford, concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Saviour in the Holy Eucharist. And here this Controversie rested till the last Term, when Mr. W. publishing another Treatise upon the same Subject, viz. 4. A Compendious Discourse on the Eucharist: Added to the End of it two Appendixes, in answer to the two Tracts that had been written against them. It appears by the Heat and Bitterness of these little Satyrs; how much those Books had troubled him, and how unable he is to command himself, even there where he pretends the most to do it. One would have thought after what the Representer had done, we had seen the height of what a licentious Pen could arise to in matters of such seriousness. But indeed this poor impotent old Man has con∣vinced us of our Error, and shewn such an indecent Passion in the menage of his Answer, as is much more to be pitied than va∣lued. But I shall leave it to those who are engaged with him, to take notice of these things: It is not to be doubted, but that in a little time their Answers will be finish'd; both the One and the Other, being, as I am informed, already in good forward∣ness. II.Of Commu∣nion in Both Kinds. COMMUNION in BOTH KINDS. Having thus given an Account of what has pass'd as to the Point of the Real Presence; the next thing that naturally offer'd its self, was the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But there has pass'd so
much concerning this Controversie, that I was willing before I came to that, to consider all the lesser Debates that have risen relating to this Holy Sacrament. The occasion of this Engagement was this: Monsieur de Meaux having some years since composed a famous Book upon this Argument, it was thought fit by those of the Church of Rome to translate that also, as well as the rest of his Tracts, into our Lan∣guage. Accordingly we find it to have been publish'd some time since, under the Title of A Treatise of Communion under One Kind. Now however it might have been sufficient for us to have fol∣low'd their Example, in translating that most accurate Answer of the late Monsieur Larrogue to it; yet one of our Divines was con∣tent to give it a new Consideration, in an excellent Book, called, A Discourse of the Communion in One Kind. In Answer to a Treatise of the Bishop of Meaux, of Communi∣on, &c. And here this Flourish ended: The Translator (whoever he was) of the Bishop's Treatise, looking upon himself to be no more obliged to defend it against his English Adversary, than the Bishop thought himself to be to vindicate it against the Attack of his French Antagonists. But tho this Controversie proceeded no farther, yet the Subject has been lately again revived by a very Learned Hand, who having searched throughly into Antiquity as to this Point, has given us an accurate Collection, called, A Demonstration that the Church of Rome and her Councils have erred; by shewing that the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Trent, have in all their Decrees touching Communion in one Kind, con∣tradicted the received Doctrine of the Church of Christ.
III.Of Transub∣stantiation. Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION. And now having cleared the way of all other Debates touch∣ing this Holy Sacrament, we are at last arrived to the great Point in dispute betwixt us, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But how to dispose of my self in so copious a Subject, and upon which so many Books have been written, is hard to resolve. I have already remarked what has passed on the occasion of the Discourse of Transubstantiation, the first that began this Debate. The next that gave occasion to the revival of this Controversie, was the Author of the Dublin Letter, who being answered by the Representer in his Second Part, cap. 3. a learned man of our Communion made good his Party in an excellent Discourse, which he calls, Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the Primitive Fa∣thers; being a Defence of the Dublin Letter, &c. And that no pretence to Antiquity might remain unconsidered as to this matter, the same Learned Hand has since obliged us with a full view of all that can reasonably be desired from the Primitive Fathers as to this matter, viz. A Full Vew of the Doctrines and Practices of the An∣cient Church relating to the Eucharist, wholly dif∣ferent from those of the present Roman Church, and inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation, &c. 2. A 2d sort of Discourses there have pass'd on this Argument in which our Adversaries of the Roman Communion, have made it their business to prove the Doctrine of the Trinity to be as full of Contradictions as that of Transubstantiatiom: But whether this be more likely to make us Papists or Socinians, to believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or to disbelieve that of the Trinity, I shall not determine. However our Divines have resolved to shew that there is no manner of reason for them to do either; and the
Tracts that have been published on this Occasion, are especially these. On the Popish Part. A Dialogue between a New Catholic Convert and a Protestant, concerning the Doctrines of the Trinity and Transubstantiation. On Our Part. 1. An Answer to a late Dialogue between a new Ca∣tholic Convert, and a Protestant, &c. 2. A Second Dialogue between a New Catholic Con∣vert, and a Protestant, shewing why He cannot be∣lieve the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, tho' he do firmly believe the Doctrine of the Trinity. 3. The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared as to Scripture, Reason, and Tradition. In a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist. In 2. Parts. 4. Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture; or the Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request. 3. Other Discourses there have been in great numbers on both sides as to this Point, and it shall suffice only to transcribe the Names of them. Popish Tracts concerning Transubstantiation. 1. A Seeker's Request to Catholic Priests and Protestant Ministers, for satisfying his Conscience in the Truth of what he ought to believe of the Lords-Supper.
2. The Catholic Answer to the Seeker's Request. 3. The Catholic Letter to the Seeker. Protestant Treatises against Transubstantiation. 1. A Plain Representation of Transubstantiation, as it is received in the Church of Rome. 2. The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated. 3. An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation. 4. A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface upon the 6th Chapter of St. John. 5. A Brief Discourse of the Real Presence. 6. The School of the Eucharist. 7. Six Conferences concerning Transubstantiation. 8. The Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request. 9. The Protestant's Answer to the Catholic Letter to the Seeker: Or, A Vindication of the Protestant's Answer to the Seeker's Request. To which we may add two Books, written indeed long since by two eminent Bishops of this Church, but thought fit to be Reprinted again, since Mr. W's attempts from Oxford about the Real Presence. The First is, 10. A Brief Declarationn of the Lord's Supper, written by Dr. Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London, during his Imprisonment. With some Determinations and Disputations concerning the same Argument, by the same Author. 11. Diallacticon Viri Boni & Literati, &c.
I mention this Book,Of the Notes of the Church. (tho a Latin one) because it is a very ex∣cellent Discourse written by Dr. John Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, in Edward VI's days, and was very rarely to be met with till this Reprinting of it. SECT. VI. Another Subject which has open'd a large field to Dis∣putes between us, and has accordingly been frequently insisted upon, is the CHURCH; with reference to the Marks, and Nature, and Prerogatives of it. I. Of the NOTES of the Church. HE must be very little acquainted with the late Methods made use of by those of the Church of Rome, in propagating their Religion among us, who knows not this to have been all along their great Endeavour, to fly, as much as possible, all particular Disputes, and keep themselves within the general Notions of the Church: That so applying whatever is, or is pretended to have been said of the Church Catholic, to their own particular Communi∣on, they might more easily deceive unwary and ignorant Men. But in this too, as well as in all other Points in debate, they have not fail'd to meet enough to encounter their Pretences. And to the End it might be better seen how vain a Pretence it is in them to call themselves Catholics, and their Church the Catholic Church, as if (in the words of the Prophet) they were alone,Isa. xlv. 6. and there were none be∣sides them: One of the first Controversies to be remark'd in this Point is, that of the NOTES of the CHƲRCH; and upon which they undertake to shew theirs, exclusive to all others, to be the Catholic Church of Christ Militant upon Earth. The former part of the State of the Controversie gave an account of the beginning of these; how our Divines engaged themselves to a weekly consideration of them, till they had past through the lar∣gest
Catalogue we have yet had of these Notes, viz. that of Cardi∣nal Bellarmin. They were then advanced to the third only, but now the whole is finished; and those little Exceptions which our Aaversaries thought fit to make to them, are fully answered, and they altogether compose a just Volume; and plainly shew, that were the Church indeed endued with all those Prerogatives they pretend it is, yet would it stand them in no stead, seeing, that according to their own Notes, the Church of Rome cannot possibly be the Catholic or Ʋniversal Church. The Notes which on this occasion have been particularly exa∣mined, are these. 1. An Examination of BELLARMIN's First Note concerning, [the Name of Catholick.] 2. —His Second Note, [Antiquity,] 3. —His Third Note, [Duration,] 4. —His Fourth Note, [Amplitude or Multitude and Variety of Believers.] 5. —His Fifth Note, [The Succession of Bishops.] 6. His Sixth Note, [Agreement in Doctring with the Primitive Church.] 7. —His Seventh Note, [Ʋnion of the Members among themselves, and with the Head.] 8. —His Eighth Note, [Sanctity of Doctrine.] 9. —His Ninth Note, [Efficacy of the Doctrine.] 10. —His Tenth Note, [Holiness of Life.] 11. —His eleventh Note, [The Glory of Miracles.] 12. —His Twelfth Note, [The Light of Prophecy.] 13. —His thirteenth Note, [Confession of Adversaries.]
14. —His Fourteenth Note, [The unhappy End of the Church's Enemies.] 15. —His Fifteenth Note, [Temporal Felicity.] To which is prefixed, A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church; with some Reflections on Cardinal Bellarmin's Notes. And annexed, A Vindication of the Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church; in Answer to a Late Pam∣phlet, Intituled [The Ʋse and great Moment of the Notes of the Church, as delivered by Cardinal Bel∣larmin (de Notis Ecclesia) Justified. A Defence of the Confuter of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church [Antiquity against the Cavils of the Adviser. II. Of the UNITY and AUTHORITY of the Church.Of the Unity and Autho∣rity of the Church. This is another Argument that has exercised the Pen of a very great Person amongst as: The occasion of his entring on the De∣bate, was given by the publishing of some Papers of His late Ma∣jesty, and which are in every Bodies hand, called, 1. The two Papers written by the late King Charles the Second.
To these an Answer was published, Intituled, 2. An Answer to some Papers lately Printed concerning the Authority of the Catholick Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of England. It was not long before two of the other side appeared about the same time, in defence of the Royal Papers: The one very light, and in some places even ridiculous, and which shews, that the Author's Talent lies towards Controversie no more in Prose, than it appears by the Hind and Panther, that it do's in Verse; cal∣led, 3. A Defence of the Papers written by the late King of Blessed Memory. The other, much ore solid and grave than the former, Inti∣tuled, 4. A Reply to the Answer made upon the Three Royal Papers. To both of which the Learned Author returned a most accu∣rate and elaborate Discourse, viz. 5. A Vindication of the Answer to some late Papers, concerning the Unity and Authority of the Catho∣lic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England. And thus far this Controversie proceeded: But there have been some other Discourses besides these, published on this Subject: In particular, the excellent Discourse just published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, with this Title,
A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity,Of the Au∣thority and Infallibility of the Church. and Com∣munion of the Catholick Church: Wherein most of the Controversies relating to the Church, are briefly and plainly stated. Part 1. by William Sher∣lock, D. D. Master of the Temple. To these, for the Affinity of the Subject, I cannot do better than adjoyn, III. Such other Treatises as have been publish'd, relating to the AUTHORITY and INFALLI∣BILITY of the Church. Where first I will beg leave to mention some short Picces which have passed betwixt a Country Parson, and a Bomish Missioner. The occasion, as I am informed was this: The Minister having obser∣ved some Endeavours to seduce his Flock, thought it his duty to give them some seasonable directions; which he therefore pub∣lished under this Title: 1. The Country Parson's Admonition to his Parishioners, with directions how to behave themselves, when any one designs to seduce them from the Church of England. In which Tract, he advises his Parishioners, as far as possible, to avoid all Disputes about Religion: But if the Importunity of o∣thers shall force them to it, he then directs them how to bring the matter to a short issue, viz. by putting them to prove the pre∣tended Infallibility of the Church of Rome. And this he manageth under the Title of, 2. The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. I ought not to conceal how acceptable those little Pieces have been to the World, nor what good they have done among those
for whose use they were chiefly designed.Of the Infal∣libility of the Church. And this those of the other side have been so sensible of, that they have thought it worth their while to set out a pretended Confutation of them both; called, 3. The Plain Man's Answer to his Country Parson's Ad∣monition: Together with the Missionaries Answer to the Plain Man's Reply. To which the worthy Author of the Two first Treatises, has lately replied, under these Titles, 4. A Defence of the Country Parson's Admonition. 5. A Defence of the Plain Man's Reply. And here I think this Controversie has ended. If any Answer has been published to these last Papers, It is more than I have yet seen or heard of; and I believe there is none. As for those sepa∣rate Discourses that have come forth, relating to this matter, the Principal, if not all, are these that follow. On the Part of the Church of England. 1. The Pillar and Ground of Truth; a Treatise shewing that the Roman Church falsly claims to be THAT Church, and the Pillar of THAT Truth mentioned by S. Paul, in 1 Tim III. 11, 15. 2. A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in matters of Religion. 3. A Plain and Familiar Discourse by way of Dialogue, betwixt a Minister and his Parishioner, concerning the Catholic Church. 4. Reasons why a Protestant should not turn Papist, in a Letter to a Romish Priest.
5. Monsieur Claude's Conference with the Bishop of Meaux.Of the Au∣thority of the Church. 6. An Historical Examination of the Authority of Ge∣neral Councils. 7. Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. 8. A Sermon on S. Mark's Day, by Dr. Patrick. 9. Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility. 10. A Short Discourse concerning the Church's Autho∣rity in Matters of Faith. On the Church of Rome's Side. 1. A Peaceable Method for the re-uniting Protestants and Catholics in Matters of Faith. Written in French by Monsieur Maimbourg. 2. Seek and ye shall find: or a search into the Grounds of Religion, &c. 3. Monsieur de Meaux's Conference with Monsieur Claude concerning the Authority of the Church. SECT V. To these Disputes concerning the Church, I do not know any that I can so sitly subjoin, as those which regard the pretended Priviledges and Authority of St. PETER, and of the POPES, as His Successors. IT is now some time since an Eminent Person of the other Com∣munion, Dr. Godden, began the Contest as to this matter, in a Sermon Preach'd by him in the Queen Dowagers Chappel, and called,
A Sermon of St.Of S. Peter and the Pope Peter, preached before her Majesty, the Queen Dowager, June 29. 1686. In requital of this, a very Learned Man of our Church, set out a Sermon which he had occasionally Preach'd in his own Church, the very same Day, upon the same Text; intituled, A sermon Preach'd upon S. Peter's Day; Printed at the desire of some that heard it, with some Enlargements, by a Divine of the Church of England. I will not say any thing more of these Two Discourses, than this, That whoso shall please to read them, will find what is to be ur∣ged from that famous Text, Thou art Peter, &c. on either side; and when they compare them together, may judg as they shall find the evidence of Truth to incline them. But of this large Subject much more has been set forth; and it shall suffice to give a very brief Account of it. 1. The Catholick Ballance; or a Discourse determining the Controversies concerning, 1. The Tradition of Catholic Doctrines. 2. The Primacy of S. Peter, and the Bishop of Rome. 3. The Subjection and Authority of the Church in a Christian State. 2. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion; with an Answer to Mr. Sclater's Reasons, and the Collections of Nobes Testium. 3. A modest Enquiry, Whether S. Peter were ever at Rome, and Bishop of that Church?
4. Sure and Honest Means for the Conversion of all Hereticks;Of St. Peter and the Popes Su∣premacy. and wholesome Advice and Expedients for the Reformation of the Church. 5. Dialogues between Philerene and Philalethe. These are, I think, the chief Discourses that have been Pub∣lished by our Divines relating to the Prerogatives and Authority that some pretend to, in behalf of St. Peter, and the Bishops of Rome, his Successors. As for those which have been sent abroad on this Head by those of the Other Communion, these are the Principal that have come to my Knowledg. 1. St. Peter's Supremacy faithfully discuss'd according to Holy Scripture, and Greek and Latin Fathers: By Mr. Clenche. 2. The Popes Supremacy Asserted from the Considera∣tions of some Protestants, and the practice of the Primitive Church, in a Dialogue between a Church-Divine and a Seeker. In Vindication of Nubes Testium. Concerning this last Discourse, you must observe, that it does belong to the Controversie about the Nubes Testium betwixt the Representer and the Divine of our Church who answered that Col∣lection. The Representer made a very faint defence of his Nubes against that Answer, but gave it a good Title, calling it, The Primitive Fathers no Protestants: To which Mr. G. shortly after re∣plied in his Primitive Fathers no Papists; after which that Contro∣versie rested, till the Representer peept out again with this Tract in defence of one point only of his Nubes Testium; but whoever will take the pains to look into it, will find that the Representer's Stock is quite spent, and therefore he is forc'd to patch up these Learned Dialogues out of his own Nubes Testium, and the Appen∣dix, with the addition only of a few bold strokes (which F. Sabran would have call'd Calumnies) about Dr. Sherlock, &c. So that this Book deserves no Answer at all; however a very Learned
Person of our Church having undertaken to answer Mr. Clcuche's Book, and Dr. Godden's Sermon about the Pope's Supremacy, hath condescended to consider this Tract also, and the world will very speedily be obliged with a Compleat and Learned Answer to them all under this Title. A Discourse of the Popes Supremacy, in Two Parts: The First, In Answer to a Treatise Entitul'd, Saint Peter's Supremacy faithfully discuss'd according to Holy Scripture and Greek and Latin Fathers. And to a Sermon of St. Peter Preach'd before her Majesty, the Queen Dowager on St. Peter and St. Paul's day, by Tho. Godden, D. D. The Second, In Answer to a Discourse Entitul'd, The Pope's supremacy asserted from the Considera∣tions of some Protestants, and the Practice of the Primitive Church, in Vindication of Nubes Testium. SECT. VI. Such have been the Treatises that have pass'd on both sides concerning the Popes Authority. The next Point which seems to follow the nearest upon these, and which indeed is chiefly founded on Arguments drawn from the Pretences before mention'd, is that of our unwarrantableness in separating from the Church of Rome, and Chair of St. Peter: And concerning which much has been done on both sides. AS for our Divines, the Treatises they have publish'd in Vindica∣tion of our Reformation from the Charge of SCHISM and HERESIE, have been these that follow.
1. A Vindication of the Church of England from the foul aspersions of Schism and Heresie unjustly cast upon her by the Church of Rome. In two Parts.Of the Charge of Schism and Heresie. 2. An Answer to a late Printed Paper given about by Some of the Church of Rome: In a Letter to a Gentleman. 3.An Answer to the Considerations which obliged Dean Manby to embrace what he calls the Catholic Religion. 4. Notes upon Lucilla and Elizabeth. 5. An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of En∣gland, in Answer to those who reproach her with the English Heresies and Schisms, or suspect her not to be a Catholic Church, upon their account. 6. A few plain reasons why a Protestant of the Church of England, should not turn Roman Catholic. 7. An Answer to the Spirit of M. Luther, and the Ori∣ginal of the Reformation, lately Printed at Oxford. 8. Animadversions on Mr. W's Discourse of Church-Government. In two Parts. 9. Reflections on the relation of the English Reforma∣tion, lately Printed at Oxford: and on the Ox∣ford Theses, Two Parts. 10. An Answer to a Book Intituled, Reason and Autho∣rity, or the Motives of a late Protestant's Recon∣ciliation to the Catholic Church. Together with a brief Account of Augustine the Monk, and the Conversion of the English. 11. The State of the Church of Rome when the Refor∣mation began; as it appears by the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own.
12. The Queries offer'd by T. W. to the Protestants concerning the English Reformation, Re-printed and Answer'd. Nor have those of the Roman Communion been sparing in this Argument, but have made this a Great Subject of Contention a∣gainst us: As will appear by the following Account. 1. Lucilla and Elizabeth, or the Donatist and Prote∣stant Schism Parallel'd. 2. The Sum of a Conference had between two Divines of the Church of England, and two Catholic Lay-Gentlemen, in 1671. 3. The Church of England truly represented according to Dr. Heylin's History of the Reformation. 4. The Gonsiderations which obliged Peter Manby Dean of London-Derry to embrace the Roman Catho∣lic Religion. 5. Schelstrate his Dissertation against Dr. Stillingfleet, concerning Patriarchal and Metropolitical Au∣thority. As to this Book, since Mr. Schelstrate's Friends heve ventu∣red to expose it in a Translation here, the Reverend and Most Worthy Dean of Paul's will not fail, if God continue him health and opportunity, to give an Answer; and I am sure the world will not be angry with me for raising their Expectations of the Dean's Answer, since they are satisfied that he will make them sufficient amends for them. 6. A discourse concerning the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original of the Reformation. 7. Church-Government Part V. A Relation of the English Reformation, and the lawfulness thereof examined.
8. Some Queries to Protestants concerning the English Reformation: by T.W. 9. The Schism of the Church of England Demonstrated in Four Arguments, formerly proposed to Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson the late Bishops of Ely and Chester, by two Catholic Disputants, in a celebrated Conference upon that Point. This little Paper with a large Title was the other day Reprin∣ted at Oxford by the Converts there. The foul dealings and egre∣gious disingenuity concerning that Conference, as well as the weakness and falseness of its Arguments, have been fully shewn in an Answer we have received just now from Cambridg, from a Reverend Person who was particularly related to one of those abused Bishops. The Title of his Answer is, The Reformation of the Church of England justisied, according to the Canons of the Council of Nice, and other General Councils, and the Tradition of the Catholic Church, being an Answer to a Paper Re-printed at Oxford, &c. SECT. VII. And these are the chief Treatises that have been pub∣lish'd on these more General Points. We come now to examine what has been done on the more particu∣lar Controversies. And first we will begin with that which is the Ground of all, The RULE of FAITH. MAny have been the Debates concerning this; both with re∣lation to what we suppose to be the only Divine Rule, viz. The
HOLY SCRIPTUR,Of the Rule of Faith. and with reference to that other which those of the Church of Rome have added to it, viz. The TRADITION of the Church. And, 1. As to the Point of the HOLY SCRIPTURE, these discourses have pass'd of late concerning it: On the part of the Church of Rome. 1. The Protestant's Plea for a Socinian, justifying his Doctrine from being opposite to Scripture, &c. 2. Protestancy destitute of Scripture Proofs. 3. A Request to Protestants to produce plain Scriptures, directly Authorizing xvi Tenets held by them. 4. The 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters of the Second Part of the Catholic Representer. 5. An Address to the Ministers of the Church of En∣gland. 6. A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant Rule of Faith. 7. The Catholic Scripturist. 8. Pax Vobix. On the Protestant Part. 1. The difference betwixt the Protestant and Socinian Methods, in Answer to a Book written by a Roma∣nist, and intituled, The Protestant Plea for a Socinian. 2. An Answer to the Request to protestants to produce plain Scriptures directly Authorizing their Tenets. 3. A Summary of the Principal Controversies between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in Answer to Protestancy destitute of Scripture proofs.
4. The Lay-Christians Obligation to read the Holy Scripture. 5. The Peoples right to read the Holy Scripture, as∣serted; in Answer to the 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters of the 2d part of the Popish Repre∣senter. 6. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith; writ by Reginald Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the Reformation, about the year 1450. 7. An Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of England. 8. A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address, presented to the Ministers of the Church of En∣gland; In reply to a Pamphlet, abusively Intituled, A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant Rule of Faith. 9. Some Dialogues between Mr. G. and others, with Re∣flections on a Book called Pax Vobis. To which I must add another and fuller Answer preparing to that same little Piece, not yet Publish'd, viz. 10. The Protestant and Popish way of Interpreting Scripture impartially compared, in Answer to Pax Vobis. 2. For what concerns the other Point, TRADITION; it has been the great Endeavour of some of late to set up once more the Infallibility of it. But none with more Noise, by an ac∣cident, which I am now to recount, than Mr. G. and the great Master of Controveesie, and Patron of this new Hypothesis, J. S. It happen'd about a year and half since, that the forwardness of Mr. G. to engage in a Dispute wherein he was sure to have the disadvantage both in the Point, and in the Person that was to ma∣nage
it against him, led him into a Conference with the Reverend and Learned the Dean of Pauls. I need not say what passed there, the whole haying since been published: The Subject of the De∣bate, was the Infallibility of Oral Tradition. The Conference being over, Mr. G. (according to the perpetual Custom of the vain and assuming spirit of that Party) began to make great Boasts in the Coffee-houses, what Feats he had done, and how great a Victory he had gained; tho the Gentleman, for whose sake the Conference was held, declared himself much more confirmed in the Communion of our Church than he was before, and resolved to continue in it. This enforced the Dean to publish a short Expostulatory Letter, called, 1. A Letter to Mr. G. giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of P. In return to this, Mr. M. who was with Mr. G. at the Conference, returned a Letter or two to Dr. Stilling fleet, concerning the Con∣ference; and these produced a second from the Dean of St. Pauls, called, 2. A second Letter to Mr. G. in Answer to two Letters lately Publish'd concerning the Conference at the D. of P. One of the Answers to the D. of P's first Letter, was called, 3. A Letter to the D. of P. in Answer to the Arguing part of his First Letter to Mr. G. To this a Person not yet concerned, put in a Reply, Intituled, 4. A Letter to a Friend; reflecting on some passages in a Letter to the D. of P. in Answer to the Arguing part of his first Letter to Mr. G. And here Mr. J.S. was thought fit to be entrusted with carry∣ing on this weighty Controversie; which he did in several Letters, which he calls Catholic Letters; in Answer to the former Letter, to the second of the Dean's, and to a Sermon, which in pursuance of this Controversie, he preached at Guildhall. To these Dr. S. has since replied in a Treatise, which he calls,
5. A Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith, in Answer to J. S. his Ca∣tholic Letters. It was expected that this excellent Discourse, which made such a discovery of the Vanity and Contradictions of that busy Man, would have stopt his Mouth for the future, especially since the Blackloist Heresy was now like to be brought on the Stage again. But J. S. was long since past such Modesty; and since, if the worst that can come, he can eat his words now again, as well as he did before, when he was cited to Rome, to be censured for those dangerous Heretical Opinions which he is now again broaching in England: He is for venturing on, and wrote a Fifth Catholic Letter (as he ridiculously calls it) against the Dean. But tho his Letter has, I believe, met with as few Readers as Himself has Admirers, and there is no danger in the World of its doing any Mischief, since I do not believe it possible to hire any Man of Sense to read three Pages in it; yet in Compassion, I suppose, to the poor head-strong Man him∣self, there is a very Learned Person hath undertaken to answer not only that Fifth Letter, but the other Discourses of the Romanists about Tradition, in An Historical Discourse concerning Tradition. This we may expect to have published shortly. In the mean time the Reverend Dean himself did take another and more effectual course to disprove J. S's Phantastical Demonstrations of Oral Tradition, by shewing, that tho we should allow Tradition to be as certain and Infallible a Rule as they desire, yet it would do them no ser∣vice, who in all those Points wherein they differ from us, have no Catholic Tradition to warrant them; upon this, in a short time after the publishing his Discourse, he set forth the First Part of a Work which we suppose may put a final end to this Debate, viz.
6. The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition; in the main Points in Contro∣versy between Us and the Church of Rome: With an account of the Times and Occasions of Intro∣ducing them. Part I. We are promised a Second Part, if God continue the Reverend Author Health and Leisure; we cannot but earnestly wish for it, since the First Part was so very acceptable, and so very satisfactory. And thus far this Controversy has been carrled on on both sides. I had almost forgot to observe, that tho the Dean of Pauls himself undertook Mr. J. S. his Catholic Letters, yet the Reflecter was not wanting to his own Defence as far as he was particularly concern'd in them. But in a Second Discourse defended his Letter against Mr. J. S. his Attack in his Second Catholic Letter: the Treatise is cal∣led, 7. The Reflecters Defence of his Letter to a Friend, against the furious Assaults of Mr. J. S. in his Se∣cond Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues. In this Condition was this Controversy when the Continua∣tion first appear'd abroad. But Mr. J. S. has since carri'd it a little farther in a new Piece, which he calls, 8. A Letter to the Continuator of the Present State of our Controversy. And in which, tho one would think his main Design were what he adds in the rest of his Title, To lay open the folly of my ex∣travagant Boastings, and the Malice of my wilful Forgeries: Yes, af∣ter two Leaves and a half, spent in railing at me, he insensibly falls to his old Adversaries, and spends the rest of his Pains upon them. And to their Correction I shall leave him, who are chiefly concernl'd to take notice of his Insolence. As for my self, I heartily
pity his Vanity; and shall neither trouble my self, the World, nor him, by taking the least notice of his Recitings. Besides this long Encounter upon the Score of Tradition, other Discourses have been published on both Sides upon this Point, Whether the Church of Rome has indeed such an Antiquity as it pre∣tends, for the Articles in dispute betwixt us? And such was, First, The famous Collection of one of their earliest Converts, Mr. Sclater, Minister of Putney, in a Book which he call'd, 1. Consensus Veterum: or the Reasons of Edward Sclater minister of Putney, for his Conversion to the Catholic Faith and Communion. And to which a Reply was published, that has put an end to this Undertaking, viz. 2. Veteres Vindicati: In an Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater Minister of Putney, upon his consensus Veterum. But the next Collection was more general, and has run into a longer Debate: It was called, 1. Nubes Testium: Or, A Collection of the Primi∣tive Fathers, giving Testimony to the Faith once de∣livered to the Saints. To this the same Learned Man who had before Encountred Mr. Sclater's Pretences, gave a short but exact Answer; and shew'd, That tho the Representer (for it seems his it was) called it a Colle∣ction of the Primitive Fathers, he might much better have entituled a Collection of Natalis Alexander, out of whom he stole the far greatest part of it. The Representer will, I hope, excuse this Refle∣ction, which I make only for the sake of Truth, and to shew how unwilling I am in any thing to deserve being thought a Misrepre∣senter; which is now become as dangerous a Name, as ever that of Heretic or Schismatic was heretofore. The Answer is called,
2. An Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium: Wherein is shewn, That Antiquity did not for the first five hundred years Believe, Teach, or Practice, as the Church of Rome doth at present Believe, Teach, and Practice. And here we are to meet a very strange Accident, the great Chastiser of Misrepresenters, that honest, sincere Man that cannot endure false dealing, but was dropt down from Heaven to be the Scourge and Censor of a licentious Age, himself become a Mis∣representer: And by a stranger kind of Metamorphosis, from an angel of Light transforming himself into a Spirit of Darkness. In short, He was it seems enraged to the last Degree, to see not only his venerable Authorities all ruined, but his Treasury discovered, and the very places mark'd from whence he had stollen his Book, without so much as once acknowledging to whom he was be∣holden for it. And yet what should he do? Reply to it fairly he could not; for after all his shew of Antiquity, the Fathers were a sort of Christians that he was utterly unacquainted with; and had he been as well versed in them as he is in Natalis Alexander, yet could he not have fairly brought them to speak in behalf of his Church. He therefore resolved under a new form to pickeer with the Author, and see if he could prevent him by some cun∣ning Stratagem from being in a capacity of shewing him any such trick for the future. And therefore now no more the Reverend Father he was before, but as a Zealous Brother of the other Extreme, tho yet a Misrepresenter still, he lets fly at the Principles of his Ad∣versary; and undertakes out of his grand concern for the Prote∣stant Interest, to shew our Divines that this Gentleman was one, who for all his Pretences in their behalf, really endeavour'd to set up Popery in Masquerade. And to this end came out a formal Piece called, 3. A Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England in order to a Ʋnion.
But to the great surprize of this Gentleman, his Adversary, who it seems was as well acquainted with Henry Hill's Press, as Natalis Alexander's history, and by a sort of Beauties so essential to the Representer, that do what he can he is not able to disguise him∣self, presently found out what an Ass was crept into the Lyon's Skin. And to let the whole World see what an honest fair dealer this Representer is, he quickly gave an account of it in Print, in his Answer to the Pamphlet, Intituled, 4. a Vindication of the Principles of the Author of the Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium, from the Charge of Popery: In Answer to a late pretended Letter from a Dissenter, to the Divines of the Church of England. To this I do not know that the Representer has yet replied: But in defence of his Nubes Testium we have an Answer that every way befits the Character of its Author: It is call'd, 5. The Primitive Fathers no Protestants: Or a Vindi∣cation of Nubes Testium from the Cavils of the Answerer. And that has produced us another Defence: viz. 6. The Primitive Fathers no Papists: In Answer to the Vindication of the Nubes Testium. To which is added an Historical Discourse concerning Invoca∣tion of Saints, in Answer to the Challenge of Fa∣ther Lewis Sabran the Jesuit. And here it was thought this Controversy would have ended, till the other day the Representer peept out with his Defence of one Chapter of his Nubes Testium, which I have already menti∣oned under this Title,
The Popes Supremacy Asserted. To which an Answer will be shortly in the Press. And here this Debate might have ended, had not a short Post∣script at the Close of the first Answer to the Nubes Testium, engaged our Worthy Author in a new Quarrel with Father Sabran a Je∣suit; and who is now grown more famous in the World from his New Antagonist the Protestant Footman, who as we have before observed, undertook the Defence of the Reverend Master of the Temple from such pitiful Cavils, as indeed were not worth the while of the Learned Man himself to take notice of; and are abundantly answer'd by his new and more proper Antagonist. In his Sermon before the King at Chester, this Jesuit told his Majesty and the Auditory, that he follow'd the advice of St. Austin when he recommended himself to the Blessed Virgins Intercession, and advised them to do the same: And for this quotes his Thirty-fifth Sermon de Sanctis. Upon this there began a hot Debate in Letters betwixt F. Sabran, and the Answerer, concerning this Authority of St. Austin; and at last from a particular Passage, rose up to a General Point, of the Practice of the Primitive Church as to the Invocation of Saints. The Pieces themselves may be consulted in this Order. 1. A Letter to a Peer of the Church of England, clear∣ing a Point in a Sermon Preach'd at Chester, in Answer to a Postscript joyned unto the Answer to Nubes Testium. 2. A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in Answer to his Letter to a Peer of the Church of England, &c. 3. A Reply of Lewis Sabrand of the Society of Jesus, to the Answer given to his Letter written to a Peer of the Church of England, &c.
4. A Second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran, Jesuit, in Answer to his Reply. And here the Controversy about St. Austin's Sermon was either ended or dropt, the Jesuit being now ferretted by the Second Let∣ter out of all his starting holes. But Mr. G. in his Primitive Fathers no Papists, taking into Consideration a Challenge, which the Jesuit had made him in one of his Letters about Invocation, published an Historical Discourse to prove that Invocation of Saints was neither the Doctrine nor the Practice of the Primitive Fathers. Upon this the Jesuit begun again, after having taken a little breath, and in a whole Sheet undertakes to answer that large Historical Account, with this Title, 5. The Challenge of Father Lewis Sabran made out, a∣gainst the Historical Discourse concerning Invoca∣tion of Saints. To which Mr. G. very soon after replied in 6. A Third Letter to Father Lewis Sabrah, Jesuit; Wherein the Defence of his Challenge concerning Invocation of Saints, is Examin'd and Confuted. In this Letter Mr. G. made such Discoveries of the strange Dis∣ingenuity, and confident Ignorance of the Jesuit, that he was resolved to rid his Hands of such an Adversary as had neither Learning nor Good-manners, and therefore told him in the Con∣clusion of his Letter that he would trouble himself no more with answering such an Adversary. Upon this the Jesuit, whose only stock is Confidence, being turn'd off by his Learned Adversary, was forc'd to address his next Reply to a Third Person, and pitcht upon Mr. Needham, because he had Licensed Mr. G's Third Letter to him; and directed a Letter to him with this Title, 7. A Letter to Dr. William Needham; In Answer to the Third Letter by him Licensed, Written to Father Lewis Sabran, of the Society of Jesus.
To which Mr. G. did finally Reply in an Address to the Jesuit's Superiors; and this it's supposed will end this Controversy, it is call'd, 8. A Letter to the Superiors, (whether Bishops or Priests) which approve or License the Popish Books in England; particularly to those of the Jesuits Order, concerning Lewis Sabrah, a Jesuit. And all these Engagements the first Answer to the Nubes Te∣stium produced: But tho we now quit our Author, yet we must not therefore leave the Subject. For about the same time that the former Answer appeared, another Learned Person of our Church began to consider it by Parts, in several Letters to a Person of Qua∣lity: And the Account of which I will now give, as far as the Pieces are come to my Knowledg. The first that appeared, was called, 1. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion: With an Answer to Mr. Sclater's Reasons, and the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet intituled, Nubes Testium. In a Letter to a Person of Qua∣lity. The first Part. The next he Entituled, 2. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, concern∣ing Images: With an Answer to the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet, Intituled, Nubes Testium. In a Letter to a Person of Qua∣lity. The 2d Part. What Notice has been taken of the former of these, I am not able to say; but the latter has produced us an Answer, Entitu∣led,
3. A Discourse of the Use of Images, in relation to the Church of England and the Church of Rome; in Vindication of Nubes Testium. To which our Author has replied in 4. A Third Letter to a Person of Quality, being a Vin∣dication of the former; in Answer to a late Pam∣phlet, Intituled, A Discourse of the Ʋse of Images. And to that in pursuance of his First Design, has lately added a Fourth, which he calls, 5. A Fourth Letter to a Person of Quality; being an Historical Account of the Doctrine of the Sacra∣ment, from the Primitive times to the Council of Trent, shewing the Novelty of Transubstantiation. To conclude this Head, I shall only add one General Discourse on this Subject, which I have before mention'd, and can never name too often, viz. Of the Authority of Councils, and the RULE of FAITH.
SECT. VIII.Of the Na∣ture of Ido∣latry. Having hitherto pursu'd the business of the Rule of Faith, and the Treatises that have been publish'd on the Occasion of it; we will now go on to the more special Examinations that have been made by both these Rules; viz. Scripture and Tradi∣tion, of the particular Points in debate betwixt us. And because I have just now mention'd some such Examinations of the two great Rocks of of∣fence to us, The Worship of Images, and the Invocation of Saints; it may not be amiss first of all to see what has been further done upon these Arguments, and the other instances of what we esteem, The IDOLATRY of the Church of Rome. THere is perhaps nothing in all our Disputes with those of the other Communion, which they so unwillingly care to enter on, as this. They look upon the very Name of it to be a kind of Re∣proach to them, and would be thought as heartily, as we our selves can desire, to detest the Guilt of it. But yet 'tis too evident to be deny'd, that our Charge is very justly brought against them; and by consequence that it ought not to be doubted, but that our Separation from them must have been most reasonable, if it can in∣deed be made appear, as we are perswaded we have plainly shewn, that we could not have continued in their Communion, without joyning with them in the Practice of one of the greatest of Sins, viz. Idolatry.
But before we come to the Particulars in which this Charge is brought against them, it is fit we should first state the general Noti∣on of IDOLATRY; and this has been effectually done, but very lately. The Reverend the Bishop of Oxon, having in a Trea∣tise which he published for the abrogating of the Test and Penal Laws, given us just occasion to do so. This Book is so well known, and the Answer to it was so lately published, that I shall not need say any thing more of either, but only add their Titles, which are these, viz. 1. Reasons for Abrogating the Test. 2. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry: In which a late Author's true and only notion of Idolatry is consider'd and Confuted. I must not forget to observe also, that the Bishop in his Tract pretending to give a new and very strange Account of the Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that part of his Book received two particular Considerations, the one in the Preface to the Reverend Dean of Paul's Book, Entituled, The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition: The other in a Learned Discourse, under this Title, 3. Transubstantiation the Peculiar Doctrine of the Church of Rome. I am told we owe this Book to a very ingenious Nonconformist; and as we cannot but thank him for the Discourse he has given us, so he deserves to be thanked for his design of answering the other part of the Bishop's Book about the Nature of Idolatry; in which he was prevented, as I am told, by the other Discourse about the Nature of Idolatry coming out while that good design was under his hands. I cannot but wish that our Brethren had begun sooner to assist us in such a large Controversie as we have been obliged to manage, and that others amongst them would follow the Example, which this Learned Author has so worthily set before them.
Another Writer hath given us a very ingenious short Answer to both parts of the Bishop's Book, and calls it, 4. A Discourse concerning Transubstantiation and Ido∣latry, being an Answer to the Bishop of Oxford's Plea relating to those two Points. As for the particular Instances wherein we make good this charge of Idolatry against them; I have before mentioned that of the ADORATION of the HOST,See above, Page 6. 19. and the Discourses that have been published on that Argument. The two Points remaining, and of which something was said under the last Head, are, the WORSHIP of IMAGES, and the INVOCA∣TION of Saints. I. Of the WORSHIP of IMAGES. Upon which Point,Of the Wor∣ship of Ima∣ges. besides the two Letters written in Answer to the Nubes Testium, the following Discourses have also been set forth, viz. 1. The Fallibility of the Roman Church demonstrated from the manifest Error of the second Nicene and Trent Councils; which assert, That the Veneration and Honorary Worship of Images is a Tradition Pri∣mitive and Apostolical. 2. A Discourse concerning the second Council of Nice, which first introduced and established Image-Worship in the Christian Church; Anno Domini 787. For the other Point, II. The INVOCATION of SAINTS. Many Discourses have been Published, and a full account given of this Matter; and if we may judge by the slender Returns
that have been made to them,Of the In∣vocation of Saints. little is to be said in Vindication of this Superstition. The Treatises that I have seen, are these that follow. 1. Speculum B. Virginis: A Discourse of the due Praise and Honour of the Virgin Mary. 2. A Discourse concerning the Worship of the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints; with an Account of the Be∣ginning and Rise of it among Christians; in Answer to Monsieur de Meaux's Appeal to the ivth Age, in his Exposition and Pastoral Letter. 3. Wholesom Advices from the B. Virgin to her indis∣creet Worshippers. This Piece was only a Translation which an Ingenious Lay-man of our Church put into English, and set a large Preface before it: To this the Catholic Representer gave an Attack in the 4th Chapter of his Second Part; and thereby obliged our Author to make a smart Reply upon him, called, A Letter to the Misrepresenter of Papists. 4. An Account of the Life and Death of the B. Virgin, according to the Romish Writers, with the Grounds of the Worship paid to her. 5. The Life of S. Mary Magdalene of Pazzi, a Carme∣lite Nun; with a Preface of the Nature, Causes, Concomitants, and Consequences of Extasie and Ra∣pture; and a brief Discourse added, about dis∣cerning and trying Spirits, whether they be of God. 6. An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of S. Ann, Mo∣ther of the Mother of God.
7. The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome demonstrated in some Observations upon the Life of Ignatius Loyola. 8. The Virgin Mary Misrepresented by the Roman Church, &c. Part I. Wherein Two of her Feasts, her Conception, and Nativity, are considered. We are in hopes that the Excellent Author of this most inge∣nious and diverting Discourse will e're long oblige the World with a Second Part, and teach the Papists at length to grow ashamed of their intolerable Superstitions towards the Virgin Mary. As for those of the other Communion, it is but little they have published in particular on this Subject, besides what I have al∣ready mentioned. But two Pieces there are which I ought by no means no forget, viz. 1. Contemplations on the Life and Glory of H. Mary. 2. An Apology for the Contemplations, by Dr. I. C. Which Apology was fully answered in the ingenious Pre∣face to the Book called, An Account of the Life and Death of the Blessed Virgin.
SECT. IX.Of the Vali∣dity of Or∣ders in the C. of E. I shall mention but one Particular more, on which we have of late, as heretofore, been attack'd by those of the Roman Church, and effectually Vindicated our selves, both against their Calumnies, and their Reasons; and that is as to the Validity of OR∣DERS in the Church of England. THE Occasion of reviving this Matter, was given by a little Scurrilous Libel that went abroad, under the name of, The Church of England truly Represented. And in Reply to whose Calumnies, Three Discourses have been Published, two of them new, the other only reprinted, viz. 1. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in answer to a Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders. 2. A Defence of the Ordinations and Ministry of the Church of England; in Answer to the Scandals raised or revived against them, in several late Pamphlets, and particularly in one intituled, the Church of England truly Represented, &c. 3. A short Defence of the Orders of the Church of England, as by Law establish'd; against some scat∣tered Objections of Mr. Webster of Linne.
But this Subject hath been most largely and learnedly handled by the Learned Mr Brown, of S. John's College in Cambridge, in his Sermon ad Clerum; and in another Sermon Preached before the University on Commencement Sunday; Translated into Latin; and both together Printed at Cambridge under this Title. 4. Concio ad Clerum habita coram Academia Cantabri∣giensi Junii 11. An. 1687. pro Gradu Baccal, in S. Theologia; Ʋbi vindicatur Vera & Valida Cleri Anglicani, Ineunte Reformatione, Ordinatio. Cui accessit Concio habita Julii 3. 1687. de Canonica Cleri Anglicani Ordinatione Latine reddita & au∣cta; a Th. Brown, S. T. B. Coll. D. Joh. E∣vang. Soc. annexum est Instrumentum Consecrationis Matth. Parker, Archiep. Cant. ex MS. C. C. C. Cantabr. I hear the worthy Author hath been very earnestly requested to Translate these Latin Sermons into English; and I am told, that he delays it only upon the account of some Answer that the Papists have been talking they would give to them, being desirous to make his Translation and Vindication one trouble. I cannot therefore but in the behalf of those who are so desirous to have these Sermons in English, request our Adversaries, That if they have any thing to say to them, they would make a little more haste with it. And for the mighty Master of Controversie, who I hear hath resolved to answer a Paragraph in one of them, I must needs tell him, That Nine Months is more by Eight and an half, than an ordinary Controvertist would have taken to answer such a Piece in. But in this Controversie we have not been merely upon the Defensive Part, but have attack'd their Orders, as well as defend∣ed our own. This a Learned Man of our Church hath done in a Book under this Title,
5. Roman Catholics uncertain whether there be any true Priests or Sacraments in the Church of Rome.Miscellany Treatises. SECT. X. Having thus reduced the Principal Treatises that have been set forth, to their Particular Heads, as far as in so great a Confusion of Matter I could well do it; it remains only to add here such Treatises on both sides, as I have before pass'd by, or could not be so readily brought to any special Consideration. NOW those of this kind, which have been set forth by the CHURCH of ROME, are these, 1. Question of Questions. 2. Why are you a Catholic? 3. Popery Anatomized; or the Papists clear'd from the false Imputation of Idolatry and Rebellion. 4. Veritas Evangelica; or the Gospel Truth asserted in xvi useful Questions. 5. Pope Pius Profession of Faith vindicated, &c. 6. Dr. Sherlock sifted from his Bran and Chaff. 7. The Pharisee unmask'd. 8. Assertio vii Sacramentorum; by King Henry viiith, against Luther. 9. A Reformd Catechism, by P. Manby.
10. Animadversions on the Rishop of Bath's Sermon, &c. To these they have, because not at leisure to write new Books, or for some other better Reason, added an old Book written by one F. Huddleston, a Benedictine; it is called, 11. A Short and Plain way to the Faith and Church, &c. To this there is an Answer almost finished by a very Learned Person, who will demonstrate to the World, how little that Book had in it to convince. On Our Part have appear'd of this Miscellany kind, these that follow. 1. Remarks on Popery Misrepresented, with reference to the Deposing Doctrine. 2. Pope Pius's Creed, with Comments. 3. The Additional Articles in Pope Pius's Creed, no Articles of the Christian Faith. 4. A few plain Reasons why a Protestant of the Church of England should not turn Roman Catholic. 5. Thirty plain, but sound Reasons why Protestants differ from Popery. 6. A Discourse shewing that Protestants are on the safer side, notwithstanding the uncharitable Judgement of their Adversaries; and that their Religion is the surest way to Heaven.
7. A Pacifick Discourse of the Causes and Remedies of the Differences about Religion, which distract the Peace of Christendom. 8. The Missionaries Arts discover'd. 9. A Request to Roman Catholics to answer certain Queries on several of their Tenets mention'd. 10. A Brief Account of the first rise of the Name Protestant, &c. 11. An Historical Relation of several great and learn∣ed Romanists that have embraced the Protestant Religion. 12. A Catechism truly representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome; with an An∣swer to them. 13. The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest An∣swer'd by an English Protestant. 14. A Discourse between two Protestants, in Answer to a Popish Catechism, call'd, A Short Catechism against all Sectaries. 15. A Plain Defence of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the Meanest Capacity: being a full confutation of the Net for the Fishers of Men. 16. Some Queries to Protestants Answer'd: and an Explication of the Roman Catholic's Belief in Four great Points consider'd; 1. Concerning their Church. 2. Their Worship. 3. Justification. 4. Civil Government. 17. The Judgement of Private Discretion in matters of Religion, defended in a Sermon at S. Paul's Covent-Garden, By Mr. Kidder.
18. The Protestant Resolved: Or a Discourse, shewing the Unreasonableness of his turning Roman Catho∣lic for salvation. 19. A Discourse, wherein is held forth the Opposition of the Doctrine, Worship, and Practices of the Ro∣man Church, to the Nature, Designs, and Cha∣racters of the Christian Faith. 20. Two short Discourses against the Romanists, by Mr. Dodwell, Cambden Professor in the Univer∣sity of Oxford. 21. An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy, printed at Oxford. 22. A Letter to a Lady: furnishing Her with Scri∣pture Testimonies, against the principal Points and Doctrines of Popery. In return to the last of these Discourses, Father Darrell the Je∣suit has been pleased to set out a Single Half Sheet, which he calls, A Letter to a Lady: wherein he desires a Conference with the Gentleman who writ Her that Letter. This is indeed a new way of answering Books, and becoming the busie, assuming spirit of that Society. One would wonder, after so little Success as they have hitherto met with in these Encounters, what should move this Reverend Father to be so for∣ward to come into the same List with Goodwin, Pulton, and a few others of the same Character. For tho abundance of Noise in a Conference, and of Misrepresentation after, may help out a weak Cause, and an Illiterate Defender of it, when they are sure before∣hand of the person for whose sake it is held; yet methinks they should be more wary than to run upon such Hazards, where, in all probability, they are not like either to gain their Proselyte, or
to have the opportunity of these kind of Subterfuges to assist them. However, tho I have neither the Honour to know the Lady, or the Author of that Letter; yet for this good Father's satis∣faction, I will venture for once to promise him, That if her Lady∣ship does desire it, not only the Author of that Letter will be ready to meet him, but to shew how willing we are to encourage a hopeful Design, let him chuse his Gownman between Blackwall and Hide-park Corner, and I dare say there is not one among them all that on this or any other occasion will decline to shew him how little reason he has for his forwardness. I am now hastning to an End of this Ʋndertaking; and, I think I cannot better finish it, than with a short Account of a Controver∣sie which made no small Noise in the World, between the Reverend Dr. Tenison, and Father Pulton the Jesuit. About Michaelmas last they met at a House in Long-Acre, on the acount of a Boy whom Mr. Pulton had perverted from our Reli∣gion. Great things were presently talked, as usual on such occa∣sions, concerning this Conference; and the Papists fail'd not to boast of a mighty Conquest made over the Doctor. This forced him to re∣solve on a Publication of what passed, tho otherwise as little fit, as designed to be communicated to the world. Each Party set forth his own Account, and first Mr. Pulton his, in two Books, cal∣led, 1. A true Account of the Conference, &c. 2. A true and full Account of a Conference held about Religion, between Dr. Thomas Tenison, and A. Pulton one of the Masters in the Savoy. Dr. Tenison's was Entituled, 3. A true account of a Conference held about Religion, at London, Sept. 29. 1687. between A. Pulton Jesuit, and Thomas Tenison, D. D.
This was followed on the Jesuit's part, with a new Discourse, called, 4. Remarks of A. Pulton, upon Dr. Thomas Tenison's late Narrative, with a Confutation of the Doctor's Rule of Faith; and Reply to A. Cressener's pre∣tended Vindication. To which Dr. Tenison reply'd in a second Treatise, viz. 5. Mr. Pulton consider'd, &c. And this produced another Discourse from another hand, viz. Mr. Meredith, who was present at the Conference, called, 6. Some farther Remarks on the late Account given by Dr. Tenison of his Conference with Mr. Pulton. As for what is added in Mr. Pulton's 3d. Treatise in Answer to A. Cressener, the meaning of it is this: Mr. Cressener a Schoolmaster, being present at the Conference, Mr. Pulton in his account of it, gave him some occasion to complain of his Relation, as to that part of it which concerned him; and therefore, to justifie himself, he published a short Treatise, to which Mr. Pulton there refers, viz. 7. The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the aspersions of A. Pulton Je∣suit and Schoolmaster in the Savoy. And thus this Controversie ended; but yet I must not leave it, till I have taken notice of another that it begat, and that no less memorable than the foregoing. For upon the occasion of this Conference, a Paper was taken notice of much used by the puny Controvertists of our days, called,
1. Speculum Ecclesiasticum: Or an Ecclesiastical Pro∣spective Glass: Written, as we are told, by a Souldier of that Party, T. Ward; and to which Dr. Tenison procured a young Man, a Friend of his, to write an Answer; which he did, Entituled, 2. The Speculum Ecclesiasticum consider'd, in its false Reasonings and Quotations. But before this was published, the Doctor obtained a Copy of a Defence which the Soldier had prepared of his Quotations, but was not yet come from the Press; and to finish all at once, an Answer was set forth to that too at the same time ere it could appear abroad in the world. This the Soldier resented, and ex∣pressed his sense of it in a Letter to Dr. Tenison; which, together with a Reply to it, were published under the Title of, 3. An Answer to the Letter of the Catholic Souldier, in a Letter from C. D. to A. B. the Examiner of his Speculum. However, not long after, the Defence was publish'd with a dreadful Name, viz. 4. Monomachia: Or, A Duel Between Dr. Thomas Tenison Pastor of St. Martins, and a Roman Catholic Souldier. And so I think this worthy Controversie ended.
SECT. XI. Having now run through the several Heads of Con∣troversy that have of late exercised the Pens of our Learned Men in Defence of our Religion, it may not be amiss to stop here awhile, and by a brief Recapitulation of the Whole, see what more remains to a compleat Vindication of our Selves against all the Tricks and Artifices, as well as against the Ar∣guments of our Adversaries. IT is sufficiently evident from the foregoing Collection, what slender Returns those of the Church of Rome have made to the many excellent Discourses, which themselves (without any pro∣vocation of ours) have extorted from us. And what prejudice they have hereby done to their Religion, I am confident they themselves are not unsensible. I need not say what a Number of Disputes they have altogether let fall; how many of our Books, to this day, remain Ʋn-answered, and are ever likely to be so. In a word, what Trifles many times they have set forth under the ar∣rogant Title of FULL ANSWERS to those they have thought fit to take Notice of. And now at last, to compleat all, they seem to have utterly deserted the Controversie; and, too late, to see that Truth and Learning are not to be run down by those who are utterly destitute of the One, and, as far as we may be al∣lowed to guess by their performances, have but very slender pre∣tences to the Other. The truth is, Propery is a Religion fit only for an Inquisition to maintain, and Dragoons to propagate. Ignorance and Barbarity brought it into the World; Interest and Passion maintain and keep it up: No sooner did Learning begin to revive, but Popery began immediately to decay; and ever since, the One has still decreased in proportion, as the Other has flourish'd. And to think at this
time a day seriously to dispute a Nation so resolute and knowing as Ours, again into the Errors of it, plainly shews either that our Adversaries have a very mean Opinion of our Ʋnderstandings, or I am sure deserve that we should have no very great one of theirs. But whatever they once may have flatter'd themselves withal, I am confident they now begin to be satisfied, That Popery is a Re∣ligion that will not thrive in our Northern Climate. And tho they are pleased sometimes to divert themselves with our Divisions, and, it may be, did from thence conceive some hopes of promo∣ting their Interest amongst us; yet I doubt not but they now see, that we are not so much divided amongst our selves, as we are all of us heartily united against them. As for the Divines of the Church of England, how firmly they have adhered to the Protestant Interest, is not unknown to any. Their Preaching, their Conversation, but, above all, their Writings declare it to the World: And how fouly, by consequence, they were heretofore either mistaken, or misrepresented, when they were exposed by some (who I believe wish'd them so) as Papists in Masquerade, or at least as Popishly affected. Never perhaps was there a Controversie more successfully mana∣ged than this has been in these late Years. Till now, these Points were handled in such a manner, that if the Learned applauded the performance, yet the Vulgar were but little the better for it. But in these Discourses, Strength of Argument, and Plainness of Discourse seem to vie with one another. The Arguments so sound, as to convince all Gain-sayers; and yet the Plainness so great, that the meanest Persons may comprehend the force of them. And thus have they pursued not one or two Points, but I may war∣rantably say, the whole Controversy betwixt us. Insomuch that from henceforth we may well excuse them any farther trouble, till either our Adversaries shall think fit to answer their Discourses, or to advance some other Arguments than those which have al∣ready been obviated and confuted. But indeed there is no great likelihood of either of these; and I dare venture to promise my Reader, that let those of the Church of Rome attacque him where they please, let them in writing or discourse offer what they are able to him, he shall here in this
Collection, which I therefore on purpose make of several of these Treatises under their proper Heads, find more than enough to an∣swer all their Allegations. I. GENERAL DISCOURSES: Or such as con∣sider the most part of the Points in debate betwixt us. 1. The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented. 2. Answer to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition. 3. Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land. 4. Two Desences of the Exposition. 5. An Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium. 6. The Primitive Father no Papists. 7. Pope Pius's Creed with Comments: 8. the Additional Articles in Pope Pius's Creed, no Articles in the Christian Faith. II. Of RELIGIOUS WORSHIP. 1. A Discourse concerning the OBJECT of Religious Worship. 2. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome.
III. Of PRAYER in an UNKNOWN TONGUE. 1. A Discourse of Prayer in an Unknown Tongue. 2. A Treatise in Confutation of the Latin Service, &c. IV. Of the INVOCATION of SAINTS. 1. A Discourse concerning the INVOCATIONS of SAINTS. 2. Second Defence of the Exposition, Artic. III. 3. An Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant Popery. 4. Mr. Gee's third Letter to Father Sabran. 5. The Primitive Fathers no Papists. 6. A Discourse in Answer to Monsieur de Meaux's Ap∣peal to the IVth. Age. Paticularly of the B. VIRGIN. See several Discourses collected, Pag. 52, 53. V. Of IMAGES and RELIQUES. 1. The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion concerning Images. 2. The Vindication of it.—See above, pag. 48.
The Fallibility of the Church of Rome demonstra∣ted, from the manifest Error of the Second Ni∣cene and Trent Councils, in the Pint of Images. 4. A Discourse concerning the 2d. Council of Nice, which first introduced and established Image Wor∣ship in the Christian Church. 5. Second Defence of the Exposition, Part 2. Art. IV. 6. Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant Po∣pery. VI. Of IDOLATRY. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry, in An∣swer to the Bishop of Oxon. VII. Of MERITS; SATISFACTIONS; PUR∣GATORY; and INDULGENCES. 1. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD. 2. Purgatory proved by Miracles. 3. Apology for the Pulpits. Appendix of Indulgences. 4. The Primitive Fathers no Papists. for Purgatory. 5. Summary of the Controversies for Purgatory. 6. A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works.
VIII. Of the SACRAMENTS. An Historical Discourse of the Ministers Intentions, in Administring the Sacraments. IX. Of CONFESSION and PENANCE. A Discourse of Auricular Consession, as prescribed by the Council of Trent. X. Of EXTREME UNCTION. 1. A Discourse of Extreme Unction. XI. Of ORDERS. 1. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England. 2. Concio ad Clerum, &c. See Pag. 54, 55. 3. A Defence of the Ordinations and Ministry of the Church of England.
4. A short Defence of the Orders of the Church of England. To these Learned Discourles we shall shortly have added ano∣ther upon the same good Subject from the Reverend and Leanred Dr. Prideaux, Prebendary of Norwich, intituled, 5. The Validity of the Orders of the Church of England made out against the Objections of the Papists in se∣veral Letters to a Gentleman of Norwich that desired satisfaction therein. 6. Roman Catholics uncertain whether there be any true Priests or Sacraments in the Church of Rome. XII. Of the REAL PRESENCE. 1. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points, of the Real Presence, and the Adoration of the Host. 2. A Reply to two Discourses, printed at Oxford, &c. XIII. Of TRANSUBSTANTIATION. 1. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. 2. Transubstantiation no Doctrine of the primitive Fathers.
3. Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church, relating to the Eucharist, &c. 4. Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture. 5. A Paraphrase, with Notes and a Preface on the vith of St. John. See many other Tracts above, from pag. 22. 7. Veteres Vindicati, in Answer to Mr. Sclater. 8. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in Answer to Mr. W. 9. Fourth Letter to a Person of Quality. See above, p. 48. 10. Transubstantiation the peculiar Dictrine of the Church of Rome, see p. 50. XIV. Of the SACRIFICE of the MASS. 1. A Discourse concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass. XV. Of the ADORATION of the HOST. 1. A Discourse of the Adoration of the Host.
XVI. Of COMMUNION in BOTH KINDS. 1. A Discourse of Communion in One Kind, in An∣swer to the Bishop of Meaux. 2. A Demonstration that the Church of Rome and her Councils have Erred, touching Communion in One Kind. XVII. of the RULE &c. of FAITH. 1. A Discourse concerning a Guide in Matters of Faith. 2. The Protestant Resolution of Faith. 3. Of the Authority of Councils, and of the Rule of Faith. XVIII. Of the Holy SCRIPTURE. 1. An Answer to the Request to Protestants. 2. A Summary of the Principal Controversies be∣twixt the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. 3. The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Scri∣pure.
4. The Peoples Rights to read the Scripture. 5. The Protestant and Popish way of Interpreting Scripture, impartially compared; in Answer to Pax Vobis. See other Discourses above, p. 38, 39. XIX. Of TRADITION. Discourse about Tradition. 2. An Historical Discvourse concerning Tradition. 3. The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholic Tradition. See more Discourses above, p. 40, 41, 42. To which I must add an Excellent Treatise omitted in its proper place, but which ought not by any means to be forgotten, called. 4. A Treatise of Traditions. In 2 Parts. XX. Of the CHURCH. 1. A Discourse of the Unity of the Catholic Church maintained in the C. of E. 2. A Discourse of the Charge of Novelty, brought a∣gainst the Ch. of E. 3. The Notes of the Church. See above, p. 26. 4. Of the Unity and Authority of the Church: See Discourses above, p. 28.
To which we must add a Book since published, which ought by no means to be forgotten, being (as we are assured) the Ge∣nuine Issue of the Great and Admired Bishop Sanderson; It is called, 5. A Discourse concerning the Church, in these following Particulars, 1. Concerning the Visibility of the True Church: 2. Concerning the Church of Rome: 3. Concerning Protestant Churches: 4. An Answer to the Question, Where was your Church before Luther? 6. Of the Autority and Infallibility of the Church. Several Discourses, p. 29, 30, 31. 7. Two short Discourses against the Romanists, by Mr. Dowell. XXI. Of St. PETER, and the POPE. 1. A Sermon Preach'd upon S. Peter's Day. 2. The Catholic Balance. 3. A Discourse of the Pope's Supremacy, in two Parts. To which we may add a Tract since Printed, with this Title, 4. Pope Gregory the Great his Opinion of the Supre∣macy of the Bishop of Rome, taken from his own Writings. See other Discourses above, p. 32, 33, 34.
XXII. Of the REFORMATION. 1. Two Discourses concerning the Necessity of the Refor∣mation. 2. An Answer to the Spirit of Martin Luther, and the Original of the Reformation. 3. Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformati∣on, Printed at Oxford. See other Discourses above, p. 35, 36. XXIII. Of SCHISM; and HERESIE. 1. A Vindication of the Church of England, from the foul Aspersions of Schism and Heresie, 2 Parts. 2. An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of Eng∣land, &c. See other Discourses above, p. 35, 36. XXIV. Of the CELIBACY of the CLERGY. 1. A Discourse of the Celibacy of the Clergy. 2. An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy; Printed at Oxford.
SECT. XII. And now after so full an Account of these Discour∣ses, and of the several Controversies that have been handled in them; I have only remaining for the Close of all, to give a short Account of that Ex∣cellent Undertaking in which our Divines are at this time engaged; and which being finished, I do not see what more can be desired in order to our full Satis∣faction in this Matter. I Have before recounted how by a joint Labour they run through the Consideration of the pretended Notes of the Church, on which the Romanists establish their usurped Authority. No sooner were those ended, but they presently resolved upon another, and a more useful Project, which was to search into our Adversaries Books; and collect all those Passages of Scripture which are usual∣ly alledged by them to maintain their Errors. And by giving the true Explication of them, at once to secure their Flock from their false Glosses, and let them into a better understanding of those Sacred Books. In this Undertaking they have already made a considerable Advance, as will appear by the following Cata∣logue: 1. POPERY not founded on SCRIPTURE: Or, The Texts which Papists cite out of the Bible for the Proof of the Points of THEIR RELIGI∣ON, examined, and shewed to be alledged without Ground.
After which follow the Texts themselves, which they bring for, 2. The Obscurity of the Holy Scriptures. 3. The Insufficiency of Scripture, and the Necessity of Tradition. 4. The Supremacy of St. Peter, and of the Pope, over the whole Church, in Two Parts. 5. Their Doctrine of Infallibility. 6. The Worship of Angels and Saints departed. In Two Parts. 7. The Worship of Images and Reliques. 8. The Seven Sacraments, and the Efficacy of them. In Two Parts. 9. The Sacrifice of the Mass. Two Parts. 10. Transubstantiation. 11. Auricular Confession. 12. Satisfactions. Two Parts. May they go on with Success to finish this Good Work; whilst we (for whose sake they take all these pains) encourage their En∣deavours, by a firm adherence both to them and to their Doctrine, and by our constant contending for the Faith we have received from them, declare to all the World, that their Labour has not been in Vain in the Lord. FINIS.
A Postscript of N. N. to Mr. John Sergeant, oc∣casion'd by his Letter to the Continuator of the Present State of the Controversie. Mr. Sergeant, Having perused your Letter to the Continuator of the Present State of our Controversie, I perceive, that you are mightily concern'd at the Historical Discourse concerning Tradition, which he mentioned to be wirting, and that youLetter to the Continua∣tor, &c. p. 13. would gladly find some way to save our Friends this vast la∣bour, and excuse them from this Impossible Task [of answering you]. I quickly apprehended your meaning, that you had a great desire not to be answered; and therefore in pure Complaisance to you, the first time I met with the Author of the Historical Discourse, I desired him, in yours and my own Name, that he would excuse himself the writing of that Book, and told him, That I understood by your Letter, that you would take it extreamly kindly at his hands, if he would not give himself the trouble of an∣swering you. But this Courship would do no good upon him; so that I was forc'd to alter my strain, and began to thereaten him; Sir, said I, if you dare to answer Mr. Sergeant, he will be reveng'd of you, for he has a plaguy sharp Pen, and will not spare you. All the answer I had to my Threats, was to be laught at, he assuring me he would venture that. Ʋpon this, I told him, it was no jesting matter; that if he did provoke you, you would turn the rough side of your Tongue to him; and ask'd him, whether he could digest the being call'd Rogue, or Lyar, or Mad Dog? his an∣swer
was, that he could not very well: why then, said I, Look you, Sir, you shall have these, and ten times worse, if you dare to answer Mr. Sergeant; and upon this I out with your Letter, and shew'd him how smartly you could handle your Pen. How will you like, Sir, quoth I, to be call'd hot brain'dLetter to the Continua∣tor, &c. p. 1. Calvinist in Masquerade, par boyl'd by the scalding Zeal against Popery, into a stanch Protestant? To be call'dP. 2. a wilful and bold Calumniator? To be told, you are a Careless,P. 2. Open, and Confident Liar? To be nick-nam'd, a Knight of the Post, that writes with∣out fear, shame, or wit? To have your Book call'd,P. 3. a little ridiculously malicious Satyr, wholly made up of Vapour, Insolence, silly Amplifications, Ironies, Inve∣ctives, and open Falshoods? To be nick nam'd, a Ther∣sites with aP. 5. steel'd Impudence? Sir, said I, if Mr. Sergeant could bestow all these Complements in so very few Pages upon the Continuator, for no reason in the world, what must you expect, if you should dare to provoke him by an An∣swer? Be wise then, and learn so much Wit as to sleep in a whole skin, and thank me for my good Advice. Now would you think it, Mr. Sergeant, that any man could have dar'd to have withstood all this! And yet this strange man did, and bragg'd withal, that neither this, nor more than this, should fright him from answering you. I had but one other Argument left to persuade him, and concluded, that it would do his business for him. Well, Sir, said I, to be short with you, why will you run your head a∣gainst a Wall? Mr. Sergeant does assure me, that his Fifth Letter isP. 5. an Elaborate Discourse, and that it is (in one word)P. 8. Unanswerable; why then will you be medling with a Book that cannot be disprov'd, that is un∣answerable? I always took you for a prudent man, shew it now, and let Mr. Sergeant alone: for he says, the BestP. 8.
Wits of our Nation have also declared in his favour, that his Letters are unanswerable:P. 8. That he is inform'd his Fifth Letter, in particular, has sold so well, that there are not an hundred left of them. Nay more, that F.W. had said, that these same Letters (which you will be daring to med∣dle with) had laid Dr. Stilling fleet so flat, that he would never be able to rise again. And can you not be quiet, with∣out bringing the best Wits of the Nation, and F. Warner, a Jesuit, upon you head? They have declared already against you, and they will in honour stand up for John Sergeant, and then what will become of you? But all this was lost, Mr. Sergeant, upon him, and was so far from silencing him, that he seem'd to grow proud of having the honour of baf∣fling John Sergeant, and the Best Wits of our Nation: And for F. Warner, he had like to have call'd him F—for da∣ring to take Dr. Stilling fleet's Name into his mouth, who had so lately, and so thoroughly expos'd him in his Appendix to the Council of Trent's Examination. In short, As to the seeling of your Letter, he told me, that if he were not mis-inform'd, 'tis no great wonder your Book∣seller should not have above an Hundred remaining, seeing there were but 300. in all Printed, and those at your own cost, and a considerable number of which you gave in Presents to your Friends, who therefore were obliged, in Gratitude, to commend it. And now Mr. Sergeant, you see what pains I have taken in your behalf; and tho the Continuator neglects you, and this other Author defies you, yet that your Letter has not been without some effect upon me. What the issue of it will be, we shall see in a little time, as soon as this Historical Discourse concerning Tradition comes out; In the mean while, all I can further do, is heartily to wish you, what I fear you will much more need than the Continuator do's Sincerity, A Bet∣ter Cause, and a more Civil Pen; and remain, Sir, Your very Humble Servant, N. N.
