W3721 12911650 95329
THE Writ of Quo Warranto Served upon the Lord MAYOR, COMMONALTY, and CITIZENS of LONDON, To inquire by what Authority they use and lay Claim to their LIBERTIES, PRIVILEDGES, and FRANCHISES. Per Jud. Mich. xxxiii Car. Secund. Reg. Lond. ss. MEmorandum quod Robertus Sawyer Miles, Attorn. Dom. Regis nunc Generalis, qui pro eodem Dom. Rege in hac parte sequitur, in propria persona sua ven. hic in Cur. dict. Dom. Regis coram ipso Rege apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post quinden' S. Martini isto eodem term', & pro eodem Dom. Rege dat Cur. hic Intelligi & Informari, quod Major & Communitas ac Cives Civitat. Lond. praed. per spacium unius Mensis jam ult. elaps. & amplius usi fuerunt & adhuc utuntur, ac clamant habere & uti absque aliquo Warranto sive Regali Concessione infra Civit. Lond. praed. & Libertat. & Praecinct. ejusdem Civitat. diversis Libertat. Privilege. & Franches. sequen. videl. Fore de seipsis unum Corpus Corporat. & Politicum in nomine Majoris & Civitat. ac Civium Civitat. London. ac per idem nomen placitare & implacitari, respondere & responderi, ac etiam habere Vicecomit. Civitat. & Comitat. Civitat. Lond. & nominare & eli∣gere ex seipsis duas personas fore Vicecomit. Civitat. praed. & Com. ejusdem Civitat. Ac ill. sic nominat. & elect. praeficere & constituere Vic. Civit. praed. & Com. ejusdem Civitat. ad Ex∣ecution. & Retorn. omnium Brevium, Billarum, & Praeceptorum Dom. Regis pro Administratio∣ne & Executione Justic. infra Civit. praed. & Com. ejusdem Civit. exequend. faciend. ac ad faciend. & exequend. omnia & singula al. infra Civit. praed. & Com. ejusdem Civit. quae ad Officium Vic. faciend. pertinent. Ac etiam habere Vic. Com. Middlesex, & nominare eligere & constituere ex seipsis Vic. Com. Middlesex, pro eodem Com. ut Vicecomes inde deservitur. ac omnia Brevia, Billas, & praecepta Dom, Regis infra Com. Middlesex praed. pro Admini∣stratione & Executione Justic. ibid. exequend. & retorn. inde faciend. absque aliqua Com∣missione sive aliquibus Literis Patentibus à Dom. Rege inde obtent. sive obtinend. Ac etiam quod Major & Aldermanni ejusdem Civit. fuerunt Justic. Dom. Regis ad pacem infra Civit. praed. conservand. ac ad Sessiones pacis & placita Coronae infra, eandem Civit. tenend. ac ad omnes Fe∣lon. Riot. & Conventic. illicit. infra Civit. praed. inquirend. audiend. & terminand. Authori∣tate ipsorum propria, absque aliqua Commissione, sive al. Authoritate à Dom. Rege in ea parte concess. sive obtent. De quibus quidem omnibus & singulis Libertat. Privileg. & Franches. iidem Major & Communitas ac Cives Civit. London. praed. per totum tempus supradictum, supra dictum Dom. Regem nunc usurpaverunt & adhuc usurpant, in dict. Dom. Regis nunc Con∣tempt. Praerogativae suae Regiae grave dampnum & praejudicium. Ʋnde idem Attornat. dict. Dom. Regis nunc General. pro eodem Dom. Rege pet. Advisament. Cur. hic in praemiss. & debit. Le∣gis Proces. versus praefat. Major. & Communitat. ac Cives Civit. Lond. praed. in hac parte fieri ad respondend. dict. Dom. Regi Quo Warranto clamant habere, uti & gaudere Libertat. Pri∣vileg. & Franches: supradict. &c.
In English thus: By the JƲDGES in Michaelmas Term, in the Thirty Third Year of Car. II. KING of England, &c. Lond. ss. MEmorand'. That Robert Sawyer Knight, our Lord the Kings Attorney Gene∣ral, who on this behalf prosecutes for our said Lord the King, appears here in his own person in the Court of our said Lord the King, before the King himself at West∣minster on Munday next after the Quindene of St. Martin (viz. Nov. 27.) in the same Terms and for our said Lord the King, gives this Court to understand and be informed, That the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, for the space of one month last past, and longer, have used, and do yet use, and claim to have and use (without any Warrant or Royal Grant) within the City of London aforesaid, and the Li∣berties and Precincts of the said City, divers Liberties, Priviledges, & Franchises following, to wit, To be of themselves one Body Corporate and Politick, in the Name of the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and by the same Name to im∣plead and be impleaded, to answer and be answered; And also to have a Sheriff of the City and County of the City of London, and to Nominate and Elect out of themselves two persons, One to be the Sheriff of the City aforesaid, and of the County of the same City, and him so nominated and elected to prefer and constitute Sheriff of the City aforesaid and of the County of the said City, for the Execution and Return of all Breve's, Bills, and Precepts of our Lord the King, for the administration and execution of the Justice within the City aforesaid, and County of the same City, to be executed and done, and to do and execute all and every the other things within the City aforesaid, and County of the same, that belong to the Office of a Sheriff: And also to Nominate, Elect and Constitute Another person out of themselves for the Sheriff of the County of Middlesex, for the said County to serve as Sheriff for the same, and to execute there and make return of all Breve's, Bills and Precepts of our Lord the King within the County of Middlesex aforesaid, for the administration & execution of Justice, without any Commissi∣on or Letters Patents obtained or to be obtained from our Lord the King on that behalf: And also, that the Mayor & Aldermen of the said City, have been Justices of our Lord the King to keep the Peace within the said City, and to hold Sessions of the Peace and Pleas of the Crown within the said City, and all the Felonies, Riots and unlawful Conven∣ticles within the said City, to enquire into, hear and determine by their own proper au∣thority, without any Commission or other Authority from our Lord the King granted or obtained on that behalf. All and every of which Liberties, Priviledges, and Franchises, the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, for all the said time, have usurped, and do still usurp over our said Lord the King, to the contempt of our said Lord the King, and to the great damage and prejudice of his Prerogative Royal. Whereupon the said Attorney-General of our Lord the King, doth desire for our said Lord the King the Advice of this Court in the premisses, and due course of Law to be made against the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid on this behalf, to answer our said Lord the King, By what Warrant they claim to have, use and enjoy the Liberties, Priviledges, and Franchises aforesaid, &c. London: Printed for W. Davies in Amen-corner. 1682.
