6332 99844992 9861
Humours Heau'n on Earth; With The Ciuile Warres of Death and Fortune. As also The Triumph of Death: Or, The Picture of the Plague, according to the Life; as it was in Anno Domini. 1603. By Iohn Dauies of Hereford. O! t'is a sacred kinde of Excellence, That hides a rich truth in a Tales pretence! Printed at London by A. I. 1609.
¶To the right Noble, Algernon, Lord Percy, sonne and heire apparant to the right Ho∣norable Henry Earle of Nor∣thumberland. THrice Noble, and more hopefull Pupill I (Who learnes thy Hand to shew thy Hearts con∣ceits Would make thy heart, before it Vice doth trie, To know her Lures, to shunne her slie deceits. But, in the Prime but of thy Pupillage Before the ioynts of Iudgement can be knit, (Although for Wit thou mai'st be Wisedomes Page) Vice throwes her Lures aboue thy reach of Wit. But yet when Time shall throwly close thy Mould, Wherein all rare Conceits still cast shall bee, Then shalt thou (with cleere eies) darke lines behold, That leade thee to all knowledge fit for thee. And, sith that Childhood more in Tales delights Then saddest Truths; Ile tell thee merry Tales, Of Lords and Ladies, with their merry Knights, Their merry Blisses, and their sory Bales. The outside of these Tales are painted o're With colours rich, to please thine eagre sence; But, lin'd with naked Truth (yet richly poore) More fit for thy more rich Intelligence. When thou canst cracke this Nut, within the Shell
Thou shalt a Kernell finde will please thy Taste; The Pallate of thy Wit will like it well, When thou shalt swallow it, for ioy, in haste. Then make this Nut a whirligigge the while, To make thee merry (if thou canst be so) To see the turning of our Sports to toile, Wherein obserue how pleasures come and go: For, as a whirligigge doth turne so fast, That sharpest sights the fruit do scarse perceiue: So can no Pallate fruits of Pleasure taste When they are come, so soone they take their leaue! Read little Lord, this Riddle learne to reede; So, first appose; then, tell it to thy Pecres: So shall they hold thee (both in Name and Deed) A perfect Pierc-ey that in darkenesse cleeres. A Pierc-ey, or a pircing Eie doth shw Both Wit and Courage; and, if thou wilt learne By morall Tales sinnes mortall to eschew, Thou shalt be wise, and endlesse glorie earne: That so thou mai'st, the meanest Tutors praise; So, Percies fame shall pierce the Eie of Daies: Then, by those Raies my Pen (inflam'd) shall runn Beyond the Moone, to make thy Moone a Sunne! Meane while, and euer, I rest prest to honour thee with my poore vttermost, Iohn Dauies.
To the good Knight, and my much honored Scholler, Sir Philip Carey. SIth Death (deere Sir) hath lately beene so fell, To reaue that life, than deere life deerer farre; This record of his greater rage may quell The lesse (perhaps) in your particular. Faine would I (if I could) beguile your griefe, With telling you of others heauie harmes: But (ah) such guile giues Griefe too true reliefe, In your true humane heart, that Pitty warmes. Life is a Plague: for, who doth liue, must die; Yet some that haue the Plague, doe scape aliue, So life's more mortall than Mortalitie: Then sith that life (like death) doth life depriue, You may reioyce, sith your Adolphus liu'd, True Vertues life, which cannot be depriu'd. Ʋiuat post funera virtus. As much grieu'd for your losse, as glad any way to shew his loue. Iohn Dauies.
To the right worshipfull my deere Scholler Sir Humfrey Baskeruile of Earsley, Knight: And the no lesse louely than vertuous Lady his Wife. SIth I am Lecturing my noblest Schollers, (You being two) this Lecture deigne to reade; For thogh it treats of nought but death & dollers, Yet it with pleasure may your passion feede: For, plagues to see (vnplagu'd) doth Nature please, Although good nature (gladly) grieues thereat; As we are well-ill pleas'd to see at Seas The wofull'st wracke, while we are safe from that. In health to tell what sickenesse we haue past, Makes vs more soūd; for, Gladnes health defends: O then your eies on this Plagues-Picture cast To glad and grieue you for glad-grieuous ends. But my sole End by this poore Meane to yee, Is but to tie your Eares, and Hearts to mee, Iohn Dauies.
To my deere, meeke, modest, and intirely beloued Mistris Elizabeth Dutton, Mistris Mary, and Mistris Vere Egerton, three Sisters of hopefull destenies, be all Grace and good Fortune. SIth on my worthiest Schollers I doe muse, How should my Muse to minde you once neg∣lect, Sith you are such? Thē, such she shuld abuse, Should she not vse you with all deere respect. Thou virgin Widow (eldest of the Three) (That hold'st thy widows state, of Death in chief) Death in thy youth (being fast) hath made thee free; Free from thy Ioy, & fastned thee to Griefe. But he that is the Lord of lordly Death, Reserues thine honor'd Sires most honor'd Sire From Deaths dispite; & while he draweth breath, Thou (lowly Soule) art likely to aspire. Thy Sisters (like in Nature, as in Name, And both in Name and Nature nought but good) (Beloued Pupills) well may hope the same, Sith of like grace there is like likelihoode. Yet in the height of Earths felicitie, A meeke regard vnto this Picture giue, To minde you so of lifes mortalitie, So shall you liue to die, and die to liue. Meane while I hope, through your cleere Stars to spie A Trinitie of Ladies ere I die. He which (for the exercise of your hie humilitie) you please to call Master Iohn Dauies.
To my worthy, and worthily beloued Scholer, Thomas Bodenham Esquier, sonne and heire apparant of Sir Roger Bodenham of Rotherwas, Knight of the Bathe. ANd, if among them that are deere to mee, (Remembred by my Pen, my Muses Tongue,) I should forget to shew my loue to thee, My selfe, but much more thee, I so should wrong. Nay, wrong the right which I to thee doe owe: But neuer shall my loue so guilefull proue, As not to pay thee so deseru'd a due; For, I confesse thou well deseru'st my loue. Thou wert my Scholer; and if I should teach So good a Pupill such a Lesson ill (By mine example) I might so impeach Mine honest fame, and quite disgrace my skill: But when I learne thee such detested Lore, Then loathe my loue, and learne of me no more. Yours, as what's most yours, Iohn Dauies.
The last Booke (being a Picture ac∣cording to the Life) dedicated To the no lesse high in Birth, then honorable in Disposition (right noble in either) the La∣die Dorothie, and Ladie Lucy Percies. GReat-little Ladies, greatly might you blame My little care of doing as I ought, Should I neglect to set your noble Name, First of those Principalls whose hands I taught. Yet, the more high your Birth and Places are, The more ye ought to mind the blast of Breath: As Philips Page did shew his Masters care, When most he flourisht, most to thinke on death! Then, with most blisse, when you transported be, Looke on this Picture; so, perceiue ye shall, We fall, like Leaues, in Autumne from the Tree, When Heau'n puffes at Excesse in generall: But from all woes excesse I wish ye may (Throgh Heau'n on Earth) to heau'n the easiest way! Your Ladiships vnworthie Tutor, Iohn Dauies.
To my beloued Master, Iohn Dauies. When I thy Reasons weigh, & meat thy Rimes, I find they haue such happy weight and mea∣sure, As makes thy Lines extend to After-times, To leade them to a Masse of Wisedomes Treasure. With weighty Matter so thou load'st thy Lines, As to dimme sights they oft seeme darke as Hell; But those cleere eies that see their deepe designes, Do ioy to see much Matter coucht so well! But these thy Numbers most familiar bee; Because strange Matter plainely they recount: For which Men shall familiar be with thee That know thee not; and, make thy fame to mount. I know no Tongues-man more doth grace his Tong With more materiall Lines, as streight as strong! Ed: Sharphell.
To mine entirely beloued, Master Iohn Dauies of Hereford. IN all thy Writings thou hast such a Vaine, As but thy selfe thy selfe canst counterfet; Which, lying farre beyond the vulgar straine, Is harder well to open, then to get. Few idle words thou hast to answer for In all thy workes; but, thou dost merite much (Nay supererogate) who dost abhorre Superfluous words, though thine be over-rich! Both Words and Matter do so well agree, To glorifie themselves in either kinde, That we must needs renowne both them, and thee, Who neerely sought (for vs) the same to finde: Thy Numbers flow from such a Minds excesse As all seeme Raptures, in all happinesse! Ro: Cox.
To the Reader in praise of the Author. IN every Tale which scarffed Truth containes, We must that Truth vnmaske to see her face: Else see we but the halfe the Tale retaines; Then such (how e're well told) lose halfe their grace. But these are Tales, which (though their truth be maskt) Tickle the itching'st Eares with withing Touches; And so such Eares to listen still are taskt, By subtill clawing, that such Eares bewitches. Canst thou but Riddles reade, and not areede? These Riddles high (well read) stoope to thy reason: That though they fat not Wit, yet Will they feede With Wittes pure Salt, that Wits fresh-Sweetes doth season: The Fiction is for gladdest Will as fit, As is the Morall for the saddest Wit. Anth: Greys.
Humours Heauen on Earth. 1 VPon a time (thus olde wiues Tales begin, Then listen Lordings to an old wises Tale) There were three men, that were, & were not kin,Kinne, as they were of the seue deadly sinnes, no kinne as they were different sinnes. (Reede me this Riddle) at the Wine or Ale, Did striue who most should grace the deerest Sin, For which the daintiest Soules are set to sale: For Soules that are most delicate for Sense, Gainst stings of honied sinnes haue least defence. 2 The first (for first Ile tell you eithers name To shew their natures) hight The Glutton. Poliphagus: A greasie guttes, of most vnweldie frame; The second named was The Leacher. Epithymus: Light as a feather, apt to lightest game: The third and last, hight he prowd, vaine, and am∣bitious man. Hyselophronus; That still lookt on himselfe, as if he saw That which the Gods did loue, and Men did awe.
3 Nor is it vtterly impertinent Vnto the matter subiect, to describe The Weedes they ware, which were as different, As was their Names, their Natures, & their Tribe; The Habit sheweth how the heart is bent: For, still the Heart the Habit doth prescribe: And no externall signes can more bewray The inwardest Affects then garments may. 4 Poliphagus a Sute of Satten ware, A description of the Gluttons habite.Made wide and side; and yet his sides did swell, So that his Trusse did couerscarse the bare, And so his Panch (an homely Tale to tell) Was fill'd with filth, that eu'ry stich did stare Of that which casd it; and of grease did smell: Which so re-glosst the Sattens glosse, that it Was varnisht like their vailes that turne the Spit. 5 His Buttons and the Holes, that held them fast, His brestmade stil to striue which best could hold But yet that breast made one another brast, And so it selfe did swell as burst it would; Who was some two elles compasse in the waste, And had not seene his knees since two daies old: No Points he vs'd; whose bumme and Belly burst, Held vp his Sloppes, as strait as they were trusst.
6 A paire of button'd Buskins casd his Legges, Which were all Calfe from Hams vnto the Heele; And after him (like clogges) the same he dregges: His Shooes were lin'd, that he no cold might feele The Soales whereof thicke Corke asunder gegs, Made broad (without Indents) lest he might reele: And ouer all, he ware a slabberd Gowne, Which cloakt his Buttockes hugely ouergrowne! 7 Thus haue we casd the Slouen, saue the Head; And wittingly we doe the same forbeare; Because his Shoulders stoode in his Heads stead, Which hardly did aboue their pitch appeare: The lumpe of flesh was all so ouer-fed, As he no man, but some Behemoth were: For they whose ioy is all in drinke and meate, Thogh mean they be, they needs must be too great 8 Epithymus (the wanton) on his Crowne,A description of the Wantons Ap∣parrell. A Crowne of Roses ware lasciuiously; A falling Band of Cut-worke (richly sowne) Did his broad Shoulders quite ore-canopy: A waste-coate wrought with floures (as they had growne) In colour'd silke, lay open to the eie: And, as his Bosome was vnbutton'd quite, So were his Points, vntrusst for ends too light!
9 His Doublet was Carnation, cut with greene Rich Taffataes, quite through in ample Cuttes; That so his Wast-coate might, ech where be seene, When lusty Dames should eie this lusty Guttes: And many Fauours hung the Cuttes betweene, And many more, more light, in them he shuttes! So that a vacant place was hardly found About this Fancy, so well-fauour'd round. 10 His Hose was French, and did his doublet sute, For Stuffe and Colour; to which sow'd there were Silke-stockings, which sate strait his thighs about, To make his leg and thigh more quaint appeere: Their colour was, as was the vpper Sute, Saue that the quirkes with gold and gawdie geere Were so embosst, that as the Gallant goes, The glosse did light his feete to saue his toes. 11 His Shooes were like to Sandalls, for they were So caru'd aboue with many a curious Cut, That through the same the stocking did appeere, And in the Lachets were such Ribbands put, As shadow'd all the foote from Sunne well neere, Though, in Rose-forme, the ribband vp was shut: And to make vp aright this Woman-Man, He at his face still fenced with a fan.
12 But Hyselophronus vnlike to him,The Prowd-ambitious mans apparrel described. Was richly clad, but much more graue it was; For, he could not endure such colours trim, Yet vs'd trimme colours to bring drifts to passe: A Backe too bright, doth argue Braines too dim: For, no such Asse as is the golden Asse: But he that State to catch, doth know the knacke, Hides all his haughtie thoughts in humble blacke. 13 His Hat was Beauer of a middle sise, The Band, silke-Sipers foure-fold wreath'd about: A shallow Cambricke Ruffe, with Sets precise, Clos'd with a button'd string, that still hung out; Wherewith he plai'd, while he did Plottes deuise; To gull the Multitude, and rule the Rout: His Sute was Satten, pinckt, and laced thicke, As fit, as faire, without each peeuish tricke. 14 His Cloke cloth-rash with veluet throughly lin'd, (As plaine as Plainenesse) without welt, or garde, To seeme, thereby, to be as plaine in Mind; For, he to seeme good, still had good regarde: His rapier hilts wer blackt, which brightly shin'd, A veluet Scobbard did that weapon warde: The Hangers and the Girdle richly wrought, With Silke of Blacke. poorest colour, deerely bought.
15 His Stockings (sutable vnto the same) Were of blacke silke, and crosse-wise gartered: The Knot whereof a Roses forme did frame, Which neare the ham the sable leaues did spred: His Shooes were veluet, which his foote became, Thus was he clad, from foote vnto the Head: Who still was still, as one of iudgement staid, Before he heard, and poiz'd, what others saide. 16 While first (puft-panch) Poliphagus bespake, (But panted as he spake for want of winde; And at each word his fat for feare did quake, Lest that winds want that fat should melt, or bind, O that (quoth he) then reached to perbrake) Mans Necke were like a The wish of Philoxenus a philosopher. Cranes, then should we find More pleasure in our meat & drink, because T'would longer passe, with pleasure to our mawes. 17 Eating and Drinking sweetly eates vp Time That eates vp all; then, feeding most of all We ought to loue; for, we are made of Genes. 3.15. Slime; Then should we feed (lest we to slime should fall) That so our flesh, by fat, to fat should climbe; Fat Capons, Turkies, Fezants we may call The The Scale of Gluttony, for the pnch to climbe by. Ladders to Perfection, and t'ascend By such Degrees, is mans perfections end.
18 Deere Taste, the sense wherein Men-beasts do most delight. Taste (quoth he) the life of all my ioy), Can they be blest that say thou bredst our curse, When thou dost sweeten all our liues annoy, That else were Hell it selfe, or rather worse? For my part, I esteeme that Gene. 3.6. Tale a Toy; And thinke that Taste alone doth Nature nurse: If thou be Natures Nurse, then say I dare, Thou nursest That that makes vs what we are. 19 Who are by nature Demi-gods at least; Gramercies Taste, that mak'st vs so to be: Man, but for thee, were farre worse then a beast; And, beasts were worse then nothing, but for thee: For, man, and beasts do toile but for the taste; Then if our taste should faile vs, curst were we: Sith both are borne to labor but for All the labour of man is for the mouth, &c. Eclesiast. 6.7. foode; That rather would offend; then doe vs good. 20 The mouth, & Maw are Pleasures blisfull Bowres, Where she lies dallying with her loue Delight: The Maw (Charibdis which Delight deuoures) Takes frō the mouth what giu's the mēbers might; Is That an Idol which such good procures? Or should it not be Adored.seru'd by Natures right, That keepes fraile Nature in her vitall heate, That else would pine for want of tasting meate?
21 Psal. 34.8.O! taste, and see how sweete the Lord; but whie Do I enforce what Epicures beleeue not the Soules im∣mortalitie, and so no scripture. forcelesse I esteeme? Yet, sith it's held for written-Veritie, Ile sucke sweete from that weede, and holy seeme: The sou'raign'st sense, enthron'd is in the Eie; Yet Taste, this Truth (if truth) doth better deeme: For, taste, and see, first taste, and after see, Implies that Taste, of Sight hath sou'raigntie. 22 O tis the Well from whence the Senses drawe Their summum bonum; sweet'st, thogh short, delite: The right hie-way to Mirth, lies to the Mawe; The way to mirth that cheares the flesh, & Good foode comforts the hart, cheeres the sprite. sprite; That warms the blood, & frozen harts doth thaw, In spight of Nature, foiling Natures spight: Then, who distasts these sweet Lauds of the Taste, His Taste is senslesse, and his Wittes are waste. 23 Aske Proofe, how all the Veines do flow with ioy When as the Mouth takes in confected Sweetes; Or when the Pallate doth her Powres imploy To meet sweet Wines, which she with Which the tong makes against the Pallate.smacks re∣greets: What hart so faint, that thē can feare anoy, Though Hell itselfe with all the Senses meets? Giue strong drink to the damn'd, & they'l sustaine, In Paines despight, with ease, the spight of Paine.
24 What Care can once but touch a merry hart, That's merry made with precious blood of grapes? And, who can choose but play a frolicke part, That by strong Sacke, frō Sorrows sacke escapes: Smart, them annoyes that feele, or thinke on smart, But not those that with Wine are Pleasures rapes: For, while they gape to let in, They that drinke much, must euery way euacuate much. out to run, They feele, & think on nought but Healths begun. 25 Thus did this gormandizing Epicure What we most loue of that we glad∣ly heare and speake.Insist in praise of That which Taste commends; And, (for winde lab'ring) labour'd past his powre To make Mans gorge his god, for godlesse ends: When loe, Epithymus (to make it sure) In part approu'd his reasons; yet he bends His pow'r to proue the wenching practicke part, To yeeld the ioy which most affects the hart. 26 These Girles (quoth he) so they be faire, and yong,Epithymus. Are they alone that most do rauish Sense; For which, no lesse then for our foode we long;The praise of Touching. The Touch, being furthest from th'Intelligence, With much more Touching be∣ing furthest remoued from the Vnder∣standing of all the senses, makes it the more brutish. libertie, and ioy among, Doth play her part to proue her excellence: It tickles all our veins with lustful pleasure, Which the mean while, hath neither mean nor me∣sure.
27 What Heart's so cold that is not set on fire, With a trans-lucent beaming sunne-brightface? But, of that face to haue the hearts desire, The Heart cannot desire a greater grace: Who couets not bright Beauties golden wire, His Heroike spi∣rites soonest enthralled with loue. Sprite is abiect, and his thoughts are base: Sith those wires winde about the turning thought, And tie it to rich pleasures dearely bought. 28 Who meets with flesh that melts with tendernesse, And melts not in Desires ay-burning flames? Whose kisses, steept in Sucket, Heau'n do presse From lips Wanton Lo∣uers most pro∣phane. diuine, too worthy for such names; Can any Eies looke into Beauties Presse, And with her trimmest trinckets make no games? No humane Eies (I weene) if christaline, But ioy to see themselues in Eies diuine. 29 To see a Body more then Lilly-white, With azur'd veines imbrodred here and there, To see this blisfull Body This Obiect makes the Soule most abiect. naked quite, And to behold Loues Hold some other where, What Thing, with ioy, can more intrāce the sight, Sith to the sight Loues Heauen doth appeare? Then adde to this, a A glauncing aluring looke. Looke that saith approch, It wil the Vessell of all Sweetnesse broch.
30 O! to embrace her that embraceth all That Beauty can embrace, is to infold In mortall Armes, Armes supernaturall, Of pow'r both No passion more violent in the Soule of Man or Beast. Gods and Men (insnar'd) to hold; And make them, as they please, to rise, or fall, Seruing Loues Soueraigne as Vassals should: For, Gods, and men do most obsequiously, By nature, serue diuine Formositie. 31 He that orethrew what ere his strength withstood,Hercules. And vnderpropt the weight of Heauens frame, Loue, made to spinne in weake vnmanly moode: And He, for wisedome, that had greatest fame,,Salomon. Loue so, with Lust, inflam'd his coldest blood: That He a 700 wiues, and 300. con∣cubines.thousand had to quench the same For, no Age, Wisedome, Pow'r, or Policie, Haue pow'r t'impugne diuine Formositie! 32 Aske Mars the sterne and stubberne god of warre, How much frail Beuty made him (crouchīg) bow: Nay aske (if men may aske) the Thunderer The high'st of gods, by lordly Loue brought low) Why he did make his mansion in a Starre, Yet fell from heau'n an earthly Danaae. Dame to know, But that both Gods and Men, most lowlily, By nature, serue diuine Formositie!
33 Giue me a Wench that hath the skill, and wit, To let me (loue-sicke) bloud in Lustes right vaine; And can, with pleasure, ease me in the fit, Yet ease me so, that Loue may still complaine Of With Loue-tricks to make Lustinsatia∣ble. heate, that is for Lusts life onely fit, Which to the life of Loue yeelds pleasant paine; That can so humour me, and what I feele, That she may hurt me still, my hurt to heale. 34 Such a Crafts-mistris, in the Arte of Loue, Doth crowne the Touch with an imperiall A lasciuious kisse bewitch∣ing wantons, knowne best to such. kisse; For, she makes Touching tast ioy farre aboue The reach of Arte to tell men what it is: For feelinglie, she can both staie, and moue About the Center of Loues boundlesse blisse Then boundlesse is the Touches excellence That, by a Lasse, can so beheau'n the sense. 35 Thus did this Orator of Lechery Dilate the shortsweete of his liues delight; Which, Hyselophronus did not The wicked conspire in e∣uill, though they vary in circumstances.deny, (As though quite opposit) but bent his might, To proue high'st blisse was borne of Maiesty; Begot by Potency, right or vnright: The greatest ioy to Greatnesse appertaines For ioy doth raign (quoth he) in that which raigns.
36 A roiall Robe, a Scepter, Mound, and Crowne Are the true Signals of the truest ioy: They neede not feare the threat of Sorrows frown That Soueraigne aucthority can silence all, vn∣der heauen, that inueighs against her in∣ordinate plea∣sures. can confound, all causers of anoy: The hand of Maiesty puts vp, and downe The meanes of mirth, and those that mirth destroy: Hee's a rare Clarke that Rgnum can declyne And Meus, Mea, Meum ad in fine. 37 What Hart is not enlarg'd, with ioy, as much As it can hold, when pow'r is more enlarg'd Then Earth can hold; or, on the same none such, When all by him, and he by none, is charg'd? No not so much as with the smallest What man shal say to the Soueraigne, What doost thou? without incurring his ire, which is the precursor of Death. Prou. 16.14. touch, Touching his life, lest such be life-discharg'd: It is the greatest glorie of Mans state,Where the word of the King is, there is power, and who shall saie ta him, What doost thou? Eccles. 8.4. When man, like God, doth raigne in spite of Hate. 38 To eate and drinke, and do the acts of lust, Is common vnto Beasts, as well as Men; What praise get they that do what That which men & Beasts by the prouo∣cation of Na∣ture onely. needs they must; But such as shames the praised now and then? For, so may men be praisd for deedes vniust, Sith Men, by nature, wrong their Bretheren: But, to correct To rule men well is proper to God and men onely. Men, with directing Rods, Is proper vnto none but Demi-gods.
39 The Spheare of Greatnes (like the highest sphere, That turnes the neather with resistlessesway) Is the high'st step to his Throne without Peere; And, to the Sunne that makes eternall day; Where Blisse abounds an euerlasting yeare, For which the most deuout doe inly Few or none so mortified, but can be cō∣tented to liue, rather ruling then ruled. pray: Then, Greatnes is the great'st good vnder heau'n, Which vnto none but Gods on Earth is giu'n. 40 O! how it rapts the Eie of Maiestie, To see all downe-cast vnderneath her feete; That may, if please her, march vpon the Hie, Till she with none, but with the Lowly meete: Then, Humane wisedome. Wisedomes reach doth tend to Emperie; And none but fooles neglect it as vnmeete: It is the highest Note that Arte can reach, To rule the voice when Sou'raigntie doth preach. 41 And what a glorie is't to mortall Man, That when he bends his high-erected front, Death in the The lookes of soueraigne maiestie doth either kill, or quicken. foldes doth play the Artezan, And kill, but with alooke, the highest Count: Yet, with a word (like Him that all things can) To create others, making them to mount; Then, who hath pow'r all men to marre or make, Must be a God, that life doth giue, and take.
42 A Seepter's Circes Rod; which Men and Beasts Doth easlie tame, how wilde so ere they bee: For, Birds that in the Stars doe build their neasts, Farre, farre aboue all Birds, of prey doe flee: To which pitch if they mount, they scorch their crests; For, heat so high is in The indigna∣tiō of a prince is most mor∣tall. extreame degree: Highnesse is sacred, and the sacred Hie, With their pow'rs wing aboue all perills flie! 43 O! tis a blisfull glitt'ring glorious state, Able to make Mortalitie diuine; Which, with Ars dmina∣bitur Astris: Wise kings much more.inspection, binds the hands of Fate, And, like the Sunne, among the Stars doth shine, Till Nature doth the Flesh inanimate; And in the mouthes of Men mens fames enshrine: Then, if in Earth be any diuine thing, It's more then God, if it be not a King. 44 Poliphagus, though he his Intralls seru'd, As if they were his Fancies Soueraignes, Or rather Gods, by which he was preseru'd, Yet hee allowance to their fancie faines; That so The concord of the Euill condemns the discord of the Good.fraternitie might be conseru'd, Which concord, in conceit, together chaines; And, thus immod'rately doth moderate The diffrence of the doubtfull Questions state.
57 But now, as wak'ned from a tedious sleepe, *Logus, chiefe guide of *Psyche, their chiefe guide (While they were plunged in all pleasures deepe) Thus gan their sensuall-senslesse Soules to chide: Whither, O whither runne ye, ye lost sheepe, Not weying in what danger ye abide? The Blinde eates many a flie; and so doe you, That chew sweet poyson, which ye should eschue. 58 But ere wee further prosecute her speach, We will describe their Garments (as we may) For as we said the Coate and Cut do teach. Sight to discerne what mood the mind doth sway: Logus was clad, as could no State impeach, Sith she was cloth'd with mean, thogh cleane aray: For, she with Garments farre more fit, then faire, But sauegard sought from Passions of the Aire. 59 But, Psyche (whom she guided) like a Qune Was richly deckt, with ornaments diuine: Who liu'd so closely that she scarce was seene, Yet through her Pallace did her glory shine, As if at least she had a Goddesse beene; Whose virtues were apparant to the Eine: Her Ornaments were Wit, Will, Memory, Which richly roab'd her with Regality.
60 Vpon her sacred Head she ware a Crowne (Like that of Ariadnes) all of Starres, To light her feete in darke waies, and vnknowne, And keepe the safest way in Passions warres; Those Starres were royall vertues of her owne (Which some call Cardinall) her gard in Iarres: Who was deckt inly with Pow'r, Grace, and Arte, Being wholy in the whole, and in each Part. 61 Her Vnderstandings Pow'r that Pow'r did line, Which Heau'n and Earth religiously adore; And in her Will she ware Grace most diuine, But in her Memory she Artes did store; That made the Whole most gloriously to shine, But most diuinely did those three decore! Affects and Fantasies her Seruants were, Which were all cloakt with Good, how ill so ere. 62 Hir prīcely train, which was of works wel wroght, Was borne by Iudgement her chiefe Officer: Then, Contemplation held her, as she ought, By the right Arme, so that she could not steere Frō those right waies, whereon before she thoght: And double-Diligence before did cleere: The outward Senses her Purueiours were, To whom the Common-sense was Treasorer.
63 Thus were these two attended and araid, Which I haue thus described by the way; And now to prosecute what Logus said From thence where I before did make him stay; Quoth hee, what meane ye thus to be betraid By sinfull Sense, which seekes but your decay? You are to seeke to know her Fallacies, But know them not by seeking in this wise. 64 How neere to temporall and eternall death You are (God wot) ye wot not, ne yet care; Not weying how worlds Worldes weale vncer∣taine in our life, but deter∣mines vtterly in our death. weale wastes with your breath, And that your breaths within your nostrills are; Which to the Aire you must of force bequeath, Perhaps forthwith, at least ere ye beware: If temp'rall death attach ye in this plight, Your temp'rall daies will turne t'eternall night. 65 To yong and old Death is indifferent; The Court and Cottage he frequents alike: Yet, of the twaine, he Courts doth more frequent; And loues those, that do Death is most familiar with those that are most strāge to him. mind him least, to strike: He wounds the lustfull, vaine, and insolent With their owne weapons, quickly to the quicke: For, euer he doth enuy lifes delight, And makes the same most subiect to his might.
66 How can vaine pleasures please men, hauing sense To feele the sweete and sowre of sinne, and grace? For, if they feele the The sting of Consciēce kil our liueliest pleasures of the flesh. sting of Conscience, All pleasures of the flesh will giue it place: That grieues the Will, that grieues th'Intelligence, Which take no pleasure in their owne disgrace: But still the lusts offraile flesh to fulfill, Is to disgrace Intelligence, and Will. 67 The obiect of the Will is perfect Good; Which, the Intelligence to her presents; That neuer yet was found in roiall food, In dainty Dames, or regall gouernments; By Daily proofe telles our vn∣derstandings, hat all world∣ly pleasures are as hort, as vaine, and vnsure. Vnderstanding these are vnderstood To yeeld but short, and counterfet Contents: If so they do, how madde are they the while, That giue their pretious Soules for things so vile? 68 The Salomon. wisest yet that euer breath'd this Aire (Of sinfull race) who in his wisedomes might Made proofe of all that was sweet, great, or faire, Yea of all pleasures which the sense delight,) Said of them all (like Wisedoms truest Heire) They were than skumme ofEccles. 1.2. Vanitie more light: If such great Wisedome found them to be such, They are much more thē fools that loue thē much.
69 Aske eu'ry sense what pleasure they doe proue In all their obiects: they must needes replie, (Sith consciēce knows it) nought to gaine our loue; For, we loue nought but what we Good is the obiect of loue good do trie: But, Proofe these pleasures doe, in fine, reproue; Sith they no sooner liue, but sooner die: For, Triall knowing them to be but vaine, Kills their delight ere we it entertaine. 70 And, Crownes are Hiues, where stinging cares do swarme; Pomp's but the White whereat fell Enuy shoots: which are as trees, whēce groes their owners harm; Harms are the fruit; crowns, flours; & kīgdōs, roots: The Arme of flesh, is but a feeble Arme; And, in such strong Extreames it little bootes: He knowes not yet the nature of a Crowne, That knows not none may call the same his Our Crowne saith the So∣ueraigne. owne. 71 What bootes a purple Robe, when purple blood Doth issue from the wofull wearers hart? And, of such issue there's more likelihood Then issue of his loines to take his part; For, oft such issue doth him little good, Who conquer The loue of a Crowne oft makes the son to hate the fa∣ther. Nature, by the aide of Arte: They learne by Arte weake Nature to command, When Crowns betwixt the Sire & Son doe stand.
72 Sou'raignes, are subiect to extreame Robert Cou∣tesse, Edward the second, Ri∣chard the se∣cond, Edward the fift, Rich. the third, Hē∣ry the sixt. despight, For lo, a Dog, sometimes, supplide their place: A King of Norway, conquering in fight The King of Swethland, for the more disgrace, Did make a Dog their King, to shew his spight, And made thē neere His Coun∣cellours. him, that were neere as bace: Then are they worse then dogges that damne their soules To catch a kingdom, that a dog cōtroules. 73 What ioy can be accompanied with feare, Sith that companion doth all ioy Feare betrai∣eth the com∣forts and suc∣cours which Reason offer∣eth. confound? But terrene ioyes about with them do beare An hell of True ioy cō∣tents the de∣sire and ex∣cludes feare, which world∣ly ioy doth not. feare, wherein true Hell is found: For, where's vnsuretie, feare must needs be there; And all's vnsure that surgeth from the ground Of this vast Sea of extreame miserie, True Antitype of true felicitie. 74 Besides, no pompe (how euer glorious) No ioy or pleasure, if sublunarie, But brings sacietie soone with their vse, As they best know that haue best meanes to trie; And none haue right ioy but the The ioy of the Soule is incident to good and ghostly liuers onely. righteous; For, ne'r doth saciate their felicitie, Which doth content Desire, and Feare exclude, Which is the summe of true Beatitude.
75 Then, if my power ore your Soueraigne, If my words (rules of Reason) can perswade, Vaine pleasures fly; throgh which ye fly to paine; Which still haue marr'd, but neuer any made: Containe your selues, and you shall ioy containe; If you be good, then Glory attēds vpon God & his onely. glorious is your trade: For, nought is great on Earth, but that great hart, That scornes all ioyes by Nature bred, or Art. 76 Rouze vp your selues, shake off this sloth of sprite; Put on the mind that men of mind becomes: Away with all Vaine plea∣sures doe effe∣minate the minde. effeminate delight, That none but worse then women ouercomes: Shew your selues men of strength in Frailties spite; For, graceles ioyes possesse but graceles groomes: O, tis To obey rea∣son is to rule kingly. Dominion in the high'st degree, When men to Reasons rules obedient bee. 77 Hereat their Conscience touched to the quicke, Beganne, halfe fainting, inwardly to bleede: No pricke more mortal then the consciēce pricke; It makes our faith to faint, and kills our Creede: Yet, frozen in their dregges, therein they sticke, Without all feeling that which must succeede: And, with hard harts (thogh said for their behoofs) They Logus thus reprooue, for his reproofes.
78 What wight art thou (presumptuous that thou art) That com'st to Councell, yer thou called bee? By what pow'r dost thou this? by what desart Think'st thou we all should be controld by thee? We know no pow'r thou hast, nor wit, Reason is thought to be most vnrea∣sonable by the sensuall. nor Art To take the guidance of our actions free; Being a meere stranger to vs and our state, Yet dost from either more then derogate. 79 Thou would'st bee taught (that thus presum'st to teach) To know good maners, persons, time and place; These circūstances they should know that preach, Or else they may disgrace their Sermons grace; And those that liue by preaching do Philem. 9. beseech, Not sharply checke, which tendeth to disgrace: Then think we o're our passions haue great powre, That giue thee sweet aduice for cheeke so sowre. 80 You may be gon, we need no councellors, That breathe out worse thē wormwood with their words; We are twice seau'n, and our owne gouernors, Your proffred seruice no good Mer vt∣nea putet. sent affords: We are the highest Powres Compettitors, And fight for pleasure with our sense, and swords: We are resolu'd to satisfie desire With all the comforts that it can require.
81 Doth Loue (quoth Logus) with our selues begin? It seemes not so, for with your selues it ends: Foes to your selues, sith you are folde to sinne; Yet will not Not to see our sinne, is to liue and die in sinne. see whereto that purchase tends: To lose your Soules, and all the world to win, Is the worst fortune, that fell Fortune sends: O be indulgent to your Soules, for whie, Christ Lord of life.Life died it selfe, that so they might not die. 82 I am that Logus, which your Soueraigne (Great sou'raigne Psyche) gaue you for your Reason, the eie of the soule. guide: Which you would ne'r vouchsafe to entertaine, Though, Humane cre∣atures are rea∣sonable, thogh many liue brutishly.vnimploied, I still with you abide: I pray you then (for your eternall gaine) That now at last I may with you reside, To doe you seruice, which if you will vse, Ile make your life and death most glorious. 83 Let not my plainenesse with you, make yee plaine Of my sterne Course; for, sith I am the Sterne That rules the Mind, I must her so restraine (When Passions rise) that she, by me, may learne The way to weale, which she seekes to attaine, Which she, by my Humane rea∣son assisted by diuine grace, true guide to perfect felicity direction shall discerne: Now, if the Sterne resist repugnant windes, The Bark, to which she's bound, to her she bindes.
84 Yee oft haue heard, that Sores quite mortified, (If euer they be cured as they ought) Must haue sharpe Corrasiues thereto appli'd, Else one sore part may bring the whole to nought: Then leaue your Gluttony, your Lust, and 3. sins most familiar with mens nature. Pride; Be sober, chaste, and meeke, in deed, and thought: This must you doe; and I must needes say this, Except I should both say and doe amisse. 85 Should I, your Guide, winke when ye go astray? Or see you runne in by-paths of offence? Else drawe ye further on, out of the way, And by all waies soothe vp your erring sense? So should I, like a traitor, you betray; Which would, in time, your Souls to We hate our euill Councel∣lors, when we are plagued for following them. hate incense: O then let me haue leaue your Soules to loue, Which least I do, when least I you reproue. 86 Repentance oft (too oft) comes too too late, (Though, better late then neuer to repent) But ne'r too soone can Grace it animate; For, Men, All men are conceiued in sinne. beyond their birth, are euill bent: So, yer they sinne, they are in sinfull state; For, sinne in their conception's resident: Then sith yer men Be (whole) it Is (in part) Repentance should take Being yer the Hart.
87 Time past, is gone, in it none can repent, If in that Time they did the same neglect: The Time to come (although incontinent) Is as vnsure, as is that rare Repentance. effect: Therefore the The present time is sure to repent in, which is no sooner thoght on, but gone for euer. present Time for it is lent, Which strait is gone, then doe it not reiect: Sith so small time may all your time ingrosse, The losse of it may be your vtter losse. 88 But, what auailes an Angells tongue to moue A fiend to goodnesse, that by kind is ill? From which he is resolu'd ne'r to remoue; No more can They are e∣nemies to rea∣son that desire to liue sensual∣ly. Reason their desires fulfill, (Though with all reason he doth seeke their loue) For, they desire to liue corruptly still; And thus, with bitter taunts they do requite His loue, that euer loues to guide them right. 89 What ere thou art (quoth they) we know thee not; Nor will we know thee, sith we know thou art Repugnant to vs; and, thou seem'st a Sot, To seeke to gaine loue by contentions Art: Thou neuer knew'st, or else thou hast forgot, That manners The Iay sits with he lay. Eccles. 17.9. like, do still like loue impart: Therefore farewell, except thou worse wilt fare, We are resolu'd, in what resolu'd we are.
90 So they to excesse fell excessiuely; Sinning, with A true mark of reprobatiō. griefe, that they could sin no more: Now, they inlarge their Bounds of libertie, Although it were but too too loose before: Like Water they Iob 15.16. lappe vp iniquitie, Which, through thē, ouerflows both Sea & Shore: A cauterized Conscience being checkt, Becomes farre worse, in Cause, and in Effect. 91 Logus thus cast from their societie, Waxt passing pensiue (as one desolate) Because his Councell was no more set by, And, with their mother Nature. Phusis fell at bate; As being assur'd in her the fault did ly, That they from him so much did derogate: Yet, knew one Custome. Praxis, Phusis follower, Had made them worse, then she them made, by far. 92 But by the way we should not do amisse,Phusis her habit descri∣bed. To shew how Ladie Phusis was araid, (Sith shee the mother of each matter is) Yer we do prosecute what Logus said: For, so her nature may be knowne by this, As outward, inward Things haue oft bewraid: For, though it seeme the Tale, by force, to part, Its recompenced with Descriptions Art.
93 Vpon her Head she ware a Crowne of Corne, Like that of Ceres; sauing that the same Was mixt (like Achelous his plenteous Horne) With fruits of eu'ry kinde, which her became; Her Haire by her was still disheuled worne, Who naked was, yet her hand hid her shame: Or if a Vaile she ware, it was but when She was to come among licentious men. 94 About her Necke she ware a Carcanet Of eu'ry Iemme as it created was: About her Wrists, in Bracelet-wise, were set The ores of Gold and Siluer, Lead, and Brasse: Thus haue we made this Ladies Counterfet, Who being bare, as barely must it passe: And now returne we eft to Logus speach, Who thus to Phusis chidingly did preach. 95 Phusis (quoth he) I speake with griefe of hart, I needs must chide, sith your fault it procures; Because you haue not plaid a mothers part Touching the breeding of these Sonnes of yours: I know you haue, by nature, so much Art, As might make them obey their Gouernours: And, that you doe not, it is your disgrace, That kill your Children with a kinde As it is saide of the Ape. embrace.
96 You may, perhaps, suppose your selfe you cleere By saying, Custome is another na∣ture. Praxis hath abus'd you much; In alt'ring of their natures, which were deere, For that from you they all receiued such; Which could not be, if you not faultie were, For, you might haue restrain'd them with a touch: If then you had corrected Custome is ouercome by Custome▪ if Nature be willing. Praxis lore, They would haue bin farre better then before. 97 Little do Mothers know what hurt they do, By their indulgence, to their saucie Sonnes; They make them wanton and rebellious too; For, let loose Nature, it to Natures loosenes must be restrained by Reasons stedfastnes.loosenesse runnes; Till Soule and Body it doth quite vndoe; For, Custome ill good nature ouer-runnes: But, if the Mother be as Mothers ought, She wil by Vse amend what Vse hath wrought. 98 Phusis, not being vs'd such checkes to take, Beganne to kindle with disdainefull ire; And, like a Ouer-kinde mothers make vnkind Chil∣dren. doating mother, she doth make A stiffe defence, for her sonnes lewd desire:Though fire be good, yet fire in flaxe is not good: so, though plea∣sure be good, yet in you hi is not good. Alas (quoth she) should they all ioyes forsake, Which both their yeares, and natures do require? Or should they wear their days in wastful thought To bring themselues, and me with them, to nought?
99 You are no friend of theirs, if so you would; And, if not theirs, then mine you cannot be: For, me and them in one Loues Band doth hold; Whom factiously you seeke to disagree: I take their part but as a Mother should, That her deere Childrens A good pre∣tēce for a fault maks the fault the fouler. good desires to see: For, it a tender Mother doth become, As life to loue the Children of her wombe. 100 And, are they not of flesh and blood compos'd? Then can such mixture be aught else but fraile? Or would you haue them otherwise dispos'd Then Adams heires, that hold but by the Taile? And flesh and Founts of Frailtie. blood to strength are still oppos'd; Yet Strength of pleasures. strength, in weaknes, gainst it doth preuaile: Sith so it is, my Sonnes may be excus'd, That haue in weakenes powrefull pleasures vs'd. 101 Now well I see (quoth Logus) thy fond loue Makes thee Affection transports iudgement in∣to partialitie. vnapt to iudge what's requisite; But, how if their loose liues the monster moue (Monstrous Gehenna) to deuoure them quite? For, he loues such to eate, as such do proue; May you not thanke your selfe for such despite? If Babes do burne them in a Candles flame, Are they, or those that giue it them, too blame?
102 These heauy words suncke deepe in Phusis minde, Who (as astonied) at the same did muse; Breath'd short, in Reason is ve∣ry preualent with the at∣tentiue. passion, as if wanting winde, Yet at the last, hi Spirite she vp did rowze, And askt of Logus, in the kindest kinde, What practise she to saue her Sonnes might vse: I hate, as Hell, that Monster, and I would My Sons (quoth she) frō him, by force, with-hold. 103 Now Logus, glad her nature had such grace, Said, for mine owne part, I will but aduise, Not deale with them; sith they did me When Rea∣son is reiected, men are lest to all brutish∣nesse. disgrace; Therefore I councell, that in any wise You hie you to the Lady Truth. Aletheias Place, And there inuoke her aide, with carefull Cries; Who is indu'd with power, will, and skill, To tell them of their misse, and mend their ill. 104 Entreate her, who will soone intreated bee, (For, she doth loue to satisfie Good-will) To go vnto thy Sonnes of each degree, And tell them of this Monster, made to Hell made for torment. Esa. 30 33. spill All those that liue secure in Pleasures glee, And greedily their hungry lusts fulfill; I will (said Phusis;) but where doth she dwell? Thou know'st (deare Logus) but I cannot tell.
105 She wonted was (said he) to neighbour mee; But since that Deceit and Guile exclu∣ded Truth frō the Earth, Fraus and Dolus (wicked Twinnes) The World produc'd, I do her seldome see; For, she from my sights reach so slily rinnes, As though to her I were an enemy, Or made prodigious through my subiects sinnes: Who prosecute her with extreame despight, That now she euen loathes to see the light. 106 Shall I (quoth Phusis) on the Earth her finde? Hardly (quoth Logus) being chas'd from thence. In th'Aire, or Water then, or in the Winde; Or else within the Fires Circumference Is she (quoth she?) said Logus, these by kinde Are mutable, and full of difference; Which she cannot abide, for she is Truth is one, but Errour is manifold. one, And rather will, then with such, liue alone. 107 Is she to Heau'n return'd (quoth she) againe? That's like (said Logus) but th'art ne'r the neere: For, without As without the Sun none can see the Sun, so with∣out Trueth none cā come at the Author of Truth. her, thou canst not Heau'n attaine; For, all by her must come, that must come there. Alas (said she) how shall I her obtaine, Sith I must haue herselfe her selfe to cleere? For, as without the Sunne, none sees the Sunne, So, without her, none wots where she doth wonne.
108 This once (quoth Logus) I will thee direct The best I can, but cannot as I could; I oft haue heard, and finde true, by effect, That she is seene about the Mansion old Of father Time. Chronus, which he did erect For him, and her, (his daughter deere) to hold; Or, Death. Thanatus, his Man, who riddes away That which his Master bringeth to decay. 109 Which Man, and Masters habites we might paint,The descrip∣tion of Chro∣nus and Th∣natus. Though we but Chalke, & Coles, and Ashes had: For, Chronus clad is like a mortall Saint In skinnes of Beasts, to shew how life doth fade; (Which of their age did seem to make complaint) Girt with an Halter, or with Girth as bad: Vpon whose Head, in stead of Hat, there stoode An Houre-glasse, as an Embleme of his moode. 110 His Haire was white as was the driuen Snow, And from his Head it seem'd to hang, by drifts Turn'd vp againe; eu'n as the same doth show When it doth hang, so driuen vpon Clifts: His Beard, beneath his girdle-stead did grow, Which, platted, in his bosome oft he shifts: Whose right hand did a Sithe, still mouing weld, And in his left, an Horologe he held.
111 His Man hight Thanatus, bare to the bones, Was more then naked from the toppe to toe: All hairelesse, toothlesse, eielesse, stocks, or stones, Are all as quicke, though he much more can doe: And all he said, I was as you are, once; Which was in sullen silence spoken to: Vpon a Spade he leanes, as if he did By his day-labour liue, call'd Wincke, all hid. 112 To these did Logus Phusis wish to wend Which were to her the Nature cānot abide▪ Death, nor Time run∣ning thereto. loathsom'st wights aliue; And hardly thought that Logus was her frend, (Although she could not otherwise beleeue Sith her and hers she sought still to defend) That would to her such wofull councell giue: And, with the water swelling in her eies, She thus to Logus mournefully replies. 113 Alas (quoth she) and to them must I goe? To their most hatefull houses must I hie, That are the greatest workers of my woe, And faine would haue me vtterly to die? What A well tunde tongue cannot please an eare vtterly out of tune. words can please a prowd insulting foe, That holds in scorne his foes humilitie? Then, what hope haue I with them ro preuaile, Who, though I kneele to them, will me assaile?
114 What shall I say? alas, what shall I do? To winne their fauour, that will not be wonne? To go to them, I shall my selfe vndo; For, though I kisse their feete, they'l me ore-runne: If not, they'l paine me, and compell me to; The choice is miserable where the best is misery. Both which, if I do go, I cannot shunne: I am amaz'd, I know not what to say, If go, I die; if no, my Sonnes decay. 115 What shall I do? deere Logus, tell me In case of di∣stresse we wil∣lingly imbrace the aduice of Reason. what? O happy were I, if this feare were past: There is no cause (quoth Logus) to feare that That no wight liuing can auoide at last; The Stag, the Rauen, and the nine-liu'd Cat Must know those houses, then be not agast, But go on boldly with erected Front, Where you shall see her liue in high account. 116 If at the first you cannot see her face, Their Porter Sicknesse. Nosus will you soone direct Vnto her priuy chamber, where her grace Will talke with you, in secret, in effect: But, see you bribe the Porter of the place With Naturall heate sustaines the vital po∣wers in sicke∣nesse. Calor naturalis, most select: So may you passe securely through each Gate, That leades to this obscured Ladies State.
117 Sickenesse described.This Nosus was a true Anatomie (Though Thanatus be truely call'd the same) Of mortall griefe, or curelesse maladie, Whose Head was hāp'red (which him ill became) With homely clowts (tide as vnhansomly) And with a staffe he went as he were lame: A Gowne (with Potions stain'd) he, girded, ware, Who panted as he went, and went with care. 118 Foure paire of Stockings did his Legs comprize, And yet his Shancks (God wot) but little were, Although the vpper Stockings were of Frize, Thicke Frize, or Rugge, or else of warmer geare: Whose Slippers were with Cotton lin'd likewise; And yet of taking cold he still did feare: Who lookt as he had not an houre to liue, And eu'ry steppe he trode, his Soule did grieue. 119 His Face was of the colour of that clowt That did his head inuolue, saue that his Face Did looke more white: his Eies both seemed out, For, they were sunck, & shrunke out of their place: His Nose was sharper then an Adders snowt; His Tong, & Teeth were furr'd, in lothsome case; His Lips were chapp'd, his Beard was driueld ore, And euer breath'd as he should breathe no more.
120 And therewithall he was so waiward still, That none might please him, but he fault wold find With the best words & deeds of meere good-will; His bodies paines so peruerse made his mind: His wozen whez'd when his breath it did fill, As, through the straitest passage doth the wind: And when he spake, his tong was furr'd so thicke, That oft his words within the same did sticke. 121 Yet ne'rthelesse, to these must Phusis hie, For, Logus held her to't by strong perswasion, Which thus she prest; Go, or thy Sonnes must die: Thou needes must do it, there is no euasion: Herein their life, or death alone doth lie; Then, of their perill if thou haue compassion▪ Thou must to These, that they may be secure, Then liuely go; for, Loue can Hell endure. 122 Phusis, though while-ere somewhat weakned, (By reason of these vncouth Accidents) Yet thus, by Logus, being Reason be∣gets in vs re∣solution to die coragiously. comforted, To his direction and aduice assents: And now (all heart) she holdeth high the Head, Scorning her wonted dread, and dririments; And, in her loue to her Sonnes, thither goes, Their case to Aletheia to disclose.
123 A wearie iorney had she, and a foule, But, what paine is't a mothers True loue deemes no paine intolle∣rable endured for the belo∣ued. loue will shunne? Who almost will forsake her deerest Soule, Yer once forsake her deere-bought deerer Sonne: By Logus helpe, she doth her feares controule; And to these houses goes not, but doth runne: And as she hies, she more and more doth learne, This Ladies Lodging rightly to discerne. 124 The descriptiō of the house of Time.When to the House of Chronus neere she drew, (Which was a Caue in Rocke of Flint cut out) It, to the sense more horride was in shew; For, it with Mosse was inlaid all about, And ore the Gate, Harts-tongue, & Brābles grew; As on the top, did Okes, old, stiffe, and stout: Which rocks rogh sides huge mossie Beeches bare, As if the Flint the weathers threats did feare. 125 This antique Top, where these trees did not shade A kind of Mosse ore-sprad, as hard, as hore; The vpper Crust of a Rocke vnfre∣quented.Which ne'rthelesse, did softly seeme to vade, And grew farre shorter then it was before; Ore which strange vermin prety Paths had made, Which there did still increase in needlesse store: For, in those Places where men least frequent, There vilest vermine are most resident.
126 About the groundsills of this hideous house (Without) grew Nettles, Noisome Plants pro∣duced from Mans more noisome of∣fence. Hemlocks, and the like; Mongst whō were Snakes and vermin venomous; Which vnawares th'vnwarie foote do strike: Within the Caue was nought for Natures vse, Saue water, which ther leakt throgh many a creek: Where nought was seene but Darknes, nought was heard, But holow Ecchoes, making Noise afeard. 127 Neere to this vncouth Caue is scituate (As t'were a vault digg'd vnderneath the same) The House of Deaths house described. Thanatus, which all do hate; For, none came euer thence that thither came: Then Chronus house its much more desolate; More deadly too, in nature, and in name: For, flesh doth faint, when but b'imagination She The Graue is irkesome to flesh & blood sees this fearefull vgly Habitation. 128 The Roofe whereof, with Sculles is seeled quite; Whereon (in frets) hang shin-bones here & there: The walls are hung with Mantles of the night; Which, all with vermine vile, imbrod'red were: If it, through any Chinke, receiued light, Twas If Graues o∣pen by reason of the earths hollownesse, they soone are closed againe with feete that treade on thē. soone stopt vp with feet which it did beare: It paued was with Ioynts and Knuckle-bones, Set in no order, but like scatt'red stones.
129 The Gate whereof is made of mans iust size, Which yet receiues all The Graue and Destruc∣tion can ne∣uer be full: Prou. 27.20. men that euer were; Vpon whose Pauement all flesh rotting lies; And, to the sense most Nothing more noisome to the Nose and Eie then a rotten Car∣casse. odious doth appeare: For, here lie Armes, and there lie Legs, and Thies; Hete rotten Teeth, and ragged Iaw-bones there; Within whose pores, the worms do keep their hold Vntill they all conuert to perfect mould. 130 No one here keepes this grim Lord company, But sullen Silence, dust, and nastie mud; And, yet he seekes all mens societie, For, still he feedeth on their flesh and bloud: Friends of those that are in burying.Hard at the Gate do mournefull mourners crie, And teare their haire, too like the Fury-brood: Which yet is neuer heard that house within, For, Thanatus is No sense en∣ioyed in the Graue. deafe, and heares no din. 131 Rotten Corruption here doth reuell keepe; Where Worms (her Minions) out of mesure dance: For, all about they trace, they turne, and creepe, And merry make with Fleshes fowle mischance; Who all the while lies drown'd in puddle deepe, As full of Soile, as full of Sufferance: Where Irksomnesse sits on a dustie Throne, As if he were Lord of that The earthly▪ Carcasse. Earth alone.
132 For, Beauty comes no sooner to the Gate Of this true earthly Hell, but she doth looke As if she were in worse then damned state; And all her Graces had her quite forsooke: The Lures of Loue, here turne to Hoods of Hate; Hate that no Loue (thogh Loue it selfe) can brook: For, Christ the Lord of Loue. Loue itselfe, which once three days lay there, Fled from the same as if it hatefull were. 133 Here Isa. 34.14. Zijm and Iim do loue alone to be, (Grimme Desolaions sterne Consociates) The vale of Visions this doth seeme to me, Where Sense may see what Sense quite ruinates: Whose Organs here, lie in varietie Of transformation; which Sense deadly hates: Where lie all Obiects which the sight annoy, Yet tis the Death is the beginning of oy, or misery. entrance to all griefe, or ioy. 134 Here Sense (saith Sense) lies in a Lethargie; Whose powres are quite supprest with Earth and Stones: Here The Graue is the ret of the restle. Rest of Labour hath the victorie: And, Sorrows here surcease their sighs and grones; Where lasting sleepe beguiles Calamitie: For, Flesh feeles not, if rotten to the bones; This is the Lake, which Men most loathe, and yet, It is the Lethe where they griefe forget.
136 Downe a darke staire (the passage to this house) On eu'ry step sits all the impes of Feare; Confronted with Chymaeraes hideous, Which maks all men to hate their comming there; Saue such as daily do that The mortifi∣ed in conuer∣sation most familiar with Death. passage vse, And with feete-mortifide those steps do weare: To them it seemes not strange, how euer strange, Those Monsters do their vgly fashions change. 137 The Elements, whereof all Flesh is made, Do, with their The Humors are the Chil∣dren of be E∣lements. Children, the foure Humors, lie Confused there, in Deaths confused Shade, That no Eie can the one from the other spie; But His that saw them ere they Being had, On whom alone, they all do still rely: This is the Picture of Not-beings Pit, Where it doth seeme (but doth but seeme) to sit. 138 Sometimes, for pride, or praise, or both, some do Bestow a stately Tombe or Pyramed. Couer on this house; For, worldly pompe doth presse them thereunto, To make the glorified more glorious; But Chronus spite that Couer doth Time ruines al monuments how euer sub∣stantiall. vndoe, Which cannot brooke the pompe of Thanatus: It is but vaine the dead to honour then, With other honour then with Tongue, or Pen.
139 Hard at the doore of this confused den Sit rau'nous Rauens, watching for their pray; Which doore if Chronus opes, they enter then, And with the Relickes, there, they prey, or play: This Roomes description, no Pen well can pen But such as markes the measure of In a Graue lies the Anato∣tomy of Ru∣ine. Decay: O! tis a Heau'n to heare Hell well set forth, And Heau'n, if ill describ'd, seemes nothing worth. 140 The Rowme is little, this description great; And yet too little, for so great a Rowme, Where all mankinde haue, and doe finde a Seate, Vntill they haue receiu'd their later doome: Let Trueth. True descrip∣tions are able to quicken things dead. Aletheia then make it compleate; Sith all descriptions true, come from her wombe: Suffizeth me to shew but eu'n a glaunce Of Thanatus his Houses countenaunce. 141 The Porter of this Place (as erst was sed) Is Sicknesse is manifold: for, we are borne one way, and die an hun∣dred waies. hundred-headed Nosus; much more sterne Then Hells grim Porter, with his threefold head; The sight of whom made Phusis hart to yerne; But, Logus said, she, by him, should be Nature is ed by reason to the knowlege of Truth. led The Lady Aletheia to discerne: In hope whereof she did the better brooke The horror of his most detested looke.
142 Now, by this time, she was within his touch, Who, to him trembling came submissiuely; And Gifts get fa∣uour, but not with Death, or Sickenesse: sa∣uing that Sick∣nes is the bet∣ter borne by the gift of na∣turall heate. gaue him of her Calor (though not much) That she might be the better vs'd thereby: Nosus, whom though diseases made to grutch, Yet, through that Calor lookt more cheerefully: And gently, with familiar aspect, He opes the Gate, and strait did her direct. 143 For, he denieth passage vnto none That makes Who tenders sicknesse shall haue his com∣pany. much of him, or doth loue him well; But, had he well the Ladie Phusis knowne, Perhaps he would haue bin to her more fell: For, when she gaue him Calor, she did grone, To thinke how soone he would the same Sicknesse ex∣tinguisheth our vitall flame. expell: And, Phusis by no meanes can well endure, That Nosus should her any Nature can not endure to be bettered by Sicknesse. good procure. 144 But he to her is most officious, He tenders her his guidance, and what not? But yet the An inbred hate twixt Nature and Death. oddes twixt her and Thanatus, (Although by Him t'was more then quite forgot) Made Her entreate this Porter curteous, To call that Ladie forth, whom Chronus, got: And gaue him some more Calor in a Box, Which gaue him strēgth to ope the Ladies Locks.
145 Herewith he went to Aletheias Bed, Who ouer head and eares lay couer'd quite; And being naked, yet thus Truth is hid with cloudes of mysteries that shee is hard to bee found. couered, He could not haue, of her, an open sight: But, he aloofe his errand vttered; Wherewith she rose, yet came within the night: For, she being naked Darkenes seeks to hide her; For, men without a Mist haue seld espide her. 146 But, out she Truth being masked we must vse the more diligen to discouer her. (masked) comes to Phusis late, Who knew her not, because she came conceal'd: But, asked who she was, who did relate, Both who, and what, and strait her selfe reueal'd: It me behoues (quoth she) to hide my State, For, most men haue with me like Monsters deal'd: Who, like to deuills, authors of vntruth, Would force erroneous sense into my mouth. 147 I goe thus mask'd (quoth she) sith men like fiends, Of my destruction make no conscience: Statesmen seeke for me, but for subtill ends; Some Churchmen would haue me Non residence, But where their pleasure, or their Many of thē measure truth by their pre∣sent worldly profite. profit tends; And, fond Philosophers peruert my sense: Strong thieues, & Lawyers, wound my tender hart, The one by force, the other by their art.
148 The Merchant and the slie Artificer Will, for a penny profit stifle me With Falshoods cloake. The biting Vsurer Doth vse me better, though but cruelly; And, hath a will to vse mee worse by farre, So he a farthing might the better bee: But, of all men, that seeme me most to paine, Vpon poore Poets which all men taxe for lying, doe least lie of any, the morall of their fictions considered. Poets I can least complaine. 149 For, though they hide me from the vulgar view, With robes (as they suppose) that sumptuous be, Yet giue they me my right, with more then due; As they best know, that haue best eies to see: They are my friendly foes, false-louers true; Which hate, in shew, but do, indeed, loue me: Whom I wil one day feed with more then praise, Which Manna makes thē look Their soules abhorre that light foode, for feeding, it doth but fa∣mish. leane now adays. 150 All those that Offices, by coine, come by, (To come by coine, by buying Offices) In Church or Common-weale, do me defie, For interrupting their by-passages: No, not so much as Somners but can spie The way to wound me on aduantages; In summe, all sorts are resolute herein, To loose me quite, so they thereby may winne.
151 Haue I not reason then, conceal'd to go, To shunne these Helhounds, hauing me in chase; Who study, by all meanes, to worke my woe, And with their craft transforme my constant face? I were vnlike my selfe, and mine owne foe, If I went like my selfe in such a case: By nature, I the Ignorant do hate; Then should I loathe, if I knew not my State. 152 But, wherefore Phusis art thou come to me? Who told thee where I lay? who found'st me out? Thine eies are dimme, too Natures eies are dimd by Adams trans∣gression. dimme me well to see; Then thogh thou see me, thou therof maist Whether I be my selfe, or no, because e∣uery like is not the same. doubt. Quoth Phusis, that full well I did foresee, By Logus, therefore brought I this about; Who told me truly who, and where thou wart, Whose sayings, touching thee, I kon'd by hart. 153 And I am come to thee for thine aduice, Touching my children; who (as I am told By my friend Logus) are in loue with Vice; Or rather to that strumpet they are sold: Who, with faire Vices per∣swasions are most forcible with the Sons of Nature. words doth sweetly them intice To thinke, and say, and do, but as she would: Who, as its knowne to all that knoweth ought, (In fine) doth bring her Louers all to nought.
154 They being bound to Thanatus his house, Are bound likewise (ah woe is me) from thence On the left hand, to the land tenebrous, Whereas Gehenna holdes his residence, Which Monster, being more then rauenous, Will quite deuoure their Bodies, Soules, & Sense; The manner of whose house, no tongue can tell, But such as can describe the lowest Hell. 155 Heere, by the way, we will awhile digresse, And prosecute the rest of Phusis plaint, When as wee haue describ'd this little lesse Then more then hell, which colours cannot paint: For what so blacke as depth of all distresse, Where vtter darkenesse raignes without restraint? Then sith we colours want, as all do see, Our too light shadowes must excused bee. 156 There lie two waies from Thanatus his house, (That still are two, sith they still disagree) One on the right hand lies, scarse now in vse, The other on the left, vs'd commonly: That, on the left, is full of all abuse, And leades vnto a world of misery; Wherein Gehennaes Hold is scituate, Which, without Hell is much more horrible then can en∣ter into the thoght or vn∣derstanding. Patterne, thus wee figurate.
157 A ruinous Rowme, whose bottom's most profoūd;An ample de∣scription of Hell. A Pit infernall full of endlesse dole; A lothsome Lake where choaking damps abound;Reuel. 20.3. A dungeon deepe, a dreadfull darkesome hole, Wher noght but howlīgs, shriks, & grons do soūd, And humane flesh still makes a quenchlesse Cole: The common Burse, where none but Bugs repaire, An Harbor full of horror and despaire. 158 Whose light is darke, which darke is Math. 8.12. & 25.30. Iob. 10.21, 22. palpable; Whose pleasur's Isai 30.33. paine, which pain no pen cā tell: Whose life is Reue. 20.14 death, which death is damnable: Whose peace is Reue. 16.11. strife, which strife is discords well: Whose ease is Marke 9.44.48. Isa. 66.24toile, which toile's vnthinkable: Where most obedience, learnes most to Reue. 16.11.rebell: Where all Reuel. 6.8. confusion raignes in endlesse date, In a tumultuous State-disord'ring State. 159 Where Reue. 16.13. toads, and vipers, snakes, and vermine vile, (Whose hissings make an hellish harmony) With slimie gleere, the place do cleane defile, Swimming in Suddes of all sordiditie, While one on others backe themselues they pile To touch the top of toplesse misery: Where heate, and coldnes, are in their extreames, And frozen harts do floate in sulphred streames.
160 The wals are hung with Cobwebs, which cōtaine Soule-catching hellhounds, clad in Spiders shape; The Roofe, of burning Brasse, which droppes like raine; Frō which no one below could ere escape: The pauement's ful of groundlesse gulfes of paine, Which thogh they stil deuoure, they stil do Hell, and the Graue are in∣satiable. gape; Whose glowing Mawes cannot The damned still are dying, and neuer dead. cōcoct the meate Which there lies boiling in an hell of heate. 161 Here, weeping warbleth notes that anguish show; And, Math. 24.51 gnashing Teeth tunes Iigges vntuning ioy: Here, Seas of And men boiled in great heate, & blas∣phemed the name of God which bath power ouer these plagues, ond they re∣pented not to giue him glo∣ry. Reue 16.9 boiling Lead their Bounds oreflow, To make a boundlesse deluge of annoy: The Sands whereof are Soules orewhelm'd with woe; Which though destroi'd, yet death canot destroy: For, endlesse Deuills. lords of death still life do giue To those that in that death there still do liue. 162 From whose wide open Throats great flames they cast, Which thūder forth with sense-cōfounding noise; The din whereof makes Horrors heart agast, Which in that den no other blisse enioyes: Such Gall of Gall affords no better tast, Which stil doth feed, with that which stil annoyes: Such boistrous Bugs can yeeld no other glee, But mirth is mone whereas such Monsters be.
163 Whose foule blasphemos mouths are fraught with spite, That boils with heat of baneful poisō there; Which spite they Reuel. 16.9spit against the Cause of Light, Such is the enuy which to It they beare: Yet, from their glowing eies flie sparkles bright, As they no eies but Vulcans Forges were: The sight whereof the sight doth so annoy, As thogh that sight that sense wold quite destroy. 164 Imagine now you see, (as there is seene) Millions of Legions of this foule mouth'd crue, With fangs more huge then Elephāts, more keene Then Crocadiles chiefe grinders, to pursue Soules diuing in those Reuel. 20▪ 3. deepes to be vnseene; Which, ouergorg'd, them vp againe do spue: While these dogs watch to take them in the rise, With teeth to teare, & feare them with their cries. 165 Here may you see a Goblin, grisly grim, (With hooke and line) stand fishing for a Soule; Which, in those boiling Reuel. 20.10 Seas, do sinking swim; Baiting their hooks with Salamanders foule: Which, being hang'd he hales it to the brim, And, all the while, as hunger-band, doth howle: Which fingred, forthwith, in the diuells name, In go the fangs, that inch-meale teare the same.
166 Then others watch (as Spiders for a Flie) In obscure Nookes, to catch a flying Ghost; That to those Nooks to hide it selfe, doth flie; Which caught, they binde it, lest it should be lost, And, to their webs of woe, with ioy they hie; Where the poore Soule is still in torment tost: In whom they all their deadly poison So fares the Flie with the Spider.poure, Which more then kills them, sith they it endure. 167 Now, sullen Silence raignes as all were dead, Then, sodainely a world of Clamor rings; Whereby the much more horror still is bred; For, sodaine feare with it most horror brings. No heart so heauie as the hart of Lead; Yet sodaine feare doth start it when it stings. The Lightnings flash doth The light of Lightning is much more horrible then comfortable. feare more than the flame That stil is seene, and stil is seene the same. 168 Heere, in a Chimney, all of burning Brickes, Sits Grimnesse, and a red-hote Spit doth turne; Whereon a humane Creature, Reuel. 17.16 melting, stickes; Whose grease doth make the fire the more to burn; Which Turne-spit, oft, his filthy fingers lickes, And, with this liquor, doth his lippes adorne: Basting the roast with what most torment giues, Whiles the poore Creature dies, because he liues.
169 But, that which is most horrid to bee heard, But much more hatefull to be felt, or seene; These Cookes oft gash their Flesh of the tormented. flesh, to interlard The same with sulphure, with woe waxen leane: Lest the soft marrow the hard bone should guard, From feeling woes incomparable keene: So bone, and marrow, sinew, nerue, and vaine Do there endure paines, farre exceeding paine! 170 In other Coasts of this infernall Realme; (Confusions Land, Gehennaes lording place,A prudent man seeth the plague, and hideth him∣selfe: but a foole goeth on still, and is punished. Prou. 22.3. Frigida Ge∣henna. True Antitype of new Ierusalem) It freezeth flesh, which pines in staruing case; Where, some do, naked, sticke amidst a streame To yce congeal'd; whom cold winds freeze apace: Yet draw they breath, more cold thē coldest frost, To freeze their intralls, and congeale their ghost. 171 If any spit (for rheums cold places breede) Its blowne, in Ice-cicles, into their face: For, those keene winds do forthwith do the deede, And Reuel. 16.21 haile, of drops, make in a moments space: On ycie morsells there the mouth must feede, Sith mouthes to ycie morsells turne apace: Here is cold comfort where is nought but cold, That all congeales, on which it taketh hold.
172 Here some (but new arriu'd) while blood is warme, Attempt, by motion, so to keepe the same; But strait they cannot stirre, nor Leg, nor Arme; For, in the offer, they freeze stiffe, and lame: Yet hold they vitall heate (the more their harme) For Ice, like Oile, doth feede their vitall flame: If such a foe to life, as such a cold Keepes life in being, life hath hatefull hold. 173 Who are so madde with paine that they do crie, O what is this we feele! we feele, O what! Is't limbes of Flesh that brooke this agony? All they haue rag'd with paine; but this, to that Is like the Ocean to a fountaine drie: This flesh, nerues, ioynts, once Racks did lacerate, Yet that with this compar'd, was Heau'n to Hell, O what is this we feele? Sense die, or tell. 174 It's but a moment since we hither came, Yet feele what paine Eternity inflicts; And though eternally we feele the same, Yet vs with what we ne'r felt, it afflicts: Proteus like still paines new fashons frame; And one another euer interdicts: Is this the Soule we thought with flesh should die, Which feeles these mortall plagues immortally?
175 Here, some with hands fast frozen to their mouth, Do seeke to thaw them with their warmest breath; But lo, the Reuel. 16.2 frost that breath so fast pursuth, That it doth freeze in comming from beneath: So, hand and mouth thereby the faster growth; Yet liue they still, though frozen quite to death: For, like to Alabaster Tombs they stand, Frozen to death, yet liue at Deaths command. 176 Here, boistrous Bugbeares do at foot-ball play With a still-tost and tumbled groning Ghost, To catch thē heat; which done, they dāce the Hay About it (breathlesse) being ouer-tost; So, with transmuted formes, it to dismay With feare that may afflict the seeing most: While that poore Soule lies panting like an Hare, Among foule hounds that seeke the same to share. 177 Now Matacheyns they daunce, with visage grim,Rewarde her as she hath re∣warded you, and giue her double, accor∣ding to her workes: and in the Cuppe which shee hah filled to you, fill her the double, Reuel. 17.6. And at ech chāge they chāge their horrid shapes: And at ech turne, they torture life and limb Of this tormented Soule, that, gasping gapes, As if the Ghost were yeelding at the brim Of deepe Not-beings Pit; which yet it scapes: At point of death to liue immortally, Is still to liue, and liuing, still to die!
178 Now comes a chased Ghost that flies, for life, Before a foule-mouth'd crie of hellish hounds; And being caught, twixt them is deadly strife, Which of them all shall giue it deadliest wounds: Each of whose teeth is like an Hangmans knife, Which torments, if not utterly confounds: O! thinke then what an hell of feare that hart Must hold, that such infernall Hounds do start. 179 Here winds, that whistle while they freezing are, (As if they merry were for freezing so) Bring, with their working, pitchy clouds of Care, Wherewith they are involu'd that thither go; Those biting frosts do, there, make all things bare, Which make the same a naked world of woe: Where nought but nipping frosts are felt, & seene, Ne'r-vading griefes do flourish euer greene. 180 Deliuer thy selfe as a Doe from the hād of the hunter, and as a Bird from the hād of the Fowler. Prou 6.5. They shall passe from the waters of the snow to ouer much heate. Iob.Here stands a Fowler, fowle, with Nets of Wire, To take a flight of Soules that staruing flee; Late fled from whence they neuer can retire; So, when in that fast-holding Net they bee, He dragges them to the frost, or to the fire, Where either are in the extream'st degree: This is the welcome which they first receaue, That of their life mis-spent haue tane their leaue.
181 This flight thus caught, the Legions of the North, Fill all those Regions with their hellish houles; And, with their vgliest formes, come roaring forth To share among them those feare-shaken Soules: The The greate the diuell the worse.worthiest takes the Soule of smallest worth To execute thereon the greatest doles. Quake flesh to heare what fraile flesh heere doth feele, For endlesse plagues turne here still like a Psal. 83.13. wheele. 182 Here may you see, for anguish, some to tear Their And they gnawed their tongues for sorrow. Reu. 16.10. flesh from bones, yea bones and flesh to And they gnawed their tongues for sorrow. Reu. 16.10. gnaw; That so they may no more those torments beare, Which make thē burst, with choler, in their Maw: Some grate their Math. 24.5 teeth, as teeth they grīding were, To cut the flesh which they before did saw: And all, and some, are so with tortures tir'd, That they seeme quietst, when they most are fir'd. 183 Here Bugs bestirre them, with a bellowing rore, (As at a Scamble we see Boyes to sturre) Who for Soules scamble on a glowing flore; Biting and scratching, like the Cat and Curre; Whiles with their Talons they their prey do gore, And thogh they striue, they do, In tormen∣ting.therein concurre: Within whose gripes the Soule, in silence grones, For feare of feeling thousand hells at once.
184 Here, in a corner sits an vgly forme, That on the matter of a liuing Corse Finds matter of much mirth; which is, t'informe Himselfe of all the sinews, and their force; Who, with a knife, the flesh doth all deforme, To pull out nerues and sinews in their course: Which like strings, broken, hanging at a Lute; So hang these nerues the Body all about. 185 Here may you see some others driuing nailes, Vnder the nailes of endlesse sorrowes slaues; Some others, threshing them (like flax) with flailes; Thē moow thē vp, in groūdlesse Reuel. 20.3. gulfs by thraues: Some, playing on their hart-strīgs with their nails; Some others, broaching them on ragged staues: And all and some more busie farre then Bees, To gather hony from the gall of these. 186 If Paine her vtmost pow'r awhile for beare, (As seld she doth; for, there she's still in force) It is suppli'd with feare, surmounting feare, For loe, in Azur'd flames, with voices horse, Farre off approaching grisly Formes appeare Which feare far off, & neare at hand, much worse: For, Fantasie with paine is more orecome, When it is comming, then when it is come.
187 And, all about in darknesse, Matth. 8.12. thicke as darke; Are seene to shine (like Gloworms) vgly eies; Which (like a Partrige sprong) ech soule do mark; So, that to scape no Soules pow'r can deuise: For, should they mount (as doth the nimble Lark) A gastly Griphon doth them strait surprise: Or should they sincke into Pits bottomlesse, There shuld they meet the like, with like distresse. 188 In mortall life (though mortall be mens woes) Three things their vtmost rage do qualifie; That's Comfort, Hope, and Rest; but, none of those Come neare this place of paines The paines of the damned are without end, meane, or measure. extremity: Mens Rackers, here, being tir'd, do let them loose; But, they are Sprites that men, there, crucifie; Who can endure all labour, without paine, While they do Sprites (that is for ere) remaines. 189 But, if mens plaguers here immortall were, And were of pow'r, vntir'd, to plague them still, Yet would they them, yer long, to nothing Nothing in this world that is violent, is permanent.weare; Or them with lacerating torments kill; But all, so plagu'd, are made immortall there, Who thogh they stil are spoil'd, yet noght cā spill: Thē, thogh Time wears that on Time doth depēd Yet they weare not, for Time doth them attend.
190 Yea, thogh their Plaguers & themselues were Immortall. such Yet, in this life, the Instruments of paine To nought would waste, with vsing long, & much; But, that same firie Reuel. 19.20 Lake doth still remaine, Which though it quite cōfounds, but with a tuch, Yet, it confounds but to torment againe: And, lest the fire should out, prepar'd there is, A Sea ofIsay 30.33 Sulphure, which still feedeth this. 191 These present paines the Wit do (pining) waste; But those to come the Will do martire most: The Memory is plagu'd with pleasures In this world past, And Vnderstanding with the pleasures In heauen. lost: Which on the Soule the Soule of The more our losse, the more is our griefe. Sorrowes cast; For, endles Ioyes to lose, crosse-woūds our Ghost: To haue bin well, doth but encrease our curse, But, to lose endlesse being well, is worse. 192 Then, what remaines to ease the wounded The spirit of a man will su∣staine his in∣firmity, but a wounded spi∣rit, who can beare it? Pro. 18.14. spright, When Hope, that keeps it Wert not for Hope, Heart would breake whole, becoms Dispaire: For, in that dungeon of eternall night That most doth ruine, that should most repaire: For, Immortalitie right good, by right, The Soule and Bodies powres doth most impaire: Then, hauing but one Immortalitie naturally is good. good thing naturall, Yet that made worse then Ill, how ill is All?
193 There, raignes what not? (that is not to be told With tong, nor The paine of the dam∣ned are as great as the wisedome of the Creator could deuise, which is infi∣nite, and vn∣vtterable. pen) that sense afflicts with griefe; There is Perditions home, Damnations Hold; Which giues death life, & death, giues life reliefe: It is the vtmost reach of Hot and Cold, And of Dispaire the habitation chiefe: In summe, it is the summe of all distresse, Which subdiuided makes it nothing lesse. 194 These are Gehennaes Consorts; these are they That still associate those that thither go: This is the Place of that fell Monsters stay; The Place where paine is infinite in woe: The way thereto is The way to Hell is hea∣uenly in shew. plaine, broad, greene, and gay, All strew'd with floures, to tice men thither so: All which to Phusis, erst by Logus, told, On Aletheia made her fasten hold. 195 Now, to returne to Phusis, and her plaint, Quoth she, (and her embraced all the while) Deere Aletheia, help me, for I faint; To thinke my Sonnes are neere this monster vile; Who, with his Tuske, will teare, and all to taint Their tender flesh, which filthy Lusts defile: Which to preuent, I faine would learne of thee, For, thou best know'st, what's best for them, & mee.
196 And, for I know thou canst aright perswade, (For all thy words are held in All the earth calleth for Truth, and the Heauen bles∣seth it: and al things are sha∣ken, & trēbe, neither is there any vniust thing in it. 1. Edr. 4.36.reuerence) I thee beseech from Vice them to disswade, And from this Land; sith none In Hel is no redemption. returns frō thence: O bid them leaue their idle wandring Trade, And tell them of this inconuenience: Go, Lady go; the way thou canst not misse, To all their homes, and tel them home of this. 197 I would (quoth Aletheia) gladly goe, But that, I feare, they will entreate me ill For Logus sake (neare Truth, and Reason neare of kinne. kin to me, they know) But thy desire I will herein fulfill: For, I will go, though I my selfe forgoe, To bar their course, and breake them of their will; For, life is wonne, though lost, in those Assaies, Wherein the loser gaines immortall praise. 198 Go, gracious Ladie, Truth is the strength, and kingdome & the power, and maiesty of all ages, 1. Esdr. 4 40. glory be thy guide (Quoth Lady Phusis, to this hardy Dame) And I, meane while, will at this Gate abide, With my friend Nature is greatly grie∣ued till her sonnes be re∣formed. Nosus, Porter to the same. So, on this iourney Aletheia hi'd, For, she, though wounded oft, was neuer lame, In all her Actions shee's most vpright still; For, she will neuer halt, how euer ill.
199 This while sate Phusis at this narrow dore, Talking with Logus, who came to Reason doth cheere the he∣uinesse of our nature in case of distresse. her there; Because she did as he her will'd before; Who told him all her hope, and all her feare; How Aletheia did her case deplore, And went to schoole her Children eu'ry where: For, Hearts are eas'd when Tongs vnfold at large, The griefes, or ioyes, which do them ouercharge. 200 Logus her course, herein, did much commend; And cheer'd her, as she could, with heu'nly words: Praid her, with Patience a daughter of the Heauens, the best com∣paniō of a for∣lorne fortune, patience, to expect the end; And comfort eu'ry way to her affords: Strengthning her hope that now her sons would mend; Sith Aletheias sayings would (like swords) Subdue all rancke rebellion of the sense, For, powrefull words winne more then violence. 201 They had not thus sate reas'ning there awhile, But Aletheia they farre off might see Flying to them-wards ouer stoppe and Stile, Oft looking backe, as those that chased bee; Thē wel they knew hope did their hopes beguile, Which they, till they had tri'd, could not Contingent Accidents are hid from the eie of Reason. foresee: For, that which is contingent who doth kno, Are onely wise, and none but God. ONE is so.
202 But comming neere thē (almost breathlesse quite) She, panting, told them (windlesse as she could) How she had bin (by vertue of her might) About the whole world, and, with courage bold, (For which, she said, she was in painefull plight) All Phusis children of their Reprehensiō vnwelcome to all resolute in euill. errors told: To whom (quoth she) in diuerse formes I came, Yet kept my Truth is like herselfe in vn∣like subiects.nature, though I chang'd my name. 203 Some tooke me for grosse Error, some for mad; Some, superstitious; some, hereticall: Some, for Deceipt; and some, for Vice, as bad: Presumptuous some; some, hipocriticall: But, the This guileful world is mor∣tall enemy to Trueth. most part, most malice to me had; For they, at first sight, draue me to the wall: Some seem'd to take my part with Tooth & Naile, That did (indeed) me most of all assaile. 204 The Curious rent my Maske to see my face; The Prowd, ore lookt, nay, troade me vnderfeete, The Learned, grac'd themselues with my disgrace; Th'vnlerned (graueld) filld my mouth with Made Truth to speak most for the main∣tenaunce of earthly mat∣ters, &c. Greet; Which made me faine, and speake as one in chase, So, all I met withall, with me did meete: Truth gets but hate, but Adulation loue: That this is truth, vnto my paine I proue.
205 So, when I saw the perill I was in, Away I fled, thus The wine is wicked, the King is wic∣ked, women are wicked, & all the childrē of men are wicked, and al their wicked workes are such, & there is no truth in them, but they perish in their iniquitie, But Truth doth a∣bide, and is strōg foreuer, & liueth and raigneth for euer and euer. 1. Esdr. 4.37.38 wounded as you see; I held it base to keepe vnscar'd my skin, Sith mine aduenture might bring ease to thee: But Phusis, this I did thy loue to win, Whom I do loue, how ere thou louest me: No dearer loue can Loue bewray then this, To venture that, for Loue, that dearest is. 206 Ah, woe is me (quoth Phusis) that thou shouldst For my poore Loue (which thou dost well deserue) Venture that Iewell, which thou dearest holdst, Yet that rare Truth is in extreame pe∣rill of depra∣uation among the vncleane. hazard, not my turne to serue: Thy will I see, in that I see thou wouldst Venture thy life my sonnes liues to preserue: And that thou shouldst for that be wounded so, And they the worse for that, the worse my woe. 207 Can neither Caueats of Mortalitie, (Which flow frō thy mouth with almighty force) Nor my perswasions, more then motherly, Giue them some feeling of their senslesse course? Are their The Soule that hath no feeling of sin, is dead in sin. Soules seared with impiety, That they for it, therein, feele no remorce? Then what shall I a woefull mother do, But wish I Were not, and my children too?
208 But what, I pray, did Princes say to thee, When thou did'st mind them that they once must die? They said, & therewith stabb'd at me (quoth she) I, like a deuill, in my Throate did lie: These, of all others, most I sought to They that lacke least worldly things most lacke friends that will tell them the trueth. flee; And yet I Veritie and Iustice sup∣ports the Thrones of Princes. honor roiall Maiestie: Without my hand sustaine, Thrones reeling stand; For, all staid Thrones are staied by my hand. 209 And how (quoth Phusis) doe the Iudges liue? Many of them (replied she) doom'd me death, Because I would not (as did others) giue Them goldē Euer since Astrea for∣sooke th' earth whosoeuer of∣fers Iustice a golden Scab∣berd she will sheathe her sword therein, Scabberds, Iustice Sword to sheath. How Lawyers? They by others losses thriue, And oft (quoth she) on all sides sell their breath. Physitions how? They reason doubtfully Till Fees they finger past recouery. 210 Poore Poets how? while they (quoth she) do fill The world with Fables, feed thēselues with hopes More fabulous; so hold they but at will Their tearme of life, of some great That life is worse then death that de∣pēds on a mī∣ers pleasure. Lord that opes His Mouth, more then his Purse, their Eares to fill More then their Mawes; which greedie Famine grops: Whose biting stomacks stil do stomack it, The while they starue for want of wealth and wit.
211 Ah these deere Harts I pitty in my hart, Who liue by sweet Immortall lines in Poe∣sie, are worse then mortall lines that end our misery▪ for the first make vs labour for our trauell, the last make vs labor for hea∣uen, if wee die well. Lines, which do end their life; For, to liue long, they hang themselues by Arte; Or kill themselues with sharpe Inuentions knife: Sith they, to liue, thus die, without desart, Long may they liue where glorie is more rife: For, greater glory no flesh can attaine, Then die for glorie, so to liue againe. 212 And doe my sonnes (quoth Phusis) fare but thus? O then aduise me (Lady) what to doe: Who said, sith they no better are for vs, Thou must Iustice. Astrea (my deere Sister) wooe To rule them with the Rod of Summum ius, Before themselues they vtterly vndoe: And wooe thy selfe to take it patiently, For, better thou shuldst beare, then they shuld die. 213 For, if she rule them not when wilde they bee, She will ore rule them being truely tam'd, If, in their life, she doe them not oresee, She, in their death, will see they shalbe damn'd: Thogh she be blind, she with mine Iustice sees with Truth eies. Eies doth see, And I doe see how life and death are fram'd: And thus, the best aduice that I can giue, Is them to mortifie, that they may liue.
214 Which hauing said, she Logus with her tooke (To dresse her wounds) and hi'd her to her Bed; So Phusis, being of them both forsooke, Sate at the doore of Thanatus, neere dead, And fell asleepe till Logus her awooke, Who came againe to her as if he fled: Whom when she saw, her hart receiued cheare, And in her face the same did soone The counte∣nance bewrais how the heart is affected. appeare. 215 Logus aduis'd her strait to take aduice Of Thanatus, and Chronus, what to do: Which to performe, she seemed somewhat nice, Because she thought they sought her to Time and Death enimies to Nature. vndoo: Yet, her loue to her sonnes did her entice, Her enemies, in this behalfe, to woo: And, thus resolu'd, she boldly rushed in Those Gates, which erst to her had fearefull bin. 216 Whose slipp'ry thresholds had neere made her fall Into the Lake of Lethe, hard at hand; But, Logus held her vp; yet, therewithall She grew so fearefull, that she scarse could stand; But held by Logus, and a Body of clay lomy Wall: Then Logus her besought (that might command) That she no more that passage would attempt, For, tis not good the Fates too much to tempt.
217 But I (quoth she) will Chronus call outright; Who forthwith came, on her sweet sounding call; Holpe by two wings, one Day & night are the wings of Time. blacke, the other white; And in his hand a Sithe, to cut downe All: Who seem'd behind but low, and When men die, their yere seeme but so many daies, & before they dy all their dayes so many yeres: The time fu∣ture seems lōg but that past, extream short poore in plight; But yet before, most pretious, trimme, and tall: Thus came he forth, and to these Ladies said, Who calls? and spake with motion most Time's euer in motion. vnstaid. 218 T'was I (quoth Logus) know'st thou not my voice? Or wilt not, sith thou wilt become vnkinde? The time hath Before mans fall. bin when It did thee reioyce; Though now (it seemes) to thee it seemes but wind: Wilt be vnconstant, so to change thy Choice? And shall I Time, made by God, the fountaine of Reason. making thee, thee fickle find? But, if I shall, of this thou shalt be sure Thou shalt the lesser while, for that Iniquitie shal shorten Times continuance. endure. 219 Thus Logus Chronus did reproue, because He wold not know that voice which wel he knew; But, Chronus he himselfe, from them, withdrawes; As one that fear'd worse chiding to ensue: But, Logus bade him stay, or shew a cause, Which Reasons are yeelded by Reason. shews to Logus are all onely due; Without whose help, old Chronus doth but dote, And cannot sing or say, right Word, or Note.
220 On this Iniunction, Chronus mute did stand; Yet stood as one that still on Still moou∣ing.Thornes had stood; While Logus seem'd his seruice to command, And gaue his Tongue The office of Reason. powre to be vnderstood: Quoth he, let Phusis haue thy helping hand, To make, if so thou canst, her children good: For, they that hurt must heale, or make amends, Then (hurting them) on thee their help depends. 221 Here Phusis, hearing how he thus was chid, Was at the point, at him, likewise to Our Nature is apt to insult vpon the least incoragement rae, But Logus bade her (in her Eare) take heede; For, faire words wold with Chronus most preuaile: Wherewith her headstrong Will she bridle did, For Logus loue, and for her sonnes auaile: But yet she said, he did great hauocke make Of her deere children in that Lethe Lake. 222 In which respect she meekely him besought (By way of satisfaction) that he would Preuent her Childrens going all to nought; And, with A forcible meane to re∣duce the euill to good. Examples, them from that withhold: For I their Mother, (quoth she) still haue sought To make them liue as toward children should: And if they perish, it shall be their blame, For, Ile leaue nought vnsought, to let the same.
223 I will, quoth Chronus; and away he flew; And, in one instant, made (the world throughout) Babes, youths: youths, Men: Men, Old: Old, Babes anew! Phsis, mean while, with Logus talkt, about The hope she had that Chronus would subdue Her sonnes to Logus rule; which He did doubt: For, no man of a rationall discourse Can thinke thei'l mend that still waxe worse and worse. 224 While thus they talkt, they on the sodaine saw Chronus, vpon his wings, returning fast; Which in her smoothest hope did make a flaw; For, so he fled as he had beene agast: What news (quoth she) as he neere them did draw, Fearing, ere she had spoke, he would be past: What do my Children? Chronus say, O what? Speake, speake, O speake, I Euery mo∣ment seemes an Age to ne that longs to heare that which his soule desires to know. long to heare of that. 225 They are (quoth he) I know not what to say, Following their pleasures; and, do thinke of noght But how they may shift me with ease away; Yet I thereby the sooner them haue caught: O what a world it is to see them play (Like Apes) with each vaine Foolishnesse is ioy to him which is desti∣tute of vnder∣standing, &c. Prou. 15.21. toy too Vanitie hol∣deth nothing too deere, for things nere so worthlesse, that may any way tend to her pleasure. deerely bought, He is no man that cannot do what not? That wise men neuer knew, or haue forgot.
225 Ayme therefore (quoth she) but didst not thou With thy Sithe menace them, to manage them? Didst thou not tell them thou their Backs wouldst bow, And that this mortal life was but a Iob 7.6. dreame? O! couldst thou not, with all this, cast them low To mount them more to high Ierusalem? What, haue they sense, and cannot vse the same, That haue no kinde of sense of sinne, and shame? 226 When night was come (quoth he) I told ech one The day was past: and when the Sabboth came, I said a weeke was fully past, and gone: A month expir'd, I No warning will preuaile with the wil∣full. told them of the same: And when the Sun his compleate course had run, I said a yeare was past, and spent, with shame: But▪ they that take delight to runne awrie, Learne so to runne by Sols The Sunne runnes an ob∣lique course in the heauens which mea∣sures time, and in time men learne to doe amisse. course in the Skie. 227 In Childhood, I did teach; in Youth, did threat: In Manhood, I reprooued: and in Age, With their own bones, their bones I sore did beat: And in Decrepitenesse, I worse did rage; For, I did euen quench their vitall heat: And to the gripes of death did them ingage. Yet for all this, they worse and worse became, Still spoiling me, till them I Men lewdly liuing make a spole of time, till  spoile them. ouercame.
228 What life then do my Yonglings liue (quoth she?) The life (said he) of wanton skipping Roes:The vices fa∣miliar with our natures in the seuerall ages of our life. What the Yongmen? Of Goates, in Lecherie: And what mē grown? Of Cocks, prowd, prone to bloes: What aged men? Of wolues that greedy be And what old Age? Of crafty Foxes those: But, most of all, do most of all transgresse, And Ther is none that doth good, no not one. Psal. 17. all, and some offend, some more, some lesse. 229 Ah out alas (cride she) what then remaines To me, or them, but miserable woe? But, I will trie if yet my care and paines, Can moue them their wrong courses to forgoe: Logus and In time, by reason, & ex∣perience wee reforme our maners, if we be not vtterly void of grace. Chronus to you it pertaines To take my part herein, as friends should doe: Not I (quoth Logus) for, against their will, I can saue none, that long themselues to spill. 230 So, Logus left them, and away he hide To seeke Astrea; (who, the earth had Leauing her last ooesteps among the men which nw are least acquainted wth her or her steps, Husbandmen left) That she of Phusis sonnes might take the guide; While Phusis ranne about (of Logus rest) And on her sonnes, with tragicke voice, she cri'd Pitty, O pitty, me, she cried est: Griefe, wāting vent, the Heart (tormented) breaks, And Paine's not sad, while she at pleasure speakes.
231 Whereat Poliphagus (whose hearing was All for the Belly) said, me thinke I heare (Yet Eares the Belly Ʋenter au∣ribus caret. wants, but let that passe) The No grace∣lesse wretch so vnnaturall but knowes the voice, and law of nature, be∣cause it is writ∣ten in all mēs hearts. voice of Phusis, our kind mother deare: The other two said, How comes this to passe That she is come? wherewith she did appeare, And to them said, Deere Sonnes, how do ye fare? Exceeding well (quoth they) and frolicke are. 232 But, do ye not consider (Sonnes) quoth she) How neere ye are to be deuoured quite By that Gehenna, which I loathe to see, (Damn'd hellish monster headsman of Delight) Except you change your course, and warie bee To shunne him and his hardly Sathan win∣noweth vs like wheate. Luke 21.31. shunned spight? For, that spit's hardly shun'd that hath both force And will, to make her Obiect worse and worse. 233 Alas (quoth they) we liue, as liue we should, Prolonging They liue ill that thinke to liue euer. Life with lifes immunities; Except the ouerthrow thereof you would, Do not It is an ab∣homintion to fooles to de∣part from euil. Pro. 13.19. perswade vs to liue otherwise: What thogh our Soules to pleasure quite are sold, Are they not sold thereby to To haue heauen in this life, is to holde hell in the o∣ther. Paradise? The Sale is good, as Reasons law maintaines, When both the Buyer and the Seller gaines.
234 Phusis (too fond, as too kinde Mothers are) Seeing them well (for well they seeme to be That liue, how euer ill, without all care) Was We mea∣sure our frinds well-doing al∣together by the line of worldly pros∣peritie. pleas'd with what she did both heare & see; Who said, that Logus sed, they ill did fare, And were in more then mortall ieoperdy: But sith she saw they were in perfect plight, She would (she said) partake of their delight. 235 Indeed (quoth they) that solemne A scorner loues not him that rebukes him, neither will he goe to the wise. Pro. 15.12. Sage we saw; Who (algates) wold haue drawne vs frō our sports: But, whilst he drew vs, we made him withdraw Himselfe from vs, with many mortall Reason is e∣uer impugned and impeach∣ed by carnall Libertines. hurts: He would (forsooth) haue had vs keepe his Law; And done our Suite and Seruice to his Courts: Then, sith he would needs Lord it ouer vs, We as free men haue seru'd his Lordship thus. 236 Would that (quoth she) ye had forborne, because Many obey him that do rule aright; For, Equitie doth limit all his Lawes; And they are held for mad, that with him fight: Hereat, as loath t'offend, she made a pawse, For, in their Fronts she saw the face of This makes so many mise∣ries by reason of flatterers in the world, for euery one co∣uets to please for feare of frownes. night: When men looke blacke, then if you peace desire, Looke white, for Blackenesse is the child of fire.
237 Here, with a smiling, and indulgent looke, (sweet) (To change their sowre look with looks more thē She told them Aletheia vndertooke To shew them what was for their safetie meet: For, her (quoth they) we neuer yet forsooke, Because we neuer yet with her did Vicious li∣uers are stran∣gers▪ or rather enemies to Trueth nd her doctrine.meet: Yet haue we heard that she is too precise, To liue with vs in Pleasures Paradise. 238 But doubtlesse (quoth she) Chronus was with you; What said he to you? what was his aduice? He to and fro (quoth they) about vs flew, Yet to stay with vs seemed more then nice: He These are the last, and there fore the worst times, which rather seeke to reforme by windy, then explanary do∣ctrine, which perswades coldly. coldly sought our lusts heate to subdue, But yer we wist, we lost him a trice: Yet, yer he went, with him wee merry made, And made him most familiar with our Trade. 239 Wherefore, we pray you, when you goe away, Leaue him with vs; For, we do well All times ap∣ter to Vice then Vertue. agree: I will (quoth she) so left them at their play, And Chronus sent to beare them company: With whom they reuelld out the night, and day; Though He from them still sought away to flee: For Chronus weareth not his Wings for nought, Sith he doth farre out flie the swiftest Thought.
240 While they thus gamesomely with Chronus toy'd, (Deceiuing him with Fancies fallacies) They heard a voice (which sorely them annoy'd) That sommon'd them to leaue their luxuries; Herewith by Thanatus, they were They that liue without thinking of their end, doe commonly die ere they think of Death. destroy'd; To satisfie Gehennaes gurmandize: At whose approach, old Chronus fled away, For he could neuer yet, with neither stay. 241 Chronus thus leauing them to be deuour'd By fell Gehenna (their foe capitall) (Of whom, by The first death, to the wicked, is the entrance into the second. Thanatus, he was assur'd) He fled to Phusis, and so, told her all: Who was within the Earths womb then immur'd, Prouiding foode for hir Broode great und small; Assuring her He school'd them as they ought, Till Thanatus had them past schooling brought. 242 Phusis herewith tormented in the Soule, Ranne (as distracted) where sicke Fancie pleas'd; Till, at the last, she heard her Sonnes to howle, As those that were most damnably diseas'd: Exclaiming on their liues, and Repentance may be too late, but neuer too soone. follies fowle, That pleas'd the Sēse with all that now displeas'd: But such compunction neuer comes but where The penitent doth desperate appeare.
243 So, when she had well wai'd their agonies Which they endured in that Monsters Iawes, And, hauing view'd the like extremities, Proceeding from the like, or worser cause, Of cruell Tyrants. Kings, that of Blood make but Size To glew together their most bloudy Lawes: Of corrupt Iudges; and Priests negligent, The three that If good, hey raise▪ if bad, they ruine it. raise, or ruine Gouernment. 244 The working woes of th'idle-curious; Of the Rich-couetous; and the Poore-prowde; Rebellious Subiects; Courtiers vicious: Lasciuious Dames; damn'd Bawdes; the cursed Crowde: Erroneous Teachers; Poets A great tor∣ment, in the life to come, is due to those that can, and will take such an immortall reuenge for a∣ny mortall in∣urie. Libellous: Cau'ling Philosophers, (by fooles allow'd) Of craftie Merchants; lying Aduocates: And swearing Sea-men; roving Runnagates. 245 In few, when she had seene the many woes Of all that in Gehennaes Hold abide, She was, by Feare. Phobus, (who attended those) Brought to the place where she did erst reside; Where she did many Praiers sweete compose Vnto Astrea, (whom the Heau'ns did hide) That she would digne to teach, and to correct The rest of her wilde Children of each Sect.
246 So, at these holy Praiers her I leaue, (Sith they are neuer None are forsaken of God that cleaue to him by humble & hearty praiee. left that so do pray;) Now, Poets say (that all in all perceiue) Is this a Fiction? or a true Essay? If both, then both are ready to deceaue Those that wold picke this Locke without a The Kay of Intelligence. kay: But, be it what it will, it is the same That is in earnest true, how ere in game. Bene cogitata, si excidunt, non occidunt. Mimi. Publiani. THE SECOND TALE: Containing, The Ciuile Warres of Death and Fortune. 1 THere was a Time (as I haue heard it sed, By those that did, at least, in Print it finde) A certaine Marriage was solemnized Betweene a mortall Paire of noble kinde; And, for the loue of those whom Loue doth wed, Immortall Gods the The Sonne of Gods first miracle hee wroght at the marriage, Ioh. 2. honouring the feast with his personall presence. company refin'd ith their pure presence; who, the Feast to grace id reuell (as did all the rest) a space.
2 Among the rest of that immortall Crue, Danc'd Death and Fortune, whose Masks were so like, That none, that danc'd, the one from other knew; So, in their choice of them they were to seeke: For, some that soght for Fortune, The wisest men are oft thus mistken for not being able o foresee perfectly fu∣ture euents. Deth out-drew; And some that soght for Deth, did Fortune strike Tme was their Minstrell, who did euer play, Aswell when they did dance, as they did stay. 3 Fortune delighted most to dance with those That best could flatter, and the time obserue; But Death still lou'd to foote it with his foes; Or else with such as he saw best The best mē Death soonest akes away, because this wicked world is vnworthie of them. deserue: When Fortune danc'd, she turnes, she comes, and goes, And kept no time, thogh Time hir turns did serue: But, whē death danc'd, he did those Mesures tread, Whose times were lōg, & short, & tunes were dead 4 So, Fortune vs'd Lauoltaes still to dance That rise, and Fortune is euer in that mion like a waue moued with the wind. fall, as Time doth either play: And Death the Measure of least dalliance, That's Passing-measure, and so strait away: Or else the shaking of the Sheets (per chance) Which he would dance, vntired, night and day: Wherein he put them downe, so that he did Driue them from dancing vnto A sport so called. Winck-all-hid.
5 The dācing done, while yet their bloods were hot, Fortune and Death began on tearmes to stand; Which, for their dancing, had most glorie got; And, who their actions did best command: From which dispute (with choller ouershot) They fel to The con∣tentious take small occasi∣on to contend. vrge their powres by Sea and Land; The while the Gods stoode most attentiuely, To heare their more contentious Colloqui. 6 When loe Deth (Lord of all that breathe this aire) Thus gan t'inforce his powre, beyond compare; I know (saith he) their honors they impaire That striue with those that their Yet mightie men of our present times thinke other∣wise, as appea∣reth by their actions. Op∣pression. inferiors are: Yet Foulnesse is not made a whit more faire By being compar'd with Beauty, much more rare; But, Foulenesse takes the greater foile thereby, And Moles are foiles to set forth Beauties die. 7 Wert thou not blind (bold baiard) thou woldst see, A mighty diffrence twixt thy might and mine; Sith among those that most almighty bee, I do admit no power more diuine: For Empire large, who can compare with mee, Sith Earth and Aire the same cannot confine: Nay, in Earth, Water, yea, in Aire, and All elemen∣tall Bodies subiect  death. Fire (That's all in all) I rule as I desire.
8 What breathes, or hath a vegetatiue Soule, But paies me tribute, as vnto their King? Nay, doe I not the hoast of Which shall haue an end. starres controule? Then Heau'n and Earth I to obedience bring: And Kings, as Beggars, are in my Checke-role; Nay, Kings more oft then Beggars do I sting: As farre as any thing hath Al that hath motion is sub∣iect to disso∣lution. motion, I Play Rex, for, all that liue, do liue to die. 9 And therefore testifie thie modestie (For error to defend is impudence) In graunting that which thou canst not deny, And to be true, thou know'st in conscience: Thou sure woldst blush, if thou hadst but one The Eie is saide to cause our blushing, &c. eie, To stand on tearmes with mine omnipotence: But sith thine Eies are blind, and Iudgement too, Thou canst not blush at that thou can'st not doo. 10 Thy reasons seeme (quoth Fortune) strong to such, As do but sleightly weigh them; but to mee, (That seeth more then thou, at least as much, For, thou wanst Iustice, For∣tune, & Death are eielesse sith they haue no respect of per∣sons. Eyes, as well as I, to see) They are too base, to brooke my Trialls Touch, For, Tyrranny is no true Sou'raigntie: And, Empire large, consistes not of large Partes, But in the free subiection of whole Harts.
11 Can any King be happy or secure That drawing bodies, cleane with-draw the harts? Or is it like that Kingdome should endure, That is, by Hate, diuided into Parts A kingdom diuided, is at point to be dissolued. And Hate a cruell Prince must needes procure, That seekes his weale by all his Subiects smarts: The Will is free, and will not be constrain'd, How ere, for it, the body may be pain'd. 12 As vniuersall as the Vniuerse Extends (I graunt) thy grand authoritie: And that thy Takers (more then most peruerse) Sicknesse, Mischance, Disgrace, and Destinie, Thy tribute take from Man, Beast (tame or fierce) To fill thy still-consuming Treasurie: But, their Vntimely, as well as vnrea∣sonable tax∣ings withdraw the loues of the Subiects. vntimely taking, with high hand, Makes thy rule odious on Sea and Land. 13 Such Officers, in each craz'd common-weale; (That vnder colour of their Offices, Do, with the Sou'raignes fauour badly deale) Great Mischiefs Princes of∣ten become o∣dious to their subiects tho∣row the fault of those whō they put in trust to go∣uerne vnder them. cause, & Inconueniences; Which though they touch the Subiects, kings do feele Who often smart for suffring that disease: When Princes tend their priuate, and neglect The common good, they cause this sore effect.
14 But ballance, on the other side, my might In th' vpright Scholes of true Indiffrencie, And, thou shalt find I haue their heart and spright Freely obaying mine authoritie: For, thou compellest, but I do inuite: I Fauors The readiest way to winne hearts. giue, whose vse thou dost deny: I do promote all those that rise to mee, But thou subuertest those that fall to thee. 15 Then, though that vniuersall be thy powre, Thinke not, therefore, Loue must to thee be such: For Wit and Courage may high place procure, But Loue and Bounty the best Baites to catch men. Loue and Bountie ampler powre by much; Then of my currant Cause I am so sure, That I dare rubbe it hard on Trialls Touch: And, for my part, to end this Ciuile Warre, Ile put it to iudicious Iupiter. 16 Although I iustly may (quoth Death) deny To put a question, without question, Vnto the Iudgement of selfe-Equity, (For so I hold iust Captare be∣neuolentiam. Iupiter alone) Yet (not affecting Singularitie) Ile make him Iudge in this Contention: Now Fortune, proue thy powre, as I will mine, And then let Iupiter iudge both in fine.
17 So, when they were (to play this masters Prize) Entred this round worlds spatious Theater, Fortune adorn'd her selfe with Dignities, With Gold, & Men are ho∣nored and fo∣lowed in this world, onely for their for∣tunes. Iems which made All follow her: These did she fall, to make her followers rise, To gather which, they did themselues bestirre: Keisars and Kings, that vsherd her the way, Oft caught much more then they could They got Territories which they could not holde. beare a∣way. 18 Here might you see (like Beggars at a dole) Some throng'd to death, in scābling for her almes; He oft sped best, that was the veriest Fortune fa∣uors fooles, foole; Some tooke vp Come, some Crownes, and others Palms For which they pull'd each other by the Pole, While Chirurgions. othersome, for thē, found precious Balms: Some found odde ends to make their States intire, And all found some thing that they did desire. 19 But, that which was most notable to see, Was the poore Priest, who still came lagging last, As if (God wot) he car'd not rich to bee, To whom kinde Fortune Liuings large did cast (As t'were to guerdon his humilitie) Which, in the name of God, he still held fast: And still look'd The way to thriue in that function. downe to find more, if he might, For, well he found, he found well by that sleight.
20 Philosophers (that gold did still neglect) Lookt only but (wise-fooles) to find their Elixir.Stone; Which toy, in truth, was nothing, in effect, But to get all the world to them alone: For, with that Stone they would pure gold proiect Worth all the A little ther∣of multiplies infinitely, as Alchymists affirme. world by computation: But, whiles they sought a Stone so rich and faire, They perfect gold but turn'd t'imperfect aire. 21 Thus, at the heeles of Fortune all attend, Whom well shee feëd for attending so: On th'other side, Death to and fro did wend To seeke one that with him would gladly go: But, none he Life is sweet. found; which made him those to end He ouertooke, in going to and fro: For, those which are vnwilling Death to meete, He is most willing soonest them to greete. 22 Nor could those Officers that him foreranne (Sickenesse, Mischance, Disgrace, and Destinie) Affect, with his affection, any Man; For, none they found that willingly would die, Sith all, before, with O Death, how bitter is thy remem∣brance to a mā that hath pleasure in his riches? Ecclus. 41.1. fauours, Fortune wan, And, such desir'd to liue eternally: For, it is death to thinke on Death with such, That Fortune makes too merry with too much.
23 Throgh Campes, & Hosts he trauel'd with a trice, (For, soldiers needs must meet deth by their trade) At last he came where some were throwing dice, Who first a Breach should enter newly made; Lord how some chaf'd (through Glories auarice) For missing that which they wold not haue Fron ullae ides. had: And, he that wan, to lose his life did striue, Yet so, as faine he would haue scapt aliue. 24 Among the rouing Crew, at Sea, he sought For one that willing was to go with him, Who, thogh they valu'd all their liues at nought, And oft for trifles ventred life & limme, Yet when their woorthlesse bloods were to bee bought They sold them deerely, and in blood did swim From bloody death, as long as they could moue, For thogh they fear'd not death, they life did loue 25 Through the Turkes Gallies, 'mong the Slaues he went To seek some desp'rat slaue that lōg'd to die; But loe, not one to die would yeeld consent, For, all, through Hope of fu∣ture good, in this life, maks men feare death as an intollerable eill. hope, still lookt for libertie: Hope doth the hart enlarge that Griefe forespent; And Faith keepes Hope and Life, in charitie. Dispaire can neuer seize that hopefull hart, That can, through 1. Iohn 5.4. Faith endure an hell of smart.
26 At last he to a Monasterie came, (Where mortified life is most profess'd) And sought for one to meete him in the same; But, all therein from sodaine None so mortified but feares death in point of dy∣ing. death them blest: And pra'd to Iesus so their liues to frame That sodainely Death might not them arrest: A Pater noster, Aue, and a Creede, They thought right wel bestow'd, so wel to speed. 27 Thence went he to an holie Ancrets Cell, Who seem'd to be quite buried there aliue; He Death embrac'd, but yet the feare of Hell Made him with Death, for life (in loue) to The fere of finall or parti∣cular iudge∣ment makes Death vnwel∣come. striue: He knew himselfe (old Fox) perhappes, too well Strait to presume that God would him forgiue: So, was most willing, and vnwilling too, To do as present Death would haue him doo. 28 In fine, Death doubting in his Cause to faile, Intreated Sickenesse such an one to finde, That wold not flinch, thogh Deth did him assaile, And scorn'd the fauors of that Godddesse Fortune. blinde: So, Sickenes went, throgh many a lothsome Iaile▪ And found, at last, one mortified in minde: Who though he were but poore, yet held it vaine, To follow Fortune that did him disdaine.
29 On whom seiz'd Sickenesse, with resistlesse force, And, pull'd him downe so low, he could not stand; To whom Death came, to make his corps a Corse, Yet, as his friend, first shak'd him by the hand; And by Deaths elo∣quēce is harsh to the eare of flesh & blood perswasions, would him faine enforce With willing minde, to be at his command: Which if he would, Death promis'd faithfully, He should die sleeping, or most easily. 30 This forlorne wrech thākt death for his good wil, But yet desird one happy howre to liue, Which ended, he would Deaths desire fulfill, Who from him with a Purge, did Sicknesse driue, That which cures one may kill another. Which shortly did one of his Kinred kill, From whome, as heire he did some wealth receiue: And being well in state of health, and wealth, He followed Fortune more thē Death, by stealth. 31 Now, hee betooke him to a Furriers Trade, And hauing Stock, hee multiplide his Store; Then Death did mind him of the match he made, But, him hee answer'd as hee did before: Quoth he, O marre me not ere I am made, But let me get (kind Death) a ouetousnes is lke the Dropsie the more it drinks the more  may. little more: Contēte (quoth Death) thou shalt haue thy desire, So I may haue thereby what I require.
32 Sables and Ermines Death for him did kill, And made his wealth thereby, by heapes, increase; Who hauing now (death thoght) the world at will, He asked him if now he would decease: Who yet desired life, of Dearh, to fill His coffers to the top, thē would he The more interest wee haue in this world, the more loath we are to leaue it. cease: Death yet seem'd pleas'd, and brought all those to nought Th'reuersions of whose States he erst had bought. 33 Then, when he had a world of wealth obtain'd, Death came againe for his consent to die; But now he told Death, his mind more was pain'd With thought, and hen life is at the best, thn Death i better. care, then erst in pouertie: Therefore he prai'd his death might be refrain'd Till he had gotten some Nobilitie: And then he would go willingly with Death, And (nobly) yeelde to him his deerest breath. 34 Death yet agreed (sith his good will he sought) And gaue him leaue to compasse his intent; Who, of a noble-man, decayed, bought Both Land & A custome among the Germane. Lordship, Honor, House, & Rent; Then Hee turn'd Courtier, and with Courtiers wroght (By Deaths assistance, & with mony lent) That he, in time, became a mightie King; And al his Proiects to effect did bring.
35 Then, Death (not doubting of his will to die) Vnto him came, to know his will therein; But, he did Death intreate (most earnestly) That sith to him he had so gracious bin, He yet might gaine imperiall Which had, makes death the more irk∣some. Dignitie Before his Death, which soone he hop'd to win: And then he would most willingly resigne His life to Death, although a life diuine. 36 Death, hoping, that the greater he was made, The greater glorie he, by him, should gaine, (Which might the vmpire Iupiter perswade That Death in powre, was Fortunes Soueraigne) Made neighbour Kings each other to inuade, To whom this King a Neuter did remaine; Who whē they had by wars themselues consum'd, He all their States, as Emperour, assum'd. 37 Now being Caesar, Death came strait to him, As most assured of his company, But to the Emperour he seem'd more grim Then erst he did, which made him loath to die; Come on (quoth Deth, & therwith held a limme) No oddes there must be now, twixt you and I: To Men in for∣tunate estate had rather go with life to the Diue then by death to God. Ioue Ile bring you, then with goodwill go To him, with me, and see you tell him so.
38 Alas (said hee) I am but newly come To honors height, and wilt thou throw me downe Ere I be warme, or settled in my Roome, And so my Brows scarse Its a double death to die when we haue attained the highest happi∣nesse of life. feele th'mperiall crown▪ O suffer me to liue, to tell the summe Of the Contentments, from my Grandure grown; For, better had it bin still Low to lie Then, being at the Highest, straite to die. 39 Either (quoth Death) come willingly with me Or thou shalt die a death thou most dost Death yeel∣deth double terrour. feare: Hee hearing this, from Death did seeke to flee, And cried on Fortune to assist him there, Peace villaine then (quoth Death) I coniure thee, Or lower speake, that Fortune may not heare: Yet Fortune (which he follow'd) was at hand, And laught for ioy to heare him Death withstand. 40 But by this Time, the Time prefixt by Ioue Expired was: and Fortune with her brought A world of people, following Her in loue, Who, willingly, for Fortune long had sought: These, as she moved, with hir still did moue, Because she rais'd them higher then she ought: In which respect she had more Where the Carcases are the Eagles re∣sort. Matth. 28. followars Then Sol (that lights Heau'ns lamps) had waiting Stars.
41 Lord how some (sweating) dropt in foll'wing hir, To whō shee dropt that which be dropt thē more; For, they were laden so, they scarse could stirre, Who vnder-went the same with labour Gaine take away the thought of paine. sore: And othersome, themselues did so bestirre, That they in each mans Boat would haue an Ore; But, seeking to gripe more then well they could, Were forc'd to All coue all lose▪ lose that which they had in hold. 42 Among the rest, there was an Vsurer, (Whose Backe his Belly did, for debt, arrest) Who being fearefull of iust Lest hee would plague him, for plag∣ing others with racking. Iupiter, Made nice to goe with Fortune, and the rest; Sith well he knew, He was a Thunderer, In, and from whom, he had no interest: For he did neuer deale with such, perhaps, That gaue for intrest nought but Thunderclaps. 43 The Souldier came, and gaue them much offence, That stood betweene his Breast, & Fortunes Back: So, Souldiers haue backe-fortune euer since, For they, for others good, go still to Wrackt for those that will rather racke then any waie relieue them. wracke; And for their wracks haue wrackful recompence; For, they are sackt, if they chance not to sacke: And if they doe, the Publique Purse must haue, That which must keepe them as a publique Slaue.
44 They, with right Swords, do ballance kingdomes rights; (A glorious office they perform the while) The woorths of The soldiers sword cuts out the Portions of Kings Kings appeares by those their weights; Which proue thē to be valorous, or vile: Yet they gaine nought but blows, in blody fights, So, Of blowes. store they get without, or fraude, or guile; The while the gown-mā keeps vnscarr'd his skin, And with his Pen (in peace) the world doth win. 45 O thou true Ioue, bow downe thine vpright Eare, To heare thy lowest Seruants Orisons, Which, in the loue which he to them doth beare, He makes for them (that wracke still ouer-runnes) Incline the hearts of Princes farre and neare, As Marses Minions to loue Marses *sonnes: And, make this little Land yeeld great increase, To stay their stomackes great, in warre and peace. 46 A Soldiers sword, from sheath, here Fortune took, To knight all those that her had followd well, Now eu'ry man did for a Knighthood looke, That scarse had found an house wherein to dwell: Yet some did much their betters ouer-looke, And thrust in for it, while their lookes did swell: So, Fortune seeing them to looke so big, Possest them Audacs fortuna iuuat. knights, without or Turffe or Twig
47 Sois Cheualier; Arise sir Knight, (quoth she) Then vp he springs, for feare lest Fortune would Recall hir word for his debilitie; Now Knight he is, for nought but being bold; For Fortune fauours Squires of lowe A Squire of low Degree is a Squire of no degree. degree, If they be more audacious then they should: Now Honor hath He, get Grace where He can, Yet Fortune gaue him grace to keepe a man. 48 Some layd on all which they, by Fortune, got Vpon their backes, that brauely sought to beare The Sword vpon their shoulders, yet could not; For, it fell in the sheathe ere it fell there: Fell lucke it was that so they were forgot; Yet they Not remem∣bring who, or what they were. forgat themselues, as did appeare; But when they saw they mist of what they sought, Thei bar'd their backs, to line their guts, for noght. 49 Which Iupiter himselfe did laugh to see; For, these so much were mou'd with this disgrace, That they were at the point to Death to flee, And Fortune leaue, for such their fortune bace: Yet followed her (most malecontentedly) Beceuse they followed her vnto that place: To cast away long seruice on a spleene, Is not to foresee, but to be oreseene.
50 O! twas a world to see what shift was made To hold vp Greatnes with a little stay; T'were sinne to say some vs'd the Cheaters trade, To borrow with a purpose A venial sin at most as these imes e∣steeme it. ne'r to pay; And get all, howsoe'r, that might be had, No, no, they did not so, I dare well say: But this I say, perhaps, they liu'd by wit, And so to liue, some great Ones thinke it fit. 51 Now, in these knightly times ye might haue seene (If you, for pleasure, had but tane the paine) Each one ye met withall, a Knight in greene; And so the world, b'ing old, grew greene againe; As if the same but in the Blade had beene; For, each one did his A Hanger∣blade in a green scabbard Hanger on, sustaine: Now, Time stood still, to sport himselfe in Maie; For, all was Greene, and at that state did stay. 52 Some shuffled for some Office: some to gaine Some Monopole, which then could not be got: For, Fortune did those Monopoles restraine, Because she thought t'was to hir Rule a Blot To pleasure One by all her Subiects paine, Thogh oft they made thē seem, as they were Changed their Counte∣nance with ar∣tificiall com∣plexions. not: Some cried for warre, and othersome for peace, But Fortune, thogh they cried, still held hir peace.
53 Now, some, for Coine their Offices did sell, As if they had bin cloid with Fortunes grace; And those that bought them, others did compell To That which is deerely bought, must be deerely sold. pay for them, when they were in their Place: And some, in seeking somewhat, did rebell; But Fortune broght them soone to wretched case: Some strong, sent long men to Ierusalem, Out of the way, to make a way for them. 54 Now, for Truths Matters, there was much adoe; Some this, some that, som none of both wold haue: And yet all three did (restlesse) Fortune woe, To yeeld to neither, that did either craue In worlds behalfe, or fleshes fixt thereto; But all, in All is not golde that glisters. shew, did seeke but Trueth to saue: For, all seem'd to sollicite Sions cause, Which they would haue confirmed by the Lawes. 55 Some sed they lied that only Truth did teach; Some enuied them that liu'd by teaching so: And at their liues, and liuings sought to reach, The iniuri∣ous offer. Which they forgaue, but would not so forgo: Somes Tongues defended Truth, which they did preach, Whose actiōs gaue hir many a bitter They had Iacobs voice and Esaus hands. blo: Some liu'd, as dying, while they sought to liue; And some died liuing; yet did most reliue.
56 Some, Liers called Carnall-libertie The glorious Libertie of Truths deere Sonnes; And Truth. her they vrg'd to prooue that veritie; But, Truth's betraid by such vntrustie Ones, That Sacrilege doe gild with Sanctitie; Yet, for that, looke for high promotions: O tis a world of mischiefe when Pretence Doth shrowd a world of Inconuenience! 57 When Truths sonnes play the Polititians, Heau'n help thee Truth, in Earth thy case is hard: Truth's hardly matcht with Machiauelians, That her wil woūd so they themselues may ward: For, pious Polititians are blacke For their ra∣ritie. Swans; And, blest are Realmes that they do (ruling) gard: But whereas Statesmen meere Earth meditate, There Heau'nly matters squar'd are by the State. 58 Some others followed her, by following others; Vpon great men these greatly did Such depen∣dencie is as ful of difficulty as vncertaintie: Enuyings a∣mong the ser∣uants cause of the first, muta¦bilitie of those great mens mindes occa∣sioneth the last. depend, All those, for likenes, might haue bin my brothers, Who then began to liue, when life did end: Or if before, they were blest in their mothers; For, those they tended that themselues did tend: It is absurd that Lords should tend their men, Yet some Lords (Gods fooles) do it now and then.
59 Some of these Seruants were so fortunate, That they came forwards,In their own not in their Lords right: for many get mony in their Lords seruice, to buy their Lords lands to do them seruice. while their Lords went backe: For, Loue beginning with ourselues, we hate Ourselues; if we by Seruice goe to wracke: Their Lords they loued for their owne estate; And lou'd to haue that which their lords did lack: O they are carefull Seruants that will keepe Their lords estate, while they, with Pleasure sleep. 60 And some of this sort thriu'd, not by their Lords; Yet by their Lords; for, by their leaue, they sell Their fauours, nay their honors, deeds, and words, And care not who do ill, so they do well: Whose Clarkeship so much Art to them affords, That for an Inch, alow'd, they tooke an London measure. Ell: So meere Cliffs made they of their Lords to clime To some high note, by keeping Tune, and Time. 61 These Climers in each Clime are high'st of all In their Who are wise in their owne eies, there is more hope of a fool then of such. Prou. 26.125 conceit; for, they conceiue they can The round world bandy like a Racket-Ball; And make a meere foole of the wisest Man: They ween the world without them were so small, As Ladies well might weld it with their Fan: O there's no measure in the pride of such. That from too little, rise to reach to too much!
62 Some others thoght they Fortune gratious found, Genus and Meere Scho¦lers. Species throwing in their way; Which they tooke vp, and them together bound, To stay with them to be to them a stay: But in the binding did them so confound, That they proou'd fooles in Men lerned, without iuge∣ment, whome the Prouerbe, The greatest Clarkes are not the wisest men, concern∣eth. specie to betray Genus and Species to such bitter Bands, For which they lost both honor, goods, and lands. 63 Lord, how some cloisterd vp thēselues like Friers, To find out Genus and Species. These, whom thus they did betray; And lay in ambush for them many yeares, Watching, by Candle-light, oft night and day; Spending much money of their friends, or theirs, And all (God wot) but to abuse their Misuse that little learning they catch. pray: O Genus, Genus, Species, Species, yee Be most accurst, that thus still coursed be; 64 Some Mathemati∣tians. others lookt for Euclids Elements, Wherof, they thought, the whole world did cōsist; Which found, they found therin such sweet cōtēts, That Euclide carried them which way he The Mathe∣matiques are most pleasing and alluring knowledges il rewarded, yet, they steale the studier thereof from themselues. list; They lookt for nothing lesse then Regiments, But held themselues in Euclide onely blist: Who blest them so, that if for lands they sought, They got no land, but measur'd land for or little. nought.
65 Others there were, that sought to find a Magiians. Spell, And needs would rise to Fortune by a Fiend; Whom they would raise, for that intent from hell; These tēded fiends too much, Coniurers and Witches are alwaies Beggars. good Fate to tend: Who whiles they soght the gods thēselues t'excel, They died, like damned Beggars, in the end: So, they that needs would rise through diuels aide, Downe to the diuell were, at last, conuai'd. 66 Some others lookt for Spirits, not Sprites of hell, But spirits of Distillators & Extracters of Quintessen∣ces. sack, and liquors of that kinde; Wherwith they thoght (if once they could excell) They could the hands of Fortune loose or binde: This made them (like poore Crickets) stil to dwel, In, or about the fire till they were blinde: And then, like Bats, that still doe loathe the light, They keep the darke conuersing with that Of liquos. sprite. 67 Others there were that sought to finde the way T'annatomize the Corps of Reasoning, With Logicall Conclusions; these would play As Iugglers play with Boxes, or a Ring; Make men beleeue what ere they please to Subtil So∣phister. say; And to a Non-plus Reas'n herselfe to bring: On these, indeed, too oft would Fortune smile, To see how they the fond world did beguile.
68 Orators.Some wordy-men, by words, sought worthinesse, These raught at Rethorikes Rules to rule thereby; And they that found the same, found little lesse Then greatest Fortune doth wel most commonly by men that do speake well Rule, for they rul'd wordily: These mē, for need, could make some mē confesse, They Treachers were, and yet themselues belie: These still were Fortunes Minions; for they could With wind of words orethrow wits strōgest hold. 69 Others there were that still gaz'd on the Starres, As if by Starres, they should the Sunne transcend: Astronomers, Prognostica∣tors.These told of future weathers, woes, and warres, Of the beginnings of them, and their end: Of Prophets that should rise (to kindle Iarres) And of I wot not what, which they defend: But while they blabb'd out Fortunes Secrets, she Made them but poore, and liars held to be. 70 Some sought for Notes, so to be notable, Musitions.Not Notes to rule themselues, but Notes in Rule; To rule the voice by those Notes tunable, Yet many did themselues the while mis-rule: Who while their Heads held points cōmendable, In many points they err'd from Reasons Rule: So, this gift Fortune gaue their Heads: they should Still hold more Crochets, then their Purses Gold.
71 Some others sought for Tongues as if they would Haue stopt their flight, as they from Babel fled,Linguists. By catching them in nettes; so them to hold, For themselues onely, till themselues were dead: These rich in Tongues, were not still so in gold; For, their Tongues tasted oft too much ofMany gol∣den Lingusts haue leaden inuention. Lead: So, these wel-tong'd men tied were by the Tongs, Oft to be authors of their proper wrongs. 72 As some sought Tongs, so others Penne-men, or faire wri∣ters. Hands did seek; Italian, Romane, Spanish, French, and Duch, With Letter Freeze among, and Letter Creeke; Those with their hads, did Fortune seldom touch; For, they wold needs teach those hands in a week, So, sold for little, that they sold for much: For it is much to giue a Crowne for nought) But onely to marre hands, too euill taught.It is a badde bargaine to giue aught for nought. 73 These pasted vp, in ech place where they came, (And no place was ther where they did not come) Bills (& those Hands they held were oft but lame) That they would giue their Hands, for some small sum; To those that wold but trust thē for the same So, in a weeke, they coson'd all and They shame the  vtterly. some: For, in a weeke, and some odde houres beside, They promis'd that which they could not abide.
74 Their occupation brought thus to disgrace, They, though they would with all For their recompence. aforehand be, Yet ran behind hand still, from place to place: So, with their Hands they caught but A, B, C: Which by interpretation of the place, Is, a all b base c Cheaters are, that so doe flee: I wish those Hand-men their hands well had vs'd, For, I know Pen-men that are so abus'd. 75 But some of Fortunes followers were her foes, And Deaths true Fencers. friends (who for him swords vn∣sheath But shewd it not, lest she shuld thē dispose Wher, if thei wold, thei could not meet with In straite prison. deth: These followed her for nothing but for blowes, For they, with fencing, kept themselues in breath: And, for they could but breath by that their trade, They still were willing Fortune to inuade. 76 Some followed her by Stage plai∣ers. acting all mens parts, These on a Stage she rais'd (in scorne) to fall: And made them Mirrors, by their acting Arts, Wherin men saw their Shewing the vices of the time. faults, thogh ne'r so small: Yet some she guerdond not, to their W.S.R.B. desarts; But, othersome, were but ill-Action all: Who while they acted ill, ill staid behinde, (By custome of their maners) in their minde.
78 If maners make mens fortunes good, or bad, According to those maners, bad, or good,Sui cuique mrs fingunt fortunam. Then men, ill-manner'd, still are ill bestad; Because, by Fortune, they are still withstood: Ah, were it so, I muse how those men had Among them some that swamme in Foizons flood; Whose maners were but apish at the best; But Fortune made their fortunes but a Iest. 79 There were knights-arrant, that in Fortunes spite, (Because they could not king it as they would) Did play the Kings, at least prowd kings in sight, And oft were prowder then a Caesar should: Yet Nature made them men by Fortunes When men haue gotten wealth they are said to be made. might, And Fortune made them Natures Zanees bold: So those, in nature, Fortune flowted so, That though she made them Kings, she kept them low. 80 But some there were (too many such, there are) That follow'd Fortune in more abiect kinde; These matches made between the Hoūd & Hare,Panders. I would say whoore; for, men hunt such to finde: These faithlesse beastly Brokers of crackt ware Had too too often Fortune in the winde; Who followed so the sent,They liue like flesh flies vpon the sorts of men. that oft they did Find her where she, frō those they spoil'd, lay hid.
81 Land-badgers Drouers.Some others followed her by badging Land, Or beastly grazing (yet made men thereby) For, they that did those myst'ries vnderstand Caught hold of Fortune in obscuritie; To whom she (strumpet-like) lay at command, Who, lusting for her, gript her greedily: Till they grew great by her: O monstrous birth, Where Shee the He makes great with Grasse and Earth! 82 Lawyers.The Lawyers went with these, with hands as full Of Deedes, and Manuscripts as they could hold▪ But, Fortune from the same those Scripts did pull, Gold sets an edge on an O∣rators tongue, and makes it cut like a ra∣zor.And in exchange fill'd either fist with Gold: For, whiles they had but Papers their were dull; But be'ng wel-mettl'd they were blithe and bold: For, Gold's a soueraigne Restoratiue, And makes men more then dead, much more then liue. 83 Aurum potabile is of that powre (If store thereof be powrde in out of hand Like Iupiters preuailing Gold is the God of this world tht uines and windes the same as it list∣eth. Golden Showre) That it will make Death lie at Lifes command: It is the Aqua-vitae which doth cure All sore Consumptions that our weale withstand: Nay tis the Aqua fortis which will eate Throgh leaden Brests, Cares, fretting, thēce to fret.
84 O giue me Gold, and I will doe, what not? And let but store of Angells waite on me, Ile make my selfe a God, with Hire Merce∣nary Swizers and Souldiers to maintaine all vniust qua∣rels euen with Monarches. Thunder-shot; Nay, I will make the Earthly Gods to flee To Hean'n, or Hell, where they shall be forgot, Sith there no God but I will minded be: But God, thou knowst, the Age is yron the while That hammer can a God of thing so vile! 85 O! gold, the god which now the world doth serue, (This Midas-world that would touch nought but gold Gilding hir body while hir soul doth sterue) How glorious art thou (held fast) to So saith the rich miser. Riches gather many friends, but the poore is seperate frō his neighbor. Prou. 19.4. behold? Thou mak'st a Beast a Man, and Man to swerue More then a Beast; yet thou dost all vphold: For, whom thou tak'st into thy Patronage, It matters not what is his Title-Page. 86 Men value men according to thy weight;The worlde in his vniust Bal∣lance weighs men accord∣idg to their Wealth & not by any other worthinesse. For, be their value ne'r so valorous Its held but base and made, by nature, sleight; Nor can it be nor good, nor glorious, Without thy vertue doe it ouer-freight; And so remaine they without Grace, or Vse: But, if thou list to lade a leaden Asse, (While thou rid'st on him) he ore gods doth passe.
87 Come Gold: thē come (deere Gold) & ride on me, Ile be thine No wisemā comparable to the golden Asse. Asse, or Pack-horse, which thou wilt; Although thou heauy art, Ile carry thee; Albe't thou art much heauier through thy guilt: Lade me (good Gold) till my backe broken bee: Sith, thou againe canst make me, being spilt: For all men now may vse me like a Sot, (That beares abuse) because I beare thee not. 88 Then foote it not whiles Copper rides on mee, Base Copper dogs, be'ng made thēselues to beare But it is meere madnesse not to bre with insensible cre∣atures: & bles∣sed are those that in this in∣ious world, possesse their Soule in pa∣tience.But logs and faggots (for a staruing fee) And in a Chimneis end away to weare: Then vp (faire Gold) Ile so mount vnder thee, As if no ground should hold me, when I reare: For, by how much the more thou mak'st me bend, So much the more thou mak'st me to ascend. 89 Ride on me Gold, and I will ride on those (If so I lust) of men, or women-kinde, That shall be great, or faire, or friends, or foes, Vntill I ridden haue them out of winde: Better is a litle with the feare of God, then great treasure,  trouble  15 16.But Heau'n my Heart still otherwise dispose, For, riding so, I blister should my minde: Which still would runne with matter of annoy, And Soule, and Body so, perhaps, destroy.
90 Then, gold, sith thou woldst The touch∣stone trieth gold and gold trieth men. Berer is a dry morsell with peace then an house full of sacrifices with strife. Prou. 17.1. tēpt me to this spoile Farewell (deere Gold) Ile not buy thee so deere; I am content, without thy help, to toile For so much Siluer as will arme me heere 'Gainst wounding Wants, which there do keepe a coile, Where nothing is but care, and griefe, and feare; My Backe and Belly kept, in rest Ile sleep, (Throgh coniuring Bookes) from gold, that diuels keepe. 91 The Fox will eate no Grapes: well, be it so;That that is to be desired of a man, is his goodnesse, P. 19 22. which seldom is foūd among much goodes. Ile eate no Grapes that set my teeth on edge, To eate such bittes as bane where oft they go, And Heart and Minde do all alike besiege: Who gathers golden fruits in Hell that gro, Do for the same oft put their Soules to pledge: But in that state that stands with little cost, Is found the golden life that Adam lost. 92 Touching this World (to my blame be it sed) I thinke of nothing, but what nothing brings; And yet no thing more musing then my head; And yet my Muse my head with nothing mings: Head, and Muse▪ Both feed on Praise. Aire, wherewith is nothing fed But dead, or dull, or else meere witlesse things: For sure that wit ne'r came neere wisdoms schools That weenes meere Aire fats any thing but fooles.
93 I would, and would not, haue, what I haue not: I would not haue, that had, the Hart inflates: Yet would I haue my Lucke light on that Lot That As farre frō want as from too much. mends the drouping Mind, & Bodies states: In too much, Nature oft is ouershot; And oft too little, Art disanimates: Then, in this life, that seeke I, for my part, That Nature keepes in life, and quickens Art. 94 To bury Liuing thoughts among the dead, (Dead earthly things) is, ere Death comes, to die: For, dead they are that lie in Mindes al∣waies conuer∣sant with these metalls are dull, & make the bodies dead to all goodnesse wherein they are. Gold, or Lead; As they are buried that in Earth still lie: The thoughts are most relieu'd when they are fed With Angells Diuinity. foode, or sweete Philosophie: But, some seeme on this Manna still to liue, Whom Quailes and Woodcoks most of al relieue. 95 Well, let these some out-liue as many yeares, As they haue haires, they do but liuing die: If so; their Soules must needs be full of feares, Whose Hopes in this dead life alone do lie: For, they weare euer double as Time weares; In Soule and Body weare they double-Die eternal∣ly in both die: O then, how painefull is that pleasant life, Wherein all ioy, with such annoy, is rife.
96 Beare with me Readers (thats the recompence I aske for telling you this merry Tale) For running out of my Circumference, Ile come in strait, before a merry Gale: But, yet a word or two, ere I goe hence, And then haue with you ouer Hill and Dale: Nothing shall let me to relate the rest, For, commonly behind remaines the best. 97 This world (me seemes) is like, I wot not what: Thats hard; for, that is no comparison:The world is like nothing: sith by sin  was mrre after it  made: &  is nothing, be∣cause he  that made al things made it not. Why thats the cause I it compare to that; For, who's he like to, that is like to none? Tis not like God; for, tis too full of hate: Nor like the Diu'l, for he feares God alone: It is not like to Heau'n, Earth, nor Hell, Nor aught therein, for, they in compasse dwell! 98 Then what is't like? if like to any thing, Its like itselfe; and so it is indeede: Or, if you will, like to the oldest Ling,Simile. That limes their fingers that on it doe feede: So that, all things they touch, to them do Euery nger as good as  lime twige. cling,Prouerb And let them so, from doing purest deede: If so it be, how mad are men the while To cleaue to that which do them so defile?
99 Now, this most noghtie thing, or thing of noght, I cannot skill of; though but bad I am; Therefore by me it least of all is sought, Though oft I seeke for pleasure in the same; Which yet (I hope) shall not be ouer-bought, For, I will giue but good-will for my Harmelesse recreation. game: And if good-will will me no pleasure bring Ile buy therewith (I hope) a better thing. 100 Now from my selfe, I eft to Fortune flie, (And yet I flie from Her, and She from me) Who came thus followd with this Company, That Iupiter did enuie it to see: There did she muster them, in policie, That Ioue of all might well informed be: For, when an heape confus'd are call'd by Poll, The many parts do make the number It makes the number ap∣peae as it is. whole. 101 Philosophers and Poets furthest off Fortune.Mongst whom Philosophers and Poets came, (Last of the Crowde) and could not well appeare; To whō blind Fortune gaue noght else but fame, Wherof they fed; but lookt lean with their cheere: So, they in Heau'n deifi'd this Dame, Sith they (poore souls) could not come at her here: And euer since a Goddesse call'd she is, Poets thanke her for That, Shee you for This.
102 Who, though they be (perhaps) but passing poore, Yet can they defie whom ere they will; Then Demy-gods should cherish them therefore, That they may make thē whol They affect misery much more then Diuinitie. gods by their skil: Twixt whom there shuld be interchange of store, And make of Wit and Wealth a mixture still, That may each others woefull wants supply; For, men by one another liue, or die. 103 Vaine fooles, what do ye meane to giue hir heau'n, That giues you nothing but an earthly hell? Thats only Flesh-pine∣ing Praise aire, which she to you hath giu'n, To make ye pine, whilst ye on earth do dwell: Ne'r speake of Wit, for ye are Wit-bereau'n To lie for nought, and make Men, like the deuill great and nought. Nought so excell: For, now, who for him If thou be wise, thou shalt be wie for thy selfe. Prou. 9.12. self's not wise alone, Is vainely wise, though wise as Salomon. 104 By this time Death came with his Emperor, Who followed Death, far off, which Ioue did see; To whom Death said, Loe vpright Iupiter, This Kesar (though a Caesar) followes mee: He doth indeed (said Ioue) though somewhat farre (But kept in off, to shew indiffrencie) For, though the Iudge do iudge aright (sometime) Before both Tales be heard) it is a crime.
105 How saist (quoth he) Lieutenant▪ didst thou come With Death to vs of thy meere owne accord? Whereat the Emprour was stroken dumbe, For, he fear'd The more we loue the world the more wee feare death. death, as slaues do feare their Lord: Yet, with desire of glorie ouercome, At last he spake, yet spake he but a word, Which was, saue I the shortest word of words, For, No a letter more then I affords. 106 Which he with submisse voice (scarse audible) Vtterd, as one that would not well be heard; But Iupiter (although most sensible) Tooke on him not to heare, and prest him hard To speake (through feare) not so insensible; For, my vice are is a stranger to great hearts. Ioues (quoth he) are ne'r afeard: Therefore, on thy allegeance vnto mee, I charge thee speake, as thou from death wert free. 107 Then, with a princely death-out-daring No courage  the dspe∣rate Cowards. looke He said, Dread Ioue, I had bin worse then mad, Sith your Lieutenancie to me you tooke, If I so great a grace neglected had; Which so I had, if so I had forsooke Without your notice, that which made me glad: Nor would I haue with Death come now to you, But that he threatned me to bring me low.
108 Wherewith the Iudge (iust Ioue) did sentence giueIupiters Sen∣tence. On Fortunes side; which made Death rage so sore, That at the Emprour he amaine did driue, Whilst Ioue lookt on, and Fortune fled therefore: Short tale to make, he did him life depriue, And euer since Death rageth more and more: That now all men false Fortune doe preferre, Before iust Death; nay iuster Iupiter. 109 And, thus with Death (that All in fine doth end) We end our Tale, and, if a lie it be, Yet naked Truth dares such a lie Scripture Parables con∣taine trueth in their morali∣tie, though not in the Letter. defend; Because such lies doe lie in veritie: But though loude lies do lie, they will not bend So lowe as most profound Moralitie: Then, be it lie, or be it what it will, It lies too high, and lowe for Death to kill. Bene cogitata, si excidunt, non occidunt. Mimi Publiani. Finis.
The Triumph of DEATH: OR, The Picture of the Plague: According to the Life, as it was in Anno Domini. 1603. SO, so, iust Heau'ns, so, and none otherwise, Deale you with those that your forbearaunce wrōg Dumb Sin (not to be nam'd) against vs cries Yea, cries against vs with a tempting tong. And, it is heard; for, Patience oft prouokt Conuerts to Furies all-consuming flame; And, fowlest sinne (thogh ne'r so cleanly cloakt) Breaks out to publike plagues, and open shame! Ne'r did the Heau'ns bright Eie such sins behold As our long Peace and Plenty haue begot; Nor ere did Earths declining proppes vphold An heauier plague, then this outragious Rot! Witnesse our Citties, Townes, and Villages, Which Therefore hah the curse deuoured the Land, and the inhabtantes therof are de∣solate. Isai. 24 6. Desolation, day and night, inuades With Coffins (Cannon-like) on Carriages, With trenches ram'd with Carkases, with Spades! A shiu'ring cold (I sensibly do feele) Glides through my veines, and shakes my hart and hand, When they doe proue their vertue, to reueale This plague of plagues, that ouerlades this Land!
Horror stands gaping to deuoure my Sense When it but offers but to Who among you shall har∣ken to this, and take heed and heae for afterwards. Isai. 42.23.mention it; And Will abandon'd by Intelligence Is drown'd in Doubt, without her Pilot Wit! But, thou, O thou great giuer of all grace, Inspire my Wit, so to direct my Will, That notwithstanding eithers wretched case, They may paint out thy Plagues with grace, with skil, That so these Lines may reach to future Now goe & write it before them in a Ta∣ble, and note it in a booke, that it may be for the last day for euer and euer. Isai. 30.8. times, To strike a terror through the heart of Flesh; And keep It vnder that by Nature climbes, For, Plagues do Sin suppresse when they are fresh. And fresh they be, when they are so exprest, As though they were in being seene of Sense; Which diuine Poësie performeth best, For, all our speaking Pictures come from thence! The obiect ofI am the man that hath seene afflictiō in the rod of his indgnatiō. Lament 3.1. mine outward Sense affords But too much Matter for my Muse to forme; Her want (though she had words at will) is words, T'expresse this Plagues vnvtterable * Storme! Fancie, thou needst not forge false Images To furnish Wit t'expresse a truth so true; Pictures of Death stoppe vp all Passages, That Sēse must needs those obuious obiects view. If Wit had powre t'expresse what Sense doth see, It would astonish Sense that Heare, yee deafe, and yee blinde▪ regard that ye may see. Isa. 42▪ 18 heares the same; For, neuer came there like Mortalitie, Since Death from Adam to his Children came! Scarse three times had the Moone replenished Her empty Horns with light; but th'empty Graue
(Most rauenous) deuoured so the Dead, As scarse the dead might Christian buriall haue! Th'Almighties hand that long had, to his paine, Offer'd to let his Plagues fall, by degrees, And with the offer pull'd it backe againe, Now breakes his Viall, and a Plague out-flees, That glutts the Aire with Vapors venemous, That puttrifie, infect, and flesh confound, Thou hast for sakē mee, saith the Lord, and gone backe∣ward: therfore will I stretch out mine hand against thee, and destroy thee: for I am weary with repenting. Ierem. 15.6.And makes the Earthes breath most contagious, That in the Earth and Aire but Death is found! A deadlie Murraine, with resist lesse force, Runnes through the Land and leuells All with it! The Coast it scoured, in vncleanlie Course, And thousands fled before it to the Feare, & the pit, & the snare are vpon thee, O inhabitant of the earth. Isai. 24.17. Pitte! For, ere the breath of this Contagion, Could fully touch the flesh of Man, or Beast, They on the sodaine sinke, and strait are gone, So, instantlie, by thousands, are decreast! No Phisicke could be found, to be a meane, But to alaie their Paine, delaie their Death; In this Phisitions Haruest, Phisitions. They could gleane But corrupt Aire and Danger by that Breath. All Artes and Sciences were at a stand, And All that liu'd by them, by them did die; For death did hold their heads, & staid their hād, Sith they no where could vse their Facultie. The nursing Vniuersities. Mothers of the Sciences Withdrew their Foster-milke while witt did fast; For, both our forlorne Vniuersities Forsaken were and Colledges made fast▪
The Magistrates did slie, or if they staid, They staid to pray, for if they did command, Hardly, or neuer should they be obaid; For, Death dares all Authority withstand. And, wheres no Magistrate, no Order is; Where Order wants, by order doth ensue Confusion strait, and in the necke of this Must silent Desolation all subdue! For feare wherof, both king, & kingdome shakes, Sith Desolation threatens them so sore; All hope of earthly helpe the Land forsakes, And Heau'n powres Then said I, Lord, howe long? and he answered, vn∣till the Cities bee wasted without inha∣bitant, and the houses with∣out man, and the Land be vtterly deso∣late. Isai. 6 11 plags vpō it more & more! Now, Death refreshed with a little rest (As if inspired with the Spirit of Life) With furie flies (like Aire) throgh man and beast, And makes eftsoons the murraine much more rife! London now And the Ci∣ties that are inhabited shal be left void, the land shall be desolate, & ye shall know that I am the Lord Ezech. 12.20. smokes with vapors that arise From his foule Sweat, himselfe he so bestirres; Cast out your Dead, the Carcasse-carrier cries, Which he, by heaps, in groūdlesse graues interres! Now scowres he Streets, on either side, as cleane As smoking showrs of raine the Streets do scowre; Now, in his Murdring, he obserues no meane, But tagge and ragge he strikes, and striketh sure. He laies it on the skinnes of Yong and Old, The mortall markes whereof therein appeare: Here, swells a Botch, as hie as hide can hold, And, Spots (his surer Signes) do muster there! The South wind blowing frō his swelling cheeks, Soultry hot Gales, did make Death rage the more,
That on all Flesh to wreake his Wrath he seekes, Which flies, like Zephon. 2.2 chaffe in wind, his breath before! He raiseth Mountaines of dead carkases, As if on them he would to Heau'n ascend, T'asswage his rage on diuine Essences, When he of Men, on Earth, had made an end. Nothing but Death alone, could Death suffize, Who made each Euen the mouse shal be consumed to∣gether, saith the Lord, Isa. 66.17. Mouse to carry in her Coate His heauy vengeance to whole Families, Whilst with blunt Botches he cuts others throate! And, if such Vermine were thus all imploide, He would constraine domestike Tame Pige∣ons, Cockes, Hennes, Ca∣pons, &c. foules to bring Destruction to their haunts; So, men destroid As swiftly as they could bestirre their wing! So, Death might well be said to flie the field, And in the House foile with resistlesse force, When he abroad all kinde of Creatures kill'd That he found liuing in his lifelesse Course! Now like to Bees, in Summers heate, from Hiues, Out Arise and de∣part, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted, it shall destroy you euen with a sore destru∣ction. Michah 2.10. flie the Citizens, some here, some there; Some all alone, and others with their wiues: With wiues and children some flie, All for feare! Here stands a Watch with guard of Partezans To stoppe their Passages, or too, or fro; As if they were nor Men, nor Christians, But Fiends, or Monsters, murdring as they go! Like as an Hart, death-wounded, held at Bay Doth flie, if so be can, from Hunters chase, That so he may recouer (if he may) Or else to die in some more easie place.
So, might ye see (deere Heart) some lustie Lad Strooke with the Plague, to hie him to the field, Where in some Brake, or And he that flieth from the noise of the feare shall fall into the pit, &c. Isa. 24.18 Ditch (of either glad) With plesure, in great pain, the ghost doth yield! Each Village, free, now stands vpon her guard; None must haue harbour in them but their owne: And as for life and death all watch, and ward, And flie for life (as Death) the man vnknowne! For, now men are become so monsterous And mighty in their powre, that with their breath They leaue no ils, saue goods, from house to house, But blow away each other from the Earth! The sickest Sucklings Yee shall cōceiue chaffe, & bring forth stubble, the fire of your breath shall deuoure you. Isai. 33.11. breath was of that force That it the strongest Giant ouerthrew; And made his healthie corpse a carrion Corse, If it (perhaps) but came within his view! Alarme, alarme, cries Death, downe, downe with All; I haue, and giue Commission All to kill: Let not one stand to pisse against a wall, Sith they are all so good, in works so ill. Vnioynt the body of their Common-weale, Hew it in peeces, bring it all to nought; With Rigors boistrous hand all Bands canceale, Wherin the heau'ns stād bound to Earth in aught. Wound me the scalpe of humane Policie, Sith it would stand without the help of heau'n On rotten proppes of all impietie; Away with it, let it be life-bereau'n. With plagues, strike through Extortions loathed loines, And riuet in them glowing pestilence:
Giue, giue Iniustice many mortall foynes, And with a plague, send, send the same frō hence. Wind me a Botch (huge Botch) about the Necke Of damn'd disguis'd, man-pleasing Sanctitie: And Simony with selfe same Choller decke, Plague these two Plagues with all extremitie. For, these are Pearles that quite put out the eies Of Piety in Christian Common-wealths; These, these are they, from whō all plagues do rise, Thē plagues on plagues, by right, must reaue their healths. Dash Veng'āce viall on the cursed brow Of Aske now among the Heathen, who hath heard such things? the virgine of Israel hath done very fil∣thily Ierem. 18 13. Zodomy, that euer-crying sinne; And that it be no more whole A mountain in Thesale. Pelions throw Of plagues vpon it both without, and in! Throgh black Auernus a lake in Italie, where they say this sinne is frequent. Auernus (hels mouth) send the same Into the deepest pit of lowest hell; Let neuer more the nature, nor the name Be known within the Zones, where mē may dwel, Oppresse Oppression, this Lands burning-feauer, With burning sores of feauers-pestilent; And now or neuer, quell it now and euer, For, it doth quell the Poore and Innocent Bring downe damn'd Pride with a pure pestilēce Deriued from all plagues that are vnpure, Extracted to th'extreamest quintessence, For Pride all Sinnes,Pride, the cause of A∣dams fall, and so of all sinne & plagues for sin, procures. In Atheismes breast (instead of her curst hart) Set an huge Botch, or worse plague, mre cōpact; That it may neuer conuert, or peruert, Nor haue powre to perswade, much lesse coact.
Beblaine the bosome of each Misteris, That bares her They are waxen fat, and shining, they doe ouerpasse the deedes of the wicked, &c. Iere 5.2 Brests (lusts signes) ghests to allure; With a plague kisse her, (that plagues with a kisse) And make her (with a murraine) more demure. Our puling puppets, coy, and hard to please, My too strait-laced all-begarded Girles (The skumme of Nicenesse) London Mistresses) Their skins imbroder with plagues orient Pearls. For these, for Strawberies, Cherries, &c. when they first come in. First-fruits, haue Shillings, Crownes, or Pounds. Fifteenes to spare But to a Beggar say, We haue not for yee: Then do away this too-fine wastefull Ware To second death; for they do most abhorre mee. Then scowre the Brothel-houses, make them pure, That flow with filth that wholsomst flesh infects; Then will I turne mine hād vpō thee, and burne out thy drosse, till it be pure, and take away thy Tinne. Isai 1.25. Fire out the Pox from thēce with plages vnpure; For they do cause but most vnpure effects. Plague carnall Colleges, wherein are taught Lusts beastly lessons, which no beast will brooke, Where Aratine is read, and nearely sought; And so Lusts Precepts practiz'd by the Booke. Who knowes not Aratine, let him not aske What thing it is; let it suffice hee was: But what? no Mouth can tell without a Maske; For Shame it selfe, will say, O let that passe! He was a Monster, Tush, O nothing lesse: For, Nature monsters makes (how ere vnright) But Nature ne'r made such a Fiend as this, Who, like a Fiend, was made in Natures spight! Therefore, away with all that like his Rules, Which Nature doth dislike as she doth Hell:
Break vp those free (yet deere & damned) Schools, That teach but gainst kinde Nature to rebell. Rogh-cast the skin of smooth-fac'd glozing Guile With burning blisters to consume the same, That swears to sell crackt wares, yet lies the while, And of gaine, by And euery one will de∣ceiue his frid and wil not speake the truth: for they haue taught their tongues to speake lies, and take great paines to doe wickedly. Ie∣rem. 9 5. deceiuing, makes her game. Who, but to vtter, but a thing of nought, Vtters all othes, more precious then her Soule: And thinks them well bestowd, so it be bought So, vtters wares with othes, by falshood foule. This foule offence to Church & Commonwealth, Sweep cleane away with Wormewood of annoy: For, it consisteth but by lawfull s a Cage is full of Birds, so are their hou∣ses full of de∣ceit, thereby they are be∣come great & waxen ich. Ierem. 5.27. stealth; Then, let the truest Plagues it quite destroy. Of Tauerns, reaking still with For all their Tables are full of filthy vo∣mitings: no place is cleane. Isai. 28.8. vomitings, Draw, with the Owners, all the Drawers out; Let none draw Aire, that draw on Surffettings, But Excesse, and her Slaues, botch all about. Sith such by drawing out, and drawing on Do liue; let such be drawne out on a Beare: For, they with wine haue many men vndone, And famisht them, in fine, through belly-cheare. Browne-paper Merchants (that do ven such trash To heedlesse heirs, to more wealth borne then wit, That gainst such Paper-rocks their houses dash, While such slie Merchants make much vse of it) Vse them as they do vse such heires to vse, That is, to plague them without all remorce: These with their Brokers, plague; for they abuse God, King, and Law, by Lawes abused force.
Then, petti-botching-Brokers, all bebotch That in a month catch eighteene pence in pound; Six with a Their Bill of Sale. Bill, and twelue for vse they catch, So, vse they all they catch, to make vnsound. That they may catch them, and still patches make, Which in the pound do yeeld thē eighteen pence; Forc'd, like sheep trespassing, the Pownd to take, Leauing their And they lie downe vpon cloths laide to pledge by eue∣ry Altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God. A∣mos 2.8. Fleece, at last, for recompence. Hang in their hang-mans wardrop plagues to aire That all may flie, or die that with it mell; And so, when none will to their ragges repaire, They must forsake their liues, or labour well. Briefly, kill cursed Sinne in generall, And let Flesh Bee no more to harbour it; Away with filthie Flesh, away with all Wherein still-breeding Sinne on broode doth sit. This was Deaths charge, & this charge did he giue, Which was perform'd (forthwith) accordingly; For now the dead had wasted so the liue, (Or wearied so) that some vnburied lie: For, All obseru'd the Pestilence was such As laught to scorne the help of Phisickes art; So that to death All yeelded with a touch, And sought no help, but help with ease to And death shall be desi∣red rather thē life of all the residue that rman of this wicked fami∣ly. Iere 8 3. part. An hell of heate doth scorch their seething vaines, The blood doth boile, and all the Body burnes, Which raging Heate ascending to the Braines The powres of Reason there quite ouerturnes! Then, tis no sinne to say a Plague it is From whence immortall miseries do flow;
That makes men reason with their rest to misse, And Soules and Bodies do endanger so. Here crie the parents fot their Childrens death; There howle the children for their parents losse; And often die as they are drawing breath To crie for their but now inflicted crosse. Here goes an husband heauily to seeke A Graue for his dead wife (now hard to haue) A wife there meets him that had done the like, All which (perhaps) are buried in one Graue. The last suruiuor of a Familie, Which yesterday (perhaps) were all in health, Now dies to beare his fellowes company, And for a Graue for all, giues all their wealth. There wends the Thy Sonnes haue fainted, & e at head of al the streets, as a wild Bull in a net, and are full of the wrath of the Lord, and re∣buke of thy God. Isa, 51.20. fainting Son with his dead Sire On his sole shoulders borne, him to interre; Here goes a father with the like desire, And to the Graue alone, his Sonne doth beare. The needie, greedie of a wealthie Pray, Runne into houses cleans'd of Families, From whence they bring, with goodes, their bane away, So end in wealth their liues and miseries. No Cat, Dog, Rat, Hog, Mouse, or Vermine vile, But vsher'd Death, where ere themselues did go; For, they the purest Aire did so defile, That whoso breath'd it, did his breath forgo. At London (sincke of Sinne) as at the Fount, This all-confounding Pestilence began. According to that Plagues most wofull wont, From whence it (flowing) all the realme o'reranne.
Which to preuent, at first, they pestered Pest-houses with their murraine-tainted Sicke: But, though from them, & thence the healthie fled, They, ere suspected, mortified the Quicke. Those so infected, being ignorant That so they are, conuerse with whom soere, Whose open Shops and Houses all doe haunt, And finde most danger, where they least do feare. And so not knowing sicke-folke from the sound (For, such ill Aire's not subiect to the sense) They One with I will dsh them one a∣gainst another euen the a∣thers and the sons together, saith the lord, I wil not spare I will not pit∣ty, not haue compassion vpon them, but destroy them. erem. 13.14. Other do themselues confound; And so confound all with a pestilence. Out flies one from the Plague, and beares with him An heauy Purse, and Plague more ponderous; Which in the hie-way parteth life from limbe, So plagues the next of his coine couetous. In this ditch lies one breathing out his last, Making the same his Graue before his death! On that Bancke lies another, breathing fast, And passers by he baneth with his breath. Now runnes the herefore will I be vnto Ephraim as a moah, and to the house of Iuda as a rot∣tennes, Hosea 5.12. Rot along each bancke & ditch, And, with a murraine strikes Swine, Sheep, and all (Or man, or beast) that chance the same to touch, So, all in fields, as in the Cities fall. The London Lanes (themseluet thereby to saue) Did vomit out their vndigested dead, Who by cart loads, are carried to the Graue, For, all those Lanes with folke were ouerfed. There might ye see Death (as with toile opprest Panting for breath, all in a mortall sweat)
Vpon each bulke or bench, himselfe to rest, (At point to faint) his Haruest was so great! The Bells had talkt so much, as now they had Tir'd all their tongs, and could not speake a word; And Griefe so toild herselfe with being sad, That now at Deaths faint threats, shee would but bourd. Yea, Death was so familiar (ah) become With now resolued London Families, That wheresoere he came, he was welcome, And entertain'd with ioyes and iolities. Goods were neglected, as things good for nought; If good for aught, good but to breed more ill: The Sicke despis'd them: if the Sound thē sought, They sought their death which cleaued to thē stil! So Sicke, and Sound, at last Neither their siluer nor their golde shall be able to deliuer them in the day of the lords wrath, &c Zepha. 1.18. neglected them, As if the Sound and Sicke were neere their last; And all, almost, so fared through the Realme As if their Soules the Iudgement day were past. This World was quite forgot; the World to come Was still in minde; which for it was Her filthi∣nesse is in her skis: she re∣membred not her last end, therefore shee came downe wonderully: she had no cōforter. &c. Lament. 1.9. forgot, Brought on our World this little day of Dome, That choakt the Graue with this contageous Rot! No place was free for Free-men; ne for those That were in Prisons, wanting Libertie; Yet Prisoners frëest were from Plagues and Woes That visite Free-men, but too lib'rally. For, al their food came frō the helthy house, Which then wold giue Gods plags from thence to keep; The rest, shut vp, could not like bountie vse, So, woefull Pris'ners had least cause to weepe.
The king himselfe (O wretched Times the while!) From place to place, to saue himselfe did flie, Which from himselfe himselfe did seeke t'exile, Who (as amaz'd) not safe, knew where to lie. Its hard with Subiects when the Soueraigne Hath no place free from plagues his head to hide; And hardly can we say the King doth raigne, That no where, for iust feare, can well abide. For, no where comes He but Death follows him Hard at the Heeles, and reacheth at his head; So sincks al The mirh of tabets cea¦seth: the noie of them that reiceendeth: the ioy of the harpe ceaseth. Isa 24.8. Sports that wold like triumphs swim, For, what life haue we, when we all are dead; Dead in our Spirits, to see our Neighbours die; To see our King so shift his life to saue; And with his Councell all Conclusions trie To keepe themselues from th'insatiate Graue. For, hardly could one man another meete, That in his bosome brought not odious Death; It was confusion but a friend to greet, For, like a Fiend, he baned with his breath. The wildest wastes, and places most remote From Mans repaire, are now the most secure; Happy is he that there doth finde a Cote To shrowd his Head from this Plagues smoaking showre A Beggars home (though dwelling in a Ditch If farre from London it were scituate) He might rent out, if pleas'd him, to the Rich, That now as Hell their London homes doe hate. Now, had the Sunne the Libra Sep∣tember. Ballance entered, To giue his heate by weight, or in a meane,
When yet this Plague more heate recouered, And scowr'd the towns, that erst were clēsed clean. Now, sad Dispaire (clad in a sable weede) Did All attend, and All resolu'd to die; For, Heat & cold, they thought, the Plague would feede Which, like a A Beast ne∣uer but feed∣ing, and when he hath eaten as much as his  hold, goe, to a for∣ed tee, and there straines out his fonde vndigested betweane the twist of the ee, and so a∣gine present∣ly falles to seue, and be∣ing full, againe to the tree, and so eftsoones to feede. Ierffe, still sinn;d in gluttony. The heau'nly Coape was now ore-canopide, (Neere each ones Zenith (as his sense suppos'd) With ominous impressions, strangely died, And like a Canopie at toppe it clos'd. As if it had presag'd the Iudge was nie, To sit in Iudgement his last doome to giue, And caus'd his cloth of State t'adorne the Skie That All his neare approach might so perceiue Now fall the people vnto publike Fast, And all assemble in the Church to pray; Earely, and late, their soules, there take repast, As if preparing for the later day! Where (fasting) meeting with the sound and sicke, The sicke the sound do plage, while they do pray; To haste before the Iudge the dead and quicke, And pull each other so, in post, away. Now Angells laugh to see how contrite hearts Incounter Death, and scorne his Tiranny; Their Iudge doth ioy to see them play their parts, That erst so liu'd as if they ne'r should die. Vp go their harts & hands, and downe their knees, While Death wēt vp & down, to bring thē down; That vp they might at once (not by degrees) Vnto the High'st, that doth the humble Isai. 57.15. crown!
O how the thresholds of each double dore Of Heau'n, and Hell, were worne with throngs of ghosts Ne'r since the Deluge, did they so before, Nor euer since so pollisht the side-posts. The Angells, good and bad, are now all toil'd With intertaining of these ceaselesse throngs; With howling some (in heat and horror broild) And othersome in blisse, with ioyfull Songs. Th'infernall Legions, in Battallions, Seeke to inlarge their kingdome, lest it should Be cloid with Collonies of wicked ones; For now it held, more then it well could hold! The Angells, on the Cristall walls of Heau'n, Holpe thousands ore the Gates so glutted were; To whom authoritie by Grace was giu'n (The prease was such) to helpe them ouer there. The Cherubin eie-blinding Maiestie Vpon his Throne (that euer blest hath bin) Is compast with The world is diuided into twelue partes, and ten partes of it are gone already, and halfe of the tenth part: & there remain∣eth that which is after the halfe of the tenth part. 2. Esd. 14.10, 11 vnwonted Company, And smiles to see how Angells helpe them in. The heau'nly streets do glitter (like the Sunne) With throngs of Sonnes but newly glorifide; Who still to praise their Glorifier runne Along those streets, full fraught on either side. Now was the earthly Mammon, which had held Their Harts to Earth, held most contagious; A Beggar scornd to touch it (so defilde) So, none but castawaies were couetous. Now Auarice was turned Cherubin, Who nought desir'd but the extreamest Good;
For, now she saw she could no longer sinne, So, to the Time she sought to suite her moode, The loathsome Leacher loath'd his wonted sport; For, now he thought all flesh was most corrupt: The brainsicke brawler waxed all-amort; For, such blood-suckers Bane did interrupt. The Pastors now, steep all their words in Brine, With woe, woe, woe, and nought is heard but woe; Woe and alas, they say, the powres diuine Are bent Mankind, for sinne to ouerthrow. Repent, repent, (like Ionas) now they crie, Ye men of England, O repent, repent; To see if so yee maie moue Pitties Eye, To looke vpon you, ere you quite be Neuertheles saith the lord, at those dys I will not make a full end of you. Ier 4.18. spent. And oft whilst he breathes out thess bitter Words, He, drawing breath, drawes in more bitter Bane: For, now the Aire, no Aire but death affords; And lights of Art (for helpe) were in the wane. Nor people praying, nor the Pastor preaching, Death spared ought; but murd'red one and other; He was a walme, he could not stay impeaching, For it is the day of the Lords venge∣ance, and the vee re∣rence for the idgement of  Isai. 34.8Who smoakt with heat, & chokt, all with the smo∣ther. The babe new born hempt strait in the head With aire that through his yet vnclosed Mould Did pierce his brains, & throgh thē poison spread, So left his life, that scarse had life in hold. The Mother after hies, the Father posts After the Mother; Thus, at Base they runne Vnto the Gole of that great Lord of Hoasts That for those keepes it, that runnes for his Sonne.
The rest Death trippes, and takes them prisoners; Such lose the Gole without gainesaying-strife; But, all, and some, are as Deaths Messengers To fetch both one and other out of life. The Sire doth fetch the Sonne, the Sonne the Sire, Death, being impartiall, makes his Subiects so: The Priuate's not respected, but intire (Death pointing out the way) away they go. The ceremonie at their Burialls Is Ashes but to Ashes, Dust, to Dust; Nay not so much; for, strait the Pit-man falles (If he can stand) to hide them as he must. A Mount thus made, vpon his Spade he leanes (Tired with toile) yet (tired) prest to toile) Till Death an heape, in his inu'd Haruest, gleanes, That so he may by heapes, ft seed the Soile. Not long he staies, but (ah) a mightier heape Then erst he hid, is made strait to be hild; The Land is scarse, but yet the Seed is cheape, For, all is full, or rather ouerfill'd. The Beere is laid away, and Cribbes they get To fetch more dung for Fields and Garden-plots;Dung-cribs. Worke-men are scarse, the labour is so great, That (ah) the Seede, They shall die of deaths and diseases, they shall not be lamented, neither shall they be buri∣ed, but they shall be as dung vpon the earth, &c. Ier. 16.4. vnburied, often rottes. It rottes, and makes the Land thereby the worse, For, being rotten, it ill vapors breedes, Which many mortall miseries doe nurse, And the Plague (ouerfed) so, ouerfeedes. Here lies an humane Carcasse halfe consum'd; And there some fow or beast, in selfe same plight;
Dead with the Pestilence, for so it fum'd, That all it touched, it consumed quite. Quite through the hoast of Natures Animalls Death like a Conquerer in Triumph rides; And ere he came too neare, each Creature falls, His dreadfull presence then no flesh abides. Now man to man (if euer) fiends became, Feare of infection choakt Humanitie; The emptie Maw (abandon'd) got but blame If it had once but sought for Charitie. The Poore must not about, to seeke for foode, And no man sought them, that they might be fed; Two Plagues, in one, inuaded so their blood, Both Famine, and Infection strikes them dead. Some staid, in hope that Death would be appeas'd, And kept the towns, which thē & theirs had kept; Till their next neighbors were (perhaps) diseas'd; Or with Deaths fatall Fanne away were swept. Thē, fain wold fly but could not (thogh thei wold) For, wil they, nill they, they must keep their house, Till throgh some chink, on thē Death taketh hold, And vs'd them, as he did their neighbours vse. If any at some Posterne could get out, As good they staid, sith sure they staid should be; They haue compassed her about, as the witchmen of the field, be∣cause she hath prouoked me to wrath, saith the Lord Iere. 4.17.For, all the Countries watcht were round about, That from the towne, none might a furlong flee. Then, who from Death did flie, the feare of Death Made Free-men keep the fliers in his Iawes; Where (poison'd with his fowle infectious breath) Their flesh and bones he (ne'r suffized) gnawes.
Now might ye see the Plague deuoure with speed As it neare famisht were, lest in a while It might be so, and want whereon to feede; So fed, the future hunger to beguile. Now doth it swell (hold hide) nay, If the botch breake not, the Patient li∣ueth not. breake, or die) Till skin doth crack, to make more It killes o∣thers with brea¦king. room for meat Yet meat, more meate it (neuer cloid) doth crie, And all about doth runne the same to get. The Graues do often vomit out their dead, They are so ouer-gorg'd, with great, and small; Who hardly, with the earth are couered; So, oft discouer'd when the Earth did fall. Those which in hie- They that feed delicately perish in the streetes, they that were brought vp in scarlet, em∣brace the dg Lament. 4.5. waies died (as many did) Some worthlesse wretch, hir'd for no worthles fee, Makes a rude hole, some distance him beside, And rakes him in farre off; so, there lies hee. But, if the Pit-man haue not so much sense To see, nor feele which way the winde doth sit To take the same, he hardly comes from thence, But, for himselfe (perhaps) he makes the pit: For, the contagion was so violent, (The wil of Heau'n ordaining so the same) As often strooke stone-dead incontinent, And Natures strongest forces strait orecame. Here lieth one vpon his burning brest, Vpon the Earths cold breast, and dies outright; Who wanting buriall, doth the Aire infest, That like a Basaliske he banes with sight! There reeles another like one deadly druncke, But newly strooke (perhaps) then downe he falls,
Who, in the And their corpes shall lie in the streetes of the great citie, &c. Reuel. 11.8. Streets, or waies, no sooner suncke, But forthwith dies, and so lies by the walles, The Hay-cockes in the Meades were oft opprest With plaguy Bodies, both aliue, and dead; Which being vs'd, confounded Man and Beast, And vs'd they might be ere discouered. For, some (like Ghosts) wold walk out in the night, The Citie glowing (furnace-like) with heate Of this contagion, to seeke if they might, Fresh aire, where oft they died for want of meate. The Traueler that spied (perhaps his Sire) Another farre off, comming towards him Would flie, as from a flying flame of fire That would, if it he met, waste life and limbe. So, towns fear'd townes, and men ech other fear'd; All were (at least) attainted with suspect, And, sooth to say, so was their enuy stirr'd, Because of their pride the Cities shall be troubled the houses shall be afraid, men shall feare. 2. Esd. 15.18.That one would seeke another to infect: For, whether the disease to enuy mou'd, Or humane natures malice was the cause, Th'infected often all Conclusions prou'd To plague him that frō thē himselfe withdrawes! Here do they Gloues, and there they Garters fall; Ruffs, Cuffs, & handkerchers, and such like things They strow about, so to endanger all: For, Enuy now, most pestilently stings! So, heau'n and earth, against Man did conspire, And Man against Man, to exrirpe his Race; Who Bellowes were t'augment Infections fire, And blow abroad the same from place to place.
Sedition thus marcht (with a pestilence) From towne to towne, to make them desolate;Destruction vpon destru∣ction is cried, for the whole Land is wa∣sted &c. Iere. 4.20. The Browne-Bill was too short to keep it thence, For, further off it raught the Bill-mans pate. Nor walls could keepe it out; for, it is said (And truely too) that Hunger breakes stone-walls: The plague of Hunger with the Plague arrai'd It selfe, to make way, where ere Succour calls. For, hungrie Armies fight as Fiends they were: No humane powre can well their force withstand: They laugh to Iob 41.20. scorne the shaking of the Speare: And gainst the gods thēselues, thēselues dare band Some ranne as mad (or with wine ouer-shot) From house to house, when botches on them ranne; Who, though they menac'd were with Sword, and Shot, Yet forward ran, & feare nor God nor man! As when a Ship, at Sea, is set on fire,Simil. And (all on flame's) winde-driuen on a Fleete, The Fleete doth flie, sith that Ship doth desire (Maugre all force oppos'd) with it to meete: So flies the Bill-man, and the Muskettire From the approaching desperate plaguy wight,Plagues are sent vnto you and who can driue them a∣way. 2. Esd. 16.4. As from a flying flame of quenchlesse fire; For, who hath any life, with Death to fight? At all, cries Death, then downe by heaps they fall: He drawes in By, and Maine, amaine he drawes Huge heapes together, and still cries, At all: His hand is in, and none his hand withdrawes. For,Simil. looke how Leaues in Autumne from the tree With wind do fall, whose heaps fil holes in groūd;
So might ye (with the Plagues breath) people see, Fall by great heapes, and fill vp holes profound. No holy Turffe was left to hide the head Of holiest men; but, most vnhall'wed grounds (Ditches and Hie-waies) must receiue the dead, The dead (ah woe the while) so Many dead Bodies shal be in euery place, they shall cast them foorth with silence. Amos 8.3. oreabounds! Here might ye see as t'were a Mountainet Founded on Bodies, grounded very deepe, Which like a Trophee of Deaths Triumphs set The world on wonder, that did wondring weepe: For, to the middle Region of the Aire, Our earthly Region was infected so, That Foules therein had cause of iust dispaire, As those which ouer Zodome dying go! Some common Carriers, (for their owne behoofe, And for their good, whose Soules for gaines doe Fetching frō Lōdo packs of Plags, & stuffe (grone) Are forc'd to inne it, in some Barne alone. Where, lest it should the Country sacrifise, Barne, Corne, and Stuffe a Sacrifice is sent (In Aire-refining Flames) to th'angrie Skies, While th'owners do their Faults & Losse lament. The Carriers, to some Pest-house, or their owne, Carried, clapt vp, and watcht for comming out, Must there with Time or Death conuerse alone, Till Time or Death doth free the world of doubt: Who thogh they Cariers were, yet being too weak Such heauy double Plagues as these to beare, Out of their houses som by force do break, And This no fi∣ction, nor in∣serted by poe∣ticall licence: But this verily was perfor∣med in the bo∣rough of Leo∣minster in the county of He∣reford: the one at the com∣mandement of sir Herbert Crost knight, one of the Councell of the Marches of Wales: the o∣ther by the in∣stigation of Sathan, and prococation of the disease. drowne themselues, themselues from plags to cleare.
These are reuenges fit for such a God, Fit for his Iustice, Powre, and Maiestie; These are right ierkes of diuine Furies Rod, That draw from Flesh the life-blood mortally. If these are but his temp'rall Punishments, Then what are they surmounting Time and Fate? Melt Flesh to thinke but on such Languishments, That Soule and Bodie burne in endlesse date. His vtmost Plagues extend beyond the reach Of comprehension of the deepest Thought; For, he his wisedome infinite doth stretch To make them absolutely good for nought. Then, O what heart of sensible Discourse, Quakes not, as if it would in sunder fall, But once to thinke vpon such Furies force, As doth so farre surmount the thoughts of all? If humane Wisedome in the highest straine, Should yet stretch further Torments to deuise, They would be such that none could them sustain, Through weight of woes, and raging agonies: Then (O) what be they that deuised are By Torments, deuised by in∣finite wise∣dome, are in∣fiite in paine. Wisedome that of Nought made all this All, That stretch as farre past speach, as past compare, Surmounting Wonder; supernaturall! They be the Iudgements of that Trinitie, Which (like themselues) are most inscrutable; Then can mans heart, but either swoone or die, To thinke on anguish, so vnthinkeable. And can our Sense, our Sense so much besot, To thinke such worlds of woe no where exist,
Sith in this sensuall World it feeles them not, And so in sinne (till they be felt) insist? Then happy That, that is insensible, Since wee imploy our happinesse of Sense To feele and taste but pleasures sensible; And see no Paine that at their end commence. To breake the Belly of our damn'd Desires With honied Sweets that soone to poison turne; And in our Soules enkindle quenchlesse fires, Which all the frame thereof quite ouerturne. Mortall life is no more (at the most) com¦pared to Eter∣nitie.To please it selfe a Moment, and displease It selfe for euer, with ne'r-ending paines; To ease the Bodie with the Soules disease, To glad the Guttes, to grieue the Heart & Braines. To make the Throat a Through-fare for Excesse, The Belly a Charibdis for the same; To vse Wit still but onely to transgresse, And make our Sense the Spunge of Sin & Shame: So fares it with sensuall Epicures and Libertines.Then happy are sweet Floures that liue and die (Without offence) most pleasing vnto all: And haplesse Man that liues vnpleasngly To Heau'n and Earth; so, liues and dies to fall. The Rose doth liue a sweete life, but to please, And when it dies, it leaues sweet fruit behinde; But Man in Life and Death doth none of these, If Grace by The conuer∣sion of a sin∣ner is most miraculous. Miracle ne'r mend his mind. Blush Man, that Floures should so thy selfe excell That wast created to excell what not? That on the Earth created was to dwell; Then blush for shame to grace thy Beauties blot.
Art thou Horizon made (vnholy one) Betwixt immortall Angells, and bruit beasts? Yet wilt twixt beasts and fiends be Horizon By that which Angells grieues, and God detests? Then Plagues must follow thy misguided Will, So to correct thine ill-directing Wit; Such as these are, or others much more ill, The worst of which Sinne (ill of Ills) befit. And loe, for Sinne; how yet the Plague doth rage (With vnappeased furie) more and more, Making our Troy-nouant a tragicke Stage Whereon to shew Deaths powre, with slaughters sore. Great Monarch of Earths ample world he is; And of our little Man is Mi∣crocosmos. Worlds (that worlds content) He giues ill Subiects Bale, good Subiects Blisse; So, though he raignes, iust is his Regiment. Our sins (foule blots) corrupt the Earth and Aire; Our sins (soules botches) all this All defile; And make our Soules most foule, that were most faire; For, nought but sin we all, all nought the while! When sharpest wits are whetted to the point, To pierce into all secrets, but to sinne! And all the corps of Luxury vnioint, To see what sensuall ioy might be therein: Whenas such trickes as no Sunne euer saw Deuis'd are daily by the Serpent-wise, To cramme all Flesh into the Deuills maw By drifts, as scarse the Deuill can deuise! Can God (most iust) be good to men so ill? And can the Earth, and Aire, wherein such liue,
Keepe such aliue? O no, all Plagues must fill That Aire, and Earth, that do such plagues reliue. What are those men but plagues, that plague but men? All men are such, that teach sin in effect; And all do so, that sinne but now and then, If now and then they sinne, in ouert act. What can containe vs, if these plagues cannot? If neither these we feele, nor those we shall, Be not of force to keepe our liues from blot, What then remaines but plagues to scowre vs all? Till we wax lesse, and they so multiplide, That we be nothing lesse, than what we are; Conuerted, or confounded we abide In, or without God, with, or without care! If when his yron Rod drawes blood from vs, And is vpon our backes, yea breakes our bones, We cease not yet to be rebellious, What can conuert vs but plagues for the nones! For Natures heart doth yrne with extreame griefe, When wel she weighs her childrens strange est, Subiect to sinne, and so to sorrowes chiefe, For both in counterchange renew their date: For now we sinne (yea with a witnesse sinne, Witnesse our conscience) then we plagued are, Plagu'd with a witnes, (witnesse plagues that With fury on vs) then, when so we fare Fall we to pray and creepe to Grace for grace, Which being got, and ease, and weale at will, We fall to sinne, and so our soules disgrace: Thus sinne and plagues runne round about vs still
This euer-circling Plague of plagues and sinne, Surroundeth Mankinde in an hell of woe, Man is the Axis standing still therein, And goes with it where euer it doth goe: For since he fell, who at this Center staies By Nature (most vnnaturall the while) Here moues man mouelesse as the Axis plaies, And Times turns (turning with him) doth beguile. And yet this Plague (if Griefs tears quench it not) Is like a sparke of fire in flax too drie, And may, if our Lusts coole not, burne more hot Than erst it did; so waste vs vtterly. We see it will not out, but still it lies In our best Cities Bowells like a Cole That threats to flame, and stil doth fall and As appeareth by the Plague bills euerie weeke. Simil. rise, Wasting a part, thereby to warne the whole. None otherwise than when (with griefe) we see Some house on fire, we strait, to saue the towne, Watch, fast, and pray, and most industrious bee, With hooke and line to pull the Building downe: So doth this fire of heau'ns still kindling ire Blister our Cities publike Body so, As we are blister'd, but with so much fire, As we may quench with teares if they do flo. if it should breake forth in flames afresh, (As (ah) what staies it but vnstinted Grace?) What thing shuld quench it but a world of Flesh? Or desolation it away to chace? Time neuer knew since he beganne his houres, (For aught we reade) a Plague so long remaine
In any Citie, as this Plague of ours: For now six yeares in London it hath laine. Where none goes out, but at his comming in, If he but feeles the tendrest touch of smart, He feares he is Plague-smitten for his sinne; So, ere hee's plagu'd, he takes It to the heart: For, Feare doth (Loadstone-like) it oft attract, That else would not come neere; or steale away; And yet this plaguy-feare will scarse coact Our Soules to sinne no more, this Plague to slay. But thou, in whose high hand all hearts are held, Conuert vs, and from vs this Plague auert: So sin shall yeeld to Grace, and Grace shall yeeld The Giuer glory for so deere desert. Too deere for such too worthles wicked Things, At best but clods of base Infirmitie; Too deere for sinne that all this murraine brings; Too deere for those that liue but twice to die. In few, what should I say? the best are nought That breathe, since man first breathing did rebell: The best that breath are worse thā may be thoght, If Thought can thinke the best can do but well: For, none doth well on Earth, but such as will Confesse (with griefe) they do exceeding ill! The best is but a Micah 7.4. Briere, and Psal. 14 2.4 none doth good, But He that makes Vs blamelesse in his Ephes. 5.12. Blood. FINIS.
