S28 11937079 51210
A True RELATION Of the sad Passages, between the Two Armies in the West: Shewing the perfidious Breach of Articles, by the Kings Partie: Their horrid Crueltie, offered to the Lord Generals Souldiers in their March from FOY: As it is certified by severall Letters, under the hands of Judicious Godly men, Commanders in the Army; who were themselves Eye-witnesses, and patient Sufferers in all these Cruelties herein Expressed. Read and Judge. Published by G. S. Ierem. 34. 18, 19, 20. And I will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words of the Covenant, which they had made before me, when they cut the Calf in twain, and passed through the parts thereof. The Princes of Iudah, and the Princes of Ierusalem; the Eunuches, and the Priests, and all the people that passed between the parts of the Calf. I will give them unto the hands of their enemies, and into the hands of them that seek their lives; and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the Fowls of the Heaven, and to the Beasts of the Earth, &c. London, Printed according to Order for L. C. Octob. 2. 1644.
A true Relation of the sad Passages, between the two Armies in the West. WHile the Lord Generall was quartered at Listi∣thell in Cornwell, He drew out his Army severall times, attempting to give the Enemy battle, but the Ene∣my refused, (So imbelbick have they alwayes been, and would never fight but upon great advantage) only they had dayly Skirmishes by parties, about passages, which the Enemy laboured to take, to hinder all Provisions, for Horse and Foot, from coming to His Excellencyes Ar∣my: In all which Skirmishes the Enemy had the worse; till the Enemy at last grew numerous, and by advantage of inclosiers, which was with stoe walles, the Enemyes Foot got very neer His Excellencyes quarters, which was great annoyance, and kept them to continuall duty, nece∣ssitated them to a narrower compasse, and hindred provi∣sions every way: So that on Friday the 30. of August, His Excellency drew his Carriages to Foy; It being conclud∣ed by a Counsell of Warre, that His Excellency, and the Lord Roberts should go by Sea to Plimouth, and that the Horse should break their way through the Kings quarters: Leaving all the Foot under the Command of Major Ge∣nerall
Skippon: The Lords, (God be praised) came safe to Plimouth, and the Horse safely past through the Ene∣mies Army, with losse to the Enemy, more then to them∣selves. The Plimouth Regiment of Horse only stayed with the Foot, who were resolved to live and dye with them: These Horse with all the Foot, stood upon their Guard, in hope some relief might come, or at least to make their own conditions. The Enemy having felt the Animosity of our Horse, in breaking through their Army, had little heart to pursue them; but presently withall their force, fell on our Foot, on every side, supposing them to be all at their mercy, but resolved to shew them no mercy at all, but to have swal∣lowed them up wholly: For by a Counsell of War they had resolved, to put every man to the Sword, and give quarter to none: This was on Friday, the King was in Person in the Army; Then to put a quick dispatch in ex∣ecution, of their cruell resolutions, they fell with all vio∣lence on our Foot, and at the first assault having taken a∣bout 30. they put them to the Sword, who asking quar∣ter, they answered, God damme, not a man of you shall have quarter. This inhumanity of theirs, increased resolution and courage in our men, who resolved to set their lives at a high rate, beyond what the Enemy durst bid, as indeed they did, for after Major Generall Skippon had made a short Speech to the Army, they threw up their Hats and gave a great shout, resolving unanimously to fight it out to the last man, and to ask no quarter, and upon the Ene∣mies approach, they gave them many fiery Salutations, which much amazed the Enemy, for by their great and small shot, sent with resolved courage, there fell of the E∣nemy at least six for one, insomuch that the enemy made a
stand, and drew back, changing their resolutions of giving no quarter: and offered quarter, which that Gallant Gen∣tleman, Major Generall Skippon refused, except he might have Honourable conditions: at last it was graunted that he should draw his own conditions, which he did, but not granted; yet after some debate, there was a Trea∣tie, and this was on Sunday, the first of September. The Treators, for the Enemy was Prince Maurice, the Lord Forth, and the Lord Digby. For Major Gene∣rall Skippon, was Colonell Wichcot, Colonell Barkley, and Colonell Butler. That night they agreed to the Ar∣ticles, which here I have set down Verbatim, that the world may see their incongruent performance, by the re∣lations following. The Articles are these. FIrst, It is agreed, That all the Officers and Souldiers, as well of Horse and Foot, under the Command of the Earl of Essex, being at the time of the conclusion of this Treaty, on the West-side of the River Foy, shall to morrow, being the Second of September, by Eleven of the clock in the morning, deliver up in their quarters, near the old Castle, all their Cannon, and Train of Artillery, withall Carriages, Necessaries, and Materi∣alls thereunto belonging, and likewise all the Armes offensive, and defensive, both of Horse and Foot, and all Powder, Bullet, Match, and Amunition whatsoever, unto such Officers, as the Generall of His Majesties Artillery shall appoint, to receive the same, except onely the Swords and Pistols of all Officers, above the degree of Corporals: who are by this agreement to wear and carry away the same. Secondly, It is agreed, that immediately after the delivery up of the said Artillery, Arms, and Amunition, &c. That all the Officers and Souldiers, both of Horse and Foot, of the said
Army, shall maroh out of their quarters to Listithiell, with their Collours both of Horse and Foot, Trumpets, and Drums, and that all Officers above the degree of a Corporall, shall take with them such Horses, and Servants, as properly belong to themselves, as also all Reformadoes, their Horses, and Armes, not exceeding the number of Fifty, and likewise to take with them all their Bagge and Baggage, and Wagons, with their Teemes of Horse, Properly belonging to the said Officers. Thirdly, it is agreed, that they shall have a safe convoy of a 100. Horse, from their quarters to Listithell, and from thence in their march the nearest convenient way to Poole, and War∣ham: and that in their march they touch not at any Garrison. Fourthly, it is agreed, that in case they shall march from Pool, to any other place by land, that neither they nor any of them shall bear Armes, more then is allowed in this agreement: nor do any Hostile Act, untill they come to Southampton or Portsmouth. Fiftly, it is agreed, that all sick and wounded Souldiers of this Army, who are not able to march, shalbe left at Foy, and there secured from any violence to their persons, or goods: and care taken of them till such time as they can be transported to Plimouth. Sixtly, it is agreed, that all Officers, and Souldiers of that Army, for the better conveniency of their march, shalbe permitted to receive all such moneys, provisions of victualls, and other accommodations, as they shalbe able to procure from Plimouth; to which end they shall have a Passe granted to any persons, not exceeding the number of twelve; whom they shall send for the same. Seventhly, it is agreed, That there be no inviting of soul∣diers, but that such as will come voluntarily to his Majesties Service shall not be hindred.
According to these Articles, The Artillery, Car∣riages, Ammunition, Armes, &c. Were delivered into the Kings possession: But how contrary to these Articles, they dealt with us, these following Testimonies do testifie. SIr, I have writ twice to you before, but have not received on line from you; which makes me thinke my Letters have miscarryed; what our Straits were, and have been, I formerly writ in the extre∣mity of our straits: After the Lord Generall was gone by Sea to Plimouth, and our Horse made their way through the Kings Army (of which I assure my self you have heard) the enemy made violent assaults against us, greedily thirsting after our blood, as the ravening Beasts after their prey; intending not to leave one of us alive: But God hath in mercy preserved us, and did wonderfully uphold the courage of our Souldiers, who were resolute and valiant, resolving either to die like men, or to come off with honour; insomuch, That af∣ter some showers of great and small shot, the heat of the raging enemy was well cooled, and they willing to be shut of us, upon reasonable termes; rather then to buy our blood at so dear a rate; and were willing to accept of a Treaty: And after some time spent about the conditi∣ons, on Sunday night the first of September, we were all agreed, and were to march away with a safe Convoy the next day, with our Colours, and Drums, &c. but with no Arms, except Officers: But then came our misery; For when we had laid down our Arms, and came to march through the enemies Army, we were inhumanely delt with; abused, reviled, scorned, torne, kickt, pil∣laged, and many stript of all they had; quite contrary to the Articles: For presently, even in the presence of the
King, and of their Generall, they took away our cloakes, coats, and hats, calumniating us by reproachfull words, and threates, if we would not desert the Parliament, and turn to the King; And after a day or two march, they Stript many of our Officers to their shirts, taking away their Boots, Shooes, Hose, &c. notwithstanding Ma∣jor Generall Skippon stoutly urged the Condition seve∣rall times, and with much wisdom behaved himself: nor was this the worst, for they hindred us in all our march from provisions, and quarter, on purpose to de∣stroy us: and truly the Mercy and Providence of God was wonderfull to us, that we perisht not in our march; I hope I shall have opportunity to see you shortly, and shall then tell you something of my own particular usage and losse, I pray, &c. Southampton, the 19. of September. 1644. Your assured Friend, and Servant, R. B. This Letter was writ to a Gentleman of quality and worth, from his intimate and faithfull Friend: here followes another, writ to a Gentleman of Eminency in the City, from a Captain of his acquaintance, who is known to be Discreet, Honest, and Religious; a Shol∣ler, and a Valient Souldier.
Most worthy Sir, My service to your selfe, and to, &c. VVHen my Lord Generall advanced into the West, He com∣mnded our Regiment out of Plimouth, amongst which I was one. We oftentimes skirmished with the Enemie, and had ever the better, which presaged a Victorie to us (as I conceived) if we would fight. The first time, our Plimouth Horse (being but a handfull) charged a vast body of the Enemies horse, and put them all to flight: I cannot describe in writing, what I saw that day actd: I was my selfe present in that Charge; It was wonderfull to see the couragious hearts of our men, and the basenesse of the Enemie. This was the first skirmish of note; the rest I omit. The next of any note, was the day my Lord Generall began to draw from istithiel towards Foy: At that time both Horse and Foot skirmished, but especially the Foot; That day, in the morning, we beat the Enemie back, for divers fields; took three Foot Colours, and one Horse Colour, and divers prisoners and men of note: I that day got the Princes Colours in the field: The whole body of the Enemies horse and foot, stood amazed at our Footmens resolution. All that day we skirmished very hot, and the Enemie stuck very close on every side, plying us continually with shot. The night com∣ming on, the Enemie drew into divers bodies of Horse and Foot; but especially towards our Right and Left Wing, two vast bodies of Horse appeared, their Foot concealing themselves as well as they could; yet we plainly perceived, their intention was, that night to fall on, or to give us a great Alarme; which they did to the pur∣pose. The next night, my Lord Generall, and the Lord Roberts, and Sir John Merrick took boat for Plimouth: and, as it fell out, it was well they went, (I meane the Lord Generall, and Lord Roberts) for without all question the Enemie would have killed them. On Sunday we had a Parley, and it ended the same night: the Arti∣cles agreed upon, I believe you have heard: but how they were vi∣olated, I am sure you cannot know, except you had seen it. Sir, be∣lieve it, no tongue can expresse the barbarous usage of our men by the Enemie: They stripped many hundreds stark naked, wounded many, and pillaged most of their money, coats and hats. This was
on the Munday, Septemb. 2. They made us, after we had laid down our armes, to mach through the Kings Army, where the Souldiers came upon us in most barbarous manner, moyling our men in the dirt, and kicking them, pulling all from them, doublets, hose, and shirts, leaving many stark naked. When we came from the Kings Army to Listithiel, the poore Souldiers were assaulted with more crueltie by the Towns-men and women of Listithiel, who stripped many men stark naked, not leaving them any thing to cover their nakednesse: And I saw them strip a woman of our partie, to her smock; she had lyen in but three dayes before: they took her by the haire of her head, and threw her into the River, and there had almost drowned her: the woman dyed within twelve houres after. Divers other women and men were served in the like nature. Also, upon Listithiel Bridge, there met three brethren, two were on the Kings partie, and one for the Parliament; The two laid hold on the other brothers throat; one of them would have killed him; but the other was more mercifull: yet they stripped him, and beat him, and swore, If ever they caught him againe, they would kill him. It is not five sheets of paper will contain the Stories and Tra∣gedies of this kinde. They so coursed and hurried our Souldiers, that many fell down under their mercilesse hands; others, with ex∣cessive thirst, were forced to drink water, worse then runs in the channels in London streets. After we were past Listithiel, we marched something quietly, till night; and then we were set upon as we marched, and divers of our Captaines were stripped at that time, to the great terror of the Common Souldiers. We marched about seven miles from Listithiel on Munday: that night we lay in the fields neere to a spring, which was some refreshing, having no other provision. This night they stole away divers of our horses; my horse was stollen that night, and I was forct to foot it to Southampton. On Tuesday morning we marched towards Horsebridge: when we came within two miles of the Bridge, on the Down, we were stayed: they told us, we must not march, till further order from the King; which much amazed us: Sir John Browne commanded the Convoy; and Generall Major Skippon urged the Articles to him, and pressed the unjustnesse of the action, in staying us: but within the space of an houre, news came, we might march; We with much. willingnesse advanced; and having gone about two
miles farther, we were stoped again for the space of an hour, by Generall Goring; yet we marched that night to Bren-farr, where we scarce had the benefit of water; we lay in the open fields that night also, it being a bitter Rainy night. On Wednesday morning, we advanced toward Ockhampton, which Town we desired to have to quarter in; when we came within a mile of the Town, news came to us, We must advance no further, the Kings Force being before us in the Town: this caused no small trouble; you might read discontent in every mans face, and hunger in all: this being the third day they had marched without victual's The Major Generall freely spake his minde to the Convoy, intreating for us with threats, rather then flatteries; and desiring to have quarter in the Town, at last it was granted, and into the Town we came: they quartered in the Town, and we quartered in the Town; but they stopt all manner of Provisions from our men: the Souldiers lay this night in the field, but they lay neer the Town; where you might have heard, the saddest moans, and direfull com∣plaints for Bread, that ever ear heard. That night a Penny Loaf would have been sold for half a Crown, and many thanks besides: I my self offered twelve pence for three ounces of Bread, at last I got about three ounces for six pence: I see some of the Souldiers pay six pence for a peece of poor Cheese, not weighing three ounces; and many of them pay the same rate for that proportion. On the Thursday, we marcht from Ockhampton, forth of London Road, that we might avoid the Kings forces, which alwayes lay in our way, on purpose to eat up our Provisions from us: we came that night to a little Village; where we had some accommodation for our selves and Souldiers: the next morning we advanced towards Teverton, where we intended to quarter, and our Souldiers were exceeding willing to go thither, expecting good quarter there; but when we came within three miles of the Town, news came, we must not come neer it, for the Kings forces were there, which made us betake our selves to a little Village, two miles on our lft hand; when we came to the Village, the Kings forces were there also, which constrained our poor, wearied, and hungry Souldiers, to lie in the hungry fields. In the next morning, we were to march towards Collington; in the way, some of our Souldiers mistook their way, and went a mile from the Army: many of which, were most miserably wounded; some were killed within a little of Ti∣verton:
and divers men we never see since, and many that escaped, came to us all blood, and wounded. After this we were pritty well rid of our enemies, and our poor starved men began to gather courage. In all this trouble, I observed Major Generall Skippon in his carriage: but never did I see any man so patient, so humble, and so truly wise, and valiant in all his actions, as he: his Lievte∣nant Colonell was stripped to his shirt, by a Sergeant Major of the Kings. I blesse God, though I lost all my Clothes, and other things, which my man had in his custody; yet my self was untouched: I brought off my Pistols and my Sword; it was Gods great good∣nesse to me, for there was much inquiry after me: they asked of my own Souldiers, which is E. H. they fearing some evill, would not tell them. I thank God, I rescued some of our men out of the Enemies hands: for they took me to be one of the Kings side. I give thanks to God for all. Sir, I beseech you take not his for a full Relation, though it be a true Relation, my self being an eye∣witnesse to all that I write. This is but the least part of what some others have seen, and felt: I am now ready to take Boat for Pli∣mouth, which is besieged: I am in extreme haste. I wish you may make sense of my scribbling Lines: I desire your prayers, who am, Sir, From Southampton, the 20. Sept. 1644. Your most humble servant, E. H. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel; much more cruell is their direfull wrath: but God will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: as they have done to others, so shall it be done to them; as their Sword hath made women childlesse, so shall their mothers be childlesse ngst women. Joab shed the blood of war, in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle, about his loynes; therefore Joabs Hoar-head must not go in peace to the Grave. FINIS.
