E186_34 53403907 97700
Numb. 36 Mercurius Publicus, COMPRISING The Sum of Forraign Intelligence: WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday August 30. to Thursday Septemb. 6. 1660. Amsterdam, August 21. THe Post of Osnabrug reports, that about six days since some of the Garrison of Munster, after they had been very merry the night be∣fore, made a Sally out of that City, when they were yet half drunk, taking in a small Fort which the Bishop had caused to be raised for the blocking up of the Place, and putting some men in it to maintain it; But as they returned back to the City, the Bishops Horse ell in upon the rear of them, and killed about thirty men, among whom one of the Burgomasters was found. The Bishop had caused some of the Citizens that were killed, to be hanged up.
A Letter from Major Robert Holmes, Commander of the Heneretta, sent unto Baron Battavella in Spain. My Lord, BEing appointed by commnd from His Royal Highness the Duke of York, to wait on Your Excellency with one of His Majesties Ships, the King of Great Britain, I think it fit to let Your Excellency know▪ That I am safely arrived upon the Coast, and intend to Anchor at Gatharia Road, where I hope to hear from you, and in order there∣unto have sent my Ketch, to bring Your Excellencies com∣mands. I did intend to put in to Passage; but finding the entring of the Harbour so narrow, I dare not venture with a Ship of this concernment without Your special Order; and if Your Excellency think not this place convenient, be pleased to appoint any other, and I shall immediately set sail towards it, if wind and weather will permit. The enclo∣sed Letters were given me by Count Constang, and Monsieur de Ovietta: I shall humbly beg Your Excellencies pardon for not waiting on you with them my self. My Lord, Your Excellencies most affectionate and humble Servant, Robert Holmes. From on Board the He∣neretta, off of Cape Mar∣tin Chegoe, Aug. 8. 1660. Edinbrough, Aug. 25. 1660. On wednesday the 22. of August, the Earl of Glencairn, Lord Chancellor of Scotland, came into this City honoura∣bly attended by about 1000. Horse. The Major General, Colonell Daniel, and Colonell Disne the English Commis∣sioners, with several Field-Officers, and two Troops of the
Major Generals Regiment of Horse, went to Mussleborough to meet his Lordship, and attended him thence to the House designed for his Lordship in this City. At his coming in to Edinborough, the Earle of Winton rode on his right hand, and Major General Morgan on his left: He was guarded from the Water-gate to the Nether-Bow, by the Major Ge∣nerals Regiment of Foot. The Lord Chancellor being come the Committee of three Estates (according to the late Proclamation) sate on Thursday, Aug. 23. and infor∣mation being given of some Remonstrating Ministers that were at Robert Symson, the Collectors house; Orders were sent to Captain Newman in Edinborough Castle, to command thence 20. Musquetiers to Symson's house, who found the Ministers subscribing a Paper tending to the dis∣turbance of this Kingdom. The Ministers were carryed Prisoners to Edinborough Castle: Their names are Mr. James Guthrie, Minister of Sterling. Mr. Robert Trayle, Ministers of Edinborough. Mr. John Strivling, Ministers of Edinborough. Mr. Alexander Moncreif, Minister of Scooney. Mr. John Semple, Minister of Carffern. Mr. Thomas Rmsey, Minister of Foulden. Mr. Gilbert Hall, Minister of Kirkliston. Mr. John Scot, Minister at Ornham. Mr. George Nairne, Minister at Brunt Island. Mr. John Murray, Minister of Maffin Parish. James Kirk, Laird of Soudaywell. Whereupon the Lord Chancellor with the Committee of the Three Estates, the very next day set forth this follow∣ing Proclamation.
GOD Save the KING. A Proclamation by the Committee of Estates convened by His Majesties special Authority, against unlawfull Meetings and seditious Papers. At Edinburgh, August 24. 1660. THe Committee of Estates in obedience to His Maje∣sties Proclamation being met, and taking to their se∣ou consideration the goodness of God, who in his great mercy hath restored the Kings Majesty to the Exercise of is Royal Government; And withall, considering His jesties great care of, and affection to this His Majesties Ancent Kingdom of Scotland, in Calling and Authorizing the said Committee of Estates to Meet; And they finding it their duty to prevent all unlawful Meetings, which may tend to the prejudice of His Majesties Service, or may again involve His Majesties good Subjects into new Troubles; Have thought it fit in His Majesties Name and Authority, to prohibite, And by these Presents do prohibite and dis∣charge all unlawful and unwarrantable Meetings or Con∣venticles in any place within this His Majesties Kingdom of Scotland, without His Majesties special Authority; And likewise all seditious Petitions and Remonstrances, under what pretence soever which may tend to the disturbance of the Peace of this Kingdom, or alienating and debauching the affections of His Majesties Subjects from their due obe∣dience to His Majesties lawful Authority, and that under all highest pains. And for this effect, appoints all Sheriffs of Shires, and Magistrates of Burghs to be careful within their respective Bounds, that no such pernicious and dange∣rous meetings be permitted, but that they be timeously pre∣vented, hindered, made known and discovered to the Com∣mittee
of Estates. And ordain these presents to be forth∣with Printed, and Published at the Mercat cross of Edin∣burgh, and the Head Burghs of the respective Shires with∣in this Kingdom, that none pretend ignorance hereof. Signed in the Name, and by Warrant of the Committee of Estates. GLENCARNE Chancellour. I. P. D. Com. After which was set forth another Proclamation com∣manding that no Disorders of Insolencies be committed by any person whatever within this Kingdom upon any of the English Nation, under all highest pain, after which they adjourn'd till Tuesday following. White-Hall. His Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the Honour of Knight-hood upon Herbert Perrot, Esquire, a worthy Member of the House of Commons, serving in Parliament for the Burrough of Weobly, in the County of Herreford. On Thursday last that accomplished Personage George Earl of Bristol, entertain'd His Majesty at his own house with a Supper, with whom was Their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of York and Gloucester, attended by the Marquess of Ormond, and other Persons of Honour. On Friday the Lords had a Conference with the Com∣mons, wherein Their Lordships acquainted the Commons with His Majesties Message for an Adjournment from the eighth of September to the sixth of November next.
Hamburgh, Aug. 25. The Danish Embassadours who lately arrived here out of Holland, are this day gone by land for Denmark. The Imperial Field-Marshal Montecuculi, is daily expected here. Two days ago arrived here from Sweden, the Pasgrave of Suzhach, and the Prince of Anha; they intend to stay here some few days, to wait on the Queen of Sweden, and then to return into Germany. The confederate Forces are now at last broke up in Holsten, being appointed to quarter this night at Rensburgh, and to morrow at New Minister; and those 600 horse which were said to continue in Holsten, are likewise to withdraw on the 21 instant, and to follow after the rest. The Imperial horse which were quartered in Mek∣lenburg, are already drawn together in order to their speedy march out of that country, and the Foot is to follow them within a fortnight. The Ratifications of peace with the Emperor, Sweden, Poland, and Brandenburg, are mutually exchanged and delivered at Danzick, on the sixth and eighth courant, and Elbing is to be delivered up to the King of Po∣land on the 14. of this moneth. What other place will be given for it to the Elector of Brandenburg, is not yet cer∣tainly known; Field-Marshal Schack is made a Senator of the Kingdom of Denmark, and Major-General Eggerick is appointed Governour of Copenhagen. The Parliament in Sweden is to Assemble on the 21 of Septemb. and the Cere∣monies of the late Kings Funeral are to be performed in the moneth October following; which when done, several Em∣bassies are to be dispatched thence for England, France, Hol∣land and other places. Vienna, 25. Aug. Letters which the last Post from Gratz, intimate, that his Imperial Majesty was to proceed on his journey for Carin∣hia and rain at the beginning of the next moneth, accom∣panied
only with few of his Court, and resolved to go so far as Triest on the Adriatick Sea coast, where the Vneti∣ans are a preparing of several Navl divertisemens and cu∣riosities, to entertain his Majesty; which it so, then his Ma∣jesties return would not he so sudden as otherwise was ex∣pected. The Venetians pursue their Leve in these parts, with much eagerness, and get a number of good Souldiers of the Bavaian dis-banded Forces into their service. The Estates of Nether-Austria are to Assemble here the next week: We are advertised from Hungaria, that the Count of Serin, upon Order from his Imperial Majesty, hath with∣drawn his Forces from the Fort of Canischa. Venice, August 6. Two of our Gallies, with many armed Bkes, are lately arrived at Ancona; the Turkish Pyrates upon information hereof, retreated out of the Gulf with their Booty: But others are since gone to the Isle of Elba, where they have plundred the Town of Piumbino, and carryed away many slaves, together with the Nuns of the Cloister in that place. The Turks having received a supply of 40 horse in Canea, they have so far made their approaches to the City of Can∣dia, that they begin to annoy it with slinging of fire into it; But ours, to relieve the place, have drawn their Forces to∣gether about Cerigo. Here arrived lately a Turkish Gally, which was mastered by 170 Slaves, who all had their liber∣ty and a piece of money given them. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Due way of Composing the Differences on Foot, Preserving the Church. According to the Opinion of Herbert Thorndike: Sold by John Martin, James Alle∣stry, and Thomas Dicas, at the Bell in St. Paul's Church-yard.
Hague, September 20. S. N. The Lords States of the Province of Zealand, to the number of twenty six, having been fetched up with several Coaches to their audience with the Lords States of Holland, Monsieur Adrin Vet, Pensioner of the States of Zealand, made a very eloquent and large Speech, wherein he remon∣stated to them, those motives and reasons which induc'd his Principals to settle and establish the Government of these Provinces upon their ancient Foundation, under a Lieute∣nant or Captain Admiral General, for which trust they had nominated his Highness the Prince of Orange, according to their resolution taken on the seventh of this moneth, de∣siring the States of Holland would be pleased to concur with them therein: In order whereunto, a conference is to be held btween the Deputies of those two States, to endea∣vour a joynt condescension to, and ratification of the pre∣mises. What the result of it will be, a short time must dis∣cover. There is no certainty yet of the Ambassadors go∣ing hence for England, and it is thought that they can hardly have their dispatch these six weeks. An Extract of the Resolution taken by the Lords States of the Province of Zealand on Saturday the seventh of August, S. N. concerning his Highness the Prince of Orange. We the Lords States of Zealand having most seriously and deliberatively n divers Sessions considered of the e∣nor of the fourth Article touching their Conventions, and the respective eminent charges heretofore successively held by their Highnesses the Pces of Orange of immortal me∣mory; and neerly reflecting on what by these conjunctures of times and affairs ought principally to be observed, as tending to the greatest honour, welfare and service, as well of this Sate in General, as of this Province in particular:
we doe once more declare it to be our judgement and opinion (as we have done several times heretofore) that to the be∣forementioned end and purpose, the Cheif management of the publick Concerne must be invested and entrusted with certain Eminent men and persons of Quality and Extraction, in pursuance of those several Remonstrances, and Resolu∣tions vigorously set forth in the beginning of the troubles and afterwards, as well by the States General, as the respective Provinces. And although the misfortune of many intricate occurrences happening in these late years, after the decease of his Highness Prince William the second, in these, as well as in the Neighboring Countries was a great hindrance and could not well allow, that such a Resolution as was necessary and much wished for, touching the appointment and Election of such a cheif and certain person, for the Government, should have its desired effect; yet finding, that by Gods Gracious and unserchable Providence, those unhappy distractions and troubles are ceased, and taking notice of a more favorable Constitution of affairs and opportunities as to the whole Christian world in general, and these Provinces in particular, which to the redress and resettlement of the State ought to be neglected, and consequently reassuming our before∣mentioned wholsome Intention of Electing one person or other qualified, who most worthily and with the most confi∣dence could be intrusted with the chief Government of this State in General, and of this Province in particular; We the said Lords States of Zealand can find no person of more Credit, worth or respect then his Highnss the present Prince of Orange, he being not onely the off-spring of those Princes, who with the hazard of their Estates and blood have layd the foundation of this Commonwealth, and by their excellent and couragious conduct purchased so honorable and glorious a Liberty, which to the Admiration of all the whole world we at present enjoy; But being likewise by blood, affi∣nity and Alliances annexed to the greatest and mightiest Prin∣ces of Christendom, by whom this State in its troubles and necessities hath been principally supported, and whose friend∣ship
and Confederacies for the time to come will be of most concern to us; considering also his Princely Qualities and Vertues wherewith God Almighty hath been pleased to indow his Highness from his very Infancie, very well agree∣ing with the Government and Humor of these Nations, who seem to take a special pleasure and wel-liking of them, and to promise to themselves much Happiness, Blessing and prosperity; and finally regarding, that the said Prince hath a fair Estate, and large Possessions in most part of the Pro∣vinces of this State, and particularly in that of Zealand, where∣by it can be maintained, that before all others, he is mainly interessed to endeavor the preservation and welfare of this State. We therefore, being solemnly summoned and assemb∣led, as is usual, upon this present Subject, have resolved and determined, out of the alledged and other weighty respects and reasons, with a general and unanimous consent to declare; 1. That the Prince of Orange, in behalf of this Province, together with the other Confederates of the Assembly of their High and mighty Lordships the States General, shall be chosen and nominated Captain and Admiral General of the United Netherlands, with a convenient Commission and Instructions to be agreed and concluded upon between the several Provinces, and a yearly revenue of 100000 Gilders for his maintenance, to be levied upon the States account, and to begin from the time the Commission is issued out. 2. To which purpose, certain Deputies are to be ap∣pointed by this assembly, to repair to the assembly of the Lords States General, to tender to their Lordships this point of electing a Governor, and with the best reasons to procure their consent, and a speedy effect of it. 3. That a tender of the charge of Governor, Captain and Admiral-general of both the Provinces, be presently made to his Highness the said Prince of Orange, with a con∣venient Commission and instructions to be issued out with∣out delay, to which the Lords States of Holland are to be required to give their concurrence, that so in regard of their
common interests, and according to antient practice, this affair may be determined pari passu, and with joint advice; and that a Commission be drawn and sealed, as it was done in the year 1647. 4. Yet in case this appointment of the Prince for the abovementioned places should not take effect with the Lords States General, and the States of Holland, contrary to the expectation, wish and good intention of this assembly, that then, upon a full report of their Deputies concerning their negotiation, this Assembly will take care, and order affairs so, as may most tend to the honor, welfare and ser∣vice of the country. 5. It is the unanimous consent of the said Lords States of Zealand, that the beforementioned Prince of Orange shall not exercise those eminent charges of General and Admiralship, till his Highness come to be eighteen years of age; which charges (during his minority) are not to be executed by any under the name of Lieutenant, but remain as now they are, which two conditions are to be expresly inserted in the beforementioned Commission. 6. That presently by an unanimous consent and appoint∣ment of all the Members assembled, the dignity and place of the First Noble shall be presented to the Prince, he being the most conspicuous and qualified Nobleman of this Pro∣vince; yet upon such clauses, restrictions and precautions, as the same dignity hath been heretofore conferred upon the Princes of Orange of immortal memory, without diminu∣tion or prejudice of the priviledges of this Province, and other the several Members of this State. 7. Upon the conferring of such charges, Honors and preheminences on the said Prince, all possible care and order shall be taken for his Highness Education and Breed∣ing, as may best befit his Princely person and Illustrious Fa∣mily. 8. That his Highness shall be allowed at the 16. year of his age, to have access to the Council of State, according as it was practised by his Highness Grand-Father Prince Fre∣derick
Henry, that so his Highness may be instructed in the Fundamental Laws and Maximes, and the Antient and Re∣nowned Government of these Countries, and the better learn the humor and inclinations of his good people and Country∣men. Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published. ☞Phil-Anglus: Some sober inspections made into the car∣riage and consults of the late long Parliament: whereby occasion is taken to speak of Parliaments in former tims, &c. With some reflexes upon Go∣vernment in general. With some Prophetick Paragraphs. By James Howel Esq. Sold by W. Palmer at the Palm-Tree near St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. Five Seasonable Sermons Preached before eminent Audito∣ries, and Dedicated to the Kings Majesty, by Paul Knell, Master in Arts of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, sometime Chaplain to a Regiment of Curassiers in his late Majesties rmy. Sold by John Place at Furnivals Inn-Gate in Holborn. Advertisement. IF any man can give notice of a light Dun Mare with a bald face, and four white feet, black mane and tail, a lock of white hairs in her tail, about se∣ven years old, and about fifteen hand high, that was taken out of a Stable in Coale Yard on Thursday August 30. by a young man about 27. years of age, brown hair, somewhat lng, of a pale complexion and round face, with a pla∣ster on the left check. If any one apprehend him, and give notice at the Red Lion in Cambridge, the Cros Keys in St Edes, or the Holy Lamb on the back∣side of St. Clements, they shall have five pound for their pains. STolen the second of September, out of a Dining-Room in Holborn, one large Looking Glass set in an Ebony frame, a Landskip being drawn at the tom of the glass, with a Shepherdess, a am, a Gat, and several other figures, there being a slaw at the top of the Glass, as also two Turkey Car∣pets, the one three yards long, and two yards and a half wide, or thereabouts; the other two yards and a half long, and a yard and a half wide, or therea∣bouts. If any one give notice thereof to r. Arnold a Grocer, at the Tobacco-Roll and Sugar-Loaf next to Grais-Inn-Gate in Holborn, they shall have ty shillings for their pains. ON Saturday lst run away from the Lord Rich: Christophilus Cornaro, a Turk Christened: A French youth of 17 or 18 years of age, with flaxen hair, lit∣tle blew eyes, a mark upon his lip, and another under his right eye; of a fair complexion, one of his ears pierced, having a Pearl-coloured Cloth suit, trim'd with scarlet and blew Ribbons, a Coat of the same colour, with silver Buttons, his name Iacob David. Give notice to the Lords Lodging at the 3 Fishes in New reet in Covent Garden, a Cooks shop, and good satisfaction shall be given.
Advertisements. THe Reader is desired to take notice, That his Majesties Printers having published the Act of Free and General Pardon, Indempuity and Oblivion, in a more contracted Form then ordinary, that it might be of small price; yet notwithstanding some persons have not only pre∣sumed to Re-print the same, to their very great detriment, but have also committed several gross faults, as in Page 5. they have left out (any of) Page 7. l. 11. (or Acquittances) Pag. 8. li. 19. (the day) li. 43. (Ma∣jesties) left out. Pag. 12. (of) left out, and (or persons) too much; be∣sides these Errata there are very many other Mistakes, which ought not to pass in a thing of so great consequence. This stollen false impression may be known, by being printed in three sheets, not of the known Letter for Acts, whereas the right is Five sheets; All Persons therefore, who desire a true Copy of the Act of Indempnity, are advis'd to beware of that false imperfect Three sheets, which will but deceive the Buyer. RIchard Verney Esq of Alaxstn in Leicestershire, about a for might since los a Lanner from that place, she hath neither Bells nor Varvels; she is a wh Hawk, and her long feathers and sarscels are both in the blood.  give tidings thereof to Mr Lambert at the golden Key in Fleetstreet, they shall have forty shillings for their pains. THe But end and the Lock of a Gunn, commonly called a taff Gunn, being dutch-worke, and fitted to its Barrel, with a Screw, within few such s of the touch-hole, was lost between London and Barnet on Tueday 21 August: if any one do bring it to Sir Eliab Harveys House in Breadstreet, he shal have twenty shillings for his pains. LOst on Sunday night last, out of the King Meadows near Kingston upon Thames, in the County of Surrey one brown bay Mare three years old and upward, having a white star in the forehead, a white snip upn the nose, and a little white on one of her hind-feet, about 14 hands high, in good flsh. Also a bright bay Mare, between 14 and 15 handfuls high, about 9 yers old, a white streak down the face, a white foot behind, and the near e of the other hind-foot, but meanly in flesh. If any give notce to Henry Mudhets at the three Pi∣geons in Kingston aoresaid; or to Mr. Bedson a Tailor in New Street in Covent-Garden, they shall have forty shillings for their pains. On Monday the third instant, the Accusation against. Col. Robert Worden was taken into consideration by his Majsty sitting in full Council, where was read a large Attestation un∣der the hands of Sir George Booh and the greatest part of the Baronets, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen of the County
Palatine of Chester, declaring that they ever found the said Col. Worden in all his Majesties concernments, not only faithful, but so industrious and prudent, as that no Person would be more acceptable for their future Trust. Upon consi∣deration whereof, and that several Lords of the Council af∣firmed, that in the time of the late Tyrannical Government, the said Colonel was highly instrumental to advance his Ma∣jesties interest, and that by their communication with him, their Lives and Fortunes had been in his power; expressing their esteem of him as of a Worthy and Loyal Person, his Majesty declar'd that He did fully acquit him from the accu∣sation and and imputation he had suffered under, and that He esteem'd him a very honest and Loyal Person, and would ac∣cordngly admit him into his former favor. In earnest where∣of his Majesty hath given him the honor of his hand, and his Highness the Duke of York hath gladly received him into his Service, as formerly, to the joy of many worthy and va∣liant Persons, who had long known the Colonels courage and loyalty, and were sorry a mistake in others should be get any suspition upon a Person so highly deserving. Westminster. And now we can tell News which all the good subjects of three Kingdoms will rejoice at; how that great Instrument of sedition and Firebrand, Hugh Peters, is close prisoner in the Tower of London. The particulars take impartially thus. On Friday last intelligence was given that Peters privily lurked about Southwark; whereupon Sir Edward Nicholas his Majesties principal Secretary of State, sent two Messen∣gers of his Majesties Chamber in ordinary to apprehend him: That night they entred the house where he lay, which was one Broad's a Quaker in S. Thomas parish, whose daughter Mrs. Peach then ly in. The Messengers search'd, but miss'd Hugh Peters, who (according to his custom) had crept into bed to the young woman, where the Mes∣sengers modesty forbad their search; she having been delivered but two days before. There lay Hugh; and the Messengers finding a pri∣vate passage out of that into the house of another Quaker call'd John Day the Cobler, (thus Quaking runs from house to house;) they search'd there also: In the interim Peters escap'd from childbed, leaving behind him his Cane with a Rpier in it, a small pocket-Bible, and a gray Cloak, (for possibly now he was in his Frock.) But on Sunday last
about six at night, in a place call'd the Maze, in the same parish near Hors-way Down, at Nathanael Mun a Tape-weavers house, Hugh Peters again lay in. The Messenger Mr. Wickham coming to the door, found it not lock'd nor latch'd, but kept fast by the Tape-weavers wife, (how faithful that sex are to Peters!) who thrust her back to the door, till the Messengers strength prov'd Mrs. Mun was the weaker vessel, and suddenly running up stairs, found that door also kept fast like the other: 'tws Hugh himself, whose shoulder at the door put the Mes∣senger hard to it, for Peters now thought he thrust for his life. But the Messenger encourag'd, in hopes 'twas Peters, whose strength fail'd, as his fer increased, at last the door flew open, where Hugh Peters was found (a true Quaker) trembling after an incredible manner: Yet now (in his wonted way of confidence) he stifly denied himself to be Peters, but said his name was Thompson (perhaps Hugh the son of Thomas) threatning the Messengers with an Action at Law for offering to ffirm he was Hugh Peters; and therefore re∣fused to go down with the Messenger, till Mr. Arnold (servant to Mr. Blagge of his Majesties Bedchamber) Mr. Hopkins a good neighbour, and Mr. Harris the honest Constable came up the stairs, who all expressed much diligence and heartiness in assisting the Messenger. And yet after all, he refused to come down (still wondring they would think him Peters,) so as they began to force him down, and then he promised to go along, but first, said he, give me leave to gather up my spirits; whereupon he call'd for Drink, and drank two quarts (two full qurts) of small Beer, for the House had no strong. Then Hugh desired he might speak privately with Mris. Mun, which they denied, unless hee would speak in their hearing; after which hee said, I will go, but I beg for the Lords sake that you call mee not Mr. Peters, for, sid hee, if it be known that I am Hugh Peters, the people in the street will stone mee. At last out hee came, but suddenly stept in a∣gain, saying, I must speak privately with the woman of the House, (a woman was his chief Confident) and now they had some tugg∣ing to fetch him back, in which struggle, feeling his skirts hard, they unrip them, and found five peeces of Gold and some Silver Medals, and out of his pocket they took his Almnack, for which hee struggled more than for his Bible. Thence they forced him to the Constables House, where they sent for his Landlord Broad (an old Accuser of honest men) who being absent, his Son-in-law Peach, (whose hap∣piness it was that his Wife had been but  daies delivered) came in his stead, who being asked if hee knew that Cloak, Cane, and Gloves, answered, that they belongd to that Gentleman; pointing to Peters. But Hugh still with his wonted modey denied it, name and ll; though soon
(forgetting himself) hee unawares put on the Gloves, and said, they were his own; and then without more trifling they brought him to the Tower, and delivered him into the custody of the worthy Lieutenant Sir Iohn Robinson (in the blood of whose Uncle, that ever-renowned William late Archbishop of Canterbury, Hugh Peters was elbow deep, and go the Archbishops Library of most choise Books, as well as his Majesties Library at St. James's) which he hath now turn'd to a pocket Bible and an Almanack. All this while, and at the Tower also, Hugh averred his name was Thomson, and denied himself to be Peters though there his Cosin Mr. Birch the Wardour knew him and called the man by his name; til at last in privat to Sir Iohn Robinson he confessed who hee was, and then (with most ingenious modesty) acchsed the Messenger and the rest for taking and bringing him to the Tower by the name of Thom∣son. So that he who before threatned an Action against those who offered to call him Hugh Peters, doth now accuse them for calling him Thomson. This is St. Hugh, who when our Glorious Soveraign was led to Martyr∣dom, fel so hevy upon his righteous soul, blaspheming him upon his then Text (Psal. 149. To bind their Kings in Chains, &c.) and may now make himself the Title of his own Book (call'd Good work for a good Magi∣strate) where among mny other, he hath these six motions. 1. That Pauls Church may be pull'd down to pave Thamestreet. 2. To dstroy Colledges, since there are none in the Gospel, pag. 4. (for Hugh was expelled one.) 3. That Physicians should take small fees, pag. 33. (What was Hugh's disease?) — 4. That Adultery should be punished with a merciful heart pag. 52. (and not like Butchers.) 5. That all un∣married maids be put to spin, (to prevent the best use of hemp.) 6. That all Records in the Tower might be burn'd—But the Records still are safe in the Tower, and so is Hugh Peters, where now we leave him. Last Monday morning about eleven of the clock, that notorious John Harris (commonly called Major Harris) was executed in Leadenhall∣street, over gainst the Merchants house where he committed the Bur∣glary by a forged Warrant in the Lord High Chancellors name. This is that Harris who hd been Conductor to Oliver Cromwels Forces, and a frequent false Witness against his Majesties good Subjects. On Sunday last his Majesty went to Greenwich to refresh himself for some few hours in that Yaugh which was presented to him from Amster∣dam; which Yaugh or Pleasure-Boat will scarce be equalled by any in these parts of Christendom. On Tuesday (September 4.) the Lord Roberts Nobly entertained his Majesty with a supper at his house at Chelsey. London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho: Newcomb 1660.
