E186_17 53403934 97700
Numb. 28. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Forraign Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday July 2. to Monday July 9. 1660. Coppenhagen June 17. THe Twenty second instant, the Swedes re∣moved their Camp from before this place, and slighted all their Fortifications. They have scattered in all the small places round about us all the forces they had here, amounting to a∣bout 3500 Horse and Foot, and whilst they are busie about the execution of the other Articles of the Treaty, the King of Denmark s preparing a great Fleet, to transport out of this Island all the Swedish Militiaes, who are reported to amount yet to above 10000 men. The two Ambassadors of the States General of the United Provinces, and the English Ambassadors are gone to Stockholm, to congratulate the
Queen Regent of Swedland, upon the conclusion of that Peace; and Mr. Hannibal Seested is likewise to repair thither with two Counsellors of State, of his Danish Majesty, to propound to her Majesty and to the States of that Kingdom an Equivalent instead of the Isle of Bornholme, which by vertue of the same Treaty, is to be restored within a years time to the Crown of Swedland, the other Ambassadors of Holland having order to remain here, untill the Ratification of the said Treaty doth come. Dantzick June 19. 1660. This week the Ambassador that was sent by the Emperor to be present at the Treaty of Oliva, went away for Vienna, as did the Count of Koningsmark, upon the advice he had that the Duke of Curland was reestablished in his Domini∣ons. It is thought that the said Count is gone to Warsow to conclude a strict alliance between Swedland and Poland, for a conjunction of the Forces of both the Crowns against the Muscovites, who are marching with a most potent Army, which is to be commanded by the Grand Duke himself, which hath obliged his Polish Majesty to hasten the Dyet, wherein a successor to the Crown is to be nominated, and the most speedy means how to raise an Army of fourscore thousand men, to be likewise debated. Our Magistrates have sent some Deputies to Warsow, to demand the revocation of some new Impositions laid on all kinde of Merchandizes and Wares; but although our commerce be exceedingly pre∣judiced by it, there is so much the less likelihood of obtain∣ing that demand, in regard the moneys accruing by the said Impositions, are particularly designed for that War, in case the States, upon their next meeting, do not finde some other way to get money for it. Flensburgh, June 22. 1660. The Danish Forces commanded by the Count Eberstein a∣bout Tonningen, having received Orders to march towards
Eyderstede, eight Companies of them are gone into Gluck∣stadt, to reinforce the Garrison there, and the rest are to re∣main in the County of Ennembergh. The young Count onngsmark, who was detained prisoner in Gluckstadt, is released, with General Horn and the other Swedish prisoners. Lubeck, June 25. 1660. All things are making ready for the march of the Imperi∣al Forces that are in Pomerania and Mecklenburgh, as also for the removing of the Swedish Forces out of Zealand, and the Isles of Lland, Falster and Moen. The Swedish Forces are to be transported into Swedland, and into the Archbishoprick of Bremen, and the Imperial Forces to pass into Bohemia, from whence the Emperor doth intend to draw his Forces to be sent into Hungary. It is supposed that a Dyet is to be very suddenly called to make an alliance with the Princes of the Empire, against the Grand Signior. The King of Denmark is likewise to repair very speedily to Flensburgh, to give them the necessary Orders, and to reform his Militia; but it is not thought he will disband his German Forces, which he intends to make use of as occasion shall serve. Wednesday, June 27. This day the Mayor of S. Albans, accompanied with Mr. Foxwist the Recorder, and some of the principal Burgesses his brethren, as the Representatives of the said Corporation, made their humble Address to his Majesty, the Recorder making a short and pithy speech by way of congratulation of his Majesties happy restoration to his Royal throne, and assurance of their loyalty and allegiance to his Majesty, and presented him with a resignation of the Fee farm rent pur∣chased by the Corporation in his Majesties absence, and the arrears incurred in the mean time. Which his Majesty was pleased graciously to accept, and to express his acceptance thereof, and that the Corpo∣ration
should, as occasion required, participate of his Royal grace and favor. I have as I acquainted you in my last, made enquiry into the business of Captain Rolle, which was contradicted in some late Pamphlets; but upon discourse with Sir James Smith and Mr. Calmay, I find that the said Captain Rolle was seised for speaking words, and that Mr. Calmady giving too much credit to him that brought the Note, did in haste signe it. Wednesday, Doctor Colladon Deputy from the Common∣wealth of Geneva, having presented unto his Majesty the Letters of the Lords Seyndies and Magistrates, and of the Pastors and Professors of that place, congratulating his Ma∣jesties happy return and restauration to his Kingdoms: And demanded in their name of his Majesty, the continuation of his Royal favor and good affection towards them. His Ma∣jesty was pleased to return them thanks for the expression of so cordial a respect, and to give the said Deputy a very graci∣ous and acceptable answer upon his demand. His Majesty having been pleased to bestow a Grant for the Degree and Honor of Baronet upon Nicholas Steward of Hartley Mawdit, in the County of Southampton Esq a Pa∣tent passed under the Great Seal of England, for conferring the said Honor and Degree of Baronet upon the said Sir Ni∣cholas Steward accordingly. Whitehall. On Monday last, Colonel Sir John Robinson, Alderman of London, and a Member of this Parliament, was by his Majesty made Lieutenant of the Tower of London; an action most acceptable not only to the City and Parliament, but indeed to the whole Nation, the very Prisoners themselves being glad of his company. The Kingdom having for a long time, by reason of his Majesties absence, been troubled with the Evil, great num∣bers have lately flock'd for cure. His Sacred Majesty on
Monday last touched Two hundred and fifty in the Ban∣quting-house; amongst whom, when his Majesty was de∣livering the Gold, one shuffled himself in out of an hope of profit, which had not been strok'd; but his Majesty pre∣sently discovered him, saying, This man hath not yet been touch'd. His Majesty hath for the future appointed every Friday for the cure; at which time Two hundred, and no more, are to be presented to him; who are first to repair to Mr. Knight his Majesties Chyrurgion, living in the Cross-guns in Russel street, Covent garden, over against the Rose-Tavern, for their Tickets. That none might lose their labor, he thought fit to make it known, that he will be at his hoe every Wednesday and Thursday from two till six of the clock, to attend that service: And if any person of quality shall send to him, he will wait upon them at their lodgings, upon notice given to him. On Tuesday, his Majesty was pleased to be at supper with the Lord Berclay, where he was very highly entertained. His Majesty hath been graciously pleased to make Sir William Compton Brother to the Earle of Northamton, Master of his Majesties Ordnance; Cool William Leg Lievtenant of the Ordnance, Persons that have suffered with his Majesty in all his Troubles: and Major Francis Nicols Sur∣veyor of his Ordnance for his faithfulness in adhering to his Excellency in all these late changes. These following were restored to their Offices being for∣merly put out for serving his Majesty, viz. Edward Sherborne to his place of Clerke to his Majesties Ordnance: Mr. Marsh to his place of Storekeeper, and Mr. Clarke formerly Com∣missary General in his late Majesties Army, to his place of Clarke of the Deliveries. His Majesty conferred on Mr. Hore the Office of Comp∣troller of His Majesties Mint. That the Soldiery may see the affection that his Sacred Majesty hath for the Arm;, he hath been pleased to do them so much honor▪ as to take that Regiment that was lately
Col. Unton Crooks, for his own, which is now stled The Roy∣al Regiment; what the names of the Officers are, you may see in the next. His Highness the Duke of York hath so far honored the Regiment of the Lord Falconberg, as to own it, which is now called the Duke of Yorks Regiment, the Lord Falconberg and the Officers being still continued. From his Excellencies Quarters at the Cockpit. His Excellency hath been pleased lately to change some Officers, and dis∣pose their Commands to others. He hath given th commnd of the roop▪ late Captain Shermans in the Lord Viscount Falklands Rgimnt, to Col. Henry Heylin. The Troop that was late Captain Greenwoods in the same Regiment, to Capt. Tho. Morley. The Company late Major Waterhouses in Col. Daniels Regiment, to Capt. Leonard Aizay. His Excellency hath likewise commissioned Major Adam Brown, brther to Sir Ambrose Brown, to be Major of Sir Anthony Ashley Coopers Regiment, being about to confer a greater honor on Major Harley. Westminster. Phinehas Pain that was lately Committed upon misinforma∣on given, that he was the person that executed his late Maje∣sty, is, upon Examination, discharged. Naples the 5 of June 1660. Our Vice Roy having received an express from the Spanish Ambassador residing at Rome, sent to give him notice of the conclusion of the Peace of the Empire, he caused presently the Te Deum to be sg for it, in the Church of St. James, in the presence of all our Magistrates, and with the noyse of all the Canons of our Castles, and other tokens of joy ordinarily made use of on such occasions. Madrid 9 June 1660. The Order of our Lady of the mercy and redemption of
the Slaves, having sent some Deputys to Algier, about March last, namely some Fryers of the Province of Castille and Andalousia, they brought from thence, about the later end of the last month 36 Slaves, whom they had redeem∣ed, and amongst others severall Moncks of the Orders of St. Dominick, St. Francis and St. Austin. And because the money they carried for that purpose, was not found sufficient for redeeming so great a number; Father Anthonio de Rigo remained as an Ostage, for the performance of the fourth Vow of that Order. The preparations against Portugal are continued every where, but the season being very much spent already, many are of opinion that they will not be made use of this yeare. Rome 12 June 1660. Within these few daies, Monsieur Boncompagno, Arch-Bshop of Bononia, arived here, and having repaired to salute the Pope, he declared him his Magior-Dome. The 5 in∣stant Cardinal Barbarigo, being come to the Palace Quiri∣nal, he received there the Cardinals hat from the Pope's owne hand, after the usuall manner, and having been very sumptuously feasted by Cardinal Chigi, with Cardinal Man∣cini, he began his visits of the Colledge of Cardinalls, by that of Cardinal Barberin, the Sub-Deane of that Colledge. The 6. Cardinal Vecchiacelli, Bishop of Rietti, was con∣secrated in the new Church by Cardinal Rospigliosi, assisted therein by Mr. Signi Archbishop of Thessalonica, and Mr. Caraffa Archbishop of Patrasso. The same day, the young son, of whom the Princess Borghese was lately delivered, was christened in the church of S. Laurence, by Cardinal Chigi, in the Popes behalf, and named Marc Antonio, John Maria, Joseph, Philip, Thomas, Nicholas, Francis, Domi∣nick, Bernardino, Gaspard and Caetan. The next day the Propositions were made for the Bishopricks, and Cardinal d'Este propounded that of Beziers in France, for the Abbot Bonzi.
Venice, June 22, 1660. The 6. instnt, Te Deum was sung in our Cathedral church for the peace between Swedland, Poland, and their Allies. The same day, the Dowager Empress went from hence for uenburgh in Siria, where she will expect the Dutchess of Mn, her mother. Since the confirmation of the news of the defeat of Prince Ragotsky's forces, 6000 men have been commanded to march with all speed towards the frontiers of Hungaria, to join with the Imperial army, and order hath been given to the Commander in chief, to re∣inforce the chiefest garrisons, so that they may hinder the progress of the Turkish army, who seem to have a design to advance that way. But it is thought they will soon alter their resolutions, if what we have heard by letters from thence prove true, that Prince Ragotsky having gathered the remainder of his forces, hath so resolutely fallen on the Turkish army, in a narrow place, that 5 or 6000 of them were slain there, and that he hath regained most of the pri∣soners taken from him. In the mean while, we are confi∣dently informed, that that Prince not finding himself able to oppose the forces that are preing against him, without a very potent assistance, hath offred unto the Emperor to put all the important places of Transilvania into his hands, and wholly to renounce any engagement with the Turkish Empire. Regenspurgh, June 15. The S. instant, the Cardinal of Osnabruck our Bishop had his Synod in this place, where he found about 600 Churchmen of this Diocese, and ended it as he had begun it, by a general Procession.
ADVERTISEMENTS. ☞There is now published that long expected and much-desired work entituled, The second part of the Signal Loyalty and devotion of Gods true Saints and pious Christians under the Gospel (especially in this our Island) to∣wards their Christian Kings and Emperours, whether Orthodox or Heteredon, virtuous or vicious, Protestants or Papists, Protectors or Persecutors, ever since their Kings and Emperours first became Christian, till this present, &c. By Wil∣liam Prynne Esq a Bencher of Lincolus-Inne, and a member of this present Par∣liament, which book is dedicated to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little-Prittain, where all the several works of this learned and pious Author are to be sold. The Grand Scipio, an excellent new Romance, written in French by Monsieur de Vaumoriero, and rendred into English by G. H. Printed for H. Mosely, T. Dring, and H Herringman, and are to be sold at their shops. The third and last volume of the History of Phylosophy, containing the lives of Pythagoras, Democritus, Epicurus, and the rest of the Halick Phylosophers. Printd for H. Mosely and T. Dring, and are to be sold at their shops a the Princes Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard, and at the George in Fleetstreet. Private forms of Prayer fit for sid times; heretofore printed at Oxford, and used (occasionally) upon daies of solemn umliation and fasting, in his late Majesties Royl Chappel of blessed and glorious memory; also a form of prayer for the 30th of January, mrnin and evenig▪ likewise prayers of intercession for the use of such as mourn in scret; together with a colection of several other prayers. Sold by William Not, at the White horse in St. Pauls Church yard. Cromwell's bloody slaughter-house; or his damnable designs laid and practised by him and his Negro's, in conriving the murther of his sacred Majesty King Charles the first, discovered by a person of honor. Sold by Iames Davis at the Grey-hound in St. Pauls Church yard. The price is 12 d. The death of Charles the first lamented with the restauration of Charles the Second congratulated; delivered  speech at the proclaiming of our gracious King, as his Town of Wellington, May 17. 1660. By William Langley, late of Licheld, Minister now of Welington, his Majesties faithful, loyal subject. Sold by Richad Lownds at the white Lyon in St. Pauls Church yard, and Sym. Gape, net to Hercules Pillar in Fleetstreet. The law of charitable use; whrin the Statute of 43, Eliz. Chap 4. is set forth and explied; with directions how to sue out and prosecute Commissions grounded upon that Statute. Also Prsents Inquisitions, and Decrees, with divers Judge∣ments, and Resolutions upon eptions and Appeals against Decrees, and other proceedings upon the said Sttute by Iohn Herne. Sold by Timothy Twyford, s his shop within the aner-Temple-gate.
☞A Leather Portmanteau lost at Sittingburn or Rochester, when his Majesty came thither, wherein was a suit of Camolet de Holland, with 2 little laces in a seam, tight pair of white gloves, and a pair of Doc lether; about twenty yards of sky-coloured Ribbon twelve penny broad, and a whole piece of black Ribbon ten penny broad; a cloth lead colour'd cloak, with store of linnen, a pair of shooes, slippers, a Montero, and other things; all which belong to a Gentleman (a near Servant to his Majesty) who hath been too long imprisoned and Sequestred, to be now robbed, when all men hope to enjoy their own. If any can give notice, they may leave word with Mr. Samuel Mene his Majesties Book-binder at his house in Little-Britain, and they shall be thankfully rewarded. Captain Edward Ranger Foot-post of Dover is restored to his place, having been deprived thereof ever since the year 1648. for his Loyalty to his late Majesty, and lodg∣eth at the Star on Fish street-Hill. WHereas there is a Pamphlet lately published, with no name to it, wherein amongst many accusations of several persons, Tho. Viner, Alderman of London (be∣ing Sheriff of London when his Prince was murthered) is said to be then present: This is to acquaint you, that it is a false aspersion, he being not there when that horrid execu∣tion was done, but did declare his detestation of so foul and vile an act. And whereas the Pamphleteer further saith, that the said Alderman Viner got well by ordering the massy heaps of plate for the Mint, that is also false, he never having the or∣dering of any of the Publick massy heaps of plate for the Mint, nor did he at any time finger one penny of the Pub∣licks money. Sir Iohn VVitterong, who had disbursed several great sums of money upon many of his Maiesties pictures, to preserve them from worse hands, did lately present them all to his Maiesty gratis. Mr. Combes lately restored to his Maiesty Land belonging to the Crowne, which he had purchased at a considerable value at Hemsted in Hertfordshire. The like was done by the Town at the same time that had purchased the other part. His Maiesty was pleased to make Mr. Combes Steward thereof. There is a particular List given unto his Maiesty of the names of all such as have bought his Maiesties Lands, and what they bought, whereby it may fairly be expected that they will be as just to his Maiesty as those honest Gent. of Hertfordshire have been.
Hamburgh, June 17. The Swede and Pole make themselves ready to fall on the Muscovite, who is much distressed by the incursion of the Tartar, who falling into Russia, gave the Muscovite a great overthrow, sack'd and harras'd the Country, and carried away many thousand slaves. On the other side the Cossacks are faln in, destroying all they meet with. The Muscovites that are hemm'd in at Lochwith, it's thought cannot get off without great loss, though the Muscovite dreins all his Garrisons to make a body to re∣lieve their Army there. The white Russians have made a confederacy to joyn with the Pole against their Lord and Emperour of Russia, as soon as the Pole shall march into the Field with a considerable Army. The Polish General Carnetzky hath defeated the Muscovy General Cowingzky, and cut him off 7000 men, who is retreated with the rest toward the Wilda at Lachowitz. There is a discourse here, that the Swede having yet his Fleet that was kept in by Vice-Admiral de Ruyter at liberty, will joyn with o∣thers at Landscrown and Gottenburgh to infest Arch-An∣gelo and destroy the Muscovite there. The Poles have taken Buckowa, which cost the Muscovites so many years siege, so that Muscovy is now reduced to a very sad con∣dition. They thirst after peace, which if not granted them they threaten to cut their Governour Nassorkin in pieces, and extirpate his whole Generation. Burdeaux, Iune 29. 1660. The 24 instant, the Queen made her devotions in the Covent of the Carmelites, Nuns of this place, and the next day their Majesties did the like in the Church of Saint Andrew. The 25, all the Corporations of this place had their audience, being conducted thereto by M. de Saintot, Master of the Ceremonies, and at night there was a Spa∣nish Comedy at Court, where the Count de Fuensaldagna and all the other Grandees were present. The 26, the Town-house gave to their Majesties the divertisement of a
great fire-work erected before their Majesties lodgings. The 27, their Majesties went aboard the great Boat pre∣sented to them by our Jurates at Cadillac, and departed, our Cannon playing all that while, with several volleys of the Kings Musketeers, who went before in two great boats, and were followed in a third boat by his Majesties Trumpe∣ters. The boat wherein were their Majesties was drawn by three barks, in each of which were twelve men rowing in blew coats, laced with silver lace, and the rest of the Court followed in several other Boats, which made a lit∣tle, but very pleasing Fleet. Whitehall. On Wednesday the fourth of July, the Mayor, Recor∣der, Aldermen, and capital Burgesses of the corporation of Doncaster, in the County of York, having the honor to be introduced to his Majesty by the Earl of Dunfreeze, Lord Castleton, and Sir John Dawney, for a demonstration of their loyalty, duty and affection to his Majesty, humbly presented by the hands of Thomas Bradford their Mayor, a congratulatory Address, wherein they returned all possi∣ble thanks to Almighty God, who had been graciously pleased to restore his Majesty to his people, and his people to his Majesties Government, ingaging themselves to de∣fend his Majesties sacred person and Government against all opposers, and therewith the Mayor tendered a surren∣der of a Fee-farm rent of 74 l. 13 s. 11 d. ob▪ per annum, an ancient Flower of the Crown, which being in these times exposed to sale, they had redeemed out of other hands, and now joyfully restored them to his Majesty, both which his Majesty was pleased very graciously to accept of, and returned them thanks, with many particular ex∣pressions of affection and favour to that Town. The same day Doctor yam, a person of great learning and integri∣ty, who attended his sacred Majesty in his troubles, as long as his age did enable him to travel, was this day sworn Chaplain Extraordinary to his Majesty.
On Thursday his Sacred Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, were entertained by the City of London at Guild-hall; the unseasonable weather took off much of the solemnity which was intended to be performed, so that his Majesty went into London attended onely by his own houshold guards, which proceeded in this order, Aju∣tant General Miller rode before at some little distance to make way, after whom went Sir William Throckmorton, now Knight Marshal, his footmen and servants waiting on either side of him, before six Trumpets, then a Kettle-Drum, another Class of seven Trumpets, six Maces, the Heralds in rich coats, the pages and footmen, and next his Majesties Coach with six horses, guarded on both sides with his Majesties Royal Band of Pensioners (walking on foot with their pistols in their hand, under the Command of the most noble and valient E. of Cleaveland their Cap∣tain) the Equires and several of his Majesties servants, next them came the Yeomen of the Guard, then the Lord Chancellor in his Coach, the Duke of Buckingham in his, and so all the Nobility in their order. The Speaker of the House of Commons in his Coach and six horses, attended by a troop of horse that were upon their guard that day, and after him the House of Commons in Coa∣ches. In London several of the pent-houses and windows were adorned with Tapestry, a lane made by the Liveries of the several Companies, and many Pageants in the streets. In St. Pauls Church-yard, the Lord Mayor, Al∣dermen, and several others of the City richly accoutred met his Majesty, and from thence conducted him to Guild-hall. The Gentlemen of the Artillery led by the most valient and learned John Lord Lucas, at Cheapside opened to the right and left, and guarded both sides of the way whilst his Majesty passed through. Being come to Guild-hall, Carpets were spread from the Hall down to the Council-Chamber for his Majesty to tread on. Before dinner Sir William Wild the Recorder made a
Speech to his Majesty, declaring the great honor that his Majesty was pleased to bestow on them in deigning for∣merly to send to them his most gracious Letter and Decla∣ration, and now to adde to that kindness, by affording them his Royal presence, &c. At the upper end of the great Hall, the Hosting towards the West was raised three ascents, where was placed a Chair of State, and a rich Ca∣nopy, where his Majesty and his two Royal Brothers di∣ned, where his Majesties servants, and several Aldermen and Common-Council-men attended. The House of Peers, and House of Commons dined at other tables in the great Hall, attended likewise by Alder∣men and Common-Council-men; at the sound of the loud musick the whole service was set on the Table, and during the whole dinner time they were entertained with variety of musick, both instrumental and vocal. After dinner was a very costly banquet, and then an in∣terlude, where a Rustick was represented, to the content of his Majesty, and the rest of the spectators. After this his Majesty retired him into a with-drawing room, where he was pleased to confer the honour of Knighthood on Alderman Reynoldson, Mr. Cleyton, the Chamberlain of London, and Colonel Player his son. On Friday July 6. The Mayor and Citizens of the an∣cient City of Lincoln, having drawn up an humble Ad∣dress to his Majesty, together with a resignation of their Fee-farm rent of 81 l. per annum under their Common Seal, did send the same by Robert Marshal Esq and VVilli∣am South Gent. unto Sir Tho. Meres and Iohn Monson Esq who now serve in Parliament for the said City, which was this day delivered. After a Speech first made by Sir Tho. Meres unto his Sacred Majesty, in behalf of the City of Lincoln, repre∣senting unto his Majesty how oft and how much that City had suffered in the late War, and how loyal and faithful the Citizens thereof do continue unto his Majesty, and
that as the want of his Majesties Government was their decay, so he being peaceably re-establish'd, they hope to repair their lesses under his protection and favour, he deli∣vered his Majesty this Address. To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. YOur Majesties most obedient Subjects, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and Commonalty of your Maje∣sties antient City of Lincoln, do humbly prostrate them∣selves before your Majesty, acknowledging that through the general defection of your Majesties Subjects in this your Kingdome from their Allegiance, occasioned by the prevalency of the late pretended powers, they were there∣in involved with tbe rest of your Majesties Subjects; and therefore do most humbly and submissively apply them∣selves, and lay hold on your Majesties most gracious Par∣don, and through and under your Majesties gracious fa∣vour and clemency do with all humility, as a body incor∣porate, present to your Majesty their sense and apprehen∣sion of Gods mercy to your Majesties Subiects (giving God the praise) that Divine Providence hath not onely preserved your sacred person in the midst of many and e∣minent dangers, but likewise hath made restauration of your Maiesty in peace to your Subjects, and of them to their Allegiance to your most gracious Maiesty, as their un∣doubted Soveraign; next they present their hopes and prayers for prosperity and blessings from Almighty God upon your sacred Maiesty, and your Government over them as their King, and beg your protection of their per∣sons and estates by the antient and known Laws of your Kingdom, and your Maiesties aforesaid City of Lincoln, & the incorporate body thereof do with al humble submission to your Maiesty acknowledg, that during the prevalency of the late pretended powers over them, and the rest of your
Subjects, to avoid the mischiefs and pressures which in all probability might have occured, if the Fee farm due from your said City had come into the hands and power of such as might have made use of the purchase of it, to have invded their priviledges and interests. Your aforesaid City upon the account of ivitable necessity, and self-preservation, were constrained to borrow the sum of seven hun∣dred pounds, wherewith to purchase the aforesaid Fee-farm of eighty and one pounds per annum. Now may it please your most Excellent Majesty, your aforesaid Subjects, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and Comonalty of the City of Lincoln, do hereby for themselves and their Successors. Freely and humbly surrender and resign unto your most Sacred Majesty, all the right & interest which they have or may pretend to the said Fee-farm rent, by reason of the aforesaid purchase: And do also humbly de∣clare, That your said City will yearly render to your Majesty, as your undoubted right and due, from time to time, as it becomes payable; and will further with all readiness freely do or make ay further De∣claration or publique Act, as your Majeties Learned Council shall devise, for confirmation of these presents, or contents of them. And in testimony of the unanimous, full and free consent of the whole body incorporate of your Majesties said City, they have cau∣sed to be put to their common Seal, the six and twentieth day of June, in the twelfth year of your Majesties most gracious Reign ov Eng∣land, Scotland, France, and Ireland, &c. His Majesty was pleased most graciously to receive the Address, with several expressions of favour: and then Sir Tho. Meres did a second time humbly upon his knee beseech his Majesty hereafter to vouchsafe his favour to that ancient City; which his Majesty granted accordingly, and as an earnest thereof gave them the honor of his Ma∣jesties hand. At his Excellencies Quarters at the Cock pit. His Excellency makes it his whole business to settle the Army as may be most to his Majesties Service, and in order thereunto hath removed several Officers, and put others in their places. He hath lately remo∣ved Capt. Pase nd Capt. Charlitn of Col. Alsop's Regiment be∣longing to the Garison of Dunkirke, and put Capt, Pope and Capt▪ Richard Powel in their places. There is a very confident report that M. Scos, one that sate in the pretended High Court of Justice, for tryal of his late Majesty of ever∣blessed memory, is now Prisoner at Dunkirke. London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.
