A3662 E199_15 E199_16 99858966 157514
A MOST NOBLE SPEECH Spoken by the LORD CAMBEL OF LORNE. One of his Majesties most Honourable Privie Counsell of SCOTLAND. Moving the Lords HOVSE in Scotland, in his Maiesties presence, for the prevention of such Advantages; whereby Incendiaries may in the vacancy of Parliaments, any way extort from his Highnesse Procla∣mations, to inforce the bringing in of Innovations into the Kirke; or confirming of Monopolies, that so all Oppressions may be removed from his Majesties Subjects of both Kingdomes. As also, an Honourable REPLY Made by the Lord Lowden, against such, who objected a∣gainst his former SPEECH. London, Printed by B. Alsop, 1641.
A MOST NOBLE SPEECH SPOKEN BY THE Earle of Argile, Lord of Lorne, &c. Competitour for the Chancellor-ship. MY LORDS, WHat was more to bee wished for on Earth, then the great happinesse, this day wee enjoy? viz. To see his Royall Majesty, our Native Soveraigne, and his loyall Subjects of both Kingdomes, so really reconciled, and united: that his Maiesty is piously pleased to grant unto us his Subiects, our lawfull demands concerning Religion and Liberties, and wee his Subjects of both Nations, cheerfully rendring to his Maiesty, that duty, affection, and assistance, which he hath just cause to expect from good People, and each Nation concurring in a bro∣therly amity, unity, and concord, one towards the other? O what Tongue is able to expresse the Honour and Praise due to that great and good God, who in those late
Commotions, suffered not the prudent Counsels of either Kingdomes to despaire of the safety of either Commonwealth: but through his blessing to their painfull and prudent En∣deavours, hath wrought such a happinesse for us, that after the great toyle and trouble, wee have so long on both sides endured, we may now each man, with his wife, children, and friends, under his owne Vine, and Figtree (and all under his Maiesties Gracious protection) refresh himselfe with the sweet fruits of peace: which I beseech the Lord of Peace make perpetuall to both Nations. Now my earnest desire is, that our best studies and en∣deavours, may be spent in contriving, and enacting such wholesome Lawes; whereby (as much as in us lyes) the opportunity and occasion of producing such Calamities, as lately threatned to fall upon both Nations, may be prevent∣ed, if in any Age hereafter such miscreants shall goe about to attempt it. It is notorious, that the late Incendiaries that occasio∣ned the great differences, betwixt his Maiesty and his Sub∣jects, tooke much advantage and courage, by the too long in∣termission of the happy Constitution of Parliaments. In the vacancy of which, they by false Information, in∣censed his Maiesty against his Loyall subiects; and by their vile insinuations extorted from his Highnesse Proclamati∣ons, for obedience to their Innovations in the Kirk, and Pat∣tents for Proiects: whereby the poore Subiect was both polled, and oppressed in his Estate, and enthralled in his Con∣science. And thus by their wicked Practises, his Maiesty was distasted, and his subiects generally discontented: in so much, that had not the great mercy of God prevented them, they had made an obstruction betwixt his Maiesty, and his liege People, and had broken those mutuall & indissoluble bonds of Protection and Allegeance.
Whereby J hope his Majesty, and his loyall subjects of all three Kingdomes, will be ever bound together: to which let all the subiects say, Amen. My Lords, The distaste of his Majesty, nor discontents of his Subiects, could never have growne to that height they did (nor consequently have produced such effects) had there not bin such an interposition by those Innovators and Projectors, betwixt his Majesty our glorious Sunne, and us, his loyall Subjects: that his goodnesse could neither ap∣peare to us, nor their disloyalty and our obedience to him. For no sooner was that happy Constellation, the Parliament in England raised, and those vaporous Clouds dissipated; but his Maiesties goodnesse, his subiects Loyalty, and their trea∣chery evidently appeared. Our Brethren of England finding the Intermission of Par∣liaments, to be prejudiciall and dangerous to the State, have taken a course for the frequent holding of them; whose pru∣dent Example, J desire may be our Patterne: forthwith to obtaine his Maiesties Royall assent for the same. By which meanes, his Maiesty may in due time, heare, and redresse the Grievances of his Subjects, and his subjects cheerefully (as need shall require) ayd and assist his Maiesty: and not onely the Domestique peace, and quiet of each Kingdome preserved; But likewise all Nationall differences (if any happen) by the wisedome of the Assemblies of both Kingdomes, from time to time, reconciled and determined, to the perpetuating of the happy Peace, and Vnion of both Nations.
