B2890 E626_25 99865694 165838
CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS Sent by the STATES OF HOLLAND, TO THE Lords Embassadors of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND: WHEREIN, They desire, that the ancient Amity may be continued between both States; And that they may be aiding and assisting to each other, against all persons whatsoever, that shall be disturbant to them. Also, a discovery of several plots of divers English and Scotch Cavaliers; And their intentions to murther the Lord St John, Mr Fairfax, and young Dorislaus. With, the States of Hollands Message to the Queen of Bohemia; Concerning the uncivil behaviour of her Son, Prince Edward, towards the Lords Embassadours and their Followers: And the States Order he should be tried by a Court of Justice. Together with an exact Diurnal of each days Progress and Proceedings, from the last of March, to the sixth of April. 1651. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood. 1651.
A Message sent by the States of Hol∣land, to the Queen of Bohemia; Concerning the uncivil behaviour of her son Prince Edward, towards the Lords Embassadours of Eng∣land, and their Attendants. SIR, MY last to you from hence, told you of the in∣solent carriage of the Cavaliers, and divers French Desperaoes; which is no whit abated: For lately, as two of your Embassadours Gentlemen were going home in the Evening, they hapned to light upon three Frenchmen, who taking occasion to justle them, without speaking drew forth their Pi∣stols and fired, but God be thanked they mist them; whereupon my Lords Gentlemen drew, and then there arose a great tumult in the street, and the peo∣ple having separated them, demanded their cause of quarel, whereupon the French to justifie their own
actions, laid the blame upon the Embassadours Gen∣tlemen, and so the business was husht up. Young Dorislaus and a cousin of my Lord Fairfax, likewise named Fairfax, are threatned above all others. There are several Scotchmen likewise, that have taken a divelish Oath, protesting the death of my Lord St. John; [threaten'd folk live long] but no doubt, the wisdom of this State will take order to curb and quiet these ranting humours. Many Scots and English Cavaliers come daily rushing into Town, as if some Design were a brewing. And they report up and down here, that Cromwel is dead, and that Massey hath routed and kild two thousand of his men, and an hundred such incredible stories, wherein the Roya∣lists abound, even to the making of themselves ridi∣culous. Yet this doth effect so much, that it often puts our cautious Statesmen to a stand, and makes some stagger, till they are certified by the next week or the next fortnights Post of the contrary; and then (perhaps) the Cavaliers have some other new story on foot, which takes off their resolutions for ano∣ther fortnight. The Portugal Embassadour hath given them a neat slip, and left good store of debts behinde him. Many of the English Cavalry are bound for Scotland, where (they say) their King is gotten to be Master, and that all Lads whatsoever are admitted into his Ar∣my; and many of them lye ready at Roterdam for a Winde to transport them thither. I much wondred a long time, why the Blades made such enquiry up and down, if all were quiet in England, it seems they had a plot in conception which proved abortive.
Sir, I have likewise sent you a representation of our daily proceedings, which are as followeth: The last of March, stylo novo, a Fast was kept at my Lord Embassadours, to implore a blessing upon our present proceedings; Mr. Dingley, Mr. Nye, and Mr. Goodwin exercised severally, and at supper we fell into an English mode of dyet, with great con∣tentment and abundance; for then my Lords began the world upon their own accompt. The first of April, some of the Gentlemen went with my Lord St. John to the new House, who was not very well for want of ayr; for the old House, was little and close. The second, being the Lords day, we had two ser∣mons, the one preached by Mr. Nye, the other by Mr. Dingey; and that morning information came to my Lords, desiring Mr. Doriaus to have a care of himself; for there were some threatned his life. The third in the morning, my Lords, and most of the Gentlemen, some on horse-back, the rest in coa∣ches, went into the Wood set with many fine walks and trees, to take the air; and as they entered, they met Prince Edward (one of the Queen of ohemia's sons) walking on foot, with the Princess his sister, by the hand. He cald to my Lords Coach, and told them they were rogues, and grinded his teeth at the rest, calling them dogs. But my Lord St. John's Groom following on horse-back, leading my Lords saddle-horse in his hand, the Prince strook him on the back parts with his hat, but the horse flinging up his heels had like to have laid his honour at his feet. My Lord rode about the Wood, and returned to dinner.
After dinner he went abroad again, to take the ayr at Scheveling, and was much pleased with the place, it lying a mile from the Hague, upon the Sea∣shore. We returned about five or six a clock. The fourth, sixe of the States who were appoint∣ed Commissioners to treat with their Lordships, (viz. Mr. Cemeren, Ereren Eoon, De Vett, Reinswood, Andree, and Valfs,) came this day the first time. My Lords received them at the door, and the Gentle∣men went up stairs, and made a Lane for them to pass through: they staid about half an hour with my Lords, gave them some complements, and re∣ceived some propositions, which they carried away with them. It seems the Embassadours complained to some of the States, of the ill language which Prince Ed∣ward gave them yesterday; whereupon it was Or∣dered, that three of them should go to the queen of Bohemia, to let her know how ill they resented the business, and to know of her, whether they were not Masters of their own Country? And to enquire how the Prince durst break any order they had made? And withall, to certifie her, that he should severely suffer for his contempt: This Message be∣ing delivered to the Queen, in the presence of her son Eward, he would willingly have excused the busi∣ness, and said; that some of the Embassadours fol∣lowers gave him (as he was walking with a Lady) the first affront, which was the occasion that he re∣turned them that uncivil language. It is reported, that the said Prince is going towards Franckendale, for the Letters that came this Week
from Grmany inform us, that the King of Spain hath sent an express, for the retoing of ranckendae to the Prince Elector. ut the States are resolved [be∣fore he departeth] to bring him before a Court of JƲSTICE, to teach him to keep a better tongue in his head another time; and we expect to have him severely dealt withal. The Queens Court is grown very mute about this business, and Prince Edward is much startled at it. The fifth of April, the Lords Embassadours get up by seven a clock in the morning, and rode on horse-back with some of their Gentlemen, to the University of Leyden, where having rode through the Town, and viewed the Academy and other ra∣rities, returned about midday. In the afternoon, the Princess Royal came by my Lord Embassadours house, in a Coach with six hor∣ses, all in mourning, and two more coaches (in the same equipage) attending her; it seems she is not gone with the Duke her brother, as was reported: certain it is, she did resolve to go, but upon encou∣ragements frome some, she staid. It is to bee feared, that though her husband be dead, too many of his creatures are alive: yet doubtless, the States see so much of their own interest in ours, that we shall re∣ceive a quick and cordial dispatch. Though I hear, that there came once hither a French Embassadour, about business of a far less import, which he thought to have dispatched in a moneths time, but was fain to stay thirteen, before he could make an end of it. But (we hope) their goodness (perhaps) our own discretion, will not permit us to do so.
The States about three a clock this afternoon, sent the Commissioners appointed to treat with our Em∣bassadours, who were entertained by their Lordships with much respect; who delivered certain paprs from the States directed to their Lordships, wherein they propose; First, that the old Correspondencies and Amity between the two States may be preserved and renewed; Secondly, that they may enter into a more strict Confederacy; And lastly, that one should be aiding and assisting unto another, against all per∣sons whatsoever that should disturb them. The States have referred Prince Edwards business to be determined speedily in a Court of Justice; and without question it concerns them to see us have Ju∣stice in this particular; For it was England received the affront done by that petty Prince, whose Nur∣sing was paid for out of the English Exchequer: And therefore we are confident those in power here a∣mong the Dutch, cannot but consult so far with their own honors, as to make a the Vindication, answerable to the crime. The young P. of Orange hath been much troubled with convulsion fits, insomuch that it was commonly reported he departed in one of those fits; but since he is recovered, and is now in health. There is daily expected here, an Embassadour from the King of Scotland, whose entertainment we de∣sire to take a view of, for thereby we may guess whether they are really affected to the Common∣wealth of England or not. Take this from the hand of Your humble Servant, EDWARD BILL. FINIS.
