C7620 E176_17 99859777 111874
A CURB FOR SECTARIES AND BOLD PROPHECIERS: By which Richard Farnham the Weaver, Iames Hunt the Farmer, M. Greene the Feltmaker, and all other the like bold Propheciers and Sect Leaders may be bridled and kept within their own beaten way, And the Sacred and weightie worke of the Ministery bee reserved to men, whom education fits, God cals, and good order in our Church prefers thereunto. A matter very considerable in these present times? Doe men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Math. 7 16. LONDON, Printed, 1641.
To the zealous but misled followers of Preachers in Corners. SIRS, THe English Proverb sayes, None is more bold then blind Baiard, and the compari∣son holds well, making Zeal joyned with igno∣rance like to mettle in a blind Horse, which renders him mischievous, rather then usefull. The Pharisees said, they saw, but were indeed blind Lea∣ders of the blinde, till both fell into the ditch; and God fired Ierusalem for their misled Zeal. Beware of following their like. As of old, so in these latter days, there are false Prophets saith Saint Paul, Their methods and sleights are subtile to deceive you, their skill very shallow and meane to informe you. The wiseman hath his eyes in his head, and seeth this. And if you will not put your garment to a Botcher, nor trust your sick bodie to be cured by a Quack∣saver; Will you submit your souls guidance to them, whom your itching eares, and self will, and blinde humour affects? A Prophet or sonne of a Prophet would have more to say: but the glasse following, if you have eies to see, may give you a sight of your Leaders defects, and your own fancies.
A Curb for Sectaries and bold Propheciers. Every man is not fit to take upon him the Ministery.SAint Paul, a Master builder in Gods house, having spoken of bringing men to ever∣lasting life by the Ministery of men, saith, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. The question implyes, that it is not an easie matter to be fitted for this sacred work. In many respects therefore a singular care is to be taken, what persons be admitted to so great a charge: and that, 1 Because they are either a savour of life to life, or a savour of death to death to their hearers. Their office must needes bee of much circumspection and trust, seeing the issues of it are of so great con∣cernment. 2 The titles given them shew, as the excellencie, so the weightinesse of their office, for they are called Husbandmen in Gods field, Planters, and Waterers in his Garden: Want of skill in managing this charge may produce thornes, thistles, weeds. They are Gods Shepherds, and have their flocks, as sheep apt to strey; if they heedfully prevent it not; They are Stewards of the heavenly mysteries, Teachers in Gods steed, co-workers with God, Watch mē, Overseers of others, Embassadors. They are the Lights of the World; and God, when he gave Lights to the World, took a view
of them, to see that they were good: and seeing Dea∣cons must first bee tryed, and then Minister, if they bee found faithfull; much-more must Workmen of higher place not have hands laid suddenly upon them, nor run before they be sent, nor take a calling upon them, un∣lesse a Titus or Timothy, put in place to that end, ordain them, and appoint them to the work. 3 The treasures which God intrusts them to com∣municate to others are comprised in the sacred Scrip∣tures, and are of so great depth, and so large extent, and have points so many and so considerable that we must resume that of St. Paul, who is sufficient for these things? let us look into the particulars. Of skill in the first Table re∣quisite in the Clergie.In the first place, the knowledg of God and his worship, and all the circumstances thereof, cannot soundly and truly be taught but by those whom Gods spirit enables thereunto, and pious education hath fit∣ted for the worke. 2 The performances of man to man, of Kings, of sub∣ordinate Rulers,In the second Table. spirituall and temporall, in all degrees; the subjection required of al inferiours; all duties com∣manded concerning preservation of our persons, mo∣dest and chast behaviour, true dealings in possessions & outward goods, truth in our ordinary speech, and wit∣nessing in cases of difference, the not desiring and co∣veting in heart, what is not ours. These all with their circumstances have so many cases of conscience be∣longing unto them, & to be discussed concerning them, that large volumes scarce serve so to unfold them but that other cases will still be emergent.And in cases of conscience. In Politicks.So that, 1 policie and government of States and Kngdomes. 2 Christian cariage, conversation in
Heaven, and civill deportment of all private persons, in all callings and places, of all trades and professions for all things generally concerning them,Ethicks. and for many particulars, are not so left to naturall reason, and hu∣mane discretion, but that they may borrow their best rules from Scriptures.Oeconomicks. So that the government of a people, and whole Countrey, private mens own Reli∣gious behaviour, and pious ordering their families may be learned from the holy Scriptures lawes, and the practice of Moses, David, and sundry other Saints of God, who for their circumspect walking both in pri∣vate and publique life be greatly renowned. 3 Seeing in the old Testament we have Gods laws amply de∣scribed in Moses,Skill in law of divers kinds is grounded on Gods Law. and further opened and enlarged in the Prophets, and the New Testament afterwards, the equity and ground of many of those laws of God are of use for tryall of all kind of Lawes, whether naturall, civill, Canon, or common Law, which in severall Nations have their use. None of all these may bee repugnant to Gods Law, but subordinate thereunto with reference to the condition of severall Nations. 3 The Old Testament comprehends in briefe the History of the World for almost 4000. yeeres;Skill in Histo∣rie requisite in the Clergie. it de∣clares the creation, and mans defection, the VVorlds drowning & reparation; how Gods Truth was proga∣ted & the Church enlarged; what was the practice, & faith of Gods redeemed people; how many oppositi∣ons and malitious persecutions befell them by the E∣domites, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines, Egyptians, As∣syrians, Babylonians, Persians, Grecians, and others, and how God plagued these Nations for their mischie∣vousnesse and crueltie: The New Testament unfolds
the History of Christ our Saviours life and death, the planting of the Christian Church, the doctrine of the holy Apostles after Christs Ascention. In these are many weighty points to be discussed, some varietie in circumstances to be reconciled, and the sweet harmo∣ny of both Testaments to be explaned? Skill in Chro∣nologie.4 How frequently is the account of times recorded in the old Testament, and sometime in the new? That wee might not confine it to the old, as a matter then onely considerable; The holy Ghost hath rolated the times of Gods mercies and judgments on the World, as a light and lustre to story, as a preserver of order, & confirmer of certaintie in Narration, and Man ought seriously to consider the same. For the Husb and man is not more observant of fit seasons, for his Countrey affaires, then God hath beene of due times in his dea∣lings with men, and managing matters in the field of the World for mans good. In Geography.5 Who can well understand the dispersion of Noahs sonnes, and their children, and the speeches often run∣ning upon them, and the places of their habitation, and how they came to entermeddle with Gods people? Who can rightly distinguish of the Rivers, Mountains, and Cities mentioned in sacred Writ, if he be not ac∣quainted with Geographie? In the deep se∣crets of Pro∣phesiers.In Gods Booke there are many prophecies, which declare deep and hidden secrets by expressions excel∣lent and much surpassing the ordinary straine. Many of these are to be searched into and cleered, as by other plainer Scriptures, so by the Histories of the World, which before Christs time were of vast comprehensi∣on, and of far greater since, in regard of the Gospells
entertainment, or abuse & rejection now in many more parts of the world. What knowledge, what study, and meditation is together with the assistance of Gods spirit required for the opening of these prophesies, which are rich and comfortable treasures left to GODS Church? In the know∣ledge of na∣ture.7 For the cleering and explaning many Scriptures it is requisite to have good skill in many naturall mat∣ters; not onely because the wisdome and power of the Creatour is seen to be wonderfull in the Creatures, but also because God often in Scripture speaks of the Eagle, Ravens, Stork; of Cedars, Vines, Alguims; of Dromedaries, Badgers, and Lions of divers kinds▪ of the Leviathan and the Tannin or Diacon of the Sea, and of many other matters in nature which are often made use of for mans information: and therefore tis ex∣pedient that these matters should be made brown. In the Hebrew and Greek tongues, &c.8 Seeing the old Testament is written for the most part in the Hebrew tongue, and some few passages in the Chaldee, it must necessarily be that there are some difficulties in our Translations, which cannot be per∣fectly looked into without the knowledge of these tongues. There are also some objections of men erro∣neous on both hands, which cannot possibly bessolved without very good skill in these tongues. Rare French and German words cannot be well knowne, but of the skilfull French and German, nor rate Hebrew words but of the learned Iews; And seeing the Hebrew tongue is now no where purely spoken, nor extant unmixt, but in the Bible, some hard words in this tongue are to be knowne by the tongues most neere to the Hebrew, as the Syriack and Arabick: for a word seldome used in
Hebrew may be more frequent in them. And for the new Testament it is written in the Greek tongue, which is very copious and elegant, and hath many words of ambiguous use and signification. It hath also some Latine words as Denarion and Taberne, and some He∣brew and Syriack, as Corban, Maranath, and divers o∣thers: What study for skill herein is requisite? Be∣sides in the New Testament be many forms of speech borrowed from the Old, many Hebraismes, many short and deep speeches inexplicable without confe∣rence with some speciall clauses of the Old. And how often in many passages of both Testaments is mention made of the customes, manners, and conditions of se∣verall Nations in the World, of their Gods and Idola∣trous worship? In Rhetorick.9 How many lofty and brave strains of Eloquence, in Esay and the Prophets, in Paul & the Revelation, would seeme strange and be unknown? how many admirable and sublime carriages of speech and figures far beyond the best Heathen Oratours would be unobserved; did not the art of Rhethorike begun of old and perfected in these latter times, and applyed to sacred use, lend her helping hand? In Logick.10. How often should wee erre in the context of Scripture, what improbable deductions would thence be strained, how many sound proofes for necessary Doctrines and conclusions would be unobserved, had we not together with the spirit of GOD, which is the principall, the use of Logick all Rules, as a good ac∣cessory? Gods providence protects his servants, yet do they gird on their swords in their journeys, and the Spirit of God doth leade us into all sacred truth, yet
Art is not to be refused to keep us from being surpri∣zed by spirituall thieves. But some object, The Apo∣stles, and so we, by the Spirit of God can doe more good then any by his Art. Answer. Speak to the Jews, Indians, Spantards, and others among us, as the Apo∣stles did to severall Nations, though not educated to their tongues, and we will much the rather credit your ability to teach us the truth (which you pretend Ar∣tists misse of) in our own tongue. Besides, the question is not whether you by the spi∣rit (which you presume to have) can by it alone doe more, then others by art alone, but whether more then others, who have the spirits assistance as well as you; and also education at some Gamaliels feet, as Paul had. Gods Spirit knew, how to make use of Art, when Moses brought up in the Egyptian learning was called to the Government of Israel, when Aholiah and Beza∣leel were chosen for the work of the Tabernacle, when Jubals invention was taken in to the furnishing of Da∣vids Quire. Did yee know Art, or the right use of Art, yee would not dis-esteem it. In the ancient Fathers.11 How many passages in the ancient Fathers of the Christian Church acquaint us with Gods goodnesse to his servants, shew the Heresies reigning in their dayes, and their Arguments against the same? How often doe they open difficulties in Scripture, in which we, had they not gone before us, might have erred? Doe not they declare how far they were from Papisticall superstitions and errours on the one hand, and from fanatical fancies and groundlesse opinions on the other hand? Object. They had their infirmities and did in some things erre. Answer. If yee have rob'd the
Pope of his Chaire, and have an unerring certainty, throw the first stone at them. Remember Michaiahs accusers, and the horns which smote him. Goe not about to take the moat out of their eye, if yee have a beam in your own. Give the ancient Fathers their due, and know that there is good use of them. In controver∣sies of divers kinds.12 How large is the field of Polemicall Divinitie and Controversie? How necessary is it to have the Ar∣guments of Papists. Atheists, Turks, and severall Se∣ctaries well answered? Why should misprisions in Historie, Prophesies, tongues, cases of conscience and the like, goe unconfuted to the great prejudice of Chri∣stian truth? Why should not the abuse of Logick and other Arts be called to account by such as have the true use thereof? Let then Polemicall skill and School Divinitie rightly managed have its due place and esteeme. Of this large extent are matters to be studied by the Clergie, things Spirituall, Temporall, Eternall, treated on in Scripture, are within their taske. In regard where∣of I propound these questions to any indifferent Reader. 1 Whether persons, educated in Manuary Trades, and spending their time therein, can possibly attaine to so different kinds of knowledge, and bee able to con∣firme truth and answer doubts: which professed Stu∣dents (suppose but of equall parts) cannot attain with∣out long continued education, direction, practice? 2 Seeing our Land by Gods blessing is better pro∣vided for with a learned, Religious, painfull Clergie, old and young, then ever heretofore, then any land in the World: are they well advised, who will be taught
by such as leap from the Shop-board to the Pulpit, rather then by them, whom education fits, and God and authority cals to the work? 3 Whether Colleges and Schools now, as of old the Schools of the Prophets, be not of singular use to fit severall persons for the manifold knowledge requi∣red in the Clergie? 4 Seeing one man cannot excell in all these kindes of knowledge, First, because mans life is short and Art long, Secondly, God hath made men of diffe∣rent capacities and abilities, whether some of the Clergy are not to be directed to one study, some to another, some fitted for higher, some for lower em∣ployments and places? As in the Apostles times, all were disposed of according to their different gifts, 1 Co∣renth. 12. 5 Whether a generall knowledge in all these kinds be not of good use in every Clergie man, that upon occasion of doubt or difficultie he may know to what book or man, having exact skill in that kind of know∣ledge, he may have recourse for resolution? 6 Whether, because tis not fit any man should war upon his own cost, provision of meanes hath not beene well made, and may well be augmented (as times dif∣fer) for encouragement and maintenance of Students, and learned men in those severall kindes. 7 Seeing teachers of ordinary congregations are to apply themselves to their hearers capacity, and to have as milke for babes, so strong meate for more able Christians: whether good benifices have not beene well by our forefathers alotted them, and whether it be not pittie they should be diverted or impaired, And the Clergie put to suit for them?
8 Whether seeing exact skill in sacred Histories and matters of the Church, in severall tongues, in contro∣versies, and the like, being somewhat removed from popular capacities and men of meaner parts, and yet most necessary to be by serious study attained, such as excell therein may not be well provided for, by some of the Dignities, Prebends, and other the like prefer∣ments in our Church? 9 Whether some men of singular naturall parts, and having got by education and practice a great measure of knowledge above mentioned, and being men very religious, conscionable, and grave, are not fitted by God for giving counsell and advice in the greatest matters among Gods people, as Eliazer did to Iosua, Nathan to David, Johojada to Ioas, Jehosua to Zorobabel? 10 Whether some Clergie men eminent for skil & government by gods blessing on their education, learning, and practice, as the Apostles were by Gods extraordinary guift, may not be thought fit to govern, direct, and inform others subordinate to them, and to order both Clergie men and their meanes for the good of the Church, as did the Apostles, and their suc∣cessors after them. I have done, and leave all to the wisely considerate. More might have beene said of the bounds of the Clergies skill, more questions annexed: But this little may informe such as will see; such as put out their own cies what salve can cure? God help them; his good Spirit guide us all. FINIS.
