C838 E78_4 99873276 125741
I Conceive these three Sermons may be of much use, for the promoting of the publike service in taking the late solemn Covenant, both here, and throughout the Kingdoms. Decemb. 5. 1643. JOSEPH CARYL.
THE QUARRELL OF THE COVENANT, WITH THE PACIFICATION OF THE QUARRELL. Delivered in three SERMONS on Levit. 26.25. and Jere. 50.5. By Thomas Case, Preacher of the Word in Milk-street, LONDON; And one of the Assembly of DIVINES. 2 Chron. 23.16. And Iehojada made a Covenant between him, and between all the People, and between the King, That they should be the Lords people. Nehem. 10.28. And the rest of the people, the Priests, the Levites, the Porters, the Singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves from the people of the Lands, unto the Law of God, their Wives, their Sonnes, and their Daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding. They clave to their Brethren, their Nobles, and entred into a Curse, and into an Oath, to walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe, and do all the Commandments of the Lord our Lord, and his Judgements, and his Statutes, &c. London, Printed for Luke Fawne, and are to be sold at the sign of the Parrot in Pauls Church-yard. 1644.
To the Right Honourable John Lord Maitland, and to the Reverend, Master Alexander Henderson, Master Samuel Rutherford, Master Robert Baly, and Master George Gellispe, Commissioners of the generall Assembly of the Church of Scotland, to the Assembly of Divines in England. Noble and worthy Commissioners. THis Covenant, so unanimously, so re∣ligiously entred into, by the Honour∣able Houses of Parliament, and Reve∣rend Assembly, (Gods two faithfull Witnesses now in England) as by your selves also, was afterward sent to the City; where, amongst the rest of the Ministers, I was to take my share in preparing the people. The Work being so solemn and great, I bethought my self how I might best serve this blessed De∣sign; The time gave me some advantage, it fal∣ling in the course of my Ministry, to preach thrice between the Warning and the Taking. I engaged my thoughts (distractions will hardly al∣low me to say, Studies) wholly upon this Work; and (blessed be God) not without much encou∣ragement: The readinesse I found in the People
to close with the invitation of God and Parliament, expressing it self, not onely in the multitudes, but in the affections of them that offered themselves to this Service, made visible in tears of joy. Yet when I had Preacht my Sermons, and ad∣mred the Covenant, I found I had not done my work. Importunity prest me to make my thoughts publike; and consulting with the ne∣sitice of the multitudes of poor ignorant Peo∣ple, that want a Teaching Minister, while the Kingdom waits for the Covenant, rather then with mine own unfitnesse, I was not disobedient to the Motion: I had rather appear in my weaknesse, then nwillingnesse to serve the publike good. Thou∣sands of the poor untaught people, will be glad of this help, the knowing will not despise it, if ; if otherwise, they shall trouble them∣selves, more then me. And now Right noralde and Reverend, These poor endeavours, such as they are, make hold to present themselves unto you: Streams do naturally run back into the Bosom from whence they issued. God hath pleased to onour your Nation in making them the First-fruits, and Pattern of a Through∣. to Ʋs, and all the rest of the . This Covenant received its first
life in Scotland, though it came to its first breathing in England. You sent it not with more affection, then it was entertained with gladnesse and joy, by our Worthy Parliament and Learned Assembly; and although with some small Additions, yet such, as did rather render it, more it self, then vary it. I shall not need to beg your Patronage for my Self or Labours, in promoting this Service, The Oath of God is upon you; whereby we are con∣tented to confesse, what in your patheticall Let∣ter to our Assemblie, you were pleased upon other respects to acknowledge, That your Assistance, is become your Debt, To all that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and per∣suance thereof: To the payment whereof, Your selves are already come through a painfull and hazardous travell, to joyn your Learned Assistance, with our Faithfull Assembly; to which, your pre∣sence addes both strength and Ornament: while Thousands of your Nation are preparing their Brotherly addresses, to pay the same Debt to the whole Kingdom, now almost in as great an exi∣gence, as once the Gibeonites were, when their five Kings, with all their united forces were with∣in few dayes march, to take a bloody and unnaturall revenge, for their entring into Covenant with Joshua.
Onely, We beseech you account it not our distrust or jealousie, if sometime you hear us com∣plaining with the Mother of Sisera, Why are their Charrets so long in coming; Why stay the Wheels of their Charrets? We know the Mercy and Righteousnesse of Jo∣shuah dwels in your Bosoms, which cannot suffer you to deny or delay that Assistance to your Bre∣thren, whom you have invited into the League and Covenant of God upon so fair and honourable termes, which Joshuah durst not deny unto the enemies of God and his people, Because they had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, Josh. 9.19. Although by a Serpentine wilienesse they had wound themselves into that Association. Jo∣shuahs Conscienciousnesse of that Obligation, carried Him and his Army all night to the rescue of the Gileoniles, Josh. 10.9. And truely, we doubt not, but your endernesse of this Oath of God, between England and Scotland, had before this time brough in your prepared forces, to the succour of your end ngered Brethren, had not our Creature-considence, unthankefulnesse, and other hidden Remors, hung at the Keel and Bottome of this Expedition. The Searcher of Hearts, and Father of Mercies,
discover, and remove the accursed thing, whatso∣ever it is, That it may no longer obstruct their timely approach, nor render it, when it comes, unanswerable to our fainting Expectations. The Lord of Hosts, bring in your Forces, and come in with them; his Terrour go before them, and his Glory be their Rereward; So shall they like a Ma∣hanaim, the Host of God, be a dread to the Ene∣mies, a Reviving to the languishing hopes of Gods people, and a powerfull means to assist our Parliament and Armies, in the setling of that blessed Peace and Reformation; for which, both the Nations have Lifted up their Hands to the most High God. Sirs, In the midst of all these Calls and Ex∣pectations, pardon, and own me, if I humbly claim my share for my Self, and poor Endeavours, both which, he cordially devotes to yours, and the Kingdoms service, who is Yours, In all Gospel Offices, to honour and serve you, THOMAS CASE.
To the Reader. READER, THe fears of unworthy Accommodations, which have possest  Spirits, God hath hither∣to graciously prevented by the Wisedom and Pie∣ty, of our worthy Senators in Parliament, who yet, have lest no stone unturned for the pro∣curing of such a Peace, as might render both King and Parliament, Church and State, truely happy, and glorious; which is, the Cordinall desire, wherewith, every good Christian, and Loyall Subject, doth travell, that wisheth, and studies the recovery and preservation of these three Kingdoms; what further secu∣rity this Sacred Covenant may adde, believe, and waite. There is another Accommodation which may do as much mis∣chief; and is the more dangerous, by how much more it is secret, which it concerns thee with all care and diligence to prevent; and that is an Accommodation with base sinfull Lusts, which fight against thy soul, and the Kingdoms safety. How low they have brought the Kingdom, is too apparent to every eye; what they have done to thy soul, is best known to God and thine own Conscience. God calls not onely upon Parliament and Assembly, but upon Familes and Persons, for a Through-Reformation; If thou compound, thou destroyest thy self, and three Kingdoms; One sinner, destroyes much good, Eccle. 9.18. This Covenant con∣scienciously made and kept, will prevent this evill: For thy en∣couragement and direction wherein, these three Sermons are prest. The first discovering, the great Quarrell of Covenant-violati∣on, either in refusing, prophaning, or breaking thereof. The second answering (according to my Model) such Objections a∣gainst the taking of this Covenant, as I met withall; and lay∣ing
down some encouragements and engagements to the taking of it. The third, holding forth such directions, as may serve for thy help, so to make, and so minde thy Covenant, as thou mayest do it both to Acceptation, and Perpetuity. If God please to adde his blessing, neither I in publishing, nor thou in reading, shall have cause to be ashamed of our pains; If God be dallied withall in this Covenant, I tremble to think, what will become of us; It is the strongest Physick that ever the Kingdom took; and I am al∣most confident, That as in the publike State, it will, either put a period to our distempers, or to our Being; so in thy personall condition, It will either blast thy Lusts, or slay thy Soul. My Rea∣son is, Because God is engaged: If we be found conscientious of this Covenant, he is engaged to us, against our enemies without, and our Lusts within, and they shall not be able to stand upon us. If after so solemn an Obligation, we shall be found to mock God, we have engaged him against us; and adde the Almighty to the number of our enemies, a swift, and a powerfull Witnesse, and Avenger of our perfidiousnesse. Nor will Refusall of this Covenant help us; when God shall come to interpret, It will be found, I fear, in most, but a depart from us; And when God shall answer the daring sinner in his own language; woe to the poer wretch, that ever he was born. I have therefore three humble Requests to make. First, To our truely Honourable, and worthily Honoured, Senators; That in the Wisedom and Zeal, of good King Heze∣kiah, 2 Chro. 30.1. in a concernment of the like nature, They would be pleased, with their Commands, for the taking of the Covenant, To send forth also, such timely Laws and Directions, into the Kingdom, as may prepare the people, and fence this holy Ordinance, from that contempt and prophanation, which will otherwise be unavoideably cast upon it. The second is to my Brethren in the Ministry, That to the same
end, they, with the good Priests and Levites, in Hezekiahs time, would be active and diligent, to put in execution, those Directions and Ordinances, and to do, what else may be found in their severall places, advantagious to the sanctifying of their people, for so holy a service; lest, if they sin through their neglect, they translate the peoples guilt upon their own heads. Yea, I could wish, That all the faithfull Ministers of Christ through the Kingdom, as they are the Lords Remembrancers to the people, and the peoples Remembrancers to God, would fre∣quently in their Sermons, minde people of the Vow of God, that lies upon their souls; and in their prayers make frequent mentions of it to God, with holy Davids, holy jealousie, and compassion over his people, in the day of their willing, and liberall contribu∣tions to the House of God. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, Orsta∣bth. and prepare their heart unto thee, 1 Chro. 29.18. That so the memory of so solemn and sacred an engagement, may not die off from the heart of the Kingdom for ever. Lstly, To every soul that shall enter into this holy League and Covenant; my request is, That they would look about them: Life and death is before them; if we break with God now, we have just cause to fear. God will stand to Covenant no more with us, but will avege the Quarrell, with our utter destruction; if we be sincere and fafull, ts Covenant will be a foundation of much Peace, Joy, Glory, and Security, to us, and our seed, to the coming of Christ, which that it may be, shall be the earnest Prayer of him, who is Thy servant for Jesus sake. Tho. Case.
The first Sermon Preached at Laurence Church, on the Fast-day, Septem. 27. 1643. Leviticus 26.25. And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrell of my Covenant. THis Chapter contains a gradation of sins, and a gradation of punishments; higher degrees of plagues, threatning to overtake higher degrees of Sin. And if you will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven times more for your sins; four times repeated over in this Chapter. The words read, they are the top, or rather the sum of both,  violation, the top or sum of all the evils of sin men∣tioned in this Chapter, and the sword with it's concomitants, the top or sum of all the evils of punishment threatned. And so you have the division of the words before I thought of it: scil. The peoples sins. Gods judgements. Their sin, the abuse and violation of Covenant, Gods Judge∣ment, the Sword, &c.
In the one they walk contrary to God, in the other God walks contrary to them: From whence observe; Doct. Covenant violation is matter of a high Quarrell be∣tween God and a people, which God threatens to avenge with the sword. You see there are two Branches in this Doctrine. I. Covenant abuse is matter of an high Quarrell between God and a people. II. God threatens to avenge this Quarrell with the Sword. 1. For the first, That Covenant-violation is matter of high Quarrell between God and a people: Quarrell you finde in the Text, and high you finde it in the situation of the Text: This standing as I shewed you at a top of the gradation of the sins here specified, or being the summa totalis of them all; Abuse of Covenant. It is this first Branch I shall chiefly pursue; The second I shall but touch upon, as time and occasion will serve. In the managing therefore of the first Branch, I shall endea∣vour these three things. 1. I shall shew you what Covenant abuse or violation is, or wherein it doth consist. 2. I shall lay you down some demonstrations to prove the , namely, That it is sc. 3. I will lay you down the Grounds, which shall give you an account of the , namely, how it comes to passe, that Covenant-violation amounts to such a High Quarrell between God and a people. Cove∣nant vio∣lation, consists.For the first; 1. In wil∣full neg∣lect. Covenant abuse, or violation; consists in these three things. 1. In a contemptuous Wilfull neglect and refusall of it, when God doth graciously invite a people or person to come into Covenant with him; so it is reported of those wicked Ephra∣mites, Manassites, and Zebulunites, that when Hezkiah sent a gracious Message unto them, to invite them to turn again unto the Lord, from whom they were departed by a grievous back∣sliding, and to keep the feast of the Passeover, (which was the seale of the Covenant) they added this aggravation to all
their former Rebellions, they refused the Message, 2 Chro. 30.9, 10 and laughed the Messengers to scorne, and mocked them. 2. It doth consist in an undue manner of taking of it, 2. In an undue manner of taking it; as 1. Rashly. 2 Rot∣tenly. Psal. 78.36, 37. and that in divers respects: First, When people take it rashly in opposition unto Judge∣ment, one of the qualifications required to an Oath, Jerem. 4.2. Of which more hereafter. Secondly, When they take it rottenly in opposition to since∣rity, as it is complained of the Israelites. They did flatter him with their mouth, and they lyed unto him with their tongues, For their heart was not upright with him, &c. When men come with their Idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling block of their in∣iquity before their face; that is, When they come to these, or the like solemne duties with the love of any one sin upon their hearts, this is to play the Hypocrite with God, and to prophane his Covenant. 3. 3. Unhal∣lowedly. When men come unhallowedly to this duety with unpre∣pared hearts, and unsanctified affections, not labouring to get their hearts into an holy Ordinance frame. 4. When they come Inordinately, with base, low, 4. Inor∣dinately. carnall and self-ish ends, as those Sechemites did in the Gen. 34. v. 22, 23. who were perswaded to be circumcised (which was the Rom 4.10. signe and scale of the Covenant of God with his people) upon carnall hopes and expectations of increasing their substance, and enriching themselves by this means. Vers. 22. Onely herein will the men consent unto us, for to dwell with us to be one people. If e∣very Male among us be circumcised as they are circumcised. Vers. 23. Shall not their Cattell and their substance, and every Beast of theirs be ours. This God reproves in his own people, Ezek. 33.31. With their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousnesse. A Covenant in the mouth, but covetousnesse in the heart; their own base earthly covetous ends they brought with them to the holy things of God. 3. It con∣sists in gracelesse breaking of the Cove∣nant. Thirdly. Covenant violation doth consist in a gracelesse and carelesse breaking of it; either by making a wicked Apostasie from it, or rising up in a cursed rebellion against it. A Wicked∣nesse complained of all a long the Scriptures, 1 Kings 19.14.
The children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down the Altar, &c. Psal. 78.10. They kept not the Covenant of God, and refused to walke in his Law. Vers. 37. Neither were they stedfast in his Covenant. Jere. 11.10. The house of Israel, and the house of Juda have broken my Covenant which I made with their Fathers. Isai. 24.5. They have transgressed the Law, changed the Ordinance, broken the everlasting Covenant. It were easie to multiply more Instances, but these may serve; And thus much for the first Quaere: scil. Wherein Covenant-Violation doth consist. 2. Demon∣strations to prove the Do∣ctrine. 1. The Saints be∣waying ts sin. The second thing that I undertook, is to give you some Demonstrations, To shew, That Covenant-Violation is matter of a high Quarrell between God and a People; which will appear if we consider. First, That the discerning servants of God in Scripture, such as have been acquainted with God, and have seen into the na∣ture of sin, have bewailed this sin with their most brinish tears, and deepest groans, and agonies of spirit. It is enough to break ones heart, to read with what heart-breaking-sighes, those holy men of God, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel, have bewailed this sin, lying in the dust at Gods feet. Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed, and lush to list up my sace to thee wy God, &c. So cryes Ezra, &c. And again, Vers. 13. After all this is come upon us, for our evill deads, for our great trespasse; seeing that thou our God hath punished  lesse, then our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this; should we again break thy Command∣ments, Vers. 15. O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we remain, yet escaped as it is this day: Behold, we are before thee in our trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee, because of this. Nehemiah is very Patheticall in the confession of this sin, all along the ninth Chapter of that Book, weeping out this godly sorrow, as it were with tears of blood. Daniel is covered with confusion of face, when he bewailed this sin of Covenant-Violation in the ninth Chapter of his Prophesie. O Lord, righ∣teousnesse belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, Ver. 7. And again, O Lord, to me belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, &c. Vers. 8. It is breach of Covenant he bewails
with so much confusion of face and brokennesse of heart in that Chapter. Secondly, Covenant-violation is a sin, Censu∣red in and by the very Heathen. highly censured in the very poor pur-blind, Heathen: It stands as an Infamy, and a Brand upon them in that Catalogue of their sins, Rom. 1.31. Covenant-breakers: Yea, it was a sin, that as blind as they were, they were able by the very light of nature, to discover in the People of God, and could give it as the accompt of that ruine and disolation which befell them, demanding of one another as they passed by the ruines of Jerusalem, Jerem. 22. Vers. 8. Where∣orath the Lord done thus unto this great City, then shall they answer, Vers. 9. Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord their God. Thirdly, It may appear to be a Quarrell of a high nature, 3. The fearfull judge∣ments, where∣with it is threat∣ned. if we consider the grievous judgements wherewith the Lord hath threatned and avenged this sin, as here in the text; The Sword with a black Regiment of other dreadfull judgements, following; Vers. 25. I will send the pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy. Vers. 26. I will break the staff of your bread, &c. And yee shall eat, and not be satisfied. And upon the persisting in this sinne; Behold, seven times more evills pursuing of them. Vers 29. You shall eat the flesh of your sonnes, and the flesh of your daughters shall yee cat. Vers. 30. I will cast your Carcasses upon the Carcasses of your Idols, and my soul shall abhorre you. Vers. 31. I will make your Cities wast, and bring your Sanctuaries unto desolation, &c. Vers 32. I will bring the Land into desolation, Vers. 33. I will scatter you among the Heathen, and will draw out a sword after you, &c. Isa. 30.18. My Brethren, God is a God of Judgement, and doth all his works in weight and measure. Nehemiah acknowledged it in his confession, Nehem. 9.33. Howbeit thou art just in all that is come upon us; for thou hast done right, but we have done wicked∣ly: Yea, holy Ezra hath a strain higher then this, in his confessi∣on. Ezra 9 13. Our God hath punished us lesse then our iniqui∣ties do deserve. Behold, these great and fearfull judgements, and curses, pursuing this sin of Covenant-violation, and yet so farre from exceeding, that they fall short of the merit of it; Our God hath punished us, lesse then our sins deserved. Of what a high
nature (think ye) is this quarrell, when so many tall judge∣ments, like so many Anakims though standing upon the Shoul∣der one of another, cannot reach it? Fourthly, 4 The care of Gods people after their re∣covery, to make up this breach It may appear from hence, in as much, as alwayes upon the recovery and deliverance of the people of God, from their Captivity, and other Judgements: you shall finde their Governours and Prophets, Sollicitous and active in the first place, to attone God by taking up this quarrell, and controversie, between him and his people; as in all the former Instances of Era, Nehemiah, and Daniel, they knew that as long as this breach lay open, there was no safety; floods of wrath and vengeance, might break in upon them at unaware; and there∣fore they labour in the first place to repair this breach, giving us thereby to understand, That Violation of Covenant is a quarrell of such an high nature, as there is no safe sleeping under it, no not for a night. Fifthly, God ac∣counts it his honor to keep his Cove∣nant. Among all the excellencies and perfections that are in God. God seems to take high delight and contentment in this, and therefore doth often delight and admire himself for it. Deut. 7.9. The Lord thy God, he is God, the faithfull God, which keepeth Covenant and Mercy. Psal. 89 28. My Covenant shall standfast. Vers. 34. My Cevenant will I not break, &c. And as he gloris in it himself; for he calleth upon his people to glorifie him in this his Excellency. Jerem. 9.24. Let him that glory thglory in this, That he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord, which exercise, loving kindenesse, judgement, and righteousnesse in the earth. The righteousnesse of God is especi∣ally seen in keeping Covenant with his people, and in this, he calls them to glory. And so they do, It is one of the high and glorious titles that Daniel ascribes to God in his Prayers: Dan. 9.4 O Lord, the great and dreadfull God, keeping Covenant, and Mercy, &c. Psal. 105 8. He hath remembred his Covenant for ever. Psal. 111 5. He will ever be mindfull of his Covenant. It is the Name, for which he is so dreadfull in his praises, Vers. 9. He hath commanded hs Covenant for ever, holy, and reverend is his Name. Now surely, That Excellency which God doth so admire and magnifie in himself; the contrary thereof, his soul doth most of all, hate, or abhorre, in a people, or person; we
see it in our own experience, That vice we most of all hate in our children or servants, the contrary vertue whereof, doth most of all please and delight us in our selves. Sixthly and Lastly, God ac∣cunts this an high fa∣vour to bring his people into Co∣venant with him, for 1. It is a promise. 2 It is e∣stablished by an Oath. God speaks of bringing his people into Covenant with him, as one of the highest Prerogatives and choicest priviledges he can honour them withall, to that purpose you may observe. 1. That it stands in the midst of a Catalogue of promises, Ek. 20.37. I will bring you into the Bond of the Covenant: And you know with what titles of honour the Apostle hath en∣abled the promises? Exceeding great and precious promises. 2. That it fals under the Sanction not of a promise onely, but of an oath also. Isai. 45.23. I have sworne by my self; the word is gone out of my mouth, in righteousnesse, and shall not return: That unto me every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall swear? An oath it is the Seal of the Covenant; and this honour God hath challenged to himself by an irrevecable Oath. I have sworne, &c. That to me every tongue shall swear. Now as it was the honour of the Priesthood of Christ, above the Priests under the Law; That whereas they were made Priests by the word onely of command; Christ was made a Priest by the word of Oath, by him that said unto him. Heb. 7.21. The Lord sware, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. So it is the high honour and dignity of this duty and prerogative of the people of God; That whereas others are conferred upon them, onely by the word of promise: This is established by the word of Oath, by him that said, I have swerne by my self, that to me every tongue shall swear. And by this you may take the measure of this sin, since by how much the more high and glorious the service and priviledge is; of so much the more vile and hatefull an aggravation must the pro∣phanation of it needs be. And this last demonstration may serve in generall as a bottome and foundation of the next ac∣count I am to make: scil. The . Crounds and Rea∣sons of the Do∣ctrine.. Of the truth in hand; which is, The third thing I undertook; Namely, The Grounds and Reasons of the Doctrine, how it comes to
passe, That Covenant-violation is a matter of so High a quarrell between God and his People. The first whereof is taken from the nature of such a Cove∣nant, 1. The Nature of a Co∣venant. A divine Ordi∣nance. Deut 6.13. Chap. 10.20. as is here spoken of. First, That it is an Ordinance of God, a part of Divine worship, having the stamp and impression of divine authority upon it; Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou clave, and swear by his Name; From which Scriptures it appears not onely to be an Ordinance of Gods appointing but one of the most speciall and solemne; In as much as oth here, and in other Scriptures it stands for the whole duety of man towards God in the first Table. The Ordinance whereby we specially are said to clave to God, Thou shalt cleave to him and swear by his Name; We cleave to him by swearing to him. Isai. 56 6. The sonnes of the stranger that joyn themselves to the Lord. How? It follows, And take hold of my Covenant. The Covenant is the joyning Ordinance, The joyn∣ning Or∣dinance. It strikes the main stroke between God and a People. In haring the word, we learn our Duty. In Prayer we call in for helpe, for divine assistance; But the Covenant, that comes and bindes the bargain. Come let us joyn our selves to the Lord, by a perpetuall Covenant. Jere. 50.5. Yea, The ex∣nall  ca  very  If we consider the very externall Ceremonies used about this duty, it will appear a very solemn Ordinance? Whether between man, and man, or between God and man. When Abrahams servant swea to his Master, to take a wise unto his son anc. He must put his hand under his Masters th. A Type that the Messias must come out of Abrahams loynes: Ge. 24 7. G 47.. So did Joseph when he swear to Jacob, &c. When God made a Covenant with Abraham; God commands him to take an Heiser of three years old, a she Goat, and a Ram, and  9.10. When he hath done, God  betwixt the pices, for a Ratification of the Cove∣nant,  17 Abraham when he takes an Oath, Lifts up his  th must high God. These and the like Posts used about this service, carry a
great deal of reverence and solemnity in the very face of them; and this solemnity even of the outward Ceremony, God useth as an aggravation of Covenant-violation. God layeth it close unto the charge of Zedeziah. That he brake his Covenant with the King of Babylon. Ezek. 17.18. When loe he had given his hand. And to the Princes and People of Juda, that they transgressed the Covenant, Jerem. 34.18. When they had cut the Galfe in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. And Vers. 19, 20. for this he threatens to give them into the hands of their Enemies. And if the externall solemnitie adde so much aggravation to this sinne, then how much more doth that inward beauty and glory of it, heap up guilt upon their heads that are found to be prophaners and violators of so solemn an Ordinance. A second Aggravation of this sin, ariseth from the Mattor of the Covenant. Covenants betwixt man and man, are in things appertaining to man; The Covenant betwixt God and man, is in things ap∣pertaining unto God; which as it doth exceedingly heighten the duty, so it doth highly aggravate the violation. It was the honour of the Priests under the Law, above other men, That they were ordained for men in things appertaining unto God, Heb. 5.2. And it was the honour of Christ above all other Priests, that his Priesthood was imployed about matters of an higher nature, then the Priesthood of the sonnes of Aaron. Heb. 8.6. He hath obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediatour of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises. Now consider then I beseech you, how excellent that Cove∣nant must be above all others; the matter whereof gave excel∣lency to the very Priesthood of Christ himself, and lifted it up a∣bove all other Priesthoods: For as the Apostle reasons concer∣ning Abraham and Melchisedeck. That Melchisideck was greater then Abraham, because he blessed him. Heb 7.7. For without question, the lesser is blessed of the better.
So may I in some sence argue the excellency of this Cove∣nant above the Priesthood of Christ, in as much as this Covenant gives excellency to this Priesthood. — He hath obtained a more excellent Priesthood, by how much he is Mediator of a better Covenant. And certainly the excellency of the matter is a transcendent aggravation of the violation of the Covenant, for men to trissle and prevaricate in things of such high concernment, in things so immediately appertaining to God, must needs be a businesse of an higher provocation, then the sonnes of men do ordinarily dream of. The Apostle reasons strongly and dread∣fully in this very case: Heb. 10.28, 29. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy; Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought wor∣thy, who hath counted the blood of the Covenant, an unholy thing, &c. The Covenant and the blood of it; the priviledge and the pur∣chase, are both trampled under feet in some degree or other, by Covenant-prophanation. Thirdly, A third reason, why Covenant-prophanation is mat∣ter of so high a quarrell, is taken from the Forme of it, which is, an Oath, an Oath on both sides. The Creature swears by God, and God swears by himself: This is the Forme or Seal of Cove∣nants, between men and men. So Jacob when he made a Cove∣nant with his Uncle Laban, sware by the fear of his father Isaac. Gen. 31.53. i. e. That is Objective! By the God whom his father Isaac fared. So Jonathan and David sware mutually by the name of God. The Oath of the Lord was betwixt them. So Zdekiah took an Oath of fealty and subjection unto Neb∣chadnezzar, King of Babylon, In the name of the God of Israel; for which cause, Ezck. 17.13. & 19. God calls it, My Oath, and my Covenant. And hence it is, That God so severely threatens the violation of that Covenant, with inevitable destruction upon Zedekiah. Ezek. 17.16. As I live, saith the Lord God, sure in the place where the King dwelleth, that made him King, whose Oath he depised, and whose Covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon, shall be dye.
The King of Babylons Oath because Zedkiah sware to him; and Gods Oath, because he sware by him: And see how divine Justice avengeth the quarrell of this Covenant. Zedkiah sware to Nebuchadnezzar, and did not keep his Oath; But for this, God swears the death of Zedekiah, and will be sure to keep his Oath. This Accession of an Oath to the Covenant, a people or person swearing, By the most high God, and calling so holy and dreadfull a Majestie to Witnesse, must needs wonderfully heighten the sin, and aggravate the quarrell; by this means, Covenant Breach, becometh a double sin; a sin twisted of two sins (and those, no small ones, neither) of lying and swearing: Jere. 23.10. The lye being the prophanation of the truth of God, and the Oath the prophanation of the God of trueth; sins for which (take them singly) a Land doth often mourn; Hos. 4.2. Of how much higher provo∣cation are they, when they meet, yea, when they meet, and are met into one, communicating their malignity one unto ano∣ther, and thereby bigning, and aggravating one another: The Lye making the Oath greater, and the Oath making the Lye greater; and out of both there ariseth an aliquod tertium, a third sin of a monstrous nature; namely, perjury, which is a blasphemy against the Truth of God, and against the God of Truth, while His Sacred Name is sworne by, and himself cald in, to witnesse to a Lye, and so that sin, or sins, which in reference to the Law of God, is disobedience; in reference to love of God, inviting, pardoning, healing, is rebellion; in reference to our promise, is treachery; is now at last in reference to the Oath, aggravated into perjury and blasphemy. This is much, but this is not all. Consider the Parties entring this Oath, and you will finde a fourth, and yet a strong ground and reason, The par∣ties swea∣ring. why Covenant-violation is so high a quarrell; The parties striking this Cove∣nant which are God and his People, and this doth exceedingly ag∣gravate the sin: since by how much the parties interested in the Covenant, are more high and honourable, by so much the more solemne and venerable is a Covenant esteemed. So Covenants entred into, between Kings, and Kings, and be∣tween Kingdoms & Kingdoms, are accounted more solemn and
sacred then those that are past between private persons: What is it then think ye, when a Kingdom, yea Kingdoms, on one side and the great Almighty God on the other side, swear mutually one to another. And the more Sacred the Covenant, the more prophane the Violation. Oh, for a People to swear, not onely By God, but to God, and yet dally or prevaricate, this must needs be a mockery of an high provocation. If God so threaten the breach of Oaths, wherein he was but witnesse, how impatient will he be of those forseitures, wherein he is both Witnesse, and Partie? A People or Person, swearing By God, to God? And yet once more consider the End of a Covenant be∣tween God and a People, 1. End of a Cove∣nant. and you will see more matter of pro∣vocation in the prophanation of it. Now the end is twofold, Primarie or Essentiall. Secondarie or Consequentiall. The Primarie or Essentiall End is to knita sure indissoluble knot, Jer 50.5. between God and his people. Come let us joyn our selves to the Lord in a perpetuall Covenant, &c. Let us joyn. A Covenant is the joyning Ordinance, the Marriage knot, as it were, wherein God and a People are made one; for as in Mar∣riage, 1 Cor 6.16, 17. two, saith he, shall be one flesh; so in a Covenant, he that is joyned to the Lord, is one spirit. Those be high and glorious expressions which our Saviour useth in that heavenly Prayer, John 17.21, 22, 23. That they may be all one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, That the world may know that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me, I have given them, That they may be one, even as we are one; I in thee, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. All one, and one in us, and one as we are one, and made per∣fect in one. These be expressions and priviledges of unspeakable worth and excellency; and these are the fruits of a Covenant, rightly struck between God and a People, when both sides do
it with all their heart, and with all their soul; as God himself renders it, more then once or twice in Scripture. I will be their God, and they shall be my People; Jere. 4.7. c. 31 33. c. 30.22. c. 32.38. i. e. I will be to them what they can expect from a God, and they shall be to me, what I expect from a People: All I am, and have, shall be for their good; And all they are, or have, shall be for my glory; and so the Spouse triumphs. Cant. 2.15. chap. 6.3. I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine. This is the first and main end of a Covenant. 2. End. And the second is like unto it; which is, to put an end to all strife. Heb. 6.16. An Oath for confirmation is an end of all strife. i. e. If here be any doubts, or haesitations, or diffidence on either side; an Oath by the swearing party, is, or should be, the removeall of that doubt, or distrust whatsoever; It should (I say) be so managed and entertained, as that it should put the matter out of question; to make all sure? Whether it be in matters of fact, de praeterito, for the time past, or engagements, de futuro, for the time to come; so it is between God and man. Man swears to God, to secure God as it were, that there shall e no more tergiversations, or treacherous dealings, as in times past. Let us joyn in a perpetuall Covenant that shall never be forgotten. q. d. Other Covenants have been forgotten, this shall never; we will backslide no more, break Covenant no more; or rather a People or Person swear to God to secure themselves against themselves to prevent, and shut the dore, a∣gainst all future sollicitations, importunities and Temptations whatsoever; That when any of their old Lovers should come and bespeck their affections, they may be able to put them all by, that there might be no possibility of yeelding or heark∣ning to the voyce of this Charmer, charm he never so wisely; while the soul may answer them all, as sometime Jepthah did his daughter (though with more warrant, and lesse trouble of minde.) Judg. 11.35. I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back.
And with David. Psal. 119.106. I have sworn, and will performe it (I will be as good as my word, though I die for it) That I will keep thy righteous judgements. And again, Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will render praise unto thee. I am not mine own to dispose of; I have given my heart, and my loves, and my self unto another; and I do not repent of what I have done, if it were to do again, I would do it, and were I worth a thousand times more, then I am, he to whom I have sworn, should have it all. And so on the other side, God swears to his People, That (s I may so say) he may leave himself no possibility of recanting or recalling his word, Heb. 6.13. Vers. 16. if he had a minde to it. The Apstles expression hints such a kinde of supposition; God, when he could swear by no greater, swore by himself: Why? That by two immutable things; sc. His Word, and his Oath, in which it was impossible for God to lye. Impossible for him to lye; A very strange expression; As if God would lock up himself under an Oath from all possibility of lying or recalling the word out of his mouth, he would not trust himselfe (as if the Apostle should say) with making a bare promise, but claps an oath upon it also, that so if be would, yet he could not go back. This seems to be implyed in this expression, out the truth is, though we need such bolts and locks to keep us from starting, God doth not; he hath as much and more mind to keep his word, then we have that he should: But for our sakes, for our sakes altogether, is this written, because of the unbelief of our bearts, to secure our unbeleeving objecting spirits, against all fear and jealousie, of so much, as a pssibility of going bk from his word, or failing of his promise, and so indeed it is after expressed. Vers. 18. That by two immutable things, by which it was impossible for God to lye, we might have a strong Consolation, &c. To strengthen our weak hands, and feeble knees, and drooping spirits in the expectations and belief of the undoubted accom∣plishment of all his promises. Now then (Beloved Christians) this being the end of Co∣venants and Oaths mutually between God and his People;
sc. To Ʋnite, and Secure the one to the other; when a People or Person, haffle, or break with God after all this, the end of the Covenant is frustrated and defrauded; The bands are broken, the security dissolved; all falls in sunder, as a bundle of Arrows, when the bond is cut, and then in comes fears, doubts, and jealousies; which oft do no small mischief in the soul, while they even take a poor People, or Person Captive, and spoil them of their precious treasure, that they can hardly reco∣ver their former comforts, or confidence again, in a long time; These breaches do so wound their spirits, and shrink up their sinews (I speak of the People of God themselves) that with their Father Jacob, they go halting (peradventure) to their very Graves. And now look upon the Covenant under all these Aspects and Notions Of Nature. Of Matter. Of Forme. Of Parties. Of End. And then you will easily be able to give an account; Why Covenant-Violation should be a matter of so high a quarrell, be∣tween God and a People, in all the three kindes of it. Contemptuous refusing. Gracelesse prophaning. Perfidious deceiving. Not onely of the Covenant of God, but of the God of the Covenant; A People of Person mocking God, and deluding themselves, breaking with God; and doing what they can to make God break with them, and to break them all to peeces. Now for the second Branch of the Doctrine. The 2. Brand of the Do∣ctrine. This Quarrell God threatens to avnge with the sword. There be but two things which I need handle heer. 1. De facto, To shew, How God hath made good this threat∣ning, in the dispensations of his providence and Justice, by overtaking this sin of Covenant-Prophanation, with this judge∣ment of the sword, and its concomitants.
2. De jure, To vindicate and assert Gods Justice in these dispensations of his, by shewing the equity and righteousnesse of such proceedings. But both these are done, if not so fully as might be, yet sufficiently already: The Instances given of the sin, in the very same places for the most part holding forth also examples of the Judgment; besides so many other Instances in Scripture, so known, That who ever is not a stranger to his Bible, may turn to them with a wet finger. And the Demonstrations and Reasons, that set forth unto you the greatnesse of the sin, the highnesse of the quarrell, do upon the very first view, Vindicate, and Justifie the Equity of Gods proceedings in avenging this sin and quarrell with so grievous a judgement, as the sword; And since the servants of God, who have well weighed both in the ballance of the Sanctuary, have acknowledged not onely the sin to have equalled the Judgement; [Thou art just O Lord in all that is come upon us.] Nehe. 9. Eza 9. But infinitely to have weighed it down; our God hath punisht us lesse, then our iniquities deserve. This therefore shall suffice for the second Branch of this Doctrine; and so we will improve the time that might be spent in the further proof, and enlargement thereof, in making Use of what hath been delivered already in that Doctrine. Ʋse. THe first Use that we may make of this sad truth, may be according to the work of this day, to discover to us what cause we have to afflict our souls, and to abhorre our selves in dust and ashes, before the Lord. For behold, God is contending with this Kingdom by fire; the fire of the sword (so called often in the Scripture) is sent upon us, and marcheth through the breadth of the Land, in the widest extent of the Kingdom, even from the further∣most parts of the West, to the uttermost parts of the North: A Sword, I say, the worst of all Judgements (witnesse the sad Catalogue of evills here that do accompany it, ut supra;) yea, a Civill Sword, the worst of all Swords; a Forraign Sword hits at randome; But this knows whom to smite, and where to
make the deepest wounds, Brother embrues his hands in the Brothers blood, and a mans enemies are these of his own house; and therefore the more enemies, because of his own house. No Quarrell so fierce, no fewd so mortall, as those are between the neerest relations, when Coals of division are once kindled amongst them. This Sword, I say, is drawn, and much flesh it hath devoured already, and drunk much precious blood. Nationall blood, Christian blood, Fraternall blood; while we cry to it, as once Jeremiah did. Jerem. 47.6. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy self into thy Scabbord, rest and be still. But the Sword either gives us no Answer, or such a one as follows there in the next verse. How can I be quiet? Seeing the Lord hath given me a charge against England? Yea, we may fear that God is saying concerning us, as once to his Prophet Ezekiel, concerning Israel. Ezek. 21.9, 10. A Sword, a Sword is sharpned, it is sharpned, and also furbish'd. Tis sharpned to make a sore slaughter, should we then make mirth? No, When God sends a Sword upon a People, the times are times of mourning, and not of merriment. Read on else. Vers. 10. It contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree. Vers. 11. And he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled: This Sword is sharpned, and tis furbished to give it into the hand of the slayer. Vers. 12. Cry and howl, son of man, for it shall be upon my People, it shall be upon all the Princes of Israel: terrours by rea∣son of the Sword, shall be upon my People. Smite therefore upon thy thigh. Vers. 13. Because it is a tryall, and what if the Sword con∣temn the Rod? The rod of God has been upon us; the rod of a more inferior and gentle correction; but it has done us no good, Folly is so bound up in our hearts, that it is not a rod of correction that will fetch it out. We will not yet stoop, nor submit unto the
Government of Jesus Christ; therefore we may fear, that now the sword comes to contemn the rod, to despise the rod; saying as it were, What does this silly Rod do here? Will they not stoop? Will they not put their neks under the yoak of Christ? Let me come Ile make them either bow or break; Ile make them either yeeld, or Ile have their blood. Those his Enemies that will not have him raign over them, bring them hither, That I may slay them before his face. Ah my Brethren, we may fear, That God is speaking against us in some such bitter language as this is; and what think you may be the cause? What the Quarrell? Surely, there is cause enough, The Parliament tell us of a fearfull Ca∣talogue of horrible provocations. Contempt of Gods holy Ordinances, and of holynesse it self; Grosse and affected ignorance, under the glorious light of the Gospel cleerly shining among us; unfruïtfulnesse under the pre∣cious means of Grace; ingratitude for mercies; incorrigible∣nesse under judgements; multitudes of Oaths, and blasphemis; wicked prophanations of the Lords day, by sports, and gamings, formerly encouraged even by Authority. All sorts of uncleannesse, Luxury, and excesse in eating or drinking; Vanity, Prid, and Prodigalitie in Apparrell; Envy, Contention, and unnaturall Divisions, Oppression, Fraud, and Violence; from divers of which sins, and many other, not one Person throughout the whole Nation, can say, That he is wholly Free; Besides that, all must confesse, That they have contributed toward the great stock of Nationall sins, and so have increased the treasure of Wrath, against these dayes of Wrath. But especially, they tell us of two horrid crying sin, Idolatry, and Blood: Idolatry, which as it was the sin of our Ancestors; so it is the spreading sin of these latter times, while by a generall connivance, and almost toleration, it hath been seve∣rall wayes fomented and encouraged. And for that other crying and cruell sin of bloodshed, That calls alouà for veng ance, it went hand in hand, with the abhominable Idoll of the Masse, in the dayes of Queen Mary, and some of her Predecessors; when many hundreds of the dear Martyrs, and Saints of God, lost their precious lives in flames and prisons.
These are the sins and provocations which our Parliament Worthies give us notice of; which surely may amount to a very High quarrell. But to all these without controversie, England hath added this Quarrell in the Text, to make up the measure of our iniqui∣ties; even Covenant-Violation. Witnesse all these severall wayes and branches of this sin, mentioned in the entrance. Which of them doth not this Land stand guilty of this day before the Lord? All sorts of Cove∣nant vio∣lation found a∣mong us. Wilfull rejection. For 1. Are there not found among us multitudes of such pro∣phane Ephramitish and Zebulonitish spirits, that do reproachfully and contemptuously, refuse and reject the Covenant of God; that deals with the Parliament Injunctions, and the Ministers of the Gospels invitations to this service; as they did with King Heze∣kihs Messengers, laugh thm to scorn; lade them with Calum∣nies and Reproaches? What more Covenants yet? Will they never have done Covenanting? Will they send us to Hell quick, with their Protestations, and Oaths, and Covenants? These, and the like voices of murmure and rebellion, God hath heard in our Tents, and his anger is kindled? Oh what shiftings and shufflings, what base unworthy tergi∣versations hath God found among us, to elude and envade this solemn service! Indeed he said, he would bring his People into the Bond of the Covenant, but if he would have the most part of the People among us, enter into Covenant with him, he must drive them into the Bond of the Covenant. Are not these of the kindred of the Scribes and Lawyers, of whom it is said, when they were invited unto Baptism, Luk. 7.30 which (was the Seal of the Covenant) they rejected the Counsell of God against themselves, being not Baptized, &c. And may not the Ministers of the Gospel answer this Generation in some such Language; as the Apostles did the unbelieving Jews, who spake against the things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming, Acts 13.45. even as these men do. Vers. 26. It was necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken unto you; but since you put it from you, and
judged your selves unworthy of everlasting life; loe, we turn to the Gentiles; so we to these men. It was our Commission and Compassion to speak to you, and perswade you to enter into this solemn League and Covenant with God and his People; but since you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of so great a priviledge; loe we turn to other People, and other Churches, we will trouble you no more; God will have a People that shall accept of this Grace of his, and think themselves highly honoured to, by the most high God. 2. Of them that do take it, how few be there that take it in a due manner, according to the Laws and Rules of so holy and solemn an Ordinance. For 1. Rash and unadvised entring into Co∣venant. Eccle. 5.1 How many be there that take it Rashly? Hand over Head, as we say, not considering what they do? The sin of former times in England hath been, That our Fa∣thers knew not this service; they regarded it not; it was hid from them; they enquired not after it; and these times of ig∣norance God winked at; or God lightly regarded them. But it is the sin of these latter times, that we slight, this Ordinance; That we know not, or regard not, to know the Laws of this Ordinance; the goings in thereof, and the comings out thereof, That we come to such an extraordinary duty with ordinary (hardly so much as ordinary) Consideration and Preparation. Indeed such care and Caution hath not been used for the informing and preparing of People, for so solemn a service, as was meet; whereby it hath been exposed to unspeakable prophanation, and the most of People have but offered the sacrifice of fools, while they have made their addresse thereunto. The Lord convince and humble those, whom it doth more espe∣cially concern to have prevented this sin, by their providence and diligence; for concerning this service we have just cause to acknowledge with holy David. 1 Chron. 15.13. For because ye did it not at first, The Lord our God made a breach upon us (yea many breaches in the West, and in the North, &c.) For that we sought him, not (herein) after the due order.
We keep our Fasts (for the most part) as if nothing were required, but to hang down our head for a day; and we take Co∣venants, as if all that is to be done, were but to hold up the hand for a day. 2. Again, How many have taken it, Vnsound∣nesse of heart. Rottenly and Hypocri∣tically, their hearts not being Psa 78.37. Vers. 3. upright with God in this matter, while some have come with their Idols in their hearts, with their base Lusts in their bosomes. Some have taken it, if not with a purpose to break it, yet with no purpose to keep it; They did but flatter him with their mouth, and lye to him with their tongues. And others have taken it with their own evasions and limitations, and reservations; such a Jesuiticall spirit is got in among us; by which means it comes to passe, that by that time men have pared off, and left one, and put what interpretations they frame to themselves, there is little left worth the name of a Covenant. 3. In the third place, How many prophane this Ordinance, by setting up base and earthly and carnall ends, and aymes to them∣selves? How many come to this Ordinance with Shechemitish spirits? Shall not their Cattle and their substance, and every Beast of theirs, be ours. If I take it not, saith the Malignant Citizen, I shall have my Wares plundered. If I take it not, faith the Malignant Gentleman, I shall have my Estate seized. If I take it not, saith the Malignant Parson, I shall have my Living sequestred, and my person it may be cast into Limbo Patrum, &c. To such base and dunghill respects, do men of vile spirits, prostitute this pure and heavenly Ordinance. 4. But lastly, Have we not all conspired together as it were, Unsaith∣fulnesse in keep∣ing Co∣venant. from the highest to the lowest, from the greatest, to the least, to break the Covenant of our God? How may God and his Ministers renew all those complaints over England, that were formerly poured out over Isral? Psal. 78.10. They have forsaken thy Covenant.
Vers. 37. They kept not the Covenant of their God; they were not steafast in his Covenant. Vers. 57. They turned back and dealt unfaithfully; they were turned aside like a deceitfull bow. Alas, what have we done with all the Covenants, we have made with God? Our Baptismall Vows, renewed (perhaps) Monthly at the Lords Table; our sick Beds engagements; Par∣liament Pretistations and Covenants with those often Monethly, Wckly, almost daily repititions of Covenants in the dayes of Humiliations and Thankesgivings; what is become of them all? Have we not dealt with them in some such like manner, as Moses dealt with the two Tables; who went up into the Mountain, to receive them from God; but as soon as he came down to the bottome, threw them out of his hands, and brake them: So have we done for all the world; we have gone up into the Mountain of the House of the Lord (so is the place of publike worship called) to make and renew our solemn Vows and Covenants, Isai. 2.3. which we have Sealed under an Oath and a Curse before, and with the most high God; but no sooner (all most) have we come down into the Valley of our ordinary walking and conversation; but we have thrown them out of our hands, and broken them all to peeces. Vow Reformation to day, and within a few dayes, be drunk again; and swear again, and be unclean again; and world∣ly, and wanto, and seure again; as toose, vain, unsavoury, and unsensible of pul like sin and misery as ever. Swear our Estates to day, and perhaps deny at wentieth part of them to morrow; Worth thousands, and deny to lend an hundred, a sor, &c. Swear to live and dye with the Parliament, and the Caus, to day, and spak against both to morrow. Swear to assist thm to day, against all Opposers, and Ma∣lignants; and it may be within a few dayes after, assist Oppo∣sers and Malignants against them. Help them off with their Taxations, though never so indifferent and easie. Couy, conc.l their Goods and Treasur, though never so justly forfeited to the State. Get their Mon yes, Arms, Horses, Provisions restored,
though never so lawfully seized by sufficient Warrant, and the industry, and piety of faithfull Officers, who venture their E∣states, their lives, their All, in the service. Swear and unswear, do and undo; protest for Christ to day, and accomodate for Antichrist to morrow; and when told of it, either they forgot; or which I tremble to think of, and blush to mention, some (and these no small ones) put in minde upon such occasions of their Protestations, and their Covenant, have not feared to reply, Alas, That was broken long since. As if breach of our Covenant did dissolve our engagements; and because we have broke once with God, we were never bound afterward to keep our word, our Oaths: Surely, That were an easie way of getting loose. But this God hath seen and heard among us; and me thinks I heat that angry question sounding in mine ears. Ezek. 17.15. Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that doth such things? Or shall he break the Covenant, and be delivered? And if the quarrell were so high, and God so angry for the breach of the Covenant that was but between man and man; yea between a people in externall Covenant with himself; and a pro∣fessed enemy; a Tyrant an Ʋsurper; what may such a People, for whom God hath done, and is doing such great things; ex∣pect upon Covenants, so religiously and solemnly made, and sworn, not onely before, but with so holy God; and so ofter, and so treacherously, yea, so desperately abused and trampled under feet! I may say unto you therefore, as sometime good Josiah did to his Servants. 2 Chro. 34.21. Go, enquire of the Lord, for us, Humilia∣tion for this sin. and for the remnant that are left in Israel, and in Judah; for great is the wrath of the Lord, that is powred out upon us, because we have not kept the word, and Oath, which we have uttered to the Lord our God. It is without all question, the Quarrell of the Covenant, which the Sword is this day a venging upon England, with so much wrath, and fury powred out; Woe unto us, out God is grievously angry, what shall we do? When David saw the Angel of the Lord standing between the Heaven and Earth, Chro. 21.16. having a sword drawn in his hand stretched
out over Jerusalem: Vers. 16. It is said, Then David and the Elders of Israel, who were cloathed with Sackcloth, fell upon their faces: And David said, even I it is that have sinned, and done evill indeed; but as for these sheep, what have they done; let thine band I pray thee, Vers. 18. and 26. Oh Lord my God, be upon me, and upon my Fathers house, &c. And by the direction of the Angel, he built an Altar, and offered Sacrifices upon it unto the Lord, and the anger of the Lord was pacified towards his people. Let us do so this day, and in all our publike and private Humiliations. The Angel hath his sword drawn; stretched out over the whole Land; Even the sword threatned in the Text, to avenge the Quarrell of the Covenant; Let us fall down upon our faces, and lye in the dust; draw water, and poure it out before the Lord; take up Jeremiahs wish, and Lamentation. Jere. 9.1. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of Tears, That I might weep day and night for the slain of the Daugh∣er of my People: Yea, That we might weep bitterly for the sin which hath ain so many precious sons of Sion; even this sin, Covenant-Violation. And, oh you that have stood out in refusing the Covenant of God, do not stand out in refusing to be humbled for your re∣fusalls. You that have been Rash and Rotten, sleight and Carnall, and hypocriticall in taking the Covenant, be not so in your con∣fessions of, and humiliations for this great sin of yours, whereby God is provoked; labour to be deep and down right; serious, solid, and substant all in your mournings and lamentations, over your sin, your selves and the Kingdom. You that have broken the Covenant of your God, over and over again, Lach. 12.10 labor to get your hearts broken for this sin: and to that end look upon him whom you have pierced; whose skin, and whose flesh, and whose heart, and whose soul, you have broken by Covenant breaches, Heb 6.6. not while he hung upon the Crosse onely, but as the Apostle, Have crucified him a fresh to your selves, and put him to an open shame. Oh look upon him, his tears, his wounds, his blood, &c. Till vour eyes run down with tears, your hearts be wounded; and
your souls even melt into blood within you. And from thence even turn your eyes also to look upon them, whom ye have pierced; your slain, wounded Bretheren: Behold those many thousands that lye slain in the high places of the field; Behold, those many hundreds thatly sick and bleeding almost to the death, of the wounds which your sins, especially, your treacherous dealing in the Covenant of God, have made upon their bodies. Oh cry with David, I have sinned; these poor sheep what have they done; Let thine hand I pray thee, Oh Lord my God, be upon me, and upon my fathers house. Oh would it not melt any heart, that were not harder then the Rock in the Wildernesse, to see so many poor Creatures bleeding, languishing, dying, slain, under the guilt of our Covenant-prophanation? I may say unto you, as once Pharaohs servants said to him. Knowest thou not yet, that Egypt is destroyed. Know you not yet, that England is almost destroyed? Oh it would break your hearts to hear the reports of the Western, and many of the Northern parts of the Land. How sad, how black, how desolate! What a face of ruine, and de∣struction, there is to be seen upon them! The Beasts of the field cut off; The wayfaring man ceaseth; The Inhabitants driven from their habitations, and the little remnant stript naked & bare, seeking for Bread to relieve your souls, with perill of their lives, Lam. 5 9. under unspeakable miseries and afflictions; doubtlesse to see what thousands feel, it would make us weary of our lives; while (in a word) those Countries and places which before the Destroyer were, as a Garden of Eden; behinde him are as a desolate Wildernesse. Bretheren, we have almost broken the Nation in pieces, there is yet a little life left: Oh lift up your voices for the remnant that remains. Labour to break your hearts into a thousand pieces. A broken heart is the sacrifices of the Lord. Psal 52.17. So many pieces, so many sacrifices. Oh take these, and upon the Altar which God hath set up, (The Lord Jesus Christ is our Altar;) upon this Altar, let us offer these Sacrifices: And the Lord poure out upon us the Spirit of Compassion and Compunction;
the Spirit of Grace and Supplication; That this day (as the rest) may be a day of Attonement and Reconciliation, wherein our God may be pacified towards us, and reconciled unto us, in the Lord Jesus. A broken and a contr heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.
The Second Sermon Preached at Milk-street, upon Saturday Evening, September 30. For the preparation to the COVENANT. The second Ʋse; Exhortation. SInce Covenant-violation is a matter of so high a Quarrell; as for the avenging whereof, God sends a Sword upon a Church or Nation; for which, it is more then probable, the Sword is upon us at this prefent, A nos 7.4. it having almost de∣voured Ireland already, and eaten up a great part of England also; Let us engage our Counsell, and all the Interest we have in Heaven and Earth, for the taking up of this Controversie; Let us consider what we have to do, what way there is yet left us, for the Reconciling of this Quarrell; else we, and our Families, are all but the children of death, and destru∣ction: This Sword that is drawn, and devoured so much Chri∣stian Protestant flesh, already, will, it is to be feared, go quite through the Land, and in the pursuite of this Quarrell, cut off the remnant, till our Land be desolate, and our Cities waste,
and England be made as Sodome and Gomorrah, in the day of the fierce anger of Jehovah. Somewhat I have spoken already in the former Use, to this purpose. Jerem. 3.13. viz. To acknowledge our iniquites that we have trans∣gressed against the Lord our God. To get our hearts broken, for breaking the Covenant; to lay it so to heart, that God may not lay it to our charge, &c. But this looks backward. Somewhat must be done de futuro; For time to come: That may not onely compose the Quarrell, but lay a sure foundation of an After Peace between God and the Kingdom. And for that purpose, a Means lies before us; an Opportunity is held forth unto us by the hand of Divine Wisdom, and goodnesse, of known use and successe among the People of God in former times; which is yet to me a gratious intimation, and a farther argument of hope from Heaven, that God hath not sworn against us in his wrath, nor sealed us up a People devoted to destruction, but hath yet a minde to enter into terms of peace and reconcilia∣tion with us, to receive us into Grace and Favour, to become our God, and to own us for his People; if yet, we will go forth to meet him, and accept of such honourable termes as shall be propounded to us. And that is by renewing our Covenant with him; yea, by entring into a more full and firme Covenant then ever heretofore: For as the Quarrell was raised about the Cove∣nant, so it must be a Covenant more solid and substantiall, that must compose the Quarrell, as I shall shew you hereafter, and that is the service and the priviledge that lies before us; the work of the next day. So that me thinks I hear this Use of Exhortation, which now I would commend unto you, speak∣ing unto us in that Language. Jere. Jer. 50.5. 50.5. Come let us joyn our selves to the Lord in a perpe∣tuall Covenant, that shall not be forgotten. It is the voyce of the Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah, returning out of Captivity. Vers. 4. The children of Israel shall come, they, and the children of Judah together; Seeking the Lord, whom they had lost, and enquiring the way to Sion, from whence their Idolatry, and Adulteries had cast them out; themselves become now like the
Doves of the Valley, mourning and weeping, because they had perverted their way, and forgotten the Lord their God. Vers. 4.5. Going, and weeping; they shall go and seek the Lord their God; they shall ask the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward. And if you enquire when this should be? The fourth Verse tells you, In those dayes. And if you ask again, what dayes those are? Interpreters will tell us of a threefold day, wherein this Prophesie or Pro∣mise is to be fulfilled; A three∣fold day of mak∣ing good the Pro∣phefie. 1. The li∣terall day That is, The Literall or Inchoative Day. That is, The Evangelicall or Spirituall Day. That is, The Ʋniversall or Perfect Day. First, There is a literall or inthoative day, here prophefied of, and that is already past; past long since: Namely, in that day wherein the seventy yeers of the Babylonian Captivity ex∣pired; then was this Prophesie, or Promise begun, in part to be accomplished: At what time the Captivity of Judah, and divers of Israel with them, upon their return out of Babylon, Ezra 8.21. kept a folemn Fast at the River Ahava, to afflict their souls before their God, There may you see them going and weeping; To seek of him aright way for them, and their little ones; There you have them, Seeking the Lord, and enquiring the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward. And when they came home, you may hear some of their No∣bles and Priests, calling upon them to enter into Covenant; so Shechoniah spake unto Ezra, the Princes, and the People; Ezra 10.2, 3. We have sinned against the Lord, &c. Yet now there is hope in Israel, toucerning this thing. Now therefore, let us make a Covenant with our God. And so you may finde the Levites calling the people to con∣fesse their sins with weeping and supplications in a day of humili∣ation, and at the end of it, to Write, and Swear, and Seal, Nehe. 9.4, 5. a Covenant with the Lord their God. This was the first day wherein this Prophesie began to be fulfill'd in the very letter thereof.
The second day is the Evangelicall day, 2 Day, nge . wherein this Pro∣mise is fulfilled in a  or Spirituall sence; Namely, when the elect of God, of what Nation or Language soever, (being all called the Israel G, Isal. 44.5. as is Prophesied, One shall say I am the Lor is, and  shall call him  by the name of Jacob, &c. and  by the Name of Israel.) I say, when these in their severall Generations and successi∣ons shall turn to the Lord their God, either from their Gentilisme and Pag, as in their first conversion to Christianity; (as  oserves after the Resurrection of Christ, and Mission of the holy host. A  exinde univers nationes ex verage  humani gents ad Dominum Deum, & ad Dominum us cus. From that day foreward you might behold por Creatures of all Nations and Languages, creeping out of their dark hol and corners of blindnesse and Idolatry, and betaking them to God and his Sn Jesus Christ, as to their Law-giver and Saviour;) or else turning from Antichristian superstition, and false wayes of worship, as in the after, and more full conversion of Churches or Persons; purging themselves more and more, from the corruptions and mixtures of Popery and Superstitions, according to the degree of light and con∣viction, which should break out upon them, and asking the way to Sion; i. e. The pure way of Gospel Worship, according to the fuller and cleerer Manifestations and Revelations of the minde of Christ in the Gospel. This was fulfilled in Luths time, and in all those after Separations which any of the Churches have made from Rome, and from those Reliques, and remains of Superstition and will∣worship, wherewith themselves, and the Ordinances of Jesus Christ have been defiled. The third day wherein this Prophesie or Promise is to be made good, 3 Day, Univer∣fall. is that Ʋniversall day, wherein both Jow and Gentile shall convert unto the Lord. That Day of the Restitution of all things, as some good Devins conceive, When ten men out  all Lan  the Nations, shall take hold of the skirt of him that is Jew; saying,  will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you, Zch. 8.23. And to what purpose is more fully
exprest in the former Verses (answering the Prophesie in the Text.) Vers. 20. Thus saith the Lord of Hoasts, it shall yet come to passe, that there shall come people, and the Inhabitants of many Cities. Vers. 21. And the Inhabitants of one Citie, shall go to another; saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts; I will go also. Vers. 22. Yea, many people, and strong Nations, shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and pray before the Lord. This I call the Ʋniversall day, because, as you see there shall be such an abundance of confluence of Citis, and People, and Nations, combining together in an holy League and Covenant, to seek the Lord. And a Perfect day; because, the minde and will of the Lord shall be fully revealed and manifested to the Saints, concerning the way of Worship and Government in the Churches. The New Jerusalem; i. e. The perfect, exact, Ezek 43.11, 12, 13. Reve. 21.10, 11. Isa 30.26 and punctuall Modell o the Government of Christ in the Churches, shall then be let own from Heaven. The light of the Moon, being then to be as the light of the Su, and  light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven dayes, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and  of their wound. By what hath been spoken, you may perceive under which of these dayes we are: Past indeed the first, but not yet arrived at the third day; and therefore under the second day, that ∣angelicall ay; yet so, as if all the three dayes were mt toge∣ther in ours, while it seems to me, that we are upon the daw∣ing of the third day: and this Prophesie falling so pat, and full upon our times, as if we were not got beyond the Literall; a little variance will do it. The children of Israel, and the children of Judah? Scotland and England, newly coming out of Babylon, Antichristian Babyln, Papall Tyranny and Ʋsurpations, (in one degree or other) Going and weeping in the dayes of their solemn Humiliations, bewailing their Back-slidings and Rebelli∣ons,
to seek the Lord their God, to seek pardon and reconciliation, to seek his face and favour, not onely in the continuance, but in the more full and sweet influentiall manifestations of his presence among them; and to that end asking the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward; that is, Enquiring after the pure way of Gospel worship, with full purpose of heart; that when God shall reveal his minde to them, they will conforme themselves to his minde, as according to that blessed Prophesie and Promise, Isal. 2.3. He will teach us of his wayes, and we will walk in his paths, &c. And that they may make all sure, That they may secure God and themselves against all future Apostacies and black-flidings, calling one upon another, and ecchoing back one to another. Come let us joyn our selves to the Lord in a perpetuall Cove∣nant, that may not be forgotten. You see by this time, I have changed my Text, though not my project; to which purpose, I shall remember that in the handling of these words, I must not manage my discourse, as if I were to make a new entire Sermon upon the Text, but onely to improve the happy advantages it holds forth, for the pursuite and driving on of my present Ʋse of Exhortation. Come let us joyn, &c. To this end therefore from these words, I will propound and endeavour to satisfie these three Quaeres. 1. What? 2. Why? 3. How? 1. What the duty is, to which they mutually stirre up one another. 2. Why? or upon what considerations? 3. How, or in what manner this service is to be per∣formed? And in all these you shall see what proportion the Text holds with the Times. The duty in our Text, with the duty in our Hands, pressing them on still in an Exhortatory way. For the first. sc. What the duty is? Answ. You see that in the Text, is to joyn themselves to the Lord, by a solemn Covenant; and so is that which we have
now in our hands, to joyn our selves to the Lord by a Covenant; how farre they correspond will appear in the sequell. This is the first and main End of a Covenant between God and his People, as I have shewed you, To joyn themselves to the Lord. The sons of the stranger, that joyn themselves to the Lord, Isa 56.6. &c. And take held of his Covenant. This I say is the first and main end of the Covenant in the Text: The second is subordinate unto it; namely, to Enquire th way to Sion. i. e. To inquire the way and manner, how God would be worshipt; that they might dishnour and pre∣voke him no more, by their Idolatries, and Superstitions, which had been brought in upon the Ordinances of God, by the means of Apostate Kings, and Priests, and Prophets, as in Jeroboams and Ahabs reigns, &c. And for which they had been carryed into Captivity. And such is the Covenant that lies before us, in the first place, as I say, to joyn our selves to the Lord, to be knit unsepa∣parably unto him, that he may be our God, and we may be his People. And in the next place, as subservient hereunto, to ask the way to Sion; to enquire and search by all holy means, sanctified to that purpose, what is that pure way of Gospel worship; That we and ou children, after us, may worship the God of spirits, the od of truth, in spirit and in truth; in spirit, Joh 4.3. opposed to car∣all wys of will-worship and inventions of men; and in truth, opposed to false hypocriticall shews and pretences, since the Father seeks for such to worship him. Now, That this is the main scope and aym of this Cove∣nant before us, will appear if you read and ponder it with due considerations; I will therefore read it to you distinctly, this Evening, besides the reading of it again to morrow, when you come to take it; and when I have read it, I will answer the main, and most materiall objections, which seem to make it inconsistnt with these blessed ends and purposes. Attend diligently while I read it to you.
The Covenant. WE Noblemen, his Co∣ it  had to cm  the  and  seve∣ral pafa∣s of the Cnant to which . Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citi∣zens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Com∣mons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the King∣dom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the honour and happinesse of the Kings Majesty and His Posterity, and the true publique Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included, and calling to minde the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, At∣tempts, and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplo∣rable state of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distres∣sed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and publike Testimonies; We have now at last, (after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protesta∣tions, and Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter Ruine and Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the Example of Gods People in other Nations; after mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutuall and solemn League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:
I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God, endeavour in our severall places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, against our common Enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches; And shall indeavour to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the neerest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religi∣on, Confession of Faith, Form of Church-Govern∣ment, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the middest of us. II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, indeavour the Extirpation of Poperty, Prelacy, (that is, Church-Government, by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commis∣saries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiasticall Officers depending on that Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresie, Schisme, Prophanenesse, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of God∣linesse; least we partake in other mens sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms. III. We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in our severall Vocations, endeavour
with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Priviledges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and de∣fend the Kings Majesties person and authority, in the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witnesse with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesties just power and greatnesse. IV. We shall also with all faithfulnesse endeavour the discovery of all such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evill Instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to publike tryall, and re∣ceive condign punishment, as the degree of their offences shall require or deserve, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge con∣venient. V. And whereas the happinesse of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denyed in former times to ou Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted unto us, and hath been lately concluded, and setled by both Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, indeavour that they remain conjoyned in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilfull Opposers therof, in manner expressed in the precedent Article. VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of Religion, Liberty,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever combination, perswasion; or terrour, to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and Con∣junction, whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause which so much concerneth the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honour of the King; but shall all the dayes of our lives zealoufly and constantly continue therein, a∣gainst all opposition, and promote the same accord∣ing to our power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our selves to suppresse or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of God. And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof; we professe and declare before God and the world, our unfained desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these Kingdoms, especially, That we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not laboured for the purity and power thereof, and that we have not endeavoured to re∣ceive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk worthy o him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfained purpose, desire, and en∣deavour for our selves, and all others under our
power and charge, both in publike and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the ex∣ample of a reall Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall an∣swer at that great day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to blesse our desires and proceedings with such successe, as may be deliverance and safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoak of Antichristian Tyranny; to joyn in the same or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and Tranquility of Christian Kingdoms and Common wealths. THis Brethren is the Covenant before us; to which God and his Parliament do invite us this day; wherein the Ends propounded, lye fair to every impartiall eye. The first Article in this Covenant binding us to the Refor∣mtion of Religion; and the st Article to the Reformation of our Lives. In both, we joyn our sils to the Lord, and swear to ask and receive from his Lips, the Law of this Reformation; Read them else again, and consider. And trudy, this is a why, as well as a what (that I may a little prevent my self.) A otive of the first Magnitude. Oh for a People or Person to be joy unto the Lord; to be made one with the most high God of Heaven and Earth, before whom,
and to whom we swear, is a priviledge of unspeakable worth and excellency! Semeth it (said David once to Sauls servants) a small thing to your eyes, to be son in law to a King, seeing I am a poor man? 1 Sam 18.23. Seemeth it, may I say, a small thing to you for poor crea∣tures to be joyned, and married as it were to the great GOD, the living God; who are so much worse then nothing, by how much sin is worse then vanity; yea, to be one with him, as Christ saith in that heavenly Prayer of his; John 1.21, 22, 23. As he and his Father is one, That they may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one, with us. And again, That they may be one, even as we are one. Yea, perfect in one; not indeed, in the perfection of that unitie, but in unitie of that perfection, not made perfect in a perfection of equality, but of conformity. This is the fruit of a right managed Covenant; and the greatest honour that poor mortality is capable of. Moses stands admiring of it, Deut 32.33. You may read the place at your leisure. But against this blessed Service and Trueth, are there muste∣red, and led up an whole Regiment of Ojctions, under the conduct of the father of lies; though some of them may seem to have some shadow of truth; and therefore so much the more carefully to be examined. I shall deal onely with some of the chief Commanders of them, if they be conquered, the rest will vanish of their own accord. Objections propounded and answered. Object. 1. If this were the end of this service, yet it were needlesse: since we have done it over and over again, It is needlesse. in our former Protestations and Covenants; and so this repetition may seem to be a prophanation of so holy an Ordinance, by making of it so ordinary, and nothing else, but a taking of Gods name, in vaine. To this I answer. 1. It cannot be done too oft; if it be done according to the Law and Order of so solemn an Ordinance. 2. The people in the Text might have made the same Objecti∣on,
it lay as strong against the work, to which they encourage one another: For surely, this was not the first time they engaged themselves to God by way of Covenant; but having broken their former Covenants, they thought it their priviledge, and not their burdn to renew it again, and to make it more full stle, and impregnable then ever; A perpetuall Covenant that shall not be forgarta; which hints a 3. Answ. And that is there was never yet so full and strict a Covenant tendred to us since we were a people. Former Covenants have had their dfect and failings, like the best of Gods people: But I may say of this in reference to other Covenants, as Solomon of his good House-wife, in reference to other women. Other Dughtrs have done well, but thou best exceeded thm all. Other Covenants have done well, but this hath excedd them all; he Paul among the Apostles, it goes beyond them all, though it seems to be brne out of duc time. Now if your Lss and Covenants among men, be either  or forited; need men perswade you to have them renewed and prfected! Of how much greater concermnent is this, be∣tween God and us, Oh you of little faith? 4 You receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper once a , and some will not be pt off, though they have no prt, nor portion in that Mystery, say the Ministers of Christ what they can; and the Sacrament is but the Seal of the Cove∣nant; consider it, and be convincd. But secondly it is objected, O. 2. We at . There be some Clauses in this Covenant, that serve rather to  us further from God, thn pr us nerr to Vint; as binding us to enquire the way to Sion of man, rather then of God; to receive the Law of Reform then from Sotland, ad other , and not from the lips of the  Propht of the Churches. . In the , we swr first to ntain the Reli∣g as it is already  in Doctrine, Go∣m, and ; when in fiul, the mest shall sweat they know not what; and seconly, we swear to conserm our selves  England to their  and  in Scotland,
which is presbyteriall, and for ought we know, as much tyran∣nicall, and more Antichristian then that of Prelacy, which we swear to extirpate; yea, some have not been afraid to call it The Antichrist that is now in the world. 1. To whom I first answer, beseeching them in the bowels of compassion, and spirit of meeknesse, to take heed of such rash and unchristian censures, lest God hear, and it displease him; and they themselves possibly be found to commit the sin, Isai 5 20. and incurre the woe of them that call evill good, and good evill. Secondly, Whereas they object, that many shall swear to they know not what, the most being totally ignorant of the Disci∣pline of Scotland, and very few understanding it distinctly. I would have these remember and consider two examples in Scripture, the one of King Josiah, 2. Instan∣ces. 2 Chro. 34 30, 3, 32. Nehe. 10.28. the other of the Women and children in Nehemiahs time. Josiah (as the Text tells us) not being above eight yeers of age; as Vers. 3. While he was yet young, be∣gan to seek after the Lord God of David, his Father; and in the twelfth yeer, he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem, &c. And this purging and Reformation he did by Covenant, wherein he sware, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandements, and his Testimonies and his Statutes. Which surely, at that age we cannot conceive he did distinctly and universally understand; no more could all the Men their Wives, and their Sons, and their Daughters, that took the Covenant (in Nehemiahs time) understand all things inparticular to which that Covenant did binde them; since they did enter into a Gurse, and an Oath, not onely to refuse all inter-marriages with the Heathen, as Vers. 30. but also to walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses, and to observe and do all the Commandments of the Lord, and his judge∣ments and his Statutes. Surely there were in this multitude, not an inconsiderable number that were not acquainted with all the Morall precepts, Judiciall Laws, and Ceremoniall Statutes, which God com∣manded the people by the hand of Moses. 2. Ob∣jections against these In∣stances. There be two things I know, that may be replyed against these Instances. 1. That of those women and children in Nehemiah, it is said in the same place, They were of understanding. Vers. 28. Every
one having knowledge, and having understanding; Vers. 29. They  unto their Brethren, their Nobles, and entred into a curse, &c. 2. That there is a great difference between the Laws and Statutes to which they sware, and this Government and Disci∣pl to which we sware in this Covenant. Those Laws and Statutes were ordained immediately of God himself; and there∣fore being insallibly right; unquestionably, holy, and just, and good; Jsiah and the people might lawfully sware observance to them with an implicite faith; but not so in a Government and Dpline set up by man, by a Church (be it never so pure and holy) for their light being but a borrowed light, and they not priviledged with an infallible spirit (as the Apostles) their Reso∣lations and Ordinances may be lyable to mistake and errour; and therefore, to sware observance to them by an implicite faith, is more then comes to their share, and as unwarrantable as it is unsafe for a people or person to do, who are yet ignorant or unsatisfied in the whole, or in any particular. To these Objections I rejoyn: Answer to these Oecti∣.  First, That that Description of the Covenanters in Nehemiah, That they were of understand∣ing and knowledg, supposeth not a distinct actuall cognizance of every particular Ordinance, Judgement, Statute, and Provision, in all the three Laws, Morall, Judiiall, Ceremoniall, in every one that took the Covenant; that being not onely needlsse, but im∣possible; but it implies onely a capacity to receive Instruction and Information in the things they sware unto, though at present they were ignorant of many of the severalls contained in that Oath. And so farre this Rule obtains among us, Children that are not yet come to understanding and fools, being not admitted to this service, as not capable of instruction. To the second (though more considerable) yet the answer is not very difficult: For First, We do not sware to observe that Discipline, but to preserve it: I may preserve that, which in point of conscience I cannot observe, or not, at least, sware to observe. Secondly, We sware to preserve it, not in opposition to any other forme of Government that may be found agreeable to the Word, but in opposition against a common Enemy, which is a clause of so wide a latitude and easie a digestion, as the
tenderest conscience need not kick at it; This preservation re∣lating not so much to the Government, as to the persons or Nati∣on under this Government, not so much to preserve it, as to preserve them in it, against a Prelaticall Party at home, or a Popish Party abroad, that should attempt by violence to destroy them, or to force another Government upon them, that should be against the Word of God; under which latitude, I see not but we might enter into the like Covenant with Lutherans, or other Reformed Churches, whose Government, Discipline, and Worship, is yet exceedingly corrupted with degenerate mixtures. Thirdly, Neither in the perservation of their Government; &c. nor in the Reformation of ours, do we sware to any thing of mans; but to what shall be found to be the minde of Christ, witnesse that Clause, According to the Word of God; Art. 1.so that upon the matter, it is no more then Josiah and the People in Ne∣himiah swore to; namely, what shall appear to be the Statutes and Laws which Christ hath left in his Word, concerning the Regi∣ment of his Church. Fourthly, Nay, not so much, for we are not yet called to sware the Observation of any kinde of Government, that is, or shall be presented to us, but to endeavour the Reformation of Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, Ac∣cording to the Word of God. In the faithfull and impartiall and search and pursuite wher∣of, if Scotland or any of the Reformed Churches can hold us forth any cleerer light then our own, we receive it not as our Rule but as such an help to expound our Rule, as Christ himself hath allowed us, Cant. 1.7, 8. 2 Cor. 11.16. Phil. 4.8. 1 Ths. 1.7, 8. In which case we are bound to kisse not the Lips onely, but the very feet of them that shall be able to shew us the way to Sion. Isa. 52.7. So that still, it is not the voyce of the Churches, but of Christ in the Churches that we Covenant to listen to, in this pursuite, that is to say, That we will follow them, as they follow Christ; And when all is done, and a Reformation (through the Assistance and blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ, that great King and Prophet of his Church) resolved on, according to this Rule thus interpreted, under what notion or obligation the observa∣tion
of it shall be commended to us sub judice lis est, it is yet in the bosome and brest of Authority; we are as yet called to swear to nothing in this kinde. So much in reference to the Instances. I answer further to the satisfying of this second doubt, That by this Covenant we are bound no more to conform to Scotland, then Scotland to us: The Astipulation being mutuall, and this Astipulation binding us not so much to conform one to another, as both of us to the Word; wherein, if we can meet, who would not look upon it, as upon the precious fruit of Christs prayer (Joh. 17.20, 21. That they might be one, as we are on) and the beauty and safety of both Nations, and of as, many of the Churches, as the Lord our God shall perswade to come into this holy and blessed Association. A third objection falls upon the second Article or Branch of this Covenant; We swear ext∣pt that wch may be the Go∣venment of the Gospl. wherein, it is feared by some that we swear, to Extirpate that which for ought we know, upon due inquiry may be found, the way to Sion, the way of Evangelicall Govern∣ment which Christ and his Apostles, have set up in the Church. Where lies that think you? In what clause or word of the Article? Who can tell? Surely not in Popery; or if there be any that think that the way, I could wish their persons in Rome, since their hearts are there already. Is it in Superstition? Nay, Superstition properly consisting in Will-worship, Teaching for doctrine the traditions of men; This cannot be the way to Sion which Christ hath chalked out to us in his Word. No more can Heresie, which is the Opposition to sound Do∣ctrine; nor Schisme, which is the Rent of the Churches Peace; nor Prophanenesse, the poyson of her conversation. None but Superstitious, Heretickes, Schismatikes, Prophane persons, will call these the way to Sion; nor these neither under the Name and Notion of Superstition, Heresie, Schisme, Prophanenesse; For the Heretike will not call his doctrine heresie; nor the super∣stitious his inovations superstition; nor the Schismatick his turbulent practises, schisme, nor lastly, the prophane person his lewdnesse, prophanenesse, though they love the thing, they hate the name. And this, before we go further, occasions another Objecti∣on,
which you must give me leave, both to make, and answer in a Parenthesis, and then I will return. Object. How then can we swear the extirpation of these, since, who shall be judge? Who shall judge what is Heresie, &c. While some will be ready to call that Schisme and Superstition, &c. which is not; and others deny that to be Heresie, Superstition, Schisme. &c. which is? To which I answer. Ans. 1. By the same Argument, we ought not to Covenant against Popery and Drunkennesse, Sabbath-breaking, nor any other sin whatsoever, there being nothing so grosse, but it will finde some friends to justifie, and plead for it; which if we shall not condemn till all parties be agreed on the verdict, we shall never proceed to judgement, while the world stands. 2. The word must be the Rule and the Judge, say men what they please, pro or con. 3. And if the matter be indeed so disputable, that it lies not in my faculty to pronounce sentence; I have my dispensation to suspend, till the word determine the controversie. I now return; If then in none of these, the doubt must of necessity lye in that word Prelacy. And is that indeed the th-way of Gospel-Government? Is that it indeed, which bears away the bell of Jure divino? What is it then that hath destroyed all Gospell, Order, and Government, and Worship, in these Kingdoms, as in other places of the Christian World, even down to the ground? Hath it not been Prelacy? What is it that hath taken down a teaching Ministry, and set up in the room, a teaching Ceremony? Is it not Prelacy? What is it that hath silenced, suspended, imprisoned, depri∣ved, banisht, to many godly, learned, able Ministers of the Gospel; yea, and kild some of them with their unheard of cru∣elties, and thrust into their places, Idol, Idle, Sheepheards; Dumb Doggs that cannot bark (unlesse it were at the flock of Christ; so they learned of their Masters, both to bark and bite too) greedy Dogs that could never have enough, that did teare out the loyns and bowels of their own people for gain, Heap living upon living, preferment upon preferment; swearing, drunken, unclean Priests, that taught nothing but rebellion in Israel, and
caused people to abhorre the Sacrifice of the Lord: Arminian, Popish, Idolatrous, vile wretches, such as had Job been alive, he would not have set with the Doggs of his flock; who I say, brought in these? Did not Prelacy? What hath hindered The Reformation of Religion all this while in Doctrine, Government, and Worship? Prlay, a genera∣tion of men they were, that never had a vote for Jesus Christ; yea, what hath poysoned and adulterated Religion in all these Branches, and hath let in Popery and prophanenesse upon the Kingdom like a flood, for the raising of their own pomp and greatnesse, but Prely? In a word, Prelacy it is, that hath set its impure and imperi∣ous feet, one upon the Church, the  upon the State, and hath made both serve, xod: 14 as Pharaoh did the Israelites; with rigour. Surely, their Government hath been a yoak, which neither we, nor our Fathers weral le t bear. Now, That which hath done this and a thousand times more violence and mischief to Christ and his People, then the tongue or pen of man is able to expresse? Can that be the way, of, or to Sta? Can that be the Government of Christ and his Churches? Object. I, but there be that will tell us, these have been the faults of the persons, and not of the calling? Answ. So cry some indeed, That yet like the men, as well as their calling, and would justifie the persons, as well as the Office, but that their wickednesse is made so manifest, that im∣pudency it self cannot deny it. But is it indeed onely the fault of the men, The aba∣sin the Church, not the fault of the per∣sons the Prelates, onely but of the calling. not of the calling? What meant then that saying of Queen Elizabeth, That when she had made a Bishop, she had spoiled a Preacher? Was it onely a jest. 2. And I wish we had not too just cause to adde, The man too. Surely of the most of them, we may say, as once Aenc∣blus spake of the Gentiles, Apud vos optimi censerter ques com∣paratio pessimorum sic fait. Give me leave to vary it a little: He was a good Bishop that was not the worst man; but if thee were some of a better Complexion, who yet, apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto, were very rarely discovered in their Episcopall Sea; yet
3. Look into their Families, and they were for the most part the vilest in the Diocesse, a very nest of unclean Birds; And 4. If you had look't into their Courts and Consistories, you would have thought you had been in Caiaphas-Hall, where no other trade was driven, but the crucifying of Christ in his Members. 5. But fifthly, Produce me one in this last succession of Bishops, (I hope the last) that had not his hands imbrued more or lesse in the blood of the faithfull Ministry, (I say not Mini∣sters, but Ministry) produce a man amongst them all that durst be so Conscientious as to lay down his Bishoprick, rather then he would lay violent hands upon a Non-Conformable Minister, though he had failed but in one point of their compasse of Cere∣monies, when their great Master the Pope of Canterbury com∣manded it, although both for Life, Learning, and Orthodox Re∣ligion, their consciences did compell them to confesse with Pi∣late, We finde no fault in this just prson. Matth. 27.24. I say produce me such a Bishop amongst the whole Bunch, in this latter age, and I will down of my knees and ask them forgivenesse. Oh it was sure a mischievous poysoned soyl, in which, whatsoever plant was fet, did hardly ever thrive after. 5. But yet further, Was not the calling as bad as the men? You may as well say so of the Papacy in Rome; for surely, the Prelay of England, which we sware to extirpate, was the very same Fabrick and Modell of Ecclesiasticall Regiment, that is in that Antichristian world; yea, such an evill it is, That some Di∣vines venerable for their great learning, as well as for their emi∣nent holinesse, did conceive sole Episcopall Jurisdiction, to be the very seat of the Beast, upon which the fifth Angel is now pow∣ring out his Viall, which is the reason that the men of that King∣dom, gnaw thr tongues for pain, Reve 16.10, 11. and blaspheme the God of Heaven. Object. I, Some Prelacy lawfull. but it is therefore pleaded further against this Clause, That although it may be Prlacy with all its adjuncts and accidents of Archbishops, Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans, &c. may have happily been the cause of these evils that
have broken in upon us, and perhaps Antichristian; yet should we therefore swear the extirpation of all Prelacy, or Episcopacy whatsoever; since there may be found perhaps in Scripture, an Episcopacy or Prelacy, which circumcised from these exuberant Members and Officers, may be that Government Christ hath bequeathed his Church in the time of the Gospel? Answ. Now we shall quickly close this businesse. For 1. It is this Prelacy, thus cloathed, thus circumstanc't, which we swear to extirpate; Read else the clause again, Prelacy, that is, Church-Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, &c. Not every, or all kindes of Prelacy; not Prelacy in the latitude of the notion thereof. 2. And secondly, let us joyn issue upon this point, and make no more words of it; If there be an Episcopacy or Prelacy found in the word, as the way of Gospel government which Christ hath bequeathed the Churches, and this be made appear, we are so far from swearing to extirpate such a Prelacy, as that rather we are bound by vertue to this Oath to entertain it, as the minde and will of Jesus Christ. And this might suffice to warrant our Covenanting to extir∣pate this Prelacy, save that onely, yet some seem conscientiously to scruple this in the last place. Object. Prelacy establisht by Law. That they see not what there is to warrant our swearing, to extirpate that which is established by the Law of the Land, till the same Law have abolisht it. To which I answer. Answ. 1. If the Law of the Land had abolisht it, we need not swear the extirpation of it. 2. In this Oath, the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, go before us, who having the Legislative power in their hands, have also Potestatem vitae & necis, over Laws, as well, as over Persons, and may as well put to death the evill Laws that do offend against the Kingdom, and the welfare of it, as the evill persons that do offend against the Laws. 3. Who therefore (thirdly) if they may lawfully annull and abolish Laws that are found to sin against the Law of God, and the good of the Kingdom, may as lawfully binde themselves by an Oath, to use the uttermost of their endeavours, to annull
and abolish those Laws; their Oath being nothing else but a solemn engagement to indeavour to perform what they have warrantably resolved upon; and with the same equity may they binde the Kingdom to assist them in so doing. 4. Which is all that the people are engaged to by this Cove∣nant; sc. Not to out run the Parliament in this Extirpation, but to follow and serve them in it, by such concurrence as they may expect from each person in their stations and callings; for that clause exprest in the first, and third Article, is to be under∣stood in all. If it be yet objected, arlia∣ment bound by Oath to maintain Laws. that the Members of Parliament have at one time or other, sworn to preserve the Laws; and therefore to swear to indeavour the extirpation of Prelacy, which is establisht by Law, is to contradict their own Oath, and run the hazard of perjury; It is easie for any one to observe and an∣swer. Answ. 1. That by the same Argument, neither may King and Parliament together, change or annull a Law, though found de∣structive to the good of the Kingdoms, since His Majesty as well as His Subjects, is bound up under the same Oath at His Coronation. 2. But again, There is a vast difference between the Mem∣bers of Parliament, simply considered in their private Capaci∣ties, wherein they may be supposed to take an Oath to maintain the Laws of the Land; and that publike capacitie of a Parliament, whereby they are Judges of those Laws, and may as I said before, endeavour the removeall of such as are found pernicious to the Church or State, and make such as will advantage the welfare of other; His Majesty being bound by His Coronation-Oath, to confirm these Laws, Quas vulgus elegerit, which the Commons shall agree upon, and present unto His Majesty. Object. I, but it seems this objection lies full and strong upon them that stand in their single paivate stations. I answer, That if there be any such Oath which yet I have neither seen, nor heard of, unlesse the objection mean that clause in the late Parliament Protestation, wherein we vow and protest to maintain and defend the lawfull Rights and Liberties of the Subject.
Surely, Neither in that nor this, do we swear against a lawfull endeavour to get any such Laws or Clause of the Law repealed and abolisht, which is found a wrong, rather then a right, and the bondage rather then the Liberty of the Subject, as Prelacy was; Had we indeed taken the Bishops Oath, or the like, never to have given our consent to have the Government by Episcopacy with its endlesse, &c. Changed or altered, we had brought our selves into a woefull snare; but blessed be God, Tt snare is broken, and we are escaped; while in the mean time, without all dout the subject may as lawfully use all lawfull means to get that Law removed, which yet he hath promised or sworne to obey while it remains, when it proves prejudiciall to the pulike safety and welfare; as a poor captive that hath peradventure sworne obedience to the Turk, (while he remains in his possession) may notwithstanding use all fair endeavours for an escape or ransome; or a prentice that is bound to obey his Master; yet when he finds his service turned into a bondage, use lawfull means to obtain his freedom. 3. But once more to answer both all objections; it is worth your enquiry, Whither the Plea of a Legall establishment of this Prelacy, sworn against in this Covenant, be not rather a tradition, then any certain, or confessed Truth: Sure I am, we have it from the hands of persons of worth and honour; the a lst Secretaries of Laws and Antiquities in our Kingdom, that there is no such Law or Statute to be found upon the file among our Records. Which assertion, if it cannot finde faith; we will once more, joyn issue with the Patrons or followers of this Prelacy upon this point, That when they produce that Law or Statute which doth enact and establish Prelacy, as it is here brancht in the Article, we will then give them a fuller answer, or yeeld the question. To conclude therefore, since this Prelacy in the Article, tis many headed Monster of Archbishops, Bishops, their Chan∣rs and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Arch-Dons, and all other Beel slicall Officers depending on that Hierary, is the Beast, wherewith we fight in this Covenant, which hath been found so distructive to Church and State; Let
us not fear to take this Sword of the Covenant of God into our hands, and say to this Enemy of Christ, as Samuel said once to Agag, (at what time he said within himself, Surely the bitter∣nesse of death is past) As thy sword hath made women childlsse, 1 Sam. 15 so shall thy mother be childlesse among women. So hath Prelacy flat∣tered it self, finding such a party to stand up on it side among the rotten Lords and Commons, the debauched Gentry, and abused people of the Kingdom; Surely, the bitternesse of death is past. I sit as a Queen, and shall not know Widdow-hood, or lsse of children. In the midst of this security and pride (the infallible forerunners of her downfall) let us call her forth, and say, As thy sword, Prelacy, hath made many women childlesse, many a faithfull Minister peoplelesse, houselesse and libertylesse, their wives husbandlesse, their children and their Congregations fatherlesse, and Pastorlesse, and Guidelesse, So thy mother Papacy shall be made childelesse among harlots, your Diocesse Bishoplesse, and your Sees Lordlesse, and your places shall know you no more. Come, my Brethren, I say, and fear not to take this Agag (Prelacy I mean, not the Prelats) and hew it in pieces before the Lord. A fourth and main Objection that troubles many, is, That in the following Article there are divers things of another na∣ture then falls within the compasse and list of such a Covenant, This Co∣venant is not pure∣ly religi∣ous, as that in the Text. as that which the Text holds forth, To joyne our selves to the Lord. There be State-matters, and such too, as are full of doubt, and perhaps of danger to be sworn unto. I shall answer, first the generall Charge, and then some of the Particulars which are most materiall. In generall I answer, 1. In ge∣nerall. Whate∣ver is contain∣ed in the Cove∣nant, is either re∣ligious or tending to Reli∣gion. There is nothing in the Body of this Covenant which is not either purely religious, or which lies not in a tendency to Religion, conducing to the securing and promo∣ting thereof. And as in the expounding the Commandments Divines take this Rule, That that Command which forbids a sin, forbids al∣so all the conducibles and provocations to that sin, All the Ten∣dencies to it: And that Command which enjoyns a duty, en∣joyns all the mediums and advancers to that duty, as the Schools say, Modus cadit sub precepto. Circumstances fall within the
latitude of the Command; so in religious Covenants, not onely those things which are of the substance and integralls of Religion, but even the collateralls and subserviencies, that tend ei∣ther to the establishing or advancing of Religion, may justly be admitted within the Verge and Pale of the Covenant. The Cities of Refuge had their Suburbs appointed by God, as well as their haitations, and even they also were counted holy. The Rights and Prledges of the Parliaments, and the Liber∣ts of the Kingdom, mentioned in the third Article: They are the aburbs of the Gospel, and an Inheritance bequeathed by God to Nations and Kingdoms and under that notion holy. Concern∣ing which a people may lawfully reply to the unjust demands of him perours, Kings, or States, as Naboth once to Ahab, when demanded to yeeld up his Vineyard to his Majesty: God forbid that I should give the Inheritance of my father. These be the Out-works of Religion, the Lines of Communica∣tion, as I may so say, for the defence of this City; which the Pre∣lats well knew, and therefore you see it was their great designe, first by Poliy to have surprised; and when that would not do, then by main strength of Battell to storme these Out-works: Well knowing, That if they once had won these, they should quickly be Masters also of the holy City, Religion it self, and done what they listed. And therefore the securing of these must of necessity be taken into the same Councels and Covenant with Religion it self. This premised in generall, Particu∣lar Obje∣ctions or Seruples. 1. Igno∣rance in them that take this Co∣venant of the ights and Privi∣viledges of Parli∣lament. we shall easily and a pace satisfie the particular Scruples and Quaeries as I go. 1 Scrupl. The most part that swear this Covenant, are in a great degree, if not totally, ignorant what the Rights and Pri∣viledges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdomes are, and how can they then swear to maintain they know not what? Answ. 1. By the same argument no man, or very few, might lawfully swear to maintain the Kings Prerogatives in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; nor the King himselfe swear to maintain the Liberties of the Subject, as he doth in his Oath at his Coronation. 2. But there is hardly any person so ignorant, but knowes
there are Priviledges belonging to the Parliaments, and Liberties belonging to the subject. 3. And that it is the duty of every Subject, according to his place and power, to maintain these; So that in taking of this Co∣venant, we swear to do no more then our Duty bindes us to; in which there is no danger, though we do not in every point know how farre that duty extends in every branch and severall thereof. 4. In swearing to do my duty, whether to God or man, if The ignorant of many particulars, I oblige my self to these two things. 1. To use the best means to inform my self of the parti∣culars. 2. To conform my self to what I am informed, to be my duty. Which yet in the case in hand, doth admit of a further lati∣tude, namely, That which lies in the very word and letter of this Article (as in most of the rest) In our severall Vocations; which doth not binde every one to the same degree of know∣ledge, nor the same way of preservation: As for example, I do not conceive every Magistrate is bound to know so much, no nor to endeavour to know so much as Parliament-men; nor every member of Parliament so much as Judges; nor Ministers so much as the Lawyers; nor ordinary people so much as Mini∣sters; nor servants so much as Masters: nor all to preserve them the same way; Parliament-men by demanding them, Lawyers by pleading, Judges by giving the sense and minde of the Law, Mi∣sters by Preaching, Magistrates by defending, people by assisting, praying, yeelding obedience, &c. All if the exigencies arise so high, and the State call for it, by engaging their estates and lives, in case they be invaded by an unlawfull power. And in case of ignorance, the thing we binde our selves to is this, That if at any time any particular shall be in question, What the Parliament shall make appear to be their right, or the liberty of the Subject, we promise to contribute such assistance for the preservation or reparation thereof, as the nature of the thing, and wisdome of the State shall call for at our hands in our severall places.
2 Scruple. But some are offended, while they conceive in the same Article, The Kings Person and a∣tority in the pe∣servation of Reli∣gion, &c. That the Clause wherein we swear the preser∣vation and defence of the Kings person and Authority, doth he un∣der some restraint, by that limitation; In the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and the Li∣berties of the Kingdom. To which we reply, Answ. 1. It maintains him as far as he is a King: He may be a man, but sure no King, without the lists and verge of Religion and Laws, it being Religion and Laws that make him a King. 2. See his Maiesties Declara∣tions. It maintains his person and estate, as far as his Majestie himself doth desire and expect to be defended: for sure his Justice cannot desire to be defended against, but in the preserva∣tion of Religion and Laws; and his wisedom cannot expect it; since he cannot believe that they will make conscience of defen∣ig his person, who make no conscience of preserving Religion and the Laws; I mean, when the ruine of his person and autho∣rity may advance their own cursed designes. They that for their own ends will defend his person and Authority against Religion and Liberties of the Kingdome, will with the same conscience defend their owne ends against his person and authority, when they have power in their hands. The Lord deliver his Majesty from such defenders, By what Names or Titls soever they be called. 3. Who doubts but that Religion and Laws (wherein the Rights and Liberties of Kingdoms are bound up) are the best security of the persons and authority of Kings and Governours? And the while Kings will defend these, these will defend Kings? It being impossible that Princes should suffer violence or indig∣nity, while they are within the Munition of Religion and Laws; or if the Prince suffer, these must of necessity suffer with him. 4. I make a question, Whether this limitation lie any more upon the defence of the Kings person and authority, then it doth upon the Rights and Privildges of Parliaments, and the Liber∣ties of the Kingdom, since there is no point or stop in the Article to appropriate it more to the defence of the Kings Person and Authority, thn to the preservation of the Rights and Privi∣ledges
ledges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the King∣domes. 5. And lastly, This Clause is not to be understood exclusive, as excluding all other Cases wherein the Kingdoms stand bound to preserve his Majesties Person and Authority, but onely pro subje∣cta materià, as expressing that case wherein the safety of his Per∣son and Authority, doth most highly concern both King and Kingdoms, especially at such a time as this is, when both are so furiously and implaceably encountred by a malignant Army of desperate parricides, Papists and their Prelaticall party. These Objections answered, and Difficulties removed, we proceed to the examining of the rest of the particulars, in the following Articles. The discovery of incondiaries or malignants that have been, or shall be: To which the fourth Article bindes us: Fourth Article. Discove∣ry of In∣cendia∣ries and Malig∣nants. Doth it not lie also in a necessary tendency to the securing and preserving of this Covenant inviolable with the Most High God, in point of Reformation? For can we hope a thorow Reformation, accor∣ding to the minde of Christ, if opposers of Reformation may escape scot-free, undiscovered and unpunisht? or can we indeed love or promote a Reformation, and in the mean time counte∣nance or conceal the enemies of it? This is cleer, yet it wants not a scruple; and that perad∣venture which may trouble a sincere heart. Object. It is this; Having once taken this Oath, This Oath will binde us to disco∣ver chil∣dren or parents, or hus∣bands & wives, &c. if we hear a friend or brother; yea, perhaps a Father, an Husband or a Wife, let fall a word of dislike of the Parliament, or Assemblies proceedings in either Kingdom; or that discovers an other judgement or opinion; or a word of passion unadvisedly ut∣tered, and do not presently discover and complain of it, we pull upon our selves the guilt or danger of perjury, which will be a mighty snare to thousands of well affected people. To which I answer. Answ. 1. The objection layes the case much more narrow then the words of the Article, which distinguisheth the Incen∣diary or Malignant which is to be discovered by a threefold Cha∣racter, or note of Malignity. First, Hindering the Reformation of Religion.
Secondly, Dividing the King from his people, or one Kingdom from . Thirdly, Making any faction or parties amongst the People contrary to the Lue and Covenant. Now every dislike of some passage in Parliament or Assem∣blies proceedings; every distent in judgement and opinion; every rash word or censure, that may possibly be let fall through passion and inadvertency, will not amount to so high a degree of Malignity as is here exprest, nor consequently bring one within the compasse of this Oath and Covenant. A suitable and seasonable Caution or conviction may suffice in such a case. 2. But suppose the Malignity do arise to that height here exprest in any of the Branches thereof; I do not conceive the first work this Oath of God binds us to, is to make a judiciall discovery thereof; while without all controversie our Saviours Matth. 18. Rul of dealing with our Brethren in cases of offence, is not here excluded; which is, 1. Vers. 15. To see what personall admonition will do; which toward a Superiour as Husband, Parent, Master, or the like must be managed with all Wisedom and Reverence: if they hear us, we have made a good dayes work of it; We have gained our brther, if not then the Rule directs us yet. 2 In the second place to take with us two or three more; if they do the deed, thou in yest sit down with peace and thank∣fulnesse, if not, 3. If after all this, the party shall persist in destructive practises to hinder Reformation, to divide the King from his People, or one Kingdom from another, or lastly to make facti∣ons or parties among the people; be it the man of thine own House, the Husband of thy youth, the Wife of thy bosome, the Son of thy loynes, &c. Lvi must know neither Father, nor Mo∣ther, private Relations must give way to publike safety; thou must with all faithfulnesse, endeavour the discovery; thine eye must not pity nor spare: Dut 1, 6 7 8. It is a case long since stated by God himself; and when complaint is made to any person in Autho∣rite, the Plantiff is discharged, and the matter rests upon the hands of Authority.
Provided notwithstanding, that there be in the use of all the former means, that latitude allowed, which the Apostle gives in case of Heresie: sc. A first and second Admonition. Ti. 3.13. This course not only the Rule of our Saviour in generall, but the very words of the Covenant it self doth allow; (for though the clause be placed in the sixth Article, yet it hath reference to all:) viz. What we are not able our selves to suppresse or overcome, we shall reveal and make known. So that if the Malignity fall with∣in our own, or our friends ability to conquer, we have discharged our duty to God and the Kingdoms, and may sit down with comfort in our bosomes. That which remains in the other two Articles, I cannot see how it affords any occasion of an objection; and the reference and tendency it hath to the Reformation and preservation of Reli∣gion, is easie and cleer to any eye, that is not wilfully blinde; The preservation of Peace between the two Kingdoms, Fifth Ar∣ticle. The pre∣servtion between the King∣doms. in the fifth Article, being the pillar of Religion; for how can Religi∣on and Reformation stand, if any blinde Malignant Sampson be suffered to pull down the pillars of Peace and Ʋnion. Besides it was a branch of that very Covenant in the Text as well as of that in our hands. The Children of Israel and Judah which had a long time been disunited, and in that disunion had many bloody and mortall skirmishes and battles, now at length by the good hand of God upon them, taking counsell to joyn themselves, first, one to another, and then both unto God. First, Let us joyn our selves, and then to the Lord, in a per∣petuall Covenant? Surely, not onely this Copy in the Text; but the Worm∣wood and the Gall of our civill combustions and warres, which our souls may have in remembrance to our dying day, and be humbled within us, may powerfully perswade us to a cheerfull engage∣ment of our selves, for the preservation of a firm peace and uni∣on between the Kingdoms, to all posterity. And lastly, as Peace is the pillar of Religion, Article sixth. Mutuall assistance. so mutuall assistance and defence of all those that enter into this League and Covenant in the maintaining and pursuance thereof, (mentioned in that sixth and last Article) is the Pillar of that Peace. Divide
& impera; Desert one another, and we expose our selves to the Lusts of our enemies. And who can object against the securing of our selves, Indiffe∣rency, and Neutra∣litie. and the state, against a detestable indifferency or neutrality, but they must ipso facte, proclaim to all the world, that they intend be∣fore hand to turn Neutralls or Apostates? To conclude, therefore having thus examined the severall Articles of this Covenant, and the materiall Clauses in those Arti∣cles; and finding them to be, if not of the same nature, yet of the same designe with the preface and conclusion; (the one whereof (as I told you, at the entrance) obligeth us to the Reformation of Religion; the other of our Lives) as serving to the imme∣diate and necessary support and perfecting of these blessed and glorious ends and purposes, I shall need to Apologize no fur∣ther in the vindicating and asserting of this Covenant before us; could we be so happy, as to bring hearts suitable to this service; could we set up such ayms and ends as the Covenant holds forth; The glory of God, The good of the Kingdoms, and Honour of the King, to which, this Covenant, and every severall thereof, doth humbly prostrate it self, (Article sixth) would all conspire to make us and our posterity aftter us, an happy and glorious people to all generations. To them that object out of conscience, Master Hinderson, and Ma∣ster Nyes Speech. these poor resolutions may afford some relief if not satisfaction; or, if these slender endeavours fall short of my designe, and the Readers desires herein, I shall send them Master Caryll. Master Soloman. to their labours, who have taken more ale and fruitfull pains in this subject. To them that object out of a spirit of bitternesse and Malignity, nothing will suffice; Quod vult, non quod est, audit semper qui decrevit errare, Chrysost. He that is resolved to erre, is satisfied with nothing but that which strengthens his errour. And these I leave to such arguments and convictions, which the Wisedom and Justice of Authority shall judge more proper; while I proceed to the second Quaere propounded. The Why? I come now to the second Quaere propounded for the managing of this Use of Exhortation;
sc. Why? Why? Or upon what Considerations we may be perswaded to undertake this Service? To enter into this holy Covenant. First Mo∣tive Gods dishonors by our former Violati∣ons of Cove∣nant. And the first Motive that may engage us hereunto, is the Consideration, how exceedingly God hath been dishonoured a∣mong us; by all sorts of Covenant-violation, as hath been for∣merly discovered at large; in the avenging whereof, the Angel of the Covenant stands, as once at the door of Paradice, with a flaming sword in his hand, ready to cut us off, and cast us out of this Garden of God; this good Land wherein he hath planted us thus long. Numb. 12.14. I may say unto you therefore, concerning our selves, as once Moses in another case, concerning Miriam; If her Father had but spit in her face, should she not be a∣shamed, &c? If our Father had but spit in our face by some in∣feriour correction; should we not be ashamed? Ought we not to be greatly humbled before him? How much more, Isa. 42.25. when He hath poured out upon us the fury of his wrath, and it hath burned us; and the strength of battle, and it hath set on fire round about. Should we not lay it to heart, and use all means to pacifie the fiercenesse of his anger, lest it burn down to the very founda∣tions of the Land, and none be able to quench it? Yea, Secondly, Second Motive, That such a means of reco∣very is yet left us. A wonderfull mercy and an high favour may we count it from our God, That yet such a Soveraign means is left us for our recovery and reconciliation; Infinite condescention and goodnesse it is in our God, That after so many fearfull provocations by our unhallowed and treacherous dealing in the Covenant he will vouchsafe, yet to have any thing to do with us, That he will yet trust or try us any more by admit∣ting us to renew our Covenant with His Majesty, when he might in justice rather say unto us, as to the wicked. What have you to do, Psal. 50.16, 17. that you should take my Covenant into your Mouths, seeing you hate instruction and cast my worsd be∣hinde you? Certainly, had man broke with us, as oft as we have broke with God, we should never trust them any more, but account them as the off-scouring of mankinde, the vilest, the basest that ever trod upon Gods ground; and yet that after so
many unworthy and treacherous departures from our God, after so much unfaithfulnesse and perfidiousnesse in the Covenant, (such as it is not in the capacity of one man to be guilty of to∣wards another) that God should say to us, as once to his own people. Thou hast played the Harlot with many Lovers, Jere. 3 1 yet return to me, saith the ; Oh wonder of free-grace! Oh might this priviledge be offered to the Apostate Angels which kept not the Covenant of their Creation, nor conse∣quently their fust estate, and to the rest of the damned souls in hell; would God send an Angel from Heaven to preach unto them a second Coant upon the laying hold whereon, and closing wherewith, they might be received into grace and fa∣vour; how would these poor damned spirits Sestirre them∣selves: what ratling of their red-hot chains; what shaking of their fiery locks: In a word, what an uproar of joy would there be in hell, upon such glad tigs! How many glorious hurche, as Capernaum, Bethsaida, the seven Churches o Asia, with others in latter times have for their Covenant-violation, been cast down from the top of Hea∣ven, where once you sate in the beauty and glory of the Ordi∣nances; to the very bottome of hell, a dark and dolefull con∣dition, and God hath never spoken such a word of comfort, nor made any such offer of recovery, and reconciliation unto them, as he hath done to us unto this day? Surely, He hath not dlt so with every People, &c. Let it be our wisedom, and our thankfulnesse, to accept of it, with both hands; yea, both with hands and hearts. If God give us arts suitable to this price, that is in our hands, Covenanting hearts, as he gives us yet leave and oppor∣tunity to renew our Covenant it will be to me a blessed securi∣ty, that we are not yet a lost people; and a new Argument of Hope, that he intends to do England good. If neglected and despised, Whether this may not be the last time that ever England shall hear from God, I much doubt, unlesse it be in such a voice, as that is, I would have healed England, Ez. 24.23. and she will not be healed; be∣cause I would have purged thee, and thou art not purged, thou shalt
not be purged from thy filthinesse any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. The Lord forbid such a thing: For, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Thirdly, We may be mightily encouraged to this service, Third Motive, It is the Privi∣ledge of Gospel∣times. Ezek. 37.16.22. in as much has it is prophesied of, as the great Duty and Priviledge of Gospl-times. You see the Evangelicall-day is one of those dayes, wherein this prophesie and promise must be fulfilled. And it is the same Priiledge and Happinesse which was prophesied of, under the type of the sticks made one, in the hand of the Prophet Ezkul: For though in the literall sence, it be to be understood, (as it is exprest) of the happy re-union of that un∣happily divided seed of Jacob, Joseph and Ephraim, Israel and Judah; yet in a Gospel-sence, it is to be applyed to the Churches of Jesus Christ, in the latter dayes, which though formerly divided, and miserably torne by unnaturall quarrells, and wars; yet Christ the King of the Church, hath a day wherein he will make them one in his own hand: The great and gracious designe which we humbly conceive Christ hath now upon these two Nations, England and Scotland; even after all their sad divisi∣ons and civi discords to make them one in his right hand, to all Generations. And this gives me assurance, that the work shall go on and prosper; yea, prosper gloriously, it having a stronger founda∣tion to support it, then Heaven and Earth, for they are upheld but by a word of power; but this work, which is called, Hob. 3 1. the New-Heavens, and the New-Earth, is uphold by a word of pro∣mise; For, We according to his promise, look for New-Heavens, 2 Pet. 3.15. and a New-Earth, wherein dwels righteousnesse. I say, by a word of prophesie and promise, which it seems is stronger then God himself; for his word binds him, so that he can as soon deny himself, as deny his promise. There shall be therefore an undoubted accomplishment of these things, which are told us from the Lord: Luk. 1.45. God will finde, or make a people, who shall worship him in this holy Ordinance; and upon whom, he will make good all the mercy and trueth; all the peace and salvation which is bound up in it:
Onely, therefore let me Caution, and beseech you, not to be wanting to your selves, and your own happinesse: Acts 13. Judge not your selves unworthy of such a priviledge, nor Luke 7.3. reject the Counsell of God against your own souls; sin not against your own mercies, by withdrawing your selves from this service, or re∣belling against it. God will exclude none that do not exclude themselves. Yea further, This seems to speak an Argument of Hope, That the calling of the Jews, and the fulnesse of the Gentiles, is not farre behinde; in as much as God begins now to poure out this promise in the Text, upon the Churches, in a more eminent manner, then ever we, or our fathers saw it, in a Gospel sence; And surely, Gospel performance must make way for that full and universall accomplishment thereof, which shall unite Israel and Judah, Jew and Gentile, in one perpetuall Covenant unto the Lord that shall never be forgotten. The Gospel Day is nothing else, but the dawning of that great universall Day in the Text, wherein God will make one glorious Church of Jew and Gentile; The Day-starre whereof is now risen in our Horizon; So that I am humbly confident, That the same shores shall not bound this Covenant, which bound the two now-Covenanting Nations; but as it is said of the Gospel, so it will be verified of this Gospel Covenant. The sound thereof will go into all the Earth, Rom. 10.18. and the words of it to the ends of the world. There is a spirit of Prophesie that doth animate this Cove∣nant, Psal. 14.15. which will make it swift and active; swift to run: His word runs very swiftly: and active, to work deliverance and safety, not onely to these two Kingdoms, but to all other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoak of Antichristian Tyranny, whom God shall perswade to joyn in the same, or like Association and Covenant. So that me thinks all that travell with the Psalmists desire of seeing the good of Gods chosen, Psal 106.5. and rejoycing in the gladnesse of his nation, and glorying with his Inheritance, Will certainly rejoyce in this day, and in the goodnesse of GOD, which hath crowned it with the accomplishment of such a pre∣tious promise as hear lies before us. While none can with∣draw
from, muchlesse, oppose this service, but such as bear evill will to Sion, and would be unwilling to see the ruine and down∣fall of Antichrist, which this blessed Covenant doth so evident∣ly threaten. Fourthly, Fourth Motiv. The ex∣ample of the Churches of God, and This hath been the practice of all the Churches of God, before, and since Christ; after their Apostacies, and Captivities for those Apostacies and recoveries out of these Captivities: The first thing they did, was to cement themselves to God by a more close entire and solemn Covenant, then ever. Nehemiah, Ezra, Hezckiah, Jeremiah, Josiah, will all bring in cler evidences to witnesse this practice. This latter Churches have learned of them, Germany, France, Scot∣land, &c. But what shall I need to mention the Churches, when as the God of the Churches took this course himself; who, when he pleases to become the God of any people or person, it is by Covenant; as with Abraham, Gen 17.2. Behold I make a Covenant with thee, and what ever mercies he bestows upon them, it is by Covenant; all the blessings of Gods people, are Covenant∣blessings; to wicked men, God gives with his left hand, out of the Basket of common providence; but to his Saints, he dispen∣ceth with his right hand, out of the Ark of the Covenant. Isa. 55.3 I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Yea, which is yet more to our purpose, When the first Covenant proved not, but miscarried, not by any fault that was in the Covenant-Maker, no nor simply in the Covenant it self, Of the God of the Chur∣ches. (for if man could have kept it, it would have given him life.) I say when it was broken, God makes a new Covenant with his People. Not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers, which my Covenant they brake, &c. Jer. 31.31. Heb. 8 8. But this shall be the Covenant, &c. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People, &c. Because they could not keep the first Covenant; God made a second that should keep them.
Oh, that while we are making a Covenant with our God, he would please to make such a Covenant with us; so would it be indeed a perpetuall Covenant, that should not be for∣gotten. Well, you see we have a Covenanting God, a Covenant Making God, and a Covenant renewing God; be we followers of God, as dear children: Let us be a Covenanting people, a Covenant making, a Covenant renewing people; and (as our God) finding sault with the first; Heb. 8.8. Let us make a new Covenant, n a perpetuall Covenant that shall never be forgotten. A fifth Motive to quicken us to this duty, Fth Mo∣. The pra∣cti f the Pope and Pre∣letes. may be even the practice of the Antichristian, State, and Kingdom; Popery hath been dexterous to propagate and spread it self by this means. What else have been all their Fraternities and Brother-hoods and Societies; but so many Associations and combinations poli∣tique, compacted and obliged by Oaths and Covenants, for the advancing of the Catholike Cause, whereby Nations and King∣doms have been subdued to the obedience of the Roman Miter. And Prelacy (that Whlp) hath learned this polisieof its mother Papacy (that Lionesse) to corroborate and raise it self to that height, we have seen and suffered by these Artifices; while by close Combinations among themselves, and swearing to their oedience, all the Inferiour Priesthood, and Church Officers, by Ordination-Engagements, and Oaths of Canonicall Obedience, &c. A few have been able to impose their own Laws and Canons, upon an whole Kingdom; yea, upon three Kingdoms, it being an inconsiderable company, either of Ministers or People (the Lord be mercifull to us in this thing) that have had eyes to dis∣cover the Mystery of iniquity, which these men have driven; and much more inconsiderable, that have had hearts to oppose and withstand their Tyranny and Usurpations. And why may not God make use of the same stratagem to ruine their Kingdom, which they used to build it; yea, God hath seemed to do it already, wle in that place where they cast that rring, Canon, and formed their cursed Oath, for the establishing their , with its endlesse &c. to perpetuits. In the ing Henry 7 Chappel. very  place hath this Covenant been debated and voted, once, and a second time by command of
publique Authoritie for the Extirpation of it Root and Branch, and the casting of it out for ever, as a plant which our heavenly Father hath not planted. And who knows, but this may be the Arrow of the Lords deliverance, which as it hath peire't to the very heart of Prelacy; so it may also give a mortall wound to Papacy it self, of which it will never be healed by the whole Colledge of Physitians (the Jesuites) whose study the Complexion and health of that Baby∣lonian Harlot. In the sixth and last place. Sixth Motive. The bles∣sed suc∣cesse of this Or∣dinance in other Chur∣ches. The good successe this course hath found in the Churches, may encourage us with much cheerfulnesse and confidence to undertake this service. It hath upon it a probatum est, from all that ever conscien∣tiously and religiously used this remedy. It recovered the State and Church of the Jews, again and again, many a time, when it was ready to give up the ghost, it recovered and kept a good correspondency between God and them, all the time it was of any esteem and credit amongst them. It brings Letters of Testimoniall with it, from all the Re∣formed Churches; Especially from our neighbour Nation and Church of Scotland, where it hath done wonders in recovering that people, when all the Physitians in Christendom had given them over. It is very remarkable, in the 20. Ezek. 37. God promiseth to bring them into the Bond of the Covenant; and in the next Verse it follows, and I will purge out the Rebels from among you, there is an [And] that couples this Duty, and this Mercy to∣gether; I will bring you into the bond, &c. And I will purge out, &c. Truly God hath made good this promise to our Neighbors; The Waters of this Covenant have been a notable Purgation to the Rebels there; It hath been a Shibboleth to discover them, and a Sword in the hand of the Angel of the Covenant, to chase or slay them. The mighty Armies of Malignants, whether inbread or forraign, though more in number, and greater in power; have not been able to stand before it, from the first day till now.
The Walls of Jericho have faln flat before it. The Dagon of the Bishops Service-Book brake its neck before this Arke of the Covenant. Prlacy and Prerogative have bowed down, and given up the ghost at its feet: And what changes hath it wrought in the Church and State! What a Reformation hath followed at the heels of this glorious Ordinance! And truely, even among us as poorly and lamely, and brokenly, as it hath been managed among us, I may say thus of it: It hath kept life and soul together; I am confident we had given up the ghost before this time, had it not been for this Water of Life. Oh what glorious successe might we expect, if we did make such cheerfull, such holy, such conscientious addresses, as becomes the Law of so solemn an Ordinance! Truely, could I see such a willing people in this day of Gods Power, as are here in the Text, encouraging, and engaging one another, in an holy Conspiracy. Come let us joyn our selves to the Lord in a per∣petuall Covenant, &c. I have faith enough to promise and pro∣phesie to you in the Name of the Lord, and in the words of his servant Haggai; Haggi 2.18, 19. From this very day I will blesse you. And that you may know of what Soveraignty this Ordi∣nance is; Take notice of this for the close of this last Motive and this second Quaere; That this is the last Physick that ever the Church shall take or need; it lies cleer in the Text; For it is an everlasting Covenant; And therefore the last that ever shall be made; after the full and finall accomplishment of this pro∣mise and duty, the Church shall be of so excellent a complexi∣on, Isai. 33. last. That the Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their inquitie. The Lord make it such Physick to us for Christ his sake. And this shall suffice, &c.
The Third Sermon on the Sabbath-day in the Morn∣ing, being the first of October. Immediately before takingof the COVENANT in Milk-street Church. I Come now to the third Quaere. How? Third Quaere, How? And this inquiry divides it self into two Branches. sc. How to Acceptation? Perpetuitie? For the satisfying of both which, I will fetcht as much as may be out of the Text, That so you may yet further behold what proportion there is between the duty there, and that which lies before us this day. In the first place, First in generall. With an Ordi∣nance frame of heart. we must enquire how this duty may be so managed, that God may accept of us in the doing of it? How to Acceptation? Now in the Generall, we must know, that this service being an Ordinance of God, it must be undertaken and managed with an Ordinance of frame heart. i. e. According to the Laws
and Rule of ivine worship; and by how much the more sacred and solemn this Ordinance is, by so much the more ought we to call up, and provoke the choicest and heavenliest of those affections and dispositions of spirit, wherewith we make our addressements to the Holy things of God. In speci∣all. In particular these. First, st in Judge∣ment. Jere 4.2 we are to come upon this service, with the most ponderous advisednesse, and most serious deliberation of Judgement, That may be. It is one of those grand Qualifications which God himself calls for to an Oath Thou shalt swear in Truth, in Judgement, and in Righteousnesse. In Truth for the matter, and that we have already exami∣ned in the former Sermon; In Righteousnesse, in reference to the keeping of the Oath (of which hereafter) and in Judgement in respect of the taking or making of the Oath, the thing which we are now about, that we should well consider what we do. And indeed, if at any time, and in any undertaking, that advise be usefull, Prov 4.26. Eccl 5.1 Ponder the path of thy feet: and keep thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God; then certainly it is most seasonable, when a people or a person, draw neer to make or renew their Covenant with the most High God. And it seems, in the latter of those two Scriptures, now quoted, Eccl s. 5.1. The Holy Ghost doth principally referre to this duty of making Vows and Covenants with God; The second Verse doth intimate such a businesse, Vers. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, To utter what? The fourth Verse is expresse, When thou makest a Vow unto God, &c. So that it is cleer, the purpose of the Holy Ghost in that places, as in all our holy services; so especially in this of Vows, to cation all the people of God, when they draw neer to utter their vows unto the Lord, to manage it with the greatest delibe∣ration, and solidnesse of judgement that is possible; to sit down and consider with our selves before hand, With whom we have to deal? What we have to do? Ʋpon what warrant? By what Rule? To what end? The lame and the blinde, Mal 1 8. Gods soul hates for a Sacrifice, the
lame affections, and the blinde ignorant Judgement. And well he may; for certainly, they that do not swear in Judgement, will not, cannot swear in Righteousnesse; They that do not make their vows in Judgement will not, cannot pay or performe them in Righteousnesse. He that swears he knows not what, will ob∣serve he cares not how. Incogitant making, will end in uncon∣scinable breaking of Covenant; and if need be in a cursed ab∣juration of it; for rash swearing, is a precipice to forswearing. And therefore, if any of you have not well weighed this service, or be any wayes insatisfied, in whole or in parts, I ad∣vise you to forbear, till your judgements be better informed. What soever is not of faith is sin. Rom. 14.23. Provided, That this be not done meerly in a pretence to evade and elude this service, to which God and the two Nati∣ons call you, as heer in the Text. Come let us joyn, &c. Take heed of casting a mist of willing prejudice, 2 Per 3 5 and affected ignorance, before your own eyes, (such the Apostle speaks of) to no other purpose, but that your Malignity may steal away in that mist undiscovered; for be sure, your sinne will finde you out. An ingenuous ignorance, and truely conscientious tender∣nesse is accompanied with an ingennous and conscientious use of all means, for information and satisfaction; and to such, I make no question, The Ministers of Christ will be ready to communicate what light they have, for resolving doubts, re∣moving scrupills, and satisfying conscience, when soever you shall make your addresses for that purpose. In the mean time, if there be any, that under pretence of unsatisfiednesse, do shun the duty and information too; they will be found, but to mock God, and Authority; to whose Justice and Wisedom therefore, I must leave them. Gods tells his people when he joyns himself to them, Hos 2 20. I will marry thee to my self in Righteousnesse and Judgement, How in Judgement? Because God considers what he does, when he takes a people or person to himself; not that God chuseth for any wealth or worth in the Creature: Faith foreseen or Works foreseen; but that finding it (on the contrary) poor and beggerly, and undone, and foreseeing what it is like to prove,
crooked and froward, unteachable and untractable; he sits down (to speak after the manner of men) and considers, what course to take, and what it is like to cost him, to make them such a people, as he may delight in; and then consulting with his treasures, and finding he hath wherewith all to bear their charges, and to bring about his own ends; he resolves to take them, and marry them to himself, whatsoever it cost him. The result of such a confultation you may read, dropt from Gods own Pen, And I said, How shall I put thee among the children, and give thee  asant Land, a goodly Heritage, the Hosts of Nations, Jer. 3.19. Here is Gods wise deliberation upon the matter: How  I put thee, &c? That is, how shall I do this, but I must do it to mine own dishonour? for I see before hand what thou wilt prove; thou wilt be the same that ever thou wast; as Idolatrous, as adulterous, as unstable, as backsliding as ever, &c. It is not a leasant Land, a goodly Heritage, that will make thee better. Well, after some pause, God was resolved what to do: And I said, (hear his resolution) Thou shalt call me my Father, and shalt not turn away from me: That is, as if he had said, I will take this course with thee. I will first give thee, the heart of a childe, thou shall call me, my Father; and then I will give thee the inheritance of a childe, (a goodly heritage, &c.) and when I have done, I will not leave thee to thy self, but I will knit thee to my self by an indissoluble union. Isai 59.21. I will put my spirit into thee, &c. And thou shalt not turn away from me, There is Gods wife Resolution; He resolves to do all him∣self, and then he is sure it will not fail his expectation; he undertakes it. Thou shall call me my father, and shall not turn away from me. Thus God when he marrieth his people to himself, doth it in Judgement. Now therefore, Eph 5.1. Be ye followers of God as dear children; And since you come now about the Counter-part of the same work; namely, to joy or marry your selves to God, do it in Judgement. Consider well what you do; And among other things, since you are so poor, and nothing in your selves as you have seen in the openining of this precious Scripture, (Jerem. 3.19.)
Bethink your selves where you will have strength and sufficiency, to make good this great and solemn engagement with your God. But of this, more hereafter. I proceed to the second qualification or direction. Secondly, The se∣cond Qualifi∣cation. Holy fear. See that you come to this service with a Reve∣rentiall frame of Spirit, with that Holy fear and awe, upon your hearts, as becomes the greatnesse and holinesse of that God, and that Ordinance, with whom you have to do; remembring that you are this day to swear before God, by God, to God: either of which, singly considered, might justly make us fear and tremble; How much more may this threefold cord, bow, and binde our hearts down in an humble, and holy proster∣nation? It is said of Jacob, he sware by the fear of his father Isaac. Gen. 31.53. Jacob in his Oath chuseth this title of Fear, to give unto God, to shew with what fear he came, but to swear by this God; what should we do, when (as I say) we come to swear by him, and to him? Surely, when he is so especially the object of our Oath, he should then especially be the object of our fear. The consideration of that infinite distance between God and us, may wonderfully advantage us towards the getting of our hearts into this holy posture. Great is that distance, that is between a King and a Begger; and yet, there is but creature and creature; greater is that di∣stance between Heaven and Earth; and yet these, but creature and creature; and yet greater is the distance between an Angel and a Worm; and yet still, there is but creature and creature. But now the distance that is between God and us, is infinitely wider; For behold, There is the Mighty, Almighty Creator, Isai. 40.15. Psa. 62.9. Before whom all the Nations are but as a drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the ballance; and the poor nothing-creature vanity, and altogether lighter then vanity. And yet, this is not all; yea, this is the shortest measure of that distance, whereof we speak; The distance of Creator and Creature; loe it is found between God and the Angels in Heaven, and the Spirits of just men made terfect; in respect whereof, the Psalmist saith of God, Psa. 113.6. He humbleth himself to behold the things that are in Heaven: It is a
condescention for that infinitely glorious Being, who dwells in Himself, and is a undantly satisfied in the beholding of his own uncomprehensile Excellencies, to vouchsafe to look out of him∣self, and behold the things that are in Heavn; the best of those glorious Inhabitants that stand round about his Throne; Who therefore, Revel. 4.8.9, 10, 11. conscious of that infinite distance wherein they stand, make their addresses with the greatest self abasements, Covering their faces, and casting themselves down upon those heavenly pavements. But behold upon us, poor wretches, that dwell here below, in these houses of Clay, There is found that which widens this distance beyond all expression or apprehension; Sin, set us farther beneath a Worm, then a Worm is eneath an Angel: I had almost said (bear with the expression, I use it, because no other expression can reach it.) Sin sets us as much beneath our Creatureship, as our Creatureship sets us beneath the Creator. Surely, there is more of God to be seen in the worst of a Creature, then there is of a Creature to be seen in the best of sin; There is nothing vile and base enough under Heaven, to make a simile of sin. And now therefore, if it be such a condescention for the great God to behold the things that are in Heaven; how infinite condescention is it, to behold the sinfull things that are on Earth! And if sinlesse Saints, and spotlesse Angels, do tender their ser∣vices, which yet are as spotlesse, as their persons, with such Reve∣rentiall deprtment; what abhorrency, and self annihilation, can be sufficient to accompany our approaches to this God of Holinesse, in such high and holy engagements, in whom, when God looks out of himself, he can behold nothing, besides our Creature∣ship, (of our own) but that which his soul hates. Heb. 12.29. Let us therefore have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably (in this so excellent an Ordinance) with reverence and godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire. The acceptable serving of God, is with reverence and godly fear. The Lord teach us to bring fear, that so we may finde acceptation. Again in the third place, The third Qualifica∣tion, Sincerity. To that end, labour to approve your selves to God in this service, in the uprightnesse, and sincerity of your hearts.
The want of this, God layes oft to the charge of the , as in other duties, so especially in this which is now before us. They lied to him with their tongues, For, Psal. 78.36, 37. their heart was not  with him; neither were they stedfast in his Covenant. And this stood between them and their acceptance; God tells the Prophet Ezekiel as much: Son of man, Ezek 14.3. these men have set up their Idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling block of their  before their face; should I be inquired of at all by them? They come with their hearts full of their Lusts; so many Lusts, so many Idols; and for this God refuseth to be inquired of by them; Should I be enquired of, is as much as, I will not be inquired of, &c. It is a denyall with disdain; should I? Or if they be so impudent to enquire, he will not answer; or if he give them an answer, it shall be a cold one; he will give them their answer at the door, better none, Vers 4. and 7. I will answer them according to the multitude of their Idols: i. e. According to the merit of their Idolatry: Calvin. super hunc loum. Af∣ferant ma∣teriam suae damnati∣ois, &c. Psal 66.18. they bring the matter of their own damnation with them, and they shall carry away nothing else from me, but the answer or obsignation of that damnation. Oh it is a dangerous thing to bring the love of any sin with us to the Ordinances of God; If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer; and so may we say to our own souls, if I regard iniquity, the Lord will not accept my person, he will not regard my Covenant. If God see any thing lie neerer our hearts then himself, he will scorn us, and our services. If therefore you would be accepted, out with your Idols; Gen. 35.2. cast ut the love of sin out of your hearts; and be upright with your God in this holy undertaking. It is the main Qualificati∣on in the Text; They shall enquire the way to Sion with their faces  i. e. In sincerity, with uprightnesse of Spirit, with the full set and bent of their souls: As it is said of Christ, when he went t his Passion, Luk, 9.51 He stedfastly set his face to go up to Jeru∣salem. He went with all his heart to be crucified; with a strong  spirit. Beloved, we are not going to crucifying work, (, it be to crucifie the flesh with the affections and lusts) but to arriage-work; to joyn our selves to the Lord in an everlasting Covenant, &c. Let us do it with our faces Sion-ward; yea, let us stedfastly set our faces, Reformation-ward, and Heaven-ward, and
God-ward, and Christ-ward, with whom we enter Covenant this day. A man may enquire the way to Sion with his face toward Babylon; a people or person may enter Covenant with God, with their hearts, Rome-ward, and Earth-ward, and Sin-ward, and Hell-ward. Gen. 27 12. Friends look to your hearts. Peradventure (said Jacob) my father will feel me, and I shall seem to him as one that mks, and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing. Without all peradventure, may we say, Our father will feel us; for he sarcheth all hearts, and understandeth the imaginations of the thoughts. If we be found as they that mock, shewing much love with our mouthes, while our hearts are far from him, we shall bring a curse upon our selves; yea, and upon the Kingdoms also, and not a blessing. It is reported to the honour of Judah in the day of their Covenanting with their God; 2 Chro. 15.55. They had sworn with all their heart, and with their whole desire. And their successe was answer∣able to their sincerity; For so it follows, And the Lord was found of them, and gave them rest round about. Oh that this might be our honour and happinesse in this day of our lifting up our hands to the most high God, that God might not see in us a double heart, an heart, and an heart, as the Hebrew expresseth it: i. e. One heart for God, and another for our Idols; one heart for Christ, and another for Antichrist, &c. But he might see us a single-upright-hearted people, without base mix∣tures and composition (for he loves truth (i. e. sincerity) in the inward parts) that he finding such sincerity as he looks for; we also might finde such successe, as we look for; Safety and delive∣rance to both the Nations; yea, That both in respect of our since∣rity and successe, that might be made good upon us, that is spoken to the eternall honour of that good King Hezekiah. 2 Chron. 31. last. And in every work he began in the service of the house of God, and in the Law, and in the Commandments to seek his God; He did it with all his heart and prospered. Ʋniversall sincerity is accompanied with universall prosperity; in all he did, he was upright, and in all he did he prospered. Brethren, what ever you want, be sure you want not sincerity; let God see you fully set in your hearts, to take all from
sin, and to give all to Jesus Christ; Me thinks I hear God saying unto us, According to your uprightnesse, so be it unto you. In the fourth place, The fourth Qualifi∣cation, of direction, make God, our End. Hos. 7.14. Zech 7.5. If you would be accepted by God in this holy service, labour to make God your End. It is your pat∣tern in the Text, They shall go and seek the Lord; It was not now Howling upon their beds for Corne and Wine, as formerly; of which, God sayes, They cryed not unto me. i. e. They did not make God the End of their Prayers; as elsewhere God tells them. When yee fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh moneth; even those seventy yeers, did ye fast to me, even unto me? In seventy yeers they kept seven score fasts in Babylon; and yet amongst them all, they kept not one day unto God; for though the duty lookt upon God, they that did the duty, did not look upon God; that is, they did not set up God as their chief End, in Fasting and Praying: They mourned not so much for their sin, as for their Captivity; or, if for their sin, they mourned for it not so much as Gods dishonour, as the cause of their Captivity; they were not troubled so much, that they had by their sins walkt contrary to God, Levit. 26.40. as that God by his judgements had walked contrary to them: They fasted and prayed rather to get off their chains, then to get off their sins; to get rid of the bondage of the Babylonians, then to get rid of the servitude of their own base Lusts. But now (blessed be God) it was otherwise: The children of Israel shall come, they, and the children of Judah, together; To what end? They shall seek the Lord, i. e. They shall seek God, for himself, and not onely for themselves; going and weeping; why? Not so much, that he hath offended them, as that they have offended him; for their sins more then for their punishments; so it is more distinctly reported. Jere. 3.21 A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping, and supplications of the children of Israel; because they have perverted their way, and have forsaken the Lord their God. They had forgotten God before, not onely in their sins, but in their duties; They cryed not to me; they fasted not to me; not at all unto me, &c. But now they remember the Lord their God; they seek his face; they labour to attone him; yea, they seek him to be their Lord, as well as their Saviour; to govern them, as well as to deliver them; they ask the way to Sion; they require, as
well (and more) how they should serve him, as that he should fae them. Th Lord is our Judge; 33.22. the Lord is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our  will save us. Beloved Christians, let us write after this Copy, and in this great businesse we have in hand let us seek God, and seek  as a  in of holinesse, as well as a fountain of happy∣. Tae we heed of those base, low, dunghilly ends, which prevail dpth. , to enter into Covenant with the God of the Hebrews, Shall not their Cattle and substance be . Lt th two Nations, and every soul in both the Nations, that  hand to the most high God, in this holy League and Covenant, take heed of, and abhorre such unworthy thoughts if they should be crowding in upon this service, and ay unto them, as one Christ to Peter; Get thee behinde me Satan, that  not of the things that be of God, but of the things that be of mn. You may remember how it fared with Hamor, and his son Sechm, and their people, to whom they propoun∣ded these ase ends. God did not onely disappoint them of their ds, but dstroy them, for them; Their ayms were to get the Hebrews substance and cattle, but they lost their own, with their lives to boot; Gen. 34.2, 27, 28, 29. For it came to passe on the third day, when they wre or, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon, and Levi, came upon the Citie, oldly, and slew all the males, &c. And the sons of Jacob  upon the slain, and spoild the Citie; they took their Sheep, and their Oxen, and all their Wealth. A most horrid and bloody, Gen. 4.5, 6, 7 treachery, and cruelty, in them, which stands as a Brand of infamy upon their foreheads to this day; but a most just and righteous censure from God, and a caution to all succeeding generations of prostituting heavenly and holy Ordinances to earthly and sensuall ends. Oh let it be our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, to the end that we may not tempt God, 1 Cor 10. as they also tempted; for if God so much abhorred, and so severely punisht these worldly respects in the men of the world; if God was so angry with poor purblind Hthen, who had no other light for their guide, but the glim∣mering light of Nature; how, will his anger not onely kindl,
but flame in the avenging of such basenesse upon Christians, a people of his own, who have the glorious light of the Gospel of  Christ, to discover to them higher and heavenlier Ends and References? so that such a Kingdom, People, or Person, tht should date to bring such base carnall Ends, to so spirituall and divine a contract, should be made a Monument of the wrath and vengeance of divine Justice; and while they propound to themselves, safety, or riches, or greatnesse, from such an excel∣lent Ordinance, God makes it by a strange, but a righteous hand, an occasion of misery and ruine to them, and their poste∣rity to many generations. Christians, labour to set up God in this day and duty, wherein you engage your selves so nigh unto him; and if you would have heavenly blessings, see that you propound and pur∣su heavenly Ends and Ayms; Lest, while you come to make a Covenant with God, you commit Idolatry against him; what∣soever we make our ultimate and highest end, we make our God: If therefore you cannot make God your sole, your onely End; yet be sure you make him your choicest, your chiefest End; keep God in his own place; and let all self-respects whatsoever vail to his Glory, according to that great Rule, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether you eat or drink, or what ever you do, do all to the glory of God. Fifthly, To do this businesse to Acceptation, Fifthly, with cheerful∣nesse. 2 Cor. 9.7. we must do it cheerfully, as God loves a cheerfull giver; so he loves a cheerfull hearer, a cheerfull Petitioner, and a cheerfull Covenanter; and you have it in the Text to, Come let us; There is their readinesse and cheerfulnesse to the work; as it was that for which the Apostle doth commend his Madonians in another service. This they did not as we hoped, 2 Cor 8.5. but first gave themselves to the Lord; So these, they give themselves to God, of their own accord, Come let us. Oh that the Ministers of the Gospel might have occasion to make the same boast of you, concerning this solemn Ordi∣nance before you, that they might say and rejoyce, that you were a people, that gave your selves to the Lord, and unto the work of Reformation, not by a Parliamentary fear, or by our Ministeriall compulsions; but above our hopes, and beyond our expectations; of your own accord.
See what a wonder not onely of cheerfulnesse, but of joy and triumph is recorded of the Jews in King Asas time, in their taking of the Covenant. They sware unto the Lord with a loud voice, 2 Chro. 25.14. and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets. And all Judah rejoyced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their hearts, &c. There was indeed a severe mult, a capitall censure inacted, against those that should refuse, and reject this Ordinance. They should be put to death, Vers. 13. whether great or small, whether man or woman. A very grievous censure; but it seems there was neither need, nor use of it; For all Judah rejoyced at the Oath; The peo∣ple lookt upon this service, not as their pressure, but as their priviledge; and therefore came to it, not with contentednesse onely, but an holy triumph, and so saved the Mastigrate and themselves, the labour, and charges, of executing that sentence on Delinquents. Oh, that this may be your wisedom and honour; That what ever penalty the Honourable Parliaments of either Nation, shall in their wisedom think fit to proportion to the grievous sin of rebelling against this Covenant of the Lord. (And it seems by the instance before, That whatsoever penalty they shall ordain lesse then death, will not be justice onely, but Moderation) I say, whatever it shall be, it may be rendered uselesse and invalid by the forwardnesse and rejoycings of an obedient people. That all England (as well as Scotland) would rejoyce at the Oath, and swear with all their hearts, &c. For certainly it will not be so much our duty as our Prero∣gative, as I have shewed you before, to enter into Covenant with God and his people. It is the day of Gods power, Psal. 120.3. the Lord make you a willing people. And as a testimony of this willingnesse and joy, imitate the people here in the Text, and stirre up one another, and provoke one another to this holy service. Let us joyn our selves to the Lord, &c. They expresse their charitie, as well as their joy; They would not go to Sion alone; They call as many as they meet, with them; Come let us joyn our selves to the Lord.
Oh that this might be your temper! It is the very Character of the Evangelicall Church; both as Isaiah and Micah have described it, Their words be the same. Many people shall go and say, Come yee, Isai. 2.3. Micah 4.2. and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord. Oh that while Nentralls and Malignants do discourage one another, and set off one another, and embitter one anothers spirits; God and his Ministers might finde you encouraging each other, and provoking one another, and labouring to oyl one anothers spirits, to this (as other) Gospel dutie and prerogative; God could not chuse, but be much pleased with such a sight. I might have made this a distinct Qualification, but for brevity sake, I couch it under this head. I come to the last. If you would be Accepted, Sixth and last Qua∣lification Faith in refe∣rence. Bring faith with you to this service: And that in a fourfold Reference, To God. To The Ordinance. To Our selves. To Jesus Christ. First, In reference unto God; For, 1. To God. Heb. 11.6. He that will come to God (in any Ordinance) must believe that God is, and that he is a re∣warder of them that diligently seek him. There is nothing God takes better at his peoples hand, then when they come with their hearts as full of good thoughts of God, as ever they can hold, such as Loe this is our God, we have waited for him, Isai. 25.9. and he will save us; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoyce in his salvation. He will save, we will be glad; i. e. God will undoubtedly give us occasion of gladnesse, and triumph in his praises. Oh sweet and blessed confidence of divine goodnesse! How well doth this become the children of such a Father, who hath stiled himself the Father of mercies. Good thoughts of God, do mightily please, and even engage God to shew mercy to his people. Heb. 4.15. Let us therefore come with boldnesse to the throne of grace; even in this Ordinance also, That
we may obtain mercy, and finde grace to help us in this time of our need. Secondly, 2. To the Ordi∣nance. Let us bring faith in reference to the Duty; As we are to believe well of God, so we are to beleeve well of the Duty, that it is an Ordinance wherein God will be sanctified, and,  of them that seek him. It is not enough, that we seek him in his Ordinance, but that we beleeve it to be his Ordinance,  faith, Rom. 14.12. is sin; he speaks not of a faith, that doth justifie the person; but of a faith, that doth justifie the perfor∣mance; that is, a , that the work whatsoever it is, is such as the word will bear me out in it, such as God himself doth approv; To do doubtfully, is to do sinfully; an  God. 3. In re∣ference  Ives. Thirdly, Bring  in reference to your own persons, be∣leev that God will accept of them in this Ordinance; whatever your success shall be in regard of the Kingdom, yet you shall find  in regard of your persons; Isa. 64.5. so the Church. Thou meetest him that rejoyceth, and worketh righteousnesse, those that remember thee in thy wayes. When a people or person can say, as the Church in another place. Isa 26.8. In the way of thy Judgements have we waited for thee, O Lord, the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. God will not stay till they come unto him, but he will  them half way; thou metest him, &c. like the father of the Prodigall, while they are yet half way, he will see, and run, and met, and fall upon their neck; and while they weep at his feet, tears of contrition; he will weep over their necks, the tears of compassion: Oh stirre up your selves, and engage your faith to beleeve, and expect a gratious entertainment; if God e you coming in the integrity and uprightnesse of your hearts, to enter into Covenant with God, to take him as your God, and to give up your selves, to be his peopl, to take away all from sin, and to give all to Jsus Christ; be will certainly take it well at your hands, and say unto you, Come my peopl, and welcome, I  you shall in my people, 4 In re∣ference to Jesus Christ. which that you may not misse of: In the fourth place, Come believingly in reference to Jesus
Christ; Be sure you bring a Christ with you; Eph. 1.6 for he hath made  in the beloved. Come without a Christ, and go without acceptance. The day of Attonement among the Jews, . was called dies Cippum the day of Expiation; and the word Cippurim, is derived from an Hebrew Root, that signifies to Cover; and so the day of Attonement, was as much as to say, The day of covering; the covering of nakednesse, as Revel. 3.18. Revel. 3.18. Psa. 32.1. and the covering of sin, as Psal. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose trans∣grssion is forgiven, and whose sin is covered; In which very name of the day, the ground or reason is held forth, why it was called a day of Attonment; sc. Because it was a day of conering; wherein Christ was typified, who is the covering of the Saints; the lng white Robes of his Righteousnesse, covering both their  and performances; so that the naednesse of neither, doth appear in the eyes of his Father; Num 23.21. He hath beheld no iniquity in ; neither hath seen perversenesse in Israel: Why? Not be∣cause there was no iniquity in Jacob, or perversenesse in Israel (for there was hardly any thing else;) but because their iniquity and perversenss was hid from his eyes, being covered with the Mantle of his Sonnes Righteousnesse, the Messiah which he had promise, and they so much looked for. Let us therefore in this service, as in all, Rom. 13.14. Put on the Lord Jesus; That as Jacob in the Garments of his lder brother Esau, so we in the Grments of our elder brother Jesus, may finde ac∣ceptance, and obtain the blessing. And thus much be spoken concerning the first Branch of this third Quaere, How to acceptation. How to perpetui∣tie? I come now to the second branch of it, and that is, How to perpetuitie? Or, How may we perform this service, Directi∣ons. so that it may be an  Covenant that may never be forgotten? To that end, take these few brief Directions, and I have done. G soul affliction for for∣mer Co∣venant∣volati∣ons.First, Labour to come to this service with much soul-affli∣ction, for former violations of the Covenant, either in refusing, or pphing, or breaking thereof: The foundations must be laid low, where we would build for many Generations. In what
deep sorrows had you need to lay the foundations of this Cove∣nant, which you would have stand to eternity, that it may be an everlasting Covenant, &c. This you have in the Text; They shall seek the Lord going and weeping; weeping in the sence of their former rebellions and pestacies, whereby they forfeited their faith, and brake their Covenant with the Lord their God; and it was no ordinary flght businesse they made of it: A voice was heard upon the high places, . 3.22. weeping and supplica∣tion, &c. They were not a few silnt tears: no, they lift up their oices and wept, as it was said of Esau, &c. They cryed so lowd, that they were heard a great way off. A voice was heard upon the Mountains; Zech 12.11, 22. and it was as bitter as it was lowd; A great mour∣ning, as the mourning of Hadedrimmon in the valley of Megidde, when all Judah, 2 Chron. 35.2, . Jerusalem, Jeremiah the Prophet, and all the , bewailed the death of their good King Josiah, with a grievous Lamentation, and made it an Ordinance for ever, &c. Oh that as we have their service in hand, so we had their hands and their hearts, to manage it with Rivers of tears, for our former vilenesse; that we could weep this day together, and after∣ward apart, . 12.. as it is prophesied, Every family apart, and our ; yea, and every foul apart, that we have dealt so  with so good a God; so unfaithfully with so faithfull a God; That we could put our Mouths in the dust, and smite upon our gh, and be ashamed and confounded, for all the Wickednesse we have committed against God and his Covenant, in any, or all thse wayes. Such a Posture God will see us in, before he will shew us the way to Sion; before he will reveal to us the Modll and Plat∣tor of Reformation; for so was his charge to Ezekiel. If they be ashamd of all that they have done, . shew them the formes of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out there∣of, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof, and write it in their sight, &c. Surely, This blessed Prophesie hath an eye upon our times, for this is one of those dayes, as I told you before, wherein God
will make good these gratious words unto his people; and God hath called together his Ezekiels, his Ministers, to shew the House. i. e. Vers. 1. The forme and pattern of the Evangelicall House or Church, unto the House of England and Scotland; Shew the House to the House of Israel, that they may be ashamed; That is, shew them the outside thereof, shew them that there is such a House, which they never yet beheld with their eyes, that they may be humbled and ashamed of their former Idolatries, &c. And thus do our Exekiels tell us there is a way of Gospel Govern∣ment, of such beauty and excellency, as our eyes never yet beheld, nor the eyes of our forefathers; To the end that we may be ashamed of all our former Idolatries and Superstitions, our mon∣strous mixtures of Popery and will-worship in the Ordinances of Christ; and that we have not sooner enquired after the minde of Christ, how he will be worshipt in his House: But now, un∣lesse we be ashamed; i. e. Deeply and throughly humbled, for all that we have done unworthy of Christ and his Worship, and the Covenant of our God; we shall never see the inside, that is, the Laws and the Ordinances, and the Forms of this House, (which are both various and curious (for so the variety and re∣petition of the words imply.) The Prophets are not to reveal these unto us, unlesse we be ashamed, God will either withdraw them from us, or which is worse, withdraw himself from them; so that our eyes shall never behold the Lord in the beauty of Holy∣nesse; we shall not be admitted to see the beauty and glory of such a Reformation as our souls long for. And as God will see us in this posture before he reveal to us the Modell and Platforme of Reformation; so also till we be in such a posture of deep Humiliation, for our former abomina∣tions. Shall we never be stedfast and faithfull in the Covenant of God: Till our hearts be throughly broken for Covenant∣breach, we will not passe much for breaking Covenant, upon every fresh temptation. Yea, till that time we be humbled, not for a day onely, and so forth: But unlesse we labour to maintain an habituall frame of goodly sorrow upon our hearts; for our Covenant-violations, shall we ever be to purpose conscientious of our Covenant. A sad remembrance of old sins, is a speciall means to prevent new,
when every solemn remembrance of former vilenesse, can fetch tes from our eyes, and blood from our hearts, and fill our faces with an holy sh, the soul will be holily shie of the like ao∣minations, and of all occasions and tendences thereunto. Rm moring mine affliction and my misery, am. 3.9, 20. the Wormewood, and the Gall. My soul hath the still in remembrance, and is humbled with∣in me. When old sins cost dear, new sins will not finde an casie entertainment; when old sins are new fflictions, when the re∣membrance of them is as Wormewood and Gall, the soul will not easily be bewitcht to drink a new draught of that poysoned Cup any more. Christian beleeve me, or thou mayest finde it by experience too true, when thou hast forgot old sins, or canst remember them without new affliction of soul, thou art neer a fall; Look to thy self, and cry to God, for preventing grace. There will be great hopes we shall be faithfull in our nw Covenant, when we come with a godly sence and sorrow for our abuse of old, and laour to maintain it upon our spirits. But so much for the first direction; I come to the second. Secondly, . Dire∣ction. See old scores crost. If you would have this Covenant to be a perpe∣tuall Covenant, Labour to see old scores crost; do not onely mourn for thy Coenant-unfaithfulnesse; but labour to get thy pardon written and sealed to thee in the blood of Covenant. There i vertue enough in the blood of the Covenant to expiate the guilt of thy sins against the Covenant. I will rinkle clan water upon you, Ezek 36.. nd you shall be clean from all your filthynesse, and from all your Idols, will  leanse you. Their sins of Idolatry, were sins especially, against their Covenant; Idolatry being the violation of the marriage knot, between God and a people; yet even from them doth God promise to cleanse them, upon their repentance and conversion, The blood of the Covenant, compared to water for the cleaning vertue thereof, should cleanse them for their Covenant de∣ments. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. 2 John .7.
Thou hast played th Harlot with many Lovers, Jer. 3.1. yet return a∣gain to me, saith the Lord. It is a mighty encouragement to renew our Covenants with God. That he is so ready to pardon the Breach of ol; and e sence of this pardon is a mighty engagement and strengthning, to keep our Nw-Covenants. Oh for God to say to a poor soul, B of good cheer thy sins be forgiven thee; Matth. 9.2 Isai 44.22.  31.33. And I have blotted out thy sins as a cloud, and thy transgressions as a thick cloud; All thy unkindnesses, and unfaithfulnesses, thy treacherous dealings a∣gainst the Covenant, &c. shall be forgotten; they shall do thee no harme, &c. This will mightily strengthen the hands, and fortifie the heart, and even make it impenetrable and impreg∣nale against all the sollicitations, and importuniis of old temptations; See a notable instance of this, Hos. 14.4. I will  their back-slidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him. I will be as the dew to Israel, &c. . His branches shall spread, &c. . They that dwell under his shaddow shall return, &c. . What follows these gratious promises? Why, Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any mor with Idols? He that before was so unseparably joyned to Idols, Chp. 4.17  31.18 that he could not be divorced from them, Ephraim is joyned to Idol. All the blows that God gave him, (though God should have beaten him to peices (as he himself afterward confess'd) could not beat him off from his Idols; in so much, that God at length gave him over, as an hopelesse child. Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone. Yet no sooner doth this Ephraim hear of a pardon, and of the love of God to him; but the bonds between him, and his Idols are dissolved, and away he thrusts them with indignation; Ephraim shall say, what have I do do with Idols? Or as the Pro∣phet Isaiah expresseth it. Ye shall dfile the covering of the graven Images of silver, Isai 30.22 and  of thy mlten Images of Gold; Thou shlt cast thm away as a mstrous cloth; thou shalt say unto it get thee hence. And thus it is with a people or a person, Rm. 5. Isa, 51.8. when once God  abroad his Law in their hearts, and makes them hear joy
gladnesse, in speaking, or sealing, a pardon upon their souls; they that before were joyned to their Idols, drunkennesse, uncleannesse, covetuousnesse, pride, wayes of false worship, old Superstitious Customes, and Ceremonies, and the like; So that there was no parting of them; or those who had long been grapling and conflicting with their strong corruptions, and old temptations, and in those conflicts had received many a foil, and got many a fall to the wounding of their consciences, and cutting deep gashs upon their souls; now they stand up with a kinde of omnipotence upon them, no temptation is able to stand before them; They say to their Idols, whether sinfull company, or sin∣full customes, Get ye hence, and what have I to do any more with Idls? What have I to do, with such, and such, base company? What have I to do with such base filfthy Lusts? I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. Christ is mine, and I am his. The reason of it is, Luk. 4.4 Can. 8.6. Revel. 12.11. Act. 20.24 1 Tim. 1..13. Because, pardon begets love; she loved much, because much was forgiven her; and love begets strength: For lve is as strong as death; yea, stronger then sin or death; they loved not their lives to the death; And I count not my life dear, sayes Paul. When once the man had tasted of the free-grace of God in the pardon of his sins, who before was a blasphemer and a perse∣cutor, and injurious; he could finde in his heart, not onely to lay down a lust, but to lay down his life to for Jesus Christ. For whose sake (saith he) I have suffered the losse of all things; Phil. 5.8. And I count not my life dear, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received from the Lord Jesus, to testifie the Gospel of the grace of God. My beloved Christians, If you would be faithfull in the Covenant of God, into which you are now entring, sue out your pardon for what is past; yea, entreat the Lord, not onely to give a pardon, but to speak a pardon, and seal a pardon upon your hearts; and never give the Lord rest, till the Lord have given rest to your fouls. The joy of the Lord is your strength. . 8.3 e∣ction. Self di∣struct. Thirdly, If you would make an unchangeable Covenant, with an unchangeable God, come furnisht with, and maintain
upon your hearts, an bundant measure of self-distrust; Labour to be throughly convinct of your own nothingnesse and disability. 1 Sam. 2.19. Je. 2.19. Jere. 10.23. By his own strength shall no man prevail. Surely, Thine own treachery may informe thee, and thine own back-slidings may convince thee, to confesse with Jeremiah. Oh Lord I know (I know it by sad experience) the way of man is not in himself: It is not in man that walketh to direct his steps. Staupitius confest to Luther, Ego pl quam mil∣lies devovi. That he thought in his very conscience he had above a thousand times renewed his Covenant with God, and as many times broken it: A sad confession, and yet, how many among us may take up the like amentation! Be convinct of it, I beseech you, and maintain the sence of this conviction upon your spirits. Say oft within your self, I am nothing, worse then nothing, This treacherous heart of mine will betray me into the breach of my Covenant, if the Lord have me to my self, I shall one day fall by the hand of my corruptions. He that walks tremblingly, walks safely. In the next place, Be often renewing your Resolutions. 4. Dire∣ction. Oft re∣nw reso∣lutions. Acts 13.23. It was the Exhortation of that good man to the New-Con∣verts at Antioch (where they were first called Christians,) That they should cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart. This Covenant I have shewed you, is the Ordinance whereby you cleave unto the Lord, the joyning Ordinance. Oh do it with full purpose of heart, and be often putting on fresh and frequent resolutions, not to suffer every base temptation of Satan, every deceitfull, or malignant sollicitation of the world; every foolish, and carnall suggestion of the flesh, to bribe and seduce you from that fidelitie which you swear this day to Jesus Christ and the Kingdoms. A well grounded resolution is half the work, and the bet∣ter half to; for he that hath well resolved, hath conquered his will; and he that hath conquered his will, hath overcome the greatest difficulty; No such difficulty in spirituall things, as to prevail with ones own heart. With these cords therefore, of well bottomed resolutions, be oft binding your selves to your Covenant, as once Ʋlisses did himself to his Mast, that you may
not be bewitcht by any Syrenian song of the flesh, world, or the , to violate your holy Covenant, and drown your selves in a set of perdition. And to that end it would not be altogether uselesse to fix you. Covenant in some place of your Houses, or Bed-Chamber, where it be may oftenest in your eye, to admonish you of your Religious and Solemn engagement, under which you have brought your own souls. The Jews had their Phylacteries, Nm. 15.18. or borders upon their Gar∣s which they did wear also upon their heads, and upon their ; which though they abused afterward, not onely to pride, making them broader then their first size or pattern, in ostentati∣on and boasting of their holinesse, which our Saviour con∣demns in the Scribes and Pharisees; Matth. 23.5. and to Superstition, for they used them as Superstitious helps in prayer, which they coloured under  derivation of the word in the Hebrew Den∣vng  which signifies to pray; whereas it is deri∣ved true∣ly from  which signifies to aff r w. Isa 49:16; yet God indulged them this Ceremony, as n hlp for their memories, to put them in remembrance to keep the Law of the Lord. And God himself seems to use this Art of Memory, as it were, when comforting his people, he tels them, Behold, I have engaven thee upon the Palms of my hands, and thy Walls are continually before me. I must confesse the nature of man is very prone to abuse and pervert such naturall helps to Idolatry and Superstition. This instance of the Jews, wretchedly improving their Phy∣lacteries to Superstitious purposes, their Idlizing of the Brazen Srpent; and thereby of a Cure, turning of it into a Plague, a snare; with the like, are sufficient testimonies. And we see how the Papists have abused and adulterated the lawfull use of naturall Mediums, to the unlawfull use of artificiall Mediums of their own inventions; Images and , first to help their Memories and stirre up their de∣votions in their Prayers, and then to pray unto them, as Medi∣ums of divine Worship. The more Cautions had Christians need be in the use of those Mediums which either God hath ordained by speciall command for the help of our memories, and stirring up of our  as the  Elments in the Sacraments; or such natu∣rall
advantages, which Morall equity allows us for the help of our understandings, and memories in spirituall concernments; such is this, we are now speaking of; it being the same, with the use of Books and Tables, &c. Tertullian tells us of a Superstitious custome among the ancient Christians, That they were wont to set up Images over their doors and Chimneys, to keep Witches when they came into their Houses from bewitching their children; and so by a little inde of Witch-craft, prevented Witch-craft. But surely to set up this Covenant where we might often see and read, what engagements we have laid upon our souls, (and I could heartily wish Christians Would do it at lest once a week) it will be an innocent and warrantable Spell, to render the Witchery of the Flesh, World, and Divel, fruitlesse and in effectuall upon our spirits, while the soul may say with David, Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will render praise unto thee. Ps. 56.12. But fifthly, Consider often and seriously, Fifth means, Prayer. 1 Pet 1.5 who it is that must uphold your Resolutions; even he that upholds Heaven and Earth: no lesse power will do it, For you are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation. It is God that first gives the resolution, and then must up∣hold and bring it into act; It is God that worketh in you, Phi. 2.13. both to will, and to do of his good pleasure; and therefore labour I beseech you to do these two things. First, Put all your resolutions into the hands of prayer: 1. Pra. David was a man of an excellent spirit, full of holy Resolves. I will walk in mine integrity. Psal 26.11. Psal 119.8. sal 4. Psal. 139.21, 22. And I will keep thy Testimonies. And again, I have sworn, and will performe it, That I will keep thy righ∣teous judgements. And yet again, Do I not hate them Lord that hate thee, &c. I hate them with a perfect htre, &c. A thousand such sweet resolutions doth that precious ser∣vnt of God breath out all along the Psalms; and yet so jealous  man is of himself, That he never trusts himself with  resolutions; and therefore shall you finde him alwayes clppng a Petition upon a resolution, as in the quoted places.
I will walk in mine integrity, Redeem me, and be mercifull unto me. I will keep thy Testimonis, Oh forsake me not utterly. q. d. Thou  me fall fearfully, suffer me not to fall finally. And so when he had said, I have sworn and will not repent, &c. Ver. 107.He presently adds (within a word or two) Quicken me, O Lord,  to thy word; And again, Accept I beseech thee, of the  rings of my mouth, Ver. 108.O Lord, and teach me thy judgements. God must teach him (as to mak; so) to make good the  will offerings of his mouth; i. e. His promises and ow. And so when he had made that appeal to God, Do I not hate them that hate the, Lord, &c. Ʋt sup: He presently betakes himself to his Prayers, Search me, O God, and know my heart, try m, Psal 129 23, 24 and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in , and lead me in the way everlasting. Mark I pray, Search me, try me, know my heart, know my thoughts, see whe∣ther thre be any wicked way, lead m, &c. He will neither trust himself, for what hets, nor for what he shall be; Try me, he dares not trust his own tryall; Lead me, he dares not trust his own Resolutions: Sch a sweet holy jealousie of himself  he creath forth with all his heavenly purposes and res∣lations. Oh,  you that would make an Everlasting Covenant with  holy David, upon every holy Resolution, clap an  say, I will reform my life; Oh redeem me, and  I will set up Christ in my heart, I will labour  him in my life; Oh forsake m not utterly, Lord , and am utterly purposed in all , to amend my life, and to go before , &c. O Lord teach me , O Lord, according to thy Word. are upon me, That I will according to my place and  to preserve Reformation in Scotland, to procure  England; That I will in like manner endeavour  Popery and Prelacy, &c. To preserve the Rights  Parliaments, &c. Discover Incendiaries; En∣ between the two Kingdoms;  that enter into this League and Covenant, That I
will never make defection to the contrary part, or to give my self to a detestable indifferency or neutrality, &c. And this Covenant I have made in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as I shall answer at that great day, &c. But now adde with David, Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any way of wickednesse in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. In a word, put your Covenant into frequently renewed Resolutions: Resolutions into Prayer, and Prayer, and all into the hands of God: It is God that must gird thee with strength, to perform all thy vows. This the close of this blessed Cove∣nant, into which we enter this day, doth teach us. Humblie beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his spirit; for this end, and to blesse our desires and proceedings, &c. And the Covenant in the Text, was surely inlaid with Prayer, while they engage themselves to seek the Lord; sc. Not onely to shew them the way to Sion, but to give them strength to walk in that way. Let it be your wisedome and piety (my Brethren) to imi∣tate both; Oh pray, and be much in Prayer, and be often in prayer, pray daily over the Covenant; as you this day lift up your hands to swear to the most high God in this Covenant, so lift up your hands, every day to pray to that God for grace to keep this Covenant. Let sence of self-insufficiency, keep open the sluce of Prayer, That that may let fresh streams of strength, every day into your souls, to make good your vows; when you be carelesse to pray over the Covenant, you will be carelesse to keep the Covenant; when you cease to pray, you will cease to pay; If you will be watchfull in praying over your vows, Prayer will make you watchfull in paying your vows; If you will be faithfull in crying to God, God will be faithfull in hearing and hlping, Psal. 50.15. Pray therefore, pray over every good purpose and resolution of heart towards the Covenant of God, which conscience shall suggest, or the Spirit of God shall breath into your bosoms, at this present, or any time hereafter; as David once prayed over that good fram of Spirit, which he observed in his people; what time they off red so willingly and
liberally to the preparing for the House of God; 2 Chr 29 . Oh, God of Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Jacob  Fathers, keep this for ever, in the imagi∣nation of the thoughts of my heart, and prepare my heart unto thee. To every command God is pleased to adde a promise; so that what is a command in one place, is a promise in another, Ex. gr. Circum  sores hin your heart, Deut. 10.1.  it is a command in Deut. 1.16. But in the 30. Chapter, vers. 6. There it is a promise,  God will  thine heart, and the heart of thy . Lord. Again, mak you a new heart, so saith the word of command; A  will I give you; so speaks the Word of Promise, Ch. 36.26. Once more, Little children abide in him, th is the command, 1 Joh. 2.28. Which in the immediate Verse , is a  prmi. You shall abide in him. Divers more such Instances I could give you; and why thus? Surely, the  teacheth us our Dutie, the Promise, our weaknesse, and  to perform that luty. The Command finds us work; the  findes us streth: The command is to keep us from ; the promi to keep us from being discouraged, &c. Wll,  God, and as he couples a command and a , so let us couple a Resolution and a Petition. As  seconds and backs his command with his promise, so let us second, and back our promises with our Prayers; the on in sence of our duty, the other in sence of our weaknesse; by the one, to bring our hearts up to God; by the other, to bring God down to our hearts: Resolve and Petition, Promise and Pry; And the Lord prepare your heart to pray, and cause his r to . Secondly, Since God onely must uphold your desires, W continually, as in his presence; Silitie is onely to be found in the prefence of God; So faire we live an unchangeable life, as we walk and live in the presence of an unchangeable God. The aints  Heaven know no vicissitudes, or changes in their holy frane and temper of spirit, because they are perfected in the  holding of his face, With whom is no variablenesse, nor . And so farre, as the Saints on Earth can  in their presence; so farre the presence of God will keep them; Isa.   the Lord alwayes before me; and because he
is t my right hand; therefore I shall not be moved, sung David of mself, liberally, and in the person of Christ, typically: The pri∣ledge was made good to both, so far as either made good the Dutie. David according to his degree, and proportion of grace,  God before him, placed him on his right hand; and so long as he could keep Gods presence; the presence of God kept him; it kept him from sin, I have kept my self from my iniquitie, Ps. 18 13 how so? Why, I was upright before him, in the former part of the same Verse. So long as he walkt before God, in Gods presence; so long he walkt upright, and kept himself from his iniquitie; or rather Gods presence kept him: And as it kept him from sin, so it kept him from fear also; Psa 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear; Mark what he saith, Though he walk not step; and walk through, not step crosse; and through, not a dark Entry, or a Church-yard in the night time, but a Valley, a large, long, vast, place; How many miles long I know not; And this not a Valley of darknesse onely, but of death, where he should see nothing but visions of death, and not bare death, but the shadow of death; the shadow is the dark part of the thing; so that the shadow of death, is the darkst side of death: Death in its most hideous and horrid representations; and yet behold, when he comes out at the farther end, and a man would have thought to have found him all in a cold sweat, his hair standing upright, his eyes set in his head, and the man beside himself, &c. Behold I say, he doth not so much as change colour, his hand shakes not, his heart fails not, as he went in, he comes out; and though he should go back again the same way, he tells you, I will not fear. How comes this to passe, how comes the man to be so undaunted? Why, he will tell you in the very same Verse, speaking to God, For thou art with me. Gods presence kept him from fear, in the midst of death and horror. Thus it was I say with David, while he could keep God in his presence, he was unmoveable, impregnable; You might as soon have stirred a Rock, as stirred him, I shall not be moved; Indeed so long as he was upon the Rock, he was as unmoveable, as the Rock it self; But alas, sometime he lost the sight of his God, and then he was like other men; Thou didst hide thy face from me, Psa. 30 7. and I was troubled. When God hid his face from him, or he hid his eyes from
God; 1 Sam. 29 1. then how easily is he moved? Fear breaks in, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul. Sin breaks in, yea, one sin upon the heels of another; the adulterous act upon the adulterous look, and murder upon adultery, as you know in that sad businesse of Ʋriah the Hittit; once off from his Rock, and he is as weak as dust, not able to stand before the least temptation of sin or fear; Psa. 61 2. and therefore, as soon as he comes to himself again, he cryes, Oh lead me to the Rock, that is higher then I; To my Rock Lord, to my Rock. But now, The Lord Jesus, the Antitype of David here in this Psalm, because he made good this (Dutie shall I call it?) For in him dwelt the fulnesse of the Godhead, Gl 2.9. bodilie; to him there∣fore was this priviledge made good perfectly in the highest de∣gree; for though he had temptations that never man had, and was to do that which never man did; and to suffer that which never man suffered; the contradiction of sinners; the rage of Hell; and the wrath of God: Yet, Because he set the Lord al∣wayes at his right hand; yea, indeed was alwayes at the right hand of God; therefore he was not moved, but overcame even by suffering. Beloved you see where stabilitie in Covenant is to be had; even in the presence of God, labour I beseech you, to walk in his presence, and to set him alwayes at your right hand; Behold, it shall keep you, so that you shall not be moved, or if you be moved, you shall not be removed; if you stumble, you shall not fall; or if you fall, you shall not fall away; you shall rise again. There is a double advantage in it. First, It will keep your hearts in awe; He that sets God in his presence, dares not sin in his presence: God sees, will make the heart say. How shall I do this great evill, and sin against God? Secondly, Ps 16.12. There is Joy in it; In thy presence is fulnesse of joy; it is true in its proportion of grace, as well as of glory; and joy will strengthen and stablish, as I shewed you before, The joy of the Lord is your strength. Psal 91. .10. As long as the childe is in its fathers eye, and the father in its eye, it is secure. Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the mst high, thy habitation, there shall no evill befall thee, &c. It will hold as well in the evils of sin, as in the evils of punishment: Well,
the Lord make you know these precious truths in an experi∣mentall manner. I have hld you too long; but the businesse requires it. Re∣member I beseech you, It is God that must uphold your desires and resolutions; And therefore, 1. Be much in Prayer, and 2. Set your selves in the presence of God, He lives unchange∣ale, that lives in the unchangeable God. In the sixth and last place, Sixth and last dire∣ction; Look up to Christ. If thou wouldest make an ever∣lasting Covenant with God that shall never be forgotten, Look up to Jesus Christ, go to Jesus Christ, he must holy, and he must strengthen, and he must keep thee, or else thou wilt never be able to keep thy Covenant; hear him else Without me yee can do nothing. Joh. 15 5 And as Christ speaks thus on the negative; so you may hear the Apostle speaking by blessed experience on the affirmative; I can do all things through Jesus Christ, which strengthneth me: Phil. 4 12 Observe I pray, Without me yee can do nothing. Through Christ I can do all things. Nothing, All things; There is a good deal of difference be∣tween two men; take one without Christ, and be his parts never so excellent, his resolutions never so strong, his engage∣ments never so sacred, He can do nothing, unlesse it be to break his Covenants and Vows, as Sampson brake his Cords like threds scorcht with the fire; and take the other with a Christ stand∣ing by him, and be he in himself never so weak and mean, un∣learned and unguifted, loe, as if he were clothed with omni∣peatie, He can do all things; he can subdue such corruptions, conquer such temptations, perform such Duties, and in such a manner, do such things, suffer such things (and in all these keep his Covenant with God) as to other men, and to himself before, were so many impossibilities: He could not before; now he can. Nothing before, All things now. All things fit for an unglorified Saint to do; All things God expects from him; All things in a Gospel sence; All things comparatively to other men, and to him∣self, when he was another man: See I beseech you, how with∣out
a Christ, and through a Christ, makes one man differ from aner; yea, and from himself, as much as can and cannot; All things and nothing; Impetencie and omnipotencie, Without me you can do nothing. Through Christ I can do all things. If therefore you would make a Covenant with Eternitie to , Study Christ more then ever, Labour to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And therein these two things. 1. Interest in Christ. 2. Influence from Christ. First, 1 Go to  st. Joh. 15.4. Labour to get interest in Christ. Interest is the ground of Influence; Ʋnion the Fountain or Spring of Communion; so Christ. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vice, no more can y, except yee abide in me. There you have the truth, and the  of it; No fruit from Christ, with∣out being and abiding in Christ; There is truth: Illustrated and  by the Vine and the Banel; There the simile, which is prosecuted and enlarged by our Saviour in the 5, 6, 7 Verses. And as all Communi  from Ʋnion, so look what the Ʋnion is, such is the Communion; Christ was filled with the fulnesse of God, 16.  17.23. ol 2 9. because united to God; The Saints receive of the fulnesse of Christ, because united to Christ. I in them, and thou , onely here is the difference. Christs Ʋnion with his Father was Pnall, Infinite, and Substantiall; And therefore the  were answerable, Joh. 3 34. For God gave not the spirit by  unto him, &c. But the Saints Ʋnion with Christ being of an iniur natur; their Communications also are proportionable; yet such as serve poor Creatures to all blessed  purposes. And therefore with Paul; 9. Labour to be found In Christ, That so, on may  the power of his Resurrection, and  his Sufferings; All the Power and Vertue that is in Jesus Christ, it is onely for thm that are in him, as the Branch in the R, as the Members in the Bdy. Christ is cld th  God, God. Isal. 49.8. I will  Covenant of the People. i. e. As Calvin well ex∣pounds it, , the surety or undertaker of the Cove∣nant, of that second new Covenant, between God and his People,
not the Jews onely, but the Gentiles also: A suretie on both sides, The suretie of Gods Covenant to them, 2 Cor. 1.20. for all the promises of God are in him, yea, and in him Amen, i. e. He sees them all made good to the heirs of promise; and Christ again is the suretie of their Covenant unto God; for he undertakes to make good all their Covenant, and Vows, and Promises unto God. Joh. 17.12. Gal. 2.30. Those that thou gavest me, I have kept, saith Christ. And I live (saith Paul) yet not I but Christ liveth in me. So that it is Christ who makes the Covenant good on both sides, as Gods to his people, so his peoples to God; And so it follows in that place of Isaiah, I have given thee for a Covenant to the people, to establish the earth; Establishment must come from Christ, the undertaker; the suretie of the Covenant; as he paid the Debt for the time past, so he must see the Articles of the Covenant kept for the time to come. For want of such an undertaker or suretie, the first Covenant miscarried; It was between God and the Creature without a Mediator; and so the Creature changing, the Covenant was dissolved; but the second, Psal. 19.19. God meant should not miscarry, and therefore puts it into sure hands; I have laid help upon one that is mighty, speaking of Christ; And I will give thee for a Covenant to the People: God hath fur∣nisht Christ wherewith all, to be a suretie; to make good his Covenant to his People, and their Covenant to him. But now he hath this stock of All-sufficiencie for none but these that are his Members, he actually undertakes for none but those that are actually in him; These that thou hast given me, I have kept. He keeps none but them whom the father hath given him; given him so, as to be in them, and they in him. I in them, so John 17.23. and they in me, so Chap. 15.5. Well, if thou wouldst be unchangeable in thy Covenant, get interest in Christ who is the Covenant; The unchangeable Cove∣nant; The Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse; Revel. 3.14. Hb. 13 8 Phil. 3 9. Yesterday and to day, and the same for ever; Get interest, Count all things losse and dung, that thou maist win Christ, and be found in Christ. Yea, do not onely labour to get interest, but prove thy interest; take not up a matter of so infinite concernment upon trust; all that thou doest Covenant to God, and that God doth Covenant to thee, depends upon it; and therefore, Work it out
with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.13 2 Pet. 1.0. and give all diligence to make it sure unto thy soul: Study evidences, and be content with none but such as will bear weight in the ballance of the Sanctuary; such as the Word will secure; such, as to which the Word will bear witnesse, that they are inconsistent with any Christlesse man, or woman whatsoever; And pray with unweariable suppliceations that God will not onely give thee interest, but cleer thy interest, and seal up interest upon thy soul and thee, to the day of Re∣demption. And then secondly, 2 Go to Christ for influ∣ence. Studie influence, when once in Christ, then hast thou right and liberty to draw vertue from Christ: For behold, All the fulnesse that dwels in Christ is thin; all that life and strength and grace, and redemption, that is held forth in the promise, it is all laid up in Christ, as in a Magazine; and by vertue of thy interest in, and union with the Lord Jesus, it is all become thin. Hence you hear the believing soul making her boast of Christ as (before) for righteousnesse, Isa. 45.24 so also for strength. In the Lord I have righteousnesse and strength, as righteousnesse for acceptance, so strength also for performance of such duties, as God in his Covenant doth require and expect at the beleevers hands: I have no strength of mine own, but in Christ I have enough; In the Lord I have righteousnesse and strength. Christ is the Lord-keeper, or Lord high Steward, or Lord-Treasurer; to receive in and lay out, Psal. 68.18. e re∣ceived, phe 48 bege gifts, &c. for and to all that are in Covenant with the Father. And this is one main Branch of Gods Covenant with the Redeemer, that he give out to the Heirs of promise, wherewith∣all to enable them to keep their Covenant with God; so that they never depart from him. As for me, Isa. 59.25. this is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. They be the words of God the Father to the Redeemer, concerning all his Spirituall Seed; The Redeemer shall come to Sion, Vers 24. And that spirit, and these words of life and grace, which were upon the Redeemer must be propagated to all his
believing Seed; by vertue whereof, their Covenant with God, shall in its proportion be like Gods Covenant with them (for indeed the one is but the counterpart of the other) unchange∣able, everlasting. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, Jer. 32 40 that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart away from me. Now therefore my Brethren, since there is enough in Christ, study how to draw it out: Indeed it will require a great deal of holy skill to do it; It requires wisedom to draw out the excellencies of a man: Counsell in the heart of a man is deep, Prov. 20.3. but a man of understanding will draw it out: It is a fine art to be able to peirce a man, that is like a Vessell full of Wine, and set him a running; but to draw out influence and vertue from the Lord Jesus is one of the most secret hidden Mysteries in the life of a Christian; indeed we may complain, John 4. The Well is deep and we have nothing to draw withall; But labour to get your Bucket of faith, that you may be able to draw water out of this Well of Salvation; Isa. 12. Labour by vitall acts of a powerfull faith; set on work in Mediation and Prayer, to draw vertue and influence from Jesus Christ; the Mouth of Prayer, and the breathings of Faith from an heart soakt and steept in holy Meditations, applyed to Jesus Christ, will certainly (though perhaps insensibly) draw vertue from him. Behold, Faith drew vertue from Christ by a touch of his Garments; shall it not much more draw out that rich and precious influence, by applying of him in the promises, and in his Offices unto our souls? Consider oh Christian who ever thou art, even thou that art in Christ, consider, God hath not trusted thee with grace enough before hand, for one moneth, no, not for a week, a day; Nay, thou hast not grace enough before hand for the performance of the next duty, or the conquering of the next temptation; nor for the expediting thy self out of the next difficulty; And why so? But that thou mayst learn to live by continuall depen∣dance upon Jesus Christ, as Paul did, Gal. 2.20 The life that I now live in the flesh, I live it by the faith of the Son of God. Paul lived by fresh influence drawn from Christ by faith, every day and hour: study that life, it is very Mysterious, but exceeding precious.
Had we our stock before hand, we should quickly spend all, and prove bankrupts: 1 Cor. 1.36. God hath laid up all our treasure of Wisedom, Righteousnesse, Sanctification and Redemption in Jesus Christ, and will have us live from hand to mouth, that so we might be safe, and Gods free grace be exalted: Rom. 12.16. It is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end your promise might be sure to all the seed. Wherefore holy Brethren, partakers of this heavenly cal∣ling, look up to Jesus Christ, who is the Covenant of his Fa∣ther, and your Covenant; loe he calls you. Look unto me, Isai. 48.22 and be yee saved all the ends of the earth. Sure∣ly, they are worthy to perish, who will not bestow a look upon Salvation: Oh look humbly, and look beleevingly, and look con∣tinually; look for Interest, look for Influence, look for Righte∣ousnesse, look for Strength; and let Jesus Christ be All in All to thy soul: thou wilt never be any thing, nor do any thing in Christianity, till thou comest to live in and upon Jesus Christ, and him onely: Humbly entreat the Lord, and give him no rest; That he will make a Covenant with thee in Christ, which shall keep thee, and then thou wilt be able to keep thy Covenant; Look up to Christ for Covenant-grace, to keep Covenant-engagement, and so shalt thou do this service (in a Gospel-sence) to Acceptati∣on, to Perpetuitie. I have now done with these three Quaeres; What? Why? How? How to Acceptation. Perpetuitie. I know much more might be added, but the work to which we are to addresse our selves, will take up much time; the Lord set home what hath been spoken. Onely give me leave to tell you thus much in a word, for the close of all; As this Covenant prospers with us, so we are like to prosper under it; The welfare of the Kingdom and of thy soul, is bound up now in this Covenant; For I remember what God speaks of the Kingdom of Israel, brought into Covenant now with the King of Babylon, to serve him, and to be his Vassals; . 17.13, 14. Vers. 16.17. That by keeping Covenant it should stand; and the break∣ing of that Covenant was the breaking of Zedekiah and his whole Family, and Kingdom. Now was Covenant-breach or fidlitie
the foundation of stabiliti or ruine to that Kingdom, which was struck, but with a dying man; how much more is the rise or fall of this Kingdom; yea, of these two Kingdom, bound up in the observation or forfeiture of this Covenant, which we make this day with the living God? You that wish well to the Kingdoms, that would not see the downfall and ruine thereof; be from henceforth more conscientious of your Covenant, then ever here∣tofore; for surely, upon the successe of this Covenant, we stand or fall; as we deal with the Covenant, God will deal with us; if we steight the Covenant, God will sleight us; if we have mean thoughts of the Covenant, God will have mean thoughts of us; if we forget the Covenant, God will forget us; if we break the Covenant, we may look that God shall break these two Na∣tions, and break us all to pieces; if we reject it, God will reject us; if we regard our Covenant, God will regard his Covenant, and regard us too; if we remember the Covenant, God will re∣member his, and remember us; if we keep the Covenant, the Covenant will keep us, and our posteritie for ever. Oh that this Consideration might be a Motive to whet on that Exhortation of the Apostle; Let him that stole, Ephes. 4.28. steal no more; And so let him that was drunk be drunk no more; he that was unclan, let him be unclean no more; they that were world∣ly, proud, secure, carelesse of receiving Christ in their hearts, and of walking worthy of him in their lives, be so no more; he that hath been Malignant or Neutrall, let him be so no more: For I protest against every man, that after the striking of this so so∣lemn and sacred a Covenant with the most high God, shall dare knowingly and willingly to persist in any one of these mentioned abominations, or any other; he is an enemy to Jesus Christ; a Traytor to the Kingdoms; a State-murderer, and a destroyer of himself, and his posteritie; and at his hands (if they miscarry) God will require the blood of all these: But there are a people of whom, and to whom, I hear God speaking gracious words. Surely they are my people, children that will not lie, Isa. 63.8. My people, mine by Covenant; I have brought them into the bod of the Covenant; I have made my Covenant with them, and they have made their Covenant with me: and they be children that will not lie; I know they will deal no more as a lying and treacherous
generation with me, but will be a faithfull people in their Covenant; and I will be a faithfull God unto them; I will be their Saviour, th y will serve me, and I will save them. Now the Lord make us such a people unto him, children that will not li; and he be such a God to us; He be our Saviour, a Saviour to both Kingdoms, and every soul that makes this Covenan; to save us from sin, and to save us from dstruction; to save us from our exemies without, and to save us from our ene∣mies within; to save us from the divell, and to save us from the world, and to save us from our selves; to save us from the lusts of men, and to save us from our own lusts; to save us, and to save our posterity; to save us from Rome, and save us from Hell; to save us from wrath present, and from wrath to come; to save us heer, and to save us hereafter; to save us to himself in grace, and to save us with himself, in glory, to all Eternitie, for Christs sake, Amen, and Amen. FINIS.
