D711B E550_30 99896102 153897
A DECLARATION OF The most High and Mighty Princesse, the QUEEN OF SWEDEN, CONCERNING Prince Charles, AND The Swedish Crown: With a Representation from the States, to Her Majesty, in reference to the same; and Her Gracious Answer thereunto. ALSo, The further proceedings of the Prince at the Hague, and His Propositions and Desires to the States. Together with the Earl of Brainfords Letter, to his Hignesse, concerning the Swedish Forces. Published by Authority. Imprinted at London, for R. W. 17 Aprill, 1649.
A DECLARATION Of the Queen of SWEDEN Concerning Prince Charles, &c. And Her Majesties Gracious An∣swer to the Representation of the States Gene∣rall touching His Highnesse. Right Honoured, THe Earl of Brainford hath had audience, with the most high and mighty Princesse the Queen of Sweden, and hath given an account to his young master the Prince, of the representing his Em∣bassie to her Majesty, purporting, That there are mat∣ters of great consequence, to be maturely debated be∣fore there can be an Army of Zwitzers obtained, which
gives a great demur to the new Game in agitation, so that if their Cards be not well plaid upon the first lea∣ding, the Game is in great halard of being utterly lost and frustrated in the conclusion. And the rather, by rea∣son of the uniting of the two most famous and renow¦ned Princes of Europe, which in all probability will soon be made manifest to all Christian princes, thorow out their severall Teritories: For the most illustrious Queen of Sweden, hath declared prince Charles pala∣tine, &c. (her Cozen German) to be her rightfull Suc∣cessour to the Crown, in case she die without Issue: the State having with a great deal of joy and triumph approved thereof, and for the further confirmation thereof, humbly besought her Majesty to be pleased to accept of him also for her husband; to which she an∣swered, That if they did make propositions to Her of that nature, she would take them into serious conside∣ration and speedily give them a positive answer, &c. so that there is so much probability in this, that it is taken for granted, that the Solemnization of Marriage will suddenly be accomplished, between his Highnesse, and her Majesty, the most vertuous and illustrious Queen now raigning in Europe, the Worlds Mirrour, Religi∣on's Banner, and a second Star to the late glorious Co∣met of England, the most high and mighty Princesse Queen Elizabeth of happy memory. Hague 14. April, 1649. Other Letters from Holland say, That the Scots Com∣missioners have had audience with the Prince, they presen∣ted Letters vnto their declared King, upon the ke, and said that was their endeared affection  them to that poture of obedience and loyalty they  King
he knew Scotlands mind by some sent before, and they de∣sire to treat about it, but first Montrosse must depart, they bewayled the death of his late Royall Father, vttering ma∣ny inveterate expressions against the causers of it: as yet no treaty hath been, nor answer given, and though it was declared, by their declared King to them, at the delivery thereof, that within few days he would return a satis∣factory answer; yet he now seems to vary, determining to take some respite of time in consultation thereon, and desires likewise to take the advice of the States Generall; and to that end hath given Sir Edward Hide directions to bring in a Declaration, to be presented to the said Councell, the sum and abstract whereof fol∣loweth. That he desires a treaty with some of the States Ge∣nerall, in reference to the present transaction of affairs, touching his remove from the Hague to the Kingdom of France, before he take his journey for Ireland. 2 That the chief motives of his inducement hereun∣to, are, by reason of the distractions breaking out anew in the Kingdom of Scotland; which divisions causeth him to despair in the safety of his person, &c. But these conjecturations in all probability will soon be frustra∣ted, for we conceive he will make his abode here, as the best center of his affairs, and that some of the States may possibly be advisers in giving assistance to his re∣sultations, in case his Councell be not over violent to o the contrary.
A Narrative of the proceedings of the Forces in Ireland touching Prince CHARLES. BY an Expresse from the City of Dublin, to seve∣rall Marchants residing here, it is advertized; That the Marquesse of Ormond, Generall Preston, the Earle of Clanaickard, and the rest of the Irish confederates, and compieres have no considerable field army, and the severall Factions break out into high Differences, by reason of the falling off of the Lord Inchiquin, and Generall Owen Roe, who are resolved not to fight a∣gainst Lieut. Generall Crumwell, and the English ar∣my, which hath occasioned Prince Rupert to represent a letter to the said Lord Inchiquin, which was to this effect, viz. That He desireth him to vse his utmost endeavours, for the propagating of the present work in hand, in relation to the investing of his sacred Majesty (as he is pleased to call the young titular King, Charles the second) in all on his English, Irish, and Scottish Throne, and to en∣deavour the restauration of him to its just Rights and Dignities, &c. ☞ But his Lordship returned this answer, That he was resolved to desist from any further engagement against the parliament of England, or to be any wayes instrumen∣tall, for the involving of bleeding England and Ireland, in another bloudy and domestique War; and that for the more apparent acquitting himself of that inhuman crime he declared that he was resolved to sacrifice both life and fortunes, against all opposition whatsoever that should en∣deavour the obstruction of the peace and tranquility of that Nation. Insomuch, that the difference between prince Rupert
and his Lordship increaseth, and the breach is like to grow wider before there can be any composure or re∣conciliation. For Gen. Owen Roe is likewise fallen into a discontented against the Marq. of Ormond, who upon mature deliberation, in reference to his proceedings, and of the English Forces to be sent over, under the conduct and command of Lieut. Generall Crumwell, the said Owen Roe called a Councell of Officers, and after some time spent in debate of the present transa∣ction of affaires, it was resolved by the Councell, That two Letter should be forthwith drawn up, the one to be communicated to the parliament of England, the other to Colonell Jones, intimating. That if they will not molest, or cause to be molested, any of the Forces under his immediate command, in their quarters du∣ring the time prefixed for their residence in that king∣dom, that then he will not iagage against any of their Forces, neither will he give any assistance to the Mar∣quesse of Ormond, Preston, or any other parties who shall engage against them, provided, that they will not any wayes trouble his quarters, upon the advance of the English Army over, during the time of his re∣sidence as aforesaid. 2 That he may have safe passage into Spain with such forces as shall bee designed for that Kingdome, &c. By which meanes and revolt, divers begin to decline from engagement, and to desert the prince; so that it is hoped that Nation will soon be reduced to the po∣wer and obedience of parliament, and a period put to her languishing ane bleeding condition. Ormond is in a very sad condition, and dare not take the field, his men moulter away apace.
The Expedition, the Tyger, and another of the Parlia∣ments ships are got to Ayrs point within a few leagus of Leverpool, to secure the Coast of Ireland on that side. We hear of some action at Sea, between the two Navies, which speaks the parliament Victors, and that they have sunk and taken 9 of the princes ships: for the further particulars whereof, I shall refer you to my next. The Dammee-prince is at King sale, from whence we hear, that he hath made proclamation (in the young Kings Name) assuming the power of Deputy and Lord Lieutenant Generall of Ireland, casting off the Marq. of Ormond, and other Commission Officers, and pla∣cing others in their stead, which causeth great mutinies and insurrections amongst the Souldiery both by Sea and Land; the one threatning to cast him over board; the other to pistoll him; which fatall Destiny, in pro∣cesse of time, may (in all probability) befall this blou∣dy tyrant, for revenging the bloud of those precious Soules, whose cryes are eccho'd up to Heaven as an al∣larum against him. Bristol. 12 April, 1649. Imprimatur, THEO: JENNINGS. FINIS.
