E1941 E49_22 99872017 155129
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, FOR The better Execution of the former ORDINANCES for Sequestration of Delinquents and Papists ESTATES. Together with an OATH that is to be ta∣ken within Ten dayes after notice given of this present Ordinance, by the severall Sequestrators, Committees, and persons imployed by vertue of the said Ordinance. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for Laurence Blaiklock. May 27. 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament for the better Execution of the former Ordi∣nances for Sequestration of Delinquents and Papists Estates. WHereas the former Ordinances of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for Seque∣stration of Delinquents Estates, have not been put into such effectuall and speedy Execution in divers places as was expected, to the great disservice of the Com∣mon-wealth; For remedy thereof, and for the more speedy Colle∣cting and bringing in of all such Monies, Rents, and Goods as are or shall be due upon the said Ordinances or any of them, the said Lords and Commons do fur∣ther Declare and Ordaine in manner and forme fol∣lowing: I. That the severall Sequestrators and Committees heretofore or hereafter to be appointed by Authority of Parliament, and the severall Sollicitors, Collectors, Treasurers, Appraisors, and all other persons by them imployed by vertue of the said Ordinances, or either of
them, shall within ten dayes after notice of this present Ordinance to them given, or before the intermedling therewith take this ensuing Oath: J A. B. do sweare, that J shall well and truely according to the trust reposed in me, Execute for the best advantage of the Com∣mon wealth, all and every of the Ordi∣nances made by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, for Sequestration of Delinquents and Papists Estates; and that J shall not for feare, favour, reward, or affection, spare, connive at, or discharge any of the said Delinquents or Papists; So helpe me God. Which Oath shall be taken by the said Committees before any Deputy Lieutenant, Justice of Peace of the County, City, Borough, or place where such Commit∣tees shall sit, who are by this Ordinance authorized to Administer the said Oath, and by the said Sollicitors Collectors, Appraisors, and other Officers before the said Committees or any two of them, who are also here∣by Authorized to Administer the same; which said De∣puty Lieutenants, Justices of Peace, and Committees re∣spectively are hereby required and injoyned to certifie unto the Speaker of the House of Commons the Names
of all such persons as shall take the said Oath, and also the names of all such as shall neglect or refuse to take the same. II. That all Officers, and every other person whatso∣ever, who hath in his custody any Goods of any person whose Estate is sequestred, shall bring the same into the severall and respective Committees of sequestration within the said County within ten dayes after notice of this Ordinance, or otherwise within five dayes after the Expiration of the said ten dayes, pay ready money to the Committees for the same, according to such Rates as they shall be appraised upon Oath, by two able appraisors appointed by the said Committees, and in default of bringing in such Goods or payment for the same, shall forfeit for every week he or they shall detaine or not pay the same, the sum of two shillings six pence for every twenty shillings worth of such Goods, to the use of the Common-Wealth. III. That all suspentions of Sequestrations of any Delinquents or Papists estates, made by the Committees in any County or Corporation, without expresse Order of both Houses of Parliament, shall be forthwith taken off, and cleared, and no suspention or excuse of persons Sequestred allowed, but what is warranted by the Ordi∣nances of both Houses. IIII. That all Debts made for goods sold, shall within ten dayes after this Ordinance be paid in by the persons owing the same to the Treasurers of the severall places where they are due, and in default thereof the said Debts immediately after the said ten dayes, to be paid
by the severall parties that sold the same, under paine of forfeiting the sum of two shillings six pence in e∣very pound for every weeke they remaine unpaid after the said ten daies, in regard the Ordinances appoint no sale but for ready monies. V. That all the sequestred Houses and Lands now stan∣ding void and unlet, shall forthwith be let, Tenanted, or improved by the respective Committees, and their Offi∣cers for the best advantage of the Common-wealth, upon paine of such punishments in case of wilfull negligence as the Houses shall inflict. VI. That active, able, trusty men, who will diligently attend this service, shall be added to all Committees of se∣questrations where there is cause, and that the Committees of accompts of the Kingdome shall from time to time present the names of such persons to both Houses of Parliament. VII. That the severall Committees for Sequestration in each County, three or more of them shall constantly meete and sit upon this service two set daies at the least e∣very weeke to be by them appointed, and shall increase or alter the number of their Collectors; and if any neg∣lect or misdemeanour shall be found in any Sollicitor in the execution of his said Office, the said Committee or any three or more of them shall certifie the same unto the Committee of Lords and Commons for sequestra∣tions. VIII. That no Treasurer appointed by the Sequestra∣tors, shall be allowed above two pence in the pound for
monies received by him, and that every Committee and Treasurer residing in the City of London, or within the Line of Communication, who shall receive any summe or summes of monies upon sequestrations, shal pay the same to the Treasurers for sequestrations at Guild-hall London within sixe daies after his or their receipt thereof; and the Committees and Treasurers that are to pay in their mo∣ney to the said Treasurers at Guild-hall aforesaid, residing within forty miles of London, shall pay the monies they receive within 15. daies after the receipt there∣of, and such Commitees and Treasurers who live above 40. miles from London, shall within thirty daies after the receipt thereof pay the same to the said Treasurers, under paine of forfeiting two shillings six pence in the pound for every weeke he or they shall detaine the same, after the re∣spective times herein limitted. IX. That the severall Collectors and Sollicitors for sequestrations, that have not heretofore pursued, or shall not hereafter pursue the severall Ordinances of sequestra∣tions, and the trust thereby in them reposed; shall be disa∣lowed upon their Accompts, all fees, or sums of money appointed unto them by any Ordinance whatsoever. X. That the severall Sollicitors and Collectors for sequestrations shall from henceforth keepe severall exact accompts of all Goods, Lands, Rents, and profits se∣questred, and enter the same into severall Bookes of Ac∣compts to be kept for that purpose, and shall within ten daies next after notice of this present Ordinance make se∣verall bookes of accompt of all Debts, Rents, and pro∣fits then arreere, unreceived and uncollected, and of the
particulars and values of all the Goods, Lands, Rents, Te∣nements, and Revenues of every person sequestred within their severall divisions, and shall likewise quarterly make and deliver the like accompts unto the severall Commit∣tees under whom they are imployed, to the end the certain value of the sequestration may be discovered, and a con∣stant revenue raised. XI. And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that all and every of the penalties in and by this present Ordinance imposed, or to be inflicted upon any person or persons offending contrary to this Or∣dinance or any Article therein contained, shall be leavied by the said respective Committees, their Collectors and Agents, by distresse and sale of the parties goods so offending. XII. And it is further ordained, that no Committee or Committees whatsoever shall without valuable consi∣deration dispose of any sequestred goods, or make any loanes thereof without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. XIII. That all Officers, and every other person whatsoever, who hath detained in his hands any se∣questration monies, or hath received any of the said Monies without a sufficient Warrant for his so doing, and contrary to former Ordinances, shall bring in and pay all such monies so by them detained or received to the Treasurers for sequestrations at Guild-hall London, within twenty daies after notice of this Ordinance, and in default thereof shall forfeit two shillings six
pence for every twenty shillings, for every weeke he or they shall detaine or not pay the same to the uses a∣foresaid; and the monies so detained, together with the said forfeiture, shall be leavied by the said Re∣spective Committees, their Collectors or Agents, by distresse or sale of the parties goods so offending: and where no sufficient distresse can bee found, the parties so offending, to be committed to prison till the money be payd as aforesaid. XIIII. And it is further Ordained, that for the pre∣vention of all fraudulent and indirect dealing, and for the present and future satisfaction of the Kingdome, All Treasurers and Collectors in the Associated Coun∣ties, under the command of the Right Honorable Edward Earle of Manchester; as also in the County of Kent and Surrey, where by severall Ordinances of Parliament they have power to detaine one third part of all the Sequestation money within the said Coun∣ties, for the better maintaining of the Forces by them Raised, respectively for the preservation of the Parli∣ament and Kingdome; shall bring in to the Treasu∣rers of Sequestrations at Guildhall London, every three moneths, or oftner, if they shall be thereunto re∣quired, an exact accompt of all the Sequestration monies by them received and issued out for the third part as aforesaid or otherwise, and produce Receipts for the same; to the end the said Treasurers at Guildhall may keep accompt of all the Sequestration monies, as by for∣mer Ordinances was Ordained, and to take care that the said monies be equally divided and applyed, as by the said Ordinances is intended; and that the like course
is to be observed by all particular men for all Sequestra∣tion monies they shall receive, in any County or place un∣der the Power or Command of the Parliament, by vertue of any particular Ordinance obtained by them, that they may receive no more then is intended and appointed by their severall Ordinances Respectively. XV. And it is further Ordained, that Iohn Madden Gentleman, shall be a Generall Solicitor for the better Execution of this and the former Ordinances of Seque∣strations, And is hereby Authorized to keep due corre∣spondence with all Committees, Solicitors, Treasurers, Collectors, and other Officers, employed about the Se∣questrations; and shall give his best advice and assistance to the sayd Treasurers at Guild Hall for the better promo∣ting and advancing of the said service: And when he shall discover any obstruction or disorder in any person or per∣sons therein employed, he shall acquaint the Committee of the Lords and Commons for Sequestrations there∣with: And for his paines and attendance on this service, the said Treasurers at Guild Hall shall pay unto him week∣ly twenty shillings; and shall also pay to the sayd John Madden all his necessary charges and expences which he shall disburse, if he shall finde it needfull, with the advice of the said Treasurers at Guild Hall, to travell into any of the Counties under the power and Command of the Parliament, for the better and more speedy effecting of the Premisses, and for Postage of Letters. FINIS.
Die Veneris, Maii 24. 1644. IT is this day ordered by the Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, that this Declaration and Ordinance for Se∣questration of Delinquents and Papists Estates, be forthwith Printed and pub∣lished. Henry Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
