F175 E399_7 99862212 114363
A LETTER From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, TO Mr. SPEAKER; CONCERNING, The Forces of the Northern Associa∣tion, and Nottinghamshire Horse joy∣ning with the ARMY. With their severall Declarations and Representations▪ ALSO, Two Petitions from the Nottinghamshire Horte; The one to both Houses of Parliament; The other, to His Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax. Imprinted at London, for George Whittington, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the Blew Anchor in Cornehill July 19th neere the Royall Exchange, 1647.
Mr. Speaker, HAving this day received these enclosed Papers, from the Northern Forces, under Col. Gen. Poyntz his command, with some other Papers from Col. Thorn∣haghs Regiment (which is already marcht up to Buc∣kingham) wherein they expresse their resolutions to associate themselves with this Army, for the more speedy and happy ef∣fecting a true, lasting, and well-grounded Peace, to the King Parliament, and Kingdome; and in order to that, have delayed obedience to the command of many of their Officers, who for some reasons best known to themselves, have refused to joyne with them in their just desires; and have also, as formerly, now again petitioned me to exempt them from further obedience to any other command, then what may conduce for the obtaining of the just desires, and establishment of the peace of the King∣dom, as in the enclosed Papers is more fully exprest, and further desiring to march up speedily to the Army. All which being of so great concernment to the Kingdome, and not well admitting delay, I thought fit to represent untoyou with speed, their several Papers and Desires, that I might receive your pleasure concer∣ning the things they desire, and your commands for their pre∣sent disposall; to the end, they may be better kept in Discipline and obedience, and such disorders prevented, as by reason of their want of Officers they may be subject to runne unto; and likewise to continue them in the North, least by their motion to the Army, they might draw a greater concourse and burthen of
Souldiers Quarters upon these parts, then they wil be wel able to beare, and thereby the disaffected in those parts (during their absence) may take that advantage to make insurrections, or any disturbance of the peace there: For the prevention whereof, & disposition of the whole, aswell in order to the peace of this Kingdome, as speedy reliefe of Ireland, I shall humbly make bold to offer my opinion, that since there are many severall di∣stinct, and (through these late distractions) disjynted Forces within this Kingdome, which were sufficient, together with this Army (being united and wl annaged) both to preserve the peace of this Kingdome, and give present reliefe to Ireland (without putting this Kingdom to the charge of raising new Forces at present for that Service) That the Parliament would speedily put all the Forces under one and the same Command, Discipline, and equall establishment for future pay and maite∣nance, which being done, it would give much encouragement to some of the Forces that may be spared out of all the Forces mentioned from England to go more cheerfully into Ireland; and if with this there were some present course taken to pro∣vide for Arreares, for such Forces as might be spared for Ire∣land, there might in probability be an effectuall reliefe sent o∣ver into Ireland before this Summer be quite spent. All which I humbly tender to your consideration, and desire your speedy Answer, that no time may be lost in so good and necessary a worke, both for the quiet of this Kingdome, and relief of Ire∣land, wherein none shall be more ready to expresse their for, wardnesse, then Redding July 16. 1647. Your most humble servant, T. FAIRFAX.
The humble Representations of the Souldiers of the Northern As∣sociation, presented first to his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax, to be by him presented to the Honourable Houses of Parliament. Humbly requesting, 1. THat the Honorable Houses of Parliament would be plea∣sed to look upon the Representative Desires and Grievan∣ces of his Excellencies Army, as our Desires and Grievances, which we humbly desire may be fully (not fainedly) granted and redressed. 2. That whereas the Parliament was pleased to declare a∣gainst their just desires contained in their Representation, and proceed to disband before redresse of the Grievances, we hum∣bly desire, That the Representations of the aforesaid Desires, & obstinctive of the just satisfactions (their Desires and Grie∣vances being ours) may be brought forth to a legall tryall. 3. That the illegall imprisonment of severall Officers, and the endeavours used by some to imprison others, for speaking in behalf of his Excellencies Army, and their just dues may be repaired, and the occasioners thereof dealt with according to their deserts. 4. That those who endeavoured to render his Excellencies army odious by aspersions, and thereby to deprive them of that honour, which they have so dearly bought, and to incense the kingdome and souldiers against them, may bee proceeded a∣gainst according to justice. 5. That such provision may be made for better supply of us for the future, whereby we may be enabled to discharge our quarters, that so we may not for necessary food be beholding to the Parliaments friends (who have spent their estates in the service) whose preservation is in the things we desire, and in whose happinesse we rejoyce.
A Declaration of the free consent and coherence of the Souldiers in the Northern Association With the Army now under the Command of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. WHereas there hath been an expresse of the reall and honourable intentions, and grounds of and from the Army manifested (in most just and honest termes to the hou∣ses of Parliament and Kingdom) cleering to every indiffer∣ent and sound judgment the cause of their proceedings, for the Kingdome and in it their own dues, and interessed satis∣faction, we having, by Good providence, this opportunity to shew our affections no lesse ready, and our selves, to maintain and confirm the lawfull obtaining & keeping our right & just priviledges by themselvs so declared to be: we therfore declare as in duty bound, for our mercies received from God and the faithfull service we owe to the Kingdome, to joyne & associate our selves with the Southern Army, under the com∣mand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the speedy and happy effecting, a true, lasting and well grounded peace, wherein may consist the preheminence of all honour and wel∣fare, both for the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, and that there may be no misapprehensions, as usually publik resolutions and resolves are lyable unto at the first, appearing in the eyes of men un-acquainted with the businesse, and in the eyes of those (who being pre-possest with guilt cunningly oppose) we further declare our selves free from any secret intentions in reference to the proportion of any particular designes, or our own particular interrests, but are absolutely raised and moved to a necessary compliance with the Army to those good and infallible principes, which tendeth to the promotion and protection of just lice, and the liberty of
the Subject, but hitherto (by the management of the affaires of so great importance) have appeared; & we shal no lesse en∣deavour to defen with our lives and estates, the lawfull de∣signes of those truly well-affected Souldiers then we would oppose a forreign invasion or prevent an indirect or unwar∣rantable warre, our warrant being the same for either nature or law, and our Covenant binding thereunto. Wee shall therfore prosecure the discovery of all persons complotting and combining against us, that we may keepe our friends and Nation free from any in∣forcement injury or prejudice especially wee giving to understand that we have not any intentions to spill the blood of any man, or to wrong their propriety of goods or intrench upon the conscience, of any, our chiefe care be∣ing in this our Declaration and intention, at present and for future, to provide for a correspondency with that army, to live or dye, rejoyce or suffer with them, as we are mutually en∣gaged, our expectations of reward being no other then the salving of those griveances published from that Army (with our own) the Souldiers, honour and lively-hood repaired; their service thankfully requited, and all corrupt avthority in Courts of Indicature and Offices of the Kingdom expunged, and all those severall good Acts for the present and future concernment, of the Kingdome establish∣ed, which as they were most satisfactory to the generality, so we desire not to require an addition of redresse of any parti∣cular mens wants or sufferings, but attend to the gene∣rall businesse in hand with the accomplishment of the Armie, and our candid and just demands, the justice, and sincerity whereof, we desire to vindicate as our lives. Pontefract Iuly 5. Colonell General Poyntz Regiment of Horse. Robert Bradley, Nathaniel Croft. Collonel Bethels Regiment. George Issot. Thomas Iackson,
Collonel Copleyes Regiment. Nicholas Baker. William Bates Collonel Orvertons Regiment Iohn Bennington William Wren Collonel Brights Regiment John Marke Edward Field Collonel Ponsonbyes Regiment. Thomas Hunter Thomas Wharton Collonel Collenwords Regiment. Robert Shayre Thomas Shacklock Collonel Legards Regiment. Robert Tod. William Blanchard. Agitating in behalfe of the severall and respective Regiments. This to be subscribed by all the Officers, and Souldiers in the Regiment, &c. Whereas the Officers and Souldiers of severall Regiments of the Army, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, did on the 5. of Iune last past, at a generall Randezvouze neere Newmarket, enter into an engagement, to and with each other, and to and with the Parliament and Kingdome, which ingage∣ment, having been since printed and published, hath now been read unto us: We the Officers and Souldiers, under the Com∣mand of Collonel Thornehaghs, do hereby declare our selves to enter into the same ingagement, with the Army, and to and with each other, and to and with the Parliament and King∣dome: In testimony whereof we subscribe our hands. Nettingham Iuly 7. 1646. George Palmer Captaine, Rich. Franke Quarterm. Edward Kirke Quartm. Francis Sutley. Iohn Pinerder. Iohn Cocke. William Roofe. Robert Marshall. William Royston. Robert Alfiet. Robert Hide. Iohn Brittan. Thomas Pond.
To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Generall of the Forces raised by Authority of Parliament. The humble Petition of Nottinghamshire Horse, &c. SHEWETH, THat although we the Regiment under the Command of our honoured Colonell, Col. Thornhagh, never had so much our owne desires as to serve under the immediate command of your Excellency in that your gallant and faithfull Field Army; yet having received a resolution next to the Justice of our Cause, by your Excellencies virtuall presence in the Commissins of our honoured Commanders, we may without vanity professe, That in our Orbes we have moved for the advancing and pro∣curing this Kingdomes peace and liberty, so cheerfully, that we cannot doubt your Excellencies countenance and assistance, which we humbly implore in our humble addresses to the Par∣liament, professing that such is our resentment of the injuries done unto you as done unto our selves, neither will we hope to stand, if you fall; nor fear we falling, if you stand, when no∣thing is controverted, but the same for which wee first enga∣ged, and dare not recede from, viz. The priviledge of Parlia∣ment. Of Free born Subjects, and Reformation of Church and Common-wealth; And as to the better effecting all these, the necessary and just vindication of the too much slighted Souldiery, amongst wee your humble Petitioners, who haue from the beginning of our engagements, which beare date al∣most with the beginning of these warres, served the Parlia∣ment these five yeares, and have not received for our service past 6.8. per weeke in money, nor free quarter one weeke wish another; and that there is at this time due unto this Regiment
in Arreares 40000 l. and upwards, that we have not received above one Moneths pay these 50 weekes; and having for our present accomodation and maintenance no other subsistence, then what a small and harrassed County of Charity (which is malignant) will afford in meat and drink: A slender requitall, as we conceive, for our losse of bloud. Our humble request unto your Excellency is, That you will recommend our further addresses unto the conside∣ration of the Honourable Houses of Parliament, where∣by we may obtain the wages of our bloud, our Arreares, and such present maintenance, as first when we engaged under their service were promised; and yet that we may not hereby be understood, to be unconcern'd in, or disin∣gaged from the past or future necessity of the Army in the plaine and honest prosecution of their Proposition and Desires in the late Declaration, and that we accor∣ding to our proportion of time and arreares may be sa∣tified, as the Army shall be for their proportions. (Subscribed George Palmer Captain, and the rest, as in the next Paper before.)
To the Right Honourable the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the Nottinghamshire Horse, &c. Humbly sheweth, THat whereas we the Regiment under the command of our noble and ever honoured Col. Francis Thornhagh (a Member of the House of Commons) have for the space of five years or thereabouts with faithfulnesse served the king∣dome by the Authority and Command of the Parliament a∣gainst theirs and the Kingdomes enemies, having bin accor∣ding to our imployment accessaries to what ever harn bindon as to the deare purchasing of Peace and liberty to the poore (yet free-borne) people of this Kingdome, and are notwith∣standing in Arrears at the least fourty thousand pounds for that voluntary (yet conditionall) service which with the expence of some blood, we have performed, neither have we ever received our monies or free quarter, in a sume (if the totall of all was here remised, as might computed make every week worth 6 s unto us, since we have borne armes our present quallity now being such as renders us unable to subsist, or compell a lively-hood by any regular way or our poore ex∣hausted County, neither are we assured of the wages of our blood, our just, well deserved and often promised arrears. Wee therefore humbly pray, that whatsoever shall be granted (in relation to the souldiers and peoples good) to that faithfull Army of yours, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, (who have bin alike faithfull to their trust) according to the propotion of their Arrears, & time and in the meane while, that such pay as by the new Mo∣dell was allowed to all, (but never paid to us) may be du∣ly deposited for our present maintenance. And wee shall pray, &c. Subscribed as the former. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1647.
