J184 E399_37 99862235 114386
A GALLANT SPEECH Spoken by His Highnesse JAMES DUKE OF YORKE TO ENGLANDS renowned Generall, His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, at the Kings Majesties Royall Court at Causam. TOGETHER, With His Excellencies Answer to the said Speech, con∣cerning the Kings Majesty, and His Royall Posterity. Also the chiefe Heads of the Armies new Declara∣tion concerning the King, Parliament, and Kingdome. With a Message from the Generall to the Citi∣zens of LONDON. July 23 Printed at Oxford for Edward Benington, for the publike use of Great Brittain, Anno 1647.
THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM The Generals Head-quarters at Redding, to the Citizens of London. Gentlemen, THe particulars which I have to re∣present unto you at this present, are things very remarkable and of great conse∣quence, being of ripenesse and maturity, both for the view of your Metropolis, and the whole Kingdome also: Therefore, for satis∣factions
of your selves, and the rest of your Fellow Commoners, I shall here communi∣cate unto you, a Copy of the Generalls De∣claration to the Lord Mayor and Citizens of London; together with another Paper of gret consquence, agreed upn by his Ex∣cellency, and the Councell of Warre, con∣cerning the Free-born Subj&s of this Na∣tion; both which, I shall here insert ver∣batim, viz. A Copy of the Declaration sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fuirfax, to the Lord Mayor and Citi∣zens of London. VVHereas in the carying on of the great bu∣sinesses of the Kingdome towards a gene∣rall and happy settlement, it hath been a sixed prin∣ciple with us to make it our first endeavour with the Parliament, that all things which threaten an En∣gagement of the Kingdome in a second warre, might be removed before we could have a confident expe∣ctation of a good issue; upon a Treaty with their Commissioners, which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of delay: yet by men that are zealous of the Kingdomes good (we hope) no endeavour will be judged unnecessary, that may se∣cure the Kingdome from the danger of any new im∣broylments.
We are now come thus far, that the most mate∣riall particulars which we have in preparation to propose, for the generall settlement of the affaries of the Kingdome, have bin communicated to the Parliaments Commissioners; and we hope they are satisfied that they containe in them things tending to a generall good, and to lay an hopefull Founda∣tion for common Right, and Freedom, to the peo∣ple of this Land for future; and for a lasting peace amongst us. But before we can securely intend and without interruption apply our selves, unto the proceedings and dispatch of the Treaty, there upon wee have delivered into the hands of their Comissio∣ners, the paper which consists of three particulars, in the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being most immediatly concerned, to the end you may see we would aske nothing which relates to you, without giving you a just account thereof, and all possible satisfaction therein; we have also given a Coppy thereof to your Commissioners, to be here with sent unto you. Wee should not desire this or and thing else of that nature were wee per∣swaded, that what wee desire is seasonable, and for yours and the Kingdomes good and quiet. And wee should willingly haue been silent (as to this:) but considering the just jealousies which lye against some persons, now authorized in the exercise of that powea amongst you, and those attempts which have bin made by some, who would have engaged your city, to a warre, had not your Lordships and the court of Aldermen and Common-Councell
by your wisdome prevented it, by getting those votes which were passed by the Mili∣tia, made null. We cannot in a case of this importance but deal freely with you, in deuring your con∣currence with ours to the Parliament; that the Militia may bee changed into those hands, out of which it was taken, of whose care and fidelity to the Publike, there hath been so long and large experience, as few a∣ges have paralleld. And if the interest wee have so long fought for be still the same, let it not seem slrange that wee desire both of the parliament and City, that those may bee in places of such a trust, who have given the best proof of their courage and constancy in prosecution of the same. Having thus far de∣clared our selves with all freedom and clear∣nesse to you, as we doe not doubt of your good acceptance of our intention therein, so we desire your forwardnesse in a worke so much tending to mutuall confidence: and to prevent the designes of any who would bee glad to put obstructions in the way to a happy conclusion, and envie nothing more
then the continuance of a night understan∣ding between you and us. By the appointment of his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Councell of Warre. Signed, Iohn Rushworth, Secre. Redding Iuly 18. 1647. A Copy of another Paper from the Army, concerning the Free-born People of England. HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax hath writ to the parliament in these words, That all persons imprisoned in England, or Dominion of Wales (not for Delinquencie in relation to the late war) may be brought to a speedy tryal, and if they appear wrong fully, or unduly imprishned, they may have reparation according to their sufferings. And in particular, it is desired that this may be done in behalf of Lieutenant Col Lil∣burn, M. Musgrave, M. Overton, and others (in their condition) imprisoned about London.
SIR, VPon the close of this Letter, a Gentleman residing neer the Court, intimated unto me, that when His Majesties Children were at Causam, his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax came also thither, and presended himselfe be∣fore the two Dukes, and the Princesse; to whom the Duke of York made this ensuing Speech. Renowned Generall, We heartily thank you for the great happinesse we now enjoy by the sight of Our dear Father, the effecting wher∣of, we cannot but attribute wholly to your industry and engagement; and as it is a great favour to Vs, so shall it be no prejudice to you: Pray accept of this Our ac∣knowledgment, as the first part of requitall, being all we are able to do at present; but if ever it lyes in our po∣wer, it shall be better requited. To which his Excellency replyed, That it was the least of those duties, werein he was obliged to serve his Ma∣jesty, and his Royall Posterity. But by reason of our motion Northward, I dare not detract too much time, but must of necessity draw to a period; only (in briefe) I shall give you some of the chief Heads concerning the Armies grand Declaration, now speedily to be presented to both Houses of Parliament, VIZ. 1. That a Councell of State consisting of 21. may have the ordering of the Militia, and power to treat with forraign States. 2. That a period be set to this Parla∣ment. 3. That some penall Statutes be repealed. 4. An Act of Oblivion past, and the future Parliaments bien∣unall. 5. Something concerning the King, touching Par∣liaments. 6. Concerning liberty of Conscience. Thus having given you a briefe account, I remain Yours to serve you, William Sanders. Redding 22 of July 1647.
8 Their eighth unreasonable Demand is, To have a Tolera∣tion for all manner of Persons or opinions without any distin∣ction or limitation at all but this, If they live peaceably, and are beneficiall to the Common-wealth. That you might see I wrong them not, I shall put down their very words:See a Letter sent from Sir Thomas Fair∣fax and the chief Comman∣ders in the Ar∣my, to the Lord Mayor, Alder∣men, and Com∣mon Councell of the City of Lon∣don. Dated from Royston Iune 10. We wish that every good Citizen, and every man that walks peaceably, and is beneficiall to the Common-wealth, may have liberty and encou∣ragement, it being according to the just policy of all States, even to justice it selfe: So that by this it seems they desire, that if Pa∣pists, Idolaters, Blasphemers, or any other persons what ever, though they continue blaspheming God, and disturbing the Church, yet must they have not onely liberty, but encourage∣ment, in case they live peaceably in, and beneficially to the Common-wealth; if the Army had told us thus, when they were first raised, they should never have had my prayers with them. Is this the fruit of all the expence of treasure and bloud, that instead of order, we shall have confusion; instead of esta∣blishing the true Religion, there should be a toleration of all Religions? what's this but to make London worse then Am∣sterdam, and England worse then India it self? 9 Their ninth unreasonable Demand forHumble Re∣present. p. 23. l. 4. Reparation and Vindication of the Army. Now with what conscience can they expect this? Would they have us say, they are an obedient Ar∣my, when they have published their disobedience to all the world? Would they have us say, they are an Army of Saints, when we know there are abundance of grosse and abominable Heretikes among them, who deny the Divinity of Christ, the Authority of the Scriptures, the Immortality of the Soule? &c. Instead of requiring Vindication and Reparation from us, we may rather desire humiliation and reformation from them. Touching the unreasonablenesse of these demands, I cannot but admire at three things, viz. 1. At the falshood of the Army, that should make these high Demands, after they had promised in a LetterSee the Letter from Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax and the chief Commanders to the Lord Mayor &c. Dated from Royston Iune 10. 1647. to the L. Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon Councell (dated from Royston June 10.) they would not go beyond their former desires. Yea in their Declaration foure dayes after this they make this engagement; Though there are besides these many particulars we could wish to be done, and some
to be undone, but these proposalls aforegoing present, being the prin∣cipall things we bottome and insist upon, we shall (as we have said before) acquiesse in the wisdome and justice of the Parliament. Notwithstanding this promise, that they would acquiesse, ask no more, not go beyond their former desires, yet have they peremptorily infisted on most of these, and many more unrea∣sonable Demands since that time. 2. I cannot but admire at the forgetfulnesse that is in the people of their solemne League and Covenant; that they will suffer an Army to foment schism by Separation, to destroy Religion by Toleration, to make fa∣ctions & parties among the people by combinations; to infringe the power and Priviledges of Parliament by their peremptory refusall, and obstinate disobedience to the Parliaments Com∣mands. 3. I cannot but admire, that any people should ap∣prove of the Demands and proceedings of the Army, when the Army it self hath some hesitancie or doubting about their proceedings, whether justifiable or not. The Counsell of War convened at Bury confessed, that among their Souldiers there wereSee the opini∣on and advice of the Councell of War at Bury, 20. May, 1647. p  lin 37. disturbed and tumultuous actings. So also in the copie of the Grievances of the Army presented at Saffron-Walden to Field-Marshall Skippon, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, Com∣missary Ireton, and Colonell Fleetwood, it is by 240. Commissi∣on-Officers of the Army desired, that the above-named Com∣missioners would,Se the copie of Grievances, p.  line 18. as farre as justly they can, cover their weak∣nesse: yea Sir Thomas Fairfax himselfe confesseth that he isSee Sir Tho¦mas Fairfax his Letter to M. Speaker, da∣ted at Bury May 30. 1647. forc'd to yeeld to somthing out of order to keep the Army from disorder, or worse inconveniences. Yea by the whole Army in their Remonstrance 'tis confest, that they shall beSee humble Remonst p. 14. 33. inforc'd to take courses extraordinary. Now if themselves confesse they have disturbed and tumultuous actings, shall we think they are all peaceably-minded; if they themselves say they have weak∣nesse in the transactions of this businesse, may not we judge it wickednesse? If their Generall confesseth, that he is forced to yeeld to some things out of order, and that in the Moneth of May, when they did but begin their mutinies, to what disorders is he forc'd since to yeeld to, now the Army hath been so inured to disobedience? I come now to urge some new Queres to the consciences of the Army.
1. Quere. WHether your disobedience to the Parliament doth not directly answer and run parallell to Absalons Rebellion against his father David? 1. Did Absalon pretend an obstruction of justice? 2 Sam. 15.3. so doe you. 2. Did Absalon wish that he were Judge in the Land, then pro∣mised, that any man that had a suit or a cause, if he did come to him, he would doe him justice? 2 Sam. 15.4. and doe not you do thus? 3. Did not Absalon at that very time he cried up ju∣stice, justice, with his tongue, carry rebellion in his heart a∣gainst his father David, and doth not the Army walke in his steps? 4. Did Absalon by faire words, a flattering carriage and plausible pretences, steale away the hearts of the men of Israel? 2 Sam 15.5 6. is not this the daily endeavour of this Army thus to bewitch and seduce the people? 5. Did Absalon (when he had gathered head) endanger and terrifie Jerusalem that great City, where his father David was? 2 Sam. 15.14. and was not the great City the Metropolis of the Kingdome endangered by the approach of the Army neere it? As face answers face in a glasse, so doth the Armies disobedience answer Absalons Re∣bellion. 2. Quere. Whether would you have the Parliament to bee speedily dissolved, in case you could new-mould it to an Inde∣pendent Parliament? 3. Quere. Whether it bee for the credit of your cause, that Judge Jenkins and other desperate Malignants, should bee the chiefe Vindicators of your proceedings? 4. Quere. Whether would you be willing that eleven or more Independent-Members should bee suspended the House, in case a Charge or accusation should bee brought in against them? would you be content that those that owne your party should be so dealt withall, as you deale with the eleven Mem∣bers? Suppose a particular Charge of Treason and Rebellion should be brought in against Cromwell: suppose further, it can be proved, that hee was chosen a Parliament-man by the Pre∣laticall party in Cambridge, because he reviled the Puritans and would stand for Episcopacy; suppose further it can be proved, that when he kept a Brew-house in the Isle of Ely, he was ge∣nerally
termed the Town-bull; suppose all this I say, would you be willing that this great Ring-leader of your Rebellion should come to a legall and publike triall? 5. Quere. Whether your capitulating with the State, stan∣ding for Punctilioes, pressing high demands of the Parliament, whether if all you desire were granted, would this seeming good you desire, bee a recompence for those reall miseries and dangers the poore Protestants in Ireland undergoe, by your delayes, and refusall of that just and honourable service. 6. Quere. With what face can you cry out against injustice in others, when you suffer that greatest act of injustice among you to go unpunished? particularly that traiterous act done by Cornet Ioyce to take away the King from Holmeby without the consent of Parliament; which is such a high injury to the King, and affront to the Parliament, that will make you stinke in the nostrills of all Nations, that shall heare of your carria∣ges; so farre are you from punishing this Ioyce, that since this trayterous action done by him, some of your most eminent Commanders have tendred him preferment, as if that act did rather deserve a reward then a censure? 7. Quere. Whether it be not just with God that the chiefe Commanders, who have stirred up the Army to disobedience to the Parliament, should be punished by God, that that very Army shall not for the future be obedient unto them? I end this subject with this confidence, that if God will not honour the Parliament and Citie, to endeavour to suppresse these se∣ditious, trayterous Commanders, who have led the Army in∣to disobedience in the simplicity of their hearts, that God will honour his Name to bring us deliverance some other way; it may bee, if no body will appeare to suppresse them, they shall destroy one another. This is the assured confidence of Tom Tell-Troth.
