l3210a 42475108 151240
LOVE in Distress: OR, THE Lucky Discovery. A NOVEL. Written by The Honourable Lady *** LONDON: Printed by W. Onley, for H. Newman in the Poultry, S. Briscoe in Covent Garden, and H. Nelme in Cornhill. 1697.
Advertisement. THere is now Published, Mr. Den∣nis's Miscellany Poems, with several select Translations from Ho∣race, Juvenal, Mr. Boileau's Epi∣stles, Satyrs, &c. and Aesop's Fables in Burlesque Verse: To which is ad∣ded, the Passion of Byblis; with some Critical Remarks on Mr. Oldham; with other Letters and Poems.
To my Dear FLAVIA. MADAM, THAT Time I stole from my more Airy Diversions, I de∣dicated to this little Piece, and tho my first design was not to have pub∣lished it, nor ever desired any Eyes to encounter it, but yours, and my own; yet for that Presumption I lay it at your Feet, and beg your Protection, with a Charitable En∣deavour to Peruse it with a partial Eye, and excuse the first Sallies of so unworthy a Pen; yet were I ca∣pable
of producing the most deserv∣ing Volume in the Universe, I should be Ambitious of no Nobler a Patroness: For it is not the sound of a great many Titles that I covet, which, oftentimes like a hectoring Bully, makes a great Noise, with little or no Courage; not that I de∣spise true Nobility, nor admire it farther then the Intrinsick Value. I have nothing to plead for the Meanness of the Present, nor any Reasons for the many Objections you or any other may make, if you please to Criticise; only you have here the first Draught of sometimes a Pleasant, sometimes a Hypocon∣driack Brain, without ever rectify∣ing; yet my dear (Flavia) accept of this humble Offering from a Friend, and afford it the Reading; some leisure Hour after the soft Mes∣sage of your Lover's Sighs has been
whispered to your Ears, and experi∣mentally taught you, Love is not that Trifle to be ridicul'd at pleasure, but rather the most serious Business of our Lives; nor imagine it too fool∣ish a Subject to entertain you, but reflect on the Sallies of your own Heart, and after mature Examina∣tion, if you find that youthful Bo∣som incapable of a tender Impressi∣on, I will readily submit to the most rigid Principle of the morosest Sto∣ick; but pardon my Opinion, if I believe it impossible, and dare con∣fidently affirm, so much Vivacity, Wit, Fire, and Beauty cannot be incapable of an honourable Senti∣ment: This is a sort of Natural Philosophy, at least a Woman's Philosophy, the only Theme they can Write of; and all these diffe∣rent Passions are agitated by Love, Scorn, Jealousie, Anger and Resent∣ment, which if not display'd in their
true Colours, consider the Author, and force a Complaisance. I would avoid all things in the common Rode of Flattery, there∣fore I shun a Character I could be very copious on, and only tell you, If this Trifle has but the Influence to effect a Smile from you, or the good Luck to disperse some melan∣cholly Cloud that would eclipse the Lustre of your Glorious Mind, I shall have the utmost of my Hopes, and esteem my self rewarded even to the height of my Lavish Wish. I could say a great deal in Com∣mendation of Love, what Effects it has had over the profoundest Philo∣sophers, the most Judicious and Learned, even those who have most contemned that Passion, have been delivered up to the most sensible Touch of it; bring authentick Au∣thors
to prove as much; produce the wonderful Effects of it in these Days; but that is not my part, I ju∣stifie nothing, but leave it to your Mercy; and if you do afford it your favourable Protection, I shall be proud I had the Occasion to shew my Choice in a Person of such singular Virtues, such nice and refined Sentiments, such inestimable Me∣rits, and One whom ten thousand Advantages, besides that of Friend∣ship, induces me ever to Subscribe my self, Your Devoted Friend, and Humble Servant, CORINNA.
To CORINNA, on her Novel entituled, Love in Distress: or, The Lucky Discovery. I Beg'd Apollo, that he would inspire, For once, my Breast with such Poetick fire, That I your Praise might to the World recite, And show how much I value what you write: But the ill-natur'd God did Aid refuse, Envious at Merit in a Female-Muse. Spight of the Churle, boldly I'll pay a Mite, Tho' I expose myself by what I write. Your Lines are strong, so easy flows your Wit Your Verse so smooth, your Sence is so polite, That you are sure the Muses Favourite. To what a wondrous pitch in time you'l grow, Who can such Judgment on a Trifle show! Trifles indeed to what your Mind possess; Proceed Corinna, and ne'r fear Success. PHILANDER.
To my much-lov'd Sister, Mrs. S. R. alias, my Sister the Lady P. on her Novel entituled, Love in Distress: or, The Lucky Discovery. THus dare a Brother venture to commend Your first Attempt, and say 'tis nicely pen'd. Assist me then, ye Muses, that I lose Not one aspiring Thought which I could chuse. That I, inspir'd by you, may add to Fame, And celebrate my dear Corinna's Name. Well, could I give her Merit just Desert, Could I express the Dictates of my Heart, But 'tis impossible, not all your Aid Can speak my Raptures of that Charming Maid. And, oh! I blush, that to my own Disgrace I want Assistance for a Sister's Praise; Yet I'll not wonder, 'tis her lavish Store Has bankrupt mine, and render'd me so poor. Fain would I from a Character so true, So natural, and well display'd by you, Give injur'd innocent Canace her Due.
Deplore the desperate Octavio's Fate, Applaud that Turn of Fortune you relate, With so much Passion, Eloquence, and Wit, That whoe're reads must feel what you have writ, Let not one Character escape true Praise, And crown each lucky Thought with golden Bays: But, oh! in vain I've only the Desire; For your bright Flame puts out my weaker Fire. J. R.
To CORINNA, on her No∣vel entituled, Love in Distress: or, The Lucky Discovery. THe painted Grapes that drew the feather'd Train, Provok'd their hunger, but provok'd in vain: Advancing near, they soon perceiv'd the Cheat, And left, unsatisfied, the Fairy Treat. Your lively Fancy does at once invite, And feast our ravish'd Souls with true delight. Strange Art! that o're our Sence such pow'r can gain, To make us feel those Passions which you feign! Their Adoration basely they misplace, Who are enamour'd only on a Face; But conquer'd, and of Liberty bereft, Your Captives have at least this Comfort left, That honourably vanquish'd, we submit To double Charms of Beauty and of Wit: By these delightful Spells our Hearts are seiz'd, Fond of our Chains, and with our Ruin pleas'd. But when you dye, (as pity 'tis you must) Instead of mouldring into common Dust, As a Reward for your ingenious Pen, The Muses have decreed, Corinna then Shall mount to them, and make their number Ten. STREPHON.
LOVE in Distress: OR, THE LUCKY DISCOVERY. LIsbon, the principal City of Portugal, famous for its curious Traffick, and no less to be admired for the produ∣cing of Worthy and Brace Heroes; amongst the rest, a Noble Youth (whose Extraction was derived from the most Illustrious Seba∣stian, the Nephew of John the Third, King of Spain and Portugal, who was unfortunate∣ly slain in the Field of Alcazar in Affrick) and whose Royal Virtues, and Heroick Acti∣ons, might worthily contain as many Vo∣lumes as our Atlas: But rather than dero∣gate in the least from his acquired, and re∣nowned Fame, I will omit all Circumstances of his Valour, and only recount the Amo∣rous part of his Life, with Impartiality.
His Parents injoyed all the Blessings of Peace, Honour, Wealth and Tranquility; all the Comforts that the World, or Nature can bestow upon Mortals in this lower Sphere; yet nothing added more to their secret Satisfaction and Felicity, than the springing Vertues, and Beauty of Melantius, which was the Name of this most Excellent Person. It was now he was attained to the Twenty third Year of his Age, and with that to all the Perfections, that a Soul stampt with the Image of a Deity, could be capa∣ble of: It was therefore no wonder if his Pa∣rents were throughly sensible of his Deserts, and knew how to set a considerable value on so inestimable a Jewel; they feared that his Generous and Ambitious Humour, would prompt him forward to be acting something worthy of himself: And indeed he had of∣ten solicited them to permit him to assist the Christians, against the increasing Power of the Insulting Turk. He pleaded the Justice of the Cause, the Shame of an Unprofitable Life; and, in short, he told them, his Soul glow'd within him, to be attempting that which he had often envyed in other Brave Men; he urg'd that the Plenty of the World ought not to indulge a Man in Idle∣ness; he had recourse to the Emblem of the Bees, and their abhorrence of the slothful Drone: He omitted no Argument that might
prevail; he feared no Danger, nor appre∣hended Fate, but begg'd he might have leave to try his Fortune where Glory was to be gotten, and not like a Dunghil-weed rot at the Spot he grew. They heard, (and often blessed the Auspi∣tious Hour that gave him Birth) but never could be brought to condescend, that he should launch for Fortune in the uncertain World: They told him, It was not the Just and Brave, that always reap the Benefit of their own Merits, for fickle Fortune is a Jilt, and often favours Fools and Knaves; yet found no Argument strong enough to diminish in the least, the aspiring Spirit of this Gal∣lant Youth. At last they thought a Married Life the Infallible Remedy to secure the only Pledge of all their former Joys: He then found himself prest to Marry, his Relations having proposed to him a Match out of one of the Noblest Families in Portugal; her Name Aspatia, only Child to the Duke An∣tonio de Almeyda, a Lady whose Perfections, ballanced with her Quality and Fortune, had made numerous Captives of less amorous Souls than our Melantius. It was a short Voyage down the famous River Tajo, that conducted him to the Scene of bliss, first under pretence of a complemental Visit; the Duke received him with an extraordinary and hearty Welcome, which
he return'd, by a grateful acknowledgment of his Favour. The Duke to divert his Noble Guest, en∣tertained him with a sight of his magnificent Palace, where he took great delight in view∣ing the unparallel'd Statues, and Paintings, and the curious Cielings, done by the most famous Masters of the Age. After he had satisfied his Curiosity, as well as he could in so short a time, the Duke led him into his Garden, which for the fine Scituation, and lovely Prospect, the Orange, Lemon, and Citron-Trees, continually in Blossom, Fruit of all sorts, and variety of all Flowers, plea∣sant shady Wildernesses, refreshing and ar∣tificial Fountains; and, in short, all that Nature or Art could render curious, made this exquisit Spot of Ground be justly term∣ed the Paradice of Portugal. Their wandring Steps led them into a re∣tired Walk, where Melantius was surprized with the sight of a Beauty; and altho' the Jessamin-Hedges, which were very thick on each side, had eclipsed some part of her Charms; yet he had discovered so many Perfections, that he was resolved to approach this unguarded Fair; who, if Heaven had informed, with a Soul agreeable to her Bo∣dy, he had no farther thought, then an in∣tire resignation of himself: With these Con∣templations he entred the Arbour, not ob∣served
by the Duke, who was just turn'd to gather a Flower, which gave him opportuni∣ty to gaze, as one void of sence, upon this Lovely Fair. 'Twas at that Instant our young Enamourato's Thoughts were eleva∣ted beyond the Power of expression. The Weather in those Climates is violent hot, especially that part of the Day, when the Sun is in the Center of the Zodiack; which so suffocates the Inhabitants, that they are willing to close with all advantages, that can render a Refreshment to their drooping Vitals: The same Motive induced this Charming Fair to receive the benefit of a soft still Wind, that whispered Content through all the lazy Air. She had a Slave, whom she was most secure in; but at this time she had dismissed her, that she might with greater freedom enjoy the liberty of sweet Contemplation: Love had been no stranger to her Heart, a Heart perhaps too apt to take the Impression; and what Per∣son of the same Sex, that has ever experi∣mented the least Power of that Triumphant Tyrant, but must acknowledge, that altho' to feed their fancy, and divert their melan∣choly hours; they may admit of a Confident, to treat with all advantage on the Object of their thoughts; yet there are some Tran∣sports of Satisfaction, that cannot be con∣tained under any limit, but breaks out into
Raptures; which when vanished, dejected and surprized they even blame themselves for being an Eye-witness. This place was all Retirement, secret and secure; none durst approach except the Duke, at some appointed hours, wherein she never failed to entertain her self with all the privacy and freedom her Heart could wish: At this time her Soul, wrapt in sub∣limer Meditations, had took its flight above all thought, and left the Body wholly bereft of sense or motion; a profound Sleep sealed her Eyes, and she appeared as divinely charming to the ravisht Melantius, as the vertuous and excellent Lucretia did, expos'd a Victim to her audacious Roman Lover: A sacred Silence seem'd to reign there, which secured her from all fears of Interruption, as in a Cave forsaken by wild Beasts-in a De∣sart. The ingenious contrivance of this Arbour rendred such satisfaction to the sight, that it unresistably allured the Beholders to a solita∣ry retreat; it consisted of four delicate little square Beds of green Turf, on the farthest of which, lay this Amazing Beauty; her Head declining to the right side, supported by a Hand, that seemed to be form'd of po∣lish'd Alablaster, her Hair hanging carelesly mov'd at the discretion of a gentle Wind, the colour fair, compar'd to Cynthya's Silver
Tresses; she had on a pair of embroyder'd Bodice, her Bosom half open, with a large white Damask-Scarf wrought with Gold, which falling off her Shoulders, had circled in her Knees, and likewise hid the other Arm, her Breast whiter than Snow, but of a warmer Constitution, wrought wonderful effects in a young tender Heart resolved to love: The discovery of all these Charms, the powerful clearness of her delicate Complexion, was capable to make him surrender upon the first Assault. You must imagine the unavoidable rustling that he made, soon expiated the drowsie God, who gently slipt his Chain, and gave his Captive leave to open her bright Eyes; then with a Face more serene and lovely than Aurora, she confirmed the languishing Ex∣pectation of her Amorous Lover; tho' the sudden confusion that seized every Faculty, at the approach of a Man, and a Stranger, dispersed a pleasing Blush throughout her Cheeks, and gave a ravishing lustre to her sparkling Eyes, which were blue, and full of Life. With what new fire this kindled him is unaccountable; for never was Lover at the height of his Wish, struck with a more acute Passion, than he was sensible of the first Minute; Fear, Pleasure, and a resenting Pity filled his Mind, to see her so severely astonish'd, that sometimes her Face with
Shame was glowing red, then streight with Anger it grew pale. Forgive me, Madam, (said he, with an Air full of concern) by unadvised steps, (tho' I must own 'twas not without design) I have incroached upon your Priviledges; charm'd with ten thousand Beauties, insensibly I did re∣sort to this Retirement. Sir, (reply'd Aspa∣tia, who had a little recover'd her self) I pray, no more; call not more Blushes to my Cheeks; but if you will restore my Peace, re∣tire, and leave me to my innocent Retreat. Melantius, who could not brook this Com∣mand, with eager Transport threw himself at her Feet, then blessed his happy Geni∣us which had been his Guide, and con∣vey'd him to the Shrine of Chaste Diana, where he would offer up his pure Devo∣tion. While thus he spoke, she survey'd him round, view'd and review'd his Noble Meen, observed his Speech, his Air, his Person, in all which discovered Worlds of Pleasure. He was of a middle stature, well shap'd, the features of his Face were regular, black-ey'd, and languishing; his Hair was of a bright Ash colour, which was very long, and lay in folding Curles all o'er his Shoul∣ders. With strange amazement, and transport∣ed thoughts, they did for a great while
stand and gaze on one another. Then, then the little envious God of Love did clap his Wings, and rejoyced at the approaching Fate of these unhappy Lovers; but soon this pleasing Extasie was diverted by Aspatia, whose Modesty recalled her surprised Spi∣rits; then casting down her Eyes which were filled with Shame, she blam'd her most im∣prudent Curiosity, when she beheld Melantius Prostrate at her Feet, with Eyes that spoke too open and intelligibly the Circumstances of his Heart; yet forced a Smile to say, Indeed you are too obsequious, too lavish of your Praise; and give me leave to impute these Fa∣vours, to that common face of Gallantry, that generally attends your Sex, rather than to your solid Judgment. By this time the Duke had recovered the Arbour; where he was surprised to find Me∣lantius in a close Conversation with his Daughter, who appeared in great confusion; the Duke blamed his own Imprudence, in leading him that way, and as he entred the Arbour, excused himself, by telling her the agreeable Entertainment of that young Lord's Conversation, had wholly taken up his Consideration; therefore to compence for having interrupted her accustomed Re∣treat, (which he attributed altogether to himself) they would leave her to her free∣dom; and seeing Laura the Slave of fair
Aspatia appear, the Duke thought fit to re∣tire. This sudden motion was something per∣plexing to Melantius, who could not depart without a great Regret, which he signified by his Looks, which were all Remorse. Im∣mediately Aspatia withdrew to her Apart∣ment, where, as soon as she enter'd, she threw her self carelesly on a Couch, and there sat very dull and pensive; Laura ima∣gining it no other, but some little concern for the disorder she was surprized with in the Garden; approach'd her with a pleasing Look: Come, Madam, (said she) banish this trifling Sorrow, here is that will make you soon assume your usual Gaiety; a Letter from the Count Octavio, Madam. From Octavio! (said she, starting in a little disorder) Give it me. But what means my foreboding Heart? Can any thing from that brave Man displease me? And yet I feel an unusual Shivering over all my Limbs, as some dire Omen of a future Misfortune! She took the Letter with her trembling Hands, and having opened it, she Read as follows.
OCTAVIO to ASPATIA. YOƲ see (dear Madam) how much I am yours, when even the Commands of my Prince, cannot detain me in Italy; nor the Threats of a Father induce me to Marry a Lady, whose Beauty has no Superiour but fair Aspatia's. I am the same constant Man, as when I left you, and only live to Adore you. What will my Fate produce? Cannot all my Sufferings, and the Sincerity wherewith I serve you, render me the most passionate of Lovers? Nor is it possible to reconcile the Duke, your Father, to a Stran∣ger? Yet this is less my Care, then how I stand in the favourable Sentiments of the only Person I live by. I am now at Porto with all the Privacy imaginable, till I know with what Incouragement I may come to Lisbon. I shall wait with much impatience, to see the Characters of that fair Hand, from whom depends, the Life, Fortune, and Felicity of, Madam, Your Unchangeable Octavio.
During the perusal of this Letter, the Commotions of her Mind was visible in her Face; and having concluded it, she fetch'd a deep sigh, and return'd to her pensive po∣sture. After some time lifting up her trou∣bled Eyes, she cry'd, Ah! Laura, did I Love Octavio? Laura smil'd at the oddness of the Question, and made no Answer; whilst she continu'd; Was I not obliged in honour to make some return to him I owe my Life to? Nay more, the Life of him that gave me mine. But say I did advance too fast, too tenderly, forgive my Indiscretion, it was no more than Gratitude did prompt me to: But why these scruplous Thoughts? Am I not the same Aspatia, young, fee, and disingag'd? No, no, but he is still the Brave the Generous Octavio; and must not, cannot, will not be imposed upon. Tormented with a thousand different Thoughts, she past the residue of the Day till Bed-time. Laura wondering much from whence this should proceed, (tho' it requi∣red no penetrating Eye to discry a deep im∣pression of the Lovely Stranger stampt upon her Bosom) had used the most prevalent of her Arguments, to disswade her from that melancholy Humour: But alas! 'twas all in vain; she retired to her Bed, where her Pillow was the only Confident to the Agi∣tati she suffered that Night; which was
spent with much more satisfactory Reflecti∣ons by Melantius, who encountred no other Ideas but those of Love and Extasie; he was transported with the many Charms he found in the beautiful Aspatia. He fancy'd her his own, not dreaming of any Obstacle that could oppose it; he consider'd the E∣quality of their Birth and Fortune, the Con∣veniency of the Match; and indulged him∣self with all the transporting and delightful Raptures that proceed from thought. The next day was that great Solemnity, wherewith Alphonso Henery entertain'd his new Queen Beatrice, Daughter to Alphonso the Tenth, King of Castile; by whom that Noble Dowry, the Kingdom of Algaroes, was added to the Crown of Portugal. All the Nobility was there present to pay their Devoirs to the Queen. In particular, the illustrious Families of Almeyda, and that of the Marquess de Leganes, who was Father to our Cavalier Melantius. The Celebra∣tion of these Nuptials, would be too tedi∣ous to recite; let it suffice, never was any thing more glorious, where Melantius made the most considerable Figure of the Beaux Esprits, and Aspatia of the Belles. The general approbation they receiv'd, did not a little contribute to augment the favourable Sentiments they had entertained for one another. And at the Tournament,
when Aspatia beheld her young Heroe enter the Lift, (with an Aspect that foretold the Miracles he perform'd) it was easie to read her Wishes in her Eyes, which were con∣stantly fixed upon him, and seem'd to move in the same Sphere with the Vicissitudes of his Fortune. But oh! how her Heart danc'd when he came of Conquerour; the Air re∣founded with 10 Poeans to the Victor, and ecchoing Triumphs filled the breath of Fame; but his proudest Trophy was the Congra∣tulation he receiv'd from the fair Aspatia; and without doubt, he was Gallant enough to attribute his good Fortune to the influ∣ence of her Eyes. After some short Preliminaries, these Di∣versions broke up, to entertain the Ladies with a splendid Ball; and it was there Me∣lantius determin'd to make an Offering of his panting Heart to the Deity he Worship'd: His kind Stars soon bless'd him with a lucky Opportunity; for Aspatia being somewhat overheated with Dancing, was in motion with her Fan, which by chance she let fall. Melantius was the fortunate Person that took it up, and delivering it with a pro∣found Bow, in a soft dying Tone; he said, Ah! Madam, could you as easily restore my Heart, which I just now resign'd an Offering at your Feet. She smil'd at the pretty Gal∣lantry, and reply'd, I never retain any thing
I cannot pretend a Property in; and would have declin'd a farther Discourse: But he continu'd, That is as your Cruelty or Justice will determine: This I can affirm, it is no longer mine; and if your Severity will not think it worth your Charitable Protection, you shall behold it the most wretched Victim in the World. He waited for no answer, but taking hold of one corner of her Handkerchief, which he dexterously convey'd into his own Hands: 'Tis but reasonable, Madam, (said he) to afford me some small Relick, to guard that Breach, which otherwise you expose to the greatest danger imaginable. Altho' this did something displease her, it was impossible to retrieve it, without a publick view; there∣fore not offering at a recovery, she suffered him to carry it off, tho' not without a great Resentment, which appear'd in her angry Brow. Melantius, who was sensible of his fault, engaged with the rest of the Compa∣ny, and appeared no more that Night be∣fore Aspatia, but as a Criminal; only she had the secret satisfaction of often seeing the Handkerchief display'd to his Lips, and there most religiously saluted. The Depar∣ture of the King and Queen, put a period to that Days Entertainment; and all the Company retired well disposed to sleep; nor did a thought molest Aspatia, who enjoyed
a sweet Recruit for the last Night's Tribula∣tion. Phoebus had already mounted the Olym∣pick Palace, and made a considerable Pro∣gress in his Day's Circuit, when our love∣ly Fair awaked, and called Laura to in∣quire how the Day had past: After she receiv'd satisfaction to some such frivo∣lous Questions, Laura presents her with a Billet-doux, which she had just receiv'd from a Page of Melantius, who still wait∣ed for an Answer: She took it with a panick fear, in hope and doubt, to find what it contain'd; but who can tell her pri∣vate Transport, when she read what fol∣lows. MELANTIUS to ASPATIA. IF an Offender may have leave to plead for Mercy, have pity on a true Peni∣tent. My Crime may be too Enormous to expect a Pardon; but I am sure my Contri∣tion is of as large a size. You have already sufficiently punished me, and that cruel Frown at parting stab'd deep into my Heart; nor could Poyson, Daggers, or a thousand Deaths
be half so terrible. Let it suffice, I only live to receive my Sentence from those dear Lips that can give Life even in the pronoun∣cing of my Death. My Life and Happi∣ness are absolutely in your power; and if to Love with the most sensible Tenderness ima∣ginable, can offend; to Die, would be but the least part of my Duty: But if a Restora∣tion of my petty Theft can any way contribute to a Pardon, permit me this Afternoon to lay at your Feet both That and your Adoring Slave, Melantius. This passionate Declaration was so far from displeasing, that it filled her with a Torrent of Joy, to find a Man so entirely at her Dispose, whom Fate had already de∣stin'd her to Love; to deny his Visit, was to rack her own Inclination, and to permit it too easily, would make the Conquest too cheap; however, this Contest did not long last, the irresistable God bore sway, and she returned this Answer.
ASPATIA to ME∣LANTIUS. I Am Confirmed, that in all points Melan∣tius is the most Gallant of Men; and where he offends, he makes but too suffi∣cient Reparation: I can forgive without these Insinuations you use to bribe a Pardon; but shall expect with the Return of my Hand∣kerchief, you desist a Suit too inglorious for a Heroe. Aspatia. Having dispatched the Page, she began to reflect how barbarously she used Octavio in the mean time; but who can resist the powerful influence of that little Tyrant, who models us after his own Chimera's? well may he be represented blind, not only for the inequality of Persons that he wounds, but whoever is possessed of the same Malady, runs violently on, pursues the Object of their Affections, adheres to nothing but Almighty Love, and cannot see an Er∣rour. Well, she is resolv'd to let Octavio stay a little for an Answer, being in some perplexity
what to write to him; she banished all trou∣blesome Thoughts, and wholly dedicated that Day to Melantius, who came dress'd with all the Gaiety of a young Bridegroom; enter'd the Room, with ten thousand Gra∣ces, and passionately flings himself at her Feet; and having stole her Hand, he gently raised it to his trembling Lips, and stampt the Image of his Soul upon it. Aspatia, who simpathized too feelingly with this Extasie, was the first that by good fortune recovered her self; and being oblig'd to take some notice, My Lord, (said she) this is far from concurring with the Capitulations I propos'd. Oh! name them not; (said he) forbid the Sun to shine, stop the bright Charioteer of Hea∣ven in his full Career, root up the Eath from its Center, but never, never bid me cease to Love; all these are more possible to be done, then not to Love the Adorable Aspatia. She already felt a Commiseration too sensi∣ble to withstand, but her unlucky Sex obli∣ges her to act that hard Part, to appease the dearest of her Wishes: she wore the Mask, and most severely reprimanded him, conjur∣ed him not to persue so extravagant a Ral∣lery; or if it were sincere, to avoid so fruitless an Amour: In short, she played the Tyrant, and insulted over a Heart, whose ut∣most Faculty was to serve her; but Melanti∣us could not yield to Despair, at every little
repulse, and resolved not to quit the Siege: He left her not that Evening, till he had brought her to a more gentle Humour; af∣ter that, not a Day passed wherein he failed to sigh and plead. This tender Application engaged her to shew him indifferent Favours, till at last Time and Assiduity prevailed, and sighing, dying, she confessed she Loved. It was then his Joy was without bounds, exalt∣ed above a common Transport, he was im∣patient for a Consummation, and every Mi∣nute of delay was insupportable; he inform∣ed the Marquess de Leganes, that now he was ready to make a Resignation of himself to the fair Aspatia, and only waited his Propo∣sals to the Duke her Father. The Marquess was extreamly well pleased at his Son's reso∣lution to Marry, commended his Choice, applauded his Prudence, and without far∣ther demurs, he orders his Coach to be rea∣dy, and away to the Duke de Almydas, whom he had the fortune to find at home: Before they parted, occasion presented to promote the Unity of their Families: The Duke returned the Marquess all the Civility in the World; and tho' he did not absolute∣ly determine, he desired time to consider, which was more out of Ceremony, than any doubt or scruple; he knew the conveniency of the Alliance, and after pretensions of ma∣ture Consideration, two or three Visits brought it to a conclusion.
Next there was a most glorious Preparati∣on for their Nuptials; in the mean time Me∣lantius had free egress and regress to the Au∣thor of his Bliss, where the blessed Hours were spent in gazing, wishing, and a thou∣sand Toys that Lovers affect to please them∣selves, till the happier Minutes may be im∣proved. Who would not conclude him now the happiest of all Men, just ready to launch in∣to a Sea of Pleasure, within reach of the wish'd for Haven, and not able to touch the Shore. Fate so order'd it that the Mar∣chioness de Leganes was taken violently ill, and in three or four days died: This put a stop to a farther proceeding, in the Hyme∣nean Ceremonies, till a long Obsequies was celebrated to the Dead. 'Tis impossible to tell how much Melan∣tius suffered at this time, not only for the loss of so dear a Parent, but at the delay of so many Joys; which without doubt would have been a kind Ingredient, and have helpt down the bitter Pill of Affliction, with less regret; there's no Life, no support for him, whilst absent from Aspatia: But the Cir∣cumstance of his Affairs forbidding his stay, the better to bear this parting, he begs her Picture, which she grants, but at the same time intreats for his: This was his constant Companion in all Adventures, never from his
Bosom, slept and conversed with him, miti∣gated his Misfortunes and increased his Joys; and so strong was his Imagination, that he fancied it bore part in all his Change of For∣tune. The time was now come, that the Mar∣chioness was convey'd to Porto, there to be Inter'd, in a Tomb belonging to their Ance∣stors. Whilst these Rites were performing, Melantius, to give vent to the excess of Sor∣row that oppressed him, walkt out one E∣vening on the Banks of Duero, whose plea∣sant Streams runs by the Walls of Porto; and moving on with a soft easie pace, silent∣ly entertaining himself with Contemplation of his future Fate, was rous'd from the A∣byss of Thought he was lost in, by a Sigh that seem'd to pierce the Air; this made him curious to discover what Person it was that gave such evident tokens of Distress: He had not gone far before he discovered a Cavalier, who lay upon the Grass, with his Face towards the River; he appeared to be very tall, and his Hair black; he had a Let∣ter in his Hand, which having read, he flung his Arm down with a little force, and cryed, Where must we seek for Vertue? Is there such a thing in being? Or, is it but a Notion? 'Tis evident it's not to be found within this Globe of Earth, if it can fail in Cruel Fair Aspatia. These words were very much sur∣prizing
to Melantius, who heard one sigh∣ing, and as he hoped for another Aspatia, he was a true Lover, and did not want for a thousand perplexing Fears and Doubts, at the Name of his Mistress, yet were they not so violent as to disturb his attention to the Cavalier who thus went on: All things in Nature look so hush and calm, and not a breath of wind disturbs the gentle Air, through∣out the Horizon is all serene, nor do these dewy Sheets one wrinkle wear; and yet the Pertur∣bations of my Breast, are able to affect the World around me: Have I not set, implored, and wisht in vain? And am I now grown so Contemptible not to deserve an Answer? Oh! Where are all those pitying Looks and Glances, that used to wound Octavio with delight? Was my Hopes exalted to that height, to make my Fall moe desperate, and upbraid me with too great Presumption? These Characters! These dear Characters! can Witness I was not once indifferent to her. Support me, feeble Limbs, once more to Lisbon, and I'll discharge you e∣ver from a future Service. The naming of Lisbon, gave a fresh Alarm to Melantius, and had like to have deliver∣ed him up to as much Desparation as the other: He was fixing direful Thoughts, when he perceived the Cavalier to rise and come forward, which obliged him to retire some distance, till he saw the way he would
take, being resolved to track him, and if possible, to find out the Mystery of his Trouble; with that design he suffered him to advance to the utmost limit of his sight; who returned the same way that Melantius came, with his Arms folded, and his Eyes fixed upon the Earth. In this posture he had not gone far, before he discerned something on the ground which cast a resplendant light, that show'd it to be of considerable value; and having taken it up, it appeared an Eb∣bony-Case inlayed with Gold, and set round with Diamonds; the outside Glories were inferiour to what he found within, and it requires a more Polite Pen to display the Wonder, Extasie and Jealousie, that posses∣sed his mind, to find the lively Protraicture of Aspatia painted there. Great Gods! (said he) Where will my various Fortune end? Am I beholden to ye for this Present, or is it lost by my more happy Rival? Perhaps Aspatia may be near this place, and by some lucky Accident have dropt it: But Oh! that hope is vanish'd 're it is conceiv'd; Octavio dare not think she who could suffer him to Languish these two Months, without the least of a relenting Pity, could be induced to set a foot near Porto, whilst it contained her much contemned Ad∣mirer: Yet, whatever Chance has sent thee, thou art welcome. Aspatia may be Cruel to the highest degree, but you are innocent, and
no Ingrate; you smile, and please me with a thousand Graces; and should I lay you near my panting Heart, you would no way resist, but yield, and there receive warmth from my raging fire: Nay, should I ravish here ten thousand Kisses, they were all my own, without the least repulse: Why then, dear Flatterer, we will never part, but cheat my childish Hope with these Delusions. He was seated under a Tree, pleasing him∣self with abundance of such wild Discourses. When Melantius missed his Picture, he re∣turned with all the Concern in the World, to the place where he discovered the Cava∣lier; and having search'd diligently, and not finding it, his fears suggests to him a thousand Doubts: Sometimes he fancies that he had dropt it as he came, and probably 'tis found by some poor Peasant; who, tem∣pted with the Treasure, would conceal it, from all possible means of regaining: Then he imagines it in the hands of the Cavalier, whom by this time he had lost sight of, and knows not where to find: This made him re∣double his Pace, and with all the speed he could, endeavour to recover the Town be∣fore he was Hous'd; yet not so expeditious∣ly as to hinder him from a slight search as he passed. Being thus imploy'd, and his thoughts wholly fixed on his Loss, he was startled at the unexpected sight of the Cavalier, who still lay under the Tree, adoring the lovely
Picture of Aspatia. Melantius filled with Joy to have found it, yet Jealousie and Spleen to see it there, went up to him; and with a hasty Voice demanded the Piece. But the Cavalier drown'd in his thoughts, answers to some former Ejaculations of his own; The Gods shall never retrieve thee. This rude reply, (as Melantius apprehended it to be) so inraged him, that without any more words he had recourse to his Sword; bidding the Cavalier (if he dar'd) rise, and defend it; who being recovered from his waking Dream by this fierce Attack, tho' not knowing the reason, yet seeing there was no time for Parley, he Drew in his own Defence; at first only parrying to avoid the Passes that were made at him, but finding his Enemy too resolute to be play'd with, he was forc'd to endeavour his Dispatch, to secure his own Life. This rencounter was maintained with e∣qual Fortune for some time, by these Com∣bitants, till Melantius feeling himself bleed in the right Arm, renew'd his force; Shame and Anger made him desperate; so that by a thrust under the left Pap, he had the advan∣tage to see the Cavalier fall; but Melantius (who was in all points truly Noble and Ge∣nerous, ran to his Assistance, deplor'd his Fate, begg'd his Pardon, and blam'd him for being so refractory. The Cavalier had
neither Sence, nor Strength to listen to his many relenting, tho' ineffectual Expressi∣ons, yet perceiving him willing to serve him, with broken Sentences and Signs, he desired to be carry'd to a little Cott within a stones throw, which stood alone and obscure at the foot of a Hill. Melantius having discry'd the place, was in distress how to convey him thither; when he beheld an old Man driv∣ing up the Hill a few poor Goats; he called to him, and desired his help, he was very ready to assist, and withal told him, what his humble Roof could afford, was at their Command; but he feared it had nothing to recommend it but Retirement, being three Miles off the City, poorly furnish'd, and ill provided. Melantius thankt him for his fea∣sonable Relief, and return'd to the place where he had left the Cavalier just expiring. When the old Man drew near to discern the Face of this Unfortunate, he burst into a shower of Tears; and cryed, Ah! poor Don Pedro; What Cruel Hand has destroyed the best of Men? Now may these Shades be cursed, whose dear delightful Retreat has be∣trayed thee, like a Syren, to thy utter ruine: Did I this Morning leave thee fresh and well, to bring thee home a dead and helpless Corpse? Oh! had I never known thy Vertues, I had never missed thee.
His grief spoke a sensible sorrow, but con∣sidering a speedy help was required, Melan∣tius interrupted him to bear the Cavalier to the House, where they layed him on a Bed, and covered up his Wound close from the Air; Melantius likewise bound up his own Arm, and the old Man called a Lad, whom they sent to the Town to bring a Chirurgeon with all speed and privacy; in the mean time careful not to disturb the wounded Cavalier, who had little other sign of Life than a trou∣bled breathing; they retire to the Door of the Hutt, where Melantius enquired of the old Man what he knew concerning him, he was nothing scrupulous to declare his ac∣quaintance of him, and thus began. Sir, (said he) I have lived upon this spot these fourscore years, never in plenty, nor ne∣ver did I want; by Trade a Fisherman, my Family once large, which I maintained by my daily Labour, till the Supream Powers were pleased to reduce it to the poor Lad you have seen, who is my Grand-child; he is now about fifteen years of Age, him have I brought up to the same Slavery, being in no Capacity to do better for him; we live alone, and eat what we earn with sweet content. One-Evening, as we were fishing, two Leagues from this place, was the first time we saw this Don Pedro, sitting at the foot of a Rock melancholy, and sighing to the Winds; but he took no notice of us that time,
nor several times after, when we have found him in the same place, sometimes reading, some∣times complaining at his hard Fate; one Day he seemed diverted with our Sport, and desred to Board us; we put to Shore and took him in, and he continued with us till towards Night, enquiring of my Life, my Family, my Abode, in all which he was particularly pleased at my unambitious Mind, and free Content; he told me I was Rich and Happy because I coveted no more. For that Night we parted, and having liberally rewarded us, he returned from whence he came, but bid us not fail to meet him the next Day, having promised to visit our homely Habitation: We fetched him punctually at the appointed place, and brought him to this Ru∣stick Shore, where he was so taken with the Retirement, and innocent Life, being a Nur∣sery to his Grief, that he could not part from us; but this mean Room (he now lies in) was his Lodging, being the best we have. Six Weeks has he been here, in which time his Diversion was to Walk alone, early and late, sometimes he would Fish with us, he far'd as we did; all I could learn relating to himself, or Country, is, that his Name is Pedro, a Spa∣niard Born; he was very inquisitive after Letters, and sent the Boy every Night to Porto to enquire. By this time the Chyrurgeon was come, whom Melantius brib'd to Secrecy; having
prob'd the Wound of the Cavalier, they were greatly incouraged to find it not mor∣tal; but his excessive bleeding had already reduced him so low, he could not speak, but fainted several times in their Arms. Melan∣tius (tho' he did not want for Jealousie that this was his Rival) yet considered his Mis∣fortune with much trouble, he stayed till he was Dressed, and after applying something to his own Arm, and leaving a Charge to the old Man to be careful of him, he returned with the Chyrurgeon to Porto, promising to be with them early the next Morning. Af∣ter a short Devoir pay'd to the Marquess de Leganez, he retired to his Bed, to Contem∣plate on the Days Adventure, and altho' his Malady requir'd rest, his distracted thoughts could not permit of any respite, but flew more swift than the fleeting Minutes; he was impatient for the Day, that he might a∣gain visit the wounded Cavalier, who (he hoped) would be in a Condition to relate some part of his Life, at least tell him, why he would not part with the Picture but by Compulsion. Scarce had the pale-fac'd Empress of the Night, drawn her Sable Curtains, but Melantius was up, and arrived at the poor Mansion; just as bright Sol had tip'd the top of Olympius with his golden Beams, ha∣ving before taken care all Necessaries should
be brought; the Cavalier, whom he found something revived by a little Sleep he had gotten, and both able to look up and speak. Melantius enquired of his Health, withal signifying some Joy for this small Amend∣ment, but an undissembled Concern for his Misfortune. The Cavalier was amazed at this great Civility, from a Person he imagin∣ed had used him the most unreasonable of all Men. Sir, (said he, in a weak faint voice) how much I receive from you now, can only be repayed by a bare acknowledgment, and I must attribute this Favour altogether to your Gene∣rosity, being as much at a loss for any Merit of mine to deserve it, as I am at our late Quar∣rel. Melantius as much puzzel'd at these Expressions, was apt to believe a Fevor had seized his Head, but considering 'em spoke with an Air that shewed a great Moderati∣on, and peculiar Grace, he was obliged to answer in this manner. Nothing could have provoked my Sword against a Person of your Worth, but the refusing to restore this Picture, which is my only present Felicity. The Cava∣lier assured him he did not hear it demanded. But, Sir, (said he) dare you so far trust my Fidelity, to inform me whose it is, and how it became yours? Melantius very willingly re∣ply'd; It is a Lady's, whose Fame is not con∣fined to the scanty limits of one Kingdom, but universally admired: She is the Daughter to
the Duke de Almeyda; and were it not for the Jilting Tricks of Fortune, I should now stile her my Wife; her own Hand recommend∣ed it to me, when the Death of the Marchio∣ness de Leganes (from whom I received my being) put a stop to our Marriage, which should have been Consummated within a Week. The Cavalier, whose Attention was inter∣rupted with a Torrent of Sighs, at this last Accent of Melantius, resigned his Life, or at least it appeared so, when all th industry that was used could not recal his Spirits; but just when they discovered some glimer∣ing Hopes, his Soul shrank back as in the Abhorrance of the World; but the assistance of the Chirurgion, who was now come, was so effectual, that no longer could the im∣pulse of his anxious Trouble repel his Art, but in spite of himself, was his Life thrust back, to die ten thousand Deaths: With the first breath he recover'd, he exclaim'd against the Cruel Fair, and blames Heaven for making her the brightest of her Sex, without dispersing their Divinest Attributes upon her. Oh! Why! (said he) Why was she created so Divinely Glorious? (That Gods themselves would have been proud to have layn at her Feet, adoring Captives) and not be bles∣sed with unblemish'd and unshaken Virtue? Is thee no Bolt of Heaen that stkes with Fate, but must it light on miserable Octavio? Ah!
false Ingrate, now triumph in thy Injures, and with thy insulting scorn crush thy loathed Victim lower than the Grave. Every word he spoke, was like Darts to Melantius, and almost pierced him through; nor was his staggering Thoughts longer in dispute, if this was his Rival: Alas! he was too terribly convinc'd; yet being nearly concern'd to have a more ample satisfaction, which he could not learn from this confused Discourse; he had so much command of him∣self, as to endeavour to moderate the excess of his Passion, and recal his Peace: But few things are of sufficient power to per∣swade a despairing Man into Reason; he looks upon himself as the lowest and vilest Insect; miserable, despis'd, and ruin'd; nay, lost in a Mist of wild Horrours. In this rage he continues to curse the malice of his Stars, sometimes pouring out Execrations on himself, for being too unworthy to possess so Divine Treasures. Then again charging her with being False, Cruel, Inhumane and Unjust. Now (said he) if this Soul dare re∣main in this desolate Body, who can be more wretched? But I will never fall so low, and abject: Nor can I bear, (even tho' her Charms are by her falshood almost lost;) that another should ravish them from me. But will the Gods permit such things to prosper? On whom we Mortals do rely for Justice. No endeavour
they could use, could bring him into a cal∣mer Humour, or engage him to suffer his Wound to be dress'd; he still oppos'd it, and tore the Plaisters off as they were apply'd. Melantius alledg'd, That probably there might be a mistake. Are you sure (said he) this is the same Aspatia? If you knew this Hand, (he reply'd) which I believe you are no Stranger to, your Doubts are evidently resol∣ved. With that he deliver'd him a Letter, in which there was such tender Expressions, that could proceed from nothing but Love: As he read, every Letter grated his Soul, to find such considerable Favours lavish'd on another. Oh! Poor Melantius; (said he, fighing to himself) thou hast but blown up the Embers, in the absence of this Cavalier; for 'tis impossible such substantial Love, could va∣nish with a flash; even when he was within reach of enjoying all that his Soul could wish for. But why should I complain? Is it not for me, she forgoes all these Engagements? If it is a Frailty, 'tis to make me happy? But how am I sure she doth not yet retain some Inclination, for the once lov'd Octavio? Who by one melt∣ing glance, may perhaps kindle afresh her expiring Flame. How may I believe that a Heart which could once play false, should constant prove to me? What Charms has poor Melantius to se∣cure it? Only Excess of Love. Notwith∣standing these uneasie Thoughts, he resolves
to see her suddenly; and if her Plea con∣vinc'd him of her Innocence, she should from him receive an everlasting faithful Love. Yet this ungenerous Proceeding with Octavio, shock'd his tenderest Sentiments; and were he not already the most amorous of Men, he had declined a Beauty that could be guilty of such pitiful Conduct: He was throughly convinc'd how much the Cavalier might have hoped for; yet considering himself the hap∣py Man, he reflects on it with Partiality. After much intreaty they prevailed with him to be dressed, and finding him inclinable to repose, (which was but a feigned show, that he might have the melancholy liberty of his own Thoughts) they left him. Melantius returning to Porto, in his way met the Boy with a Letter directed to Don Pedro, and knowing the Hand to be Aspa∣tia's, who could blame his Curiosity, in this juncture of Affairs for opening it? She had been in a Sea of Troubles and Fears in his Absence, considering what would be the e∣vent of Octavio's Passion, should she not an∣swer his Letter: She knew he could not long be a Stranger to her Amours with Melantius, and therefore she thought cunningly to pal∣liate the Story to him her self; with this de∣sign she had framed, (with all the Subtilty and Craft that could be invented) a way to break to him the dreadful Secret; and in order to that, had thus writ.
ASPATIA to OCTAVIO. THink me not Ʋngrateful, when I send the Generous Octavio, the best of Wishes. Oh! how unaccountable are the Circumstances of our Lives and Passions? Let it suffice, 'tis you, and only you, can make my future Days happy, or miserable: I have Wonders to tell you, and beg that speedily you come to Lisbon. Laura shall meet you, at the usual Rendezvous, and conduct you to the lost and confused Aspatia. This indeed new model'd his Resolutions; and instead of seeing her, his design is now wholly to abandon her, having discovered (as he thinks) a sufficient Demonstration of her Falseness; Rage and Resentment, fill'd his Soul: Am I at last (said he) abused and forlorn? No, false One, you may triumph, but never shall insult over the wronged Melan∣tius; for from this Minute, I will shun thy false deluding Chams. Thus fully determined, he goes home; no rest could he take, various were his thoughts, and as various his Resolutions; yet all deter∣mined in that point, of never seeing more the Fair Deceiver. How to dispose of himself he was not long at a stand, when he reflected that all Italy was in Arms, and that the Di∣spute
betwixt the Pittis, and that Compleat Heroe and Champion for his Country, Lo∣renzo de Medici, the Tuscan-War that was then afoot, the Republick of Venice that was likewise engaged, would give him a glorious Diversion, from his perplexing Crosses, especially too since the Turks gave them new Fears, by menacing the remainder of those Islands, which they held in the Ar∣chipelago. Thus positively resolv'd, he writes a Let∣ter to the Marquis de Leganes; in which he desired him not to be concern'd, at his sudden Departure; since he had made a Vow to perform some Religious Duties, not only relating to himself, but for the good of his dead Mother's Soul; withal telling him the reason why he did not take his leave, as his Duty requir'd, was fear of being op∣posed in that which nothing ought to avert; and in his absence, which he hoped would not be long, his Prayers should constantly be offered up for his Prosperity: Likewise, that he should go nigh to steer his first Course to our Lady of Loretto. This being prepared, he call'd a Servant whom he could trust, and having related to him his design, ordered him with speed and privacy to hire a Feleuqua at the nighest Port. Whilst his Man (whose Name was Montal) was thus employ'd: Melantius writes to
Aspatia this Letter, and in it incloses hers, which he had intercepted going to Octavio. MELANTIUS to ASPATIA. YOU must pardon me (Madam) if I dare not encounter those dangerous Eyes once more to take my last Farewel; believe me, 'tis with great Regret I quit this Kingdom, and had Aspatia been true, not Empires heaped on Empires, could have tempted me to leave her. At the same time I must applaud your Gene∣rosity to the unhappy happy Octavio, who by a dire Mistake of Fortune, has suffered under my Hand, yet not so cruelly as by your Eyes: 'Tis time to abate the Tyranny you have used, and restore a Heart he once has been possess'd of. If I have wrong'd him in intercepting this Billet, y ur Mercy which I am sure will not be wanting, can calm the raging Feavor in his Blood. Yet to make a Reparation for my Fault, but more to gratifie your dearest Wish, by my Absence you shall fear no Obstacle to molest your Tranquility; and where-ever I am, spight of myself, I am the lost confused Aspatia's Melantius. Soon after Montal returned with the News of a Merchant-Vessel that only waited the next fair Wind to hoist Sail for the
Streights, which they hourly expected. Me∣lantius got all things in readiness, having con∣trived just as he Embark'd, to send his two Letters forward. About the hour of Twelve, a Mariner came to give Montal warning, that the more speed they made the better. The Night shrouded with her gloomy Vall, and a fresh Breeze of Wind represented to Melantius (as he made to the Port) not the calmest Reflections; yet with a Noble Bra∣very that always attended him, he Em∣bark'd; where we will leave him on his Voyage, and relate what was done in the mean time at Home. Early the next Morning the Marquess de Leganes had his Letter, which extreamly startled him, but being a Pious Man, and considering the consequence of the Business, he the easier dispenc'd with his Absence; and what made him the more credulous, was his Engagement with Aspatia, which he judg∣ed to be too dear a Tye, to quit upon a Whimsy: Thus with moderation did the Marquess bear the Absence of his Son, but for what poor unfortunate Aspatia suffered, (who knew too well the cr cause) I dare not undertake here to display. Only the weight of her Misfortunes was of power to sink a World. A Death-like Cold seiz'd her Heart, her every Faculty lost their use at the News of his Flight. In this manner
she continued for a long time, till her swel∣ling Passion forc'd a vent; then how often did she blame her unhappy Conduct, raging and almost frantick, she deliver'd herself up to the extremity of an immoderate Sorrow: No Name was too hideous for such black In∣gratitude, as she term'd it, nor no Wish too hard or severe; at the same time forgetting her unkind usage to Octavio. There was not one Argument Laura omitted to restore her Peace, but to no purpose, her Reason was lost; she beheld her self fallen from the height of Bliss to the most abject Misfortune, and in her wild thoughts she saw the Man she loved, and hourly languished for, in a∣nother Country, pleasant, and diverting himself in Company with all the Ladies of Beauty, Wit, and Fortune, whilst she was flighted and abandoned by him, deserted, and foraken: How this rack'd the utmost faculty of her Soul? Oh! Melantius; Oh! Cruel Melantius, did she cry, How misera∣ble? How wretched miserable have you made me? If I have been unjust, Heaven knows it is not to thee; then blame thy self, thy dear engaging Self, that has betray'd Aspatia to those base Characters of False, Ʋnjust, and Ʋngenerous. This Passion continued so violent, that she found it impossible to appear before the Duke that Day, without exposing her Senti∣ments,
having lost her Master-piece of Dissi∣mulation and Cunning, which by some is attributed as incident to the Sex, too sensi∣ble was her Affliction to bear disguise, and therefore to conceal it from the Duke, whom she knew would search too nicely into the dreadful Cause, she sent Laura to acquaint him she was indisposed, immediately retiring to her Bed, in expectation of a Visit, knowing him to be the most indulgent of Fathers: Not long after he came reading of a Letter he had just receiv'd, and having enquired and advised about her Health, This Letter comes (said he) from the Marquess de Leganes, wherein he acquaints me of a short Voyage his Son has taken to the Chappel of Lo∣retto; but, I believe (continued he with a Smile) your Intelligence has been more speedy. At this second Confirmation and killing un∣grateful News, she could hardly support her self, and as he prest on to know if she had been before informed, she felt the great∣est difficulty and pain to force but those words, I was. The Duke having some guess at the nature of her Malady, left her to gain some Re∣pose, or rather to the freedom of her own Thoughts. No sooner had he quitted the Room but she called Laura to her, and with an easie Look, as if she had master'd some difficulty, spoke to her in this manner:
Since I have confided in thee as to all the Circumstances of my Life, so must you now assist me in this last and most Desperate: I Love, and you are no Stranger to the Extre∣mity of my Passion, my Life, my Honour, my Fame, are but false Idols to that Potent God: Tell me then, Can I live and not possess Me∣lantius? That dear Melantius, whose Soul once mov'd with the same tender melting touch as mine. Oh! 'tis impossible; he thinks me False, Perfidious, or he had never left me: Shall I then live with this black Infamy, and not right my self? No, I will seek him to the utmost Verge of Earth, and there proclaim my Innocency; then if his Heart should prove impnetrable, and obdurate, my Death shall convince him of the direful Truth; and my wrong'd Ghost shall be ever before his Eyes, raving for Justice and Revenge, perplex his future Peace. Laura gave her self no trouble to diswade her from this Exploit, believing it no other then a Chimera she would never put in exe∣cution; But she found her self mistaken, it was what had taken deep root and fixt in her Resolution, she persisted in it daily, and then she failed not to lay before her the danger and hazard, but chiefly the false Con∣structions would be made of such an extra∣vagant Action. Aspatia was deaf to all Advice, and only made answer, She would
not be diverted from her Design, tho' she was forced to adventure alone. When Laura found her so fully determined, she assured her, nothing could have that face of diffi∣culty, or terrour, to make her decline her in the most desperate Attempt; but hoping her care in reminding her of what might prove to her Disadvantage, should not of∣fend, she positively consents to obey her Commands. Thus satisfy'd with Laura's Compliance, the next Consultation was to get Mens Cloaths, the easier to disguise their Flight, and most commodious for their adventurous Travels. This Task was left to Laura, as likewise to hire a Vessel to Transport 'em to any Port in Italy, who performed very punctually all her Commands, and pretend∣ing a Visit to some Relations for two or three Days, by Aspatia's Connivance, she went directly to Setuval, a famous Haven about 20 Miles from Lisbon, where she secured a small Feleuqua for their purpose, and also placed Horses in the Rode for their more speedy conveyance thither. The Wind sat fair every Hour she was there, which obliged her to make a quick return to Lisbone, to inform Aspatia, and assist her Flight. Night being the time for performing of such Projects, they waited wish great im∣patience and panick fears till it came, in the
mean time providing good store of Gold and Jewels, the most portable and necessary Luggage, and being thus Knight-Errantly Equip'd, they sally'd out, and at two Miles Stage took Horse, and rid full speed to Se∣tuval; they arrived there about four a Clock, was Embark'd with the Courage of Heroins, and a fair way under Sail e're they were missed at home. But yet too soon was the fatal News spread throughout all Portu∣gal, for the Duke not seeing nor hearing from his Daughter the next Day, conclud∣ing her not well, went (as was his usual Custom) to her Apartment to visit her, but not finding her there, he was much surprized, and seeing a Note lie on the Ta∣ble he took it up, which to his greater Wonder, he found subscribed to himself; wherein she acquainted him she had left the Kingdom, but had no way left to excuse her Flight, but that Almighty Love was the powerful Cause, whose Passions and Effects were ever unaccountable, and begg'd him, if he could, retain a thought of his own former Joys, he would be so Charitable to recollect them in her defence, and believe she left so good a Father, with the greatest vi∣olence imaginable; concluding with her Pe∣tition to indulge himself, and bear her Ab∣sence with moderation, and a charitable O∣pinion of her, giving him some hopes of a
speedy return, which should compensate for all her imprudence: But alas! This was of little force or efficacy; for the immoderate Grief, Anguish, and Shame which possess'd the Duke, (not only for the loss of a Child he had built his chief felicity on, but at the Dishonour of his Family, which could never be retriev'd) was not with ease to be al∣lay'd: He consider'd her the Bloom of all Portugal, celebrated for her Beauty, and u∣niversally admired; but when he came to reflect what a Blot she had given all these Advantages, he could hardly support the Trouble. There was no Port throughout the Kingdom he failed to send to, with Or∣ders to search all Transport-Ships; all dili∣gence imaginable was used, but to no pur∣pose; our Amazons were fled beyond recal, their Habits taking off all Suspition. Being thus destitute of Comfort, he found himself not Phylosopher sufficient, to bear with tranquility, so great a Misfortune, e∣specially in a place where he had all Eyes upon him, he therefore retired to a curious, tho' solitary Seat he had some twelve Miles from the Port of Ville-neue, where he pass'd his Days recluse from the World, with great Devotion and Acts of Charity, only now and then a select Friend, in particular the Marquess de Leganes, who was herein greatly interested, a fit Companion to lament with
him the unfortunate Conduct of both their Children: But what the more confounded the Marquess was, he lately had an account his Son was long since arrived at Leghorn, and after visiting some of those Holy Places he had promised, he had put himself in the Gens d'Arms of the Florentines, under Lo∣renzo de Medici; where he did those Won∣ders, I shall have no occasion to speak of here. But to return to Aspatia, whose Voyage for the best part was pleasant and prospe∣rous, they apprehended themselves past all danger, being within ten Leagues or less of Leghorn, when a boisterous Storm arose, and so violent a Tempest, that it terrify'd the most daring Mariner; the Seas ran Moun∣tains high, and the Heavens clattered out Peals of Thunder; and notwithstanding they were so nigh the Shore, they were again drove out to Sea; and finding the Storm grow louder and more dreadful, they cut their Main-Mast by the Board, and strove to lay their Vessel at Hull, whilst all Hands were at work to furl their Sails, she sprang two Leaks, and it was with much ado, by the incredible labour and industry of the Seamen, who were continually plying the Pump, she was kept above Water.
This was a sad discouragement to our A∣mazones, (whom, tho' I cannot affirm, wish'd themselves on their own Native Soil) yet none can blame them for being dismay'd, when even the Tritons and Dolphins were a∣mazed. This Tempest lasted full six Hours, all which time it seemed to threaten them with immediate Destruction, at length it be∣gan to clear up to Windward, the Wind a∣bated, and in little time they made Land, tho' distant from the design'd Shore. They wrought lustily for their Deliverance, and recover'd a rocky and dangerous Haven, be∣longing to the State of Naples, call'd, Fuz∣zuelo. The Feleuqua had done its last Du∣ty, in bringing them safe to Land, her Rud∣der being spent, and she so much disabled, she was incapable of further Service, and lay a dismal Memorandum of their past Danger with her Keel upward upon the Sands. With Joy they Landed, tho' feeble and faint, with little Nourishment, and hard Work, they in the Storm being forc'd to fling over Board most of their Provisions to lighten the Vessel. This was a place which obliged every one to shift for themselves; being none acquainted with the Country. There were few other Passengers than Aspa∣tia, who now went by the Name of Don Lelio, and Laura by that of Carlo.
Wildness, Wants, Barrenness, and innu∣merable Calamities were seated here, which dreadful appearance encouraged the Wea∣ther-beaten and distressed Saylors, with Re∣solution to scale those desperate and stupen∣dious Mountains, in pursuit of Food and Life; but this Atchievement had too many Difficulties and Terrors to be attempted by Don Lelio, who was driven to that extremi∣ty, to beg when they had allay'd their own Hunger, some one would be so Charitable to return with Relief, and assist them up that desperate Precipice, yet before they depart∣ed, to prevent any Outrage which might be offer'd, he distributed Gold largely amongst them, and assured them he had but a small parcel left for the supplying his own Neces∣sities, the Quantity, and Freeness where∣with it was given, easily confirm'd them in this belief, and there was not one but pro∣mised an Expeditious Return with the first Provisions they found. Thus did this Ex∣travagant Passion reduce the Tender, Beau∣tiful, and much to be pitty'd Don Lelio to all the Distress of Hunger and Cold; nay, exposed to a Multitude of other Dangers; yet nothing made so cruel an Impression as the Absence of Melantius. Her Heart was not so obdurate, as to bear such sensible af∣flictions without Tears, which were shed in abundance by them both, to see themselves
left on a naked Rock, destitute of all com∣fort, and likely to become a Prey to some furious wild Beast: Thus loaden with fears and grief, they imparted their sad Thoughts one to the other, as they mov'd along the Shoar, and engaged in this lamentable Con∣versation, weeping their Fate, without de∣sign, or consideration, they had stragled a∣bout a Mile from the place where they first Landed, there they found an easie ascent up the Mountains, 'twas a Path that was le∣vell'd as much as those impregnable Rocks would permit, and appeared to be frequent∣ed; they were in great dispute, Whether they should make any Sally alone, not only for fear of the Dangers they might encour∣ter; but for fear of missing those who had promised to bring them succour, at last they resolved to take a view of the Countries on the other side, and then to return to their appointed place, they fortified one another with Counsel, Courage and Comfort, and attained to the utmost height of the Clift, before they could think of descending, and to their great satisfaction, they found on that side an easie descent; they were like∣wise delighted with the pleasant Prospect of a lovely Champion Country stock'd with curious Rivers, and fine Woods; this Pro∣spect for some time took up their Considera∣tion, and they had not yet determined what
to do, when they heard the agreeable sound of soft Musick in a Wood, at the Foot of that Rock; they were now in hopes they were not far from Inhabitants, and believed it the best prudence to seek for shelter there, rather than trust to poor famished Wret∣ches, who perhaps were as far from Com∣fort as ever; they made no longer delay, but with speed descended, enter'd the plea∣sant Wood, and made up, as nigh as they could guess, to the harmonious found that they heard on the Rock; they had not gone far before they came under the Shade of a Noble Poplar, which spread his Branches o∣ver so large a Circumference, that it requi∣red admiration, as a curious piece of Nature; but what was more surprising to them, was to read on this Tree carved in great Cha∣racters on the Bark, Cruel Ʋnkind Octavio. This Name had dreadful effects on Don Le∣lio, which made Carlo take pains to draw him from that place, least it should have proved prejudicial to them both; yet be∣fore he would consent to depart, he wrote underneath it with the point of his Sword, Cruel Ʋnkind Melantius. By this time the Musick desisted, which put them to some trouble to find the way, but following a small Track they had discovered, e're they were aware, they were entertained with the same Instrument again; and a Voice that
was sweet, and so nigh that it surprised them. The Words that were Sung, were these. I. MƲst I Love, and must I Languish, And ne'r hope to ease my Pain? Can I bear the bitter Anguish Of a slighted cold Disdain? Is the Darts then of no power For to wound this Dear Ingrate? Must I suffer every Hour, And be pity'd when too late? II. Cruel God now change thy Fashion, Since we must thy Will obey; Give us both an equal Passion, Or both Flames do thou allay: Say Great Deity, Must never My soft Wishes have redress? Oh! How vain is all endeavour? Love can only Love express. They listned with great Attention, ha∣ving at the same time the advantage of seeing the lovely Person, who deliverd 'em in French, which both of them understood perfectly well; it being generally used by the Quality of most Nations: The Words were deliver'd with an Air all Passionate yet Serene; which Don Lelio had the satisfacti∣on
of observing without being discover'd himself. The Youth appear'd about the Age of Sixteen, Beautiful as Narcissus, Fair as the God of Love, his Eyes of the nicest black, had a gloss that out shined the Glo∣ries of the Day, and all his Features surpri∣singly perfect: He was dress'd after the French Mode, gallant in all things: His Hair which was curiously fair, was tied up in a Scarlet Ribbon: He was seated under a Myrtle Tree, and had a Lute under his Arm which afforded them this delightful Harmo∣ny. Appearing in this posture, he exceeded all the Fictions that Poets attribute to A∣donis. The Woods, the Groves, the pleasant murmuring noise of little Rivulets, and this amorous Song, gave Don Lelio a sweet Idea of Elyzium; and it was no small comfort to him, that his Fortune had cast him on a Shoar where there were Lovers; he could not believe them a barbarous People, that were capable of so refin'd a Sentiment. The Verses were so composed, they gave no in∣telligence, Whether a Man or Woman was complain'd of, and the Habit being all that appear'd Masculine in this Charming Youth, who had so much Goodness, Innocence and Sweetness in his Looks, that they apprehend∣ed no danger to encounter him: When the Song ended, they made up to the place
where he was, who appear'd in a great dis∣order at their approach, but they being willing to put an end to a Fright (that had spread an agreeable Blush throughout his Face) readily told their Distress, declaring they were Shipwrackt Persons, thrown by Fortune on that Coast, tho' distant from thence some Miles; the rest of their Compa∣ny making their way over the dreadful Mountains, they only were left without hopes (unable to follow such desperate At∣tempts) till their wandering Steps had led them to that place, which had an Eye of Humanity in it. They humbly intreated him to inform them where they might hope for some Relief. Don Ariosto (so was this young Cavalier call'd) viewing the effemi∣nate Delicacy of Don Lelio and his Com∣rade, had pretty well dissipated the Fears that had assaulted him, and being of a com∣passionate tender Disposition, was impati∣ent to assist them; therefore with a quick return, he requires them to follow him, and to his utmost endeavour he would contri∣bute to serve them, tho' he fear'd, the place could not produce any Accommodati∣on worthy of such Persons; being acquaint∣ed with nothing but a poor Cabbin at the entrance of that Wood. They gladly ac∣cepted the Favour, and full of grateful Ac∣knowledgments, redoubled their Paces to
this happy Retreat, which they found mi∣serable poor to appearance, but 'twas no small Surprize to them when they entred, to see all things, tho' far from fine, curiously neat. The Inhabitants were, an Old Man, and an Old Woman, with one only Daugh∣ter, they received him with all the Joy in the World, and he appear'd to have no small Authority there: Having first refresh∣ed the Strangers, with wholsome Cordials, he led them into a Room, where there was a little Field Bed, and all things else neces∣sary for a Cavalier, not to be expected in so mean a Mansion. He told them it had been his Abode a considerable time, finding more Content there, then in greater Splen∣dour. He presented them Cloaths to shift themselves, retiring that they might have liberty, whilst he ordered a plentiful Sup∣per; at which he had a Relation of all their Misfortunes at Sea. This Entertainment was comfortable and delightful, but broke up soon, that the weary Travellers might take Repose after their hard Sufferings. How terrible was the Complement expect∣ed here from Don Lelio? For it was but rea∣sonable he should Invite Don Ariosto to par∣take a Lodging in his own Bed, whilst the others opposing it, seem'd a gentle Courti∣sie, taking up with Cloe's Chamber, who for a shift was forc'd to lye at the Feet of her Old Parents.
Our Adventurers spent some part of the Night in discoursing of their Deliverance, as also of the Youth, Beauty, and particular way of living of the Lovely Ariosto: And notwithstanding some Sleep they had got, Don Lelio found himself the next Morning in a violent Feaver, unable to sustain so hard a Fatigue, which whilst his Body was in A∣gitation he was insensible of. This News was a great Affliction to Don Ariosto, who used all Endeavours to restore his Health, he watch'd by him Night and Day, and ad∣ministred several things to him, having some knowledge in Physick, which Art he had for some time studied; but finding his Me∣dicines and his Care ineffectual, he was infi∣nitely concern'd. Don Lelio continued desperately ill, even to the threatning of his Life; yet during all this Sickness, not one had the least Suspiti∣on of his Sex; till one Day Carlo and he, whose constant Entertainment it was to con∣dole their sad Destiny, had been seriously engaged in Discourse, when upon some oc∣casion Carlo quitted the Room, without warning, and that so softly, he was not missed. Immediately enters Don Ariosto, and approached the Bed, but finding all si∣lent, and the sick Cavalier's Head turn'd on the other side, concluding him asleep, was just retiring, but was stopt by his Voice,
who believing he was still speaking to his faithful Carlo, thus went on: Ah! Laura, how imprudent will your poor Mistress be ren∣dred, for leaving an indulgent Father, and all the Glories of this World, to bear this Hard∣ship, and to pursue an unworthy false Ingrate, quit a Palace worthy of a King, to die here in a lonely Cott? But more, my dearest Laura, how terrible must Aspatia's Memory be to thee, when thou dost reflect, that by her wild Conduct thou wert lost, left on a Forreign Shoar destitute of Friends; whilst thy weak Sex not dole to contend with the lean Jaws of Famine, Cold and miserably Poor, perhaps some broken Crums for a Regalio, a Bed of Straw to rest on, thy Sleep disturbed with Fears, thy Days with Horrour, till by this lin∣gring Wretchedness you perish. Canst thou for∣give me then? Oh never! never! This pitiful Complaint, not only fill'd Don Ariosto with Wonder, but with the most sensible Compassion imaginable, when Don Lelio who had desisted a while from speaking, and hearing no reply, turn'd his languishing Eyes, which were drown'd in Tears to seek Carlo; but how full of confu∣sion were those Eyes to see Don Ariosto at the Bed-side? Fixt and immoveable he lay, and seem'd lost in concern for what he had uttered: For sometime Don Ariosto took pleasure to gaze on her pretty Disorder,
whilst the other was tormented with a Mul∣titude of Fears and Doubts; till Pity could no longer view such cruel Sufferings, he step'd up to her Bed, and with a Voice full of Amazement: Madam, (said he) for so I now may call you, since Chance has made me your accidental Confident; I here stand ready to confirm with the most sacred Vow, an ever∣lasting Secrecy; for it would be more then bar∣barous in me, to insult where all Circumstan∣ces ought to oblige me to the tenderest Compas∣sion; and therefore not to keep you longer in suspence, and to secure you from all Fears or Jealousies of me, know your Fortune has not play'd the most Jilting Game in casting you on this despicable Shoar; for this Habit (point∣ing to himself) conceals the same Sex. How incredible soever this appear'd to Don Lelio at first, his sudden. Recovery from his pre∣sent Confusion, and the new Life it seem'd to inspire him with, shew'd how willing he was to believe it; whilst Don Ariosto thus continued: By what I have heard, Love has had a powerful Influence over you, which dou∣bly engages me to serve you, for I blush not to own, I now suffer under the Extremity of that Passion. A great deal more he spoke to this purpose, giving convincing Proofs of what he said. Don Lelio conceived no Bounds to his Joy at this Confession; yet not being a∣ble to speak till a multitude of intruding
Sighs had made way, it was visibly seen how timerously he entertained this happy Disco∣very; at last with a faint Voice, between Hope and Distrust he thus broke silence: With what Phrase may I term you? Pardon my Dispute, for I was ever difident of my own good Fortune, being almost inured to an unkind Destiny, but it would be no other than a Poor, and Ʋngenerous part in me, to Conceal any thing from a Person that so frankly has dispers∣ed my Fears, by a kind and free Declaration. I have no scruple now to confess to you ingeni∣ously, not only my Sex, but even all the Chan∣ces of my Life, when my Condition will per∣mit, and you are at leisure to hear. As these words were delivering, Carlo en∣tered the Room, in no small Surprize (as may be imagined) which was much more augmented to hear Don Lelio, call (in a free and unconcern'd manner) by the Name of Laura, taking Don Ariosto by the Hand, and thus speaking: My poor Laura, how much am I bound to Heaven, that in mittiga∣tion of my deplorable Disasters, has rais'd me here the best of Friends, and one whose Suf∣ferings strangely sympathize with mine. Fear not to imbrace with the tenderest Affection this our Generous Protector, for the Charming Ariosto is a Woman.
Wonder and Amazement crowded thick upon Carlo, to find so strange a Revolution in so short a space; but being confirm'd by the Mouth of Don Ariosto all that had pass'd, she was overjoy'd: with unspeakable satisfa∣ction did these metamorphos'd Fair Ones unite; and having spent some time in dis∣coursing of small Occurrences of their Lifes, they declin'd the principal Events to a more favourable opportunity, that the recital might not be troublesome or tedious to Don Lelio. For that night they parted infinitely pleas'd, and with such mutual Engagements of Friendship and Fidelity, that none could be greater or more substantial. From this moment Don Lelio recover'd, so much doth the Satisfaction of the Mind contribute to the Health of the Body, in a short time he became perfectly well: But during his Sickness, which lasted Eight Months, you shall have an account of Me∣lantius, whom we left in the Florentines Army. To tell, with advantage, the wonderful and glorious Exploits of that young Hero, would be too mighty a Subject to joyn with this Trifle; nor ought a less florid Pen than that of Homer, or Virgil, undertake so heroick a Task; therefore let it suffice, that after having perform'd beyond the Credulity of Man, it was his chance, during a Truce, to
be sent with other Commanders, to recruit their Troops with Neapolitans, having Per∣mission from the State. They arriv'd at Naples about the time of Don Lelio's reco∣very, and had march'd thro' the remotest parts of that Republick, in quest of Men, which they imagin'd might hide themselves in those Mountains, to avoid a Service at∣tended with too many Hazards. They were now within a league of that sacred Wood which harbour'd the lovely unfortunate Don Lelio. This place Melantius had already found out, where he often sought to calm and sweeten the Frenzy of his Mind, which was almost fester'd by Despair. One day he had retir'd hither, to seek a Sanctuary in the midst of Solitude; when striving to shake off his oppressing Fetters, he was convinc'd there was no evading the Sentence of the Deity, and therefore resign'd himself up as Love's cruel Martyr, and not without a harsh Contest betwixt Love and Honour. This Debate held him till he ar∣riv'd, all hopeless, at the foot of the Poplar (we spoke of) whose beauty and exceeding largeness took up his consideration some small time; but when he espied those two Senten∣ces on the Bark, writ in different Characters, who can describe his Confusion! oppress'd with a heavy weight of Fears, Doubts, and Jealousie, he was hardly able to support his
sinking Fate. The Blood came thrilling from his panting Heart, his Sinews shrunk, and so strange a Lethargy came all over his fainting Senses, that he seem'd fix'd to the center, at length, with hard strugling to resist this powerful Charm, he regain'd his Spirits, but so faint and weak, he was forced to re∣tire, and leave the pursuit of this Mystery till the morrow. But instead of rest that night, his dark melancholy Thoughts were fill'd with Illusions and Fancies, as perplexing as those he came from. The next morning, which was one of the serenest and pleasantest imaginable, he was up with the first summons of the chirping Lark, and with greedy and thoughtful steps travers'd the enamel'd Fields, till he enter'd the Wood, where he began a curious search, examining every Tree, if possible, to make a farther discovery. He met with several little Sentences, but no more intelligible than the other; being come under the shady embracing greens of that proud Poplar, where he, the day before he was seiz'd with that anxious Trouble, had some Reflections on the hard measure of his Tyrannick Chains, but overcame them with a Resolu∣tion to continue his search. He had not advanc'd far, but there pre∣sented to his Eyes two young beautiful Ca∣valiers, Arm in Arm, walking a deliberate
pace; and one at some distance behind them. These were the reciprocal and charming Don Lelio, Don Ariosto, and Carlo, who had chose this lovely Morn to ease the Se∣crets and Burden of their Souls. They seat∣ed themselves on the Bank of a pleasant and purling Stream, so close to the place where Melantius had conceal'd himself, that with ease he overheard all they said. The first that broke silence was Don Ariosto, who, after some deliberation, thus began: The History of Canace. THE Story which I shall tell you will be brief, having no Adventure to entertain your Ears, but the unaccountable Passion of a foolish and credulous Woman. My Birth, without ostentation, is as con∣siderable as any Family this day in Italy, being Daughter of the Marquess de Castigli∣one Della Stivere, who married one of the Illustrious House of Caraffa in Naples; their Hearts were firmly united, and for some few years enjoy'd the calmest Sererity that a tender Passion, attended with Greatness and Plenty, could create: But Love, nor
all this Tranquility, could not defend them from the Tyrannick Power of Death; for, my Mother, after being deliver'd of me her fatal Offspring, at the end of thirteen months resign'd her Charms to the cold Tomb, lea∣ving the Marquess my Father the most deplo∣rable of Men; which he gave evident de∣monstration of to the World, not being able to survive the dear Partner of his softer hours full three months. My Parents being dead, I was committed to the charge of the Viscount Bozzolos, the noble and reciprocal Friend of my deceased Father, who in particular had left me his Ward, where I was brought up by the Viscountess (his Lady) with all the care imaginable, till maturer years made me ca∣pable of the best Education, which was li∣berally bestow'd upon me. But ill Fortune still attended me, and bereft me a second time of an affectionate Mother: 'Twas a Loss difficultly to be supported by the dis∣consolate Viscount; yet Time wearing out the Excess of his Sorrow, he began to be comforted in the blooming Virtues of one only Son, and me, now his adopted Daugh∣ter, in whom every little Advantage of Wit and Beauty was his Glory. I was now the absolute Mistress of his House, and so equal∣ly did he share his Favours between Octavio (so was his Son call'd) and me, that the
nicest Eye could not judge which stood fair∣est in his Affections. Yet an unkind turn of Fortune render'd us two the ingrateful In∣struments of his Affliction; for, our Infant Natures, which had made us Companions in our harmless Pleasures, united us in a strong Band of Friendship, which daily improving, as we ripen'd in years, at length produced a mighty flame: Not that this could have done us any prejudice of itself, being (as we understood after) what the Viscount ever wished: but not knowing how it would be accepted of, (and a timerous bashfulness that generally attends young Lovers) made us industrious to conceal a Passion which con∣sequently prov'd my Ruine. Joyn'd to Octavio's Virtue, Wit, and Beauty, he had all the Power and Art of fine Perswasion; noble, facetious, and gene∣rous, but juster to his Friendship than his Love; one who could never fail to make his Passion prosper; with such Insinuation would he move, none could resist his Whispers and Address. In short, he made a Conquest of Canace, turn'd me to what he wish'd; he won my Soul with honourable Vows, and for my Love return'd me double Interest. Thus, for some years, we enjoy'd a calm Content of secret, innocent, and virtuous Friendship. Wrap'd in these chast Delights, we never once had Dreams of greater Bliss,
had not the revolution of Affairs convinc'd us, that a Lover's Hopes has no Confine∣ment. Octavio, to be render'd more polite, being already Master of his Studies, was by his Father sent to read the World and Men. This Separation was a fatal blow, to two united with an ardent Passion; but, being limited to just three years, we strove to bear it with a handsom courage, not part∣ing without mutual Protestations of Love, Fidelity, of Truth and all. Here Passion swell'd so big she could not speak, and fill'd her Auditors with feeling pity. But a few Sighs being past, and having dried her love∣ly Eyes, she renew'd her Discourse, where 'twas broke off, and all that lavish Wishes could suggest, to Hearts then flaming with a pure Desire. His Travels being accompanied with a noble Youth, the Confidant and Friend of all his Pleasures, (by Name Alcidas, of the great Family of Pittis, those mighty Com∣petitors to the House of Medicis, whose En∣mity has been so long contracted, that the colateral Branches of that House still bear the unjust Resentment of that Quarrel;) some minutes stole away without Regret; my Faith I plighted, and he swore to be for ever mine. But, oh! forgive my interrupt∣ing Sighs, Who can relate the fickle Chance
of Fortune, without grief, which more is to be blam'd than any breach of my Octavio's Promise? A constant correspondence pass'd between us; and that we might with freedom write our Thoughts, our Letters were directed to one had been my Servant, who being now dispos'd of in the World, liv'd still with grateful Sentiments to serve me. Having thus passed two Year, and better, my cruel Fate drew on apace, Alcidas's business call'd him home in haste, when having made all ready for his Journey, Octavio recommended to his care, Letters to his Father, and to me. He was no Stranger to our constant Vows; Octavio had impar∣ted all that pass'd, and left him as the trusti∣est of his Friends, with Justice to applaud his Love and Virtue. But see the strange reverse of Fortune, Alcidas came full fraught from poor Octavio, with Love, fresh Vows, and a thousand fond Addresses; which he defers to a kind opportunity, dispatching first his business to the State. He now be∣came a constant Visiter, entertaining us with Stories of Octavio; the great delight I took in hearing of him, made me ne'r fail to be in company; yet no secure occasion did present, to make me happy with that dear Epistle. My rm attention, when he did display the Courage, Wit, and Beauty of
my Lover, engag'd my Heart, my Ears, my Eyes upon him; but, oh! how often have I been surpriz'd to find his Colour come and go, his Speech to faulter, with all the sym∣ptoms of a troubled Mind. This pass'd without my knowing what it meant, being resolv'd not to take notice of it; but yet, alas! too soon I knew the Cause. Alcidas being frequent in his visits, came on a day the Viscount was abroad; I entertain'd him with an easie Freedom, but the ungenerous Passion raging in his Breast, made him remiss in all the Gallantries he did observe, he look'd wild, turn'd pale, and answer'd, Mal a Propos, to all I spoke, seeming involv'd in anxious Cares and Trouble. I knew not what to think, but fear'd the worst, and was just going to ask him his Disease, when I percerv'd him rise, and come towards me trembling, he held a Letter in his Hand, his Eyes half drown'd in Tears, he had not power to speak, till a large shower was sprinkled at my Feet, then in the po∣sture of an humble Supplicant, he thus be∣gan: Madam, you see here prostrate at your feet one whom the Fates have done their worst to plague. The envious Gods throw heavy Curses on me, and rend my Soul with Horrour and with Death. I from my youth have been
Octavio's Friend, his secret, constant, honest, bosom Friend, lov'd where he lov'd, contemn'd where he despis'd, affected all Diversions he approv'd, loath'd Place and Person that he did not like: So equally, so firm, so true we lov'd, as we were made to pleasure one another. What shall I say? The Heavens have done their worst to make a Wretch of base undone Alci∣das; this Friend, that dar'd to trust me with his Life, made me the Confidant to your A∣mours, and recommended to my faithful charge Ten thousand tender Vows, and passionate Ad∣dresses, withal this Letter, (putting in my Hand the Billet which he held, but still went on) which I discharge, as I am bound by Ho∣nour. But, oh! when making to this happy Soil, why was I not blasted on the way, drown'd in the turbulent, rude, boisterous Floods, or shook by some rough Thunderbolt to Atomes? Then Friends might say, So fell just good Alcidas. But I must live to lose my Fame and Value, and dye a Blot and Scandal to my Name. Cursed be those Stars that did conduct me to those Charms which made a Captive of my Friend Octavio; my Opticks are the same, my Heart is his, and where he loves, I cannot but adore. Then pardon, Madam, that you here behold your Slave re∣duc'd to love, without a Limit.
Here having stop'd, I knew not what to say: I must confess, I felt a great Compassi∣on, his modest Speech could not incurr my Anger; his sense of Wrongs and Faults com∣mitted pleas'd me; and I commiserating his ill chance, was going to return, when he proceeded: Judge, Madam, the sad Conflict of my Heart, betwixt my Love and those most sa∣cred Ties of Friendship. Must I then wrong my Friend? By all that's good, I will not play him false. And at these words he started up in haste, his Words and Gesture seem∣ing much resolv'd, when suddenly his Ayre was wholly chang'd, and falling faint∣ly at my Feet again; But, oh! (said he) my Heart is not my own; who can resist those Charms I now behold? And saying so, his Spirit sunk within him, and left him breath∣less by me on the Floor. This Accident indeed disturb'd me much, I call'd for the Assistance of my Maid, and with our Industry and Care recover'd him. Then I began to plead against his Passion, to represent my Contract to Octavio; still taking care to clinch upon his Honour, and blow those noble Sparks I still felt warm with Generosity, which I affirm'd would render him more Praise, more Joy, than the fruition of my dull Embraces: He heard with all the torment of Despair; yet being
byass'd by his generous Genius, he did re∣solve to quit the Siege, and never, never more to see my Face; but parting, told me, when I heard his Death, which suddenly would invade my Ears, I should remember, none ever lov'd so well, nor none e'er suffer'd more. In short, he seem'd fix'd in his Resoluti∣on, which fill'd me with a World of Satis∣faction, hoping that Absence might effect his Cure, without that cruel Remedy of Death. I retir'd with a Mind transported with the Thoughts of my Octavio, read his dear Letter over twenty times, kiss'd and caress'd his Characters and Seal, and thought my self secure from this Alcidas. But see the frailty of a Lover's Promise: 'Tis true, he made no more his common Vi∣sits, endeavouring with true care to avoid my presence; but the cross Destinies, that ow'd us Spight, led his dull pensive Steps in∣to a Church where I was offering up my Hours Devotions: He came up to the Altar where I kneel'd, and plac'd himself a little distance from me, but knew me not, by rea∣son of my Veil: Nor had I yet observ'd a Man so near me; for being wrap'd in a Se∣raphick Joy, my Thoughts had no relation to the World; when flinging up my Veil, to breath some Air, I heard the Voice of one in great surprize cry out, Good God, de∣fend
me; with that I turn'd, and to my troubled view appear'd Alcidas, pale as Death, unable to support his sinking Limbs, his Eyes all languishing with Love and Pain, spoke with more moving Rhetorick than a Tongue; yet, Pity being all I could afford, I left him in that most deplorable estate, whilst he, without the power to move my stay, made faint Petitions with his trem∣bling Hands; but I, deaf and insensible as the Winds, fled, and with eager paces got me home, where I began to exclaim against this Chance, with angry resentment of Al∣cidas. How much he lov'd, I was too well convinc'd, and doubted the Event of such a Passion: I plainly saw how Willingly he strove, with Violence and Art, to quench his Flame, but yet the gnawing Tortures of his Breast insensibly excites him to relief: Two or three Interviews he got of me, fan∣ned his soft Fire into a furious Blaze, which he no longer able to support, abandon'd Friendship, Honour, Truth, and Virtue, and gave himself intirely up to Love. The first Advance he put in execution, was, to propose our Marriage to the Viscount, which several times was done without my Knowledge. The aged Seniors met in con∣sultation, and struck the Bargain as them∣selves thought fit. Alcidas's Family was rich and noble, himself admir'd for a gallant
Youth, lov'd, valu'd, and approv'd of by the World; which pleas'd the Viscount, that I there should match, to Honour, and to Wealth, as I was born. Things being thus decreed, 'twas requisite next to consult my Mind in this Affair, of which I had not entertain'd the least Suspici∣on; till on a day, pensive, and sad as Death, I chose the Garden for a safe retreat, to nurse that melancholy vapour which op∣press'd me. After I had spent some time in troubled Thoughts, under the shady Bran∣ches of the Trees, my Maid drew near, and gave to me a Letter; the Character I had never seen before, which seiz'd me with a strange unusual Distrust; but when I open'd it, and found Alcidas's Name, Gods! how it struck me with a killing Fear! my feeble Limbs could hardly do their Office, to bear me to a little private Arbour, where I sate down to read the fatal Billet; the Contents thereof were these: ALCIDAS to CANACE. LOVE, the predominant Passion of the Mind, I find, can bear with no Competi∣tor; how much I have strove to overcome its Power, witness thou great Controuler of our Reason: but the resistless Charms of Heaven-born Beauty has quite cashier'd that idle No∣tion
Honour, which serves but to betray our free-born Wishes to the Capricio of another's Appetite; a meer fantastick empty Vanity of our own making, and govern'd by our Wills, not Inclinations. Octavio loves, but much more doth Alcidas: Desire doth rage in every vital part; nor can my Soul subsist without your Pity: I can no longer suffer endless pains, Nature will prompt us Remedies to seek, and Reason teach us how to ease a Torment. Won∣der not, Madam, that I have engag'd the Viscount's Pleasure, to secure you mine; all that can move an Avaricious Mind, shall la∣vishly be offer'd at your Feet; only resolve to make me truly happy, since my unbounded Pas∣sion will aspire to gratifie the tenderest of my Thoughts, and prosecute with vigour my De∣sign, being positively destin'd ever Yours, ALCIDAS. I found by this, his Hopes were much ex∣alted; the Viscount's Promise strangely did amaze me, for yet he had not told me his In∣tentions, nor did I dream I was so near a Ruine; what should be done, I could no way determine, but sate confounded at this cruel blow. When I perceiv'd the Viscount pass me by, a thousand Resolutions fill'd my Mind, which suddenly were lost without Conclusion: Sometimes I thought to charge him with Injustice, blame his too free di∣sposal
of my Heart, and positively refuse the Match. When milder Thoughts took place, I soon found this too rash; Honour and Virtue bound me still to Duty, since he had prov'd in all respects a Father: to tell him how Octavio and I lov'd, could no way get admittance from my Tongue; and Reason did suggest, that had he liked that Love, he would have first propos'd it. Debates and Tumults rising in my Breast, I knew no Method how I should allay them. Oppress'd without the comfort of Relief, various Opinions ended in this last, of tax∣ing him with an unkind proceeding: With that I quit the Arbour where I sate, and met the Viscount, who was now return'd. My Thoughts swell'd high to vent a Flood of Grief, but a respectful Awe confin'd my Tongue, and I had no more power left than just to ask him of his Health: However, long I was not in suspence; the Viscount fondly told me his Design, bid me prepare to make a happy Bride, and bless the World with an Illustrious Offspring. He told me, I must wed the brave Alcidas, with all the Advantages that Fate could give, or I could wish for. What I return'd I cannot now re∣tain; my Thoughts were so disturb'd, I quite forgot my Answer, but sure I am I very much oppos'd it, which he imply'd to
Virgin-Modesty, bidding me depart, and wisely make my Choice. I left him almost ready to expire, got to my Chamber, where I wrote at large each circumstance and tittle to Octavio, bid him make haste to save a constant Maid, since Life or Death depended on his stay; but not a Letter ever reach'd his Hands, Alcidas in∣tercepted all that pass'd, still pushing on with violence and care the consummation of a wretched Bliss. Hard shift I made to get two months Re∣prieve, in hopes to have an Answer from Octavio, but seeing none, I found there was a Cheat; Rage and Resentment so possess'd my Mind, I gave myself up wholly to De∣spair, and did at the last extremity resolve to sacrifice myself when at the Altar. Things were now almost brought to a conclusion, the Wedding-day prefix'd, a Pomp prepa∣red, where I was to surrender by compulsion a Hand, where I could not resign a Heart: but what prevented my unhappy fall, kills my sad Soul with the remembrance: Octa∣vio, by some base officious Hand, had false Intelligence of this Amour, wherein they represented it my Choice, with all the ag∣gravations could incense a man abus'd, as he believ'd he was: The Viscount's Letters told him of our Marriage, without the circum∣stance of my aversion, and ne'er receiving
any one from me, confirm'd him easily, be∣yond dispute, that I was turn'd a fickle mean Ingrate. What he design'd I never yet could learn, but he with speed came posting home to Ma∣drid, a place where we for many years re∣sided, enter'd the City privately at night, and got admittance in the Family; 'twas late, and we were all retired to Rest, which made him give Command not to disturb us; but no Repose could ease my weary Eyes, that almost were consum'd with Tears and Grief. I spent that night in Tortures be∣yond Wracks, dreading each moment which drew on the day when I was to be married to Alcidas. This News Octavio learnt in his Discourse with an old Servant, that had let him in, which raised him to the heighth of Despara∣tion. Some hours he trac'd the Room in great disorder, having difmiss'd the Servant to his Bed, with charge to keep it secret he was there; whilst bandying in his Thoughts Ten thousand Projects, ill Chance, and not Premeditation, forc'd an Act, which Love, and only Love, must justifie. Just as the Day peep'd thro' its thick Veil, and cast imperfect Shadows on the Earth, Alcidas, whose transported Thoughts ne'r rested, impatient of delay, came under∣neath
my Window, and with a gentle Sum∣mons rais'd his voice to these Expressions, which as my Maid took down, I well re∣member: The SONG. ASTREA, wake, disperse thy Fears; Look up, behold, the Day appears: Whilst I impatiently do wait, The promis'd bliss, to crown my Fate. Phoebus, lash on each fiery Steed, Let Phaeton supply thy speed; My Heart does burn as well as bleed. Rise and outshine the splendid Light; Let every killing Grace invite, And raise my Soul to such desire, That Thought no farther can aspire: Then every dying Sigh shall breath The Extasie I do receive, And those Delights I mean to give. Clear up those gloomy drooping Eyes, And see the glorious Sun arise, With brighter Splendor to survey The Triumphs of this happy day: Away with all disdainful Pride, All coy Reserv'dness lay aside; Prepare to be a joyful Bride.
Octavio did with pain attend the end, and being well convinc'd this was Alcidas, rush'd out upon him in a Storm of Rage, and with a Dagger smiting in his Breast, cry'd out, This as a grateful Present from Canace, deliver'd by the Hands of wrong'd Octavio. Alcidas struggl'd with a weak defence, and strove to gain some time to draw his Sword, but 'twas too late, the Wound he had receiv'd laid him on the Ground, de∣priv'd of Life. I from my Chamber plainly heard what passed, which render'd me half dead with Fear and Horrour; too well I knew Octa∣vio's voice to be deceiv'd, and could not guess what Fate had brought him thither; a thousand dreadful Thoughts did multiply, and fill'd my Bosom with a throbbing Ter∣rour: hurried by distracted Fears, I flung a Night-gown carelesly upon me, and ran with open Arms to find Octavio, but found him in a manner overwhelm'd with Sorrow. The lovely Mourner, fix'd as in a Trance, stood weeping o'er the Body of Alcidas, when I with trembling Transport seiz'd up∣on him, spoke all the tenderness that Love could dictate, but he contemning all my Sighs and Tears, forced himself violently from my Arms, made no Reply to any thing I said, but threw me from him with a scorn∣ed
Disdain, and left my Heart just bursting with this usage, whilst he with nimble flight stole from the City, got to his Servant left without the Gates, mounted his Horse, and rode for Life and Refuge, abandon'd by all Comfort to his Fortune. Mad as a frantick Bacchanal I rav'd, and hardly could be hinder'd from pursuing him. My Maid had us'd all Arguments with Rea∣son that might perswade a sense not wholly banish'd; but finding I was refractory to Advice, and hearing the trampling noise of Feet draw near, made no Apology, but pul∣led me in, and gently shut the Door. This Quarrel reach'd no Ears but only ours, except the Servant, who had let him in, who finding him uneasie in his Mind, had modestly withdrawn to wait his Order, and accidentally being fallen asleep, not waken'd till the Fray was almost over: Scarce had my Maid chain'd up the out∣ward Gate, but he approach'd us with dis∣order'd Care, making a strict Enquiry for Octavio; Oh! how I sunk beneath my load of Fears, left this loved cruel Man should now be ruin'd; Ingrateful as he was, I still ador'd him: 'Twas then, even tho' his Per∣juries were fresh, I did forget the Outrage done my Heart, to think of Means for his Security: Stifling the Anguish of my sinking Soul, I made a cunning search into this Ser∣vant,
and learnt from him the time Octavio came, and that he was alone, disguised and dull, that none had seen him enter but him∣self, whom Business accidentally had kept up. This gave, through all my Fears, some little Hope, that probably there might be no Di∣strust, if I could bribe this man to Se∣crefie. With subtile Instruments I prob'd his Breast, and found it at the bottom truly honest, his Interest and Advantage was Octa∣vio's, whom he loved and served for many Years, admir'd in Infancy his budding Vir∣tues, and at those early days sought his Af∣fection; yet I not failed, from time to time, to seal his vow'd Fidelity with powerful Gold. Having thus passed a sacred solemn Promise, next, to avoid Suspition in the House, we stole with silent Caution all to Bed, to me the most detested place in Na∣ture (because design'd for Rest and Fase); yet forc'd my Heart even far beyond my Will, since all this Care concern'd Octavio's Good. Till nine of the Clock the next morning, I suffer'd all the racking Pains of Love, Fear, and Jealousie, and by this time Report was spread throughout the City, that Alcidas was slain, his Hat and Gloves, that drop'd in the Rencounter, being found drench'd in a dreadful gore of Blood, but for the Body,
it could not be heard of, tho' careful strict enquiry was made. The Viscount startled at the fatal news, came trembling with sur∣prize and grief, to tell me; at sight of whom, before he spoke a word, Reflection dash'd my tortur'd breast, and not being able to support its weight, I sunk from the Chair I sate, into a Swoon. He guess'd, by this, that I had been inform'd, and weeping, bore a part in my Affliction, pitying my Loss, and poor Alcidas's Fortune. Industry was us'd to bring my Life, but all their Application was in vain, till above half the day was spent, then I began to breath the Air of wild Di∣straction. Madrid was now the Seat of Wonder, Rage, and Sorrow; the Murder of so great a man was generally lamented: a search was now began throughout the City, both for the Assassinates and wretched Corps, no House, or Vault, or Well escap'd a ran∣sack, which gave me all the agony of Fear, for the unfortunate distress'd Octavio; yet all this diligence made no discovery, no Author found that had done such a deed, nor could Alcidas's Body e'er be heard of, which Riddle I could never understand. Our Fa∣mily did suffer cruel Censures; my strange Aversion, and the fatal Place, the Time, nay, every Circumstance look'd odd, and gave too fair Pretences for Suspicion, but nothing could be prov'd; so that the Death
of this Unfortunate receiv'd no other expia∣tion than a publick Sorrow. Contrary to my Hopes, 'tis true, I liv'd, but liv'd the most dejected She on Earth; mourn'd that this Tragedy was not my own, rather than be the Fate of all adored me: I saw the passionate Alcidas fall, and fear'd the utter loss of brave Octavio; his parting Blow kept still a fresh Idea of all the Cruel∣ty that there was acted. I doubted his ex∣tremity of Mind would prompt him rashly to destroy himself; or, if he liv'd, he liv'd no longer mine. How wretched, how un∣happy was my Life! my Fears augmented by perpetual Silence; no Tidings of Octavio could be heard, no Letter nor no Message did come near us, which much perplexed the melancholy Viscount; but I, that knew too much, and dreaded to know more, dy'd dai∣ly with the expectation of the worst. Some∣times I thought I was oblig'd to speak, that necessary Methods might be taken; but, oh! the Bloody Fact had so much Horror, that my Soul shrunk at the remembrance, to tell the Viscount 'twas impossible, and likewise barbarous to disturb his Peace; besides, I knew not how he would resent my manage∣ment, in keeping it so long. Thus restless, thus oppress'd, I sunk beneath the Burden of a Secret, which Time had made too dange∣rous to reveal. The small Relief of Hope
had almost left me: Silent and sad, I bore a tedious Pain, and only waited Death to give me Ease, when there arriv'd a Letter from Octavio; the Viscount, unto whom it was directed, read it with all the smiling Ayr of Pleasure, but my prophetick Fear allow'd no Transport; an unaccountable foretelling Sad∣ness did overcome my Joy, to hear he liv'd; I dreaded to enquire, yet knew not why; but, oh! too soon the Viscount did expose that Letter, which produc'd my final Ruin. Octavio was now at Portugal, from whence he excused his long silence and stay, since 'twas not to be imagin'd he could return to Madrid, without endangering the loss of Life and Fortune, for Reasons which he guess'd the Viscount knew; but he, good Man, did only apprehend these words as they related to the next that follow'd, which told him of a noble Match propos'd, between himself and a most glorious Maid, fram'd by peculiar Providence with care, and made a charming Abstract of Perfection; Aspatia, happy Aspatia, was her Name, Daughter to the most Renowned Duke de Almeyda, born to command and conquer all that saw her: Crowds of adoring Slaves lay at her Feet, and gloried in their blest Captivity, the Uni∣verse did ne'r produce before a clearer Vir∣tue, Wit, or solid Judgment; nor Nature form so lovely or exact a Beauty; For, oh!
(said she, in Sighs and floods of Tears) I have heard her perfect and impartial Chara∣cter. At this Don Lelio blush'd, and almost died with swift reflections on his vanquish'd Ho∣nour, and the kind lavish Praises of his Rival. The sad conceal'd Melantius, at this part, was ready with his Passion to expire, but chaced with violence his Spleen away, to give attention to the mournful Sequel; whilst Don Ariosto, who had too much Grief to mind an alteration in Don Lelio, proceeded in this manner: 'Twas here my Fugitive discover'd Charms; nor Sorrow, Wit, nor Reason coul withstand; such Charms, that when his Soul was all o'er dark and dismal Horror calm'd and dispers'd the melancholy Cloud, disarm'd the torturing Fury in his Breast, and plac'd a Troop of smiling Cupids there; 'twas not without encouragement he wrote to learn what he might hope for from his Father, on what Demands he might expect to gain a Beauty of that bounteous Wit and Dower, giving his Raptures latitude to speak the most he thought his Mistress could deserve. This when I read, no Tongue can tell my smart, my throbbing Breast did heave, my Eyes distorted, no doubtful Wretch that stood their latest Doom, was half so shock'd
at a condemning Sentence, speechless and cold I fell upon the ground, and only short∣breath'd Sighs declar'd I liv'd; but soon a∣gain I did recover strength, to fall a Suppli∣cant at the Viscount's Feet, to whom I wept, and told the movingst Tale, that his sad Pressures, like to Niobe's, seem'd to have turn'd his reverend Frame to Stone. I wept, and told him even from our budding Loves, each circumstance of what I have now rela∣ted, declar'd the Murder, and display'd my Wrongs, begging him to compassionate my Cause, since I was still compel'd to die or love him. Grief stop'd his Tongue from making a Reply, but with his Head he bid me quit the Room, to give him liberty to vent his Trou∣ble. I left him languishing to that degree, that Fate sate daring Reason in his Face, which pierc'd my very Soul; as I departed, the look he gave me seem'd a last Farewel; and 'twas with great compulsion I retir'd, to leave him to the rigid Sourge of Fortune, which, I perceiv'd, did handle him severely. After some wretched hours of close retire∣ment, he forc'd a settl'd Mind, and sent for me; his Countenance appear'd without a Cloud, and every Action had an easie Ayr: Smiling, he rose, and took me by the Hand, and plac'd me on a Seat just by him, discour∣sed me with the greatest Moderation, that I
could hardly credit what I saw. Maturely he discuss'd upon each point, and brought it subtilely to a kind result; told me, that since hard Fate had play'd its Game, our Care must be to help and crown all future ma∣nagements with good Success; bid me not mourn what I could not redress, but learn of him to bear the Lash of Fortune. I could not judge if this was Artifice, or whether he had overcome his Passion, yet parted from him much more satisfied, for he had promis'd to restore Octavio, if I would leave the Conduct to his Will. With hum∣ble resignation I consented, wholly to be di∣spos'd by his Command; for, I confess that my unparallel'd Love fell to the heighth of abject Supplication. Within two days I went from Madrid, to pass the tedious minutes more sedate, in a still rural Villa of the Viscount's, that thirty miles stood distant from the City; there, there how many wretched hours flew, in the reflection of my dubious Destiny; no Shade, no Grove, but conscious of my Grief, my Tears supplied each Rivulet and Spring, and every melancholy Grotto spoke Despair, to the perpetual Volleys of my Sighs. 'Twas thus I spent the best part of a Year, whilst the kind Viscount acted things at home beyond the expectation of a Friend, and cun∣ningly in my behalf he did proceed: he writ
Octavio word, That his Fears need not any way oppose his coming home, for none could guess him guilty of that Crime; besides, the great Affair which he propos'd could ne'r be decided at that distance; therefore 'twas requisite he should return, to settle all in Peace for his advantage: giving some hints, that I was then retir'd, lest that should be a Motive for his staying. It was these generous Letters once more induc'd Octavio to see Madrid; the Inter∣view between him and the Viscount, I heard, was very passionate and moving, which be∣ing mitigated in few days, he introduc'd the mournful Tragick Tale, which was the fatal Cause of all our Evil: Octavio charg'd the weighty Sin on me, whose Falseness had be∣tray'd him to that Mischief, and then the good old Man did weep, to vindicate my much wrong'd Faith and Honour, owning the Act (as really 'twas) his own, to force me on a Match I loath'd and hated. At this Octavio sensibly was touch'd, and bore a friendly part in my Misfortune, but Love was banish'd, all that Stock he swore could never be exhaust∣ed, now was spent, and I was then reduc'd to sordid Pity: Nothing could move a kind Consent to see me, his Heart was absolutely now another's; for tho' upon the Fall of poor Alcidas he fled, to seek a noble Death, entirely despising Thoughts of Life, resistless
Beauty, that o'erweighs the World, and bal∣lances bright Virtue with a Bubble, with her engaging Charms seiz'd on his wandring Soul, and laid her strict Commands on him to live; he could not view a Mistress so abu∣sed, nor stand the Test of my severe Reproa∣ches; nor would he wed the Woman for whose sake his Hands had been imbrew'd in that dear Blood; or rather 'twas his new∣born Flame prevail'd, to make him quit the Seat of his Confusion, and seek a Sanctuary of Repose on the soft Bosom of his chosen Bride. Within six Weeks he went from Madrid, to prosecute his last-establish'd Love; nor were there any Offers could reclaim him: Which News the Viscount would have hid from me, but oh! I had too true Intelligence, Reason kept Argus Watch, tho' Love was blind; nor could my hundred Eyes be all deluded, too obvious was this last ungrateful part for me to be deceiv'd, or Heaven to pardon. I scorn'd myself, that I could not contemn the Man that had so slighted and abused me; but, oh! impossible, I lov'd to that degree, not all my Wrongs had influ∣ence to reclaim; still I ador'd, still languish'd to retain the most perfidious Wretch that ever breath'd; in vain I sigh'd, in vain de∣plor'd the loss of all my Hopes, the false Octavio, in whom I yet discern'd Ten thou∣sand
Thus you have heard the Fate of poor Canace, the most unhappy Maid that ever lov'd; hitherto all my Life has been one Plague, and what I am to suffer will be great, since now the utmost prospect of my Hope is Bankrupt to that last and wretched point of learning how to bear with Resignation. Don Lelio, who had given strict attention to the relation of this mournful Tale, look'd on the lovely Innocent, who wept, and weep∣ing pierc'd the Souls of those that heard her, like April showrs in Tears she mourn'd, which like the Heavenly Dew drop'd from her Eyes and veil'd the lustre of those beautious Orbs, and, like an Evening Zephirus, her Sighs whispering their murmuring Accents through the Air, wrought the Inanimates unto com∣passion. Thus Sorrow in its Splendor did appear, all moving, all transporting, all en∣gaging, melting the tender Hearts of the Spe∣ctators, who gazing on the melancholy Maid, suffer'd the charming Object so to please, they never thought to interrupt her Grief, till they beheld her fall into a Swoon. Melantius, all o'er Pity and Concern, was rushing from his Covert to her succour, when he perceiv'd Don Lelio clasp her close, laying her Head upon his panting Bosom, and chaffing gently with his Hands her Tem∣ples, this application summon'd back her life,
which by degrees assum'd the glorious form, dispersing through her dying Face a Bloom that warm'd the very Heavens with Desire, and gave such Satisfaction to Don Lelio, that catching her with Rapture in his Arms, he cry'd, Cease, cease, my dearest Friend, to be perplex'd, Octavio may and shall be still thy own, if Time and your Disease will now permit. Wonders! 'tis Wonders that I have to tell you. At this Melantius did again retire, who otherwise was going to appear, and make an offering of himself to serve them. The faint∣ing Maid, recover'd by this Speech, rub'd off the Chagreen of all her Woe, and earnestly compos'd herself to hear; the which Don Lelio having well observ'd, most readily pro∣ceeded in this manner: The History of Aspatia. LET not an empty Name incurr your Rage, nor be you too too partial in Re∣sentment, then I'll confess myself to be Aspa∣tia, that very same Aspatia you distrust, yet Honour with so high a Character, she whom blind Fortune took delight to jilt, and make the Pastime of her fickle Humour; she who has met with too severe a Curse; yet con∣scious of no weighty Sin but Love, your Ri∣val
once, for evermore your Friend, if you will generously embrace the Offer; for know, it was my unexperienc'd years gave me that Title, and not Inclination, Gratitude may sometimes be mistook for Passion; no more was mine no farther my Concern: But I'll not dare to justifie Octavio; he who insensi∣bly abandons Charms the greatest Monarch would be proud to boast of, can no way make addition to a Crime, of which the World most justly will accuse him: Yet since 'twas you that first engag'd his Heart, and taught it how to love, and to resent, Pity a Mad-man's Frenzy, 'tis no more, and let me plead for him who is my Ruin. At this she paus'd, and gave Ariosto time to view her with Amazement, and Disorder, Fear, Hope; and Jealousie at once attack'd, and batter'd her with fierce Artillery; she look'd upon her sometimes as a Foe, sometimes a Friend, and knows not which to think her, but prudently her Judgment did suspend, till she had heard the sequel of the Story. Never till now Melantius was so lost, to see Aspatia by him in that habit, within the compass of his Arms, there in a Country de∣solate, remote, far from her noble Father and Relations, weeping to craggy Rocks and sensless Trees, far from that Princely Splen∣dor once she us'd to grace the Courts and Palaces of Lisbon, where glorious Captives
waited at her Feet, proud to be chose to do some little Service, and where he had ima∣gin'd her in all the Gaiety of Youth and Pleasure, triumphing o'er a Crowd of bleed∣ing Hearts, stabbing by Frowns, transporting by her Smiles, beyond the Wishes of fanta∣stick Woman: What could this mean? by what strange Miracle found he Aspatia, on the Verge of Naples? That sprightly Beau∣ty that enslav'd the World, tracing a soli∣tary Grove in Sorrow, wasting the Treasure of her Youth in Exile; oh! how amazed, how Thunder struck was he, to see that un∣expected killing Object, the Mistress of his Soul before his Eyes, with all those Charms that made him first her Captive! her whom he unadvisedly abandon'd, whose very Me∣mory he once contriv'd to banish, too late alas! he found he was deceiv'd, found that the Gods had Interest in her Cause, and took peculiar care to make it prosper; 'twas hard∣ly he gave credit to his Eyes, but really did believe he saw a Vision, wishing perpetual Sleep to charm his Senses, still to retain that dear deluding Phantasm; but when he re∣collected from that Thought, and found each Faculty was sound and perfect, his Wonder and Confusion did encrease, to know what God, what Fate had brought her thither: All angry Resentments left his Breast, inspi∣red by Wishes and Love's softer Fire, the
little God sate playing in her Eyes and shew'd him all the Pleasure, not the Pain, of dazling Rapture and more fond Desire, inviting him by all those little Arts that first betray'd his easie tranquil Mind to the subjection of his wanton Snares, to curse his Rigour, yet adore his Power: Once more he triumphs o'er his bleeding Heart, shot thick his Arrows, and secur'd his Throne, tickled him with the Feathers of his Dart, till unperceiv'd he fell upon the Steel, and smiling at his Wound, suck'd in the Poyson. Don Lelio's Dress did render him more fair, exposing Beauties that were made to conquer; Charms that had been conceal'd lay open now, Limbs the most regular and most surprizing. Lost in a mighty Extasie, he gaz'd, dying and languishing for the pos∣session; not one past Injury did grate his Soul, or discompose its ravish'd Entertain∣ment; Resentment fled beyond the very Clouds, and buried all his Wrongs in dark Oblivion. The Nymph, all chast and inno∣cent, did look youthful, engaging, beautiful and tempting, and to his Eyes appear'd with∣out a blemish: None but his wretched self he did accuse and tax with too much Folly and Credulity, who rashly had forsook, for the first Fault, the most deserving Creature in the World: If she had Sence, he knew she must resent it, and therefore was distracted
with his Fears, how to retrieve the Interest he had lost: With Looks unguarded, and unbounded Thoughts, he gave away the rem∣nant of his Soul, each wandring Faculty, caught by surprize, was made a second and substantial Conquest, prompt by Distrust and violent Desire, his breaking Heart no longer could resist, but was just falling at her Feet for Mercy, when the distressed fair One thus broke silence, and Curiosity stop'd his pro∣ceeding: That I am Daughter to the Duke Antonio de Almeyda, I blush to own, having the least deserv'd that worthy Lot, and most abused my Interest in that Name: My Mother, who deriv'd from no inconsiderable Branch of the Piacenze's Dukes, had all Advantages that could compleat a Beauty; for, besides the rare Perfections of her Person, she had Wit, Fortitude, Judgment, and Virtue, which be∣got her the Applause, Admiration, and Esteem of all that knew her: she was universally a∣dor'd, and industriously sought for by all the neighbouring Princes in Italy; nor did a Stranger pass throughout the Country, that made it not his chiefest care to see the fine Charlott, so was she call'd. Amongst the rest, it was the Duke d' Al∣meyda's chance (who was just then come to that Title by the Death of his Father) to travel through Parma, where she then resi∣ded;
he resolv'd not to quit the City till he had a sight of this lovely celebrated Beauty, which was no hard matter for a Man of his Quality. He saw, and was convinc'd, gave up his Freedom at the fatal View, and ever after own'd himself her Slave. Their Amour was romantick and enter∣taining, but too tedious to recite here, there∣fore passing over all Preliminaries, we arrive at their Nuptials, which was very noble and magnificent, with splendid Masques, Balls and Tournaments, wherein all the youthful Nobility assembl'd, and perform'd diversity of Gallantries: Three years after Marriage the Duke stay'd in that Country, by the In∣tercession of his Wife, who found no small. Regret to leave her Native Soil; but at length, urg'd by necessity of some weighty Affairs, wherein the Duke had been a very considerable Loser, they were forc'd on their Journey at a very inconvenient time for my Mother, who was then eight months gone with Child of me, Heaven had already bless'd them with a Son, whose graceful Aspect pro∣mis'd early Virtues: Not much above one year they had enjoy'd him, when they set forward towards Portugal; they met with a pleasant Land-Journey, and embarqued with as fair a Prospect, but that over-ruling Power that finds it expedient sometimes to dash our sweetest Cups with Gall, presented them a
too too bitter Draught, which when com∣pel'd by Fate, there's no Man can resist. They were within some few hours sail of shore, when the Heavens overcast, and a dreadful Storm arose, which prov'd only a direful Omen of their Misfortunes, for in less than half an hour it clear'd again to pleasant calmness and serenity; when from the Top∣mast-head they 'spied a Ship that gave them chace, with all the sail that she could make they crowded down upon them; they were in some consternation and surprize, but the Duke, whose noble Soul could ne'r admit of Fear, took all the most convenient methods for defence that the short time would give him leave. Now, by the nigh approach, to their Perplexity, they discern'd her to be a famous Pyrate, who for many years had scou∣red those Seas; no way they had to escape, for their Adversary having the Wind, soon boarded them. The Duke at this time per∣form'd Wonders, but having few Assistants besides his own Attendants, and not being well provided for what so little was expected, after a stout defence, which startled much the Pyrates, by desperate Multitudes he was re∣puls'd: They being now the Masters of the Ship, grew insolent, and rifled all their Trea∣sure, clapping the Sailors under Hatches, and making all their Prize. My Mother, who had endur'd all the violence of Fears and
Terrour, at this last Scene of immediate Death or Slavery, fell with the direful Ima∣gination into a Swoon. The Duke being luc∣kily by, receiv'd her in his Arms, and altho' his Reflections did present him with too clear a Prospect of their Woe, he us'd all the In∣dulgence and tender Applications that could recover her, and encourage her to bear Fae with a Patience worthy of herself. It was a considerable time before he was convinc'd she liv'd, and the fatal demonstration serv'd but to involve him in a greater Doubt; for the warm Perswasions he had whisper'd, summo∣ned back some fleeting Hopes, and untimely disclos'd her Eyes, to be a Spectator of young Frederick (their only Child) and his Nurse, just forc'd on board the Pyrate. This Sight renews her former Grief, and sunk her with the weight of Desperation: Nor was the Duke, with all his Fortitude, now in conditi∣on to address a Comfort, he saw his Wife expiring at his Feet, his Child a Captive to insulting Villains, and he the sinking Prop that should relieve them; Love, Pity, Cha∣rity divides his Breast, and equally demands his kind Assistance, but all the Means was taken from his Hands, and he had nothing left but his bare Wishes, which was reduc'd to wish himself, and his dear Wife, next Prey, that they might suffer all together. Whilst he stood in this Extremity of
Care, a violent and unexpected Hurricane a∣rose, and separated the Ships, which lay gra∣pled together, the fury of the Tempest drove them so fast, that in short time they lost sight of each other: The Seamen, who were very industrious at their Plunder, were most of them in the Long-boat, conveying off their Booty, and but two at this time left on board the Duke, abject Rascals, who finding their Necessity, meanly were imploring for their Lives, but the Duke, who was wholly taken up with his Sorrow, had but just reason enough left to release his own Seamen, to whose Mer∣cy he left them, and from whose hand they receiv'd their Deaths, whilst he imploy'd him∣self in the recovery of my Mother: Grief, and the cruel Sufferings she underwent had taken full possession of her Heart, and it was with great difficulty they kept her Soul and Body together, till they made a Port in Al∣garves, call'd Tavila, where she had not been two days, but she was deliver'd of me, some∣time before the usual season, and deliver'd up her Life at the same minute: My Father was the most afflicted Man in the World, and had it not been in consideration of me, which oblig'd him to preserve his Life, in care to mine, he hardly had surviv'd my Mother. He stay'd not long after the Funeral-Rites, but took me, with my Nurse, to a House he has near Ville-Neuove, where he liv'd a dis∣engag'd
and retired Life, till I attained the Years of Fourteen, at which time he thought it convenient to introduce me into the World, that I might be the better capable of acting for my self: We then remov'd to Lisbon, where we liv'd with all the Gran∣deur that could render an advantage to my blooming Years, I had the Priviledge of vi∣siting the Court, and some publick Places, which, in a short time, got me not a few Admirers. The Duke was willing to see me well disposed of, and incouraged those of the most Illustrious Families, and of the greatest Characters, for me to make my Choice; but I being only taken with the Gallantry and Address, liv'd with a cold Indifference to the Sex, and could not be prevail'd upon to Marry. It was at this time, that my small Beauty gained some little Fame at Lisbon, when Octavio appear'd at Court, and was gene∣rally reported, a Noble Cavalier, but one whose nice Virtues were eclipsed by a pro∣found Melancholly, there lack'd not those who imputed it to Love, and apply'd it to several of our Beauties, yet knew no more then from their bare Opinion; he had the good luck to be particularly receiv'd amongst the Ladies; and I confess my self, that of∣ten I have view'd him with some Pleasure: He had something in his Aspect that attract∣ed
all Eyes, and something in his Dispositi∣on so engaging, that there was no beholding him with bare Indifference; yet mine was Admiration, and not Love, which after∣wards I was too dear convinc'd of: Several small Services I had receiv'd, which past with me but as his common Humour, till a more evident Address too fatally inform'd me; Madrigals, Songs, and Billet-doux, he sent; by Night with Sighs and Serenades he entertain'd me; by these and a thousand o∣ther ways, he oft declared the Message of his Heart, which found more free access in∣to my Breast, then all the Gallantry I knew before; yet I had Conduct to conceal my Thoughts, and gave him not the least In∣couragement, but rather seem'd vext at his ill plac'd Passion; some Months pass'd on with this Amusement, without much Love, or much Consideration, till daily Services inhaunced the Store of mighty Favours, that I began to fear the Payment; hitherto he had no access into our House, and found it difficult to gain my Presence, till a most fam'd remarkable Exploit, gave him a fair, and plausible Pretension: One Day at a famous Match of Hunting, where most of the Nobility (then residing at Lisbon) participated of the Diversion, Ladies as well as Men, were in the Field to see the Pastime, and partake of the Chace, I
being mounted on a fierce Arrabian Cour∣ser, followed the Game with earnest satisfa∣ction; my Inclination to those Country Sports, and the Rural Life I had been used to, gave me opportunity to make my self a compleat Horse-woman: I was now hot in pursuance of the Chace, and gave full Reins to my Horse, without consideration, when a Servant followed me to deliver a Tablet I had dropt, which I turning back to receive, just as I was at the brink of a rapid River, and not checking my speed, the Horse not being used to boggle at any opposition, took the Water, and before I could recover, plung'd into the Stream, where with the vi∣olence of the Flood, and strugling of the Beast, I lost my Saddle, and was left float∣ing. All that saw this Accident, were in great Consternation how to deliver me from the danger, yet was cautious of themselves, but the Duke my Father, urg'd by his Paternal Love and Care, desperately pursued me in∣to the River, where instead of preserving me, he met with the same Misfortune, and we had like to have sunk together, had not the Brave Octavio, (who was then on the top of a Bridge built over the Stream) seeing our Distress, quited his Horse, and like Per∣sius, or some Guardian Deity leapt in to save us: The Event answered his Design, for
after some little strugling, he recovered us both, and swam with us out in each Hand in Triumph. This God-like Action begot Admiration in all the Spectators, but for our parts, that had not yet sence to know our Safety, or Deliverer, stupid, and half dead, we were conveyed to a Grange within view, where the best means was used to recover us: And here Octavio's Gallantry was more observa∣ble, in refusing to shift his Cloaths till he was confirm'd we lived. From these generous Actions, (after the Recovery of a dangerous Sickness it gave us both) Octavio became the Darling Friend of the Duke, and their Intimacy grew so remarkable, that it was a great Chance to find them separate; a long while Octavio was so brave to stifle all his Hopes, with feigned Indifference, being loath to urge the mighty Obligation, till Love, resistless Love overcame his Will, and added greater hopes to gratifie his Passion, no longer could he bare the hard Restraint, but willing to im∣prove his fleeting Hours, began a more so∣lemn Court then ever yet he had pretended to. From my Youth, and Unexperience, and the particular Esteem I had ever found for Octavio, I was inclinable to believe I Lo∣ved, he being the first Man that could ever warm me into a Liking, and considering the
Duke was just upon the Design of Marrying me, Gratitude, and some small Inclination, made me not violent to oppose a Flame, I thought I could better dispence with than a∣ny; but the Duke, since the Misfortune of his Wife and Son, having fixt his future Bliss, and utmost Hopes in me, and lived Unmarried to make me Great and Fortu∣nate, could not bare the Thoughts of my Separation to another Kingdom; and I re∣ally believe there was nothing but Octavio's being a Stranger, disappointed his Wishes; he declined it with all the Complisance in the World, conferring daily Favours on him, and generous Offers to compensate, if possible, for the Lives he had received at his Hands, without so dear an Acknowledg∣ment, not forgetting prviate Commands to me, not to allow or encourage his Address: but I, from the Duke's Affection to him, not expecting this Repulse, had rashly ad∣vanced too far, and tho' it was not difficult for my Heart to recant, yet Duty oblig∣ed me to refer my self to my Father, and Honour to excuse my self under the same pretext to him. Affairs were in this manner between us, when Octavio was summoned Home to Ma∣drid, which he evaded a long time, nor would not depart till I had promised him, if he could gain the Duke's Consent, he should
not fail of mine; we had private Enterviews by the Assistance of my Maid, where through his Intercession, I assented to a Correspondence during his Absence, for the grateful Sentiments I had entertained of him fince his rescuing us from Death, made it dif∣sicult for me to deny him any reasonable Request. With these Assurances, tho' not without great Regret, he set forward his Journey; I was not under the easiest Circumstances when we parted, but Time, and a more dear, yet cruel Remedy, soon disingag'd those Cares. Melantius, Son to the Marquess de Le∣ganes, just return'd from his Studies, (a young Cavalier, Charming as a God, Beautiful to a Wonder, Wise as Apollo; Just, Heroick, Affable and Courteous, Gallant and Enga∣ging; a Face, a Shape, and Wit form'd for Love and Success:) (Heavens! I Rave) be∣came my Lover. Then, and not till then, my panting Heart, learnt to distinguish a real Passion, from that of an imaginary En∣gagement. Gods! With what new Fire was my Breast enflam'd, and how exquisite was the dear sence of all my Joys and Doubts; and how different from the feeble warmth I felt before? But to Behold him was too great a Bliss: To hear him Speak, or Touch him, was a Heaven of boundless
Pleasures, and thrilling Satisfaction, and to imagine more, was not to live. Scarce had she ended this last Accent with a Sigh, but Melantius (charm'd to an un∣expressible degree, flung himself at her Feet, (forgeting all past Jealousies and Fears) throughly convinc'd of his Mistake, with eager Kisses he devour'd her Hand, sigh'd on her Knees, and panting on her Breast, assoon as e'er his Passion would give leave, with a transported Joy, he burst into these words: Be false! Be vain! if possible you can; still, still I am born to Love and to A∣dore you. Aspatia thus luckily and strangely surpri∣zed, could hardly give a credit to her Sen∣ses, and it appear'd incredible to all, a too substantial Blessing to be real, Dumb with Amazement, silently they gazed, and gave themselves intirely up to Wonder: But A∣spatia, whose more particular Interest had involved her in a thousand doubtful Appre∣hensions, had much ado to recover from the Agitation, either excess of Joy or Fear had drove her to. As soon as she was convinc'd by the tender Imbraces of her Lover, that it was no Illusion, she fain would have assum'd a Neglect and Resentment equivolent to the Injuries she had receiv'd, but Inclination, and Reflection that he had took her at too
critical an advantage to impose an Affectati∣on, she dispens'd with Form, and raising him from the Ground, with Eyes all Love and languishing, she said, Rise to my Arms, thou dear, thou cruel Man, and once again receive thy own Aspatia. Melantius sprung at the Invitation to the Bosom of the Fair, which was panting him a Welcome, where in equal Raptures, they were a long time Clasp'd, till Aspatia's Curiosity (to know by what prodigious Chance, they had so wonderfully met) rous'd her. Melantius, after a Complement to Don Ariosto (whom he saluted by the Name of Canace, giving her to understand he had overheard her Sto∣ry, and wishing her as quick a turn of For∣tune) and some kind notice of Carlo (whom he discovered was the trusty Laura) gave them a punctual and diverting Narrative of his Life, from his quitting Portugal, to that happy Minute. By this time a Reconciliation and Intima∣cy was seal'd on all hands, and their Sto∣machs giving them a Summons, they ad∣journ'd to the Cabbin, referring the Con∣clusion of Aspatia's Story to the Afternoon; which when she had finish'd, and Melantius was confirm'd his Mistress had been Con∣stant, transported at the News, he prest returning Home, that they at once might satisfie their Parents, and compleat their
own Felicity: Aspatia, weary of that way of living, required no perswasions to a thing she already was impatient to put in execu∣tion. Don Ariosto, who had determined never to leave Aspatia, was doubly now in∣duced to accompany them to a place, where probably she might retrieve her Lover; only desiring the Liberty to continue the Habit she was then in, till some fair occasion presented for her to change it. Thus being agreed, Melantius took leave for that Night, that he might discharge himself from his Command in the Army, and early the next Morning return'd with Montal, whom he order'd with Speed to provide for their Departure; where we will leave them on that Design, and return to Octavio, whom we left almost Expiring. Grief, Disappointments, and the Anguish of Octavio's Wound, had reduc'd him to a violent Feavor, which daily increasing to the hazard of his Life, it was thought ex∣pedient, to send for a Priest to perform the last good Office: Adrian a Franciscan Fryar in the Neighbourhood, a pious and judicious Man, heard his Confession; after which Introduction, he became a constant Visiter; something in Octavio's Person won his Soul, and he resolved with care and diligence to serve him; his Distress and ill Accommoda∣tion mov'd him with Compassion. This
Kindness was observ'd by poor Octavio, who as far as his Ability, made a grateful Return. The good Humour and Sanctity of Father Adrian, had begot so great an Esteem in Octavio, that at Intervals he made him his Confident; and now finding himself grow worse, he trusted him to acquaint the Vis∣count Bozzolos, where, and under what Cir∣cumstance he was, which a long time he had been a Stranger to. Upon the first no∣tice the good old Viscount, fearing the Deso∣lation of his Family, and inevitable Ruine of all his Joys, made no stay for reply, but without consideration of the Fatigue, got all things ready, and the next Day set Sail for Portugal; the Ship put into the Port of Velle-Neue for Water, and the Viscount impatient to see Octavio, tho 'twas with more trouble to a Man of his Age, yet for more dispatch, resolved to perform the reft of his Journey on that less dangerous Ele∣ment: He took but the respite of the Night, and the next Morning mounted Horse for Porto, with Alacrity and Speed, he set for∣ward, being attended for twelve Miles to∣gether with a cool Breeze that render'd the blushing Cheeks of Aurora very refreshing: About this time he arrived in a pleasant Vale, (where the Duke de Almeyda, and the Marquess de Leganes were a Hunting) the Viscount's Horse starting at the approach
Peace, and took care, as much as possible, to conceal my concern from her; but when I found my self opprest, took Horse, and under pretence of taking the Air, privately indulg'd my Sorrow. In one of these melancholly Humours, as I was moving along the Shore, by the vast Billows that came rolling in upon me, and the mountainous height of the swelling Sur∣ges; I rais'd my Eyes that were fixt on the Ground, to contemplate that Emblem of the impetuous Storm in my Breast, when I perceived a Vessel strugling with the Wind, endeavouring with all her Skill to plow her Passage to the Island of Sicily, whilst the swelling Seas repuls'd her Course, and the rapid Waves forc'd her back as fast: This Contest of the angry Floods, and the Sai∣lers Task to oppose 'em, took up my Thoughts, till I saw the raging Tempest rush the shattered Vessel on the Sands be∣fore me, where Waves after Waves dasht on her Sides with their resistless force, start∣ing the Planks, and leaving Breaches that unsatiably receiv'd the Torrents that pour∣ed in, till Drunk with the Deluge, she tum∣bled down, and sunk with her Freight and most of her Men; Despair or Hopes made some attempt to stem the Tempest, others to catch at Planks, but all in vain, none could float to Shoar, but unable to sustain the Conquering Main, sunk in the Gulph to
the Stygian Lake; except a few, whose luckier Thoughts had prompted them to se∣cure the Long-Boat, and with great diffi∣culty saved their Lives. I made up to the place where they Land∣ed, being curious to know their Circum∣stance, and found they were all Sailers; but one who was their Captain, and a Boy about a Year old, very Beautiful and richly Clad; I was strangely taken with the Child, who infinitely resembled mine, and enquir'd his Birth and Country; but they very rea∣dily told me, That therein they could not satisfie me, for they knew not themselves, confessing they were Pirats, and that in their Course towards Portugal, had met with a considerable Prize, and again lost it in the late Wrack; their Child they imagined to be by its Splendour a Nobleman's aboard the Ship they Plunder'd, but whose they could not tell; for being suddenly separated by a furious Storm, they had not time to secure more than the Child and his Nurse, who either for fear or spite dyed in half an hour after she was taken; the Child was pre∣served in hopes of Ransom, or rather Provi∣dence design'd him for a better Fate. The Duke de Almeyda, who had attend∣ed with violent Emotions this part of the Story, was no longer able to forbear inter∣rupting him, but with an insupportable A∣gony, and the most violent Concern in the
World, he enquired what Fortune since had attended that instant: The Viscount won∣dering at his Disturbance, only made answer, I hope he Lives; and began to examine, if he had any Interest in such a Loss? The Duke in Tears briefly related his Misfor∣tunes; his Ship-wrack, the Death of his Wife, and loss of his Child; which being ended, he prest with all violence to know if he had no Mark, no Remnant of his Cloaths, by which he might be convinc'd of his Hopes. The Viscount having earnestly heard him, reply'd, How glad am I, and how ea∣sily shall I depart this Life, since I leave my Octavio so brave, so good a Father, for I am more than perswaded he is your real Son, look on this Signet; took from off his Neck, wherein a handsome Cypher is ingraved, and call it to remembrance if you can. No sooner had the Duke survey'd it, but with all the Joy imaginable he cry'd out, Thou infallible Oracle of Truth, I am now confirm'd from these dear Characters which contain the Names of my self and Wife, that it is the same young Frederick wore, when he was Ravish'd from us; and thou my Guardian Angel, let me know, by what strange Providence you have preserv'd the first dear Pledge of all my sacred Vows, that in my trembling Arms I may receive the happy Au∣thor of my future Peace, and pant upon thy Breast ten thousand Blessings, before my joy∣ful Soul expire with Transport.
The Viscount much surpriz'd at this Dis∣covery, and much pleas'd to find he had fo∣stered such a Noble Off-spring, proceeded to his Relation. Sir, (said he) this Child I Ransom'd from the Pirats, with no inconsiderable Sum of Gold, and with an unusual satisfaction bore him Home with me, where having told the whole Adventure, it was look'd upon as a particular Regard Heaven had of my Inte∣rest, and therefore had thus miraculously sent this Child to propagate my Name and Family, in lieu of that I had lost; my Wife being from some Reasons so possess'd by the Physicians, to be past hopes of more, it seem'd plausible to me, and from a wonderful Affe∣ction I had took to the Child, I was incli∣nable to believe it the Decree of Heaven, and immediately with the Consent of my Wife, Adopts him; and from his strange re∣semblance of my own, nam'd him after the Deceas'd Octavio: This was manag'd with all prudent Care and Privacy, and had the good luck never to be suspected, which was a great Satisfaction to all but my Wife, whom it had a quite different Effect on, for the mighty Pleasure she saw us take in the early Virtues of that Infant, rack'd her with Imaginations of the double Joys she had received from her own; which her Humble, Modest Disposition endeavouring to conceal from me, for want of Redress in time, broke her Heart.
From hence the Viscount miss'd not a tittle of Octavio's Life, to that of Fryar Adrian's sending for him to a place near Porto, where Melantius left him wounded: I was hasting thither (said he) when I met with this ill ac∣cident, which now I bear with less regret, since it has procured me your acquaintance, and dis∣cover'd so happy a Secret: concluding it was alwaies his Design before he died, to tell Octavio of his obscure Birth, that he might esteem himself doubly engag'd to the Inte∣rest of the Bozzoo's, (that had chose him when Fate had reduc'd him to the station of a Plebean) as likewise to put him upon some glorious Attempt, to demonstrate to the World, that his Birth was noble, which he ever believ'd, tho' till that lucky minute could never be convinc'd of: Notwithstand∣ing (said he) I have made it my search this five and twenty years, I wonder'd much I ne'r could find it out; for besides the token of this Cypher, and his swadling Clothes, he has that infallible Mark. In haste the Duke did inter∣rupt him there, A Star my Frederick bears upon his Breast. The same has my Octavio, cry'd the Viscount. Not till this period did the Duke recollect how much this long Dis∣course might discompose the Viscount, and being throughly convinc'd, and overjoy'd at this Discovery; caressing him with all the Gratitude imaginable he left him to Repose. Immediately he order'd his Coach to fetch
Octavio, waiting with violent impatience his arrival. By this time Octavio was pretty well recover'd, and not hearing from the Viscount, was preparing with all expedition for Italy, when the Duke's Orders arrived: He knew not what to think of the Invitation, but knowing the Duke to be in all respects the most nice in Honour, he could not ap∣prehend a Trick; besides, the Equipage and Address had too good a face of Friendship to be cover'd with Deceit; he scorns to distrust, and resolves to comply, and in order to that acquaints his Friend Adrian with this Sum∣mons, desiring he would accompany him; Adrian readily consented, and they set for∣ward on their Journey. They were no soo∣ner arriv'd, but the Duke met Octavio with Tears of Joy, telling him, That Providence had put it in his power to compensate a little for the Favours he had receiv'd from him, for Heaven, in some small Capacity had made him the happy Instrument of serving his Fa∣ther, who in his speed to visit him had broke his Leg, and now lay dangerously ill in his House, at whose request he had sent for him, (he fear'd) to take his last Farewel. Octavio return'd the Duke the heartiest Thanks Gratitude could frame; and having curs'd his Stars and Destiny, for drawing in∣to such Troubles all that he lov'd or valued, he beg'd to be conducted to his Father; the Duke himself was his Guide, who drew open
the Curtains, and presented him to the Vi∣scount. Octavio soon recall'd him to remem∣brance, tho' his Sickness had much transfor∣med him, and falling on his Knees, implor'd his Blessing, and then religiously beg'd Hea∣ven for his Recovery. He desir'd him to at∣tribute the Misfortunes he had brought to his Relations and Friends, as the heaviest Plague on his own Head, it being the Decree of Heaven, and not within his power to avert. The Viscount embraced him with all ten∣derness, and after a pious Benediction, told him, 'twas easie to forgive him any thing, so great was his Paternal Care and Love; his joy was mighty for his Welfare, which he de∣monstrated by no common satisfaction. But now (said he) prepare, my dear Octa∣vio, to hear a most surprizing, unexpected Story; you are no more my Son; turn to the Duke, and pay that due Obedience, to that most glorious Author of your being; but when I am dead and gone, (as soon I ear I shall) with grateful thoughts remember how I lov'd you. This Speech confounded so Octa∣vio, that he began to think his Brain distem∣per'd; but the Duke not having patience to wait longer, fell on his Neck, and told him it was true: he sent immediately for the Mar∣quess de Leganes, and Father Adrian, to whom at large he did relate each circum∣stance the Viscount had told him, as well as that of his own Knowledge; which agreeing
so exactly, even to the Mark on his left side, it soon put the reality beyond dispute. This when Octavio heard, and was so well convin∣ced of, with all submission he addressed him∣self to his new Father, who received him in his Arms with exquisite delight, pouring forth Blessings on him, and confirming him his by the Name of Frederick, which Name for the future he order'd him to assume. Frederick, after this, applied himself to the Viscount, professing all Acknowledgments a generous Soul could shew for such unparallel'd Fa∣vours: He told him he would still esteem him as a Parent, serve and obey him with the Duty of a Son, and to the World declare his noble Usage. This News was soon dispers'd thro' Por∣tugal, and every one congratulated the Duke's good Fortune: But poor Frederick's Soul was so oppress'd with Sorrow, that all the Satis∣faction he receiv'd stom this Discovery, was, that since his Birth had doubtful been, he prov'd a Branch of such a noble Stock, and luckily was hinder'd from adding to his ma∣ny Sins, by marrying of his Sister: But the Blood of Alcidas lay so heavy on his Breast, he ne'r had Hopes of any real Comfort, there∣fore was under much concern, that these Af∣fairs had prevented his design of leading a Monastick Life, which his own Desire and Fryar Adrian's Advice did prompt him to, by way of Expiation for the Murder of his
Friend. 'Twas with these Hopes he kept the Fryar with him, flattering himself, that one day he should have an Opportunity to put in execution what he so much desir'd. This he resolved, but otherwise Fate de∣creed; for in an Evening, to compleat their Joy, (some three months after this Discove∣ry, which minutes he melancholy had pass'd) enter'd the Room (where they were all as∣sembled) Melant us, Aspatia, Canace, (in her Cavaliers Dress) Laura and Montal; which unexpected Guests amazed them all: Their Wonder was so great, that for some time they gaz'd confusedly upon each other, without the power of moving or of speaking. Aspatia first broke silence, who prostrate at her Fa∣ther's Feet, with all the Rhetorick that she could use, desir'd his Pardon: The good In∣dulgent Duke o'erflow'd with joy to see his Daughter: her Pardon easily upon her Lips he seal'd, and raising her from off the ground, cried, Welcome my dear Aspatia. With no less joy the Marquess de Leganes saw and receiv'd Melantius, and declar'd Heaven show'd so strong a hand in all these Revolutions, that they were both convinc'd 'twas so decreed by Providence, to make the Event successful to them all. During this time Canace was all Anxiety, striving to bear an equal part be∣fore her Lover, whose Eyes she found more lovely now than ever. From their first entrance her Eyes re
fixt upon him, and hardly could she stop the violent sallies of her Jealousie, altho' she knew Aspatia was his Sister, which they had been inform'd of on their Journey, the Fame of so remarkable a thing having rung throughout the Kingdom. Curious was the Interview between Frede∣rick and his Sister; his Passion now was no∣bly turn'd to Friendship, and he could gaze upon her without love; he confess'd the Pain and misery that all-along had waited on that Flame, had sufficiently reveng'd his Baseness to Canace, whom he still own'd the Mistress of his Soul; but Revenge, a rash Vow, and the Contempt she had baffled him with (as he imagin'd) made him so violent in his last Amour; but now he finds 'twas manag'd by an unseen Power, who by hidden ways, be∣yond our comprehension, easily brings the darkest things to light. That power (replied Aspatia) we are all oblig'd to, who by this Dis∣covery had prevented wondrous Mischief, that must have ensued; and now there remains no more to compleat an universal Happiness but the fair, the constant, the virtuous Canace. At this Don Frederick blush'd, and sighing said, Tho' I can love sincerely none but her, yet by a direful Imprecation I have rashly made, Gods, that I live to speak it! she never can be mine. Canace, who had heard with pleasure the most part of this Discourse, felt so violent an effect of Passion at this Part, that, unable to
repel its force, she fell into a Swoon. All run to the assistance of the young Cavalier, and wonder'd at the occasion of his sudden Illness. Aspatia thinking it a fair opportunity to dis∣cover her, readily reveals both Person and Disease; he was sensibly concern'd, the Com∣pany joyning in her behalf, representing her matchless Love and Constancy, he took her in his Arms, (who was but just reviv'd) and pressing her upon his panting Breast, with a Sigh that almost burst his Heart, he cry'd, Ʋnless 'tis possible to call my Friend Alcidas from the Grave, I cannot wed Canace. Adrain, who till now had been a bare Spe∣ctator, thought it high time to act his part; and in order to it, having demanded an at∣tention, pull'd off a Beard and false Eye∣brows, which hitherto he had wore for a Disguise; and with a Smile took Frederick by one Hand, and Canace by the other, told them, That Heaven, in regard of their mu∣tual Affection, had rais'd Acidas from the Dead to do that Friendly Office for them. All that knew him formerly were convine'd 'twas the same, and was more astonished at this Adventure, then all that had happened to them before; but Frederick still doubtful of his good Fortune, had scarce Faith to credit what he saw, not daring to give way to any Joy, least he should meet a Disap∣pointment. Alcidas observing this, ran to embrace him, and with a Voice that show'd
his mighty Joy, (he cry'd) Doubt not, my der Octavio, for now you hold with is your Arms your Real former Friend Alcidas, who now is throughly satisfy'd of the Contrition, for that unhappy Deed which Love, Despair, and Jealousie provokt you to; and since I have been the fatal Cause of your Misfortunes, I think it now my part to ask a Pardon. At this Fre∣derick being convinc'd, tho' with no small wonder receiv'd him with all the Joy and Satisfaction that Friendship, Love, or Gra∣titude could move; here all those nice Pun∣ctilio's that Emulation, Love, or Honour could inspire, did pass between these Gene∣rous, Noble Souls: Thus linkt in one ano∣ther's Arms with strict Embraces, they there confirm'd an everlasting Friendship. This Transport being over, Alcidas by the Company was prest to tell the Story of his strange Escape; who (after some Cere∣mony to the Presence, and a particular Ad∣dress to Canace, whom he intreated for a Reconciliation) he gratify'd with this Re∣lation: The History of Alcidas. AFter the fatal Blow I receiv'd under Ca∣nace's Window, by the Deluge of Blood that perued it, I was soon disabled from making any defence, but fell on the Spot,
and lay groveling in my Gore: I had just sence enough left to hear the unhappy Au∣thor lament my Fall, who soon after retir'd, leaving me for Dead. The Corigidore and his Son going their Rounds, perceived the Body, which knowing, and finding that I yet breath'd, out of Care for my Preserva∣tion, convey'd me to his own House, with∣out raising an Alarm, which would have ta∣ken up too much time; they stop'd my Blood, and I (after some other Applicati∣ons) recover'd my Senses, and immediately demanded, If they had secured any Body upon suspicion; they answer'd, None; but excus'd that Neglect from their Industry to preserve my Life; I easily forgave them, and having understood that none knew of my Misfortune but themselves; I Brib'd them to Secresie, desiring to continue con∣ceal'd in their House, till I saw what this unlucky Accident would produce, promising, if I was likely to Die, to discover as much as should take the Guilt off them; and if I liv'd to advance their Fortunes: They had formerly been Servants to my Family, and knew my Capacity of performing what I promised: Upon this Score (tho under pre∣tence of a powerful Ascendant I had over them) they swore a solemn Secrecy to my Commands, and likewise procur'd me a Chirurgeon, Skilful and very Faithful; thus I remain'd secure from suspicion in their
House; and was carefully conceal'd, during the publick Search: After which, happily recovering (tho not without great difficulty) my Eyes were open to the Follies of the World; I abhor'd my extravagant Passion, looking upon it as a vast Crime, being a Breach of our most sacred and solemn Friend∣ship, and the fatal Cause of those many Trou∣bles that ensued. This moral Reflection wrought so effectually with me, that from that moment I resolved to quit the Vanity of this World, and dedicate all my Love to Heaven, and the Remainder of my Days to the Expiation of my pondrous Sins; 'twas some Pleasure to me also when I reflected what a hearty Attonement this would prove for the Wrongs and Injuries I had done to my dear Octavio. I defer'd the Execution of my Vow some time, least some unhappy Wretch might suffer for my Death, were not I there to clear him; but all prospect of a Discovery being over, and the Unfortu∣nate Alcidas almost forgot, I found it a convenient time to Transport my self to Portugal, where I entred my self in a Con∣vent of Franciscans, and in due time took the Habit and Order. Having left a Charge with the Corigidore not to reveal any know∣ledge of me without my Order, unless the ha∣zard of any Man's Life requir'd the Discove∣ry, which Commands I find he has been very punctual in observing. And thus you have
heard the Fate of Alcidas, whom Heaven miraculously has preserv'd; no more to in∣terpose between your Joys, or be a Plague to any of your Hopes, but plac'd in a Sta∣tion, luckily to reconcile all Differences, to unite mutual Love, and cement your reci∣procal Contracts for ever. The Affability, Bravery, and Zeal wherewith Alcidas deliver'd this Discourse, and the Pleasure he shew'd, in hopes to be (after all the Misfor∣tunes he had caus'd) the happy Instrument to re∣concile them, mov'd every Heart with an extra∣ordinary sence of his Merit, and from the sincere Dictates of Love and Esteem, each address'd him a particular Congratulation; their Joy was unli∣mited, and there required no Perswasions to make an unanimous, Assent to gratifie their Ten∣derest Wishes; the fierce Sallies of our Heroes youthful Bloods could hardly be restrained within Bounds, nor could the subtilest Artifice conceal the Ladies Transports, whilst their becoming Blushes betray'd their Thoughts, and their dan∣cing Eyes discover'd their Impatience for the ap∣proaching Happiness; nothing but the Viscount's Illness was an Obstacle to their Bliss, for whose Recovery they waited; but he, the only Unfor∣tunate, having had the Pleasure of hearing this Relation, and the boundless Joy of once again seeing and receiving to his Bosome his dear Ca∣nace, on whom he confer'd ten thousand Bles∣sings; he had the Satisfaction to depart this Life in Peace, loaden with Honour, and with Years, leaving Frederick and she, the happy Possessors of a vast Inheritance. Sorrow for this Loss had something eclipsed the
Tranquility of every Breast, and defer'd their Joys, to pay a mournful Tribute to the blest Me∣mory of the Noble Deceas'd, living in as much Comfort as the occasion would permit, till a just time was expired for their Grief, when they con∣sented to enter the Lists of Matrimony, and A∣drian perform'd the Nuptial-Rites. I. Now does each Bridegroom's Face appear In Joy, which their warm Hearts express, Waiting for That they purchas'd dear, And Sighing, Languish to possess. II. The trembling Brides with wishing Eyes, By equal Love and Tears opprest, Long to secure the Noble Prize, But dare not, dare not think the rest. III. Thus to Compose the cruel Pain, That Dying Lovers oft endure, When all Endeavour is in vain, Hymen effects the mighty Cure. The Ceremony was very magnificent, and at Bed-time Adrian confess'd, That his Soul was so absolutely resign'd to Heaven, that he could see his Mistress in the Arms of his Friend without re∣gret. Where we will leave both Couple, 'tis pos∣sible, to Repose. The Curtains drawn, the rest must not be known, Inquire no more, the time may be your own. FINIS.
