M2762 E895_1 99863060 168423
COENA quasi ΚΟΙΝΗ: The New-INCLOSƲRES broken down, AND THE LORDS SUPPER Laid forth in common for all Church-members, having a Dogmatical Faith, and not being Scandalous: In a Diatribe, and Defence thereof: AGAINST The Apology of some Ministers, and Godly People, (as their owne Mouth praiseth them) asserting the lawfulness of their administring the LORDS SUPPER in a select Company: Lately set forth by their Prolocutor, Mr. HUMPHREY SAUNDERS. Written by WILLIAM MORICE of Werrington, in DEVON, Esq LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for Richard Thrale, and are to be sold at the Cross-Keyes at Paul's gate, entring into Cheap-side, M. DC. LVII.
Augustin. in Psal. 48. Concio. 1. Tom. 8. Pag. 93. EXigitur a manducante quod manducat, non prohibeatur à dispensatore, sed moveatur timere exactorem. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. 11. Hom. 27. Tom. 4. Pag. 110. Quoniam Dominica coena, hoc est, Domini, debet esse communis, quaeenim Domini sunt, non sunt hujus servi aut alterius, sed omnibus communia, quod enim Dominicum est, idem & commune; nam si Domini tui est, quemad∣modum est, non debes tanquam propria tibi assumere, sed tanquam res Do∣mini, communiter omnibus proponere, siquidem hoc est Dominicum, nunc autem non sinis esse Dominicum cum non sinis esse commune, sed tibi comedis. Bullinger. adversus Anabaptist. l. 6. c. 9. p. 229. & 232. Probationem Ministri aut Ecclesiae judicio non relinquimus, ut tum de∣mum aliquis ad coenam Domini accedat, cum Ministri vel Ecclesia satis dignum fidelem & sanctum judicaverit — Probet homo seipsum — non debet ab alio probari. Musculus in 1 Cor. 11.28. Pag. 438, 439. Apparet necessarium & utile esse eorum studium, qui neminem ad coenam Domini admittant, quem ipsi antea non probaverunt, si modus & discretio adhibeatur, nec velut universali lege indiscriminatim omnes, etiam qui in∣culpate se gerunt in Ecclesia, ad hujusmodi examen constringantur: verum juxta timendum est, ne institutum hoc, quàm nunc magni aestimatur, tam olim in priscam servitutem Ecclesiam Christi reducat, & noxium reddatur. Sane Apostolica institutio nihil hujus requirit, sed hortatur unumquem{que} ut seipsum probet — sed quid si Minister Ecclesiae hac Apostoli sententia nolit esse contentus, nec admittat nisiquos ipse explorat, item quid si fidelis ad panis tantum, & non poculi Dominici communicationem admittatur, sicut in Papatu fieri videmus? Respondeo, ubi nec Domini ea institutio, nec Apostolica Doctrina servatur, ibi non est ut communicet fidelis, sinat Magi∣stratus illos regnare in Ecclesia, donec visum fuerit Domino modum im∣ponere illorum Dominio. Chamier Panstrat. Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 19. S. 17. Pag. 196. Non sunt digne praeparati; Scelus hominis! cur indignos Sacramento di∣cis quos indignos negas pace Ecclesiae? Itane tibi videatur qui censeantur in corpore Christi, ut indignos pronuncies qui vescantur Christo? at Chryso∣stomus negabat, dignos esse qui vel precibus interessent; quodnam quaeso in∣genium tuum est? Chrysostomi certe Catholicum, vide ne tuum non Chri∣stianum. Casaubon. exercit. ad annal. Baron. exercit. 16. S. 31. Pag. 366. Coena Domini privatae epulae non sunt, natura sua, sed publica fidelium omnium invitatio.
The Summe of the Dissertation. DIATRIBE. SECT. I. OF Antiquity and Innovation, the Character of their Discipline: the state of the question. p. 29. DEFENCE. SECT. I. What Authority the Diatribe ascribed to the Fathers and an∣cient Church. Why the Apologists derogate from them? p. 32. SECT. II. Of Antiquity, Custome; sad consequences of Independency, the novelty thereof; the Fathers not without errors, yet not to be sleighted. What may be called the Primitive Church? Pro∣testants alwayes honoured their Fathers, and never declined their Testimony. p. 33. SECT. III. How the Apologists have suited their Discipline, to comply with several-Parties and Interests? the odious Blots of their Pen. p. 42. SECT. IV. Whether the Diatribe were guilty of Petitio Principii? 44.
SECT. V. Whether their Discipline advance Godlinesse? The Sacra∣ments are Seales of the Conditionall Covenant; which Doctrine hath no affinity with semi-Pelagianisme. Whether the exhibiting the Sacrament make men Saints? Whether the giving thereof without discrimination upon tryal, blind men in their sins; or be the setting of the Seal to Blanks? Whether the Sacraments are privileges of the Godly? 1 Cor. 10. argumentative for a free Communion. 46. SECT. VI. Independent Bookes and Arguments. Of Rhetorique; what Builders the Apologists are? 62. SECT. VII. The Apologists causlesly irritated by an Allegory. 67. SECT. VIII. In whom the School vesteth the Power of Church-Censures. Whether the Apologists may de jure, or do de facto, censure alone? How they have restored the Sacrament? 68. SECT. IX. The state of the Question: the model of their Church: Whether their way smack of Donatus his schisme? Ecclesiastical Communion consists principally in Communion of Sacra∣ments. Of Examination precedent to the partaking of the Eucharist. Whether, and how necessary? What knowledge may be competent? What profession of Faith the antient Church required before admission to Sacraments? Of Excom∣munication, Suspension, Presbytery; the Apologists no friends thereunto. 71. DIATRIBE. SECT. II. The Lord Jesus examined not his Disciples antecedently to his Supper. He admitted Judas to the participation, as the Fa∣thers consentiently assert, and the Scripture evinceth, Luke 22.21. & Joh. 13.2.26, 27, 30. discussed. 96.
DEFENCE. SECT. X. How we know Christ examined not the Apostles? The force of Arguments from the Authority negative of Scripture? Of the washing of the Apostles feet. VVhether any did par∣take the last Supper, save the 12. Apostles? The Apologists conceit of the 70. Disciples. Of Confession of Faith, how and when necessary? Examination is a virtual and interpreta∣tive diffamation. VVhether it be a small thing they require? VVhether Examination, if it be necessary, ought to be made but once? 111. SECT. XI. Judas did communicate at the Lords Supper. What is thereby inferred? The Attestation of the Fathers in that matter: the consent of later Divines. The weight of the testimonies on either side: the Apologists confess there was no visible cause to exclude him. VVhether Christ in admitting him, acted onely as a man? His not condemning the adulterous woman. 122. DIATRIBE. SECT. III. The sufficiency of Scripture, whereupon Negative Arguments are grounded: the Argument deduced from 1 Cor. 11.28. it is difficult and unsafe to judge of other mens estate. Of te∣merarious judgment. Of judging men to be wicked or irrege∣nerate. With what difficulty, and what a Pedegree of conse∣quences their proofs are derived from Scripture? Generall Rules for satisfaction of doubting Consciences, perswade the contrary to their way. Of Christs admitting onely Disciples: Heb. 13.17. Mat. 18.16. Rev. 2.2. 1 Pet. 3.15. 1 Cor. 5.11. explained and vindicated. 134. DEFENCE. SECT. 12. 1 Cor, 11.28. Reinforced and vindicated; Negative Argu∣ments, whether this be such? Whether all revealed in Scri∣pture be necessary? Christs not examining his Disciples. The sense of antient and modern Interpreters upon that of 1 Cor.
11.28. the testimony of Paraeus vindicated. Examination but an after-reckoning to Auricular Confession; and built upon the same Foundations: the Consequences thereof alike to be feared. 149. DIATRIBE. SECT. IV. No pre-examination in the antient Church, save of Catechu∣meni. Sending the Eucharist to persons absent and stran∣gers. The institution and abolishment of Confession. Liberty to approach the Lords Table upon self-examination. Whom the antient Church excluded from the Eucharist. The Judg∣ment of the Fathers, Casuists, and School-men, concerning those that are to be admitted, and to be debarred. To partake was antiently commanded as a common Duty. The omission reprehended, the common right asserted. 181. DEFENCE. SECT. XIII. The honour and interest of the Ministery. Confession of sins as necessary as Examination. Whether their principles have any affinity with the Roman, or may be subservient and manu∣ductive to Popery. The antient Discipline most like to ad∣vance Reformation. What were the Catechumeni, Ener∣gumeni, Penitents? The several degrees of the latter. The Church-way of the Apologists hath no conformity with the antient Church. How the Heathens proscribed profane per∣sons from their Holies? VVhether the Antients went too farre in Censures? A testimony of Albaspinus, falsified by them, cleared. Another of Chrysostomes vindicated. 185. SECT. XIV. Sending the Eucharist to strangers and persons absent, whether a corruption? VVhether the Fathers were prodigal of Christs blood? Of admitting to the Eucharist presently after Ba∣ptisme. Of the Literae formatae, and communicatoriae. 182. post 185. SECT. XV. Of daily communicating; of receiving at Easter; all the Peo∣ple anciently communicated. No man to be repelled upon
the private knowledge of the Minister or other. Whether all did partake the Lords Supper that heard the Word? What sinnes may exclude from the Sacrament? Whether the an∣cient Church knew or practised any such Censure as Suspen∣sion? The Negative proved, the Arguments for the Affir∣mative profligated. Penitents were first excommunicated. What Communion anciently did signifie? What Abstinency denoted? What was the Lay-Communion? What was meant by removing from the Altar? What Suspension anciently signified, and in what sense that notion was used? What the School determines of giving the Eucharist to ma∣nifest and occult sinners? Suarez imposterously alleaged by them. What Suspicion may warrant an Exclusion? Whe∣ther their way of Separation be conformable to the Ancient? Of their care to keep men off from the Sacrament. The Ap∣plication of a passage in Chrysostome redeemed from their Exceptions. Whether there be reason to examine dispositively to hearing the Word, aswell as to receiving the Sacrament, and danger to the Unworthy in the one, aswell as in the other? The casting of Pearl before Swine, and giving holy things unto Dogs, what it intends? The difference between the Word and Sacraments. All not anciently admitted to all the Word. The Sacrament multifariously proved to be a converting Or∣dinance, and this to be the common judgment of Protestants. What effects may be hoped onely by seeing the Administration, without partaking? The Sophisme discussed, He that partakes worthily, is converted already; he that eates unworthily, eates damnation. VVhether men are prohibited those Duties which they cannot well and duly discharge? The moral works of na∣tural men. 186. DIATRIBE. SECT. V. By a free Communion, there is no damnum emergens by pol∣lution of the Ordinances, Minister, or Communicants: the visible Church is aggregated of good and evil. It is Schisme
to renounce Communion of Sacraments, with evil men not duly censured, the administration not to be intermitted, be∣cause all are not sufficiently prepared: or those that are un∣worthy may partake. The similitudes defeated of giving a cup of poysoned wine onely with admonition. Of giving a Legacy to Schollars of such a capacity and parts, which the Trustees cannot otherwise distribute. Of being guilty of the sins we hin∣der not. The weak to be encouraged and promoved by admis∣sion. As much danger by mix'd Communion in the Word and Prayers as in the Sacrament. The Reasons pretended to debar from the one as argumentative to exclude from the other, Matth. 7 6. examined. VVhether the receiving the Sacrament be a Duty injoyned to all, and a good work in all? VVhether it be a converting Ordinance? VVhat the Sacra∣ments seal, and how? VVhether they confer grace. The same evil effects ensue by male administration of discipline; as by a free communion, and the same reasons which forbid se∣paration in the one, do also in the other case. 235. DEFENCE. SECT. XVI. The removing the scandalous by the power of the Keys no ingre∣dient of our question, nor any part of the Discipline which they practise. What scandals may deprive of the Sacrament? Whether formal Professors, if they could be known, were to be admitted? How holy things may be polluted? As the Sa∣crament, so in like manner other holy things may be defiled. By a free admission the Sacrament is not polluted by or to the Minister, nor others that communicate worthily; and it is no more dangerous for the unworthy to come, than to keep off. Whether mix'd Communion be a burden of sinne, or pain? In what cases it is lawful to have Communion of Sacra∣ments with evil men. The godly were alwayes commix'd with the wicked in Communion of Sacraments, proved through the History of the Scripture. Sacrifices were of like nature with Sacraments, and for offering or eating thereof, no signs
or tryals of real Holiness were required. Whether there be an equal necessity of profession of Faith at the receiving of the Eucharist, and of Baptisme. The Church of Corinth was cor∣rupt, yet in reforming thereof the Apostle prescribed no such tryal. When and how far admonition and reproof may be suf∣ficient? Of Ambrose his proceeding against Theodosius. What are the effects of the society of evil men with good. The errors of Audius, Novatus, and Donatus. Whether the Apo∣logists symbolize with them? Church-fellowship consists chiefly in Communion of Sacraments, they make the Church of the Called to be no larger than that of the Elect. The state of the Church according to the Parables of the Floor, Field, and Net, Matth. 13. Our Thesis asserted in the express words of the Antients. The Pastor of Corinth not reproved for per∣mitting mix'd Communions, 1 Cor. 4.21. considered. The Parable of the Marriage-Feast. Of sealing men. Their too free Pulpits, no free Tables: of Preaching without Ordination. A recapitulation of much of the Discourse. 255. DIATRIBE. SECT. VI. Whether this Discipline suit with Rom. 14.1. & 10. or check not with Charity, relish not of the Pharisee? Whether it sort with the qualifications of the High-Priest, Heb. 5.2. Or the example of Hezekias? Whether it smell not of Diotrephes? Of examining persons set beyond suspicion. Whether their way were cast in a like Mould with Popery? Of their Elders: their way is independent. A complaint of our Schismes and Heresies. Perswasions to mildness and moderation. 307. DEFENCE. SECT. XVII. They misrepresent their Church-way. Whether the Queries of the Diatribe, were doubts of Friends or Enemies? What are properly scruples? 318. SECT. XVIII. Rom. 14.1. & 10. discussed. Whether they judge or despise their Brethren. Psal. 15.4. vindicated. No other Qualifications re∣quired
in order to communicating in a Church-member, ha∣ving a dogmatical Faith, but to be without scandal: whether they reject onely the wicked? whether their way render them not guilty of temerarious judgment: of judging the heart, of bearing infirmities; of moral men. 320 SECT. XIX. 1 Cor. 13.7. considered: whether they suspect not much evil, believe or hope little good of their people, of examining the knowing to be exemplar to the ignorant, or to nanifest their humility, whether it be their duty to submit to such a passive examination? whether to call them to it be not directly to de∣tract from them, or interpretatively to diffame them? small matters are often great in the consequence. 2 Cor. 11.2. examined? the properties of charity in hoping and believing, all the ignorance charged, is not to know it to be duty to sub∣mtt to their commands, whether conversion may be sudden? whether the Church have loss or gain by these ways of pre∣tended Reformation? 332 SECT. XX. Whether the Apologists are charitably suspected, or can be justly charged with Pharisaism? whether their actings proceed out of tenderness of conscience? A paralel between the Apolo∣gists and Pharisees in some things. 369, (169) SECT. XXI. What was Diotrephes? what his ambition? whether the Apologists exceed not the bounds of Ministerial power, by bringing all under triall, excluding and not for scandal, and that so many, and by common continual practice? whether this check not with 1 Peter 5.3. whether those they reject are scandalous? themselves separated and left the Church be∣hinde them. Of Ecclesiastical power, what it is, and how far extensive? The duty of Stewards. It is Christ's honour
to have an universal Church. Their actings, 1. Not com∣manded or warranted by Gods VVord. 2. They act solely. Of their Elders, of ruling Elders in general, not by divine right, yet a prudent constitution requisite to be continued in some way, the interest of the whole Church in censures, the Elders Representatives of the Church, whether the ancient Church knew any such? 3. They act arbitrarily, of the former Bishops, the Flowers of the Apologists Canina fa∣cundia, which they cast on the Opposites of their way, the aspersions wiped off, and some of them reflected, of small things, and whether their Injunctions are such? what may be the consequences thereof, viz. their own power and greatness in the intention, which yet in effect may be thereby lessened, whether their promiscuous examination be to prevent respect of persons, of examining persons known to be knowing, of the Shekel of the Sanctuary, of their aviling of their peo∣ple, and thereby giving advantage to the Papists to upbraid us, of the former Bishops, the lack of light in some places through want of some to hold it forth, whether the Diatribe aspersed Presbytery to be modelled like Popery? the Apologists no friends to Presbytery; their way hath some analogy with Popery, and accidental tendency thereunto. 378, (178) SECT. XXII. Of Independents, their godliness, their Schism, the confessed imperfection of the way of the Apologists, their desire of an union with the Independents, an admonition to the Pres∣byterians, the confounding of Churches and Parishes by the Apologists, their gathering of Churches, whether they are guilty of disorder against Law? whether Magick were laid to their charge? whether they are culpable of Schism and Sedition, or injury to other Ministers? of the hatching others Eggs, like the Partridge. 414, (214)
SECT. XXIII. VVhy they have not the Sacrament in their own Churches? why onely at Pyworthy? whether it be no great matter to be cal∣led or drawn thither? Of their return to their own Churches. How they stigmatize the People, and judge their hearts? Of serving the times: they confess the Word and Sacraments to be the same thing: what thereupon followes? 426. (226) SECT. XXIV. VVhether they are Butchers or Surgeons? VVhether guilty of Schisme? Of negative and positive Schisme. VVhat are just causes of separation? VVhether our Saviour separated from the Jewish Church, for instance, in eating the Passover? They condemn what they practise, by confounding Churches, and by separation. They grant Professors to be visible Saints, which destroys their Platform. Their Reasons why all sorts are to be admitted to the Word and Prayer. VVhether there are not better Reasons to warrant a like admission to the Sacra∣ment? VVhether the same conclude it not? VVhether the Churches of England are all true Churches? Sacraments Notes of the Church, and therefore communicable to all Church-Members; they grant Discipline enters not the defi∣nition of a Church, yet they separate for want thereof. VVhe∣ther they may not aswell deny Baptisme to the Children, as the Eucharist to the Parents? 434. (234.) SECT. XXV. Their great abuse and distortion of Scripture; with what a train of Consequences their Arguments are far-fetch'd; they are borrowed from the Donatists, Papists, Brownists, Indepen∣dents; none of them conclude the question, as themselves have stated it: the Argument raised from 1 Cor. 14.40. examined. Whether it be a glorious and comfortable practice that none approach the Lords Table, save holy persons? Whe∣ther their way be warranted by the Laws? The moderating of Censures. Whether their way have like ground with the
antient Discipline, in receiving in Penitents? Whether there be order and decency in mix'd Communions? The lesser good to be omitted, to acquire the greater; the confusion and disorder of their wayes. (250.) 450. SECT. XXVI. Jeremy 15.19. Discussed and vindicated. (264.) 464. SECT. XXVII. 2 Thes. 3.2. & 6. Opened and redeemed from their misappli∣cations. Whether antiently the Commerce with any not ex∣communicate were avoided? VVhat society Excommunica∣tion cuts off from? How Suspension might be used, and is abused? (267.) 467. SECT. XXVIII. 1 Cor. 5.11. Ventilated, and the Chaff of their Interpretation dispersed. Whether we may have communion in sacred things with such as we may not have society with in civil? (274.) 474. SECT. XXIX. Matth. 7.6. The sense thereof enucleated and shewed not to be subservient to their purpose, but odiously abused. VVhether Ministers may act in Censures alone, and upon their own knowledge (281.) 481. SECT. XXX. 1 Cor. 11.27. & sequent. Discussed, of eating and drinking unworthily. VVhether there be a necessity of examining all, because some cannot examine themselves? Whether any ir∣regenerate man can examine himself? VVhether this tends not to introduce Auricular Confession? Jude 3. opened. (288.) 488. SECT. XXXI. 1 Tim. 5.22. Interpreted and answered. Of Principals and Ac∣cessories, 1 Tim. 3.10. considered: Not like Reasons to exa∣mine those that are to communicate, and those that are to be ordained. (293.) 493.
SECT. XXXII. 1 Pet. 3.15. Heb. 13.17. Discussed: VVhat obedience is due to Ministers, and what power they have? 497. (297.) SECT. XXXIII. Levit. 13.5. 2 Chron. 23.19. Joel 3.17. Nahum 1.15. Zach. 19.21. Brought off from the Rack whereon they have set them. The difference between Legal and Moral Un∣cleanness; what the former typed. 501. (301.) SECT. XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII. Their repeated fallacies. The complacency of their close, which is destructive to their main Discourse. 509. &c. (309).
The Preface. BEing engaged in the publick Service of my Countrey, I have been alwayes most forward to employ the power intrusted with me, for recovery of Tythes to the Ministery, whose honor and mainte∣nance I have ever sensed to be very much of the interest of Religion; for as Heraclitus once said, Were it not for the Sun, it would be night for all the Stars: so, were there not such greater lights, whose Office and Ministerie is to enlighten the world, the frye of twinkling Stars could not prevent or supersede a general Darkness, espe∣cially being Stellae prosilientes, Falling stars, which have no Celestial origen, nor are fixt in the proper sphere, but carried upward by their innate levity, and kindled by an irregular zeal. Among such as were occasionally convented for Non-pay∣ment, there were some that pleaded in their excuse, that they would willingly pay their Tythes, if their Pastors would admi∣nister the Lords-Supper, which some of them did altogether intermit; others did onely exhibit it to a Church which they had new gathered; and therefore they prayed they might not be compelled to pay their Tythes to those which had interpre∣tatively renounced and disclaimed to be their Pastors, by ha∣ving appropriated another flock: This being no irrational answer, nor easie to be gain-said (for as Crassus said to Lucius Philippus, If thou wilt not owne me for a Senator, neither
will I acknowledge thee to be a Consul; and as the Ca∣nons say, there is Matrimonium inter Episcopum & Ecclesiam; so in Divorces, when for espousing a new Love, the former Wife was repudiated, there was still, Tibi{que} res tuas habeto) I knew no expedient apter to evade it, then by a gentle sup∣pling and inflecting them to pay their Tythes, upon promise that I would engage the forces I had, to perswade their seve∣ral Ministers to revive and reduce the Sacrament in their proper Churches, and to admit them thereunto, if there were no just and manifest obstacle. In complyance with this promise, and because the cure (as with the Leper under the Law) begins with the Ear, I privately entred into an amicable altercation upon this Subject with some of these Ministers; For even the Lights of the Sanctu∣ary may need Snuffers, though such ought to be of pure gold; and however the School tels us, that an Angel of an inferior Order doth not illuminate another of a superior; yet in the Elementary world, Naturalists say that the Jackal is conducter to the Lyon, and the little Musculus goes before the Whale as a guide, and to direct him from shelves and flats; yet never∣theless I was not herein without the modest sense of Tertullian, Non tantus sum ut ego vos alloquar; verumtamen gladiatores perfectissimos, non tantum magistri & praepositi, sed etiam idiotae & supervacui qui{que} adhortantur de longinquo. As they have taught us to distinguish of Conversion wrought at the Sacrament, but not by it; so some one or other per∣haps occasionally, if not causally, was at such colloquies and transactions, if not by them, induced to return to his Duty, and redintegrate the Communion in his Church: Others I found according to that character of St. Hierom, Facilius vinci posse quam persuaderi; but having sundry times by some interveniencies and avocations, been frustrated of the opportunity of a full carrying through, of the conference which I had entred upon with one among the rest, who see∣med to me to have sollicited with, and engaged others by his influence and inspirations, and who had new gathered a Church, (if not in that notion, yet much of that nature) I thereupon concluded to give him my sense, and the reasons thereof in writing; which accordingly I lapt up in one sheet,
and transmitted to him by a private, and no vulgar hand: And because I had no thought it should be seen abroad, I was not carefull to give it any handsomer dress, but onely put it in an homely attire; and having as little ambition as skill to paint to eternity with Zeuxis, I took no long time to draw this picture of my mind, which was onely two dayes in forming; so that I might plead with Hierom, Qui non ignoscit ingenio, ignoscat tempori; indeed I rather touched then handled things, and like Ladas I passed very lightly over the sands, intending to leave no impression or footsteps of any traverses betwixt us; but nevertheless, as contrariant to my complacencies, as cross to my expectation, what I intended to speak in the ear, was preached on the house tops; for no sooner was this pri∣vate Rescript received, but the Church (as according to the idiom of the Donatists they speak) was congregated, and at their tribunal was my bashful sheet brought forth (which I rather wished had been sentenced to perpetual imprisonment) to be publickly arraigned. To justifie or excuse the publishing hereof, it hath been plea∣ded, that it was not wedded to him under any caution not to communicate or impart it; and that 2. it was expedient to publish it to the Church, because they were concerned in it, and they heard but their owne Cause pleaded. But for answer to the first; I should have thought, that though I had been silent, yet Morality would have dictated, that without my consent first had, nothing of mine should have been made common to any, besides those to whom I allowed it, and the publishing needed my express assent to warrant it, not my direct prohibition to restrain it. To the 2. Though the Church were concerned in the subject and mat∣ter controverted, yet that can no more evince an expedience to communicate to them the traverses betwixt us, then be∣cause every one of the Nation is interessed in the conduct of State-affairs, that therefore it is necessary or fit that the peo∣ple should be acquainted with the counsels and agitations thereof: I had no altercation with them; my address was not to the Orbs, but the Intelligence that set them on their moti∣ons, and with Diogenes I struck at the Master, for what I thought more culpable in him then in the Scholars. I never
was of Lucilius his minde, who professed he wrote onely to the unlearned Tarentines, I should rather invert the speech, and say, Perseum curo legere, Laelium Decimum nolo; let him that I strike at be such an one as may totum telum recipere; and let the learneder smite me, whose reproof shall be an ex∣cellent oyl (so it be cold oyl, for oyl set a fire is most raging and mischievous) that shall not break, but heal the wounds I may chance to have in my head. I am somewhat of Ari∣stippus his minde, the bite of a Weazel would trouble me more then the tooth of a Lyon. Si cadendum est, Aeneae magni dextra cadam, & sim jugulatus Achille: But the course they took could onely have been rib'd and inlaid with some reason to support and strengthen it, if I had scattered my papers among his Church, and sought to toll away his Pro∣selites, and if they had been hereby shaken, or made volatile, and could not have been otherwise fixed, but by perswading them how in that argument he had foyled me (which general notion, and that taken up by an implicit faith, was, I doubt, all the impression which the generality of them could get by the reading of our dissertations; for though those matricu∣lated into his Church, may perchance be all sufficiently prin∣cipled in repentance toward God, and faith in Christ Jesus, which my charity prompts me to hope (whatever others re∣port) yet I doubt (however they may blandish them) that their understandings are too narrow and disproportionable to make judgement of controversies, especially agitated scholastically.) Sic mihi magnopere faber est invisus, in altum Qui struit, adnitens superare jugum Oromedontis. But hereupon it was bruited abroad that I should forthwith receive an answer; and though methinks so many hands should have made more light work in respect of time, and not so light in regard of waight, yet I can instance the person, one of their Church (and I know they will resent with indignation any suspicion that one of that extraction and refinement should re∣tain any Dregs or impurity of an untruth) which did say, and the person to whom, and the circumstances of time and place
when and where he said it, that foure Ministers had laid their heads together to frame a speedy answer to my Epistle; in which relation therefore that which they call an Apology of some Ministers and godly persons, may be so named as well in respect of the efficient as the subject. But whether sat bene, I shall not say, but I am sure not sat cito; and though they would have it to be as the Jews Messias, born long since, but shewing it self long after; yet I know their Answer (like Lapis Lazuli among Physicians) had many several Washings before they could agree to give it, and about a yeer after the Answer was said to be inchoated, the Church met to peruse and set their Seal to it, which after several concoctions and filtrations was then thought fit to be sent in progress to several Towns among their Symmists, whi∣ther like a Snowbal to gather somewhat by rolling, and to raise a posse comitatus against this rebel to their Discipline, I will not assert upon conjectures or reports, but shal be facil to believe that if this Temple of their Diana had been so many yeers in building by all Asia, it must rather have been one of the wonders of the world. For the censures which they insinuate to have attended or prevented the coming forth thereof, as I am not justly obliged to be responsible for what I was not guilty of, who (as Memnon General to Darius said his Souldier was) am prest to fight, not to rail, so I cannot discreetly undertake to excuse what I am ignorant of; but if they mistook not the tinckling of their own ears for outward sounds, perhaps some of their own Cougregation that think themselves losers of a just li∣berty of communion, might seek their recompense by a free∣dom in communicating their grieved minds, and in civitate non libera (as they made it) would yet have linguas liberas; and then I shall onely remind them a story of Philip of Macedon; when one told him that Nicanor who was in Court, and neg∣lected by him, spake reproachfully of him, he sent him a large Donative, and supplyed his indigence; and thereupon Nicanor began to talk very honourably of the King; which made Philip to say, Videtis in nobis esse situm, ut bene vel male audiamus: but whatsoever those censures were, or by whom∣soever aspersed, as winds blustring about the earth are caused
by vapors breaking out of the cranies thereof, so were these rumors occasioned by themselves that were pleni rimarum; and it fared then with them as it useth to do with such as buy winds of Witches, who by opening the knots of the ropes given them, raise so great gales, as make them wish them stilled again, which they have let loose, and cannot hush: Had they done (as Augustin speaks of Zachary, Ta∣cuit generatus vocem) men might have held their peace, and the Apologists had peace; or as it was said of Bonaventure; Had they been first the dumb Oxe, the world needed not to have wondred till they had lowed: That ever I writ any thing to be answered, or that they undertook the answer, had never slown so far, nor sounded so loud but in the winds which their owne birth first raised; and that which was my desire, might have been our common felicity, to have dis∣charged all our volleys with white powder, not onely for the candor, but because (they say) it makes no report; and to have resembled heavenly rather then earthly bodies, the one moving without sound, the other with bustling; and so never to have come forth upon the stage, but to have acted our parts behind the curtain, had not they drawn it aside, to shew what prizes they could play, and to make open sale of the Bears skin as soon as they began to hunt; for what ever cen∣sorious omens others had of them, themselves had endevou∣red to make the Countrey ring with their celeusma's, and the Paeans of their triumph for this victory; and though the dust followed their chariot, wherewith they seek to blind mens eyes, yet the creaking of their wheels (and they are onely dry things wanting fatness which use to move with noyse) were heard long before they were seen to come. Yet all this while I was no more answered then one man may be by whispering in anothers ear, nor did no more feel the stroke of their rod, then Nico did the blows wherewith his image was beaten by those that made no haste to encounter himself. I might justly have expected it, not onely upon the score of Civility, but Christian charity, that I should first have been privately admonished of my faults, before the Church had been told thereof; for even a truth unseasona∣bly published, is a virtual slander; and though I will not
profess with Aristotle, Let them not onely reproach, but beat me too, whiles I am absent, yet I shall say with Plancus, when he was told that Asinius Pollio had written inve∣ctives against him, not to be published until after his death, that there are none but Ghosts and Goblins that fight with the dead; and in respect of obloquy, there is the same rea∣son of the dead, and those that are not present; but perhaps it was their conceit, that the expectation of the blow, which they boasted to be impendent, would anticipate the suffering thereof, knowing that pauculum differt patiaris adversa, an expectes, nisi quod tantum est dolendi modus, non timendi; dolens enim quantum scias accidisse, timeas quantum possit accidere; and because that cito periisse est loco beneficii, therefore they would be persua∣ded by Caligula, Sic feri, ut sentiat se mori. Almost two yeares after I had inscribed and consigned to them my single sheet (by which time perchance I might have forgotten that any such thing had passed my hands, had I not been awakened to the remembrance thereof by their assiduous alarms) I received in manuscript their answer; but in the inte∣rim, perceiving this my smal spark by their stirring was like to be no longer covered under ashes, but to be laid open to publick light, therefore least it might expire and vanish through its own exility, and so waighty a question sustain some prejudice by so short an answer (which Nebridius St. Augustines friend ha∣ted) and so suddenly formed (which I need not professe, seeing, as Apelles, when his boy shewed him a painted table, and told him that it was done in haste, answered, he might have spared to tell him so, for the work sufficiently shewed it) therefore as the Tuberous use to take their younglings into their bellys again for their better fostering and defence, so I reassumed into the wombe of second cogitations this rude Minerva, this concep∣tion and abortive issue of my brain, and new moulded my Dia∣tribe, yet retaining the same Scheme of the former black lines, though dilating and filling them with fresher colors, yet kept it close and secret, having still a desire with the old Romans, to sacrifice mutae deae ad compescendas detrahentium linguas, untill by the veiw of their Apologie transmitted to me, I had the provo∣cation and the call to remande my Diatribe (the same with little or no alteration which here precedes this defence) and
they had the virgin prospect thereof; for seeing how undecent it was in them, to prostitute their answer to others eyes, before it was represented to mine, I could not stumble at the same stone of offence, since as in good things the example merits more prayse then the imitation, so in evil the imitation de∣serves more blame then the example; and together with that review were conveyed some animadversarions on their Apo∣logy, as velites to begin the Skirmish, till time could bring to the shocke the waightier armature. To these animadversions their Prolocutor replyed, and I rejoynd. But within short time after a gentleman of quality and worth came to me (as he said) from the Apologist, to tell me, he was very willing to cut off or winde up the thread of controversie, which he heard I was preparing to draw out farther by forming an answer to his Apology. But I might be superseded of such pains; for he desired I would rest as silent as he had resolved to be, who would never henceforth have to do with me in any altercation of this kind. I (who had always applauded the wisedom of the Romans that set the image of Angerona on the altar of Volupia, and have ever sensed most pleasure in silence) received with much complacency this amicable offerture, and thereupon laid aside and took a farwell of the thoughts of making an∣swer, and that little Schedule which I had scribled, I passed this sentence upon, tineas pascat taciturnus inertes. But it seems they thought that also, per injurias injuriis tu∣tum est iter, and they had learned that principle of Machia∣vell, that whom they stagger with one wrong, they must ut∣terly cast down with more; for although he that read over the Oration which Lysias made for him, the oftner he perused, the worse he relished it; yet it seems they better fancying their discourse, the longer they contemplated it, and be∣holding themselves under I know not what multiplying glasses, fell in love with their own image, and thought themselves so considerable, and their way so exemplar, as to acquaint the world with so much of both, or else being as they say excited thereunto by importunity of friends (the common vouchee to warrant publications) whereof one hath hung out his bush at the dore, to whom though perhaps some
as wise men will say, as Apollonius did to Tigellinus that asked him how he liked Nero's singing at the harpe, melius de Nero∣ne sentio quam tu; cantare enim tu illum dignum putas, ego autem tacere; yet I shall alone adde, that the gentleman hath in one respect salved the honor of his judgement, by insinuating a doubt that his love to the person may deceive him, though in another regard he hath detracted from the credit thereof; for amans quod cupiat scit, quod sapiat nescit; honestius est cum judicaveris amare, quam cum amaveris judicare; yet however for my part, amet tua carmina Maevi; but upon these or other impulsives, about two years after this, and at the last Spring out comes in print their Answer to my first sheet (which I had professed I would disclaime and not own) and that without ta∣king any notice of the reveiw thereof (which they had all those years in their hands) and which alone (having slighted the former) I assumed to defend, as a peece which I thought better fortified, even as if they had borrowed some of the sub∣tilty of the Serpent who assaults the heele when he cannot reach the head; or, had been prompted by Balak to see but the utmost part of them, and not to see them all, and hoped to have power to curse them from thence. Though I had this Apology in manuscript long before it came abroad in print, yet I could not be sure what alterations it might undergo by new sublimings, or what increase of strength it might make acquist of by a posse regni, aswell as (they say) it did by a posse comitatus. I confess I had not enough of that wisedome which I might have learned from the motto of Venice to prepare for war in the time of peace; and the rather, because I had little of that which Epictetus calls the sinews of Wisedom viz. Distrust; but had I not been cajoled by the former message, perhaps my Jacob might have come forth into the world holding their Esau by the heel, though I think the birth-right will not be worth them a mess of pottage, But I shall soberly profess it, as a precise and measu∣red truth, that my Antilogy hath taken up as many hours in the transcribing (so illegible it hath proved by the hasty and evil hand that drew the originall) as it was in the composing. What Hannibal told Scipio had been happier for Rome and Car∣thage, had been also better for us, viz. to have kept our selves within our bounds and limits, rather then to have come abroad
in such a warfare, and to have confined and inclosed our igno∣rance within our own precincts, and not to have laid it open to general notice; the first happiness is to be furnished with know∣ledge, and the second not to blab our ignorance; and Quintilian saith, that Caesar and Brutus fecerunt carmina non melius quam Cice∣ro, at faelicius; quia illos fecisse, pauciores sciunt; and if we had not per∣haps been favoured with the like repute for writing which Gal∣ba acquired for governing, (capax imperii, nisi imperasset) yet surely we had both been held wiser men if we had held our peace; who though we may fiddle, yet neither of us can make a great city. The Apologists shadow is not like to be the longer for this vi∣ctory. I doubt (contrary to what Socrates said) it will not be easy to commend the Athenians among the Athenians themselves for very excellent Writers; and as it was said of Poets, so must it be of Writers in printe; mediocribus esse poetis, Non di non homi∣nes non concessere columnae; and as Geometricians demonstrate, that an angle of sphaericall lines can never be equall to one made of right lines, but will be still greater or lesser, so there is no me∣diocrity for Writers; he that is not very good, is stark naught; and therefore whereas they have said they were willing to have put their tract under a bushel, though it had been proper enough to have put it into a dark lantern, to have guided themselves, and conveyed the light thereof to me only; yet perchance in re∣spect of others, since nec defensoribus istis Tempus eget, when the heat of those Epidemicall controversies hath produced more Writers (to use Plautus his comparison) then an hot sommer brings forth buzzing flyes; and as it was sayd of a city in Greece, the Physicians were more then the sicke, so Writers are almost equall in number to Readers; therefore if they had set it under a bushel, since it doth not much olere lucernam, there had been no great loss of lustre to themselves, nor miss of light to the world; and whither a bushel had not been a proper place for it, since modius est mensura aridorum, let the learned judge. For my selfe, who Mecum habito & novi quam sit mihi curta supellex, as I only designed my first undertakings as a sacrifice to truth, not ostentation, so I passionately wished to have offered it in private, as the old heathen were wont to make all their Sa∣crifices, tecto & velato capite (except those to Saturn and Hercules) and I protest I look as strangely and with as much wonder on my self in print as any of those in Ovid's Metamorphosis on their new
transformed shapes, or as those did that awaked in Aladeules his paradise; but indeed we are lapsed into an age which with∣out any great skill in Philosophy hath attayned to that which was said to be the end thereof, to admire nothing, not by dis∣covery of the true causes, but by observing the multiplicity of strange effects. Whither I make vision by intramission or extramission, and look either at home or abroad, I can see little or no encourag∣ment to have publickly engaged in this controversie being first beyond my ability, who because mancipium negotiorum, am also mancipium paucaelectionis, especially in those chronicall contro∣versies, and which like Cadmus his fighters have risen out of our earth, non hic sulcos ducimus, nec hoc pulvere desudamus; as Galba was said to be magis extra vitia, quam cum vrtutibus, so I can scarse pretend to be extra ignorántiam, not at all cum scientia. I have not those choice opportunities of resort to living libraryes (as Eunapius called very learned men) nor to dead counsellors (as Alphonsus named books) and as one said of the Duke of Savoy, that he had money enough to make a feast, not to make a war; so I have books enough to feed the minde with matter of con∣templation, not to engage in controversies, if I had secessum scri∣bentis & otia, and the station I hold, and condition I live in, were free of those continual distractive avocations, which necessarily rout the meditations, when set sometimes in aray, (as in me will be obvious to any, by that uneveness of my stile (whereof my self am conscious) which like the moone hath not only spots, but according to Galilee, unequal parts, hils and valleys, and which flyes in an indented line, higher or lower according as my wings were dry or dipt in the current of those incumbrances) yet nature hath not indulged me with understanding so acute as to peirce farther then the bark of things, nor with a flame ac∣commodate to sublime and distill much of the substance or spi∣rits thereof; and therefore though sometimes proni studii certius indicium est, supra vires niti, quam viribus ex facili uti; alter enim quod potest praestat, alter etiam plus quam potest; yet because I could onely ad pauca respicere, I was not willing de facili pronunciare, and had rather not to have committed a fault then to ask pardon for it, and to have held my peace with Cato, until I could have spoken things better then silence; but they have made a coward fight, and therefore beshrew the Spartans who (as Antalcidas up∣braided
Agesilaus) will make the Theban, crasso jurares aere natum, a fighter whither he will or no. 2. Contrary to my affection and judgement, who am one of those plants that most love and best thrive in the shadow, nec ca∣ret umbra Deo, and like Coral am more verdant under water, but am red with blushing when I come up above it; who as I can∣not undergo the judicious triall of the learned, so I am not wil∣ling to hazard the passionate censures of the Ignorant, and as I am Asinus ad Lyram, so those Controversies make me no Mu∣sick, who had rather sit down by the still waters (most subser∣vient to the complacencies of Contemplation) then to be plunging in those of strife; and had rather shed my tears on the fire of contention, then be stirring in the coals. I do often recognize that of Bodin, Veritas in controversiis fidei potius precibus apud Deum, quam argumentis quaerenda & investi∣ganda est; and I have observed that beside the original maladies of Error, and the symptomatical diseases of Pride, Animosity, Fa∣ction and obstinacy, when iram atque animos à crimine sumunt, not only those in whom there is any thing of the serpent, are not to be charmed when (as Augustine tels us) one ear is laid to the earth, their interest, and the other covered with the tail, viz. that wherein is their sting or power, but that even accord∣ing to the doctrine of Astrologers, those impressions which are six in men at their first appearing into the world from the in∣fluences of those superior lights that are then culminant and as∣cendent in the houses, become complexional and turn into that nature which expellas furca licet usque recurret; so that upon those accounts very few are healed by going into the troubled waters, though moved by the best Angels of the Church, but too ma∣ny are like Aristophanes auditors, nunquam persuaseris etiamsi persuaseris; and like the little Indian fish, of which Columbus re∣lates, that what he once seiseth upon, he holdeth fast while life holdeth. Durus ut ilex tonsa bipennibus, Per damna, per caedes ab ipso Ducit opes animumque ferro. 3. With the sense of many disadvantages and praejudices; Olor sine Favonio silet; but whosoever shall sing to my tune, shall not keep time; and therefore as Tacitus said of the age of Domitian,
Inertia pro sapientia erat, so since the hope to turne the streame is overballanced by the feare to be overturned by it, this may seeme a time for the prudent to keep silence: when Numa's tenth Muse Tacita shall finde more quiet then all the other nine with all their singing. Beside, this is an age when scribendi cacoethes & censura ultra crepidam, are both in their state and vigor, as Phy∣sicians speake: Baronius and Genebrand call the tenth Century an unhappy age, because it had no Writers; our age contrary∣wise hath the infaelicity to have too many, who blot their own names more then their papers, and onely seeme to do pennance in a white sheet, for their ignorance, vanity and presumption. Rhetorick hath almost put an Ostracisme upon Logick, yet it were to be wished that very many books were but at such an ascendent as Rhetorick, and were speciously painted though not strongly built, which, the truth is, have not so much fucus as the Venetian Curtezans deceive with, which are said to be fat with clouts, white with chalk, red with painting, and high with shooes. But he that with Marsias hath found any pipe of po∣pular eloquence, which Minerva hath laid aside, such a one dares to contend even with Apollo himself, and if he be able to tell a sen∣sible tale in a handsome stile, thinkes himself accomplisht to make a good defence of any thing, and a sufficient reply to any man, as if it were a full answer not to hold his peace, Facile est cuiquam videris re∣spondere qui tacere noluerit, Aug. whereas really they are onely like birds of Paradise, that have feathers to fly into light ayry discourses, but no feet to stand upon any good or solid grounds; and their discourses are but as the Nightingale, vox, praeterea nihil, and onely verborum flumen, mentis gutta, and then onely come to containe good matter when they fall in∣ter thuris piperisve cucullos, and then indeed they are spiced with some sweetness. And when books are written by such as are Aquilae in nubibus, non graculi in sepibus, yet it is the fate of learn∣ed men, what Carneades said was the misery of Athens, that what wise men debated, fools did judge of; so he that quits and takes leave of his private muses and recesses, to come in publick, shall be sure to be like the Owl, which though Minerva's bird, yet when he comes abroad out of his shade, draws all the smal birds to flock about and peck at him; and whise men presume to understand above what is meet for them to understand (for Crede mihi nimium Martia turba sapit) every Cobler dares correct the quaintest table that was ever drawn by the pensill of Apelles;
and St. Basil might now meete with more cooks, who presume to dress and season spiritual food, when it becomes them onely to looke to the pottage-pot. Lastly it cannot but facilitate a desire of conditions of peace, when I am not able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against me with twenty thou∣sand. Men are linked and sodered in a concatenation, and as it were a league offensive and defensive in Controversie; and as viols set to the same tune, when the string in one is touched, the like is moved in the other; so in this case, touch one and move all: and as they pretend that severall needles set severally to turn upon their tables, and toucht with the same loadstone, when one is set to any letter or point, the other by sympathy turnes to the like; so others of like principles drawn by the same attractive, will thinke themselves interessed in the united defense of them, and set themselves upon the same point, and common letters; and so I shall be like not onely to encounter men of more learning, Impar congressus Achilli, and shall be indangered to complain with Caesar, Extorqueri sibi causam L. Cottae patrocinio, but also to combat with more men of learn∣ing, Non Hercules, & tamen contra plures, whose single stock cannot hold out against a common purse. 4. With no affection to my subject, and therefore it is like to be worse ventilated; for the Italians (in their proverbe censuring the different elegances of pictures, as being done either con dili∣genza, con studio, con amore) intend that peice was most exactly drawn which the painter formed with a love to the work. Tis true what the Orator said, Crescit cum amplitudine rerum vis in∣genii, neque quisquam claram & illustrem orationem efficere possit, nisi qui causam parem invenit; and what was spoken of poverty of fortune, is applicable to that of the subject, Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta domi; but I disaffect not my subject upon that account, as if it were among such as Verbis ea vincere magnum Quam sit, & exiguis his addere rebus honorem, yet if I were susceptible of workes of this nature, I had rather be imployed about the stuffe of the spouses garments then about the borders and fringes; and rather operate upon the pillars then the rayles of the tabernacle; and were I nare sagaci, I should thinke it a nobler chase to hunt the wild bore of the forrest, then any gentler beast that may do hurt in the vineyard. I envy that glory to Hortensius that never engaged in a civil war; And
it is the matter as much of my sorrow as my wonder, Quis furor hic ô Phoebe doce, quo tela manusque Romanae miscent acies, bellumque sine hoste est? Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda trophaeis, Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos? And allthough truth be a dearer friend then Plato, and how∣ever Faveo Curioni, Caesari honestissime cupio, pro Pompeio emo∣ri possum, sed tamen ipsa republica nihil charius; yet I confess I do not without some displacency checke with that resolution of Tully, subeam cum iis qui videntur esse boni, quam ut videar à bonis dissentire; though good Josias may go forth to fight without hearkning to the Words from the mouth of God, yet it is commonly presumed that good men carry the Arke into the field with them, and like some Ethnick Cities which in a siege tye up their walls to the images of their supposed Gods, Secumque Deos in praelia ducunt. And that which inclined me to have trust up my sailes and kept my anchors unwaighed, was least by the winde of some mens breath, Neque enim ignari sumus ante malo∣rum, I should be carried on the hard and sharp rocks of censure, or the quick sands of volatile and temerarious judgement, as one that goes out to fight against holiness and reformation, un∣der whose badge and cognizance their Church-way is lanched forth for its pasport; And therefore as Caesar said his wife should be, I was desirous to stand free, not onely of crime, but su∣spicion, to obstruct any way that lookes to those ends. For this very stamp makes a peece regardable even before the mettal be tryed, and the very face of holiness and reformation (though borrowed and laid on by painting) is at first blush, like that of Parthenopaeus (one of the engagers with Adrastus in the Theban war) so beautifull, that it is a charme to restrayne any from offering to hurt it. I have the thousand witnesses to attestate for me how I should tremble to break one of the least commandments, and teach men so, and to kill all those whom I impede the cure of; and as I sinned in my forefathers before I was borne, so by leaving them any scandal to sin in posterity after I am dead; Nay if I should ravel but one thread in the seamless coate, or asperse one spot in the clothing of pure gold, I should sadly thinke what Lube∣rius
once said, Nimirum hac die una plus vixi, quam mihi viven∣dum fuit; and therefore having this Murus aheneus, I shall fetch some incouragement from that of Ambrose, Qui bene sibi conscius falsis non debet moveri, nec aestimare plus ponderis esse in alie∣no convitio quam in suo testimonio; and I shall finde no less comfort in that of Seneca, Nemo pluris aestimat virtutem, quam qui boni viri famam perdidit ne conscientiam perderet. But I wish it were news that some that expressly execrate the heresie of Florinus, did not, though unwittingly yet virtually and interpretatively dash upon it, and blending Manes his two principles together, derive the Origen of evil streames from the pure fountain of all good; As they say, fryer Bacon could cause his own writing to seeme inscribed in the Moone, and de Loier tells us, that the image of St. Francis at Lyons set on a Tower, by reflection of the clouds seemed to be in the heavens; so some men are deceived with a conceit to read that as a writing from hea∣ven, which was formed on earth; and that to be the image of di∣vine truth, which is but the reflection of some mens fancyes. Birds of every feather will be making nests to lay their young at Gods altar, and malefactors for protection take hold of the horns thereof; but as God would have them taken thence, so none will permit that every opinion or practise should pass un∣questioned that takes Sanctuary under the notion of holiness and reformation. And if to be an opposite to this way, be to be among the Anti∣podes to holiness and reformation, I shall yet die with Phocion and the ancient Church and old Fathers, and the forain Pro∣testant Churches (which it seems now we may not name Re∣formed) and moderne great Divines, will be set in the same Cli∣mate, whereof I shall hold forth so true and plain a map form∣ed out of their own lines, and drawn up by their own charts, that all save squint-eyes shall directly see the World of those that consent with me. I shall not build according to the German model to afford a prospect of the furniture of the house at the dore, yet adjourn∣ing farther considerations and fuller discoveries to the inner rooms, I shall here in the frontespice onely glimpse forth, that though as the Historian speakes of Crescens, Nero's freed∣man, In malis temporibus partem reipub. se fecerat, so some men have set up their own models as the onely measure of righteous∣ness,
and their form of Discipline like Polycletus his statue, as the canon to all others, and have farther made this Scrutiny at the Sacrament, the poles whereon all holiness and reformation must hang and move, and the materia prima or basis of all other elements; and as if it were the Palladium which onely could preserve the City, so as all their discourses of the beauty of ho∣liness and reformation conclude in the necessity of this discri∣mination, as all Cato's counsels in the Senate ended with this close, This I think, and that C. thage is to be destroyed; yet I shall offer it to men of temper and judgement to be considered, whither as that which the silke worm designes for an house be∣comes his tombe, so this so common and so generall a suspen∣sion of men from the Sacrament (whereby they are dealt with as the Balearides used their children, who afforded them no bread until by their tryed and approved dexterity in shooting they could hitte it down from an high place, though they were rea∣dy to be starved in the interim; whereas yet they are as good markmen which are fedde that they may have strength to shoot) hath not most of all obstructed the designed reformation, and the settlement of that Discipline, which might have advanced it, had the principles thereof been closely stucke too; but being perverted and blended with other heterogeneals hath set us at a greater losse, and left us at a fault. First by irritating and imbittering mens spirits, instead of sweetning and so endearing them, as that the virtue of the agent might have been more effectual upon the patient well dis∣posed. Secondly by injecting suspicions in some, and raising mispri∣sions in others, of the tendency and issue of those undertakings; who cannot be persuaded as Leo the Philosopher told Philip marching with an army to subdue Byzantium, and saying that he went to make love to the City, that he that meant to become an affectionate wooer, would come with clashings of armour, and not rather with sweeter Musick; it is farre from endulcing or obliging men to finde, that whereas no iron toole was used about the altar, nor iron was imployed in Solomons temple for matter or instrument, the very nayles being of brass, as the dores were of olive, the Emblem of Peace; and the very heathen (as Tully tell us) forbiding all brass and iron in their temples, Ʋt duelli instrumenta, non fani, yet nevertheless they have now so
much hard iron in their Church frames as it were to cut us up or cut us off, making such dissections and excisions, not of the Sacrifices, but the Sacrificers, and making Divination by inspe∣ction into the intrailes, and researching what they are within; so that though the Persian Magi by observing their king at his Coronation to lay his hands first upon bread and knife, did augu∣rate that his raign would prove plentiful, but cruel; yet men ob∣serving that at their first inauguration they catch such fast hold of the power of the Sacrament, and cut off the generality of their people from partaking thereof, do rather shrewdly Divine that their government will be scarce of Sacramental Bread, yet rigid in the administration; but wise and moderate men know it is with most people as with swarms of Bees in their rise, which must not be angred, least they take their wings and leave their stings with us, but be charmed with pleasing sounds, and have their hives dressed with sweet herbes that they may sticke; and when they are once setled, you may order and dispose of them better, and as you think expedient; and more easily then dis∣cern the drones and cut them off, and the Bees will work with you and afford you hony. Let them open their eyes and wipe them and look about, since they have set themselves to heale the distempered body in this way and method of cure, whither the dyscracies be not multi∣plyed and heightned rather then remedied and lessened; Et dum sanare vitia voluerunt, auxerunt, as Lactantius in another case; we conjecture by the ingredients of the Medicine, what effects it would worke; but when we see how the Physick hath wrought, we can more certainly determine of the nature thereof. And since their applications, how many humors which in mixtion and mutual contemperation were neither discerned, nor were mo∣lestous, yet being secerned and gathering head, and putrifying and turning to a dangerous nature, have set the whole body out of frame, disturbed and inflamed it, and have broken out into ulcers? spewing out their heterodox venom; and whatever dis∣ease might be at first pretended of configuration, number, or site, they have now at last occasioned a solution of continuity, the most mischeivous and destructive malady of all others, that sure their reformation in this kind is but as Luther said of the Cardi∣nals, they were like Foxes sweeping the house with their tails, raising more dust then they cleansed.
It is evidently true what Mirandula asserted (though he were at first taxed of heresy for it) That no man hath so much power over his own understanding, as to make himself believe what he will, (the understanding depending upon the will, Quoad exercitium sed non quoad specificationem.) And therefore though some would willingly believe the contrary; yet they are con∣vinced to opine, that however this way carry a facing of refor∣mation, yet it hath an underlining of a designe, and is but a con∣foederacy to bring a most perverse interpretation upon that of the Gospel, He that will be great among you, let him be your minister; and by translating Diocesan Bishops into Parochiall, onely to cut up the old Moones to make new Starres; And what such men think, they sense an obligation and impulse plainely to speak, not onely because wounds that bleed inwardly are most perillous, and Miserum est ab iis laedi de quibus non possis que∣ri; but because the Basilisk being first seen, it may be forstalled of killing, and they may be more cautious what they act, that finde themselves to be no longer in the darke. That Commune odium Dei atque hominum, Panstrat. tom. 4. lib. 3. cap. 1. sect. 3. Advers. Ana∣bapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 229.230. as Chamier denomi∣nates the old Anabaptists, first crumbled the Church into sand, and then blew the dust into our eyes. Post doctrinam de coena scru∣pulose quaerunt Anabaptistae, saith Bullinger, quorum causa coena dominica instituta, &c. the Anabaptists scrupulously inquire af∣ter the Doctrine of the Supper, for whose sake the Lords Supper was instituted, and to whom to be given; and they talk much of separation, to wit, that sinners are to be driven from the Supper of the Lord; and by this meanes, whereas the Lords Supper is amiable and full of joy, they make it horrible and sad, and so straighten the admission thereunto, that even Godly men abhorre to approach it, and rather fly from it then come near thereunto; and how therefore should faithful Ministers so easi∣ly (as the Anabaptists would have it) exclude from the Lords Supper, men that are sinners, yet desiring the grace of God, and which give witness thereof, by their comming to the Sup∣per? thus he. It was verily one patch of the sheeps clothing where∣in these Wolves walked, and the perfumed baite wherewith they covered their deadly hook, to decry mixt Communions, whereby the pure were polluted, and the prostituting of holy Ordinances, and falsely applying sacred seales. Those seeds were indeed first sown by Novatus Lucifer and Audius, but pro∣spered
little, and took no deep roote, untill fomented and cul∣tivated by Donatus; and then they sprung up, and grew to a tree of great hight and spreading branches, which (like some trees in India) was venemous to all that came under its shade and droppings. St. Augustin assisted by some other Church Heroes, by many strong blows of his sharp and acute wit feld down this tree; the stump of the rootes thereof, were nevertheless left in the earth, and Quod aruit in se, refloruit in ipsis Anabaptistis, who new manured and watered it, and brought it to repullu∣late, and rise up to some hight. And then sure it must needs be good that Nero persecutes; and therefore, Timeo Danaos & dona ferentes. The Brownists and Independents were lesser spriggs growing from this root, and were but as several filtrations and refinements of that Schisme which the Anabaptists had too grossely distilled and extracted from Donatus; for this flame that hath made such combustions in the Church, hath like fire risen in the forme of a Pyramis, more full and gross below, and the higher and farther it goes, it is purer, less, and neerer to a point; yet though those later inherit not all Donatus Conclu∣sions, yet they hold in Fee (in fide) his principles by descent, and all heires are not ex asse, for some were onely per uncias and yet inheritors: And sure he that reades Augustin against the Donatists, and attending the substance, reflects not on all cir∣cumstances, will think it a dispute against our modern Separa∣tists, and that Parmenian, Petilian and Cresconius were some that had gathered new Churches. But Etiam tu Brute fili? Even of those that went out to fight against them, many like those sent forth to make discovery of Jehu, have in somewhat turned behind them, as if Independen∣cy had the same common or analogous fate with Ireland; who∣soever came to plant, sooner by conversation imbibed and be∣came assimilate to the Dispositions and Custome of the Irish, then was capable to reclaim and rectify them; and as Hierom said, Gentilem agunt vitam sub nomine Christiani; so many are Presbyterians in name, and Independents in their notions; and wearing the Livery of the one, go about the work of the other, Virtutem qui verba putant; and it may be said of such as Chemni∣cius spake of the Monkes, concerning Pelagianisme, they defye the Heretick and foster the Heresy; some I suppose out of a me∣dious complyance, hoping by going on part of the way to draw
them another, so to meete and close in the middle, as if it were absolutely true which the Paracelsians assert against the Gale∣nists, that similia similibus curantur; and they could take such, as they catch Dotterels, by imitation of postures; some I believe in the heat of zeale (without a clear light) so to set their foot in a clearer path, and keep it unpolluted by evil company in their way, and like the Garison of Sfetigrade, when a Dog was dead in the well, they would not drink the same water, though the Town were lost by it to the Turkes; Others I doubt take this way, because they trace many footsteps there, moving ac∣cording to the influence of example more then reason, and natu∣ralizing for innocency the imitation of anothers fault; and sup∣posing an Error, when it is made publick, to be adopted by truth; others I fear lift up their foot this way, that they may better set it on their peoples necks; for however the Prophets reject those talents and change of garments, yet perchance there will be some that runne after them. This hath been the Spring that hath made the waters nought and the land barren, and which needed such salt to be cast into it, Sal mordacis veritatis, (as Hierom speakes) I am conscious that this is a tender point, and perhaps as intangible as Erasmus said some others were, which Luther medled withall; but as Mauritius said of Phocas, if he be a coward, he is a Murderer; so, should I withhold the truth for feare, I kill those whom I might have profited. Amyclas silentium perdidit. This is a Sacri∣fice to truth; and hony was not to be used in any Sacrifice; yet like the Dove, Si mordeo osculando mordeo; for I have endeavoured with the Spartans, before the battle to Sacrifice to Love; and with Hercules, to hang my sword in a bough of myrtle, which was Consecrated to Love, but Non amo nisi offendero; I love their persons, all whose opinions and practises I am not in love with; nor could I truly love them, did I not love them in and for the truth; he that is summum bonum, is also primum ve∣rum; and as God the chiefest good, is the formal object and rea∣son of all love, so those material objects must also be loved in relation to him, and as those to whom we would communi∣cate that Soveraigne good and prime Truth, whereof they are participable; and therefore, Nemo me potest uti amico & adu∣latore. It was the Motto of that genius of France, Richelieu, Maneat
moralis benevolentia inter discordes sententia; and it was a greater Mans, (Augustine) Rarissima dissensione condiri plurimas consen∣siones; I cannot call a spade otherwise then a spade, yet have been sollicitous that we Macedonians might not appear rude, nor seeme to be among those bestias calami, Psal. 78.30. as Hierom Allegorically expounds that which we read the Company of Spear-men, but is in Hebrew, Beasts of the Reeds; Si quod dixi ferventius, non illud contumacia sed fiducia dicenda est. And if my stile seeme to be keene and peircing, I shall say that they have sharpned it by hard grating, and even ayr comprest by such grating turnes to fire; the Schoolmaster when Carneades demanded, Ʋt sibi vocis modus da∣retur, answered, Do tibi modi loco eum quocum disputas; and there∣fore as Agesilaus surprised by the Athenian Embassadors at play with his children, asked them, if they had children or not? for if they had, he feared not their Censure; if they had not, he desired them to suspend it, till they had some; so I shall hope from those that have been so coursely and undecently dealt with as I have been, to be freed from blame; and I desire those that have not felt such dealing to supersede their correction, till they have been sensible of the like; and am further confident, that to those that like some animals have not their gall in their eare, I shall neither seeme like the Dolphins to have my teeth in my tongue, nor as the Polypus to bring up any excrements at my mouth; for indeed though Tobit's eyes were opened with gall, yet I like the way of Jonathans cure as more sweet, to open them with hony; but yet we know, this makes some eyes to smart notwithstanding. If my way of writing seem an attempt to go out of the com∣mon rode, and yet to misse the way, and too long for the ordi∣nary Gests, or Stages. For the first it is true, I should perchance have rather concurred with the Poet, Coenae fercula nostrae, Mal∣lem convivis quam placuisse coquis; and yet I recognize too that Polycletus statue formed according to his own judgement, was more approved then that which was carved according to vulgar Opinions. It was the advice of Augustin that in places infected with Heresy all men should write that had any faculty, that all sorts of people among many books might light upon some; and perchance it might be as convenient to have the books written, in all kind of wayes, that all sorts might meet with these which
suited them; and some there be, that when there is corn in the sack would be glad to find silver also in the mouth; and though they cheifly wish the sword should cut, yet are better pleased to see the hilt also well hatcht, and the edge to be set on by the grownd-stones of the Philistines; and I confess though I have endeavoured to head my arrowes aswell as I could, yet I know, they would have flown the farther and peirced the deeper too if they could have been well feathered; and though I have sought to serve up solide meat, yet I think it would have better taken the pallat, and been received into the stomach, if it had had plea∣sant sauce; and though my poverty forbid the banes, yet I like the motion made by Euripides, to wed the Graces to the Mu∣ses; and if I could therefore, I would with Demosthenes have written not onely Picta sed sculpta; and though Nobis non licet esse tam disertis, yet notwithstanding, In magnis voluisse sat est; and the ingenuous acknowledgment of what I ought to have done, may excite others that are able to do it (and so Fungar vice cotis, acutum Reddere quae valeat ferrum, exors ipsa secandi,) that so books may be redeemed from beggery, and the distilla∣tions of the pen become more sublimed, which for the most part, carry too much of the dreggs, and thereby the blatant herd may be discouraged and shamed to make such use of those which in their hands are Goose-quills with a witness. For the length of the Treatise, though the thread thereof be not spun out in any aequality to theirs, who replied in twelve sheets to one of mine, and this Discourse is returned in farre less then a twelvefold proportion, yet it is very true that I have been reminded by some judicious Friends, that so limber a Discourse as theirs is, did merit no large or full grown An∣swer; but as when certain Grecians entertained by Lucullus with a costly supper, said, they were sorry he should be at such cost for them; he answered, Not so much for you sakes as for mine own; so the paines I have taken, was not because their Apologie was worth so ample an Answer, but because the Controversy was worthy of a full and diligent handling. I confess also, I could never rellish that Greek Proverbe, that A great book was a great evil, unless it were a great evil book. If my Observations have not deceived me, the lesser books hold forth the greater vanity and emptiness, of which alone Omne majus continet in se minus, and that of Salvian is too frequently
verified, Intelligimus id quod parum est nihil esse, if books were thought fit to be greater in continuous quantity, they would be less in discrete (and perhaps less indiscreete) while it would dis∣courage many to attempt to make such frivolous use of their fea∣thers, who like the flying fish cannot hold out any long flight, because their wings are soon drye. I supposed I should finde more cause to repent to have spo∣ken too little of what was needfull, then to have held my peace in what was necessary; had I left any haire untoucht, perchance they would have thought it had had a shadow; and therefore as it was said in the Destruction of Maximinus and his Son, Ex pssimo genere ne catulum relinquendum, so I was unwilling to leave any sprig of this root, least it might sproute again, or to suffer one thread unbroken, lest the frame might seeme to hange by that, and be kept from falling. If there shall be nothing superfluous which ought to have been pruned, if there be any thing of complacency that may be in via pro vehiculo, and may so abridge and render a long way the less sensible, if the subject be of great weight and importance, as Non est longa oratio de rebus maximis, according to Euripides, so as Pliny said of Tullyes Orations, the longest are best; and there will be less fear of fastidiousnes by writing too much, then of prevarication by passing over things fit to be mentioned; or of negligence and perfunctoriness, by not writing enough; Hac tu credideris longam ratione Colossum. My subject may put in to be of this kind of matter, but I (who am impar subjecto, and infinitely farre from what Heynsius saith of Livy, a Writer equall to the Majesty of that People of whose History he wrote,) cannot be so fond or so farre my own flatterer (Neque enim mihi cornea fibra est) as to pretend that my hand∣ling thereof is in that kind of manner; but then they be my other defects and imperfections, and not the length which are the alloy of the work to embase the worth, and avile the price thereof. And defects and imperfections doubtless it carries forth to many with it. Quid tu? nullane habes vitia? imo alia, haud for∣tasse minora; for not onely, Opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum, but also, Non eadem expectes à summo minimoque poeta; but what∣soever they shall be found to be, I shall humbly begge they may be forgiven on the same condition whereupon Sylla gave
a reward to an evil Poet, that I write no more. And yet not∣withstanding if the Apologists, their Associates and Auxiliars (they having secured me under their hands, that their pur∣pose is to commend it to others more able, that I may have a satisfactory Answer) shall thinke fit by any sober and rational re∣ply, Ʋt Musis sociae Charites sint, to assault this work, since I have now taken Sacramentum militiae, or rather, militiam pro Sacra∣mento; I shall endeavour to defend it as long and make it good, aswell as I can; and according to the oath taken at Athens, Pugnabo pro sacris & solus & simul cum aliis; and I shall not be sorry if my Master when he comes, shall find me so doing, who can be content (pro hoc) stantem mori; yet nevertheless if they shall convince me of any Errors, (who am infinitely farre from Tully's Confidence, se nullum verbum quod revocare vellet, emi∣sisse) as I have so much of a man as to be very likely to erre, so I hope I have not so little of a Christian, as to be an Heretick, by pertinacy; Et non est obstinatus qui paratus est corrigi, as Augustine; I shall never be Insanus adversus antidotum, who am so much a Slave to reason, as to say still, Draw me, I will runne after thee; and since Nimis dedignatur mortalitatem qui errasse erubescit, I shall subscribe to the reason of better judgements (as Cornicis & columbae auspicia irrita fiunt, adveniente Aquila) and being argued of any lapse, as the feathers of those fowls which were sacrificed under the Law, were cast into the place of ashes; and among the old Heathens, a tongue was sacrficed to Mercury, Ad expiandas perperam dictorum labes, so I shall sentence my pen to ashes, (the Embleme of Repentance) and devote my tongue to speak with more prudence hereafter; but if any reply be taken from the cart (where they railed by Priviledge) not the Schoole, or be seasoned Nigro sale Momi, non sale candenti Mercurii, as Hie∣rom speaks, as I know that Magnum contumeliae remedium negli∣gentia, so I shall like that Albanian Dog sent to great Alexander, when ignobler animals were set to bayt him, vindicate my self onely with contempt, and chuse the more honorable and most proportionable wayes of revenge, Non esse visum dignum ex quo peteretur, and by taking no notice, Eripere ei qui fecit contume∣liae voluptatem; or if secondly they shall cast their rejoynder in∣to the same mould wherein they formed their answer, and shall stuffe and color it onely with an ignorantia Elenchi, by disputing for a power to remove notorious and scandalous sinners from
the Communion of the Sacraments, and so like the Lapwing set up their cry at so great a distance from their nest, defending that which is not impugned, and deserting the defense of that which is the matter of their practice, and occasion of our contest; or shal onely Intueri lunam laborantem, and take no notice of her clearer light, and like flyes seeke for and stick onely upon a sore place, and falling upon the sicke or some single parts of the ar∣my, without charging through the main body, which is rather a freebooting then a fight, and a pyracy not a just war, nor can ever assume a Victory; for since as Philip of France said of his Son Lewis in England, As long as Dover Castle stands out, he had not a foot in England; so as long as one Argument remaines unanswered, the cause is not carried; in all these cases also I shall onely make use of that which Tully calles the Eloquence of Atti∣cus, Silence, Respondere sciant me sibi dum taceo; or lastly, if any shall charg upon me with another piece of Carolostadius, Nec res nec ver∣ba, or a stair higher, with a parcel of Erasmus (according to Lu∣thers Diverbe) Verba sine re: As Augustin told Antony, that challenged him to the combat, if he were weary of living, there were wayes enough to death besides his Sword; so such infirme, saples and enervous Treatises, will soon dye of themselves, and need not to have violent hands laid upon them, Bene tacuit, qui de∣fensione non eget. But since Divine Providence hath permitted them to hale and thrust me forth to appeare in publick, so perfectly repugnant to what my iudgement dictated to be expedient, and my affections sensed complacent, and the Lord knows also contrary to those frequent Prayers which I put up to him to hinder and prevent it, if he saw it good: it shall be neither pride nor presumption to hope that it is possible that God, who is Ita artifex magnus in magnis ut non sit minor in minimis, hath some service to do for me, and some discoveries to make by me (as weak eyes fixt attenti∣vely on the Starres discern more then better sights observe with a transient aspect) and if by his blessing, I shall be capable to fa∣sten but one pinne in the shaken frame of the Church, or my buc∣ket to bring up but one drop of truth from that well where it hath been lately cast down and covered, and my spark which their stirring hath raked up, shall cast forth one glimpse to make known the way of Peace; or if as Xenophons expedition though with little effect excited great Alexander to a braver and more
succesful invasion of Persia; so this spark may kindle some greater and higher flame in others, or my writings might be dusted with some filings of that precious Stone called Glossopetra, which Pliny speakes of, which is like the tongue of a man, not bred in the Earth, but fallen from Heaven in an Eclipse of the Moon, which is said to still the winde; and so I could Motos componere fluctus, I should thinke for this, if for nothing else, I had lived to some purpose, and should dye with more comfort. Augustin tels us, that double-forheaded Janus was the inno∣centest of all the Gods, Tanto frontosior quant innocentior; and ve∣rily the Conscience I have of the candor and cleareness of my own heart (weighing it with those graines allowed to humane frailty) in all the Conduct of this Matter, who can say with Augustine, Ego omnia quod bona fide dixerim, sine ullo studio con∣tentionis, sine aliqua dubitatione veritatis, sine aliquo praejudicio dili∣gentioris tractatus exposui) renders me somewhat the more confi∣dent, that those weak Elucubrations shall finde the more favo∣rable receprion with men, and gratious success from God, to whose blessing I humbly recommend them, and if his presence go not with them, let him not carry them hence.
THe Author, though absent, yet was not wanting in his care to have the Press better corrected; yet neverthelesse, through incuriousnesse many Errata's have escaped, to his no little perturbation: Besides, that lines are broken, where they should be con∣tinued, (as Ex. gr. pag. 218. line 11.) and continued, when they should have been broken, (as ibid. p. 12.) And that the mispointings sometime vitiate the sense, (as E.G. p. 88. in the two last lines) and often perplex it, especially by omitting or misplacing the Half-moons, which should make the Parenthesis: Also, the Margin is taken into the Text, which begets an incoherence; p. 74. l. 28, 29. And by leaving out (not) where it ought to be; and putting it in, where it should not be, the sense is sometimes rendred contrary. And p. 194. after And l. 6. to hands, l. 7. is somewhat inserted, without the Authors privity, and which was not in his Copy. For the grosser faults (especially in those sheets which he could see) here are directions to amend them, which (though it be not easie to doe, because the pages are preposterously numbred also, the Revder is desired to correct, before he enter upon the work, who else will be at greater losse of time to find out the sense: smaller faults, and misplacing quotations higher or lower, are left to his own discretion to rectifie. PAge 6. line 14. read breath. ib. 32. dele no. p. 7. l. 11. r. dole as. p. 12. l. 24. r. sixt, p. 13. marg. r. vide∣ri. p. 17. l. 6. d. as. p. 18. l. 6. r. a knife. p. 20. l. 30. r. where whosoever. p. 23. l. 32. r. vour. p 24 l. 25 r longum. p. 26. l. 10. r. assure. 16.18. r. Augustus. p. 50. l. 30. r. Mayo. Ib. 47. their effect. p. 53. l. 7. r. that, p. 59. l. 35. r. nos sacit, p. 61. l. 16. r. consequent, ib. 22. d. and, p. 62. l. 7. r. scrutiny, ib. marg. r. cor∣rept, p. 67. l. 38. d. not, p. 71. l. 25 r. malleable, p. 73. l. 42. r. suspected, p. 74. l. 69. r. Church; therefore, p. 76. l. 22. r. whether I should. p. 79. l. 11. r. but not, p. 81. l. 5. r. vendicated, p. 82. l. 13. r. assier, ib. marg. l. 28. Socrates History, p. 83. ult. r. or faith, p. 84 l. 28. r. nor is, ib. 38. r. I could, p. 85. l. 45. r. in the, p. 86. l. 20. r. rectè; p. 87. l. 36. r, bittle, p. 88. l. 27. r. they bear, p. 89. l. 6. r. etsi, p. 91. m. r. pag. 467. p. 93. l. 22. r. Presbytery, p. 95. l 10. r. Vibius, ib. 24. d. et, p. 99. l. 6. r. any, ib. m. l. 7. r. in 3. ib. l. 10. r. 3 part, p. 110. l. 10.  8, p. 112. m. r. tract. 49. in Johan. p. 113. l. 11. r. Titleman, ib. m. r. Morton, ib. 40. r. what, p. 114. l. 22. r. wherein, ib. m. r. concionatorium, ib. m. l. 24. d. verbi, p. 115. l. 30. r. inference, ib. m. l. 3. vera esse, p. 118. l 5. r. material, p. 119. l. 27. r. ignominia, p. 120. l. 38. r. little gemmyes, ib. 40. r, pleased, p. 124. l. 3. r. Pius, ib. 27. r. theirs, p. 126. l. 33. r. his own age, p. 128. against l. 11. add 4. d. 9. q. 4. p. 701. & q. 5. p. 703. p. 129. m. r. 39. ib. 16. d. not, ib. 43. d. to, p. 131. l. 31. r. apertè, p. 132. l. 14. r. principle p, 135. l. 30. d. self, p. 137. l. 11. r. no power, p. 139. l. 25. r. syllogizari, p. 147. l. 36. Meier, p. 149. l. 30. r. wherein, p. 169. l. 11. d. where. p. 182. l. 9. r. delinquents, ib. 11. r. left, ib. 28. r. receive, p. 183. l. 5. r. confession, p. 184. l. 30. r. resultively, p. 186. l. 2. r. Clytus, p. 187. r. examination, or that to be a part of repentance, p. 188. l. 27. r. puts, p. 169. (as miscounted) l. 11. d. where, p. 170. l. 9. r. iutè, p. 171. l. 19. d. of p. 173. m. r. Aquin. 3. q. 80. p. 177. l. 13. r. Liturgie, p. 178. l. 5. r. either in the causes, ib. 26. r. or in the, p. 179. l. 14. r. extra oleas, p. 183. l. 21. r. consecration, p. 184. l. 23. r. was afterward usual, p. 186. l. 16. r. their way, p. 189 l. 18. r. it is, p. 190. l. 31. Corviaus, p. 192. m. against l. 12. add Epis. 108. tom. 2. p. 98 ib. against l. 18. l. 2. obs. 4. p. 241. p. 194. l. 6. r. communion and the dispersers, &c. p. 200. l. 39. d. if, p. 209. l. 45. r. inquire, p. 211. l. 12. r. but Casaubon, p. 215. l. 12. r. of Heathens, ib. 13. d. who, p. 217. l. 14. r. such onely, p. 219. l. 24. r. quia per. p. 221. m. l 13. r. minàs com∣modè,
p. 225. l. 7. r. vivified, ib. 26. r. unum, ib. 34. r. sanitas, p. 226. l. 4. r. of the Saints, ib. m. against l. 11. add tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. S. 3. p. 27. p. 228. l. 21. r. Cramner, ib. 48. percipi, p. 229. m. r. in Ep. ib. 25. r. president, p. 230. l. 48. r. enmity, p. 232. l. 1. generate, ib. 26. ii. p. 233. m. r. 1, 2. p. 236. l. 5. reasons, ib. doe, ib. 13. r. perpended, ib. 25. r. no more than the word is, p. 237. m. l. 5. r. tom. 10. ib. 13. r. tom. 7. ib. 23. rapsi, p 238. l 14. r. tamen, ib. m. r adde concord. eccle. epist. 166. ib. 45. r Audius. p 241. l 36. r socie∣ty, p 243. l 6. r I am, p 257. l 10. r submit, p 265. l 32. r if it doe, p 271. l 3.  ib. 23. fulmen, p 272. l 26. r amittit. ib. 30. separetur, p 273. l 13. r Parmenianum, p 274. l 22. r vassal, p 277. l 8. r their greater share of the, ib. 20. , ib. 43. , p 281. l 7. r. Rabirius, p 282. l 12. r fluminis, ib. 36. r to receive, p 283. l 10. r to evince there is, p 286. l 10. r Corinthum, p 290. l 22. jungentur, p 291. l 30. r may be, p 296. l 15. r ecclesiam, ib. l 20. m. r cap. 5. In the first page not figu∣red, m. l 4. r p 122. ib. 22. r secundum Mat. In the following page, l 4. r lenitas, ib. 12. and so, ib. m. l 2. r 41. p 297. l 30. r of truth, ib. m. r scandalo & offendiculo, p 301 l 3 r three witnesses, ib. 12 as if it were, p 304 l 29 will be, ib. l ult. r Preachers, p 309 l 43 r Laberius, p 310 l 30 r old Ro∣mans, p 311 l 30 r Synonymus, p 312 l 2 nuncupatively, p 313 l 29 Laudat, p 317 l 2 r Church, ib. 24. appositely, p 319 l 5 r lapilli ib. m. de Just. p 321 l 18 r oporteri, p 324 l 4 r warrant, p 327 l 4 r heart, ib. 31 quis{que} p 328 m. l ult. tom. 8 232, p 333 l 15 r aliquod, p 334 l 6 r. cuicta, p. 335. l. 15. r. that which, p. 338. l. 16. r. an expectation of any, p 342 l 24 r whom they, p 70 l 3 r no seal, ib. 25 r checkered, p 173 l 5 r those callings, ib. 27. d. and, p 172 l 13 r profecerit; p 174 l 33 r Talicotian cures, p 175 l 1 r abhominable, ib. 13. r the Pharisee, ib. 40 r opprobries, p 176 l 23 r animorum, p 177 l 42 r who bave, p 178 l 27 r him in p 179 l 39 r have they, p 180 l 39 r not a rigid, ib. 41 r gerere, p 184 against l 14 m. add Eccles. l 1 c 5. p. 1942. ib. 38 r cinie, p 185 l 29 d. the, p 186 l 6 r rumorum, p 187 l 9 r a draught of a, ib. 13 r accipientes perverse, p 190 l 20 r Blondel, & so pag. 300 l 27. p 192 l 29 r to their eyes, p 195 l 33 r alleviated, ib. m. l 15 r conqueruntur, p 196 l 40 r paralel, p 197 l 40 r as we, p 198 l 44 r done, ib. m. r Bezam & Witgenstein, p 201 l 7 r to be set, p 209 l 21 r leave, ib. 48. r be, p 213 l 26 r not have been, ib. 32 r as well they may, ib. 46. r Barcochab, pag. 215. l 40 r perscribi, ib. 42 r was good, p 217 l 29 r incurious, ib. 38 r not knew it to be, p 220 l 37 r rational, p 221 m. r Cam: opera, fol. 424 p 228 l 43 r Est Ulubris, p 233 l 5 r themselves, p 236 l 25 r superstition, p 239 l ult. r do not, p 241 l 6 d. but, p 244 l 35 r it cease p 248 l 11 r apposite, p 254 l 14 d. them, p 258 l 30 r may doe, p 259 l 18 r tales, ib. 35 r within, p 261 l 30 r majus; here adde in the marg. Azor. Inst. Moral. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 27. p. 50. p 262 l 11 r fugeret, p 263 l 5 r as if it were, ib. 34 r if evil, p 265 l 1 r table, p 271 m. r post. Collat. p 272 l 15 r not casting, b. 1 r then not in, p 273 l 7 r proscribe, p 277 l 18 r as Charondas, p 278 l 3 r till, ib. 48 r confine, p 281 l 7 r yet, p 283 l 13 r converting, p 284 l 1 r invisible, ib. 25 r at, p 285 l 44 r they have, p 286 l 5 r decry, p 288 l 1 r caninum, p 289 against l 2 adde contra Fulgent. Donat. inter opera Augustini, p 286 l 21 r me∣naceth, p 292 l 22 r detested, p 293 against line 25 adde contra lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 4. & cont. Epist. Parmen. l. 2. c. 22. p 294 l 27. d. dalous, p 312 l 26 r panem, ib. 43 r pascit, p 314 l 1 r carreir.
THE DIATRIBE. SECT. I. Of Antiquity and Innovation. The Character of their Disci∣pline; the state of the question. ALthough I am none of the superstitious adorers of Antiquity (for Antiquitas secli est juventus mundi) neither will be any of the froward retainers of Custome, which may be as turbulent a thing as Innovation (Christ having said that he was Truth not Custome) yet I have learned from Scripture to make a stand upon the ancient ways, and then to look about and dis∣cover what is the straight and the right way; and surely No∣velty, though it be not by and by rejected, yet it is alwayes su∣spected; for what is most ancient, is most honourable, saith Aristotle; and most true, adds Tertullian: and what is setled by custome, though it be not the best, yet at least may seem fit; where as Mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adjuvat utilitate, August. Epist. 118. c. 5. perturbat novitate: and therefore Tremember, that not onely the Spartans set a mulct on the Musitian that added one string more than ordinary to his Harp; but the Lycians suffered none to propose a new Law, but with an halter about his neck, that if the reason thereof were not approved, he might forthwith be hanged for offering novelties: And therefore I cannot but conclude with Augustine, Non est à con∣suetudine recedendum nisi rationi adversetur; and with Ulpian, De Musica, l. 2. c. 8. In rebus no∣vis constituendis evidens esse debet utilitas, ut recedatur ab eo jure quod diu aequum visum est. If this new way (and I think I may without hazard of a quarrel take the liberty to stile it so) of gathering Churches, and making a kind of Monopoly of the Sacra∣ment, had ground and warrant from Gods Word, the Practice of the Primitive Church, the demonstration of Reason, or did manifestly conduce and tend to the advance of godlinesse and pure Religion, I should not check with it for the novelty (relatively to our age) Jesus Christ is antiquity enough; and I should say with Galba, Hoc age & feri, siquidem ita est è re populi Romani (seu potius Dei) But when many good and moderate, and rational men are much unsatisfied, that it carryes any of these Stamps or Characters, and it is doubted (not altogether irrationally) that it tends to quench the smoaking flax, not to enflame it; to break the bruised reeds, more than to strengthen them; to blast the Seeds of devotion, which a gentler influence would cherish and foment; and to make the most of men profane and careless of the Ordinances, who by partaking thereof, might feel the power, and be charmed with the sweetness and comforts of them, and possibly to make one part of the people seem as
Pharisees, and the other as Heathens and Publicanes, and (in effect) to turn Aarons Rod into a Serpent, and make men fly from it; and for my own part, unless I am blind through ignorance and infirmity (whose own heart witnesseth to me that I am not wilfully or maliciously so) I can see nothing really to support this new frame, but Rhetorical Amplifications, not Rational Arguments; Popular, not Logical Discourses; and Similitudes and Allegories, rather than Reasons: Ad populum phaleras: which is handsomly to paint an house that hath no solid foundations: I cannot therefore up∣on these reflections, but excuse those that at the sound of such Musick cannot fall down and worship the Image that Nebuchadnezzar hath set up. 1. The liberty and profitable use of private conference, in order to preparatory In∣struction, is not controverted: it is an apt and elegant comparison of Quintilian, that men are as bottles, which are sooner and better filled, by taking them in hand one by one, and pouring water into them, than by setting them together, and sprinkling water upon them. 2. That where (as the Casuists speak) there is violenta suspicio quae morali∣ter facit rem certam, (for if it be onely probabilis suspicio, they will tell you, that melior est conditio possidentis bonam famam, but) in case of violent suspition, (and perchance also if it might be but morally probable) that any persons are through ignorance unable and incompetent to discern the Lords Body, that such may and are meet to be examined, or that such of whom is like suspition, that they have lapsed into any crimes that are scandalous, may be publiquely questioned and sifted; and where Ecclesiastical Discipline is setled, that Witnesses may be examined concerning them, is not denied. In such cases, the same may be spoken of neglect of Probation, as is said of the omission of private admonition and reproof; a man may be called to an ac∣count for an idle silence, as well as for an idle word: for as evil talk leads men to evil, so an evil silence leaves them in it: Faciens & Consentiens eâdem lege tenentur. 3. That notorious sinners (and the Casuists, who have St. Augustine to prompte them) say, Quando adest evidentia ju∣ris, quia juri∣dicè convi∣ctus, &c. vel evidentia facti, &c. as Filiucius and Suarez ex∣press it. that they can be notorious onely upon this account, Cum crimen est manifestum aut per sententiam in judicio (Civili aut Ecclesiastico) aut per publicam in eo confessionem, aut per evidentiam talem ut nulla tergiversatio∣ne potest caelari: And they farther tell us, that every crime that can be proved, is not therefore manifest, but is rather manifestabile, than manifestum: but that such notorious sinners being contumacious may, and in a well-constituted Church must be excommunicated in a juridical and ordinate way with the greater, (yea, and if that would content them) or lesser Excommunication, and respectively to the merit of the cause, and disposition of the persons, is granted: Yet not so much for prevention of any pollution that any may contract by communion with them (for nec causa cau∣sae, nec persona personae praejudicat, as saith St. Augustine, concerning Peter and Judas their communicating together, & quisquis ab hac Ecclesia Catholica fuerit separatus, Contra Do∣nat. post. Col∣lat. tom. 7. p. 122. quantumlibet laudabiliter se vivere existimet, hoc solo scelere quòd à Christi unitate disjunctus est, non habebit vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum: quisquis autem in hac Ecclesia bene vixerit, nihil ei praejudicant aliena peccata, quia unusquis{que} in ea proprium onus portabit, saith the same Father) But, first, to humble, and by shame to reclaim the offender: And, secondly, to keep the example from having any spreading contagious influence by impunity: As also, thirdly, Epist. 152. to remove the Scandal, which the Discipline of the Church may contract by remission and indulgence, lest the City of God, (as the Fathers call the Church) should
be as Philip stiled one in Greece, that fostered all scelerous persons, the City of the wicked. And fourthly, that also as Valerius Maximus in another case, Quantum ruboris civitati turpiter se gerendo incusserunt, tantum laudis graviter puniti adferant. Wherefore I oppose not a probation negative, so as to see that there be no manifest exception against men for unworthinesse. I deny the necessity of a positive trial, to make a scrutiny and search into them for some real worthinesse. I conceive him visibly worthy that is an intelligent, and no apparently ulcerous member of the visible Church. I do not judge, that they are to admit none that are not otherwise visibly worthy, but ought not to exclude any that are not visibly unworthy. I think it not necessary, that all that are admitted should have demonstrative signs of holiness; but suppose it enough, that they are not signally wicked. I conceive it not ground suffi∣cient to exclude them, that their lives are suspitious, unlesse their crimes be notori∣ous; persons scandalous, and openly flagitious, we may separate from us: from others that fall not under that notion, we may not separate our selves. And a power to act in such cases, the Ministery need not complain wholly to want, even in Churches un∣presbyterated, much lesse upon pretence of such want, suspend the Celebration and administring of the Sacrament altogether; for they may assume as large and free power to exclude some such, even where no consistorial, juridical, formal proceeding can be had, as they now take to put by, and interpretatively to excommunicate all, which they do, while they (at least many of them) administer it to none, but intermit the use thereof altogether, or exhibit it to very few or none (in comparison) but to such onely as they have gathered into a new Church; and therefore as one being asked where he found his interpretation concerning Constantines donation (as another his gloss upon the Salike Law) answered, If any looked on the back-side of that Do∣nation (and so of that Law) there it was to be found: so might it be more aptly said, that from whence they derived the power and liberty to excommunicate all by non∣administration, or so many by non-admission, they might fetch a right to exclude per∣sons scandalous (yea and apparently ignorant.) But our Rhodus and Saltus, our present question is, whether it be not onely profitable, but necessary, antecedently to the Communion, to make examination, notional or real, of the knowledge, or the lives not onely of such, who upon morally probable grounds, may well be suspected to be in∣competent for ignorance or crime, but of all indifferently, so as for want of will in any to submit to this probation, they may justly be debarred the Sacrament; and for want of power or means in the Minister, to exercise this Discipline, he may lawfully intermit the administration, or administer it onely to such as will submit themselves thereunto, gathered and convened (and not by their proper Pastour) out of distant places, and several Congregations.
DEFENCE. SECT. I. What authority the Diatribe ascribed to the Fathers, and ancient Church? Why the Apologists derogate from them? THe Paper (so I shall call it, after that name which the Apologists always give it at the Circumcision thereof) in the first Section, seemed to rise to the hoary head of Antiquity, and cast a suspitious eye upon Novelty, recogni∣zing that, habet ut in aetatibus authoritatem Senectus, sic & in exemplis antiquitas; and accounting with the Oracle that to be the best complexion, which was concolor mortuis: yet this was delivered onely in thesi, and general, not in hypo∣thesi, or particular application to my subject, and by way of preface, not of ar∣gumentation, as they suggest, calling this the first-born argument, which yet had no double portion of substance, nor was the beginning of strength, or ex∣cellency of dignity: Fit enim natu∣rae quodam instinctu, & judicio recto sanè si illo recte utamur, ut in religionis negotio nova omnia sint suspecta & ferè exosa. Casaub. exer∣cit. 16. S. 43. p. 390. There was notwithstanding, not the least intimation made, as if any thing that bears the stamp of Antiquity were therefore to be received, but onely not hastily to be laid aside; nor that any thing was to be rejected, because new coined, but not to be so easily entertained: neither that whatsoever was ancient, was infallibly true, but the more credible: nor that which was new, was undoubtedly false, but more suspicious. The Apologists cannot say, and whosoever shall make inspection into the Paper, will not see, that I attribute too much to Antiquity, and if they would have ascribed any thing, they needed to have said nothing. But it seems they have the same quarrel to Antiquity, which the Affricans have of the Sun, Urit fulgore suo; and as Herod, being originally a stranger, and Alien, sought to suppresse the Genealogies of the Jewish Nation, and especially of the Royal Linage: so the Apologists seek to disparage and detract from the exemplary practice of the ancient Church, and judgment of the Fathers, whereunto in opinion and way they are strangers. De Carthagine potius nulla quàm pauca. I am not susceptible to assert the ho∣nour and reverend esteem of the illustrious Fathers (as Iuther calls them) neither shall I need to undertake it; for though mutus fit oportet, qui non lauda∣bat Herculem, yet it was no unapt check of Antalcidas, Quis unquam sanus eum vituperavit? But since the Apologists, instead of answering the testimo∣nies, have thought to discredit the Witnesses, and have somewhat enlarged themselves both in this and the 13. Section, to lessen their authority: It may seem proditorious, to desert their Defence, and to shew lesse zeal to support them, than they have done to deprave their credit; especially seeing, as Isocrates was said to have made many Orations, in sending forth many Orators: and
he that saves a Physician, preserves many lives and many remedies: So I shall in vindicating this Topick, fortifie the Arguments drawn from it; and if it seem out of my way, yet it is but in fresh suit of the Apologists, whom I am bound to follow. SECT. II. Of Antiquity, Custome, sad consequences of Independency, the no∣velty thereof, the Fathers not without errours, yet not to be sleighted. What may be called the Primitive Church? Protestants always ho∣noured the Fathers, and never declined their Testimony. THey embrace that saying, That which is first is true, because true antiquity is a friend to truth, and every good way is old: but they restrain, and limit this to such age and antiquity, as things may claim onely for being revealed in Scripture: But this is not the onely antiquity which we are now debating of; this is Antiquity proved Ex priori; but it is Ecclesiastical antiquity (as I may call it) the consent and custome of the antient Church, antiquity pro∣ved Ex posteriori, which we are now considering of; what authority it carries, what reverence and esteem it merits, and what force and influence it hath. We concur to adore Divine Scripture antiquity as the best: Veritas in om∣nibus imaginem anteceda; po∣stremò similitu∣do succedit. I ertul. Aug. contra Crescon. l. 2. c. 29. Idem de peccat. merit. & remis. 1.1. c. 22. In mde natura & , . 61. . Mihi pro his omnibus, imo supra hos omnes Apostolus Paulus; to assent to it, as the truest, as that which nec falli potest nec fallere; and to captivate our understanding thereunto, Sine ulla recusatione, & cum credendi necessitate: But because this is the best and truest, and most infallible antiquity, therefore to infer, that no other antiquity needs to be considered of, or is worthy of reverence, or can lend any strength of argument, is as if I should conclude, that because an Apodictick Syllogism (whose principles are propositions, verae, primae, immediatae, priores, notiores, causae conclusionis,) is onely Scientifical, that therefore all Dialectick Syllo∣gisms concluding ex probabilibus, are useless and despicable; or that St. Paul argued both weakly and superfluously, that the woman ought to have power on her head because of the Angels, when it had been enough, and more efficaci∣ous to have said, because of God: or because Christ is the onely Mediatour be∣tween God and Man, by his merit and efficacy; and upon whose intercession alone we can rely with faith: therefore 'tis vain and fruitless to seek or regard the help and assistance of the prayers of the godly. To the antient Church I think most authority to be ascribed, and greatest reverence to be attributed, since streams run purest neer the Fountain; and if that which is first be truest, what is next to the first, is next to truth: and here∣fore, Sānctorum Patrum constitutiones qui proximiores fuerant Christo scames, said Nazianzen; and those Orders be most pure, that come most neer to the example of the Primitive Church, said the holy Martyr Sanders: Fox Act. & on. p. 494. yet the at re∣station of that Church, I grant, is but an humane testimony, nor perfectly ∣vine, but in part, as it faithfully testifieth what the Apostles did and said: Di∣vine, in regard of the matter and thing testified: Human, in regard of the
quality of the Witnesses, and manner of testification, and therefore formally as such, being but an humane testimony, can beget but an acquisite faith; for no conclusion can be of higher nature than the premises, as no water can be made to rise higher than the Spring: Picus Miran∣dula, Canus, and I grant that, Fidei acquisitae (quae fulcitur homine proponente, non Deo revelante) subesse potest falsum: and therefore, Nun∣quam hominem quemvis per fidem acquisitam ità existimamus esse veracem, quin for∣midemus cum vel falli posse vel fallere. Yet notwithstanding, fides acquisitase habet ad fidem gratuitam, sicut praeambula dispositio ad formam, & disponit animam ad receptionem luminis, Alexander Hales; all as cited by Dr. F. White's an∣swer to Fish. p. 14. 22. quo assentitur primae veritati propter se, & dicitur ipsam in∣troducere sicut seta filum: and though divine revelation in Scripture be there∣fore the sole principle, immediate motive, and formal reason and object of be∣leeving, and last resolution of Faith; yet the authority and external testimony of the Church, may produce the same, as an adjuvant instrumental admini∣string moral cause, and subordinate help. Prae omnibus si aperta fuerit Scriptura, eam ipsam amplector, saith St. Augustine: and therefore he that will not beleeve Moses and the Prophets, it will be in vain to raise any of the dead to perswade him; when the Scripture shines out in full brightness, omnes Perstringit stellas exortus ut aethereus Sol: But when that Sun shines not so clearly, as to con∣vince and satisfie contenders who have bad eyes: the Fathers, as Stars that re∣ceive their light from that Sun, may reflect some illumination upon us, as the Stars are to be seen by day, in dark pits, and obscure places: and though I con∣sent to Augustine, Epist. 19. ad Hieron. that let the Learning and Holiness of other Writers be never so eminent, I will not think it true, because they have thought so; but because they are able to perswade me either by other Canonical Writers, or probable Reason: yet I add, that I am more confirmed in my perswasion, that I rightly hit the sense of Canonical Writers, and apprehend the Dictates of true Reason, when I conceive the same, which I finde that they thought; though they are not principles of infallible verity to command beleef, yet they are grounds of credibility to sacilitate assent; Non domini, sed duces, to use Seneca's words. And I shall more easily embrace that which hath their witness, and be more apt to doubt of that which wants their testimony; Sola argumenta ex Scripturis esse necessaria, Cathol. Orthe∣dox. Tract. 1. q. 10. p. 121. è Patribus autem probabilia, saith learned Rivet: Their consent I esteem not ut fidei mensuram, sed ut testem temporis & argumentum historicum, which makes certain the matter of fact, that such was the doctrine and practice of the first and purer times, being registred to us by those that cannot be ima∣gined not to know, being so neer; nor be suspected to combine falsly to im∣pose upon us, being so pious. They are not moved to hear men count and call good ways new, and the Adver∣saries of true Doctrine have always loaded it with this Title (which confirms them to see the ways of their government have the same lot) and therefore this principle of Antiquity yeelds but a popular and fallacious Argument. But few I suppose will be moved with this argumentation, as not fallacious enough to impose upon popular judgements. For, First, implicitly and interpretatively, those good ways are their ways, where∣in is involved Petitio Principii. Secondly, if so small a matter confirm their judgement, it is suspitious, that as small a weight of reason might first settle it; Talia sunt alimenta, qualia sunt Elementa.
Thirdly, If that be a popular and fallacious argument which is derived from a principle made use of commonly by Hereticks, or others, thereby to give a specious lustre to their own Opinions, and cast an odium on their oppo∣sites, then Scripture it self may be sentenced to be a principle, yeelding onely popular and fallacious arguments; for who knows not, that most Hereticks have sought to fortifie their Opinions with pretence of Scripture, and have upbraided their adversaries with want thereof? Fourthly, when any pretend antiquity to give countenance to novel and un∣warrantable Opinions or Institutions, by turning the wrong end of the Pro∣spective, to make things at hand seem to be far off: the fallacy is not in the principle, but the men that abuse and falsly apply it; nor lies it in the propo∣sition, but the assumption. Fifthly, seeing as Hierom tells us, Mendacium semper imitatur veritatem, the argument is the more specious, and like to carry more force, because subtil falsi∣fiers have assumed it; for they being wiser in their Generations, would not lay on those colours that had no beauty or lustre; nor would they set that stamp on their counterfeit Coyn, did they not know it would make it pass more cur∣rant. Hierom (say they) is condemned, for desiring leave of Augustine to erre with seven Fathers, but they dare not, nor are willing to give this liberty; but yet they take as much, when in the question, whether Judas communicated of the Lords Supper, they mention twelve late Writers, and not all of them, aut magni aut bonì nominis, asserting the negative; and ask, who would not erre with such as those are? But we say, though we would not erre with the Fathers, yet we less distrust our selves to erre with them, or when they are on our side; and proba∣bly suppose our selves farthest from erring, when neerest to them. As the Scripture bids us to remember Lots wife, so they say to the Preten∣ders of Antiquity, Remember the Gibeonites: Had this Memento been limited to false Pretenders of Antiquity, it might have been plausible: but if themselves had not forgotten to take some of the salt of that Pillar, whereinto she was turned, to have seasoned their discretions, they never would have made this instance indefinitly, and without limitation: For, First, it follows not, because they counterfeited old things, we may not al∣leage that which is truly ancient; or because some stones are counterfeit, therefore none must be precious Jewels. Secondly, it may be retorted on themselves, the Gibeonites would not have simulated that, which had it been true, would not have been effectual to the ends for which they fained it; and had their bread, and bottles, and shooes, been as old as they dissembled, Joshuah might, and would have accepted, and been at peace and in league with them. And will it not then be consequent, to suit the Apodosis to the Protasis, in this Allegory or Similitude, that Antiqui∣ty is a likely Plea, and lends a good Topick; and such things as wear her Live∣ry, and bear her Character, are more receptible than those that want them? But if the antiquity the Paper calls for, do signifie but Custome, as they guess by some passages, viz. what is setled by Custome, they will be bold to say of such antiquity, It is vetustas erroris: I shall say with Augustine, Quis dubitat veri∣tati manifestatae debere consuetudinem cedere? But I add, Veritatem non ostendis,
de consuetudine confiteris: De Baptism. cont. Donat. l. 3. p. 82. Tom. 7. Ibidem, l. 7. p. 99. Ibid. l. 4. p. 85. ad Januar. Ep. 119. de Ci∣vitate Dei, l. 15. c. 16. but abstracting custom from the consideration of the matter, either as it is good (for goodness will warrant it self without custome, yet honum & consuetum duo sunt bona: and as St. Augustine gravely, Cùm consue∣tudini veritas suffragatur, nihil oportet firmius retineri) or as it is evil; for then custom cannot authorize it: for the Philosopher said, Omnia mala habenda pro peregrinis: and S. Augustine, Aut propter fidem, aut propter mores vel emendari opor∣tel quod perperàm fiebat, vel institui quod non fiebat: But only as custom, even as such, Ad humanum sensum vel alliciendum, vel offendendum, mos valet plurimùm; and upon that & other reflections, insinuated in the Paper, I might, without offence, conclude with Ulpian; In rebus novis constituendis evidens esse debet utilitas; and with St. Augustine, Non est à consuetudine recedendum nisi rationi adversetur. But beside, the customs which I chiefly reverence, and engage to defend, are the customs of the antient Church; Ad Casulan. Ep. 86. and if the Apologists will be bold to say of such antiquity, it is vetustas erroris, I shall modestly re-mind them, that they are more bold then wise: And if they shall sleight the judgement of St. Augu∣stine, in his rebus, de quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura Divina, mos Populi Dei, vel instituta majorum pro lego tuenda sunt, nor shall prize the sense of the great Council of Chalcedon, , Let the ancient custom prevail; yet I hope they will grant there was some weight in that Argument of the A∣postle, 1 Cor. 11.16. We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God. The gray hairs of Opinions and Practices are then beauty, and a Crown when found in the way of truth and righteousness: They are then indeed a Crown more glo∣rious and worthy of double honour; but yet aetas per se venerabilis, saith Calvin: and therefore some suppose, that in the Greek an old man is called , which signifieth honour; Willet in Lev. 19.32. Arist. l. 19. Ethic. 2. Jansenius in locum. C. à Lapide in locum. and it is the dictate of the same spirit (which Aristotle hath also delivered almost verbatim) Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, formally as an old man. And some Expositors, because the relative is not in the Hebrew, thus inter∣pret that of Prov. 16.31. The hoary head is a Crown of glory, it is found in the way of righteousness, as if old men were commonly righteous: as the Chaldee in the late famous Bible renders that of Leviticus, Rise before him that is learned in the Law, implying old men to be so: so as therefore we might turn the allusion against them. The light of Doctrine hath long filled our Horizon; the light of Discipline was not so forward or successful, being a long while held by some men in unrighteousness: Ni∣mirum liberanda veritas illos expectabat, as Tertullian once said of Marcion: but — utinam talis status esset in illo, Ut non tristitiae causa dolenda foret: Fair words cannot perswade us that we are not hurt, while we feel the smart of our wounds: neither have we been bred up in Anaxagoras his School, to beleeve the snow to be of other colour than our eyes discern it. What Quin∣tilian and Seneca said of the Common-wealth, we may apply to the Church; the one, Quaedam sunt crimina laesae Reipub. ad quorum pronuntiationem soli oculi suf∣ficiunt: The other, An laesa sit Respub. non solet argumentis probari; manifesta sta∣tim sunt damna Reipub. The Tree is known by his fruit; and we have tasted such bitterness in the fruits of this Discipline, and the Principles thereof, that as Joab stubbornly said to David, Thou hast shamed the face of all thy Servants:
So even those that could not be satisfied with the topping, but wished the cut∣ting down of the former Tree, as being grown too high, to over-top and drop upon the Paradise of God, are truly ashamed to see this Plant spring up in the place thereof; which not onely like the Boranetz or Tartar Lamb, though it seem to creep low toward the ground, and bear wool like the Sheeps cloathing, yet destroys all verdancy, and suffers nothing to grow or prosper neer it: but he also that shall contemplate in what a light flame the whole Wood is, will be apt to conclude, that the Bramble is become the King of Trees, from whom onely this fire could come forth: So that some may well cry out, as the Constan∣tinopolitans at Arsacius his succeeding of Chrysostom, Deus bone, quis cui? and are afraid to have contracted a suitable guilt to what the Romane Senate incur∣red toward Drusus; of whom Paterculus tells us, Qui tanto meliore ingenio quàm fortunâ usus est, ut malefacta collegarum, quàm ejus optimè cogitata, Se∣natus probaret magìs: But I remember Herodotus tells us, that Phrinicus was amerced 1000. Drachmes, for representing in a Tragedy the loss of Miletus, and thereby renewing the sorrow thereof: and therefore I shall not farther have unguem in Ulcere, having else-where rubbed the sore; and also, because not onely illè dolet verè, but also tute, qui sine teste dolet: onely in answer to the Apologists expressions I shall say, That their Light of Discipline hath proved an ignis fatuus, to lead us into Precipices and abysses; or a Comet to portend and effect mischief, and the fumes and exhalations thereof have eclips'd that Light of Doctrine, which they confess formerly filled our Hemisphere; it hath been onely forward to undo us, and successful as Pompey was great, miseriâ no∣strâ: and as Curio was eloquent, malo publico, and was brought forth with more unrighteousness, then ever it was with-held. O utinam arguerem sic ut non vincere possem! Me miserum; quare tam bona causa mea est? Yet is it aes alienum, to acknowledge, that I neither can justly charge upon the Apologists, nor will I leave them under the least suspition of having any personal share of, or proper guilt in the Heresies and Profaness, specula∣tive and practical Antiscripturisme, whose abominations in this Land make all good eyes to water, and godly hearts to bleed: But I look on Independency (the Principles of which Discipline have imposed on the Apologists) as the summum genus, the common Principle, and as it were the Trojaa horse of all those evils: for as the jangling Sects of Philosophers pretended to be all So∣cratical; so the differing Sects assume the Livery of Independency, which is the Basis, as Physitians speak, of the Composition, and the Bond and Common tye of the Bundle: So as I impute not the mischief to Independents distribu∣tively, but collectively; nor think them to flow formally and inseparably from Independency in the Abstract, so as to spread through al the denominations, but to have spawn'd from Independents in the Concrete, and that Discipline hath given the occasion of the rise and growth thereof, which how strict soever it pretend to be, in admitting to Church-membership, or Communion of Sacra∣ments, yet is too loose in the liberty afforded to Opinions; in a conceit some∣what like Tamberlains, That Religion is like a Posie, which is most sweet, when made up of variety of flowers. In an epidemical Contagion, some may be yet antidoted by temperament and habitude of body, yet the Pestilence is mortally infections; and although there are many good Subjects of the notion of Pa∣pists, yet Popery hath many treasonable and seditious Principles: So though
under the notion of Independents there are many Orthodox men, yet Inde∣pendency is causally very heterodox; as he that lets down the Fence, or lays open the Gap, is guilty of all the mischief which the wilde Beasts do in the field. They ask, whether we say the Sun rose not till twelve, because it shined not till then; or that America was a second or new Creation, because sound out of late? and thereupon perswade us, that their Government is elder than the former Custome of our Predecessours, and not younger than the Scriptures; and that it is unreason∣able and unsafe to look onely on the Customes and Practices of the next Ages before us, which they are sure worship'd God impurely. Though Clouds may mask the face of the Sun at one place, or for one in∣stant, yet it shines forth in some other; and not onely by discourse of reason, but by evidence of sense, after the Sun is come into our Horizon, we know he is risen, for we then always see the light thereof (though not in full bright∣ness thereof perhaps) for without that light we could not well see. Though America was but lately discovered to us, it was not unknown to all others; the Inhabitants were not ignorant thereof; and we know all this while under what Meridians and Parallels it was situate, and we are satisfied that it had a real, though no notional existence in respect of us: but we are still to seek where this new world of their Discipline was in being, until it was found out of late: And suitably to the products of divine inspiration, or results of rational discourse; a thing of this kind could have no being, till it was found out (and therefore not fitly compared with America;) If they can assign when, and where antiently their new light of discipline shined before we saw it, (unless perhaps some flashes thereof were among those who supposed they had more light of truth, The Donatists alleaged in defence of their Separation that of Cantic. 1.7. because more of the Sun-beams, and thought that onely among them∣selves the Beloved made his Flock to rest at Noon) I shall yeeld there was such a Sun, though latter ages saw it not; else I shall suspect it to be onely Pa∣relius, a counterfeit Sun, subsisting onely in the vapours and exhalations of mo∣dern heads. Antient Customs may be antiquated, and again redintegrated: some truths, in some ages, smothered by the predominating Errour and Faction, and be afterward revived; for Nullum tempus occurrit Regi Coelorum: But it is one thing to be new, Jewel apol. p. 5. c. 1. Divis. 1. another to be renewed; Quod verum est, serum non est, saith Saint Ambrose. As there can be no change in God himself, so ought there to be no change in his Religion, saith that Gemma Theologiae: If therefore their Disci∣pline were but lately found out, it will be found to be without warrant. If they will commence per saltum, Neb. 7.63, 64. and say it is as ancient as Scripture, but cannot trace the descent and pedegree thereof, through any one age of the antient Church, they are onely like those Priests the Children of Habajah, who sought their Register among those that were reckoned by Genealogy, but it was not found; therefore were they, as polluted, put from the Priesthood. Although we shall gladly dormire inter medios cleros, that is, saith S, Augustine, in utrius{que} Testamenti authoritate conquiescere, In Psal. 67. ut quando aliquid ex i's profertur & probatur, omnis contentio pacifica quietè finiatur: Yet besides, that, they are likely to have as little foundation in Scripture, as they implicitly confess to have support from the practice of the antient Church: In the interim also they con∣tract
many prejudices, not easily to be wrastled with; for who will hastily be∣leeve, that in this age, which to other works of the flesh, hath added swarms of Heresies (& mali mores excoecant intellectum, saith Ockham) the Light of Dis∣cipline should break out, when so many gross Clouds eclipse the greater Lumi∣nary of Doctrine; that this secret of the Lord should not have been with those that feared him in so many ages (whom he promised to teach, and to be with, and to lead into all necessary truth, Non verisimile est ut tot & tantae in unam sidem erraverint, saith Tertullian: Et quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est erratum sed traditum) nor reflected on us by those great Stars of the Primitive Sphere, between whom, and some others, is no more comparison, than between the pillars of the Temple and their shadows (as Nazianzen magnifieth Basil) and when the like late discovery cannot be asserted of any other truth? And lastly, that this Discipline should be so necessary, when the Church of God for many ages flourished in godliness, knowledge, and peace, and yet was never ac∣quainted with it. They are not the next ages before us that we look upon, as they odiously in∣sinuate, but the most antient; and yet I wish that the present times may not ingratiate and endear the former age notwithstanding its corruptions, and have the fate which some think Augustus aimed at in adopting Tiberius, that the memory of his Government might be more sweetned by the succession of a worse. In the 13. Section (for we will still endeavour to collect and unite toge∣ther, what they have scattered of one concernment) they seek to enervate the testimony of the antient Church, by telling us out of the Lord Verulam, That they which too much reverence old times, are a scorn to new; That the Fathers a∣greed in mistakes, and were divided in truths; That the Opinion of the Chiliasts (taken for an errour) is by Justin Martyr referred to the Apostles: Irenaeus af∣firms, that Jesus Christ lived fifty years on earth: Lubbertus is cited to say it is the manner of the Fathers, when they would commend a thing, not knowing its ori∣ginal, to refer it to the Apostles and primitive Times. In the three first Centuries, the Learned are perplexed with spurious works of the Fathers, which makes uncertain the state of the Primitive Church, which some extend not beyond the Apostles days, or third Century, and it is stretched too far to the age of Chrysostome. We know, and acknowledge, that the Fathers (like the Moon) never bor∣rowed so much light from the Sun of the Scriptures, as to be clear of all spots. Stapleton himself grants, there is none of the Fathers, in which something erro∣neous may not be observed; they are like the Birds hatch'd at Cair by the warmth of an Oven, which have every one some blemish; and I wish their errours were of no other alloy, than such as the Apologists have detected: Piscator, Alsted Mead, Hack∣wel, Gallus, &c. where∣of, that of the Chiliasts, themselves dare not stigmatize for an errour: (and therfore unaptly alleage it) but only say it hath been taken for one, perchance they are more indulgent thereunto; because it is a Darling fostered, & much fawned upon by many of their Brethren, and indeed hath divers more learned assertors than them, who consent in the thing, though with some difference in the manner: and for the conceit of Irenaeus, it is a Chronological, no Dogma∣tical errour; and Chronologers are one of those three things that never agree: Id calumniâ carere debebit, saith Sulpitius Severus: But because the Fathers
might, or did erre, therefore to give no credit to their Witnesses, would be (in effect) destructive to all kind of humane testimony. From hence onely can be concluded, that they are not infallible, and there∣fore our understanding not to be captivated into any obedience to their Di∣ctates (in that sense we call no man Father save the Ancient of days) and that iis (in enucleandis fidei controversiis) non necessarium est consentire tanquā ab omni exceptione veris, Chamier. tom. l. 1. c. 6. p. 4. Aquin. 1. q. 1. art. 8. ad 2. aut etiam in se—possunt proferri (ut) quibus ex certa Suppositi∣one certis etiam circumstantiis hic discernendi (rectum ab obliquo) usu convenire queat; saith Chamier, and authoritatibus Canonicae Scripturae utitur proprie ex necessitate argumentando, authoritate autem aliorum Doctorum Ecclesiae quasi ar∣guendo ex propriis sed probabiliter &c. as Aquiaas: But the errours of a single Father, or their mutual differences cannot lay any obstructions in our way, who lay no such great waight on their singular Opinions, yet set much by their general consent, in what the most, and most famous in every age have deli∣vered, as received of them that went before them, and as practised or beleeved by them: What Lubbertus is alleaged to say, will not make either scale theirs or ours, to move much with the waight thereof; the notion Apostles is not alway taken properly, Dr. Ham. Re∣sol. 6. quae. q. 5. p. 351. And see Par∣ker of the Cross, part 2. p. 126. de Bap∣tis. Contr. Don. l. 4. c. 24. & alii & Epist. 118. c. 1. or strictly to be understood; one great learned man hath mani∣fested it, that in the Primitive Times Bishops were usually called Apostles: and another hath told us, that the ancient Church extended the Apostolical Times beyond the age of the Apostles, even to the Nicene Council: The igno∣rance whereof perplexed Baronius to reconcile it: How Scithianus and Te∣rebinthus are said to live Temporibus Apostolorum, who lived in Aurelians time, 300. years after Christ: and howsoever, yet I know it was the rule of Saint Augustine, often inculcated, and approved by our principal Divines in matters of fact and practice, That which the universal Church holdeth, and which was not appointed by Councils, but always observed, is most rightly believed to have been delivered by Apostolical Authority. If some Bastard Writings are put upon the Fathers, which like Eaglets being brought forth to the sun, are not very hard to be discerned, by their inability to endure the light of critical exa∣mination: there are others which the Learned are agreed upon to bear the characters of their true Off-spring, which set the antient Church within our light and prospect; and it is no argument, that because some coyn is coun∣terfeit, therefore none must be current; let them reject it, if we offer to pay them with false money: But I doubt their practice will need some counterfeit Writings to support it; for the genuine Works of the Antients will lend it no authority. They should much have favoured our ignorance, to have pointed at those (had their authority been worth our notice) who confine the Primitive Church within the age of the Apostles, or extend it not beyond the second cen∣teury, that we might have tryed what weight their reasons or authority carry in the counter-scales against the generality of the polemical Divines; who, though primitive be a relation, and spoken always with respect to another, so that what is primitive in reference to one, is not so toward another; yet they dilate the antient Church, Doctoribus Ec∣clesiasticis 6. priorum saeculo∣rum veterum patrum adscri∣beremus titu∣lum. Rivet tract. de patr. Author. Tom. 2. p. 648. Accor∣ding to one of the Epocha's, the time for the measured purity of the Inner Court, and that is the visible Church remaining in its primitive purity, is 454. years. Mede's Remains on Rev. p. 20. whereunto more reverence and esteem is rendred, unto the first five hundred years; and within which Latitude of five hundred, did Bishop Jewel impale the testimonies which he challenged his adversaries to produce, in confirmation of several pieces of Popery: and sure the age of Chrysostome, which
was the latter end of the fourth, and beginning of the fifth Century, was like the eighth Sphere; which though not next to the first mover (according to the old obsolete hypothesis) yet had more bright stars than all the Orbs beside. What they insert out of the English Plato, that to reverence old times, is to be a scorn to the new, is meant of the arts and civil customes thereof, which are lickt into better shape by time, and daily improved, and refined into more per∣fections: Pervarios casus artem experientia trudit, Exemplo monstrante viam,— but Theology and the Doctrine of Faith being inspired, not acquisite, was sub∣stantially perfect at the first tradition thereof; and those which were neerest to those Secretaries of the Holy Ghost, had the advantage and opportunity to re∣ceive a cleer explication and right understanding thereof; and though too much reverence to those antient Times, may peccantly verge from mediocri∣ty, (wherein the matter of virtue consists) yet he that shall scorn any for reve∣rencing those old Times which we dispute of, may put for to be Doctor of the chair of Scorners, and hath been new dip'd in their principles, who have learnt to say, in effect, with that Pope, Hoc verum erit, si ipse volo, & non aliter. And whatever the Apologists may insinuate or glance at, the Protestant Di∣vines did never absolutely disclaim, or renounce the tryal by the Fathers; nei∣ther do they suffer any such Thrasonical vaunts as that of Campian, Field of the Church, l. 4. c. 5. p. 349. & appendix. Part. 1. Sect. 2. p. 750. to go un∣checked and unshamed, Patres admiserit? captus est; excluserit? nullus est; in altero fugam adornant, in altero suffocantur: Luther, and the rest at the begin∣ning, seem to decline such tryal, (saith a learned Divine,) because the corru∣ptions of their writings were so many, as could not easily be discovered (confor∣mable to the advice of Vincentius Lyrinensis, who saith, If Heresies be invete∣rate, and so have times and means to corrupt the Monuments of Antiquity, we must flee to the Scriptures onely) but now having found out by the help of so many learned men, both of our adversaries, and amongst our selves, that have travelled in that kind, which are their undoubted Works, and which doubtful, or undoubtedly forged, we willingly admit the tryal by the Fathers, and we now onely decry and condemn the Papists for their servile enthralling them∣selves to the judgment of the Fathers as to a Law, as Canus speaks, and ad ulti∣mum iota, as the gloss on the Canon Law delivers, and for fettering themselves with an oath, never to expound Scripture contrary to their consent, and for ad∣vancing them, to the disparagement and obsoleting of the Scriptures; as among other examples did the Sorbonist, Reynolds de Idololat. Rom. Eccles. l. 1. c. 8. p. 515. p. 301. Whitaker tom. 1. p. 13. Marta de Ju∣risdict. citat. Dr. J. White's Defence way true Church, c. 20. p. 105. whom Stephanus asking where he read such a thing in the New Testament? he answered, Se illud apud Hieronymum aut in Decretis legisse; quid vero Novum Testamentum esset ignorare: but never de∣serted a tryal by the Fathers, as by the Jury, though not as by the Law (which is the Scripture) nor as by a Judge (which is the Holy Ghost) Ad hanc canitiem tanquam in Areopagum provocamus, saith Whitaker to Campian: and I could cite many others to the same purpose; they are the Papists themselves, that with no∣table hypocrisie depress and avile their authority, when it interferes with their Interests, speaking out plainly what the Apologists more covertly insinuate, That the common opinion of the Doctors, is not to be regarded, when another contrary opinion favours the Keys, or the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or a pious case. Those that wash'd off the water of their former Baptisme by new immersions,
were the first that sought to bring under water also the authority and reverence of the antient Church; and it is very observable, that from the same Fountain have sprung the foul and bitter waters of Schisme and Heresie that have defi∣led and envenomed the modern age, as if it were therein legible, that had due honour been given unto the Fathers, our days of peace and truth had been pro∣longed in the Land. What the Psalmist says of Children, I think of the Fathers, Happy are they that have their Quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the Enemies in the Gate. The Philosophers that writ of the contempt of glory, yet bewrayed their n∣bitious itch after it, by affixing their names to the books: So even those that seem to decry and sleight the witness of the Fathers, yet think themselves more gay Birds, when deck'd with their Plumes; and that they make higher flights, if they can impe their Wings with any of their Feathers: The Apologists them∣selves in their 35. and 37. Section, and else-where, seek to borrow some colours from them, to paint the face of their Discipline more seemingly fair. And it is still true what Erasmus was wont to say, When Hierom is for our purpose, his au∣thority weigheth much; when against us, it is worth nothing: Yet as Agesilaus sent Tissaphernes his thanks, that by fraction of the sworn League, he had set the gods on his side; so I thankfully accept this implicite and interpretative yeel∣ding me the Fathers on my part, while to my sense no other corollary can be deducted from all their discourse hereof, but this, Let them say what they list, we neither value them, nor will beleeve them. SECT. III. How the Apologists have suited their Discipline, to comply with severall Parties and Interests; the odious blots of their Pen. PRimus felicitatis gradus est non delinquere; Secundus delicta cognoscere, saith Cyprian: They now condemn not all that differ from them, and must ac∣knowledge that some godly men, eminent in parts and places, close not with them: and this I shall gladly take and put among their retractations, for heretofore it hath been their course (resulting as much out of subtilty, as censo∣riousnesse) to brand such as are adverse from them, as enemies to godlinesse, and so to sentence them (I think) is to condemn them; yea they condemn them, while they renounce Communion of Sacraments with them, there being no way to communicate with them, but to tread that path which they have li∣ned and beaten out; and if they grant them to be godly persons, how can they without Schisme desert communion with them? But indeed if their model of discipline be the onely path to Reformation, and be that point alone wherein peace and holinesse meet and close together, I think they could not but con∣demn all that walk not with them therein, though in truth, rather this renders it evident, that it is no such right way, because so many godly and eminent men are found in another Road.
But as some censure them for going too far, so do others for not going far enough in their seperation. And it is like enough that this befals them, which is the common fate of men that compound and medly themselves to comply with several Interests, and bear up with divers parties, who modelling themselves like the Tragoedian Bus∣kin indifferently for every foot, while they would ingratiate with all, are endea∣red to none. Aristenus long since resolved Media via nulla est, and the Praetor of the Sam∣nites in Livy wisely observed Media via neque amicos parit, nec inimicos tollit, and men of that model are like the flying Fish, which being partly Bird, partly Fish, is still prosecuted in the water by the Fishes, and in the air by the Birds: The Apologists indeed, like good Astrologers, will be sure to have chief respect to the Stars that are culminant, and when they draw the Scheme, and set the Figure of their Discipline, they observe who are Lords of the House, and accordingly make their judgment: so that (as famous du Moulin said of the Papists) He that would know their Opinions, must consult with the Almanack. Some of them that were the first to turn Tables, in the time of the Prelates, have been since so busie in tumbling them, that now at length they have in effect tur∣ned them altogether out of the Church. When the Jews were in the Sun-shine of prosperity, then the Samaritans would claim to be their brethren: but if once they were under a Cloud or Tempest, the other would not own the Kindred: And it is no new thing for men to be (in truth) like the Stone which Suidas fableth to have been in Aarons Brest∣plate, Cujus Color sive ad prospera sive adversa mutaretur; for some while the Apologists held forth their Church in the notion of Presbyterian; but I could give account of the occasion (and cast it up with their own Counters, which if all the Box be not of the right stamp and metal, yet I am sure those I shall take are without suspicion) when their Church was to be entred by them in the Ca∣talogue of a gathered Congregation. A learned Divine of ours said, in answer to an Heterodox Prelate, that there were some tantùm in uxoratu non Papistae; and I may as truly say that some are tantùm in decim is non Independentes; and friends to that way, Usque ad aras tan∣tùm, those Altars whereof they live: but manum de hac tabula, which as the Ita∣lian Proverb speakes, I have not drawn Con amore with my affection to the draught. But to speak freely, (being indeed too free of such obloquy) the most carnal and prosane in the Countrey are foremost in opposition to them, the scum of whose cho∣ler they often see and hear, who measuring them by a fleshly line, finde their work de∣fective, (I had snpposed rather excessive) not being able to bear the strictnesse of the word, (I thought they would have said their discipline.) It is a misfortune, as sad, as singular, that the godly and wicked being of such different principles, should meet in one conclusion against their way. If the choler of some profane persons asperse on them, or their model (as perchance there may be some that are like Ithacius in Sulpitius Severus, who had no other virtue in him but his hatred towards the Priscilianists) yet scum being such light froth, cannot stick or defile, being soon to be wip'd off. Malè de me loquun∣tur, saith Seneca, sed mali — Malis displicere laudariest, but yet notwithstan∣ning,
Moverer si de me Marcus Cato, si Laelius sapiens, si duo Scipiones ista loqueren∣tur. But whatever they be, Non multùm supra eos eminent quibús se irascendo ex∣aequant; and since also, qui alterum incusat probri se ipsum intueri oportet, who would think that the Apologists, who take so tender a resentment of some pas∣sages in the Paper (which yet I hope to approve, doe disrelish more by the di∣stemper of the Organ, than the quality of the object; for quibus os putet, om∣nia quae afferuntur putida sunt, oris, non alimenti vitio) would drop from their Pens so odious a blot upon their Opposers, among which (none perchance ha∣ving said more in opposition to them, though nec me qui caeteros vicit impetus) doubtlesse they set me with Uriah in the sore-front of the hottest battel, that I may be smitten, and my good name dye. Compare them, and determine if the Allegory and allusion taken from Ne∣buchadnezzars Image, and the Romans pretended Magick, and an application of a passage in Chrysostome, which lye so indigested in the rising stomachs of the Apologists, or what else in the Paper may be capable of distast, be not cha∣rientisms, and civil complements, in respect of this calumny, which sure is but the scum of a Brest boyling with an impotent choler; hic nigrae succus loliginis, haec est Aerugo mera, Ep. 47. is it possible; Tantae-ne animis caelestibus irae? I am more sensible of the dishonour they have hereby done themselves (for, qui alteri ma∣ledicit sibi convitium facit) and as Cyprian, Neque qui audit, sed qui facit convitium, miser est) and my known deportment, especially measured by Seneca's Rule, Qui se innocentem dicit, appellat iestem non conscientiam, might have prevented, and will refute their calumny; and who, while I make not any externall judg∣ment, either my Theater, or Tribunal, cannot by such clamours feel the Musick interrupted, which the Bird makes in my breast; scutum conscientiae sufficit ad∣versus gladium Linguae: But I shall neither much complain (for omne naturâ in∣validum querulum est) nor recriminate (since as Cicero to Dolabella, tua modera∣tio eorum infamet infamiam) nor be passionate, because as Gregory, Qui mala non fert, ipse sibi per impatientiam testis est quòd non est bonus) but I shall quietly take up these arma justitiae à sinistra quorum convitiator faber est, as Augustine, and make use of this Dung spread upon me, to meliorate and manure me into more fruitfulnesse; and it shall be my solace, that qui volens detrahit famae meae, no∣lens addit mercedi meae, as Suaviloquus Augustine. SECT. IV. Whether the Diatribe were guilty of Petitio Principii. WHether their way be grounded on the practice of the Primitive Church, is the great thing in question, and subject-matter of this Congresse, and there∣fore not to be begged in the entrance. Quantum mutatus ab illo; how can this consist with their judgment delivered in the 2d. and 13th. Sections; nay, re∣peated in the lines immediatly following in this Section, where their expressi∣ons amount to this, that they nothing weigh, or make no account of the practice
of the ancient Church, much lesse doe they reckon it a great thing, no: would they willingly have it brought into question upon this subject; so far are they from making it (antomastically) the subject-matter of this Congresse, well knowing, that to re-search into the judgments and practice of the Ancients, is with Roderick of Spain, To break open a Temple, where they shall onely finde Images of men armed against them. Magentinus, an Interpreter of Aristotle, tells us, That a begging of the questi∣on, is, when that which is proposed to be proved is used as a medium to prove it self, or when we use a medium, which seems to differ from the question, but is all one with it. Now let any man cast eye on the Paper, and see what in that place I pro∣pose to prove, and what medium I use for proving it; and then judge whether I offend in begging the question; or whether I may not question, that the Apo∣logists need to beg more speculative knowledge concerning that Sophisme, though already they know as much practically, as any men that ever I met with. I first insinuated, that Antiquity claimed reverence, and Novelty carryed suspicion: Next, that if the new way of the Apologists had ground or warrant from Gods Word, the practice of the Primitive Church, the demonstration of Reason, or did manifestly conduce to the advance of Godlinesse, I should not check with it for its Novelty (in relation to our age) but when many good, and moderate, and rational men were unsatisfied, that it had any such ground. or warrant, or tendency; and it seemed to me onely supported by popular dis∣courses and similitudes, I could not but excuse those that conformed not to it. All this was by way of Introduction, rather than of Argument, or onely Propo∣sitio Narrationis, and a precapitulation of what was to be dilated, and in parti∣cular to be demonstrated afterward: So as you may see the Apologists here make a great Cry with little Wooll; yet out of this Lana Caprina they have spun six or seven of their Sections, making every Comma the subject of one of them; and in every one of the rest I was as guilty of Petitio Principii, as in this point; saving that they have omitted to speak here to the Warrant which their way should have from Scripture, and demonstration of Reason; so as I may say with Augustine to Cresconius, Si propterea respondisti quia tacere noluisti, non quidem ad omnia, sed tamen respondisti; si autem ad hoc respondisti ut ea quae à me dicta sunt, enarrares, video quidem te ad multa respondisse, sed nihil video re∣fellisse.
SECT. V. Whether their Discipline advance godliness? The Sacraments are Seals of the Conditional Covenant, which Doctrine hath no affinity with semi-Pelagianisme: Whether the exhibiting the Sacrament make men Saints? Whether the giving thereof without discrimina∣tion on tryal, blind men in their sins? or be the setting of the Sealt, Blanks? Whether the Sacraments are privileges of the godly? 1 Cor. 10. argumentative for a free Communion. BUt they are struck with wonder at that (which is neither novum, rarum, aut magnum) viz. That any are unsatisfied that their way conduceth to godlinesse, as if this were a principle evident in it self, and apprehensible by intelligence, or by intuitive knowledge; or else themselves like Cato, that did good because he could do no other; but for truth of this they are confident to lay at stake their hearts, which else deceive them much, and their understandings, which otherwise fail them quite; and we shall be much too blame, if we will not be convinced by these new Topicks: But whatever befall their hearts, surely their memories have deceived, or attentions have failed them, while to start a trivial quarrel, they talk as out of the paper of a Rational, whereas onely it speaks of a mani∣fest conducing to godlinesse, and so themselves relate the words, when they de∣liver the Text in grosse, though they here change it, when they lay it forth by retail. Let me first say, that it is not sufficient to warrant their way, though it did perchance conduce to advance of godlinesse in some acts or ends; for things are not denominated good onely from their ends or consequents; Bonum ex integra causa, licèt malum ex singulis defectibus: as in Logick, Ex falsis verúm{que} aliquando sequetur: so out of evil may good accidentally result. Corruption of Judgment, and false Opinions, may influence toward the generation of some real good. I doubt not but the fire of Purgatory hath holpe to sublime and purifie some souls in this life, which it never did in the next; and, as Birds at Cair, are hatch'd in Ovens by heat of fire, so that Purgatory fire hath produced many good works, though perhaps (as they say of these Birds) all of them may have had some blemish; though no man can malè uti virtute, yet he may bene uti vitio: As there are pious frauds, so there are pious injuries; there may be ex rapina holocaustum, yet sacrifice is no plea or protection for robbery; nor may I de∣prive men of their right, with design to make them more diligent and sedulous to recover it, or others to preserve theirs. But their way shames and restrains sinne, therefore conduceth to godliness: and it were somewhat indeed, if it onely shamed and restrained sin; but it shames (by rejecting from the Sacrament) many that are not culpable of scandalous sins, and restrains the use of those means, which properly and directly (being Gods Ordinance) have a tendency to the preventing and beating down of sinne. Secondly, it advanceth godliness:
First, by engaging such as walk in it to more watchfulness, being by this profession exposed to more observation for their ways. 1. If other mens eyes and observing of them excite to some watchfulnesse, and so consequently improves godlinesse (as they say the Tortoyses eggs are hatch'd by her eyes) it is the profession of godliness that occasions men to be observed; not formally, as it is professed in their way. 2. This is therefore either to impale and confine all profession of godliness to be in their way, and no other, or they conclude sophistically; for this which is but an accidental effect, is not proper to the profession of godliness in their way, but common to such profession in any way whatsoever; yea, it is common to an hypocritical profession: for whosoever makes any shew to be of the City of God, is set on an Hill, and cannot be hid. The smallest motes are discerned in the Sun, and he that pretends to more light, shall never be in the shade: and invidious observation, like the Sun-beams, reflects most upon that ground which seems to rise above the Level: Yet I trust this cannot excuse hypocrisie, or blanch it with a tendency to godliness onely, because a bare profession to be good, makes men more curiously observe others, whether they are such or not. Secondly, in regard of the mutual watchings they submit unto: They that can watch over each other when they dwell some of them at neer 30. miles di∣stance, have either as admirable eyes, as he that could from the Promontory of Lilibaeum in Sicily discern the number and bulk of the Galleys that came forth the Port of Carthage; or else have that rare Catoptrick which Fryer Bacon is said to boast of, whereby he could read things in the Moon, that were reflected from the Earth. Thirdly, through the benefit of many private Exhortations and Duties, whose Light and Heat may both kindle and cherish gracious affections. The more faulty are the Apologists, not to make them publick and more communicable, since Light and Good are diffusive, and they kill as many as they might have benefited: Is it lawful to doe good, or to do euil? saith our Saviour, shewing good not done, is doing evil. But first, why can they not be as watchful over themselves or others, if they had a communion of Sacraments with others, as now when they separate from them? Why should not their private Exhortations and Duties, if made pub∣lick, and others brought to partake thereof, have as great influence, in order to the advance of godliness, intensivè toward themselves, and greater extensivè in relation to others. Hath their Watch no other spring to set the Wheels a going, but hope to be rewarded with the Sacrament, in such a singular way, whiles others are exclu∣ded? as if they would not —Virtutem amplectier ipsam Praemia si to ll as:— Sure then their Watch is onely to observe the time. Secondly, if upon admission of a multitude, the Sphere would be too great for their virtue to extend unto, and the Horizon too large for their watchful eye
to make inspection through; yet neverthelesse they need not by some general observation of the rest, remit or neglect their special watch over so many, as now they look after: and methinks it should be no lesse difficult to be watch∣ful over many collected in one Parish, than over so few dispersed, at such di∣stance, in so many Parishes. Thirdly, if those be evil whom they desert, they are like to fall worse by such desertion; but I cannot see it likely, that themselves should grow lesse godly by their communion; in the natural body, when any parts are sick, all the hope of help from within, is in those parts that are sound (as Plutarch tells us upon ano∣ther concernment) some men are like ambergrice, which though it have an in∣grateful odour simply and by it self, yet begins to smell most fragrantly in compositions; and those consonants which among themselves, nor spell, nor sig∣nifie any thing, yet joyned with vowels, doe form a perfect found; Aliquod bonum propter vicinum bonum; There is a winning by conversation, (as one stick kin∣dles another) the example and emulation of good men, the desires to approve themselves to such (as Antigonus called Zeno his Theater; and Aeschines never did better, than when he spake in the presence of Philip) and the awe they have of such (as Cato kept the whole Theater in order; and of like influence was it in the Poet to be Coram Bruto) conduceth much to meliorate actions and persons. Fourthly, why should they more distrust themselves to be like the Grape in this quality, Uvaque livorem contracta ducit ab uva, than the rest to resemble it in this property, Botrus circa botrum citiùs maturescit? True goodnesse is like Elixir, that by commixion with baser metals, improves them, not imbaseth it self; like Light, hath more splendor amid darknesse; and like fire, heats more by an Antiperistasis: and is their goodnesse onely of affinity with the Sentida, which withers, if any touch with it? Fifthly, if by this separation themselves like the spirits and extractions of Chymists, become more pure and virtuous; yet what becomes of caput mortuum, those dregs of the people, as they call them? they not onely lose the influence of their godly Examples, private Exhortations, and Duties, but the fruit and help of the publike Ordinance, from which they are retrenched: Cannot these men go to Heaven, unlesse alone, as Cyprian said to Pupian? Is the good lesse, because communicable? (which is as much as to say, good is lesse good, because it is good; for the nature of good, is to be communicable) Or is their eye evil, because Gods and his Churches is-good? As he that saw the Votive Tables in Neptunes Temple of those that escaped shipwrack after their Vowes, asked, Where were the Monuments of those that were drowned after they had vowed? So what becomes of them that be excluded, while these are so im∣proved by their appropriate exercises? Is it fit that some men should feast, while the most starve? Is it not better that many should receive Sportulam, than a few rectam? Doth their way advance godlinesse, in those whom they reject? which are divers hundreds, to one they admit: If it advance the conti∣nuous quantity of godlinesse, sure it doth not the discretive. How many in so many years, have they gained to godlinesse; that is, to their way (for as Tychonius said of his Donatists, Quod volumus sanctum est) how much have they enlarged their Pomaerium's? I think there need no Libri Elephantini to record and catalogue their Proselytes: they say, the goodness of Phsifick is best
demonstrated à posteriori, by the effects in working; and sure they cannot boast much of what in this they may have wrought or effected, when their Prolocutor hath above 5. or 600. in his Parish, and hath not (I take it) above 5. or 6. of them sublimed into his Church by all his Separations. Lastly, are there none godly but they? Or they more godly for this way, and would not have been godly, or not so godly but for this way? Are they of this way more godly, then many that are not of it? If they evince this, Herbam porrigo; if not, Urbem defendam dum vita atque arma supersint, I cannot with truth say of all, nor will speak with reproach of any, as Augustine doth of the Donatists, Damnant foras quod intus operantur; Yet I say, that if they deny there are as godly men that cross their way, as any that walk along in it, whereas they say, they boast not of their holiness, I shall tell them, that they not onely boast, but falsly boast thereof; the light of some of them doth shine, but we cannot discern it make any extraordinary blaze, and their Lights need snuffers too, as well as others: they are many of them perhaps godly men, de∣nominating them from the better part, and according to their general course, not every particular action, and by their main end, not every of their ways, they have their alloy and rotten grains, and must be weighed with their grains, as well as other men. And though I am none of those who like Leaches suck out the corrupt blood; or like Quails, feed upon poyson; neither do delight to stirr stinking Carrions, which should rather be buried; yet there are publike Records which cannot be hidden, of grievous and execrable crimes, whereof some of their Communion (who were not onely ex domo novitiorum sed professe∣rum) have been convicted, and which they have confessed; but though they do not expresly boast of their holiness, yet they are conceited thereof, and im∣plicitly and interpretatively boast of it, while they separate from others, as not holy enough for their Communion, and suppose they should be polluted to communicate with them. All righteousness is by comparison; and though Guic∣ciardine said of the Popes, that he was a good Pope, whose wickedness exceeded not other mens; yet they that profess to be holyer then others, and reject others from their Communion onely because not holy enough, if they be not much better then other, they are much worse; and as those little Globes that have a Diurnal motion about the Sun, we say are spots in the Sun, which yet are Stars, and would other-where be so denominated, were they not so neer his out-shining light: so that holyness which would be passable in others, will not be tollerable in them that pretend to so much; and it must be a greater Star that shall appear of any magnitude in any higher Sphaere. God hath given sundry of their Meetings so much experience of growth, as to knowledge and affection this way, as plentifully confutes this Paradox: con∣futes it in order to themselves perhaps, if they had stood in doubt thereof; not to others who cannot take notice of, nor have seen such experience. But this is but Testimonium domesticum, the belief hereof is resolved into their own testi∣mony; and it is strange, that in a Democratical Church-Government they would imitate the Prerogative of Monarchs, and write teste meipso: Moses his face shined to others, and he knew it not; but it seems their shines, and them∣selves onely know it. But what improvement of graces soever hath been oc∣casioned by their Meetings, as St. Augustine saith of the Miracles wrought by Hereticks, they were done to confirm that truth which they held common with
the Church, not their Heretical Opinions; so that increment of goodness was caused by the word and prayers at these Meetings, not formally, or the rather as they were Meetings in a way of Separation. The old impure way of Pell-mell tends to many evils, it strengthens the hands of the wicked: And for this we must take their word, unless it can be proved by Jeremy 23.14. (Where though I find the Prophets of Jerusalem re∣proved for strengthning the hands of evil-doers; yet I do not read any thing to perswade me, that they did this by admitting them to the Sacraments and Sacrifices:) Or can be confirmed by Luke the 13.26. where is mentioned, that they that shall stand without shall say unto the Master of the house, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets: But I did ne∣ver till now imagine, nor I think did any other dream, that this was eating and drinking at the Sacrament: or if it were so to be understood, then to ad∣mit them to the Word preached also, may as well strengthen the hands of the wicked, as to give them admission to the Sacrament; for they plead as well his teaching in the street, as their eating and drinking in his presence: And I ra∣ther think it worthy very serious consideration, whether their way of excluding men pell-mell, and in the lump, doth not seem more to strengthen the hands of the notoriously wicked, while they see no other censure, or detestableness in this kind fall on themselves, then befall such as are innocent of Crimes noto∣rious. And as contemptu famae & contemnuntur virtutes, so when men are pre∣cipitously made to be of contemptible fame, they are put into some hazard to contemn virtue: Peccandi occasionem suspicando fecerunt, saith Seneca: and as some wise men think, in the case of jealousie, to hold any in suspicion is the way to put the matter out of suspicion: Plerumque bonos tractato pravos esse facit; so some may with more facility be tempted to fall to worse, when if they should so lapse, scarce can worse befall them; and being put to shame without great crimes, they will be less ashamed to become criminous, Liberius peccant cum pudor omnis abest, And (since as Mago Almoner to Henry the seventh told the King, by occasion of the History of Joseph and his Mistris, It is one thing what a man should do, another what he will do) some men, though their Crimes have not been so great as to merit repulsion from the Sacrament; yet their grace per∣haps may be so little, as that being repelled, they may be too conformable to the resolution of Otho in Tacitus, Cùm nocentem innocentém{que} idem exitus manet, acrioris viri esse meritò perire. Secondly, while wicked men enjoy the priviledges of the godly, it will be dif∣ficult to convince them of their impenitency and want of conversion: It seems then, that (as Pliny tells us) as the presence of an Adamant frustrates or su∣spends the attractive virtue of the Load-stone, so the Word by participation of the Sacraments is defeated of its power to teach, to convince, or to judge, and ceaseth to be quick, and powerful, and piercing, &c. (all which effects we should have rather conceived might have been furthered and improved by the Sacraments.) Let the Minister make them Saints in the Chancel (he may now do it in the Church as well since their Tables are no longer turned Altar-wise.) they will give him leave to make them Devils in the Pulpit till he be weary. This might be some colour for this effect of obduracy from their principles, who suppose all ought to be real Saints that communicate; but there can be none
from ours, who assert, That Jesus sate down with the 12. and one of them was a Devil; but yet while they profess to admit none but Saints, and persons rege∣nerate, the admission may make some rest secure upon that priviledge, without more re-search or inspection into themselves, and so to deceive themselves, Advers. Ana∣bap. l. 6. c. 9. p. 231. because they have deceived others, Metuendum est, saith Bullinger, ne caena do∣mini plerum{que} detur summis hypocritis et subtrahatur longè dignioribus, etenim qui se demiserint & humilitatem simulaverint, etiamsi animo longè turpissimo sint, et Evangelium spernant, nihilominus pro optimis et sanctissimis habebuntur, qui sunt dig∣nissimi caenâ domni; qui verò apertiores sint, et bilariores erant, et obnoxii communi∣bus peccatis, à semulatione autem alieni sunt, Corde tamen firmiter divinae miseri∣cordiae fidunt, &c. quia nondum illis pro peccatis suis satisfecerunt, ne{que} illis proban∣tur ac nondum satis digni videntur, excludentur à caena domini. This he speakes of the Anabaptists, but it is as applicable to others. The door of the visible Church is incomparably wider then the door of Heaven, (saith learned Baxter) and Christ is so tender, so bountiful, Saints ever∣lasting Rest, Part. 4. Sect. 3. p. 104, 105. and so forward to convey his Grace, and the Gospel so free an invitation to all, that surely Christ will keep no man off: if they will come quite over in spirit unto Christ, they shall be welcome; if they will come but to a visible profession, he will not deny them admittance there, be∣cause they intend to go no farther, but will let them come as neer as they will; and that they came no farther shall be their own fault; and it is not his readiness to admit such, nor the opening of the door of the visible Church, that makes men hypocrites, but their own wickedness: Christ will not keep men out for fear of making them hypocrites; but when the Net is drawn unto the shore, the Fishes shall be seperated, &c. And in the precedent page he saith, Their being baptized persons, if at age, or members of the Universal Church, into which it is that they are baptized, is a suffi∣cient evidence of their interest to the Supper, till they do by heresie or scandal blot this (evidence) — and this after much doubting dispute and study of Scripture (he saith) he speaks as confidently, as almost any truth of equal moment. The way of pell-mell blinds men in their wretchedness: very like! blindes them with light, and poysons them with the antidote, just as the means is de∣structive to the end. Light may indeed some-while a little blind some weak eys, yet it is the proper means of seeing, and to keep them in the dark, will perpe∣tuate their blindness, not make them see better. Doth it not argue blindness of understanding to think by any argument to evince, that it shall either blind men in their wretchedness, or impede their conversion, by sealing to them an assurance, that if they believe in the Lord Jesus Christ they shall be saved by his death, which is the sum of the Covenant of Grace, whereof the Sacraments are Seals? To raise our Structure the higher, and make it stand more firmly, we should perchance dig the Foundation deeper; and because this erroneous principle is the Fountain of those bitter Waters of strife, our Marah and Meribath, it might seem expedient to cast a little Salt into the Spring of those Waters to heal them. A Covenant is a mutual compact or bargain between God and Man, consisting of mercies on Gods part granted over to man, and of conditions on mans part required by God: it results from Gods antecedent and voluntary love that he entred into paction with man, and performeth his absolute promise of giving Faith and perseverance to his Elect: to which promise no condition is imaginable to be annexed, which is not comprehended in the promise it self,
but to Gods Covenant of conferring other mercies, which flows from his conse∣quent love (which is a natural property in God, whose proper nature inclines to reward good and evil) is a restipulation and condition of duty annexed. Of this conditional Covenant onely (the former being indeed rather a promise then a Covenant, being onely Gods act, without any mutual act of man) the Sacraments are divine external seals (and I suppose it is no such just cause, as may legitimate a war, whether it be more proper to say, they are conditional seals of the Covenant) to testifie and confirm unto us, that we shall surely acquire what God hath promised, if we seal back as it were our counterpart un∣to God, and performing the condition render unto him what he requires, as a conditional promise is made absolute by performance of the condition, which otherwise obligeth not. That the Sacraments are not Seals of the absolute Covenant, nor set to without respect to the condition, carries the stamp or seal of the Corporation of Protestants, and those which have set their hands to any Writing against Bellarmine, in that controversie of the efficacy of the Sacraments, have attested this truth. And some others of the Luminaries of our own Sphaere have re∣flected much light upon the point. I therefore (whose harvest cannot attain to their Gleanings) shall not light my Candle in the Sun, nor in the worse sense bring an Owl to Athens, Tu sequere à longe et vestigia semper adora. It may seem as much delirous to discourse of Military Glory after Hannibal, as it was for Phormio to do it before him; and a Smith may seem already to have run mad in undertaking (as he of old did to have effected) the amendment of an instrument of Archimedes. Onely I shall say, that whatever some rather odiously then ignorantly insinuate, this is yet neither the language of Ashdod, nor carries any stamp, or holds any affinity with Semi-Pelagianisme (or if you will call it so; Arminianisme, which is Synonymous (for Arminius and Socinus have had the fortunes to have these bastard and illegitimate Doctrines put upon them, which had other elder Fathers) as Sextus 5. his Obelisk, and Farnezi his Bull, and other Monuments, though formed and erected by the old Romane Emperours, are now denominated from those that of late times have redeemed them from rubbish, and restored their beauty) but the Doctrine we hold forth, hath no Analogy therewith: For beside that we assert Faith to be absolutely and infallibly infused by God, per modum creationis, and nothing to concurre to conversion, ex parte voluntatis causativè sed tantum subjectivè; and, ut cre∣damus, to be wrought passively, in nobis sine nobis, although actively ipsum cre∣dere be produced, nobiscum simul tempore consentientibus et co-operantibus, where∣as the Arminians symbolizing with the Jesuits, affirm Faith to be purely an elicit act of Free-will, through a moral perswasion onely, upon an object con∣gruously proposed, alliciens consensum non efficiens; and Grace (whose name they have antiquated, as well as destroyed the Nature, substituting the word help or motion in stead thereof) to be a general and indifferent influxe, ter∣minable by mans good or evil free-will. Besides this, we are now disputing of Gods Covenant and Promise in time, not of his Decree before all time. If thou believe, thou shalt be saved, is not of the nature of a practical decree, but of a promise, and is onely doctrinal and enunciative: neither do we (as they do) make Gods Decree conditional, but onely the execution thereof, and not the will of God to save but the salvation of man, Gods eternal purpose in saving
being absolute in respect of any cause or condition impulsive in the object, not in regard of the means in the execution, and order to the end. Gods promises for their form correspond not with his purposes, his promises being according to the manner of his executions, but his purposes have a different method: What he purposes, he performs for the matter, but not as he purposed for the manner: he saves in the same manner that he decreed to save; but in exe∣cuting or saving doth not follow the same order which he did in decreeing: this which is last in execution, is first in intention; Dr. Kend. Vn∣dicat. part 2. c. 7. and that which is performed on a condition, was absolutely intended: the intention was to perform it upon condition, but upon no condition was it so intended. We do not therefore say God intended upon condition of Faith to give Salvation; but that he inten∣ded to give Salvation, upon condition of Faith; intending to give Faith abso∣lutely, and Salvation conditionally. But the Sacraments therefore being onely Seals of the Conditional Cove∣nant, then men are not made Saints by being made partakers of them. Indeed the use of them may help to make men Saints by their influence and efficacy, but they do not imply, or presuppose all those to be absolute Saints that par∣take them; but onely Saints conditional, if they seal back their counterpart to God, and fulfill that Condition whereupon he makes his grants and conveyan∣ces: or onely relative and notional, not real Saints, Saints by calling, not by qualification; as the Apostle writing to the entire Churches, among which (especially among the Corinthians) many walked inordinately, calleth them Saints, that is, such as are made partakers of Gods Covenant, and Members of his Church; not Saints actu, sed vocatione, professione, debito, (as A Lapide) called to be Saints, taking the word (called) , and exegetically, ut sint Sancti, as Paraeus and Aretius; and so called charitativè, quia cha it as om∣nes habet pro verè conversis, qui fidem et poenitentiam profitentur: such Saints, as according to the idiom of Scripture, are Synonymous with Professours of the Christian Faith: for it is not likely to be conceived by any, and will be more difficult to be proved by the Apologists (who else-where say Professours are vi∣sible Saints) that all those Saints whose bowels Philemon refreshed, and whose feet the Widows had washed, and who had share of the Collections and Contri∣butions, and Ministrings, had all given evidence of their real Sanctity: or that Paul when he shut up the Saints in prison, did tarry and forbear to do it, till he was convinced they were really such; but it was sufficient they were professors of Christianity, and that was enough to denominate them Saints. He that is a member of the Church, is within the Covenant, and is in Scripture-phrase a Saint, though not living altogether conformably to his profession, (those pri∣viledges which are given to the visible Church, in respect of internal essence, (according to Tychonius his Rule de permixta Ecclesia) being attributed to the visible, in regard of external existence, as to be Saints, holy children of God, Saints everla∣sting rest, part 4. Sec. 3. p. 105. Gal. 3.26. Christs body, 1 Cor. 2.13. branches of Christ, Joh. 15.2.) and there are many Saints, or sanctified men (saith Mr. Baxter) that yet shall never come to heaven, who are onely Saints by their separation from Paganisme into Fel∣lowship with the visible Church; but not Saints by separation from the un∣godly into the Fellowship of the mystical body of Christ: He is therefore (as I said) a relative, though no real Saint; and the entring into, and the accepta∣tion of the terms of the Covenant, is common to very Reprobates; and in that
notion a grave and learned Divine saith, Mr. Balls ans. to Can, part 2. p. 52. Tom 4. l. 1. c. 12. that Cain was in profession a Saint be∣fore he had discommon'd himself. And we grant, that such an external, or (as Suarez calls it) a Legal Sanctification the Sacraments alwayes indeed do effect; so saith the famous Chamier, Sanctificationem illam quae pertinet ad exter∣nam vocationem in Ecclesiam, quomodo Paulus dicebat ramos, id est, omnes sui tem∣poris Judaeos esse sanctos, quòd eorum truncus, id est Abraham Sanctus fuisset, Rom. 11. et filios fidelium sanctos, 1 Cor. 7. Hanc sanctitatem concedimus semper conferri per Sacramenta, nimirum quia utrin{que} in confesso est, esse testes professionis Christianae, unde sequitur quicun{que} Sacramentorum sit particeps, hunc pertinere ad eum populum qui profiteatur Religionem veram; and if they will have none to be made such Saints by profession, but those that are Saints in verity, I shall de∣sire them to perpend, that their Argument is more forcible to forbid the admis∣sion of such as are not manifest Saints, and approvedly holy to be Church∣members, then to be partakers of the Sacraments: for indeed the former are expresly, and in terms called Saints and holy, and therefore with more colour might they argue, that there ought to be probation made whether they were such before they were admitted into Church-fellowship, and what they shall answer to evade the force of the Argument against admitting none but upon tryal to be Church-members, may perhaps be catcht up and returned to fru∣strate the Argument for non admission without tryal to the Sacrament, & vox tua facta mea. 2. Not to question why the Sacraments, (or indeed this of the Lords Sup∣per, and not Baptisme also) are made the priviledges of the godly, and not other Ordinances also: Or how external and sensible Ordinances can be pri∣viledges of an invisible and indiscernable Society: Irregenerate men admitted to the Sacraments enjoy no proper priviledges of the godly; but as is their Faith, such are their priviledges: A common Dogmatical or Historical Faith externally professed, gives them title to the common external seals of the Co∣venant. External Ordinances are not onely priviledges of the godly in facto esse, sed etiam in fieri: and either the Apologists must say they are never deceived in these which they admit, or else sometimes notwithstanding their caution, themselves are not priviledged from communicating the Sacraments to the unregenerate; and in so doing, they set the seal to a blank, and co-operate to their damnation, and the act contracts more of guilt in them then it can do in us, in whom it is for the impulsive cause, onely an errour of charity; and for the matter thereof, if it should be evil, yet is not so formally to us, because we are not thereof convinced in our Consciences; whereas they impose upon themselves a necessity of acting that, which they can have no infallible assu∣rance they shall not fail in doing of, and yet are perswaded the failer thereof occasions that which cannot be lawfully done. As it is no obvious thing or facile work for any man to obtain an evidence of his own regeneration, so it is infinitely more perplext and intricate to acquire such assurance concerning another: and therefore upon this principle, that the Sacrament appertains to none but the truly regenerate, as the doubting soul can never approach, and so the sick be cast into an incapacity of a Physitian that most needs him, and the weak in Faith be frustrate of that which was instituted for confirming thereof, and the humble soul will be most afraid to come, and the presumptuous be
most forward, since baser Mettals soonest run, and are most volatile, the richer are more fixt, and the full ear hangs the head, when the empty pricks up: and as he that knows most, discerns best that he knows little; so where there is much grace, there often the want thereof is most complained of; whereas when the strong man armed keeps the house, the things possessed are in peace: so also no Minister can admit any man with comfort, because not in Faith, and therefore with sinne, nor without a snare, because not in allibly, but doubt∣ingly. For whereas it may be answered, that it is enough to act with the judg∣ment of Charity, and to go as far as that can lead and direct, I shall reply, That Charity is very incompetent to hold the Beam, when things are to be waighed out in the Scales of Justice, and with à suum cui{que} tribuere. Charity pre∣sumeth all are good that are not manifestly evil, interprets all doubtful things concerning persons in the better part, and judgeth aliorum bona certa meliora, certa mala minora, bona dubia certa, dubia mala nulla; which though it exalt the excellency of the virtue absolutely, yet it shews it is not respectively fit to be a just Judge, which must be impartial; and by what signs soever he may seek to make judgment, the possibility of being deceived will render him still pen∣dulous and doubtful, whether those signs be certain, or his disquisition and de∣liberation sufficient: and besides, if any shall say, that they admit none that are manifestly wicked, but such onely as being closely and secretly such cannot be discerned to be hypocrites, I shall answer them, as Augustine did Cresconius, Contra Cresc. l. 2. c. 23, 24, 26. Tom. 7. p. 47.49. Cur conaberis occultum excipere peccatorem, quem Scriptura non excipit, non ait oleum manifesti peccatoris, sed absolute oleum peccatoris, — Nec qui Baptizatur à mortuo manifesto, sed absolute à mortuo — ita nec occultus excipitur, quo evertitur omne quod loquer's: so in like manner they are unregenerate, abso∣lutely such, to whom the priviledges of the godly are to be denyed, and not oc∣cult unregenerate men onely. 3. Why is the one Sacrament more the priviledge of the godly, As cited by Bede, on 1 Cor. 10. and often by Chamier, v. g. Tom. 4. S. 11. c. 5. Sect. 27. or more makes those Saints to whom it is exhibited then the other? Are they not both alike equally Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and is not the Eucharist the re∣newing of that Covenant which was formerly made by us, or others for us in Baptisme? Et institutio paria, et significatio similia, et finis facit aequalia. It is no ways to be doubted, saith Augustine, that every one of the faithful doth partake of the body and blood of Christ, when by Baptisme he is made a member of Christ. They administer the Sacrament of Baptisme to Infants, of whose sanctity they can have no prognosticks, and of whose Parents holiness they have no Dia∣gnostick signs: to tell me that other qualifications are more requisite to the one Sacrament then the other is nihil ad rhombum, that is not now our subject mat∣ter, but whether if the Sacrament of the Eucharist be imparted to any that give not satisfactory testimony of grace, the priviledges of the godly be prostituted; and if so, why then it should not hold alike in the other Sacrament of Bap∣tisme also: truly, as all the Rivers run into the Sea from whence chiefly they are derived, so let the Learned perpend, Whether these conclusions that seem to tend and lead thereunto, Advers. Ana∣bapt. l. 6. c. 9, p. 229. did not first flow from the principles of Ana∣baptisme, that great Abysse of modern Heresies; though perchance as Rivers they may seem at first to run a quite contrary course from the Sea, and to move so silently, that none can discern their motion thitherward, Post doctrinam
de caena domini scrupulosè quaerunt Anabaptistae (saith Bullinger) quorum causâ instituta sit, et quibus danda est, ac multa de separatione dicunt, atque hac ratione caeam domini amabilem et gaudio plenam, horribilem & tristem faciunt, ac aditum ad eam adeo coarctant, ut pii quo{que} homines ab ea abhorreant, et eam potius fugiant quàm accedant. And as a straight Line drawn out in length is weak, and can∣not be strengthned but by being re-doubled, and bowed back again, whereby it draws neer to the nature of a circular Line, which is more strong by the sup∣port which each part yieldeth to another: so let it also be considered by the Senate of the Learned, (for these points need rather Oedipus then Davus) whether the Apologists can be true and firm to their principle of admitting none to the one Sacrament, as being the proper priviledge of the godly, with∣out satisfactory tokens of godliness, unless they also suspend Infants from the other, until they grow into a capacity of giving such marks and demonstra∣tions; and also, whether they can exclude the Parents from the one Sacra∣ment, without rejecting their Children from the other, since the Parents Faith is the ground of claim to the Child; and if a Dogmatical Faith, and External Profession cannot entitle the Parent to the Eucharist, whether can it give the Child a right to Baptisme, since quod facit tale debet esse magis tale: But for my part, were I convinced of the truth of these principles of the Apologists, I should have strong tentations to turn Anabaptist, and doubt I could not else be true to them, or maintain them. This may also pertinently serve to blank or founder their Hackney Argu∣ment, that the seal is to set a blank and false testimony that is given by a pro∣miscuous admission; for when the Sacrament, the seal of Faith, is administred to those that are not true Believers, the seal is set to testifie and confirm that truth of sacred Writ, If thou believe, thou shalt be saved, (which is the compen∣dium and abstract of the Covenant.) This promise is made to unbelievers, though it be the object of Faith; but the thing promised, which is the appro∣priate object of Hope, is not to be acquired by any that performs not the con∣dition: Besides, not onely by the rule of contraries, nor alone by an equal ac∣commodation of that rule in interpreting the Laws, Praeceptum faciens includit praeceptum non faciens, Mark 16.16. (and therefore consequently the promise made to doing, implies the threat against not doing) but even in terms it is exprest, that as he that believes shall be saved, so he that believeth not shall be damned; and therefore the Sacraments being seals of the Covenant, as they confirm and as∣certain the mercy to the faithful partakers, so do they the judgement to the un∣faithful receiver: and therefore never is the seal set to a blank, to whomsoever applied, for somewhat of holy writ is still sealed, either salvation or damnation, according to the performance of the condition or not; as the same Deed or Wri∣ting sealed and delivered may (according to Covenants) contain a grant and confirmation of a right and estate, upon condition of some services; and upon default thereof, that right and estate to be forfeited, and a mulct or penalty to be then incurred; and he to whom the Original is sealed, may seal back his counterpart, and oblige himself to observe the condition, before he have per∣formed it, and though perchance afterward he break it, and so analogically he may receive Gods seal, the Sacrament, and set his own by taking it, that yet believes not; and as in the Word preached, which is the savour of life unto life, and of death unto death, and a sweet savour howsoever in both, he that be∣lieves
takes his part of the promise; he that doth not, receives his portion, which is the threat; so that to either it may be said, tolle quod tuum est & vade, and the terrour of the threatning may conduce and dispose to the acceptance of the promise, as fear introduceth love, as the needle doth the thread (in the expression of St. Augustine) even so it fares in the visible Word, the Sacra∣ment. Farther, when the Sacrament which is Gods external Seal of this promise is applied to an unbeliever, it hath all that is essential to Gods actual sealing of the truth thereof, the promise being made and published, the Sacrament by in∣stitution signifying it, by similitude representing it, by sanctification assuring it, and God thereby engaging himself to verifie it; in respect of external sealing nothing more is done to a true believer, (for of internal sealing and making the external to be successful or efficacious, is not the question, neither may we confound the external sealing with the inward, which is made by the spirit onely) nothing is done more in relation to sealing to him that performeth the condition, than to him that fulfilleth it not. As when a Writing is sealed and delivered to the use of two to become a Deed when a condition is com∣plyed with, or else to be as an escrol, he indeed that observes the Condition onely hath the estate thereby conveyed, but the sealing is alike to both. And this Conditional proposition is an absolute truth, even when made unto a Re∣probate: though it be false that he believes, and that he shall be saved, yet it is true, that if he believe he shall be saved; for if the connexion be true, though both parts severally considered, or though one or other of the parts re∣solved into a Categorical proposition be false, yet the proposition is true; Dr. Kend. ubi supra. the verity whereof depends on the connexion between the Predicate in the Ante∣cedent, and the Predicate in the Consequent, which put together so as the Pre∣dicate of the Antecedent become the Subject, and the Predicate of the Conse∣quent be made the Predicate in a Categorical proposition, it will result onely into this indubitable truth, He that believes shall be saved. Indeed if this Sacrament should be exhibited to an Infidel, not added to the Church, who had entred into no Covenant with God, nor assented by any Hi∣storical Faith to the written Word, or should have the Sacraments exhibited without the Word, then they might argue that the seal were set to a blank, but being exhibited to those who are in Covenant with God, (as all are that be of the visible Church, how else can their children be baptized?) and have recei∣ved by a Dogmatical Faith the written Word of promise, whereof the Sacra∣ments are seals, there can be no blank but in the argument, if they shall in this case urge it; they will not say that it is an untruth or false testimony when it is delivered in the Word, though unto reprobates to whom that promise is offe∣red, and the offer chiefly bottomed on the sufficiency of Christs death, to save all that shall believe, it being true that Christ by his death merited salvation for all upon condition of believing, if thereby we imply onely the connexion between Faith and Salvation, so that all believers shall be saved, (though it be not truth if we thereby intend that he merited salvation for all persons) his death indeed being sufficient for all, in regard of the price and merit thereof, though we cannot properly say he dyed sufficiently in respect of Christs pur∣pose in laying down his life, and of the efficacy of his death, I say the offer of this promise to reprobates is grounded chiefly on the sufficiency of Christs death to
save believers, and partly on our insufficiency to know who shall believe. And if this proposition be no false testimony when it is held forth in the Word, wherefore should it cease to be true when it is given in the Sacrament, why should the same thing be true when proposed thetically, generally and to the ear, and false when applyed hypothetically, particularly and to the eye; as if the essence of truth consisted in the manner and way of representation, and not rather in the adaequation of things to the understanding? If they shall object that the Sacraments are mutual engaging seals, and as Gods seals on his part, so ought the receivers to set their seals to the counterpart, and when God obligeth himself to be their God conditionally, they absolutely promise to be his people; and therefore when wicked men partake of the Sacrament, in them at least it is a false testimony, while they profess to be what they are not; and because all that are within the Covenant of Grace de jure should be Saints, they ought to exclude all such of whom they are not satisfied and con∣vinced that they are such de facto. I answer, 1. That I grant there ought to be the answer or restipulation of a good conscience in all for to be saved, but not in all that partake of the seals of grace and salvation. Yet whosoever re∣ceives them doth or ought to set his seal to what is thereby sealed to him, which is onely, that he that believes in the Lord Jesus Christ shall be saved. 2. Let them assign a cause why the same reason holds not in Baptisme, and why upon that account they adjourn not the baptising of Infants, till they can render that satisfaction, seeing Baptisme is a seal of the Covenant as well as the Eucharist, and the seal is set to a blank when the baptised hath no faith, as∣well as when the Communicant believes not. 3. Not to mention that there is a kind of mutual Covenant between God and Man, in hearing of the Word, God obliging himself by his promises there revealed, and in us there is a vir∣tual engagement and profession of our religious reception of Gods will, and subjection of our Consciences thereunto with belief of his truth, hope of the good there promised, and love of God, which therein reveals himself, all which though wicked men seem to profess, yet nothing thereof they perform. But to insist on prayer, there is the like mutual Covenant, God obligeth him∣self by his promise (though indeed as Durand aptly, Ames. Cas. Consc. l. 4. c. 16. p. 187. promissio divina in Scripturis sanctis non sonat in aliquam obligationem, sed insinuat meram dispositionem liberali∣tatis Divinae, and thereby (as Thomas,) Deus non nobis fit simpliciter debitor, sed sibi ipsi) in some sense, to hear our prayers, if made in Faith, and in our prayers there is always an implicit, and for the most part an explicit and express pro∣mise and engagement to God, to endevour to attain what we pray for, to glo∣rifie God with all which we obtain by prayer, to observe his will that is pleased to accept the representation of ours, and to turn that verbal praise which we give him into real, by glorifying him by our religious lives, and complying with our vows, and verifying our professions of service, without all which prayer be∣comes nothing but a mockery of God. But do not wicked men in all this flat∣ter him with their mouth, Psal. 78.36. and lye unto him with their tongues? and if then men must be suspended from the Sacrament until they approve their holiness to the satisfaction of the Church, lest otherwise they make an hypocritical engagement and false promise, it seems to me to follow that upon the same ac∣count they ought not to be admitted to prayers. Neither are or ought men to be Saints onely in order to the Sacrament, and not to other Ordinances; and
if they must be rejected from the Sacraments till they give convincing signes of their sanctity, because all that are admitted to joyn in this highest act of Church-Communion (as they stile it) ought de jure to be Saints, it seems to me that till they render such signs they ought to be excluded altogether from all Church-Communion, and to be accounted as Heathens and Publicans, and no members at all of the visible Church; for the Church and Saints by cal∣ling signifie the same thing, and all ought to be Saints that are of the Church. Lastly, I may not deny that (through an accidental abuse which may not prejudice things good in themselves) wicked men may be facil to flatter and indulge themselves with a good conceit of their condition, though sinful, or an hope of their impunity in their evils, because of their participation of the Sa∣craments. It seems by what St. Paul delivers, 1 Cor. 10. the Corinthians are an exem∣plary instance hereof, being guilty of the like presumption and security. But what way of cure doth the Apostle use to prevent or remedy the malady? Truly not Empyrick-like straightway to take the knife in hand and fall to cut∣ting oft, (for he doth not tell them that therefore all ought to be suspended beside manifest Saints) but he proceeds dogmatically, and to expel and cor∣rect the errour of the Corinthians (which also lets out the vital blood and spi∣rits of this Paradox of the Apologists) he better doth instruct and principle them, shewing that the Sacraments which were common to good and evil men, could give no privilege to sinne, nor protection from punishment. For quem∣admodum tu comedis corpus Christi, sic illi Manna; & quomodo tu bibis sanguinem, Homil. 18. in 2 Cor. In locum. Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 10. Sect. 5. p. 148. Aquinas, Justinian. Estius, Lapide, &c. English late Annot. Cha∣mier. to. 4. l. 3. c. 2. p. 55. stc illi aquam ex petra, saith Chrysostome. The Fathers did all eat the same spiri∣tual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink; the same, non in symbolis, seu signis, sed significatione seu re significatâ, as Piscator; iisdem quoque symbolis illustrem inter eos gratiam suam reddiderit; the same cum nobis, with us, not onely the same among themselves inter se, as the Papists would have it, for that would take off the energy of the Apostles argument, whose scope being ut ostendat quòd sicut illis non profuit quòd tantum donum sunt assecuti, ita nec his quòd consequuti sunt baptismum & spiritualia perceperint mysteria, nisi sint ostensuri vitam dignam gratiâ, in the words of Chrysostome, wherein not onely all Protestants concurre but even many Pontificians themselvs, therefore ut apta esset comparatio, oportuit oftendere nihil esse inaequalitatis inter nos & ipsos in iis bonis quibus falsè gloriari vetabat. Ergo pares in Sacramentis non facit, nec ullam praerogativam nobis re∣linquit, saith Calvin, and therefore in illa comparatione rem eandem significatam esse fundamentum comparandi — nulla consequentia si compararentur in∣aequalia aut dissimilia — nam si res impar, Ibid. c. 1. in promptu exceptionem esse futuram, Periisse Israelitas non participes beneficiorum quorum nobis Sacramenta sunt, addes Chamier: and the drift of the Apostle here is to compare those Sa∣cramental Types in the old Law with the two Sacraments in the new, and that in two respects: First, for the same nature or substance of mysteries in both; and secondly, Mede Diatr. p. 556. Chamier Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 1. for the same condition of the receivers, if either they abuse them, or walk un∣worthy of them, saith a late judicious Writer. They were therefore the same spiritual meat and drink, in re (as Chamier) non in modo rei, (their Sacra∣ments praefigurativè, ours rememorativè, and ours having ex ampliore revela∣tionis modo gratiam uberiorem, as Calvin, non in specie visibili, sed virtute spiri∣tuali
— in signis diversis eadem fides, as Augustine, and out of him Anselm, there being discrepantia in signis, In Joh. Tract. 26. & 45. Tom. 9. convenientia in re significata, as Paraeus, theirs being antitypes of ours, signs of the same things, & ut apud Graecos Grammati∣cos  sunt elementa quorum idem sonus, tempus deversum, as Chamier, and so this was the same meat and spiritual drink too, because spirituale aliquod significans, Ut supra. as Augustine and Piscator; figura spiritualis, as Sa, quia in symbolum & significationem spiritualium, as Salmeron, & quatenus habuerint rationem Sacra∣menti, adds Piscator. So then however these were Sacramenta extraordinaria, transitoria & temporaria, yet being the same with ours (or else Christ is not ours, for that Rock was Christ) the same with ours in use, end and effect, and operating, Tom. 4. c. 9. p. 36. saith Ames, eodem genere non gradu efficaciae, and agreeing with ours omnibus iis capitibus, quae sunt de natura Sacramenti, as Chamter; and therefore the Fathers receiving the Sacramental Communication of the body and blood of Christ indeed, Confut. Rhem. Test. in 1 Cor. 10.3. Willet contr. 11. q. 2. p. 544. (as not onely Fulk and Willet, but the whole Protestant Host of the living God do contend) yet many of them God was not well pleased with, some whereof were Idolaters, Fornicators, Murmurers, did lust, did tempt Christ, yet the same spiritual meat and drink was received by all Sacramen∣tally, though effectually onely by believers, the spiritual thing by the good alone, the Elements, which were spiritual in their signification, by evil men also. And thereupon likewise I hope it will seem evident to unprejudiced and unbiassed men, that the Sacraments are not onely communicable to such as have given positive signs and demonstrations of Holiness. There are such answers given to the Argument drawn from this Scripture, as smack of some willingness to correct the Text, rather than their Models, and to set their spurs in the Apostles side, rather than to loose the reins in their hands. Some tell us; Chamier ubi supra, Sect. 32. p. 17. First, that those were extraordinary Sacraments; but what then? Extraordinaria habent quicquid est de natura ordinariorum, exceptâ solâ ordinis circumstantiâ, quae eadem temporis ost, saith Chamier. Secondly, But these had no special promise annexed: But if so, then they had nothing beyond the Corporal use; and the Apostle was mistaken when he calls them spiritual meat and drink, and saith the Rock was Christ, in signification; though yet being extraordinary Sacraments; Ames thinks that idcirco non requirebatur ut promissionem haberent spiritualem ab ordinariis distinctam, sed satis fuit ut illarum promissionum beneficia singulari modo repraesentarent. Bell. ener. Tom. 3. c. 4. p. 42. Thirdly, that those might be common to all persons that were also common to beasts, which passed through the red Sea, drank of the waters of the rocks, and eat of the Manna. But to omit that, Paraeus calls this Vere bestialem & caninam arrosionem veritatis, an argument smacking more of the Beast than rational Creature: even the matter and Elements of our Sacraments are common to bruit Ani∣mals; for a Beast may drink of, or be washed with water, and eat of bread, even a Mouse may devour that which is consecrated; the possibility whereof hath made the Papists (out of whose Forge these Weapons issued, and upon whose Anvil they were fashioned) not more cautelous in their preventing it, than curious in their disputing thereof.
Divine Institution, doth not alter the nature of things, nor moral and rela∣tive mutations infer real; the mystical use must be distinguish'd from the phy∣sical; and from this use superadded to their nature they became spiritual, and Sacraments; none but those that were capable of that use (which not beasts but onely rational Creatures could be, (did partake a Sacrament; and it had been an hard saying, if the Apostle had told us, that Beasts did eat and drink spiritual meat and drink (as he calleth this.) Fourthly, That upon the score of this Argument, both Infants, and all flagi∣tious persons, such as were these Idolaters, Fornicators, &c. may be also ad∣mitted to the Lords Supper: But for answer (beside that one knot is not untwisted by tying on another) wee do here onely argue that Sacraments formally as such, are not proper privileges of real Saints, or absolutely incom∣municable to any, but such as have given satisfaction of their Holiness (which is their hypothesis, against which we are here disputing) and so much I think is fully and cleerly evinced by this instance; but yet though they are not abso∣lutely incommunicable, We do not assert, nor is it here upon consequence, that all Sacraments may now practically be communicated to all persons, be∣cause there are arguments drawn from other considerations, besides the nature of Sacraments in general, which limit and restrain their use. As for Infants, (to whom yet the Apologists will not affirm the Sacraments to be absolutely incommunicable, for themselves admit them to Baptisme) as they were in that time to Circumcision; and there being no more that we can find required to qualification for those extraordinary Sacraments than was requisite to Cir∣cumcision, which was onely to be within the Covenant, immediatly in their own, or mediatly in their Parents right, Infants were in a capacity to receive these, as well as the ordinary Sacraments. Beside, an argument drawn from the Infants eating Manna, may pass in the next rank to that which Bellarmine collected from the drinking of Beasts, which might make a natural, but could no moral use thereof, and take it as common food, but not as spiritual, or as signs and pledges of better things. A principal end of the institution of the Lords Supper, was the commemoration of his death, for which Infants are in∣competent; and here is an express command for a man to examine himself, which Infants are not susceptible of; and upon this account they are not ad∣mitted to the Eucharist, though they are to Baptisme, being capable of the use and end thereof, viz. to initiate them into the visible Church, and constitute them members thereof, and engage them to the faith and obedience of Christ, and work upon them some other relative effects, in all which a passive recepti∣on is sufficient, whereas in the Eucharist an active is requisite; Adult intelli∣gent persons though criminous, have a potentiality to make such use, and do such acts, whether actually they do or not, though perchance they are incapa∣ble of an holy and effectual use or actions; yet notwithstanding I do not think (as Paraeus doth not) that the Israelites did explicitly understand the mystical use of the Cloud, Rock, and Manna, yet most of them implicitely did so, Com. in 1 Cor. 10.1. and apprehended them as signs and symbols of Gods being in covenant with them, and all that were intelligent might have done so, and therefore all did in com∣mon partake of these extraordinary Sacraments. And however there may be pious considerations and prudential motives whereupon such flagitious per∣sons
ought to be removed from Communion of Sacraments; Yet where either for preservation of unity, or through the multitude of offendors, or non-settle∣ment, or non-administration of such discipline, or through any other obstacle (all which considerations might perchance be found in the condition of Israel in the desert) that cannot be done; for all those to whom it is not done, there may safely be a mixt communion, and free admission to the Sacraments being Covenanters and Church-members, without any such scrutining or proof of their real holiness, which I suppose may be concluded out of these premises. It irritates much when it is said that their way symbolizeth with the Donatists, but among other things seposited for future discussion, Aug. de con∣vert. Donat. c. 23. p. Ep. 50. this is one point of their Correspondency, that the Donatists would have all their Church to be Saints, & suam ecclesiam ex qua esse profitentur, sine macula esse & ruga, and as they cast at our dore that with us wicked men enjoy the privileges of the godly, so Cres∣conius tells St. Augustine vos inter fidelem & perfidum nihil discernitis, Brevicul. Collat. 3. Tom. 7. p. 118: but if they be all Saints with whom they hold Communion of Sacraments in their Church, theirs is less like to be the Church of God, for there are tares in that field, chaffe in that floor, bad fishes in that net, nec latere, sed cerni, not undisco∣vered but apparant, Contra Dona∣tist. post collat. c. 8. Tom. 7. p. 123. as Augustine, out of Cyprian, and so manifestly evil that the Wheat is rather hidden, saith he, when the Chaff is manifest. But adjourning a more plenary discourse of this matter, I shall here onely remind them of an aviso of Bullinger in an Epistle to Beza, Né dum purgatissimam ecclesiam, né quid hîc aliud suspicer, volunt instituere, brevi nullam habeant. SECT. VI. Independent Books and Arguments. Of Rhetorique, what Builders the Apologists are? THE Apologists are rare men, for they say they pretend not to much art, & Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit. It seems they can be content to quit the key of knowledge, so they may hold fast that of power; but I doubt they would not patiently hear another to say what they speak of themselves; else why can they neither digest nor relish the speech, that some other shekels may waigh more than those of the Sanctuary; and if they pretend not much to art, why undertake they that, which none should presume to do, but such as can justly make that pretendment? and there∣fore as St. Hierome tells us, mendax humilitas, incauta humilitas; so I shall re∣member them of what a grave Divine answered to one that spake somewhat in his own disparagement, Greenham. Oh, said he, why do you praise your self so much!
But as their own Espencaeus saith of the Bishops of the Councel of Trent, they were learned in their Assistants, so the Apologists tell us that what ever be their way of arguing, some other of the same judgment with them in the main have pub∣lished arguments logical enough, and as yet unanswered. I cannot conceive those of the same Judgment with them in the main to be any other than Indepen∣dents: But if they relate unto, or intimate those learned pens that have been drawn forth and impressed, in asserting Presbytery, and vindicating the power of excommunication (as I doubt they do, because in their subsequent discourse when their own quivers are empty, they make use of some of those arrows which were never aymed at, n are proper for the mark) I must tell them they have no more interest in, or advantage by those arguments than the page which Huartus speaks of, could have in all the Kingdoms and Nations of the earth, by the false imagination in his frantick distemper, that they were all his Vassals and Contributaries, and himself the onely Master thereof. Of Trea∣tises maintaining Independency I am assured there are many more written than I have read, who am not much conversant in the late English Pamphlets, who love not to be opening packes of small Wares, and chuse to set up some great lights in a room, rather than go to search every corner with a candle in my hand. But truly of those Independent Writers that I have met with, if I shall offer my judgment, I must say of their Arguments as du Moulin did of Boniface his Extravagants, They will do well with a sword in hand; I presume the Apologists engage more of time to books of this subject, and I doubt not but they have cropt the best flowers to make up this garland wherewith they seek to crown their way of discipline, which in their order we shall consider. But the arguments which the paper means, when it calls them popular dis∣courses and similitudes, were neither more lamely nor disadvantageously repre∣sented (as they suggest) than really they were, for the Apologists have not cu∣red their halting, they still go the same pace in their Apology, though to sup∣ply the weight, here is addition to the number, but non gemit Antigenidus si Tellias novas habet tibias, and they could not well be unknown, or easily be mistaken, being so often inculcated, and made the ordinary subject of their Sermons, and resound of their Pulpits, this being the Sparta, they have chosen to adorn, and therefore no matter if not given under their hands till now, though perchance it had been more politick not to have now given them, the eye being not so easily charmed as the ear, and we might have imagined them better, if we had less perfectly known what they had been, and they might have been like the Images of Brutus and Cassius in the Funerals of Junius, Julius. eo ipso praefulgebant quòd non visebantur, as many other things; the less known, the more have been reve∣renced; like Callipolis, onely fair afar off, and resembling the Chariots Vegetius speaks of, At first a terrour, but upon more acquaintance a scorn. We yeeld them the knowledge of distinguishing between illustrations and arguments, but we know more of their illustrations, than their Arguments, and their Declarations of the purity of Ordinances, and of the Saints, the prophaning or polluting of either by mixt Communions, the giving false testimony and prostituting the privileges of the godly, the mischief of evil society, and the partaking of other mens sins (which are good propositions till they be yoked with unsuitable as∣sumptions, and terms argumentative in thesi, but misapplied in hypothesi) out of which mediums the Arguments were formed which the paper meant and called
popular, because onely like to take with that kind of people which have Cor in auribus, non aures in Corde, as Augustine speaketh, taking things ut sonant, non ut sapiunt: such are neither good arguments, nor st illustrations: but out of their resolutions nothing can be distill'd but fallacia consequentis, and which are therefore but like Aegyptian Temples, specious in the Frontispiece, and a Calf or an Ape in the Penetral, Desinit in piscem mulier formosa supernè. But some reasonings in the Paper are of that constitution, (I suppose they mean illustrations, which word immediatly preceded) and there are indeed many illustrations of the reasons, or the things proved by reason; but whereas they have told me that my discourse is onely Rhetorique, and that I should have used more of the fist than the palm, and a major and a minor would have done better than my ingenious sentences, and witty illustrations, besides that which the Poet hath prompted me with, —Leporem tu quo{que} pone mihì. Let them string up such sentences and illustrations, and I shall like their dis∣course the better, if such a thread run thorough it, such sentences, though som∣time pick'd from Heathens, being in some degree argumentative, seeing to rea∣son from what the wisest of natural men have taught, carryes no great unsui∣tableness to St. Paul's reason from what Nature teacheth, 1 Cor. 11.14. I must further take leave to answer, that (absit invidia verbo) it is so facil and fami∣liar to me, that of quicquid conabor dicere I could make syllogismes; how easie had it been to have thus argued? That which was not done by our Saviour Christ at the first institution, is not necessary to be done in order to the admi∣nistration of the Lords Supper, but the special examination of every Commu∣nicants knowledge or life was not done by our Saviour Christ at the first in∣stitution; ergo. Or thus, That which was by the Lord Jesus imparted to Judas, is not to be denied to any that is not scandalous or notoriously wicked; but the Sacrament was by the Lord Jesus administred to Judas, ergo; Or thus, What was permitted by St. Paul is still allowable; but to come to the Sacrament up∣on the private examination of a mans self, was permitted by St. Paul, ergo. And thus I could as easily have done thorough the whole discourse; but out of the Schools, I thought it a more flat and tyring way of arguing; and I took my precedent chiefly from the greatest Masters of Controversies, in whose larger Vo∣lumes I meet not with many explicit syllogismes, and remembred that Tacitus commendeth Seneca, that he had Scribendi genus temporis illius auribus accommo∣datum; and that Mercury speaking to Battus, sell into Battology, — Me mihi perfide prodis? Me mihi prodis? ait. — And therefore chose rather to be in fashion, than to wear richer cloths, and to be wet with the common showre of folly, as it is in the Fable, than to be wise with singularity.
But who hath not read in Aristotle of a rhetorical, cryptical, and implicite Syllo∣gisme, which Logicians say is usual, Ornatûs aut brevitatis causâ; and which by a tacit supply of one proposition is made up perfect: Children when they first learn to read, spell every syllable, but grown more skilful, they make up and pronounce every word at its first aspect: so I think the like of discourses, where any versed in arguing can readily analyse the speech, and by a mental supply of what is onely implyed, finde the force or fallacy of the argument. Though I have censured others for popular Rhetorique, the Imposture of our times, yet not as rhetorique, but as Enervous, where affections are onely wrought upon, reason not at all; and which being resolved, appears but like a Calf made out of golden ear-rings. Whether mine be of the one, or the other kind, neither my self nor the Apologists are competent Judges, who perchance may both look on it through a Perspective, though I at one end, they at the other of the Glass; and at the one end all things appear greater, at the other less than they be. But however it be, though they (as Cresconius did St. Augustines) do slight and up∣braid my rhetorique (such as it is) having perchance the like quarrel there∣unto which he had to Demosthenes his Candle, because it stood in his light, and they have some affinity with Cleon, who using to hold the worst side in the cau∣ses he pleaded, was therefore always inveighing against Eloquence; yet per∣chance some may find more implicite Syllogisms in my Rhetorique, than Lo∣gick in their explicit ones. As he among the Romans was held the best Citi∣zen, that being a Plebeian favoured the Optimates, and being a Patrician coun∣tenanced the people; so I think him a more accomplish'd Writer, that taking the part of a Logician to work on reason, takes in ayd of Rhetorique; and play∣ing the Rhetorician to move the affections, makes Logick auxiliar. Things of the same signification may have different impression, according as they are dressed, and set forth; and perchance the same thing nakedly and bluntly de∣livered, had not made so easie and great an impression on the famous Marquess of Vico, as it did when set forth under an elegant similitude by Peter Martyr. I would be made all things to all men: Modus orationis auditor, Orpheus in Sylvis, inter Delphinas Arion. It was Epiphanius his commendation, that the Learned liked him for the mat∣ter, and the unlearned for the style; and (as Pliny saith, they sometime deal with the Elephant) it is convenient to deck the Manger with flowers, that the Provender may go down the better. But the Apologists will prove themselves Builders, and not Painters; and sure they may be both with commendation, for Christ was painted crucified among the Galatians, which Interpreters under∣stand of the lively and evident setting forth of his sufferings. Let them there∣fore lay solid Foundations, and build up firm Wals, we shal not only allow, but take complacency in the painting thereof: But let them not bring us back again to Babel, that when we call for stones, they bring us onely Mortar to daub with. They are, they say, Builders, not Painters; perchance he that can judge of Colours, will take this but for painting: they may be Builders at some times, and in some things and respects, and yet perchance be Painters onely in some others (as particularly in this subject:) for it is not necessary, that he that builds should never paint. It is a debt to Truth, to acknowledge that
they are capable to build up in our holy Faith, and do edifie: themselves di∣sparage their skill and pains in building, more than I dare to do; and confess their power of destruction an hundred to one greater than that of Edification, pulling down a goodly Church, that with some stones selected out of the ruins, they may build an angust Chapel after their model. And can they pass for good Builders, when after twenty years labour in a Town that hath formerly had two or three expert Architects to prepare the work, (and one of them shi∣ning. Tanquam inter ignes Luna minores; By whose excellent preaching, they were like Capernaum, lift up to Heaven) succeeding each other (and as Machiavel saith of Princes, so may I of Mini∣sters, The continued succession of two good Ministers cannot but effect great matters:) that yet their Prolocutor among 5. or 600. stones cannot hitherto hew or square above five or six of them for the Altar, or make them lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. built up a spiritual house (as the Apostle speaks.) It is likely, that in some resemblance with that living stone, they may be some of them disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious; but while they will not own them for such, they detract much from their own faculty in building. I sup∣pose we do not see any painful and holy labours in Gods field recompensed with so poor an Harvest, and God is not wont to give so small an increase, where any wise planting and diligent watering hath preceded. Had the Apo∣logists been as frequent, and earnest, and importunate, in preparing men for the Communion, as they have been in asserting their power of suspending them, and been careful rather to prevent, than to punish indispositions, I be∣leeve they had superseded those multa supplicia, which cannot but be to them tàm turpia quàm medico multa funera, as Cassiodor speaketh; but suam quis{que} homo rem meminit; and the Proverb which Ammonius, in the life of Abbo, tells us, was used of things too eagerly and impertinently insisted upon, venit ad decimas, may now be turned into venit ad suspensionem; their Pulpits have been too much set to the tune of their models and plat-forms of Discipline, which might with more honour and more fruit of their Ministry, have onely resoun∣ded repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: but while they have been more careful lest they marre their own Inheritance, than to raise up the name of the dead (viz.) Jesus Christ our elder brother upon his Inheritance, no marvell though they spit in their own faces, and put upon them∣selves the reproch of bad builders. He is not like to build the house better, that hath not entred at the door. The influence of the Agent is upon the Pa∣tient well prepared, and those preparations and previous dispositions are best wrought by familiar and gentle applications, humble condescentions, meekness, of spirit, and by being given to Hospitality, which are the most proper tools and most effectual Instruments to build with: durum & durum non faciunt mu∣rum; and he that shall chuse to make use of the contrary, may think to build such a Chamber for himself, as Tobias had by the preparation of Eliashib, in the Courts of the house of God; but he may not hope to build Gods house, especially when his Rod takes up almost all the Ark, and leaves so little room for the pot of Manna. The Halcyon or Kings-Fisher doth onely build his nest
in a calm; and the Fishers of the King of Heaven are onely like to edifie the Church by calm comportments, and gentle applications, not by raising such firy and boysterous storms. Amphions Musick brought together, and laid the stones for building the Walls of Thebes; but they are so long, and so much knocking and beating of the stones, that they break them to pieces, and are like the Italian Musicians that were admitted to sound their Airs before Sultan Achmet, which were so long a tuning of their Instruments, that he thought this their best Musick, and sent them away with contempt and indignation, and fru∣strated of their reward. SECT. VII. The Apologists causlesly irritated by an Allegory. — Quis te tam lene fluentem Moturum tot as violenti gurgitis iras Nile putet? WHO would have imagined, that the drawing of an Allegory from Nebu∣chadnezars Image, would have been an occasion to bring me into the firy Furnace, (as St. Augustine calls an Adversaries angry mouth) and that quicquid tetigero ulcus erit. Bitterly, (they say) but — Flagrantior aequo Non debet dolor esse viri, nec vulnere major. I conclude, that I cannot but excuse such, as at the sound of such Musick cannot fall down and worship the Image which Nebuchadnezar hath set up; I make their holy and Christian way, the means (antonomasticè) of spiritual life (though I trust all are not spiritually dead that partake not of these meanes,) Nebu∣chadnezars Image and Idolatry, and their Exhortations, moving soules to their so∣ciety (as tending to Reformation, and some rise of order) so as it seems they only are of the Reformed Religion, whereas they onely reform the Church militant in the Military notion; (as Troops and Companies are said to be reformed when they are lessened) This is Pagan Musick; Magnum crimen Caie Caesar, & ante haec tempora inauditum! But are the Apologists in earnest, and will they as much blemish their Charity, to think I intended this, as their discretion, to suppose that this can be inferred from my expressions? If I seem to conclude bitterly, it is because the stomach vitiated the tongue with choler, therefore every thing tastes bitter: Doth it more imbitter them to hear the same thing drest in a Rhetorical figurative expression, than in a rustical and blunt Language; Acuto quàm retuso telo vulnerari commodius sit, saith the great Physician Celsus. A comparison reflects more light, and impresseth more com∣placency, than a simple contemplation. If I had said I could not but excuse these that could not dance after their pipe, would not that have irritated them with the harsh sound thereof? And what do I in that other delivery of my self, but signifie the same thing in other words? Scaliger tells us of a Maid that sounded at the sight of a Rose (as Cantharides are killed with smells of
sweet flowers) and it seems the Apologists are offended with a poor Flower of Rhetorique, a Rose that hath no prickles. Allegories are but implicit and contracted similitudes, which as they must not be wrested beyond their scope, and (as Heralds say of Bearings) the resemblance must be taken from the best of their properties, not the worst; so he that shall apply all that to the sub∣ject of the apodosis, which agrees to the subject of the protasis, will forfeit as much of discretion as of charity. In that Allegory, (viz.) where the dead carcass is, there will the Eagles resort; the carcass refers unto, and shadows out our blessed Saviour, but dare any to be so foolishly blasphemous, as to apply unto our Saviour other properties of a carcass than that one of conveying his Saints to him as Eagles to a carkass. Do not the Apologists in the close of this Section, tell us in the phrase of Scripture, of Adders stopping their ears to them, and of their piping to them that have not danced, and shall we have so little wit or ingenuity, to say they grant themselves to be Charmers or Fidlers? With as much colour of justice do they complain else-where, that I lay Ma∣gick to their charge, in saying their gathering others from their proper Pastors into their Church, resembles that Magick which some Romans were slandered with, of charming and bringing other mens fruits into their Fields. As Socrates said of Heraclitus his Works, What I understand, is good; what I understand not, I beleeve is good: So when they else-where complain of despiteful Ca∣lumnies cast upon them, who will not contrariwise be apt to say, what I know hath no cause of complaint; and therefore I beleeve what I know not is as causless. But as it tends nothing to the honour of their patience, imbecilla se laedi putant si tanguntur; so as little to the repute of their innocence, to be so tender, Hieron. in Is. 2. Tom. 4. p. 20. Aug. Tom. 7. p. 69. as to catch fire from every spark; for not onely wise Tacitus hath said, agnita sunt si irascaris; but more reverend Hierom, Qui mhi irasci voluerit, priùs ipse de se quod talis sit confitebitur; and perchance when they suspect I accuse them of Idolatry, they re-mind that of Hierom, Omne dogma contrarium veritati adorat opera manuum suarum, & constituit idolum in terra sua. SECT. VIII. In whom the School vesteth the power of Church-censures. Whether the Apologists may, de jure, or doe de facto, censure alone? How they have restored the Sacrament? THE Paper, (quantum distabat ab illa?) that otherwhere is too par∣simonious, is here (quanto majora dedisti) become very prodigal, in gran∣ting them more power than they desire, (and then surely the grant is excee∣ding large) for it impowers the Minister alone to excommunicate, which the Lear∣ned make an act of jurisdiction belonging to the whole Church, (the act and exer∣cise of that power, none but their late sprung party of Independents do invest the whole Church with, though the Church-Representative in general Coun∣cils perchance do assume it) Or to the Officers of the Church, (which is not so
accurately expressed, for the Minister is a Church-Officer too) but herein he speaks the opinion of the School, which seems to put Church-censures into the Mini∣sters hands alone. But however, the School-men may perchance seem to allow a Minister to deny the Sacrament, ad hic & nunc, to him that is notoriously guilty of mortal sins; and so is jure & demeritoriè already excommunicate; Aquin. suppl. q. 22. art. 1. Biel. in 40. d. 18. q. 2. conclu. 3. Valencia in 3. disp. 7. q. 17. punct. 3. sic eti∣am Durand. & Estius in 4. d. 18. ille q. 4. iste Sect. 14. item Vasquez de excom. dub. 17. yet so broad and unlimited an expression, that the School seems to put Church-cen∣sures into the Ministers hands alone, argues the Apologists to have tasted the School-men, tanquam canis ad Nilum, or heard them, tanquam eccho per reflexio∣nem, at second hand; for it is their general and constant doctrine, that not all Priests, nor onely Priests; but, as Aquinas speaks such qui habent praelationem sive jurisdictionem coercivam; that is, judicii exterioris contentiosi, in the words of Biel, or legitimam jurisdictionem, ordinariam, vel delegatam in foro externo Ecclesiastico, in the phrase of Valentia, have the power of Excommunication, though paro∣chial Ministers may inflict it sometimes by special commission, or in certain particular cases, by custome; as in Theft and Rapine. But — Capream de rupe videbant, Casuram sperant, decipit illa canes. The Apologists do but dream all this while; when they awake they will finde they have not that which they thought to have held: neither was that granted which they assume. The Paper argued, ad hominem onely, not ad rem, and suppo∣sed they might comparatively take as much power alone to exclude some noto∣rious sinners, as they did assume to excommunicate so many that were not noto∣riously sinful: & yet as Luther said in the matter of Absolution, Hieron. ubi supra. in casu necessitatis quilibet potest esse Sacerdos; so under the duress of necessity, (quae quicquid co∣git, defendit, saith Seneca, so that the Oracle resolved, omnia necessaria concedit Deus) where discipline by any obstruction is not regularly setled; or those that should concur to the exercise thereof, do generally and totally desert or neg∣lect the duty, if the Minister by the power of those keys which he holds in his single hand (so it be not Citra consensum Ecclesiae ac praecipuorum ejus membrorum, In 1 Cor. c. 5. p. 466. maximè autem Christiani Magistratus; as Paraeus limits it particularly, although that consent be onely implicit and interpretative) shall shut out from the Sa∣crament, untill he verifie his repentance, any one that hath lapsed into such an execrable sinne and scandal as deserves excommunication (for onely for such sins St. Epist. 118. Augustine affirmeth may a man separate from the Communion) and is notorious by sentence of any Judicatory whatsoever, Confession of the party, or Evidence of the fact, See more of this Sect. 29. that Minister that shall do this shall live without any quarrel from me for so doing. But yet what necessity in some cases may some∣time warrant, is not always and in all cases regular or absolutely to be practi∣sed. Honesta lex est temporis necessitas, necessity is a temporary, no perpetual Law; and the great Lawyer Paulus resolveth, quae propter necessitatem recepta sunt, non debent in argumentum trahi. And as the Paper did not concede them what they suggest, so had it granted as much, yet it is no more than they de∣sire, unless their desires have narrower boundaries than their practice; for in the 29. Sect. they say in terms, the Ministers of the Gospel may act by virtue of their Commission from Christ, upon their own knowledge or conscience, as to censuring; but as a Conquerour, having vanquish'd his enemy, will not be
content with that which before would have given complacency: so by that time they were grown confident of their Victory, and thought their shadow grown longer, and like the bounds of Sparta; so their power is lengthned with the sword; and perchance as the shine of success may quicken them, their claims may still spring to a greater heighth. And if they do not claim, yet they already usurp the power to suspend alone, without the efficacious concourse of any others. Those whom for form sake they call their Elders, may perchance sometime heretofore have co-operated, not as Physical, but Moral causes, ad quorum praesentiam, non efficientiam sequitur effectus, to whom therefore I cannot allow the nature of Consonants, which though mute of themselves, have their sound when joyn'd with Vowels; but those having no vital principles, they are rather like Architas his Dove, and Regiomontanus his Eagle and Fly, which move by these Wheels which they make and set, and whereof they order the spring; and yet also it is very obvious and transparent to all about them, that these Wheels have been rarely or never set a going about the Work; for one or two of the Ministers onely made tryal and judgment, and admitted or laid aside as they list, which I think they will not deny; or if they should, I could verifie by particular instances. But whatsoever be the neglect of others, the Apologists have now redeemed their faulty omission of the Eucharist, the frequent Celebration whereof they sense to be their duty; and so secundo post integritatem gradu consistunt, and are almost innocent, because (as they say) humbled: The lesser evil hath somewhat of good, and it is well that they see, and farther from evil, that they have in any degree reformed their fault, God may in his good time reflect one beam of light more upon them, and make them see that they have yet no other∣wise rectified their sinne of Omission, than as he doth, that idly sate still, and then starts up to run a wrong way. But as qui tardè vult, diu noluit; so qui pau∣cis dat, multis negat; as I doubt not but they would hitherto have wholly inter∣mitted the administration, unless they could have gathered a selected compa∣ny, among whom to have administred it in the way of separation: so now still they omit and lay aside the Celebration, in respect of so many as they admit not, which are by far the greater number: so as take the denomination from the greater part, and we may say they administer to none (in comparison) and in their proper Churches and Charges they celebrate not; for as the Papists poysoned their God in the Sacrament, that they might poyson the Emperour, so they have suspended the Sacrament it self in their Congregations, that they might suspend the people: and their zeal to the administration, may well be gathered and concluded out of this, that their Prolocutor by his Allotrio-Episcopal influence and acting, hath procured and brought into some Chur∣ches, under the notion of Pastors, some which long time after were not Mini∣sters lawfully ordained, and so in no capacity to consecrate and administer. And whereas they tell us, that all that are desirous and worthy, with little pains, might partake thereof; As for many of those that are rejected, their de∣sire will be sufficiently witnessed, and their worthiness is not to be tryed by un∣sealed weights, and uneven ballances; and for the pains which they must take, which I imagine they intend of their travell to a remoter place, Ad Paulin. Ep. 13. Tom. 1. although fru∣strà fit per plura, and one place is as neer heaven as another, as St. Hierom said, Et de Hierosolymis & de Britannia aequaliter patet aula coelestis: so they that call
them ten or twelve miles, may with as much reason command them twenty or thirty farther: Yet it is not so much the place, as the way that is questioned, and the reason and authority that enforceth it. But of the place, we shall su∣spend farther consideration, having destined a special Section to that Topo∣graphy, and desire onely it may be here perpended, whether the thrusting out of such a multitude from the Sacrament, do not check with that caution, which Augustine so often inculcates, of not eradicating the Wheat, while they rashly would separate the Tares. SECT. IX. The state of the question; the model of their Church: Whether their way smack of  Donatus his Schisme? Ecclesiastical Communion consists principally in Communion of Sacraments. Of Examina∣tion precedent to the partaking of the Eucharist. Whether, and how necessary? What knowledge may be competent? What pro∣fession of Faith the ancient Church required before admission to Sa∣craments? Of Excommunication, Suspension, Presbytery; the Apo∣logists no friends thereunto. IT is no unprofitable way, saith an eminent Divine, Dr. Jo. Whites Defence way, p. 143. when one cannot defend his question to pick a quarrel to the state thereof; Which trick, saith he, Dr. Staple∣ton in his time made good use of. The Apologists, it seems, have learn'd this trick, and here question the Paper for mistaking the question; but it being their practice directly which was questioned, the state of the question will be best determined, by calling under our prospect their way and their practice. At Holisworthy divers assembling at the Publick Lecture, the Prolocutor of the Apologists, who was married to that Church, and now by a new kinde of Poly∣gamy sought to contract a new and fairer Spouse, of such as were most mall∣able to his impressions, and facil to be lick'd into that shape whereunto he would form them, drew some few (for he retained his interest in his old Church, when he gathered a new; and being more provident than Aesops Dog, kept the substance, when he catch'd after the shadow; and held the Bird in hand, when he sought more in the Wood) into a more private Conventicle, where after the Lecture, they had a kind of prophecying, and one or other was by turn selected to be Moderator of their Exercises, where Jacob not rolling away the stone from the Well for the sheep, but the sheep for Jacob to drink, while the Ministers sate by in silence (& silere eos turpe est & Xenocratem loqui.) O∣thers, who though like those Animals whose eyes serve them well enough in the dark (for their private obscurer condition) yet have no perspicacy for a grea∣ter light; so their parts either infused by nature, or acquisite by study, being too angust to reach that heighth, or comprehend those Dimensions: Yet
— Currus petit ille paternos. They presuming (as I think) to understand above what was meet for them to understand, Epist. ad Paul. in Tom. 3. p. 8. which the Apostle forbids; and when — quod Medicorum Promittunt Medici, tractant fabrilia Fabri. Sola Scripturarum ars est quam sibi omnes vindicant — hanc universi praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequàm discant, which St. Hierom derides, and not contenting themselves with the judgment of discretion, Hieron. ubi supra. but usur∣ping that of direction, and cancelling the natural Law of Relatives, were all Pastors without Flocks, and the Sheep all turn'd Shepherds, they undertook (— Quae non viribus istis, Munera conveniunt.—) To expound and apply difficult Texts of Scripture, and resolve doubtfull Cases and Questions in Theology; and with the Child (as it is in the Story of St. Augustine,) to lade out the Ocean with their Cockle-shell; and as they arro∣gated to be Gods mouth in publick teaching of the rest, so to be the mouth of the rest to God, in publick praying for a blessing upon others. Nay, some of their Women impatient of that Gagge which the Apostle had set in their mouthes, as if not fitted for this age, wherein he did not fore see that Sex should become such able Speakers, had their frequent interpositions, even to the modelling of their Meetings and Exercises, Discunt, proh pudor! à feminis, quod viros doceant; so as their Congregation had somewhat of Analogy with the State of Athens, where Themistocles ruled the City, and some other governed him. And now, when in conformity to the Independent Archetypon, (where when seven or more persons by frequent society are satisfied of the holiness of each other, they agree to constitute a Church of themselves, so when) they had drawn forth stones enough, hewn and formed them to their fashion, that there might be no noyse of Hammers at Pyworthy, thither the Prolocut or car∣ryed them without ever appointing of a Communion at home, where such as were fit might come to be admitted, or examining who in his Parish else were fit, or endevouring to fit them in any other way, save by preaching, That to come under their discipline, was the onely door to let in to the Sacrament, he there erects of these Stones his altare contra altare, whereof all they which did at first partake, and were received into Communion of the Sacrament, had their tesseras hospitales, Ad annal. Ba∣ron. Exer. 16. Sect. 43. p. 393. or mensales, or somewhat analogically to what Cafaubon speaks of the Heathens in their sacred mysteries, Habuerunt & Symbola quae pro tessera erant thyasotis corundem sacrorum per quae se invicem agnoscerent, bring∣ing their Leaden Tokens with them, as Badges to distinguish them, or Passports to warrant their admission. Others afterward, led by their proper affections, or drawn by their importunity, entred into society and communion with them, after they had rendred some satisfaction of their worthiness, most (of any one Parish) out of the Parish of Pyworthy, from whence their Elders were selected, many out of divers, some adjacent, some distant Parishes, very few out of the
Prolocutors own Parish, who yet upon some emergencies would have owned the Church, and appropriated the gathering thereof to himself, so as however he else-where speaks of finding a Church setled at Pyworthy, to colour his ad jour∣ning thither from his proper charge; yet it was of his settlement onely upon this occasion: and though that Parish Church had then a Minister, yet he that hath since ordinarily officiated there was long onely a candidate of the Mini∣stery. This abridgment of their Church-History, will set this whole Discourse in more light, and put us right in the true state of the question agitated between me and the Apologists, which had its rise and result from their proceedings: Nonnulla pars est inventionis nosse quod quaeras, saith Augustine. They say, the Author is unacquainted with their way, (and it had been happy if none had ever been acquainted therewith:) It is probable, they have their Cabala's, for at their Assemblies they have sought to set Harpocrates at the door, that some of the mysteries of their way might be as secret, as the Holyes of Ceres: but the thingnow in question, — Opinor Omnibus & Lippis notum & Tonsoribus esse. But we erre in saying they examine all, which they deny that they do; such as are more knowing, and are willing, do onely make profession of their Faith and know∣ledge, some publickly, some more privately; which is in effect to say, that they do not examine them in one point, but in all: there is no more difference be∣tween examination upon interrogatories, and a large continued profession, than between a Pedlars laying open his whole Pack, and his shewing forth some few parcels, that some may enquire for; or than when a person is suspected to have filched some commodity, between his ripping up, and shewing out all the laps and receptacles of his garments, and the Officers making a particular re-search into them. By compelling men to make profession, they make (in effect) an examination of more particulars, and put them under a more difficult tryal; as to give a brief answer to a question, is more easie, than to make a long con∣tinued Oration. And if this profession be not an examination, let them exa∣mine themselves: how can they reconcile these two assertions, That they do not examine all, and that in the reformation of a corrupt Church (which they say is the work they are about) it is necessary to examine all, without convicting them∣selves to omit to do that which they say is necessary. And if profession therefore be a kind of examination, how can that also cohere with truth, or with it self, that they examine none but those which may well be suspected of incompetent knowledge; and yet they bring under this profession such as are knowing. And if none he examined, but such as may be well su∣spected of incompetent knowledge (which we not suspect, but know in some particulars to be otherwise, unless they are of the humour of Dionysius of Sicily, who admitted all to have recourse to him, save those he expected treacherous; but yet suspected all for such, that he might admit none,) then such as are not of competent knowledge being uncapable of admission to the Sacrament; and they admitting not the rest of their Parishes, because they should be, and will not be examined: how can it consist with what they tell us else-where, That it is enviously surmised, that they think all those uncapable, whom they admit not: And
if they will examine all, and yet do examine none but such as may well be su∣spected to be of incompetent knowledge, it is as little to the honour of their Ministery, as to the credit of their peoples proficiency, since Diogenes thought the Master was to be stricken, when the Scholar play'd the Truant. The omitting of the use of Sacrament (they say) concerns them not: but sure it doth, because they omit it in their own Parishes and charges, where it is their special and proper call to administer it, and they omit to distribute it to all that come not under their examination. That about convening from divers Parishes, will but confound the discourse if mixed with it, (and indeed it is like to confound all the specious discourses they make in defence of their way, as I shall endevour to manifest anon) most of those admitted were taken in, not without their proper Pastour. I will not divide the house upon that tryal; but whether these that were admitted with their Pa∣stour, were culpable of Schisme, we shall hereafter examine: in the mean time, St. Cyprian imputes Schisme to those that were admitted without their Pastour, Ecclesia est plebs sacerdoti adunita, Cyprian. Epist. 68. p. 209. that is, (as Junius explains him) Respectu unio∣nis externae & materialis, non internae & for∣malis cum Christo — ex illa formali seu essentiali sunt Catholici, ex externa, secundaria & adventitia noscuntur & cen∣sentur in corpore, Junius in Controvers. 4. Bell. 1104, 1105. Citat. Vasquez in 3. Disp. 219. c. 2. p. 499. Tom. 3. grex Pastori suo adhaerens, unde scire debes Epi∣scopum in ecclesia esse, & ecclesiam in Episcopo, & si qui cum Episcopo non sint, in ec∣clesia non esse: and farther, Frustrà sibi blandiuntur ii qui pacem cum sacerdotibus Dei non habentes, obrepunt & latenter apud quosdam communicare se credunt; cùm ecclesia, quae Catholica una est, scissa non est, ne{que} divisa, sed sit uti{que} connexa, co∣haerentium sibi invicem sacerdotum glutino copulata; and if it were not Schisme, it is a fault forbidden by the first Councel of Carthage, Ut nullus Clericus vel Laicus in aliena parochia sine literis sui Episcopi communicaret; and a fault which the Councel of Milevi censured with deprivation of the Communion. 2. Such as were admitted of other Congregations are persons justly (which term is unjustly assumed or begged) offended with the grossness of their administra∣tions at home; where no separation at all is made, nor cherishing of desires that way. It gave the pretended rise to Donatus his Schisme, that Caecilian (supposed a traditor) was retained in Communion with the Church. First, this is to condemn themselves for chaffe, by separating themselves from those whom they suppose to be chasse; Vos nihil in∣ter perfidum & fidelem dis∣cernitis. Cres∣conius Augu∣stino: Sepa∣rarunt caus â quòd in Com∣munione Sa∣cramentorum mali maculant bonos, ideó{que} se corporali disjunct one à malorum contagione recessisse, ne omnes pariter perr. Aug. de unitat, baptism. c. 14. for saith St. Augustine, De area vix excutie∣ris, si triticum es, — eo ipso quòd discedis & volas, paleam te esse indicas. And secondly, to confess that all Augustins learned and ardent propositions, & strong armature against the Donatists, could not beat down and dash in peeces that Schisme, but that it would in part rise and spring up again in these men. For if to refuse to have Communion of Sacraments with evil men, and to separate be∣cause discipline is not exercised in casting out of evil men, be not a main part
of the Schisme of the Donarists, I am too dull to understand the sense of St. Augustine; and if I mistake him and their Heresie, I erre with Plato, and many learned men share with me in the same misprision. If they shall say, That they separate not from all Churches, but onely from those Congregati∣ons that are so corrupt, and therefore they are neither Donatists nor Schisma∣ticks: I answer: 1. Might not the Donatists have put in the same Plea, Altingius probl. Tom. 2. part. 2. pro∣blem. 17. p. 329. Junius in contro. 4. Bel∣lar. p. 1165. Ames. de cas. Consc. l. 5. c. 12. p. 288. who when they di∣vided themselves from the Catholiques had a Communion with the many Churches of their fraternity? Adhuc ista verba communiter dici possunt, potest enim & alius dicere, as Augustine; this is the common defence of all Schismaticks, that when they leave one Church, they go into another; but as Altingius will give them one venny, Quibuscum coenam sumere detrectamus, eorum fraternitati tacitè renunciamus: So secondly, let them take a blow from the famous Ju∣nius to beat down this interposition, Schismatici comperiuntur multi, qui non à spiritu aut capite aut à corpore discindi volunt, sed ab hac, illave ecclesia (i.e.) mem∣bro particulari corporis ex infirmitate particulari; especially if, as Ames addeth, the separation be propter causam omnium ecclesiarum communem (as we suppose it is, being causâ morum corruptorum, scandali, aut singularium offensionum, Tryal grounds, Separat. c. 10. p. 197. Sacramen∣torum Commu∣nione sociamur. Contra Dona∣tist. post. Col∣lat. c. 28. Tom. 7. p. 127. Sa∣cramentorum participando∣rum commu∣nione cohaerere. Ibid. c. 21. p. 126. In una congrega∣tione paria Sacramenta tractantes. Contra Par∣men. l. 3. c. 2. p. 13. Malus frater, propter communia Sacramenta. Collat. cum Donatist. prima die. Si in communione Sacramentorum mali maculant bonos, si propter ipsam tantam Communionem Sacramentorum mali perdunt bonos. Contra Crescon. l. 2. c. 35 36. p. 5. Tom. 7. Commixtos bonis malos intrà retia suorum Sacramentorum. Bre∣vicul. collat, cum Donatist. 3. die p. 118. Bonos malis in communione Sacramentorum misceri. Ful∣gentius l. de fide ad Petrum. wherein all Churches may be alike concerned.) If they shall think to evade by tel∣ling us, that they hold communion in other Ordinances, not onely Mr. Ball gives sentence against them; That to use one Ordinance, and not another, is to make a Schisme in the Church; but St. Augustine hath fore-stalled their Plea, who as he makes external unity and communion to consist mainly in the participation of Sacraments, so he constitutes much of the Schisme of the Do∣natists in their refusing to have communion in Sacraments with the Catholikes. And though I deny not that they renounced and protested against all other communion with the Orthodox, as well as in the Sacraments (to which heighth and wideness of separation the Independents have not risen or remo∣ved) yet do they symbolize with them in the kinde, though not degrees of their Schisme; for there may be several stories of building one higher than another, yet all upon the same foundation: And these Duties notwithstan∣ding wherein they communicate with others, they account no acts of Church-fellowship, or Ecclesiastical Communion, but such as they can dispense unto Pagans also. And themselves also seem to constitute the root of Church-fel∣lowship in the Communion of Sacraments, owning none to be of their Chur∣ches, but such as communicate with them of the Supper of the Lord. As there∣fore they applaud the fighting Cock, which having lost one eye for the battel, turns away his blind side lest he be stricken, where he can least ward the blow:
so I cannot blame the Apologists to seek to sequester from the question their gathering into their Church such as separate from and renounce communion of Sacraments with their own Congregations, which is the grand heteroclyte and chief anomalon of their way; which (as Calvin saith of the point of Justifica∣tion controverted between us and the Papists) would they retract, it would almost quit the cost to grant them all the rest. But the lawfulness of this they undertake to assert hereafter. But Aut deme verbis, aut adde viribus, for the words require more than a City: In the interim, they abstract the state of the que∣stion, and deliver it in this form, Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted Church it be necessary that all the members thereof do submit to some examination or tryal of their knowledge before they be admitted unto the Lords Table? This que∣stion they fear not to maintain in the affirmative. Et cùm magna malae superest audacia causae, Creditur à multis fiducia.— They suppose corruption in their Churches, (and he hath no fire of divine love in his heart, that hath not Water limbeck'd out of his eyes to see it) Men well sa∣tisfied with the present frame and temper, not looking on them under any such disorder, they can expect little of reason or truth from — Vox tua facta mea est; If we could as easily accord in other things as this, Et duo concordes animo moriemur in uno; Onely I cannot tell, neither should I concur with them in a desire nor much to dispute with such; for the more they are sick, they the more need the Physi∣cian, and though Cain be not his brothers keeper, yet Jacob holds him by the heel, detinet gressus suos (as Bernard allegorically interprets it) and though they seem never so incurable, yet he that lay 38. years diseased, might perchance have bin sooner cured, had he not wanted one to put him into the healing pool: however, si non liberabo animam suam, liberavi meam; for Qui non corrigit rese∣canda, committit, & facientis culpam in se habet, qui quod potest corrigere, negligit emendare, saith Gregory. But yet notwithstanding all this, it would be the great question, whether they found, or made more of this corruption, and whether the Cure may not be as mischievous as the Malady, as it fared with Cn. Pompeius, of whom the Historian tells us, Gravior remediis, quàm delicta erant; and whether since they undertook the Cure, the Diseases have not grown more desperate and incurable, & ut antea flagitiis, ità nunc legibus laboratur; or perchance a∣mong wise and moderate men this would be beyond question, Hae manus Trojam erigent, — Parvas habet spes Troja, si tales habet, When men of their way and principles declaim against the corruptions of the Church,
Clodius accusat moechos, — And when they cry up Reformation, Clodius de pudicitia. And it will be farther no less questionable, why this way of examining and proscribing from the Sacrament, should be unto reformation (as quick-silver to other metals) that without which they could have no constitution, and that this Cure could be wrought by no medicine, whereof this is not the Basis, so as all the Psalms of reformation end in this Gloria; whereas I rather think (si non falsis ludor imaginibus) that scarce any thing hath more obstructed the work of reformation, than this inclosing of the Sacrament, and censorious dri∣ving of so many from it; as nothing more prejudiced the Romane Church, nor more helped forward the work of our Reformation, than their with-holding of the cup from the Laity, which hath made them lately somewhat wiser by their harms; so as now in this Nation (what is done elsewhere I know not) the Laicks are permitted the Wine, though not the Cup; out of which it is powred into a Glass wherein they drink it; for reason of State forbids they should have it in the same manner the Priests receive it, that being reserved onely for Kings to be so far made equal with Priests; and if they should perfectly reform this sacrilegious abuse, they should confess a former error, and consequently for∣feit their Palladium, the infallibility of their Church; and since res, aetas, usus semper aliquid apportat novi, aliquid moneat, ut illa quae te scire credas nescias, & quae tibi putaris prima, in experiundo repudies, it is possible that at length piscator ictus sapiat, and those Fishers of men too may change those Nets which drive away most Fish, for those that may inclose more, and not by alienating hearts, forfeit their hands, which might help to carry on the work they pretend to. As Saracenus Moses to Lucius of Alexandria in Ruffinus, Nunquam verior potest esse fides quae auribus capitur, quàne quae oculis pervideur; so let them give us some sensible effects and demonstrations à posteriori, of the aptness and energy of their way for reformation; they cannot dispute us out of our senses, and we see where they set up after eight or nine years, among several hundreds, they gain scarce so many units; and their reformation is like the filings and washings of Gold by false Clippers, onely to impair and embase it, like Dioclesians desert∣ing the Empire to attend a Garden; or like Woolseys destroying forty religious houses (as they were then accounted) out of the ruins thereof to build two Colleges. Nay, they do not edifie after that proportion, nor to that similitude. As whom they admit, have liberty given to beleeve what they list (liberty in things of the minde, being the great bait or philter of Independency) so those whom they reject, are like enough to take liberty to do what they list, little or no care being taken of them; and they being cast off without any great crimes, may be careless what they do, since they can speed no worse, though their crimes become greater. I know nothing can so much excuse the former frame and temper as the succeeding; as Augustus adopted Tiberius to reflect more glory upon his own raign by comparison with his Successors, comparatione deterrimâ sibi gloriam quaesivisse, saith Tacitus; nor any thing that can more en∣dear the present frame and temper of the Church, but the like fear which the old woman had that prayed for Dionysius of Sicily.
It is no new thing to transfer upon others our proper faults: Me suo nomi∣ne exulem vocat; as Nero set Rome on fire and charged it on the Christians, and yet all the time of the burning too he sang some of Homers doleful verses: but ori digitum, for the fore-finger that used to stop the mouth, had the attribute of salutaris from antiquity. But to revert to the question, as stated by the Apologists. If there were no other Gulph between us, but the necessity of Examination of our knowledge, in order to our admission to the Sacraments, we might sooner come together: but yet, first, why this should be onely necessary in the reformation of a long corrupted Church, and not be of a stable permanent necessity (seeing know∣ledge is always needful in every Communicant, and they will be satisfied that every one is knowing, and that satisfaction cannot be had without examina∣tion, as they pretend) they have not favoured our ignorance so farre as to tell us; and I doubt we shall need not onely some Delian diver, but Elias himself to come to resolve us. 2. In reformation of a long corrupted Church there may be an obviousness of reason to examine those that are corrupt, or suspected to be so, but all are not so (we hope,) and why all should then passe under examination, our dul∣ness needs to be prompted to apprehend the reason. 3. It had had more of rational congruity to examine in reforming an igno∣rant Church, rather than a corrupt, for there may be knowledg enough, where there are corruptions too many. 4. We are left in a mist also, and need to have it cleared up to us, how they understand the Church to be corrupt; whether with the Brownists (the comparative degree of this separation) they suppose the reformed Churches to be corrupt in the first constitution, and in Essentials, which though directly they affirm not, yet implicitely and by consequence they seem to say it; why else do they gather new Churches, and separate from the former Congregations? Among Heathens they might finde a proper spheare for such activity, not here; if there be Churches already gathered to their hand; and they cannot, in my sense, stand firm and unshaken upon this degree or stair, unless they ascend to the superlative degree of separation, and require a farther probation in order to the re-acception of the other Sacrament; and so as the Papists upbraid us to have had no Church before Luther, they will gratifie them farther, confessing that till now gathered by them, we had none since. 5. If they suppose corruptions onely in Accidentals, in doctrines not funda∣mental (but that charge they have seemed to wave;) or in discipline and man∣ners, this indeed is the way to keep the power in perpetual exercise, & qui velit potestatem, perpetuam velit, for whatsoever the Donatists may talk of a Church in this world without spot or wrinkle, yet as Beda tells us (who according to his wont took the hint thereof from Augustine) while the Apostle saith, Retract. l. 2. c. 18. That he (viz. Christ) might present to himself a Church not having spot or wrinkle, he first said glorious, sufficiently signifying when she should be without spot or wrinkle, to wit, when she should be glorious; here she may be fair, but among women (onely by comparison) and yet is black still, habet aliquid Aethiopici decoris, as Origen. Since then Corruptions will still be, and Reformation thereof ought always to be, they need not have limited the necessity of examination in these terms, in reformation of a long corrupt Church, but have determined it always necessary.
6. And of necessity we must cast dirt in the faces of the Churches of God, that have preceded us, as well in dignity as time, if in reformation of a long cor∣rupt Church this examination be necessary. The godly Judges and Kings of Israel and Judah, with the assistance of the Prophets and Priests, oftentimes had a zeal like fire to consume the grown corruptions, and purge and purifie the Church; yet there is no light that there was any such fiery tryal of those that were to come to the Sacrifices or Sacrament. St. Paul begot the Corinthians to Christ, and that body by many distempers soon grew corrupt, and in purifying thereof, the Apostle prescribes no such looking to the state of those that were to be admitted to the Sacrament, he onely commands every man to examine himself, none to examine another; not to take our Prospect at too great a di∣stance: The Morning Star of the Reformation arose to dispel and clear the contagious Mist of Popish Errors, Superstitions, and Usurpations; yet we can∣not discern the least foot-step of any such way of examination, but whosoever professed a desire of Communion with them, was accepted and received into fellowship with them in the Sacraments, unless by any notorious crime he for∣feited it. 7. And if the question thus stated be the mark the Apologists shoot at, let us with a touch onely, and in general here, try how their arrows will fit or reach it. They have mustered up in the 25. and following Sections, sundry Argu∣ments grounded on Texts of Scripture, to verifie their judgment, and defend their practice: Doth any of them conclude the question thus stated? I be∣seech you try in which of their Syllogismes is this Thesis, the conclusion; It is necessary in the reformation of a long corrupt Church, that all members thereof sub∣mit to some examination of their knowledge. Nay, which of them mentions any examination, (onely one Text speaks of giving an answer, but not to the pur∣pose) or which specifies the Sacrament, as that in order whereunto the duty in∣joyned is to be performed? one excepted, where is a command for men to exa∣mine themselves, none to submit themselves to be examined by another. The withdrawing from, noting, not eating with, not giving holy things, or casting pearles, shutting up, keeping out, &c. is to be understood (in their own sense) of men of wicked lives, nothing here intended of men defective in knowledge, and nei∣ther can examination be concluded out of the Texts, but by making petitio principii the medium, viz. that what is there injoyned as duty, cannot be com∣plyed with, but by such examination. But then for the limiting and restraining of all to the time of Reformation of a long corrupt Church, the Chymists that can extract oyl out of steel and flint, volitant velut umbrae, compared with these men, whose omnipotence of Logick can create something out of nothing. Who ever till now suspected, that onely in the reformation of a corrupt Church things ought to be done in order and decency? The precious to be separated from the vile, that we should be delivered from unreasonable and evil men, and withdraw our selves from every brother that walketh disorderly; That we must not cast pearles be∣fore Swine, and give holy things to Dogs, nor be partakers of other mens sins; that we ought to obey them that rule over us, &c. As if at other times, when a long corrupt Church is not to be reformed, we need not, nor are obliged to do any of these things. Diogenes seeing a roving Archer, ran to stand at the mark as the safest place; so surely all the Apologists shafts are shot so extremely wide, that I may willingly chuse to keep my self at this mark, which they set up for
the state of their question, and yet never fear to be hurt with any of their arrowes. Concerning examination the paper did never absolutely oppose it as pre∣cedanous to this Ordinance (as they suggest.) I might say to the Apologists as St. Augustine did to Cresconius, Lege prius diligenter contra quod scribis, aut in∣tellige quae dicuntur, aut noli quod intelligis vertere in aliud; for the very first inspection into the paper will cleare it of that charge: it is denyed to be ne∣cessary that all be examined, but it is affirmed of some (viz. such of whom there is a violent suspicion that they are ignorant) that it is meet they should be examined, and these propositions carry neither Diagonall, nor interpretative contradiction. Though they have not yet prompted us with the least Jota of Scripture that might enforce this examination preparatory and dispositive to the Sacrament, nor helped us to the smallest colour of reason to evince it to be more requi∣site, in order to the Sacrament, than other Ordinances, yet we shall here tell them: First, that wee doe not so much question the conveniency of exa∣mining, as the necessity thereof: Durum est quod necesse est, said Quin∣tilian. As love is the sweetning of labour, and ubi amor est, non est labor, sed sapor; so necessity is the imbittering of all undertakings, like the Salaman∣der which if laid to the root of a tree, it never flourisheth or prospers. Quod cogitur, altera mors est. As the Colossus at Tarentum might be moved with a fin∣ger, but not at all stirred, if one set his whole force to it; so many may be facil to goe that are impatient to be driven, and lesse cheerfully chuse to doe that which they cannot chuse. It is a memorable Story which Cardan tells us of him in Millaine, who having in sixty yeers been never without the Walls, yet when the Duke hearing thereof sent him peremptory command ne∣ver to goe out of the Gates during life, he that before had no inclination to doe so, yet soone dyed with greefe to be denyed the liberty of doing it: Be∣cause therefore we would not be brought under a yoke or into bondage of any thing, we strive to stand fast in that liberty wherein, we thinke, God and the gifts which he hath given us, have set us free. 2. We doe not altogether dispute whether they may call men to examina∣tion, as whether it be so necessary, ratione medii, so as that if they will not come under it, they have power for that cause onely, to keep them from the Sacrament. Lo. Verulam. We shall say of this matter, as a learned Man doth of Alchimy, which intends to improve baser Metalls into Gold, and then with one drop of that Elixir to transmute a whole Sea of Quicksilver into Gold; That the foundation is more facible than the superstructure, the antecedent more ra∣tionall than the consequent, the proposition more plausible than the infe∣rence: So in the first part they may pretend colour, but in the second are blanke. A Land-lord may require his Tenant to bring forth his Lease and shew his title, but if he thinke himselfe not obliged to produce it, it follows not that he may be thrust from his Tenement. When Bellarmine arguing for Auricular confession and agitating the History of Nectarius, Bellarm. de poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 14. pag. 304, 305. tom. 6. Denison de auricul. confess. cap. 14. p. 92. objects that Adversarii non admittunt homines ad Eucharistiam nisi exploratos, and for proofe
thereof, besides Melancthon, cites Calvin, Interim quin sistunt se oves pastori, quoties sacram coenam participare volunt, adeò non reclamo, ut maximè velim hoc ubique observari: Dr. Denison answers, Illam consuetudinem probant — illud tamen ut ab ecclesia susceptum, non à Deo praeceptum, exigunt. And howsoever this be vendicated as the Doctrine and practise of the Reformed Churches, espe∣cially those that are of Presbyterian model, yet in the necessity (and so also in the Universality) thereof, it is but a Servant lately taken in for a need, that weares the badge or cognizance of the family, but it is not of the linage or right off-spring. We know that Gentlemen of this Nation that travell into France or Holland, upon the offer of themselves are ordinarily admitted to partake the Sacrament, without examination, and even in the Church at Charenton, the most celebrious of the Nation. 3. We doe not so much oppose this pretended power of examination, as the consequence of it. As Qui veterem fert injuriam, invitat novam; so if we give place to one imposition, we make way for more, and as in Gods Law, he that offends in one point, is guilty of all; so in mens commandments, he that gives up his liberty in subjection to one thing, forfeits it in all, for even in this concernment, Eadem est ratio partium & totius, and if obedience be due to one command, it is also to more, that shall come stamped with the same authority. 4. Neither doe we at all contest against an expediency of examination re∣latively to some persons, such as lye under a violent or morally probable su∣spicion of ignorance, Quando intercedit sufficiens ratio ad generandum dubium, as the Schoole defines it, who being convicted to be ignorant, we deny not but it is fit their approach be somewhile retarded, untill they are better instructed; but such whose understanding in the Gospel is well known, Reply to Dr. Whitgift. p. 164. or which doe exa∣mine themselves, Mr. Cartwright saith, their meaning is not they should be examined: and when there shall appeare an expediency of Examination, none but will say, it may be done aswell in private, and that it shall sort better as well with charity, as prudence, to doe it so. But though palpably ignorant persons may be excluded, yet it is a fallacy of the consequent to conclude that therefore all must be examined. There are some that are elevated above all suspition of ignorance, and there are other wayes of discovery of ignorance besides particular examination upon interro∣gatories. Themselves tell us, that they examine none that are taken to be Di∣sciples, and therefore they may know them to be such without examination, by their education, discourse, actions, and imployments. Were a Pastor so fa∣miliarly conversant with his Flocke, as he ought to be, and is some thinke im∣plyed not onely by Paul's preaching from house to house, but also by those alike-used Scripture idioms, the Church in or among you, and you in the Church; or did not deeme the feeding of the Lambs by catechising, to be beneath his magistery and greatness, he would need no other marks or signes to know his Sheepe by, than such as he might take from common conversation. Even themselves say that Christ needed not to examine his Disciples before they did partake of his Supper, because they were known to him; but if their Sheep be not also known to them, they are no good Shepheards that practi∣cally know their duty. But to dispute, No ignorant person ought to be admitted, therefore all ought to
be examined whether they are ignorant, is (as I have elsewhere instanced) as if I should argue no Ideot ought to mannage his own estate, therefore all ought to be examined, whether they are Ideots, before they be admitted to the man∣nagement of their Fortunes, and is somewhat analogous to Bellarmine's reaso∣ning, that because Ambrose censured Theodosius, therefore he was a lawfull Judge of him in an external Court, to examine matters in order to his sen∣tence, who notwithstanding proceeded onely ex evidentia facti. And however, we cannot thinke it fit to examine silly Maid-servants, what is the Essence of God, that is a depth too great to put an Elephant in, much more a Lambe; The Philosopher could say, De Deo hoc tantùm dic, Esse; and Gregorie better, Ne vocabula quidem Dei naturae congruentia reperire homines pos∣sunt, and therefore de Deo cùm dicitur, dici non potest. And we should also thinke it very usefull to affie the Standard of the San∣ctuary, and to determine what measure of knowledge may be a competency for the Sacrament. It is evident that the Catechumeni presently upon their ba∣ptisme were anciently admitted to the Eucharist, Durantus for this cites the authority of many Fathers de ritib. Ec∣cles. lib. 1. cap. 19. p. 161. Albas. de veter. Eccles. rit. l. 2. obs. 22. p. 315. Mr. Ball answ. to Can. 2 part. p. 58. Sylvius 22. ae. qu. 2. art. 10. conclus. 3. p. 28. Usher serm: on Ephes. 4.13. and answer to the Jesuite p. 311. & 312. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei l. 4. cap. 11. Hieron. ad Pammach. tom. 2. p. 238. hist. l. 7. c. 30. and yet Albaspinus tells us, that during their catechumenacy they were taught nothing de arcanis Sacramentorum; and the profession at first required of all that were received to Baptisme (as a learned Divine affirmeth) was that they beleeved the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; Regulam fidei per baptismum accipimus, saith Irenaeus; qui ba∣ptizandi erant olim solitos reddere seu recitare Symbolum, is affirmed by Sylvius, out of many antient Authors. In the Eastern Church, they recited the Ni∣cene; in the Westerne (who, saith Bishop Usher, applyed themselves to the ca∣pacity of the meaner sort more than the Easterne) the Apostolicall, and both he and Erasmus shew, that the Apostles Creed (which the Fathers called regulam fidei) was not so large at first as afterward, when it was enlarged by accession of sundry Articles occasioned by the emergency of severall Heresies and other occasions. Bellarmine is very confident (and we take up this arrow to shoot it back against himself) that the Apostles never used to preach open∣ly to the people other things than the Apostles Creed, the ten Commande∣ments and the Sacraments, Hierom tells us in his time, there was but fourty dayes allowed for catechizing the Heathen, Ut per quadraginta dies publicè tradamus sanctam & adorandam Trinitatem, saith he, (which insinuates what was the Doctrine taught them;) and the same thing Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus & omnis testatur antiquitas (addes Victorius in his Schola;) and Socrates relates the whole Nation of the Burgundians were catechised seven dayes, & the eighth were baptized; and if we may judge of their proficiency by the time of in∣struction, it could be no great stock of knowledge, that aliens from the Church and Faith could acquire in that interim, in all probability not so much as the Children of the Church may doe after so many yeers teaching, as the other had dayes. The Apostles themselves at the first institution had a very small cantle of knowledge, who had onely an implicit Faith, even of the death and resurre∣ction of Christ, as appeares, John 20.9. and Luk. 9.44, 45. and 24.7, 8. nei∣ther doe we finde they had any other preparatory instruction concerning the
Nature and ends of the Sacrament, save what was collected from the words of Institution, which we propound not as a sufficient extent of our knowledge, or that we should content our selves with such a measure, but as a restraint upon their rigor, and that they should accept a lesse stint than what they exact. But notwithstanding if some are weak in knowledge, it is no unlikely way to improve it by frequent partaking of the Sacrament, where the great mystery of the redemption of the World by the death of Christ, is so sensibly shewed forth; so as to suspend men because of their meane knowledge is, as if they should deny them the meanes, because they have not fully attained the end: and if profession of Faith may serve in lieu of examination (as the Apologists insinuate) the very comming to the Sacrament and partaking thereof is a kinde of reall profession of Faith. And Aquinas tells us, Addit. ad 3. q. 5. ar. 2. Durand. 4. d. 17. q. 14. Loc. com. part. 4. p. 194. Sacramenta sunt quae∣dam protestationes fidei, or signa protestativa fidei, as Durand, an owning of Christ externally; and engaging to beleeve in him; they profess their Faith as touching the body of Christ nailed upon the Cross, and his blood shed for their salvation (saith Peter Martyr) confession being to be made with outward actions, not onely with the mouth: And if any orall and explicite confession was thought fit to be made, it was onely the joyning in the publick repeating of the Apostolique Creed, which in the Easterne Churches usually preceded the Sacrament: and therefore in the third Councell of Toledo it was decreed, Cano. . Ante communicationem corporis Christi & sanguinis, juxta Orientalium partium mo∣rem, unanimiter clarâ voce sacratissimum fidei recenseant Symbolum, ut primùm po∣puli, quam credulitatem teneant, fateantur. Besides, the adding Amen to the words of Consecration, wherewith (saith Ambrose) the Elements were delivered, quibus singulis vescentes confessionem fidei suae addebant, respondentes, Amen: Chemnitius saith, was a profession of the Faith, Exam. Trid. Concil. part. 2. p. 107. Idem p. 111, 112. and the same learned Man addes, that therefore in Festis solennioribus tota multitudo ad majores Basilicas conveniebat, & ibi solennis quaedam Communio celebrabatur, Ut quisque publicâ professione ostenderet se esse membrum ecclesiae, and this, he saith, was enacted to be done by the Agathense Councell; where observe that he speakes of tota multitudo, not five of five hundred, and so many at these times convened, that one Church could not containe them, and Leo prescribes that therefore sacrificii oblatio reiteretur: and sure every mans proper reason will dictate to him, how impossible it was that in such a confluence there could be a triall of every mans knowledge and holiness, which could neither be perfectly known to them that in such manner administred. De re Sacra∣ment. l. 2. p. 52. Hospinian speaking of the solemne communions upon the greater festivals, tells us, Nec malo consilio haec solennis communio instituta fuit, sed ut hac publicâ professione declararent se esse membra verae ecclesiae, & admonerentur sicut unus est panis, ita multos se unum corpus esse, atque hoc modo consensus in doctrina & fide retinerentur. So when Erastus objected, that sinners were called to the Sacrifices; Beza an∣swers, Such sinners as testified their repentance by their sacrificing: and if to sacrifice were a profession of repentance, then to come to the Communion, by the same proportion of reason, is a profession of Faith, and the Priest might have as rationally examined the truth of the Sacrificers repentance (which he did not, but charitably judged of the sincerity of his heart by the offerings of his hands) as the Minister may now make research into the knowledge of Faith
of the receiver. And at the Passover, the antitype and  of the Lords Supper, and the same in substance with it, as themselves affirm: we have not the least. Evidence that there was, but there are Arguments that there could be no such examination of the partakers; Rivet. Gerhard. for though the owner had brought the Lambe to the Courts of the Temple to be killed by the Priests, which the Learned deny; yet it was eaten at home by the whole Family, to whom the Master taught the end and use thereof, but called none to ac∣count what understanding they had of that, or any other mysteries. Let them, if they think it expedient, and will afford the pains to do it, examine men also of their aptness to profit by the word, and of their proficiency thereby; but as if men decline and will not come under such examination, we cannot allow them to shut them out from hearing the Word; so neither can we permit them to exclude all from the Sacrament, that conform not to be examined in ante∣cedency thereunto. Yet if the Apologists would onely bring us all under the necessity of an un∣limited examination of our knowledge, to have peace with them, we might be content interpretatively to put out our right eye, and subject our selves to a suspicion of our ignorance. But Ad populum phaleras, — Ego te intus & in cute novi.— A satisfaction concerning mens knowledge and verbal examination in order thereunto, is not onely nor principally contended for by them, nor alone or chiefly questioned by us. They insist on it to be satisfied of their Holiness, and without real proof thereof they admit none to fellowship in the Sacra∣ments, which they tell us are the privileges onely of the Godly: This is that Helena that chiefly sets us all at War, and hath kindled those flames: they sup∣pose that to be a Church-member with a dogmatical faith, gives not a right of being admitted to the Sacrament, or is the Directory for them to admit him: Neither is a negative holiness sufficient to be free of scandal, but he must give positive signs of sound grace; nor that it is enough they have nothing against him, he must shew some evidence for himself of real holiness: it avails not that they know nothing to the contrary, they must have farther satisfaction; they grant not that every intelligent member of the visible Church hath a right, till he have forfeited it; but allow no title till he have pleaded and ap∣proved it by some evidence that he is a member of the invisible Church: They repel not men for notorious Crimes, nor in any formal judicial way of Censure, but because they are not satisfied concerning them, or they have not merited their good opinion. Nay, I would particularly instance in some that after admission have been laid aside, not for want of grace, but for lack of some de∣grees thereof, as for not being humbled enough; and for defect of such satis∣faction, or almost upon suspicion of the unsanctified estate of some, in whom they may perchance observe some inordinateness, they suspend themselves (ra∣ther than those which are the far greater number) from the Communion, ga∣ther a new Church of those they suppose more pure and holy, and erect a sepa∣rate Altar, whereby they directly fall within the definition given of a Schisma∣tique by the great Councel of Chalcedon, Qui seipsum à Communione suspendit,
collectam facit & altare constituit. Had the Apologists conformed their Churches to the Presbyterian model, set up and setled that form of discipline; had they retained the Celebration of the Sacrament, and constantly at their appointed times administred it in their proper Churches, and admitted all those that they could not particularly charge with, and plainly convict of some scandalous crime (and notorious, according to the received definition) what Silenus said was the greatest happiness of this world, had been the felicity of this contro∣versie between us, Never to have been born, or soon to have dyed: yet they suggest, 1. That in yeelding that scandalous and notorious sinners may be suspended, I pre∣varicate, by granting the main of the question, and yet opposing them stiffly. 2. They impute it to me, that my concessions look one way, and my arguments another, imply∣ing, as if I did covertly dispute against the power of Excommunication. 3. They obliquely charge upon me, by some insinuations, as if I were inimicous, and had some animosities against the Presbyterian Government. But to the first, Praevaricator est quasi vari∣cator qui di∣versam causam adjuvat pro∣dita causa sua: quod nomen Labeo à varia certatione tra∣ctum ait; nam qui praevarica∣tur ex utra{que} parte constitit, quinimo ex al∣tera. Cujac. ob∣servat. Or it is a metaphor taken from vari, those that have their knees out of joynt that they touch above, and the feet are farre asunder; so they that strive together and are friends privi∣ly, are called Prevaricators. Dr. Andrews. (not to question how properly they apply the word prevari∣cate) though the main had been granted, yet some lesser and collateral things might merit my opposition, as well as they have found their defence: but yet having the main in grant, I should have thought, that to defend these pettier things, were a play not worth their lamp. But that which they call the main was never the least part of the thing controverted, being yeelded without all controversie. It is indeed the main Fortress and Castle whereunto they ratreat upon every charge, though they will find the Gates thereof shut against any refuge for them: verily all the fatness of their discourse hah no other relish, but that there is a power, and that it is a duty to exclude such as are nefarious and scandalous from the Communion. Were the Apology deplumed of those feathers which are but borrowed, in respect of what is proper to our question, it would shew as naked as Aesops Crow; but their Arrows thus feathered, as little hurt me, as hit the mark they have set up; for if I had blended the beams of the Sun with my ink, I could not have made it more clear or lucid that I am not among the Antipods to that Thesis; rather the abstract of our difference, and the punctual state of the controversie between us, is compendiously this: They think none ought to be admitted to the Communion, but such as give sa∣tisfactory signs of knowledge and holiness; I suppose they should exclude none but those that are signally ignorant and flagitious. They require a positive probation as necessary, and that demonstrative proof ought to be rendred of their godliness, I judge a negative trial sufficient, so as to have nothing against them, and that they be not obnoxious for any notorious wickedness. They will admit none, whose sanctity may be doubted; I allow onely such to be reje∣cted, whose crimes are notorious: They argue, that because none but such as are fit and worthy ought to be admitted, it is therefore necessary to make tryal generally of the fitness of all, and not finding a competent number of fit per∣sons in their proper charges, that they may separate into a new Church, ga∣thered and made up onely of such as they judge to be fit; I suppose the falla∣cy of the consequent in both, is the first limiting and restraining their proba∣tion within anguster bounds (those that are not notorious or not violently su∣spected, needing no trial; and those that are notorious, being for the most part past it, and tryed to their hand;) and in the latter I concede no liberty at all,
and though de jure and speculatively onely fit persons are to be admitted, yet de facto and practically all intelligent Church-members that have made no publike forfeiture of Church-privileges and interesses, nor of good existima∣tion, that bonum depositum in aliorum mentibus, are regularly to be deemed and accepted as fit, and accordingly to be admitted. These are the proper issues between us, and what is heterogeneal to these is ignoratio elenchi; and where they should defend these hypotheses, and vindicate this course of theirs, onely to contend for the power and duty of Excommunication, is it not Andabatorum more, to fight blind-fold? or seeing it to be best for their advantage, to run at tilt, not against a fighting enemy, but a wooden image of their own erecting, fitting the mark to their arrows, not suiting their shafts to their scope; and in effect is nothing else, than as if a Tyrant, to justifie his rapines and persecuti∣ons, should plead the just power of Kings to punish ostenders upon lawful pro∣cess. For let them punctually answer, are all these jure aut juridicè, excom∣municate or suspended, whom they admit not? Are they de facto, grosly igno∣rant, or notoriously wicked and scandalous? They cannot say it, and they de∣ny that they think it, let them then recount these two assertions, That they ad∣mit all, save grosly ignorant, and notoriously criminous; and yet these whom they exclude, are not such. St. Augustine never more urgently pressed Petilian and his Hyperaspist Cresconius, to answer that question, Si Conscientia certè dantis attenditur quae abluat accipientis, &c. than I shall importune the Apologists to satisfie this Dilemma: Those many whom you reject from the Communion, are either judicially sentenced for notorious sinnes, (and then I will confess that they are justly separate from you;) or else not so censured, and then you must confess you unjustly separate from them. To say they are not wil∣ling, is to say contrary to what they profess, who complain of being defrauded of what they have such a will to partake, Varus ait, Scaurus negat, utri creditis? To suggest it is their fault that they partake not, is to make them culpable for not taking that which they cannot have; for when had they a Synaxis in their Churches? To tell them they must come at Pyworthy, (where he that tells them so, is Pastor of no Church there; those that are so told, are not the flock of any Pastor there) they might as justly call them to Exceter; and would they come there, they must notwithstanding come under this probation, and wait upon their good pleasure and gracious opinion, which is the thing questio∣ned, and sets the business in the same posture as before, after all these pallia∣tions. So that in the conclusion, when they tell us elsewhere, he that puts them to prove that persons knowing and not scandalous may be excluded, shall hear of their refusal; we must say to them, we do indeed hear of their refusal, but it is onely to prove this, not to do it, whiles they exclude these whom they dare not say; and if they did, we should knowingly gainsay, that they are ignorant or scandalous. To the second, that my Concessions look one way, my Arguments another, (as if like the Parthians I turn my face from that mark I shoot at; or like Faustus, that pretended to write against Pelagius, yet half justified him) it had been a just debt, if not to me, that I might see my error; yet to themselves, that we might see their truth and ingenuity, to have instanced in any one ar∣gument of mine, that pleads against the power and duty of Excommunication. No, when the Civil Magistrate is become both the Sonne and Father of the
Church, I doe not think that the opening of his Praetorium should shut up the Ecclesiastical forum exterius, nor the exercising of his sword, lay the keys aside to rust: Let them not be tryed to open other Locks than they were made for, that Moses may have no cause to say the Sons of Levi take too much upon them; we shall no more repine at Aarons keys or rod, than at Moses sword. I am sensible these are different Administrations, and have several reasons and ways and ends. There are some Crimes which need Censure, and sometime the Civil Laws take no hold thereof, nor can the Civil Courts take cognizance of them; and the Magistrate punisheth, though the Offender repent; and is sa∣tisfied when the pain is suffered, or mulct is paid, whether he be penitent or not. The Church hath a contrary method in her punishments, and which are not properly punishments, but castigations; the holy and prudential ends thereof I have elsewhere displayed: I do not therefore hold it fit to excommunicate Excommunication, though I judge the undue conduct and culpable exercise thereof to be suspended. Let it not be 1. too frequently inflicted, it being Medi∣cine, not Food; and Physicians tell us, that Medicines lose their efficacy by or∣dinary use; and though Cacochymie give indication, yet continual Purgings brings the habitude of the body to a cachexy; and in the Timpany, to let out all the water without stops and intermissions, destroys the Patient. 2. Nor too precipitate, Nulla unquam de hac morte hominis cunctatio longa est, And Avenzoar (they say) trembled three days before ever he administred a Purge: 3. Nor ordinarily, until after frequent admonitions, & afflatur omne priusquàm percutitur; let all other good means be used, Cuncta priùs tentanda,— Let it be as Physicians say of Antimony, that it must be like a cowardly Captain to come up to the charge last of all, and after all others; let it be onely upon obstinate impenitence, and when it is immedicabile vnlnus, then quaecunque me∣dicamenta non sanant, ea sanat ferrum; as saith Hypocrates. 4. Let it not be for any thing, but scelus, or affine sceleri, that which is interpretativa negatio fidei, gross abominable iniquities, whereby the Church may be defamed, and the enemies have cause to blaspheme; and such as may be stumbling, blocks to other mens Consciences; such sinnes as appear omnibus execrabilia, as Augu∣stine, and are excessus peccatorum, as Estius speaks: let it be not inflicted for smaller faults, which else would be (as Parisiensis tells us) as if to kill a Fly on the fore-head, we should knock a man in the head with a beetle; and let not such purity be required from men in order to their safeguard and immunity from this Censure, as Anabaptists exact; who, as Marlorat tells us, Marlorat. in 1 Cor. 51. Ball tryal of the grounds of Separat. c. 10. p. 187. Ante Commu∣nionem protestantur se tantam habere Charitatem, quantam Christus in cruce pendens. 5. Let it be for such Crimes as are notorious by publike notice; not if one or other, (though perhaps the Minister be one of them) do know thereof; but let them be such as are scandalous in their course, commonly defamed by evidence of fact, or confession or proof of witnesses; and if not by innumeris documentis testibus{que}; as Augustine pleads, yet by more than one; for uni testi, ne Catoni
quidem, credendum est: even when the great cry of Sodom came up, yet God went down to see, whether they had done altogether according to the cry; Si regnas, jube, si judicas, cognosce. 6. Let it be done humili charitate & benignâ severitate — sine typho elationis in hominem, & cum luctu deprecationis ad Deum; Aug. cont. Par∣men. l. 3. c. 2. Tom. 7. p. 13. and as it is said of Augustus, Priùs suas lachrymas quàm alienum sangui∣nem effudit; for otherwise, — hujus enim summi raríque voluptas Nulla boni, quoties animo corrupta superbo Plus aloës, quàm mellis habet,— Let it be thus regulated without humane wrong in hypothesi, and let it in the∣s pass as of divine right. The greater Excommunication I mean; for as concerning Suspension, which they call the lesser Excommunication, I am deceived if it may not be called the least in the Kingdome of Heaven: the Tree from which that Wood was gathered, was of a later rise and spring in the Paradise of God, not of the first planting, and hath no divine ground to fix its root in; if there be any Characters in Scripture asserting expresly, or by plain and easie consequence the divine right thereof, See this am∣ply discussed, or any footsteps thereof in the tract and course of all the ancient Church, so as that any were suspended from the Sacrament, that were not sepa∣rate from the body of the Church by Excommunication, those characters and footsteps are too small to be discerned by my dimme eyes, without the help of spectacles to be lent me, or my Horizon too narrow to reach them, unless their hand, like that in a margin pointing to the places, shall lead me neerer to them. Tertullian I am sure defines Excommunication of what kind soever it be, à Communicatione Orationis & conventûs, & omnis sancti commercii relegatio. I am not ignorant there is frequent mention in the Casuists and Schoolmen, of excommunicatio minor, but these bear no weight, where these men hold the beam; yet notwithstanding it may have place, and be of wholesome use, when men strongly accused, or violently suspected of offences in their nature scandalous, are under tryal, and as it were pendente lite; in which respect it may pass, as gradus excommunicationis, as Ames calls it; and if they will give that name to a deferring to administer to those that are manifestly ignorant, while they are under catechising, I shall not contest against it, and besides I should be no eager Opposite thereunto; because as Alcibiades acquired more esteem, be∣cause Socrates loved him; so I should be more indulgent to this act of disci∣pline, by reason it hath the favour of some godly learned men, and seems also to march under the Colours of Prudence, and pretends to wear the cognizance of Piety and clement moderation, and onely under the notion of clemency; and upon account thereof, we may give a passport to that, which is the main weapon wherewith the Casuists and School-men fight for the lesser Excommu∣nication; and from whose Armory, the Divines of this judgment have borrowed it, That he that can do the greater, can do the less; which having many other li∣mitations, must especially be limited to matters of the same kinde; for other∣wise (for instance sake) a Justice of peace that can send a man to the Goal for Felony; which is the greater, cannot commit him to the Prison for Debt, nor likewise in matters of the same kind. However it may go upon the account of
clemency, it cannot pass upon the score of justice; for a Judge that may for a crime take a Malefactors life, may not nevertheless deprive him of his eye for that offence; yet so as suspension be exercised in such a regular way as excom∣munication ought to be, and for such notorious scandals as merit excommuni∣cation, (for then the person suspended seems excommunicate, jure, licèt non juridicè, in fieri & si non in facto esse, in actu signato, si non actu exercito, demeritorie, etsi non effectivè, and so our ground may still lye unshaken, that every member of the visible Church, not uncapable through natural disa∣bility, hath a right to the Sacrament, while these in such manner suspended, though not fully and formally cut off from the body of the Church, are yet having a virtual excision, no compleat members thereof; and being much loosned, have loosed much of the privileges founded in, and resulting from Church-membership,) I say with these qualifications, though this Jephtha be the Son of a strange woman, yet since he may fight for Israel against the Am∣monites, I shall not vote to cast him out; and though like an Heteroclyte, it be among those quae genus variant (having not that kind of evidence and au∣thority which excommunication hath,) yet if it do not flexum also (and deflect to any inordinateness, among those which novato ritu deficiunt superant{que}) for my part I shall not proscribe it: Even menial servants merit some respect onely for wearing the Cognizance of noble Families; onely as they distinguish the Romane gods into those Majorum Gentium, & Semi-dei, seu Indigites & Semones; so let there be a distinction among acts of discipline, of those that are original∣ly of a divine impression, and necessary, and such as are of later prudential Edition, and expedient onely in some cases. And to proceed farther, 3. Disp. 7. q. 17. punct. 1. p. 1387. I am not altogether of the judgment of the School and the Casuists that determine, Abstinendum à sententia excommunicationis, quando constaret non modò non profuturam peccatori, sed etiam nocituram, quia scilicet magìs indurabitur; yet I approve it with the limitations of Valentia, Tunc solùm verum esse, quando circumstantiae non essent tales, ut propter exemplum & bo∣num Commune redundaturum ex tali Excommunicatione videretur meritò posse negli∣gi privatum detrimentum illius. And I do fully consent with Augustine, Si con∣tagio peccandi multitudinem invaserit, Contra Par. men. l. 3. c. 2. Tom. 7. p. 13. divinae disciplinae severa misericordia necessa∣ria est, — tunc autem hoc sine labe pacis & unitatis & sine laesione frumen∣torum, fieri potest, cùm congregationis Ecclesiae multitudo, ab eo crimine quo anathe∣matizatur, aliena est — & eum posse tali modo salubritèr corrigi, qui inter dissimiles peccat, idest, inter eos quos peccatorum similiùm pestilentia non corrum∣pit, — ne{que} enim potest esse salubris à multis correptio, nisi cùm ille corripitur qui non habeat sociam multitudinem; cùm verò idem morbus plurimos occupaverit, nihil aliud bonis restat, quàm dolor & gemitus. Plures numere tuti inter mul∣tos societate culpae tutior. Tacitus. And such a course is not onely suitable to civil prudence, (an example whereof we may finde in Sparta, (a City of the strictest and severest discipline of all Greece) & as the best men, so the best City of Greece, might pass for the best of the Heathen world, (where though he that fled out of the battel carryed afterward the perpetual Characters of Infamy, yet when such a multitude were put to flight at the great battel of Leuctra, Agesilaus thought fit to lay asleep, & suspend the Law for that time. But 2. conformable also to Divine wisdome, Annot. in Mat. 13.41. not onely in respect of what Grotius tells us, Quod ad poenas generales attinet, quales sunt diluvia, incendia, aliaeque id genus pestes, cùm non possunt ita infligi, ut solos improbos contingant,
proborum etiam paucorum causâ, Deus iis abstinet, aut certè eas temperat: but in regard of what St. Augustine proves, from the patterne of the Apostle, who though he excommunicated one incestuous person at Corinth, Ubi supra. yet, cùm jam mul∣tos comperisset & immundâ luxuriâ & fornicationibus inquinatos, ad eosdem Co∣rinthios in secunda Epistola scribens, non itidem praecipit, ut cum talibus nec cibum sumerent, multi enim erant, nec de his poterat dicere, Si quis frater, &c. sed ait ne iterum cum venero ad vos, humiliet me Deus & lugeam multos, &c. per luctum suum potiùs eos divino flagello coorcendos innuens, quàm per illam correptionem, ut caeteri ab eorum conjunctione contineant. And 3. the contrary course is altogether opposite to the ends of Excommu∣nication, either general, as edification; whereas this is vastare civitatem, non sanare (as Salust of Catiline;) & clades, non medicina, as Germanicus in another case; or special, as making them ashamed, whereas the multitude of offen∣ders takes away all shame, as among Negroes it is beauty to be black, and they paint Angels of that colour. The civil judgments and Ecclesiastick censures, though otherwise different, yet are both built upon these common grounds, that punishments are inflicted, not because a fault hath been committed, but lest it should be; that the fear of that offence may come to all whereof the pe∣nalty hath fallen upon one; and as it fares in the Church, so it falls out alike in a Christian Common-wealth, if the Laws be not duely executed in the pu∣nishment of Malefactors, good men are scandalized, and evil are encouraged by impunity; and not onely the Justice of the Nation, but the honour of Re∣ligion also is left obnoxious to obloquy: yet however no man contradicts the moderating of civil punishments by clemency, or approves the excess of Ju∣stice, which is cruelty, such as the Poet reproved in Sylla, Ille quod exiguum restabat sanguinis urbi Hausit, dúmque nimis jam putrida membra rescidit; Excessit medicina modum, nimiúmque secuta est Quà morbi duxere manus. — He must be more than a Cherubin that deignes not to looke to the mercy-seat; Nec quisquam est cui tam valdè innocentia sua placeat, Seneca de Clem. lib. 1. ut non stare in conspectu clementiam paratam humanis erroribus gaudeat. It may fall out also in many ca∣ses, what Livy tells us to have happened in that of Q. Maximus, Nec minùs fir∣ma est disciplina militaris Q. Fabii periculo, quam Titi Manlii miserabili supplicio; and it is as consentient to prudence, as the practice of States, where there is a multitude of Delinquents, to chuse out the fattest for Sacrifices to justice, and with Tarquin; to lop off the heads onely; and where by a partial or negligent execution of Laws and administration of Justice, offenders suffer condigne pu∣nishment, it cannot yet warrant or excuse a denying of subjection, or a raysing of sedition, or an erecting and constituting new Common-wealths in the Com∣monwealth, as if men could not live with a good and undefiled Conscience where were any bluntnes in the Sword, or inequality in the Scales of Justice; and why those considerations may not have some place, and the reasons there∣of be in some measure applicable to Ecclesiastical censures, I confess I can∣not apprehend, but am yet to be instructed. When the Church had no Civil Magistrate, and very many sinnes there
were, which the Lawes took no cognisance of, nor prescribed punishments for, the Ecclesiastick Censures recompenced that defect: Now when Municipall Lawes under Christian Magistrates are multiplied and extended to the corre∣ction of most offences, the execution thereof might in some degree supply the neglect of Ecclesiastical censures, and comply with the greatest part of the ends thereof, as to humble, and by shame to reclaime offenders, to inhibit the contagious spreading of the example, and to remove the scandall which Re∣ligion might contract, by permitting offences to passe unpunished: for as for pol∣lution of others (without society in sinne) false testimony and sealing of blanks and the like, I think the prevention thereof to be no proper end of censures, 1 Cor. 5. nor finde any such thing intimated by the Apostle, where he argueth and rea∣soneth for the putting away of that wicked person from among the Corinthians, nor suppose them to be any more effectual meanes to that end, than anciently in Eclipses the resounding of those aera auxiliaria mentioned in the Poets, were to ease the ignorantly fained — solis lunaeque labores; Or the torches that were then held up were to reflect light on these great Lu∣minaries. I say the Laws of the Common-wealth might in some degree supply the neg∣lect of Church censures (which are to be exercised in palàm facinorosos, ma∣ximè si circa hos magistratus officium non faciat, saith Paraeus,) so farre, In 1 Cor. 5. p. 14. 67. as to restrain and withhold men from separation, or (which is the moderne Peri∣phrasis and new notion, to blanch and palliate separation) from gathering new Churches. And this is that which to me seemes cardo negotii, and that which I must insist on, that though Excommunication be obstructed or laid asleep, or culpably exercised, and so there be a mixture of good & evil in one Communi∣on, yet there must be no separation into the new gathered Churches. The con∣trary opinion and practice was the very spirit and extract of the heresy of the Donatists. Calvin tells us, Instit. l. 4. c. 12. sect. 12. that because the Bishops onely reproved some evils which they thought not profitable for the Church to punish with Excommuni∣cation, therefore they made invectives against the Bishops, and raised a schisme against the Churches of Christ. Morton grand impost. cap. 15. sect. 25. Martyr. loc. com. part. 4. c. 5. p. 61. Parae. in 1 Cor. 5. p. 467. Augustin. con∣tra Parmen. l. 3. c. 1. & 2. p. 12. & 13. tom. 7. And Dr. Morton shewes us that they separated from the other constituted Churches in Africa, especially because of the mix∣ture of Godly and wicked professors in one Communion; and Peter Martyr and Paraeus both tell us out of Augustine, that the Donatists objected to the Catho∣liques that they had no Church because they wanted Excommunication: but St. Augustine answers them, Dicant ergo si possunt, meliorem se atque purgatio∣rem habere nunc ecclesiam, quàm erat ipsa unitas, beatissimi Cypriani temporibus, who yet held communion of Sacraments with men notoriously culpable in una congregatione, paria Sacramenta tractantes, and though, saith he, siat hoc (scil. excommunicatio) ubi periculum schismatis nullum est — salvâ dilectionis synceri∣tate, & custoditâ pacis unitate — adhibitâ prudentiâ & obedientiâ in eo quod praecipit Dominus, ne frumenta laedantur; yet as he instances in the case of Cy∣prian, Quia non poterant ab iis corporaliter separari, ne simul eradicent & tri∣ticum, sufficiebat iis talibus corde sejungi, vitâ moribusque distingui, propter com∣pensationem custodiendae pacis & unitatis, propter salutem infirmorum, & veluti
lactentium frumentorum, ne membra corporis Christi per sacrilega schismata lania∣rent; and to this truth his whole books are but one continued testimony: and for this we have better, even infallible and authenticke witness, for when the incestuous Corinthian was not censured yet, neither did any, how much soever they might pretend to purity, 1 Cor. 5. separate themselves into a gathered Church, nor had any check from the Apostle for not doing so, or command to doe it, no not if in case, as he had judged already, that wicked person should not have been put away from among themselves. And when the Angel of the Church of Thiatyra suffered that woman Jezabel to teach and to seduce, Revel. 2.20. and 24. to commit fornication, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, those which had not that Do∣ctrine, nor known the depth of Sathan, were onely commanded to hold fast what they had, and had no other burden put upon them, because they had not separated Jezabel from the Church, either of command to separate, or of ca∣lamities and threatnings for not separating, and for being defiled with such communion. To conclude this discourse, (the thred whereof I have spun into some length that it might reach thorough the whole extent and limits of Excommu∣nication, and which is very pertinent to cleare aswel the state of our Contro∣versie from mistake, as I my self from misprision,) I shall now winde it all up in this clew; That I approve very well of Excommunication the greater, and condemn not the lesser, but I like not their way of inflicting it, because not like to that course, which I thinke onely to be approved, and as Rectum est sui index & obliqui, that which I conceive right, will manifest theirs to be croo∣ked, being too common, and laid on too many, too precipitate and without par∣ticular admonition, and inflicted for no grosse and notorious crimes, impeni∣tently and obstinately persisted in, but onely because men are not, in their opinion, holy enough, or cannot satisfie them of their holiness: and indeed whereas they insinuate others to be opposite to Excommunication, themselves plainly destroy the nature thereof, not onely because In omni foro ad judicium rectum, In 4. d. 18. q. 2. art. 1. requiritur & cognitio causae, & sententiatio, as Biel speakes, whereas yet they suspend the greater part of the people without either of these, but because the definition (which includes the nature) of Excommunication, is to be censu∣ra ecclesiastica privans ab aliqua communione fidelium, &c. whereas they Ex∣communicate (with the lesser Excommunication I meane) and exclude from their Communion a multitude upon whom no Ecclesiastical censure ever passed. Now lastly, for Presbytery, I long since read and took much impression from a passage in Bodin, De method. hist. c. 6. p. 245. Laudabile, si quid usquam gentium, quódque rempub. efficit, si non opibus & imperii magnitudine, certè virtutibus ac pietate florentem, illa scili∣cet Pontificum censura, quâ nihil magis divinum cogitari potuit, — ad Christi norman dirigitur, latenter primùm & am'cè, deinde paulò acerbiùs, tum nisi pa∣reas, &c. igitur nulla meretricia, nullae ebrietates, &c. And I still approve of Presbytery according to the judgement of Calvin, as a prudent Government, regulated generally by the word of God, and conducible to Truth and Godli∣ness; yet not after the opinion of Beza, as particularly injoyned by Gods Word, and necessary to be alone entertained; where Truth and Godliness shall be, Ut ab ea non magis liceat recedere, quam ab ipsius Religionis placitis. I am not against Presbytery, yet I am not so much for it, as to be against all
other formes of government beside it. I deny not that to be a good govern∣ment, yet affirme not that there is none else that is good. I never voted for exorbitant Episcopacy, nor should I have ever suffraged against a regulated; I would have gladly lived under rectified Episcopacy, and I am content to be under a moderate Presbytery, (for there are rigidi & molles Presbyteri, aswell as rigidi & molles Lutheran) and between regulate Episcopacy and moderate Presbytery is no such gulfe fixed, that there can be no passing from the one to the other, and if they be not like some of the Heathen Gods which were the same deities, but had one name apud superos, another apud inferos, yet sure they are not like Angles made of right, and Angles made of Spherical lines, which can never be made equall; and we will not dispute which is the right line, or which more Spherical, (more known in the Sphere of the world) seeing we endevour to atone them. All things are apt to be soyled by diuturnal use, and mens corruptions will have an influence into their a∣ctions. Streames pure in the Fountain, contract some filth by a long course, but accidentall evils may not prejudice what is essentially good: Faults of the concrete are to be sequestred from the abstract, and the miscariages of persons not to be put upon the score of the Office they manage. And Presbyters are men too, and man hath a connotation of frailty, and never comes up fully to the Standard of the Sanctuary, though I think they hold out weight as much, and need as few graines of allowance to make them passable for sanctity, as any generation of men that I know, so that I wish we had more of Presbyters, and am sorry to find so few right Presbyters, and that many passe under that notion, which are but conterfeits and prevaricators. Even my zeal for the honor of Presbytery transports me into a dislike of those which lapse from their principles, as if they distrusted and were out of love with them, and reflect dishonor upon that name by their recidivations. Nor can I take complacency to find that Cassius, Quicquid velit, nimis velit, and I think it very wise and seasonable Counsell which Galba gave to Piso, Ne∣ro à pessimo quoque desiderabitur, mihi & tibi providendum est, ne etiam à bonis desideretur; I should be sorry to heare it said, that Diogenes tramples on the pride of Plato with greater pride, and looke upon it with indignation, when those that pretend to be inimicous to Episcopacy, are suspected not to be so, because as Charles of Burgundy excused himself not to wish evil to the King of France, because in stead of one he wished there were twenty: So they doe not extinguish the Dominion, but change and multiply the Subjects thereof, Magìs alii homines quàm alii mores, as Tacitus, and they doe onely as he said of Mucianus, Vim principis complecti, nomen remittere; and like what Cossitanus complained of in that Historian, Ut imperium evertant, libertatem praetendunt, si perverterent, ipsam aggredientur; or like as Caesar and Pompey contested not to vindicate liberty, but who should seize on the Soveraignty, Caesar would admit no Superior, Pompey no Equal; and Paterculus tells us of the latter, oc∣cultior non melior. It grieves me also that in stead of Independents returning to Presbyters, they are too facil and too forward to turne toward them, in a scandalizing complyance, and to be imposed upon, and seduced with their principles, as if (by such a transplantation, as Paracelsus talkes of in natural generations) there were several formes in them, but that still resulteth to give being and denomination which meets with most plenteous and suitable
nourishment, Ipsi serviunt temporibus, ut ipsis serviant tempora, like the Hyaena, they are males one yeer, and females another; and like the Mervail of Peru, which every yeer beareth different flowers. This hath been the Gangrene of Presbytery, which spreads and mortifies, and the Worm which hath smote the Gourd, under which our heads hoped to find a shadow to deliver us from our grief; so that now the East Winde and the Sun beat upon us even to faint∣ing. But I shall ingenuously confess, that as my weak understanding cannot dis∣cern that the Word of God particularly determines, or absolutely prescribeth any one entire form of Church-government, but onely holdeth forth general rules for the constitution and exercise thereof, as may suit with order and de∣cency, and conduce to edification in godliness, and advance of truth and peace; so my tractable will is ready to embrace and submit to any that shall not check with these rules, nor retrench those ends, (as to me Independency seems appa∣rently to do; but which else shall be to those ends most subservien, I suppose may be aptly demonstrated ex posteriori, and not obscurely determined by Time the Mother of Truth, and Experience the Mistress of Wisdome) rather than in an unhappy contest about setting on such or such a garment on the Church, to tear her flesh, and scatter her limbes, and in a difference about ma∣king the hedge, to burn up or devast the field. And as Discipline seems but as the Garment of the Church: so Joseph may be his Fathers darling, and yet have a party-coloured coat; Epist. 86. Tom. 2. p. 76. In ista veste varietas sit, scissura non sit, saith St. Augustine, and elsewhere in the like case, Omnis pulchritudo filiae regis intrinse∣cus, illae autem observationes quae variae celebrantur in ejus veste intelliguntur, unde ibi dicitur in fimbriis aureis circumamicta varietate, sed ea quo{que} vestis ita diver∣sis celebrationibus varietur, ut non adversis contentionibus dissipetur. To think to hang the whole frame of a Government upon two or three words onely in Scripture, (as Curio did the people of Rome upon one hook in his Amphitheater) and which may as rationally be understood of, and as properly applyed to ano∣ther subject, matter and persons, as those which they expound it of, and which would hardly ever be so interpreted, but by a judgment seasoned with their in∣fusions, and predisposed by their glosses, or facilitated by proper affection to beleeve what they would have to be: Truly I cannot but wonder with Cato, that one Soothsayer doth not laugh when he meets another. A wise and lear∣ned man tells us, Sir W. Ra∣leigh. that Ignorance hath set Philosophy, Physick, and Divinity in a Pillory, and written over the first, Contra negantem principia; over the second, Virtus specifica; over the third, Ecclesia Romana: to which we may adde the fourth (though set there more by Interest and Faction, than Ignorance) even Discipline, and superscribe Jure Divino. I am not of that Elevation, nor my judgment at that Ascendent, that either should be worth the notice, Et melius fuerat non scribere, nam{que} tacere — Tuum semper erit, — and therefore the Greek Epgran called Silence, Pharmacum tranquillitatis for∣tissimum.
And perchance the not carrying of a stone in my mouth, like the Cranes flying over the Cilician Mountains, to prevent their cacklings, may draw many about my ears; for to deliver my self in such an opinion, is to set Atha∣nasius against the whole World, and the whole World against Athanasius; but because Momus would have every one to have a window in his brest, and the importunity of the Apologists hath coacted me to manifest, that I hold no opi∣nion which I dare not own; and as that Romane professed of his house, I could be content my bosome were patent to every man; I have therefore adventu∣red to deliver my judgment, as one that am peaceable and faithful in Israel. And though Ursius Crispus found more of safety when Ille igitur nunquam direxit brachia contra Torrentem; — Yet he should have had more honour and conscience, had he been — Civis qui libera posset Verba animi proferre, & vitam impendere vero: But yet I do not know why I should not claim my share of that rara tempo∣rum felicitas, as Tacitus calls it; and wherein our age exceeds that of Nerva, Ubi & sentire quae velis, & quae sentias, loqui licet. But Quis coelum terris non misceat & mare coelo, In tabulas Syllae cùm dicant discipuli tres? Who can patiently hear the Apologists traduce others as averse from Presby∣tery, when that disaffection lies in their own Wallet, More vulgi suum quis{que} Contra Ruffin. l. 3. fla∣gitium aliis objectantes, as Tacitus in the case of Vedeius Aquila; yet forgetting that caution of Hierom, Caveas in alterum dicere, quod in te statim detorqueri po∣test; and what is their opinion of, or affection to Presbytery, make judgment (as they did of Hercules) by this foot-step: they tell us that Mr. Jeanes hath his ad∣vantage upon his adversaries (among whom it seems they rank themselves) by this, P. 170. that he holds them strictly to Presbyterian principles (from which it appeares they would go loose) whereas they think it safer to transgress a disputable prin∣ciple of Presbytery (so as it appears they are not convinced of the certainty of those principles, which by being still disputable, are onely problems, and not principles) than to offend against the light of the word: Whence it follows, that a man cannot keep close with Presbyterian principles without clashing with the Word; and then also these principles are not disputable, but undoubtedly and indisputably false and vitious, if they cannot adhere to them without receding from the holy Scripture. When they can wipe off and expiate these blots which their Pens have drop'd upon Presbytery, and point out any as black and odious shed from mine, let them mark others with a black coal or their black Ink, for adversaries to that way; in the interim, Nonne igitur jure & merito vitia ultima fictos Contemnunt Scauros & castigata remordent.
Besides, how little their model and course symbolizeth with the Presbyterian way, he may reade that runs it over. Rarely do the Presbyterians use Cen∣sures, and on very few do they inflict them. Who ever in any of those forrein Churches of that Discipline hath found the farre greatest part of their people under suspension, or any suspended, but upon regular process, for the scandal of some notorious evil, obstinately continued in after admonition? Because they turn aside from this way, we walk not with them, who should easily be at agree∣ment, did their way agree with the Presbyterian. DIATRIBE. SECT. II The Lord Jesus examined not his Disciples antecedently to his Supper. He admitted  Judas to the participation, as the Fathers consentiently assert, and the Scripture evinceth. Luk. 22.21. & Joh. 13.2, 26, 27, 30. discussed. IT is St. Basils conclusion extracted from the Exordium of Moses, and St. John (In the Beginning) , to begin at the beginning: In quavis institutione, quod primum, est & praecipuum: Et primum in uno quo{que} genere est regula & mensura reliquorum: Consentani∣ously St. Paul makes Christs first institution the pattern of all subsequent administrations, as being perfect and exact in all Essentials. He received of the Lord what he delivered, and he disclaims all additionals; but now our Lord Christ when he first instituted this Sacrament, made no previous exa∣mination of his Disciples, before he administred it to them: he shewed them the nature, use and ends thereof, and he washed their feet, an Emblem of the preparative cleansing by Faith and Repentance, and purifying of the affe∣ctions: Usus allegoriâ ex communi hominum usu desumptâ, qui in balneis aut quovis lavacro corporaliter sunt jam recèns loi, caetera quidem mundi sunt, atta∣men quidem necesse habent abluere pedes, quos contactu terrae quotidie inquinant, etiam cùm primùm balneo egrediuntur, aut etiam cùm adhuc in illo nudis ambu∣lant pedibus: Jansenius harm. c. 130. p. 140. In locum. Idem Grotius. to which Protasis of Jansenius St. Augustine addes the Antapodosis: Homo quidem in sancto baptismo totus abluitur, verùm tamen cùm in rebus huma∣nis posteà vivitur, uti{que} terra calcatur, ipsi igitur humani affectus sine quibus in hac mortalitate non vivitur, quasipedes sunt, ubi ex humanis rebus afficimur:
but to enable the discharge of this duty of purifying, a general instruction and exhortation on the Ministers part is proportionable, without a particular exa∣mination; as is here verified, and sufficiently warranted by the practice of our Saviour. If any shall answer, that the Apostles were enrich'd with an extraordinary talent of knowledge and sanctity, which frustrated and prevented the neces∣sity of probation. I shall reply; First, that it is evident by sundry passages of Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.17. as is evident by Joh. 20.9. and knew no∣thing of his death, Luk. 9.44, 45. that they were then somewhat ignorant, yea even of the resurrection of Christ, (without which all Faith is vain) which doth not so much disparage them, as magnifie the powerful inspirations of that holy Spirit, which so soon after, and so abun∣dantly endued them with knowledge, as well as power, from on high, that Leo might have said, Quàm plenè, as well as, quàm citò discitur, quod docetur, ubi Deus magister est. But secondly, if the Apostles needed not to be examined, because the suf∣ficiency of their knowledge and holiness could not be doubted, then by a proportionable accommodation of reason, neither ought such now to be, whose competency of knowledge cannot well be suspected, nor lives repro∣ved for notorious crimes, which is the issue we plead for. Thirdly, they were clean, but not all; and if Christ admitted Judas to the Communion of his last Supper with the rest of the Apostles (who though he might look with a face of Religion toward the other Disciples, yet Christ, whose eye pierced into his heart, beholding him under the true notion of an hypocrite, and without hope of repentance; and yet admitting him together with the rest, without any satisfactory signs of holiness, which Judas could not give, and Christ needed not to make re-search of, but onely as being at that time no sinner notorious:) I should gladly learn, by what authority and precedent any that profess the Faith, and are innocent of notorious and scan∣dalous sinnes, which may check with their profession, can be rejected? and by what means the unworthiness of some receivers, can be so spreading or diffusive, as to reflect guilt on him that administers, or pollution on the Ordi∣nance, or prejudice on others that partake in the Communion, since the un∣worthiness of Judas could have no such influence. And because the weight of this precedent will sway very much to the turning of the Scales in this con∣troversie, and the Fathers in their contests with the Donatists made so much use thereof upon the like occasion, I shall prompt my self with an hope, that it may quit the cost of time (which is the price of discourses as well as busi∣ness) to inlarge in a copious discussion of this question, Whether Judas did partake of the last Supper of our Lord? wherein our Antagonists are eager, and very much ingaged to maintain the Negative. But that our Saviour admitted Judas to such participation, is the conso∣nancy of the Fathers, — Veteres, ingentia nomina, Patres. None of them that are majorum gentium that I know, have contradicted it besides Hilary. I am conscious, that a learned man hath mustered up some ancient names which he would impress to fight for the contrary. But either
his Witnesses are not such as he pretends, or their testimonies not so as he suggests: For first, Ammonius Alexandrinus, though he first repeat the story of Judas his receiving the Sop, and going forth immediatly thereupon; and afterward rehearse the Institution and Distribution of the Sacrament; yet it follows not that therefore Judas did not communicate; for the Author that cites this testimony doth much insist upon this, as a principle, That things are not always acted in the same order, wherein they are recited; and besides I hope to verifie it, that Judas his receiving of the Sop, and imme∣diate going forth, hath no such influence upon this question, as to evince that which they suggest, which are for the Negative; Dionysius (ancient, though counterfeit) doth not assert that which is pretended; for when he saith, In which Supper (that is, the Lords, as the Alleager tells us a little before) the Author of those Symbols doth justly deprive or cast out Judas, who had not holily with agreement of minde supped together with him on holy things: We cannot upon his Ipse dixit, assent that (In which Supper) must signifie, before Supper, and that by holy things can onely be meant the Paschal Supper; and that Christs separating Judas from the society of the Apostles, can be onely a se∣paration corporal, not spiritual; or could be made at no time else but imme∣diately before the Institution of the Sacrament. But not onely Aquinas and Valentia, Part. 3. q. 81. ar. 2. part. 3. d. 6. q. 9. p. 2. pag. 989. De Scriptura 9. 6. c. 12. p. 385. but the most learned Whitaker alleage Dionysius his authority for our opinion. As for Maximus, (who was yet a Century short of the six hundred years, within which the Learned impale the Fathers of more signal authority) and Pachymeres, who was a Youngling of the thirteenth Century, and whom indeed Doctor Whitaker casts on that side, yet neither of them do seem so cleerly to testifie that for which they are produced; They both expresly say, that Judas received the mystical bread and cup, which could not be meant of the Passover; for whatever they may say of the Bread, yet the Cup there was not mystical, being not essential to the Paschal Supper, but occasional; for they used it as a common drink with their meat; neither by the myste∣ries which they say Christ gave to his Disciples alone, after Judas was gone forth from Supper, is it necessary to understand the Sacramental Elements, for thereby they might understand the mysteries of the Kingdome of Hea∣ven, as they are called Matth. 13.11. and mysteries of the Faith, as they are named 1 Tim. 3.5. more cleerly set forth in our Saviours Divine Sermons, subsequent to his last Supper. And though upon another account the for∣mer Author say, That after the Sacrament, both Matthew and Mark doe immediatly adde, And when they had sung an Hymne, they went out into the Mount of Olives: Yet though the Evangelists immediatly adde their out∣going, it follows not, they immediatly did go out, those being two different things, and though nothing intervene between the recital of the one and the other, there might notwithstanding between the existence of them; and if the giving of the Sop to Judas were the same night with the Institu∣tion of the Lords Supper (as they would have it) then it appears that Christ his Divine Discourses with the Apostles, recorded John 14. were had before his going thence, which is afterward expressed in the last verse of the Cha∣pter; and if not, yet it is most likely by John 181. that his other Heavenly Sermons, Chap. 15.16. and 17. were before his going forth after Supper en∣ded, either in the house, or the Mount of Olives, or in the Garden, it matters
not in which; for since it was after Judas went forth, it is all one to our pur∣pose. As for the Recognitions of Clemens, the famous Whitaker reprobates and stigmatizeth them as suppositions upon this very score (among others) be∣cause they affirm Judas did not receive the Sacrament; and as for Rupertus Tuitiensis the Abbot, and Innocent 3d. the Pope, they came into the World too late (between the twelve and thirteenth Century) to carry away vene∣rable authority (though Rupertus also is fetch'd off from this party by Vas∣quez) neither could any more of that alloy counter-ballance the Scale against the common consent of the School, M. 3. q. 81. art. 2. disp. 217.6.1. 2. part. q. 81. ar. 2. who all follow the conduct of the great Bellweather Aquinas, and are unanimously for the affirmative: and as I know not any one of them that strayes or divides himself from the Herd, so doe the Canonists also strike in generally, and take the same way with them. That the Churches of England and Ireland were of this beleef, while they approved and incorporated the words of St. Augustine to this purpose, the one in the 29th. the other in the 96th. Article, is silently confessed. That the Confessions of Bohemia and Belgia assert the same, Harm. Confes. S. 14. p. 432. Edit. Lon. 158. is denyed with too great affront to truth, violently overborn to support the contrary opinion. When that of Belgia saith, Judas and Simon Magus did receive the Sacrament, this Author answers, that it was meant of Baptisme, whereas but look into the place cited, the whole context will appear to be of the Lords Supper, which is the onely subject of that 35. Article of the Confession of Belgia, and the head and title of the Section in the Harmony, and no other Sacrament is there mentioned; and use and custome, which have the Empire of words, and give the Law to forms of speaking, hath made it more common and trite when we speak of the Sacrament without specification or restraint, to under∣stand thereby the Lords Supper. And as for the Confession of Bohemia, Harm. p. 388. s. 12. whereas it saith Judas, received the Sacrament of the Lord Christ himself; He answers, It was that of Baptisme, whereas there is no evidence that Christ baptized any. Augustine indeed thinketh that he did baptize the Apostles onely; but others dissent, and think they had onely John's Baptisme, and the Text seems plain against it, Job. 4.2. Jesus baptized none. I am not igno∣rant that the negative in this question, Whether Judas communicated? hath some great modern names appendent to it; but if the Beam should be swayed by Authority, they are not enough by farre to turn the Scale; but he that hath brought forth the greatest Muster-roll of them that I have met with, hath a strange way to answer and enervate the Authorities marshalled against him for the affirmative, by saying, That the Authors hold some other opinions that check with their judgment in some other things that alleage those authorities; and if wee should fight with him at the same weapon (which indeed would movere tribu, and abolish that Topick ab authoritate) we should soon defeat him of most of his Authors, that are for the Negative: for (to omit that Musculus cited for that Opinion, differs in judgment from him in a greater matter, viz. That Excommunication is of no permanent necessity, but instituted and practised onely while the Church wanted a civil Magistrate;) even in this subject concerning Iudas, the most of his Authors acknowledge, that he received the Paschal Supper, though it be denyed by him, who I think is in that denial singular, except perchance (which Maldo∣na supposeth, and Gerhard denies) that Hilary went before him, who per∣chance
foresaw that if Judas received the Passeover with Christ (which be∣fore the Institution of the Lords Supper was in stead thereof, and correspon∣dent thereunto, and significative of the same thing) it was as subservient to our purpose, as if he had partaken of the Lords Supper. But because we are all of Augustine's minde; Ego solis canonicis Scripturis dbeo fine ulla recusatione consensum; and other Authors are to be alleaged, non cum credendi necessitate, sed judicandi libertate: we shall therefore say in the words of Ambrose, Recita de Evangelio: and of Augustine, Procedat in medio co∣dex Dei. As in the agitation of the Controversy concerning Transubstantia∣tion our Divines argue from the forme and words of the Institution (He took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, &c.) that he blessed what he took, and brake, what he blessed, gave what he brake, and bid take of what he gave, and eat what they took, and this was bread, and at every period it was still bread: so I may with some resemblance frame such an Argument in this present question, He (that is, Jesus) sat down with the Twelve, Matth. 26.20. He gave to his disciples, verse 26. he bid, Drink ye all of this: verse 27. and as they did eat, Jesus blessed and gave to them, Mark 14.22. and they all drank of it. Now the Disciples which he gave it to, were the Twelve he sat down with, those all that he bid drink were the same he gave to, and those all that drank were the same which he bid drink thereof, and those were still the Twelve, the full number of twelve: I recognize that it is somewhat smartly observed, that, 1 Cor. 15.5. Christ is said to have been seen of the Twelve, yet they were then but eleven at that apparition, Judas being gone to his own place; so in like manner the mention of twelve, doth not here necessarily take in Judas at the Sacrament, nor conclude the for∣mal and precise number: For answer, I think this shall not be aptly and per∣tinently here interposed, because it is confessed that Jesus sat down with the full number of twelve, though some suppose that Judas did rise before the Institution of the last Supper. Secondly, Beza supposeth (from whom Piscator dissenteth not) that in that place to the Corinths  was intruded in stead of , that appa∣rition being here spoken of, which is rehearsed John 20.19. when Thomas was also absent, for verse the 7. of that Chapter, reciting another and latter appearance, the Apostle saith, He was seen of all (as if that former number was not all) the Apostles, viz. the Eleven, as is recorded, John 20.26. This conjecture borrows strength from the vulgar translation which here reads, of the Eleven, whereby it is manifest, that the Translator read in the Greek ; so as when the word  seemed (though without cause) a fault in writing, some substituted in stead thereof , and some  Hie∣rom and Ambrose their Text have the Eleven; Augustine and Beda have both readings. For my part I profess to be very tender in admitting any such miswritings and Sphalmata's in sacred Scripture, except pure necessity com∣pell it (as in Kainan, Luk. 3.36.) Chrysostom therefore hath another answer, That this appearing was after Matthias was chosen and inserted into the College of the Apostles, and though we elsewhere read of no such appea∣ring, so neither doe we of that mentioned verse 7. But let it be, that the Twelve here is a name of order, not of number, as Cajetan according to his wont, abstractively, and that Major numerus consuetus ordinarius Synecdochicè
positus pro minori non ordinario, as Estius answers it; Et quia eodem numero institutum erat eorum Collegium, saith Grotius: and as the late Annotatours observe Gen. 42.13. that it is said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, and yet in the same verse it is added, One is not: yet because it is so taken here, to argue that it must be so accepted in other places, is, Elenchus ex particula∣ribus. At the time of the apparition there were but Eleven, at the Institu∣tion of the Sacrament they were known to be full Twelve, the circumstances and universal particle (all) shew the number to be compleat, at least it was so, at the sitting down, by general concession. In this question, Whether Judas did partake of the Lords Supper or not? Caput argumentationis for the affirmative, is Luk. 22.21. and for the negative is John 13. vers. 2, 26, 27, 30. That we may first fortifie our own holds, be∣fore we fall out into the works of the enemy, let us consider that of Luke, where immediatly after distribution of the Cup, it followeth, But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table, whereupon it fol∣loweth that Judas was present when the Sacrament was distributed, and consequently did Communicate. Hereunto it is answered, That Luke relates this by an hystorology and re∣capitulation, these words being mentioned by St. Matthew and Marke to be spoken by our Saviour before the Institution of his Supper, and it is more like that they observed the true order rather than St. Luke, one Evangelist being more credibly to be reduced to the order of two, than two to the me∣thod of one; especially considering that Luke relates not the matter of the Lords Supper, according to the order wherein things are spoken or acted, because he relates the taking of the Cup; verse 17.18. (which some will have to be the Eucharistical Cup) and giving thankes, before the taking of the bread: Besides (say they) Matthew and Marke record that discourse of the Traytor to be uttered as they did eat, which could not be if Luke observe the right order, for after Supper he took the Cup, and after the distribution of the Cup, Luke addes that reflection upon the Traytor. Whereunto I shall reply, That it hath more verisimilitude, that Luke observes the proper order of things, rather than the other Evangelists, not onely because he professeth according to his perfect understanding of things, to write in order, Chap. 1. verse 3. but because he recites both the Institu∣tion of the Eucharist, and manifestation of the Traytor in one continued se∣ries of Speech; This cup is the new Testament, &c. but behold the hand of him, &c. Whereas Matthew and Marke make the one and the other, as it were several paragraphs or sections, Now when even was come he sat done with the Twelve, and as they did eate, he said, &c. Matth. 26.20, 21. and then verse 26. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread. And I think it is more likely that para∣graphs may be transposed, where things of one concernment are digested and set forth together, than things in one historical series, where is a conti∣nuation, rather than transition of Speech, or else we must look for the pro∣per order of the acts and gests of Tiberius in Suetonius, rather than in Tacitus. The discretive particle (but) sheweth also, that Luke speakes of somewhat unsuitable unto what went before, as that though Christ shed his blood in love to mans salvation, yet one of them, then at his Table, sought to spill it in a treacherous malice.
Concerning the Cup mentioned Luke 22.18. it hath no relish to be the Eucharistical Cup, which being spoken of afterward, verse 20. Luke that pro∣fesseth to write in order, was not guilty of such confusion and vaine repeti∣tion. In locum. Beda and Theophylact, together with Piscator and Cajetan (to omit Bel∣larmine who therein runnes byas) affirme it to be the Cup of the Passeover, neither doth our Saviour call it his blood of the new Testament, or, the new Testament in his blood, but simply the Cup. A Paschal Cup indeed, I know none formally of that denomination, the Cup then used was as common drink with their meat, Buxtorf. Syna∣gog. Jud. c. 13. p. 338. however the modern Jews, as Buxtorfius tells us, by pre∣scribed rule, then drink foure Cups in memorial of foure deliverances mentioned Exod. 6.6, 7. but as when our Lord saith, I will not any more eate thereof, verse 16. he relates to the Passeover mentioned verse 15. so the Cup, which Luke first speakes of, was in all probability the last Cup in the dimis∣sory Supper, Weems Chri∣stian Synagog. p. 196. Idem Buxtorf. in Thal. Lexico. where after the Master of the Family had drunk the last Cup he said, This night I will drink no more; and there was a Paschal Canon that they might drink no more after they had drunk that last Cup; and our Sa∣viour seemes to allude to this, verse 18. I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, &c. which though spoken before, was no more inconsistent with his drinking presently afterward of the Sacramental Cup (if he did drink there∣of, which though divers of the Fathers supposed, upon misprision that the Cup here spoken of by Luke, was the Sacramental Cup, and the Schoole doth thereunto generally assent, yet divers learned Men (as particularly Luther) deny it, In 3. part. q. 81. art. 1. because we read onely that our Lord gave to his Disciples, not that he eat or drank himself;) yet his speech no more obstructs that drinking, than his saying, It is finished, was incoherent with his dying soon afterward: In the one he said he would doe no more, what from a little af∣terward he would not doe; in the other he said that was done, which wa instantly to be done. Deodate thereof interprets it thus; This is the last mea I shall make with you, and notwithstanding this expression he did eat also after the resurrection by a certain dispensation, which was not egestatis, but potestatis: and not to nourish his body, but to feed our Faith in his resurre∣ction; and of this comestion after he was risen, Chrysostom and Beda under∣stand this to be meant, untill I drink it new, &c. To that which Matthew and Mark say, That the discovery of the Tray∣tor was as they did eat, and Luke speakes of the taking of the Cup after Sup∣per, and then followed the detection of the Traytor: I answer, That as St. Matthew saith , as they did eat, when Christ discoursed of the Traytor, verse 21. so he useth the same words at the Institution of the last Supper, vers. 26. as they were eating, Jesus took bread; therefore it seems that, as they were eating, which Matthew useth, is not at great difference with, after Supper, as Luke expresseth it, otherwise there could be no Harmony be∣tween the Evangelists; reconcile therefore the 26 verse of Mathew, with that of Luke, and the 21. verse will soon come into the same agreement. The truth is, at the Passeover there were several Suppers, or more properly ac∣cording to our English idiom, several courses: As now among the modern Jews, first the unleavened cakes are set on the Table, then the pultiula or Pap which represents the straw and mortar in Egypt, next the acetaria or Sal∣let of bitter herbs, and then lastly the Lambe; and discourses or prayers are
interposed between the one and other, as Buxtorfius relates, Synag. Judai. cap. 13. and therefore the disclosing of the Traytor might be after one Supper, and yet as they were eating of another. Nevertheless I doe not think that at the first Insti∣tution of the last Supper, or mention of the Traytor, properly and in strict∣ness of Speech, any thing was eaten, but manducantibus illis, is well inter∣preted by Deodate, while they were at the Table, and by Maldonat, Statim ut coena peracta est, antequàm surgerent, antequàm mensae & ciborum rel quiae re∣moverentur. And whereas it is argued, that it appears by Matth. 26.23. he that dippeth, &c. as also by giving the Sop, John. 13. that they were eating at the time when the Traytor was discours'd of; it may be readily answered, In locum. that the dipping, non notat praesentem actum, sed consuetudinem, as Paraeus: Notatur non una certa & singularis actio, sed agendi consuetudo, as Piscator; It denoted no present action, for that had signally discovered the Traytor with∣out more inquiry, of whom yet the Disciples remained ignorant, and Judas himself did afterwards aske, Is it I? but those words did onely obumbrate one of those that usually did eat together with him; and Jansenius observes that the Greek in St. Matthew is in the pretertense, hath dipped, though Marke hath it in the present, and he addes that our Lord intended not to shew what Judas did at present, but to what familiarity he had admitted him, that was about to perpetrate such a crime; Sylvius in 3. q. 81. art. 2. p. 331. not as a signe to discover the Traytor, but to exaggerate his treason, as Sylvius; and it doth not prove that Judas at that time had his hand in the dish, more than that David's fa∣miliar friend did eat of his bread, at that instant, when he said, he lift up his heele against him, Psal. 41.9. Of the Sop we shall speak more amply anon. But to prevent more altercation about the order of things in the several Evangelists, we finde that Judas sate down among the Twelve Apostles, who were not twelve without him; our Lord gave to his Disciples and they did eat, he bad all drink and all did drink; where is there any mention of Judas his going forth before all was ended? De non apparentibus & non existentibus eadem est ratio in lege (etiam divina.) We pursue our Quare impedit, and ask, what should cause a writ of Ne admittas to be sued forth against Judas, who (as Maldonat observs) had he risen from Table before all had been ended, he had bewrayed that treason, which he laboured to conceale. Here therefore are interposed two Arguments, whereof the first seems to be raised de jure, that he ought not, the other de facto, that certainly he did not communicate; the first pleads, That all those that then did partake of the Sacrament, for them Christs body was broken and blood shed, and they all were to drink new Wine with him in his Fathers kingdome, But neither of these can be verified of Judas. Ergo. Hereunto what if I should answer as Calvin doth to that of Matth. 11.21. (a response which I confess I have heretofore asmuch acquiesced in, as in a∣ny other solution rendred, either by our Divines or the Dominicans) That the Speech of Christ is applyed to the common conceit of mens minds, and he speaks after the manner of men, that is, as men might morally think or judge, and not out of his heavenly Sanctuary. Themselves say that in case Judas were admitted, Christ dealt as a man therein; And indeed a man might morally have thought and judged, that one of the chosen Apostles, con∣versing
so long with Christ, taught by him, and publickly teaching him, and now eating the Passeover, and his last Supper with him, had his share in the prementioned privileges; and then these words can be no more exclusive to Judas at the first Institution, than now they be to any reprobate when by a charientisme and according to the judgement of charity, like words are used in the subsequent Administrations. But I neither will, nor need, to fix upon, or to adhere unto the Answer. The rule of Tychonius the Dona∣tist, De doctrina Christiana, l. 3. tom. 3. p. 13. which is the Second of his Seven Rules, and which he calls de Domini Corpore bipartito, but St. Augustine better names, de permixta ecolesia; will suf∣ficiently satisfie this Argument, viz. Quando Scriptura, cùm ad alios jam lo∣quatur, tanquam ad eos ipses ad ques loquebatur videtur loqui, vel de ipsis cùm de aliis jam loquatur, tanquam unum sit utrorúmque corpus propter temporalem cemmixtionem & communionem Sacramentorum: What agrees to one part is often affirmed of the whole, especially when it is the greater part, and be∣side that the Apostles here represented the whole Church, and that Christ in some respect, interpretatively at least, tasted death for every man, pro∣pter susceptam communem naturam & causam, and to make the salvation of all men possible, though that were not the onely nor adequate effect of his death, Loquitur colle∣gio Apostolo∣rum, atque adeò non fuit neces∣sarium ut sin∣gulì postea il∣lum potum bi∣berent, sed sa∣tis est quòd multi. Sylvius in 3. q. 81. art. 2. p. 331. and as Athanasius thinketh no man had risen, if Christ had not dyed, and therefore he dyed for all, that all might have resurrection. Neither of these Sentences were spoken to the Apostles distributively, but collectively; not to Judas in particular, or in the singular number, but take ye, eat ye, in the plural , Ad plures eorum, non ad omnes referendum est, saith the Ordinary gloss, the words were verified toward the major part which was enough to warrant the truth of what was said, broken, shed for you, and drink with you, as Maldonat observes. Judas was one of them to whom our Lord said, Matth. 19.28. You that have followed me in the regeneration, &c. shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel; yet that promise shall not be verified in Judas, though fulfilled toward the rest, and Matthias shall possess the Seat of him, who is gone to his own place. Now for that which is the Achillean Argument, and by the seeming force whereof many modern Theologues have been carried to the other part, viz. the giving of the Sop to Judas, which they think must needs be given before the last Supper, where was nothing to dip it in, and upon receiving where∣of, Judas went out immediatly; I hope to give so full and clear an answer thereunto, as may satisfie any unprejudiced and unbiassed understanding, and so by finding an error in their writ of Ne admittas, and recovering upon our Quare impedit, we may bring our Quare-incumbravit, and at this Insti∣tution give Judas that Induction, which the Antients suitably to all circum∣stances in the Text have afforded him. First, Dr. Hammond Annot. in John 13.26. p. 340. conceiveth that the dipping is misapplied to the Sop, and may signifie no more than Christ's putting, or dipping his hand into the dish, vers. 17. to whom having dip'd I shall give, &c. but if, as he supposeth, , doth properly signifie the lower side or crust of the bread, which was wont to be given about to each of the guests in the postcoenium, which was among the Jews as the Grace-cup; it is necessarily consequent that Judas was present at the Institution of the Sacra∣ment, and not onely at the first part of the Supper. it hath ever seemed strange to me, that learned Men have con∣cluded, that the Sop must needs have been given to Judas, either at the
Paschall Supper, where the Charoseth (the sauce wherein they dip the bit∣ter herbs of the colour of clay, the Emblem of their servitude in Egypt) is thought to be that wherein the Sop was dipped, or rather say some, since it is not like that Christ kept the Passeover with any conformity to their super∣stition and traditional rites, the Sop was given at the common Supper, for heere onely could be some liquid thing wherein to intinct it, whereof there was none at the Lords Supper. I know that the Learned agree not about the number or order of the Suppers, but for my part I strike in with them, that suppose there was among the Jews but one Supper upon the matter, viz. the Paschal Supper, though that might be divided or diversified by several formalities, as I said before, and they were several courses rather then Suppers. Buxtorfius tells us, Synagog. Ju∣daic. cap. 12. p. 325. that the later Jews that day in the evening whereof they eat the Passeover, dine betime in the forenoon and slightly, and eat no more untill they keep the Passeover, that they may eat that with the better appetite; and it is the less likely that then they will at that supper cloy themselves with other meat: and howsoever they might eat other common meat with the Paschal Lamb, as there was occasion, yet it appears incredible that ten persons (for there might be no more sometimes, and never were above twenty) should eat a whole Lamb either before or after another set distinct Supper. The dimissory supper was as secundae mensae: Weemse p. 133. Christian. Sy∣nagog. and heere some think the bitter herbs were brought in, and in the time that this was eating, our Lord instituted his Supper, which being before they rose, and before the utensils and remainder of the meat were taken off, as Interpreters conclude to reconcile Matthews (as they were eating) with Lukes and Paules (after Supper) what I beseech you should hinder, but that the Sop might be dipt in some of the liquid reliques of the former Supper, yet standing on the Table, even after Christ's Institution of the Sacraments? or how will they disprove or make it seem improbable, Gerard. harm. c. 171. p. 453. Estius annot. Johan. 13.26. that it was Wine (not consecra∣ted) wherein our Lord dipt the Sop? (for which there wants not the au∣thority of men very learned.) There is no necessity then to conclude, that the Sop should be given before the Sacramental Institution; but neither, Secondly had it been so given, is there any cogency of reason to hold, that Judas his going forth immediately after his receiving thereof, should be so instantly as to retrench all intervenience of time, wherein the Lords Supper could be afterwards instituted. That the word  immediatly doth not al∣wayes signify a moment of time, but a very short interval, (as Maldonat ex∣presseth it) may appear Marke 1.12. for  and  are of the same signification and indifferently used, both being rendred, protinus, statim, continuò: but  translated immediatly Marke 1.12. cannot be construed but with some latitude of time; for after the voyce from Heaven saying, Thou art my beloved Son, &c. it is added, and immediatly the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness, which could not be in a moment, considering the cir∣cumstances of his baptisme, and comming up out of the water, and revesting himself. Annot. in lo∣cum. Nay the learned Grotius interprets immediatly in this place non mul∣tò pòst; nam dies unus, saith he, aut alter intercessit, John. 1.29. neque in∣usitatum, ut  ita usurpetur, ut John. 13.22. The same latitude of constru∣ction the word must have as it is used by Greek Authors  Sta∣tim
à puritia; , jam inde à vetustate in Xenophon, , statim cùm juvenes sunt; & , statim ineun∣te aetate in Thucydides: none of these can be limited to a moment, but must be interpreted with some latitude, and therefore the Syriac according to Tre∣melius translation renders  in this place of St. John, eâdem horâ, the same houre, and thus forms the Text, Ipse Judas accepit panem eâdem horâ & egressus est foràs: Judas received the Sop the same houre and went forth. Thirdly, as there is no necessity to conclude, that the Sop, if given that night was given before the last Supper, neither is there any cogency of rea∣son to inferre, that if it had been given before that Institution, that there∣fore Judas went forth so immediately, as to leave no proportionable interim between the one and the other, for the Consecration and distribution of the Sacrament. So lastly, there is no certainty that the Sop was given to Judas that night when the Passeover and our Lords Supper were eaten. And I shall crave leave to offer some Animadversions which may make it seem not impro∣bable, that it was dealt him at a former Supper in Bethany, and that the Sup∣per mentioned, John 13. was neither the Passeover, nor Supper of the Lord. That thirteenth Chapter of John begins with these words, Now before the feast of the Passeover; and then in the second verse saith, Supper being ended; so as the Supper there rehearsed seemes to be before the Passeover. The mar∣ginal annotation on John 13.1. referres us for the consonancy of the Evan∣gelists to Matthew 26.2. where it is said, after two dayes is the feast of the Passeover; so as by comparing the Texts, the Supper mentioned in St. John was two dayes before the Passeover, and though it be said John 12. that Je∣sus came to Bethany six dayes before the Passeover, yet the Supper recorded, vers. 2. of that Chapter, and in the 13. Chapter, might be some dayes af∣ter his comming, and but two dayes before the Passeover, and some lear∣ned men suppose that he had that week several recourses to and from Be∣thany. It seemes a very Tortious and improper answer to interprett before the feast of the Passeover) to be the night of the Feast, but before the eating of the Paschal Supper: There is neither reason, nor example, nor authority for it, and it sounds contrary to common sense, and the two dayes mentioned Matth. 26.2. are destructive to the interpretation. Besides when our Lord said to Judas, (what thou dost, doe quickly,) some of them thought that Jesus had said unto him, buy those things that we have need of against the Feast, and there∣fore this could not be spoken in the night of the Feast of the Passeover, it being then too tardy to make preparation for that which was elapsed, or at least instant. If any one shall interpose, That there was also the Passeover of Bullocks and Sheep which the Jews called Hagga, which was celebrated on the fif∣teenth day of Nisan, and the second day of unleavened bread according to Numbers 28.16, 17. In the fourteenth day of the first moneth is the Passeover of the Lord, and in the fifteenth day of this month is the Feast. I shall answer, that beside that it seemeth by 2 Chron. 35. that these Bullocks and Sheep were killed on the fourteenth day, though the people feasted on the remainder
of the offerings upon the fifteenth: let it farther be considered, that had this been spoken on the fourteenth day of the month at night, when the Paschal Lamb was eaten, how unlikely it was, that the Apostles could imagine that any provision could have been made for the next immediate day, so late, and so unseasonable, for it was night when Judas went forth. I shall not lay much weight upon this observation, yet it is not despi∣cable, that after that Supper where the Sop was given, John 13. there is mentioned one exit or going thence of our Saviour John 14.31. and after that, several of his Sermons are recited before his last going forth over the brook Cedron, where was the Garden whither he went from his last Supper John 18.1. which insinuates that the Supper mentioned, John 13. was not his last: And since St. John seems somewhat abruptly and without any cohe∣rence with, or relation to any thing antecedent in that 13. Chapter, to say (and Supper being ended) it seems to me not irrational, nor unparalell to other parts of Scripture, to conjecture that he now reverts to recite what far∣ther happened at that Supper mentioned in the former Chapter. The He∣brews have a Proverb, in Scripture Non esse prius & posterius, and such in∣tercalations and historical Epentheses are not onely frequent in Genesis and other Books of Scripture, but obvious also in the Evangelists, as may be ob∣served in the series and order of Jansenius his Harmony, and it is the first of Tychonius his rules (which St. Augustine calls keyes for unlocking the hidden things of Scripture) and which he names Recapitulation; Dicuntur quaedam quasi sequantur ordine temporis, vel rerum continuatione narrentur, cùm ad prio∣ra quae praetermissa fuerunt latenter narratio revocetur. Farther Sathan was first entred into Judas before he had recourse to the High Priests about betraying of his Master, Luk. 22.34. but he had first re∣ceived the Sop before Sathan entred into him, John 13.27. (he might have thoughts and tentations of Treason before, but he put it not into act or exe∣cution till Sathan had gotten the possession of his heart,) therefore he had swallowed the Sop before his resort to the Priests. But now from the Supper at Bethany, he went forthwith to the Priests to drive the bargain with them Matth. 26.14. and so consequently then (or before) he must needs re∣ceive the Sop. Neither doth this Argument depend onely upon St. Matthew's relation of Judas his entring into Conspiracy with the Priests immediatly after his recitall of the Supper at Bethany (though St. Marke also observe the same Method) and Luke relates his conference with the Priests as before the Passe∣over, and the Fathers think that he grudging at the wast of the oyntment bestowed upon our Lord at that Supper, took thereby the occasion of his trea∣son; and seeking to repaire his losse, findes a way to sell the oyntment which was already spent, by selling his Master who was anoynted with it, Damnum quod effusione unguenti se fecisse credebat, vult magistri pretio compensare, saith St. Hierom, but St. Matthew also, Chap. 26.16. (saying, and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him) doth evidently shew, there was some in∣terval of time between his Contract with the Jews, and the execution of his Treason, and therefore consequently some dayes before the Passeover he had agreed with them for the acting thereof, conformably whereunto the Antient Church conceived, that Judas entred into conspiracy with the
Priests on the fourth day of the week, and that his passion followed on the sixt, and in memory of the one, they fasted Wednesday, and in remembrance of the other, upon Friday in every week. Besides, Judas going out at night when he had received the Sop, the time was too angust to make his redress to the Priests, drive his bargain, muster the Souldiers, and returne to seise his Master, all in that one night, if before hand things had not been treated, resolved, disposed and ready prepared, in order to the execution. So as Satan being entred into him before he de∣signed the treason or went about it, and that entry being made together with the reception of the Sop, he could not receive it in the night of the Passeover. If any shall tell me that the contrary is the common opinion both of An∣cient and Modern Authors, I shall franckly acknowledge it, but so is it al∣so, that Judas received the Supper of our Lord, and if they will assume a liberty to dissent in the one, they must yeeld us the freedome to vary in the other. Whereas it is objected, that if our Lord had made known the Traytor so signally at the Supper at Bethany, two or three dayes before the night of the Passeover, how could the Disciples be so dull or forgetfull to be still igno∣rant of him, and to question again who it should be? It is easy thereunto to answer, That if at the Paschal Supper, when they think the Traytor was marked out by the Sop, the Disciples yet noted it not, nor understood it to be Judas, either through perturbation of Spirit, as Augustine, or the softness of our Lords voyce, as Jansenius and Grotius, or the charitable and innocent goodnes of their natures, which could neither suspect nor beleeve any such thing of another, more then of themselves, or because that manner of speak∣ing (thou saist it) licèt sit affirmantis non est planè affirmantis rem, Tu dixisti, Etsi aliquando af∣firmantis, in∣terdum tamen est vel inter∣rumpentis, vel suspendentis sermonem, qua∣si diceretur, tu videris, hoc apse dicis, non ego — po∣tuit etiam hoc dici sic à Juda & à Domino responderi, ut omnes non ad∣verterent — illud cui panem porrexero, & post communionem & soli Johanni dictum fuit. Sylvius in 3. q. 82. art. 2. p. 331. Vasquez in 3. q. 81. art. 2. disput. 217. c. 3. p. 485. sed, ut ibi annotavit Euthymius, aenigmati simile fuit, eo quòd Judas confessus non fuerat, aut quia illis verbis aliud intelligi potuit, nempe ipsum Judam revera illud di∣xisse, as Vasquez, Sylvius and Barradius to like effect. For the same reasons they might take as little notice of, and as little apprehend the discovery, made at the former Supper at Bethany; and what ever shall be alleaged to excuse them, or manifest the reason of their inadvertency at one time, may also serve for the other. But that none of them understood Judas to be the Traytor, even to the last, no not St. John himselfe (as some learned Men conceive) is evident, John 13.18. no man at the Table knew for what in∣tent the Lord said, what thou doest, doe quickly. Had they been perswaded that Judas was the Traytor, could they have thought that Christ would have trusted him with buying any thing for the Feast, or giving ought to the poore, as they conceived he meant by these words, quod facis, &c. and had St. John at last understood it; doubtless he would have revealed it to the rest, that with one consent they might have risen up against the Traytor, as Jansenius observes. Our Saviour spake of the Traytor at Bethany to shew he foreknew the plot∣ting
and designing, and in the Paschall night also, to manifest he foresaw the acting and execution of the Treason. And as for that objection, That had Jesus told them two days before that one of them should betray him, they had at that time began to be sorrowful; and to ask, Is it I? It may be there∣unto answerd, That men are not always equally affected at the relation of the same things, they may have divers dispositions, suitable to different occurring circumstances. Secondly, they might then also be sorrowful, and make such interrogations, though S. Iohn record it not, else how wil the Objecter answer the Argument, should it be retorted upon him, as that, the discovery of the Traytor mentioned in Iohn, was not the same with that recorded by the other Evangelists; be∣cause at the one the Disciples were said to be sorrowful, and asked, Is it I? At the other, not? If any shall farther object (as my own thoughts by a prolepsis prompt me, that some perhaps may do) that the lotion of the Apostles feet is commonly understood to be (among other causes) mystically in order to their prepara∣tion to the Sacrament, and an Emblem of the pureness thereunto requisite; and that though it were usual not onely among the Iews, but other ethnick Nations, to wash before meals, yet to do it after Supper, was proper onely to the Iews, and that onely at their Paschal Supper; whereas some learned men say, there was a double washing, suitable to a double Supper; and the second lotion was before the Dimissory Supper; all which are Arguments, that this giving of the Sop at the same time, with the washing after Supper, was at the Passover. I shall answer, That some of the Fathers have indeed made such alle∣gorical applications of this lotion, but there is nothing in the Text to war∣rant it; where other Reasons thereof are implyed, v. 14. and other rendred by the Fathers; as, Ut somnium illud de regno politico messiae eis excuteret, & in seipso perfectae humilitatis exemplum ostenderet: Farther, Semel lotos baptis∣mate, eodem lavacro non indigere, sed hoc lavacrum quotidianis excessibus est institutum, & jugis retractatio us{que} ad novissima veniens, & omnia debet opera & cogitatus singulos prescrutari, & affectus per vitia discurrentes, vagam in∣stabilem animam per inania evebentes corrigere & lavare, ne{que} quidquam in vita pretermittere indiscussum, quod gemitibus & suspiriis non fuerit expiatum: Be∣sides, Discipulorum pedes in praedicationem Evangelii praeparare, ut verum esset, Quàm speciosi pedes Evangelizantium! &c. Yet more, Ut esset symbolum spiri∣tualis illius aquae quae misso spiritu sancto in Apostolos erat effundenda, ut copiosiùs perfunderentur, cùm mundi utique sam essent. Lastly, and principally to shew them, Vobis necessarium est lavare pedes (i. e.) quodcun{que} Ministerium mutuà praestare, nam per lotionem, quod infimum est obsequium, etiam reliqua multó{que} mag is honestiora debemus exequi; as Thephylact, and from him Calvin, Salmero, Maldonat; and Grotius renders this reason, Tam vili Ministerio se subjecit, ut amorem suum evidentissimè ostenderet. Quod diximus vile Ministerium, appa∣ret, 1 Sam. 25.41. But however, Allegoriae illatae, non innatae, non sunt veri sensus Scripturae, sed applicationes & dilatationes veri sensus, nec sensus Scrip∣turae, sed artisicium interpretis. And as Origen well, are like Gold out of the Temple which is not sanctified; yet granting that it was done partly to set forth that preparation requisite to the partaking of the holy mysteries and
previous thereunto; yet I deny that it could not be so, though done two or three days before hand. The Jewes had their preparative before the Passe∣over, and the Lamb was tyed, as some think, to the Bed-posts four days before, that they might better remind the reason of the Institution, and dispose them∣selves to the Celebration; and our Saviour might also on like grounds some dayes before, prepare his Disciples for the receiving of that Supper, which he instituted in stead of the Passover. Concerning the washing after Supper, the learned man which denyed that Iudas did partake of the Passover, pressed with this Argument, tells us, that for  — some Greek Copies have , & Nonnius,  (but indeed Maldonat supposeth that Nonnius used that word onely because  would not stand in his verse) and so the sense were as Augustine (and so I know do others) expounds it, Supper being prepared and ready to be set upon the Table. Of this else-where the same Author gives some instances; and if this were so, the Argument were evaded, and the doubt assoiled; for if the Washing were not after Supper, then it was not peculiar to the Passover. But indeed this plaister is too narrow to cover all the wound, the Author took no notice of verse 14. where it is said, he rose from Supper , so as this washing could not precede it; I therefore answer, That this lotion being to an extraordinary end, was not made in the usual manner and method, and to shew it was not to mundifie and fit them in order to that present Supper, according to the National Custome; but to another end, and for a mystery, our Lord inverted the usual order, and makes that subsequent, which was commonly antecedent to Supper. what ever the reason were (& melius est dubitare de occultis, quàm litigare de incertis; and here also not altogether unfitly may be applyed that of Gregory, Qui in factis Dei rationem non videt, infirmitatem suam considerans, cur non videat, rationem videt;) it is but a weak Hinge to hang such a consequence upon, viz. The Iewes wa∣shed not after supper, but at the Passover; therefore it was at the Passover that Christ after supper washed his Disciples feet: As if I should argue thus, Because the Jews onely at the Feast of Tabernacles cut down and brought in boughs, Tremel. An∣not. in Iohan. 7. S. 2. and cryed Hosannah; (so as the boughs and days of the whole Feast were called Hosannah, from the usual acclamations of the people when they carryed the boughs up and down;) therefore our Saviours triumphal entry into Hierusalem, when they cut down boughs, and cryed Hosannah, was at the Feast of the Tabernacles, which in truth was made but a few dayes before the Pasover, which was always kept in Nisan, whereas the Feast of Tabernacles was celebrated in Tisri six moneths after. If any shall now after this tedious discourse interpose with Cassius, Cui bone? and tell me that howsoever it may be yeelded that Judas did partake of the Lords Supper, yet this cannot conclude an admission of persons scandalous and openly flagitious, since Judas his sinnes were then secret and uncensured. I shall say, that it is not of my concernment to answer the objection, which may perhaps be pertinently obtruded to the Erastians, but is excentrick to my motion, and heterogeneal to the case I plead for, who undertake not to be an Advocate for persons notoriously wicked and scandalous, not asserting that those which are notorious for sinnes may not be rejected, but that without
tryed and approved notes of sanctity they may be admitted; nor that men whose flagitiousness is publickly known may be repelled, but none upon any private notice of their faults, may be excluded. And thus much will be ine∣vitably concluded from the example of Judas his admission, which was— Hos quaesitum munus in usus. DEFENCE. SECT. X. How we know Christ examined not the Apostles; The force of Arguments from the Authority Negative of Scripture. Of the washing of the Apostles feet. Whether any did partake of the last Supper, save the twelve Apostles? The Apolo∣gists conceit of the seventy Disciples. Of Confession of Faith; how and when necessary? Examination is a vir∣tual and interpretative defamation. Whether it be a small thing they require? Whether Examination, if it be neces∣sary, ought to be made but once? THE initiation of this Section of theirs is like an initial Letter, which is fairly flourish'd, but signifies nothing (viz. to the point in hand) Our heat of pursuit after the main question, will make us separate those Heterogeneals, and taking no notice of their shoots at Rovers, we shall onely gather up the Arrows, which they have aimed at the mark. They first ask us, How know you that Christ did not examine his Disciples, since the Evangelists tell us, that all that Christ did was not written? How know you that? 1. Ad hominem. I pray them to tell me how they know it; for they say it, and I trust they are men that know what they say. — Dicit{que} tibi tua pagina; — They tell us that St. Paul prescribed no other but self-examination to the Co∣rinthians, because he ey'd Christs performances with his Disciples, whom he needed not to examine, being known to him; as therefore he that being rough∣ly
asked by one of King Ptolomies Courtiers, Who let him into the Palace? an∣swered nothing, but ran to the wall, and with a Coal drew his Portraiture in black lines: so we need make no other answer, but draw forth their own lines, to shew how we might have known this, themselves (very credible men in their own judgment) told us so, An ignorabas apud Lucullum coenare Lucullum? The Argument of the Paper was built on this ground, that the action of Christ in the first Institution of the Sacrament, was the Archetypon, and exemplar cause of all subsequent Administrations: so that herein matter of fact being matter of Law and Rule; as well what Christ did, as what he did not, being in some sort Dogmatical (for we are thereby taught that it was not necessary to be done) and then in Laws, not to appear and not to be, being equivolent (Lex saith Ga∣briel, Biel in 3. dist. 37. q. vinc. art. 1. Est signum notificati, nam quia nulla Lex obligat, si notificata non fuerit: therefore upon this Foundation, this was our Architecture, viz. What was not recorded to be done at the first Institution, it is not necessary to doe in the following Dispensations, this being a conclusion resulting from the former prin∣ciples: so as then to ask, how we know that Christ did not examine his Disci∣ples, is virtually and in effect to demand, how we know that all which Christ or∣dained as necessary, to be done, is recorded in Scripture, and so to put us to prove the perfection of Divine Writ; but they say, the Evangelists tell us that all that Christ did was not written; true, but it follows not, all was not written, therfore all things necessary to be done, or beleeved are not written. The Evangelists are very punctual and exact in setting down things circumstantial, & cannot there∣fore be piously imagined to have omitted matters more substantial, & what was necessary to have been done, was of necessity to be written for our example and learning, without yeelding a deficiency destructive to the perfection of Scrip∣ture; wherefore grounding the assertions upon the next verse of the same Evangelist, Tract. 4.9. Such Iohn. Augustine tells us, although Christ spake and wrought some things which are not written, yet those things which seemed unto him sufficient to the salvation of Beleevers were selected to be written; and Cyril assures us, that so much as holy Writers judged sufficient for good manners and godly faith are written, Cyril Alexan l. 12. John c. ultimo, cited by F. White, answ. Fish. to the end that we shining in right faith, good works, and virtue, may attain the Heavenly Kingdome. If therefore pre-examination had been so necessary to those ends as they suggest, doubtless Christ did practise it, and that practice would have been registred, since his example was to be part of our rule, as themselves confess, and therefore to be made known and laid before us; so as they need not scornfully put us to prove that Christ did not examine his Disciples, since it may be well concluded, he did not, because they cannot finde it registred that he did; had it been necessary to be done, it had been re∣corded; and not being recorded, he thought it not necessary. But that he might notwithstanding examine them, is as rationally suggested out of John 20 31. Many other things Iesus did which are not written: As rationally indeed as the pack of Popish Traditions, is thereby confirmed; for proof whereof this is one of their common places. But whereas they tell us, that they cannot finde that Christ examined not his Disciples, unless on the back-side of Constantines Denation, which the Paper mentioned; Rather as the challenge of the power to compell all men to submit to their examination, proceeds from the like ambitious spirit, as did that forged Donation, so the concession thereof is either some interlining, or endorsement of the same charter.
They next teach us, that argumentum à Scriptura negativè, non valet, which being delivered generally and unlimitedly or applyed to the special point in hand, where the fact is constitutive of the rule and dogmatical, impresseth some wonder in what School they learn'd such Logick, or such Divinity, which is not taught by any Protestant. The Papists who shame not to profess that many Doctrines of Faith are neither openly nor obscurely, expresly nor involvedly, contained in Scripture, In Thom. 22. q. 1. art. 10. (as Bannes in terms) and that therefore to tye our faith to Scripture onely, is to play the fool, and marre all Religion, (as is affirmed by Coster) I admire not, if they decry these Arguments ab authoritate Scripturae negativè, that so they may better advance their common topick of traditions; and therefore it is not strange, that their Logicians Hunnaeus, Litelmau, Tom. 2. contra. 3. de missa. l. 1. c. 24. p. 706. and Fon∣seca deride them, but also their Achilles, Bellarmine magisterially tells us, Illa argumenta negativa (non habetur expressè in Scriptura, ergo non est fastum) jam ipsis pueris ridicula sunt. But such Arguments having for their basis the per∣fection of Scripture, as the rule of all things to be done or beleeved; or of Faith and manners (as Augustine speaks) and which could not be the rule, if it were not commensurate to both, nor perfect, if it wanted any thing. Surely for these that with Lyrinensis confess the Canon of Scripture to be perfect, and in it self sufficient for all matters, yea more than sufficient, to explode or cen∣sure these negative Arguments, is to betray the Fortresses of the Faith, and make over the Armory of the Church to the Enemy, Keckerman. Alsted. which in the Common-wealth the Law makes Treason. But notwithstanding not onely our celebrious Lo∣gicians in their Topicks, assert and verifie them, our famous Divines generally in their Disputes against the fifth Gospel of traditions, doe practically approve them, the ancient Fathers use, and authorize them, as the Scripture denieth what it noteth not, saith Tertullian; We beleeve it not, because we reade it not, saith Hierom; we ought not so much as to know these things, which the Book of the Law contains not, saith Hilary; but even the Scripture it self affirmeth and argueth for such Negative Arguments, yeelding examples of them; Jer. 19.5. Joh. 8.40. 1 Cor. 11.16 Heb. 1.13. as which I com∣manded not nor spake it: this Abraham did not; we have no such custome, nor the Churches of God; to which of the Angels said he, &c. And as judgment often varieth with interest, and things acquire the price not so much for what they are really in themselves, as for what they are relatively to our ends and turns; so that which is no good money when they should take it, Norton pre∣test. appeal. l. 2. c. 7. S. 9. &c. 25. S. 12. is currant coyn when they should pay it. Not onely Rellarmine himself, as also other Pontificians like this Weapon well enough, when they think they can give a blow with it, and do make use of such Negative Arguments, as a very learned Divine at large declareth; but even the Apologists themselves, though they here expel this Iephta, as the sonne of a strange woman; yet when they have need of his help in their distress, they court him again in this same Section; so as that Irae∣neous saith of some others, Cùm arguuntur à Scripturis, convertuntur in accusatio∣nem Scripturarum, so onely they are against those Arguments, when such Argu∣ments are against them. Next, I do not know how to understand the Apologists, when they say, It is too confidently affirmed, that Christ shewed (his Disciples) the nature and end of the Sacrament, which seems to me as the refuge of a person desperate of help; and then etiam ad novaculam, as if they would catch hold of that which would cer∣tainly wound, and uncertainly relieve them; for if they suppose absolutely and
generally that our Saviour declared not these at the Institution, how can that consist with the wise and holy and perfect discharge of his prophetical office? for if he taught it not then, where did he unfold, or where else did he deliver that Doctrine? How could the Apostles have that competency of knowledge which might render them capable to discern and partake of the Lords body? and how was that a Sacrament, Sacramentorum verò ea natura est, ut non modò non cognosci, sed ne esse qui∣dem omnino sine verbo que∣unt. Thes. Sal∣mur. part. 3. S. 15. pag. 34. si concionari est explicare seu vivâ voce, seu ex Scripto ver∣bo divino con∣gruenter, quae fuerit Dei vo∣luntas in insti∣tutione Sacra∣mentorum, concionatorum omnino verbum requiritur — ut enim verbi Dei voluntas nullo verbo de∣clarata nequit efficere ut in signi materia quidquam praeter eam materiam intueamur, quae ipsa per se materiam signi vel Sacramenti non habet. Ibid. S. 35. pag. 11. Instit. l. 4. r. 14. S. 4. p. 472. In 5. ad Ephes. Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 15. S. 9. p. 16. In Evang. Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 2. p. 75. Piscator in Matth. 26.26. p. 280, 282. without accession to the Element of that word, which was to be not onely constitutive of the Sacrament, but also declaratory of the mysterious Rites, and the thing represented, and also promissory of the graces thereby exhibited? For sine doctrinae copula, attoniti undo aspectu sensus nostri redderentur, saith Calvin; and in another place, Sola mysterii explicatio, facit ut mortuum elementum incipiat esse Sacramentum; for the elements and actions being no natural, but instituted signs, there must necessarily have been a concurrent Word to manifest the reason and end of the Institution, and the things which they were instituted to signifie; for, Signa indeterminata ex se, ad significandum determ nantur per verba quibus instituuntur, as Chumier; and cor∣respondently Barradius tells us, Cùm panem benedixit gratiás{que} patri egit, animos discipulorum verbis praeparasse. And to supersede any larger demonstration there∣of, a most logical and very learned Divine hath collected the definition (inclu∣ding the nature, use, and end) of the Sacrament, out of the very words of In∣stitution, the Genus, and the Difference, taken from the various Arguments; as not onely the adjuncts, the matter; not onely that of Bread and Wine, but the matter of another kinde, in breaking and pouring forth of them, (where con∣sists part of the use) the form, viz. the relation of the Elements to the things signified and sealed by them, (in both which is very much of the Nature) the Ends being four; the representation of Christs death, the testification of the fruit thereof, the vivifying and consolation of the faithful, and an excitement to Thanksgiving: and so thus concludes his explication thereof, At{que} haec est doctrina simplex ac salutaris de coena domini ex ipsis v rbis institutionis deprompta, ejusmodi certè ut fideles omnes meritò in ea acquiescere possint, omissis quaestionibus aliis non necessariis, &c. And if we may acquiesce in the Doctrine of the Sacra∣ment extracted from the words of Institution, then the nature, end, and use of the Sacraments must be held forth in, and may be collected from these words, else we could not rest in the Doctrine contained therein. But if the Apologists intend (and it is onely charity which formally respe∣cteth their good; not justice which relates to our debt, that must incline us so to understand them) that the nature, use, and end of the Sacrament was not shewed by the washing of the Disciples feet, it is like the Rainbow, Thaumantis silia, and very wonderful how any that hath common sense, could impute that sense to me: but it seems if they could not finde, they would make somewhat which they could confute: but they have therein onely done, as if Antipheron should have charged fiercely upon his own phantasme. Was there any colour that having said, Christ shewed his Disciples the nature, end, and use of the Sa∣crament, that I did infer or conclude it out of his washing of their seet? As
there was no causal or illative particle exprest that might insinuate that sense, so a conjunctive particle onely was understood; and to his shewing them the nature, use, and end, out of the words of Institution, I joyned also his teaching them the duty of preparation in order to the right use, by the lotion of their feet, with an implication likewise, that this being specially recorded, it was as likely that the particular pre-examination of them would in all probability have been as well recited, had it preceded, or been so necessary: And yet nei∣ther did I relate that as my proper sense, or that I supposed the washing to be directed, as a type or emblem to that signification. But 1. I reminded, Potest aliquae interpretatio esse secundum quid hoc estjuxta analogiam fidei & Scripturae, si ei non repugnet, quae tamen non sit vera sim∣pliciter hoc est, juxta genuinum sensum alicujus loci. Paraeus in Gen. c. 1. v. 1. p. 30. Mede in 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. Diatrib. p. 598. that some of the ancient Fathers did so allegorically in∣terpret and apply it; and if their Interpretations be true secundùm quid, though not simpliciter, I am not very willing to check with them. 2. Though the Fathers are of little reckoning, and stand in the lowest place of account, where these men dispose of the Counters, yet farther I remembred it to be the sense of divers modern Theologues; and among the rest, of one higher by the head than the ordinary rank, surmounting them, Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi. The washing (saith he) of the Disciples feet before Supper, what doth it else call for, but a cleansing of our hearts before we communicate? And though I would not willingly erre with Plato, and doe reckon Truth a greater friend, yet I would not willingly quarrel with Plato, when he crosseth not my way. 3. I finding some thus to judge thereof, who are of somewhat like judgment with the Apologists in this Controversie, I took it up as an interpretation ad ho∣minem, non ad rem; I alledge it ex hypothesi, non thesi, for as long as a Dog is not like to bite me, what need I hold him by the ear? and I thought perchance they would have given a more favourable reception thereunto for their friends sake, since it falls out often what Stapleton adviseth to, Olim quando{que} in Ecclesia re∣ceptum fuit pe∣des lavare ante sacram Com∣nionem, Du∣rantus de Eccl. ritibus, l. 2. c. 55. Sect. 10. p. 816. which sprung from this mystical consideration. That men look rather who speaks, than what is spoken, and imitate the Athenians, who approved that speech in one mans mouth, which they liked not in anothers. The truth is, I have elsewhere contradicted this reference, and shewed it not to be the mystical sense of Scripture, but the artifice of the Interpreters, and the application or di∣latation of the proper sense, and an allegory illate, not innate; and therefore, — Viderit utilitas, Let them of whose interest it is to assert that allegorical sense, endeavour to vindicate it, if they can; for my part I shall not feather Arrows to be shot against me, and then be put to ward their stroaks: here the Apologists and I shall easily concur, and our lines meet in angles, however elsewhere they runne parallels; but though he washed their feet to teach them humility, which is the figurative sense or application which they onely or especially contend for, yet it follows not, that no other was meant or intended. Augustine teacheth us, that tanta est ubertas divinarum Scripturarum, De Doctri. Christian. l. 3. c. 27. Confes. l. 12. c. 24. ut saepe eadem verba pluribus modis in∣tellecta, plures sensus sine falsitate recipant, (which is to be understood of my∣stical or figurative senses.) That their feet were now washed, might lesson
them the preparatory, cleansing of their affections; that Christ washed them, might learn them humility. But if not Sacramental preparation, yet that somewhat else was intended then an example of humble and charitable condescension, the Fathers long since collected, partly out of v. 10. Ye are clean, but not all, chiefly out of v. 8. If I wash thee not, thou hast no part in me, whereby is understood, not that he should not partake of the Sacrament, as Cajetan straightens it, but should have no part of his felicity in his Kingdome, or (which typically and symbolically to him was the same) in his familiar conversation and necessitude, from which he should be ejected. Wherefore factâ anagoge ab externa lotione ad internam, ex tulit Sermonem, and speaking to all, in his speech to Peter, by the externall lotion, shadowed forth and signified the internal, either purifying of the affecti∣ons, and cleansing the stain of sinne by grace of repentance, or purging of the soul from the guilt of sinne by his blood; (as Origen, Cyprian, Ambrose, Augu∣stine, Gregory, Bernard, Piscator, Cajetan, Jansenius, and their own Margine takes notice, that the late Annotations so expound it) and the spiritual wa∣shing, either to be wholly by regeneration, (Christ hereby reviving the signe that is given of it in baptisme, as Diopate) or dayly, whereby quotidian lapses are cleansed, this being as the fruit of Christ, his advent into the world, and of his passion, saith Bucer; so that this sentence contains a general doctrine (saith Calvin) that we are all stinking and defiled before God, untill Christ absterge our filthiness. If some have supposed this washing to be after the Sacrament, the summe is small for number (onely Cyprian among the Ancients that I can recognize) and their reasons of as small waight: that which imposed upon and mislead them was vers, 2. Supper being ended, but I hope my Essayes elsewhere have not left it improbable that this Supper here mentioned, was not had in the Paschal night, or if it should have been so, yet coenâ factâ, no more concludes the close of the Supper, then die facto, the end of the day; and some of the Learned ren∣der the sense of the Greek by coenâ paratâ; but if that construction be not plau∣sible, others reade inter coenandum, or by a Synecdoche integri, understand the first part of the Supper ended, for at the Passeover were several suppers or ra∣ther courses, so as it might have been after one of them, or after all, and yet before the Supper of the Lord. Besides it is expressely recorded, that afterward he sate down again, vers. 12. and that he sate at Table, vers. 23. because John leaned on his bosome; but whosoever be of that judgement, that this lotion was after the Sacrament, I hope the Apologists will not consent with them after they have been prompted (which they were not caute and provident enough to foresee) that it will then follow that Judas was admitted to the Communion, for vers. 13. we read, when Jesus had thus said, i.e. spoken so much of this washing that preceded, he afterward discovered the Traytor, and dealt him the Sop. That (wash one anothers feet) signifies, examine your selves, is no mans in∣terpretation, but their proper fiction; but yet if Christ his lotion of their feet had been figuratively instructive to the cleansing of their hearts, in order to a Sacramental preparation, self-examination had been either a part thereof, or means and help thereunto; and if they had been onely lessoned to examine themselves, and nothing else been signified, then it might perchance, as they
say, have stood better, if they had been bid to wash their own feet, but the exam∣ple of Humility and Charity could onely be propounded by Christs doing it, and the spiritual washing of regeneration was now aptly represented, while he made the external lotion, who merited and applyed the internal, and exami∣nation of the Minister may better discover mens preparation, but the generall Exhortations best prepare them; and if they shall tell me, That Exhorta∣tions are or may be intermixed with Examination, yet formally it is the Ex∣hortation instructs, and Examination tryes the proficiency, and there is a ne∣cessity of the instruction, none of the tryal; and why a general Exhortation may not without farther tryal, fit men for the Sacrament, as well as for other duties, and while it expounds and lays open and applyes the Word of Institu∣tion (as it ought to do) as well dispose us to recieaing, as the very reciting of the words did prepare the Apostles (for we read of no other preparatory in∣struction, which they had) I should be glad the Apologists would give a ratio∣nal account before the Greek Calends. If Christ did not examine his Disciples, doth it therefore follow, that they may not examine some or all in their Assemblies. Ignorantia elenchi is commonly that Ink which this Sepia sheds to facilitate an escape; let them bethink themselves, is it our question (even as themselves would state it) whether the Minister may examine, or whether of necessity he must? I grant he may examine some, I deny it to be necessary that he must all; and so much I inferred, because Stripture is silent that Christ examined his Disciples, and the consequence is bottomed on this positive Doctrine, current among Theologues, that what∣soever is Essential, or absolutely necessary to the Sacrament, may be colle∣cted out of Christs doings and sayings at the Institution. Christ administring onely to his Disciples, teacheth us rather to exclude the Igno∣rant. Let them do it, we shall not quarrel them; but will they say that all are such whom they exclude? How constantly they hugge their dear Ignoran∣tia elenchi! The strength and consequence of the Arguments drawn from Christs admitting none but Disciples, I have elsewhere examined, and shewed that by the concurrent testimony of Orthodox Divines, Tom. 4. l. 8. c. 3. Sect. 25. p. 292. the Disciples then re∣presented the whole visible Church, not (as they would have it) onely the invisible Church, and such as were real Saints. The great Chamier distills a more pure and wholesome Doctrine from Christs administring to his Disciples, eo docuisse neminem admittendum qui non sit in numero fidelium, at{que} indè abstinere jubemus omnes excommunicatos. But they say (as if they would ribbe or buttress the former Argument, which hath been the sand whereon they have laid the Foundation of their discourses on this subject) that he admitted not onely Disciples, for then all Christians may come in under that notion; but that he admitted onely his choice Disciples, he had the 70. and others, but those as more infirm were not admitted. What proficiency the Apostles had then attained to, we have elsewhere discussed; Infirmi erant, Advers. Anna. bapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 233. meticulosi, infirmi etiam in Charitate, & aliis virtutibus & in hac ipsa caena inter se contenderunt, quisnam maximus inter ipsos foret, saith Bullinger; but turdus sibi malum ejicit, Golias his sword shall cut off his head; for may we not reminde them of what they have so soon forgotten, and in their own words answer, How know you that? viz. that none of the 70. were admitted? The Evangelists tell you, that all that Christ did was not written, &c. they might be present for
ought they can prove. Except (while they have the abomination of divers weights, one weight to take in, another to put out by) a Negative Argument be of force, when it will make for them, and invalid, when it will be against them, or be more conclusive in things meerly historical; which having no direct concernment with faith or manners, are not so materious to be recorded (of which kinde is this,) then in such things where the fact should help to consti∣tute the rule, and therefore ought to have been registred, if they had been done. If Chemnitius think the 70. or any other beside the 12. were not ad∣mitted, I have elsewhere shewed, that men as learned as he (though he was eminently such) doe suppose that some of them might have partaken, Tom. 5. l. 8. c. 3. Sect. 29. p. 202. And of this judgment also is Dr. Fulk, Rhem. test. in Mat. 26.20. though it be not expressed. Of this judgment among the ancient, is not onely Euthy∣mius, but Chamier tells us, that the Liturgies of Peter, Clemens, James, Mark, Ba∣sil, Chrysostom, expresly mention that the Disciples communicated, as well as the Apostles, at the first institution of the Sacrament; and though it be said, Iesus sate down with the 12. yet there is no exclusive particle, nor is it added, (and none else.) But if Chemnicius suppose the 70. were not admitted, let them consult him, whether Iudas were not one of those that had admission; and then casting up the reckoning by his Counters, tell me what they shall gain by not casting in the 70. But I cannot divine what authority or reason the Apologists had to affirm, that the 70. were excluded, because more infirm (& so not capable it seems.) I had thought, that if none but the 12. or 11. (as they would have it) did communicate, it was because they onely were Christs con∣stant Family, as it were, and the Passover was to be eaten by one Family to∣gether, if they made up 10. persons; and Christ passing from the Passover, and translating it to his Supper, admitted no more at the latter, then he took to the former; and seeing that it was a Jewish Canon, that not above 20. should eate together of one Paschal Lamb, our Saviour could not perhaps admit of many more than the 12, for that reason, if (as it is likely) he conformed to that observation. But it seems then by the Apologists, that those whom they admit, are as it were in the notion and capacity of the choice Disciples, those whom they re∣ject, of the infirm 70. Yet to accommodate it more aptly to what they have said, that Christ thereby teacheth us to exclude the Ignorant and Wicked, they should say not blanchingly, the infirme, but the ignorant or wicked 70, for such they im∣ply them to be by being excluded; and therefore those whom they reject may comfort themselves with that Martyr, to be stock'd in the same hole with Phil∣pot, and to be in the same condition with the 70 (whom Christ chose notwith∣standing) and to be no otherwise Dogs or Swine, then they were; but if Christ called not those that were infirm, they profess not to follow his pattern, for they say, they exclude not the weak, this strengthning appointment (as they call it) being proper for them. They assure us, they examine none that are taken to be Disciples, that is then, none that be Christians, (for Christian and Disciple in Scripture idiom, are synonimous) or perchance none that be their Disciples, though many that be Christs: but how do they know them to be Disciples, before they have exa∣mined them, if that be true which often they inculcate, That they cannot judge of mens fitness without examination?
Real Disciples will not refuse to satisfie the Church, and encourage weak brethren by a voluntary profession of their Faith. True, if the Church doe need, and shall have just cause to require such satisfaction, but as the Church can receive no satisfaction, by a kinde of auricular examination taken in privare oftentimes by themselves, unless like the Pope, themselves are the Church virtually, or the Church must be satisfied, because they are so; so why should the Church need farther to be satisfied from such; of whose knowledge they cannot doubt? this were to render the Church, like those remindless persons, whom we sometimes see to go about to seek that which they carry in their hands; and if they are already taken for Disciples, how can it be doubted that they are not knowing? 2. Real Disciples will not refuse to make such profession of their Faith, when those that are weak want encouragement in the Faith, but such an en∣couragement is not to be given by a submission to examination. G. de Valentia 2.2. disp. 1. q. 3. puur. 2. p. 328. 321. Valentia and Sylvius determine it generally, Oportet instare casum aliquem necessitatis confi∣tendi fidem aut ex divino praecepto, aut humano obligante regulariter, quando non subest justa & rationabilis causa omittendi illius observationem. Aquinas limits it more specially, Ubi fides periclitatur, quilibet tenetur fidem suam aliis propalare, vel ad instructionem aliorum fidelium, sive confirmationem, Sylvius 22. q. 3. art. 2. p. 31, 32. Aquin. 22. q. 3. art. 2. Filiuc. cas∣tract. 22. c. 3. S. 74. vel ad reprimendam infidelium insultationem, and when by his silence, ex hoc crederetur, vel quòd non haberet fidem, vel quòd fides non esset vera, vel alii ejus taciturnitate ever∣terentur à fide; or as Filiucius more abstractly, Quando proximus per confessio∣nem fidei quae ab aliquo fieret, facilè traheretur ad fidem, — item quando ali∣quis versaretur in periculo negandi fidem, & alius posset propriâ confessione id dam∣num impedire: And when they have defined in general, that confession is ne∣cessary, when by omission thereof, subtrahitur honor Deo debitus, vel utilitas proximo impendenda; yet they adde, Quocirca illud verbum Subtrahendi accipien∣dum est hoc loco, vel contrariè vel privativè (i. e.) vel deum affici ignominiis, &c. vel quando aliquis à fide avertitur, aut retardatur, &c. non negativè, ut sit non ex∣hibere honorem Deo vel non impendere utilitatem proximo, &c. Baldwin. cas. l. 2. c. 1. c. 10. p. 81. & 79. And to like effect doth Baldwin resolve, who also tells us, Cùm extra statum Confessionis fides no∣stra alioquin satis nota, non opus est perpetuò iteratâ confessione, quae jactan∣tiae potiùs speciem, quàm virtutis Christianae laudem habet, but among all the Casuists of one side or other, which have punctually determined of, and limited the occasions and circumstances wherein profession of Faith ought to be made, it is a marvellous thing, that not one of them (that I know) hath stumbled up∣on this case, or reminded to define it necessary at admission to the Sacrament; whereas rather the very coming with desire to participate thereof, is without more adoe a reall profession of Faith, and accommodates and complies with those ends, in order whereunto the Casuists teach, that profession of Faith is needful, as before was shewed. And if weaker brethren are hereby encouraged to make like profession, or to un∣dergo what is equivalent thereunto and instead thereof (viz. Examination,) they onely can thereby prove, the one ought to be done in order to the doing of the like by the other, whereas we deny the necessity of either; and they should first have evinced the later to be a duty, and then have injoyned this as a means ordinate to facilitate it; the end failing, the means cease to be neces∣sary. But as the setting up of a Dictator at Rome, put inferiour dignities to silence; so the precedent of more knowing persons, I should think, might ra∣ther
discourage the weak, who cannot write Iliads after Homer, — Ne tu divinam Iliada tentes, Nor write after that Copy, which the other have given in more perfection then they can imitate. See S. 18. However, they may paint the matter with colours fetch'd from pretended ends or intentions, examination (and consequently such an imposed profession, which is tantamount) hath a connotation of suspicion; we do not inquire, where we do not doubt; and therefore to reduce men under such tryal doth ex natura rei imply, that they are suspected, or doubted to be ignorant; and this is to render them infamous, ignorance when it is (as in this case) pravae dispositionis, being a sinne, and whatever they may speculatively opine, yet interpretatively and practically they do thereby hold them as igno∣rant, and therefore rob them of their good fame, that proprium bonum deposi∣tum à natura in aliorum mentibus, Sylvins 22. q. 60. art. 3. conclus. 4. p. 316. and that jus quod habent, ut bona de iis opinio concipiatur, quàm diu contraria manifestè non probatur; and therefore to compel them to come under this Inquisition, that by such encouragement those which are weaker may be mollified and sweetned, is but burnt-offering out of rob∣bery, to do real wrong to prevent an imaginary, and to avoid scandalum accep∣tum to fall upon datum, and is as if they should break one mans head, to give another a plaister; and in a Taliacotian way of cure, to slash and cut off one mans flesh to salve anothers deformity; or in a more obvious resemblance, having their purse cut in a throng, to search every known honest man there, that the thief may take no exception. Yet elsewhere they are confident to tell us, That this is a small matter, so as it seems to come to plead for it self in forma pauperis: but as Plato answered, The Custome of small things may be a great matter. Solinus tells us, Brevissi∣ma apud Amyclas vipera est, & proptereà dum despectui est, faciliùs nocet; and St. Augustine of the Cynifes in Africa, which are almost invisible, quae tamen cùm inserueriut corpori, acerbissimo fodiunt aculeo. Yet if the smallness of the thing should facilitate any to undergo it, let it perswade them not so eagerly to press and contend for a small matter; if it be a small thing that is required, it is as small, that is denyed; and therefore the denyal should not merit so great a penalty, as suspension from the Sacrament: and with what Conscience can they drive off men from so necessary a Duty, and rob them off so great a bene∣fit, for a small matter? Esse nihil dicis, quicquid petis, improbe Cinna, Si nil Cinna petis, nil tibi Cinna nego; But yet great motions are made by small Wires, Raynolds Confer. with Hart. p. 318. and huge Weights hang upon Gemmeys; a little Spark may be so fuelled and conducted, as to set the whole World on fire. Sorcerers, they say, beg and are spleased with small things to be given to them, but thereby get a power to work what mischief they please upon the givers. The Rent is oftentimes small, but Homage and Fealty and Wardship be of great consequence. It was a small matter, and seemingly pious and advantageous, for the Emperour to receive his Crown of the Pope, with a benediction; bul in process of time that drew on and counte∣nanced
the construction, that the Pope gave him the benefit, and bestowed the Crown of the Empire upon him; and afterward it was thence inferred, that he might deprive him thereof, and otherwise dispose it. And abstracted from these formidable consequences; there are many other Reasons, why such as are real Disciples may yet not forfeit such esteem, and yet refuse to take on this yoke. Some perchance wave this profession and examination upon the same score that Luther sometimes omitted Confession before the Communion, lest it should be brought in as a thing necessary; and because, as the same man hath taught us, that Nihil pestilentius in Ecclesia doceri potest, Quoted by Mr. Baxter. Saints Rest, Ex Hofner. part. 1. p. 138. quàm si ea quae necessaria non sunt, necessaria fiant, hâc enim tyrannide conscientiae illaqueantur, & libertas fidei extinguitur; and others perhaps upon that account, whereupon men of publike spirit oppose inclosures, lest the Poor be injured, though them∣selves lose nothing by it. Christ had communicated before with those Disciples in the Passeover, which was the same in substance with this Institution, therefore he needed not to examine them, that were admitted before. Albaspin. de vet. eccl. rit. l. 2. obs. 23. p. 327. Statue∣rat ecclesia ut easdem lectio∣nes poenitentes memoriâ custo∣dirent, & iis∣dem doctoribus quibus cate∣chumeni subji∣ciebantur, eru∣diendi trade∣rentur, — de integro om∣nia fidei prae∣cepta & prima rudimenta eos ediscere & au∣dire volebat; — quòd opi∣naretur eos qui se flagitiis mortiferis ob∣strinxissent, di∣vinae supremae{que} justitiae cogni∣tione aliquâ{que} scientiâ von tinctos. Instit. l. 3. c. 4. S. 13. Either the same dispositions and qualifications re∣quisite to the Lords Supper, were required to eating the Passeover, or not; if so, then they ought to have been examined before they were admitted to that, and that would have been recorded for our direction; if not so, then though ad∣mitted to the Passeover, they ought before admission to the Lords Supper to have been examined, and that would have bin registred for our example. But if the Apologists will assume liberty to inferre, that having been admitted to the Passeover, the same in substance with this Institution, they might without far∣ther examination have admission to the Lords Supper, I hope they will give us leave to conclude, that Judas having partaken of the Passeover, it was all one as if he had communicated of the Supper of the Lord. The most zealous Assertors of examination presse it not after once admission in a due way; but unless all be agreed upon what is the due way, a man may be of∣ten examined, upon pretence the former was no due way of admission: but if they were all agreed upon the due way, as some that are ad∣mitted at one Church will not be (I know) at another; yet my understanding hath not light enough to discern, if there be at one time, why there should not be at other times a necessity of examination, since man (which carryeth a con∣notation of lapsing) hath a natural tendency to his first principle of nothing, and is apt to decrease in goodness, and fall to worse; and (as Ockham tells us) mali mores excaecant intellectum, and therefore intellectual graces may decay with moral: And also by neglect of reading, and careless hearing, knowledge will be impaired, since as the soul is called at first abrasa tabula; so when it is written on, yet the letters (as in Table-books) will wear out in time, without new impressions; and as the flying fish cannot hold his flight any longer than his wings are wet, and therefore is still dipping them; so must notions be of∣ten renewed, or they will at length be antiquated; and upon this account a reiterated examination may seem at least expedient, and accordingly a book of discipline in Scotland requires all Masters and Mistresses of what age or condi∣tion soever, to come once a year before the Presbytery with their Housholds to be examined personally, whether they be fit to receive the Sacrament, in re∣spect of their knowledge; And Calvin, who wisheth ut sistant se oves Pastori, de∣termines it, quoties sacram coenam participare volunt.
SECT. XI. Judas did communicate at the Lords Supper. What is thereby in∣ferred. The Attestation of the Fathers in that matter. The consent of later Divines. The weight of the Testimonies on either side. The Apologists confess there was no visible cause to exclude him. Whether Christ in admitting him acted onely as a man? His not condemning the adulterous Woman. — Baccare frontem Cingite, — IF they could be blasted by the prejudice and foreboding of the Apologists, our endevours to prove Judas to have participated the Lords Supper, would be very unsuccessfull, for if we could lay and keep that ground, yet after all our culture it would beare us no other but Sodom-fruit, which we might paint faire, but it would prove but dust. Nothing they say, being thereby conclu∣ded against their judgement or practice; but I feare this dust is in the Apologist's eyes, & Non vereor nè quid portendant omina veri. They adde, though Christ saw Judas to be an hypocrite and admitted him, it onely followes thereupon, but that hypocrites may be admitted, and who thinkes the con∣trary? But they might have had enough Logick to have discerned, or ingenui∣ty to have confessed that somewhat more is thereupon consequent, to wit, that (known) Hypocrites may be admitted, and to this the Apologists think the contrary and profess it. They speake of excluding prophane and ignorant persons, and are told an hypocrite was admitted, and this they say in truth is to paint an house that hath no foundation. Truely there is no colour for it, that this were painting howsoever, but it had been an improper material to build with, if, as they speak of excluding onely prophane and ignorant, so they did exclude no other, but though they have obdured their hearts to the exclusion of them that are not such, will they also harden their forheads to say they exclude none but such, and that all are such whom they admit not? If they dare not say that all excluded are such, why doe they say they are speaking of such, when they should (as we doe) speake of such as they exclude? If like the Lamlae they have eyes prying abroad, and layd up in boxes at home, yet can they vainely think, that others have not eyes in their head, to see that they exclude not only such as are ignorant and prophane, but those also which by submission to tryal give not satisfaction of their knowledge and sanctity? And doe but observe when elsewhere they distill the Argument of the Paper, how they more rightly
give us this for the Quintessence, Christ admitted Judas to the Communion, therefore what need this prying? and not as here they would suggest, therefore ignorant and prophane may not be excluded; so as it seems not onely by their discipline, but by their arguings, they suppose all men ignorant, else they would not dare to argue so imposterously. Neither is the Argument altogether wide the mark whereunto it was aymed; for if Christ exhibited it to Judas whom he knew to be ungodly, then the Sacra∣ment is not the Privilege onely of the Godly, nor is the distribution thereof, to such whose hearts or lives answer not their Profession, a partaking of their sinnes, or a false testifying or false sealing, neither are convincing signes of the sound work of grace upon the heart, that which gives the capacity or right of receiving; all these seeme to be concluded from this instance, and all are against their judgement and practice. Were they of my opinion, they should manage this argument about Judas, in another sort? We might suspect the Apologists did smacke of some of the Paracelsian notions, and were facil to beleeve that strong imaginations elevated either by conciliation of an amicable intelligence (as they speak with Avicen) or by Ap∣plication of its Spirit to the Spirit of the World (as Ficinus prompts them) can worke Masteries upon another mans fancy, and make him contrary to his proper notions to beleeve or imagine what they list: for how else can they be so confident to impose (Erastianisme) on me, an opinion to which I have so often and so plainly professed my self to be diametrally opposite? how well they can manage an Argument, we shall have tryal enough, but let us confider the management they would have made of this. Christ knew Judas to be a wicked man, yea a reprobate, yet admitted him, there∣fore Ministers may not keep back such as they know to be wicked; thus the Erastians. If this be the best managery they can make thereof, we finde little encourage∣ment to trust an Argument in their hands, that will so soon decoct and evir∣tuate the force thereof, and vitiate and betray it into a fallacy of the conse∣quent: for from Christs admitting Iudas known to him to be wicked, it follows not that Ministers may not keep back such as they know wicked, but onely that they may admit them. There is a disparity between the freedome and the neces∣sity of admission, but if they understand by the Ministers knowing them to be wicked, a private knowledge, then I shall profess it to be my opinion, that a Minister may not keep them back; and Christ his admitting Iudas whom he knew to be wicked, will suppeditate an Argument for proof of this opinion, which will not tremble in its arraignment at the barre of reason, unless ignorance or passion usurpe the Bench; and this opinion is also seconded with the authority of divers Casuists elsewhere cited, whereunto I adde the suffrage of a grave and learned Divine that tells us, Sinners are secret, not of publicke notice, Mr. Balls Friendly tryal of the grounds of separation. pag. 187. though one or other (perhaps the Minister) may know them, in their course scandalous — they are not to be repelled, if they offer themselves, because though one know them to have sinned, thus and thus, it is unknown to others, and so the sinne is pri∣vate, and not generally known — otherwise liberty should be given to wicked Mi∣nisters to punish with this punishment whom they please: but if they meane a pu∣blick knowledge either by evidence of fact, Confession or judicial sentence, men so known to be wicked, may be repelled from the Communion by the Mi∣nister, and the contrary, which is the judgement of the Erastians, as it falls not
into my opinion, so it flows not from the example of Iudas, whose crimes were not then so notorious. Aeneas Sylvius (when he was more Godly in truth, and before he was ius in name) he used to say, It was a subtile artifice of the Popes, to set the Lawyers to dispute, whether Constantines Donation were valid de jure, thereby to in∣troduce an Hypothesis, that such a Donation there was de facto. The Apolo∣gists follow the contrary Method, and spend most of the Section, to disprove that Iudas communicated, and say lesse to the consequence and refult of that example; We have elsewhere anticipated and forestalled all or most of their Arguments, and applyed Answers, and so having cut down and crop'd their harvest, we shall have lesse trouble with the Gleanings. After an heedful search (with others eyes) they cannot finde the consonancy spo∣ken of among the Ancients, (for Judas his participation of the Lords Supper.) But have all their researches found any Father of the first six Centuries that sings a Note which breaks the symphony, (Hilary excepted) whom though Algerus thinks by a benigne interpretation might be reconciled to this opinion; yet Vasquez confesseth the words admit it not, and Suarez saith his endevours are frustrate. Advers. Ana∣bapt. l. 6. c. 9. pag. 230. But howsoever Bullinger expressely tells us, Sententiam suam nullis firmis argumentis probat, propter quaeilli credendum. Unity is no number, one is next to none, as in Musick when many sing to one Tune, one antiphonous voyce cannot spoile the Harmony. What like point can they instance in, wherein so many lines of the Antients are concentred? and an opinion of a thing not in termes revealed, but collected by discourse and abstractive knowledge, which passeth with a nemine contradicente, is a rare Phoenix, or rather a bird of Para∣dise (if that place admitted that way or manner of knowledge.) But those Fa∣thers that vote with the paper, are ballanced by multitudes of the best modern lights. Perhaps there is Romana statera, where according to the distance from the Cen∣ter, one ounce may be weighed against a pound, and the Earth against a Bar∣ley-corn, as Archimedes boasted. But it shall be as vaine, as odious, to enter upon those Staticks, and to make comparisons whether the Ancients were Gy∣ants, the Neotericks but Dwarfes, and Dwarfes may see farther advanced on Gyants shoulders, according to the trite Allegory; or whether the modern lights are great, like the Moon, because so near us, and have greater influence, although they borrow their light from the Sun, that yet appeares lesse. I shall not therefore dispute of this, but not quarrelling that hypothesis; yet when that constellation which gives light to Iudas his Communicating, is beside the an∣cient, made up of as many, yea more new Starres, than the other that hath an opposite aspect, I hope those modern lights alone (with Hilary onely among them) cannot ballance so many of the Ancient and Neoterick both together. The Fathers might receive this from one another without due looking into the Text. The Fathers might? it hath indeed no absolute impossibility, but they might not also, and that hath more verisimilitude, it being not like that so many of them had so little of judgment and so much of Credulity, to precipitate their Sentence without examination, or were so negligent in consulting Scripture in this, wherein they were assiduously conversant, and whereunto they so pa∣thetically excited others to have recourse, but the Fathers are still much in their debt, for the honour they doe them. Bullinger saith, in this case, Iis ideo fidem habemus, quòd ea quae scribunt, Evangelio nitantur, I shall yet grant the
Fathers might be confirmed in this truth by Tradition, which in things histori∣cal is a very good Topick, and consequently contributes some strength to this opinion, and those that were nearer the Fountain, had the streams thereof more pure, and clear, than those at greater distance; as in multiplicity of Echo's, by reiterated repercussion of the sound, the later is more weak and dull than the former, and in plurality of Rain-bows, that which is by immediate reflection of the Sun, is brighter and stronger than those which rise from reflex of each other. Bannes jeasts at Pighius in the case of Honorius, as if he could better tell whether that Pope were an Heretick or not, than all those Councels and Fathers that lived neer his time; we may note the like vanity in this point, and as our Di∣vines subtilly observe, that whether those Councels and Fathers erred or not, concerning that individual Pope, and in judging Honorius an Heretick; yet from that judgement it follows, that they thought the Pope might erre; so if the Fathers were mistaken in determining Iudas to have participated, yet it is consequent that they supposed such as Iudas was, one without sound grace or satisfactory signes of conversion, and yet not duly censured for scandalous crimes, might without any pollution to the Ordinance or others, or prostitu∣ting the Privileges of the Godly, or false Testimony, or partaking of sinnes, participate the Sacrament. They are conceived to erre in this point, by taking the Sop to be the Sacrament, so doth Augustine; Resp. In some places he doth indeed seem to suppose so, L. 5. de Bap∣tism. parvulor. c. 8. & tr. 62. in Ioh. & tract. 26. Super illud, Patres vestri. and so doth Beda, to whom Augustine was, as Tertullian to Cyprian, Da magistrum, but in other places Augustine asserts the contrary, and as I know not of any other that so thought (except Origen perchance seem to doe so) so I deny that such misprision was the source of the other Truth, which was bottomed upon pre∣gnant Arguments collected from the Text, and wherein those that doe con∣ceive them to erre, doe but as the Aethiopians, who sentence candor, for de∣formity. The Ancients not consonant to this opinion, are set down by Mr. Gallaspy in his Aarons Rod. Resp. But sure his Rod is not Virgula divina, it hath detected no hid treasure, In 3. Aquin. in Evangel. tom. 3. these testimonies were long since laid open and discovered by the Schoolmen, (who profligate them) and by Barradius and others; neither is his, like Aarons Rod, in this particular, but as the Magicians Rod, having brought forth things not true and real but counterfeit, (— hîc dormitabat Homerus.) We have brought them elsewhere to the Test, Suarez 3. q. 73. art. 5. disp. 41. sect. 3. Vasquez in  q. 81. art  disp. 217. c. Ibid. c. 1. pag. 481. & 482 Sylvius in 3. q. 81.  p. 331. and we hope have sufficiently an∣swered them, and more we could say, especially to that of Dionysius, whom not onely all his Commentators, saith Suarez, interpret to hold Iudas to have com∣municated, but Vasquez and Sylvius copiously vindicate and bring him off, to our side, as the former also turneth the edge of Rupertus his testimony against them, who is alleaged by Mr. Gallaspy, though omitted by the Apologists, Ru∣pertus (saith he) similiter, (scilicet) solùm refert utrámque sententiam, nullam tamen earum, ut propriam pronunciat, qui solùm contèndit ut is qui velit senten∣tiam Hilarii defendere, simul etiam asserere debeat nemini nisi de crimine convicto & confesso communionem denegandam esse, (and were their judgement and practice such, we should not quarrel them:) but indeed to adde more in this
point, the work would not be worth our lamp, onely whereas the Apologists citing foure Testimonies onely, out of Mr. Gallaspy (for as I take it he men∣tions not Theophylact) viz. Hilary, Clement, Dionysius and Innocent: they tell us they have examined some of them by their own Books, but though we cannot recon∣cile this with what they say a few lines before, That Theophylact is in their own hands, others they have transcribed upon the forenamed Authors authori∣ty; yet we should be glad to be assured such ancient Authors did finde place among their Books, if the one half of them were not counterfeit. But sure Dio∣nysius his Testimony is none of those they have examined, otherwise they would not cite it under the name of his Commentator Pachymeres, and for Innocent we are informed by Sylvius, Ita propendet in unam partem, ut alteram non rejiciat. But Theophylact is in their hands; In 3. q. 81. art. 2. p. 331. Habeo Themistoclem Atheniensem: he that shall survey divers of their quotations, will be facil to suspect they cannot say of many of their Authors, as they doe of Theophylact, and it was incautely said so of him alone, for as Exceptio roborat legem, in rebus non exceptis, so men∣tioning him to be in their hands and no others, it may perchance be construed they could not say the same of others, otherwise they would have said it of the rest of their Classicke Authors also. But what saith Thophylact, Some say Christ gave the Sacrament to his Disciples, when Iudas was gone forth, and doubtless they were Godly and eminent Divines in or before Theophylact's time, for he judgeth them worthy of credit, and makes Christs practice according to their interpretation, a rule to beleevers, to doe the like, and put evill men from the Sacrament. Resp. 1. It seems rather those some that said so, were not viri nominis in the Hebrew idiom, but — sine nomine turba, Or ignota capita, after the Romane Periphrasis, unless perhaps he meant it of Hilary, whom straying from the common opinion of the Fathers he named not for honours sake (as those which think that in the 16. of Luke to be an Histo∣ry, supposed our Saviour named not the rich man, because he spake in his dis∣praise) and though Hilary be but one person, and Theophylact speakes in the plural number, yet such Enallage's of number are as current, as common. But if they were any of his own (who lived in the tenth Century or thereabout, for there is some difference about the precise time) it is lesse to their credit, that being the infelix seculum, as Genebrard, infelix & indoctum, as Bellarmine, obscurum, as Baronius, exhaust and destitute of learned and ingenious Men, and Writers, and whatsoever these some were, as omnes urgentur ignoti longâ nocte; so it seems their authority weighed not much with Theophylact, nor so as to in∣cline the beame of his judgement to that opinion; for however here he deter∣mine not the question on either side; but leaves it in the middest; yet else∣where upon that of Matth. 26.27. drink ye all of this, he seems to affirme that Iudas was admitted, though he have a singular opinion, that he onely drank of the Cup and reserved the Bread; and though here, as they say, he make an inference from the Hypothesis, yet that is ordinary among such, as yet lay no great weight on the Thesis; and whereas he infers that therefore we must put evil men from the Sacrament, either he understands close and undiscovered
evil men, (such as the Apologists say, Iudas was) and then he checks with them that say hypocrites may be admitted, it being not in mens power to di∣scern or exclude such, or else known evil men, and then the exclusion of such cannot be inferred from the expulsion of Iudas, who was not such: so as by the vouching of Theophylact I conceive they have gotten nothing, but to let us know he is in their hands; Benè habet, Presbyter creatus est Campianus ab Antonio Archiepiscopo Pragensi, as once said Whitaker. They next array and empanel a jury of twelve, the most eminent of our mo∣dern learned Writers, hardly to be matched, which oppose, or leave doubtfull, Judas his receiving, and upon their verdict they give judgement in despight of all Writs of Error, for who, say they, would not erre with such? A strange line drop'd from their pens, that so much avile all humane authority, & si ego id dixissem. But indeed, Pauperis est numerare pecus, — And though they say, they could double the number, besides learned Papists not a few, — Credat Iudaeus Apella, Non ego. — I am confident they would have then made them legible, had they been Clas∣sical, for however some are nomina quibus assurgo, and such as — nunquam sine laude loquenda, Yet they have drawn very low for others of them, & Pastor qui proprias congre∣gat oves, quas relinquit, agnoscit alienas; for me, — inopem me copia fecit: And though I could have held forth some late luminaries beaming light upon this Truth (among whom I think I might as rationally and as solemnly have fixed, Mr. Prynne, as the Apologists have done Mr. Gallaspy) more for num∣ber, not lesse for weight, which will be assented to by any that findes Zwin∣glius, Calvin, Cranmer, Whitgift, Iuell, Hall, Whitaker, Bucer, Bullinger, Martyr, Harm. c. 171. p. 454. Paraeus, Aretius, and Chamier among them, besides Willet, Ball, Hammond, T. Blake, and Ravanellus, &c. (and even Beza himself is alleaged by Gerhard to be of this minde;) yet I chose rather to produce constellations, as many, as they have held forth single Starres, as beside these more than twelve Signes thereof, in the modern Zodiack now discovered. 2. The whole Syntaxis of the Fathers (without any heteroclyte, Ubi supra. save Hilary) whereof Vasquez particularly quotes Cyprian, Origen, Cyrill of Hierusalem, Chry∣sostom, Hierom, Augustin, Theodoret, Leo, Beda, Euthymius, Rabanus, Theo∣phylact, a full Jury. 3. Besides Justinian (which makes it current by the stamp of Imperiall au∣thority) in his Edict and Confession of Faith, with divers more of later birth,
whereunto not onely Valentia annumerates Sedulius and Remigius, but another learned Man hath added Ambrose, Mr. Prynne. Maldon. in Matth. 26.20. Nazianzen, Haymo, Victor Antiochenus, Occu∣mensus, besides Bernard, and others; and Maldonat tells us, Omnes quos legeri auctores. 4. All the School (omnes qui de hac re meminerunt, saith no pedary School∣man) and though a late Writer mention Durand, Vasquez ubi supra 4. d. 9. q. 4. p. 701. & 4. q. 5. p. 703. Salmeron, and Barradius, to be of contrary judgement; yet as I wonder, why the two later are ranked in this Classe, being onely Commentators, and not of the School; so it is more wonderfull, he should vouch Durand to warrant that opinion, when it is mani∣fest he was of our part, saying in one place, Sancti dicunt, quòd Judas prodi∣tor sumpsit in coena corpus Domini cum caeteris Apostolis; and in another, Christus hoc Sacramentum dedit Judae, quem sciebat esse in peccato mortali. And 5. the Canonists generally, and (since the Apologists have prayed in aide from the Church of Rome) I might have affirmed it to be the common opinion thereof. Not onely (6.) their Expositors (ex recentioribus expositoribus ferè omnes, as Vasquez witnesseth, and I recognize none Enantiaphonous, save Barradius and Salmeron) but also the chief Pillars and Pinnacles thereof (as Baronius and Bellarmine among others) asserting it. But 7. the Church hath inserted it into their Missalls, Psalters, and Hora∣ries, as Turbae fratrum duodenae Datum non ambigitur; And therein running in consort with the Old Christian Poets, that sung, Bis sex cum sociis epulatus nocte supremâ; And among the Reformed Churches I cited the Articles of the Churches of (8.) England, (9.) Ireland, the Confessions of (10.) Belgia, & (11.) Bohemia, and might (12.) have instanced also in the generality of Divines of the Augustan Confession (not one dissenting, Ubi supra. saith Gerhard, that he knows) in which Sphear shine many great lights, though they have their spots, like the Moon, and so perchance hath the Sun too (for so some Astronomers tell us) though we cannot discerne them by that light onely which beames from himself. So as we may reverse the verdict by an attaynt of their Jury, and return more then 24. as a new Jury to doe it; and as the Apologists are bold to say, that the Fathers are conceived to erre by the mistaking the Sop to have been the Sacrament; so I may with lesse presumption affirme, that modern Writers have been misled by a misprision, that the Sop was exhibited to Judas before the Sacrament, and upon reception thereof he went out so immediatly, as to leave no interval of time for the administration, neither of which is proved nor scarce probable. I espied the Basilisk before he eyed me, and have elsewhere answered their Arguments before they produced them; onely there is one, which I had not wit enough to foresee, and perhaps wit (if I had it) were not so likely to ap∣prehend it; as upon a deliberation in the conclave of sending a Nuncio to a certain Kingdome, one being commended as a wise man, it was replyed, That a
wise man was not fit for the imployment, because he could not conceive or imagine what such a people designed. It is an Argument, and they blazon it for considerable, (and so it is indeed for the vanity thereof) taken from the note of the last Translaters of the Bible, and set to Luk. 22.21. to shew there begins another matter, not a continued History orderly set down. I perceive Sixtus Senensis (as learned as he was) was deceived, when telling us of a Stygmatical or punctuary interpretation of Scripture, he addes, that it is peculiar to the Hebrews, and our Divines need not to be longer puzled what Campian means by saying Omnes res & reculae made for his Religion, for it is like he meant some such Notes as these. But if the Apologists are in earnest (as we thought they had jested, when heretofore they used this Argument to some Gentlewomen) we shall tell them, that these Notes are set to shew a di∣verse Subject matter of the relation, though orderly continued, but never used to manifest an hysterology, or transposition of things; and if so obvious a thing have not fallen under their observation, let them consult the recital of the Decalogue, Exod. 20. where the same Note is not prefixed to the fifth Comman∣dement, which I think is yet set down in order; and in that one History of Da∣vid's duell with Golias, not delivered but according to the order of things, they will finde it very often affixed, and it will introduce an intolerable confusion in sacred Writ, if this note shall allwayes remarke things transposed. But would they please to have more of the Textuary, than of the Cabalist, the particle , veruntamen, the first word of the Text, hath farre more force to approve a continuation, and that the words were spoken after the Con∣secration, than the note hath to assert a transposition, or that they were ut∣tered before it; for if the words of Consecration had been set down by anti∣cipation, the adversative particle had been unfitly set there; for in the judge∣ment of the learned, Quoties aliqua per anticipationem priùs narrantur simpliciter tantum, per particulam continuativam aut copulativam, narrari solent. St. Augustine tells us therefore that this of Luke doth evidentissimè demonstrate Judas to have been present; and Suarez resolveth, Veruntamen, Suarez. 3. q. 73. art. 5. disp. 41. sect. 3. Sylvius in 3. q. 8. art. 1. p. 331. aptè indicat hoc esse dictum in ipsa communione Sacramenti, nam sensus est perspicuus, Trado vobis corpus & san∣guinem, quamvis non ignoro inter vos esse qui me tradit, unde sancti advertunt, illa verba dicta esse à Christo, tum ad commendandam charitatem suam, tum ut emolliret cor Judae, ut resipisceret & non indignè communicaret. And Sylvius addeth, ut di∣scamus nihil ab eo praetermissum quod ad emendationem pertineat. That Judas departed before the administration, appears, because having received the sop, he went out immediately, and what that signifies every Englishman knows, that is, instantly, forthwith. That the Sop was exhibited to Judas the same night of the Institution, and before the Sacrament instituted (which is implyed in this cryptical Syllogisme) is no such principle, as to be evident in it self, and to need no proof; and I am deceived if I have not formerly manifested, that it was dealt him at another time; and if it were given him in that night of the celebration of the Lords Supper, yet that it was done after it was ended, is to the judgement of Augustine, Beda, Hugo, Thomas, and others, as Vasquez quotes them, and of Cyrill and Chrysostom, as Suarez alleageth them. Ubi supra. For the terme immediately, Customary use Quem penes arbitrium est & fas & norma loquendi,
hath rather evidenced it, that when we say, we will immediately or instantly come or goe or doe a thing, we doe not binde or conclude our selves to a pre∣cise and punctual instant, but think we have complied with our engagement if in a short time we performe it; and the use of the word in Scripture doth af∣ford such latitude, and thereof may be vouched a multitude of instances. When our Saviour tells us, Mark. 4.29.  that when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he put∣teth in the Sickle, we do not see nor can imagine that the husbandman watcheth to reap his Corn in the first instant of its ripening: Luk. 19.11. they thought the Kingdome of God should immediately appeare, I presume not in an in∣stant, but after a short space, John 6.2. Immediately the ship was at the land. not in an instant by miracle, but by a speedy, yet successive motion; Acts 17.10. Immediately they sent away Paul and Silas, but such a dispatch could not be prepared in a moment; Mar. 1.28. Immediately his fame spread abroad thorough all the Region, which could not be carried so farre, but in some length of time; Mark. 4.5. Immediately the seed sprung up, where immediately can onely signifie speedily, for seed doth not pullulate but after some little time; and that which our translations render straightwayes, is in the Greek for the most part , the same which they here translate immediately, and he that considers the things mentioned to be done straightways, Mark. 2.2. and 3.6. and 15.1. will be facil to belevee, that they could not be set about and entred upon, and expedi∣ted in lesser time than our Saviour might have administred the Sacrament af∣ter he had dealt Judas the Sop. Nay we finde that the Sacrament of Baptisme is in the preparation for it, and administration thereof said to be done straight∣wayes, as Acts 16.33. it is said that the Jaylour and all his were baptized straightway, the word in the Original is , which as it signifies in praesentia & subitò, so here the Vulgar and Castalion render continuò, so doth Beza in some Editions, in other illicò, as doth Piscator, and by the same word Continuò, doth the Vulgar, and sometimes Beza translate : here, John 13.30. in some Editions he reades statim, as Piscator doth also; so doth the Vul∣gar elsewhere, as in that of Mark. 4.29. turne  into statim, which in John it translates continuò, so as it seems the words are all Synonimous or indifferent. But then it is not imaginable that all the Jaylors family could be convened and prepared, and things accommodate for their baptisme in an instant, and therefore Tremellius out of the Syriac, as he renders  eâdem horâ, the same houre in that of John 13.30. so doth he also in that of Acts 16.33. translate , eâdem horâ. But if we should confine immediatly to an instant, yet the Apologists cannot make it cleare when that instant commenced. For (not to insist, upon the sense of Baronius and Maldonat, that he went out immediately before Christ his so∣lemn Sermon, and was no partaker thereof; Continuò (saith the Cardinal) so∣lùm significat Judam non exspectasse prolixam Christi concionem;) it is observable what Vasquez prompts us with, that it is not said, he went forth immediately after he had received the Sop, but, having received it, acceptâ offulâ, as Beza and Piscator: or cùm accepisset, as the Vulgar reade the Greek particle of the Ao∣rist , and after the mention of giving the Sop, Satan is said to have en∣tred into him, and Christ said, what thou doest, doe quickly: now it is likely that between the Sop and Christ his Speech was Judas confirmed in his wicked pur∣pose, by being possessed of the Divel, to perpetrate it, and after Christ his Speech
(from thence the instant commencing) then immediately he went forth, not immediately after the Sop, but chusing that opportunity to goe off, to escape farther discovery, seeing his going out might be interpreted to be by reason of being sent by his Master to doe some service quickly; and so the Paraphrase of the words will be, when Christ had said what thou doest doe quickly, then imme∣diately Judas having already received the Sop, wherewith the Divell entred to spurre him faster to his treason, went forth. And so the mention of the receipt of the Sop at his going forth, shewes not the moment of the time, but the cause of his Exit, the Divel driving him, that entred with it. But whereas, Dictator∣like, they tell us that those words, what thou doest, &c. were spoken before the Sacrament, we desire we may be excused to suspend our Faith, untill they prove what they say, or prove that all they say is Oracle. They think he spake well that prompted them to say, that Judas was but had Porter to let in men to the Sacrament: Verba nitent phaleris, sed nullas verba medullas Intus habent, — Judas was not he that lets in, but he that entred, not he by whom, but after whom others may seem fit to be admitted. To prove that others besides such as have approved signes of holiness may have accesse, it had been unapt and in∣congruous to have produced the example of an holy Man, but the instance of such a Son of perdition is a very proper example; but what rigid and injurious Porters are they, that shut such as are not notoriously wicked and scandalous out of that gate, where Judas had entrance? There was no visible cause for his exclusion: Then we trust it follows after all this bustling to the contrary, that he was admitted (or else Christ excluded him without visible cause, and then sure he could be no patterne to us, as they say he was, for I hope we may exclude none causelessly;) but then let them also exclude none but such as they have visible cause to repell, and not require such a visible cause (as plaine Evidence of their conversion) before they admit. Advers. Ana∣bapt. lib. 6. c. 9. p. 230. The Apostles thought wel of him, without any suspicion. Bullinger is peremptory, Judae malefacta in mensa commemoravit, adeò aptè, ut nihil clarius dici potuerit: but if they knew not in individuo signato, who it was, they did in individuo vago, and that one was not clean, and was a Traytor and Divell, and yet they were not startled, nor scrupled to communicate all together, and therefore sure had no impressions that to participate with such was a pollution to themselves or the Ordinances, or any prostituting of the privileges of the Saints, or setting of the seale to blancks, &c. Besides seeing some of these sad effects depend upon the nature of the thing, viz. the very sumption of the Sacrament by wicked men, more than our knowing them to be wicked and to receive, these mischiefs would have resulted, though they were ignorant of the rise thereof, Balls Tryal grounds of s∣paration. p. 198. and the Ordinance seems to be polluted though they were not; but therefore it seems from hence to be a necessary consequent, that the simple presence of unworthy or wicked men defiles not, for then our Saviour had spoken a contra∣diction, when he said, Ye are clean, but not all, John 13.10. because if one had been unclean, all had been defiled: No, neither our knowledge of their un∣worthiness and wickedness, for then Judas had stained the Ordinance to Christ
himself; nay, the notorious knowledge thereof doth not pollute, where there is no power (through non-establishment or obstruction of discipline;) nor op∣portunity (when at the time of communicating there cannot so suddenly be admonition or judicial process had,) nor conveniency (through danger of Schisme) to repell, nor leave from Christ to separate. Judas was knowa to Christ as God, and he dealt Ministerially as man. First, it is not absolutely and universally true, that Christ in this Ordinance dealt as man, but rather as Mediator, God and Man; for none but God could institute a Sacrament, whose blessing onely can conferre the grace which is si∣gnified, and sanctifie, and virtuate the Signs and Elements into an aptness to those ends whereunto they were instituted, and none but Man could have administred them; besides if he knew Judas his treason as God, yet notwith∣standing, he made it known to men. And 2. it is not pertinent to dispute of the Principles of his knowledge, or formally how he knew it; it is sufficient, that he had knowledge thereof, and might have made it known to the Disciples and told them thereof, and in all likelyhood would have done it, had his partaking with them been so mis∣cheevous; and the Apologists confess, nay contend for it, that he made this dis∣covery before the Institution, and whether they understood at the time of ce∣lebration, of whom he spake particularly or not, is very disputable among lear∣ned Men: So then, if none but Saints ought to have been admitted, how could our Saviour have given admission to one whom he had publish'd to be a Divel? Judas non possit illis annumerari, Advers. Ana∣bapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 230. saith Bullinger, quorum peccata levia & occulta sunt; praeterea Johannes ante coenam eum manifestum furem fuisse scribit, Joh. 12. and he cites Augustine, saying, Dominum, cùm haec sciret, nihilominus ipsum in coena tolerasse, ut nos doceret & exemplum nobis praeberet, malos tolerandos esse, eós∣que etiam si coenae intersint, bonos tamen non polluere; and if herein Christ dealt ministerially, then he was a pattern to Ministers, how to comport themselves in like cases, which is not to repel those who by a notorious knowledge appeare not to be wicked, however privately they may be known to him for such. 3. The sinne of Ananias and Saphira was in secret and not known to Peter, but by Divine revelation; yet the first in every kind being the measure of that which follows, that we might take notice of the greatness of the sinnes of lying, avarice, hypocrisy, and sacrilege, Ut incuteretur metus & firmaretur discipli∣na, illo exordo legis Evangelicae, say the Fathers, Peter made known his sinne, and that by a signal judgement; and upon the like account of reason, if it were so necessary to repell all but real Saints from the Sacrament, doubtless (as the Greeks call punishments , examples) our Saviour by such a Standard of example, as the punishing of Iudas, by express casting him out, would have measured out, and established that discipline in his Church. 4. I think they would say, or at least it were better said (wherein we shall consent with them) that Christ rejected not Iudas, because he knew his wicked∣ness onely as it were per scientiam privatam, he did not know it, nor could then give the Disciples knowledge thereof, per scientiam publicam & notoriam, that is, neither by evidence of fact, Aquin. 3. q. 81. art. 2. Similiter Suarez ubi su∣pra. confession, or judicial conviction, and quia nobis debuit esse exemplum justitiae, non conveniebat ejus magisterio, ut Judam occultum peccatorem sine accusatore & evidenti probatione ab aliorum communione separet, ne per hoc daretur exemplum Praelatis ecclesiae similia faciendi, as the School long
since determined. If they would suite their practice to this method, and regu∣late it by this principle, (as it is evident they doe not, nor dare they say they doe) I had never set forth to charge them, and should soon sound a retreat; and as they say, Christ was a pattern to us, who are to admit visible Disciples, not being able to descend into their hearts: so correspondently would they worke according to this pattern, and give admission to all that profess to be Christians (for Christians and Disciples are univocal) and which by notorious crimes obstinatly continued in, doe not blot their profession, and not make the Sacrament, which Bullinger so much disresents, and whereunto (he saith) it was never instituted by Christ, Ut sit ventilabrum aut cribrum, Epist. Petr. Da∣theno. quo cribrentur aut dispergantur ab invicem homines, sed synaxin (i. e.) coagmentationem, societatem, communionem, & con junctionem, would they doe this, I shall — compescere limina Jani. The not condemning of the adulterous woman by our Saviour Iesus, Iohn 8. is not paralell, but hath great disparity with his not repelling Iudas, unless we shall thinke it all one, not to doe a thing when it is proper to his office, and when it is not agreeable thereunto. In discharge of the woman, he dealt not so much like a man, calling for her accusers, and when none came dismissing her, but he acted like a man that did relinquere suum jus Magistratui, as Brentius; In locum. & no∣luit munus legitim judicii abrogare, as Musculus; Sicut reliquis suis exemplis aut Evangelicae doctrinae praeceptis, nullum voluit facere praejudicium eorum quae cuique ex officio pro salute reioub. conveniunt; ita nec hoc suo facto, as Iansenius; and because Hoc non erat ejus officium, as Piscator, & non venerat ut esset externus Ju∣dex scelerum, as Iansenius, or suum munus cum ossicio Magistratûs consundere, as Aretius; whereunto are consonant Estius, Barradius and Deodate. And the power of inflicting capital punishments being then taken from the Jews, as they confess it was not lawful for them to put any man to death (though I know also some learned Men give another reason of that Speech;) it is thought they brought the adulterous woman in regard thereof, thinking thereby to have ensnared him; and to evade that snare and frustrate their designe, he condemned her not; It was not then for want of Accusers, for they had formerly testified her offence to have been notorious by evidence of fact, shee was taken in ipso facto, or furto, as the Greek is, by a Synecdoche speciei , but being gone off, Christ asked where they were, and whether any had condemned her; onely that in absolving her he might defeat the designed surprise of the Pharisees, Ii te non condemnant, neque ego te condemno; quod illi faciunt, ego facio, objicere in me non possunt, leginos repugnare, in the words of Barradius: you may see then how Diaphonous the example of the adulteress is to that of Judas. But it seems the Apologists are like Blondus, of whom it is said that he cared not quàm vera, but quàm multa sriberet. Yet Horatius will lend Dioxippas a Sword to cut off his head, as it is in the prophane Story, suitable to that of Golias and David in the sacred; for if Christ could not judge the woman to punishment, because there were no Accusers, and no man had condemned her, why doe they then punish with loss of the Sacra∣ment, those that have had no accusers, nor have been condemned by judicial process.
To their Epiphonema, or rather Io-poean in the close of the Section, attending their triumphs over so poor and despicable an Argument as this, I shall onely say, Rode caper vites, tamen hîc cùm stabis ad aras, In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit; And I shall conclude with that which Bullinger alleageth out of Zuinglius, Bullinger ad Petrum Dathenum ad∣vers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 230. where∣unto are perfectly consonant what himself delivers against the Anabaptists; Apertum esse satìs, quales ipse Dominus primae suae coenae (quae haud dubiè omnium fuit absolutissima) adhibuerit convivas, ne{que} decere ut nos Dei filio (qui solus corda filiorum hominum perspecta habet) acutiores nobis sumamus oculos, aut nobis ipsis in coena sumamus judicium, quod ille nobis ne{que} praecepto ne{que} exemplo de∣dit. DIATRIBE. SECT. III. The sufficiency of Scripture whereupon Negative Arguments are grounded. The Argument deduced from 1 Cor. 11.28. It is difficult and unsafe to judge of other mens estate. Of temerarious judgment, of judging men to be wicked or irregenerate. With what difficulty, and what a pedegree of consequences their proofs are derived from Scripture. Gene∣ral Rules, for satisfaction of doubting Consciences, perswade the contrary to their way. Of Christs admitting onely Dis∣ciples, Heb. 13.17. Matth. 18.16. Revel. 2.2. 1 Pet. 3.15. 1 Cor. 5.11. explained and vindicated. THE Canon prescribing and directing the due administration and recei∣ving of the Sacrament, is 1 Cor. 11. We cannot with Tertullian adore the fullness of the Scripture, unless we yeeld it to be a perfect rule of faith and manners, which it cannot be, if it be deficient in any thing neces∣sary to be done or beleeved, especially in such places, where it purposely handleth things of that concernment: The Law of the Lord is perfect (& per∣fectum est, cui nil deest,) and it is able to make wise unto salvation, and thoroughly to furnish the man of God. And therefore here, and onely here an
Argument, ab authoritate negativè, holdeth good: But in that Chapter to the Corinthians I finde a precept, Let a man examine himself, none; that he should necessarily pass the examination of another; between the proper examina∣tion of himself, and eating and drinking no other thing intervenes; Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, (So) without more examination, ha∣ving done so, he must not be letted; and therefore this very Commentary is made upon that Text by pathetical Chrysostome; He doth not bid one man to examine another, but every man himself, making the judgment private and without witnesses. Paraeus strikes in Unisons with that ancient Father, The Apostle saith not, the Priest shall examine, or prove them, but every man himself. So doth Sarcerius, He commands not that one should be approved to another, but each one to himself; as long before Clemens Alexandrinus accounted every mans Con∣science to be his best director in this case. By what authority then can he be put back from the Sacrament, that hath examined himself? And to suspect that any have not examined themselves, who shall profess to have done so, (without a violent suspicion, which is neer to a moral certainty of the con∣trary) how can it be competible with Charity, that hopeth all things, beleeveth all things, and thinketh no evil? This being a stubborn hard bone, much adoe there is to overcome it, with∣out drawing blood from the jaws; One sets his teeth to it, and saith, That the precept of examining a mans self, excludes not the examination of his Pastor, or the Elders, or the Congregation, both may be consistent, and both requisite. But the offerture is supervacaneous, for the Argument concludes not; A man must examine himself: therefore the Minister, &c. may not, or need not examine him; but we onely argue, that because where the Apostle professedly prescribeth the preparative dispositions and duties requi∣site to worthy receiving, he not onely gives no express precept that the Mini∣sters, or Elders, or Congregation shall examine, nor the people submit to examination, but rather the contrary, for having examined himself he per∣mits himself so to eat, therefore it is not of the necessity of duty; for what the Scripture commands not, obligeth not; he permits a man to pass from self-examination, to receiving without any other thing intervening; Let him exa∣mine himself, and so let him eate, without any more adoe in respect of exami∣nation, which if it had been requisite, the Apostle would as well have said, Let him also pass the examination of his Pastor, &c. as examine himself. And this Argument from the Authority negative of Scripture (though (bet him eate) affirms also the liberty of access, without any other than self-examina∣tion) is not onely efficacious in general concerning the necessity of things to be done or beleeved, but in this place, and upon this very account, is spe∣cially approved by Interpreters, and urged as conclusive to the excluding the necessity of any other examination. Another tells us, that the Corinthians were a Church lately planted, a peo∣ple newly called out of the world, and converted to the Faith, and therefore it was to be presumed they were sufficiently qualified both for knowledge and sanctity, and needed no other but the proper examination of their own hearts. But I shall reply; First, if they were newly converted, and so late begotten of the seed of the Word, they were then lefs grown in explicite knowledge, and less perfectly
instructed in the mysteries of the Faith, and therefore did more need to be put under probation in the notion of the Catechumeni: but in truth the Church of Corinth, had been divers years planted, and the Apostles baptizing whole Families (Yonglings as well as aged, as other Texts warrant us to assert against the Anabaptists) in all probability, besides the first Converts, there was now since the first constitution of that Church, a second rise and growth sprung up to be adult and capable of the Sacrament. Secondly, the Rule of the Apostle is written for our instruction, catholique and extensive to all times, places, and persons, not limited or restrained to the Corinthians, and to confine and appropriate general precepts to special times, and particular persons, is artificium haereticum, to expilate and exhaust the Ar∣mory of the Church, and imbezill the Weapons of the Faith, and tends to de∣feat the standing Forces of Scripture. Thirdly, ex concesso, this will then consequently exempt from examination verbal or real, such as may well be presumed to be sufficiently qualified, and so it is not of necessity, that the probation should be general. Fourthly, the whole Epistle sheweth, how culpable those Corinthians were; and how many were their errors in faith, and spots in manners; so that for ought I know, our Congregations generally (abstracting them from these dismal Heresies which have lately spawn'd from, and been fostered by men of like principles to those we dispute against, and which for ought I see, obstruct no mans access to the Sacrament, if his Seraphical Elevation can vouchsafe a condescension to Ordinances) are not more guilty or obnoxious. Even in this very concernment of their qualifications for the Communion, it ap∣pears by 1 Cor. 11.20, 30. that many of them received unworthily, and dis∣cerned not the Lords body from common meat, and had taken too much drink before they came to partake of the mystical Cup; Yet neither doth the Apostle command, nor encourage the intermission of the Lords Supper, nor reprehend those that were better qualified and conditioned, for commu∣nicating in a mixt Congregation, or among the Rout, (as they phrase it, with somewhat too strange a spice of the old Pharisee) as if it had been either a stain to their holiness, or a pollution to their persons, or an obstacle to the fruit and efficacy of the Sacrament; neither doth he charge or caution the Elders thenceforth to admit no more without a pre-examination. Another thus answers, That this self-examining is onely meant of that judging which prevents the judgment of God mentioned, ver. 31. which no mans examining of another can doe, but onely his examining of himself. But if this were granted, yet then it follows however, that no other but such self-examination is required by the Apostle, for he prescribes no other but this, and that is as much as we contend for. But when that learned man tells us in the same place, that the Pastors and Elders of Corinth had admitted some to the Lords Table, whom they judged fit and worthy Communicants, but God judged otherwise of them, it was no impudence nor presumption in us to expect that he would have shewed us, where there is one syllable at least that mentions the admission onely of such as were by them thought fit, or of any probation made of their fitness, that were not notorious and scandalous sinners; and if self-examination be sufficient to prevent Gods judgement, it must be enough to prevent all sinne, every sinne being waited on by judg∣ment;
and consequently to prevent a sinful receiving, there needs none but a self-examination. Another takes this bone in hand, and would crush and break it with this interposition, That to the right examination of a mans self such dispositions and graces are requisite, as no unconverted man is capable of; so as though upon self-examination a man might be admitted, yet no man not having ma∣nifest signs of being in the state of grace, can hereupon ground any title or claim to the Sacrament, as being not susceptible of self-examination. Where∣unto I shall say (not to reflect that it carries a spice of Socinus, to hold that onely persons converted are capable of the Sacraments) that it is a suppo∣sition suitable to their principles, that they assume a power to judge the secret things of the heart, for it was wont to be an indubitable maxime, De occultis non judicat Ecclesia, and of that nature is the right discharge of the duty of self-examination. They can pretend but to make judgment onely of externall actions, and such as may give scandal and offence, those they can take cognizance of, and they lye within a judicial Sphear, but the other, viz. the secret things of the heart, fall within none but a divine Horizon, and none can be scandalous onely for such things, because no others can take notice of them. I shall still retreat to my first Fortress, I reade, Let a man examine himself, not that any should examine his examination: Nay positively I finde, that upon self-examination he may so eat, which liberty cannot consist with a ne∣cessity of having self-examination examined by another. Men are com∣manded not onely to examine themselves, in order to receiving the Eucharist, but also generally to try their ways, Lam. 3.4. and their works, Gal. 6.4. and if unconverted men cannot doe this, they may upon like account bring them under examination for their whole life, & give a new name to the same thing of auricular confession: And if unconverted men cannot examine them∣selves, how shall they know themselves to be unfit and unworthy, that they may repent and better dispose themselves, and in the interim abstain? Who gave them liberty or means to search the heart, who are not proper Masters to whom men must stand or fall? But they tell us, that there is a two-fold knowledge, Intuitive, which is by an immediate looking on, and Arguitive (or according to the more usual Scho∣lastick term, Discursive) which is by comparing one thing with another, and reasoning from one thing to another; in the first way God onely knows the hearts of men; in the second sense, we may know the condition of mens hearts, by their outward actions, as a tree by his fruits. Whereunto I shall answer, that it must still be reminded, what was premised in the state of the question, that I disclaim and protest against the patrociny of persons notori∣ously wicked and scandalous, no part of my Apology looks toward such, but to stigmatize with this brand all those whom they exclude from the Commu∣nion, and to exclude them upon that score, is a calumny to the persons, and a contumely to Sion, and will be matter of triumph to Gath and Askelon. Parcite paucorum crimen diffundere in omnes.
Subsequently to this Hypothesis I shall say, that when men of moral life, un∣rebukable for those crimes, which Tertullian calls graviora & exitiosa; and others, vastantia conscientiam, and whose knowledge of the Articles of the Faith, and Principles of Religion, cannot rationally be doubted of; yet such cannot by favour of their opinion, be translated into the Albe of persons con∣verted able to examine themselves, I doubt, if such a judgment smack not more of a result from entuitive, than discursive knowledge. Secondly, I think a man may use and exercise this discursive knowledge where there is no need, by a superfluous indagation of things that appertain not to him, and he is then alenae conversationis curiosus explorator, and may also not sufficiently ground or deduce his knowledge, and may put more in the conclusion, than was in the premises, and may suppose his syllogismes to be demonstrative, when they are but dialectick, and perhaps sophistick, and he is then alienae conversation is temerarius judex, in the judgment of Bernard; and therefore to apply to this purpose that of Augustine, Quid opus est ut dfiniatur cum discrimine, quod potest nsici sine crmine? What need we judge the states of men with danger, which we may be ignorant of with safety? Thirdly, though a man have been supposed formerly not to have been qualified and impowred to examine himself, yet who can judge whether be∣fore his approach to the Holy Table, in a sense of the necessity of the duty of self-examination, applying himself in some degree to the discharge there∣of, that spirit, which as the winde bloweth where it listeth, so sometimes comes suddenly, as a mighty rushing winde, may not inable him to the present effe∣ctual performance thereof? Whereof to say that notwithstanding proba∣tion ought to be made previously to the Sacrament, is but to bgge the que∣stion, and to condemn the Apostles, who admitted thousands, and among them also Simon Magus to baptisme, upon the profession of his Faith, without farther tryal, and in order to persons adult, there is the same reason for the one Sacrament, and the other. Fourthly, the conclusion that a man is not able to examine himself, doth here presuppose, and is inferred from another conclusion, that the person is a wicked unconverted man; but there is so much uncertainty in the premi∣ses, and so much danger in making the conclusion, that I think no charitable soul humbled by the fear of the Lord, will be very forward so to conclude, this being judicium figuli non luti, domini non conservi. Though I will grant that for any great and scandalous sin, being notorious, a man may be suspen∣ded; yet I cannot yeeld that every such scandal concludes a man irregene∣rate, nor can I alow him under such a notion, to be either repelled, or yet examined, much less to be accounted such; because he hath not given them satisfaction of his sincere holiness. God may have 7000. in Israel, and yet Elias himself not able to discern one of them. If in some men we seem to observe few or no good works, yet our heavenly Father may see them in secret. As some things seem, and are not, so others are and do not seem. The Stars have the swiftest motion (or at least the Earth hath,) yet move without noise; 'tis distance and want of neer approach, that makes them seem less than they are, and some Stars (as in the Galaxt) shine un∣seen, and the Moon when that side toward the Earth is darkened, yet that to∣ward
Heaven doth shine bright. Some may perhaps imitate Mucianus (or Vespasianus) in Tacitus, Omnium quae dixerat fecera{que} arte quâdam ostentator: Others take more of the Publican, than the Pharisee, and as Artificis est celare artem; so they think it a good work to conceal their good works, and there∣fore chuse to shut their closet dore upon their prayers, and to cast back and muffle their left hand when their right dispenseth almes, reckoning other mens eyes to be latrones praemii, and their applauses furta coeli, robbers of their reward; and though they honour him for his works sake (in the full latitude of honour, as it is comprehensive of obedience, reverence, maintenance) yet perchance are not perswaded, that it is an elicite or imperate act of Religi∣on, or the great Criterion thereof, to bring into captivity their understandings and wills to the obedience of their Pastor, and for to pass for religious men, to degrade themselves into unclean beasts, and to swallow without chewing the cudde: Et nos homns sensum habmus, in the phrase of Ambrose. If in some others we seem to take notice of some evil deeds, yet can we discern no good thing in them? Flyes that stick onely on sores, may soon make the oint∣ment of a good name to stink. Why look we on the Moon onely when un∣der an Eclipse, not in her brightness? 'Tis no rule for the Syllogismes of Charity, Et sequitur partem Conclusio debiliorem. We may judge the acts of a man not his state, & injustitiam facti, non personae: Comines would say he was a good Prince, whose Vertues exceeded his Vices; In many things we sinne all, and therefore toleramus & toleramur, saith St. Augustine. That other Syllogistick Canon is here more applyable, Syllogizare non est ex particulari: The denomination is to be taken from the major part, and a man must be judged, not by a few actions, but all, or else an heavy sentence might pass up∣on David and Peter. One or two acts cannot constitute an habit, or argue a malignity in the agent, an habit being the principle of doing things willing∣ly, delightfully, constantly. There is a smoking flax that may be long before it be kindled into a flame, and a mustard seed of faith, that may long lye dead as it were, ere it spring and fructifie. There is life in an Apoplctick, though he lye as dead, he may n time recover, non infusione novae vitae quae aberat, sed diffusione ejusdem quae inerat: Frigidity is the proper passion of water, which is sometime accidentally hot, but notwithstanding in that instant, is virtually and potentially cold, and soon by its intrinsick form will revert to its proper quality. Grace may be where great sinnes seem to exclude it, as contraries may co exist in the same subject, in remiss degrees. Grace may be vva, though not vivax, and in actu primo though not always in secundo; in essence, yet not in present operation: and as St. Ambrose said to Theodosius of David, Thou seest his sinne, not his repentance; so we see not whether men lapse into an offence by inadvertency, surreption, sudden motion, nor how violent and importunate was the tentation whereby they succumbed, nor how imperfect was the consent, which might be much refracted by the reluctancy of the
minde. Aristotle himself distinguisheth between the sinnes of incontinent and intemperate persons; the one offends with some reluctancy, the other runs into evil with a full carriere; Twisse vindic. part. 4. p. 192. and the incontinent, he saith, is , hath a principle of natural goodness, that makes him prone to repent, and capable of melioration. And even a regenerate man is a mixt person, made up of the flesh, as well as the spirit; he is as the twilight, where light and darkness are mixt and blended together; and though the path of the just be as the shining light, which shineth more and more till perfect day, yet till the second rise and coming of the Sunne of righteousness, it suf∣fers some alloy of darkness. The flesh and the spirit are still at warre one with the other, and though sometimes, and in some things, the one or the other prevail, yet the one never worketh without the renitency and reaction of the other; so that as the persons, so the actions are mixed, and there is ne∣ver an efficacious willing of the one, without a remisse volition of the contra∣ry object; the act is voluntary, but the things are done, nolentèr, volentèr, and the act is more remisse through the mixture of what is involuntary, Rom. 7.15. with what is voluntary in the precedent deliberation. And as the reluctancy of the flesh, and the influence and working of Concupiscence in all spiritual mo∣tions and actions of just men, distils a sinfulness into the same, and thereby stains, impairs, and extenuates them so far, as that though it prevail not to pervert the substance of just actions, yet it enfeebleth and impedeth them from attaining to that height and strain of perfection, whereby they should be able to justifie before God; so the retraction and reluctancy of the spirit in evil actions (where that spirit is, which none can know but he that feels, for who else knows the spirit of a man?) though it make them not cease to be∣come sins, nor can give them form; yet it remitteth and mitigateth the guilt, and gives them some qualification, so as such men so offending, though they are not without spot unrebukable, yet these may be the spots of his chil∣dren, and they may be good men that commit some evils. The quintessence to be limbeck'd and distilled from those resolutions is this, That it is as difficult to discern, and doubtful to judge of the states of men, as dangerous to erre in such judgment; it is a judgment never easie, nor always infallible, for the spirit of man which is in him, to judge of his estate, and more difficult and dangerous for another, that knows not the things of a man. In doubts that concern things, nothing but the weight of reason must turn the scale; but in doubts concerning persons, the poyse of Charity must incline the beam toward the better part, if not positively and speculatively to esteem them to be good, yet negatively and practically not to conclude them evil, but ad hîc & nunc, to handle them, as if they were good. When we judge of things, the good or evil thereof is not attended, nor are they prejudiced, whatsoever we may chance to judge of them; but the good or evil of him that judgeth is looked after, as he shall make true or false judgment, Truth being the proper good of the Understanding, as Fals∣hood is the Evil thereof; Aquin. 22. q. 60. ar. 4. and therefore every one ought to endeavour to make true judgment of things: But in judging of men, the good or evill of him that is judged is principally respected, who is honoured, if esteemed good; and vilified, if judged to be evil; and therefore we ought to take heed, that we judge him good, rather than evil, unless evident and morally certain
reasons perswade the contrary. And as for him that so judgeth, though per∣haps falsly, that judgment is no evil to his intellect, as neither doth it pertain to the perfection thereof in it self, to know the truth of all singular contin∣gent things, but it rather belongeth to, and argueth good affection. It is safer therefore to offend by excesse of charity, than through defect, and I had rather erre ten times upon the score of hope, than once upon the account of supercilious rash judgment. It is a good rule of the School; In judicandis aliis, eorum bona certa, meliora; certa mala, minora; bona dubia, certa; dubia mala, nulla judicemus. They had need be pregnant, and vehement proofs, if not plain demonstrations, that shall warrant one to judge another to be a wicked man, for if to doubt it (which is when the mind is pendulous, and suspended in the middest, without inclining to either part) or to suspect it (which is the concitation of the mind to an assent,) or to opine it (which is an assent, but wavering and infirm, and with fear of the contrary) upon light signs and arguments, be sinful; much more is it fully and firmly to judge him to be such; and they may also be light Arguments to judge him to be evil, which yet may be sufficient to doubt, or suspect, or opine him to be so, because the former assent requires surer grounds, especially when this judg∣ment must be a sentence externally and juridically pronounced, as in this case it is or ought to be, when a man is thereby debarred the Sacrament. In doubtful things the safer part is to be chosen, but Tutius est reddere rationem propter charitatem, quàm crudelitatem, It is clearly more safe to judge men good, than to sentence them to be evil; for to erre in the former, is no pra∣ctical moral error, nor injurious to any, but onely speculative, and in things contingent an evil of no moment; but to offend in the latter, is a practicall error, through an inordination and inconformity of such judgment with righteousness, which is a greater evil to him that judgeth, as being a wrong done to another, and a robbing him of his proper goods, his good name being a depositum laid up in the mindes of other men (Honesta fama alterum patrimonium; & fama pari passu cum vita ambulat) which he ought not to be deprived of, but upon reasons very sufficient in the estimation of Prudence; otherwise the forfeiture of reputation, being a punishment, he shall be punished without cause, and without such reasons perswading the assent, though the judgment perhaps may be materially true, yet it is formally false judgment; true in it self, yet false in him that makes it. The Lawyers say, Jura sunt promptiora ad absolvendum, quàm ad condemnandum, and they adde, Cùm sunt parium jura obscura, reo favendum est potiùs quàm actori, & qui ju∣dicat, habet se, ut actor, proximus de quo judicatur, ut reus. I have been the more copious upon this subject, because what is said of judging or opining men to be irregenerate, is applicable in some degree to a supposing them ignorant. Ignorance, when it is of those things we are bound to know (which differenceth it from nescience) and do neglect, becoming so a pravous disposition, marcheth in the same rank, and with the same pace with sinne, and a suspicion thereof in like manner robbes men of their better treasure, their fame deposited in the brests of men, and those two coming under suspicion, being the impulsives of examination, and obstructives to ad∣mission, and the colours wherewith they paint the necessity of the one, and
the shadows whereby they set off the other at more distance. Lastly, some would impose upon us, that though here in this 1 Cor. 11. the Apostle prescribe no other but self-examination, yet that in other places, there is found that which may inforce a being examined by others. But first before we come to take a prospect of the particular places alleaged, they all fall under this prejudice, and are thereby frustrated, that Verum vero non con∣trariatur, and therefore the highest principles of revealed truth cannot check or clash with themselves; but if any other, save self-examination, were prescribed as requisite antecedently to partaking the Lords Supper, it would contradict this permission, that he that hath examined himself might so eat, (So) without other examination; and therefore, whereas they pretend that the silence of the Scripture here in this place, is supplyed by the voice of God sounding it elsewhere; who can but doubt that such sound is like the musick of the Spheares, rather imaginary, than real? Some Texts are indeed pretended for it, and Arguments drawn and formed out of them, but more in number, than in weight, which if with any importunity they shall impose upon the world, doubtless some will say of them, as some Interpreters think of the Jebusites, 2 Sam. 5.6. that they manned their walls with the blnd and the lame. And seeing this antecedent probation is so earnestly obtruded, and vehe∣mently urged a necessary to the Sacrament, not onely necessitate praecepti, but medii also, (for without this, that is not to be administred) verily it seems strange, that the Assertors thereof cannot produce one Text, wherein is one syllable of the Sacrament, or one word of those that have the power and au∣thority to examine, and but one where is any mention of probation or tryall, and that too, being Heterogeneal to this subject. And since at best their proofs are onely Arguments of probability and of conveniency, and propositions propagated and deduced from the first principles of Scripture, by so many descents and generations, that it is hard to try whether they do truly come from that Stock, or not, and in some mean Parents by the way, there may be fallacies which may vitiate and bastard them, I cannot apprehend how they can beget a certainty in the Conscience, that without such previous proba∣tion, the Sacrament ought not to be administied, at most they can onely cre∣ate a dubious conscience whether it may or not, or an opining, that it should not. And then (beside the special Arguments for the opposie part, ponde∣rous enough if duly weighed o turn the Beam and settle the Scale) and be∣side that which St. Augustine tells us; Quod intellgimus, debemus rationi; quod credimus, debemus authoritati; sed quod opinamur, debemus error'; And La∣ctantius, Id opinatur quisque quod nescit; and therefore Bernard seconds them, that Opinio, si assertionem habeat, temeraria est; besides this, it seems to me, that the principles laid down in general by the Casuists and Jurists to regulate doubtful and opining Consciences, and lead them to act, do ra∣ther warrant and perswade the Concession, than the denial of the Sacra∣ment without such probation. As (to omit that poor topick of the common opinion) those Canons; 1. Favores ampliandi, Odia restringenda. 2. Melior est conditio possidentis; which beside the possession of a good
same, until conviction of demerit to the contrary, is also applyable to those that have been formerly admitted, which are the greater part of them that are now excluded. 3. In dubiis tutior pars est eligenda, rationabiliter in dubiis favorabiliori parti adhaerescendum est: semper in dubiis benigniora praeferenda sunt; in re du∣bia benigniorem interpretatonem sequi, non minus justum est, quàm tutum: sem∣per in obscuris quod minmum, quoties dubia interpretatio libertatis est, secun∣dum libertatem respondendum est. And lastly, the greater offence lying on this side to neglect the Ordinance and Worship of God, than upon that part, to communicate with persons im∣probous, or unfit in that Worship, and those Ordinances. But to take a special view of the forces which they muster, and to encoun∣ter them; the Arguments drawn from these general Precepts of taking heed to the flock, and watching over their soules, &c. are onely Paralogismes arguing à genere ad speciem affirmativè. The Argument formed from Hebrews 13.17. (They watch for your soules, as they that must give an account; therefore (say they) if they must give an account for us, we ought to give an account to them;) this is fallacia conse∣quentis, for it follows not, that they cannot or ought not to perfect their ac∣count to God of the discharge of their duty, if we become not particularly ac∣countant to them, and come under probation of what effects, the discharge of their duty hath wrought in us; and why is this account to be taken (if we were obliged to render it) onely antecedently to the Sacrament and alone concerning our fitness for that one Ordinance, not all; or at one only time, not continually? Yea, why not of all our actions, if we must account to them in all, for which they must account for us, for that wil not be for one act, but all? This alone flows naturally from the Text, we ought to make account of them, but not that we must give an account to them. Concerning that allegation of Matth. 18.16. If thy Brother trespass against thee, &c. however it may be applyable in order to he proving of Excommu∣nication (whereo yet as learned men as lived in their age, some have doub∣ted, others have denyed;) yet sue it cannot be pertinent to his examina∣tion, unlesse by some rare Alchymy of discourse they could turn a trespasse, or a wrong done to a brother, into an offer to communicate, or that it be a trespass to desire the Communion, or that we can trespass against none but the Mini∣ster and his Elders. A late Author (not unlearned and sufficiently eloquent) hath bottomed and laid the soundation of his argumentation upon this subject in his prin∣ciple, Tht Christ at the first Institution (which ought to be the president to all future Administrations) gave the Sacrament onely to his Disciples, and therefore those which are not Disciples, may not participate thereof, and the Disciples of Christ must have such and such qualifications, which no un∣regenerate men can have: Ergo. But the frame must needs be weak that is raised upon such a foundation; for Architects say, a crack in the Foundation, but as great as one digit, makes a breach in the building of many foot: For first, Chamier Tom. 4. l. 8. c. 8. p. 202. that the Dsciples (which learned men thnk not evident, that they were no more than the twelve
Apostles, Gerhard loc. Com. Tom. 5. p. 18. Ames. Bell. enervat. Tom. 3. c. 7. p. 159. and it is not improbable (saith Gerhard) that the Master of the house, and some of his Family might also communicate) did then represent the whole body of the visible Church (as the same Author elsewhere con∣fesseth) and is nervously approved by Protestant Divines against the Papists, who would justifie the substraction of the Cup from the Laity upon this very score, because the Apostles to whom it was first given, were onely Priests, And that a Christian and a Disciple, are Synonimous, may appear by Act. 11.26. The Disciples were called Christians. So Matth. 28.19. Go teach all Na∣tions baptizing them, &c.  the word used, is as much as to make Disciples, and not onely signifying to teach; for else it were a Tautology in the 20th. verse following, where it is added, teaching them, &c. therefore to convert any to the Faith of Christ, Spanheim. dub. Evang. Tom. 8. p. 93. though but externally, is to make him a Disciple, he that is baptized is a Disciple; and in this notion we grant, that none but Disciples may partake the Holy Supper, that is, none but Christi∣ans. And as soon as any were discipled, that is, converted, they were without any stop to be baptized; and if Disciples are to be taken in that latitude and equivocal notion, in order to the one Sacrament, it shall be strange to think they ought to be construed in any stricter or more limited sense, in reference to the other. Secondly, Judas was one of those Disciples, one of those Twelve that sate down, yet had not those graces, though necessary to constitute and qualifie a Disciple. Thirdly, it appears by the first of the Cor. 11. that very many admitted there to the Communion, had not these Qualifications essential to real Dis∣ciples. Fourthly, if Disciples quà tales, and formally such, are to communicate, then since quatenus ipsum includes de omni; all Disciples are susceptible of the Communion; but that Infants are Disciples, hath been sufficiently pro∣ved, both formerly, and also of late by excellent Divines against the Ana∣baptists; yet we do not think fit to imitate the ancient Church, and give the Eucharist to Infants. The three favourite and palmary Texts, which as most commonly, so with most colour, are produced in proof of this Discipline, are that of Revel. 2.2. Thou hast tryed them which say they are Apostles, and are not; and that of 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every one that ask∣eth you a reason of the hope that is in you; and 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, &c. with such a one, no not to eate, &c. whereof the second seems to prove the necessity of a verbal examinati∣on (at least passively) the third of a real; and the first, like Janus, lookes both ways, and toward the proof of either. Concerning the first, it can conclude nothing to this purpose, unlesse by some new Art trochilike, they could draw it to be consequent, that every tryal must be by examination of the persons, and that every one approaching to the Lords Table is likely to be a false Apostle, and that false Apostles were onely or chiefly to be tryed antecedently to the Communion; or that because He∣reticks, such as Ehion and Cerinthus (which are thought to be here meant) and the Nicholaitans, which are expresly mentioned, ought to be tryed by their
lives and doctrine applyed to the Rule of Gods Word (which is the sense of Interpreters upon this place) that therefore every other person offering to communicate, though never pretending to be Teachers; Paraeus. Piscator. Aretius. Menochius. Tirinus, &c. much less holding forth new Doctrines needful to be tryed, must be pre-examined before their admittance; no man but will discern the fallacy of the consequent. Touch∣ing that of Peter, first the Answer here commanded to be given, is not proper∣ly a profession of the Faith, but a defence thereof, or a Confession under the Cross, as Aretius expounds it, , a Defence of Christian Religion, consisting in Speech and Arguments, saith Piscator; Gagnaeus. Menochius, in locum. and therefore (saith he) it is added with fear, viz. of God, lest for favour of men, or fear of persecution, dissembling the truth, you offend God: so the Syriack is rendred by Tremellius, ad defensionem; so Justinian understands it; and Estius inter∣prets it to be an Answer to the Objections of the Adversaries, which Oecu∣menius admonisheth to have been after a sort necessary in the Apostles age, when the Gentiles derided the Christian Religion, and reproached Christi∣ans for worshipping a crucified God, undergoing such persecutions, and de∣nying themselves the present complacencies and endeerments of life, out of a vain and empty hope of future uncertain things, not falling under the comprehension of Sense. The Apostle therefore commands the faithful to have answers prepared and premeditated, whereby they might refel the Ob∣jections of the Gentiles, and assert their hope of eternal glory to be most ra∣tional, and satisfie any that was desirous to learn the Reasons of such Hope: this is the summe and exstract of the Commentaries of Calvin, Paraeus, Estius, and Justinian, upon the place. The vulgar Translation reads, In locum. ad satisfactio∣nem, and the glosse expounds it to be satisfaction by words and deeds, justi∣fying their Faith, both by defensive Arguments, Constancy, and a godly life, which is in effect the Exposition of Aquinas also, which seemes likewise to be understood by Diodate in his Annotations, viz. he will have beleevers still ready to shew unto all men, that they sincerely serve the onely true God. Secondly, if this giving an answer were properly meant of a profession of Faith, when there is hope of him that asketh, when the glory of God is to be asserted, or the name of Christ to be confessed, as Bullinger extends it: yet what is all this to an answer upon examination antecedent to the Sacra∣ment? How is the necessity thereof more at that time than another, evinced out of this Text? If it be answered, That if we must be ready to give an∣swer at all times, much more before the Communion; truly I think he shall deserve thanks, as for a largesse, or for a charientisme, that shall grant the consequence; but let it however be conceded, yet much more at the Sacra∣ment, and onely at the Sacrament are things disparate, and the necessity hereof is at no other time obtruded; but neither however comes this home to our issue, as not proving that unlesse men will be thus ready to give an An∣swer, they may not be admitted to the Eucharist, nor the Sacrament at all be administred. They must be strange Scrues and Wires that shall draw this conclusion from the Text; the Flock may be faulty in neglect of their duty, yet this cannot blanch with an excuse the omission of office in the Pastor, and that may be requisite necessitate praecepti, which is not so medii.
Thirdly, but let it be by Supererogation yeelded, that by this answer is meant an account of Faith and previously to the Synaxis, ye why must every man be restrayned to the Pastor and Elders; when Dydimus thought that the Governors of the Church were those principally concerned to be ready to give the answer, not to receive it? why might not the Papists have asmuch colour to prove auricular Confession from that of St. Iames, cap. 5. v. 16. Confess your sinnes one to another, as these men have to prove that every man must give an account of his Faith to his Pastor and Elders out of this of Peter, Be ready to give an answer to every one? But as our Divines reply upon the Papists, that by that text in Iames, the Priests are aswell bound to confess themselves to the people, as they unto the Priests; so why may not I aswell retort, that by this Scripture in Peter, the Pastors and Elders are aswell bound to submit to the exa∣mination of any of the people, as any of them unto theirs? I shall therefore conclude that I doubt they will never be ready to give an answer to any that asketh a reason of the hope that they have, that this Text should make for their purpose. Now lastly to that of 1 Cor. 5.11. (which is indeed the darling and Cham∣pion-Text of the separation) I shall answer, that not to eat here, cannot be understood of eating at the Lords Table, for there is nothing in the Context to leade to that interpretation, no like Phrase elsewhere in Scripture to warrant it, no sufficient authority to back, nor other reason to evince it, save that it will serve the turn, and their hypothesis to keep company, & to eat cannot signifie to have Fellowship and to eat together at the Sacrament. The Apostle could not possibly be so mistaken as to be supposed to forbid them not to Company & eat with the Fornicators of this World at the Lords Table where they never came, nor need they have gone out of the World, if they had not gone thither with them: wherefore this is generally understood of eating common meat, not Sacramental; yet they that goe this way are divided into two paths, some take it as a consequent of Excommunication, with men so censured not to eat; others understand it Symbolically, as it denotes familiar consortship and inti∣macy, which they are forbidden to have with such Offenders; but neither of these wayes will it lead to their ends, nor conclude any thing subservient to their purpose: for the Argument will be either Ignorantia elenchi; and is not pertinent to our question, if the Text be to be understood of an inordinate brother judicially excommunicated; or else Fallacia consequentis, (and it fol∣lows not from eating together at common Tables to the not eating together at the Table of the Lord) if the words are meant of ordinary eating with an inordinate brother not yet juridically sentenced. St. Augustine, Oecumenius, Aquinas, and divers others, with some very ancient Copies, set the word (Called) before Fornicator, not Brother, and reades thus, If any Brother be called a Fornicator; the Greek will bear both readings; but the Lear∣ned say, that when nominatus idem valet quod appellatus, the Greek word com∣monly used is  or ; but the word here is , Signanter nominatus, or diffamed with the name, a man of name as it were, that he is designed generally of all by that name, and hath made that common name as it were proper to himself.
Famosi more Scripturae nominati dicuntur, saith Estius. (1.) St. 1. Homil. 50 & contra Parmenian. 2. In locum. 3. In locum. Augustine therefore understands it such a naming, as befalls a man condemned for such offence in a juridical way; so doth (2.) Aquinas; and though (3.) Estius (whom one calls the most rational, acute, and solid Doctor of the Romane Church) think not that the word nominatus, includes all that Augustine re∣quires, yet the Apostle (saith he) doubtless would have that done in a judiciall order, which he elsewhere prescribeth, 2 Thes. 3.14. as well as here; but if the crime be so notorious, that by no gainsaying it can be denyed, (and in the entry into this Discourse, we added this to the constitution of a notorious sinner) as was the offence of the incestuous person; it seems not (saith he) That the sentence of the Judge is to be expected, in order to the avoiding of the Offender; In 4. Sent. p. 1. d. 18.5.7. pag. 266. yet the same man, Valentia, Biel, and Vasquez, produce this very Text, to assert and prove the power of Excommunication, whereby according to the old Verse; Os, Orare, Vale, Communio, Mensa negatur. And of such a Church-censure, Calvin and Aretius understand the place also, In 3. disp. 7. p. 17. punct. 1. pag. 1385. In l. 4. d. 18. q. 2. art. 2. De excom. dub. 7. n. 2. p. 517. In locum. whereof if this be the genuine sense, it shall be very impertinently alleaged in this question, which then should imply a contradiction, if it were thus pro∣posed; Whether persons lawfully excommunicate, or excluded from the Sa∣crament, are to be admitted thereunto? But if it be to be understood of per∣sons criminal, yet not juridically censured by the Church, and that with such we must not eat at common Tables, and thence it be concluded, therefore much lesse at the Table of the Lord. I shall deny the consequence, because the prohibition of ordinary con∣verse (which is symbolically, rather than Synecdochically here set forth by eating with them; Obliterari fidem commer∣cio infideli. Tertul. for the Table was a Symbol of friendship among the An∣cients, as Bullinger, and a note of intimacy, as Paraeus reminds us) is grounded upon the danger of a tacite and insensible sucking in, and contracting a Con∣tagion from such vitious company; Ne consuetudine, velut contagione, paribus inficiamur moribus, say Interpreters, it being one of the most admirable things in the world, in the judgment of the Philosopher, Aristippus. To remain good in the society of evii men; but there is no such fear of infection by communion with them at the Lords Table, where they so seldome meet, remain so little while, and have no examples of vices, nor occasions nor tentations to them; so as where the reason of the prohibition extends not, the Law doth not; and therefore Marlorat out of Mayer affirmeth, That this prohibition pertaineth not to the Holy Supper, whence we ought not to withdraw our selves, In locum. because some fla∣gitious persons, not by common consent of the Church excommunicated, doe partake thereof, as the Anabaptists (saith he, shewing the source and fountain of these principles) falsty teach; and in expresse terms St. Augustine tells us, Acci∣piamus us{que} cum iis corpus Christi, cum quibus panem edere prohibemur; that is, Epist. 84. let us take the body of Christ with them, with whom we are forbidden to eate bread: besides, not to eat at ordinary refections, is arbitrary, I may chuse my Consorts; but to eat at the Lords Supper is a duty, I may not refrain it, though I like not my company, and though I have no society with peccant
men in that which is formally or occasionally evil, yet I may have in good. I may worship God together with them, but not dishonour him, I may not so desert evil men, as to neglect my own good, nor any act of goodnesse; and 'tis not so much a local and bodily secerning our selves from evil men that God requires (as the Donatists falsly taught) but a spiritual separation in mind and affections, and from their sinnes, more than from their persons. When any is hindred to separate evil men from the Congregation of the Church (saith Augustine) if he put away the evil from himself, he is not commixt with them in his heart, De verbis Do∣mini, &c. Sermo 18. Tom. 10. p. 18, & 19. and so spiritually he is not onely conjoyned to good men, but separated from evil: Duobus modis non te maculat malus; (saith that Father) si ei non consentias, & si redarguas, hoc est non commu∣nicare, non consentire: communicatur quippe quando facto ejus consortium vo∣luntatis vel approbationis adjungitur: — displicuit tibi quod quis{que} peccavit? Non tetigisti immundum; — redarguisti, corripuisti, monuisti, adhibuisti etiam, si res exigit, congruam & quae unitatem non violat, disciplinam? existi inde — manens loco exiit inde — clamando exibat inde — ut corde recedamus, ne majus malum in separatione bonorum committamus, quàm in malorum conjunctione fugiamus, sicut ipsi Donatistae fecerunt. Objurgando au∣tem est liber in conspectu dei, cui ne{que} sua peccata Deus imputat, quia non fecit, ne{que} alia, quae non approbavit, ne{que} negligentiam, quia non tacuit, ne{que} super∣biam, quia in unitate permansit. Lastly, if this precept, Not to eate with those that walk inordinately, shall be a standing precept in the strictness of the letter, how can they justifie their frequent practise to the contrary? But such is the preposterousness of some men, that notwithstanding this Text, they will doe what the words imme∣diately forbid, viz. To eat with them at common Tables, and yet by pretended virtue thereof, they will not do what the Text prohibits not, viz. To eat with them at the Table of the Lord.
DEFENCE. SECT. XII. 1 Cor. 11.28. Re-inforced and vindicated. Negative Ar∣guments. Whether this be such? Whether all revealed in Scripture be necessary? Christs not examining his Disciples. The sense of ancient and modern Interpreters, upon that of 1 Cor. 11.28. The testimony of Paraeus vindicated. Exa∣mination but an after-reckoning to auricular Confession, and built upon the same foundations, the consequences thereof alike to be feared. WHat a learned man saith of 1 Cor. 7.14. Baxter. I doubt I may adde of this Text 1 Cor. 11.28. against which men do wilfully cavil as if they were sorry, that God speaks it so plainly; and I doubt not impartial and judi∣cious men will discern, that notwithstanding all their bustle and ratling, the Apologists are but like that Goth in Procipius, who though he fought fiercely, yet had the mortal Arrows sticking in his Helmet, whereof he soon after fell. They say they concede the fulnesse and sufficiency of the Scripture, but they forthwith interpretatively and by consequence retract that grant, while they deride an Argument from the authority thereof negatively, which necessa∣rily hath its foundation upon, and result from the sufficiency thereof in genere regulae, as I have formerly shewed. But this sufficiency (they added) is in the whole, but all of any one matter is not contained in any one place, what is wanting in one, is supplied in another. The Scripture in the full latitude of a rule is no otherwise sufficient than colle∣ctively, tota Scriptura, non omnis, as we answer the like cavil which the Papists have to 2 Tim. 3.16. where , omnis is tota; but yet distributively every part is sufficient to that whereunto it was intended, and contains a full di∣rection in that which it undertakes to teach; and therfore the Apostle here edo∣ctrinating the Corinthians that examination was necessary to precede the Sa∣crament, if any other probation than every mans of himself had been requisite, he should have injoyned that, or else he sufficiently taught them not their whole duty; and I suppose it will not be easie to instance wherein the proper seat (as I may speak) of any doctrine, Eccles. pol. l. 2. S. 6. p. 67. where it is professedly and designedly taught, that any necessary point thereof is in that place omitted, and supplyed in another. Of the thesis, or matter in general, hear judicious Hooker, because
the things that proceed from God are perfect without any manner of defect or maim, it cannot be but the words of his mouth are absolute, and lacke no∣thing which they should have, for performance of that thing whereunto they tend, whereupon it followeth, that the end being known whereunto he dire∣ceth his speech, the Argument negatively is evermore strong, and forcible con∣cerning those things that are apparently requisite to the same end. And for the hypothesis, Epist. ad Bezam. or this special subject in hand, let them hearken to Gualter, Ita certè quae infinitis exemplis tam veteris quàm novi Testamenti probari poterant, nos movent, ut privatum illud examen, quo quis{que} seipsum probet, secundùm Pauli praecep∣tum, sufficere putemus iis qui ad Domini mensam volunt accedere, nam si quod praeerquàm voluisset fieri Apostolus, magna erat illud praecipiendi occasio, cùm ex Professo de legitimo coenae usu dissereret, apud eos qui innumeris erroribus at{que} vitiu polluti, ipsam quo{que} horribili usu prophanarant, sed vidit proculdubio quàm peri∣culosum sit aliorum conscientias rimari velle, quando nihil facilius est quàm seve∣riùs in alios animadvertendo, sanctitatis majoris existimationem venari, & saepe tentationum lineis metiuntur per importunos illos Censores, qui consolatione potiùs sublevari, & confirmari debebant, ideo in hac ipsa causa graviter monebat viden∣dum esse ne à Sathana occupemur, cujus machmationes nemo Christianus igno∣rat. It hath been the ill hap of all the Arguments hitherto alleaged, to dash upon that rock, ab authoritate Scripturae negativè. It hath been their ill hap to be guilty of a palpable and gross mistake, for the Argument collected from the admission of Judas was not such, nay this very Argument in hand is not such; for though we say we finde a precept, Let a man examine himself, none that he should passe the examination of another; yet we do not argue, that because the Apostle hath onely commanded the one, therefore the other falls not under precept; but we thus reason, the Apostle requires a man to examine himself, and permits him having done so, to receive the Sacrament, which is the natural analysis, and ge∣nuine paraphrase of the Text; and if any other examination were to intervene, then having examined himself, Answer to chall. Josuit. p. 8. Senensis bibli∣oth. l. 6. p. 527. For denying the necessity of Confession before recei∣ving of the Sacrament, Cajetan his Commentary on 3. q. 80 art. 4. is left out of the Roman Edition. Syl∣vius in 3. q. 80. art. 4 p. 311. yet (So) nevertheless he could not be permitted to eat and drink: and thereupon, not onely the glory of this Nation, and our Age, Bishop Usher, doth from hence extract this Porisma, That in the Apostles dayes when a man had examined himself, he was admitted to the Lords Table; but the great Cardinal Cajetan (though cross to the interest of his Church, and his fellows are angry for it, especially his constant evil genius, Catharinus) was sensible of the force of this consectary, and concludes, Dicendo (Sic) &c. by saying (and so) he signifieth that to a worthy receiving of the Eucharist it is sufficient that a man have examined himself, and useth this as a medium to conclude against necessity of confession, and is therein applauded by one of his party, viz. Petrus, Soto. Secondly, had they been all such Negative Arguments, I think they had not dashed upon a rock, but been built upon it, being founded upon the perfection of Scripture, as I have formerly asserted. Thirdly, in the controverting of this question I am for the negative, and Po∣nenti non infcianti, incumbit onus probandi, per rerum naturam, factum negantis pro∣batio nulla sit, saith the Law; I had complyed with my part, if I had shewed their model of Discipline had no foundation in Scripture, to shew there was no ne∣cessity thereof that was enough; for the Scripture denieth what it noteth not,
saith Hilary, and we beleeve it not, because we reade it not, addes Hie∣rom. Fourthly, would I use such wanton and licentious Arguments, as the Apolo∣gists doe, setting the Scripture upon a rack, and violently forcing it to speak what is not in it, not giving, but making the sense of Scripture, and so ex Evan∣gelio Christi facere Evangelium hominis; as Hierom, and Scripturarum verbis pro esca uti, as Athanasius, we could not want superfluity of Arguments from Scripture authority affirmativè; perhaps we might bring forth some of theirs, as apt for our purpose, as applicable to theirs, if not more, and might make such Idoll-Mercuries of most of the Trees in the Paradise of God; but God forbid we should so take his Word in vain, and abuse both Scripture and our Readers, as it is sadly evident to me, the Apologists have done, which we shall hereafter ma∣nifest; and whereof, if they shall not take shame, we shall be ashamed in stead of Cato. That nothing can be necessary about the practice of the Sacrament, which is not there express'd, they see no reason to yeeld; but they should have spoken more ratio∣nally, if they had shewed reason why they should deny; but though they fall short of that, yet they go too farre another way, when they talk of no other thing necessary, which they should limit to no other probation. They are sure there is elsewhere, which is not there, (that is certain, but they should have said of this concernment) and all is necessary that is revealed, re∣dundancy being a blemish to the word as well as deficiency; although I am not willing to fall into Parerga's, and to contract Pyrrhus his fault, to be diverted by every petty occasion from the main; and shall not therefore insist on, rectify∣ing this sorry expression, yet I must touch upon it. All that is revealed in Scri∣pture is not necessary to be known, or explicitly beleeved; as that Paul left a cloak at Troas, yet all that is known and sufficiently declared, and particular∣ly offered to consideration, is necessary to be beleeved: for the necessity of be∣leeving results not from the matter great or small, but the formal reason or ob∣ject (and objectum formale quod, est Deus in essendo, sub quo, Deus revelans, say the Schools) and this is the same toward all the material objects, so as the smallest matters revealed, and sufficiently propounded are to be beleeved ne∣cessitate praecepti, although not medii; and though not revealed, because necessa∣ry; yet are necessary, because revealed, and particularly declared, consequent∣ly and accidentally necessary, as secondary objects of Faith, though not of themselves pertinent to the object of Faith; Aquin. 22. q. 2. art. 3. for Nihil per se pertinet ad objectum fidei, nisi per quod homo beatitudinem consequitur; but without this particular de∣claring and propounding, all that is revealed is not necessary to be beleeved, but in preparation of mind, and by Faith implicite, tanquam particulare in uni∣versali, by a general virtual negative Faith not to gainsay it; and therefore sure it was not so clearly and accurately delivered that all that is revealed is necessary. Besides, though the Scripture be more than sufficient, as Lirinensis, not pre∣scribing more things than are necessary to be beleeved or practised; Antonius Perez. but in fre∣quent repeatings, and deliveries of those things, more than had been simply necessary; yet I will not say as a Papist doth (which is the more strange) that the Scripture is superfluous and redundant (much lesse that the knowledge of
most things in the same are unnecessary) quia instractionis varii sunt gradus, ut alia sit plena, alia uberior & amplior, & disertiùs quaedam explicata, as Chamier observes. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 2. S. 3. p. 104. But if they mean onely that some other tryal is elsewhere prescribed, be∣sides self-examination, though not here mentioned, and therefore necessary, because by Divine Revelation commanded; as they do not bring it forth, nor point us where we may finde it, so I know they cannot finde it, (for Scripture being most perfect truth, cannot contradict it self; and if some other probation were injoyned him that had examined himself, he could not (so) eat, which would check with St. Paul's direction; and therefore if they have found such a command, I doubt they read it with Gregory and Bede's Spectacles, wherewith they saw things that had no existence, or else met with it in the Gospel of the Hebrews, the Acts of Paul and Tecla, the Epistle to the Laodiceans, or the Acts of St. John, according to Cerinthus. Here the Apostle mentions no tryal by others for two Reasons; First, because the Corinthians to whom he speakes were newly admitted to Church-fellowship by pro∣fession of their Faith, and needed not to be called to this again; but in our Church true discipline hath been neglected, and many are unfit: I have formerly superse∣ded this answer, and shewed the impertinency thereof, and shall not actum agere: onely since they know that we cannot swallow what they offer without chewing it, they should have brought some proof that the Corinthians did make such a profession of their Faith, as they require in order to admission to the Sacrament; for we finde cause to doubt, that there was no such discipline pra∣ctised in the first times, since when three thousand were baptized in one day, and added to the Church, we cannot imagine it facible, that every one of them should make such an explicite verbal profession as they require, and there could not sure be such an Evidence of the ability of all those Corinthians, that they should be all taken to be such Disciples, as they say are not to be exami∣ned, but the profession of their Faith is sufficient. But since the Corinthians were so ignorant (not convinced of the Resurre∣ction) and so criminous, as the Epistle chargeth them to be, if yet upon self-examination the Apostle permits them to communicate, that liberty cannot ra∣tionally be denyed to those, who doubtless are not so culpable as they were. The Precept, Let a man examine himself, is universal and catholique; and why then should the permission to communicate upon self-examination be peculiar onely to those Corinthians at that time, and so to separate what God by St. Paul hath joyned together? To restrain and limit Divine Rules to particular times or persons, without cogent circumstances, sets open a desperate way to evade the force of Arguments deduced from Scripture, and to betray or make brea∣ches in the Fortress of Faith: and though the Apologists to escape out of a pre∣sont strait , to serve a turn, take that way, yet when they have soberly re-minded themselves, they will finde this path leads to a preci∣pice; and that hence some may take the advantage and encouragement to tell them, that Excommunication was onely a temporary discipline, in joyned while the Church wanted a secular Magistrate. If some in our Churches may be suspected to be unfit, it may perchance be fit to bring them under tryal by examination; but why paucorum crimen should
be attended with paena in omnes, and the unfitness of some should introduce a necessity of examining all, I am not acute enough to discern the conse∣quence. 2. The Apostle here eys Christs performances with his Disciples, whom he needed not to examine, being known to him. We are fully reconciled to this assertion, that the Apostle reflected upon the actions of Christ as his pattern, and delive∣red onely what he had received of the Lord; but then it seems that neither in what he received, nor what he delivered, is any the least hint of any other, save self-examination: Cranmer De∣fence true and Cathol. doct. of Sa∣cram. p. 5. And then the Morning Star of our English Reformation having explicated what the Evangelists and St. Paul in this 1 Cor. 11. have left written of the Institution, concludes, That things spoken & done by Christ, and written by the Holy Evangelists, and St. Paul, ought to suffice the Faith of Chri∣stian people, as touching the doctrine of the Lords Supper, and Holy Commu∣nion or Sacrament of his body and blood; as Cyprian had long before assured us, that in sacrificio quod Christus obtulit, non nisi Christus sequendus est; so that we are safe enough, if we beleeve and practice so much as either in the Evangelists describing Christs Institution of the Sacrament, or St. Paul repeating and ex∣plaining it, and directing to the right administration, and due receiving thereof, we finde to have been done or prescribed; and we may hope sooner to finde pardon for not advancing beyond what we have their example or precept for, than they can to obtain excuse for seeking to lead us farther. If the Apostles needed not to be examined, because known to Christ, then without examination mens fitness may be manifested, and such as are known need no farther tryal; but if the Apologists would condescend to be as gently and familiarly conversant with their people, as Christ was with his Disciples, perhaps they might have as much knowledge of them also, or infuse so much knowledge into them, as to prevent and fore-stall examination. Yet according to their model, the Apostles howsoever ought to have made a publick profession of their Faith, though they were not obnoxious to examination. And if they tell us in earnest, that for example sake those whose knowledge is elevated above suspicion, yet ought to submit to examination, I hope they will yeeld there had been far more reason for our Saviour, whose practice was to be our pattern, and whose example was to pass into a Law, to have examined his Disci∣ples, though he actively, or they passively, needed it not; yet because we nee∣ded it, as a standing influential example, since that being the first administra∣tion in that kinde, was to be the rule & measure of all to follow. And surely it is not easily imaginable, that where professedly the Institution is recorded by the Evangelists, and repeated by the Apostle, with directions for the fit reception of the Sacrament, that there being the proper seat of such Doctrine, there should be no one word of previous tryal, and that it should else-where hang upon a long chain of consequences; and by several distillations be extracted from such places of Scripture, where is no mention at all of the Sacrament, or any preparation thereunto. The celebrious name of Zanchy is mentioned, not to reflect light, but to raise a cloud, for they neither produce his words, nor direct us, where we may take view of them. If none of these Reasons were of weight (as they cannot but sense enough to distrust, for sure they will not turn those very scales at Sedan, which Capellus tells us would break with the four hundreth part of a grain) yet why may not
examination of Pastors and Church Officers, stand with that of a mans self, these being not contrary, but subordinate, and the Precept being not exclusive, Let a man examine, &c? They are so accustomed to ignoratio elenchi, that it is passed into their nature; we doe not say those two are so contrary as to be incompatible; nor argue, that because one is injoyned, the other is excluded: but we reason thus, that the liberty of communicating onely upon self-examination granted by St. Paul (so let him eat) cannot consist with the necessity of passing first the tryal of another before admission. Small hopes of his self-examination, that cannot bear the friendly tryal of his Mi∣nister, (it seems now without the Elders:) This is like, as to say, there is little hope he will prove a good or penitent Emperour, that with Henry the fourth, will not wait three days barefoot in the acerbity of Winter-weather, at Pope Hildebrands gate, to be restored to the Communion of the Church. This self-examination is meant onely of secret sinnes, and sincerity of graces, which men cannot see, and that their examination is for the satisfaction and honour of the Church, and is of that which may be known and judged. However, they may con∣fine or limit the examination here commanded; yet no other besides this falls under the command, and their limitation is grounded onely on their voluntary assertion, which limits not our judgment; and this self-examination is not pri∣marily of sinne, but faith, whereof knowledge is an integral part, Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. In 1 Cor. 11. Hom. 28. Tom. 4. p. 112. (by which Text Chrysostome explains this) and if they will not inquire concerning secret sinnes, we forbid them not to judge of notorious, and of the sincerity of grace, if a self-examination be suffi∣cient, why require they a probation of the sound work of grace upon mens hearts, before they admit them? As for the satisfaction and honour of the Church, we have elsewhere taken them under disquisition; it tends perhaps to swell them with honour and greatness, (non magnitudo, sed tumor est;) but for the Church, it cannot be for the honour thereof, to have so many for ignorance or sinne uncapable of the Sacrament, or to lye under such a suspicion, as to need farther tryal, before they are admitted. They ask, Whether a godly communicant be bound to no other duty then is parti∣cularly exprest in this Scripture, and they hope prayer and other duties may be regar∣ded and practised, being warranted else-where, though not here mentioned. How they still claspe their favourite, Paralogisme! For first, though it is one thing to say, no other duty is necessary but self-examination; another, that no other examination is necessary, beside that of a mans self. Yet secondly, although self-examination have several parts, and divers ad∣juncts, (which we shall not frigidly say, may, but must, be regarded and practi∣sed,) yet all need onely to be done in private with a mans self, without others privity, Homil. 28. in 1 Cor. 11. Tom. 4. p. 112. within thine own conscience, none being present but God, who seeth all things, Enter thou into judgment, (saith Chrysostome,) the Apostle non publicum faciens judicium & sine teste argumentum, as he elsewhere hath it. Among those Concomitants, prayer (which is Sal omnium officiornm) is one, and this is cultus naturals, non institutus, and spreads it self, and is ingredient or united to all duties, as Mercury is joyned to all Mettals, being to them, as Parmenio was to Alexander, without whom he could do nothing; and like The∣mistocles
in the honour of the battel of Salamine, in all account the Second, who∣ever be the first; but if they think that in the recital of the institution, and rules for the celebration, and receiving of the Sacrament in the Evangelists and St. Paul, there is no command, or example for prayer to be used, more than for examination by others, they might easily have adverted, that Christ (cu∣jus exemplum pro imperio est; and who is that Elen or lapis funiculi mensorum, as the Chaldee reades that of Gen. 49.24. because his example is to be the mea∣sure of our actions) did begin with blessing, , as Matthew and Mark, & benedicere est bene precari; as the Hebrew, Beracha, Benedictio, is de∣rived from barac, precatus est, & benedictio panis & calicis est invocatio divinae beneficientiae super illa (as Jansenius) and the sanctifying thereof to that spi∣ritual end and use whereunto they were designed, and with giving of thanks, In 1 Cor. 10.16. p. 306. , as Luke and Paul; which also Matthew and Mark mention at the taking of the Cup, (as indeed both blessing and giving of thanks are signified by the same Syriac word, Non quòd eadem, sed quòd conjuncta, tanquam ejusdem orationis partes seu membra quidem ex quorum utrolibet, Synecdochicè totum possit intelligi, nec non alterum ex altero, as Estius: And giving of thanks is a subje∣ctive, if not integral, part of prayer; In Matth. 26 Homil. 83. Tom. 2. p. 174. and from thence the whole action is de∣nominated the Eucharist; and Christ (saith Chrysostome) gave thanks, to instruct us how we should celebrate this mystery. They yeeld, some Fathers and others gave the same gloss of those words, as the Paper doth, not in that sence, which seems to smack of the Rhemists, who tell us, Rhem. Testam. p. 433. that every one must assure himself, that if any thing (in the Scripture) sound to him as contrary to their (which they style the Catholique) doctrine, he fai∣leth of the right sense: but if I had prompted or dictated to those Authors, they could not have written more clearly to my sense, or more expresly for my purpose. They do not think men onely prohibited to busie themselves about others, negle∣cting of their own condition, or forbidden to rest upon other mens opinions of them; (having learn'd the knack it seems, which the Belgick Expurgatory Index pre∣scribes, when any of the Fathers is opposed in disputation, to excuse and ex∣tenuate it, and seign some convenient sense) as if this were all which they col∣lect from the Text. St. Augustine upon another occasion tells us, that Curiosum genus hominum ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, is always desidiosum ad corigen∣dam suam: yet however, a curious busying of themselves about others, whether they neglect their own condition or no, is culpable; and the reproof thereof may perchance hit with them, for curiosity is one ingredient, though I fear ambition be the basis in this composition, and a considence of themselves ill grounded on others flatteries, is no more peccant, than a distrust and suspicion of others, resulting from their own malignant or arrogant censoriousness, but the Authors cited doe in terms tell us, that St. Paul (whom we must recognize to give precepts concerning right and holy communicating) commands onely self-examination, injoyns no one to examine another, no not the Priest or Mi∣nister, but prescribes the sciutiny to be private and without witnesses, not pub∣lick. And whereas they tell us, that Chrysostome speaks onely of private exami∣nation, which should be secret, but that which is for information and satisfaction of the Church, should be with witnesses: Sure they found this in the glosse of
Orleance, which corrupts the Text; for Chrysostome sayes, that no other but examination without witnesses is prescribed; and then for them to inferre that another examination must nevertheless be with Witnesses, is such another in∣terpretation of Chrysostome, as the Pontificians give of Pope Telesephorus insti∣tuting Quinquagesima for the Clergy, whom they make by the word Statuimus, to mean Abrogamus. If Clemens counted every mans conscience his best Director, they hope he meant it not of men void of true conscience, as all are, whom they willingly keep off. Resp. Clemens doubtless speaking so generally and indefinitely, thought he was obli∣ged in humility to judge no mans conscience, and in chairty to judge every man conscientious, who by notorious sinnes had not forfeited that reputation; and to say they repell none but such as are void of true conscience, let them examine their own consciences, how this stands with truth, or consists with what elsewhere they say [That they doe not judge all those to be wicked whom they ad∣mit not] unless perhaps they can think to salve themselves by saying, They un∣willingly keep ost those that are such; but since we see they admit them not, we cannot beleeve they doe that unwillingly, which we know no necessity in∣cumbent on them to doe, and finde to be done towards so many, so common∣ly, and so constantly. We could stick more flowers on the garland of autho∣rity, wherewith the Paper sought to crown the sense which it rendred of this place. To omit the Ancients, Durant deritib. Eccles. l. 2. c. 55. S. 10. Chem. exam. concil. Trid. part. 2. p. 140. Hist. Sacram. l. 4. p. 366. Answer to Je∣suites, p. 99. Epist. ad Petrum Dathenum ad∣vers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 229, 232. Epist. ad Bezam. Gualt. Epist. ad comitem Wity∣enstein. among whom Athanasius comments on the words, I would propound no man for thy Judge but thy self; and Theodoret, Be thou thine own Arbiter; and Theophylact, I give thee no other Judge, I commend thy self to thee. Chemnicius affirmeth, Ex interpretatione Pauli habemus illam dispensatio∣nem panis & poculi ex praecepto Domini debere fieri, omni homini probanti se, item omnibus qui invocant nomen Domini. Hospinian more punctually, Probet seipsum quisque, non igitur sacerdotibus, aut aliis, hoc munus demandat, sed sibi quemque vult esse probatorem. And as expresly B. Usher, who recounting the suppressing of Confession, in Nectarius his time; and thereupon the giving liberty to eve∣ry one upon the private examination of his own conscience, to resort to the ho∣ly Communion, he addes, which was agreeable both to the Rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28. and to the judgment of the more ancient Fathers; and as fully Bullinger, Ut quilibet juxta Canonem Apostolicum suae relictus conscientiae; ad caenam accederet, dicente Apostolo, probet autem homo seipsum; and elsewhere expresly saith, non debet ab alio probari; and again, Probationem, Ministri aut Ecclesiae judicio non relinquimus, ut tum demum aliquis ad coenam Domini accedat, cùm Minister vel Ecclesia ipsum satis dignum, fidelem & sanctum judicaverit. And he cites Zuinglius, advising Oecolampadius, Ne nimis rigidè ageret, & mysticam coenam pleris{que} redderet ingratam, adeó{que} difficilem & morosam. And Gualter is no less full in the consort, Nec ego videre possum cur conscientiarum carnificina ex eo fieri debet, quod ut fidei confirmandae & recreandis af flictorum conscientiis, à domino est institutum; and in another place, Non abs{que} causa quaeritur, an caena Domini, quae ut communionis & societatis christianae Symbolum sit, uti{que} fidei confirmandae serviat, à Christo instituta est, in usum planè diversum, adeo{que} Christi instituto contrariun converti debeat, ut interim dissociationis & exclusionis organum, & conscientiarum carnificina fiat, deinde annon cum Pauli regula hoc pugnet, qui ut
quis{que} seipsum probet, non ut aliorum conscientias curiosiùs scrutemur, jussit? Apparet (saith Musculus) necessariam & utile esse eorum sudium qui neminem adcoenam Domini admittunt quem ipsi auteà non probaverint, si modus & discretio adhibeatur, nec velut universali lege indiscriminatim omnes etiam qui inculpatè se gerunt in Ecclesia ad hujusmodi examen constringantur, verùm juxta timendum est, In 1 Cor. 11.28. p. 438, 439. ne institu∣tum hoc, quàm nunc magni aestimatur, tam olim in priscam servitutem ecclesiam Christi reducat, et noxium reddatur, sanè Apostolica institutio nihil hujus requirit, sed hortatur unumquem{que} ut seipsum probet — sed quid si Minister Ecclesiae hac Apostoli sententiâ nolit esse contentus, nec admittat nisi eos quos ipse explorat, item quid si fidelis ad panis tantum & non etiam poculi dominici communicationem admittatur, sicut in papatu fieri videmus? Respondeo, ubi nec domini ea institutio nec apostolica dotrina servatur, ibi non est ut communicaret fidelis, sinat magistra∣tus illos regnare in Ecclesia, donec visum fuerit domino modum imponere illorum dominio. This voyce is Bath col, which comes with thunder, yet is that Ful∣men, which Seneca calls Monitorium. But however they may despise or avert their ears from the voyce of others, yet Paraeus hath such honour, that they are content to hearken to him, the words cited out of him in the Paper they acknowledge to be his, non dicit Apo∣stolus, sacerdotes probent, &c. But they say Paraeus speaks this: 1. Of Popish Priests. 2. Of Auricular Confession. 3. In the following words he is theirs, Examina publica vel privata commu∣nicantium minimè improbamus, sed requirimus. To the first, though the Libertines boast, that what is sinne in others, is not in them; and the Popish Canonists tell us, that though it may be a wanton and impudicous act in another to kiss a woman, yet a Priest doing it, it is to be pre∣sumed he doth it onely to bless her; yet we think it abominable to have such divers Weights, and divers Measures; and therefore cannot denominate good and evil with respect of persons, nor conceive that what is not just or warranta∣ble in Popish Priests, should yet be so in the Apologists; and if a man after self-examination may so communicate without further probation by a Popish Priest, we have not light enough (unless they reflect it) to see, why he may not do so too without more tryal by any other Minister. To the second, If he that hath examined himself may so receive, that (So) is exclusive of any farther examination, as well as of confession; and though Paraeus alleage and apply the Argument, to refute the necessity of confession, which he pertinently saith, ad hanc probationem olim instituta fuit, and his con∣clusion is specially against that; yet the medium is general and extensive, and applyable to all of the like kinde (universaliter applicandum, quod particulariter dictum.) And by the analogy and proportion of reason, it may as effectually be urged, and accommodated to frustrate the necessity of their pre-examination, since all the particulars are involved in, and may be collected out of the gene∣ral; and out of one principle may several conclusions be extracted and apply∣ed to divers subjects. And whatsoever plausible reasons, or specious preten∣ces, they can muster, to elude the force and energy of this Argument; and notwithstanding the liberty granted by the Apostle, to maintain their proba∣tion as necessary, the same or the like, doe and may the Papists muster, to sup∣port the necessity of confession.
To the third, Paraeus indeed owns the words they cite, and the Paper runs not discord with them, which disallows not, but supposeth pre-examination may be requisite, as an act of prudence, ad hic & nunc, in order to particular persons who may rationally be suspected to be of incompetent knowledge, but not as an universal and unlimited Empire over all, with power to make re-search of their lives, and the signes of saving grace in them, as well as disquisition of their knowledge and intellectual gifts. Paraeus hath no spice that relisheth of this, and if his sense were not, as we have interpreted, we must dosiderare Paraeum in Paraeo, and the weapon he hath sharpned against the Papists, would be turned upon himself; for if he think it required of the Minister, to make probation of all, how can it hold coherence with that which he saith, Est{que} doctrina gene∣ralis de legitima & salutari usu Sacramenti, probatio sui praecedat, postea veniatur ad sacrum hoc epulum — non dicit Apostolus, sacerdotes probent, explorent communicantes, sed quis{que} probet seipsum. And though he approve of some kinde of examination, yet he would have it such, from which absit tyrannis & supersti∣tio, & ducantur afflictae conscientiae ad Christi corpus & sanguinem; And though we shall suspend to asperse tyranny or superstition on their way, yet we are con∣vinced, to say it is out of the way of drawing men to the Sacrament of Christs body and blood, and rather drives them from it. And though examination may in some respects and circumstances be requisite, yet Paraeus warrants not that it is so necessary, necessitate medii aut praecepti, as if it be not practised, or cannot conveniently be effected, that either the Ordinance may be suspended from administration, or any from partaking. They think it hinted that their probation hath risen out of the ashes of auricular confession; and we cannot dissemble, that we conceive those ashes to have im∣proved their grounds, and that out of those ashes they have made glass for this Prospective, for that they have built upon the same foundation, and propt their Fabrick with the same but tresses, we have evidenced out of Valentia, (whereof they have, I suppose, more out of cautness, than contempt or negligence, taken no notice) and in like manner, as Bellarmine, Lorinus, and others, argue from Levit. 13.5. for proof of confession, so do they also dispute for their examina∣tion, and I might adde, that as they conclude because persons ignorant are to be excluded, therefore they must examine all, or else they cannot make judg∣ment of their knowledge; so both Bellarmiue and Vasquez, pleading for the necessity of confession, Bell. de paenit l. 3. c. 2. p. 231 Vasquez in 3. q. 90. art. 1. dub. 2. p. 184. say, the Priest is to judge who ought to have absolution (without which none can have admission to the Sacrament) but ne{que} sacer∣dotes judicare possunt, nisi peccata cogno cant, & incognitâ causâ, non potest fieri ju∣dicium. But though confession and examination are pitch'd upon the same ground, and perchance have the same prospect, and after look the same way, (v.z.) to∣ward power and greatness, yet we never said they were in all things of the same model and form of building; and therefore they might have superseded their Parergon, and spared supervacaneously to shew us the differences between their probation and Popish Confession, though Amasis his famous Basin and Idol, were formed of the same mettal, it doth not follow that they must have been of the same figure. As the Arguments rallied for their probation, are to my sense (and I hope to make it evident to others) as loose and wanton, as those the Papists arrang for Confessions, and some of them are the same (as
that of making judgment of, and shutting up the Leper) and theirs of Jeho∣shapha's Porters, weighs just as much as that of the Papists, concerning God's asking Cain where his brother was; so auricular Confession hath as specious pre∣rences of Reformation, and Godliness to usher and attend it, as they can pal∣liate their examination with, (which is oftentimes, if not always, auricular too, and acted by themselves alone in private) as besides the disposing for the Sa∣crament, that it must needs give a bridle to sinne, and a stirrop to holiness and perfection, when a man takes so frequent a survey of his actions and passions, censuring them with grief, confessing with shame, curing by counsel, and ex∣piating with punishment, and redeeming with resolution to offend no more. Confession was first onely publick recognition for publick scandals, and then inlarged and extended to private sins, but voluntarily undertaken, not impo∣sed, of Consilium Ecclesiasticum, it becaine at length Praeceptum Ecclesiae, then in∣joyned for all sins quoad substantiam, at length quoad circumstantias, and con∣fession, as Luther calls it, degenerated into carnificinam cruentissimam conscientia∣rum; and this was that prisca servitus whereunto Musculus feared this exami∣nation was like to reduce us. The Keys at length got new Wards, and instead of opening Consciences were used to unlock Cabinets and Kingdoms, and they that carryed them, hereby became Masters of the house, and kept all men under their girdle by the keys that hung at it. The Presbyterians profess they examine none but children; but some of ours of that notion, spread and dilated their examination to all, though adult in knowledge, as well as years. The Independents enlarge and extend this tryal to their lives and gracious conversation, not onely to exclude them for the scandal of notorious sins, Bayley Dis∣swas. c. 7. but not to admit them without approved signs of Holiness, and to reject them not onely ob evidentiam juris aut facti, but upon suspicion. And lastly, that which was at first onely commended, as adjumental to Godliness, is now become, as it were, the form thereof, giving the name and essence thereunto; for let a man walk harmless and blameless without rebuke, yet if he walk not with them in this way, he is but a morral man onely, and hath not yet commenced religious, as if it might be said of this discipline, as St. Au∣gustine speaks of discretion, tolle hanc & virtus vitium erit, and an inconformity thereunto, were like the slaying of Callisthenes to Alexander, a blasting of all graces, or an alloy to all endowments. But nevertheless this new Light makes all to shine that walk in it, like the bright light of the Sunne, which gilds all his spots, and makes them invisible, which some by their Prospectives discern in the body thereof. What farther rise it may have, or progression make, we cannot certainly fore-tell, but may solicitously fear, since men of these principles are like the Crocodile, which ne∣ver ceaseth growing, while he lives; so doe they still increase in new singulari∣ties and humours, and pretended discoveries; yet I hope they will also be as sagacious as the Crocodiles of Nilus, who never hatch any thing, but they lay it without danger of being hurt by the rising flood: yet in the interim, an ordina∣ry judgment may easily discover, that a Fortress founded in the Conscience, and raised on the advantage ground to command our reputation may keep all the parts adjacent in subjection, and bring them under contribution.
And seeing Priam at this age was not unhappy, and confession it self in so short time had neither so enlarged her phylacteries, or out-grown her girdles (which was punish'd with death among the Gaules) as this probation hath done, there∣fore we fear the Year, when the Spring is so nipping; and it is more like to be a sharp Thorn, that pricks so soon. And since we see that not onely by an ex∣traordinary power, as in the time of Elias, but (as Fromundus tells us) by natural course, a small Cloud may soon over-cast our Heaven, and of a small Seed (as Mustard) a Tree may spring up, wherein the losty and high soaring Birds may build their Nests. We may be excused, if we cannot make light of this cloud, with a nubecula est, citò transibit, as Athanasius of Julian; and if with the Ant, we bite the seeds, that they grow not. However they may seriously and plausibly talk to us here of reformation, and satisfaction and honour of the Church, and elsewhere of the smallness of the thing required; yet — Timeo Danaos & dona ferentes. Or (perhaps rather) petentes. We remember what the shepherd in Aesop said, who beholding the smoothness and tranquility of the Seas after a former Tempest, which enforced him to cast all his Dates over-board, which he had sold his Flock to buy, and adventure in the way of Merchandize, Palmarum fructus concupiscit opinor, ac tranquilitatem propterea praese fert, and we cannot be so simple, as they say the African Dabath is, who is so charmed with Musick sweetly sounding in his Ears, that he the whiles suffers his feet to be fetter∣ed.
DIATRIBE. SECT. IV. No pre-examination in the ancient Church, save of Catechu∣meni. Sending the Eucharist to Persons absent, and Stran∣gers. The institution and abolishment of Confession. Li∣berty to approach the Lords Table, upon self-examina∣tion. Whom the ancient Church excluded from the Eu∣charist. The judgment of the Fathers, Casuists and School∣men, concerning those that are to be admitted, and to be de∣barred. To partake, was anciently commanded as a com∣mon Duty. The omission reprehended; the common right asserted. HAving now heard the Nightingale her self to sing, perchance all will not be of Agesilaus his humour, and refuse to hear any that imitate her voyce, having therefore examined the Authorities of Scripture, let us survay the judgment of the Fathers, and practice of the Primitive Church, which cannot but elucidate and confirm our sense and interpretation of Scripture; for as Plato said, Majores nostri propiores fuere progeniei deorum; so the ancient Church stood neerer the light, being neerer the Sunne of truth, and his twelve signes, which signified and shewed forth his Gospel, and through which he moved round about the world. In these Primitive Times, I finde that mutual reconciliations, and in the African Churches, Vigils or watchings in Prayers, and in Chrysostome's time, Fa∣stings, and sometimes, and in some places the publick renouncing of some parti∣cular Heresies, were antecedent to the Synaxis; but I meet with no Records of any command or example of previous probations as necessary, save for Catechu∣men's. The Eucharist was then often sent to persons absent, Justin. M. Euseb. ex Iraeneo, centur. Magdeb. cent. 2. p. 85. it was given to strangers coming to Rome, as a pledge or Symbol of their Communion and consent in the same Faith, where was no probability, or surely no evidence, of precedent pro∣bation. When the Church that saw the benefit of publike Confessions for publick Offences, redounded as well to the subduing of the stubborness of their hard hearts, and the improving of their deeper humiliation, as to their raising up again by those sensible comforts, which they received by the publick prayers
of the Church and use of the keyes; some men reflecting hereupon, and fin∣ding their own Consciences smarting for like offences, which being se∣cretly carried, were not obnoxious to the censures of the Church; to the end, they might obtain the like consolation and quiet of minde, did voluntarily submit themselves to the Churches discipline herein, and underwent the bur∣den of publick confession and penance. And to the end this publication of secret offences might be performed in the best way and discreetest man∣ner, some prudent Minister was first acquainted therewith, by whose direction the Delinquent might understand what sins were fit to be brought to the pub∣like notice of the Church, and in what manner the pennance was to be per∣formed by them. At first it was left free to the penitent, to chuse his Ghostly Father; but at length, by general consent of the Bishops, it was ordained, that in every Church one discreet Minister should be appointed to receive Confessions, untill at length in the time of Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople, (who dyed, A.D. 401.) upon occasion of the infamy drawn upon the Clergy by the confession of a Gentlewoman, Socrates. hist. l. 5. c. 19. p. 349. defiled by a Deacon in that City, it was thought fit it should be abolished, and liberty should be given to every man upon the private examination of his own conscience, to resort to the Holy Communion, which doubtless occasioned Chrysostome (the Successor of Necta∣rius) to make those deliveries of himself which have been formerly mentio∣ned. The result of those premises is this, That the ancient Church some∣time thought it requisite, that confession of sinnes should precede the Communion (which at length also was laid aside) but without any other examination, verbal or real, of all Communicants. But seeing Faith and Repentance are as necessary, as knowledge, to worthy receiving, and as prin∣cipal a part of that, whereof every one ought to make examination of himself, or others are to make of him, I wish it might be advisedly perpended, whe∣ther there be not as great reason, to have auricular confession in some rectified and qualified manner, and to impose it as necessary, in order to the communion, as to introduce their particular examination, as a duty so neces∣sary, especially since the Lutherans assert and practise it upon Homogeneal or like principles, as preparatory and antecedent to the Sacrament contra  nonnullorum Calvinianorum, Baldwin. cas. consci. l. 4. c. 10. c. 2. l. c. 12. c. 18. as they speak, although they doe it not, for the manner, with obligation to the particular enumeration of all sinnes, nor for the matter, with any absolute necessity of doing it; and therefore Luther used to say, that he sometime communicated without confession, to shew it was not necessary, and other times confessed himself for the comfort of absolution: and the Church of Rome also bottoms her rigid practice (car∣nificinam animarum, as their own Cassander calls it) upon the same grounds, that these men do their probation, because (say they) It is the duty of the Priest to repell the unworthy, and admit the worthy, which is best done upon the Penitents estate manifested in confession; Valentia Tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 8. punct. 3. p. 931. and Time, the Mother of Truth, may discover, whether these principles be not some previous dispositions to the generation of such a practice of confession, and that as necessary. In the ancient Church were excluded from the Communion the Catechu∣meni, energumeni, persons excommunicate, and Penitents, and such as lapsed in∣to Heresie, until they repented; and that any other, save under these notions
and capacities, were shut out and debarred, the Monuments thereof in Ec∣clesiastick History have not fallen within my angust Horizon: Homil. 3. ad Ephes. c. 1. Tom. 4. p. 356. Hom. 50. Tom. 10. p. 115. de medicina poeni∣tentiae super illum. 1 Cor. 5. si qui frater nominatur. Tom. 9. c. 3. p. 210. ad 4. senten. distinct. 9. in 3. Aquin. q. 50. art. 6. Duran. Biel, Estius, Caje∣tan, Valentia, Suarez, Vas∣quez, Nugnut Sylvius, &c. Biel in 4. di∣stinct. 9. q. 2. Lessius de ju∣stit. & jure. l. 2. c. 16. dub. 4. S. 55. p. 158. Baldwin. l. 4. c. 9. cas. 1. Ursin. Cate∣chis. part. 2. q. 81. p. 578. He that partakes not is a Penitent (saith Chrysostome.) We can (saith Augustine) repell no man from the Communion, although this prohibition be not yet mortal, but medicinal; but one that by his own conscience, or the sentence of the Ecclesiastical or civil Judica∣tory, shall be accused and convicted of some crime. And in another place which Gratian cites under the name of Hilary, but it is St. Augustines in his 118. Epi∣stle, Si peccata tanta non sint, ut excommunicandus quisquam homo judicetur, non se debet à quotidiana medicina Dominici corporis separare. And the School (if it have any regard left it) doth generally hold; (as also doe the Casuists, Baldwin, Navar, Lessius, Filiacius, &c.) (and besides divers reasons, they cite the authority of St. Augustine to fortifie their opinion) That the Commu∣nion is not to be denyed to a secret sinner, that is not notorious, if he openly desire it, lest he be thereby diffamed, and lest the minister be, as saith Biel, Proditor criminis, inferens poenam ante criminis probationem, & poenam publicam, ob peccatum occultum; and he is not a Casuist minorum gentium amongst his Partizans, who tells us, that aliquis in peccato occulto, licèt jus petendi Eucha∣ristiam non habet, & petendo peccat, tamen habet jus ne à parocho infametur; neither is it enough that the Minister know the offence, Per scientiam priva∣tam, nisi etiam per publicam & notoriam, much less si rumor aliquam de iis su spicionem moverit, nam si nondum sit apertè reus, nec satis convictus, aut con∣fessus, admittendus est, ne tam pretioso animi sui thesauro per nos defraudetur, saith a reformed Casuist; and though (as Lessius would have it) it were indeed sinful in these to demand the Commun on, yet notwithstanding it may not be righteous for the Minister to deny it them: for they are two que∣stions in the judgment of a grave Divine, Qui debeant accedere, Et qui debeant admitti, ad coenam; prior est angustior, posterior latior & generalior, quia tan∣tùm pii debent accedere, sed non tantùm pii, verùm etiam hypocritae, nondum pa∣tefacti, sunt ab Ecclesia admittendi. In those first times they generally communicated daily, which St. Augu∣stine saith, he neither approves nor reprehends; afterward twice or thrice a week; at length constantly on the Lords day, as appears by Justins Apology, and others of the Ancients; but the fervour of devotion rebating, it was or∣dained, that generally every one, pubertatem excessus (which was about the 15. or 16. year) should communicate thrice a year: thus decreed Fabianus, Bishop of Rome, as also did the Agathon Councel. This Decree is found un∣der the name of the Apostles Canons, being the tenth in common account, and the ninth in Zonaras, (which, though I am not ignorant, are not rightly fathered upon them, yet are ancient and not contemptible:) As many of the faithful as come into the Church and hear the Scripture, and continue not out the prayers, nor receive the Holy Communion, let them be put from the Communion, as men that work the breach of order: and it is noted in the Margin upon the same Canons, in old times all that were present did communicate; and conso∣nantly the Councel of Antioch decreed, That all that come into the Church of God, and hear the holy Scriptures, and  (which Zonaras interprets, upon pretext of reverence and humility; Chamier, the violation of religious order) refuse the receiving of the Lords Sacrament, let them be put from the Church; and to like effect, determines the Bracharen Councel; Quid
causae est, De verbis Do∣mini secundum Johan. Serm. 2. saith St. Augustine, ô Audientes, ut mensam videatis, & ad epulas non accedatis? In vain (saith Chrysostome) we stand at the Altar, when none will participate, &c. If thou stand by, and doe not communicate, thou art wicked, thou art shameless, thou art impudent — I would not onely have you to participate, but to be worthy partakers; thou wilt say, I am unworthy to partake of the holy mysteries; then art thou unworthy to be partaker of the prayers: not onely by those things set before us, Homil. 3. ad Ephes. c. 1. Tom. 4. p. 356. but by Hymnes also doth the Holy Ghost descend; you that are under penance depart, &c. He that partaketh not is a Penitent; Why therefore (saith he) depart ye that cannot pray, &c? Neither onely was the participation of the Eucharist injoyned as a common duty, and the omission thereof complained of; but the common right there∣of asserted by the Ancients, That which is the Lords, they make proper to them∣selves, In 1 Cor. 11. Homil. 27. Tom. 4. p. 110. In 1. ad Cor. c. 11. Tom. 8. p. 494. saith Chrysostome, those things which are the Lords, are not this servants, and not that servants, but common to all; he permits it not to be the Lords, that permits it not to be common to all: It is not the Lords, saith Hierom, but mans, when every one invades it, as his proper Supper; for the Lords Supper ought to be common to all, since he himself equally delivered the Sacrament to all his Disciples that were present: To the same tune Oecumenius sings in consort with him, Because, saith Haymo, it is one bread, it must be common to all, simul hoc sumimus, simul bibimus, quia simul vivimus, saith St. Augustine in Gratian. It is true, that Chrysostome, who so eagerly and passionately urgeth all to come, doth as earnestly and pathetically charge Ministers, not to admit known Ostenders to the Communion, In Matth. 26. Homil. 83. Tom. 2. p. 176. (and some vehement expressions of his to this purpose are our Antagonists chief gleanings from Antiquity) But if one be ignorant that he is an evil person, after he hath used much diligence therein, he is not to be blamed, saith the same Father, for these things are spoken by me, of such as are known: but this is not our question for persons known to be flagitious and wicked, we have formerly proscribed and excepted out of our Apology. In the close of all this, let it now be considered, whether there can be any conformity between the ancient Church, and these men, that are resultative∣ly and interpretatively as busie and as earnest to exclude men from the Sa∣crament, as the Ancients were to bring them to it, and if now men stand by, and would, but shall not be suffered to communicate, where and upon whom then shall we lay Chrysostomes Stygma, or where will it fall; and how may it be avoided of wicked, shameless, impudent? If the Pastor shall say of his Flock (as it seems some of his Auditors did of themselves) they are unwor∣thy, Chrysostome will give the Pastor the same answer which he did his own Flock, they are then unworthy to be partakers of the Prayers; and the Coun∣cel of Antioch addes, Unworthy to hear the Holy Scriptures, if they are not under penance, they are not in that Fathers judgment, worthy to be repelled.
DEFENCE. SECT. XIII. The Honour and Interest of the Ministery. Confession of sinnes as necessary as Examination. Whether their Principles have any affinity with the Romane, or may be subservient and manuductive to Popery. The ancient Discipline most like to advance Reformation. What were the Catechume∣ni, Energumeni Penitents. The several Degrees of the latter. The Church-way of the Apologists hath no confor∣mity with the ancient Church. How the Heathens proscri∣bed prophane Persons from their Holies. Whether the Ancients went too farre in Censures? A Testimony of Abbaspinus, falsified by them, cleared. Another of Chry∣sostomes vindicated. FOr the congregating of Homogeneals, we have formerly in another place taken under examination the beginning of this Section, and in hypothesi have made libration, what weight the judgment and practice of the ancient Church doth bear; here in thesi we shall perpend on which side that weight lyes, theirs or ours, and how the Beam inclines. They are irritated that in relating the History of Nectarius his putting down of Confession, we have mentioned the defilement of the Gentlewoman by the Deacon, What else, say they, serves that Story of uncleanness for, but to cast an odium on the Ministers? My reverent and affectionate respects to Ministery are as well known, as I am: As Virgil, when Filistus calumniated him, said, He would be silent, because Augustus and Mecaenas would answer for him; so I may spare to vindicate my self in this, because so many Ministers of my ac∣quaintance will doe it for me. And if I should appeal from Philip asleep, to Philip awake, I presume the Apologists themselves will acquit me of any odium toward Ministry; I wish some of them were not more culpable for inodiating Ministers, and censorious vilifying their persons and pains, that themselves may attract more esteem and dependencies, who (like the men of China) though they may think the Presbyterians to have one eye (as the Chinois say of the Europeans,) yet they conclude all the World beside to be blind. For my part,
I desire to receive a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, and not of a concurrent in this or that way, Tros Tyriúesv, and love and honour the Minister, as Cyrus did the King; they onely doe (as Hephestion did Alexander,) as he is a friend to their ways; yet as much as I honour them, yet I cannot doe to some of them, as the Peguans did to their Pagodes, pull out their eyes, and give them up in sacrifice; or as other Indians to their vast Giantlike Idols, who when they are carried in triumphal Chariots, cast themselves under the Wheels, and are con∣tent to be crush'd and broken to pieces. And I shall farther be led by my plain∣ness to confess, rather than by any cautele or politick closeness o dissemble, that I have this principle, that they should have much reverence, large mainte∣nance, but no great power; for as most Nations have been still set on fire by the Coales of the Altar; so when the flame there riseth too high, it reflects the less light, but occasions no little combustion; and it is out of love to them also, that I entertain this perswasion, since Amare, est velle honum alicui, and it is for their good to be moderated and contracted in their power, least as some herbes growing too rank, they become degenerous and evirtuate; and not onely like Cypress trees be fair and tall, but fruitless, but also runne more hazard to be shaken for their heighth, and to be maligned for their over-dropping. And let me humbly, and without offence, beseech them, without passion or prejudice, to consider and set upon their hearts, whether according to that righteous sen∣tence, He that exalteth himself shall be abased, by a just hand shaking a Rod, (which God forbid should be ever laid upon them, and through them upon this poor Church, which cannot stand without them,) whether the grasping of too much power, hath not of late put them in danger of holding none, and their straining to reach too high, hazarded the setting of them out of joynt. Whether their debarring so many of their right, may not have occasioned so great in∣trusion into their peculiars, and their casting off so many from the Sacrament, have not brought into question their casting out of the Land, Judicia Dei multa occulta, nulla injusta. And as for what they here charge upon me, he that knows my heart doth know, there was no such thought therein; I inserted that of the Gentlewoman as a constitutive & commonly known part of the Story, requisite to manifest the occasion and reason of the fact of Nectarius; but he that did not know the Apo∣logists, might be apt to suspect that they had the same cause of anger against me, that Bessus had to the Sparrows, as if they accused him for what he was se∣cretly guilty of: And not onely say out of Tacitus, Reperies qui ob similitudi∣nem morum aliena malefacta sibi objectari putant; but take up what Salvian hath said, Nec ego de nilo dico, nisi de eo tantùm qui in se quod dico esse agnoscit, si enim extra conscientiam suam sunt quaecun{que} dico, nequicquam ad injuriam ejus spectant cuncta quaedico, si autem in se esse novit quae loquor, non à mea sibi hoc lingua dici aestimet, sed à conscientia sua; but I not onely hope, but am assu∣red of better things of them; & however they are faulty so to suspect my mean∣ing, I am not culpable to insinuate any such suspicion; but perhaps they would in this also be like the Donatists, those among them called Circumcellions, of whom St. Augustine tells us, Cogunt eos quos in viis invenerint, laethalia iis vul∣nera inferre; so they will enforce me to would them whether I will or no, and though I have as little cause, as will, to doe it in this particular.
They acknowledge repentance to be as necessary a disposition and qualification to receiving, acknowledge; and a part of examination to be that of repentance; but when they should have answered our inference, That then it carrieth equall reason to urge and practise a tryal of mens repentance antecedently to the Communion; and that this must introduce as great a necessity of bringing men under confession, as under their examination, they keeping close to their familiar ignorantia elenchi (which runs thorough all their discourse, as the string of poyson doth thorough a Lamprey) instead of answering, whether it be uni∣versally and absolutely necessary, doe onely tell us, that Confession in a right and rectified manner (and we fore-stalled them in these qualifications) hath been, and is practised in some difficult cases, and they dislike it not. And truly so much we shall say and grant them of their examination, if they would require no more, and let it be moderated and regulated as our Divines prescribe for Confession, whereof Luther saith it is Utilis, non necessaria, Instit. l. 3. c. 9. S. 12. debet esse libera, & nemo cogi; wherein Calvin is Symphonous, saying, Si ita privatim angitur & as flictatur peccatorum sensu, ut se explicare nisi alieno adjutorio ne∣queat, and adding, iis tantùm modò commendetur, Exam. conc. Tri dent. part. 2. c. 5. qui eâ se opus habere intelli∣gunt, because (as Chemnicius rationally asserts) non est mandatum, ut corda scrutentur; so let their examination be proposed as profitable, not imposed as necessary; let it be somewhat of their prudence, nothing of our bondage; let it be exercised toward such as may justly be suspected of gross ignorance or exi∣tious crimes (for such a just suspicion onely is principium inquirendi, as Vasquez speakes) and others left free, that are elevated above such suspicion, and we shall be as perfectly reconciled to their examination, as they or our Divines seem to be pacified toward confession. But in the interim, the Argument remains unshaken; If repentance be as necessary a qualification to receiving, and as essential a part of examination as knowledge, then there is in order to communicating no less reason to introduce the discipline of confession, than of examination; if the one be set up, the other must also be imposed; if the one may be omitted, the other may be laid aside; if the one be but profitable to some, the other is not necessary to all: these two being like the subcelestial Gemini, which appear ominously and unluckily, the one without the other. They assert their Principles in their separation and examination not to be Romish; and we suppose by former instances, we have demonstrated the contrary. They profess to abhor the Church of Rome, her ways, and friends, and to be able to main∣tain their cause without the Philistines forge, however the Apologists may have a file for sharpning some of their Weapons; yet in several subjects their main Armature was forged, & hammered out by the Popsh Philistines, for there was no Smith in Israel wont to own it: Nevertheless, they are no farther off from Popery, than we are from any suspicion that they are thereunto affected, one ei∣ther practice or opinion gives not rise to a denomination. But secondly, we know, though Saul had put away those that had familiar Spirits and Wizards out of the Land; yet being in a strait and exigence, he had recourse to one of them for counsel; and I might say, did I not doubt it might irritate, that two Foxes, though looking several ways, may be conjoyned in a Fire-brand.
Thirdly, besides that which is opposed directly, may be farthered obliquely, and by accident, and some men may suppose they are in the way to Dothan, when they are going to Samaria, and suffer like delusion with those in Athe∣naeus, who supposed themselves to be at Sea in a Tempest; and casting out the Utensils of the house, thought they had eased the ship of her luggage, and were plying hard their Oars to attain their Port, whereas all was but the effect of their cups; and such Impostures may be occasioned by the golden Cup in the hand of the woman full of abominations, though insensibly and unawares sip'd off, as to make men dream they are doing one thing, when they are acting ano∣ther. And as the Rabbins (though vainly) expounding Exod. 32.24. say, that Aaron intended not to make a Calf, but cast the golden Earings into the fire to consume them, but by the operation of Sathan, working by some Aegyptian Magi∣tians in the Camp, the form of a Calf came forth; so it is neither impossible nor unusual for some proling men, by over-witting and under-acting them, to make their enemies unwittingly to drive on their designs, and unwillingly ad∣vance their Interests: as it was said of Pompey the Great, Miscriâ nostrâ Magnus est; so what sage man fears not, that our divisions do more occasion and facili∣tate an union with that Kingdome, which is not so much divided within it self; and that not onely because the Trumpets must be of one peece that can call to the Assemblies; but we see that water which is in an entire body, is not so subject to the impressions of Air, yet being scattered into drops, is easily preyed upon, and absorp'd by it; and when a besieged City is set on fire, the ene∣my, who upon this account helps to blow and foment the flame, may more easi∣ly enter and surprise it amidst our confusions. And verely the unchurching of so many may make them more malleable to temptations to step aside into the Roman Church, which is ready to spread her skirt over them, in which respect he that put away his Church from this ordi∣nance (the Canon of the Nicene Councel saying, Matrimonium inter Episcopum & Ecclesiam esse contractum) saving for the cause of fornication, that is, some no∣to rious sin, causeth them to commit adultery; or lastly in so little freedome to partake of the Ordinance, and so great liberty to take up any wild and extra∣vagant opinions, truth and godliness may finally fall under such an eclipse, as the glimmering of that Popish gloworme may be a comfort in so great darkness, and such an ignis fatuus followed as a guide, when there is no better: and upon this score perchance, these cunning juglers, (like Boris of Muscovy) clande∣stinely cause and help to set our houses on fire, that they may get honor and power by rebuilding them: Wisemen will finde these no idle feares nor ground∣less jealousies, but as in that famous automaton, the spheare of Cornelius Bezael, there was an igneous spirit inclosed in the center thereof, which caused the motion; so time may discover, that though some others are the maine spokes, yet the fiery spirit of the Jesuits lying hidden in the center, have wrought in this sphear these rotations and circumvolutions, and it may too late appear that unadvisedly all this while we have plowed with Popish heyfers, and after all our turning up and harrowing of the Church, they may reape the harvest of all those sowings. The paper recording the discipline of the ancient Church, asserted, That from the Communion (as customarily and indeed antonomastically we speake,
though properly the Communion and the Eucharist were farre differing things) it excluded onely the Catechumeni, Energumeni, persons excommunicate, pe∣nitents, &c. and thereupon inferred, That seeing they eject very many which fall not under any of those notions, their practice is not conformable unto (but disagrees from) that of the ancient Church. Hereunto instead of giving an answer, they onely say, that A smatterer in an∣tiquity (and whether they be of that lower forme or no, the reader will by and by have trial) may know the ancients rejected and suspended divers sorts of men, under sundry considerations, and were exceeding cautelous about admission to this ordinance, no print whereof is to be seen in the common practice of our assemblies, (& that is as true indeed of their assemblies as of any others) where such orders and distinctions of men as are named may be fonud: And then next they make us their catechumeni, in describing to us what they were, (but whether themselves may not in some respect be penitents for such descriptions the reader shall judge,) and the care of the ancients to keep off ignorant and unfit, shames the ordinary administrations in our Parishes, where no such things are thought upon, but All to the Sacrament is the plea and practice; and then they take the boldness (— Nimium ne crede colori.) to say, thus farre antiquity is for us, rather than against us. There is no good soule but is anhelant for the restitution and erecting of collapsed discipline, and when other petitions may be frustrate, yet (as Philo comforted his coun∣trymen, that God would heare them, when they could not be heard at Rome, so) we must take the better way to it, by petitions preferred to Heaven, Coelo restat iter, coelo tentabimus ire. But I must tell the Apologists, that I doubt they are parcel-guilty of the ob∣structing of this work, and they will finde somewhat thereof upon their proper score, who have laid aside the right reynes, and caught hold of the false, and neglecting that discipline, which is rooted in Scripture, hath flourished in the purer times, and brought forth sweet fruits where ever it was cultivated, have bestowed and engaged themselves in the grafting and dressing of an exo∣ticke plant, which they have no warrant to set; nor hope it should beare much or good fruit, since it is too close and contracted, not spreading its arms and braunches abroad, and like the Clove tree ingrossing all moysture to it self, makes all other to wither about it. To graspe too much is the way to hold lesse, and in this sense perchance, the half may be more than the whole, and to draw the wires too high, is the way to crack the strings, not to tune the in∣strument, Est modus in rebus, — And as Cyneas told Pyrrhus, he might have been more happy had he been con∣tent with Epirus, and not attempted the conquest of Italy and Sicily; so had the hedge of ancient Discipline been onely repayred and kept up, and not ray∣sed higher, and set farther out beyond the old line and landmarks, the seeds of
peace and Godliness might have been more happily sowne and more prospe∣rously flourished, in the field of the Church, which now lies lesse manured and more full of tares and noysome weeds, Moribus antiquis res stat, — And a famous man saith, Sir F. B. That women are sometimes more fortunate in their cures, than learned Doctors, because the one keep the old receipts punctual∣ly, which the others magisterially take liberty to vary from, and to alter the simples; so the Physick of ancient Discipline in all probability might have cured our Distempers, citò, tutò & jucundè, whereas these new recipe's (like the Paracelstan prescripts of Mercury sublimated and calcinate, and such violent re∣medies) in stead of proving Medicines grow to be maladies, and to cure the disease, kill the Patient, Ut anteà vitiis, ità nunc remediis laboramus. I shall not press or insist upon that of Bullinger, Potest in Ecclesia justa consti∣tui disciplina, Epist. ad Beza. ut interim coena Domini libera maneat omnibus illis qui se juxta Pau∣li doctrinam probarunt; but with hands and feet (asserting my self, and joyning with and drawing others, embracing and also propugning it,) I shall descend into that opinion, that persons notoriously wicked and scandalous should be cast out. And whereas in the close of the Section they say, They wish they could see this done in the Assemblies about them (which would beget better thoughts in them of some mens spirits, than now they have) but thereof they know the contrary. I shall tell them, that I wish they would consent that none but such, as easily as I shall grant, that all such, ought to be ejected: If some would have done it, and want power to do it, it is their affliction; if any have the power, and do not ex∣ercise it, it is their fault; but yet to hold Communion with those Assemblies, where it is not done, St. Augustine warrants them, it shal be much to their praise, and nothing to their prejudice; and they have almost as much to plead for themselves, as he had to justifie the Catholick Church against the Dona∣tists: And for my part, I profess I had rather, All to the Sacrament, than any to Schisme and Separation. And for their thoughts of others, they are no mans Tribunal: They that know their Witness is in Heaven, with such it will be a small thing to be judged of them; neither are they such Cato's, as that it should be punishment enough to be condemned by them; their teeth are not like the Tygers Claws, wherewith whosoever is wounded, can never be healed, nor doth afterward prosper; nor, I hope, are the Images or Conceptions, which they form of others in their Thoughts and Intellects, subject to the like fate, which (they say) those Images are, which are made by Witches, where the hurts and usage done to the Image, pass and are transferred to the man whose Image it is. I might dispense with my self from making any animadversions upon their descriptions of Catechumeni, Energumeni, and Penitents; it is enough that my Ar∣gument stands free, and that they confess the ancient Church separated none but of such denominations, and cannot say that those whom they suspend are onely such, but then so confidently to conclude, that because the ancient Church removed such sorts of men, therefore Antiquity is for them, they must pre-suppose us bred up in the Rabbinical Schools, where the Disciples are taught to beleeve that white is black, if the Rabbi tell them so.
Non obtusa adeò gestamus pectora Poeni: With as much colour of reason doe the Papists conclude, because they finde the word Tradition in Scripture and the Fathers, and Merit, and Satisfaction, and the like in ancient Writers, that the same names must needs be of the same things, and were understood and taught in the same notion, which now they conceive and hold; could they produce any Records, that all passed examination in point of knowledge, or any, save the Catechumeni, stran∣gers to the Church and Faith, and Children (who were a sort of Catechumeni;) or any at all underwent a probation of their lives, or were separated, because they were not convincingly holy, and not onely because they were notoriously wicked, that in any Church, onely one of an hundred was admitted, and a sepa∣ration made from the rest, either negatively not to communicate with them, or positively to constitute new Churches; they should then hit the Bird in the eye, whereas now they doe not so much as beat the Bush; Tiberius. but doe onely like that Romane Emperor, Cui proprium erat nuper reperta scelera priscis verbis obte∣gere. Suspension the ancient Church practised and commended, not in that notion and manner, nor of such persons as the Apologists do use it, but because they finde the word of suspeusion in the Monuments thereof; to conclude that their disci∣pline is found there, is somewhat like him, that reading Missa fuit Romae, in the subscription of some of St. Paul's Epistles, inferred that that Masse was then said at Rome; or because some kinde of suspension is laudable, that theirs must be as commendable, is not unlike to Caracalla, who supposed that because one Alex∣ander was a brave man, none of that name could be bad: but seeing they are not Popes, who are to be beleeved absolutely, simply and without condition, whose Will is in stead of Reason; and it is not for us to judge whether they speak consentaneous to Reason; but it is Heretical to think they may not de∣termine, as they have determined, we shall desire them to shew us out of any Records that the ancient Church practised or commended suspension, as now it is understood and practised, Et vitulâ tu dignus. — It may yet reflect some light upon our subject, to make some observations upon their expresses concerning the Catechumeni, Energumeni, and Penitents. The first, they say, were such as the Church nurtured in the fundamentals of Re∣ligion, being unbaptized (as they suppose) the children of Pagans. I shall not in∣stance any case, wherein a Catechumen unbaptized, might yet have been a child of Christian Parents, as particularly if his Parents had died before the times of baptisme (which were usually but twice in the year) and then his next of kinne being a Pagan, had detained him from the bosome of the Church: nor shall I insist upon it, that Children in years, though born of Christian Parents and baptized, did also pass in the rank of Catechumeni, and went out at the Ite, missa est: nor shall I rectifie their judgment, by shewing that some Catechumeni were the Sons and Daughters of Jews; I shall onely observe, that had there been in
those days any Anabaptists or Independents, the Catechumeni might have been the Children of Christians, and yet unbaptized; for the one would have bapti∣zed no Children at all, and the other, none but those whose Parents had been gathered into their Churches. Secondly, it is observable, that those Catechumens, as soon as they were bapti∣zed, Tract. 11. in Johan. Chemnicius exam. part. 2. p. 101. Gerhard loc. com. vol. 2. p. 1. Durant cited before. Casaubon. ad annal. Baron. exer. 16. S. 36. pag. 378. Notae in quos. canon. concil. Gal. p. 167. Albaspinus de veter. Eccles. ritibus, l. 1. ob∣ser. 19. p. 142, 143. Patrem vocas Deum & fra∣trem mox vitu∣peras, si vero non est frater tuus quomodo dicis pater no∣ster? Chryso∣stome. were admitted also to the Eucharist, which not onely appears by that of Augustine, Transeant per mare rubrum, & baptizentur, & manducent Manna; but by what Chemnicius cites out of Chrysostome, and Gerhard out of Justin, Ambrose and Theodoret, and Durantus out of others; and by what Casaubon tells us, Vetus Ecclesia semper adjecit baptismo participationem corporis Christi, (but where he addes praesertim adultis, some learned men think it was tantùm adultis, that which was given to Infants being onely the Wine (for so Hugo asserts) and that scarce formally, as the Sacrament, but as they used to give them milk and honey;) and how little time was allotted for instructing the Catechumens, and what a small viaticum of knowledge was required to carry them to the Sacra∣ments, I have formerly shewed; and surely it could not be imagined that they who were strangers to the Christian Faith, and bred up in other Rudiments; and who, when they came over into the pale of the Church, in the first times, as it seems, were neither admitted to the reading of the Gospels, nor the Sermons and Expositions thereof, (which, Albaspinus saith, may be known by these words in the Sermons of the Fathers, Norunt fideles) and which said not, nor learned the Lords Prayer, till they were baptized, (for they were not called Brethren, that were not admitted to the Eucharist,) and in that respect joyned not in say∣ing Our Father (which perchance hath brought us to stumble on the reason, why the Lords Prayer is never recited in the Churches of the Apologists, be∣cause there are so many present, who being not admitted to the Eucharist, may not be called their Brethren, nor have God to their common Father) I say that it cannot be imagined that in so short a time, with so slender means, they could with as great a summe (of knowledge) obtain this freedome of the Sacra∣ments, as the generality of our Congregations have, who (like Paul) are free∣born, & Ecclesiae cives nati. The Energumeni (they say) were men supposed to be possessed by Sathan, or men excommunicate, because such are delivered unto Sathan; and they derive Energu∣meni ab energia, and out of Altenstaig tell us, Illi dicuntur Energumeni, qui interiùs laborant per vexationem daemonis: But observe, first, for the notatio nominis, how they institute a new Grammar, deriving Participles from Nouns, and not from Verbs; I should have rather thought it more proper to have fetch'd it from Secondly, for notatio rei, whatever Alstentaig tell them, who compiled his Lexicon out of the School-men, (who were not always over-excellent in Lan∣guages or Antiquities) persons possessed were but one species., and included not the whole latitude of Energumeni, Ideots and Lunatiques coming also under∣that generical notion. Whether to deliver one unto Sathan, were directly to put him under the corporal power, possession and inflictions of Sathan, as a sad consequent of Excommunication in those times, (as the Greek Fathers sup∣pose,) or onely to excommunicate, which is a delivery up to Sathan by conse∣quent, a declaring him to be subject to the Kingdome and Power of Sathan, and no longer to appertain to the Kingdome of Christ, and not a cutting him off
from one Ordinance (for that could not be said to be a tradition unto Sathan, but a depriving of all the means useful to eject Sathan, Dr. Ham. An∣notat. in 1 Cor. 5. E. and the power of his Kingdome out of the heart (as the Catechist that instructed men and fitted them for Baptisme, was wont to be called the Exorcist, that cast Sathan out) as the Latine Fathers, and modern Expositors, both Protestant and Popish, conceive,) I shall not dispute; this is beside my subject, and there was never a triumph for any victory, out of a mans proper Province; onely I shall observe, that though excommunicate persons had been so under the afflictive power and possession of Sathan, yet all that were so were not excommunicate, and yet those that were not compotent of minde, if they were not born such, but fell into any di∣stemper, after they had first received the Eucharist, Aquin. 3. q. 8. art. 9. Vasquez in 3. Tom. 3. q. 80.9. disp. 212. c. 3. p. 442. Valentia 3. disp. 6. q. 8. p. 2. p. 926. Albas. not. in Canon. quos. Conc. Gall. 7.1616. Communior ta∣men ejus usu recepta senten∣tia est, dandam illis esse com∣munionem. Sylvius in 3. part. Aquin. q. 80. art. 9. p. 319. Filiucius cas. tract. 4. c. 7. n. 190. p. 49. Casaubon. exercit. 16. S. 43. Albasp. l. 2. obser. 4. Bellar. de poenit. l. 1. c. 22. many of the School-men (how justly I shall not dispute) incline to grant them the Sacrament, at least for a Viaticum at their departure; and as for those that were possest, to whom indeed that name of Energumeni is more commonly applyed, the first Councel of Orange allowed them in some cases the Eucharist, if they were not perpetually vexed, Si lucidis gauderent intervallis, saith Albaspinus, so do many of the School∣men and Casuists by warrant of some later Councels and Fathers, and though some sinne occasioned the possession, yet (for which there is the authority of Cassian, and an instance of Prosper) if they were not delivered up to Sathan for any great crimes, and so were in the condition of persons excommunicate; and si de purgatione curent, si vita sit purgatior, si non blasphement, si non enuncient, (that is, ut explicat Balsamon) si tempore quo non vexarentur, docent alios, quae ipsi à daemone didicerunt, they were not altogether excluded; generally they agree it ought not to be denied them dying, so as we see, that the far greatest part of their Parishes are thrust into a worse condition, than the Energumeni. The Penitents were communionis Christianae velut candidati, as a learned man calls them, and in a medious state or condition between the faithful and Ex∣communicate; for with Penitents there was allowed a civil converse, and to∣ward them might be vouchsafed all Offices of Humanity; but with persons excommunicate, as men polluted, it was piacular to have any company or com∣merce, they were not safely to be looked upon, but weae universally shunned, and not held worthy of the light. The Apologists very pertinently observe, that men were put under penance, for being scandalous in manners and opinions; and I wish their discipline had been conformed to this pattern, and exercised onely upon such and no others, espe∣cially since they confess it is not necessary they should assigne other qualifications (of such I suppose they mean as are excluded) than Antiquity did; but where∣as they undertake to instruct us in the ancient course of admitting Penitents, and say, They were first admitted to the limits of the Church. 2. To lye down in the Church-porch. 3. To the hearing of the word, but not to stay at prayers. 4. Next to the Sacrament. A smatterer in Antiquity (to retort their own phrase) would not have given so incurious and imperfect an account of their method of discipline.
For, first, however the foot-steps thereof are not so plainly to be traced in the Latine Church, (and yet Albaspinus finds them in that of Tertullian, Haet expectat, haec exorat poenitentiam, quandó{que} inituris salutem) yet in the Greek Church, the Monuments thereof are so frequent, that to him that hath seen things but per transennam, or tasted them onely tanquam canis ad Nilum, it is ve∣ry obvious, that there were four degrees or states of Penitents (not three as they limit.) First, such as were Flentes or Plorantes, who stood and sometimes lay down without the Church, weeping, and requesting those that entred to petition the Lord for mercy toward them, (which at first was not imposed by Law, but arbi∣trarily assumed.) Secondly, Audientes, who stood in the Porch, and heard some portions of the Scripture (not all that was read;) l. 2. observ. 29. p. 390. and Albaspinus supposeth, that in the first ages, Missarum concionibus, quae lectionem Evangelii consequebantur, interesse non potuerunt, but they were not permitted to joyn in prayers, either those of the Church and faithful, or those of the Catechumens, nor yet to pray among the latter. Thirdly, Prostrati, or succumbentes, who were admitted to a place behind the Pulpit, or behind the Quire of the Church, called Catechumenium, (for there the Catechumens stood also) who were permitted there to kneel, & pray amongst the Catechumens; but (as some suppose) were permitted onely their own prayers, not those of the Catechumens, and they went out with the Catechumens, or (as some think) after them. Fourthly, Stantes, who I conceive were also called initiati, who were admit∣ted to joyn in all Ordinances with the Congregation, save the Eucharist, which standing by, they might onely behold others (viz. the Consummati, as they were called, answerable to the Epoptae among the old Heathens) to receive, but themselves might not partake; nor beside were they permitted to bring their oblations, nor participate of what was offered and blessed (which some have mistaken for the Eucharist) neither had they the kiss of peace. These two last steps the Apologists tread over, and the second they divide into two, as little caring to understand the ancient discipline, as to model their own in conformi∣ty thereunto. 2. They do truly observe, and we think it very observable, that such a course the ancient Church took about admitting Penitents (and therefore Albaspinus tells us, poenitentiam quasi ad quendam catechumenatum repraesentandum institutum esse) and from thence shall re-minde them, that those several degrees were onely such as whereby Penitents were re-admitted, not whereunto they were directly and immediatly censured; but having been first excommunicate in order to their restoring to the Communion of the Church, they had the favour of being admitted by these several steps of penance, and none were Penitents, that had not been first excommunicate, which is diametrally opposite to their way of su∣spension, whereby men are immediately and only made stantes, that were never excommunicated, nor passed the other degrees of penance. I shall conclude this History of the ancient discipline with that of Hospinian, Historia de re Sacrament. l. 2. p. 40. Catechumeni & poenitentes, finitâ concione, templo jussi sunt egredi, antequam sacra peragerentur, ne cum reliqu's fratribus communicarent, ex quo liquidò claréque evin∣citur, caeteros qui remanserunt omnes communicasse: and besides them of those
notions, he tells us, Admissi sunt ad coenam, l. 3. p. 185. quicun{que} doctrinam Christianam sunt amplexi, so that though onely persons fit and worthy were admitted, yet it is hereby manifest, that they accounted all such fit and worthy, as were neither Catechumens nor Penitents. Next, they take hold of what the Paper grants, that the Primitive Church saw the use of publick confession; it did so; but it also saw the abuse, and thereupon abolished what had been formerly introduced; but that was done, they say, after the abuse appeared, whereas now they say men sweat at the sight of the saddle, or ra∣ther bridle, to curb their lusts. The confusion and abuse of their way is as appa∣rent, and therefore consequently it is to be laid down, — Vel si mutabile pectus Est tibi consilii, — And besides, the wisdome of prevention is better than that of remedies, as Hy∣gieina is a safe and happier part of Physick than Therapeutica; but if any sweat at the fight of the saddle or bridle, which have been ridden and galled with it, it is no marvell, since neither are made onely to mount and manage an unruly stubborn horse; but the one is a Pack-saddle, fitted onely for an Asses back (by supposition of a general ignorance) and fashioned to be capable to take any load or burden that may be laid on; and the other to check and turn and lead us where they list, so as indeed it is like to become our bridle and their reins. Their examination, they say, is little more than publick confession; I think upon examination they ought to make confession of a palpable error, who igno∣rantly or wilfully mistake confession of sins (which the Paper saith, the An∣cients saw the use of) for confession of faith; the admitting some of their members onely upon publick confession of faith, we have formerly traversed. That others have done the same thing privately before two or three witnesses (whereof sure their Elders have sometimes been none) hath been (they say) in tenderness and conde scension to their bashfulness. If they did this to any for∣mally as bashful, they should doe it to all of that condition; for quicquid prae∣dicatur per se, praedicatur de omni; I beleeve of men, and am very confident of women, the greatest part are bashful; yet I cannot learn they shew such ten∣derness or condescension to the greatest part, which may render it doubtful that it is done to some with respect to the Gold-ring; and because Heliogabal'us sil∣ken Nets are more proper to catch such Fishes, as St. Peter took. It is for the honour of Antiquity, that as all the different sorts of Philoso∣phers at Athens pretended to follow Socrates, so the new coyns of doctrine and discipline would seem to bear the ancient stamp; the Apologists, that have much nibled at, and detracted from Antiquity, would yet give their discipline for its better pass, a Testimonial from the ancient Church. They formerly bid us to remember the Gibeonites, and we cannot forget them, while their like pra∣ctice keeps up and refresheth the memory of them, by such a counterfeit pre∣tence of Antiquity, but rather it is the misfortune of this age, that their myste∣ries so long hidden, were now first published, which hath been like the opening of the Chest in the Temple of Apollo, that Rhodiginus speaks of, or the breaking
up, by the covetousness of certain souldiers, greedy of spoil, of the Image of Apol∣lo Chomeus, which, as Ammianus Marcellinus tells us, was brought from Scleuoin to Rome, from whence issued forth pestilent vapours, which infected the adja∣cent Countries. The Antients removed some few from the Communion, and those onely by judicial sentence; for the scandal of some nefariousness, either evident, coniest, or proved by Witness; whereas these suspend at once their whole Congrega∣tions, as if they were guilty of one common Apostasie, not judicially, but arbi∣trarily; not for notorious crimes, but upon suspicions; and admit none of them, till they have approved themselves to their good opinions, by demonstra∣tive signs of holiness; and till they doe so, they separate from all Communion in this Ordinance with them, (which suspending first, and then making tryall and probation afterwards, methinks holds some resemblance with Lidford Law, whereof in our Countrey they say proverbially, That they bang and draw in the morning, and sit in Judgment in the afternoon;) so as therefore, though we should be unhappily obstructed and retrenched from the like disci∣pline, as the ancient exercised (which is our great sorrow, and not a little their fault (as I have shewed) who seem like an hard-galloping hot-spur, that asked if he might attain such a place before night, and it was answered, Yes, if he rid softer) yet farther to excite others to a compliance with their way, and to com∣plain of inconformity to it, and pretend it little varieth from the ancient, they have therein as much of reason, as the Grand Signior had to pretend the Turks descended from the ancient Trojans, and thereupon to invite the Italians to assist them in the wars against the Greeks, the Enemies of that Nation, from whence they had one common origine. It affects them to reade in the few An∣cients they converse with Sancta sanctis, pronounced by the Deacon before the admi∣nistration; but they that are not conversant with many of the Ancients (though it had been more happy for them, and us too, had they been acquainted with more) have, (it seemeth) not learn'd that this was onely in order to the dis∣mission of the Catechumeni and Penitents, Exam. part. 2. p. 109. Chrysost. Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephes. c. 1. Tom. 4. p. 356. ad inquis. Jan. c. 13. Lilius Gyrald. syntag. de diis, p. 498. Syn. 17. Alexand. ab Alexand. dier. gen. l. 6. c. 19. p. 709. Servius in Virg. Aenead. p. 1017. and no others, the rest being under the notion of Sancti, and was but equivalent to the Ite, missa est, and , and also served to prompt the rest to examine themselves, as they might have read in Chemnicius: And they might also have learned from Chrysostome (if he be one of these few Ancients that they converse with) that the Deacon also proclaimed, You that cannot pray, depart; so as they were thought to be as indis∣posed for prayers, as for the Sacrament; And those that were not under pe∣nance, were not thought unholy or unworthy of those holy things, as they might have found in St. Augustine, Hoc enim est indignè accipere, si eo tempore accipiat, quo poenitentiam agere debet. The very Heathen had one to cry, Procul hinc, Be gone you that are profane: But first this was not extensive to all their Holies, ad  sacra profani ad∣mittebantur, saith Gyraldus. Beside, to keep analogy with that custome, they should (as the Heathen did) exclude those whom they judge prophane, from the Temple, and from all sacred actions, not one alone; and hence is profanus quasi porrò à fane; and therefore in that of Virgil, — Procul ô, procul este profani,
There is also added in the next Verse, — Toto{que} absistite luco, And that conclamation too, was after the sacrifice ended, Adventante dea, procul ô, &c. And farther by profane the great Grammarian Servius understands such one∣ly as were not yet initiated into their Rites, Lil. Gyrald. ubi supra p. 498. Sueton. in Nerone, S. 34. and those were answerable to the Catechumeni, and the procul hinc was therefore equivalent to their Ilicet, and to the Christians Ite, missa est: Others think it meant of such as were polluted with homicides and flagitious villanies, (such as Nero was, who durst not (saith Suetonius) enter the Fanes, through conscience of his Crimes) such as corre∣spond with men among us cast out for notorious crimes; and so learned Casau∣bon supposeth the Procul ô, procul este profani, to bear fimilitude with that in the Leturgy pronounced by the Deacon, Omnes Catechumeni, Exercit. 16. S. 43. p. 399. &c. discedite (where∣of were sundry formes) and had the force of an excommunication; but there was no examination of mens lives, it was enough when it was aloud said ; to answer , without farther scrutiny. And some farther think this was onely an usage proper to their Eleusinia sacra, where he was pro∣fane that was not wicked; and indeed there was little less impurity in most of their Rites, for as for sins of the flesh, Alexand. ab Alex. dierum Genial. l. 6. c. 26. p. 747. Dr. Hammond Tract. of Idol. and Annot. in 1 Cor. 5.10. Antiq. Lect. l. 12. c. 2. (notwithstanding their Pontifician Law in Tully, Deos castè adeunto, &c.) omnes ferè mortales in templis coire & nefandis li∣bidinibus commisceri nefas non putarent, saith Alexander Neapolitanus; and there∣fore a learned man supposeth, that in the New Testament, as Fornication is commonly joyned with Idolatry, so sometimes by Idolatry is meant sinne of uncleanness, which always attended upon Idol-worship; and as for Drunken∣ness, it was so common in their Sacrifices, that Aristotle's  inflexum pu∣tat, (saith Rhodoginus) quòd ebrii fierent , that is, post sacrifi∣cium; and both the one and the other recommended under the opinion of Re∣ligion, and the prescribed way of worship. The Ancients are censured for going too far this way; perchance they are so, but for going too farre not in theirs, but in a different way: Their rigour was in excommunicating some for smaller offences (for as farre as I can discover, Si redeant veteres, ingentia nomina, Patres, they would say, Excommunication we know, and delivering to Sathan we know, but for suspension, who are you?) and in inflicting penance for so many years; to make men Flentes three years, Audientes so many more, Succumbentes as many, Stantes for two years, and in keeping some for more grievous Crimes from the Communion till death; and then sometimes giving them onely abso∣lution and benediction, but not the Eucharist, and granting no absolution after a second lapse, which as it gave an occasional Rise to Novatus his Schisme, (there being but this difference between him and the Catholiques, that he de∣nied the power, and they often exercised not the act of remission; they did not, and he taught they could not, absolve;) so it hath onely that of Innocent
to excuse it, Apud Albasp. ubi supra l. 2. obser. 5. p. 248. Coactam compulsám{que} Ecclesiam severiùs animadvertere in delinquen∣tes, quò atrocitate disciplinae austerioris invectâ in officio continerentur fideles, con∣tra persecutionum fluctus, and lest they, to escape and decline persecution, should comply with Ethnick Idolators. But this was not the general Rule of Discipline in all the first Ages of the Church; but acts (in the nature of an exception) suited onely to times of Per∣secution, no constant method, but temporary and occasional, not of the sub∣stance thereof, but accidental, pauca admodum vi tractata, quo caeteris quies es∣set, as Tacitus in another case, and was like Galen's drawing blood in some de∣sperate pestilent Fevers, Us{que} ad animae defectum, which is not to be exemplary or regular in ordinary practice, the like discipline being not warrantable but in the like times, and with the like reasons. And as rigid as they for that time were, their rigour onely extended judicially, to reject some for manifest and scandalous wickedness, not all till a manifestation of their real holiness; nei∣ther doth it follow, that if some few known Malefactors were then too severely castigated, that now many that are not such, have no just cause to complain for suffering (though) a lesser punishment. And whereas they plead their distingue tempora too, for their actings diffe∣rent from the Ancients, in gathering and ordering Churches, in respect they live in a corrupt Church, which is not therefore to be stood upon: perchance it were not, if the Innovation stood upon a bottome of more Reason, than the retention of the ancient Discipline could doe: but for ought they have yet proved to the contrary, the new seems to be as far from having a better Basis than the old, as it is now at last by their confession, from having any buttress to support it, from a similitude with that ancient way, from the causes which constituted it, and from the effects flowing from it; there are clear demonstrations of the excellency of the one above the other; and such constitutive causes as the old had, the new cannot have; and the old may have the same effects influent on our times which it ever formerly had, that though we shall not say with Taci∣tus, Scito super omnibus negotiis meliùs atque rectiùs olim provisum, & quae conver∣tuntur, in deterius mutari; yet in this particular, we shall call for the old wine, as the better, (the new being heady, flatulent, and too much purging.) Of the corruptions of this Church we have formerly considered, and shewed those cor∣ruptions ought not to be the Generation of their Separation, which though they call a gathering of Churches, yet by a denomination taken from the major part, may be rather called a dissipating, or a gathering onely of Ears, and scattering of Sheaves, to be snatch'd up for some other strange Barn. And be the Church distempered by corruptions, yet we shall be more glad to see the Cure undertaken in the way of the old approved Methodists, or Dogmatists, ra∣ther than of Empericks, (who are all for the knife,) for we fear those new Phy∣sicians that practise onely on a new Church, must according to the German Pro∣verb, have a new Church-yard. To shew what Spirit the best of the Ancients were of in this matter, they re∣hearse the testimony of Albaspinaeus (as they of late call him, though in the el∣der Editions of his Works, he be named Albaspinus) viz. They thought it dete∣stable to God and Man, not onely for them that were defiled with lesser sinnes; but if under a Cloud of suspicion, to come to the Eucharist, and judge it dangerous for ab∣solved Penitents to touch those things, if not thought holy enough by them, to whom
the care of the Sacrament was committed. Next, they cite Chrysostome, who, say they, is as full as can be wished (whom therefore they wonder should be brought in for this suggested liberty) he admonishing Ministers not to deliver the Eucha∣rist to the unworthy; though he wear the Crown, thou hast greater authority than he, no small punishment hangs over our heads, if we suffer any to come that we know to live in any sinne, not saying, If he will not submit to tryal, you have freed your soul, if you exhort; but saith, his blood will be required of thy hands. These being the onely stakes in their hedge, cut out of the Forrest of Anti∣quity, we shall more diligently examine their strength. First, concerning Albaspinus, I must re-minde them, that he speaks this of such as had been first excommunicate for some scandalous offence, and then were put under penance in order to their restoring; for he delivers it in answer to the question, Why after the first three degrees of penance, the fourth was ap∣pointed? so as this will be extra aleas, in respect to any defence of their way, who discommon men from the Sacrament, that were never thus censured for any scandalous crime. Secondly, they shew a respect more partial to their Cause, than just to their Reader, by imposing on him in the Translation; for levissimâ maculâ inquina∣tum, is not, defiled with lesser sinnes, but with the least, or lightest stain, viz. of their former sins (which in all likelyhood were great:) for those staines the An∣cients thought to be purged and expiated by penal acts (not the offence, as an offence to God, or the punishment due to sin, which are opposed to justification, but only the spot consisting in an habitual pravity, & opposed chiefly to justifi∣cation) and repentance and sorrow to be instrumental causes, Dr. Chaloner, origen and progress of Heres. p. 133. whereby grace be∣came effectual in destroying these sinful affections, so as the meaning of levissi∣mâ maculâ infectum, is in effect, defiled with the least affection to his former sins. Secondly, Maculae nebulâ offusum, is but the same thing in Hyperbole; and though it should properly be rendred a Cloud of stain, and virtually may signifie a suspicion of a stain, (not as they would have it a cloud of suspicion for lesser sins) notwithstanding lest Nebula so interpreted, should prove (as it also sig∣nifieth) a Road-net to catch Woodcocks, and might seem to give some confir∣mation to what they practise in suspending men, because they suspect their lives; it must also be known, that this was onely a suspicion of one that having once been duly convicted to have fallen, might be doubted not to be perfectly recovered; and the Law determines, Semel malus semper praesumitur esse malus, in eodem genere mali, and there is great difference in the reason of delaying up∣on suspicion the restitution of one that hath notoriously sinned, and suspending one onely upon suspicion of sinne. Thirdly, Those absolved Penitents, were absolved onely of three degrees of penance; not the fourth, as is evident by the Context, and the Ancients thought a reconciliation or restitution, per saltum, to be the restoring of a man not per∣fectly cleansed, but of one bringing back his spots upon him; this is that which Cyprian complains of, that when nondum restitutâ Ecclesiae pace, ad communicatio∣nem admittuntur, & offertur nomen eorum, & nondum poenitentiâ factâ, Epist. 10. pag. 30. nondum exomologesi finitâ, nondum manu eis ab Episcopo aut Clero impositâ, Eucharistia illis data; and saith he, Haec qui substrabit fratribus nostris, dicipit miseros, ut qui pos∣sunt agentes poenitentiam veram Deo patri ad misericordiam precibus & operibus suis satisfacere, seducantur, ut magis pereant, & qui erigere se possunt, plùs cadant.
Fourthly, The Imposture is more gross when quod non satìs sancti & sancti∣ficati censebantur, quibus tanta res committeretur, is thus translated, That they were not thought holy enough by them, to whom the care of the Sacrament was com∣mitted; whereas it rightly should be rendred, Not holy enough to whom so great a thing should be delivered. And whereto their changing of the words and sense doth tend, may be pertinently remembred, when we come to examine, whether their way smack of Diotrephes, it being onely regni causâ, for which it seemes jusjurandum violandum est; whether the Apologists themselves perused this Au∣thor, or it were a quotation lent them, we know not; but I now finde it requisite that we should peruse those which they quote. But for Chrysostome, whose words might have been long enough sought for, by their quotation of the 38. Homily on Matthew, (which though I am easie to excuse as a Pen-lapse, (whereof in this kinde they have many,) yet it seems not such by a second referring us for them to the same place; but however we know he owns them, and delivers them in the 83. Homil. on the 26. of Matthew, and some of them else-where also.) Biblioth. l. 6. Annot. 152. p. 481. And for answer to them, I shall not need to bring forth that Rule of Senensis, Non esse concionatorum verba semper eo ri∣gore accipienda, quo primùm ad auditores perveniant, multa enim declamatores per hyperbolen enunciant, & hoc interdum Chrysostomo contingit: Themselves have taken notice of my answer, That Chrysostome speaks of notorious sinners, (which are not pleaded for,) and as for their Reply, That others are not pleaded against or excluded, but only put under tryal for example: those empty husks have bin so often ventilated, that I shall not spend more breath to dissipate them; onely I shall confess, that Chrysostome saith not, If they will not submit to tryal, you have freed your soule; for he could not say any thing of that, which was not, and which he dreamed not of; for I shall desire them better to quote me, where he speakes of any such tryal which they ought to make, or submission which we should yeeld. In the same Homily, indeed, he explains himself, to intend all this of notori∣ous offenders, and so Peter Martyr understands him, saying, Quòd si quis venerit cum sordibus, Loc. com. part. 4. p. 63. ignoranter, nulla vestra culpa est, nam haec mihi de notis & manifestis disputata sunt) and means it of such, as had been formerly censured, and were under penance, He that partakes not (saith he) is a Penitent, such as the Dea∣cons might take notice of by a precedent publike sentence against them, it is to them he speakes, In Matth. Homil. 82. You deserve no little punishment, if conscious of notorious crimes in any of the Communicants, you connive at them to partake of that Holy Ta∣ble: They were the Deacons, who as they proclaimed Sancta sanctis, so them∣selves were cryed unto to look to the doors, and they shouted out three severall times to them to go out, that were not to receive, in the Leturgies of Basil, Chry∣sostome, and the Ethiopick; and yet they will not say that the Deacon had power to examine, De sacro par∣ticipat. myster. Tom. 5. p. 328. Homil. 28. in 1. Cor. 11. Tom. 4. p. 112. or authority to cast out any not formerly censured. Besides, Chry∣sostome notwithstanding all his thunderings here against admission of persons unworthy, by his lightnings else-where it often appears, that he himself took notice of many that came unworthily, and participated, as Licèt sit aliquid à vobis patratum acceditis; and also, non quemadmodum nunc facimus, temporis gratiâ ac∣cedentes magìs quam animi studio, ne{que} ut praeparati ad vitia nostra expurganda compunctionis pleni accedimus, sed ut in solennitatibus simus, quando omnes ad∣sint; and again, multos video temerè quomodocun{que} consuetudine magìs, quàm le∣gitimè
aut consideratione & mente, de corpore Christi participantes. Serm. 3. in c. 3. ad Ephes, Chrysostome well knew such ought not perchance in respect of their proper Consciences to have come; yet he was not ignorant, that in the judgment of the Church they ought not to be repelled, unless notorious and scandalous; they being different questions (as some conceive) Who may come, and, Who may be admitted? and that he may have a right in foro Ecclesiae, which cannot approve it in foro Coeli. Chrysostome resolved Judas did participate, and yet saith, Homil. 51. in 14. Math. Tom. 2. p. 115. Nullus Judas hanc mensam adeat. If they have not been formerly duly censured, at the in∣stant of their approach, how can they be regularly rejected, where neither any degrees of admonition, nor judicial process (which regularly ought to precede) can at that suddenness be complied with; and in charity it may be not irratio∣nally supposed, that he that offers himself after admonition (usually previous to the administration) that none unworthy adventure to come, Advers. Ana∣bap. l. 6. c. 9. p. 230. hath repented of his former sins, and comes with Vows of amendment? Quomodo ergo fideles Ministri (saith Bullinger) adeò facilè, ut Anabaptistae volunt, à coena Domini exclu∣derent homines peccatores, sed tamen petentes gratiam Dei, & qui hoc testantur, eo ipso quòd accedunt ad coenam? The Fathers generally (not onely Chrysostome) doe pathetically perswade men to come prepared, and emphatically threaten such as come without due preparation, not in order to excluding of all such as upon tryal were not found to have such preparatory qualifications; but to excite their solicitude, and quicken their care to fit and dispose themselves, and try their hearts how they were disposed; their Exhortations looked to make them come worthily, not to suspend them, lest possibly they might be unworthy, as St. Paul menaceth dam∣nation to him that eateth and drinketh unworthily; yet forbids not to come, but commands Self-probation; and I could instance in these Divines, who assert a free admission of all Church-members, yet doe with as much efficacy press and insist upon a coming with holy and suitable affections, as those that are so closehanded and tenacious of the Sacrament. So that sure Chrysostome is not as full as they can wish, unless as Porus, when Alexander asked him, How he would be dealt with? answered, As a King, and that was enough; so it be sufficient that the authority of the Minister (it seems alone) be greater than the Kings: but whether they have cause to continue their wonder that Chrysostome is brought in by us to give witness on our part, we shall manifest in due place. In the inte∣rim we shall give them this corollary, That because the ancient Church repelled notorious sinners, for them to argue, that therefore they admitted none without examination and tryal of their Sanctity, is as if I should conclude, that because the Laws of this Common-wealth punish Theeves that are judicially attainted, therefore they put every man under a restraint, untill he approve himself a true man.
SECT. XIV. Sending the Eucharist to Strangers, and persons absent, whe∣ther a Corruption? Whether the Fathers were prodigal of Christs blood? Of admitting to the Eucharist, presently after Baptisme. Of the Literae Formatae, and Commu∣nicatoriae. THe Paper to make some Dialectick proof, that there was no such scrupulous examination of men taken previously to communicating in the ancient Church, alleaged, that then the consecrated Elements (which being recei∣ved, became the Sacrament) were sometimes sent to persons absent, and to strangers coming to Rome, &c. The Apologists Quorum vis animus{que} ferox contingit Olympum; take this for a corruption, smelling of rank superstition, the Paper fetching it from Rome, bidding us prove it to be an ancient practice, and they will prove it to be an ancient errour. — Sternent Adversas acies, quales cum montibus altis Volvitur amnis humi. But I have already verified the practice, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 9. S. 32. and need not farther confirm it, for Chamier prevents me by affirming negari nequit, adeò frequentia sunt testimonia & exempla; but they have not yet convinced the errour: for it is not sufficient to prove it erroneous, to say it came from Rome (yet it was onely the sending it to strangers which was said to be used, not instituted at Rome, in token of peace and communion) for this was done when Rome was in her Virgin-puri∣ty, and before she turned Whore; when all those glorious Eulogies were given her by the consentiens laus bonorum, & incorrupta vox benè judicantium; and to suppose she merited them not then, because now she doth not, is an error as wide upon one side, as that of the Papists is on the other, who thinke she de∣serves them now, because then she did. It is no Argument because Jordan falls into the dead Sea, that it never had fresher streams, neither is Rome like the Birds of Phineus, that whatsoever she hath touch'd, must be afterward pollu∣ted.
It was enough for my purpose, that I proved the thing de facto; and I am no more obliged to prove it de jure, than our Divines are to justifie the deferring of Baptisme by some in the ancient Church, (and particularly by Constantine) untill toward their death, because from thence they collect an Argument, Tertullian, Haymo, Aquinas, Erasmus, Glossae, alii{que}. that Baptisme was not then beleeved to be of such necessity; nor more than those many and great names of Tertullian, Haymo, Aquinas, Erasmus, &c. that conceive St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.29. did draw an Argument, to prove the Resurrection from a practice either of the Cerinthians, or the Marcionites, could suppose he inten∣ded to legitimate that custome. But of this usage which we discourse of, however these austeri Aristarchi may lash it; yet the modest sweetness of famous Chamier, (as, Ut quis{que} est major, magis est placabilis —) will take with more complacency, than their harsh censoriousness, Ubi supra S. 18. S. 28. p. 127. who having said that consultissimum ut Sacramenti actio sit continua, addes of this practice, quia olim factum à piis viris, non sumus adeò praefracti in nostra sententia ut damnemus. And indeed, though Protestant Divines condemn the reposition of the Sacrament, in order to circumgestation, and adoration, &c. yet Sacramental actions being defined by their ends, and this transmission of the Elements be∣ing onely a continuance of their first Ordination to a Sacramental use, and so the Sacrament being a Relative, and being not extra usum, had still rationem Sacramenti; and the conservation thereof elsewhere, being signified unto, and ratified by him that was to receive, since the words work not of themselves, but by the understanding of him that communicated, may seem sufficient: There∣fore under these Aspects, this Custome which partly arose in times of Persecu∣tion, l. 1. obser. 8. p. 60. and partly was grounded on this reason (as Albaspinus tells us out of In∣nocent) that they to whom it was sent, se à nostra communione non judicent se∣paratos, and perchance upon other reasons, of which, as of other usages, though our great distance may render us ignorant; yet it seems they were so weighty and considerable, that no Christian then living interposed any Objections a∣gainst them; I say, this Custome is not therefore condemned, though not alto∣gether approved by our gravest Theologues, as Morton, Chemnicius, Gerhard, &c. But for my part, since the Apologists, Contra ibunt animis vel magnum praestet Achillem; I shall not hazard the Charge, nor abide the Shock of such bold Assailants, but quit the ground, having already served my turn of it. They had the confidence in the fromer Section, to proclaim the Fathers were for them; but now Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?
being but a little galled, they wince, and say that Antichrist hath been long work∣ing in the Church, (and the Fathers, it seems, were his Chaplains, and his Work was carryed on by them, and not onely by the Gnosticks, and other Hereticks,) and might be too prodigal of Christs blood; I wish they could vindicate themselves from being worse than Prodigals, that are so covetous thereof, & avarus est de∣terior prodigo: But neither could the one lavish, nor can the other with-hold from others his blood, but only that which properly is but the sign thereof, and to become his blood to those alone that beleeve; and to be effectual in sealing of Salvation by it, upon condition of Faith; yet that signe, without prodigality to be exhibited to all that profess Faith, and can discern what is thereby signi∣fied, and the Salvation to be offered in signo, to whom it was never intended in beneplacito, Salvation, upon condition of Faith in Christ, being but the tenor of the Gospel, which is held forth in the Sacraments, as well as in the Word, onely with a different manner of propounding; and therefore anciently the Catechumeni, as soon as they were baptized, (and till then they were not held faithful) were at once admitted to publick hearing of the Gospel, and partici∣pating of the Eucharist. Which Custome, as it is witnessed, de facto, by our Di∣vines formerly quoted, and by many of the Fathers, mentioned by Lorinus; so the same Author thinks, In Acta. c. 2. v. 42. p. 109. it had its ground and rise from Act. 2.41, 42. where it being said that four thousand were baptized in one day (of whose conversa∣tion sure there could be no tryal had, neither could they make any special con∣fession of their Faith, whereof their coming to be baptized onely, was a reall profession; which though it was usual in the baptizing of such as came over from Paganisme, that they might testifie they were Christians; yet there is neither the like Rule, nor Exercise, nor Reason, for a Confession to be made at the Eucharist, by those who have been bred in the Profession of the Faith, and where their approach and desire to participate, is a special profession, as I have shewed:) I say, as soon as it is said they were baptized, it is added in the next immediate verse, They all continued stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking of bread; (that is, in breaking of the Eucharist, as the Syriack reades, and the general sense interprets it) and prayers. From discrediting the Witnesses, they speak to enervate the Testimony, (viz.) That Strangers by place, may upon knowledge of some members, or Cer∣tificate from the Church, be admitted; but I briefly demand, Whether with∣out farther probation, upon such Knowledge or Certificate onely, they shall finde admission, or not? If yea, they give up the cause Tam Scythae lasso meditantur arcu Cedere campis. for this might alwayes supersede all farther tryal, and closeth with what we have asserted, That the knowledge of men collected by ordinary converse with them, might frustrate and prevent all farther examination. If not, they given us words that signifie nothing, and which onely Sunt apina tricaeaue, aut si quid vilius istis.
Indeed it is obvious in Antiquity, that strangers were not regularly admit∣ted to the Sacraments, without Certificates from their proper Pastor, which were called Literae communicatoriae & formatae: But their way is as dissonant from this Rule, as the observing thereof would be destructive to their ends; Ne quis sine literis Episcopi sui, in aliena Ecclesia com∣municet. 1. Concil. Carthag. Can. 6. Apud Centur. Magdeburg. 7. Apud Caran∣zam. for such Literae formatae would altogether frustrate their new Formatae Ecclesiae, gathered and made up of such as have no such Communicatory Letters.
SECT. XV. Of daily communicating; of receiving at Easter; all the Peo∣ple anciently communicated. No man to be repelled upon the private knowledge of the Minister or other. Whether all did partake the Lords Supper that heard the Word? What sinnes may exclude from the Sacrament? Whether the an∣cient Church knew or practised any such Censure as Suspen∣sion? The Negative proved, the Arguments for the Affir∣mative profligated. Penitents were first excommunicate: What Communion anciently did signifie? What Abstinence denoted? What was the Lay-Communion? What was meant by removing from the Altar? What Suspension anciently signified, and in what sense that notion was used? What the School determines of giving the Eucharist to ma∣nifest and occult sinners? Suarez imposterously alleaged by them. What Suspicion may warrant an Exclusion? Whe∣ther the way of Separation be conformable to the Ancient? Of their care to keep men off from the Sacrament. The Ap∣plication of a passage in Chrysostome redeemed from their Exceptions. Whether there be reason to examine dispositively to hearing the Word, aswell as to receiving the Sacrament, and danger to the Unworthy in the one, aswell as in the other? The casting of Pearl before Swine, and giving holy things unto Dogs, what it intends? The difference between the Word and Sacraments. All not anciently admitted to all the Word. The Sacrament multifariously proved to be a converting Or∣dinance, and this to be the common judgment of Protestants. What effects may be hoped onely by seeing the Administration, without partaking? The Sophisme discussed, He that partakes worthily, is converted already; he that eates unworthily, eates damnation. Whether men are prohibited those Duties, which they cannot well and duly discharge? The moral works of na∣tural men. HEre (they say) is little that presseth them: The Numidian Bears are so far, that they feel no stripes; and it is said of an Eastern King, he was so fat and so gross that he was not sensible of pain, when Needles were stuck into his body: but it may be our Needles are not sharp enough to enter, we shall therefore see what they are to the point.
In the Authorities also there is, they say, more confusion, than variety. Answ Confusion may like scandal be given or taken, and it is also passive aswell as active, and I might excusably suspect, that those authorities have somewhat confounded them, for to some they have found nothing at all to say in answer, and to the rest, nothing to purpose. I shall not contest with them for accu∣rateness of method, neither do I think they need contend with any for va∣riety; the method is but accidental to the matter, and as long as Accidens po∣test abesse sine subjecti interitu, if the substance be defended, I, that seek not to interweave mine own image with Minerva's in this buckler, shall be less soli∣citous of the credit of the method, whereof nevertheless I am as little diffi∣dent, onely for their censures, as I am distrustfull of others capacity, for the Sa∣crament, for their censoriousness. The Paper pleaded not for keeping up a quotidian Communion (the reasons perhaps that gave first rise thereunto being ceased) and therefore their arguing against it is but a Sciamachy. Hieron. ad Lu∣cinium & con∣tra Jovin. Aug. de Serm. Domini in mon∣te, 12. Neither was it the assiduity that was principally insisted upon, but the generality of communicating, Totum populum quotidiè Eucharistiam sumpsisse, as Hierom and Augustine. Nevertheless the daily re∣ceiving of the Ancients, shews they made no such huge difference between preparation for the Word and for the Sacraments, and it also upbraids their long procrastination of any communion, of which though now at length they have reassumed the administration, yet toward the far greatest part of their Congregations it is still discontinued, and in divers Churches, by their influ∣ence and promotion, are those placed as Pastors, who long time were not in a capacity to administer it, (though by an intolerable presumption without any calling thereunto they adventured upon administring Baptism,) which I should think, (since the Casuists say, Filiucius Tract. 13. c. 1. n. 14. it merits the lesser excommunication to receive the Sacrament from the hands of a Lay-man, and the Administer is more guil∣ty than the Receiver) is a juster cause to have suspended them from the other Sacrament, than any they can charge upon many of those, whom they put under suspension. Those men have been since ordained, after they had waited to see how the Horoscope would be formed and setled, and what Aspects the Stars were like to have, and which would be ascendent or descendent, and which aucti lumine, aut minuti, aut combusti, that so they might re∣solve in what way to ordain them, for a more fortunate and auspicious nati∣vity. Those that content themselves with receiving twice or thrice a year, or make it onely an Easter-formality, I neither am, nor shall be retained to be their Advocate, yet perchance many may so infrequently receive, that are not content with it, but rather patient of what they cannot remedy, and as these may share of the same comforts which the Apologists hold forth to them, among whom the administration hath been long intermitted, so is their condi∣tion much better than is that of their people, by how much the lesser evil is nearer to good: and seldome is less obnoxious, than never. Cavendum nè si ni∣miùm in longum differatur perceptio corporis & sanguinis Christi, ad perniciem animae pertineat, said the Council of Cabillon. To receive at Easter, onely through formality, Ad popul. An∣tioch. Hom. 61. hath frequent increpations from the Fathers, Chrysostom especially, when Circulis rem definis, and when ex consuetudine magìs quàm legitimè, aut consideratione & mente, and temporis gratiâ,
magìs quàm animi studio, Serm. 3. in Ephes. c. 1. in 1 Cor. 11. Hom. 28. Tom. 4. p. 112. contra Liter. Petiliani l. 2. c. 94. tom. 7. p. 31. as hath before been declared; yet notwithstanding reproving the abuse, they continued the usage of general communicating at that time, and not in that Emperical way (as a grave Divine wittily speaks) applying the remedy to the weapon, but to the patient, abolished not the act without trying to reform the fault, in the manner of doing, but notwithstand∣ing some abuse the ancient Church still thought that an apt and opportune time for the celebration, when as Augustine saith in the like case, Ipsa festivitas ferventiores facit, etiam qui in caetero anno pigriores sunt, and in their sense (who thought not the least helps despicable, seeing small pullies serve to advance great weights) the very season was a kinde of prompter to remember them of that which the Sacrament was instituted (with infinite more efficacy) to shew forth, Aquin. 2.2. q. 2 art. 7. Durand. in 3. dist. 25. q. 1. n. 9. insomuch as thereupon divers Schoolmen and Casuists make it an argu∣ment of supine ignorance, that any should not have explicite knowledg of those mysteries of Christ, which were so publickly solemnized by the Church, and therefore though they laid no abstract necessity in the observation, nor ho∣liness in the time, yet they thought it had much of seasonableness, and nothing of superstition, (which may be as palpable in not observing, as in observing, set-times for duties) and it was decreed, that at that time every one should communicate, not to imply that it was sufficient to do it then onely, but as Ho∣spinian speaks of Zepherinus, Hospinian hist. Sacrament. rei l. 2. p. 124. Cùm vix unquam eveniret ut simul omnes communica∣rent, necesse verò erat ut qui permixti erant profanis & idololatris, externo aliquo simbolo fidem suam testarentur, diem certum in anno, ordinis & politiae causâ, statu∣it, quo totus Christianorum populus, fidei confessionem sumptione coenae Dominicae, ede∣ret: onely these Antipodes to antiquity can endure no Communions at Easter of any time else, of whom compared with the Ancients, we may say, as they do of the French and Spaniards, That what the one is, the other is not; And per∣chance as Maldonat tells us, That he approves an exposition (though another of Augustine's be more probable) onely because it most dissenteth from the inter∣pretation of the Calvinists; and Bellarmine saith, That an opinion is the better welcome, because the contrary thereof is embraced by the Protestants; so they consultly declaim against the Sacrament at Easter, because the ancient Church then used to celebrate it. That the ancient Church decreed, that all having passed puberty should com∣municate several times in a year, checks their impeding the far greatest part from communicating once in many years. Had the Ancients symbolized with them, they might more aptly and properly have decreed, that none should participate the Sacrament, rather than that all should; for the denomination is to be taken from the major part, and among these men far more are re∣pelled than admitted, and one of an hundred is none in comparison; and whereas they tell us, They have also taken in some about fifteen or sixteen years old, (the age of puberty,) I must tell them, that the thing which I directly and principally intended was, that all were to communicate, not at what age they were admitted; but they, contrary to Law, let go the Principal and arreign the Accessary; but from the admission at that age, it may materially be ob∣served, that the term, untill which they were excluded, and from which they were admitted, was their puberty, not till upon triall they made demonstration of their sanctity. Let them fix one eye on the ancient Church, and cast the other on their Congregations, and tell me, if their admitting one of an hundred
look with any suitableness to that of unicuique praesentium in Justin Martyr, Distribuunt unicuique prae∣sentium, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. Unicuique po∣pulo permit∣tunt partem ejus sumere, Clemens. Strom. l. 1. Theodor. in 1 Cor. 11. Panis ille quem universa ecclesia participat. Maxent. cit. à Centur. Magd. cent. 6. c. 4. p. 115. Cunctus populus, Justin. Apol. Hosp. Hist. rei Sacrament. l. 2. p. 5. & 52. Haymo in 1 Cor. 11. ut cit. Cham. Casaubon, Exer. cit. 16. sect. 31. p. 366. uni∣cuique populo in Clement, totus populus in Hierom and Augustin, that omnes ex aequo in Theodoret, that promiscua multitudo, (which out of Rhenanus) tota multitudo, (which from Chemnicius we have formerly mentioned) and that mixta frequen∣tia & multitudo hominum, and si quibus collibusset, which Hospinian speaks of to have participated in the greater and more solemn feasts; and whether it be conformable to that precept and reason of Haymo, Omnes communiter ex uno pane communicate, quia illa oblatio unus panis est, & communis debet esse omnibus. Whereupon Casaubon calls the Lord's Supper, Publica fidelium omnium invi∣tatio. That all present at the Word were by decree to communicate, they grant might well be, except such as were under censure, or obnoxious to it: it was never intended to be decreed by them, nor meant to be alleged by us, but upon the known Hypo∣thesis of not extending it to persons under a judicial censure; but while they dilate the exception to such as are only obnoxious to censure, (that is, in a sense suitable to their practice, which else it self would be obnoxious) such whom they shall judge unfit, (who repell so many, whereof not one, that I know, was ever duly censured) is a gloss of their own; agreeable with no Text of anci∣ent Discipline; but the contrary is evident, by the testimony of St. August. Nos à communione quenquam pro∣hibere non pos∣sumus, nsi aut sponte confes∣sum, aut in ali∣quo judicio ec∣clesiastico vel. seculari nomi∣natum atque convictm. De medicina poeni∣tentiae super il∣lud, 1 Cor. 5. si quis frater, &c. & Homil. 50. Mr. Bal. tri∣all of the grounds of se∣paration, p. 188, 189. I. 3. de celebrat. missar. p. 121. Augustine produced by the Paper, which (according to the caution given by that ancient Sophister, at the encounter of an hard argument) they take no notice of, nei∣ther hath it any smack of justice or reason that any man should be judged ob∣noxious, and thereupon be kept off, by any other mans, or ministers private knowledg, but according to allegations and proofs of witnesses, or evidence of fact: The common good necessarily requiring that such publick actions of this nature should be regulated by a kinde of publick not private knowledg, which once admitted into judicature wold soon fill the Church and State with a world of scandals, injuries and inconveniences, and liberty should be granted to wicked ministers to punish with this punishment, whomsoever they please, as a solid Divine disputeth more at large, not onely according to the Doctrine of the Schoolmen, (and particular∣ly out of Suarez) but also of the Canonists. The judgment of the former, we shall presently produce; for the later, let him be their fore-man to speak for them, who was second to none, our learned Countreymnn Lynwood, Imò, saith he, quilibet Christianus habet jus in perceptione Eucharistiae, nist illud per pec∣catum mortale amittat, undè cùm in facie Ecclesiae non constet, talem amsisse jus suum, non debet ei in facie Ecclesiae denegari, aliàs daretur faculas malis sacerdotibus pro suo libitu punire hac poena, quos vellent. And if the Minister should pro∣ceed to act upon his private knowledg or judgment, he shall do what Christ himself, did not, and, themselves say, he ought not to have done, in the case of Judas so as such a course is as much opposite to the practice of Christ;
as the judgment of the School and Canonists, whose judgment is steered by his practice. They next ask, How agrees that Note upon the Margine of the Canons, in old time all did communicate, yea, all that heard the word, by the decree of the Council of Antioch? Chamier tom. 4. l. 7. c. 18. sect. 21. p. 194. Such as were under penance, aswell as Catechumens, (for licuit discedere in missa catechumenorum, sed qui intraverit & Scripturas audiverit, id est, non fuerit egressus cum catechumenis, hunc jubent canones excommunicari, vel ex∣pectare missam fidelium, ac proinde communicare) such are still presupposed to be seposited from our discourse, aswell as they were known to be sequestred from the Sacrament; they know we onelyspeak of the rest, and that of those, all that hear the Word should participate of the Sacrament, agrees well enough with the way of the ancient Church, and the way of righteousness too, but in∣deed agrees not with their course, where an hundred of those that are neither Catechumens nor Penitents, partake of the Word, and but one of them of the Sacrament. These then were dark times, unless they were holier than ours, that is, they were dark, unless they had more light, they were holier doubtless, because more humble, and more meek, and more charitable; but some men are like the Hermit, who thought the Sun shined onely into his Cell, and resemble Seneca's Harpaste, who thought the rooms to be dark, when her self was become blinde. They tell us, a saying of a godly man, That all to the Sacrament is the great Go∣lias of those days, with whom the little Davids of this age are encountring; and I shall requite them with an Apothegm of a man, that perchance can be no godly man, because not of their judgment, That none to the Sacrament, but whom they please, is the great Diana of the Ephesians, for which all the Silver-smiths of the times are making Shrines, as if the Image fell down from Jupiter, when it was made by the Crafts-men. The testimony that allows no cause of separation from the communion, but such sins, as deserve excommunication, they say, bears no weight; yet it is alleged out of St. Augustine, but Augustinus tecum erravit, as Corvicius. The truth is, St. Ep. 118. c. 3. Augustine reciting and allowing therein the sense and judgment of some pious men in his age, speaks this of an active separation of a mans self upon conscience of his sinfulness, and not of a passive, as it is commonly under∣stood by Gratian and others; but the argument holds with more nerves and energy against a passive separation, since a greater cause is requisite to exclude those that do come, than to deterr them from coming, and many may not per∣chance lawfully approach, which yet cannot but unlawfully be repelled, as I have said before. And if the ancient Church excluded none but such as were or had been ex∣communicate, we may be indulged to think no sins a cause of separation from the Eucharist, but such as merit excommunication. I confess, my Horizon is very narrow, (as men that are of no heighth, have no large prospect) and mine eyes are weak, and do not discern all that I might, and my memory as frail to re∣tain all those species and notions, which sometime perchance I have received; but sure I did never meet with (or have forgotten) any clear evidence in anti∣quity, that warranted the distinction between Excommunication and Suspensi∣on, as now it is apprehended and practised, or that any were excluded from the
Communion antonomastically, but such as had been first separate from all Com∣munion, or to speak properly, from simple Communion. The Apologist tells us indeed, that Antiquity hath distinguished between Excommunication and Suspension, but they verifie it by no evidence, or testi∣mony, save their own, and we should advise them, rather to imitate Pythagoras his Scholars in their silence, than to emulate their Master in his Ipse dixit. Their Margin seems to quote Ames, as asserting what they affirm, but though that learned man distinguish in the place cited, between the greater and the lesser Excommunication, Cas. consci. l. 4. c. 29. sect. 29. yet he produceth neither Scripture nor authority to back that distinction, (who elsewhere plainly confesseth, that Suspension is not ex singulari Christi instituto.) They say, the Paper it self makes the Ex∣communicate but one sort of the excluded: True, but doth it say, or doth it follow from what it said, that the suspended were another sort? The others suffered exclusion for natural disabilities, we are speaking now of those that were separate for sins, which are moral defects, and among those, though the Paper distinguish Penitents from Excommunicate, it was not because all those under penance, had not also been excommunicated, but because all excommunicate were not Penitents, these later being (as I said before) com∣munionis ecclesiasticae candidati; it was conceded them as a favour to do pe∣nance, in order to their redintegration, which to the others was not as yet vouchsafed. But however the Apologists (like the Ostrich leave their Eggs in the dust, that any foot may crush them, and so) have deserted all incubation upon su∣spension, yet I am not ignorant that some others have engaged in a vindication of the practice and exercise thereof, in the primitive times; but however their sheets like that of Parrhasius, may seem real to other Painters, yet they are but painted. They shew us, 1. That divers sorts of men were not admitted to the Eucha∣rist, which were not under excommunication. And we grant it, but we ask, if it necessarily follow that they must be persons suspended, that is, Ab excommu∣nicatis solis poe∣nitentia peti poterit. Alba∣spinus not. in c. 2. ep. 3. Innocent. ad Exup. p. 143. Multi reperie∣bantur excom∣municati qui circum fores ecclesiae poeni∣tentiam flagi∣tabant. Idem. de vet. eccles. ritib. l. 2. obser. 4. p. 240. Per poenitentiam ab excommunicatione sive à peccato excommunicationis, ut loquuntur antiqui canones, liberabantur, Ibid. obs. 3. p. 227. Cum excom∣muncato poenitentia concederetur—ante poenitentiam meminerimus poenitentem excommunica∣tum fuisse—& poenitentiae benedictione eum ab excommunicatione liberatum fuisse. Ib. p. 242. obs. 4. Aug. ep. 108. tom. 2. p. 98. 3. concil. Tolet. can. 12. & 6. concil. Tolet. can. 7, & 8. item Albas. not in can. p. 92, & 104, Idem de vet. eccl. rit. l. 2. obs. 4 p. 241. such as were onely debarred the Lords Table, and that immediately, without having been first excommunicated, or cut off from the body of Christ his Church, before they were kept off from his body in the Sacrament, or without being first sepa∣rated from a Communion in all Ordinances, aswell as that of the Eucharist? for this is that which they call Suspension, and this is that which they must as∣sert out of antiquity, unless they will give us a Cloud in stead of Juno. And this we deny, and gainsay, that there were any such persons, or any such eccle∣siastick censure. Those censured persons that were kept off from the Lords Table, and yet lay not under Excommunication, were Penitents; who indeed were not excommunicate, but had been, and were in the way of redintegrati∣on with the Church, from whose Communion they had been segregated, and though in the way of their reuniting, they were joyned first by one piece, and
then by another, and did communicate first in other Ordinances, before they did in the Eucharist, yet they were first excluded from all, not that one of the Lords Supper; and although at the fourth and last concoction of penance, were admitted to Communion in all save that one, yet at first a total remotion was the terminus à quo, whence they began to move farther in order to their resti∣tution and rest, and however some had the Salve ready, assoon as the Wound was inflicted, and it seems were sentenced unto penance without their Petiti∣ons, and a determinate time limited how long they should lye under it, yet the very adjudging to penance, implied a former separation from Communion in all Ordinances, and not onely and immediately from the Eucharist. This might be multifariously verified, but as one Caesar contained many Marii, so one testimony of Augustine shall virtually involve many, and he tells us, Agunt etiam homines poenitentiam, si post baptismum ità peccaverint, ut excommu∣nicari & postea reconciliari mereantur, sicut agunt in omnibus Ecclesiis illi qui pro∣priè poenitentes appellantur. Penitents had peculiar habits, being lapp'd in sack∣cloth and ashes, their hair was polled, they came not neer their wives, nor in∣termeddled with publick business, nothing of which is enjoyned or inflicted upon suspended persons. And Albaspinus informs us, Iisdem exorcismis paci restituerentur poenitentes, quam catechumeni in Christianam familiam transierant, unde dignoscitur de utris{que} idem judicium apud antiquos fuisse. We need not then be prompted that Excommunication differed from Penance, for we acknow∣ledg that they were different conditions, as are also aegritudo & neutralitas con∣valescentiae, but the one is but a step from the other; yet neither of these con∣ditions was to be under Suspension. Amongst all those sorts of Penitents there was none properly suspended, that is, immediately and onely removed from the Lords Table, there were sundry degrees of them, and those degrees passed under several notions in divers ages and places, but no Church Lexicon will warrant that any of these denominations was synonymous with suspended, as Suspension is now understood and practised; , separatus, is a term we grant appropriate to a person excommunicate, because the Ancients knew no separation but by excommunication; but why , non ac∣ceptus, non admissus, exors, should be translated suspensus, as that word is now commonly accepted, Can. 13.  Zonar. annot. in can. 12. se∣cundun ipsius comput. (though we shall allow the Translation in that sense wherein the notion was anciently used) and not rather be synonymous with that other of , or denote Penitents, while it signifieth onely not to be received into Communion, (as Penitents were not, although they differed from the excommunicates) and as in the same Canon of the Apostles (whence the instance is tken)  and  is used for such receiving, and  for the receiver, is (I suppose) a writ that bears no teste but meipso. And to argue, some were not received into Communion, therefore they were suspended, is a fallacious affirming of the Species from the Gnus. But Zonaras set it out of question by interpreting it of one seeking to be or∣dained, and not yet approved or accepted in one place, and was therefore for∣bidden to be ordained in another. 2. They vouch Antiquity to warrant, that some waited divers years till they were admitted to the Eucharist; and we acknowledg it, but know no reason why it should be thereupon inferred, that these were persons suspended, that long expectation being never the proper passion of Suspension, for the Cate∣chumeni
were long in subliming, and the Penitents especially, upon every step of their rise and re-admission, made some stay and commorancy, as be∣fore hath been declared, and their probation was of more or less duration, respectively to their offences, and to the customes of several ages, and several Churches. 3. They would perswade us, that to be put from the Communion was onely to be denied the Eucharist, and that therefore Suspension is legible in all those Canons, whereby a deprivation of the Communion is decreed. But surely, they betray their own judgment to be weak, or hope that ours is so, that make this allega∣tion. Albaspinus will roundly tell them, L. 2. obs. 8. p. 258. to suppose this word Communion ought to be taken for the Eucharist, — is a notable folly and ignorance, which he cannot incurre that is but meanly versed in turning over the Writings of the Fathers, or in the knowledg of Antiquity. And his very first observation might have better informed them, L. 1. c. 1. p. 2. & 5. that the Communion extends more largely than to the Eucharist, — and comprehends all those things which pertain to holy things, the usage of life and society of men; and he concludes that the custome and use of this word as now it is, is much deflected from the true, le∣gitimate, and ancient acception thereof, L. 1. obs. 4. p. 41 which is scarce ever used for the Eu∣charist, unless some other word be appended to it, yet upon this false account much stress is laid upon the first Council of Arles, as if it decreed Suspension, 1 Arelat. can. 3.4.7.19. because it prescribed a separating from the Communion, whereas it is clear, that as abstinere eos à communione, à communione separari, à communione excludi, non communicare, are the forms of censure indifferently and univocally used in the Council. So in the second of Arles, alienus à fratrum communione, 2 Arelat. can. 19.21.25.31.23. ab Ec∣clesiae liminibus arceri, ab Ecclesia alienus, ab Ecclesia excludi, ab Ecclesiasticis con∣ventibus removeri, are but the same things in other notions, which are frequent also in other Councils, and cannot be restrained to, or expounded of Suspen∣sion from the Lords Table, but a separation from the Church and Ecclesiasti∣cal Assemblies, (whereunto persons suspended are admitted.) And if to be separate from the Communion, had been onely to be kept from the Sacrament, then to receive the Communion must consequently be to partake the Eucharist. Not. in concil. Elib. can. 1. & de vet. Eccles. rit. l. 1. obs. 1. & 11. & not. in can. 12. concil. Arel. 2. & can. 12. concil. Vasens. &c. But Albaspinus clearly shews, that many at their decease were received to the Communion without the Eucharist. And out of the second Council of Arles, he proves that some who happened to dy before they had finished their pe∣nance, yet had given signs of repentance, were restored to the Communion after their death, by the receiving of their oblations, when there could be no re∣ception of the Eucharist, and accipere communionem, was onely to be absolved, and the Communion was fidelium societas, jus societatis, jus quod quis habere pos∣sit in societate fidelium & corpore Christianorum, which was analogous to the jus civitatis among the Romans, whereunto some think the Church had reference, and therefore there is rarely in the Canons any mention of Absolution, it be∣ing signified by these words, communion, society, consortship, and reconciled; and notum est (saith Albaspinus) reconciliationem esse ab Eucharistia distinctam, ipsám{que} reconciliationem nihil aliud esse, quàm corpori fidelium restitui eos, à quo peccata illos distraxerant, poenitentésque de ea, non verò de Eucharistia esse solici∣tos. Beside this censure, to be separate from the Communion, was generally denounced for the greatest offences, so that if thereby Suspension onely be to be understood, we should be at as great a loss, and asmuch to seek of Excom∣munication,
as now we are of Suspension; and the latter would have justled out the former, and left no matter for it to work upon, for it self alone would do all, and the lean Cow devour the fat; and seeing the sacrificing to Idols, which the Eliberin Councel calls Crimen principale, and summum scelus, and Tertullian, Cyprian, Eliberin. Can. 1. & 52. and other Fathers account the greatest offence, was onely censured with separation from the Communion, and the Libellaici, such as privately re∣nounc'd their Religion under their hands, dispersers of infamous Libels, were sentenced to be anathematized: if to be separate from the communion, had bin onely to be suspended, and to be anathematized were to be excommunicate, at least if it were not more than simple excommunication, viz. dirarum devotio, it would be very admirable, that the greater crime should be adjudged to the lesser, and the lesser offence to the greater punishment. And if not to com∣municate were always strictly and onely to be understood of having no Com∣munion in the Eucharist, the 28. Canon of the Eliberin Councel, would look with a sad aspect upon our Apologists, which in joyns Episcopum ab eo qui non communicat munera accipere non debere, for this would bring them to as great a penury of common bread, as they have brought upon their people of Sacra∣mental, since they should then have nor Tithes nor Offerings, but from five or sixe in a Parish; for about that number are those whom they admit to the Sa∣crament, and in some of their Parishes, I think not one hath admission. Fourthly, the notion of abstaining hath made some to surfeit with excess of confidence to have found some tract of Suspension in the Road-way of the an∣cient Discipline; but they are mistaken in their Trace, and it is another Game than they hunt after; for though some learned men; both Protestant and Pa∣pists, straining to suit the ancient practice to some resemblance with the mo∣dern, and set the Sunne to the clock, have supposed that the abstenti were per∣sons suspended; and that abstincre per quinquennium, & ut pauco tempore abstineat, was only to be separate from the Eucharist, yet notwithstanding, 1. as this term of abstention (if I be not deceived) is as often used as a forme of censuring in the Councel of Eliberis, Concil. Elib. can. 16. & 21. Can. 20, 62, 34, 37, 40, 41, 49, 52. as in half of all the other Synods, so there we finde it promiscuously and synonymously made use of with those forms, ab Ecclesia ar∣ceri, ab Ecclesiae communione arceri, alienus ab Ecclesia haberi, penitus ab Ecclesia absici, anathematizari; &c. which beyond all possibility of Contest, denote an Excommunication. 2. In those expressions were Censures denounced for as small offences, Can. 49. & 50. as they were in that form of abstaining; for I should think it was no greater crime to permit those fruits which they received with thanksgi∣ving to God, to be blessed by Jews, than to eate with them; yet the former was punished expresly, Can. 16. & 61. with casting out of the Church, and the latter with abstai∣ning. 3. We may observe, that in this very Council, abstention was inflicted for great crimes, as giving their daughters in marriage to Jews and Hereticks, (which was forbidden by other Canons under pain of Excommunication,) and marrying the Wives Sister; l. 2. obser. 3. p. 10. whereas in those times, Levssima peccata multorum annorum excommun catione luebantur, saith Albaspinus, (where take up by the way this observation, That if the smallest faults were punish'd with Excommu∣nication, there was no matter left for Suspension to practise upon.) 4. When for Usury the same Councel sentenceth a Clerk, Can. 20. beside degradation, to abstain; and a Lay man to be cast out of the Church, I should conceive it denounceth but the same Censure on both, since it is not like the Church would castigate
that sinne in a Clerk, with a lesser punishment, in whom this was a greater sin, especially since as under the Law, Albasp. l. 2. obs. 34. p. 429. Erasmus in Cyprian. l. 1. epist. 11. p. 38. secundum edit. suam. Pamelius an∣not. in epist. 62. secundum suam edit. & Goulart. S. 13 p. 172. & epist. 38. S. 10. p. 91. Can. 61. In Cypriani epist. l. 3. ep. 14. p. 93. Albas. not. in can. 47. concil. Elib. p. 68. Idem de vet. eccles. rit. l. 2. obs. 22. p. 320, 322. the sinne-offering of the Priest was as great as of all the Congregation; so Leo tells us, Haec quae in aliis Ecclestae membris non vocantur ad culpam, in illis tamen habeantur illicita; and therefore whosoever had born civil office, been a souldier, or done penance, was uncapable of holy orders. 5. In the ancient Idiom to abstain was onely to separate and remove; and con∣sequently abstentus was but ; for so Erasmus tells us in his Expli∣cation of the words peculiar to Cyprian, prefixed to his Edition of that Father, and upon that place abstinendo diaconum (whose ence was none of the least, having lyen with professed Virgins) he notes absinere pro amovere; and Pame∣lius in his Annotations specifies what kinde of Separation or Removal that was, viz. Non separare amovere simpliciter; sed separare à communione; and he more plainly describes it, by saying, Peculiaris penè Cypriana phrasis quâ absten∣tum pro excommunicato & abstinere pro excommunicare usurpat — quanquam aliâ periphrasi saepe id circumloquitur, ejicere & de Ecclesia pellere. 6. It is most evident by the first Council of Toledo, that with such as were under abstention, it was forbidden to have any Commerce, (aut colloqui, aut convivari;) which yet was never prohibited towards persons suspended, but onely with such as were excommunicate. 7. That abstinere was first to be removed from all com∣munion, may appear by the same Council of Eliberis, where he that marrieth the Wives Sister is censured to abstain from the Communion for five yeares, unless the necessity of his infirmity enforce, velociùs dari pacem, where by peace, is meant fraternity, absolution, and reconciliation, or admission into the com∣pany of the Church, as Erasmus expoundeth, and Albaspinus intimates; which shews, that he was before put from the Brother-hood, and cut off from the body of the Church by Excommunication. 8. Albaspinus tells us, Abstenti nec poeni∣tentiae compotes essent; and farther, Idololatras & abstentos ad Ecclesiarum aditum ibi fletu & gemitu elicere misericordiam studuisse; Which renders it evident, that the abstenti were the same with excommunicate; and that these two notions were (in his judgment) Synonymous, Arel. can. 3. as appears also by what he otherwhere de∣livers, ab hac societate non solùm arcebantur haeretici, schismatici, abstenti, sed etiam poenitentes & Catechumeni, where abstenti must stand for excommunicate, or else they were omitted by him, who were principally excluded from the Church. 9. Whereas the first Councel of Arles decrees, de his qui arma pro∣jiciunt in mare, placuit eos abstinere à communione; Albaspinus also himself gives the sense and effect of that Canon, Ut qui in pace arma projiciunt, excom∣municentur, and addes this note, Pauco tempore à societate fidelium abstineant, which is more than Suspension (the suspended being not debarred from the society of the faithful) as Abstention from the Communion, is more than Se∣paration from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the former being of greater latitude than the latter. Lastly, we shall often finde, that after abstention from the Communion, penance was imposed in order to restitution; and pe∣nance presupposeth a precedent Excommunication. But if Abstention were Suspension, and to be under Penance, was also to be suspended only from the Eucharist, then Suspension had been imposed to obtain a restoring from Suspen∣sion; and when we reade in the Canons, poenitentiam agere quaerunt, it should seem they desired to be suspended; but neither was penance like to have been
desired by them, unless to get out of a greater evil, under which they lay be∣fore, viz. Excommunication. 4. They produce Testimonies to prove, That some were rejected until death, but were not excommunicate so long; for some of those might have the Sacrament at their dying hour, which persons excommunicate could not have. But —Ubi vincere apertè Non datur, insids arma{que} tecta parant. If they were rejected until death, they were so long also excommunicate; for in that second Canon of Neo-Caesarea, (which is referred to) Mulier si duobus nupserit fratribus, abjiciatur in diem mortis, sed propter humanitatem in extremis suis Sacramentis reconciliari oportet, ita tamen ut si forte sanitatem recuperaverit, Matrimonio soluto ad poenitentiam admittatur: It is rendred manifest by the first Canon, that this Censure was Excommunication; for there absiciatur is explai∣ned by an addition of Extra Ecclesiam; and casting out of the Church is Ex∣communication: neither doth it follow, that she was not excommunicate so long, because dying, she might have the Sacrament; for, first, as we cannot be convinced that reconciliari Sacramentis, doth properly and onely signifie the ad∣mission to the Sacrament, but thereby by a Synecdoche is understood perfecta communio, & maxima & absolutissima reconciliatio, wherein a right also to the Eu∣charist is involv'd; Justellus in∣stead of Sacra∣mentis recon∣ciliari oportet renders it, poe∣nitentiam ha∣bebit. L. 2. obser. 4. p. 239. Idololatrae, mae∣chi, homicidae, apostatae. Concil. Elib. can. 3. Arel. 2. can. 24. Cyprian. l. 1. ep. 38. Cartag. can. 76. Nicen. can. 13. yet though it were in their sens to be understood, nevertheless though no excommunicate person, in sensu composito, could partake of the Eu∣charist, (as neither could a person suspended, without a contradiction) yet he that stood excommunicate, might in extremis, in fine, in necessitate infirmitatis, as the Canons speak, be admitted to penance, to be assumed and undergone, if he did recover into health; and in the interim receive not onely the simple Communion, but also the Sacrament, which seems clear and demonstrable from this very Canon; as also doth that other truth, that men were first excommuni∣cate, before they were made Penitents. Adducor ut credam (saith Albaspinus) facinorosis & ex omni scelerum & flagitiorum coliuvione concretis hominthus, vel etiamsi in ea praecipites peccata abeant, poenitentiam (modò illa peteretur) nun∣quam denegatam; and he cites the words of Caelestine, in an Epistle to the Bi∣shops of France, Poenitentiam morientibus denegari — quid hoc rogo aliud est, quam morienti mortem addere, ejus{que} animam nè absolvi possit occidere? And howsoever in some of the first Times, and during the ardour of Persecution, for some sinnes (four sorts of which Albaspinus recounteth) besides those which Tertullian calls non delicta sed monstra; and offences a second time lapsed into (where it was decreed, in fiae Communionem non dandaem, ne lusisse de Do∣minica communione videantur) the Communion was denyed to be afforded in their dying condition, (which manifests the falseness of that over-bold asser∣tion, That none were excommunicate until death) yet as this was decreed with a condition express'd (nisi digna satisfactione poenituerint, as the Canon speaks) and as it appears by Gyprian, and by the third Canon of the first Coun∣cil of Arles, that Communion was especially denyed to men at their death, be∣cause they had not petitioned to do their penance, while they lived in health. So not onely the fourth Councel of Carthage, held in the fourth Century, ex∣presly
decreed, That penance should be permitted to dying persons (which sup∣poseth them then under Excommunication) and then that the Eucharist should be immediatly exhibited to them, if they desired it, with condition of perfor∣ming their penance injoyned, in case they survived: But the great Council of Nice also determined, Ut si quis vitâ excedat, ultimo & necessariv viatico mi∣nimè privetur; si vero desperatus & Communionem assecutus supervixerit, sit inter eos qui Communionem orationis tantummodo consequuntur. Generaliter autem omni cuilibet in exitu posito & Eucharisitiae participaonem petenti, Episcopus cum examinatione oblationem impertiat; where if Viaticum be not the Eucharist, (as Zonaras, Balsamon, and Casaubon suppose it to be) but onely the simple Com∣munion, as Albaspinus, and others conceive; yet all, none dissenting, agree, that the Lords Supper is spoken of in the latter part of the Canon; and beside the Story of Serapion is Lippis & Tonsoribus nota, known to all those that have but half an eye in Ecclesiastical History, and have top'd off the least haires thereof. 5. But they were at a greater fault, and ranne away with a falser sent, that hunting after Testimonies for Suspension among the Records of Antiquity, tell us, that Penitents were persons only suspended the Lords Table, & not excommunicate, because some adjudged to penance, were admitted to the Laicke Communion: for if Penance were Suspension, then the privation of the Communion could not be Suspension, because it was provided by sundry Canons, that such as were deprived of the Communion, should be put to doe penance before they could be reconciled and restored; and that had been as much, in effect, as if they should be suspended, in order to discharge them of Suspension. But then secondly, the Lay-Communion, being onely Laicorum jus in corpore Christi mystico, & Ecclesia, as it was contradistinguish'd to Ecclesiastical, or Sacerdotal Com∣munion; the being put into the Lay-Communion, was neither the doing of Penance, nor any essential consequent thereof, (though perchance some that were adjudged to be degraded from being Clergy-men, might also, Concil. Eliber. can. 50. as their of∣fences were in merit, be sentenced to penance, Ut erat expressum in eorum elo∣giis & judiciis, saith Albaspinus; and it appears, that some, when they had fini∣shed their penance, were put into the Lay-Communion,) but formally and properly to be set in the Lay-Communion was onely a degrading or deposing of a Clerk, and reducing him to the condition of a Lay-man, being a censure onely inflicted on the Clergy, and but the same which Augustine calls Degra∣dation, and the Councels Deposition, and removing from Order, Concil. Elib. can. 51. Arelat. 1. can. 26. Chamier. Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 3. and all Eccle∣siastical Office; as appears not onely by that of Gyprian, Ut Laicus communicet, non quasi locum sacerdotis usurpet; but by a multitude of other Testimonies pro∣duced by Chamier, Albaspinus, and others: To argue therefore, they were ad∣mitted to the Laick Communion, ergo, they were not excommunicate, is in ef∣fect to conclude they were made Lay-men, ergo, they were not excommunica∣ted. And if Penance were Suspension, and the Lay-Communion were any part or appendage of penance, it will carry a consequent implication, that all Lay-men were suspended, or else that to be suspended, was to be admitted to the Eucharist, as Lay-men were. And let the Lay-communion be, as Baronius, and others would have it, to partake the Sacrament without the Railes, or could it be as Bellarmine supposeth, to receive in one kinde; yet in either way there was a
communicating at the Lords Table, Non diffiteor qui communicabat laicè, accepisse eucharistiam more laicorum, Albaspin. de veter. eccles. rit. l. 1. obser. 4. p. 4. saith Albaspinus, so as neither could penance formal∣ly have any affinity with the Laick Communion, nor was any Penitent fully and perfectly in such Communion, because during that state, he could not partake of the Sacrament: but when his penance was ended, he intirely communicated as a Lay-man; that is, had the right and privileges of a Laick onely, because he was not restored to Holy Orders; whereof, indeed, he that had done pe∣nance, was ever afterward ncapable: And therefore I have laboured under much wonder to what end this Argument was produced. I remember Maldo∣nat tells us of a Text, Luke 2.34. Facilior fuisset hic locus si nemo eum exposuisset; and per∣chance we might have been more facile to beleeve that there might have been some evidence for Suspension in Antiquity, if those that have so confidently assumed to prove it, had not fallen so short of their undertakings, and our ex∣pectation; who as Scaliger said of Baronius, that he did Annales facere, non scri∣bere; so they have rather made than found their proofs, and have rather impo∣sed upon, than informed us, so that we may not know, unless we shall continue ignorant. But having cleared these mists, let us look what purer light can be reflected upon us from the Monuments of the ancient Church, that we may see to trace their foot-steps, and discern what way they walked. The notion of Suspension is scarce found in the ancient Fathers: Augustine often speaks of Church-cen∣sures, and sometime specifies the several Acts of Discipline, Correption, Excom∣munication, Degradation; but I have not met with the name, much less the thing in all his Disputes against the Donatists, where it was most likely to have occurred. And had the Church in his time known any such Censure (especial∣ly inflicted for want of a visible worthiness) he could never have said, as is pre-alleaged, Si peccata tanta non sunt ut excommunicandus quisquam homo judice∣tur, non debet se à quotidiana medicina Dominici corporis separare; or had it been denizon'd in Chrysostome's age, he would not have said, that those which were unworthy to partake of the Eucharist, were likewise unworthy to joyn in the Prayers and Hymnes. But as Alexander scorned to steal a Victory in the night, but would get it in clear day, so we shall hide nothing that we can bring to light, which may be of advantage to their cause, though it seem to have been in the dark to all those which I have met with, that have defended it, who have said less for them∣selves, than might be said for them, and are therefore obnoxious to David's in∣crepation, who when they take themselves to be valiant men, and who is like them in Israel? yet have not kept their Lord so, but that any one of the people may come to destroy him. But nevertheless, though Tellias get these new Pipes, no Antinegidas need to be troubled, for they will not sound to his Tune, nor make any judicious man to dance after him. To deal ingenuously, as the Canons of the ancient Councels will lend the best Prospect of the Discipline of the Church, those being the Mould wherein that was cast; so we shall acknowledge, that in those Canons we sometimes meet with the notion of Suspension, like as we doe with those of Retentus, Sequt∣stratus, Remotus, Segregatus, Exclusus, all of them Synonymous, and all to be limi∣ted and defined by the terminus à quo, that from which was the Separation:
But I doe with some confidence assert, that suspended is there taken in the pro∣per, not the modern appropriate notion, signifying a deferring of, or detain∣ing from; and that not onely this one Ordinance of the Lords Supper, but all Ordinances; and is, in effect, but Excommunication, carrying onely besides a connotation of a future restitution to Communion, after penance done, or sa∣tisfaction given. The same words have not always the same sense in all Ages, nor signifie the same things, else we might conclude the Assemblies of the Hea∣then to be Churches, and their Clerks of the Market to be Bishops; and to ar∣gue, that the term Suspension is found in ancient Records; therefore there was such a thing, as use hath since made the word to import, carries as much reason as the Papists have to conclude, that because prayer for the dead was used in the ancient Church, therefore it related to Purgatory; or is with as much sense as Valderama proves the order of Jesuites out of Scripture, because it is there said, that God hath called us to the society of his Son Jesus. But that Suspension in the old Canons implies not a deferring of, or detaining from the Eucharist onely and immediately, but a with-holding from all Ecclesiastical Communion, is very clear and evident, because it is always said to be; First, either a suspension from Communion, Agathens. can. 64. as in the Agathen Councel (one instance among many) and Communion was comprehensive of more than a Society in partaking the Lords Supper, it is a suspension from the communion of the Church, and from Catholique communion, Aurel. can. 23. & 15. can. 31. as in the fourth Councel of Orleance; neither of which ever was, nor can be restrained and limited to fel∣lowship in one Sacrament; and in the latter Canon it was denounced for Idolatry, the greatest sinne, and therefore not like to be censured with the lesser punishment: and in the same Councel it is suspension from the church; but into the church containing, men now under Suspension are admitted, and from the church contained, are not cut off. Secondly, it was a Suspension from all fellowship in talking and eating with others; and therefore not a suspension from the Eucharist onely; neither are ever those which are put under this younger Suspension, (which is called the lesser excommunication) proscribed from all conference and society in food; but that the ancient Suspension was attended with such an interdict, appears li∣quidly enough by the second councel of Arles, Arel. 2. can. 30. Si à communione sacerdotali (which was to be, and act as a clerk or ecclesiastical person) fuerit suspensus episcopus (which seems the truer reading, though some copies have suspectus) yet if this were all, it were but onely deposition or degradation, which excluded not from commerce, but that which follows, shews it attended with a greater punishment, non solùm à clericorum, sed etiam à totius populi colloquio at{que} convivio placuit excludi donec resipscens ad sanitatem redire festinet. Aurel. 1. can. 11. But if this canon leave it obscure, yet more clearly is it apparent by the first councel of Orleance, decreeing, Placuit eos à communione suspendi, & ab omnium Catholico∣rum conviviis separari. Thirdly, It was a suspension of that nature, as whosoever was blasted there∣with could not be redintegrated, but by doing penance (but none were made Penitents that had not first been excommunicate) It is legible in the third councel of Toledo, Secundum formam Canonum antiquorum, detur poenitentia, Tolet. 3. can. 11. & 12. hoc est, ut priùs eum quem sui poenitet sacti, á communione suspensum faciat inter reli∣quos
poenitentes, ad manus impositionem crebrò recurrere, expleto autem satisfactio∣nis tempore, sicut sacerdotalis contemplatio probaverit, eum communioni restituat; and it is apparent out of that more ancient councel, Arel. 2. can. 11. the second of Arles, where those that sacrificed to Idols are thus censured, Duobus annis inter Catechumenos, triennio inter poenitentes, habeantur à communione suspensi. Not again to reflect on this, that it carries no verisimilitude, that so great a crime was sentenced to no greater a punishment, than removal onely from the Sacrament: for expla∣nation of this canon, we must know, that to be among the Catechumens, and among the Hearers, Neo-Caes. can. 5. was in effect the same; and it seems by the councel of Naeo-Caesarea, that the Catechumens, at least one sort of them, such as were not genu∣flectentes, passed under the notion of Auditors, (Catechumeni, id est, audientes) and to be an Hearer was the second degree of penance; and among the Cate∣chumens and Hearers, though not confusedly, yet in one common place, stood also those that were for a certain time excommunicate, and likewise Jewes and Heathens; for the sourth councel of Carthage, wherein Augustine was pre∣sent, decreed, Ut episcopus nullum prohibeat ingredi ecclesiam & audire verbum Dei sive gentilem sive haereticum, us{que} ad missam Catechumenorum (though nei∣ther to the Catechumens themselves were the Gospels read, as appeares by the councel of Aurange, . Arausic. can. 18. ne Catechumenis Evangelia legantur) where also incident∣ly observe, that as the ancient church admitted not all to eat the Sacrament, so they permitted not all to hear all the words. But as those that were under Niddui might be present at Divine Service, if they kept their distance of four cubits, so Albaspinus shews that about the sixth age those that were for a set time excommunicate, De vet. eccles. rit. l. 2. obser. 24. p. 336, 338. obs. 29. p. 390, 391. Poenitentes tertii gradus  l. 2. obser. 32. p. 405. Poenitentia per appropriatio∣nem; primus & secundus gra∣dus dispositio∣nes erant qui∣bus ad tertium exequendum pararetur. obs. 24. p. 357. & obser. 4. p. 243. did also enter into the church, and stood among, or neer the Catechumeni, to hear some portions of the Word, and Expositions there∣of, In eodem loco consistere, ibi{que} provolvere se ad genua, & aliquas preces inter∣ponere, though they departed before the Mass of the Catechumens, that is, be∣fore their Prayers, and before the Sermon too; as also did the Catechumens themselves. But to prosecute the interpretation of the former canon, when those suspended persons advanced farther, and from the Catechumens step'd to be among the Poenitents (whereby Albaspinus understands the Succumbentes) even those in this third degree of Penance, were not onely suspended from the Eucharist, but separated from communion in sacred offices, Orationes, preces, sacra, sacrificia, oblationes, agapae, Stationes, vigiliae, jejunia & similia, — ea omnia poenitentibus aeque ac excommunicatis deerant, saih Albaspinus, so as it is very evident, that in this canon to be suspended from communion, was to be ex∣communicate, because of the several steps of penance which were to be gone over in order to raising and restoring to communion. Fourthly, Ilerden. can. 5 if In the Ilerden councel, Suspension is expounded by Segregation from the body of the church, Veraciter as flictos non diu suspendere vel desidiosos prolixiore tempore ab ecclesiae corpore segregare. Fifthly, if I have not failed in my observation and account, the term of Suspen∣sion is but twice onely, less often mentioned in the fourth councel of Orleance, than in all the preceding Synods; but it is there arbitrarily, and indifferently
used with those formes, which without all colour of contradiction import Ex∣communication, viz. ex consortio fidelium vel ecclesiae communione pellatur, Aurel. 4.  16.12, 13, 20, 22. ha∣beatur extraneus, pacem ecclesiae non habeat, ab ecclesiae limmibus arceatur, ex∣communicationis severitas imponatur. And not to advance farther toward the West or Occident and Declination of Discipline, but to set up our pillars with a nihil ultra at the fifth Council of Orleance, 5 Aurel. can. 2. while it decrees that none be suspen∣ded from the Communion for small and light causes: had the Fathers under∣stood Suspension in the modern sense, they had rather abolished, than regula∣ted it, by taking away the proper object whereupon it worketh, viz. lesser and higher offences; and when they adde, that Suspension be inflicted for such of∣fences for which the ancient Fathers drove the Offenders out of the Church, they did not so farre relax the reyns of Discipline, as to censure onely with Suspension from the Lords Table, those whom the Ancients punish'd by ca∣sting out of the Church; but their Discipline had made them know no distin∣ction between Suspension, and casting out of the Church; and therefore they used them univocally, or the one as an Exegesis of the other. Lastly, we shall also fairly confess, that in ancient Monuments we meet with those expressions of removing from the Altar, and separating from the communion of Sacraments, and of being reconciled thereunto; but we are convinced to judge, that they onely by a Synecdoche complicated with a , signifie a rejection from, and restitution to a plenary and absolute communion, in gene∣ral, by one and the most excellent part thereof: And this may be sufficiently proved by several passages in St. Augustine's Disputes against the Donatists, Epist. 11. c. 3. tom. 2. p. 108. especially against Parmenian: But we need re-search no farther than that place in his Epistles, which we have so lately agitated; for having said, Si tanta est plaga peccati at{que} impetus morbi, ut medicamenta talia differenda sunt, authoritate Antistitis debet quis{que} ab altari removeri, & eadem authoritate reconciliari, hoc est enim indignè accipere, si eo tempore accipiat quo debet agere poenitentiam, non ut arbitrio suo, cum libet, vel auferat se communioni, vel reddat, caeterùm si peccata tanta non sunt, ut excommunicandus quisquam homo judicetur, non debet se à quo∣tidiana medicina Dom nici corporis separare, where we see plainly, that ab altari removeri, & excommunicandum judicari, are either consignificant, or exegetical, as well as that he thought that none were to separate from the Lords Table, but for such sins as rendred demeritoriously excommunicate. And though this be a pearl of so great price, that he which finds it, cannot but be willing to sell all the false notions that he hath to the contrary for the buying thereof; yet it is no Union, though one, yet not the onely Orient testimony, there being many others like and equal to it: The first Council of Toledo decreeing, 1. Tolet. a. 2. that publi∣cam poenitentiam gerens sub Concilio, divino reconciliatus fuerit altari, implies, that to be reconciled to the Altar, was to be absolved of Excommunication, and re-admitted to communion with the Church; whereof to partake of the Altar, was the most perfect and absolute act; for he that was thus reconciled was under penance, and all penitents were such as had been excommunicate. The Ilerden Council determineth, Ilerden. can. 2. Communione corporis Domini priventur ità ut his duobus annis vigiliis orationibus & elcemosynis pro viribus, quas Dominus dona∣verit, expientur; quod si definito tempore negligentiores, &c. prorogandi ipsius poenitentiae tempus, in potestate maneat sacerdotis; whereby it is manifest, that by deprivation of the communion of the body of the Lord, as the chiefest part of
Church-fellowship was the loss of all other Ecclesiastical Society, or Excom∣munication intended; for as persons suspended are not sentenced to such con∣tinual Watchings, Prayers, and Alms; so whosoever was a Penitent had been excommunicate. The second Council of Tours defining, Eos ab Ecclesia sanct∣repellant, Turonen. can. 3. nec participare sancto altari permittant, manifestly declares, that they understood a repelling from the Church, and non-permitting to partake of the Altar, to be identical: but such as of latter times are suspended, are never re∣pulsed from the Church, which is more than to be debarred the Eucharist. And lastly, Can. 14. the fourth Council of Orleance defining, Tam diu habeatur à commu∣nione altaris, vel omnium fratrum ac filiorum charitate suspensus, makes the latter to be exegetical to the former; and evidently proves, that to be suspended was to be cast out from all fellowship with the Brotherhood, and Sonnes of the Church. Wherefore seeing the ancient Church knew not their Suspension, which is the onely penal, and indeed main act of their Discipline; yet for them to pre∣tend to affinity with the ancient Discipline, is a boldness like to finde as little success, as excuse; unless as that old Sycophant advised, Calumniare audacter, aliquid haerebit; so they vaunt boldly of things, in hope they will stick with some for their confidence; or as some Heathens commended the ancient Heroes for fetching their Pedegree from the Gods, though falsly, because it raised their spirits, and advantaged their reputation; so they think it will produce like effects for them to derive the descent of their Discipline from the ancient Church, though it can claim no kindred therewith. They next come to give an account of their regard to the School-men, but they might have spared the Irony. Few are inimicous to School-learning, but they that are ignorant thereof, such indeed despise what they have not; as Gallienus when Aegypt revolted, and Gaul was lost, said, Quid? sine lino Aegyptio esse ne possumus? Num sine trabeatis sag is tuta Respublica non est? and as Iovius speakes of Detractors, Fortunam suam eâ vindictae voluptate consolantur. The School indeed is a Libanon, or Forest over-grown with Thorns and Briers, yet much good Timber may there be found to build and make Beames for the Temple; and as Otho said to Salvius Cocceamus, nec patruum sibi Othonem fuisse aut obli∣visceretur unquam, nut nimiùm meminisset; so shall I say of that Learning, it is not too much to be studied, nor altogether to be neglected. They desire those that have the School-men, to consult them on the third part of Aquinas, (and if they have them, they might have given a more spe∣cial direction and reference, this which they give being like Magna civitas, magna solitudo) who put it into the hands of the Minister, to deny the Sacra∣ment to all, whom they judge scandalous sinners, or unworthy persons. Reso. They say, there is a Fish, whereof a part being eaten, it proves poyson, if the whole, an Antidote; so the doctrine of the School in this point being partially and mutilously set forth, may seem to make for them; but fully and plainly represented, will speak much against them. This dissertation will give us some Prosopography of the Apologists, and reflect light to see how forward they are to impose upon others (if these passages were oculis subjecta, and entred by the horny gate) or how facile they are to be imposed upon themselves, (if they were demissa per aures, and had entry thorough the Ivory Port.)
It must therefore be recognized, that the School distinguisheth of sinners, whereof some are secret, not of publick note, or commonly diffamed, though some few, and perhaps among them, the Minister may know them to be scan∣dalous in their ways. Some are publick and notorious, either by judicious sentence, confession, or such evidence of fact, as by no Tergiversation can be concealed, or gain-sayd, so as they are generally known to be flagitious. To the latter sort, the most of them (for some dissent, as Soto, and others) judge that the Priest ought to deny the Sacrament; De duplici Martyr. p. 600. S. 31. and we shall not much clash with their judgment, since such are juridice or jure, demeritoriè if not effectivè excommunicate, as we have before delivered. And however (as saith the pretended Cyprian) Tales interdum tolerat ecclesia ne provocati etiam perturbent populum Dei: sed quid prodest non ejici coetu piorum, si merueris ejici, nam ejici re∣medium est, & gradus ad recuperandam sanitatem, ejectionem meruisse summa ma∣lorum est, ac frustra miscetur coetut sanctorum in Templo manu facto, si summotus est à consortio Dei, & ab universo corpore mystico Christi. Vasquez 3. q. 80. art. 6. disp. 209. c. 4. p. 417. The former either se∣cretly come to desire or demand the Sacrament (and a secret demand (and de∣niall) is as Vasquez determines, when no other is witness thereunto, but he that denieth, and he that is denied) or publikely doe offer themselves, and so de∣mand to receive it: If the demand be sccret, they prescribe, or at least allow the deniall; and onely of this occult deniall doth Suarez make those delive∣ries of himself, which they recite, and imposterously apply that simpliciter, which he speakes secundùm quid, and enlarging that to any publick denial up∣on publick demand, which he onely restrains and limits to occult, Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, & crimine ab uno, Disce omnes, and it is of this kinde of deniall alone, whereof he saith, quando non interveniunt intrinseca in commoda (which passage they have clip'd off from the rest) potiùs consulendum dignitati & reve∣rentiae Sacramenti, quàm juri peccatoris; for this, he saith, Non est propriè puni∣tio, quae judiciarium ordinem & probationem delicti requirit, sed est prudens ad∣ministratio Sacramenti; and as he addeth, is a certain virtual secret, and fatherly correction, for which the proof of the offence, or confession of the offender is not al∣wayes to be exspected, it being no publick judicial action, but private and hidden, and which cannot otherwise be exercised: But for such an one as is not notorious, Suarez in . q. 80. art. 6. disp. 67. S. 3. p. 856, 857. S. 4. Quamdiu oc∣cultum est ejus peccatum non amisit suum jus in sacie ecclesiae, & ideo habet jus in foro externo. Sylvius in 3. q. 80. art. 6. p. 336. S. 4. p. 858. though known to the Priest, or some others, to be wicked and scandalous, if he publickly de∣mand the Sacrament, and come and tender himself to receive it (which he calls a virtual demand,) Suarez in this case sings another note, that the Priest with∣out grievous sinne, cannot deny him the Eucharist; and in this assertion, saith he, almost all Divines agree, which he backs with many reasons: as first, To deny it him, were to diffame him. 2. Upon the denyal, follows a certain and infallible de∣triment of Infamy; but upon giving it, there is no certain sacrilege of unworthy re∣ceiving; for it may be the offender may be suddenly changed and inwardly con∣verted, and so dispose himself, that he may worthily communicate. 3. He ought to exhibite it, to avoid scandal. 4. Because a secret sinner (that is not notorious) hath a right publickly to demand the Eucharist, and cannot be deprived of this right, un∣till he be sufficiently convinced of his crime. And he farther addes what I formerly recited out of Mr. Ball, That it apper∣tains to the common good and convenient Government of the Church or Common∣wealth, that common good things or benefits, which are publickly to be dispensed, and distributed according to the merit and dignity of particular persons (as the Sacra∣ment
is) should not be dispensed according to the private but publick and notorious knowledg of the Administer, which he saith, is a moral Principle, which if it should not be observed, it would occasion many scandals, troubles and injuries, and Mini∣sters might defame whom they list, and fein a sin and unworthiness, where there is none, and the faithfull must often▪ sear and be afraid, lest they should be defamed by the Minister. And to those Reasons of Suarez, another (which he thinks of more efficacy) is superadded by Vasquez, Here (saith he) two Precepts concurre, one of not un∣worthy administring the Eucharist, Ubi supra, c. 3. p. 409. which consists in this, That it be not administred to one unworthy; the other, of not defaming our Neighbour, nor publishing his sin; the first is a virtue of Religion against Sacrilege, the other a virtue of justice against Detraction; and though the virtue of Religion be more worthy and perfect than justice, and consequently the sin opposed to Religion be greater than the sin opposite to justice; yet the commandment of not defaming more obligeth, than the administring the Eucharist to one unworthy, and a sinner, because as Thomas saith, 2.2. q. 32. art. 4. The obligation of Mercy is preferred before Religion, for we worship God with external Sacrifices, not for himself, but for our selves and our brethren; for our benefit, not his, who receives no profit by them, and in this sense he expoundeth that of Osea 6. and Matth. 12. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. So as where they say, See the Schools say more than they would have them, — Exclamet Melicerta perisse Frontem de rebus. — For 1. The Schools allow no power to deny the Sacrament publickly to those that in the proper judgment of the Minister are unworthy, but this power they assume, withholding it from such as were never duly censured by any other Judicatory. 2. The School warrants a publick denial unto none but notorious sinners, but they keep back the Sacrament from all that do not upon triall approve themselves Saints, and though they pretend to hold, that none are rightfully to be excluded, but such as are some way scandalous, yet actually they withhold the Communion from those that they dare not say, much less have they been sentenced to be scandalous, and are therefore more inexcusably culpable, to be like Medea, To see and approve better things and do worse. 3. The School prescribes the Sacrament to be exhibited to secret sinners, if they publickly crave it, that is, such whose sins though known to some few, and among those to the Minister, yet are not notorious; but they to prevent the vir∣tual craving by their approach, and offering themselves, (like Julian who struck at Christianity rather than Christians, so) they have excommunicated the Sacrament it self out of their proper Congregations, that none might come to demand it, and those that have come to them to require it, have been denied the participation, though such as have not been patible of the definition of no∣torious sinners; and though they suppose that it proves nothing, that the Schoolmen and Casuists assert, that secret sinners are not to be kept off, yet it proves their course not paralel with the line drawn out by the School, who de∣ny it to those, the far greatest part whereof can be but occult sinners, and not within the definition of notorious; and it is something sure, that hereby the
School and Casuists must consequently conclude, that when a Minister doth (as he ought) distribute the Sacrament to him whom onely by his private no∣tice he knows unworthy, he doth no act simply unlawfull, by partaking of the receivers sin, or prostituting the privileges of the godly, or giving false testi∣mony, nor that he is to suspend him, untill he hath rendred, upon triall, de∣monstrative signs of his conversion. They say, Suarez tells us, That a violent suspicion is enough to deny the Sacra∣ment; but (as Pliny writes of the deceitfulness of the Panther) they shew forth those parts which seem fair for them, and hide the head, which would seem stern and terrible; so Suarez indeed saith this of a publick suspition, not of any private, and of such a violent suspition too, quae probabili rationi deponi non potest, for if it be onely probable suspicion, Sect. 6. p. 863. that onely sufficeth ad gene∣randum dubium, non ad judicandum simpliciter de peccato alierius, and in such a case saith he, Melior est conditio possidentis, Suspect's de a∣liquo crimine neganda est, si suspicio publica vehemens seu violenta, sive si laborat publica infamia; non item si est suspi∣cio solùm pro∣babilis vel prae∣sumptuosa. Syl∣vius in 3. q. 80. art. 4. p. 311. Dr. Twisse. & quando aliquis non sufficienter probatur malus, praesumendus est bonus, and a violent suspition is described to be such quae moraliter facit rem certam; such a suspition Suarez thinks sufficient, because in rebus moralibus non est quaerenda metaphysica evidentia, sed sufficit moralis cer∣titudo, and therefore this violent suspition is (in Suarez his sense) equipollent to evidence of fact, or little short thereof, for otherwise that any less suspition is enough to deny the Sacrament, is so far from being the common opinion of Divines, that they commonly opine and directly resolve the contrary, as I have elsewhere manifested, and it would otherwise be contradictory to Suarez his own judgment, otherwhere delivered, viz. That the Sacrament is not to be denied, but to him that is notorious by Law or fact; and his fellow Vasquez (whom a famous Schoolman hath weighed in his ballance, and found to pon∣derate more than Suarez) doth tell us, that infamy (which is I think somewhat more than suspition) Licèt sit sufficiens principium, inquirendi contra ipsum de de∣licto ad poenam, non statim vldetur sufficiens ut statim puniatur tanquam manife∣stus peccator, in conspectu ecclesiae, denegando ei Eucharistiam, cùm infamia illa non e rei evidentia, sed ex aliquibus judiciis ortum habet, quae sufficere non debeat, ut ità graviter quis puniatur. And seeing the publick repulsion from the Sacrament is called the lesser Ex∣communication, and that being defined to be an ecclesiastical consure, Cas. consc. tract. 13. c. 1. Sect. 9. p. 254. and Ei∣liucius telling us that ad ferendam censuram requiritur jurisdicto fori contentiosi, so that whereas Biel taught, That whosoever sinned mortally incurred the lesser Excommunication, because he that remains in any mortal sin deprives himself of the Sacrament. Vasquez refutes this opinion as false, upon this ground, De excom. dub. 1. Sect. 7, 8. because the lesser Excommunication is an ecclesiastical censure: hence there∣fore it follows, that regularly according to the Doctrine of the School, neither should the Minister alone inflict it, neither ought it to be inflicted upon suspiti∣on, but according to the judicial process upon proof or confession of some crime, or evidence of the fact. Their testimony out of Gregory may serve to assert what we confess, That for such manifest faults as seem to be inconsistent with grace, and to exclude it, a man may by authoritative sentence be put from the Communion, but tends not to prove what we deny, that he may arbitrarily be suspended, till he demon∣strate himself to be in the state of grace. They have the conscience to appeal to the Readers judgment whether there be
not more conformity between them and antiquity, than their adversaries can pretend unto, that make no separation: But we approve, and shall cooperate in a separa∣tion of others from us, by juridical censure, that are notoriously wicked, for this suits with the ancient Discipline, but not a separation (as theirs is) of our selves from them, that are not manifestly godly, no nor yet from that Church, where that laudable Discipline, though de jure approved, is not defa∣cto, through some obstruction, exercised, for this sorts with the old Donatisme. The Chymists boast much of their extractions and separations of the pure parts from the impure, but Sennertus commends an answer of Queen Elizabeth to one glorying of such spirits, If, said she, we were purely spirit, we might be cured and nourished by such spirits; so I shall say, If we were onely and alto∣gether spiritual, we might have a Church universally holy, and a pure use of the Ordinances, but till we come to be so, which will be onely when we shall be as those immortal spirits, the Angels, those violent separations are like to leave us scarce any body of a Church; but because the ancient Church made some kinde of separation, and they also separate, therefore to infer, that theirs must needs be the like kinde of separating, and their way conformable to the ancient, is such another argument, as the Chymicks use, that because Ezra weighed out two vessels of fine Copper, precious as Gold, therefore they must needs forsooth be of metall transmuted or improved by Chymical artifice. Ezra 8.27. They know not who they be that are so carefull to repell and exclude men from the Sacrament; indeed every man being his own grand flatterer, he is the first that sees his perfections, and the last that discerns his faults, and there are some that misprise their faults to be their perfections, as the Mexicans think, that to be beauty and gallantry which is the vilest deformity, to have their lips by the weight of jewels pendent in them drawn down over their chins to the im∣bearing of their teeth; but if to suspend whole Congregations, not because they are proved to be wicked, but meerly because they are not approved to be Saints, (which is as if we should withhold a mans sood from him till he make proof of his good digestion) to suspend the Sacrament it self in their proper Churches, that they may better suspend their people, (which hath some affinity with Caligula's wish, That the whole City of Rome had but one neck, that he might cut it off at once) to take so much pains to justifie and defend their suspending of so many as unfit, when (as he said to his Son encountring with his Enemy, Percute qua aratrum) the same labour might have made the most of them fit, and however they shall be fitted, yet to give them no ad∣mission or entrance, but onely by stepping over their threshold, which they have set up by Gods threshold: he that shall deny that this is to be care∣full to exclude and keep men from the Sacrament, and as Alcibiades perswaded Pericles, to be studious rather not to give, than to give an account, so that this is to be more solicitous not to give, than to give the Sacrament: he hath been bred up in Anaxagoras his School, where in defiance of sense, it was denied that the Snow was white; and if I should do it, I should doubt that even for this I should come too near the danger of incurring some of Chrysostome's stig∣matical Epithites. Chrysostome was ere while as full as they could wish, now he is fulsom, and their stomaces cannot digest an argument collected from his words: They very calmly and with silence let pass the greatest and most forcible part of the
testimony, and onely pick a quarrel to the application of one piece thereof. Chrysostome had said, that he that stands by and not communicates, is wicked, shameless and impudent. And the Paper thence (modestly as it could) offer∣ed it to be considered, by arguing à pari, if not à fortiori, where or upon whom that censure would fall, or how it would be-reversed, if those that stand by and would, yet shall not be suffered to participate; hereupon Ignescunt irae, & duris dolor ossibus haeret, They take this shaft into their sides, as if aimed at them, and complain of the wound, and indeed cùm vitia incessimus, reum ira manifestat, but I shall say with St. Hierom, Neminem specialiter meus sermo pulsavit, Tom. 1. ep. 2. ad Nepol. c. 26. — qui mihi irasci volu∣erit, priùs ipse de se, quòd talis sit confitebitur. As our Saviour told the Jews, That not he, but Moses accused them; so it was not I, but Chrysostome that laid the censure, and leaves it not on them, but ex Hypothesi, upon supposition, they do that which he censureth; it was he that delivered the Law as the major, if their conscience become the witness against them in the case, and make up the minor, for the conclusion, let any man be judg. I could not borrow a nail from that Master of the Assemblies, (as the words of the wise are called) and not drive it to the head, nor bring forth and onely shew the weapon, and not strike with it, nor make it like Thebes, when Epaminondas was slain, a spear that had no head or point. If they shall prompt me how I might apply the words to make them argumentative, in any more modest or candid manner, I shall be very docible, to write after their copy; and excuse and expunge my former cha∣racters, or, Ut Lugdunensem dicturus Rhetor ad aram, My tongue shall lick out and make amends for the blots of my Pen. But noise and outcries (whatsoever some Nations imagine) will not help an Eclipse. As in Tophet they set up a loud sound, and raised clamours to drown the cry of the dying childe; so perchance they keep this ratling about thatwhich seems to pinch the credit of their persons, onely to drown the sound of that blow which-mortally wounds their cause; for what was transcribed out of Chry∣sostome, That he which was unworthy of the Eucharist, was also unworthy of the prayers; this they take no notice of, like weak souls that wink when they are put in fear, and think the danger lessened which they see not; And this, though his words seem yet to be the sense of the whole Church, which did conclude all her publick and solemn prayers with the receiving of the Sacrament, so as Albaspinus tells us, De vet. eccles. rit. l. 1. obs. 16. p. 124. Mede Christian Sacrif. Sect. 1. p. 475. Vix repories quenquam eo (i. solenniter) usum esse nisi ad Eu∣charistiam significandam. As we vocally conclude all our prayers, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord, so (saith Mr. Mede) the ancient Church in the solemn and publick service, when she presented her self before God as one body, did vi∣sibly, by representing him in the Symboles of his Body and Bloud, he being thereby commemorated and received by them (and us) to the same end for which he suffered, that through him we receiving forgiveness of sins, God might accept our persons and prayers. The Stations which were but dimidiata jesunia, Fasts extended to the ninth hour, and not prolonged us{que} ad authorita∣tem
demorantis stellae, in Tertullian's Idiom, and which he tells us had their name from the example of Souldiers, whose standing to watch before the Palace, being called Stations, I. 1. obs. 14. p. 101. gave the like appellation to the Christians coming to∣gether twice a week, and continuing together in prayer for defence of the Church, and to impetrate Gods favour, those Stations being (as Albaspinus de∣scribes them) Nihil aliud quam coitio ac veluti conjuratio totius ecclesiae contra De∣um, and whereby as Tertullian speaks, quasi manu facta eo Deum perpellebant, adi. gebánt{que} ad id quod obnixè peterent, concedendum; But those Stations were al∣ways concluded with the Eucharist, as the close and upshot thereof. In the fifty days betwixt Easter and Whitsunday, L. 1. obse. 15. p. 106, & 108 a time of more solemn prayers, and which Albaspinus affirms to equal the Lords day in Worship and Religion, eve∣ry particular Christian (saith he) most sweetly was compelled and enforced to receive the Eucharist. Besides, they had no other place where they offered the publick prayers, but that whereon the memory of Christ's Body and Bloud was celebrated, and even as in the Old Testament, where they called on the Name of the Lord, there they still built an Altar, and their Sacrifices were Rites whereby to invocate God, as may be collected from 1 Sam. 13.12. So in the swadling of the Christian Church, Breaking of Bread, or as the Syriack reades, the breaking of the Eucharist, and prayers, are conjoyned, and both referred to their Christian fellowship, as the Exegesis thereof, shewing wherein the Communion of the Church consisted; so as therefore whosoever was of the body of the Church did both partake of the Prayers and of the Altar, and who was divided from the one, had no benefit of the other, as Mr. Mede produceth Ignatius to witness; Pag. 494. and it was morally impossible, that those which were re∣ceived as competent for a conjunction in the former, could be rejected as in∣capable of Communion in the later, seeing this was a concluding part, and as it were the peroration of that other. We would have as much care impended, and forwardness manifested, in ma∣king men worthy partakers, as in having them to partake, but we do not con∣ceive there lies upon us any obligation to give, or on others to take, by triall, an account of our worthiness: nor that their title to the signs and elements, the Sacramentum rei & Panis Domini is rooted in or resulting from their worthiness, but their Church-membership. We wish every Heir were a prudent and tem∣perate manager of his Inheritance, but he must not be suspended from the en∣joyment thereof, till he demonstrate his temper and thriftiness, his right accrews as Heir, not as a good Husband or a sober man, and yet while he is in infancy or an Ideot, he is not admitted to manage it, and by Outlawry he forfeits his per∣sonal, and cannot sue for his real Estate, and by Attainder forfeits the whole. They tell us of the comforts they have found in their endeavours to preserve the dignity of Gods Ordinance. They are very subtil or cautious to dispute a∣gainst us so often with those arguments whereof we can take no perfect cognizance, and for truth whereof we must take their word, their inward experiences. But to answer, the dignity of good things is their commu∣nicableness, and it is no indignity to the Sun, that the Negro's partake his light, though it scorch them; but it seems that the Apologists are like the Eastern people, that think it conduceth to the Majesty of their Kings to be re∣cluded and shut up from publick intercourse, whereas it were more for their honour to be imployed in the administration of the Office, whereunto they
were designed. But if their endeavours have been, formally as an Ordi∣nance, to preserve the dignity thereof, they should have done the same towards all Ordinances, by the Canon of per se & de omni, but their care hath not been like in such way to preserve the dignity of the Word and Prayer, which we think, and shall endeavour presently to shew, to be Ordinances of like dignity, and to be in danger of as much indignity, as the Sacrament by a free and pro∣miscuous admission; so that we doubt, that it will start much suspicion that there is an influence of Self and interest into their endeavours, and their love to the dignity of this Ordinance is Amor concupiscentiae, non amicitiae, as that which will better serve their turn, and fit their ends. To condemn their people for not taking what they will not give them, is pa∣ralel to the hard measure of some of our Kings, that compelled some to fine for not taking the Order of Knighthood at the Coronation, when as they came to tender themselves at the day, and could not obtain it. It seems to them below reason, to see no difference between other Ordinances, and the Lords Supper, as to matter of examination. It may perchance be below their reason, which is at such an elevation, but seeing Nos, populus terrae, quibus non licet esse tam disertis, are not at such an ascendent, it had not been below their charity better to inform us of this difference. To hear without faith makes the Word become the savour of death, In 1 Cor. 14.22. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 73. tom. 5. p. 141. Confut. of Rhem. Test. p. 528. and al∣so to seal mens condemnation, as Diodate in terms delivers it, as to eat and drink unworthily makes the Sacrament turn to damnation. Si nihil ex eo quod huc convenimus & admonemur, — lucrari deberemus, haec non modo nihil no∣bis prodessent, verum & majoris occasio damnationis fierent nobis, saith Chrysostome; (do you think this a matter of less hainous offence to neglect his Word, than his Body, saith Fulk?) so there is no disparity in the danger of the one or other. As previously to eating, there is a command for a man to examine himself, so dispositively to hearing there is a precept, to take heed how we hear, and seve∣ral other qualifications are thereunto required, 1 Peter 2.1, & 2. James 1.21. so as there is no inequality in the obligation to bring suitable dispositions. The formal part in faithless hearing, can no more be separated from the mate∣rial, than in unworthy receiving, so as there is no disproportion in the hazard of sinning, and with as little difference are the Principles and Reasons, supposed to forbid the admitting of unworthy persons to the Sacrament, extensive and applicable to the non-admission to the Word, In 3. q. 80. art. 6. p. 365. Universaliter in omni materia est contra jus naturae admittere indignos ad quaecun{que} beneficia, as Nugnus argueth, and either the Word is no Pearl, nor holy thing, or else though Pearls and ho∣ly, the Sacraments may as well as the Word, (ex Hypothesi) be cast before Swine, and given to Dogs. That prohibition primarily and directly respects, and is intended (as is elsewhere shewed) to the not preaching of the Word to those that may fall under that metaphorical notion, and is applicable to the Sa∣crament (which was not then instituted) onely extensione quadam Scripturae, non proprio & literali sensu. To say, that more apply this Text to the Sacrament, than to the Word, as it is impertinent to tell us how it is usually applied, when we require how it is to be rightly understood, so it is improper for them, Ad similitud∣nem non ratio∣nem vivunt. Seneca. to make any such aid-prayer, who would by a kinde of Petalism exile, that Topick of Authority, and make it an Utopick, save perchance when it may do them ser∣vice, and then as Ockham to the Emperour, they will defend with the Pen,
what shall protect them, as with a Sword, and if the Argument may be impress'd against an adversary, then onely Hostem qui feriet, fuerit mihi Carthaginensis. But however, if (as they confess) the Text may be extended to Hearers of the Word, that comes full enough to our purpose, for if (as they dispute) because the Pearl and holy things of the Sacrament are not to be cast or given to Swine or Dogs, that is, persons unworthy, therefore it is of necessity to make triall who are worthy, may not we with as good consequence, and as much force of reason argue, that because the Pearl and holy things of the Word are not to be dispensed unto such also, that therefore they ought to examine who are such or not, antecedently to such dispensation? But farther also, if (as we argue and the Context will evince) the prohibition be first and chiefly intended of preaching the Word, then as the direct light is brighter than the reflected, the first draught of any fancy in picture is more perfect than the second; so the not casting or giving those Pearls and holy things being principally meant of the Word, and applicable to the Sacraments onely in an accommodate sense, it seems to follow that those which are not such Dogs and Swine, but that to them the Word may be preached, they are neither such, but that to them also the Sacraments are administrable. If they knew any did come to hear with a design to mock, or purpose to blaspheme the truth, they would sense an obligation to exclude him from the Auditory, and to frustrate this wickedness. Why is there not as great an incumbency for exa∣mining of Hearers that they might be known, as to prevent unworthy re∣ceiving, there is for probation of Receivers? Nay, I presume they would ad∣vance farther and come up to Bellarmine, De eccl. mil. l. 3. c. 10. that saith, Si ecclesia possit dignoscere impios, incredulos & hypocritas, nunquam admitteret, aut casu admissos excluderet. And doth it not hang upon the same hinge of reason, that because no wicked faithless person ought of right to be admitted into Church-fellowship, there∣fore they ought to make triall of all before their admission to be members (which is the state of that disease of Independency, and Meridian of that New Light) aswell as because no unworthy person ought de jure to participate the Sacrament, Cit. à Gratiano 1. q. 1. c. Inter∣rogo. & ab Hospini∣ano Hist. Sa∣cram. l. 2. p. 97. & centur. Magdeburg. centur. 5. c. 4. p. 215. Casaubon exercit. 16. sect. 36. p. 378. & 363. therefore they ought antecedently to make probation of every ones worthiness before he be a partaker? St. Augustine affirmeth, the Word of God not to be less than the Body of Christ; and Casaubon saith, that preaching of the Scriptures, which is called a spiritual Table, is another kinde of spiritu∣al eating of Christ, as the Fathers teach us. As indeed Origen saith expresly, Of the Sacra∣ment, p. 10. Hoc unum ea∣tenus inter ea discrimen est quod quae ver∣bum in mentem per aures insi∣nuat, ea sucramenta per oculos in eandem ingerunt, Theses Salmuri, part. 3. sect. 13. p. 34. Bibere autem sanguinem Christi non solùm sacra∣mentorum ritu, sed & cùm sermones ejus recipimus in quibus vita consistit. And the Word and Sacraments tend to the same end, but by somewhat different ways, the same promises are conveyed by both, but in one demissa per aures, in the other oculis subjecta fidelibus. Cranmer tells us, as the Word preached puts Christ into our ears, so likewise those Elements of Water, Bread and Wine, joyned to Gods Word, do after a
sacramental manner, put Christ into our eyes, mouths, hands, and all our senses, so as neither for dignity are they unequal, nor different in the effects and ends. And this seems to me to be acknowledged by the Apologists them∣selves, when they tell us, Sect. 23. That the want of the Sacrament is supplied by the Word, whereby God gives Souls to eat and drink the Flesh and Bloud of Christ Jesus by faith. As the Eucharist is onely dispensable to such as are capable to shew forth the death of the Lord, and to examine themselves; so Ezra brought the Law before the congregation both of men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, Nehem. 8.2. As infants are debarred of communicating till maturity, so not onely among the Hebrews (as St. Hieron. Pro∣em. in Ezek. tom. 4. p. 727. Casaubon ubi supra, p. 399. ad 404. Hie∣rom tells us) none under thirty years of age was permitted to reade the begin∣ing of Genesis, the Canticles, nor the Exordium or end of Ezekiel; and Casaubon shews us, That as in the ancient Church, onely the faithfull were admitted to some certain Prayers, so the Fathers distinguish'd the Doctrine into , which might be publish'd unto all, and  those secrets which were not rashly to be evulged, which neither in familiar Colloquies, or Catechisms, or Sermons, they temerariously mentioned before Pagans, Catechumens, or any other not initiate; and in this thing (saith he) agree all the Greek and Latine Fathers ad unum omnes; and some of them do bottom this use upon that very place of Matth. 7.6. And from hence resulted that usual form (especially used in mentioning the one or other Sacrament, Norunt initiati quod dicitur, which is to be found at least fifty times in Chrysostome, and not much fewer in Augustine. And as Casaubon tells us out of Dionysius, that none not initiated were admitted to see the Administration of Baptism, so it is evident out of the Monuments of Antiquity, Albasp. l. 2. obs. 22. p. 315. & obs. 23. p. 327. L. 2. obs. 1. p. 190. that to whom they divulged the mystery of the Eu∣charist, to them they exhibited the use thereof, and to whom they thought not fit to administer it, to them they deemed it not expedient to publish it. The Church (saith Albaspinus) took order during their instructing the Catechumens, Ut iis interea nihil de sacramentorum arcanis aperiret. And in another place he tells us, Catechumenos saluberrimis Christianae religionis praeceptis, omissâ omni mysteriorum & sacramentorum mentione, imbuerent; and therefore they went out not onely before the Administration, but also before the explicati∣on of the Mysteries. When it was objected to Athanasius by his Enemies, that he had irreverently broken the Mystical Cup, he in his Apology heavily accuseth them, that they had not blushed to discourse of the Mystery of the Lords Supper before Catechumens and Ethnicks; and when Celsus scornfully hereupon called Christian Religion, A clandestine Doctrine; Origen answers, That the most of their Heads of Doctrine were publickly delivered, and if some were not generally communicated to all, the Christians were therefore no more to be reprehended, than the Heathen Philosophers, who divided their Learning into , which were brought forth to all, and , which were confined within their own School. The learned Grotius also shews out of Clemens Alexandrinus, that Chaldaei, Hebraei, Aegyptii, Annot. in Matth. 7.6, vetustissimi sapientiae professores, praecepta sua tradebant , and indeed as the Apologists have told us of the —Proeul 6, procul ite profani.
whereby the Heathen excluded flagitious persons from their Sacrifices, Rosinus antiq. Rom. l. 2. p. 195. so we could return, that they onely commmunicated their mysterious Doctrines also to such as were initiate, whence Mysterium dicitur , quod est es clau∣dere. So as then all being not held capable of hearing the Word preached, (aswell as some were not of the Sacrament) it were consonant to their Prin∣ciples, to have examined who were or not, and consequently there might seem to be a parity of reason for a probation previous to admission unto the one Or∣dinance, aswell as the other. The Sacrament is a Seal of Faith, therefore say they, There must triall be made of their faith, 1 Cor. 14.22. that are to receive it, and hath it not equal force in the consequence, to argue, prophecying (which by the concordance of Interpre∣ters is interpreting of Scripture) is a sign unto, or serveth for believers, there∣fore probation ought to be made, whether they believe, that are to partake of Prophecying or the Word preached. As the Lopers said, If we enter into the City we shall dy there, 2 Kings 7.4. and if we sit still here, we dy also; so he that hears and believeth not, shall be damned, and he that eats and drinks without faith, can but eat and drink his damnation, there is no safer sinning in the one or other. And Aristippus would have found no odds in dying by the bite of a Lion or a Weazel, nor Heliogabalus been sensible of any difference in the kinde of his Halters and Poniards, that should have killed him. If the hope of learning and possibility of attaining faith, may support and warrant a promiscuous admission to hearing the Word, though notwithstand∣ing many that hear, have no right to the promises held forth in the Word, nor any interest in the salvation offered in Jesus Christ, but all those in effect signi∣fie nothing to them, yet nevertheless all must hear, and those are generally and indifferently to be propounded to all; if because the matter of the duty, viz. Hearing, is commanded by God, it ought to be performed by all, though many are not qualified to do it in due form, or to a right end, since our powers or our prosiciencies are not the measure of our duty, but Gods precept, and our obligation is not rooted in, nor results from what we can do, but what God will have done, and the good commanded must be done, though evil (not causally but consequently, not of it self, but accidentally) ensue in the doing: Why either all these considerations should not (in some measure and degree at least) be extensive and applicable to an admission of all Church-members to the Sacrament, or why (considering this) their solicitude and sedulity should not be extended and applied to the trying and preparing men in order to wor∣thy hearing, aswell as to communicating, may seem not so much below reason (as they say) to ask, as perhaps above it, to answer But now when we can see no difference in the Grounds and Reasons, and yet do behold such disparity in their affections and factions concerning the one or other Ordinance, which did they simply and purely rise and flow from zeal to purity of Ordinances, or salvation of souls, would equally respect all Ordi∣nances, and salvation of souls, in all like concernments. We cannot be so blinde or so connivent, as not to discern that which may fa∣cilitate us to suspect, that the Sacrament is but the accessory, some other thing is the principal which is reposited among arcana Imperii & ragion di stato, and the wheels of their Discipline run Byas, and themselves like false Proxinetes un∣der
colour of wooing for their friend, court for themselves, and onely pretend to fit men for the Sacrament, but intend better to fit them for their proper ends, Canponantes sacramentum: so that though Caesar apertly did invade the Soveraignty, and Pompey pretends the name and interest of the Common∣wealth, yet the difference is no more than between a Storm and a Mine. That there is not the same reason for a precedaneous examination in these two Ordinances, they assay to prove, Because Heathens are capable of the Word, Go preach the Word to every creature; The other is proper to Saints, to strengthen and comfort the begotten, —Has fundit dives facundia gemmas. But they forget that we are not disputing ad rem, what is or ought to be done, but arguing ad hominem, what should be done consequently to their Principles, viz. that Ordinances are not to be dispensed to persons unworthy, who cannot but sin in participating unworthily, and that they are partakers of that sin, which admit them, from which and the like Aphorisms there seems to result a necessity of examining Heathens precedaneously to their admission to the Word preached, whether they are humble, docil, and facil, to captivate their understanding to the obedience of faith, or not. 2. There is not the same reason for examining of Heathens, as of those that be members of the Church; What hath any to do to examine (more than to judg) those that are without? The Ethicks tell us, that some are not idoneous Auditors of moral Philosophy, viz. young men, not defined by pau∣city of years, but weakness of understanding, and inconstancy and levity of manners: now though perchance a Reader or Master may sense it as the dictate of prudence, to make triall of the ingeny and temper of such as by agree∣ment are his profest Scholars, yet it follows not, that if a stranger shall acci∣dentally go into, or transiently pass through his School, or being perswaded by some Declamations made abroad by the Master or Scholars of the excel∣lency and praise of the Art, shall purposely come with some propensness to be∣come a Scholar, if he shall like the Doctrine which is taught; that he must suspend his Lectures, and impose silence on himself, untill he have tried the capacity and docibleness of his adventitious Auditor. 3. Though Pagans may be permitted to be Hearers, (and yet in the ancient Church they were not admitted to hear all the parts of Scripture indefinitely, but onely some special portions thereof) yet they hear it not as their Word, or that wherein they can yet claim any actual right or interest. In 1 Cor. 14.22. Prophesying is a sign for them that believe, a sign of favour and benediction, whereby God teacheth and blesseth his people, (as Paraeus, Aquinas, A Lapide, &c.) primarily and principally intended to the faithfull. Plato, who is therefore called Moyses Atticus, seems to have been very conver∣sant in the writings of Moses, whereunto some think he refers in that frequent phrase, As the old saying goes: the fifth Commandment is explicitely found in Homer, and divers of Solomon's Proverbs in the moral Philosophers, yet never∣theless it was the proper privilege of the Jews, that to them were committed the Oracles of God. A Writing or Deed belongsonly to him to whom, or to whose use, it is sealed and
delivered, though an unteressed stranger may perchance hear it read. In the Charter of a City none hath actual interest, until he be incorporate and made free; yet a forreiner may hear the purport thereof, and perchance may consultly be made acquainted therewith, to facilitate and inflect him to denizen him∣self, through the alluring hope of participating the benefits and privileges thereby granted; yet all that while the Magistrates hear no obligation to make inspection into, or take account of his condition, that is not yet under their government. 4. We are now disputing onely of Christians, and such as are of yeers of discretion; Defence of the Admon. S. 1. p. 118. and of such Mr. Cartwright expresly sayes, If they be not meet to re∣ceive the Holy Sacrament of the Supper, they are not meet to hear the Word of God, they are not meet to be partakers of the prayers of the Church; and with what law∣fulness they may offer themselves to the Prayers, and to the hearing of the Word, they may offer themselves to the Lords Supper; so he correspondently to what hath been else-where shewed to be the judgment of Chrysostome; and upon such ac∣count, there is as much need of examination, in order to fit them for partaking the other Ordinances, aswell as this. That of Mark 16.15. Preach the Gospel to every Creature, is paralel to that of Matth. 28.19. Go teach all Nations; and to teach, is (according to the Original) to disciple; and then it might seem consonant, that they should preach to such as were disciplinable, and in a capa∣city to be made Disciples; and then next they may take notice, that it follows (baptizing them) whence it will be consequent, that as they ought onely to admit to baptisme, such as receive the Word with Faith; so to receive, as their Hearers, such alone as entertain the Word first offered and propounded to them, without any malicious blaspheming, or despiteful persecuting thereof (for those onely fall under the denomination of Swine and Dogs, to whom Pearles are prohibited to be cast, and holy things to be given) and then concor∣dantly to their principles, even the Heathen should be examined, whether they were such or not, previously to, admitting them to be constant and profess'd Hearers. But to seposite the Argument ad hominem, and to reflect upon that which may perchance be hence collected and alleaged ad rem, as, that if confession of faith be requisite antecedently to baptisme, then à pari, examination or the like confession, is as necessary to the perception of the other Sacrament: I shall hereunto reply, That the consequence doth not hold, because the latter hath neither like example, nor equal reason with the former; we find prece∣dents for the one, and until they, like the old Mercuries, will with their finger point us the way, where we may find the like for the other, we shall be like the Mercuries too, stand still, and let them be like the Passenger to go on their course. It carries much of reason, that he that renounceth his former princi∣ples, should declare and let us know, what beleef he is now become of; and be∣ing by baptisme to be initiated into the Church, should tell us what Faith he desires to be baptized in; there is not the like reason for those who being mem∣bers of the visible Church, doe formally, as such, make continual profession of faith; the former by a great summe (as it were) obtain their freedome, the latter are free-born, but as the Children of Christian Parents, being born, as it were Denizens of the City of God, the Church, doe forthwith receive baptisme without adjournment thereof, till they are susceptible of making
profession of faith, so by similitude of reason, should those that are baptized, and intelligent Church-members, be admitted to the other Sacrament, without any farther explicite professing. That examination should seem requisite precedaneously to be aring the word (they say) hath no conformity with Antiquity; for Catechumens and Penitents were ad∣mitted to the Word, not to the Eucharist. But doth it therefore follow, that either they were not, or ought not to be examined, whether they were apt and capable before they had such admission? This onely shews, that some admitted to the Word, were not permitted the Sacrament; not that those Hearers were put un∣der no tryal, nor needed to be so. The Catechumens were onely Embrio's, and Christians in fieri, & but an higher story, or the first winnowing of Heathens, & to them is applicable what we have already discours'd of: the Penitents in their steps to restitution, who were admitted to hear in the Porch some portions of the Word, not the whole, but before any excommunicate person could be indulged the favour of penance, he rendred some hopeful signes of repentance, which could not be collected but upon some tryal; which argueth for us, that there was some probation of them, before they were admitted to be complete Hearers; but when they first were cast out, they were as well excluded from the Word, as from the Sacrament, correspondently to the method of discipline among the Jews, where he that was under Cherem, did neither teach, nor was taught, which both checks with the practice of the Apologists, and confutes their principles. To tell us out of Ames, that the Word goeth before, the Sacraments follow, doth no more enforce this consequent, that therefore there needs no examination precedent to the Word, than it follows, that because Baptisme goes before the Eucharist, therefore there is no necessity of any examination, or profession of faith to be made antecedently to baptizing adult persons; or because seed∣time goes before harvest, therefore no care need to be taken, whether the ground be cultivated and carefully manured, where we cast our seed. But though, as applied by them, it savour more of Bellarmine, arguing that the Sa∣craments excite not Faith, as the Word doth, because Verbum Dei praecedit fi∣dem, sacramenta autem sequuntur; Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 8. p. 204. — unde verbum praedicatur infidelibus & haereticis quibuscun{que}, ut incipiant credere, at sacramenta requirunt fidem saltem in adultis, nec possunt rectè conferri, nisi iis qui priùs credunt: Yet we shall per∣fectly close with what they alleage out of Peter Martyr in this, and grant that the Word may be preached to those that have not yet heard or understood it; and that from such (viz.) Heathens, the communion of the Supper ought to be pure, if so they would not fouly clash with him in the rest, but admit thereunto such, who openly profess themselves Christians (as I am sure all those doe whom they exclude) to whom he saith it is given for a publick thanks∣giving. And it seemes to me, to carry no great disproportion of reason, if the Word may be preached to such as have not heard or understood, in hope they may understand and beleeve, and in order thereunto: that then also the Sa∣crament may be exhibited to them that profess the Faith of Christ, without disquisition, whether they doe sincerely make that profession or not, because it is not onely probable to Charity they may have sound Faith, but possible their Historical or Dogmatical Faith (if they have no other) may by that Ordi∣nance be improved, and quickned into a special lively working Faith. But here they cast their Shete anchor,
—Cùm fessas non vincula naves Ulla tenent.— and bring forth their Palladium, that must preserve the City, and which they also think to be like the shield of Pallas, with the Gorgon's head, that will blind and astonish all beholders into silence. Who knows not that distinction between a converting and confirming Ordinance? We know the effects and influences of one and the same Ordinance may be so distinguish'd; but acknowledge not there is any such essential difference or distinction between the several Ordinances of the Word and Sacraments, we shall onely grant, 1. That the Sacraments are no converting Ordinances, in relation to men out of the Church, and to turn men from Ethnicisme to Christianity, although they be such to men within the Church, Prae festi. Mo∣rat. p. 392. and to convert them from an Histori∣cal or Dogmatical, to a lively-active-saving faith, when Mr. Tombes inferres, then breaking of bread is a converting Ordinance, Mr. Baxter answers, If you mean that it may convert, who ever denyed it? Yea, or it may be useful to convert unsound Christians to sincerity? 2. That perhaps appropriately, rather than properly, by a denomination ta∣ken from the more frequent and more ordinary effect thereof, the Sacraments may be called confirming Ordinances, and so contradistinguish'd to the Word. 3. Though as seales obsignating, and assuring conditionally, they are not without some efficacy toward conversion (as shall be shewed) yet seeing in that way they convert onely by confirming, converting to a true special faith, by confirming and quickning a common general faith; therefore as seals they may be said to be primarily confirming Ordinances; and though also as seals actually and absolutely confirming relative grace, and exhibiting the benefits and privileges of the Covenant, they suppose faith either in fieri, or facto esse, Faith being the Condition of the Covenant, whereupon those benefits and pri∣vileges are bestowed; Art. 45. or though as conjoyned to the Word for more ample confirmation thereof (as the Confession of the French Churches hath it) they in that respect are also called confirming Ordinances, (Quomodo enim duo vincula dicuntur uno fortiora, & duo testes fortiores solitario, sic proculdubio longè plùs valeat ad confirmationem fidei, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 9. S. 32. promissionis obligatio, & Sacramentorum pignoratio, quàm alterutra seorsim, nimirum quia & intellectus per se movetur in verbis, & per sensus, in sacramentis, as Chamier discourseth;) yet as they are signes shewing forth, and representing the death of Christ, and salvation there∣by, unto beleevers; so they are means, and moral instruments, to beget that real grace which converts the heart, (in like manner as the Word doth) those two, the Word and Sacrament, not having different effects and operations, in relation to Faith; but onely a different manner of efficiency, and the one as∣sisting and confirming the other toward the same effect. But in their sense, though this distinction, this their Palladium, (as the old Heathens fabled of theirs) may be pretended to have fallen from Heaven; yet, as other Images, it was the work of mens hands, and of a late framing; and whosoever shall
hotly strive to preserve it, shall like Metellus, rescuing the Palladium at Rome, hazard, in such flames, the loss of his eyes. But if we should, by hypothesis, allow the distinction in their sense, yet it brings nothing pertinent in answer to our Argument; for who hath so little of natural Logick (if he have no artificial) to judge, that because the Sacra∣ment is onely a confirming, and the Word a converting Ordinance, therefore it can possibly be consequent, that pre-examination is requisite in order to right partaking of the former, not the latter? Who would not rather, without any Prompter, suppose, that such examination were rather to be required for disposing men to be partakers of the Word, whose effects are more general, gracious, and profitable, (as I have elsewhere manifested) and where the ha∣zard and danger both of damnum emergens, & lucrum cessans, is more to such un∣preparedness and indisposition? and either due preparation is necessary to no Ordinances, save such as confirm Faith (and then men may come to the Word unprepared;) or else men may come to some Ordinances duly prepared without pre-examination. Like Iphilus treading on the tops of Corn, without any pressing them, they tenderly insist upon this point, and doe rather knock at this door, than enter; but let us survey their discourse, Fatale aggressi sacrato avellere templo Palladium.— Some have contested against this difference, but with small success: It may pro∣bably be so, in respect of perswading such, as according to what Stapleton advi∣seth, Look who speakes, not what is spoken; or such who are like Peleus, Cedere nescius; or like the Canes of China, which are but hollow Reeds, yet are as hard and impenetrable, as Iron; and like the Luciferians, easier to be over∣come, than perswaded, being perswasion-proof to all that checks with their In∣terests; and therefore adde the many grains of their affection, to supply the weight of reason, and to turn the ballance their way: Quod valdè volumus, hoc facilè credimus: We know the Spartans out-faced their great Defeat at Man∣tinaea, set up their Trophees, and arrogated the Victory; besides, the good Cause may not always have the best advocate. Tully against Oppiaricus prevailed in a bad Cause, and Aeschines against Ctesiphon miscarried in a good; and some Advocates are like Pericles in the Theater, who being vanquished by Thucydides, will by their bold eloquence perswade that they are Victors. But it shall as much intrench upon discretion, as modesty, for me to enter upon odious comparisons, between the persons they mention, or their Wri∣tings; Vivorum, ut magna admiratio; ità censura difficilis: one of those whom they so magnifie (and I shall not strive to open wider the Pupil of their Eye, to make either of them seem less) is (with one or two more of his Nation) as the Tower of David, builded for an Armory; where hang all the Shields of mighty men; they are, I confess, Stars of great Magnitude, and perchance my Astralobe takes their Altitude at no lower Elevation, than doth that of the Apologists; and though I cannot move Concentrick with them in this Circle, nor make them my Cynosure, or such Stars whereby I guide my course; yet the Apologists are more Anomalous to other of their motions, and less follow their light. For Mr. Prinne, although perchance, as he said of the Macedonians, Quis
non in hoc potest esse eloquens? Yet I shall not dishonour him by my poor De∣sence, which, like Incense, will more cloud, than perfume his praise, Frigida aus species est vituperationis; although I shal only say, that he being , & magnus in omnibus, it could not be expected that he should be non minor in singulis; and being no less eminent for the multitude of his Writings, than for the magnitude of his Learning (and so much curious workmanship may not be looked for in a great Colosse, as in a small Statue) and that not∣withstanding his Adversary encountred him in that subject, which he had chosen as his Sparta to adorn, and to make it his Master-peece, as Apelles did the Table of Venus, wherein to display all his Artifice; and Pontice, rem solam qui facit, ille facit. Yet notwithstanding all these advantages, I may truly say, Nec retulit praedas, nec palmam victor ab hoste; but onely to argue he had the better, because he had the last word without re∣ply, is an Argument taken from the Cart, where anciently Scolds used to play their prizes; and they might as well conclude that the Rock hath the worst, because when the surging billows break upon him, . 2. c. 1. De civitate Dei. and fall into froth, he moves not forward to beat them lower, Quis disceptandi finis erit & loquendi modus, si respondendum esse respondentibus semper existimemus? saith Augustine, there would then indeed be no end in writing many books. But Quid Cannas Mithridaticumq, bellum, Et Syllas Marios{que}, Mutios{que}, Magnâ voce sonas, manu{que} totâ, Jam dic, Posthume, de tribus capellis; We need not trouble our selves to inquire, how other have fought, or who hath been Victor in this Arena, but come to discharge our proper parts. But yet we need not fight, for the Cause is given up, and the Weapons laid down, and the finger held up as in dedition at the first encounter: for they franckly and ingenuously confess, That at the receiving of the Sacrament, conversion may be wrought, or there may be the first sensible feeling of grace wrought; but though they quit the field, yet they will not come in and yeeld, but retreat to this Fortress, That this effect is not produced by, or flowing from the Sacrament, but from the word annexed to, and concomitant with it; and that the Sacrament is yet no converting Ordinance, in an ordinary way; nor was sanctified, nor may be used to that end. But Quisquis hominum sic respondeat; nisi qui veritati adversatur, contra quam non ha∣bet quod respondeat? as Augustine to Petilian; for what is this, but to say no∣thing, Cont. lit. Pet. l. 3. c. 36. rather than seem to be convict by holding their peace; and to be like the pulse of the flowing Sea, which seemes ever and anon a little to retract those waves which yet it sends up in a still rising flood toward the Shore? For to recapitulate a little, when we argue that if Infidels and faithless persons are to be permitted to be Hearers of the Word, because thereby Faith may be begot∣ten in them, that then also all Church-members may be admitted to partake of
the Sacrament, because by it, their historical and dogmatical Faith may be ele∣vated, and improved to a sound and saving faith: hereunto it is usually an∣swered, that it follows not, by like consequence of reason, because the Sacra∣ment is no converting Ordinance, but onely confirmes that Faith wherewith men come thither. But now I beseech you perpend, whether it be not all one to our purpose, and the scope of the argument, if conversion be wrought at the Sacrament, which they grant, though attributing somewhat to their acuteness, we concede, it be not effected by it, as long as Faith is wrought there, though not thereby, there is the same reason for coming thither. But then secondly, Is not the Word always an essential constitutive part of the Sacrament, or can it be a Sacrament, but by accession of the Word (as well instructive, as consecratory) to the Element? Institut. l. 4. c. 14. S. 4. p. 472. that word quod praedicatum intelligere nos faciat, quid visibile signum sibi velit — quo tendit ac nos dirigit (saith Calvin) who illustrates this truth, by comparing the Sacrament without the Word, to a seal set to a Charter without writing; and this indeed properly (which Allegory they otherwise misapply) were setting a Seal to a Blank; and therefore he saith farther, Comment. in 5. Ephes. Sola mysterii explicatio facit ut mortuum elementum incipiat esse sacramentum, correspondently to Augustine, Detrahe ver∣bum, & quid est aqua nisi aqua? accedat verbum ad elementum & fit sacramen∣tum: and then also the words of Consecration, as likewise the visible word, the actions, instruct also: verbum sacramenti est pars ejus instructionis, saith Chamier, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 15. S. 9. p. 16. Bell. Enerv. Tom. 3. c. 2. p. 16. and as he tells us, that though omne concionatorium, non est consecratorium, at omne consecratorium, est concionatorium; so Ames well directeth, instruere circum∣stantes, & consecrare elementa, non debent inter se opponi, quid per instructionem circumstantium de elementi destinatione ad usum sacrum, elementum ipsum ex parte consecratur. Why then doe they separate those which God hath joyned, and sophistically argue à malè divisis, ad bene conjuncta, and interpretatively, and in the last result onely seem to say, that the Sacrament, when it is no Sacrament, doth not convert? Thirdly, as Luther, Calvin, and Chemnicius, and other Orthodox Divines af∣firm, that those sins lapsed into after Baptisme, are remitted by Faith and Re∣pentance, renewed by the memory of Baptisme; so also the word formerly heard, but not then applyed and laid to heart, being now re-minded by occa∣sion of the Sacrament, which else had not been recognized, may entitle the Sacrament to be the present and immediate cause of conversion; and as the word afterward beleeved, makes the Sacrament effectual to an Infant; so the Encharist makes that word afterward more efficacious toward Conversion, which when it was first heard, was not received with true Faith. The word calleth it self a light, and in creating the new man, illumination by the word hath resem∣blance and Analogy with light in the creation of the world, which had the primo∣geniture among all the works of God, being mentioned to be first made, and is that whereby other of his works are discerned and quickned, and enabled for their operations; and as Light is actus perspicui, so nothing can be acted in any perspicuity or clearness, without the enlightning word; yet notwithstanding in a clear light, some eyes cannot read without the help of Spectacles; and will any man therefore conclude, that those Perspectives are not meanes or Instru∣ments of discerning Characters, because they have no subserviency to that end, without the adjument of Light? The Chymists boast much of their Uni∣versa
medicina; and some of them thereby understand the Calidum innatum & spiritum insitum, which of it self works out, and mastereth many Diseases; but when some Maladies are too stubborn and violent to be expulsed, and there is indication of some proper medicine to be applyed for cure, although no remedy can put forth its virtue, or produce any effect without it be quickned and actua∣ted by that Native Balsam; yet we deny not therefore the force and operation of the Medicine, nor dare to affirm it is no healing Pharmacon. Fourthly, They will not adventure to say, the Sacrament doth confirm Faith, without the accession of the Word thereunto, even formally as it confirmeth; and if the requisiteness of such a connexion of the Word therewith, doth not frustrate the Sacrament of the denomination of a confirming Ordinance, why should the like necessity of the concurrence of the Word with the Sacrament in conversion, deprive it of the name of a converting Ordinance? Fifthly, We pre-suppose, and lay it as our Hypothesis, that none but Covenan∣ters with God, and Church-members, are capable of the Sacraments, and such have been Hearers of the Word, and are pre-endued with a Dogmatical-Histori∣cal Faith; but all that have the Word of Faith, have not the Work of Faith; they beleeve speculatively, but not practically; not laying the promises to heart in an efficacious application; they can make out the Proposition, but are not perfect in the Assumption and Conclusion; have the Synteresis fixed in them, but are strangers to the Syneidesis, and Crisis: Now the question is, whether the Sacraments are moral Instruments, and effectual outward meanes to set that knowledge home to the heart, which before was onely floting in the brain, and to set open the passage between them, and to turn and bring them, that before at distance looked toward him, to close up with Christ, and to give their heart to him, and cast their dependencies upon him. Not to fetch in any auxiliar strength from that opinion, or bottome any ar∣gument thereupon, which some learned men embrace, that an Historicall or Temporary Faith differs onely in degree, not in kinde, from that Faith which Tertullian calls Morata; and Augustine, Radicata & confirmata, which if it were so, then the Sacrament onely by confirming Faith, and elevating and improving it to greater degrees, might, with more facility, work conversion. But howsoever, if they differ in kinde (which to me seems to have more warrant from Reason) yet the raising and increasing of the degrees, may alter the kinds, as aire advanced to some more degrees of rarefaction, and consequent heat, turns to be fire; so since the Sacrament by quickning and fomenting the weak degrees of Faith, by confirming it, and making it take root, may adde such strength thereunto, as to make it purifie the heart, and purge the Conscience from dead works, seeing we see Augustine describes true Faith to be onely a con∣firmed rooted Faith; and if it have the essence of true Faith, it cannot but have the consequent operation thereof, viz. to change the heart; and seeing (what was hinted before) as Seales, the Sacraments doe confirm Faith, whether obje∣ctivè, making the matter more credible, or subjectivè, causing the persons, both more facile to credit, and more firmly to adhere to it: therefore he that had attained by the Word to a superficial floating, and ineffectual Faith, may by the Sacrament, improve it to be lively, solid, and efficacious, as he that thinks a Note under a mans hand to be no security, nor will engage or undertake the performance of a duty upon such Assurance, will be facilitated to doe it when a
Seal is added to the Writing; and as two Bonds are held stronger than one, and two Witnesses more credible, than a single one; so without all doubt, the Obligation of a Promise, and the Pawn or Pledge of the Sacrament, avail more to the confirmation of Faith, the understanding being by it self more moved by the words and by the senses in the Sacraments, In praedicatione verbi & admi∣nistratione Sacramento∣rum idipsum fere usu evenit quodin usuvini, etenim ei qui assueti sunt, quotidiano potu vix ejus vim sentiunt, quibus verò rariùs aliquanto ex∣hibetur, in iis ejus spiritus miram quandam efficacitatem exerunt, cùm ad vires corporis re∣creandas, tum ad alacritatem inusitatam animis ingenerandam, &c. Thes. Salmur. p. 3. S. 17. p. 35. Idem hîc fere usu evenit quod in visu, quia natura duobus oculis objecta visibilia nos perspicere velit, nisi aliquid moliatur extra ordinem, visu quidem non caremus, nec quidquam videmus duo∣bus oculis quod aliquatenus cernere nequeamus uno tantum, at id facimus nimis commodè & for∣tasse minus acutum. Ibid. S. 49. pag. 47. as was even now alleaged out of Chamier; and though the same things have been propounded before in the Word, yet they may now take more impression, being held forth in the Sa∣crament, even as the same proposition made in the Word, doth often acquire better and more happy effect at one time than another; and much rather may it doe so, when it is tendered as well in divers ways, as times. Whatsoever effect in the perfecting of Faith, and attracting and uniting the love of the heart unto God in Christ, can be produced by the lively apprehen∣sion, and serious meditation of the death of Christ, and his love in dying for the salvation of those that beleeve, the Sacrament may be productive of, which by institution signfies, and, by similitude, represents and shews forth his death, and expresly tends, and directly and appositely conduceth to the remembrance of him. And how frequently and urgently is the consideration of Gods love manife∣sted, in sending his Son to dye, and Christs in dying for us, Joh. 15.12. & 13. Rom. 5.8. Ephes. 5.2. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Joh. 3.16. & 4.9. & 11. &c. recommended as the most exciting; and, as the Apostle speaks, constraining motive, to the inter∣changable love of God and Christ; and also of our brethren, as material ob∣jects of our love (whereof God is the formal,) and as participable of that blessedness, which flows from Gods love in Christ? This is plainly confessed by the Provincial Assembly of London, who patheti∣cally say, That the breaking of the Bread, understandingly looked upon, Vindicat. p. 104, is a forcible argument to break your hearts, — and in the right use to effect that which it doth move unto, — there is power in an applicative and fiducial remem∣brance of Christ at the Sacrament, to heal all the sinful issues of our soules, — and if you practically remember the Sacrament of his death, you will finde virtue coming out thereof to make you dead to the World.
Can any tell me, Baxter praefe∣stinantis mora∣tor. p. 393. Ex instituto Dei & Christi, ad eadem illa objecta, quae verbo continen∣tur, cum reprae∣sentanda tum praesertim obsignanda referuntur, nam & Chri∣stum testantur mortuum esse pro peccatis nostris ac suscitatum à mortuis pro justificatione nostra, & in eo nobis exhi∣bent, quicquid boni specie & jucundi, & honesti, & utilis animos nostros movere, & ad studium pietatis, & verae sanctimoniae excitare potest. Thes. Salmur. part. 3. S. 11. pag. 33. Mundatio animae per gratiam infusam accedit ad ratio∣nem creationis. Altisiodor. Objecti illa repraesentatio in sacramentis quàm in verbo pleniùs expressa fuit, ideo{que} movet efficacius. Thes. Salmur. S. 46. part. 3. p. 46. vide S. 31. & 38. p. 38, & 40. saith a learned man, in what kinde of causality the Word works, which the Sacrament doth not also work in? though in Conversion the work of the Spirit concurre with the Word, either by infusing a principle of new life, and inspiring supernatural habits; as Principium quo, into the soul, which is principium quod, as is the Tenent of most of Orthodox Divines; or by superadding a real efficacy to a moral perswasion, as some others hold (who yet seem farre enough from any symbolizing with Pelagius, while they suppose not this efficacy to be common or equal; nor to rise from the event; nor to be founded in the annexed congruity, and due application of this perswasion, in respect of any external circumstances, or the proper disposition of the Patients; but in Gods Decree, and the special operation of his Spirit) yet which way soever it be, the Word, though it have a practick Energy by assistance of the Spirit, and be a practical instrument of righteousness and salvation; yet the operation thereof is not Physical, but Moral, and Metaphorical; not an efficiency, but an objective proposition and perswasion, movere objective, per modum signi; and working Faith, not formally, but consequently; not by causal influence, but as subservient mean, and by mediation of its signification apprehended, though the manner of signifying be very actual and efficacious, in which re∣spect Faith is an acquisite habit, as in regard of the operation of the spirit, it is an infused, and is produced in the manner of a Creation. And the like kinds of propounding the object, and signification, and perswasion, cannot be denyed to the Sacrament, even in a more extensive manner, striking more senses, and affecting them with multifarious impressions; and therefore it must also be granted, that it hath the like moral and consecutory efficiency, in order to the begetting of Faith, and purifying of the heart, and thereby bringing Christ to dwell therein. To say that it is no proper sanctified meanes in an ordinary way for conversion, nor may be used in Faith to that end, carries as little relish of reason, as resentment of piety. Extraordinary and accidental causes, as they doe rarely produce their effects, so they are not ordinate to them, in their own nature and the in∣tention: Quae destinato consilio fiunt, nunquam dicuntur per accidens, saith Cha∣mier; Quae fiunt à causa per acci∣dens, rarò; fiunt causa efficiens per se, & quae natura sua & intentione ad effectum ordinata est. Alsted. Ne{que} illi qui (Sacramenta) causas dicunt per accidens, &c. quae fortuitae sunt, vel sine quibus non, for∣tuitae quibus alius finis, &c. Vide Chamier. Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. S. 13. & 14. p. 28. &c. 3. sect. 33. but as it is no rare thing for conversion to be wrought at receiving of the Sacrament (as they speak,) or by it, (as we say;) so the administration hath a
natural tendency and influence thereunto, and such a coherence as is between causes and effects; by commemoration and representing of the death of Christ, De doct. l. 2. c. 1. and offering and applying the fruits and effects thereof. For a Sacrament is a sacred sign, as St. Augustine tells us, that signum est res, praeter speciem quam in∣gerit sensibus, alud aliquid ex se faciens in cogitationem venire; How the Sa∣craments may be operative to conversion by their signi∣fication, see Theses Salmur. part. 3. S. 44. p. 15. 45. p. 16. Ep. 25. so as it is instru∣ctive by the nature thereof, and a virtual kind of teaching; and as intellection is wrought by those either spiritual accidents, or intentional things, the intelli∣gible Species, which are but similitudes and representations of things; so those signes impress upon the Understanding the things signified, by that similitude which they bear unto them, a similitude non per participationem ejusdem quali∣tatis, sed illam quae est proportionatorum, ut sicut se habet hoc ad illud, ità hoc ad istud, as Biel expresseth it; and the form, and therefore the nature of a Sacra∣ment, is the union between the signes and the thing signified, being a spiritual relation, founded partly in this analogy, similitude and proportion between them, Si sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum sacramenta sunt non haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent, saith St. Augustine. But to insinuate as they doe, That the beholding a deaths head in a Ring, hath either equal, or the like kinde of influence in conversion with the Sacrament, is to avile and degrade Gods Institutions into the same Classis with Humane In∣ventions, and God should then have no more power to ordain Sacraments, or significant Ceremonies, than man hath, if his Institutions are by his blessing no more adopted and sanctified to the grace of Conversion, than mans are. And this spot of their Pen shall demerit much thanks from the Papists, not onely by verifying their Calumny, that we attribute no more efficacy or operation to the Sacrament, than to a Picture; but also by rendring them some advantage to argue in defence of their Bookes for Lay-men (though prohibited Bookes by Gods command) and to plead, that to behold a painted or carved Crucifix, may ex∣cite as holy affections toward Christ, In Gal. 3.1. as to have him before our eyes evidently set forth crucified among us, as well by his Sacraments, as his Word (as Bullin∣ger, Piscator, Paraeus, and others interpret it.) 2. What grace soever the Sacrament exhibits, it is by virtue of their sancti∣fication to that end, a Sacrament by the Scholastick definition, signifying by in∣stitution, representing by similitude, and by sanctification (they say, containing, we) conferring spiritual and invisible graces: If they require an express spe∣cial promise, warranting the use thereof for a converting Ordinance, let them first produce such, to approve it may be used for a confirming. As heat cannot be separate from Light in the Sunne, so neither can the virtue of converting be dis-joyned from that of confirming, in those Texts which hold forth the na∣ture and use of the Sacrament; but, as Metals, have their name from , because their veines runne together; so these powers are in the sacred Mines of spiritual Treasure, concurrent and complicated, that let them shoot any shaft for the one, we shall (as the Yorkists did in the Battel of Towton against the Lancastrians) take it up, and return it to fight for the other. If they suppose that it verifies the one power, in that the Sacrament is called a seal of Faith; but it approves not the other, they forget that a Seal is set to a gift and grant, as well as to a confirmation, and serveth as well to convey, as to corroborate; and besides, the Sacrament, as a Seal, gives and confirmes a relative grace, as a signe, it doth the reall, (such as is the new heart) the for∣mer
by obligation, the latter by signification. It is true, our Divines usually call the Sacraments confirming Ordinances, but not in that sense which they imposterously fabricate, exclusively to converting, but because they are pri∣marily Seales of Faith objectivè, being added to confirm and ratifie the certain∣ty of the promises, though with some more particular and appropriate applica∣tion upon performance of the condition: Chamier. Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 9. S. 18 Easdem res confirmare, quae prius erant solis verbis conceptae, est enim ea signorum natura, ut quae Diplomata in mem∣branis sunt, fiant efficaciora, sortiantur{que} effectum suum. Sacraments having some analogy with an Oath, wherewith God confirms the promise, willing more abun∣dantly to shew unto the Heirs thereof, the immutability of his counsel, non suam naturam spectans, sed nostram infirmitatem, and therefore Paraeus calls our Sacra∣ments, In Hebr. c. 6. v. 17. p. 888. God's visible Oaths, as the very words, saith he, manifests; for Lawyers call a solemn Oath a Sacrament; and therefore they are Gods Oaths, in con∣firmation of his Promises; Si verbum meum non sufficit, ecce signum do, addes Chrysostome; but then even in confirming Faith objectivè, they consequently not onely strengthen, but beget Faith subjectively (as a Seal in confirming the Writing, begets a beleef of the validity of the assurance) and so are meanes of Conversion, producing a firmer assent to the truth of those Promises, which before were not effectually laid hold of; Dico sacramenta (saith Chamier) esse notiora & efficaciora fidei faciendae, Ubi supra S. 24. p. 42. (observe he saith faciendae, non tantùm confirmandae) ipsa promissione, codem modò quo sigilla regia sunt notiora & ffi∣caciora ipso diplomate, nimirum quia solent apud nos esse cognitiora certiora{que} quae in oculos cadunt, quàm quae auribus admoventur. As then he that is not satis∣fied with a bare single promise may credit an oath; and then that oath is pro∣perly the means whereby he is perswaded into a beleef; and as when a naked Writing is not held a good Conveyance, until it become a Deed sealed and de∣livered, that sealing and delivery makes good the assurance, and is that which invests the right and interest; so when the Word preached doth not profit, being not mix'd with Faith in them that hear it, the Sacrament, that superadds to the Dogmatical or Historical Faith, a fiducial assent, doth not onely confirm, but cause that Faith which justifieth, and brings peace with God. And to say it cannot properly be said to doe this, because it doth it not without precognition of the word, is as if they should say, that because a Deed is a writing sealed and delivered, that it doth not therefore become of force from the sealing and delivery, but from the writing read; or that an incorporal estate did alwayes pass, when the grant alone was read, and was onely confirmed by the sealing and delivery. Though most of their cunning lye in such generalities; yet I shall not insist on it, that Christ hath promised to be with us in all his Ordinances unto the end of the world. And that there are general promises, that their hearts shall live that seek God, Psal. 6.9.32. Prov. 8.17. Matth. 7.7. Lam. 3.25. Psal. 75.4. that the Lord will be found of them that seek him, and is good to them that wait for him, and to the soul that seeketh him, and they that dwell in his Courts shall be satisfied with the goodness of his house; and that this is extensible and accommodable to seeking and waiting on him in all his wayes and Ordi∣nances; and, as a general rule, extends to and comprehendeth all particulars, not specially and expresly excepted; so they must shew by direct and explicit proof that the grace of conversion is denyed to this particular ordinance, or
else it is included in the affirmation of such grace to be annexed to ordinances in general. As the generative faculty for propagation of the species is still supported and enlivened by influence of Gods benediction, Be fruitful and multiply; semel qui∣dem dicta est, semper autem fit (saith Chrysostome,) so the converting power in the Sacrament, for continuance and dilatation of the Church, is maintained and verified by the power of Christ's blessing of the Elements, to the remembrance of him, which commemoration is efficacious to the engaging of the heart to him. The Sacramental Elements are the Body and Blood of Christ, and the Blood of the New Testament, shed for many for remission of sins, as well by significa∣tion, as by obsignation, and the obsignation is but an higher kind of significa∣tion; they are the communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, In locum. signifying and sealing them, accompanied with their effect, and spiritual reality (saith Deodate) by virtue of the Holy Ghost. And why should not the signification be really effectual in production of reall grace, as the sealing to the causing of relative? or the signification have no such effect in the Sacrament, which is so efficacious, when made in the Word? Beside, every promise made to the Word, Homil. 3. a Ephes. c. 1. is exten∣ded to the Sacraments, which are but visible words. And when Chrysostome in his Exhortations to frequent communicating, affirms, not onely by these things set before us, viz. the Sacrament; but by Hymnes also doth the Holy Ghost descend, he implyes, that by the Sacrament the Holy Ghost more evidently came into mens hearts, than by the other means; and whether that of 1 Cor. 12.13. of drinking into one spirit, which the Syriack, Ambrose, Augustine, and others render, drinking of one spirit; and which Calvin thus expounds, Participationem calicis huc spectare, ut unam Christi spiritum hauriamus; and Piscator, Etsi verbi au∣ditionem & sacramentor legitimam c. brationem spi∣ritus conso∣lans & san∣ctificans se∣quitur remu∣nerationis er∣go, potiores amen esse in eo sacramentorum partes, neque sane leviter praetereundum est quod Paulus dixit nos spiri potari, — eui nihil unquam simile protulit cum de verbi praedicatione locutus est. Thes. Salmur. part. 3. p. 40. Calvin in loc. Piscator in loc. Gerhard loc. com. tom. 6. c. 20. p. 173. Chrys. in homil. moral. 24. Ut regene∣rentur ab uno spiritu, viz. Sancto, and Gerhard, Ex uno calice bibimus, ut unum spiritum accipiamus, refer not to the conferring of real grace, as well as relative; and so whether those Testimonies of Chrysostome, and other Fathers, (which if I should muster up for my defence, I might, like that Romane Vestal, be op∣press'd with the multitude of such Bucklers) concerning the Sacrament, calling it Fundamentum, salus, lux, vita, medicamentum immortalitatis, antidotum non mori∣endi, (the saying of Ignatius) Renovationis & regenerationis causa, (which is Nyssen's,) & vivificatio spiritûs, which is Cyril's, Saint as mentis, which is Cypri∣ans, &c. relate onely to confirming, not begetting of Faith, let men more learned judge, but truly. I cannot beleeve. Can they deny, that the Sacrament by shewing forth and signifying the Lords death, and putting us in remembrance of him, and his Body broken, and his Blood shed for the remission of sins, is a part of the Gospel, or good tidings of great joy, for a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord; and must they not then also grant, that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation: Bellarmin. Evernat. tom, 3. c. 5. p. 33. from which very Text of Rom. 1.16. Ames concludes, that aequè tribuitur justificatio verbo & sacramentis, cùm ambo justificent ut instrumenta Dei, & ambo sua natura significent
aliquid nobis fide recipiendum ad justitiam & salutem, consequens est ambo justi∣ficare, mediante fide? Is not the administration of the Sacraments a part of the work of the Ministery, applicatio redemptionis in signis? and are not those offi∣ces, and that work also, for the perfecting of the same, and the edifying of the Body of Christ, Lapide in Ephes. 4.12.  (which Erasmus and Vatablus translate instaura∣tion, coming (saith one) , signifying rem collapsam re∣staurare & reparare. 2. perficere, absolvere, consummare? which as they will grant in relation to the Word preached, so they cannot deny it, in respect of the Sa∣crament, if that be a Ministerial work; but Docemus sacramenta esse partem ex∣terni Ministerii gratiae, quo Deus uti voluit ad promovendam salutem humanam, as Chamier witnesseth. If they cannot deny the Word to be operative to Conversion, they must also grant the like operation to the Sacrament, which workes in the same generical way, in order to the same effect, these being like two Needles touch'd with the same Load-stone, which move together, and turn alike to the same point. If they will not concede such efficacy to the Sacraments, they consequently and virtually denegate it to the Word, these two Ordinances being such friends, as to have things common between them; and like two Viols set to the same Tune, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. S. 3. p. 27. touch one, and the other is touch'd also. Bellarmine delivers it as the common tenent of the Protestants, Sacramenta mediatè aliquid efficere, quate∣nus videlicet excitant vel alunt fidem, quae homines justificat, quod tamen ipsum, id est, excitare fidem, non faciunt nisi repraesentando; volunt enim eodem modo concur∣rere ad justificationem sacramenta, Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 2. p. 177. Estius in sen∣tent. l. 4. dist. 1. S. 8. quo praedicatio verbi, nisi quod praedicatum ad∣hibetur auribus, & per auditum fidem, sacramenta adhibentur oculis, & per visum excitant etiam fidem; and Estius seconds him, Docent Sectarii sacramentorum eundum esse usum quem Evangelicae praedicationis, & proinde non aliter ascriben∣dam volunt hominis justificationem sacramento, quàm verbo Evangelii, quia inqui∣unt, scut sacramentum, ita Evangelium virtus Dei est in salutem omni credenti. And this is true, which they affirm, but not the whole truth; for beside this vir∣tue of representing, the Protestants doe attribute to the Sacraments also another of obsignation, Ames. Bel. Enervat. Tom. 3. c. 3. Operantur ultra repraesentationem per efficacem ordinationem & assi∣stentiam Dei, saith Ames; and they are not onely theoretical signes, to signifie; but practical, to confer the things signified, and have omnem efficientiam respectu gratiae, quàm signum practicum potest habere per ullam relationem, — non tamen efficere gratiam immediatè, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 7. S. 45. p. 38. sed mediante spiritu Dei & fide; yet so as that illa non propriè pendent à fide, sed fides ex illis, & illa ex constitutione Dei; and as Cha∣mier speaks of Baptisme, justificare excitando fidem non dicimus, sed potiùs justi∣ficando excitare fidem, quando quidem fides non est causa praecedens; but that they excite Faith, and produce real grace by their signification and representing as the word doth, is the common opinion of Protestants, the Provincial Assem∣bly at London say, Vindication. p. 104. Instit. l. 4 c. 14. S. 16. & 17. As Christ in the Ministery of his Word preacheth to the ear, and by the ear conveyeth himself into the heart; so in the Sacrament he preacheth to the eye, and conveyeth himself into the heart, and therefore it is well called a visible Sermon. Fixum maneat (saith Calvin) non esse alias sacramentorum quam verbi Dei partes, quae sunt offerre nobis & proponere Christum; and elsewhere he addes, hac ratione Augustinus sacramentum verbum visibile nuncupat, Loc. com. part. 4. p. 194. a. quod Dei promissio∣nes velut in tabula depictas repraesentat, & sub aspectam graphicè at{que}  ex∣pressas siatuat. And so Martyr calls them speaking Signes; and Junius match∣eth
them and the word, as Twins, Quod autem foras est in Ecclesia testimonium, aut in sermone positum est, Eiren. part. 1 tom. 1. p. 710. aut in symbolis & sacramentis ejus — unum sunt secundùm substantiam, etsi in specie materiâ{que} externâ differunt; so likewise sa∣cramenta conferentia gratiam significando per visum (saith Chamier) alio modo si∣gnificant, quàm Evangelium per auditum, & tamen utra{que} Cham. tom. 4. l. 2. c. 5. S. 7. & 15. conferunt significando — communis modus significandi, at{que} ita operandi in intellectum quan∣quam per diversos sensus; and what he saith of Prayers, is as well meant of, and applyable to the Sacraments, Si preces habere possunt intelligentiam, ergò & instructionem, nam haec nihil est quàm intelligentia communicata. Exam. Concil. Trident. 2. part. p. 101. Objectum fidei (saith Chemnicius) est verbum & sacramenta, imò in verbo & sacramentis ve∣rum fidei objectum est Christi meritum, gratia Dei & efficacia spiritûs, & fides ideo justificat, quia illa in verbo & sacramentis dicitur justificare; and I could amasse an heap of Testimonies to this purpose, Vere priùs flores numero comprêndere fas sit, and that this is to be understood of real grace (not onely of relative) and of the first conversion and change of the heart, not onely seems plain by that of Chamier, (who, like Plato, may be instar omnium, & inter omnes, — Tanquam inter viburna cupressus) Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. S. 8. p. 27. Ibid. l. 2. c. 12. S. 20. & 21. p. 13. Docent Catholici in sacramentorum perceptione efficigratiam in fidelibus; but farther by this, Effici antem concedimus sanctificationem, sed hanc geminam, externam, aliàs internam — internam sanctificationem esse credimus efficaciam spiritûs sancti in animum accipientis sacramentum, à qua efficacia fit etiam arcana mulatio in∣tellectûs & voluntatis, cujus respectu agnoscimus sacramenta esse instrumenta quae∣dam; and most evidently (as nihil incontradicibilius in Tertullians phrase,) by this passage, Quicquid movet intellectum ad assentiendum veritati divinae, rat fovét{que} fidem, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 4. S. 16. p. 31. gene∣at sacramenta movent intellectum ad assentiendum veritati di∣vinae, ergo: Major patet; quia fidei est assentire veritati divinae — Minor etiam facilè probatur, movent enim intellectum qua signa sunt, ita{que} significant, signi∣ficationis vis tota pertinet ad intellectum, movent autem ad assentiendum, quia signa sunt veracia, non mendacia, veritas autem quam significant, est divina non huma∣na; so as this may set it in the clearest Sun, that those which deny the Sacra∣ments to be converting Ordinances, in this point they are also speculative sepa∣ratists from the communion of Protestants. And as certain Princes, in some straits of indigence, have coyned Leather instead of Silver; so this new-minted distinction of a converting and confirming Ordinance, was stamp'd in such a distress and necessity, for want of better Bullion; and is not Sterling (onely I have not read of Princes that have fallen into such an exigence at the Inaugu∣ration into their Principalities) or was false Coyn rather borrowed from the Papists, who deny this Sacrament, to confer the first grace, Suarez 2. in 3. disp. 7. q. 62. Vasquez. disp. 205. c. 4. who cite Hales, Durand, Bonaventure, Biel, Paludanus, Major, and others, for this opinion. but to suppose him just that receives it.
I recognize, that some interpose to tell us, that what use or effect the Sacrament can have by representing, may be acquired by seeing the Admi∣nistration without partaking, and then it might be sufficient for some to look on; but I shall regest, that to what end shall they look on, if they can look for no fruit or good effect thereby? And wherein can the Aspect be fruitfull or effectuall to men unconverted, but as it shall be subservient and adjumentall to their Conversion? And if the Sacrament may be thereby capable of any such efficacy by representing to the Eye onely, it will be necessarily con∣sequent, that the efficacy thereof, in order to that end, must be farre grea∣ter, when it workes also by signifying to the other Senses; and the ap∣plying signes are also added to the representing: but though we should not willingly turn out of the way, yet farther to remove this block out of the way of freer admission to the Sacrament; wee shall an∣swer, 1. That the Blessing of our Saviour sanctifies the Bread and the Wine, in order to the taking of both; and eating of the one, and drinking of the other, not to the seeing them administred, to the doing this in remembrance of Him, not beholding it done, and he shall unwarrantably presume to expect the fruit of the Promise, that performes not the Duty of the Precept; the Sa∣cramental Elements put Christ into all our senses, (as I have formerly ci∣ted out of Chamier) not onely into our Eyes, & significatio quò est expressir, hoc magis. operatur (as Chamier) to him that ears not, Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 10. S. 36. p. 246. it is no Sacrament; for sacramenta ut relata, non habent extra usum, rationem sacramenti: And Chae∣mier also approves a passage of Valentia to this purpose, Scilicet rem sacram in proposito intelligi debere, quae sanctificat hominem suscipientem rectè ipsum sacra∣mentum, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 11. quod talis rei sacrae est signum, ita ut intelligere dbeamus esse signum rei fanctificantis practicum, quoniam significat rem quae in ipsa praxi & usu talis signt sanctificat. Secondly, Definitions are the very essence of things, and the Apostle defi∣neth this Sacrament by the Communion, the Bread which we break is the Com∣munion of the Body of Christ, (not the Inspection) and we are partakers of one Bread, not beholders. For the better amplification of the benefits of Christs In∣carnation in special, there was to be a Mystical Incarnation of Christ in us, as well as a real for us, Mede in 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. p. 582. (as Nazianzen-defines, the Eucharist to be a Communion of the Incarnation of God) which is not effected, but by receiving this Body and Blood of his, changing them into ours by way of nourishment. St. Augustine tells us, that without the similitude of the signe to the thing signified, there is no Sacrament, but the Analogy of the Eucharistical signes to the Body and Blood of Christ, consist in the respect of aliment and nutrition; which respect faileth, without eating and drinking; and a Sacrament being not ens Physicum sed rationis, Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 7. S. 18. p. 174. may be a Sacrament to one, and not to another, as Chamier disputeth, it is but common meat and drink, until it be consecrated; but the Consecra∣tion is not perfected, nor in facto esse, until participation, as it is no compleat motion, until it have attained its term; Even Bellarmine, Valentia, and other Papists, Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 10. S. 15. p. 245. make Consumption to be of the Essence of their fictitious sacri∣fice. Nay Chamier goeth farther, and denyes, Ullum fructum ex Eucharistia participi videndo; ratio facilis quia non sit instituta, ut significet ea ratione sed aliâ,
— quare cùm Eucharistia pertineat ad gustum, (sic Augustinus) ridicule so∣phista (Bellarminus) dixit aequè significare per oculos, id est, videndo. And when I shall finde their Appetite as well satisfied, and their Stomachs as much filled, by looking on a good Supper, as by eating it, I may be facile to assent to their Hypothesis, and beleeve the Supper of the Lords may be alimental and re∣fective to the soul, by seeing, as well as by partaking. Thirdly, As the benefit is not equal in seeing and eating, In Eccl. l. 3. so the danger is alike in either, if they be without Faith; for since not onely (as saith Hierom) in this Mystery; but in the reading of the Scripture, we eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of Christ; and the Word preached (as I alleaged out of Casaubon) is a Spiritual Table, and another kinde of spiritual eating of Christ; therefore to whomsoever, or howsoever salvation by the death of Christ is represented, if not laid hold of by Faith, it turnes to his condemnation, and he hath no life in him, because he eates not the flesh of the Son of Man, nor drinkes his Blood; so that as a man may eat Christ spiritually, and not sacramentally, and have the rem signi, without the signum rei; so he that eates not spiritually, contracts damnation, though he be restrained from Sacramentall eat∣ing. Fourthly, Therefore, saith Chrysostome, not onely they that sit down at the Table, but they that are present at the Feast, without their Wedding Garment, Mep. ad Ephes. Hom. 3. Tom. 4 p. 356. are subject to condemnation; for the Master of the Feast will not ask, How durst thou sit down, but how durst thou come in, not having a Wedding Gar∣ment? Fifthly, To be a spectator of the Celebration, and not a partaker of the Sa∣crament, as it hath no precedent in the practice of the ancient Church (save among those that were in the last degree of penance) for those that were not thought worthy to partake, were not held fit to look on, Albaspin. de vet Eccl. rit. l. 2. ob. 2. p. 206. but were dismissed in the Ite missa, cùm ex more Diaconus clamat, si quis non communcat, det locum, (as saith Gregory) and it was thought all one, to behold the Celebration, and to be a partaker; for if a Catechumen had by fortuitous accident, beheld the administration, he was forthwith baptized, and from Baptisme was an imme∣diate passage to the Eucharist; and whom they thought fit to be permitted the inspection, they supposed worthy to be admitted to the participation of the Eu∣charist: so to stay as a spectator, De consecrat. dist. 2. was censured to merit the punishment of Ex∣communication (as I have elsewhere manifested) peracta consecratione, omnes communicent, qui noluerint ecclesiaisticis carere liminibus, sic enim Apostoli statuerunt, &c. as Gratian recordeth. Lastly, as it is Treason to carry Arms and Ammunition to the Enemy, so this principle treacherously betrayes the Protestant Cause, and brings Aid to the Popish, furnishing them with an Argument, to justifie or excuse their private Masses, and mutilate Communions, if they may be profitable and effectual to spectators of the Sacrament, when it is administred, as well as to participa∣tors. And sure if they doe not lend, they that use it borrow this Argument from the Pontificians, Aut Plato Philonizat, aut Philo Platonizat; Bellarmine telling us, in his Disputes against our opinion of the Sacraments efficacy by exciting Faith, and operating by their signification, correspondently as the Word doth, (as in truth many of the Arguments usually urged to disprove the Sacra∣ments to be a converting Ordinance, are but feasting us in that Idol-Temple,
and with part of the sacrifices, which Bellarmine hath offered to the God of Ekron) that what effect the Sacraments have by signification, may be acquired by seeing them administred, as well as by partaking; and from this principle also he argueth in defence of the Communion in one kinde, and with the Po∣pish Heifers have they ploughed, that have found out this Riddle, and (in al∣lusion to the antique mode in founding Cities) have turned up this Furrow, and drawn this Line, where to make a Wall to retrench and keep out from the Communion. And perhaps also the Papists putting their private Masses upon the score of the peoples indevotion, hath prompted the Apologists and their fellows, to lay their comparatively private Communions, and the exclu∣ding of so many, on the account of their unwillingness to come, and on their irreverence; and hereupon to put the blame for the with holding both kindes from so many, as among the Papists they doe for withdrawing one species from all, except Priests and Kings, save that lately the consecrated Wine is given the Laity, in some Countreyes, poured out into a Glass, which by no meanes is to be drank out of the Chalice, that the Priest may have still some privilege and elevation above the people (equal to Kings.) Wherein, as in a glass, we may see somewhat besides Truth and Godliness doth carry on and biass the wheeles of this kinde of motions. That Argument seemes in some false glasses to shew a more colourable face of reason, which some have thus painted; He that receives worthily, is con∣verted already; he that partakes unworthily, ears and drinks to his damna∣tion, not conversion: But this is meer painting, which will neither abide the fire, (or tryal) nor the light of the Sun, and will be defaced by every strong breath that blows upon it. But first to seposite and adjourn the consideration, that there lies no little weight of Reason and Authority in that scale, which propends to think, that the unworthiness of him which eats and drinks unto damnation, is meant onely of a contrary, not privative unworthiness, and alone of such as come with a pre∣sumptuous irreverence, and wilful contempt of the Ordinance; and not of those, that approach with some sense of their duty, reverential esteem of the Mysteries and moral conformity: I shall first propound it to be considered, whether these be not some of the Weapons, (or formed by their Pattern) wherewith fresh Sophisters use to play at foiles, such as those; Either a man dyes, while he is alive, or when he is dead; either the Light first enters into a room, when it is dark, or when it is lightsome; either the soul had an existence before it was infused into the body, or after; and with either of the horns of this Argument, they think to push down an Antagonist, and make it like a Croco∣dile, to vanquish him which way soever he takes. But I shall, secondly, offer it to be recognized, that the Argument is ano∣ther Dialect of the Language of Ashdod; for not onely in analogous manner, Bellarmine disputes against the Institution of the Legal Sacrifices, for the typical expiation of sinne, viz. Either he that offered was just, and then needed no such expiatory sacrifice; Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 4. S. 10. or unjust, and then it could not be available to him; and Chamier tells him, he might have formed the like Argument against the Eucharist, as against the antiquated sacrifices, but also the Papists with like artifice argue against justification by Faith, that before justification nothing in the natural man can justifie him, he being at emnity with God, and
after he is justified, faith cannot do that which is done already; and again, that no man can believe his sins to be remitted, and himself to be accepted as just, untill remission of sins, and such acceptance be obtained, and afterward faith cannot impetrate that which is precedently acquired. Thirdly, I shall hold it forth to be perpended, whether this argument do not lye as directly, and will not reach home as fully to dismount the Word also from being a converting Ordinance; for that profits not, but where it is mixt with faith in the heart, and therefore he that hears with faith, is converted al∣ready, he that doth not so, findes it the savour of death unto death, and not of life unto life. Fourthly, we grant that he that hears faithlesly, and he that communicates unworthily, In sensu composito, persevering in that state and privation, cannot be converted, but is condemned already, but in sensu diviso, he that comes without true faith, and unworthy to receive, may yet be converted in recei∣ving, and be a worthy Receiver; and having eaten of that Lamb (as St. Chry∣sostome speakes) may be transformed from a Woolf, that meat not being chan∣ged into the substance of the partakers, but changing him that partakes into it self; and so this Bread which signifieth the Body of Christ, may not onely strengthen or confirm mans heart, but in that Blood, which the Wine repre∣senteth, there shall be life. Beside, the Sacraments are meanes of Grace; and therefore to suspend men from the partaking thereof, till the work of Grace be manifest in them, is to shut up the means from them, till they have ac∣quired the end; to restrain them from Physick, till they have recovered into health; to forbid them to wash their hands with water, till they be clean; and to keep them from the fire, till they be warm. A great Master of the School sets it down as one difference between infused and acquisite habits, Christian and Philosophical virtues, Estius in 2. dist. 27. sect. 4. p. 384. that Virtus Christiana non requirit praeviam actuum fre∣quentiam, sicut virtus Philosophica, sed etiam uno actu acquiratur, aut sine actu praevio infundatur. But if infused habits were wrought in the manner of ac∣quisite, (as some conceive) yet as in natural generations, though the previous dispositions were precedent, yet the introduction of the form is momentaneous; so in Regeneration, though the Word heard have wrought some preparations and predispositions, yet the new heart may be conferred at the instant of receiving, and the new name be given together with the Manna, whereby the ultimate disposition to that form may be wrought, by the infusion of the sa∣cred Spirit, and as though Sol & homo generant hominem, yet the man as the proximous and immediate natural cause, is called the Father of the childe, and not the Son; so the Sacrament, though enlivened and quickened by the Word, may be notwithstanding justly named the moral cause of conversion; and whensoever else that new heart is inspired, and that change wrought, yet as in natural mutations, when there is a transition from one state to another, and from privation to a form or habit, the same individual moment is the end of the one, and beginning of the other, Illud in quo aliquid primo mutatum, instans est, and the Ultimum non esse unius, est primum esse alterius; and thereup∣on as the most of Philosophers affirm, Omne quod movetur, partim est in termino à quo, & partim in termino ad quens; and also as In motu recto cum reflectione, non datur quies intermedia; so in some analogy herewith, when there is (whe∣ther by the Word or Sacraments) a change from a carnal to a spiritually rege∣nerated
estate (though there be antecedent dispositions to grace, yet those be∣ing but preludial influences of grace, therefore notwithstanding) though the last act in the carnal state were suitable to that principle, yet the first act in the spiritual, flows from the fountain of that new life, and it shall be a strange piece of unreasonableness to argue, that because that man and that act were evil in the former instant, that neither can be better in the next, or that the precedent indispositions shall obstruct or vitiate the subsequent operations. Relative grace is conferred by the Sacrament upon condition of faith, which it may therefore presuppose, as precedent in nature, though it be simulta∣neous in time, but real grace cannot precede nor presuppose faith, for then it should go before, and be presupposed to it self; The gracious benefits of the Co∣venant are promised and proposed upon condition of faith, but faith is not of∣fered or promised upon condition of believing. True faith onely gives an interest and right in the Res Sacramenti, & Panis Dominus, but an historical dogmatical faith, and outward profession thereof, constitutes a Church-member, and that lends the title to the Sacramentum rei, & Panis Domini, (and yet the receiving of the later may be a subservient means to elevate and promove that historical, to a saving faith, which may bring to the participation of the former.) And as sound faith is necessary to that hearing, whereby the soul may live, but not to hearing simply and absolutely, but men hear that they may believe, not onely because they have believed; so it is in the receiving the Sacra∣ment: and what Chamier tells Bellarmine, I may say to them, that will have none but such as are approved faithfull, to be admitted to this seal of faith, Paulus circumcisionem pronunciat fuisse signum & sigillum fidei, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 20. p. 29. quid ergò sciebántue omnes ii qui circumcidebant infantes, eos esse verè justificatos? Yea though perhaps at the instant of receiving, Recordatio tan∣tundem saepè praestat vi il∣lius spiritûs, quantum rei ipsius eahibitio. Theses Salmur∣part. 3. sect. 23. p. 37. the heart feel no great warmth thereby, yet may it catch such sparks from the ardency of Christ's love manifested in his death, which though at first it made but a smoaking flax, yet being fuelled by continuing meditations, may by degrees grow into a bright and lively flame, and the strength of that meat may be more manifested in the consequent walkings toward the mount of God, just as Physicians advise weak and nauseous stomacks, to eat, though they have no present appetite, because they shall feel the effects thereof in their future in∣creasing strength. But as it did not follow, that if the Sacrament were no converting Ordinance, that examination were a more necessary Antecedent to an admission, so nei∣ther is it consequent, that therefore none ought to be admitted that cannot convince others of their conversion, for that conclusion cannot be distilled but by such a medium, that unconverted men must not be permitted to do or undertake any duties which they cannot well and duly discharge; but he that so judgeth, is not yet converted from an errour, as dangerous, as manifest for the Apologists eliminate Prayer also from converting Ordinances, yet know they have not yet met with any such new light, as hath led them to tha Paradox, that no man not converted must pray. All the moral actions of na∣tural men (though sometimes these falling Stars make a greater blaze than the fixed, an Alchymy Lace hath a more glaring lustre, than Silver) were but Splendida peccata, peccata, quia non ex fide (which is that onely Altar, where
the Swallows can finde a nest to lay their young, saith Augustine) Non bona, quia nihil bonum sine summo bono, nec placere ullus deo, sine deo potest; they were but Falsae virtutes in optimis moribus, (as Prosper) and but Vitia, quia non virtu∣tes relatae ad deum, & simillima celerrimo cursui, extra vam; the Tree was not good, and therefore the Fruit was not, and the inside of the Platter was not cleansed, (saith Basil) and they could not convert nor dispose unto conversion, for pure nature hath neither congruous, impetratory merit, nor proper prepara∣tions for grace (as no stream can rise higher, than the fountain) yet these works good ex genere & objecto, evil ex circumstantiis & fine, (neither formally nor virtually ordinate to God) they were nevertheless obliged to perform, and were sure of some reward for them, either by increase of temporal blessings, or lessening of eternal punishments, they impetrate medious, though not the highest mercie. Ordinant bominem benè, respecta finis ultimi in aliquo genere, L. 2. q. 65. art. 2. p. 195. non autem finis ulti∣mi simpliciter, (saith Aquinas) A man therefore must do, and may be permitted to do, that good thing, which he cannot do well, and especially when the fre∣quent acts may conduce to the obtaining of that habit, which may enable to do better. There are sundry duties and several good works which convert not (which are a kinde of Isthmus between nature and grace) and like as the twilight is an effluence of the rising Sun, so these are but the results of dawning grace, for operamur ex justificatione, non ad justificationem, saith Augustine, Ronus es Do∣mine animae quaerenti te, quid tum inve∣nienti, sed hoc mirum est quòd nemo te quaere∣re valet, nisi prius invene∣rit, vis igitur inveniri, ut quaeraris, quaeri ut inveniaris? Potes quidem quaeri & inveniri, non tamen perveniri. and yet may be ordinate to conversion, as conditions and qualifications, by the influence and effect of grace, in fieri, though not in facto esse, and why the attendance upon this Ordinance of the Sacrament, if it were not converting, may not yet be rank'd in this classis, I cannot discover any cause to deny; and then why those that cannot yet evidence their conversion, may not safely be admitted to at∣tend upon and partake of this Ordinance, they will not finde colour to gainsay? Their admission cannot be altogether frustrate, for though the Sacrament have no immediate causality for such an effect, as conversion, yet it may be adjumental intermediously, and subordinate thereunto, and though it beget not the ultimate, Bernard. de di∣ligen. Domi. p. 951. Cajetan. 3. q. 79. art. 1. Valentia 3. disp. 6. q. 7. punct. 1. p. 91 yet it may some previous dispositions for introductions of the form: He that is less evil, is more capable of good, and he that moves but a foot, is nearer the term, than he that stirs not at all. Cajetan (though therein he enterfeit with his fellows, who generally deny the Sacraments to confer the first grace, unless by accident, and by consequent, (as Valentia limits and explicates it) confesseth, Posse contingere, ut sumens sit, qui nec consequatur vitam gratiae, nec de novo mortaliter peccet, sumendo, sed ità excusetur à peccato in sumendo, ut propinquior sit vitae gratiae, ex qua appropinquatione, secundùm aliquos actus attri∣tionis & desiderii divinae gratiae pautatim perducatur divinâ duce misericordiâ, ad occasiones verae contritionis, ut andem aliâ forte vice sumendo, gratiam verae con∣versionis percipiat.
When the Sacrament doth not convert in act, and if it were not conversive in power, yet is it not without effect, when received by such as bring not faith with them at the reception; as the Fathers compare the Sacrament to Manna, so like Manna (as some have thought thereof) it relisheth according to the quality and disposition of the palate, he that cats and drinks his condemnation hath from justice a (suum cuique) and that damnation is sealed to him by that receiving, who now being without excuse, shall be judged out of his own unwor∣thy mouth, and that kinde of sealing is one genuine effect of the Sacrament, for Dicimus effectum, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 4. p. 27. ut totius ministerii, sic sacramenti, esse infidelium quidem damnationem, sed fidelium salutem, saith Chamier. He that receives the seals of the covenant, seals back a counterpart to God, accepts of the terms, and assents to the conditions, and as God obligeth him∣self to conferre the benefits promised, if conditions be observed; so the receiver concludes himself to suffer the punishments threatned, if he perform not the conditions; as in the gift of an Estate upon condition, the Donor may plead the Charter against the Donce, for a Forfeiture, upon breach of conditions, aswell as the Donee can allege it to prove his Title, as long as he fulfills the conditi∣on; and yet that actual sealing of damnation, while men persist in that estate of infidelity, may be a potential sealing of salvation; as to that obsolete argu∣ment of the Pelagians, furbish'd up and new trimm'd by the Arminians, That supervacaneous were the comminations against Apostacy, if there could be no falling from faith; it is answered, that the threatnings against recidivation from the faith, are morally conducible and subservient to confirm and establish us in the same, and as Luther saith, The way not to go into Hell by condemnation, is to descend into it by meditation; so the impression of that seal of condem∣nation, making them know the terrors of the Lord, may perswade men, and the spirit of bondage may so make way for the spirit of adoption. Whatsoever the Grand Inquest of learned judgments shall do, the Pety Jury of tender consciences, will give up their Verdict of these opinions, (viz. That the Sacrament is no converting Ordinance, and that none that have not, or cannot give convincing arguments of their sound conversion, may not partake thereof) that they are Carnificinae animarum; for consequently to the Princi∣ples of this Doctrine, he who out of distress and affliction of conscience, cannot make out the evidence of his conversion to himself, (and as we reade of some Melancholiks, so there may be a melancholy in the conscience, whereby men may suppose themselves spiritually dead, when they yet live) may not dare to come, and he that being overcast with any cloud exhaled from mens uncharitableness, prejudices or misprisions, or his own bashfulness, and natural inabilities, cannot hold it forth to others, may not hope to be admitted, and they shall be most capable who can deceive themselves by their presumption, or others by their handsome expressions and fair shews, and so this Wine shall onely not be given to those that be heavy of heart, nor this staff of Bread put into their hands that are weak and ready to fall; and this will be interpreta∣tively, as if he alone that is sick must not take Physick, and a Physician may onely administer to such, as upon inspection into their state, he findes to be of sound health, and hereby also a way shall be smoothed to a kinde of private Masses, for the Minister must needs communicate alone, when he can be sure of
no mans conversion, but his own, and may not admit any whom he hath not as∣surance to be converted, for probability thereof is not ground sufficient, but without faith thereof, it must be sin, since their rule for admitting is not, whom they think to be converted, but who are so, and therefore God sets us out of this perplexity, did we not involve our selves therein, for he bindes us not to be responsible for other mens consciences, but for our own, because we cannot look into anothers, but into our own, he ordains us not to give judgment where we can have no evidence (Et non datur scibile, sine causis sciendi) nor sets up a mark for blinde men to shoot at; but the Directory for admission is that which we may well reade and make easie judgment thereby, viz. Church-member∣ship with a dogmatical faith, and therefore we may perceive that any other voy∣age will be with hurt and much damage, when neither Sun nor Stars do appear from above (nor can we frame to keep any compass below) whereby to steer our course, and being exceedingly tossed with such a tempest, the onely way is to lighten the ship of this load. DIATRIBE. SECT. V. By a free communion there is no Damnum emergens, by pol∣lution of the Ordinances, Minister, or Communicants: the visible Church is aggregated of good and evil. It is Schism to renounce communion of Sacraments with evil men not duly censured: the Administration not to be intermitted, be∣cause all are not sufficiently prepared, or those that are un∣worthy may partake. The Similitudes defeated of giving a Cup of poysoned Wine onely with admonition: of giving a Legacy to scholars of such a capacity and parts, which the Trustees cannot otherwise distribute: of being guilty of the sins we hinder not: the weak to be encouraged and promoved by admission. As much danger by mixt communion in the Word and Prayer, as in the Sacrament. The Reasons pre∣tended to debarre from the one, as argumentative to exclude from the other: Matth. 7.6. examined: whether the recei∣ving the Sacrament be a duty enjoyned to all, and a good
work in all. Whether it be a converting Ordinance? What the Sacraments seat, and how? Whether they conferre grace? The same evil effects ensue by male-administration of Discipline, as by a free communion, and the same Rea∣son which forbid separation in the one, doth also in the other case. CLemens Alexandrinus magnifies it in Socrates, that he hearkened unto none but Reason, and Plutarch tells us, Idem est deum & rationem sequi, suitable to that Stoical Principle well illustrated by Perseus, Ni tibi concessii ratio, digitum exere, peccas. which is very true, being understood of reason rectified by, and subordi∣nate to holy Scripture. Having therefore pondered the authorities of Sacred Writ, and propended the testimonies of the ancient Church, let us try on which side the weight of reason will incline the Beam, in this con∣troversie. There is no Damnum emergens in admitting to, and there is Lucrum cessans in rejecting from the Sacrament, any that profess the faith of Christ, though but formally, and are not openly wicked and scandalous, to the manifest belying of their profession, what then should rationally impede and obstruct their ad∣mission, or promove and imperate the rejecting of them, whom it obligeth in duty to come, and in no mans duty is it written down, to repell them or sepa∣rate from them. There is no emergent mischief or inconvenience by their receiving, either in respect of the Sacrament, (quod) others (cum quibus) the Minister (à quo) or themselves (qui) the Sacrament is not defiled by their partaking, no more is it by being preach'd unto faithless people, and that is no more than our Lord Christ was by the kiss of Judas, or an Angel by de∣scending upon earth, into some unclean place. Those that communicate with them, are not polluted, more than the sons of God were by Satans coming among them to present himself before the Lord, nor thereby de∣frauded of the fruit and efficacy of the Sacrament, more than the rest of the Guests were deprived of the Feast by the sitting down of one that had no wedding garment. God doth not binde us to set up an Inquisition into other mens consciences, Contra literas Petil. tom. 7. p. 26. (Nemo curiosus, qui non malevolus) nor can their hy∣pocrisie or cold formal profession, hurt any beside themselves: Tale cuique sacrificium fieri (saith Augustine) qualis accedit ut offerat, & qualis accedit ut sumat — ità si offerat deo malus & accipiat inde bonus, tale cuique esse qualis ipse fuerit, quia & illud scriptum est, omnia munda mundis. To God (saith a learned man) they seem such as they are, Hooker Eccles. Polit. l. 5. sect. 8. p. 370. but of us they must be taken for such as they seem, in the eye of God they are against Christ, that are not truly and sincerely with him, in our eyes they must be received as with Christ, that are not in outward shew against him. Multi corriguntur, ut Petrus, multi toleran∣tur, ut Judas, multi nesciuntur donec, &c. Many are amended, as Peter, many
are tolerated, as Judas, many are not known untill the Lord come, who shall en∣lighten the hidden things of darkness, and manifest the counsels of all hearts: De poenitent. medicina. tom. 9. p. 210. & homil. 50. tom. 18. p 115. Ad mysteriorum divinorum signacula celebranda multi mali, &c. To the celebrating of the Seals of divine mysteries, many wicked men also may have access, for God in this life commendeth his patience, that in the next, he may shew forth his severi∣ty, saith St. Augustine. Christ would be baptized with the promiscuous mul∣titude, and with the same Baptism wherewith the Scribes and Pharises were baptized, to confute (saith acute Spanheym) those, Dub. Evang. part. 3. p. 153. who in imitation of the Catharists and Anabaptists come not to the Lords Supper, if it be admini∣stred to such as are in their opinion flagitious: what prejudice or pollution or reproof from the Apostle reflected upon the Corinthians that were worthy re∣ceivers for the concurrence and communion of those that came unworthily? who onely did eat and drink damnation to themselves, not to others; but when he said, He eateth judgment to himself, he sufficiently sheweth (saith Au∣gustine) that he eateth not judgment to another, but to himself, because the fellowship with evil men defileth not in the participation of the Sacraments, but in the communion of works. The Master of the Feast said to him that had no wedding garment, Friend, how comest thou in hither? Not, Friends, why come you in which such a guest? Neither were they for his sake commanded or permitted to forsake the Wedding; our teeth shall not be set on edg with the sowre grapes that others eat: every one lives by his proper righteousness, In Ezek. 18. not anothers, and dies for his own sins, not another mans, saith Origen, Quibus mali placeant in unitate, ipse communicant malis, quibus autem, &c. Those to whom evil men are pleasing in unity, they communicate with evil men, but those whom they displease, who cannot amend them, nor before the time of Harvest dare to root up the Tares, lest the Corn be also eradi∣cated, they communicate not with their actions, but with the altar of Christ, so that not onely they are not polluted by them, but by the Word of God they deserve to be commended and magnified, because lest the Name of Christ be blasphemed through horrible Schisms, Contra Donat. pertinac. tom. 2. p. 142. contra lit. Petil. tom. 9. p. 26. contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 36. they suffer that for the good of truth, which they hate for the good of equity, saith Augustine. And again, Quaerendum est quis habeat charitatem, invenies non esse nisi, &c. It is to be inquired, who have charity, and you shall finde none but those that love unity; some likewise shall say, In thy Name we have eaten and drunk, and shall hear, I know you not, which eat his Body, and drink his Bloud in the Sa∣crament, and acknowledg not in the Gospel his members diffused through the whole world, with whom therefore they shall not be reckoned in the day of judgment. And in another place the Apostle saying, Be not partaker of other mens sins, Keep thy self chaste, to shew (saith he) in what sort a man might communicate with other mens sins, he adds, Keep thy self chaste, for he that keeps himself chaste, communicates not with other mens fins, although he communicate (not their sins, but) the Sacraments of Christ, which they receive to their judgment with them, from whom he hath severed himself, by keeping himself chaste. There may be a common concourse to the ma∣terial part of an act, without concurrence in the formal, neither can a Phy∣sical concurrence make partakers in a moral act, there can be no such transite from one kinde of action to another, both People and Minister concurre to the receiving, not the unworthy receiving (if thereof they are no causes) to
the act, not to the ataxy or sinfulness thereof, they cooperate not in the evil, but permit it, Contra epist. Parmen. tom. 7. p. 11. as that which morally they cannot remedy: Quod non placet, non nocet, & qui seipsum custodit, non communicat alienis peccatis, (saith St. Augu∣stine) for if in evil actions, any man consents not to them, the evil doer bears his own cause, and his person (saith he) prejudiceth not another whom in consenting to an evil deed, he had not his partner in the crime. What is said of him that is born of God, Non facit peccatum, quia patitur po∣tiùs, is in some sort appliable to this purpose; the People (and the same may be said of the Pastor) are physically active, morally passive, and neither give nor partake of the Sacrament, to, and with, one unworthy, but one that is undivided from the visible Church, the notes whereof must agree to it, as Proprium quarto modo, omni, soli & semper, whence if the Word and Sacra∣ments are those notes, (as our Divines assert) though Non quoad essentiam ejus internam, certò & necessariò declarandam, tamem ad visibilem aliquem coetum designandum, qui est Ecclesia particularis ex instituto Christi formata (as learned Ames;) All then that are actually of the visible Church may challenge a right unto a free enjoyment of these Sacraments, to the one, by being born of Christian Parents; to the other, by being baptized, and having a dog∣matical faith, which every intelligent person is presumed to have, else there may be a part of the visible Church not authoritatively or judicially seque∣stred, from the communion thereof, which are not in a capacity of obtaining that which denotes the Church. At no time can the Church pretend to, or hope for perfection of degrees, rarely to that of parts; Jacob's Ladder had several degrees in it, and all were not of one height or rising: perplexed and complicated are those two Cities (saith St. Augustine) in this world, and mix'd one with the other, untill they are separated in the last judgment; Exhortatio ad conc. Eul. ep. tom. 2. p. 147. the Church being no homo∣geneous body, constituted of singular parts: The Floor hath in it Wheat and Chaff, the Field Corn and Tares, the Net good fish and bad, and it is observable, that at the Nuptial Banquet, was one found without a Wedding∣garment. With those and other similitudes (saith Augustine) the Lord confirmeth the forbearance of his servants, lest while good men may think themselves blamed for commixture with evil, by humane and rash dissensions, they destroy the little ones, Contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 35. or the little ones perish. I keep the Church (saith the same Father) full both of wheat and Chaff, I amend whom I can, I tolerate whom I cannot, I fly the Chaff, lest I become the same thing, but not the Floor, lest I be nothing. Let no man (therefore saith he) desert the Floor before his time, Contra ep. Par∣men. tom. 1. p. 11. let him tolerate the Chaff in threshing, suffer it in the Floor, for he shall not have any thing to bear within the Barn, he will come that hath his Fan, and divide the good from the bad. To forsake the assemblies, because of the mixture and communion of hy∣pocrites and evil men, seems to be a kinde of negative Schism or Separation, and a positive, to gather and constitute a new Church, and I would willingly know if it be not the renewing of the old Heresies and Schisms of Donatus, Lucifer, Contra Faust. Manich. tom. 6. p. 60. Novatus, and Audim? Whether it make not the Church of the called to be of no greater latitude than that of the Elect? (whereas many are called, but few are chosen; Cum paucis haereditatem Dei, cum multis signacula ejus participanda, saith Augustine) and whether in time by degrees, this singulari∣ty
may not antiquate the Sacrament, and make the use thereof wholly obsolete, and bring men to be Seekers, and like the Phenix, In 1 ad Cor. c. 11. v. 26. p. 430. one alone in the kinde of their devotions, and to that humour of the Swenckfeldian in Musculus, that would never communicate, because he could not in his judgment finde any Church sufficiently adorned to make a fit Spouse for Christ. And as the better qualified people may not withdraw themselves from the Communion upon pretence of mixt Congregations, and fear of prejudice by them, so neither upon the like score, may the Minister withhold the Sacra∣ment from them, or intermit the Administration thereof; for can it be thought rational, that the holy desire of a competent number should be un∣satisfied, because the greater part are not equally prepared, and so well dispo∣sed to joyn with them? Is not this to eradicate the Corn for the Tares sake? whereas rather both should be suffered to grow together untill Harvest. It was a Principle of wise Cato's, It is better many receive Silver, than a few Gold: and can it be held just that none should have Silver, because all cannot receive Gold? or because the Leven cannot be throughly purged, that therefore the Children must eat no Bread? or because the Hedg of Discipline cannot be effecutally planted, that the Field of the Church must ly altogether unmanured? and must the Wheat receive no nourishment, because the Tares stand in the same Field? Shall a certain essential duty be neglected, for an uncertain accidental evil? Shall not this be to furnish Apologies for the Papists? who restrain the liberty of the Scriptures, and withhold the use of the Cup, for preventing (as they say) of contingent abuses thereof? Shall others be sterved, lest some surfeit? or shall Ste∣wards (as the Ministers of Christ are called, 1 Cor. 4.12.) detain their food from the family, because many abuse it? Hypocrates tells us, that Diseases of In anition are worse than those of Repletion, and it is a Maxime in Phy∣sick, Omne peccatum quod commissum fuerit, magis committitur in tenui, quàm in paulò pleniore victu. And there is therefore less peril in administring more food than may do good, than in substracting necessary sustenance. There was no crown so honorable among the Romans, as the Civick, which was con∣ferred on him that had saved a Citizen, as being of more advantage to the publick, than to have killed an Enemy. And shall it then be judged rea∣sonable to hazard the loss of a Citizen, upon pretence to kill an Enemy (or rather indeed, lest we should save him) and to disappoint those that are worthy, lest there be a concurrence of such, as we think unworthy? Valerius lost the honour of his Triumph, because Magis dolor amissis civibus, quàm gaudium fusis hostibus, praevaluit. And as in the Ethicks, the covetous is determined to be worse than the prodigal; so in Theology it seems to be more obnoxious, to withhold the Sacrament from such as are worthy, than to administer it to those that are not, Satiùs impunitum relinqui facinus nocentis, quàm innocentem damnari, said the wise Historian. And what prejudice re∣sulteth to the Minister to distribute it indifferently, so as he have, by pub∣lick and preparatory teaching, and (as he shall finde it fit and seasonable, and meet with opportunites to do it) by private conference, endeavoured to principle and dispose them to a worthy receiving; Petitur à te cura, non curatio, saith Bernard, & sapientis est nihil praestare praeter culpam. If thou teachest,
that is thine, if he will not learn, that is his, take what is thine, and goe thy way, saith the same Author; if the Watch-men cry, and the City will not be warned, their blood shall be upon their own heads, he hath delivered his soul: Exigitur à manducante, quod manducat, &c. It is required of the eater that he eat (saith St. Augustine, In Psal. 142. Tom. 8. p. 342. who therein seems to distill and extract the very state of the question) Let him not be prohibited by the Dispenfor, but let him be admonished to fear him that will take an account: neither was the Pastor of Corinth blamed, for admitting those that did eat and drink unworthily; but they were reprehended that came so unprepared; nor were the servants chec∣ked for bringing into the Marriage Feast, a man that had no Wedding Gar∣ment, though himselfe were cast out into utter darkness; nay, if persons merit∣ing to be excommunicated, shall notwithstanding be admitted, the Minister of the Church, where Excommunication is not setled, is excused, saith lear∣ned Ursin, Catech. part. 2. q. 82. p. 588. so as he willingly give not the Supper to such as abuse it, but be instant in admonishing, and desire to prevent abuses; for blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; and Calvin, with as much charity, as judgment, sui∣table to himself, as harmoniously with Ursin tells us, Hoc quo{que} ad disciplinae moderationem in primis requiritur, Instit. 4. c. 12. S. 11. &c. This also is principally to be required to the moderation of discipline, which Augustine disputeth against the Dona∣tists, That neither private men, if they see vices not so diligently, as they ought, to be corrected, by the councel of the Elders, doe thereupon presently make a departure from the Church, nor the Pastors themselves, if they cannot as they wish, and ac∣cording to their affection, purge out those things which need correction, doe therefore lay aside their Ministery or trouble the whole Church with unusual asperity— for it is true which he (viz. Augustine) writeth, That whosoever, either by rebu∣king correcteth what he can, or (saving the bond of peace) excludeth what be cannot correct, or what, saving the bond of peace, he cannot exclude, doth with equity dislike, and with firmness support, such an one is free and acquitted from the curse; and he other where (saith Calvin) rendreth the reason hereof, Because all godly purpose, and intent, and manner, and way of Ecclesiastical disic∣pline, ought always to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, which the Apostle commendeth to be conserved by bearing one with another; and which being not conserved, the medicine of punishment is not onely supervacuous, but also begins to be pernicious, and therefore ceaseth to be a medicine. I know the trite (I dare not say trivial) similitude, that it fareth with the Minister, in order to the Sacrament, and the dispensing thereof, as with one that hath a Cup of Poyson in his hand, for whom it is not enough to shew the danger in drinking thereof, and to perswade to abstain from the same; but if he reach it forth, and deliver it to any, he is guilty of all the mischief, consequent to the swallowing thereof. They say no similitude runnes on all four feet; but I am deceived if this have ever a Legge; for, first, the Cup of Poyson is in its own nature deadly, and will certainly kill, but the Sacrament is good in it self, and of its proper nature, and evil onely by accident, and not onely its possible, but probable, it may do more good, than hurt. Secondly, There lyes no obligation upon any to deliver, nor any necessity upon any to take the poysoned Cup; but I hope it is made evident that it is a
duty incumbent on the Pastor to exhibit, and on the People, to partake of the Sacrament. Thirdly, some would think it relisheth of some venome, In Johan. tract. 28. to compare that to a Cup of Poyson, which the Apostle calls the Cup of Blessing. St. Augustine was of another mind, Securus accede, panis est non venenum; and he tells us, that when amongst the Christians about Carthage, De peccator. merit. & remis. tom. 7. p. 137. the common appellation of the Sacra∣ment of the Body of our Lord was life; what other did they hold, but what was said, I am the Bread of Life? That which is given, is not mortiferous, in re∣spect of the Giver, or the gift, but through the wickeness of the Receiver; for as we are taught in Philosophy, Quicquid recipitur, In Psal. 142. tom. 8. p. 342. de Baptism. contra. Dona∣tist. tom. 7. p. 89. recipitur ad modum recipientis: it is not evil which is given, saith Augustine, but that which is good, is in judgment given to an evil man, that which is good, cannot be well for him that evilly receiveth; and in another place, Judas gave a place to the Devil in himself, not by receiving what was evil, but by evil re∣ceiving: from that wickedness, God may reclaim and convert the Recei∣ver, in the very act of receiving, and the reception is a meanes subservient to such Conversion; so as what Augustine saith of love, may be applyed to admission to the Communion, Aut ama me, quia sum Dei, aut ut sim Dei; he that hath a wound seekes a medicine, saith St. Augustine; it is a wound that we are under sinne, the celestial and venerable Sacrament is the Medicine; De verbis Dom. &c. Serm. 28. tom. 10. p. 24. and of that wickedness or continuance therein, the Pastor and Elders can have no morral certainty, need not make any curious inquiry, nor ought temerari∣ously to judge, Gratissimum veniae genus nescire quod qui{que} peccasset, plurimum mali credulitas facit, in quibusdam rebus satius est decipi, quàm diffidere. What place (saith Angustine) shall be left for innocency, if it shall be one mans proper fault, not to know anothers. And the remote probability, even possi∣bility of producing good effects thereby, is a sufficient Ground and Warrant for the administration: for in doubtful things the safest part is to be chosen; and it seemes safer to doe our duty, whereof good may also ensue, than to neglect it, upon a doubt, lest evil may happen. Fourthly, it is not the receiving condemns, but the receiving with that wicked disposition; which remaining unrepented, would condemn, though they received not; the act of receiving in the unworthy, is not evil, ex genere & objecto, but onely ex fine & circumstantiis, (as hath been said) and the evil effect is alone in the evil manner of doing; and as a co-operation by another in such acts, or a permission thereof, doth not contract a satiety in the evil, which is not caused or consented to; so neither will the possibility, or hazard of an evil accidentally consequent thereunto, palliate or excuse a Ministers intermission of Divine Ordinances, for else he might be secure from any woe for not preaching the Gospel, since the Word being a savour of death unto death, when it is not received with Faith, (which all have not) it might be more safe and more charitable not to preach it, lest it ag∣gravate some mens condemnation; and for ought I know, upon such princi∣ples he might forbear to hold sorth the Lord Jesus, as the true way of Life, because he is also set for the fall of many, Luke 2.34. and to be a stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offence, Esa. 8.14. I recognize another similitude (for in the agitation of this controversie, similitudes doe often supply the place of arguments) that as if a man be∣stow
a Legacy to be issued and distributed to Scholars of such a capacity and parts in a College, the Trustees cannot exhibite it to any others, and they must necessarily make probation of the parties, to get an assurance of their capacities, so, &c. But for answer; First, here is Petitio Principii, a begging of the question, by a presupposing that the Sacraments were entrusted by Christ with the Ministers, to be distri∣buted to such select persons onely, as in their way of probation, they shall judge capable of them: But we cannot so inclose that which St. Jude calls the common salvation, nor make the Rose of the Field (as Christ is called) to be a Flower of private Gardens; Allow to God (saith Oecumenius) that his Garden be diffused farre and neer (longè laté{que}) in plain terms we say, that every actual and not duly separated member of the visible Church, ha∣ving an Historical Faith, hath a right unto that which is one of the Notes of the Church, the Sacrament; and since eadem est ratio partium, & totius, as that cannot be a visible Church, to which the Notes agree not; so he is no actual external member of the visible Church, that is excluded from that which denotes it. Secondly, by retorsion, as in a College, all that are (as we use to say) of the Foundation, doe partake of the Donatives of the Founder, until upon expulsion or sequestration upon just cause, they forfeit them; and that mis∣carriage is discovered not by private scrutiny, but by publick observation and judgment; nor upon surmises, but proof and sentence thereupon given; so have all intelligent persons actually within the visible Church (the Col∣lege of the faithful) by Title of their common Historical Faith onely, a right to the Ordinances, and external common privileges, bequeathed by our Lord Christ, until by obstinacy in notorious sins, they merit to be expelled, and put from the Communion, and are accordingly sentenced judicially, not arbitrarily, or upon private surmises and suspicions; and in very deed there is no one false species hath more imposed upon them, than this, that if none ought to be admitted, but such as are worthy, that therefore special proba∣tion must be made of the worthiness of every one, which hath a palpable fal∣lacy in the consequent; and is just as if I should argue, the Law allowes no Ideot to be admitted to the managery of his estate, therefore every man must come under examination, (whether he be an Ideot, or not) as if a generall observation and converse could not suffice to make discovery and give judg∣ment. I am conscious also of that Rule, that a man is guilty of every sinne he la∣bours not to hinder; but notwithstanding it thereupon follows not, that the Pastor and Elders engage and enfeoffe themselves in other mens unworthy receiving, unless they make probation of them, thereby to discover and impede their sinne of receiving unworthily. For first, no man is guilty in not hindering that sinne which he knowes not, (nullius crimen maculat nescientem, saith Augustine) nor hath any com∣mand, nor any authority to make particular search and enquiry after, the Church is onely to judge of open crimes and scandals, not of things secret and occult.
Secondly, it must be an imminent, an apparent evil, and evil in it self, and in its own nature; for I am not obliged to snatch away a mans meat, left he surfeit; nor take his purse, lest he squander his money in debauches; no nor at all times to seize his sword, lest he doe mischief with it, unless it be evident to me, that he intends so to abuse it; and into his intention, if secret, am not bound to make any solicitous scrutiny; nor to disarm him upon the warrant of my proper suspicion, much less may I hinder him of doing that which is good in it self, for fear lest it become evil to him by accident, else I must keep him from hearing the Word, lest he receive it not with faith, and so it condemn him; the possibility that he may doe well and receive good with or by the thing, especially when that thing is intrinsically good; and the hope which Charity should prompt me to, that it shall become good to him, is sufficient to disoblige me from impeding him in it. Lastly, if the matter be necessary, and the failer be onely in the manner of doing it, the rule holds not; for (to crop one Ear of a whole Harvest, and instance in one of many cases) how else could a Christian Prince with a safe Conscience, for confirmation of a League, take an Oath from an Heathen by his false Gods, and not rather hinder such Idolatry; but that the Sacraments are respectively necessary, necessitate praecepti, is denyed by none, and granted by most, to be so necessitate medii ordinarii. Now lastly, concerning those that should receive (whom we know to have the greatest interest in the lucrum cessans, while the Sacrament ought to be exhibited to them and is not; and whom they suppose to have no less share in the Damnum emergens, when the Sacrament is administred to them, and ought not) I shall say, that as it was spoken of Adrian, The multitude of Physicians had killed the Emperour; so let some men consider, whether or no, while they fear accidentally to lose or hazard those soules, they doe not more endanger them, and their own soules too, by with-holding from them the Sacramenr, which is Gods Ordinance; and therefore the likelyest means conducing to their salvation: It is a cruel fault to deny corporal bread to the hungry; a greater to with-hold the food of the soul; and that of Gregory is here applyable, He kills, that doth-not feed; Christ chose to converse with sinners, that he might win them off from sinne unto himself, and the ser∣vants of the King gathered together to the Marriage-feast, good and bad; the separation was made by the King at his coming, not by his ser∣vants, Matth. 22.10. And who can gain-say, but that as Christ by breaking of bread, was made known to his Disciples at Emaus, whose eyes were former∣ly holden that they could not know him: so the frequent receiving of the Sacrament may better fit and dispose them for receiving, and bring them to a clearer sight, and more special application of Christ unto salvation. There is scarce any, but takes some little reverence of the mysteries, improves or re∣newes some notions of the redemption of mankinde, by the death of Christ, carryes away some small impressions of good things, at least for the present, some dispositions, though not habits; and how those weak seeds may be quickned and ripened by frequent communicating, can be onely known to God; but we may charitably hope for multiplyed acts, beget and perfect habits; and in this respect there is a similitude between habits infused, and
acquisite (though the acquist of the former have a special assistance and inspiration of Gods gracious Spirit) Use makes prompt; and Physicians tell us, that when Appetite is dull, and digestion weak, yet both may be increased by moderate refection; whereas to exclude any from the Sacrament, because he is not so well prepared as he ought, is to deny a man a medicine, because he is sick, for which cause he chiefly needs it. Defects in the manner and form will not discharge or supersede any from the matter of duties, else they might plead excuse for the intermission of prayer, or excluding others from it, because they cannot pray without distractions and other indispositions; and from hearing, because of defects in the attention of mind, or devotion in the affections; he that performs the matter, and communicates, though with a failer in the manner, so it be without malice or presumption, doth some part of his duty; and sheweth some, though but an outward regard and conformi∣ty to Gods Ordinance; and so I should think were a lesse sinner, than he that altogether despiseth or neglects it. Est aliquid prodire tenus: the one is malum per se; the other onely per accidens; that which is not done with a perfect heart, may yet be good in the sight of the Lord; as it was said of Amazias, 2 Chron. 25.2. it may be bonum, though not bene; and it may be impetratory of some reward, though not of one eternal. And though Hypo∣crates have an Aphorisme, that Corpora impura quo magìs nutris, eo magìs laedis: yet that cannot justifie any to defraud another of his wholesome meat, lest it turn into crudities, and cacochymick humours, though perchance Physitians may think fit to abate it sometime toward those that are notoriously sick, and sensibly lapsed into a Dyscrasy. One chief end of the Institution of the Eu∣charist, was to shew forth the Lords death: And the recordation thereof, and external acknowledgment of Christ to be the Redeemer of the World by his death, being made by a greater number, though not all so well disposed, or inwardly qualified as they ought, may yet somewhat conduce to Gods glory, and the end of the Institution. It was matter of rejoycing unto St. Paul, that Christ was preached, though out of envy and strife, and contention; not sincerely: An outward formal humiliation in Ahab, was so farre accepted by God, as to mittigate his punishment; and the externall performance of the command by Jehu, though upon sinister ends, and with culpable affections, procured a temporal reward. He that is not against us, by being scandalous, is on our part, Mark 9.40. and therefore should be a partaker with us; and its our part to cherish and encourage him, in hope to bring him neerer, ra∣ther than by a discountenance and discouragement, to hazard the driving of him farther off; The perfection of the best, is an imperfect perfection; the best part thereof consists in the sight of their imperfection, saith Bernard; and the greatest peece of our righteousness, is an agnition in truth, and a confession in hu∣mility, of our unrighteousness; and Gods commands are then only reputed to be done, when that which is not done is forgiven, saith Augustine: If the denomination be taken from the major part, our firmest beleeving is rather unbeleefe, than faith; as he that said in the Gospel, I beleeve Lord, yet prayed, help (not my faith, but) my unbeleef. He that hath the best preparation and disposi∣tions of Spirit, for an approach to these holy mysteries, must yet fly to Christ Jesus, to have the blemishes thereof covered with his righteousness; and the
defects thereof to be supplyed by his fulness; and he that owns the meanest, and the weakest, if in any degree sincere, may by the same means obtain an elevation and acceptance thereof; for it is onely Christ his stamp, and not our metal, that can make it pass current, and the garments of our Elder Bro∣ther alone, that can make us capable of the blessing: As therefore the an∣cient Church for several Centuries (though upon erroneous principles) gave the Eucharist to Infants in years; so the Church ever did, and upon such considerations may still, without errour, exhibit it to Babes in Christ; and such we are charitably to suppose the weakest to be, that profess his Name, and by the great transgression, and abominable iniquity, doe not evidently belye their profession. We have been cautioned by the admonition of Marlorat and Spanheym, that to desert or separate from the Communion, because of the admission of some, in their opinion, wicked or unworthy, doth symbolize with the Ana∣baptist, and hath a raste of their Leaven; but whether those principles, that it is of necessity to make probation of their fitness and worthiness, that are to be admitted to the Holy Supper; and that this Sacrament being a Seal of Faith, ought not ordinately to be administred to those that have not Faith, may not also be extensive, and aswell applicable to the Sacrament of Ba∣ptism, and so do tacitely advance and drive on also the interest of the Ana∣baptists, who will have none to be baptized, untill they have given sure evidence of their sound Faith and real Conversation, and unawares mili∣tate in the Tents of, and run Biass toward, that faction, I shall not make research into, much less dare to determine, but transferre and resign the consideration thereof to more comprehensive judgments, it shall be enough for me with the Pismire in the Apologue, To awaken the Lion, and make him look about. But I shall now bring it to the Scales, and more importunately offer it to be weighed by judicious men, whether those Reasons wherewith some men make so specious a Muster, and whereof they make ostent with so many plausible amplifications, if they were mutato nomine, fitted and applied to the hearing of the Word and Prayer, they might not serve aswell, and have asmuch force and efficacy, First, to stave off and exclude unconverted men from those duties, as from the Sacrament. And secondly, to intro∣duce a necessity of probation antecedently to the ordinary partaking of the Word (in those who are born within the Church, and bred up in the pro∣fession of the Faith) and of Prayer; as to the participation of the Lords Supper. And thirdly, render it as piacular to joyn with Congregations wherein persons unconverted and unworthy are mixt in hearing the Word and Prayer, as in the Communion of the Body of our Lord; though the Reasons might be indifferent, and the same or the like in all, yet for me∣thod and perspicuity sake, we will take our instance for the first in Prayer, and make our experiment of the second in hearing the Word, and take an assay of the third point in both. To abridge and sum up the Reasons produced for debarring uncon∣verted men (that is, such as satisfie them not with demonstrative signs of Godliness) from the holy Table; they may be reduced to this
Compendium, that they neither can perform the duties requisite to, nor can be capable of the mercies of the Sacrament, that by partaking unworthily, they doe but multiply their sinne, and aggravate their damnation, whereto he also is accessary, that either doth exhibit it, or consents to it, or suffers them, or by partaking with them, countenanceth their receiving, according to those branches of this rule, Consensus palpo — participans, nutans, non obstans; now turn those against an admission and conjunction with them in prayer; have unconverted men those dispositions and affections, and ele∣vations, suitable with, and requisite to religious prayer? the clean hands, 1 Tim. 2.8. Faith without wavering, James 1.6. Fervency of Spirit, Rom. 12.11. Can they call on the name of the Lord Jesus, that depart not from iniquity, 2 Tim. 2.19? Are they susceptible of any holy communion with God, or of the gracious effects of Prayer, or capable of any share of the righ∣teousness and intercession of the Lord Jesus, which must be spread upon their persons and their prayers, to make them acceptable? Will not the multi∣plyed sins of distrust of Gods promises, irreverence towards so glorious a majesty, dulness of spirit, deadness of affection, and extravagances of thoughts, increase their guilt and irritate their judgment? shall so precious a duty be thus prophaned? so high a privilege, as this is, to powre forth our wants into the bosome of God, be prostituted? and so great blessings as are held forth to faithful prayers be despised? What dishonour results hence to the name of God? What a grief is impress'd on the spirits of the godly? What a profanation reflected on so sacred an Ordinance? Were it not better for them to forbear prayer, than onely to pray, to the promoving of their condemnation? Is there nay promise they shall be heard? Are they not expresly told that God will not hear them, whose prayers are abomina∣ble? Psal. 66.18. Isa. 1.15. 1 Joh. 3.22. Prov. 28.9. Are not they that admit them to a communion in prayers (where they but flatter God with their mouth, and lye unto him with their tongues, in all that is said) guilty of those sins, because they hinder them not? and doe onely concur to farther and accelerate their damnation, and so deface the purity, and defile the beau∣ty of so divine an Exercise? You may see what an Harvest he might make of this Stubble, that were torrens suadae{que} medulla; and happy in sermonis di∣vite vena; and now consider, I beseech you, if the same apogogical or abdu∣ctive reasons may not be as speciously and as plausibly urged and ampli∣fied, to bring off unconverted men from prayer, as to take them off from the Lords Table, and have not as much energy and force, in order to the one, as to the other. Secondly, concerning hearing of the Word; The conclusion that it is ne∣cessary to take examination of men previously to the Sacrament, and to make tryal whether they are worthy or not to be admitted, is deduced and extra∣cted from that principle, He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. But now try and examine (I beseech you) since the Word is said to be the savour of death unto death, and that the Word shall judge them in the last day that hear it; and there is a caution, Take heed how you hear, and qualifications required in hearing, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Jam. 1.21. and men hating instructi∣on
are not to declare his Statutes, or take his Covenant in their mouth, Psal. 50.16. and he that discerns not the Word of God from the Word of Man, hears his damnation, and lets it in at his ear, as well as the other eates and drinks it, and the Word and Sacraments represent but the same Christ, and the same promises under divers notions, and to several Senses, the one to the Ear, and the other to the Eye, Hand, and Mouth; the one being an au∣dible, and the other a visible, tactible, gustable word, and both are Divine Ordinances for the salvation of soules: whether there should not be as great a necessity incumbent, to examine men (already incorporated into the Church) of their fitness and dispositions and preparation, in order to hearing of the Word, as to the receiving of the Sacrament; and upon the same score, why should it be more perilous, or hazard more pollution of our selves or the Ordinances, to joyn in mixt Congregations, in eating of the Sacrament, than in hearing of the Word, especially since that prohibition, not to give that which is holy to Dogs, and cast Pearl before Swine, (which is sometime superciliously enough alleaged to justifie this Oeconomy of re∣pelling from the Communion, such as they suppose unworthy) is first and principally intended of the Word of Instruction and Reproof, as appeares by the Text, and the sense of Interpreters. Though surely by the way, that Text cannot be very pertinent, nor well ap∣plyable to the point for which they produce it; for those Pearls are prohi∣bited to be cast before Swine, Jansenius in Mat. 7.6. Idem Estius in 4. sent. d. 9. S. 9. p. 123. and those holy things forbidden to be given to Dogs, upon this caution, lest they trample them under feet, and turn to rent those that dispense them; but there is no danger, saith Jansenius, that if the Sacrament be given to sinful men that desire it, they should turn and rent those that exhibite it, but rather that they will tear those that deny it; nei∣ther can any be understood under the notion of Dogs or Swine, that are not notoriously wicked and scandalous; and such onely are here properly and especially meant, as are Blasphemers and Persecuters of the truth, and mali∣cious resisters thereof: but in these we plead for, their reverence to the Sacra∣ment, and desire to partake thereof, supersedes all fear, and anticipates all caution, lest they approve themselves such Dogs and Swine, as to trample the Ordinance under feet, or rent the Dispensers thereof. But to stigmatize all those for Dogs or Swine, whom they admit not to the Sacrament, Dignos laude viros, labe notare, would be either rodere dente canino, or else porcino foedare modo, and canina facundia, according to Lex Remia, might render them obnoxious to a literal stigme and real brand, being a calumny unwor∣thy, not onely a charitable Christian, but a moral man. But let us examine what they interpose to disprove our paralel of reasons; verily much pargetting there is, to shew a dispariry between the Word and Prayer and the Sacraments, and to set them at difference, which agree so well in the common and generical notion of Ordinances; and it is remarkable to contemplate how the Sacraments are used, like Casting-Counters, sometimes standing for one hundred, and then again but for ten, according to the plea∣sure and interest of the Disposer, to serve one turn they are sometimes ad∣vanced into a Sphere higher than the Word, and we may somewhere meet with a fardle, of what by a charitable construction, we may call Reasons,
pack'd together to this purpose, and Rhetorically enough displayed, which yet indeed are but parcels of small Wares, and which are like the Duke of Bri∣tain's Souldiers, Briton's in English-mens Cassocks; to accommodate another end, they are at other times degraded, set many Orbs lower, and their virtue more disparaged and alleviated, as upon this instant occasion, we are told by some, that Prayer and hearing the Word is a duty commanded; but there is no Precept, that wicked men should come to the Sacrament; that in the one, the matter is good, and there is onely a failer in the manner; but in the other, both matter and manner are faulty, and that by Prayer and hearing of the Word, they may acquire some good, temporal at least, and mitigation of punishment, but not so by communicating; and therefore the Reasons are not alike for the admission, probation of, and conjunction with unconverted, irregenerate, and unworthy men, to and in the former and latter Ordinan∣ces. But I take leave to answer, That it is the unanimous suffrage of the Fa∣thers, asserted by our Divines against the Papists, in the question whether the Communion in both kindes be necessary, that Take, Eat, Drink ye all of this, Do this, Shew forth the Lords death, (as some learned man will have it read) are explicite commands, words not onely of invitation, of power, of liberty, Piscator. but of command, and precept, as Justin Martyr and Chrysostome in terms expresly. A Theologue of no ordinary elevation for learning and piety, Perkins cas. consc. l. 2. c. 10. resolves in his Cases of conscience, that by virtue of these command∣ments, every man of years, living in the Church, and being baptized, is bound in conscience to use the Lords Supper; and so also doth the School re∣solve, In 3. q. 80. ar. 11. though they extend not the obligation to a receiving in both kindes, as there is no formal command in terms requiring wicked men to communi∣cate, so neither is there such for them to pray; the commandment is proposed indifferently and in general terms to all men, and the Genus includes the se∣veral Species, and the Species all the Individuals (as our Divines answer the Anabaptists, objecting there is no formal command for the baptizing of in∣fants, which are comprehended under the general notions of all Nations, and Houses, and Families) neither can the want of those special qualificati∣ons or powers enabling to the discharge thereof, exempt from, or dispense with, the obligation of general duties, otherwise we might reverse and cassate the whole Moral Law, which we are obliged to keep, though we are not now able to perform our duty. It seems to me a sad and piacular enunciation, that the receiving of the Sacrament by an unworthy person, is said to be materially evil, or ex genere & objecto, though I deny not, it may become so, Ad hîc & nunc, ex fine & circumstantiis. I suppose the Author that dropp'd those inconsiderate words, might justly with the Annular or Physick-fin∣ger, touch the place behinde the right ear consecrate to Nemesis, which among the Ancients was used by them, that begg'd pardon of their gods for any inconsiderate and obnoxious speech; what influence and effect the parti∣cipation of the Sacrament may have upon unconverted and faithless persons, I have elsewhere spoken, and need not here to recapitulate. That which is most commonly, and most speciously, and by the best learned, objected to prove that there is not the like reason in this case, in relation to the hearing of the Word, and receiving of the Sacraments, is this, that the Sa∣craments
are not converting Ordinances, (as the Word is) there being no institution, nor promise, nor command, to use them to that end, but they are onely sealing Ordinances, and conferre not, but confirm Faith, presuppose it, and testifie our union with Christ; not beget it; that the Word is to be prea∣ched to those that believe not, but the Sacraments to be administred onely to believers, and those properly and really believers, which not onely assent to the Word of Faith, but to the work of Faith, believing practically, aswell as speculatively, else the Seal should be set to a Blank, and there should be a false testimony in witnessing that which is not, and so be a practical Lye; some few perchance attribute more to Baptism, as to be a regenerating Or∣dinance, but the Lords Supper they think is nothing like, as if it were more to be the Laver of Regeneration, than the Body and Bloud of Christ, or as if it were not the same internal grace, exhibited under divers external signi∣ficative Elements. As the Lutherans, to verifie that opinion that the Sacraments conferre grace ex opere operato, are constrained to assert a Total falling from grace; so these men to defend and maintain with more facility this Tenent, that the Sacraments are no converting Ordinances, have also thought it ex∣pedient to deny also, that they conferre grace, and with an admirable confi∣dence obtrude this, as the Doctrine of all Reformed Churches. I am not willing to start and prosecute more Controversies at once; this which I have primarily taken into agitation will engage enough of time and paper. I remember Torquatus his fate, that though he killed an Enemy, yet suffered punishment, because he went out of his Rank and Order to do it: I shall therefore appositely to the present subject answer, That they need not tell us of differences between the Word and Sacraments; no several things but have their different properties, else they could not be severall things; they might deliver us more disparities; but what are those they mention to make a difference between the Preparation or Probation, needfull to the one and the other, and the Communion and Fellowship in the one and not the other. Let it be (as it is pretended) that the one is a converting, and the other a confirming Ordinance; doth it therefore follow, that there must be a preexamining of the fitness of men in order to the one, and not the other? that we may admit of the society and concurrence of formal Professors in the one, and not in the other? Let it be so, (as it is suggested) but is not then the Word the more blessed, gracious, and venerable Ordinance? as to give being, is more than to supply food, and to infuse life, more than to in∣crease strength, and so calls for more reverence, purity, and preparation, in order thereunto, as more honour is due unto our Parents, than to our Nurse, and Lawyers put more weight upon those words in a Deed, Give and Grant, than upon that of Confirm. Ipsum esse perfectissimum omnium, 1. q. 4. ar. 1. comparatur enim ad omnia, ut actus, nihil enim habet actualitatem nisi in quantum est, saith Aqui∣nas, and the more noble Effects make the Causes more noble; and is not the World to all Ordinances, (as Faith to the Just) and to all righteousness, the life and soul thereof? Others beside Believers (say they) may be admitted to the hearing of the Word, but yet must no care be had, nor triall made, whether those that hear, believe or not, or are disposed to believe? And is it no matter whether the Word become the savour of death? onely course
must be taken, that the Sacrament become not deadly, no matter though the word be so? And if none must be admitted to the Sacrament but those that have Faith, then none can receive admission, for who can be assured that another hath Faith, which is rooted in the heart, which onely God searcheth? the hidden man of the heart is invisible to any forrein eys, the hidden Manna cannot be tasted by any other than he that imbosomes it, and the new name is not legible by any, save a reflected beam of light. If it be answered, that they intend onely that such are to be admitted, who by a discursive knowledge collected by external signes in the conversation, and reasoning from one thing to another, they conclude to be faithful and regenerate: I answer, that such knowledge is not infallible, they may be de∣ceived, and doubtless are in many; and therefore in admitting of some, they must needs set the seal to a blank, and are false Witnesses, and practical Ly∣ers, in relation to such, as notwithstanding this probation doe deceive them; neither can their endeavors to the contrary salve the thing, being notwith∣standing done, though it may render the persons more excusable for doing it, who also must still be perplex'd and anxious, whether the signes be sufficient, and the judgment regular. There may be also a partial and male-administration of Discipline, and an approbation of the unworthy, who may perhaps ascendere ad altare per gradus, by stairs of favour sundry ways impetrated, and in such cases (where∣in they yet prescribe, that there ought to be no intermission of the Synaxis, nor separation from the Church) all the prejudices, and pollutions, and profanations, which they so much amplifie and declaim against, in mix'd Communions, doe arise and occurre. But what doe the Sacraments seal, more than the Word assures? save that the one applyes that more particularly, which the other holds forth general∣ly, and doth it by a representation to the eye, and hand, and mouth, which the other doth unto the Ear: Circumcision is indeed called a seal of the righ∣teousness of Faith; And as by an analogy and proportionable accommoda∣tion, may our Sacraments be so named; so God openeth the ear, and sealeth instruction; also Job 33.16. and binds up the testimony, and seals the Law among his Disciples, Isa. 8.16. Methinks when I reflect on this Argument of theirs, I re-mind that sophisme of the Arminians, who argue, That which every man is bound to beleeve is true; but that Christ dyed for him, is that which every man is bound to beleeve: ergo, Which Argument seems to me to have some similitude with this, That which seales Christ, and remission of sins unto Faith, pre-supposeth Faith in them, to whom the Scal is applyed; but the Sacraments seal Christ and remission of sins to Faith, ergo; and the like answer may serve to the one and other fallacy, viz. That as no man is bound to beleeve that Christ dyed for him, unless he beleeve and repent, but is rather bound not to beleeve it, the death of Christ becoming effectuall to him onely upon condition of his Faith and repentance, and the assurance thereof, viz. That he shall be saved by Christs death, being a conolusion that results from a Major proposition (he that beleeves and repents shall be sa∣ved, by the death of Christ,) and a Minor (I beleeve and repent) so the Sa∣craments seal not the donation of Christ, and remission of sinnes, in and through him, but upon the condition of faith and repentance, just as the Pro∣mises
hold forth Christ in the Word preached: And therefore the Seal is not put to a blanck, but offered to be set, if Covenants be performed, as a man seals a Writing to become his Deed, when Conditions be performed, else to be as an Escrol; to the faithless the Sacrament is a Seal in actu primo, not in actu secundo: a Seal still in its own nature, not in the effect, a Seal obje∣ctively, viz. of the conditional Covenant and Promises, not subjective∣ly, viz. of Faith in that person, as the Seal doth not ratifie the services of the Tenant, but the Grant of the Lord upon condition of performing the homage and fealty. Whether the Sacrament be a converting Ordinance or not, I shall onely say succinctly, That they which deny it, doe but prevaricate; for they say, that the Sacrament abstracted from the Word, and without it, converts not, which is as much as to say, that the Sacrament, when it is no Sacrament, doth not convert; for without the annexion of the Word, it is no Sacrament, Accedat verbum ad elementum, & fiet sacramentum; which our Divines (with excel∣lent reason) understand not onely of the Word as consecratory, but as con∣cional, and as a word of Doctrine, teaching the nature, end, and use thereof, for they have no efficacy, but by mediation of Faith, and that hath alwayes relation to the Word, such a Word as is effectual, not quia dicitur, sed quia creditur, saith St. Augustine. But whether Conversion be wrought by the Sacrament, or at the Sacrament (as they would have it) observe (I beseech you) to be all one to our purpose, so as Conversion be effected; but indeed Faith hath three acts, Knowledge and Assent in the Understanding; and Affi∣ance in the Will and Affections; so that true justifying Faith, is a fiduciall Assent pre-supposing Knowledge; now the question truly stated is this, Where there is an acquist and antecedency of knowledge and assent onely, which is but an Historical or Dogmatical Faith, whether that affiance, which is a ca∣sting of a mans self upon Christ, and a closing up with him, and together wherewith is alwayes a Conversion of the heart, and a renewing of the spirit of the minde, cannot be wrought in the instant of receiving, or be the effect of the Sacrament, (as a moral cause) as well by the holy Spirits infusing of that internal formal principle, or gracious habit of justifying faith; as also quickning the present actual exercise thereof, in embracing of the Lord Je∣sus, whom though they had formerly heard of by the ear, yet they never, untill then, felt in the heart? This I think, so well explained, cannot well be denyed; and until our age, I am confident, was never questioned. In this same way miracles, afflicti∣ons, the conversation of the Wives, may actually convert, much more the Sacrament, which effects it not accidentally and extraordinarily, as the other; but ut medium ordinarium, & ex natura suae institutionis & speciali or∣dinatione divina. The Word begets Faith, onely by way of object propoun∣ded; for Faith (as all spiritual graces are) is infused into the soul, and there produced, per modum creationis, not by any natural operation, but by a su∣pernatural and immediate act and influence of Gods Spirit, which begets Faith, by illuminating of the minde, and inclining the Will to apprehend and imbrace the object; and in the same way that the Word worketh, are the Sacraments operative; Exam. concil. Triden. part. 2. p. 77. for illum (scilicet Christum) pater proponit fide ap∣prehendendum & accipiendum ad remissionem peccatorum & in verbo & in sacra∣mentis, saith Chemnicius; and when the same object is held forth in the Sacra∣ment,
what should there obstruct the same operation of that Spirit, which Bellarm. Ener∣vat. tom. 3. c. 5. bloweth how, as well as where, it listeth; and therefore in the same manner doe the Word and Sacraments justifie, saith learned Ames. It is true, what∣soever is received, is received according to the mode of the receiver; and so the Sacrament converts to Faith, or confirmes in it, according to the condi∣tion and estate of the receiver; but because the confirming of Faith is the more frequent and sensible effect, the denomination is taken from that which happeneth, utplurimùm, for the most part; and because they are added to the Word for confirmation of the object of Faith, to make it more credible to any subject, as Seales to Writings; hence the Sacraments are commonly cal∣led confirming Ordinances, Gerhard. loc. com. tom. 5. p. 1. and more especially the Eucharist is called the Sacrament of confirmation, in a relative opposition to Baptisme, named the Sacrament of initiation. But that the Sacraments doe confer grace, was (for ought I know) ne∣ver denyed by any in the Reformed Churches, Zuinglius excepted, (for as for the Anabaptists, Dr White Pref. to the Orthodox Faith, &c. and Socinians, I cannot yeeld them the honour of that notion) the altercations we have with the Papists is not de re, sed modo rei; not about the thing, but the manner; He was a very learned Divine, who up∣braiding the Papists how they calumniate us in our Tenents and Doctrine, to reflect an odium upon our persons, and profession, reckons up this among the rest, that they impute to us, that we deny the Sacraments to conferre grace; We indeed deny (what the Papists affirm) that the Sacraments con∣fer grace, as the neerest, immediate, and proper causes thereof, by any force or virtue intrinsecal, Ne{que} verò natu∣ram efficaciae sacramentorum ij satis expli∣cant, qui aiunt Deum agere ad eorum praesen∣tiam tantùm, eum enim in finem instituta sunt, non ut nos admoneant Deum agere aliquid, sed ut ipsa sint in∣strumenta effi∣cacia quibus Deus utatur ut in nobis ali∣quid operetur, habent ergo efficaciam insitam aliquam, at objectivam & quae requirit facultatem cognitivam, ex∣citatam illam & ut loquuntur in actu. Thes. Salmur. part. 3. S. 43. pag. 14. Yet this is not all that other Protestants ascribe to them. inherent, or seated in them, as Physical and real causes whereby grace is effected and brought forth, ex obedientiali potentia animae, or so as a medicine cures a disease in the body, without any previous motion, or thought of mans minde; but we grant notwithstanding, that they are impe∣tratory, instrumental, moral causes of real grace, by their signification, of re∣lative, at least, by exhibition and obsignation, in respect of God ordaining them to that end, and by a certain assistance of divine power and virtue, (which the School calls assistiam ex pacto) as being practical, and not onely theoretick signes, but effecting what they signifie: for God being cal∣led upon by reason of his promise, is present with his grace, and worketh in∣wardly to the similitude and proportion of that which the Elements doe outwardly; (as the Waters of Jordan cured the Leprosie of Naaman, by the power of God working with them,) who had first ordained, that they which should doe what he commanded, shall receive that which he hath promi∣sed, just as a Kings Letters Patents, sealed with his Seal, are said to confer an Office or Lordship upon him, to whom they are granted; and that saying of Hugo hath a Passport on all fides, Fideles ex istis elementis salutem non quae∣runt, etiamsi in istis quaerunt, ista enim non tribuunt, quod per ista tribuitur; God not resigning his grace to them, but by them imparting it unto us, by the
mediation of our Faith and his Spirit. I might be voluminous in amassing testimonies of our Divines to this purpose; but viso Solone, vidisti omnia, doe but peruse the great master of Controversies, Chamier, and reade him direct and express for this point, citing both the confession of the French Church, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 1. & 2. and Calvin, as witnessing to the truth hereof; and whereas Calvin affirms that God works by the Sacraments, as by Instruments, but by a force internal and intrinsick to himself, and not passing forth from himself into the Sacraments; Chamier tells us, That this is the very state of the controversie; with what in∣genuity then could a great Champion of the opposite opinion, among other Divines, muster up both Calvin and Chamier to be on his part? and in what sense all the other testimonies cited by him were meant, judge by this one, that where he argueth, that the Sacraments being by their definition signes, cannot be causes of what they signifie; neither are the things signified, the effects of the Sacrament, he cites Chamier, as adstipulating to that assertion, quia ut efficientia toto genere suo differt à significatione, &c. Whereas Chamier urgeth that Argument, not to disprove all efficiency of the Sacrament, but inhaerentem sibi efficaciam, which are his express words in his entry into that Ninth Chapter a very few lines before the words cited: so as the Reciter im∣poseth upon us with a fallacy, à dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter; as if Chamier denying one kinde of efficiency, denyed all, and the same answer may be given to his other alleaged testimonies, which are in the same sense to be understood. This puts me in minde of Nugnus the Dominican, who disputing against the Jesuits in the Controversies concerning Predestination, Grace, and Free∣will, he tels them, They will rack men to witness for them, though evidently known to be of another judgment; which made him say, he feared they would deal so with him too, when he was dead, notwithstanding his express opposition to them: of all our Divines, that I know, C. 8. p. 139. learned Whitaker hath gone farthest, concerning the efficacy of the Sacraments, who in his Answer to Dury the Jesuit, to close with Peace, yet not check with Truth, doth thus express himself, Si Alani sententiam amplecteris, eam ego minimè reprehendam, sic enim ille de hac causa scribit, Gratiam in anima hominis Deus operatur per Sa∣cramenta, tanquam per instrumentalem causam, non alia ratione, nec minùs verè, quàm homo dicitur scribere per calamum; scriptio verò, (adds Whitaker) non in∣cluditur in calamo, sed calamo ad eam rem apto & instituto scribitur, ità Deus per Sacramenta sua, tanquam media & organa, gratiam in nobis efficit, & tamen Sa∣cramenta gratiam in se nullam includunt. So he, which is more than the Fran∣ciscans would concede to the Dominicans at the Council of Trent. Lastly, let it be thought upon, what advantage is given to the Socinians and Anabaptists by this Thesis, that the Sacraments have onely a signifying power and virtue, and onely to confirm Faith, and not to conferre Grace, for frustrate and supervacaneous shall the Administration thereof prove, where is neither actual Faith to receive confirmation, nor understanding, to apprehend what they signifie. Thus long have I staid, like the Samaritan, to put Wine and Oyl into the wounds of this Truth, which I found wounded in my way, but shall leave it
with the two pence (which some expound the two Testaments) to be better cured by others, and go on my journey. Last of all, let us take one prospect farther, and upon view make triall, whether the motives used, to perswade the Administration of the Lords Supper, and the Retentives applied to keep men from deserting the partici∣pation thereof, when by a male-administration of Discipline, either through negligence or corruption, wicked men are admitted, cannot also be as apt and proper and suitable to the same ends and purposes generally in mix'd Congregations, and where Discipline is not at all established, or for weighty Reasons cannot be executed. They tell us in that former case, that we joyn not with wicked men, but they with us; that for us to joyn with sinfull men in sinful matters, would bring guilt upon us; but if some bad men will joyn with us in good matters, it proves no prejudice to us. To celebrate the Lords Supper, is in it self exceeding good, if others that ought not will come and goe as farre with us, as the outward act, it is evil to them, but none to us, having to our power opposed their presence (which power we are elsewhere taught to be admonishing, reproving, and mourning, &c.) We are farther bid to take heed that we neglect not an undoubted duty, to escape an uncertain danger; a peril merely supposed, will not warrant the omitting of a practice cleerly imposed; O bracteata verba! whereupon I shall make no long refle∣ction, but briefly say, that great is the truth and will prevail; and onely ask whether this breath blow not away all their former similitudes and argu∣ments; Whether this be not herbam dare to give up the cause, and flight or quit their strongest holds? and like Penelope, to untwist her own Web, and to become like an Eagle struck down with an Arrow, feathered from her own Wing, as was Julian's Motto, Propriis configimur alis: for now, Nescio quo pacto, vox tua facta mea est. Onely if they shall interpose that in male-administration of discipline some∣what is yet done, and onely some few evil men are admitted, but in non-establishment, or non-execution thereof, nothing is effected, and many more doe intrude to the Holy Table; I answer, that as magìs & minùs non vari∣ant speciem, so the multitude or paucity cannot give form, though it may de∣grees to the quality of the action, in the one case or another: if it be evil to admit or communicate with many hypocrites or wicked men, it is also evill to doe it, though but with a few such; and the evil is greater, because done by them, who are always so much the worse, by how much more they pretend to be better; and by the help of Discipline established, have the means to con∣duct things better: but let such Discipline be established, so that where and when they please, it may be exercised; and then it seemes it is nothing so pe∣rilous or placular, though some be admitted or communicated with, as unwor∣thy, as those that now are repelled. Truly, the reflection upon those, and the like passages, is that which tempts some circumspect men to suspect, that the Silver-Smith is still at his Work-house for his Diana, (& quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam) whose Arguments, though hammered at the
Forge, have more energy and influence, than those which are borrowed from the Schools, and such Topicks beyond all Apodicticks. DEFENCE. SECT. XVI. The removing the scandalous by the power of the Keyes, no In∣gredient of our question, nor any part of the Discipline which they practise. What scandals may deprive of the Sacra∣ment? Whether formal Professors, if they could be known, were to be admitted? How holy things may be polluted? As the Sacrament, so in like manner other holy things may be defiled. By a free admission the Sacrament is not polluted by or to the Minister, nor others that communicate worthily, and it is no more dangerous for the unworthy to come, than to keep off. Whether mix'd Communion be a burden of sin or pain? In what cases it is lawful to have Communion of Sacraments with evil men. The Godly were always com∣mix'd with the Wicked in Communion of Sacraments, pro∣ved through the History of the Sacripture. Sacrifices were of like nature with Sacraments, and for offering or eating thereof, no signes or tryals of reall Holiness were required. Whether there be an equal necessity of profession of Faith at the receiving of the Eusharist, and of Baptisme? The Church of Corinth was corrupt, yet in reforming thereof the Apo∣stle prescribed no such tryal. When and how far admonition and reproof may be sufficient? Of Ambrose his proceeding against Theodosius. What are the effects of the society of evil men with good? The errors of Audius, Novatus, and Donatus. Whether the Apologists symbolize with them?
Church-fellowship consists chiefly in communion of Sacra∣ments: they make the Church of the Called to be no larger than that of the Elect. The state of the Church, according to the Parables of the Floor, Field, and Net, Matth. 13. Our Thesis asserted in the express words of the Ancients: The Pastor of Corinth not reproved for permitting mix'd Com∣munions, 1 Cor. 4.21. considered. The Parable of the Marriage Feast. Of sealing men thereto. Free Pulpits, no free Tables: of Preaching without Ordination. A recapi∣tulation of much of the Discourse. THis Section cuts out little work for them] Like the Spaniards at the siege of Amiens, when the French came to the Assault, they sit down and play; here is indeed little work that they will doe (and therefore magna pars temporis effluit aliud agentibus) but enough that they should have done; some arrows (they say) are well drawn, but aimed at a wrong mark; but I doubt haeret lateri lethalis arundo; we cannot suppose that they have (as it were) been dipp'd in Styx (like Achilles) and are altogether invulnerable; but ra∣ther that this is an Assay of the Spartan valour, who being struck down by a mor∣tal blow, used to snatch their mouths full of earth, that they might not be heard to quetch or groan, thereby to affright their fellows, or animate their enemies; however it is pity, they are unhappily fallen upon an encounter with so weak an Adversary, whom it shall be no honour to vanquish; Egregiam vero laudem & spolia ampla reportas; yet it would be great ignominy to be overcome by, Cedere majori virtutis sama secunda est, Illa gravis palma est, quam minor hostis ha∣bet. In which (they say) the Paper objects and answers it self, there they shall not need to intermeddle, Una eadem{que} manus vulnus, opem{que} tulit; but it had been propitious, if the Paper had indeed answered it self, for I doubt it will not be found, that they have made any reasonable answer thereunto. That the Sacraments are necessary, necessitate medii, they grant is true; yet to be administred in due manner, and with care; but they are content, if not cautious, not to take notice, that this was interposed to defeat one of their most colourable Arguments, that a man is guilty of every sinne which he doth not hinder, and consequently of others unworthy receiving, &c. whereunto it was among other particulars answered, that this Rule holds not, where the matter is necessary, and the failer is onely in the manner; but to receive the Sacrament, is a matter of necessary duty, &c. yea necessary to him that yet cannot receive it, Eucharistiae sa∣cramentum omnibus man∣datum à Domi∣no. Tertulli. de corona militis. c. 3. p. 121. in that due manner which is requisite (as hath been else∣where demonstrated) but from this greund they have thought fit to retreat, and have thus left one of their Champion-Arguments bleeding, and not ferch'd it off.
But what ever work they have here to doe, ours is brought before-hand, and we have anticipated their often re-doubled charges, by our as frequent Defen∣ces, That our Concessions and Arguments make up a kinde of Janus, and look two wayes, (yet which way soever we look, we can see no instances thereof;) That the scandalous cannot be kept back, unless the Minister have a power to im∣pede them, (as if any body could be so silly to think, there could be any acts without Powers, or Powers without Subjects, nothing of all this being ad Iphicli boves, onely the object and manner, in the exercise of the power being contro∣verted) that this power he cannot have without a concurrent and subordinate power to examine, whereunto men must then subject, (which is in effect to say, that I cannot shut up or manacle a mad-man, unless I have authority to examine all men in the Nation whether or no they be in their wits;) that a free admission (even of those that are not scandalous, but of those that have not been tryed and approved) is to partake of their sins (where we cannot partake with them in the sinne of so frequent Tautologies) the similitude of a poysoned Cup which he is not excusable that holds forth, though he warn of the danger (which is to us a Cup of Trembling, to hear the Cup of Blessing (as the Apostle calls it) com∣pared to a Cup of Poyson; and it hath some analogy with that horrid act of the Papists, who made it Corporal Poyson for the Emperour Lewes, as they make it Spiritual Poyson) that men godly and well-disposed (that is, those who have been measured for such by the standard of their peculiar Sanctuary, nil rectum nisi quod placuit sibi ducit) may have it, if they desire it, (that is, if they will take their yokes upon their necks, and suffer them to plow and turn up their bosomes, they may then draw toward the Holy Table, and reap the sacred Bread) that the fewness of those that are accepted, is from their unfitness (unfit∣ness to partake of Christs body, who yet are still members thereof; and to eat at his Table, who yet are of his Houshold by profession of Faith) and unwilling∣ness (but if they accept some, and not others, yet those others must offer them∣selves, else they cannot be not accepted; and if they offer themselves; then they were not unwilling: but sua vitia aliis exprobrant, the unwillingness is in themselves to accept not in those to come, who though they would sell all they have, to buy such a pearl of the Master, yet are perhaps unwilling to say to the Servant, as the Egyptians did to Joseph, Buy us for bread, and we will be thy servants; or as in profane Story Lysimachus did give up himself and his forces to Dromocheta for servants, to be refresh'd with drink.) And because they will have it where they please (no but where it hath pleased Law, and established order to determine it should be had, that where men live of the Altar, there they may serve at the Altar; and if they will, out of singularity, or interest, remove those ancient Land-marks, seeing obedience is not onely limited or regulate by the quantity or degree of the matter commanded; but the kinde thereof, and the authority of him that commands, they that now command their attendance eight or ten miles, may call them forty, or one hundred) and will have it as they please, (no but as the Church of God, by constant practice hath given witness to be most pleasing and agreeable to his will that first ordained it: but in the last result, since their own pleasure is directed or limited by no certain Canon or Rule of licet, but onely libet, it must be onely as themselves please, as the gloss speakes of the Pope, in his quae vult, ei est pro ratione voluntas; and as Platina reports, that Paul the second used to say, Omnia jura in scrinio pectoris
nostri collocata esse, sic stat sententia, loco cedant omnes, Pontifex sum) that coming to this Ordinance, is a Disciple-privilege, (true) that is, the privilege of Christi∣ans; Disciples and Christians being in Scripture synonimous: it is the privi∣lege of Disciples in profession, not onely of those that are such in verity, every one that is a Disciple is not perfectly disciplined, De verbis Apo∣stoli, serm. 23. tom. 10. p. 76. Si fidelis est seu potiùs fidelis vocatur, as Augustine determines: These and all the rest of that pile of so often sodden Coleworts, (the ventosity whereof may well offend any stomack) we have often, very often profligated, and shewed to be as impertinent, as im∣portunate, and though rallied here and put into new array, yet, I may say of them, as that Roman General said of a recruited Army of Enemies, that those African Nations muster'd under several names, were but the same men whom they had formerly beaten under the notion of Carthaginians. As for their excuse of non-administration for want of a competent number, we shall hereafter manifest it (we hope) to be a most incompetent defence, and though among their Arguments, it be of the number, yet to bear no weight. And whether or no my arrows were aimed at a wrong mark, I am sure theirs do not look at all to the right scope, but they transfer and impute their proper faults to me, as that Indian beast, resembling a Ferret, to escape the pursuit of the Dogs that chase him, casts back his own Excrements, to defile and annoy them therewith. Their Remuria, or the honour they would seem to do to the power of the Keys, which themselves have broken, and hammered out into new Wards (and which is but as the solemn Festivals which Romulus instituted to Remus, when he had murdered him) their asserting of the subject of Ecclesiastical power, to which themselves in truth have left no esse, which an inesse presupposeth, (and which is but as if the Athenians, after they had put an Ostracism upon Aristi∣des, for being too just for them, should have afterward inquired where he should have a Mansion in the City) their backing of the Keys by the Sword, and reflexion on the authority of the Ordinances of Parliament, issued for keeping back the unfit and unworthy, (where we must tell them, Hac sit iter, manifesta rotae vestigia cernes. The Ordinance is intended for repelling persons scandalous; and if they would keep within that line, these lines had been superseded; but perchance they will take as little content to be admonished of it, as we shall do compla∣cency to check them therewith, how the Parliament resented the claim of a power Jure divino, to keep back from the Sacrament, &c. but Pars ultima vo∣cis, In medio suppressa sono est.) All these are but Parerga, and but Respondere de coepis, cùm rogo de alliis; for did I ever directly or by consequence deny the power to cast out persons scandalous and notoriously wicked? that I assert the contrary, I cannot make more legible than I have done, unless, with Frier Ba∣con, I had the art to make my Letters to be read in the Moon: do I call in question the subject of that power, or is this any constitutive part or conse∣quent appendage of our question? If they have forgotten, we cannot but reminde them, how themselves have stated and abstracted the controversie; Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted Church, it be necessary that all the members thereof, do submit to some examination or triall of their know∣ledg,
before they be admitted to the Lords Table? This is indeed but a crypti∣cal definition of the question, and a paring and multilating thereof, as I have elsewhere evidenced; but let it be pieced and enlarged by extending the exa∣mination and triall to be of their real holiness, aswell as of their knowledg (according as is their practice consonant to their Principles) and that makes up and compleats the whole matter controverted. Now then let it be in∣spected, whether the casting out, or the suspending of notorious scandalous Of∣fenders, fall within the verge or skirts of this question? For first, they limit and confine this triall to the reformation of a long cor∣rupted Church; but the casting out and suspending of the scandalous, is a Discipline not onely accommodate to the reforming a long corrupted Church, but requisite to all Churches, though refined from dregs to the greatest purity, Aug. contra Faust. l. 13. c. 16. tom. 6. & 60. & de unit. Eccles. tom. 7. p. 109. they are here capable of, for that there will be Zizania & palea us{que} ad diem messis & ventilationis, hoc in Euangelio dictum, hoc à Prophetis antea praedictum, ante enim praedictum est, Sicut lilium in medio spinarum, ità proxima mea in medio filiarum, — unde appellat spinas, nisi propter malignitatem morum, & easdem unde filias, nisi propter communionem Sacramentorum. Secondly, where crimes are notorious by evidence of fact, examination is forestalled, and offenders are tried to their hand, and when it may fall out to be requisite to examine the offenders themselves, and witnesses against them, yet this is to be, not in order to admission to the Sacrament, or to manifest their right thereunto, but onely succedaneous to a violent or pregnant suspiti∣on, in a judicial way of proceeding for triall, whether by such crime, of which they are particularly accused, they have forfeited or not, that title which they had, as Church-members, to the Sacrament, together with their Church-mem∣bership, which was the root and foundation, whereon that interest was raised and bottomed. Thirdly, will they proceed also to suspend the use of our senses, and exer∣cise of our reason, as to imagine we could believe, if they should tell us, or will they contract the guilt of such a fault, which perchance in some others, they would say merited suspension, as to tell us, that all (I doubt scarce any) of those whom they exclude have in such a judiciary way and method been cen∣sured for scandals particularly charged, and verified against them? they suspend not so much particular persons, but whole Congregations, not upon forfeiture of their title, but till they can obtain their confirmation of a right to the Sacrament, not for any definite or special scandal charged and approved against them, but upon a general charge of unfitness, whereof they are arbi∣trary judges, without any certain rule, whereby mens fitness shall be measured, (Tota ratio facti potentia (seu voluntas) facientis) and without evidence of wit∣nesses; this is that yoke which we strive to shake off, which neither we (but we cannot say our Fathers, for it is the heavier yoke, because green, and the hewing thereof is of later date than their days) nor our posterity is able to bear, and this is that which they should assert and justifie, the proof whereof while they desert and impertinently fall to make long harangues, to demon∣strate that scandalous and notorious offenders ought to be cast out or suspend∣ed, this is onely to act, what they dare not defend, and to defend that which they act not, nor needs their defence,
Nemo magìs rhombum stupuit, nam plurima dixit, In laevum conversus, at illi dextra jacebat, Bellua,— It is but part of the Foxes skin, set to piece out the Lion's, when it falls short to serve the turn, and is an imitation of that cunning stratagem of war, that, when the ground is not tenable by them that have engaged to defend it, to set up lighted Matches elsewhere, to draw the Enemies Vollies to a wrong Mark, while they in the interim retreat silently and unpursued. No, no, we quarrel not the power of the Keys, nor the regular use of them, nor the proper subject of that power, the ground of our quarrell is, because they exercise not that, but assume another power, and lay aside the Keys, to make use of Pick-locks, and in stead of using that paternal power, seem like Nimrod, to become mighty Hunters: we judg that Excommunication would make a perfect System of disciplinary Physick, both Hygyene, to preserve, and Therapeutice, to restore, the collapsed health of the body of the Church; we are offended to see these empyrical ways of cure, new, and violent, and peri∣lous, Nat. hist. l. 29. c. 1. by such Physicians, as Pliny speaks of, Non dubium est omnes illos famam novitate aliqua aucupantes, animas statim nostras negotiari, such as he saith Archa∣gathus was, Mox à saevitia secandi urendi{que}, transiit nomen in carnificem & in toedi∣um ars omnés{que} medici; we would have Physicians to dissect and cut up dead bodies (such as are in deadly sin) not with Vesalius to practise their Anatomy upon living men (that are not convicted of scandalous offences) for of such Anatomists Tertullian might have fitly said, what he unjustly spoke of Hero∣philus, Qui hominem odit, ut nosset, of whom he doubts whether he were Lanius aut Medicus; we can be content they should use Suspension, but not as Bel∣larmine and Valentia say, The Pope determines matters of Faith, either with or without a Council, whether he use means and diligence in finding out the truth or not, voluntarily and prophetically, Quod ego volo pro canone erit, & hoc verum est, si ipse velit & non aliter, (as Luther saith, Every man hath a Pope in his own breast, so this were to triple-crown a Pope in every Presbytery) neither can we patient that after the conquest of the Prelatical party, they should deal with us in our right to the Sacrament, Speed. as William the Conquerour did with the English, seising (saith the Historian) most part of every mans Revenues into his own possession, causing them to redeem them again at his hands, with reserva∣tion of Rents and Services, and making a Domus-Dei Book, to take a particular Survey of every mans Estate for his advantage, and none but his own party could bear any Office, or carry any credit, or receive any countenance; and when there wanted but one Groat in weight of a Sum required, he exacted above so much more than the first proportion, and reversing the ancient Laws, set up his own will in stead of them, and all must hold by the copy of his countenance; and when Frederick the stout Abbot of St. Albans, who opposed him, told him, he had done the duty of his Birth and Profession, and if others of his rank had performed the like, as they well might and ought, it had not been in his power to have pierced the Land so far. And when the Barons con∣tested with his Successours for recovery and redintegration of their Laws and Liberties, both he and they might aswell have pleaded the profitable and ne∣cessary
use of good Laws and Government, thereby to colour their arbitrary rule and oppressions, as the Apologists assert the power of the Keys, to blanch their breaking of the old Locks, and setting up new Bars, Non de vi, ne{que} de cae∣de, nec de veneno, lis est mihi de tribus capellis. They first seem to pitch upon this ground, that the scandalous should not come; so far we advance with them, but they will not here cast up their fence, which would too much straighten them, they have therefore another plot, and they take it in, by adding unfit to scandalous; but Dolus latet in generalibus, they should have particularly defined, wherein that unfitness consists, unless they tacitly imply, that all those are unfit, whom they shall arbitrarily judg to be so; What are scandals, every man can judg, but unfitness it seems must be left indetermined in respect of particulars, that for that (as Caligula was wont to say) he would reduce the Pretors in all their decisions to say, Eccum Caesarem, so we must subscribe Eccum Presbyterum. If they shall (as perchance they may seem to do) interpret or limit this unfitness to be ignorance, we can pro∣duce pregnant instance of some whom they have laid aside, and (what if they have been formerly admitted too) whom they cannot be ignorant of, to be far from ignorance, and whom it shall be a scandal to themselves, to say they were scandalous; but for our part, we shall not through their retrenchments seek to force any way for the notoriously ignorant, onely we are doubtfull whether the protracting of their admission untill they are better instructed, may be pro∣perly named Suspension (as it signifies in their account, a Church-censure, and a lesser Excommunication) more than we may say those are suspended, who when their brother hath ought against them, are commanded to leave their gift before the Altar, untill they be reconciled, and then to come and offer, and we are also desirous that the Shekel of knowledg for the Sanctuary, may be reduced and fixed to a certain determinate weight, lest perchance upon ten∣der of a great sum it may be rejected (as it once was by the Conquerour) for the want of a Groat in their account. They can yeild no reason, why men not scandalous nor ignorant, should be kept off▪ Resp. The more inexcusable are they, to act that, for which they can alleage no reason, for elsewhere they say it is an odious surmise, that they think all to be scandalous or ignorant whom they admit not. If their minde be to admit all that come not under those qualifications (I should think them rather unqualificati∣ons) why contract they that resemblance with Medea? — Video meliora, probó{que}, Deteriora sequor. — And seek a similitude with the Papists, of whom a judicious man observes, Sand's Europae specul. p. 3. That their Religion is not so corrupt in the Doctrine (as in the Schools they deliver it, and publish it in their writings, where manifold opposition holds them in aw, and hath caused them to refine it) as it is in the practice, and in their usage among themselves, — so that sundry, whom the reading of their Books have allured, the view of their Churches hath averted from their party. But whereas they would salve or palliate the matter by saying, Their minde is to admit all that are not some way scandalous, I fear this will onely ampliare odia & restringere favores, and rather retrench and straighten the way of admission
than enlarge it, by leaving no access, but at their will and pleasure, for whos∣ever shall cross their way in any one step, may be perchance accounted some way scandalous; for their way is some way, and let wiser men consider, while — me solicitum timor anxius urget, if this be not a likely way to turn Bookland into Folkland, and our Charters into a Tenancy at will; and to say, their minde is to admit all that are not some way scandalous, will be virtually and in the last result, their minde is to admit, whom they have a minde to admit, for they will easily finde a staff to beat away those, whom they shall say are Dogs, from the holy things, since even he that takes the right way, Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 27. yet often stumbles therein, and therefore Justitia no∣stra quamvis vera sit propter veri boni finem ad quem resertur, tamen tanta est in hac vitâ, ut potiùs peccatorum remissione constet quàm perfect one virtutum; and then in every sin there is somewhat of scandal, as that signifies a snare to catch, or an obstacle to detain or stop, or a stone or block at which men may stumble and fall, and whereby in general in this life, as in the way wherein we walk toward blessedness, there may be an occasion to another of spiritual ruine, by tempting him to imitate evil; as a learned man observes, that in stead of scandal the Ethiopick Translator of the New Testament useth a word signifying Temptation, Lud. De Dieu. Ames. Medul. Theol. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 49. p. 316. or impeding, or retarding them in doing good, or diverting them from the Gospel; In omni opere malo quod aliis innotescit, scandali ratio inest, saith Ames; and however the Schools resolve that Scandalum activum non pos∣sit inveniri in viris perfectis, yet besides that we have here onely an imperfect perfection consisting most (as St. Augustine determines) in an acknowledgment of, and craving pardon for imperfections; the Scholars do interpret this of their Master to be understood, Aquin. 2.2. q. 43. art. 6. Valent. 2.2. disp. 3. q. 18. punct. 4. p. 747. Sylv. 2.2. q. 43. art. 5. & 6. Filiucius tr. 28 c. 10. sect. 239. p. 174. aliíque, &c. Non nisi ordinariè & utplurimùm, verum est quod asserit D. Thomas. Regulariter & ex majore parte, saith Sylvius out of Bannes and others, and so also do the Casuists determine; and though perchance as one saith, Infirmitates omnium piorum communes, quando ipsis non indulgetur, non ba∣bent aptitudinem in sese ad alios inducendos in peccatum: and others ex iis ratio∣nabiliter non potest sumi occasio peccandi; yet though in themselves, or rational∣ly, they are not apt to do it, yet accidentally in some they may occasion it, and men may be censured or suspected to indulge those infirmities, which he that knows their hearts (which we cannot) may know they reluct against, and so may still be somewhat scandalous. I should therefore rather adventure to say, that onely by great scandals, not repented, and obstinately persisted in after admonition, should the right of admission to the Sacrament, be forfeited; the father of mercies (whose imitation is our perfection) doth not withdraw for every sin, nor separate from the soul for many corruptions; as some sins are al∣lowed by Divines, not to be mortal, (not in the Popish sense, but) because ex genere, in respect of the matter, not being repugnant to the main Offices pre∣scribed by the Commandments of God, Field of the Church, l. 3. c. 9. p. 277, 278. or ex imperfectione actus, not being committed with full consent to the quenching of the gracefull operations of Faith, Hope, and Charity, toward their main object, and which are reconcile∣able with true Repentance, and the sincere estate of Regeneration, and such are remissible or venial; Negativè per non abiationem principii remissionis: so cor∣respondently,
some scandals may be so tolerable, as not to exclude from the seal of the Covenant of Grace, by not meriting an ablation of the Root and Principle of Admission, viz. Church-membership. If they could know men to be formal (that is, dead and hypocritical) though they were not scandalous, they should be kept off. But Disputent, non jubeant, Disco, non pareo; I had rather think, that unless before they admit, they will take an examination of Gods Book of Life, aswell as of mens lives, and get a certainty as these are not at present real and sin∣cere Professors; so they never can be, they have no warrant for this, for be∣cause men are not yet converted, to forbid them the Sacrament, which may be an adjumental means of their conversion, is as if any should have been denied to look upon the Brasen Serpent, because they were not cured of the stinging of the fiery Serpent. As Beza said of one that upbraided his former faults, This man envies me the grace of Jesus Christ, (which now he had) so this were to envy them that grace which by this means they might have. De occul∣tis non judicat Ecclesia. We had rather walk in the footsteps of our Saviour, than in that track which they would score out; he knew Judas to be a formal and false Professor, and yet did not repell him, and themselves confess, there was no visible cause for his exclusion, (because he was not convicted of any no∣torious crime or scandal) and Christ (they say) therein dealt as man; and there∣fore no man ought to repell another for such an incapacity, especially when he knows it onely per scientiam privatam, non publicam & notoriam. And this also is the divine Oeconomy of God omniscient, to hold forth the means of salva∣tion to those, who he knows will not make any saving use of them, onely for their inexcusable conviction, not infallible conversion, so to will the saving of them voluntate signi, quamvis non voluntate beneplaciti. The Apologists are like raw Chymists, who resolve things into smoke and va∣pours, but distill no Spirit, nor make any clear or liquid Extraction; they tell us often of polluting and defiling the Sacrament, but do with no clearness ex∣plain the reason or manner thereof; to break up those mists, we shall hold forth this light, that in the sense of Scripture, to pollute, is to do an injury, to contemn, or to hold as vile, Jer. 34.16. Mal. 1.7. Lev. 18.21. & 19.12. & 21.6. Sometimes this pollution is understood to be in the opinion of men, Sanctius in Jer. p. 75, 34. 6. p. in Malach. 1.7. p. 1711. Willet in Levit. 19.12. p. 457. Lapide in Levit. 19.12. Dicuntur ea mali polluere quantum in ipsis est. August. contra Parmen. l. 2. c. 13. p. 9. Sanctius in Malach. 1.7. sometime in the profane attempts of men, who as much as in them lieth, defile the name and things of God, in this notion we shall grant, that the Sacrament may be said to be polluted by an unworthy Receiver. But first also, no less is every holy Ordinance by an indign Partaker, both the Word when it is preached to those that reject it, or receive it not with faith: and Prayer when it is made without reverence or devotion, and so like∣wise is every duty, when it is discharged negligently and inordinately, and the Name of God, and Religion, and the Church of God are polluted in all those vitious and defective performances; Si quispiam alteri vile aliquid offert, vilem illum esse demonstrat, quia haec aut moribus aut meritis, accommodata fatetur, saith a very good Commentator; & ungracious persons can no more actually or inten∣tionally sanctifie Gods Name in undertaking any other duties, than the Apolo∣gists say they can, in approaching to the Lords Table; and if so many as they
are doubtfull or dissatisfied of, or have private exceptions against, must be suspended from the Sacrament, lest that be polluted; they ought, by a parity of reason, to forbid them to profess to be Christians, for the Name of God may be also polluted, Ezek. 20.39. & 39.7. Isal 48.11. and thrust them out of the Church, for the Sanctuary also is subject to be polluted, Ezek. 44.7. Zeph. 3.4. and drive off from all holy things, which are obnoxious to pollution, Numb. 18. and banish them the Land, for that also is in danger to be polluted, Numb. 35.33. and perhaps they ought not to receive their Tithes when they are brought them, for Gods holy Name is polluted with their gifts, Ezek. 20.39. But it seems there is no fear of contracting, nor need to be care of preventing, pollution, but in the Sacrament. Secondly, this being a relative, not a real pollution, (for the Sacraments be∣ing moral, and not physical causes, are not capable of real pollution) therefore not properly to preserve the purity of the Sacrament, but to maintain the dignity of all Ordinances, and chiefly the honour of the Christian faith, (lest the Word of God be blasphemed, Dum Christi in∣famatur Evan∣gelium. Hier. in locum. Tit. 2.5.) and the Churches Discipline, lest that contract some scandal, by suffring and indulging such nefarious offenders, was that wholesome expedient of Excommunication first instituted, and (as we have always granted) is still to be exercised, and for this very thing contest with them, because they practise not that old way of cure, but rather prove pra∣ctices, such as carries some resemblance with that perverse custome of the wilde Irish, who rather than they will thresh out the Corn, and winnow off the Chaff, do burn the Oats in the straw; and we have ever suffraged to that of St. Augustine, De fide & oper. c. 5. tom. 4. p. 13. Sic vigilet tolerantia, ut non dormiat disciplina, and we shall con∣curre with him and say, Cùm iis per quos Ecclesia regitur, adest, salva pace, po∣testas disciplinae, adversus improbos aut nefarios exercendae, tunc rursus ne socordiâ segnitié{que} dormiamus, &c. But thirdly, it is one thing to cast out and separate notorious offenders, an∣other to withdraw and separate from those that have not tried notes of true holiness, and therefore for such as juridicè aut jure, effectivè vel demeritoriè, are not excommunicate, or salvo pacis vinculo, cannot be so, for their multi∣tude or other obstacle, and such as have not approved their real sanctity upon triall, and may be supposed to have no other, but a relative holiness, as that they are Church-members and Professors of the Faith, and perchance walk not so ordinately, but to give rise to a suspicion of their unsincerity, or if some way faulty, yet onely known to be so to some few, and not publickly or notoriously defamed by the course of their lives, yet by admission of such to the participation thereof, the Sacrament is no more polluted in it self, nor an∣nulled toward others that communicate therein with them, than are the Word and Prayer, by their being partakers of them, (and that is onely no more, than the Brasen Serpent was, by being looked on by men envenomed by the fiery Serpent) or their Christian Religion is, by their being admitted or continued Church-members, neither is there in order to the conservation of the one, than of the other, from pollution, any greater necessity to put them under triall, or to separate from them, nor more cogent reason to deny them the Sa∣crament, Homil. 3. in Ep. ad Ephes. tom. 4. p. 356. than to forbid them to do any materially good work or duty, yea or to exclude them from being Church-members, Non equidem dixit Rex, (saith Chrysostome) ut quid accubuisti mensae, sed jam ante quàm invitareris, aut intro∣ires,
te indignum fuisse pronunciavit, ne{que} enim ait, ut quid discubuisti, sed cur in∣trâsti? Fourthly, nay farther in that very case of notorious evil men, Aug. tells us, Cùm sive per negligentiam praepositorum, sive per aliquam excusabilem necessitatem, Ubi supra. sive per occultas obreptiones, invenimus in Ecclesia males, quos Ecclesiasticâ Disciplinâ cor∣rigere aut coercere non possumus, tunc non ascendat in cor nostrum impia ac pernicio∣sa praesumptio, quâ existimemus nes ab his esse separandos, ut peccatis eorum non in∣quinemur, atque ità post nos trahere conemur veluti mundes sanctós{que} Discipulos, ab unitatis compage, quasi à malorum consortio segregatos, veniant in mentem illae de Scripturis similitudines & divina oracula, vel certissima exempla, quibus demonstra∣tum & praenunciatum est, malos in Ecclesia perm xtos bonis, usque in finem saeculi tempúsque judicii futuros, & nihil bonis in unitate ac participatione Sacramentorum, qui eorum factis non consenserint obfuturos. A Testimony, which like Thunder and Lightning, might cast down the very Foundations of those Babels of Ga∣thered Churches, which some have built to get them a name, (such and such a mans Church) and lest they be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole Earth, (among such as they suppose less pure) and which the confusion of Languages that is among them, may in time make them to desist from farther advancing. Fifthly, the Sacrament, in this notion of pollution, is not polluted by the Minister and his admission, but by him to whom it is administred by his acces∣sion, neither to him that communicates worthily, but to him that unworthily participates. And for him that so partakes, to abstain, is as dangerous as it is perilous to come, as for him that cannot plead his interest in Christ, to eat or not to eat common food, is a perplexity on either side mischievous, for if he eat, he is an usurper of the Creature; if he eat not, a murderer of himself; so not onely by the censure of the Canons, the abstainer from the Sacrament is among such, Qui sibi praescribunt poenam, declinant remedium; Decret. part. 2. caus. 33. dist. 1. c. 56. and is as if he that is dangerously sick, forgetting the incumbency to use the means to preserve life, and possibility, that the Medicine may work effectually, should desert that Physick, whereof the operation is doubtfull, lest if he do not purge or allevi∣ate the humours, it irritate them, and make them more malignant, and the Disease more mortal; but also in the judgment of Chrysostome, is in the certain way to destruction, for Quemadmodum frigida accessio periculosa est, ità nulla my∣sticae illius coenae participatio pestis est & interitus; and is as if a man did fly from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or went into the house, and leaned upon the wall, and a Serpent bit him; and as it is reported of one of Antigonus his Souldiers, that he became more adventurous and undaunted to think, that if he fell not by the Sword to an Enemy, he must how ere perish by the mortal Disease he had within him; so the polluted conscience which he still bears about him, will condemn him, though he forbear to pollute the Sacrament; and as Bias as∣much check'd with true Philosophy, to cast his riches into the Sea, as he could have done in taking the fruition of them; and Ahaz sinned as much through infidelity, in refusing a sign, as the adulterous generation did in seeking it; so the Sacrament is asmuch polluted (that is, contemned or vilified) by the want of a precious esteem thereof, and an holy care to dispose and fit our selves to the participation thereof, though we do not partake it, as it is by a presumptuous
and unworthy receiving thereof; and as he that offends being drunk, merited a double punishment, by Pittacus his Law, one for his offence, another for drunkenness; so he contracts a double guilt, that neither comes, nor is quali∣fied to come, to the Sacrament, whereas he that performs the matter, doth some part of his duty, though he do not the whole, by discharging it in due form and manner, and an impotency to perform a duty, as he ought, doth not cancel the Obligation to do it, he doth well that comes, but he doth evil that comes unworthy; thou believest there is one God, thou dost well, saith the Apostle, James 2.19. yet he did no more than the Devils did, and sinned in believing no otherwise than they did, yet did well in believing so much. Secondly, he that exhibites, profanes not that which he applies to that use whereunto it was ordained, and doth the work of his calling in administring, and performs an act of justice, in rendring to every one his own right. But first, the Sacraments by their Ordination, are to be used by all that profess the faith of Christ, being Testes professionis Christiana, as Chamier. As Pompey said, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam; so it is necessary they go to the Sa∣crament, whether they can come worthily or not, though the due manner of coming be also of as great necessity, as is their going. And secondly, they have a right to partake of them that are members of the Church of Christ, Membra Ecclesiae praesumptiva, as the School, and Ecclesia con∣jecturalis, as Cusanus speaks, the Sacraments being a note of the true Church, and receiving an act of Communion with the true Church, Unum corpus sumus, qui de uno pane participamus; and by the Rule of Contraries, Qui de uno pane non participamus, non sumus unum corpus, as Albaspinus argueth, the Sacrament being Signum unitatis, Vinculum charitatis, as Augustine affirmeth; and as a vi∣sible being in covenant, or professing true Religion explicitely or implicitely, makes a visible member, Baxte Inf. Bap. p. 243. and sincerity in the covenant makes a member of the invisible Church; so Church-membership is a sufficient evidence to the aged, of their interest in the Lords Supper, till they blot that Evidence, saith a godly learned man; Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 19. sect. 17. p. 196. and as Augustine affirmeth, Simul bibimus, quia simul vivimus; so they that live together in the Church with us, and are not judicially cast our, have a right to eat with us of the Sacrament; and therefore the famous Chamier, disputing against private Masses, and answering the Objection, That the People are not worthy to partake, saith, Scelus hominis! Cur indignos Sacra∣mento dicis, quos indignos negas pace Ecclesiae? Itanè tibi videntur qui censeantur in corpore Christi, ut indignos pronuncies qui vescantur Christo? at Chrysostomus negabat dignos esse, qui vel precibus interessent; and having then, till they be judicially separated, a right thereunto, in foro exteriori, to suspend them from the fruition thereof, till they evidence their title in foro interiori, is as if be∣cause in foro coeli, nothing is ours in property, but as we feel our claim in Christ, nor in use, but as it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, therefore they should sequester a man from his legal rights, untill he ve∣rifie his title by faith in Christ Jesus, and permit none to be a civil Owner, till he approve himself no spiritual Usurper, which were to dash on that Heresie (which is falsly imputed to Wickliff) That all Dominion is founded in grace. And thirdly, the exhibiting the Sacrament is a part of the work of the Mi∣nistery,
who are to take all to be with Christ, that are not notoriously against him, and who are the Servants to set forth the Feast before those many that are called, the separation of those few that are chosen, being the work of the Master: and not onely Nugnus affirmeth, In 3. q. 80. art. 6. diffic. 4. p. 367. Qui confert Sacramentum peccatori publico, non facit immediatè illam actionem quae peccatum est secundùm se, quia pos∣sit alius benè recipere Sacramentum, quemadmodum qui petit ab alio pecunias, qui tamen non vult conferre nisi sub usuris, non peccat licèt sciat, quod alius non vult conferre, nisi sub usuris, quoniam totum hoc est per accidens respectu petentis, simili∣tor dicendum est in nostro casu, &c. But also Suarez (who in the name of the School, as if he alone were the School virtually, as the Pope is said to be the Church, they say, speaks more for them in this case than they would have) doth consent, Actionem dandi Eucharistiam homini indigno, In 3. q. 80. art. 6. disp. 67. sect. 4. p. 859. non semper esse intrinsicè malum, sed tunc solùm, quando ipse qui dat Sacramentum, est aliquo modo causa in∣dignae sumptionis, vel quando commodo vel debito modo exercendo munus suum, po∣test illam vitare & non facit, ac denique quando illi constat eum qui petit esse in∣dignum, eâ scientiâ & modo, quo opus est, Scil. per scien∣tiam publicam & notoriam. quando moraliter vitare non potest actio∣nem dandi, quando prava dispositio petentis, non est illo modo cognita, quo opus est, tunc actio dantis non est mala ex parte dantis, & intentio ejus est bona, quamvis ex parte recipientis, receptio sit mala, quod nullo modo imputatur danti, quia nullo mo∣do potest esse causa, quòd alius indignè sumat, ne{que} cum actione ejus est per se ac ne∣cessariò conjuncta, indigna susceptio, quamobrem ibi est nulla cooperatio ad malum, Praebere illud indignè com∣municaturo, non est malum, nisi quatenus praebens coope∣ratur peccato indignae sum∣ptionis, qui au∣tem praebet, quia debet, nec habet justam rationem impe∣diendi, non cooperatur ejus peccato, Sylvius in 3. q. 80. art. 4. p. 316. sed sola permissio, quae moraliter vitari non potest; nam qui dat Sacramentum, solùm cooperatur, ut hic homo sumat, non tamen ut indignè sumat, posset enim, si vellet, dignè sumere, quamvis autem sacerdoti constet hîc & nunc indignè sumpturum, ta∣men non potest id vitare, ideò ne{que} tenetur, neque illa censetur cooperatio, sed per∣missio, atque ea ratione non operatur sacerdos tunc contra conscientiam, quia dicta∣men conscientiae tunc non est regulandum per scientiam privatam, & quasi speculati∣vam, quòd is qui petit est indignus & peccator, sed per scientiam practicam, qua ho∣mo considerat quid hic & nunc agere oportet, concurrentibus his circumstantiis, sci∣licet occulta malitia hujus hominis, cum publica petitione hujus Sacramenti, tunc enim verum dictamen conscientiae est, dandum esse hîc & nunc Sacramentum huic homini. And as we can thus borrow Jewels from the Egyptians, so we may al∣so take the offerings of the Israelites, for making the Tabernacle, Triall Grounds, sep. c. 10. p. 205. and setting up the Altar; for Mr. Ball hath the same deliveries insubstance, saying, The Minister may reach the Sacrament to an unworthy Communicant, and yet be inno∣cent, for he doth not so much give it him, as suffer his Communion, because he hath not power or authority to put him back, he reacheth him the signs, as that which he cannot withhold, because he is held in by the prevailing power, without which he cannot be debarred; in this case the Minister is neither actor nor consenter to his admission, because he doth it not in his own name, but according to the order esta∣blshed by God, who will not have any member of the congregation publickly denied his right and interest to the holy things of God, by the knowledg, will and pleasure, of one singular Minister, — if his unworthiness be not notorious, if it be not so judged by them that have authority, he must administer the sacramental signs unto him, not as one worthy or unworthy, but as to one undivided from them.
Besides, as a good man may unpolluted receive the Sacrament from an evil Minister, so a good man may undefiled exhibite the same unto an evil man, and I may proportionably apply to the one act what St. Augustine declares of the other, Contra Crescon. l. 2. c. 28. tom. 7. p. 50. Ille verò qui accipit, si homo bonus ab homine malo, si fidelis à perfido, si pius ab impio, perniciosum erit danti, non accipient, illud quippe sanctum malè uten∣tem judicat, benè accipientem sanctificat, si autem & ille qui accipit, iniquè acceperit, nec sic rescissum, sed agnitum, quod per se oberat, correcto proderit sacramen∣tum. Thirdly, neither is the Sacrament polluted to him which communicates with an unworthy Partaker: First, Ubi supra, p. 192, & 199. no more than by a Communion in any other Ordinance, which is the same for substance as this, (saith Mr. Ball.) And secondly, such Communion in his sense, being not free and voluntary, but necessary, in respect of the duty injoyned of God, through the enforcing Law of meet∣ing the Lord in his holy Ordinances, and preserving the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace and love. And Ut teneamus charitatem, fine qua & cum sacramen∣tis, & cum fide, nihil sumus, saith Augustine. And therefore thirdly, Ep. 2. p. 28, 29. in the judgment of famous Beza, Nec ut ritè ad coe∣nam accedam, scrutandam est mihi, qua quisque conscientia ad eam accedat, sed de mea ipsius conscientia mihi laborandam est, itaque & cum adulteris, & cum homi∣cidis, & cum sceleratissimis quibusvis, modò nullâ meâ culpâ tales sunt, si ad coe∣nam castus & purus accessero, nihil illorum impuritas nocuerit, & quod de moribus etiam de doctrina dico, &c. He that receives worthily is no more polluted by communicating with him that partakes unworthily, than the believing Wise was defiled by continuing with the unbelieving Husband, who was rather san∣ctified by her, and the groundless fear of such pollution, is no better warrant for any to separate, than it can be to such a Wife, to depart from such an Hus∣band, and those that shall refrain the Sacrament, because some unworthy are admitted to partake it, have some resemblance with the Indian Prince, That would not go to heaven, because the Spaniards went thither. And if, as Peti∣lian argued, Conscientia dantis attenditur, quae abluat accipientis, so the consci∣ence of him that receives must be looked after, lest it commaculate the par∣taker, as St. Augustine said, A quibus baptizeris, angelos quaere: so must we ei∣ther communicate onely with Angels, or (as Constantine bid Acesius) set up our Ladder to go to Heaven alone; for other mens consciences, we have neither means perfectly to discover, nor authority at all to research; and surely the Sacrament is as much annulied, and our consciences commaculated, to receive it from a wicked Dispenser, as together with a sinfull Partaker, there being also a command, that he must be sanctified that offereth the Bread of his God, Lev. 21.8. & 21. And he that hath a blemish ought not to come nigh the Altar, aswell as he that was unclean ought not to enter the Sanctuary; and whosoever of the seed of Aaron should go unto the holy things, Augustine tells us the Dona∣tists held that in communione sacramentorum mali maculant benos. De unico Baptism. c. 14. having his un∣cleanness upon him, should be cut off, Lev. 22.3. But to hold up the one or the other, however the Apologists may blanch and palliate it, or be irritated and imbittered to hear it imputed, is pure-pute Donatism, and but Particulas de magni coenis Donati: and therefore the Disease being the same, the same Recipe's
and Cordials may be aptly and properly administred, which are still extant in St. Augustines Pharmacopy, that tale cui{que} esse qualis ipse fuerit, that to the pure all things are pure, nec praejudicat causa causae, nec persona personae, communio ma∣lorum non maculat aliquem participatione sacramentorum, sed consensione factorum, he puts an emphasis on that word himself, he eats and drinks damnation to himself, to no other, immundum non tangit qui ad peccatum nulli censentit, dis∣plicuit tibi quod quis{que} peccavit? non tetigisti immundum, separate thy self, non corporis separatione, sed vitae dissimilitudine; and then thou communicatest with the Altar of Christ, not anothers sins; every one shall bear his own burden, liberet te ista sententia, saith he; and tale cui{que} esse qualis ipse fuerit; farther, qui seip∣sum custodit, non communicat alienis peccatis, the Sacrament being indeed recei∣ved by every one secundum modum recipientis; and this Spiritual Manna (as some suppose of the Corporal) relishing with, and affecting every one, accor∣ding to his proper Palate and Disposition, not suitable to anothers, as hath been said. And therefore whereas the Apologists say, That if they knew ungodly men to be admitted, it must be a sore burthen unto them, and that under this bur∣then godly people have long groaned. I shall say first, that whereas it is the burden of the Song, (no mix'd Com∣munion) that Father tells them, Cont. Parmen. l. 2. c. 21. tom. 7. p. 11. & l. 3. c. 1. mixtus reis & obnoxiis nisi per conscientiae ma∣culatam consensionem nullus recte dici potest; and that malus malis misceri potest, bonus autem nullo modo, quamvis cum iis in una congregatione miscetur. Secondly, by this Burthen they either understand a load of sorrow, or of sin, malum poenae aut malum culpae, if the first, though it is absolutely true, that we contract and enfeoffe upon our selves those sinnes, which we see and mourn not for; and as the best complexion hath the perfectest touch, so a righteous soul like Lot (Cujus persecutio facta mala sodomitarum erant, saith Augustine) cannot but be vexed with unlawful deeds; yet comparatively, why the sinne of un∣worthy receiving should be singled out, as a more special object of, or greater motive to sorrow, than other sinnes; or that it should lye with more weight, or more tender resentment upon the spirits, to communicate in mix'd Congregations with unworthy Receivers, than with those that hear or pray without Faith: surely this seems to me no passion resulting from any sensible cause, but an Antipathy, whereof no Reason can be assigned; and I think there is as much cause of grief and obligation to sorrow, for the one as the other; like as St. Augustine told the Donatian Bishops (if we shall gratifie Cresconius so far, as to call them so, rather than Donatists) refusing to sit with the Orthodox in the Assemblies, and justifying their refusal by Psal. 1.1. that they had as much ground from that Text, Not to stand in the way of sinners, as, Not to sit in the seat of the scornful; and therefore in this comparative respect, this is a burden or scandal acceptum, non datum, and nothing need to make the Load so heavy, but to think it is so. And I doubt it fares with them, as with those labouring under the Disease called Incubus, who complain of somewhat lying heavily upon them, when the perturbation is onely from their own distemper'd humours and phantasms. And as the Altar which Pausanias mentions, whereby the Women Prophetesses (those fatuae fatidicae) divined in the Temple, some felt it light, and some heavy, according to their condition; so it is onely the weak or sore shoulders, which renders light things burdensome, nihil gravitat in
proprio loco; and as they say, he that lyes at the bottome of the Sea, feeles not the weight of the incumbent water, because both are in their proper places, the man neerer the Center, and the Water farther removed; so those that unwor∣thily approach the Holy Table, yet as long as they continue Church-members, being in their due place, their coming should not be so extraordinarily burden∣some to any. Sustineas ut onus, nitendum est vertice recto, At flecti nervos si patiare, cades. But secondly, if they understand it of a burden of sinne, if the members have no Ulcers so foul, infectious, and immedicable, as to indicate an excision, and their faults are not so notorious and scandalous, to merit Excommunication; or if their Sores shall be of that nature, and their Crimes of that guilt, yet if to cut them off, shall be either morally impossible, or it cannot be done with congru∣ous Discipline, which violates not unity, as St. Augustine speakes, then as long as they are not consentientes quibus haec placent, Contra. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 17. tom. 7. p. 34. Contra. Epist. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. tom. 7. p. 13. Contra Donat. pertinac. Ep. 162. tom. 2. p. 142. Contra Ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. p. 13. tom. 7. sed tolerantes quibus haec displicent, (as he also distinguisheth,) non operantes per morbidam cupiditatem, sed tole∣rantes propter pacificam charitatem; and onely pro unitatis bono tolerant, quod pro bono aequitatis oderunt; and when misericorditer corripit homo, quod potest, quod autem non potest, patienter fert, & cum dilectione gemit & luget, donec ille desuper emendet & corrigat, aut us{que} ad messem differat eradicare zizania & paleam ven∣tilare: in such a case and manner, to communicate with such, doth not com∣maculate; and to partake with them in the Sacrament, is not to participate of their sinne; and if the contrary opinion be not the great principle of Dona∣tisme, the Apologists, or their Friends, should doe well to write a Commentary, better to explain St. Augustine's bookes against those Hereticks; for without some such new Light, I cannot possibly see how to understand him other∣wise. And indeed by a Communion of Sacraments, they have as much ground of fear, to contract a burden of sinne, as Artemon's servant in Plutarch, to carry a Canopy over his head whither soever he went, lest the Heavens should fall up∣on him; hearken I beseech you to St. Augustine, (of whom I may say more truly what he did of Miltiades, O filium Christianae pacis, et patrem Christianae plebis) Every one shall bear his own burden—let him carry his burden, De verbis Apost. Serm. 23. tom. 10. p. 76. and thou thine; because when God hath shaken off one burden from thee, he hath im∣posed another, he hath taken off that of Covetousness, and laid on that of Cha∣rity—let not them beguile you that say, We are holy, we will not bear your burdens, and therefore will not communicate with you: They carry grea∣ter Burdens of Division, Schisme, Dissention, Animosity, False Testimonies, Calumnious Accusations, &c. and elsewhere he exhorteth the Donatists, Let every one bear his own burden, Contra lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 67. p. 27. tom. 7. both among us, and among you; but cast away the Burdens of Schisme, which you all carry, that you may bear your Burdens in Unity; and those that carry evil Burdens, if you can, you may mercifully amend; if you cannot, you may patiently tolerate.
As we should not be scandalized, Etiamsi multi nobiscum manducant & bibunt temporaliter sacramenta, qui in fine habebunt aeterna tormenta; so we may not hope to anticipate the Angels work to gather out of Christs Kingdome , all scandals, Matth. 13.41. Non te agnoscerem Angelum eradican∣tem zizania, nec si cùm messis venisset, ante messem, non tu, sed quisquis fuerit, non est verus: qui designavit messorem, designavit & tempus; — Angeli tibi nomen potes imponere, tempus non potes breviare, ita{que} falsum dicis qui sis, quia nondum venit quando sis. It were passionately to be wished, not onely that all were of the body of Christ, that partake of his body, as Augustine, August. in Joan. tract. 27. but that all were Candidata familia, as Ambrose speakes; and not onely that there may be a parcel of Holy Communicants, but that all the Church should be holy and without blemish; Aug. de Ovibus. tom. 9. p. 224. and therefore there may seem to be as great an incumbency to admit none by Baptisme to be Church-members, as to give admission to none unto the Eucharist, until they had approved their holiness; and we must not acquiesce in the bare wishing hereof, but in order thereunto, I grant, what we may doe, we must; but Illud possumus, quod jure possumus: it was not enough that the Ark was shaken, and that Uzzah might well have staid it; and there∣fore he ought or lawfully might have put to his hand to support it; no, but be∣cause he inconsiderately laid hold of it, without a Warrant from God, and be∣yond his Vocation; and as the Jews conceive, distrusted God, as if he could not have upheld his Ark without his unlawful assistance, he was struck dead; and as the Rabbins say, was blasted with Lightning; and as Seneca saith, one kind of Lightning is called Fulnmen monitorium; so that stroke may enlighten and ad∣monish us of this truth, that pretences, though of Reformation and Holiness, will not secure, nor good intentions excuse, any actings and intermedlings without a Warrant and Commission; and therefore in divers cases and emer∣gencies St. Augustine thinks it to have more of prudence and piety too, to have Communion of Sacraments with evil men, than to separate them, and much more then to separate from them; and that we may suffer them sine crimine, whom we cannot cast out sine discrimine. As first, if in gathering the Tares, Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 4. p. 35. tom. 7. the Wheat also be in danger of being pluck'd up, Absit à servis patrisfamiliâs, ut immemores sint praecepti Domini sui, & sic adversus zizaniorum multitudinem, flagrantiâ sanctae indignationis ignescant, ut cùm ea volunt ante tempus colligere, simul eradicetur & triticum. And sure this is the very case of the Apologists, for in a large Field wherein grow five hun∣dred Blades, upon pretence of rooting up the Tares, they have left but five or six, whom they will own for stalks of Wheat. Secondly, when there is danger of Schisme any ways to happen and arise, Cont. Epist. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. p. 13, 14. Fiat hoc ubi periculum schismatis nullum est — cùm sine periculo violandae pacis fieri potest, quia nec ipse (Paulus) — aliter fieri voluit, ut à congre∣gatione bonorum separetur malus — quando ità cujus{que} crimen notum est om∣nibus & omnibus execrabile apparet, ut vel nullos prorsus, vel non tales habeat de∣fensores, per quos possit schisma contingere, &c. and this consideration might have kept up the hedge against that breach which they have made; and the re∣cognizance thereof should have bound them to the peace, to prevent that Schisme, whereof if their undertakings rendred them no prognostick signes, their actings have lent us the Diagnostick; for if to separate from so regarda∣ble
a number, who were never by any judicial sentence separate from them, whose Crimes were not known to all, much less execrable to them, where the Defenders for number (perchance for weight) exceed the Accusers, (all which Checks with St. Augustine's Canon,) and onely because they had in su∣spicion their lives, as not approved for their real Holiness, and submission to their Discipline (which was the case of those of the foundation of their Church, the cives primitivi) and because they were offended with the gross∣ness of their Administrations at home, where no separation is made (as they express themselves) which is the condition of those that were the superstru∣cture of their Church, & civitate donati, (and perhaps è civitate Donati,) if to have (as they chuse to have) a separate Administration, and no Communion of Sacraments, Filiucius tr. 22. c. 9. S. 298, 299. p. 49. Camer. praelect. de Eccles. de Schism. p. 324. Polanus syntag. l. 7. c. 22. p. 549 be secedere in religionis negotio, & delectari congregationis dissidio, & non tanquam pars Ecclesiae, sed quasi quoddam per se exercere spirituales actiones, if that secession be unjust and temerarious, which is neither for grievous and in∣tollerable persecution, nor for Heresie nor Idolatry in those from whom they separate, but in the best pretence (and they lay no better colour thereon) is onely for corruption of manners and scandals; though I shall not say that this is a Disease of Schisme in state or vigor, (for it may please God it may be without pertinacy; neither are they Members wholly cut off, but hang yet to the Body by some Nerves and Ligaments, and thereby have communion with it in some things) yet if it be not Schisme in the increment, or at least the be∣ginning, they must (cancelling the old) give us a new definition of Schisme, together with their new Discipline. Thirdly, when there is a numerous multitude of offenders, St. Augustine sends forth a Ne procedas, and a prohibition to Ecclesiastical Discipline, Quicquid sceleris & iniquitatis multitudinem inebriat, amittet veritatis examen; And this judgment he soundeth upon St. Paul's dealing with the Church at Corinth (as is elsewhere shewed) when there were many offenders, Non iis praecipit Corpora∣lem separationem, Contra Dona∣tist. post. collat. c. 20. tom. 7. p. 125. multi quippe erant, non sicut ille unus, — longè aliter vi∣tiosa & curanda & sananda est multitudo, ne fortè si plebe separatur, per schisma∣tis nefas etiam triticum eradicetur. And herein judicious Calvin consenteth with Augustine, and Reason with both: For, as Lapidaries deal with precious stones, if they have a small cloud, or flaw, they grind or cut it out; but let it remain if it be so great, that it cannot be taken off, without much lessening and dete∣riorating of the stone; so where a few are notoriously and obstinately pec∣cant, Discipline may justly and prudently be exercised for cutting them off, but not where the Corruption is Epidemical; Institut. l. 4. c. 12. S. 13. for this were to cure the parts, by destroying the whole: If therefore the Plague of Leprosie have covered all the flesh, (and not a part onely) let them be as clean, according to the Law, Lev. 13.13. And these Contemplations might have procured a Supersedeas, not onely to their de proprietate probanda (by putting men under tryal to prove their right to the Sacrament) but also to their de leproso amovendo (or casting out contaminated persons) if those whom they have removed had seemed (as they doe not the most of them) defiled, non per vana convitia, sed per vera testimonia, as St. Augustine speakes; and from this Rule are they therefore also Heteroclites, in declining to have communion with such, a farre greater part of their Parishes, as that those whom they admit, are rari nantes in gurgite va∣sto;
and their number carries the proportion of but one to an hundred to those whom they reject; so as if periere nocentes, yet it was cum soli poterant superesse nocentes; and this was onely as Lucan observes of Sylla, to let out the corrupt blood, when there was in a manner no other left in the body. But they should rather have perpended (as Bullinger adviseth) that of the Apostle, Data est mihi potestas ad aedificationem, non ad destructionem; and that of Seneca had not been unworthy their consideration, Divina potentia est gregatim & publicè servare, multos occidere & indiscretos, incendii & ruinae potentia est. Let them set upon it never so specious a colour, and blanch it with pretences of necessary Reformation, and flourish it with the gloss of just zeal, to the purity of Ordinances, and purging out of dross, and winnowing the chasse, in order to the restoring of an Holy Communion, Epist. 162. tom. 2. p. 142. (Nunquam sic errat genus humanum ut non agnoscat ventilatorem Parmnianum) yet St. Augustine will confidently tell them, Objiciuntur nobis crimina malorum hominum — quae si vera & prae∣sentia videremus, & zizaniis propter frumenta parcentes, pro unitate tolerare∣mus, non solùm nullâ reprehensione, sed etiam non parvâ laude nos dignos diceret, quicun{que} Scripturas sanctas non surdus audiret, legant qui volunt, legant qui possunt eloquia coelestia, invenient omnes Sanctos Dei servos, & amicos, semper habuisse, quos in suo populo tolerarent, cum quibus tamen illius temporis sacramenta communicantes, non solùm non inquinabantur, sed etiam laudabiliter sustinebant. If we shall take our account, and Epoche ab urbe condita, from the first foundation of them, De civit. Dei l. 10. c. 4. De civit. Dei l. 15. c. 5. yet ever permix'd were these two Cities, as Augustine speakes, and conjoyned in a Communion of Sacraments, quàm porrò antiquus sit in sacrificando Dei cultus, duo illi fratres Cain & Abel satis indicant, saith Augustine; & Cain (primus ter∣renae civitatis conditor (as St. Augustine calls him) primogenitus diaboli et ar∣chetypus impiorum, as he is commonly named) hath some evidence to claim pre-possession of the Altar, being the first that is recorded to have hansell'd it with sacrifice; and it is very probable, because he brought no holy dispositions to that service, and carryed thence such malicious affections to his brother, (nemo repentè fuit turpissimus) that he had rather formerly given signes, that he was of that wicked one, than demonstration that he was a Saint; yet as a member of the visible Church, being within the Covenant, he was not without a capacity of sacrificing; and though he could not wash his hands in innocen∣cy, as he ought to have done, yet he might compasse the Lords Altar. The sacrifices before and under the Law being Seals of the Covenant be∣tween God and his People (as expresly say the late Annotators) could not be other than a kinde of Sacraments, or analogous to them, In Psal. 50.5. Sum. contro. tract. 3. q. 1. p. 9. Loci com. tom. 4. p. 291. S. 71. Panstrat. tom. 4. l. 1. c. 6. & 8.12. & l. 3. c. 4. in Gen. c. 5. v. 3. p. 145 — 6. those two not onely agreeing in generali signorum notione, as Rivet; but also ratione finis, as Gerhard; and they not onely fall within the definition which St. Augustine hath given of Sacraments (which makes Bellarmine to reject that definition) but Chamier expresly disputes against Suarez, that the Sacrifices were Sacraments; because, saith he, they were Ceremoniae institutae à Deo significantes gratiam; and he adds Omnia sacrificia quae ab hominibus in remissionem peccatorum offeruntur sunt sacra∣menta; and before the institution of Circumcision, the people of God had no Sacraments; if sacrifices were not of that denomination, and though we are not facile to credit what the learned P. Fagius relates out of the Rabbins, That the fire consuming the sacrifices, was formed into the figure of a Lion, to em∣blem
that the Lion of the Tribe of Juda should give himself a sacrifice in the fulness of time; yet it is evident, that the sacrifices not onely were Visibiles con∣ciones de Messia ejús{que} beneficiis, solennis confessio peccatorum, et solennis supplicatio ad Deum pro remissione, as Paraeus; but also praedicamenta unius veri sacrificii, as Augustine; figurae et protestationes Christi immolandi pro salute mundi; as Lira∣nus; Ubi supra. signa rei sacrae, signa protestantia fidem in Christum, signa confirmantia fidem, as Chamier. And though, as Rivet amongst others observes, that in Sacraments we receive from God, and in sacrifices we give and offer somewhat to him; yet quia vi∣ssim mediantibus illis sacrificiis, Deus aliquid dabat hominibus, hoc est, sua confere∣bat dona et bona, Loci com. tom. 4. p. 280. et in futurum sacrificium Messiae, mentes fidelium convertens, fidem eorum confirmabat, ideo non abs re, hoc quidem respectu sacramentorum vice defun∣cta esse sacrificia pronunciamus, saith Gerhard; and what is signified and exhibited to us in our sacraments was also to them in these sacrifices; of the one sacra∣ment Augustine saith, Contra Fau∣stum. l. 20, 21. Hujus sacrificii caro et sanguis ante adventum Christi per viotimas similitudinum promittebatur, in passione Christi per ipsam veritatem redde∣batur, post ascensum Christi per sacramentum memoriae celebratur; and of the other Gregory, Quod apud nos baptismus, hoc egit apud veteres pro majoribus vir∣tus sacrificii. And it is also observable, that as the Sacrificer presented somewhat to God, whereby to finde favour in his fight, in tender whereof a sinner agnized him∣self to be Gods vassal and servant; so in token of Gods acceptance he had some part thereof returned again to him, in signe he was reconciled and restored to his Covenant, by the atonement and forgiveness of his sinne, the sacrifice being munus federale (saith a great Divine,) forasmuch as according to the use and custome of Mankinde, Mede Diatrib. part. 4. in Ezra. 6.10. p. 258, 263. to receive meat and drink from the hand of another, was a sign of Amity and Friendship, much more to make another partaker of his Table, as the sinner was of Gods, by eating of his oblation: and therefore upon this reason, the Antients called the Eucharist a Sacrifice, for the analogy the one had to the other, both being Epulae federales, those of the Old Covenant, this of the New, both being Rites of Atonement; or for impetration of re∣mission of sinne. And the same learned man elsewhere saith, That among all the Sacrifices of the Law, Diatri. 3. part. in 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. p. 585. none either for name or nature comes so neer the Sacrament of the Supper as the Eucharistical,— a part whereof was burn'd upon the Altar, as in other Sacrifices; but the remainder and greater part was eaten by the faith∣ful people who brought it, that so their Sacrifices being turned into their bo∣dies nourishment, might be a sign of their incorporation into Christ to come, who was the true Sacrifice for sinne; so whereas other Sacrifices were onely Sacrifices, this was also a Sacrament; the rest were onely for expiation, but this also for application, being a Communion of that Sacrafice which was offe∣red, rightly therefore was it added to all Sacrifices: for what profit was there of expiation of sinne, unlesse it were applyed, well might it then be called a Sacrifice of Peace, as containing in it a Communion of Peace, and Commu∣nion with Jesus Christ, &c.
And to verifie this similitude and correspondence between the Eucharist and Sacrifices Eucharistical, the Altar is called the Lords Table, Mal. 1.7. & 12. and the Offerings named the Bread of God, Lev. 21.21. Joh. 3.33. 1 Cor. 9.2. 2 Tim. 2.19. Ezek. 28.12. Joh. 6.27. Rom. 15.28. 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephes. 1.13. & 4.30. Rev. 7.3. In Psal. 50.5. And though there may be said to be a signal difference between Sacraments and Sacrifices, in that the latter are onely signa, the other also called sigilla gra∣tiae: surely whatsoever confirmeth, or secureth, or perfecteth, or remarketh another thing, is in Scripture Idiom called a Seal; and therefore (methinks) there should not be such an Emphasis or Antonomasie set upon that one single place of the Apostle, where he calls Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; yet farther also, not onely Paraeus fully enough affirmeth, that the sacrifices were signa promissionis gratiae, quibus fides de remissione peccatorum pro∣pter Christum confirmabatur, sicut de circumcisione dicitur, quod erat sigillum justitiae fidei, & ità sacrificia vicem sacramentorum praestabant; but also Deodate in ex∣press terms asserts, that the sacrifices were seales of Gods Covenant; and Mol∣ler, that fuerant tanquam sigilla; and  hujus pacti. But then I assume, was there any such Discipline of putting men under tryal, whether they had presented their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, before they were admitted to present their sacrifices to the Altar? Was there ever such a separation made of men, or thrusting out any from compas∣sing the Altar, who were admitted to enter the Temple? Or were they de∣nyed a Communion in sacrifices, which were not discommoned from other both religious and civil conversation? We finde general and indefinite com∣mands to sacrifice, Numb. 28.2. Reproofs for not doing God the honour to sa∣crifice, Isa. 43.23. the number of sacrifices to be of equal latitude and extension with that of all the people, 2 Chron. 7.4. and all the Congregation, 1 Chron. 29.20, 21. all Israel was in Covenant with God; Hammond. Answ. to Quaer. p. 180. tit. bapt. inf. and they are described to be those that had made a Covenant with him by sacrifice, Gather my Saints to∣gether to me, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice, Psal. 50.5. Sanctos vocat omnes Israelitas, saith Jansenius, They were all the Members of his Church and People, sanctified by his Covenant, and the seales thereof, by his calling and profession, though many have denyed the truth and virtue of it, Singuli in lo∣cum. as Deodate. Or those whom he sanctified by his Sacraments (addes Bellarmine) though maxima multitudo eorum erat impia & profana (saith Moller) tamen non dubium est hanc sententiam de toto corpore populi esse intelligendam, non separatim, vel ad impios vel pios trahendam; and it must necessarily be so comprehensively understood, seeing Interpreters understand this of gathering together by the Angels at the last Judgment, where all must appear, without any separation, save what shall be made afterward; and though some learned Interpreters think, that the making a Covenant by sacrifice, carries an allusion to that solemn Cu∣stome of Nations, where to strike more Religion, Alexand. Neapol. dier. genial. l. 5. c. 3. Leagues were entred into with victims and sacrifices, Caesâ jungebant federa porcâ (or porco, as Servius would mend it, who rather marres it, quia in omnibus sacris plus valent feminini generis victimae) whence also some fetch the Etymology of fedus, à porca foede lacerata; yet others suppose the Psalmist specially alludes to Exod. 24.8. where the blood of the Covenant was sprinkled on all the People, or refer it generally to all sacrifices, which were seales of Gods Covenant; and correspondently the Rabbins say, that Israel did not enter into Covenant, but by these three things, Circumcision, Baptisme, and Sacrifice; so that then though onely clean Birds
might be brought to be sacrificed, yet they were not all clean that came to the Altar to sacrifice; neither had all those that sacrificed, an house and a nest where to lay their Young in the Altar, that is (as the Fathers allegorize it) had not Faith to breed and bring forth their good workes, though their sa∣crifices were not sweet, Jer. 6.20. but were as the bread of mourning, Hos. 9.4. and polluted bread, Mal. 1.7. yet their offerings were not to be inter∣mitted, but rectified, and their ill doing did not cancel the duty. Nunquid & Samuel Saulem nesciebat, saith Augustine, quem per os ejus aeternâ sententiâ damnârat Deus, verumtamen & ipsum & sanctum David, unum Dei tabernacu∣lum intrantes, inter eadem sacrificia videbat, sed distinctè uti{que} videbat, quia distinctos videbat, August. cont. Donatist. post. col. c. 20. tom. 7. p. 125. & unum eorum in aeternum amabat, alterum pro tempore tolerabat: Nay, when Saul was so farre from convincing any of his sanctity, as that he had manifested to all his Hypocrifie and Unholiness, immediatly from the increpa∣tion of his sinne, and menacing of the punishment; and when he rather gave pregnant signes of impenitency, than rendred manifest signes of repentance (for when he said, I have sinned, he onely made a confession without sincerity or internal contrition of heart, swelled up with worldly pride (as Deodate) Non humiliter dixit aut sensit, Singuli. in 1 Sam. 15.24. (as Serrarius out of Rupertus) Gloriam non Dei, sed suam ista confessione mercari voluit, and confessed onely for fear of the people, and the loss of his Kingdome; as Willet, Nam non priùs dixit peccavi, quam audiit regnum aliò esse tranflatum, as Gregory, so as Culpabilis fuit ista confessio, as Ber∣nard, Ne{que} vox est animi verè poenitentis, sed ejus qui poenitentiae simulatione at{que} umbrà, aliquid à se malum removere studet, — sanè quem verè poenitet ne{que} de honore retinendo satagit, quem peccando videtur jure perdidisse, ne{que} um∣bram quaerit quam praetendat culpae, as Sanctius, in concurrency with Gregory, Lira, Cajetan, &c.) Yet notwithstanding all this, holy Samuel was induced to af∣ford him his presence, communion, and assistance in the sacrifice, as Josephus noteth, Graviter eum corripuit, & cum eo tamen ad offerendum Deo sacrificium sine excusatione perrexit, saith Augustine; cum eo revertitur, saith Serrarius out of Gregory, Contr. Donatist. post. col. c. 20. tom. 7. p. 125. quia potentibus hujus seculi sic est damnanda iniquitas, ut bonum quod ha∣bent exasperati non perdant. If the Priests had known, or would have made use of those Catoptricks which are now in so much request, whereby a shadow seems a substance, and a meer species appears a body, they might have here had a sub∣ject would have afforded as many Umbrages, and as much specious pretence for building Castles in the Air, wherein to have secured the sacrifices from being touch'd or laid hold of, as the Apologists have done for shutting up the Sacrament from being taken but at their will and pleasures, they might have urged, that unless men had shewed forth their hands, and approved them to be wash'd in innocency, they might not come within the compass of the Al∣tar, and pleaded, that whatsoever toucheth the Altar should be holy, Exod. 29.37. that there must be a sanctifying of themselves to come to the sacrifice, 2 Sam. 16.5. that the sacrifices of the wicked are abominable, Prov. 21.27. and as if they had cut off a Dogs neck, Isa. 66.3. whereby the sacrifices, as well as the holy things, are polluted, Hos. 9.4. And seeing the sacrifices were munera federala, signes of their incorporation into Christ, where the Offering was a re∣cognition of being Gods Vassal or Homager, the acceptance was a testimonial of being reconciled and interessed in Gods Covenant by remission of sinne, and the admission to eat at Gods Table, an Argument that he was of his Houshold:
unless then the sacrificer had by evident signes convinced the Priest of his reall holiness, there was danger of giving false testimony, and putting seals to blanks, and prostituting the privileges of the godly: but as Angustine to Gaudentius, O dolor! fraudata sunt tali Magisterio tempora antiqua, quonam nondum natus eras. And surely my infirm eyes can discern little difference between what the Apologists now alleage and practise, and what the Priests might then, with as much reason have urged and done, save that perhaps some may suppose, it was of more advantage to the Priests, to admit many to the Altar, who had there greater share of their Offerings, but to give access unto the Table to a few, may (for ought we know) be more of the interest of the Apologists; whose Offerings may increase by their admission of such onely as they shall approve of and elect; but sure had the Priests admitted but one of a hundred, to have sacrifi∣ced, as they doe not above that proportion to communicate, I doubt they that served at the Altar, would hardly have lived of the Altar: that which some may interpose of shutting out unclean persons under the Law, we shall put un∣der suspension, until a farther and more proper opportunity, when we shall hope to shut out that instance, because it is clean beside the purpose. But whatever judgment may be given of the sacrifices, yet Circumcision and the Passover, were univocal Sacraments, and Signes and Figures of the same things, which ours represent and signifie, and antitypes, and  (as Rivet calls them) to ours; and upon this Analogy of Circumcision to Ba∣ptisme, we draw an Argument for baptizing Infants now, which were then circumcised; and the like reason may carry it farther, to argue for such admis∣sion to the Lords Supper, as was then practised by Rule for admitting to the Passover. And so also during that policy (in relation to persons adult at least) I think there was the same reason for admission to Circumcision, as to the Passover, and no disproportion in the qualifications and dispositions requisite to the one and other; and I suppose the same may be verified of Baptisme, Aug. Contra Crescon. l. 4. c. 45. and the Eucha∣rist. But notwithstanding the many and great corruptions of that people, those who did not communicate in the sinne, yet held Communion in the Sa∣craments, Sicut Prophetae sancti & septem millia virorum, qui non curvaverunt genua ante Baal, à populo tamen suo, & à communibus sacramentis non se divise∣runt. Sunt alia quae pietatem ejus in dubium vo∣cant, videtur defecisse à pa∣rentis pietate. Rivet in Gen. 18. Exer. 91. p. 353. and in c. 21. Exer. 104. p. 403. Ita Paraeus ex∣pressè in Gen. 16.12. & 17.21. p. 249. & 259. Though the Covenant were established with Isaac, yet Ismael, whom the Hebrew calls a Wilde Asse; and the Chaldee paraphrase retaines the Origi∣nal word. Metaphoricè pro homine insociabili & ferinis moribus praedito, saith Rivet; and whom he, and Paraeus, Cajetan, Pererius, and others judge to be a profane man, and a Reprobate; and Mr. Broughton thinkes to be the onely evil man, whose name is fore-told in Scripture, though he had then no Title to the Inheritance, yet he had the Seal of Circumcision to shew for it; which was also given him (saith Paraeus) very observably, Ut ei non minus quàm aliis offerretur, & rata maneret federis gratia, donec eum ab ipsa manifestâ apo∣stasiâ excluderet, & ità redderetur  deinde propter Disciplinam, cuj omnes Abrahae domesticos subjectos esse voluit, ut servaretur ordo & vitarentur scandala. And so also at the first Institution of this Seal, all the Males of Abraham's Family were the Virgin Waxe (as it were) to receive the stampe thereof, as well those bought with his Mo∣ney, as they that were borne in his house, and it was impress'd on
them the same day, that the seal was ordained, and they could then be put un∣der no long tryal, or great preparation; and though it have better Evidence than that of Gen. 14.14. (where his trained servants are (according to that which some will have to be proper to the Hebrew) rendred his catechized ser∣vants) that Abraham had taught his servants the knowledge of God, Gen. 18.19. Yet that they were by any former probation found all of them, to have evi∣dent signes of holiness, and that Abraham's Family had a Prerogative beyond Christs, and was a Paradise without a Serpent, it is very hardly imaginable; or that it was (as Scaliger of Virgil) such a monstrum sine labe, but their capacity of Circumcision was rooted in their being parts of Abraham's Family (the Church) and their admission to that Seal of the Covenant, is made an Argu∣ment to prove that even the Children of Infidels, Rivet. in Gen. 17. exer. 89. p. 343. taken or bought, by and in the power of Christians, may be baptized, as hath been determined in a Na∣tional Synod of the French Churches. When the seal had been disused, and for 40. years antiquated, at the great sea∣ling day, when that great Body of the People was circumcised, Josua 5. and that Body was not, nor could be, without some Excrements, and therein, as in Mines, there was vile Earth, as well as precious Metals; and when that Ore was brought forth out of the dark Mine, and was capable to have been sifted, or put under a fiery Tryal, or have been brought unto the Teste, yet without any such separa∣tion of the precious from the vile, we doe finde that all Israel was circumcised, v. 8. and that without any examination, or any profession, save general and virtual, that we can finde; and then immediatly follows their keeping of the Passover, v. 10. so it was ordained that every soul that was circumcised should eat the Passover, every soul that was susceptible of a journey to the place which the Lord had chosen, and was capable to eat such solid meat which In∣fants were not. And upon this account the Rabbins also, except the Blind, Lame, Deaf, and Idiot; yet was the Command for eating thereof an absolute and general Rule, with no other exception, but of being on a journey, or under any legal uncleanness; and even these were not to omit, but to adjourn it one moneth, In Lev. 9.13. else to be cut off from their People (for that omission of duty (say the late Annotators) is dangerous, as well as commission of sinne against God) we doe not finde so much as that moral uncleanness was a barre to the keeping thereof by any that continued of the Congregation of Israel. And not to conceal a truth, there is no foot-steps of any cutting off, or any Law or Precedent for such casting out from the Congregation, by sentence of Excommunication, for any notorious crimes or scandals in all the Old Testa∣ment; I shall not gain-say, there may be some Evidence found among the Rab∣binical Writings for the practice thereof, which may onely argue it to be then an Ecclesiastical, but no Divine Institution. But it cannot be imaginable, how there should be any such examination antecedent to admission to partake of the Passover, when the Lamb was neither brought to the Temple, nor killed by the Priest, In Exod, 12.6. p. 890. In Gen. 17.11. Exer. 80. but slain and eaten privately at home, as Rivet proves out of Philo, Josephus, Liranus, and others, and of the same opinion is Gerhard. Rivet extracts the definition of a Sacrament out of Gen. 17.11. which he de∣fines Signum federis inter Deum & homines, and the partaking of the Sacrament is a renewing of the Covenant with God, and much upon this account it is pre∣tended, that a profession of Faith is exacted as previous to the participation:
the same inconveniencies then may seem to refult from an admission to a for∣mal & explicit covenanting with God, as from being admitted to take the seal of the Covenant, and consequently the like Reasons may seem to prohibite the one and the other. Unless we shall think it less to be entred into a Gild or Com∣pany, than to wear the Livery; or suppose it not strange, that he that is taken Tenant, shall be denyed his Evidences: but now long before this Nationall Circumcising, there was a covenanting with God by the whole Nation of the Jews, all the people in the whole heap or floor without winnowing away of the Chaff, Exod. 24.7. Deut. 29.10, 12. many of which notwithstanding, the Psal∣mist sings a sad note of them, They flattered him with their mouth, and lyed unto him with their tongues, for their heart was not right with him, neither were they sted∣fast in his Govenant, Psal. 78.36, 37. and Moses himself renders this Chara∣cter of them, that they were a stiff-necked and a foolish people, and had not eyes to see, nor ears to hear, nor hearts to beleeve; yet in respect of the Cove∣nant and Promises, he nevertheless calls them an Holy Nation, and the pecu∣liar People of God; and therefore like as Aeneas Sylvus said in the case of Priests Marriages, howsoever there might be some Reasons for excluding of such as are not approved for Personal Sanctity; yet there are more Reasons for admission of such as are not by judicial Censure cast out of the Church, be∣cause of their federal Holiness; and we may therefore say of their new Chy∣mistry, whereby they pretend to separate the pure from the impure, as Gerson did of some constitutions, Eorum sanctior esset omissio. When (as they say of the Viper, that having bitten a man, he runs to the wa∣ter to prevent death) so Hierusalem and all Judaea, and among them Pharisees and Sadduces, that generation of Vipers, mali corvi malum ovum, which by per∣secuting the Prophets, had been destructive to their Mother the Synagogue, came to the Water of Baptism, though under the notion of Vipers, which are foras speciosae & quasi pictae, In Mat. 3.7. intus autem veneno plenae (saith Barradius) where∣by it was signified they were malitiosum simul & astutum maxime hominum genus qui scirent summam impietatem maximâ pietatis specie obtegere (as Jansenius) yet John did not assume to judge which of these Serpents had cast forth their poyson when they came to the water, without a purpose to resorbe it, and which not, who were truly, and who fainedly penitent; nor did he suspend the Water of Baptisme, till he had made tryal who was worthy to receive it, he repelled none that confessed their sinnes; and that Confession in all probability could be onely implicite and virtual, they being such a multitude, or at most but ge∣nerall; and so our Divines assert against the Papists, Annot. in loc. alleaging this place for Au∣ricular Confession, (whereas they exact it in particulars) their very coming for Remission, being a tacite acknowledgment of their guilt, Baptismus Johan∣nis erat externa professio poenitentiae, saith Estius; and so consequently the very approach unto the Sacrament, whose institution and signification respects re∣mission of sins, is an implicite and interpretative confession of sins; yet besides there is none also at any time admitted, without joyning with all the Congre∣gation together, in the express and explicite confession thereof. But a confession of sinne satisfieth not those Censors without examination and tryal of the truth, and seriousness thereof. Pag. 191. And however they frivolously suppose, that John baptized not those Pharisees, which he called a generation of Vipers, because it is said Luke 7.30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected
the counsel of God, being not baptized of him; and that therefore those of them that came, did come to see; or as sent, Joh. 1.24. Yet first, it is so evidently beaming from the Text, that some of the Pharisees were baptized, that I know not one Interpreter that doth not see and acknow∣ledge it; and to that of Luke. 7.30. they say, he spake not of all the Pharisees, but of many, and those that were then present at that discourse of our Saviour, Quia (saith Maldonat) de universo loquebatur genere, non de singulis hominibus, neminem excepit, alioqui nec omnis populus nec omnes Publicani, à Johanne ba∣ptizati fuerunt, illi{que} crediderunt, & tamen generaliter dicit, omnem populum & Publicanos fulsse baptizatos; and saith Estius (and Jansenius correspondeth) po∣test & sic exponi, quòd dicit Lucas, Pharisaei & Legisperiti, qui à Johanne baptizati non fuerunt, spreverunt consilium Dei in semetipsos, quâ expositione non dicit multi fuerunt an pauci, sed tantum significat aliquos fuisse, &c. Secondly, those mentioned Joh. 1.24. as they are called Priests and Levites (though I deny not, but that notwithstanding they might be Pharisees) yet they might be sent at another time, and others than they that are here mentio∣ned: those coming onely to be baptized venientes ad baptismum, id est, ut baptizarentur, saith Barradius: Why else did John wonder who had forewarned them to fly from the wrath to come? (to come as Spyes, was no way to escape, but to procure wrath.) Chrysost. in Mat. 3. Homil. 11. p. 28. Estius Annot. in loc. And Origen supposeth they came to be baptized, there∣by to ingratiate with the People, who held John in so great esteem; and this oc∣casioned John to excite and quicken them to verifie it, that they came rightly by their after-works and fruits; as Chrysostome, and Estius; but he did not suspend their Baptisme, until they had given satisfactory signs thereof. Thirdly, they forget that Luke relates this increpation, O generation of Vi∣pers, to be spoken to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, not onely to the Pharisees; and yet that multitude upon their confession of sinnes in such manner as is said, without farther probation, was baptized. At one of the greatest Draughts that ever was made by the Fishers of men, when Three Thousand were taken in the Nets of the Gospel, they were all put into the Water of Baptisme the same day, without farther tryal, which were good Fishes, and which bad; and in the next verse we finde their admission to breaking of Bread, they continued in fractione Eucharistiae, saith the Syriack; and that this is spoken of the Eucharist by a Synecdoche membri, is the judgment of Luther, Calvin, Bullinger, Gualter, and Piscator; besides Lorinus and Sanctius: and though Beza and Aretius understand it of the Agapae, yet harum potissima pars fuit Eucharistia, Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 2. S. 34. p. 231. in Art. 242. ita{que} bîc sane nulla controversia esto, saith Chamier, & hinc porrò colligitur illa consuetudo Ecclesiae antiquissima dandi Neophytis Eucharistiam immediatè post Baptismum; as Lorinus observeth. But they suppose this Argument will sorsake our Armies to fight under their Colours, Pag. 192, 193 and militate for them; for they say, What more could be said of the truest Saints, than is said of those Act. 2. 1. They were pricked in heart. 2. Were desirous of the ways of salvation. 3. They were stedfast in the Communion with the Apostles, and practise of Holy Duties, whereas many of their People (and those many must be all those which they reject from the Sacrament, or they talk impertinently) are as void of the knowledge of Religion, as Hea∣thens, and in practice worse then Pagans.
But for answer, we may first observe what obliging and endearing ways they have to work upon and win their People, and they might consider, that it as∣much derogates from the credit of their Ministery, that they have such a peo∣ple, as from the Honor of their Charity, that they can speak nothing but Dirt and Daggers of them; but as when a Virgin was to be put to death, she must first be defloured and vitiated, before she could be executed, so they must needs avile and asperse their People to justifie themselves; but when Rubirius condemned by Caesar appealed to the People, Nihil aequè ac judicis acerbitas profuit, so we cannot but look more compassionately upon their Congre∣gations, because they use them so spitefully, whom we are confident a great part of them like Anteius and Ostorius in Tacitus to be inter damnatos magìs quàm reos, and their quarrel against them, to be like that of Fimbria against Scaevola, totum telum non recipit, they will not receive their Yoke. Secondly, for those Converts there is no more recorded of them, than may be in those, which are brought to embrace the Word of Faith without the Work of faith; and to make an external Profession without any real Conversion of the inward Man, they were pricked at the heart, but compuncti fuerunt Cain & Judas, saith Calvin: As the denunciation of judgement struck Ahab into a low posture of Humiliation, so it is possible many of those Ulto∣rem metuunt regnantem, quem occiderunt benedicentem (as Erasmus;) Their con∣tinuing stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship and breaking of Bread, and Prayers, Calvin saith, is the form of the Church, but all that are of the visible Church are not of the invisible; a man may continue in the Doctrine of the Apostles, yet not in the practice of that Doctrine, he may be no speculative Heretick, nor Apostate, yet may be a practical Heretick, there may be a pure light without heat, or influence, as in Glow-worms or Cucuija, he may give all his Goods to feed the Poor, and not have Charity, (parting with the Substance to catch a shadow, for honor est umbra virtutis) he may perform external duties, without the hidden Man of the Heart, like Architas Dove and Regiomontanus Eagle, make a brave flight without a Principle of life, carried by other wheels, and engines, most of this (if that fellowship be, Communicatio ad mutuam conjunctionem, eleemosynas, aliá{que} fraternae communio∣nis officia, as Calvin) may be verified of many of those whom they suspend, save that the Breach they have made, keeps them from breaking of Bread, and though desirous of the ways of Salvation they find this way obstructed. But thirdly, do they soberly opine that all those were real and perfect con∣verts? I suppose then they are solitary in that opinion; not onely these three thousand, but the rest about that time coming into the faith, found present Baptism, a door into the Church; among these first converts were Ananias, Saphira, and Nicholas, and yet these first Blades of the seed of the word were blasted, and withered without sound fruit. But fourthly, whatsoever they were, it was not the truth and reality of their faith, that admited them to Baptism, but the external profession of the faith, their continuance stedfast in the faith what ever it importeth, was a thing subsequent, they had not continued, when they onely began to believe, and
then were they Baptized and brake bread, and the Apostles suspended not their Baptism, till probation had, whether they would so continue, and their continuance was in breaking bread also. When the Eunuch had made a draught of his faith by profession thereof; Philip did not suspend the seals; when he came to water, there was no haeret aqua, though there was not time enough to verifie the unfainedness of his profession, yet nothing hindred him to be Baptized, and when the prisoner of Jesus Christ, had brought into captivity the thoughts of his jaylor to the profession of an o∣bedience to Christ, although he immediately before resolved to have given himself a wicked kinde of Baptismus sanguinis, by killing himself with his own sword, yet without suspending him for such a desperate resolution, he received the Baptismus flaminis, and that straightways (which is a word of no more La∣titude than their immediately () here being equivalent to , John 13.30. Which leaves no proportionable time to take any evi∣dence of the soundness of the work of grace in his conversion, and what ever probable signs thereof himself might give, yet nothing is recorded of those of his house, but that the word of the Lord was spoken to them, which doubt∣less they professed to receive with faith, and without more adoe, all his were Baptized too, being upon that profession taken to be of the houshold of faith. Primus haeresiarcharum, as the Fathers call him, and primogenitus Sathanae, as Ignatius stiles him, Simon Magus, whose fresh sorceries and witchcrafts were such, as might have justly put his profession under a suspicion of counterfeit, and if ever to have brought any to the tryal, now to have done it, and to have expected some signs, that he that was to be washed, were also sanctified, and as they say of Lapis Armenius, that it must be often washed ere it be approved, so on the contrary he should have been often proved ere once washed; yet we find notwithstanding that without suspension or probation, upon his profession to believe, though he were still in the gall of bitterness, which poison he suck'd from the old Serpent, and therefore there was no hope that the Spirit which appeared at Christs Baptism in the likeness of a Dove, which is without gall, should descend upon him, who onely in Ecclesiam ut Corvus ingressus est, quae∣rens quae sua sunt, saith Augustine, & probatus est ad aquam contradictionis (as St. Hierom accommodately) quia in hypocrisi accepit baptismum: Yet he was admitted to Baptism, which there was an active right in the Apostles to give without examining whether he had a passive the receive, Quem prodidit orbi, Poena sequens nescisse fidem, sings Arator. It might appear by prolix induction (but that longum iter per exempla) that the first profession of faith gave a right to Baptism, whereof Livery and Scisin was thereupon taken, and when any deserteth the tents of Paganism and comes into the quarters of the Christian Church, before he be entred into the Muster-Roll, take his Sacramentum Militiae, and march under their ensigns, or be otherwise received than as an enemy, he ought to shew wherefore he is come, and profess himself to be for that party, and therefore that a pro∣fession of faith is requisite antecedently to Baptism, In Act. c. 9. v. 37. is not contradicted. Est regula universalis, saith Calvin, Non ante recipiendos esse in Ecclesiam, qui ab e
fuerant prius alieni, quam ubi testati se fuerint Christo credere, for it were (saith he) an impious and too gross profanation of Baptism to administer it to an infidel, to one that assents not to the faith objective, and hath not faith subjectivè, viz. a Dogmatical and Historical faith, (wherein is founded a title to the Sacraments) and how else shall we know that they are become Christian believers, unless they profess to be so, and make it known; but as that great Divine addeth, inscitè & perperam fanatici homines Paedobaptismum hoc prae∣textu impugnant, so I may say that irrationally and ilfavoredly shall they seek to conclude an equal necessity of the like profession previously to the Eucharist; for the same reasons which Mr. Calvin produceth evince to, there is no such necessity that the Baptism of infants should be suspended until they are capa∣ble to make profession of their faith, are as apt and applicable to prove, that it is not necessary that such as are baptized, should profess or be examined of their faith before their admission to the Lords Supper, those who once were aliens, when they were made Denisons of the Church, made this profession at their naturalizing (or rather unnaturalizing, this being a translation from the state of nature to that state of grace) but those that were children of the faithful Dicimus, saith Calvin, Ecclesiae filios nasci, & ab utero reputari in Christi membris, and this may aswel supersede the necessity of profession of their faith at the partaking of the Eucharist, as he concludes it to do at the re∣ceiving of their Baptism. And it seems to me to have asmuch reason, that the parents should give evidence of their faith, when they bring their children to Baptisme, (the Childrens right being rooted in their faith) as when they offer themselves to the Lords Table; but their constant conversation and fellow∣ship in the Church makes them Confessors, and they need not be made Mar∣tyrs by farther trial; until justice convict them to be evil, charity must con∣clude them to be good; & sicut difficilè aliquem suspicatur malum qui bonus est, sic difficilè aliquem suspicatur bonum qui ipse malus est, saith Chrysostom, it is the Character of a strait heart, and close hand, to examine a poor beggar of his whole life, before they think him worthy of a morsel of bread, whereas it is better to feed divers, that are unworthy, than suffer one to want that is worthy, Semper habet unde det cui pectus est plenum charitatis, saith Augustine, & habere omnia Sacramenta, & malus esse potest, habere autem charitatem, & malus esse non potest, adds the same Father, and though that of the wise man may seem a paradox, Melior est iniquitas viri quam mulier benefaciens: And that be an hyperbole that the worst Grecian is better than the best Cretian, yet it is a just truth, that the errors of charity are better than the best pretences of ri∣gor and censorious uncharitableness, and it is neerer the partaking of the Di∣vine Nature, to spare many for the sake of a few good men, than to dissolve, or shatter a whole Church for a few evil. The Church of Corinth was a very corrupt Body, Morbus est partium vi∣ventium cor∣poris humani ad actiones naturales exercendas impotentia seu ineptitudo ab earundem constitutione praeter naturam ortum habens. Sennertus. and needed purging as much as any, there were not onely Cacochymical humors mixt with the blood, but they were gathered and ripened into Spiritual diseases, there being an
impotency or unaptness in the parts of that body to exercise spiritual actions, springing from their constitution beside grace; there were diseases in their state and vigor, diseases of all kinds, morbi intemperiei, they were too hot at strife and contention, 1 Cor. 3.3. & 11.18. And too cold in their love and zeal to the reverence of the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. To the honor of the A∣postle, 2 Cor. 10.10. And to their weak brethren whom they scandalized, 1 Cor. 8.12. They were too moist with intemperate drinkings, 1 Cor. 11.21. and their profane distempers in receiving the Sacramental food of their souls, which had brought them to an Atrophy and Apepsy, together with their un∣cleanness, fornication, and lasciviousness, wherein they had sinned already, and had not repented, were a compounded intemperateness, 2 Cor. 13.21. There were morbi totius substantiae, though not arising from occult qualities, yet otherwise, not onely as they were carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3. But through their denial of the resurrection of the dead, which is the life of faith and substance of Christianity, quae est singularis fides Christianorum, saith Augustine, there were morbi compositionis, in figura, the immodest and irreverent habit of their women, 1 Cor. 11. In magnitudine, they were puffed up, 1 Cor. 4.18. & 5.2. There were swellings among them, 2 Cor. 13.20. In numero, there was one mem∣ber continued and cherished in that wickedness which was execrable to the heathens, which should have been cut off, 1 Cor. 5.1. In situ, there were tumults, 2 Cor. 13.20. Eating and drinking in the Church, which they should have done in their own houses, 1 Cor. 11.22. Eating in the idol temples, and partaking the cup and table of Devils, 1 Cor. 8.10. & 10.21. And lastly diseases solutae continuitatis, in their envyings, strifes, divisions, 1 Cor. 3.3. & 11.18. And going to law one with another, for trifles, and that before In∣fidels, Chap. 6.1, 2. Yet notwithstanding all this, Contr. Donat. post. Collat. c. 20. Tom. 7. p. 125. there were many pure and precious souls among them, & tamen omnes ad unum altare accedebant, & eadem Sacramenta communicabant, qui eadem vitia non communicabant, saith Augustine: What then doth the Spiritual Hippocrates (to whom might more plausibly be applied what Macrobius attributed to the Coan, Nec falli potest, nec fallere) he first acknow∣ledgeth them to be the Churches of Christ, and a society of Saints, he doth not Unchurch or Anathematize them, and although the same men that did partake of the Table of Divels, were partakers also of the Table of the Lord, and though they met together for the worse, and in effect did not eat the Lords Supper, but held a kind of Bacchanal rather, yet he denies not this promiscuous Communion, he doth not command, nor permit such as found themselves precious, Vbi supra p. 126. to separate from those they saw vile, non corporaliter se∣parat, sed spiritualter separare non cessat; Nolite seduci, corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia prava, non eorum congressum, sed consensum timet, saith Augustine, he in∣crepates not the Church-governors for admitting such, nor lays any injunction of excluding so many of them, nor gives any advice to suffer none to pass to the Lords table, but through the Strainer of Examination, but he allows them to continue the use of the Lords Supper, and onely corrects the abuses, where∣by they provoked the Lord, and lost the fruits of their refection, being not strengthned in Spirit, but rather made weak and sick in body, and soul too
(some of them) who did eat and drink damnation onely to themselves; and when he saith to themselves, Vbi supra p. 125. quid aliud nisi istos vaniloquos cogitabat (saith Augustine,) ut ei non sufficiat dicere, judicium manducat & bibit, nisi adderet sibi, nè hoc etiam ad illos pertineret, qui pariter quidem, sed non judicium, manducabant: he wills them not to resrain the Supper but their sins, to amend their stomacks, not to leave their meat; to use some preparatives, not to lay aside the main Physick; he prescribes them to examin themselves, not to subject them to the examination of another, but (so) to eat, not abstain, In 1 Cor. 11. p. 438. and (so) to eat without any forain examination, Nec dicit abstinete igitur à pane hoc, &c. saith Musculus, hoc pacto malum quod reprehendit non emendasset; si Medicus dicat aegroto quia comedis ac bibis secùs quàm valetudini tuae restituendae conducat, consulo nè posthac edas & bibas, hoc ipsum consilio non curat & restituit sed perdit, etenim non resti∣tuitur valetudo non edendo ac bibendo, sed competentèr pro qualitate morbi edendo & bibendo; consimili modo non correxisset Apostolus malum hoc Corinthiorum con∣sulendo nè in posterum de pane ederent, &c. — hoc Apostoli exemplum se∣quatur Minister Christi, sicubi viderit esse quosdam qui coenâ dominicâ abutuntur, ne{que} suspendat institutionis dominicae usum, ne{que} jubeat ut ab illo abstineant, sed ur∣geat potiùs ut in seipsos inquirant, & gratiae Dei sacramento se competenter ac∣commodent. Though when as a single person had perpetrated and persisted in such a no∣torious and execrable crime, as appeared horrible to the Gentiles, who yet beheld it by a Dim light, then liberiore correptione & excommunicatione ju∣dicat dignum, the Apostle strikes and blasts him with the thunderbolt of his censures, ut poena ad unum, terror ad omnes; then cum inter dissimiles peccavit— cum congregationis ecclesiae multitudo ab eo crimine quo anathematizatur aliena est, (as St. Augustine speaks.) But when the corruptions were great and Epidemi∣cal, then the Apostle both suitably to the Aphorisms of Physick, which prescribe that in statu morbi non est purgandum, sed praestat quescere; and also si sanguis nimìs corruptus est, Hippoc. 2. Apboris. 29. Sennertus Instit. & ratione causae (cùm hoc modo in cacochymiam exquisitam de∣generaverit) & ratione signi (cùm vires imbecilles denunciet) venae sectio non convenit; and also agreeable to the practice of Physicians, who in a Tympany dare not let out at once all that corrupt water of the Belly, whence death would follow in stead of health; so this Spiritual Physician doth not drive them all at once from the Communion, nor (as if to the reformation of that Church it had been necessary) make them probationers for some time until they were readmitted to a Church-fellowship upon demonstrations of Sancti∣ty; but to his reproofs, his doctrine, his exhortations, he only adds his mourn∣ing, Epist. 64. Tom. 2. p. 61. Cum multos jam comperisset & immundâ luxuriâ & fornicationibus inquina∣tos, ad eosdem Corinthios in secunda epistola scribens, non itidem praecipit ut cum talibus ne cibum sumerent, multi enim erant, nec de his poterat dicere, si quis fra∣ter, &c. sed ait, nè iterum cùm venero ad vos, Contra Parmen. l. 2. c. 3. Tom. 7. p. 13. humiliet me Deus & lugeam mul∣tos, &c. per luctum suum potiùs eos divino flagello coercendos minans quàm per illam correptionem, saith the same Father; and this patern he commends to the imitation of every pious and prudent Christian in like cases, patienter ferat & ex dilectione gemat & lugeat donec ille desuper emendet, & corrigat, atque usque ad messem deferat eradicare zizania, &c. And it is upon this account that a ju∣dicious
Divine observeth, Mr. Balls answer to Canne. part. 2. p. 57. that the Apostles tolerated great abuses in private persons, which they could not redress, doubtless they condemned the having many wives at once, but when that Custom prevailed amongst Jews and Gen∣tiles, they gave no command for the casting such out of the Church, but onely prohibited them to be chosen Bishops, so as it is evident that what St. Augustine professeth hath been practised in all ages, Toleramus quae nolumus, ut pervenia∣mus quò volumus. If the Apologists could meet such an example, or finde such an argument to condemn promiscuous Communions, as might be fetch'd from Corinth to defend them (cuivis licuit adire Corinthi) they would speak thunder and look light∣ning, and in decrying mixt Communions, would mix Heaven and Earth, or rather set them farther asunder, and yet at what distance soever, sublimi feri∣ent sidera vertice, Yet notwithstanding all their courses, togather and constitute a pure and unmixed Church and Communion, will be like the course of the eighth Sphear, which shall be finished onely at the end of the World; in the mean time (as the Chymists tell us) the lesser fire the purer Distillation, and this fire must not be such a purging fire as the School-men say the fire of the last Conflagration shall be, thorough which all alive must pass to be puri∣fied, the best aswel as the worst, this fiery tryal ought neither to be so violent nor Universal; fire mollifies and hardens Steel according to the varieties and intensions of heat, and so Rheubarbe if gently decocted, purgeth, if over∣much it bindeth, and Galen tels us, that quaedam medicamenta pulverizata exl∣guâ quantitate ulceri inspersâ cicatricem inducunt, eadem vero si largiùs usurpan∣tur carnem absumunt, & ulcus cavum efficiunt, et contra cathaereticorum quaedam si parciùs usurpentur in cicatricem inducunt, et fiunt epulotica; so in Purgative Discipline a little may do much, and too much nothing, leniter castigatus re∣verentiam exhibet castiganti, asperitatis autem nimia increpatio nec increpationem recipit nec salutem, Concil. 3. Can. 6. saith the Bracaren Council: What Arnoldus in his Aphorisms adviseth the Corporal Physician, is as proper for the Spiritual, Prudens et pius Medicus morbum ante expellere satagit cibis medicinalibus, quàm puris medicinis — nunquam properabit ad pharmaciam, nisi cogente necessitate, and especially ought he to be sparing of Purgatives; Galen himself assuring us, Omne purgans medicamentum corpori purgato contrarium, &c. succes et spiri∣tus abducit, substantiam corporis aufert; of them therefore that are so much for Purgatives, when alteratives might do the Cure, that drive out so much of the pure Blood, to expel the evil, which being left mixt with the other, might be perhaps concocted and assimilated; we may say truely, plus periculi à Medico, quàm à morbo, the injustice of this repulse makes those sad that ought not to be sad, and the commonness thereof strikes less shame into those that should be ashamed, and while they are not convinced to merit it, they will despise the censure, et contra audentiùs ibunt, and by degrees may some of them grow to disesteem the Ordinance, which they are perswaded it is not their fault that they cannot have, and will little fear to wax worse, since if they should do so, they cannot fare much worse. But they say, it is an unsound position, that a previous exhortation on the Ministers part frees his soul, more is required of him, suspension is an effe∣ctual means, and he must suspend such as he knows, or may know to be wick∣ed,
or he defiles his own soul with other mens sins, more is also required of the people, praying and informing and declaring among them. Chrysostom bids them to deny the Sacrament to some, Ambrose kept oft Theodesius, an Em∣peror, which was more than admonishing. Resp. Paterculus saith of Cato, He did well because he could do no other; but it seems the Apologists do so often fall into ignoratio elenchi, because they can do no other; for we do not say, that a Previous exhortation is absolutely and universally sufficient, but re∣spectively for some persons, and especially such as are the most of those whom they repel, and (Enough) exclusively to particular examination, not to just excommunication, such as are notoriously flagitious, and obstinately so after admonition, we shall not onely concede, but commend the keeping of them back, or casting of them out by the Church Officers, if it may possibly, and also prudently be done, as we have formerly expressed; such vipers as are like∣ly to poyson others, by a vitious example or manifest Scandal, we judge fit to be cut off, and to make Triacle of them for the curing or preferving of o∣thers, Qui non corrigit seipsum, alii corrigant se per ipsum; for such therefore we shall grant that excommunication is more effectual Physick, and not gain∣say that for such as lie under a violent suspicion of such atrocious crimes till it be tryed and adjudged, whether they be guilty or not, suspension may be no unwholesome preparative, and if the Officers have a power without obstru∣ction, and the exercise thereof may be without destruction (sine periculo schismatis) & cum congrua, & quae unitatem non violat, disciplina, (as Augustine speaks,) and yet if they do not their duty, the People notwithstanding have done their duty, if they inform, admonish and reprove the Officers; (for even the Bells of Aaron sometime need to be moved by others to make them sound) and do the like also to the offenders, although they communicate with them in the Sacrament, or else St. Augustine was deceived in his sense and application of Scripture, and with him the Church, De verb. Dom. &c. Serm. 18. Tom. 10 p. 18. et 19. who spake by his mouth against the Donatists, Duobus modis te non maculat malus, st ei non con∣sentias, & si redarguas — objurgando liber est in conspectu Dei, cui neque sua peccata Deus imputat, quia non fecit, ne{que} aliena quae non approbavit, neque negligentiam quia non tacuit, neque superbiam quia in unitate permansit; But when that Discipline of casting out cannot be in such manner exercised, and when they are many, who though their cleanness be not according to the Pu∣rification of the Sanctuary, yet their defilements are not notorious and Scan∣dalous, so as to merit casting out, Aug. Contra Ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. tom. 7. p. 13. In. Psal. 48. Tom. 8. p. 93. August. epist. 64. To. 2. p. 61. Gratian Part. 1. de con∣secrat. d. 2. Fol. 417. in these cases also we have a warrant from St. Augustine, that a previous exhortation from the Pastor, is a compliance with his duty, for having advised, Cum idem morbus plures occupaverit, — homo patienter ferat, & ex dilectione gemat at{que} lugeat, donec ille desuper emen∣det, &c. He adds turba iniquorum, cum facultas est in populo promendi sermo∣nem, generali objurgatione ferienda est; and elswhere saith, exigitur a manducante quod manducat, non prohibeatur manducare à dispensatore, sed moveatur timere exactorem; And such was his advise to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage; Non ergo asperè quantum existimo, non duriter, non modo imperioso ista tollantur, magìs do∣cendo quàm jubendo, magìs monendo quàm minando; And from Augustin Gratian takes the note to sing the same tune, that the Stewards may not by any means
keep back those Nimrods, and fat ones of the Earth, from his Masters Table, but warn them fairly of the ensuing danger: And a judgment and practice con∣trary hereunto, was that which sormed and denominated the Schism of the Do∣natists, Qui cum cernerent in Ecclesiis vitia, quae verbis quidem reprehenderent Epi∣scopi, Instit. l. 4. c. 12. S. 12. sed excommunicatione non plecterent, (quia non putabant se hâc viâ quic∣quam profecturos) in Episcopos atrociter invehebantur, tanquam Disciplinae prodi∣tores, & à Christi grege impio schismate se dividebant, saith judicious Calvin. And therefore it is good counsel from Anselme on 1 Cor. 11. Ita{que} ô fratres mei, ca∣vete jam indignè illud sumere; cavete cum schismate ad illud convenire; and it is a grave observation of Moller, upon the 26. Psalm, where it is said in the fifth Verse, I have hated the Congregation of Evil-doers, and will not sit with the Wicked; and it follows, v. 6. I will wash my hands in Innocency, and so will I compass thine Altar, In Psal. p. 214. Cont. Ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 4. O Lord; Est antè in hoc loco notandum (saith he) quòd David quanquam affirmet se fugere consuetudinem impiorum, &c. tamen eorum odio non deserat Ecclesiam, ne{que} abdicat se à focietate divinitus mandata, in which tune Augustine was praecentor chori, singing of David, &c. Lavabat manus cum inno∣centibus & circumdabat altare Domini, Videtur allu∣dere ad lotio∣nes manuum quibus sacrificaturi utebantur, vel ad veterem ritum lavandi manus cum se innocentes profiteri vellent. Menoch. Annot. in locum. ideo quippe tolerabat nocentes, ne desereret innocentes cum quibus manus lavabat. Yet the Fathers, they say, injoyned and practised more; but for that, as the Scythians stopped at the Sepulchres of their Fathers, to fight Darius; so we have formerly made some stay at the Monuments of the Fathers, to defend them from their violence; but the Apologists discourse, as if we denyed the power of Ex∣communication, or that this were the Poles of the Controversie between us: Whereas we have often confessed with the mouth, and still beleeve in our heart, the not onely lawful, but profitable use of that Discipline; we contest not with them for practising this, but for not practising it; not for casting out those which have forfeited their Birth-right by Conviction, or Attainder for great Crimes; but disseising them, and keeping them out of their right, till they recover it by a Tryal before their Tribunals; not for tracing the old Pathes, but for treading out new wayes; and not by the Line of the Fathers, who will never father this suppositious Issue: Excommunication is indeed the Child of Antiquity, and the Pedegree thereof may be traced like Adam's, to the antient of days; and since Non est mortale quod opto, I seek not Humane Inven∣tions, but reverence and submit to those of Divine Original, Hoc erat in votis; but if a Serpent shall catch up this Child, and interpose it between himself and our Darts, to stop or divert them; we hope to appear such marks-men, as can wound the Serpent, yet not hurt the Child; but when they should prove their way of suspending whole Congregations (not some few particular persons) and upon a general charge onely of unworthiness, no speciall Crimes or Evi∣dence, and put them to prove their right, before it might be justly questioned, this which is the Hinge whereon the weight of the Controversie lyes, and the Center whereunto the Lines should tend and move, they slip over this im∣provisum aspris veluti qui sentibus anguem Pressit, and insist upon the power of
excommunicating persons scandalous, which is not controverted, Haec sunt tua Candide , Quae tu magniloquus nocte dié{que} sonas, but having nothing else to speak to any purpose, they are still saying this, though it be nothing to the purpose. But we shall say as in like case St. Augustine said of the Donatists, Ità vos putant non habere cor, ut non intelligatis eos omnino non esse superatos quan∣do vobis ea dicunt, quae omnino non dicerent, si aliquid utile quod dicerent inveni∣rent. But it is not inconsiderable, that Ambrose his keeping of the Emperour Theodosius, is singled out as the onely Example of Antiquity, where this Disci∣pline was so frequently and constantly exercised, as if they would strike the more terrour by so formidable a precedent, and make the greatest know, they must be awed by that Power which coerced an Emperour: Novus per pectora cunctis Insinuat pavor; but if they would write after this Copy, we should not blame their hand; but such Letters would be like Bellerophon's, Davenant. determinat. q. 48. p. 233. Willer Synop. Cont. 4. q. 8. p. 204. destructive to themselves, and their present way. To Ambrose they have appealed, to him let them go; not therefore to question the proceedings de jure, in this particular case, which some will not approve of, that suppose, however soeveraign Princes are absolutely excommunicable; yet for some respects, not practically to be excommunicated, especially with the greater Excommunication. In the additions to Aquinas, there is cited the Gloss of Augustine upon Mat. 13. which saith, That the Prince and a multitude, are not to be excommunica∣ted. And reges si aliquando potestate abutantur, non sunt à nobis exasperandi, sed ubi sacerdotum admonitionibus non acquieverunt, divino judicio sunt reservandi, saith Ivo Carnotensis; and therefore they suppose, that Ambrose herein exceeded his limits, especially (which is the judgment of a greater number) if he undertook by his sole power to excommunicate an Emperour, unless it proceeded from some extraordinary spirit; or as if he were prompted thereunto by such an An∣gel as Jvo saith, an Arrian saw suggesting to him, when he preach'd, and now sent forth some of that fire which Paulinus his Secretary is said to have seen to enter into his mouth; but indeed he seemes to have done it by the counsell and publick judgment of the whole Church of God in Italy, 11. q. 3. as the Ecclesiastical History declares in Gratian, Ob hoc, cùm à sacerdotibus Italiae redargueretur, agno∣vit delictum; but howsoever allowing him his sting as well as his honey (which were both emblem'd by the Bees that swarm'd on his Infant-lips;) and to in∣sist on the matter de facto, they may please to take notice; First, That Theodosius had perpetrated a notable great Crime, Cent. Magdeb cent. 4. c. 13. p. 847. Tom. 2. Contr. 4. q. 4. p. 626, 627. Quae sit atrocitas à te commissi facinoris, saith Ambrose to him, rem faedam commisit, — propter tumultum temere Thessalonicae concitatum, misit milites suos, qui ejus jussu, magnam promiscuè multitudinem, cives, peregrinos, nocentes, innocentes trucida∣runt, at{que} ità propter tumultum paucorum, septem millia hominum perierunt, in the words of Whitaker; so as this was no light or ordinary fault, but an execrable offence, Non delictum, sed scelus, as Calvin distinguisheth. Secondly, the matter was notorious by Evidence of Fact, Baldwin. cas. l. 4. c. 10. p. 1127. Willet ubi su∣pra. and the Emperour also confessed it; so as the proceeding, as it was judicial, so it was just and rightly grounded; not bottomed or carried on upon suspicions, light Conje∣ctures, or fallible Reports.
Thirdly, the Emperour was by Ambrose excommunicated, not onely suspen∣ded, L. 2. obs. 15. p. 295. Tom. 2. l. 5. c. 13, S. 3. de Theodosii imperatoris excommunicatione & octo mensium poenitenta me∣moriâ proditum est, saith Albaspinus: He was forbidden to enter the Church, Oc∣currit ei ad vest bulum, prohibuit ingredi sacra limina, saith Chamier out of Theo∣doret; he was scarce allowed to look on the Church, Qubus oculis aspicies com∣munis Domini Templum; not at all permitted to conjoyn in the Prayers of the Church, Quomodo manus extendere stillantes injusto sanguine; he was set among the Penitents; In luctu & lamentatione menses octo exegit, regio ornatu deposito, nec post tantum tamen temporis receptus priùs est, Cent. 4. c. 10. p. 673. & c. 3. p. 82. nisi ab Ambrosio iterum duriter reprehensus, doloris sui in Templi vestibulo in pavimentum se dejiciens & plorans, certa fecit indicia, ac in loco poenitentium subsistere non recusavit, say the Centu∣rists; and elsewhere poenitentiae curriculo completo ad Templum postea cum lachry∣mis rediit — in terram pronus se prosternens ac cum Davide orans, Adhaesit pavimento anima mea, De civit. Dei l. 5. c. 26. tom. 5. p. 70. &c. receptus ab Ambrosio, populo pro eo deprecante, (all according to the mode of the Penitents) so as imperatoriam celsitudinem (saith Augustine) pro illo populus orans, magìs fleret videndo prostratam, quàm peccando timeret iratam: By which it appears, that this was fully an Excommunication, a casting out from all Communion, not a suspension from the Sacrament one∣ly, with an admission to joyn in the Assemblies, and to partake of other Ordi∣nances. When they shall in all these particulars reconcile their way to this example of Ambrose, we shall be reconciled to their way; but when they shall doe that, Jam gryphes jungantur equis, aevo{que} sequenti, Cum canibus timidi vement ad pocula damae. The society wherein the wicked are is corrupted, defiled, and leavened, (not to justle with the Hypothesis, as that they are wicked whom they keep off, which themselves will not speak of many of them; but say onely they are in∣conformable to their Disciplinarian Tryal; nor to tell them that the Apostle in the place they respect, by Leaven, understands quod est lethale & contagiosum, non est fermentum Apostolo quod potest tolerari) we acknowledge that evill so∣ciety is a Malignant Planet, Camero de Eccles. p. 328. when it is auctus lumine, and sheweth it self formal∣ly as evil; but why it should especially shed its influence at the Sacrament, as if it were their onely Topical, is beyond our Astrology. Such as they commu∣nicate not with in the Lords Supper, to them there is not denyed either os, orare vale, mensa, they hold Fellowship with them in other Ordinances, they refuse not civil commerce with them; and if they entertain them not at their own Tables, yet they deny not (being invited) to eat with them at other Tables, Why then should the Lords Table onely become a snare, or trap or stumbling block to them? They doe not there see them give any evil Example, that Malignant Planet is there minutus lumine, or combustus; and why should not there, the exemplary Devotion of others reflect and infuse some goodness into them, since also bonum est sui diffusivum. And the Aspects of Malignant Pla∣nets are somewhat meliorated, when they are in conjunction with those that are of benigne influence, Ecclesia membra impura in se habet eisdem{que} interdum circumfluit, Ecclesiast. l. 1. c. 4. tom. 1. p. 1938, 1939. saith Junius (who speaks words which quatiúnt{que} summos fuimina montes) quicun{que} ex Ecclesia visibili sunt, iidem revera sunt ex Ecclesia Catho∣lica, eos{que} haberi aequum est in membris Catholicae — imè verò (ut ait Chrysostomus) ob hoc ipsum Deus  ità constituit omnes homines
promiscuè & bonos & malos in unum coalescere; ut & horum vitium resecetur, & illorum virtus reddatur illustrior; and out of Cprian he alleageth, Obesse mali bo∣nis non debent, sed magis mali à bonis adjuvari; and the wise Heathen could say, Bonorum virorum conversatio paulatim in pectus descendit, Caten. aur. in Mat. 13. p. 56. & vim obtinet prae∣ceptorum, & est aliquid quod à magno viro vel tacente proficias. And as Aquinas tels us out of Augustine, that boni dum adhuc infirmi sunt, opus habent in quibusdam ma∣lorum commixtione, sive ut per eos exerceantur, sive ut eorum comparatione magna illis exhortatio fiat, & invitentur ad melius. So also the hope that the Unbelee∣ving Husband might be sanctified by the Beleeving Wife, that is converted, as Augustine, Theodoret, Lira, Carthusian, Hammond, Lapide, &c. Or, the assurance that he was sanctified, that is, not polluted, or defiled; as Chrysostome, Anselme, Paraeus, Calvin, &c. was a stronger motive with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. to keep them together, than the fear of being leavened, or corrupted, or made partaker of his sinnes, was a perswasive to depart from each other. And there is beside more danger of Contagion from them in ordinary Conversation, which is more frequent, and insinuative, and where they are lesse strict and composed, and where the virtual Contact may disperse the Contagion; and therefore to keep at distance there rather, may be a wholesome caution. That of 1 Cor. 5.11. with such a one, no not to eat, I hope to shew in due place, to be meant onely of common and civil eating; and therefore to strengthen and maintain the Nerves of that Argument, à minori ad majus, such as they refuse to com∣municate with at the Lords Supper, they should not participate with at Com∣mon Meales. En rogat ad coenam melior te Classice rectam, Grandia verba, ubi sunt si vir es, ecce nega. The unclean persons under the Law, were not onely suspended from the Passcover, but also proscribed the Tabernacle; yea some of them put out of the Camp, Numb. 5.2. and they collect an argument from that precedent to exclude men from the Sacrament; therefore the force of the same Reason will require that they be propelled out of the Church also; and seeing those who once have swollen into a Wisdome beyond Sobriety, and have strayed beyond measured and fixed Bounds, Unde discedant fortasse faciliùs sen∣tiant, quàm ubi consistant inveniant, these arguments perchance be at length di∣lated and expanded, to inferre not onely a necessity of exiling them from all Fellowship in any Sacred Ordinance, but of interdicting them of all Secular Commerce, and of having any complyance with them in civill usages, and transport some not only to like superstition and stubborness with the Donatists, who would not sit in the Assembly of the Orthodox, because it was said Psal. 25. (as the Vulgar Latine reckoned it) Non sedi consilio impiorum; and who as Optatus told them, would scarce have had Heaven and Earth in common with them: but to like inhumanity and desperatenesse with Mr. Gresnold (whom Mr. Ball mentions,) who of a Separatist turned more than an Anchorite, and would neither commerce, nor speak with, or receive ordinary food or help, from those whom he thought wicked, or not called, and which might pollute him, till he and his Children were starved or perished for want of necessaries. But they have in readiness a Reason, why the Wicked more defile the Sacra∣ment, than the Word, because Gods Word allows a visible mixture at the one, not at the other; but we expected they would have brought forth some Argu∣ments
to have proved, that ex natura rei, a Communion with wicked men (though this he excentrick with our present subject, which is not of men ma∣nifestly wicked, but not evidently godly) had been more influxive and apt to pollute at the Sacrament, than at the Word; but at this Obstupuit retró{que} pedem cum voce repressit; and it seemes onely that the difference resulteth not from the contagion, but the unlawfulness of the one, more than the other; which unlawfulness they say was plainly proved before, but sure, if they made any plain proof, that any which were put from the Sacrament, lest they might else have polluted it, or the partakers thereof, were yet allowed by Gods Word to have publick communion in the Word, without any danger of such pollution, their Book hath met with the Index Expurgatory before it came to us, for there are now no such passages therein legible. The Errours of Novatus, and others, the distinguishing of the Church visible from the invisible, the estate of the Church here, all this they yeeld, and yet can see nothing gained upon them. Resp. A dangerous symptome, for Hippo∣crates tells us, that quibus cerebrum concussum fuerit & doluerit, percussis aut aliter lapsis, statim privantur voce, non vident, non audiunt ac ferè moriuntur, but they will not so easily purge themselves of Donatisme, while they suppose a Communion in Sacraments with evil men, without consent in evil, doth pollute or commaculate; for Cur Ecclesiae non communicat pars Donati? saith Augustine, videlicet ne à peccatoribus polluatur — orbem christianum per communionem sacramentorum maculatum peccatis criminabantur alienis; Contra Cres∣con. l. 3. c. 65. & l. 4. c. 1. &c. 28. but he tells them, Etiamsi vera at{que} peccata sunt, bonorum societatem maculare non possunt, ne{que} enim boni communicant peccatis alienis, quibus uti{que} faciendis non consentiant, quamvis cum ipsis qui ea faciunt, donec areâ dominicâ, sicut palea, ventilabro ultimo se∣parentur, non eorum peccata sed Dei sacramenta communicent. We shall howsoever endeavour that they may not onely recipere totum telum, but also be sensible of the stroke and the wound. First, they grant what the Paper proposed, that to forsake the Assemblies, or to make a separation, because of the mixture of evil men, was the Heresie of Do∣natus, Audius, &c. But what it tacitly assumed, that they were guilty of a like se∣paration upon like grounds, that they think they may be confident to deny. But although perhaps there be not such an exact agreement between them and those Hereticks, as they say there was among the 72. Interpreters, who though in several Cells, yet punctually accorded in the same Translation; yet that there is some conformity in judgment and affection between them, as they write there is among those, between whom there is a Synastry, and who have the same common Stars and influences at their Nativities: if themselves will not see, we hope to make others to discern; for first, they separate from those which by no judicial process are separated from them, so did those Hereticks. 2. Their separation is carried on by the same motives, for they confess that divers of their members have forsaken Communion with their proper Congregations, Centur. Magd. cent. 4. c. 5. p. 208. L. de unic. bapt. c. 14. S. 9. be∣cause they were offended with the grossness of the Administrations at home, where no separation was made, just as Theodoret tells of the Audians, Recederé{que} à communione Ecclesiastica dicebant quòd in illa ferrentur faeneratores & impuri; and right as Augustine, and others (elsewhere alleaged) shew us of the Donatists, that they separated from other constituted Churches, because of the mixture of
godly and wicked persons in one Communion, and because some whom they thought of right ought to have been so, were not in Fact excommunicated. 3. That Reason the Apologists have back'd with a second, adding, that the commixture of the Wicked with the Godly, defileth and polluteth; and there∣fore they refuse Communion with them in the Sacrament. And these were the very Dictates and Arguings of the Novatians and Donatists, Centur. Magd. cent. 3. c. 3. p. 71. ubi supra. as Cyprian and Au∣gustine inform us, In communione sacramentorum mali maculant bonos, &c. so as plainly the lives of the one and other are paralels, though in a different Meri∣dian. If to excuse themselves from symbolizing with those Hereticks, they shall alleage that they doe not suppose the Church either should, or can, be constituted of such as are free from all sinne, but such as are cleer of Crimes, not who are really, but onely who are visibly worthy: We shall re-minde them, that those Heresiarchs were pure from so gross an errour, as to think there were no Hypocrites in the Church, or that all of their Societies were pure without mixture, or perfect without defect; neither did they pretend to have read the Book of Life, to know who were Elect, nor presume to know the hearts, (Gods peculiar) and to discern who were Hypocrites; but they would admit of com∣munion with none whom they could distrust to be culpable in any sinne; or that had not a visible worthiness (as the Apologists would qualifie their mem∣bers) they would not communicate with those they judged to be impure, as is mentioned of the Audians, though they were not yet cast out, nor thought fit to be so. —Mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur. — Secondly, If to vindicate themselves they shall suggest, that they admit such to Church-fellowship in other Ordinances, and only deny it in the holy Supper (besides that some men may build higher upon the like Foundation, and runne farther in the same way) we must remember them, that it hath been elsewhere shewed, that the Fathers have described Ecclesiastical Communion by Society in Sacraments, and have asserted evil men with the good, Sociari, cohaerere, fra∣tres esse, misceri, in and by a Communion of Sacraments; and St. Cont. Ep. Par∣men. l. 3. c. 2. tom. 7. p. 12, & 13. Augustine tells us, that Cyprian & alia frumenta Dominica, quòd in illa tunc unitatis Ecclesia cum avaris & rapacibus, cum his qui regnum Dei non possidebant — panem Domini manducabant & calicem Domini bibebant, (which frustrates any interposition that this Communion of Sacraments was onely in the one Sacrament, and not in the other,) and that they were together not onely unam cum iis intrantes Ec∣clesiam, but also in una Congregatione paria tractantes sacramenta; for quia non po∣terant ab iis corporaliter separari, ne similiter eradicarent & triticum, sufficiebat iis à talibus corde seungi, vitâ moribus{que} distingui, propter compensationem cu∣stodiendae pacis & unitatis, propter salutem infirmorum & tanquam lactentium fru∣mentorum, ne membra corporis Christi per sacrilega schismata laniarent; and as it is not Ecclesiastical Communion, but Schisme, rather in the judgment of Mr. Ball, to use the one Ordinance, and not the other; Cited before. and they are not to be rec∣koned of the body of Christ, which are unworthy to eat the Body Christ in the Sentence of Chamier; so Casaubon tells us farther, Exercit. 6. S. 52. p. 145. Eos 'qui ad Christianismum adspirarent, priusquam sacramentorum facti essent participes, ne{que} esse, ne{que} dici posse, Christianos, ne{que} ad Ecclesiam pertinere, — aditum, — per
baptismum, sed ne{que} satis hanc semel esse ingressum sed — oportere & con∣jungi Christo — per sacramentalem ejus manducationem. L. de Pastorib. c. 13. p. 221. tom. 9. They were not by Antiquity held or named Fideles, that did not partake of the Eucharist, the Ce∣lebration whereof was therefore called Missa fidelium? Quaeris, saith Augustine, nè fortè Catechumenus irruat sacramentis? Respondet, fidelis, which implyes, that every of the faithful (which was a member contradistinguish'd from the Catechumens) and onely those that had the name of Faithful, used to com∣municate; neither were they esteemed Brethren that were not partakers of the Sacrament; L. 1. obs. 19. p. 141. for so Albaspinus tells us, that the Penitents and Catechumens were not called Brethren by the Faithful; so as the denomination being ta∣ken à fortiori, it cannot be absolutely called Church-fellowship, that is with∣out Communion of Sacraments, which is implyed and tacitly assented unto even by themselves, who call those onely the Church, whom they admit to the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. Thirdly, if to defend themselves, they shall interpose that they separate not from the Catholique Church, but from corrupt Congregations, I shall admo∣nish them, that seeing the publick Worship is not sinful; but it is onely preten∣ded that sinners are admitted to a Communion therein, and those that are pure may joyn in that Worship, without concurring in any sinne, save that which they suppose is contracted only by a Communion with such men, though not in evil (but rather in that which in it self is good) and formally as it is a Communion onely with those that are evil; That to separate on this account, was both the root and pith of the Schisme of the Donatists, who did not own any separation from the Catholique Church, but impropriated that Church to themselves, and held Communion with many Churches of their Model, but se∣parated from others, and therefore might have put in the same Plea with this; but seeing those Churches from which the Apologists separate, are Members of the Catholique Church (as till they be cut off juridicè aut jure they are so) and in this consideration, Eadem est ratio partium & totius, and all Members are conjoyned to the Body; See more of this therefore if they separate from any such particular members, they divide from the body of the Catholique Church, as I have before proved by the authority of Junius, that it is schismatical, so to be torn off ab hac illáve Ecclesia, i.e. membro particularis corporis ex infirmitate particulari. Next, that they remove the antient Land-mark of that distinction between the Church of the Called, and that of the Elect, may be discerned by any that passeth by their way. There are many externally called, who are onely rela∣tive and notional Saints; Saints in the judgment of Charity, because they have given their names to Christ, entred into an outward Covenant with God, and doe make profession of their Faith, but such as are effectually called, and are united to Christ in virtue, as well as profession; and in whom the Spirit of Christ is operative by influence of grace and salvation, such onely are Elect Saints, real Saints in verity. Now if they will admit none to an entire Church-fellowship (which is not, as was said, without Communion of Sacraments, others that communicate not, being not owned by themselves to be of the Church) save such as give demonstrative signes that they are elected, doe they not
(quantum ad hominem, though it be impossible quoad rem) contract the Church of the Called, and make it no more extensive than that of the Elect, and turn those many that are called, into a few that are chosen: sure I think this cannot but be visible to any, unless to one Cui lumen ademptum. And by this meanes also there may be multi hirci intus, multae oves foras. Hom. Deonibus tom. 9. p. 224. Since as Augustine meekly, scit praedestinatione & praescientiâ oves, & hircos, ille solus, qui praedestinare potuit, qui praescire — si autem multas oves foras er∣rare plangimus, vae quorum humeris & lateribus & cornibus factum est, non enim haec facerent nisi fortes oves; quae sunt fortes? de suis viribus praesumentes; quae sunt fortes? de sua justitia gloriantes — humeris audaces ad impellendum, quia non portant sacrinam Dei, latera mala, conspirantes amici, societas pertinaciae, cor∣nua erecta, elata superbia, — mitte foras quod non emisti, certe ipsa tota causa est, quia tu justus, & alii injusti, & indignum erat ut justus esset cum injustis, indignum scilicet ut frumenta essent inter zizania, indignum ut oves inter hircos pascerentur, donec Pastor veniret, qui in separando non errat; ita tu angelus eradicans zizania, non te agnoscerem angelum zizania eradicantem, nec si jam mes∣sis venisset, ante messem non tu sed quisquis fuerit, non est verus, qui designavit mes∣sem, designavit & tempus — angeli tibi nomen potes impoere, tempus messis non potes breviare, ita falsum dicis qui sis, quia nondum venit quando sis — noli velle zizania eradicare, quando tempus non est, sed tu ipse intrò redi cum tem∣pus est,— cornua sunt ista ventilantis, non mansuetudo pascentis — non expectas finem, nesciens quando tibi sit finis, unde hoc? nisi quia & ipsos tan∣quam hircos accusasti, falsò accusasti, nam si verè accusasses, non te separasses, tua separatio illorum est purgatio. Lastly, for the state of the Church, Exponere simi∣litudinem istam ne conati qui∣dem sunt — illam similitu∣dinem — omnino attin∣gere nolucrant— Brevic. collat. cum Donatist. tom. 7. p. 117. Cont. Donat. post. collat. c. 7. p. 122. tom. 7. which is a floor where chaff is heap'd with Wheat, a Field where Tares grow intermix'd with Wheat, a Net where bad Fish is involved with good, &c. most of those similitudes Quibus Dominus suorum ser∣vorum tolerantiam confirmavit (as Augustine) they, like the Donatists of old, (whose Copy it seems they have chosen to write after) will take no notice of, as any way concerning them; but I doubt it is onely nihil ad nos, because supra nos; and they doe not answer it, because they cannot, durum, sed levius fit patien∣tiâ quicquid corrigere est nesas; for seeing Ecclesiasticall Communion is de∣scribed by a Society in the Sacraments, and therein principally is constituted; and if there shall be a commixtion of evil men with good, not onely in the Congregation, but also in Una Congregatione paria Sacramenta tractantes, as was even now alleaged out of Augustine; and not onely in the Word, but as idem verbum Dei simul audiunt, so also simul Dei sacramenta percipiunt: then whatever they suggest to the contrary, thus much is gained hereby, (which will be on their part the loss of the question.) First, that none ought to be so offended with the grossness of their Admini∣strations at home where no separation is made; as thereupon to remove, or de∣sert to have a Communion of Sacraments with such Congregations, August. de verb. Dom. in Evang. Matth. Serm. 18. tom. 10. p. 18. and sepa∣rating from them, to gather themselves into another Church, (which yet they confess to be the case of divers of them) the Corn lay fast in the same Floor with the Chaff; and that onely was volatile, Non vos seducant perversi, paleae nimis leves avolant ante adventum ventilatoris ex area; and therefore he dire∣cteth elsewhere, ex eo ubies, disce quid es, and consequently adviseth, nemo ante
tempus ventilationis deserat aream, In Psal. 25. tom. 8. p. 26. Brevicul. col∣lat. cum Donat. 3. die. tom. 7. p. 117. Cont. Donat. post collat. c. 6. tom. 7. p. 122. In Psal. 149. tom. 8. p. 360. quasi dum non vult pati peccatores, nè praeter aream inventus, priùs ab avibus colligatur, quàm ingrediatur in horreum, the good Fishes break not the Net to get out from the bad, Commixtos bonis malos intra retia suorum sacramentorum; And this commixture will continue while we are in the Sea of this World, intra eadem retia, donec ad littus perveniant, pariter di∣vina sacramenta percipiunt, then shall the separation be, when the Nets shall be without hazard of breach of Schisme; the Wheat growes still in the middest of the Tares, so the Vulgar reads it, (Nunquam in parte triticum, in parte zizana, per totum triticum, per totum zizania, saith Augustine; and again, Unius commu∣nionis sunt —& communione Sacramentorum participandorum cohaerent, as is elsewhere alleaged) and this Wheat transferres not it self into another field, and that field where both grow together, is the Church, as the Catho∣liques asserted in their Disputation with the Donatists; for the Commons of the World will bear no Wheat, Quaest. in Mat. tom. 4. p. 78. q. 11. C. 28. tom. 1. p. 11. that growes onely in the Inclosure of the Church, extra exclesiam soli sunt mali; and the Angels shall gather out of his Kingdome all Scandals, and them which doe iniquity; therefore they were in that Kingdome, which is the Church, as Augustine acknowledgeth in his Retra∣ctations; and though our Saviour interpret the Field to be the World, it was (saith Calvin) onely by a Synecdoche, transferring that to the whole, which agreed onely to a part, and especially Quoniam passim aratrum suum ducturus erat per omnes mundi plagas, ut sibi agros excoleret in toto mundo: and because, saith Estius, Ante jactum bonum semen non potest intelligi Ecclesia, quae constat ex fructu seminis, Annot. in Mat. 13. i.e. tritico, propterea dicitur semen jactum in agrum, id est, mundum, non in Ecclesiam ex semine construendam; and therefore out of those Premises it was, that St. Augustine concluded, (as is formerly rehearsed) Cùm ergo sive per negligentiam praepositorum, De fide & operib. c. 105. tom. 4. p. 13. sive per aliquam excusabilem necessitatem, sive per oc∣cultas obreptiones invenimus in Ecclesia malos, quos Ecclesiasticâ Disciplinâ corri∣gere aut coercere non possumus, tunc non ascendat in cor nostrum impia & per∣niciosa praesumptio, quâ existimemus nos ab his esse separandos, ut peccati eorum non inquinemur, atque ità post nos trahere conemur, veluti mundos sanctós{que} disci∣pulos ab unitatis compage, quasi à malorum consortio segregatos; and as the mo∣tive hereunto, he addes, Veniant in mentem illae de Scripturis similitudins &c. Secondly, De fide & operib. c. 105. tom. 4. p. 13. it is consequent from hence that the mixt communion in Sacra∣ments of the evil with the good, doth neither (as they suggest) defile the Sa∣craments, nor corrupt or commaculate the Assemblies, nihil bonis in unitate & participatione Sacramentorum qui eorum factis non consenserint obfuturos, as Au∣gustine infers, they were still good nets and good fishes though evil fish was included in them; it was the Lords floor, and it was corn though compiled with chaff; it was wheat though interserted with tares, and it was to be gather∣ed at last into the barn, Quibus parabolis & figuris Ecclesia praenunciata est us{que} in finem seculi, bonos & malos simul habitura, ità ut nec mali bonis obesse possint, cum vel ignorantur, vel pro pace & tranquillitate Ecclesiae tolerantur,—si eos prodi, aut accusari non oportuerit, aut aliis bonis non potuerit demonstrari—non ita{que} polluunt mali bonos in eodem agro, in eadem area, in iisdem pascuis, in iisdem retibus constituti, quia non iis communicant boni, sed altari & Sacramentis Dei,
as it follows afterward, Custodit Dus innocentiam sanctorum & fidelium suorum, Coatra, Donat. post Coll. c. 4.5.10. p. 12, 21 23, 124. tom. 7. sicut piscium bonorum, sicut pinguium frumentorum, ut intra ista retia non iis no∣ceant permixta genera reprobanda, & in ista area non iis nocent permixta palea ventilanda, — quia nec causa causae, nec personae poterit praejudicare persona—non corporalis sed spiritualis contactus, qui sit per con∣sensionem, ipse polluit homines quorum causam unam facit ipsa consensio. 3. Although nec emendationis vigilantia quiescat, nor those acts of disci∣pline be laid asleep which may be exercised salvâ unitatis pace— sicut enim & disciplina servat patientiam, & patientia temperat disciplinam, & utrum∣que refertur ad Charitatem, ne forte aut indisciplinata patientia foveat iniquita∣tem, aut impatiens disciplina dissipet unitatem, and therefore that Sinite utraque simul crescere us{que} ad messem, is no supersedeas for any particular man, whose crime is known to all, and appears execrable to all, as Augustine speaks, Cont. ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. Annot. In Matth. 13. but that such rank overgrown and notorious tares, may in due manner be weeded out, Excessus peccatorum justâ severitate plectantur (as Estius,) aswel by the Ecclesiastick as Civil powers, when metus iste non subest of rooting up the wheat, and where per culum schismatis nullum est — sed omnino de frumentorum crta stabilitate certa securitas manet, In Matth. 13. yet it is a prohibition for the generality of wicked men, saith Deodate, prohiberi extirpationem malorum omnium in genere, saith Jansnius, restraining either power, ut semel et simul omnes malos sepa∣ret, saith Estius, many whereof are not so perverse, but their salvation may be hoped, and many belonging to Gods Election are to be converted in due time, neither is it possible or expedient, corporally to separate all evil men from the good, all endeavors in order to such forestalling the Angels work by a perfect separation and taking away all scandals, will be frustrate in the success, and superstitious and unwarrantable in the undertaking, In reformatione Ec∣clesiae nimiam  sectantes plus nocent quàm profint Ecclesiae, In locum. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 2. tom. 1. p. 1967. saith Paraeus, quòd si per severitatem censurae Ecclesiasticae periculum superventurum Ec∣clesiae videatur, presbyterium patienter ferto, quod cum pace Ecclesiae nequit corrigere, ne cum Zzaniis triticum extirpetur, adds Junius, Colli∣gere volens Zizania simul cum iis eradicet triticum, et nec sic quidem quod volet efficiet, ut Zizania à tritico separet, sed magìs triticum, id est, Contra ep. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. Tom. 7. p. 13. De verb. Dom. in Evang. scrm. in Matth. Serm. 18. tom. 10. p. 19. seipsum & alios in Zizania perverso separationis studio convertet, as Estius infers, agreeably to what Augustine long before had taught, non per diligentiam segetem dominicam pur∣gant, sed per temeritatem potiùs inter purgamenta numerentur, and therefore cum ipse dixit, Sinite utraque crescere, cum ipse dixit messores angeli, ipse cujus est ager, qui sevit bonum semen, — non te permittet Dominus interpretari quod vis, ipse qui exponit hanc parabolam claudit os tuum, os sacrilegum, os impium, os profanum, os tibi contrarium, qui contradicis testatori, etiam te ad haereditatem vo∣canti; quomodo claudit os tuum? dicendo, Sinite utra{que} crescere us{que} ad messem; and elsewhere, ipse nondum separat, tu vis separare, ipse mixta tolerat qui semina∣vit, — servi si vel in ipsis zizaniis evellendis aliquid suâ sponte facerent, ipsi zizaniis annumerentur—tolera, ad hoc enim natus es, De ovibus tom, 9. p. 223. tolera quia fortè toleratus es, si semper bonus fuisti, habeto misericordiam, si aliquando malus fuisti, noli perdere memoriam — si ego, qui semper rectè judico & qui falli non pos∣sum, differo judicium meum, tu ignorans, quemadmodum judicandus sis, audes tam praeproperè judicare — modò ergo tempus separationis non est, sed tolerationis.
And consentiently with all those, Annot. in Mat. 13.14. judicious Grotius, Quanquam verò certissi∣mum est hoc Christi dicto, non magistratibus publica judicia adimi, quae malos formi∣dine poenae coerceant, ne{que} Ecclesiae jus segregandi à suis coetibus eos qui Doctrinam adulterant, aut vitae turpitudine maculant Christianum nomen, tamen quia levitas & patientia divina aliquâ saltem ratione omnibus hominibus, at{que} inter cateros, etiam Magistratibus & Ecclesiae praepositis imitanda proponitur, minime dubitandum — quoties magnus erat peccatorum numerus at{que} inter eos, ut fit, multi excusabiliter prolapsi, remissum aliquid de rigore Disciplinae multis exemplis probari possit. Clearly therefore, while they unchurch the generality of their People, su∣spend them (and as they say, in effect, because they suspect their lives) from the Lords Table; any so by denying them to eat of his Bread, imply them to be none of his Family, and hold them unworthy of a Communion of Sacra∣ments, which is the Bond and Knot of Church-Fellowship, since they raise such tempestuous Windes and Storms, as blow away the whole heap at once, Chaff and Corn together, and so fall under Augustine's Censure, Tuo vento pes∣simè ventilaberis, and will not suffer their Net (that hath too narrow a Mash) to gather out of every kinde, Ubi supra de evibus. good and evil, saith Deodate, Tam ex putridis quàm ex bonis piscibus, as Piscator, but will be gathering Churches onely of appro∣ved Saints, and out of an unwarrantable zeal (stomachati adversus zizania) to gather up the Tares, have rooted up all the Wheat, save five or six Blades in their large Fields, where were used to grow so many Hundreds: indubita∣bly therefore this practice of theirs, is so diametrally opposite to those Para∣bles in the scope and formal part of them, which is unquestionably argumen∣tative, Estius. (of all which I may say as a learned man hath said of one of them, Videtur haec Parabola dirigi contra futuros haereticos, qui tantae essent superbiae ut nullorum malorum communionem, in Ecclesia admitterent, dicerent{que} solos bonos esse in Ecclesia, & si qui mali in eam irrepsissent, continuò ojiciendos esse, ut Do∣natistae & alii similes) and doth so sensibly clash with those Rules and Con∣sectaries, which Augustine hath extracted from them; who as it is said of Aristo∣menes, that he being judged by the Oracle to be the best man of Greece, was the best man of the World; so he being Praecentor Chori, and Prolocutor of the Church in their Contests with the Donatists, was as congruous and as compe∣tent an Interpreter, as any whatsoever, of the sense of these Scriptures, so much agitated and disserted among them, (and therefore I have chosen to speak so much from his mouth) Os d'gnum aeterno tinctum quod fulgeat auro,) that for the Apologists to face it out, that nothing is hereby gained upon them, is but a peece of craft taken up of such Merchants, who being like to break in their Credits, dissemble their losses.
That of the Net they touch not with, lest they be taken with it; the heap, they leap over, being not to be removed out of the way, but that of the Tares they think to tread down or pul up, and tell us, That Tares signifie not prophane men but hypo∣crites, such as come so near Christians as they cannot distinguish them, De plantis sa∣cris, c. 46. Cum fructum fecisset, id est, cum Ecclesia ministri malos bonis admixtos esse ex pravic eorum actioni∣bus deprehon-dissent. Mnc. annot. in loc: Brevical. Col∣lat. 3. die tom. 7. p. 118. Offendicula tam in doctri∣na tum in mo∣ribus. Beza. Quos vocat scandala & qui qui faciunt ni∣quitatem quia nempe sua im∣pia vita & do∣ctrina sunt & sibi & aliis scandalo. (i.) Offendi∣diculo & rui∣nae ex hac expo∣sitione quae est est Christi pa∣tet non hic agi de solis hereti∣cis — agitur in genere de omnibus pecca∣toribus. Tirin. Serm. 233. de temp. &c. tom. 10. p. 229. which are like the wheat in growing up, but scandalous men are not like believers. It is not clear what kind of weed Zizania is, some say the word is originally Arabick, others Syriack, and indeed the Greek Etymologists are not very happy in the derivation, many tell us, it is the same with infoelix Lolium, Cockle or Darnel,, and because some of the Fathers thought those Tares to be Hereticks, some would fain fetch from hence the origin of that name Lollards, whereby the Papists called such as opposed their er∣rors, superstitions and usurpations. Diodate thinks it was a kind of hurtfull plant which spoiled the corn in Palestine, and was great and grew in branches, and is unkown in these dayes. Lemnius, he sacred Herbalist tells us, Ziz aniorum nomine designatur omnis inutilis, vitiosa, noxia fruticatio, uae sementi & frugum incremento offi∣cis, and correspondently Castalion translates it, malas herbas. It is not like then that it was like wheat, but if we should allow it to have been so in the growing up, yet we must remind them, that it was after the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, and appeared to be Tares, and they were discerned plainly to be such by the servants who would have pulled them up; that after this it was said by the Housholder, Let both grow together, &c. had they at first stood there under the pro∣tection of hypocrisie, yet now that mask was fallen off, and that varnish lost, Nec latere sed cerni, saith Augustine out of Cyprian. It shall be superfluous to shew that Hierom, Augustine (though sometime they think hereticks set forth under the umbrage of Tares) some other Fathers, and the generality of modern Interpreters understand those Tares to be Emblems of wicked and scandalous men, Ad zizania reseruntur omnia scandala, saith Hierom, scandala tum doctrinae tum vitae, as Piscator agreeing in sense with Beza, the children of the wicked one, that is, Hereticks, Schismaticks, Hypocrites, wicked and profane men living in the Church, as the late Annotations out of Theophylact, Euthymius, Augustine: when beyond all those we have better testimony from the Word and Truth, Christ himselfe interpreting this parable, who expoundeth the Tares to be the children of the wicked one, and them which doe iniquity, which is too com∣prehensive to be restrained onely to hypocrites, and seeing that which the Angell-reapers shall gather at the last great harvest, is the same that the servants discerned to be tares, and would precipitously have pluckt up; that being expressly said to be scan∣dals in the originall, and the same word is retained by the vulgar and Tremelius, and Offendicula, whereby others render it, is the same in sense, though not in sound, those Tares must be concluded to be scandals, and though they come near Christians bearing the name, and owning the profession, and therein indeed like believers, yet they may be distinguished from sincere Christians, otherwise they could not be scandals, and though they may be denominated hypocrites in a large and generall notion, because their actions give the lye unto their profession, In Ec∣clesia Christi ficte intrantes, promittentes & non facientes, voventes & non reddentes, renunciantes malo & iterum idem facientes, as Augustine, yet the falsity of that pro∣fession, and the difference thereof from their actions, was as discernable as the Tares from the Wheat. But it seemes the Apologists will allow none to be in the Church save such onely who appeare to be godly, and will cast out all whom they dscern not to be sin∣cere,
he that had imbibed the Philosophy of Pythagoras, would suspect the souls of the Donatists had made a transmigration into their bodies, for had they with Ae∣thalides been dispenc'd with for drinking of Lethe, they might have said with Pythageras (remembring when he was first Aethalides, and after Eu∣phorbus) Cognovi clypeum lvae gestamina nostrae, and have owned the Shield of this answer for the same with that of the Do∣natists, Contra Donat. post Collat. c. 8 p. 123. tom. 7. or very like it, who being prest by the Catholicks with arguments drawn from those similitudes, chose to answer to that of the net gathering of every kind; malos in Ecclesia usque in finem seculi permixtos esse confessi sunt, sed occultos cos esse dixe∣runt, quoniam sic à sacerdotibus ignorantur, quemadmodum pisces intra retia, cum adhuc in mari sunt à piscatoribus non videntur, to whom Augustine the then speaker of the Lords house (his Church) replies, C. 10. Propterea ergo & arcae comparata ost, ut etiam manifesti malicum bonis in ea pronunciarentur futuri, neque enim palea quae in area est permixta frumentis, etiam ipsa sub fluctibus latet, quae sic omnium oculis est conspicua, ut potiùs occulta sint in ea frumenta cum sit ipsa manifesta. As also in that Conference where were 306 orthodox Bishops, Brevical. Col. lat. 3. die. tom. 7 p. 118. Quamvis de∣beat vigilare Ecclesiastica disciplina ad eos non solum ver∣bis sed etiam excommunica∣tionibus & de∣gradationibus corripiendos. Contr. Donat. post. Collat. c. 10. and no fewer than 296 of the Donatists, it was asserted that i was not destructive to discipline, nor incompatible with the watchfulnesse therof for correption of evill men, not onely by words, but also by excommunications, although, mali non solum in ea latentes nesciantur, sed plerunque propter pacem unitatis etia neogniti toleremur, and therefore this glosse being in the judgment of the ancient Church so corruptive of the text, Augustine tells them, Quanto melius seipsos corrigant, quam Euangelia sancta pervertunt & ad vanum suae mentis errorem eloquia dominica detorquere conantur. Though the beauty of holiness (which like the Sun gilds those that look toward him though with squint eyes) may give some specious advantages to those Declamations which are made against mixt communions, as spots to that beauty, yet this is ra∣ther paint or colour laid on, than any true beauty, and as they say, the use of the artificiall fucus despoils the native candor, so reall spots are contracted by those as∣sayes to cleanse the imaginary, and by those separations to make the Church more pure, it becomes nimio candore deformis, & propter venustatem invenusta, and the face of the Church more blemished, by being made not onely lean and hollow, and withered, but also defective in many integrall parts, and were they all onely parts superfluous, yet is there more peril in their removall, than their remaining, as Chirurgions tell us, that sometimes the cutting off of a Mole as an alloy to beauty, hath occasioned the cutting off of life. It is a grave censure given by Cal∣vin (that Augustinus redivious) cum sub studio perfectionis imperfectionem nullm tole∣rare possumus in corpore aut in membris Ecclesiae, tunc diabolum nos tumefacere superbia & hypocrisi seducere moneamur. What was the judgement of the ancient Church in this case of mixt communion, may be seen by the verdict of Augustine, who in the Controversies with the Dona∣tists, as well as in the contests with the Pelagians, was the Foreman to say for them, and that judgment as it was never reverst in after Ages by any Writ of Error, so it is as direct to our issue, as can be conceived, for we have heard expressly, that evill men are to be permixt with good in the Church till the great day of judgement, and in one congregation, (in una Congregatione) and not onely in hearing the same word of God, (idem verbum Dei simul audiunt) but also communione sacramentorum (they receive the same sacraments, paria sacramenta tractantes, simul Dei sacramenta
percipiunt,) not onely participating of the one Sacrament of Baptisme, but also of the other of the Supper of the Lord, De verb. apost serm. 23. tom 7. p. 76. Cont. Donat. post coll c. 20 p. 125. tom. 7 quid si communicares cum illo (malo) mensam Domini, and omnes ad unum altare accedebant, and they did eat panem Domini, and drink calicem Domini, and those evil men are not latent, or undetected hypocrites, but known to be evill, etiam cogniti and manifest evil, manifesti mali, and this is as full and as express as can be wished or imagined, so that as the Fathers in a Councill against the Pelagians, formed their Canons out of the very words of Au∣gustine, so we in this controversie need say no more, than he hath said before us & for us, and as he that to avoyd the shot of an enemy, took up his son in his arms and held him there as a shield against his darts, so we close with Augustine, that none can strike us but through his sides. But whereas the paper set forth that the Pastor of Corinth was not reproved for permitting of a mixt communion, and admitting such as did partake unworthily, but they onely were reprehended that came unprepared, the Apologists answer, That he whole Church is blamed for it, Dic quibus in verbis & cris mihi magnus A∣pollo. Why 1 Cor. 4.21. this rod was (they say) for abuses, and their negligence in this might be one. Resp The Canonists call the Glosse upon Gratian comparatively Palca, but sure this glosse is absolutely and purely chaffe, and the offer to catch us with it, implies they overvalue themselves or despise us, as if any thing would take from them or pass with us, secure defacilitate credentis, as Tacitus said of the Orators in Neroes time. We are disputing what was, and they alone tell us what might be: but if onely it might be, then also it might not be, and so Suillus his si ita est ibis, is no better than Trochilus his, si non est redeo, for fear one fallacy might not be a snare strong enough to hold us, they have twisted a twofold cord, that it might less easily be broken, here is first an argument a genere ad speciem affi∣mative, things are eprehended, go. this thing. 2. petitio principii, abuses are in∣crepated, but this is an abuse, go. We argue this was not reproved, therefore it ap∣pears not to be an abuse, they conclude this is an abuse and therefore it was bla∣med. A text in this fashion glossed, will prove like a Delphick sword to serve for any occasion, a common place, or general repertory, from whence to fetch an argu∣ment to confute or condemn any thing, it is but to say, it is an abuse, and there∣fore might be in this or that place reprehended. Even such a catholicon & panacea, and common retreat do the Papists make of their traditions, for they say what∣soever the Church believes or practiseth, and is not contained in Scriptures, must be presumed to have been derived from and confirmed by tradition, and so also this rod will serve the Apologists to whip any thing, and such arguments may not onely become rods, but axes too, both the ensignes and the instruments of their power to cut off whomsoever, for whatsoever they shall call abuses, but the rod which the Apostle here shakes over them, (in the judgment of A Lapide) threatens them for their elation and vain confidence, which he taxeth them for in the foregoing verses of this chapter, or rather properly respecteth the execrable crime of incest, and their conniving thereat, which he increpates in the consequent chapter, as is the consonancy of most Interpreters, that they might see there was just cause of so se∣vere a menacing, and that they were such, as merited to feel the rod, In locum. rather then to be handled with lenity, he now laies to their charge this notorious and detestable offence, saith Hierom, Aquinas, Calvin, Paraeus, Piscator, Cajetan, Estius, &c. Cont. Ep. Par. men. l. 3. c. 1. and Augustine seeme also of the same judgment, and therefore (as Calvin and
Piscator admonish) that this last verse of the fourth, ought aptly to have been the first of the fifth chapter, so Estius tells us, that the Greek Scholia's do so dis∣pose and institute it. But I believe scarce credet Judaeus Apella, that the Apostle should here in a general reproof, tax them for a fault which he particularly menti∣ons not until seven chapters after, or that he should blame them for it here, where the matter was not mentioned, and when they could not understand what it was which he meant, and yet cast no censure upon it, where he specially recites it, and when they might have known what it was that he censured; or that he should incre∣pate abuses, and yet not tell them in any the lest word expressly, or involvedly that this was one of them; or that though Paul is said to have been seen infusing into Chrysostom when he preacht, yet neither he, nor any other understood this to be the Apostles sense in this place, till the Apologists found it by I know not what in∣spiration, surely these painted grapes are so badly coloured that we cannot be so farre tempted as to pick at them. To that which was offered from the parable, that the servants were not checked for bringing in one without a wedding garment to the nuptial feast, but onely him∣self was cast out: They oppose, First, That this is a parable and proves nothing but onely in the scope of it, Resp. Dicimus inficias, De civit. dei. l. 16. c 2. tom. 5. p. 192. In parabolis multa dicuntur non ad signifi∣candam, sed ad implendam nar∣rationem, non quasi parabolae partes sed qua∣si emblemmata & ornamenta, non quod uni∣cui{que} parti sua apodosis sit red∣denda, sed quod cum illis adjun∣ctis ita apud bomines sieri solet. Menochi∣us in Matt. 13.26. sed vox ea sola reperta est. We may say of raising arguments from parables, as Tacitus doth of a kind of Ma∣thematicians, In civitate nostra & vetabitur semper & retincbitur, but for my part I am sufficiently conscius, that as in pictures, so in parables (which are pictures for the ears, & picturae sonantes) the designe and scope, which is the formal part, is onely to be observed, the parerga and accessories (though without them the o∣ther could not well be set forth) yet signifie nothing: what Augustine elegantly writes, of the types & prophetical histories of the old Testament, is as applicable to parables, Non saue omnia quae gesta narrantur, aliquid etiam significare putanda sunt, sed propter illa quae aliquid significant attexuntur, solo enim vomere terra proscinditur, sed ut hoc ficripossit, etiam ctera aratri membra sunt necessaria, & soli nervi in citharis atque hujusmodi vasis musicis aptantur ad cantum, sed ut aptari possint insunt & caete∣ra in compaginibus organorum, quae non percutiuntur a canentibus, sed ea quae percussa re∣sonant his connectuntur, ita in prophetia historia dicuntur & aliqua quae nihil signifi∣cant, sed quibus adhaercant, quae significant, & quomodo religentur. I shall therefore take my aim onely to the scope of the parable lest I misse my mark. Secondly, They make a great question whether this is to be understood of the preaching of the Gospel or the Supper of Grace at large in the Word taught, not in this Ordinance. Resp. Promissa est nobis recta, at data sportula, to tell us li∣berally of a Supper of Grace at large, and then to straiten and contract it to one dish as it were, viz. the Word taught, is such another kind of contradiction in the adject, (save that it differs in the transposition) as we deride the Papists for about their Roman Catholick, an universal particular; a totum pars. But that the Sacraments are part of the entertainment at this supper, though their calling that proposition into doubt (yet without pretence of any reason) might make it a problem, Dona piorum ctui destinata significantur. Grotius annot. in Matt. 13.41 yet it is past a question, and is become a conclusion in the consentient judgment of Interpreters, who thus give us the bill of fare (if I may so speak) at this Supper, nuptiae sunt desponsatio & copulatio Ecclesiae cum Christo, aeterno quidem consilio electionis praeordinata, in tempore autem ministerio verbi & sacramentorum ma∣nisestata,
in the words of Paraeus, Corporis cibo animi significat alimenta, Nuptiale con∣viviumest men∣sa doctrinae E∣vangelicae, sa∣cramentorum (praesertim eu∣charistiae) & omnis generis gratiarum in∣quit Origen. Autor imper∣fecti &c. & Euthymius, a∣pud Tirinum Annot, in lo∣cum. Serm. 2. de verb. apost Cen∣tur. Mag. Cent. 5. c. 4. p. 215. Chrysostom E∣pist. ad Ephes. homil. 3. tom. 4. p. 356. Bonos & ma∣los sine discri∣mine, Sa An∣not. in locum. Cont. Donat. post coll. c. 20. p 124. De fide & o∣perib. c. 17. tom. 4. p. 16. quae Deus nobis praebet, videlicet Evangelicam doctrinam, sacramenta caelestes{que} divitias, saith Barradius, and if they will have it from the mouths of their witnesses, nuptiale con∣vivium quo Deus in hac vita mentes fidelium pascit; jucunda & salutaris doctrinae Evan∣gelicae praedicatione & variis sacramentorum &. spiritualium charismatum serculis, adds Jansenius, and without contradiction whatsoever the Church of Christ is here nou∣rished or conforted with, in order to a conjunction with him, is part of this feast, and therefore though we should consent with them, that the Sacrament did not in∣generate, but onely nourish faith, yet without all question, they are some of the provision served up at this Supper: Boda thinketh that the Eucharist is allegorically set forth by the vitulus saginatus, that was prepared for this feast, and Augustine by way of excellency (as it were caput coenae or coena coenae, as Athens was called the Greece of Greece) or perhaps by appropriation (because that is most proper and sutable to a Supper which is per modum gustus & nutrimenti, as there is an Asia propria in Asia) saith nuptiale convivium (i.) altare domini, and so also Chry∣sostom applies it, mensa regia apparata est tii — accumbe mensae & esto parti∣ceps dominici corporis. Thirdly, They do not find that the servants brought in that man, for then they might have been questioned too, Resp. This seems to me an implicite concession, that this part of the parable is then argumentative, and therefore of the scope, and since if they think it reason to argue, that the servants brought not in the undeckt man, for then they might have been questioned for being therein culpable, I sup∣pose we may raise a more rational argument, that if they did bring him in, and were not blamed for it, that in so doing they were not faulty, though whether they brought him in or not, will not lay any turning waight in the scales, for the beam will be swayed as much by their not casting out, as by their bringing him in, yet it very manifest that he was brought in by the servants, who being sent out, gathered together as many as they found both good and bad, (and we meet with none of the bad but this one) where though pauciores boni in convivio dominico viount, yet one is mentioned because in illo uno grande corpus figurabatur omnium malorum ante do∣mini judicium convivio dominico permixtorum saith Augustine, and though they were bad yet if a mortuis operibus poeni entiam non recusant, they are to be admitted to the Supper, onely qui recusant & non intrare cupientes repellantur, as Augustine; and so if this man should have been such an one (as the spirit of the Donatists hath in∣spired them to think) as ab invitatoribus videri non poterat — & in turba latenter irrepisse ignaris, (howsoever Augustine be of contrary judgement, saying, ne{que} enim & ipse sicut piscis sub fluctibus erat, & sic ab invitatoribus, quomodo piscis a pisca∣toribus, videri non poterat,) yet it is farther hereby evident, that other bad ones were gathered by the servants, who had no power of discrimination, nor of ga∣thering Churches consisting onely of good, and upon their gathering of good and bad, the wedding was furnished with guests, (such guests as they had gathered) and then comes the King, and takes notice of this man, not they that had invited him, saith Augustine, Cont. Donat. post coll. c. 20. In locum, so also the late Annotations. (who therefore implies he was brought in by the servants) sed ipse dominus cujus erat convivium ligari jussit & projici, and he calls him friend, onely because invited to the wedding, (saith Hierom) but who brought the in∣vitation but the servants, he was as it were a friend, by reason of his faith (adds the same Father,) viz. a common or dogmatical faith, for to come to the Feast is so to believe, dicuntur venire ratione fidei & sacramentorum fidei quae suscipiunt, as
Iansenius) and they that came not, being invited, did not come because they be∣lieved not, Rom. 10.14, 15. therefore on the contrary, they that came believed; but now how could he believe, unless those that were sent had invited him by preaching, and if he were called he was brought in by the servants, for themselves make calling and inviting synonomous, but that he was called is apparent, for otherwise it were no apt or rational inference, to conclude from his casting out, that many are called but few are chosen, and we know no ordinary way of bringing into the Church, which is the Pallace where the King makes this feast, Ephes. 4.11, 12. but by his servants whom he gives for this work of the Ministry. They think he said well (whose eccho they are) that parables are like spectacles, they help some men to see, but others see the worse for them. We all see the worse for them in signo, for it argues an imperfect knowledge to see things in aenigmate, as onely dimme eyes need spectacles, so our dull apprehensions introduce a necessity of adumbrating heavenly things by earthly, spiritual by corporal, that what is scarce intelligible in it self, by disproportion of the subject apprehending and the object apprehended, may be perspicuous in another; if any see the worse by occasi∣on of them, it is vitio subjecti, non objecti, aut medii, yet we shall easily yield, that parables are like the infusion of Borage, whereof the first extractions are cordial, but if too much be drawn forth, it is seculent, or like the Pyrhite which may be gently cut and formed, but pressed too hard it burns the fingers; but the Apole∣gists would have us look onely on this parable through their spectacles, and would like Praxiteles break our glasses, because they shew forth their deformity; but weak eyes may without any spectacles discern, that the scope of the parable, which is confessedly argumentative, Maldonat. is the same with that which our discourse aims at: some Interpreters tell us, that the same thing is signified by this parable, which was set forth by those of the tares and the net, the scope whereof we have (we think) e∣vinced, is to manifest that evil men will be, and may be permixt in the Church with good, Ubisupra. in the communion of Sacraments, or permixt (as Augustine) convi∣vio dominico ante domini judicium, by which Feast, that he especially understands the Feast of the Lords Supper, appears by what immediately follows, A quibus se boni interim corde & moribus se separant, simul & manducantes & bibentes corpus & sanguinem domini. And from the servants gathering here good and bad, Gregory collecteth the same Corollary, which Augustine extracteth from the other parables, in hac Ecclesia nec mali sine bonis, nee boni fine malis esse possunt, bonus autem non fuit qui males tolerare recusavit, and as in the parable of the tares, the zeal of the ser∣vants was expresly controuled, Jansenius. that would root up and cast them out, so here their charity is tacitely approved, that brought in the bad. Others find a special aime that this parable hath in some parts thereof, viz. admoneri fideles, ne satis sibi esse putent quod credant, & baptismate abluti sunt, at{que} intra Ecclesiam recepti, iisdem participent sacramentis, eodemque nutriantur doctrinae pabulo, sed opus esse ut vivant vitam sua vocatione dignam, and then it were frustrate to admonish them, not to confide in perception of the Sacraments, unless they were admitted to par∣take of them But whereas they are jealous that if the utmost be made of each branch of the parable, to advance sacramental liberty, not onely admitting but even constraining of the worst, might be inferred, which every one might see to be a sandy foundation. We take not our timber for building from the branches, but the stock or stem, which is the scope, and we suppose the sand is in their eyes, not in our foundation, as some∣times
that is insite in the organ which seems inherent in the object, we think it will stand firm and unshaken if we say, that the worst of those that onely have no wed∣ding-garment, may not onely be admitted but constrained to come, constrained by the power of the word and force of perswasion, as the Shunamite constrained Elias to eat bread, 2 Kings 4 8, and Lydia constrained Paul, Acts 16 15. Alexand. ab Alex. Dier. gen. l. 5. c. 21. and as Hercules Gallicus constrained men to follow him by chains issuing from his mouth, and hitcht in their ears, for their coming may be a means to obtain a wedding garment, as the master of the wedding often conferred vestments on his Guests that were invited, Annot in Mat. 22.10. and he that hath but a common or dead faith may be often ea∣ting at this Feast, improue it to the growth and strength of a speciall and live∣ly faith. They are not invited because good, but are made good upon his invita∣tion? and it was not his coming without the garment that occasioned his condem∣nation, but his continuing devested after he was come, Vocari omnes sine discrimine ad nuptias ju∣bet & mali si∣mul cum bonis veniunt, vecato quidem bonos efficere debet. Hilarius apud Quistor pium. annot. in Mat. 22.14. none brings his robes with him, but they onely are cast out which will not put them on when the Master of the feast holds them out to them. The Apologists if they would rub their eyes from this sand, might see that we put a difference between having no wedding garment, and having a foul nasty garment. We approve the casting out of those few that are notoriously and obstinately wicked, but not the keeping out all that are not mani∣festly gracious. For the honor of the Church, the reformation of offenders, and admonition of others, they have power to throw out the scandalous, but have no warrant to gather Churches of those onely which they shall upon tryall find good, (the servas gathered good and bad) they may cast out those that have garments abominably defiled, not take in none but such as they have tryed to have them ac∣curatly neat and shining, they are judges to take cognizance of the apparent stains and spots, not search to make inspection into the substance of the Cloathes, much lesse of the linings, least of all to reject them because they are not of their fashion. The servants in all probability could not be so blind or incurious, as not to ob∣serve before the King came, that the man had no nuptiall veste, Ʋbi supra. but saith Augu∣stine, Non illi qui invitaverunt (where by the way take notice that he was brought in by invitation) sed ipse Dominus cujus erat convivium ligari jussit & projici, and among modern Commentators he is not onely è grege, sed egregius, that hath given us this observation, Hic qui regis oculis displiuit, satis placuit reliquis convivis, à qui∣bus ejectus prius suisset si perturbatorem se molestum exibuisset, Jansenius. quemadmodum & Eccle∣sia ejiic ante diem judicii manifeste criminosos, aut Ecclesiae pacis perturbatores, reliquos peccatores occultos, aut non ita scandalosos relinquens divino judicio, and from him Diodate runs no great discord (and with both is Piscator symphonous) for whereas it is said, that the servants gathered good and bad, that is (saith he) indifferently worthy and unworthy, as well in regard of their condition, base or honorable, as in regard of their goodnesse or badnesse, to signifie that in the Assembly of those that are called, which is the externall Church, many hypo∣crites and wicked men are gathered together with the good and true be∣lievers. They conceive that the Gospel way of inviting all sensible sinners (to be fure of the sense of which expression we my say as Cajetan in another case, non ingenio sed divi∣natione opus esse) suits the parable well, but no sacramentall liberty can be there infer∣red, the unsealed may be called or invited, but the uncalled may not be sealed. Whe∣ther the administration of the Sacraments be not one track of the Gospel-way, and
those that are sensible of their sins, and would take that way as well for the obtai∣ning of faith, as the strengthening thereof, and remission of those sins by faith, may not have that way free and set open for them to goe in, he whose own reason doth not apprehend and dictate, may perpend whether what we have formerly offe∣red for proof thereof, doe not look like reason: as none else will think the objecti∣on, so neither can we suppose the answer to be among such things, quae decies repe∣tita placebunt, but if the unsealed may be called, if they be not only actively but also passively called and come in, why may they not have the seal of their calling, and being called to believe, partake of the Sacraments, the seals of faith? And though we think it not proper to say that men are sealed but the promises to them, yet like Mercury to battologize with Battus, and use their forms, we are not so foolish to think, whether or no they be so fond to imagine, that any that are uncal∣led should be sealed, for the Sacraments being the proper cognizances of Christia∣nity, are not communicable to any but Christians, and the profession of the faith is as tessera hospitalis, without which none must eat at the Lords table. But if the uncalled may not be sealed, doth it therefore follow that the called may not be sealed? we rather think the contrary to be consequent. It is not onely denoted by the Greek name of the Church , but warranted by the constant Idiom of Scripture, that the Church and the Called are confignificant, Rom. 1.6, 7. and 9.24. 1 Cor. 1.9, 24. and 5.11. and 7.18. Col. 3.15. &c. and therefore though none but of the Church and called, yet all that are of the Church and called may be sealed, but it seems still they will have none but the chosen to be called, and so make the Church of the called to be of no more latitude than that of the elect, which we observed before, though they would take no notice therof, like the Ostrich which when he hides his head and sees no body, supposeth no body sees him. But to speak properly, men are not sealed, but the promises to them, and the Sa∣crament by sensible things and actions assures their faith, that if they believe in the death of Christ, they shall be saved by it, which is to them onely a conditionall sea∣ling also. And then likewise as is their calling, such will their sealing, an externall calling takes onely the outward conditionall seal, an inward hath the internall and absolute seale also. And beside, before any come to the Supper of the Lord, he is not onely called but sealed too, with one of the seals, viz. Baptisme, for that seale hitherto they impresse upon all them and their children, as many as the Lord our God shall call, so that many are sealed that have no inward call, and though upon another account, of other qualifications more requisite to the Eucharist then necessary to Baptisme, all that are baptized do not communicate, but only those who being intelligent, are capable of a Dogmaticall faith, yet formally as the Sacraments are seals, why any one should be susceptible of the one, that is not capable of the other, my ignorance cannot apprehend, and I doubt their learning cannot prompt me. But whereas they say, They like a free Pulpit, but condemn a too free Table; Sadly they and their friends have made their pulpits too free, suffering others to in∣trude there as Ambassadors for Christ who had not his commission, and of their Table have been too parcimonious, and the Stewards have grudged the liberality & abridged the allowance of their Master, In 1 Cor. 11. for oportet communes mensas esse communes (saith Oecumenius) atque illam dominicam imitari quae omnibus aeque prostat, in the former they have been carried away with an epidemicall stream, occasioned by the common shower of folly falling in those times, (where preacher seem to be bred)
as the best Meteorologists tell us, those frogs are, which though some may vainly imagine to be rained down from heaven, yet indeed are generated of the dust of the earth, diluted and levened with a little humor and spirit of the rain that comes from cloudy meteors, and yet crawle about and croke in every corner, when they are not yet perfectly formed, for what ever the inward parts may be of any of them, they are but half made up without an externall calling) but whether in the later (of no free Tables) they have some resemblance with Philoxenus, who being a Musician and defining the soul to be the harmony, was said to put his own affe∣ction into his Philosophy, I will not determine. To that serious caveat given them which might chalenge a more prolix and in∣tentive consideration, Not to hazard their own souls while they are scrupulous about others (the paper had it legible thus (while they fear accidentally to lose or hazard souls, whether they do not more endanger them and their own souls too, by with∣holding from them the Sacrament, the likeliest means of full, and perfect recovery of them?) they answer, that unworthy comers do directly quoad corruptionem actus, defile and destroy themselves, nor is the Sacrament a proper or likely means to recover such as they keep back, but rather likely by accident more to blind and harden them, and to pre∣vent mens sins and damnation cannot hazard their souls, but will comfort their consciences; under this buckler they fight. The things which they here answer were alibi damnata priusquam hic nata, and do but resemble vagrants, which being whipt in one town, will in another still be begging (viz. the question.) Of this subject we have elswhere (we hope) said enough to satisfie discerning and equanimous men, to those that are not such we have said too much, the one we trust will be satisfied, of the other we are satisfied why they will not be. We have copiously shewed, That if unworthy persons eat and drink damnation, it is sbi non aliis; That it is one question who may come, another who may be admitted, and they are not warranted to proceed in doubtfull things who are not commissioned to be judges save only in things manifest; That though another cannot comply with his duty in worthy receiving, yet the Minister may not cancel his, in not giving the Sacrament, nor dispense with a certain duty for an un∣certain danger, nor hath any warrant, much lesse precept to with-hold that which is good of it self, upon fear or suspition that it may do evil by accident, for upon this score may all good things in the world be inhibited; That though indifferent things being abused, may be denied or removed, yet what is good in its proper na∣ture and direct effects, may not be laid aside or with-held for any accidentall abuses; and that seeing he doth as much evill as he might do good, which neglects to do it, & he kils that might help to save and omits it, therfore there is equal danger in with∣holding this food of life from those that are or may be worthy, as in exhibiting it to those that are or may not be such, yea rather more danger, because it is sarer to erre on the account of charity, then on the score of unmercifulnesse and censoriousnesse, and where is hope of doing good, he cannot be excused of the omission to doe it, upon a lesser fear of evill, and the fear must needs be lesse then the hope, because the later is grounded on the certain goodnesse of the thing, and the good that may be either in fieri or facto esse in the person, and the fear is onely founded in the evill that may be onely in the person; That inability to make due performance of the duty, cancels not the debt; that he which dischargeth the materiall part onely, doth some part of that duty, and doth better than he that neglects all. As it is said of some in Scripture (as particularly of Amazias, 2 Chron. 25.) He did that which was right
in the fight of the Lord, though not with an upright heart, for faciunt illi rectum, sed non rectê, as Piscator on that place, who also observes, Etiam hypocritarum opera externa quae cum lege Dei consentiunt, ei placent quatenus legi ipsius conformiasunt. And the very coming to the Sacrament is a reall or virtuall acknowledgement that the death of Christ is the fountain of life, and is an externall profession at least of depen∣dance upon him for salvation; and therefore seeing those that are not against us (by any scandall) are on our part, Mark 9.40. they should not be denied to par∣take with us, and it is our part rather to draw them nearer by cherishing and coun∣tenancing that little good they have, than to lose them by contempt, and let their spark expire for want of fomenting. Conceduntur (saith Paraeus on that place of Mark) esse externe, & aliquo modo cum Christo qui Christum non oppugnant: Iutelli∣git (adds Calvin) quatenus non nocent, prodesse; est enim proverbialis sententia qu∣monemur; Non esse movendum bellum donec simus lacessiti: It is as if Christ had said, In this furious hatred which the world beareth me and my Church, you ought to hold it as a favour; And again; If any one be not against us, if God himself rewar∣deth small benefits done to his, you ought likewise to accept of and love those who make profession of my Name (as Diodate paraphraseth it.) It hath been also di∣sputed, that the same perill of damnation is impendent on wicked men in refraining as well as approaching, and the same hazard is contracted by their partaking of o∣ther ordinances of the Word and Prayer, as well as by their communicating at the Sacraments, for the word by accident doth harden and also blind men, and therefore upon like account men may be driven or kept back from the Word as well as from the Sacrament, which is but a visible word, and represents the same premises though in a different manner, and which by the ordination and rendency thereof is a means to convert and meliorate those who have yet onely a common and Dog∣maticall faith; and though in firm eyes may in some degree be blinded by great light, yet light is the means of seeing, and they doe not see better by being kept in the dark, and it will seem strange if men should be blinded by having this light made surer, or clearer to them, he that believeth in the death of Christ, shall have life by it (which is the conditionall promise that the Sacrament sealeth) and that therefore to seek to prevent their sins and damnation by not permitting them the Sacrament, is to endeavour to advance the end by withdrawing the means. And lastly, that of those who are kept back, such as are in any degree good, are depri∣ved of the means which might better their graces and comforts, and such as are not notoriously wicked, are rather irritated than humbled. This and much more was otherwhere laid open and spread abroad, and there∣fore shall not farther be brought forth here in packs, and therefore if they fight un∣der this Buckler which they talk of, although it be such a Buckler as was Aga∣memnons, wherein Pausanias tells us, terror was pourtraied with a Lions head, and with this inscription, Hie pavor est hominum, and perchance is such a shield as the Emperours at their inauguration were set upon, and lifted up to be shewen forth to take the acknowledgements of their Soveraignty from the Souldiery, and others, yet surely it is not like the brazen shield of Liberius Mimus in Agellius, which dazelled mens eyes, for we may yet see where to strike and wound them, not∣withstanding this shield, and whether they have not lost this shield (which was ignominious among many Nations, and therefore according to a particular punishment for this offence, among the old Gauies, where they did arcere à sacris those who did lose their shields) they should not henceforth be kept from
those holy things (which they have with-held from others to reserve for themselves onely) Doctorum arbitriores dirimendajacet. DIATRIBE. SECT. VI. Whether this Discipline suit with Rom. 14.1. and 10. or check not with Charity; relish not of the Pharisees. Whether it sort with the qualifications of the high Priest, Heb. 5.2. or the example of Hezekias. Whether it smell not of Diotrephes. Of examining persons set beyond suspicion. Whether their way were cast in a like would with Popery. Of their Elders. Their way is Indepen∣dent. A complaint of our Schismes and Heresies. Perswasions to mildness and moderation. VVE first (though preposterously to the Roman order) brought forth our Triarii to the shock, and considered the authorities of Scripture; next we lead up our Principes, and examined the testimonies of the Fathers, afterward we drew out our Hastati, and surveyed the force of reason on both sides (though herein unsuitably also to the Roman discipline, for they put more confidence in their Principes than their Hastati, as being better men and better armed, whereas we cannot but attribute more to reason than any humane authority) we shall lastly in the same unconformable method, produce our Velites, which are a militia not altogether of different kind from the former, but a lighter armature and skir∣mishing at more distance. I should be glad that the Architects and Modellers, or patrons and propugners of this discipline, would by any strength of reason remove the prejudices which some prudent and moderate and godly men have concerning it, and with any clearness and liquidness of evidence satisfie them that there were no cause to doubt First, Whether it suit with the rule of the Apostle, Rom. 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith receive you? Whether it be not a judging and setting at nought of thy brother, and so contrary to verse 10? and whether it check not with the precept, Phil. 2.3. esteeming others better than themselves? Secondly, Whether this oeconomy that seemeth to hope or believe nothing, but suspecteth all to be ignorant or hypocrites, and therefore of necessity to come to probation, resent of that charity that hopeth, believeth all things and suspecteth not? Thirdly, Whether it savour not much of the old Pharisees, (who had their name from separation) touch me not, for I am bolier than thou? as if they would not touch with the rout, and it were the hazard of vitiating their pureness, to have a mixture with Congregations of people, that know not the Law (being ignorant) or
break it (being unholy) or whether it relish not of that Pharis's standing and praying by himself in the parable? where Beza notes a singularity and seque∣string himself from the Publican, who must stand a far off and pray, which, as one saith, was not supplicatio but superlatio, so that he turned proditor virtutis and by his pride and censoriousness and singularity became worse than the Publican, so verifying at last what he formerly said, that he was not like this Publican, who was indeed better than himself: unasuperbia destruit omnia, which occasioned St. Augustine to say, Observe brethren that humility in evil deeds, pleased more than pride in well doing. Fourthly, Whether it smack of that character and qualification of the high Priest, Heb. 5.2. to have compassion of the ignorant? Si deus benignus est, ut quid sacerdos ejus austerus? vis apparere fanctus? circa vitam tuam esto austerus, circa alienam benignus; nonne melius est propter misericordiam rationem reddere quam propter severitatem? (saith Chrysostom) or carry a conformity to that ten∣derness and moderation of Hezechias, who prohibited not them the Passover, that were not cleansed; but prayed for them, that the Lord would pardon every one that prepareth his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, which affection had the stamp and seal of divine approbation, for the Lord hearkened unto He∣zechias and healed the people, 2 Chren. 30.18, 19, 20. Fiftly, Whether it smell not strongly of the spirit of Diotrepbes that sought the preheminence, and be not a Lording it over Gods heritage? It seems to tend to a reducing every one to an awfull and servile subjection to his Minister, lest his reputation be blasted by being repelled from the Communion, and this is the more suspected, because not onely persons which they may suppose they have cause to doubt to be of incompetent knowledge, must pass this try'd by ex∣amination, (and so likewise is it when persons without crime and unrebukable must be Probationers) but generally every one, not onely such of whom they might be doubtful (and yet in dubio melior est conditio possidentis bonam famam, (as I said before) but those of whom (sure) there can be no such violent suspi∣cion, as to make the thing morally so much as probable, which onely (by the opinion of the Casuists) may warrant such a trial, but even those that per∣chance were more susceptible of Catechising the Elders, and whose shekels are known to be double to those of the Sanctuary, which makes it look more like a designe than duty, and may render them suspected of that which Augustine saith in a case not unlike, Cont. Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 1. tom. 7. p. 11. Instit. l. 4. c. 12 S. 12. and Calvin mentions, Non odio iniquitatis alienae, sed studio suarum contentionum infirm as plebes jactantia sui nominis irretitas, vel totas trahere, vebecrte dividere affectant — ne luce veritatis carere eos pateat, umbram rigidae severitatis ostendunt, and to think there is cause to suspect every ones insufficiency, is to imply (as the Papists have abusively perverted that of Gregory upon Job) that while the Oxen laboured, they were all Asses that fed by them. If it shall be replied, That persons of conspicuous knowledge and approved abilities are therefore called under examination to be exemplary unto others, and to prevent and remedy their opposition and repining at this course; I answer, That this is to make Aemilius suffer because Rutilius hath deserved it, to enlarge an impost and burden extensively, to lessen the sense thereof intensively, and might as well excuse a Justice of Peace to require sureties of the good behaviour of all the honest men in the Parish, lest a suspected person should repine, whom
he hath thought fit to bind to the good abearing, or oblige a person of honour patiently to suffer his house to be searched for stoln goods, and a man of unque∣stionable innocency and integrity, tamely to permit himself to be taken up and examined upon an hue & cry for a Felon, only to be exemplary to suspicious per∣sons to submit to, & patient the searching of their houses, & to undergoe such Ar∣rest and examination: In a word, it is to provoke some men without just cause, lest others be irritated for doing that which, in respect of them, may not be unjust. And since this way is obtrued to the world under the Notion of Presbytery (which sure is a misnomer, for by the proper principles of that Discipline, it seems that Children onely are to pass examination) it grieves some, that suf∣frage for the Presbyterial Government, Bayly disswa∣sive, p. 164. to hear others hereby take a specious ad∣vantage to suspect, that it was cast in the like mould with that of Popery, whose main, if not onely principle, was the advance of the power and grandeur of the Prelates and Priests: as they among other things would seem to have a power to damne any man, while they taught a necessity (necessitatem medii) of partaking the Sacraments, as absolutely medious to Salvation, and the efficacy of those Sacraments to depend on the intention of the Minister, Gr. Valentia l. 1. c. ult. de missa. (for it was no Sa∣crament if he intended not to consecrate the elements) and that also in the Masse (which is a sacrifice for sin) there is a certain portion belonging to the Priest which he may dispose of for he behoof of whomsoever he by his Memento shall think good; so this Discipline vesting a power in the Pastor, (without any notorious offence and without any such judicial proceeding as the Presbyte∣rial way requires, and that very justly, because exclusion or suspension being an Ecclestastick punishment, requires and Ecclesiastical Judicatory) to exclude from the Sacrament, ad libitum & placitum, impowers him to put men by from the ordinary means of salvation, and so coacts an awful servile dependance upon him and subjection to him. If they shall interpose, that the Pastor acts or undertakes nothing soly or arbi∣trarily, but hath alwaies the concurrence of the Eldership, I shall answer them as we do the Papists concerning the worship of Images, What ever we hear of their doctrine, their practise is otherwise, and (as he in Tacitus, quid verba audiam cum facta videam?) the experience of the contrary falls within our Hori∣zon, and if some of their Symmists mistake not, or misreport not their model, not the Elders onely but the whole Church are the common Judges of mens sufficiency (though rarely notwithstanding convened upon such occasions, as I think) which is more sutable to the Independent way, but were it so, as they alleage, yet (though perhaps having talents proportionable to private Christi∣ans) how uncapable and how incompetent those Elders are, ad hic & nunc, to be set up as Judges, being of such parts and education, I need not say, who as little dare to undertake, as they are unable to act any thing without the infu∣sions and conduct of their Pastor, and though I will not say, as the Italians do of the Cardinals in the conclave in relation to the sense of the Pope, That they do assentari non assentire, yet others cannot but observe, that the Elders of those Churches (which be spoken without any odious extension to all of that Noti∣on) are but Cyphers, serving onely to add the more of number, and like Mer∣cury in conjunction with the Sun, lost in the light, and having no influence but what is derived from him, and as in the Consulship of Julius Caesar and Bibu∣lus, because the one carried all the sway and honour from the other, they dated
writings, Julius and Caesar being Consuls, no mention being made of Bibulus; so notwithstanding the conjunction of the Elders, the Ministers are virtually and in effect sole in the action, and act arbitrarily too, for any rule or Canon that ever I could take notice of to regulate their proceeding; but in whomsoever the power be vested, yet, nec unquam satis fida potentia est, ubi nimia est; and what∣soever the men may be that exercise it, yet, Vespasianus moderatus, sed imperator, non libertas. Lastly, Whether this be not more than half way towards the Independents, and symbolize not with the Congregational way? for what subantial diffe∣rence is there between their gathering a Church, and this collecting together of Communicants, some out of one place, some out of another? What material disparity is there between this admitting none without profession made, and sa∣tisfaction rendred of their sufficiency both in faith and manners, and then en∣tring into fellowship, and the Independent Covenant? As their way of ga∣thering is the same, so their way of governing the Church is very like; the In∣dependents admit any to the hearing of the Word, not to the Communion of of the Body and Blood of Christ, so do these; they have further conformity in admitting and countenancing their gifted brethren to pray publickly, and though not in their publick places of convention, nor in the formality of prea∣ching, Bayly diswas. &c. p. 174. yet to teach in their private Assemblies and Meeting-houses, according to the medious way excogitated by some Independents, to reconcile the diffe∣rent opinions among themselves upon that matter, and it is said, that not the El∣ders onely, but the whole Congregation doth occasionally make judgment Are not both (they and the Independents) equally guilty of an Allotrioepiscopacy, of removing the ancient Land-marks, and confounding of Churches and li∣mits, and taking in such, of whose souls they have by no law nor consonancy to good order any proper or special care? and of a resemblance with the Partrich, Ier 17.11. which gathereth the young which she brought not forth, as was the ancient, and is still the marginal reading? and of that magick which Furius Cresinus among the old was slandered with, of charming and bringing other mens fruits into his field, contrary to holy Scripture, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. Heb. 13.17. Can. 17. not. in quosdam Canones Con∣cil, Gal. p. 160. Can. 20. Can. 6. apud Magdeburg 7. apud Caranz. L. 1. Epist. 5. Epist. 6. contrary to that rule of righteousness, what you would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them, Matt. 7.12. contrary to the ancient Canons of the first Council of Arles, Ne quis Episcopus alium Episcopum conculcet, hec est in∣volare in vicini sui diaecesim, saith Albaspinus, and the third Council of Car∣thage, Ʋta nullo Episcopo usurpentur plebes alienae; and the first Council of Carthage, nequis vel clericus vellaicus sine literis Episcopi in aliena Ecclesia com∣municet; and contrary to the judgement of Cyprian, singulis pastoribus portio gregis est adscri ta, quam regat unusquis{que} & gubernet, rationem sui actus Deo reddat, oportet eos quibus praesumus non circum-cursitare: and again, sine spe sunt & perditionem maximam indignatione Dei adquirant, qui schismata serunt & ro∣licto Episcopo alium sibi foras pseudo-episcopum constituunt? So as they must excuse me to think that they onely take magni nominis umbram, when they sometimes assume the name of Presbyterial Churches, at best they can be but blended, and by mixture constituted of some of the principles of the one way, and the other, Amphibii, Zoophytes & Epicaenes, like the Chy∣micall naile in the Duke of Florence his cabinet, part Iron and part Gold, like the Amphisbaena that hath two heads, and moves two divers wales, that have a
Crow for Caesar and another for Anthony, or as the Angel in the Revelation, that flew between heaven and earth, is by a learned man interpreted to be Gregory the Great, who was the last of the good Popes, and the first of the bad; so they may passe for the worst kind of Presbyterians, though the best sort of Independents. But surely as Aristotle said of the Milesians, That they were not fools, but yet they did the very same things that fools doe; so if these be not In∣dependents, yet they have the same actions and wayes. There may be and are some differences perchance in opinion and practice between the one and the other; but that impedeth not, but that they may passe under one notion and denomination. The Churches of France and Spain are in many points Anti∣podes each to other: Azorius will tell us, that what is the common opinion in the one kingdome, is not so in the other, (as concerning the immaculate con∣ception of the virgin Mary, and the worshipping the Cross with Latria, &c.) yet both are Papists, and so are all they among whom Bellarmine himself by the ac∣count of Pappus, reckons up above three hundred different opinions, and per∣haps we might find far more among those who properly and professedly passe for Independents, and so many perchance as are not to be reduced to a fixt & certain number, except by a second Clavius, who hath in one sum set down the number of the sands that would fill up all the concave space between the Earth and the eighth Spheare, or peradventure so many as there are Indulgences in that one Church of Lateran, which a Papist saith none but God can number, and he Indeed at his great day of account will be sure to number both the one and the other. And as these mens ARguments are most of them Arrows taken out of Inde∣pendent Quivers, and sharpned on their Anvils, so let assay be made by some skilfuller hand, more versed in these controversies, whether the forces mustred against separation, fight not most of them against this new modell, which I know nor how to blanch or palliate with any other name than a Separation, a separation of themselves as the purer part, from the dregges of the common sort, as if common and unclean were still synonomous in relation to all sub∣jects, for though it may differ gradually from other separations, yet magis & mi∣nus non variant speciem, especially surveigh that rich Armory which St. Augustine furnisht against the Donatists, and try if most of his weapons may not be appo∣sitely and properly made use of in this present controversie against our Anta∣gonists. It were indeed a more humble zeale and better placed, and more discreetly re∣gulated, for those Ministers to engage their endeavours to frame and constitute their several Towns and Parishes according to the way of Presbyterial Churches, where they have a more warrantable call, where their speciall work lies, and where they receive their maintenance, and to take heed to those Flocks whereof the holy Ghost hath made them over-seers, rather than to be gathering and for∣ming (without obligation or warrant) of new Churches out of Churches, of such persons as by remoteness of place are not susceptible of any frequent com∣munion together in the ministry of the word, and have one pastor for the Word, another for the Sacraments, at least if any body can tell who is the Pasos of some of those Churches, in which are so many Ministers, that have severall pastorall charges elsewhere, and some other of these (in like manner) gathered Churches, who have stept farther, and stand at greater distance in their separa∣tions,
have onely such Teachers as can be called Pastors no otherwise than the Idols of the Gentiles were called Godsn, uncupatively or ironically, or by antipbra∣sis, so that by a Charientisme we may say of them as the Athenians did of A∣lexander, If he will be a God let him passe for one. And I would have those that are lawfully ordained Ministers, abstracted from Selfe and Interest, (for pessimum veri affectus venenum sua cuique utilitas,) to consider with what right they can take tythes from them whom they will not own to be of their Church, & seeing officium & beneficium sunt relata, with what conscience they can exact the whole tyth as their due, when they omit a great part of their duty? And for such as are univocally and compleatly of the Independent way, I would, gladly know how it is coherent with their principles to receive tythes at all; for to say they take them not immediatly, while yet they doe by mediation of their Farmers and Agents, is such a palpable imposture as the Capuchins gull the world with, who may not touch with silver themselves, but they have their boyes at hand to purse up all they can carch Lastly, I shall hold it forth to the serious consideration of prudentiall and godly men, whether this setting of the Sacraments in an elevation of purity and holinesse above the Word, as a lower and higher story, or sphear, have not been the spring or source of those manifold schilmes and heresies which of late years have made the Church of God as an heap of sand, without unity or commu∣nion, and whether that opinion haue not been fomented by an ambition of pre-eminence of power in some men, and singularity of holiness in others. Episcopacy like a tree not bearing good fruit, hath been howen down and cast into the fire, but is it seasonable, or uits it with prudence, or is it of the Inte∣rest of religion, in the ashes thereof to be like Archin edes, drawing of lines and circles, and figures of Church-government according to our severall models, while the enemy is at the gates of our Syracuse, or in a more proper Allegory, like the factions of John and Simon and Eleazar, to be at feude among our selves, while the Romans have laid siege to, and are like to surprize our Jerusalem, to divide and break our Ranks, when we should stand close and conjoyn our selves to withstand the impression and charges of our enemies? To ravell more threads in the coat of Christ, when it is more than time and need to stitch up the rents? In these unstable and ensnaring and lapsing times, to quench the smoaking Flax, which being not tenderly cherished, either will altogether ex∣pire, or catch after strange fites, and new lights? to hazard the blasting of the blossoms of Aarous Rod with sharp and nipping censures at their first putting forth? Hoc I thacus velit & magno mercentur Atridae. They are prudent principles and worthy of reflection, Novum imperium in∣choantibus utilis clementiae fama: Potentiam cautis quam acrimoribus confiliis tutius ha∣beri: Remissius imperanti melius paretur. Numa built a Temple for Faith and Peace under one roofe, and Charity and Peace must have some Sacrifices, if it be not with neglect of the Altars of indi∣spensible truth, lest we have daily more cause to exclaim passionatly with Nazi∣anzen, Loving Peace, loving Peace, loving Peace, where didst thou leave us? Some things also may be just, in Ecelesia constituta, which in constituenda are not fit. It rendred a complacency to wise Solon to have given the Athenians Laws, the best of those they would have received, Excellentissima animdvertenti, ne medio∣cria
praestare quidem rubori oportet esse: And he was a judicious Physician whose Maxim it was, Frustra disputamus utrum satis tutū sit remedium quod est unicū. The wisdom of God himselfe hath taught us, That no man puts a piece of new Cloth into an old garment, otherwise the rent is made worse, nor puts new wine into old bottles, else the bottles break and perish, and the wine runneth out, and no man ha∣ving drunk old wine, straight way desireth new for he saith the old is better. Quid jugum vestrum super eos aggravatis quorum potius onera portare debetis? saith Ber∣nard; and he was the greatest propagator of the faith, and advancer of the truth that ever was, who was made all things to all men that he might by all meanes save some. Seraphins which have their name from love, are an higher order in the Scholastick Hierarchy, than Thrones, Dominations, Principalities & Powers; and Doves whose wings are anointed with sweet ointment (the Emblem of love) draw all others to the house, as it is in St. Basil; not onely Tacitus com∣mends Agricola that rarissima moderatione maluit videri invenisse bonos, quam fecisse, but when St. Paul questioned Agrippa concerning his faith, he anticipated his confession and answered for him. And when the King acknowledged that he did but almost believe, the Apostle by a Charientisme presumed to know that he believed: That great Fither of men knew it was the best bait to catch soules to graulate our brethren in their weak beginnings, and to pretend a considence they are such as we desire they should be, to take hold of such as are coming forward, and to draw them farther with signes of love and indulgence, and to seem to hope well of them, not to discourage or set them out of countenance, or to distrust or disparage them, ctiam fictilia vasa confringere domino soli conces∣sum, saith Cyprian. And surely there is no more obliging way, or more apt or ex∣pedient to excite or quicken men to the acquiring of any ability, than to account and commend them as having in some degree made acquist thereof, for as Qui monet ut facias quod jam faeis, ille monendo Laudet, — so convertibly, Quilandat quasi secisti, te sic monet, ut quod jam laudat, facias. And Bernard sweetly tells us, Si non est itasicut dicitur, fit ita quia dicitur; most men are like the herb Basil, (as the Genoans told, Sforza's Ambassadour, that themselves were) which stroke it gently, it yeelds sweet, hardly, an unsavoury smell, or like the Colossus at Tarentum, which you may move with your finger, but not wag it if you you put all your strength to it: gentle instruction is more effectual than rigid censure, Moses was blamed for striking the rock (which might have produced fire) when he should have spoken to it to bring forth water. Some Chymicks think the mild warmth of a Lamp is fitter to improve and transmute other metals into gold, than the violent heat of fire: the same arrow dipt in Me∣dian oyle, shot from a strong Bow, loseth its force, if from a gentler is more ef∣ficacious: Ne excedat medicina modum, lest as he said in Tacitus, Non medicina sed clades est, moderation and clemency are vertues more proper to our times, and indeed at all times more subservient to edification, than rigor and austerity: It is sometimes true that molesta sarina vir bonus, & quaedam virtutes odio sunt, severi∣tas, obstinatio, & invictus adversus gratiam animus: discretion (tolle hanc & virtus vitium erit) perpends not onely what is good, but what is fit. It was said by Tully to be Cato's fault, that he was too strist and severe, as if belived in Plato's
common-wealth, not in the dregges of Romulus, Nocuit (faith the Historian) antiquus rigor & nimia severitas cui jam pares non sumus. If they think there be a general unfitness in men for this ordinance, (which we concede not) yet not to produce that of Tiberius, Praestat omittere praevalida & adulta vitia, quam id as∣sequi ut palam fiat quibus vitiis impares sumus, let them only reminde the wise coun∣sell of Bodin, Though it be wholsom if one member be putrid, to burn or cut it off, for the safety of the whole body, yet we mst not therefore use cauteries or cutting off, if all the members be putrified and infected with a Gangerne; or rather let them take co∣gnizance of the advice of the judicious and meek-spirited Augustine, who tells us, Siex separationc vel schisma metuendum, Contra Par∣men. l. 3. c. 2. p. 13. tom. 7. vel contagio peccandi &c. If through separation a schisme be to be fearad, or the contagion of sinning have invaded a multitude, the severe mercy of divine discipline is necessary, because the thoughts or counsels of separation are then vain, and pernicious, and sacrilegious, because they are impious and proud, and do more porturb infirm good men, than correct stubborn evill And a little afterward, Let a man with mercy rebuke what he can, & what he cannot, let him patiently suffer, and with love grieve, and lament, untill he from above dee a∣mend and correct, or deferre untill harvest, to root up the tares, or winnow the chaffe, and yet as Christians of good hope, secure of their own salvation, among desperate ones whom they cannot rebuke, let them continuc imunity, let them put away the evill from themselves, if they cannot put away evill men from the midst of them. And in conformity to & in the pursuance of the same principle, writing to Au∣relius Bishop of Carthage, with complaint of the rifenesse and impunity of drun∣kennesse in Africa, he adviseth that some remedy be applied by a Councell of Bi∣shops to be convened, but addeth, Non ergo aspere, quantum existimo, non duriter, &c. Not sharply, (as I think) not with rigor, not in any imperious way, let these things be taken away, but more by teaching then commanding, by admonishing than threat∣ning (monendo quam minando) for so it ought to be done with the multitude of offen∣ders, but severity is to be exercised toward the sins of a few. There is much dispute whether the Martyrs shall be raised up before the last and generall resurrection, Epist 64. but we have lived to see the old heretickes to have a kind of resurrection in the reviving and now raising up of their abominable heresies, so that what Prosper Aquitanious wrote in reflection upon Pelagius, Pestifero vomuit coluber sermone Britannus, might now be amplified and extended to the plurall number, we having whole nests of those Adders spawning through the whole land, the venome of their damnable heresies, destructive to the very fundamentlls of Faith, and all this while we are quartelling about trimming up the house, while the foundations are shaken. It was St. Augustines advice, that in the time of an heresie, every one should write, yet how few uncase and impresse their pens against the ene∣mies of our common faith, or are valiant for the truth, and contend earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints. — Vix totidem quot The barum portae, vel divitis ostia Nili, But many (and perhaps too many that Ante leves volucres censebis in acre.) are disputing of Church government with that acrimony, as if Fortunae Graeciae in hocsitae, and we had no other arae & foci to contend for. Sylla could say, Ante
frangendus hostis quam ulciscendus civis, but we engage our forces against our brethren, and let the enemies of Gods truth enlarge their conquests through our distractions and diversions, every man is erecting a Kingdome for Christ, that himself with his model may sit therein at his right hand, and we hear of this mans Church, and that mans Church, as if by the revolution of a Platonick year, we were come again to those old Emblems and Idioms of Schisme, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, but every one claims to be of Christ; but it is an acute observation, Christus noluit ficri judex ad divisionem, and with what hearts o∣thers do resent it, I know not, but I look on it with sadness and astonishment, that this and that form of discipline is cryed up, (in a manner antonomastically) for the Kingdome of Christ, as if he had new made his Scepter of late, which we have been formerly catechised to be his word; discipline may be subservient and adjumental to the Kingdome of Christ, but how it should be a part thereof properly, either integral, subjective, or potential, I confess I am yet to learn. And yet howsoever notwithstanding, he that shall declare against, or be not satis fied with, or complies not with their waies, is forthwith blasted with the airs of being an enemy to Godliness, as if (as the Gracchi said,) apud se esse rempublicam, and Eudemon boasted of the Jesuits, Penes se esse imperium litera∣rum, so these mens opinions and practises were the rule and measure and touch∣stone of things, and they had the monopoly and mintage of godliness, and no∣thing must pass for currant but what flowes from them, Sedul. Apol. pro libro con∣form. l. 1. c. 20. & c. 13. & l. 2.1.6. and carries their stamp. The Book of conformities blasphemously tells us, that St. Francis was deified, that he was made one spirit with God, and that God did obey him at a beck in every thing, and that he knew the secrets of all hearts, but I will not, nor dare not so to aggravate the greatness of their presumption, nor yet at all urge, how bold they make with God, that set his stamp upon all they coyn without his Letters patents, and vouch him to warrant all their deeds, and make him their second in all their duels, without his leave or consent, but I shall onely say, as that Spartan did before the approaching battel of Lectra, the day is coming, that will shew who is good (or a godly) man, in the mean time it shall more suit with godliness to make an arrest of judgment. But vir bonus est Sejus sed tan∣tum Christianus; the Waldenses are without blame and unrebukable, onely they blaspheme the Church of Rome, the inflexibleness of some men to move along with them in these excentrick orbes, is the onely rotten grain in their Pomegra∣nates; would they but strike in, and be carried about with them, for that onely stamp sake, without any melioration or refinement of their mettals, per∣chance they might pass currant too for pretious pieces, now they are onely bit∣ten because none of theirs; As they say the Snakes in Syria sting all forrainers, but never any of the Inhabitants, and the Hedg-bore hath sharp prickles without, and is smooth and soft within, so they have pondus & pondus, and ballance their own party and their opposites with several weights and in divers scales. Let me add also, that the pretence of godliness cannot give things their pass port, for Luther tells us of a proverb, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, nor can the reverence and esteem due to some mens persons, seal all their opinions and pra∣ctices, for the same man hath a smart saying, Nunquam periclitatur religio nisi inter reverendissimos; neither can the aim and intention of doing some good, or greater good to some, protect or countenance a consequent train of greater e∣vils
intensive or extensive, for the Apostles rule checks with such designes, and Salvian tells us of some that do errare bono animo, & Lactantius of others that honesta voluntate miscri sunt. The Church therefore (according to the Italian proverb) had need to pray especially to be defended from her friends, and it is no new thing to receive wounds in the house of friends, Zachary 13.6. and for the Spouse to complain, that the Watchmen that went about the City have smit∣ten her, have wounded her, the Keepers of the walls have taken away her vaile from her, Cant 5.7. And surely such as are Heteroclites to their rules and A∣nomala's to their waies, would more patiently bear the harsh censures they are as∣perst with, did not the Church of God suffer; but as when Alchymists under pretence of multiplying mettals and improving and transmuting them into Gold, do decoct, consume and turn Gold into nothing; and as the Woman in the Greek Fable that was mortally sick, telling her Physitians her symptoms, who an∣swering her, all was good, she cried out, That good had undone her: so the Church is in danger of being ruined under the Notion of being better built, and not onely hereby, that utque ante hac flugitiis, ita nunc legibus laboratur, but some are like Pompey, gravior remediis quam delicta erant; and as if things were like the Hebrew to bespeld backward, instead of Godliness, prophaness, and not neglect alone, but contempt of Ordinances, Schismes and Heresies not onely creep, but break in, grow, and spread among us, and while we hear all will be now well, we see and feel that stark naught could scarce be much worse, — pudet haec opprobia nobis, Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli. And although the effect hereof like those of an eclipse, are like to be more felt long after, yet we are already but too sensible of the fruits which these grounds bring forth, wherein some men have prepesterously thought so great a part of Gods husbandry doth consist, fruits indeed wherewith our teeth are so set an edge, that we can have no great stomack to them, and I dare say with some confidence, that were the Laws of this Church Government (whereunto some perhaps will shrewdly apply that of Demonax, quibus boni non egerent, mali fierent nihilo me∣liores.) to receive a comitial rogation, more Romano, the farre greatest part of Intelligent men (except such as are biassed by interest, & jurati in verba sua; so as to sacrifice Troy to their Helena, and as Demetrius of the table of Protoge∣nes, to be more tender of the draughts of their own pencil than of the City) would give their suffrage with A. rather than V. R. As the Wolf said in Plu∣tarch when the Shepheard slaughtered a Lamb, At si ego id fecissem, if I had done it, the whole Country had been raised against me. But it falls out sometime su∣table to what happened at the battle of Montlchery, where Comines tells us, that some lost their places for running away, which were conferred upon others that fled much further. And sadly, while some men of one sort of principles, have shut up the Church door, by intermitting, or restraining and contracting Baptisme, the Sacrament of Institution (januam Ecclesiae as one calls it) and some of other principles, have walled up or new railed in the Communion table, and either omit, or confine and inclose the Eucharist, (which hath almost lost its name of Commu∣nion and Synaxis, and by a denomination taken from the greater part may be rather called an Excommunion or Apaxis,) the greatest part of men are left ex∣communicate
and made as heathen and Publicans, and being not added to the Church become such as shall not be saved, and God onely knows, (for who else can give a stop unto, or predefine the bonds of fancy and singularity (Quo teneam vulius mutantem Protca nodo? whether as the Chymists also by frequent sublimations & separations reduce the substance of things in a manner to nothing, so whether these separations and gatherings out, (which may perchance to grow one out of another (like a line which is divisibilis in semper divisibilia) and the later pretend to be upon as good reason as the former) may not reduce the Church unto a very small cantel, and really expose the greatest part unto a kind of paganisme, and so the zeal of those men may become antipodes to that of David, and eat up the house of God, (for experience aswell as philosophy tells us that omne divisibile est corruptibile, and the Church is like the controverted Ship, si dividas perdes) and so the new waies of gathering Churches may in the end be patible of the description which he gave of Chymistry: a multiplication of the whole by nothing Et quod praesenti vix tempore credimus, auni Sera dies{que} decent. I shall close up all with a signal and excellent passage of the incomparable St. Augustine, — Cui doctior orbis, Submissis desert sascibus imperium: a piece of discouse flowing with mild and honey, or rather melle dulcior, lacte candidior, which as it holds forth the whole state of the controversie, so it may aptly and oppsiely serve for the decision and up hut of the same. Fortè in populo Dei stat juxta te avarus raptor, inhians rebus alienis, De verhis A∣postoli Ser. 23. tom. 10 p. 76. quem nosti ta∣lem & sidelis est vel potius sidclis vocatur, non potes eum de Ecclesia pellere, non habes aliquem aditum castigando & corripicudo corrigere, accessurus est tecum ad altare, noli timere, unusquis{que} proprium onus portabit, memento Apostoliut scurus accedas, unus∣quis{que} proprium onus portabit, tantummodo tibi non dioat, porta mecum, nam ficum illo communicare volucris avaritiam, onus non minuitur, sed duo gravabuntur, por∣tet ergo sarcinam suam, & tu tuam, quoniam quando ex humeris tuis dominus tuus talem sarcinam excussit, alteram imposuit, excussit cupiditatis, imposuit charitatis, — non vobis fumos vendant qui dicunt, sanctisumus, non portamus sarcinas ve∣stras, ideo vobis non communicabimus, majores-isti portant sarcinas divisionis, ma∣jores isti portant sarcinas praecisionis, sarcinas schismatis, sarcinas haeresis, sarcinas dissentionis sarcinas animositatis sarcinas falsorum testimoniorum, sarcinas calumniosa∣rum crimina ionum: has sarcinas conatisumus & conamur deponere de humeris fratrum nostrorum, illi amant tenentes illas ad se, minores esse nolunt, quia psis sarcinis tu∣muerunt, nam & qui pouit sarcinam quam gestabat collo quasi minor fit, sed pondus posuit non staturam — nonne melius isum serres quàm te foras efferres — ecce quomodo serres si attenderis Apostolum dicentem, unusquis{que} proprium onus porta∣bit, liberet te ista sententia, non enim cum illo communicares avaritiam, sed com∣municares cum illo Christi mensam, & quid tibi obesset si cum illo communicares Christi mensam? Apostolus dicit, qui enim manducat & bibit indignè judicum sibi manducat & bibit, (sibi) non tibi, sanè si judex es, si judicandi potestatem accepisti, Ecclesiasticâ regulâ, si apud te accusatur, si innumeris documentis testibus∣{que} convincitur, coerce, corripe, excommunica, degrada: sic vigilet tolerantia, ut non dormiat disciplina.
DEFENCE SECT. XVII. They misrepresent their Church-way. Whether the Quaeres of the Diatribe were doubts of Friends or Enemies. What are pro∣perly Scruples. THe Apologists hope their Principles and Practices will carry their Pasports, if they be not mistaken. Confidence is indeed a kind of Charm upon others of weak wit or spirit, and as Calumniare audacter, so also Gloriare audacter, aliquid haerebit, but why then (quasi caeco loquuntur, audienti quid dicunt, non videnti quod a∣gunt, as Augustine speaks of the Donatists) do they seek to lead men into mists and mistakes of those principles and practices, with specious pretences of their suspen∣ding onely some persons convict to be scandalous, as if this were the hinge of the controversie which we had with them, and palliate their casting off whole Con∣gregations, whereof the far greater part are not garbled with scandall, & gathering new Churches of such as are offended with the grossness of their administrations at home, where no separation is made (as they speake?) Perfect wares never use to be held forth by false or halfe lights, and therefore it seemes they would withingly have their principles and practices mistaken, being such (that as Cardan saith, Qui acutè vident minus amant,) so men must like them the worse, by how much better they understand them,, —Si non videare Tota places, neutro si videare places. The Doubts and Quaeres made in the Paper seem to them the hard thoughts of Enemes rather than doubts of Friends. But first, it greatly matters not which, for Antisthenes well said, Ad tuendam sanitatem opus est aut ingenuis ami∣cis aut acribus inimicis, and as hony enlightned the eyes of Jonathan, so gall did those of Tobit. Secondly, but why of enemies, unlesse they are become such because they tell them the truth? Veritas (quae assentatione gratiam non parat) odium parit. But I suppose rather as Hypanis is sweet in the Spring, but bitter fal∣ling into Exampeus, so what is odiously resented, may be amicably meant; Non amo nisi offendero and he that was the harbinger to a Prophet for recovering of life, was neither to salute or complement with any by the way, but to lay on the staffe. Thirdly, Scrupus est proprie lapillus levis qui pressus sollici∣tudinem creat, undescrupulus dictus. Ser∣vius in 6. Ae∣neld. Enemies perchance they are to their separation, not to their persons, and are like that skilful Archer Alcon, who when the Dragon was complicated with the child, could strike his arrow in the one, and not hurt the other, Qui vitia odit homines amat, and Augustine pithily, Hoc est perfecto odio odisse, ut vitia non ho∣mines oderis, nec vitia propter homines diligas. They pretend not to be willing to contend about words, yet fall into a Logomachy and aucupium verborum, Scruples (they say) are mens doubts in their own way, that much impedes and intangles their conscience in their own actings, that is their Scruple.
Scrupulus, which originally and properly signifies a little stone in the shooe, Azor. moral. tom. 1. l. 3. c. 20. p. 97, 98. or otherwise troubling any in his going. is metaphorically transferred to denote any doubt or suspition whatsoever. The Casuists define a scruple to be in anima solici∣tudinem, suspicionem, & dubitationem hominis, conscientiam pungentem & cruciantem, instar lapelli exigui in calcco latentis, quiedem laedit & vexat as Azorius: but though this be the Ecclesiasticall sense of the word, it doth not follow, that it may not be used in another notion, no more than because Idolum and Sacramentum (and the like may be said of sundry other terms) are in the Church Idiom appropriate, the one to an Image worshipt, and the other to an outward sign of an internall grace, therefore the one may not be used for the visible species, or a vain imagina∣tion, nor the other for an oath or gage: in the former sense I had neither occasion nor meaning to use it, for scruples are there understood to be leviuscula argumenta & fundamenta (as Azorius and Filiu ius;) leves rationes, as Balwin, but we are not perswaded the reasons and arguments alleaged are of that kind, Filiucius tract. 21. c. 4. Sect. 175. p, 11. Baldwin Cas. cons. l. 1. c. 10. p. 24. De Instit & jure, l. 2. c. 29. Dub. 2. Navar. Ma∣nual. c 27. Sect 280. p. 1037. (though by a Meiosis or Charientisme we stiled them so) until they have better convinced us therof; and scrupulus est tenuis suspicio mali circa rem bonam vel adiapheram, saith Lessius, and onely makes the concience assning and adhring to one part of the question, lightly to recede and a little to doubt thereof; but the judgements which we desired might be satisfied, are rather more fully perswaded by other reasons, and not a little by those, not to assent or adhere to this way, which seems evill, though they af∣fectionatly wish, for some of their sakes that trace it, that it were not so evill, as up∣on these reasons it seems, or may be suspected to be: so as whereas Conscientia scru∣pulosa contra id quod judicat habet argumenta (as Navar) these arguments are rather contra id quod non judicat. But whereas they say, Scruples are mens doubts in their own way (where sure they use the word Doubts as improperly and incuiously in respct of the Theologicall sense, as they suppose we do Scruples, (for a doubt and a scruple are different noi∣ons amongst Casuists) we shal grant in Ames his words, Scrupul messe formidi∣nem animi circa suam praxim, but we cannot yeeld that we used the notion in any other sense, for that which by exenuation we called Scruples (ut we shall not from henceforth use so much indulgence and compliance among those that have not lear∣ned inter bonos bene agier) are arguments, which though opposed to he way of the Apologists, yet make men more searfull and sollicitous to concurre and co-operate with them in that way, and so are concerning their proper wayes and actings like∣wise. But that you may see the Apologists are not unlike some fierce men, Ames Cas. Consc. l. 1.6. p. 15. which they say will sight with their own madow, and that they quarrell with an expression which is but the shadow or image of their own, cast back your eyes but upon the close of the precedent Section, and see if the word Scruple be not used by them in the like sense which they carp at here in us, for expressly they say, While we are scru∣pulous of others, which necessantly inferres, that scruples may be in their concepti∣on, as well of other mens wayes and actings as of their own. Yet for my part, let them call them what they please, Nihil apud me distat in verbo quod non distat in sensu, as Ambrose, I shall not strive in words to no purpose, which is as Augustine inter∣prets, Non curare quomodo error veritate vincatur, sed quomodo tua dictio dictioni prae∣seratur alterius, for I have also learned from Plato, Nos ditiores ad senectutem per∣venturos fi nomina neglexerimus, and if they think I have been guilty of a mis∣nomer, and this Scruple (which is but the third part of a grain) can adde
to their weight, I shall readily put it into their Scales, yet I doubt it will not much ponderate, where any other thing is in the Ballance, or discretion holds the Beam. DIATRIBE. SECT. XVIII. Rom. 14.1. & 10. discussed Whether they judg or despise their brethren. Psa. 15.4. vindicated. No other qualifications required in order to communicating in a Church member having a Dogmaticall Faith, but to be without scandall. Whether they reject onely the wicked. Whether their way render them not guilty of temerarious judgement. Of judging the heart. Of bearing infirmities of morall men. THe first Qure which the paper sprung from Rom. 14 1. & 10. they think as light as the paper, ludibrium venti, easiy blown away with the least wind of their breath. But though we did not pretend to fetch those arguments from the Peripatum, but rather from the Academy, and brought them forth not as demon∣strative but considerable for their probability,, and as arguments minorum gentium & senatores pedarii, yet how weak soever they may seem in the faith or beliefe of a∣ny, we shall strive they may be received, and will seek to fetch them off from doubt∣full disputations. They say, The Apostles scope is far from the business in hand, he speaks of eating herbs, not the Sacrament, and it is onely a not receiving the weak to doubtfull disputations. But may not the same arrow that is shot to one scope or mark, be aptly aimed and sent forth toward another? If they have forgotten that the same principle is pre∣gnant with many conclusions, and by the vertue and officacie of the same middle term, or probative medium, may sundry conclusions be inferred, or if they recog∣nize not that natural notion and principle of discourse (one of those two feet where∣upon all syllogismes stand and move) de omni & nullo, viz. quodcunque affirmatur aut negatur de toto & genere, affirmatur aut negatur etiam de parte & de specie, and therefore consequently any truth derived out of another truth must be therein con∣tained, or if they remember not that Canon in Divinity, quod particulariter dictum est universaliter applicandum, yet we must remind them, that neither the Sacra∣ment, nor any preparation or trial in order thereunto, is the scope or subject of those places of Scripture, from whence they have laboured to draw and form all the arguments for defence of their Church way (that one of 2 Cor. 11.27. onely excepted) as without any further light held forth by us, will be obvious to any that shall make inspection into the texts which in due place shall be consider∣ed. We do not pretend that this precept of the Apostle doth directly or expressly com∣mand
a receiving to the Sacrament, yet (according to Diodate and Hammond) it enjoyning a receiving of the weak in faith to the Communion of the Church, we opine that it consequently requires the reception to the Sacrament, Church-fellowship chiefly consisting in, and being described by a communion of Sacra∣ments (as hath been declared) and Church-Communion being comprehensive of all other special acts, and parts of common and publick Christian duties or pri∣vileges; if that be prescribed to be afforded in general, the other are so command∣ed, as being included under, and contained in that, and we do propound, that by force of this Canon, it is clearly enjoyed, that qui robustiores sunt operam im∣pendant insirmis sublevandis, & qui magis profecerunt safferendis rudibus — as Calvin, thee is cmmanded nolite ahjiere — cujus nondum confirmata est fides as Gagnaeus, qui nondum erant in fide satis instructi, as Menocbius and Tirinus. Fra∣terne agendum cum rudioribus, caveant{que} ne eos a professione Euangelii deterreant, as Piscator. Ad conversationem vobis adjungite & habete ut fratrem, neque repellite tan∣quam aienum in Christo, — tolerandus est ne forte resiliat ah incapto, as Estius. Af∣fectu cbaritatis vobis conjungite ad supportandum, as Aquinas, and therefore none may judicandae fratern conscientiae licentiam ad se trahere, as Calvin; de se potius quam do aliis solicitos esse oporteat, as Paraeus, the reason being rendred, quod potestas julicandi de aliorum conscientiis, propria sit Christi, quod unusquis{que} illi ratiouem de scipso redditurus st, as Piscator. And then we assume, that for them (as if there were no other way to rectifie their Assemblies than as Candiot corrected Ficinus his translation of Plato, with one common spung:) to put from the Communion whole Congregations (which is not to improve the health or growth of the Church, but to reduce it to an atrophy and consumpion by such continual violent purgings) and t do thus, not for grosse and palpale ignorance or notorious offences and scandls, but because they have not approved their knowledge or holiness to those Censors, and like Procrustes to rack and draw them to the length and measure of their bed, is not to support or animate, but cast down and dishearten, not to assure and evidence, but to irritate and imbitter men, not to bear with them, but to bear them down or overbear them, since most men carry some an logy to the leaves of the arbor tristis, whereof Nieremberge tells us, that being roughly handled they scarce smel, but gently toucht do spire forth an excellent odour, nor is this to hold, or converse with them, as brethren (the ancient Church calling none brethren that communicated not) but rather as alins from Christ, being not by the Apo∣logists reckoned of the Church; aliens, because not of the faithful, for the anci∣ents named those onely fideles, which did receive the Sacrament; and aliens from Christ, because not worthy to partake of his body, and when men manifestly dis∣cover not themselves by scandals, yet to reckon them unworthy of the Communi∣on, is First, To judge their consciencies by determining of things occult (whereof the Church never pretended to any judicatory) for they have not manifested them∣selves by crimes that are notorious. And is secondly, to despise them, not onely speculatively to esteem them evil, 22. q. 60. art. 4. in c. in 22. disp. 5. q. 4. punct. 5. p. 865. but practically also, to deal with them as evil, for qui habet malam opinionem de a∣lio abs{que} sufficienti causa, injuriatur ei, & contemnit isum, saith Aquinas, and in dubio per malam opinionem de proximo, indigne is contemnitur, adds Valentia, and there can be no sufficient cause, nor indicia vehementia, nor can their condition be otherwise than doubtful, where the actions are not scandalous, and if when they
call them dead and bastards (as here) and account them Dogs and Swine (for upon that score and in that notion they say elsewhere they administer not the holy things to them) they shall yet deny that they despise them, I think they shall despise our reason also to hope to make us believe so, and they have as much reason to say this is not contempt, as the Glosse in Gratian hath to deny any may be called a Whore till she have been culpable with 23000 men. But whereas they insinuate that the 4 verse of the 15 Psalm will warrant and bear them out to contemn vile persons, I shall say if they are not scandalous for notorious crimes they are not vile, and if they be not vile they are not to be con∣temned. Junius and Piscator tell us that according to the Hebrew it should be translated, contemptus est spreius, and they render reprobus, as the vulgar doth malignus, In locum. and to contemn, is not to flatter, (as Junius;) or voluntarily to ho∣nour vice and impiety for flattery or any worldly respects, (as Diodate;) to cover or excuse their vices by filthy adulation, Quantumvis opibus, potentia, gloria florentes — non vere∣tur peccantes redarguere & impedireubires & occasio postu∣lat. Tirinus in locum. and seek friendship and have commerce with the impious and slaves of Satan, (as Molle;) and it would seem prodigious if it should more check with this duty to admit into Communion those that are not notoriously flagitius, then to reject them shall clash with that property in the for∣mer verse, that taketh not up a reproach against his neighbour, dictis aut factis (as Junius;) non admisit ad aures suas vituperationes, detractiones, susurra iones, calum∣nias contraproximum (saith Bellarmine;) Omnem proximi contumeliam & injuriam avertere conatus est, as Ianseuius And we think we may therefore take up for a conclusion that Epiphonema of Pa∣raeus upon this text, stolidus fanaticorum error improbatur, qui Ecclesiam veram non putant subsistere, nisi ubi emnes sunt pariter firmi fide, pariter sancti in vita, & nul∣la Zizania cum tritico in agro domini pullulare conspiciantur. They say the Apostle speaks of not receiving the weak to doubtful disputations, and he doth so, but he doth not onely speak of that, but first prescribes them to be re∣ceived, and afterward prohibites their reception to doubtful dispuaions, but as the Ganonists say that fictione Canonica, Saturday and Sunday are all one, so i seens the Apologists would sain have receiving and not receiving to be the sme; they in∣ferre therefore, men are not to be called is such exercises as may be hurtful to them; and we grant it of such as have a direct tendency unto, and natural efficiency of hurt, but not of such as may indirectly and by accident onely become hurtful, for then they may not be convcared to the hearing of the Word, which by accident doth blind and harden, and is the savour of deah unto deah, In since the inhi∣bition to receive them to doubtful disputations is bottomed on this apagogical rea∣son, lest they should be disquieted with troublesom: questions (as Diodate) we suppose the reason to be as illative to forbid their examinations and trials, whose questions do occasion and produce as much of trouble and disquiet as can ordina∣rily result from disputations, but they unwittingly mistake or would willingly take others in a mist, while they with as much solemnity, as little pertinency discourse, as if by weak in the faith, were to be understood onely such as had a sound lively and saving faith though feeble in a remiss degree, such as have a true Godly fear and some degree of graciousness; whereas by the very light that naturally beams from the text, and is reflected also by Interpreters, it is meant of such as are not yet full in knowledge, nor perswaded of Christian liberty (as Diodate) qui in doctrina Euangelii rudor est, nondum satis edoctus & persuasus de libertate Christiana, (for here fides est persuasio de usureram indifferentium per synechochen generis as Pis∣cator,
and Calvin in effect consenting with him, and however they rebel against this light, yet it strikes on their eyes to make them see and say also in this very Se∣ction, that the Apostle speaks of those who were not of a pure gospel judgment, about ceremonies. Paraeus onely by a proportionable accommodation extends it to those that are infirm, circa mores & studium pietatis, — qui languidius profece∣runt & saepius hallucinantur in vita, such as are carnal, not simply but in some re∣spect, and therefore concludes (in opposition sure to their principles) tali inaequa∣litate domesticorum dei non est quod offendamur. But they here part hands with their brethren, who they confess go beyond their warrant when they take Saints of the first magnitude onely into fellowship. But sure their warrans are brethren too aswel as they, and they can pretend no better war∣rant to exclude all, save of the second or third magnitude, then their brethren can shew to reject all save of the first. We think that though one starr differs from a∣nother in glory, yet every the least star while it stands in the firmament of the Church, ought to be in fellowship and Constellation with the rest, and till he prove a falling star, a nebula, or plain nebulo, it will be onely a by blow of the taile of the Dragon to cast him to the earth. I is Gods prerogative to tell the number of stars, there are many pure stars more than we can see, the Galaxi is but a Con∣gregation of them, and some stars that are eclips'd toward earth, shine upward to heaven, and to own none for stars, but those that will move concentrick with them, and borrow all their light from them, is a false astronomy, and fits none but those that would set their nest among the stars. The judging of others estate and condition, the waies and cautels of doing it, are but perergas and heterogencals to our question, for it is not mens goodness or regeneration, which is the foundation of their right or interest to the Lords Sup∣per, bu Church membership with a dogmatical faith compleats a title to Ecclesi∣astical Communion, and consequently to the Sacrament, and it is a contradicti∣on in the adject, and a meer bull, (though such an one as Mariana saith are some∣times let loose in Spain in solemne places, which gore and overturn and trample on the people) that a man should be a member of the Church, and yet not be recel∣ved to Church fellowship. Whatsoever other qualifications are requisite to the person in order to his coming to the Sacrament, yet they are to require nothing more in foro exteriori for his admitting, cum enim quilibet Christianus, ex hoc ipso quod est baptisatus sit admissus ad Dominicam mensam (saith Aquinas) non potest jus suum ei tolli, nisi pro aliqua causa manifesta, 3. q. 60. art. 6. they need look for no other positive thing, if they discern nothing privative (viz. no notorious crime) that may for∣feit that right; if they see nothing to disprove it, they may spare to seek for what may farther prove and verifie it, charity carries with it an obligation, practically and negatively at lest, to judge all those to be good that are not manifestly evil, and therefore he that is not visibly unworthy, is visibly worthy, because a visible mem∣ber, and if worthy of a Communion in other Ordinances, (as hath before been argued) why not in this also? unless as the Orators exalted eloquence that them∣selves might rise therewith, so they elevate the Sacrament to a higher sphear, be∣cause themselves pretend to be the Intelligences that must onely make it move or rest, and I should desire them to shew me any Scripture ground whereon they can build this bypothesis, That those intelligent persons, who are worthy to have Commu∣nion in the Word and Prayer, are unworthy of fellowship in the Sacrament.
It is granted they may make judgment of such as actually discover themselves by scandall, or perhaps potentially by a violent suspition, but to make discoveries of others, in order to judge of their state or condition, they have none but a for∣ged warran, that bears not the Teste of heaven, nor is exemplified in the Rolls of the Scripture, and therefore whereas they say, That Calvin affirms that judge∣ing in this place, Rom. 14.10. is to bring men under our own lawes. Though I finde not that he makes that interpretation, yet it being true secundum quid, because a divine truth, though perchance not simpliciter, becaus not proper to the place, yet sup∣posing it were so, we cannot but conclude they judge their brethren, because we finde their lawes under which they would bring them, but they are yet to seek of those of Christ, unlesse they will doe as the Glosse on Gratian hath done, to cite a whole sentence for Scripture which is no where, or will have us to think of them as Ho∣sius teacheth of the Church of Rome, Dist. 43. Si quis verb. po∣stulat. that what pleaseth them, is the expresse word of God. If (as they profess) they exclude not, but take the weakest, then they ought to admit all those that are not guilty of scandall, for other sins are but weaknesses, and so deno∣minate their subjects. If (as they say) they refuse none but the dead, and bastards, and contemners of Gods waeyes. It is a sad topicall fate which hath befallen the places they settle in, if all those grounds they cultivate bear no other fruit but such as that near Sodom Lake, which how specious soever it seems, yet proves to be but dust and emptinesse when they take them in hand, and it is no personall felicity to have the luck of the worst harlot, that theirs is alwayes the dead child, and after all their fishing for men, they rather have the fortune of those (which indeed is just about their proportion) that doe fish for pearls in Mare del Sur, where Acosta relates that there is scarce one round pearl found for an hundred raggs, and their people so desperatly evill, that no∣thing else could rectifie them but that which Antonius Augustinus borrowes from Martial to apply to Gratian, Ʋna litura to blot them all at once out of the commu∣nion; but if they refuse none but such as are dead and bastards, they cannot pass this dreadfull verdict upon them, unlesse they have convicted them to be scanda∣lously wicked, and yet they tell us we passe an uncharitable judgment upon them to ac∣count that they judge so uncharitably of those they receive not, whereas it cannot but be clear, that all are wicked whom they reject, if they refuse none but such as are wicked. Yet as truth is like light, which cannot be hid, but will find some crany to shew it self, and was anciently (saith Pierius) described Hicroglyphically by a Peach, which is like an heart, and a leafe hanging thereon in resemblance of a tongue, to shew that the tongue should adhere to the hear, and utter the truth thereof; so truly we have found their heart hanging on their tongue in this matter, and how∣ever they would else blanch the businesse, yet they have dropt a confession elswhere, that it is non-conformity to their discipline, which is the ground of their exclusion, and here they reply that scandall is not that alone for which they reiect, but they must see some measure of true godly feare, some degree of graciousnesse in those they admit, it is not enough that they have nothing against them, to defeat that title which as Church-members they have to Church-fellowship, but they require from them a farther proofe and verifying thereof by signall demonstrations of sound grace. And though we shall grant as they say, That it is a smoakie house where ordinarily the smeak breaks out, yet it doth not follow, that they make break into
every house to examine whether it be sullied with smoak or not, but rathertarry and tye up their judgement till the smoak break out, and rather suspend their cen∣sures through charity, then men by precipitation, which is noverca justitiae, and see∣ing they pretend to judge of men by their actions, what need is there of other exa∣mination, when they may be sufficiently read in those real characters, and till they can charge them with offences in particular, instanced, and evidenced in their circumstances, they should supersede the notion that they here give them of offending Brethren. Besides, Though Smoak shall break out of an house, there may be other wayes to rectifie it, then by pulling down the chimney, admonition or reproof may be a means to amend what was a miss, and perchance the fault might be in the pre∣sent ill-laying of the wood, or some violent storm, as few chimnies but smoak by such accidents, as a strong tentation and sudden passion may overbear or transport a man contrary to his constant course and frame of spirit. But though they read not as they write, nor sing as they prick (as it is said of the French) but fit the Notes according to the Ears, and to the interest of the occa∣sion, yet let them say or unsay it, we know that very many of those whom they reject or lay aside, are not justly aspersible with notorious crimes (which onely constitute scandals) and very few or none that we know, have been duly or judi¦cially convicted for such, and therefore not onely speculatively to esteem them cri¦minous, but practically to deport themselves toward them as such, seems to ly within the precincts and bounds of temerarious judgement. To stave off and evade the charge of rash judgment, — illis robur & aes triplex Circapectus crat; they make a Threefold Defence, saying, 1. That they judge not mens hearts, Nor 2. Ther final estate but present condition. 3. They make judgements by their actions. If we should gratifie them with a concession of the Hypothesis, yet the brush will not white the Wall, nor wash out the stain; we may allow their Ple, In 22 q. 60. art. 3. Ubi supr. Bald∣win, l. 4. c. 12. Cas. 7. p. 1177 Lessius l. 2. c. 29. dub. 2. p. 296. Azor. par. 3. l. 13. c. 11, pa. 1150. Filiucius tract. 40. c. 1. sect. 2. p. 386. and yet they will fail of their issue, and a Writ of Errour lye against their judgement, temerari∣ous judgement taken generally, being assensus ve certus ve incertus vel etiam dubitatio de malo proximi, quae oritur ex levibus indiciis, atque adeo insufficientibus, as Sylvius delivers it (from whom the School and Casists dissent not) and there∣of Aquinas (and Baldwin, Lessius, Azorius, Filiucius out of him) make Three degrees, 1. In ipere dubitare de bonitate alterius. 2. Certò aestimare ejus malitiam. 3. Procedere ad aliquem judicialiter condemnandum; And those may be light and insufficient reasons to warrant the 3 degree, which may justly prompt us to the 2, and those that may induce us to the 1, may not
justifie the 2; therefore though they neither judgemens hearts, nor final estate, yet if they make judgement of the present condition by such actions, Ames cas. cons. l. 5 c. 11. p. 295. as are an in∣sufficient foundation for such a superstructure, it will be rash judgement formal∣ly, although it be true judgement, as a true assertion may be a lye (as Ames ob∣serveth:) But to interpose our exceptions to their pleadings in particu∣lar, First concerning the judging of their final estate, I think that it is such a fault as covetousness was to Luther, contrary to his nature, he was never tempted with it; so I think few men do offend in this, or presume to judge of Gods eternal counsel, but only according to mens present justice, not to censure others abse∣lutely but conditionally, as they shall repent or go on in their trespasses, none be∣ing ignorant that God can raise children to Abraham out of stones, and perfect the new Creation as he did the first, out of nothing; and unless therefore they could also create something out of nothing, this part of their answer will little faisfie or conduce to their excuse. 2. Though they deny it, yet they do judge the heart, if they judge the man and his estate, for the heart is the man and makes the estate, as Apollodorus his heart told him in his dream, when he seemed to be in the boyling choldron, that it was he that did him all the mischief: If they shall think to salve that sore by the second part of Physick, which thy prevented not by the first, and shall say they mean that they judge not the heart immediatly or by intuition, but mediately by the actions and by discourse, and judge not the intentions when the actions they can∣not, Then Secondly, If the actions cannot give result and bottom to such a judgement, if more be put in the Conclusion then flowes from the Premises, and the branches sprout farther than the root can bear them, the heart is judged without or beyond the actions; but seeing every mans heart is conscious of that which Augustine saith, Totam vitam humanam circumlatraripeccatis, In Psal. 129. our justice consisting not in perfection of virtues, but remission of sins, (upon which place of Augustine Vives well n∣teth, boni sumus, non quod bene vivimus sed quod commissorum scelerum nobis fit à Deo gratia, for as our corruptions are (as the Historian said of the Germans) triumphati potius quam victi, so also consequently all our righteousness here is in ficri, non facto esse, being neither pure but mixt, (as those we call pure Elements have much impurity, onely the coelestial bodies are fully purified) nor perfect, for there sometimes want parts as alwayes degrees, and the best men are imperfect not only in latitudine entis, or in genere, but in specie also, as the learned distinguish and aliter hic non potes esse perfectus nisi scias hic te non posse esse perfectum, saith the same Father, In Psal. 38. for every regenerate man is two men, like that monster Camerarius speaks of, which was two above the navel in every part, though one beneath, which would often be at disagreement and contention, and like a Plant-animal, having some sense of heaven, yet like a vegetative drawing much from the earth, like the flying Fish, that can one while fly toward heaven, and anon is under water, and there∣fore as it was said of Seneca, he was inter Christianos ethnicus, inter ethnicos Chri∣stianus, so a sanctified person though in respect of the men of the world (as Am∣brose speaks) he be a righteous man (the denomination being taken from the bet∣ter part, and the inhaerent quality denominating the subject, though together there be an inhaesion of the contrary quality) yet in regard of pure and perfect righteous∣ness he is sinful: therefore as long as any is free from peccata sauciantia, grievous
and exitious crimes, I think there is no sufficient signe or rational cause to judge and conclude him a wicked man, for they must sure be beams whereby to build such judgment, moats will not suitain it, and he that without other premises con∣cludes him such, I think judgeth the hear: None knows so well the things of a man, as the spirit of a man which is within him, and seeing it is no easie or sudden work for a man to discern and determine of his own estate, it must consequently be more difficult and deceptious for any other to undertake it, and therefore con∣siderately Augustine saith, Tract. 90. in Iohan. we ought continere & prohibere firmas defini iones & sen∣tentias de proximo, and however some have designed and limited the signa pathogno∣monica, or the proper characters of what are the spots of Gods Children, and what are not, yet they are rather characters whereby a man is to make trial of himself, whereby the spirit in man onely can judge, and are rather signs in abstracto than in concre o, what makes a righteous man, than who is such; and though the rule be right, yet there may be error in the application, the proposition may be true, and yet the assumption be so false as to vitite the conclusion: Cont. 2. Epist. Pelag. Nos silios diaboli non faciunt quaecunque peccata (saith Augustine) peccant enim & filii Dei, if a man therefore I've without scandal, I suppose other faults can render his condition at most but doubtful, and though they could beget or foment a probable suspicion of his evill estate, 22. disput. 5. q. 4. punct. 3. p. 862. yet since opinio est asser sus sed vacillans propter conjunctam actu vel potentia pro∣pinqua formidinem, as Valentia, — unde suspicio dicitur quasi sub-aspicio qua debiltter videatur per suspicionem res, tanquam si videretr la ens sub altera, and La∣ctantius could say, Id opinatur quisque quod nescit, and Bernard, Opinio si habet as∣scrtionem temeraria est, a probable suspicion sufficeth onely ad generandum du∣bium, non ad judicandam simpliciter, as was formerly alleaged out of Suarez. And since, Honesta sama est alterum patri, enium, and fame is weighed in the oppo∣site sele against life, Et quisque habet jus naturaliter ad bonum nomen & famam, quae est bmaopinio de virtute alterius in menten stra — & proprium bonum depositum anatura in aliorum mentibus, (as Ames and Filiucius, Ʋbi supra. Sect. 4,) and then also me ior est conditio possiden is, and therefore qumdiu aliquis nen sufficienter probatur malus prae∣sumendus est bous, as was also cited out of Suarez, 22. def. 5. q. 4. punct. 3 p. .60. Suarez. ubi supra. uhi supra. Conclus. 4 p. 316. De Serm. dom. in monte l. 2. tom. 4. p. 258. L. 2. de serm. dom. in monte c. 28. Ʋbi supra. art. 4 p. 315. and seeing cjusmodi bona ex∣istima ione continetur cujusque fama, (as Valentia,) therefore uisque apud omnes debet esse bonae existimai nis quandecunque maifeste malum de ipso non constat, (as Azorius and Lessius,) but non constat de illo, (saith Sylvius,) quamdiu solum est dubiam — sufficiens ratio ad bene jud candum de proximo, est ipsum jus qued habeat ut bona de se opinio concipiatur quamdiu contraria manifeste non probatur, and in this ve∣ry reason, among others, is that Theorem rooted, which is unanimously delivered ly he School-men and Casuists, Dubia, (de personis) sunt in meliorem partem in∣ter retanda, which St. Augustine thinketh, (though perchance too rest ainedly) was that which alone was commanded, Matt. 7 1. and though it be not necessa∣ry to interpret all doubts positively in the better part, but the act of judgment may be suspended, yet even dubia rationabilia positive in meliorem partem interpretanda sunt, ex suppositione, hoc est, supposito quod re utrirque dubia aliquis actus sit eliciendus, ille debet ferri in meliorem partem, for ubi non apparent, saith Sylvius, manifesta in∣ditia de malitia alterius, si ea quae dubium movent non interpretemur in meliorem par∣tem, non habemus ipsum pro bono, hoc autem non fine ejus injuria & contemptu est, quan∣do non suppetant sufficientia argumenta; & confirmatur, frater habet jus ut de illo bene ju∣dicetur donec legitime constet contrarium, ergo suo jure fraudatur, si quis dubia non in∣terretetur in moliorem partem, and however we may (saith he) by such a positive
act expose our understanding to some error, yet it is such an error, as is not ad∣verse to prudence, Ita etiam Caie∣tan, & Valen∣tia, &c. nor the perfection of man, or the practical understanding, but onely the speculative, quamvis enim actus quo judicamus hunc hominem esse bonum, pos∣sit esse falsus, quia fortassis ille homo est sceleratus, actus tamen quo judicamus talem aest imationem hic & nunc esse formandam, est verus; prior namque pendet ex conformi∣tate ad rem, Nocere potest intellectui ut cognoscens est, pro quanto fal∣sam cognitio∣nem quando{que} ingerit sed prodest intelle∣ctui ut dirigens est, quia facit ipsum dirigere conformiter ad appetitum re∣ctum, atque per hoc intellectum ut dirigentem esse verum. Caietan in Thom. Aquin. 22. q. 60 art. 5. Ʋbisupra. posterior ex conformitate ad rectam rationem; prior actus si erretur, est a∣liquo modo malus, sed tantum secundum quid, quia neque appetitum respicit, neque ad mores pertinet, quorum tamen respectu aliquid dicitur simpliciter bonum vel malum; po∣sterior etiamsi erretur in persona, quae judieatur bona cum sit mati, est absolute bonus, ideoque alterius actus errori praeferendus, cum enim bonum morale consistat in recto or∣dine voluntatis ad finem, voluntas autem ad fivem dirigatur per dictamen rectae rationis, illad judicium est simpliciter bonum quod dirigit voluntatem ad sequendam rectam ratie∣nem, ejusmodi vero judicium est dictus posterior actus, dirigit enim voluntatem ad quod prudentia justitia & haritas dictant, ad eligendam scilcet bonam opinionē de proximo hic & nunc, quando non licet habere aliam, ne alioquin faciamus ei injariam; And however in order to cautel, to avoyd a dammage, or apply a remedy, doubts may be interpreted in the worst part, not definitively judging one to be evil, but suppo∣sitively searing he may be evil, and deporting our selves so, in respect of caution, as it he were such, yet in all punstive acts (saith Caietan) because they so low the judgment, the former rule holdeth, and therefore he concludes with this Epi∣phonema, Exista regula praelati debent subditos subditasque ex dub is factis non mali∣tiae arguere, aut punire, sed bonam de iis opinionem ut prius de iis habere, & tamen cantelas, cuodias, remediaque adhibere, ac si mali essent, provide tamen ne aliquid fiat quod famae proximi deroget, hoc exim esset injuriari illi, quod in dubiis vitandnm est. Thirdly, and howsoever other faults may rationally suffice to raise or support a speculative judgement that such is an evill man, yet practically to judge of him in this speciall respect of debarring him the Sacrament, all other offences beside such as for their greatnesse, obstinacy and notoriousnesse are scandals are levia indicia, light either in respect of the matter, or the vehemency, and cause a temerarius judgment in the third degree, and that also as well by taking the liberty of contra∣diction as of contrariety: for as to the matter they ought to be excessus peceatorum, that are punishable by such a just severity, as was produced out of Estius his Anno∣tations on the Parable of the Tares. Dr. Willet out of Zago zabo, relates, that the Aethiopians forbid none the com∣munion for any sin save murder, Synop. Contro. 13. q. 7. p. 6, 8. and though they too much restrain the matter, yet they shall too much enlarge it, that shall extend it to any thing save seclus aut af∣fine sceleri; other sores, though they may need the Epulotick of admonition, or the Cathaereticks of increpation, yet merit nor knife, nor Causticks, and such lapses I suppose the Snuff-dishes should be of purer gold, that shall cover them in order to the communion, In Psal. 99. om. 2.2. p. 23. Quid si & ipsum (saith Augustine) antequam proficeret, nemo vellet pati? si ergo quia proficit, nullum hominem vult pati, convincitur quod non profecerit; in∣tendat charitas vestra, sustinentes invicem (ait Apostolus) in dilectione, &c. non babes quod in te alius sustineat? miror si non est, sed ecce non sit, co robustior es ad caeteros su∣stinendos, quod jam non habes quod et in te alii sustineant; non sustiner is? sustine caeteros: non possum (inquis) ergo habes quod in te alii sustineant Even Seneca could say, Iniquus est, qui commune vitium singulis objicit, non est Aethiopis inter suos infigni∣tus color — quicquid itaque in alio reprehenditur, id unusquísque in suo sinu inve∣veniet,
mali inter malos vivimus, una res nos facere potest quietos, mutuae facilitatis con∣ventio: Church-censures should not be like Cob-webs (as Gonsalvo said of a Soul∣diers honor) that every small Fly should stick in them, nor must they cut off men for such small faults, (so as (they say) in Italy with a pocket stone-bow held under a Cloke, they will shoot needles to pierce a mans body, yet leave a wound scarre discernable) for if they be suffered to get over this hedge, and that to be free of scan∣dall shall not be a fence sufficient against such censures, we shall scarce know where to find them, nor where they will drive us; perhaps not onely small practicall errors, but speculative differences may at length be looked upon through such multiplying glasses, as to be thought meritorious of excommunication, and whether or no Mr. Broughton and Mr. Ainsworth proceeded so far in their controversie about Aa∣ron's Hood, whether it were of blew colour, or Sea-water green, or if Johnson Pastor of the Brownists at Amsterdam (some of whose blood runs in the veins of these men and their brethren) and his brother had not advanced to that height about the Lace and Whales-bone in his wives gown-sleeve, yet we know wiser and better men have broken out into such inordinateness, for as small a mat∣ter as an inconformable keeping of Easter. And then also as the matter must be flagitious, so also it must be notorious; that which in other judgements and estimations of men, may be vehement signes, in this case will not be such, as in no occasion we may pass judgement upon a fame; (for famae nemo credit nisi inconsideratus, quia sapiens non credit incerto, saith Tortullian) and therefore in famy (as was recited out of Vasquez) is onely sufficiens principium inquirendi) nor upon suspition, for that is insufficiens ratio condemnandi, for it being, as Aquinas defines out of Tully, opinio mali ex levibus signis, (and to judge upon light signes, Rivet. Explic. decal. tom. o∣per. 1. p. 1445. is that which constitutes and denominates the judgement temerari∣ous) or according to others is acceptio unius partis cum formidine alterius, so as it leaves the matter uncertain, for ita uni parti assentitur ut tamen credit se falli posse, & verum esse contrarium ejus quod opinatur, but we must judge none evil, unless it ma∣nifestly appear he be so, and it appears not as long as it is doubtfull, for there must be no more in the understanding than was in the sense, neither can the stream (as we find in Aqueducts) be elevated above the fountain, we can have no certain knowledge resulting from uncertain principles; so also in this case the private cer∣tain knowledge of the offence by the Minister, or one or two other single persons, is no sufficient or rationall ground for such a censure, because none may be con∣demned but by a publick and notorious knowledge of his crime, for every man hath a right, that no publick punishment be inflicted on him, but for a publick fault, and it is a morall principle, That benefits are publickly to be dispencd and di∣stributed according to the merit of particular persons, not according to the private, but publick and notorious knowledge of the dispenser and distributer, which to in∣stringe or clash with, would open a gap to innumerable scandals, Sect. 15. troubles and inju∣ties; all which hath been more clearly and copiously declared and asserted, and therefore I need but to touch it here tanquam canis ad Nilum, and go on. Lastly, not only when a man cries guilty and sayes he will amend, yet untill he gives himself the lye by a relapse, practically to judge him a wicked man, because his conversion cannot be sudden (as they declare their judgement in the subsequent Section) I fear is a judging of the heart, but when men are harmlesse and blame∣lesse, and yet are denied to be the sons of God, and being allowed onely the title of Morall men, cannot be afforded the attribute of Godly, I think this is not onely a
judging of the heart, but the very dreggs of temerarious judgement, for whereas Augustine thinks that the prohibition of judging Matth 7.1. De serm Dom. in monte, l. 2. p. 258. tom. 4. doth first forbid to reprehend that which it is uncertain with what mind it is done, and charity (as Bernard saith) should excuse the intention when it cannot the action, this contrari∣ously is to condemne the intention when the action cannot be reproved. And why onely Morall men? do they perform the duties onely of the second Table, and make no conscience of the first? The love of our brethren is the ordinary Diagnostick signe of our love toward God, yet because the rule rather holdeth negatively than affirmatively, to disprove that love to God to be unfeigned, which is not verefied by our love to our neighbour, rather than to prove that he truly loves God, who performs externall acts of love to his brother, with an affection of humanity, (un∣lesse it be also understood of true Christian Charity, whereof though our neigh∣bour be the Materiall object, Estius in 3. Sent. Dist. 27, Sect. 5. p. 29. yet God is the formall, and so since in all that are so loved, there is one reason and respect of loving, viz. God, as the chiefest good, who as such is loved above all, and to whom other things loved being considered in that respect and for such reason are referred, therefore it is one and the same love according to the habit whereby we love God and our neighbour, Ʋnus amor, duplex objectum, & thence it is evident, that since nothing can separate from it self, the love of God and our neighbour cannot be separate one from the other: but because thus to understand the love of our neighbour, were to begge the question (this being the thing controverted) therefore let them then be arraigned for the wilfull neglect and breach of the Commandements of the first table, (though the obser∣vation of the first is in most of the particulars not to be discerned by intuitive but abstractive knowledge, where the conformity of our actions to other the precepts, is the medium to prove it) if there appeare no evidence to convict them, then they must necessarily suppose, that their outward actions flow not from a principle of grace as their efficient, nor are directed to Gods glory as their finall cause, which since none can see but he to whom the heart is transparent & pervious, do they not by thus judging the root, when they cannot blemish the fruit, not onely forestall the judge∣ment of God, but usurp his peculiar throne, and are guilty of laese Majesty to in∣trench upon his royall prerogative? But as it was said by Erasmus of the times about the Nicaene Councell, Ingeniosa res est esse Christianum, so it seems it is now a fashionable thing to be a Christian, as he that weares rich stuff, yet if his clothes be not also of the fashion, he seems ridicu∣lous, so if men trim or suit not their religion according to the mode (though the fashion is very changeable) yet however like the new Moon, they may shine toward heaven, yet the earth looks upon them as without light; but I doe seriously with, that since most men love to be in fashion, there be none that took up religion as a complement, in conformity rather than concience looking losser qu eundum est, quam quò itur, and were not like some Boats on the Danew, that can onely row with the current, and as the full-bellied Oer, that alone doth swim with the stream, like Mercury, whose influences are onely borrowed from those greater planets he is in conjunction with, and like the inferior Orbs, are carried about by force of the superior, and onely dance to the tune, and keep time according to the musick which the Speares make above. For the greatnesse of thy power shall the people lye unto thee, so Junius, Piscator, and the Vulgar read Psal. 66.3. and so the Greeke Fathers expound it. But though we have sufficiently disputed and evinced it against the Papists, that
the keyes were not given to Peter alone, but in him to the whole Church, yet some men will nevertheless seise and appropriate them to themselves, as if no other but those they hold in their hand, would set open the gates of Heaven, where is no going in, unless in such and such a party, nor admission, but under such or such a notion, and as the Statute of 11, H 7. appoints that the Standard of weights and measures shalt he kept in some certain Towns onely, so also it were constituted, that no weights or measures of the Sanctuary (or rather Sanctity) could be al∣lowed, unless sealed and afficred according to the Standard of such a Town or such persons, hoc sanctum est si ip, e velit & non aliter, & quos volumus sancti sunt, and perchance as the Carthusian said to Comines of Galeazo, Nos in hac terra solemus om∣nes appellare sanctos qui bone faciunt nobis, if to other gists he add not this, to have one of some sort of men, that — erit sibi magnus Apollo, from whose Tripos he shall fetch his Oracles, and to whose Altar he bring his offer∣ing, tam bona cervix simul ac jussero demetur (as Caligula was used to say.) But howsoever some are not forward to purchase credit with them at the price of their consciences, by concurring in a separation, (for nihil charius emitur quam quod conscientia emitur, quae dum integra est facile consolatur famae egestatem) nevertheless let them judge as they list, this is the source of others comfort, De Pastor. c. 7. that as their hearts are not mens Senate (as Chrysostom speaks) and therefore they should not judge them, so since oportet nos omnes exhiberi ante tribunal Christi, non te timeo, non e∣nim potes evertere tribunal Christi & constituere tribunal Donati (as Augustine pa∣thetically) and elsewhere, homo sum de area Christi, palea si malus, Cont. lit. Petil. l. 3 c. 12. granum si bo∣nus, non est hujus areae ventilabrum lingua Petiliani — quicquid autem in ipsa frumenta maledictorum calumniarumque jactaverit, fides eorum exercetur in terris, mer∣ces augetur in c lis. Augustine (they say) makes it pride to contemne discipline, and we assent to it, so it be a discipline that doth not bring some men into causeless contempt and car∣ry a suspicion of, or a tentation to pride in others. When it is said in the Gos∣pel, Jesus answered, when none spake to him, some interpret it, that he answer∣ed to truth speaking in his conscience: Whether the Apologists in the excuse of them∣selves for pride, answer to their own consciences, I know not, but (as I conceive) that the paper never taxed their persons with pride, so here in this place it did not impute to their way, that it did bear appearance, or might prove an occasion of pride, unless as pride is the root of every sin (since none turns away from the chie∣fest good but out of an inordinate affection in some thing or other of his own ex∣cellency (which is the effence of pride) or as more specially it is the source of judging and despising others, or may be a symptomatical disease consequent to this other. Pride therefore like it self usurps and takes place of other things here, and we shall bid it sit lower, and shall trasfer that consideration to the 21 Section, when we come to dissect Diotrephes, whereof pride is the very form or proper passion. In the mean time, to tell us, First, that religious courses have been usually bran∣ded with pride, and rigor and sullenness, (which is but commune argumentum) since such misprissions are not the proper passions of religion, and this being held forth in relation to themselves and their defence, doth Secondly, imply, that they are humble and godly, and that we say the contrary, which is ignorantia clenchi, for we desire not to beat down Plato's pride with pride, nor think Satan can cast out Satan, and therefore will not commit the fault while
we are decrying it, that is, to judge others while we dispute against judging o∣thers, we are not tempted to think the Apologists ungodly, we define not of their state, we onely by way of admonition tell them their way and actions have the ap∣pearance of evil. And thirdly doth insinuate, That their separation is an holy and not an humerous singularity, (which is but petitio princlpii,) and Fourthly is but an appeale for the truth of all this to their consciences, which is one∣ly testimonium domesticum. And besides, in propriis caecutimus omnes, and as the reflex beam is weaker than the direct, so we see our selves more partially than we do others. And also Augustine adviseth, curemus etiam nihil facere quod veniat in suspicionem, and elsewhere renders the reason, duae res sunt, conscientia & fama, con∣scientia necessaria est tibi, fama proximo tuo, qui confidens conscientiae negligit fa∣mam crudelis est; yet in all this, if they will sit down like Narcissus to contemplate their own image, we shall not here trouble the water, nor bring up truth from the bottome to represent them another face, (not of their state, but of those acti∣ons) though elsewhere we suppose we have held them forth a glass that may better shew them their feature, which I hope will not find the like fate with that in the fable, which the old woman cast away in anger for shewing her more odd and ill fa∣voured than she pleased her self with a conceit of; all this is but shooting at Ro∣vers not at Pricks, and therefore if the arrows did fly as thick as to darken the sun, (as they are more like to bring darkness than light) yet we may securely not fight (as Diaeneces said by occasion of the boast of the multitude of the Persian shafts) but sit down in the shaddow. SECT. XIX. 1 Cor. 13.7. considered Whether they suspect not much evil, believe or hope little good of their People. Of examining the knowing, to be exemplar to the ignorant, or to manifest their humility. Whether it be their duty to submit to such a passive examination. Whether to call them to it, be not directly to detract from them, or interpreta∣tively to defame them. Small matters are often great in consequence. 2 Cor. 11.2. examined. The properties of charity in hoping and believing. All the ignorance charged, is not to know it to be duty to submit to their commands. Whether conversion may be sudden. Whether the Church have loss or gain by these Waies of pretended reformation. THese Sections of theirs, which like the Gemini, when one goes out the other appears, are twins indeed, and very like, ovum ovo non similius (as the Poets sable the Gemini were produced out of eggs) — facies non omnibus una, Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.
All these are but lusoria tela, non decretoria, wherewith they do ventilaze non pugna∣re, (as Seneca,) and flourish rather than fight: They scornfully upbraid and des∣pise my writing, as being Rhetorick onely; I wish I could say that theirs were such, the Palm may give a shrewd blow (the Emperor Maximinus therewith struck down a Tribune to the ground) and if it reach home and fall with force, makes greater impression than a loose and half clinched fist of a weaker armo, but let an equal Ar∣biter judge, whether they deal not here with me, as Tissaephernes did with Xenophon, who followed him where ever he marched, yet at distance, and came not to any close Encounter, but onely raised fire and smoak about him. The Scripture hinted at by me, they say must be 1 Cor. 13.7. but they might have pleased to have took notice also of the 5. verse, and to have taken in totum telum, those texts fully and plainly demonstrate, (as is liquid enough by the words with∣out clearing thereof by consent of many Interpreters) that it is the property and cha∣racter of charity, Omnia tolerare aut continere, est enim, saith Menochius, metaphora sumpta a tignis, pondus aliquid fulcientibus, vel a vasis quae nihil exudant liquoris — valde proprium charitatis aliorum defectus tolerare, & silentio premere quae aliis nocitura sunt, aut famam denigrando, aut alia ratione incommodum aliud afferendo, not to suspect the worst of any man, not to reckon or impute evil to any man, as the Greeks, Vatabius, and Dr. Hammond, thinks the word  signifies; in me∣lius omnia interpretatur, as Aretius; non facile mali quicquam suspicatur, dubia in partem accipit meliorem, as Grotius; & omnia meliora credit & sperat, as A Lapide; etiamsi in speciem vita & mores minus respondeant, imodiversum praese ferant, etiamsi pa∣rum spei conceptae respondeant mores, as Marlorat out of Meyr; meliora semper defide∣rat & subsequutura sperat, as Bulliuger, and inverts the verse, saith Martyr, and saith Qui non est hodie cras magis aptus erit, and it inclines a man to believe without prejudice all the good that he hears or can have any ground in charity to believe of him, to hope what he believes not, Cas. Consci. l. 5. c. 15. p. 296. Ames. Explicat. de∣cal oper. tom. 1. p. 1445. and never so far to despair of his repentance, as to give over the using all probable means that may reclaim him, as Hammond paraphraseth, & therfore Ames, upon this sole ground that charity thinketh no evil, layeth the foundation of that conclusion, that doubt∣full things concerning persons are to be interpreted in the better part, and Rivet inferres, that evil suspitions, though they break not out into full judgement, are condemned by the Law, because charity which is the end of the Law is not suspiti∣ous, as appears 1 Cor. 13.5. and how then can it suite with this eulogy of charity, or be conformable to this character, to suppose and believe the worst of so many, rather than to hope the best, and to have them in suspition, when of all doubtless it cannot be a violent suspition, and for all of them there cannot be vehement signes to warrant it, and when of the most or a considerable multitude, their condition can at most be but doubtful, yet to interpret that doubt in the worst part, and to improve and pursue that suspition, so as to suspend them of the Sacrament till the light of further triall have dispeld this cloud of suspition under which they lie, for ignorance or sinfulness, and in the interim to frustrate them of that means which might make them better, and to renounce the hope that they may be imbettered by it, even when the conversation of very many, if not the most, holds forth nothing that might be obstructive to such hope? if they be charitable, why do they suspect so much, believe and hope so little? Ʋt quisque est vir optimus, ita alios sui fimiles facile suspicatur, onely evil dispositions are of evil suspitions, (as to eyes vitiated with the yellow jaundice all things appear yellow) and in this sense also, quicquid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis: If they suspect not, why do they seek to make such trials and researches of men? for who makes any inquisitive examination for discovery of that which he hath not some doubt and suspition of? this was that which the paper sought to be satisfied of, — fari jubet, & responsa reposcit, Ordine cuncto suo. — Quaerenti talibus Illi, The particulars of 1 Cor. 13.7. are in the judgement of the learned to be referred to God not man: I wish the Apologists which are so eager to examine others, did better know how to express themselves, that we needed not so often to examine them of their sense and meaning, so ambiguously do they here deliver themselves, as to leave it as flexible to a construction, that God believeth and hopeth all things, as that a charitable man (or charity concretively) believeth and hopeth all that is to be be∣lieved of God and hoped from him. But because we are perswaded the Apologists are no way sowred with the leven of Vorstius, and because the later sense is that which is delivered by the Interpreter they quote, we shall so also understand them, and concede that several Expositors (especially the Latines of the middle ages) do so expound it, but they are notwithstanding born down by a stronger current of In∣terpreters, and ciearly outshined by the light of that truth naturally beaming from the context, and though the Apologists have a Velleity, yet they have no will to con∣tradict it. They deny therefore, that they are without hope of all, or suspect all. And that may be a truth if there be but one whom they hope well of, and suspect not; but do they not suspect the most, and the far greatest part of their people? else why do they not admit them till probation have cleared up and set them out of suspition? And however the general rule may have sme exception, and whatever blanch they give to their trial of some particular persons, whom (they say) they examine to be examples to others, not to take satisfaction to themselves, yet the general reason whereupon that examination is bottomed, is a suspition and unsatisfiedness they have of men, and those few are brought forth to be tried to give a slide unto, and to facilitate the triall of the rest, and so in the last resolution and remote and mediate impulsive, suspition is the cause of their probation also, and is causa causae, quia causati; And if they suspect not all, yet if that suspition of some be not vio∣lent, or the signes vehement, it is as sinfull to suspect their people distributively, as well as collectively; for eadem estratiopartium & torius, as sinfull aeque, though not aequaliter, the same formall and intensive sin, though not the same gradually and ex∣tensively, and though a probable suspition may warrant a triall, and a Metaphysicall evidence, (as Suarez speaks) be not alwayes necessary whereupon to give judgment in morall things, yet a morall certainty is pre-requisite for censuring any to be debarrred the Sacrament, and the crime that shall merit it must be publick and notorious, and so consequently be past an ordinary or probable suspition. Such as are removed beyond suspition of ignorance are examined, say they 1. For ex∣ample to others; but they that professe to be satisfied with nothing but Scripture, might have remembred, that omnis homo exse aestimat alterum, and conceiving us be of the like principle, they should have therefore offered us some precept or ex∣ample out of Scripture for examining such as are elevated above all doubt of igno∣rance, onely to bring in those of a lower Form: (for so they phrase it) If when per∣sons of greater elevation in the world; may probably be suspected to be grossly igno∣rant
of the things of God, they had called such under examination for example and encouragement of those which are of lower station, yet obnoxious to the like suspition, this were free from exception and worthy of commendation, but when there is transitio à genere in genus, that knowing men must be brought under the discipline to endear it, and to make it more receptible with the ignorant, this is to do an apparent wrong to some, that others may appear not to be wronged, and calls to my remembrance the history which Seneca relates of Piso, who though he were à multis vitiis integer, ye being one cui placuit pro constantia rigor, and having condemned a Souldier upon suspition to have slain his fellow whom he brought not back, and upon the point of execution his fellow returning, and the Centurion bringing both back to Piso, to manifest the innocency of the condemned person, Piso as if the extending and multiplying the injustice, could lessen the odium there∣of, condemnes not onely those two, but the Centurion also, because his commands ought not to be disputed whether right or wrong, Honestior illi pertinacia videtur quam poenitentia: which that can warrant a notional examination, & give it any firm root, is a suspition lest men should be ignorant, as that which can warrant and sup∣port excommunication, are crimes notorious, obstinately continued in after ad∣monition, if therefore they will examine, and suspend untill they have been exami∣ned, such as they are not ignorant of to be knowing, to smooth and levigate the way by their example to the examination of those that are ignorant, by some pro∣portion of like reason, why may they not excommunicate innocent persons to per∣swade and induce such as are flagitious, patiently and humbly to submit to those censures? 2. The more pliant such men are, the more they think their humility will commend their knowledge; As it was answered of old to him that perswaded a Democraticall government, That he should first begin to set it up in his own house, so we shall desire they would rather manifest their own humility in not exacting this subjecti∣on, than to perswade others to demonstrate theirs by undergoing it. But it seems as Brennus, when the full weight of money was made up for the ransome of Rome, put his sword ino the Scales, and would have that weighed out also; so though men have their knowledge to the full weight, yet they must also acknowledge the power and authority that these mn have to impose upon them a farther load. But certainly to lay needlesse burdens upon men, and then perswade them that it be∣comes their humility to undergoe them, comes somewhat too neer that of Julian, when he struck the Christians upon one cheek, and told them they were commanded to turn the other. 3. The tryll of such may be necessary (but if it onely may be, it is not certaine that it is so) relatively to the Church and the work of reformation, but I have elswhere examined this reason for examination, and I hope have shewed cause sufficient to suspend and cast it out, but hving already perchance too long troubled the Reader about it, I will not here seeth, Kid in his mothers milk, that is, as Philo morali∣zeth it, adde trouble to trouble. 4. They do in the 21 Section bring forth another Reason, Because such as are able and godly, so know not their abilities as to oppose them against their duty. But he must have very poor abilities whom they can without better Arguments impose up∣on, that it is the duty of any knowing man to degrade himself from one of the Fideles to be one of the Catechumeni, and to make so low a stoop to that which hath an appearance of evil, viz. of ignorance, and to be accessory to the stealing from
himself the reputation of a man of knowledge, and suffer himself to be practically taken for an ignorant person: As it hath been said of Women, That their comport∣ment is a better fence to their Chastity then their negative, which denies without denial, and secures even from tempting, and that she hath forfeited somewhat of modesty, that hath not forestalled all sollicitatiō; as that he comes too neer that comes to fetch a denial, so here in this case he is somewhat garbled, that is only questio∣ned, and though he pass the tryal, yet it is a diminution to be put to it, and a dispa∣ragement, that (as Socrates said to one that excited him to defend himself against the calumnies of Aristophanes) his Conversation had not made his Defence before∣hand. It cannot (unlesse per antiphrasin) be their duty subiici humanis praesumptionibus, when as religionem, quam paucissimis & manifestissimis Sacramentorum celebrationum sacramentis misericordia Dei liberam voluit, Epist. 120. c. 19. servilibus oneribus premunt, as Augu∣stine speaks; nor so cheaply to give up their liberty, in a kind of blind obedience (for we cannot see any reason in the commands, and it is an obedience that befits only the blind and ignorant) and to let them build high to dam up other lights, and as the Papists at one part of Summer Masses (though for another mystery) do put out all the Candles save one, so to permit them interpretatively to conclude at the celebration of the Sacrament, that only the Pastor hath light, and the rest of the people have none, nor are they engaged in duty to bow down that these may go over; and as was said of Pompey the great, to let them become great by their diminution, & like Valerian to Sapores, to become their footstoole to mount on horse-back, and when they are in the saddle, and hold the reins, who knows how far, or how fierce∣ly they may use their spurs to ride? For though the things at first aspect seem but small, yet like some seeds, they are great in the virtue and consequence. A Deed of Gift of all is executed and perfected only by the delivery and giving up of one parcel of the Goods, and there may be livery and seisin had and taken of a great Lordship only by the giving and receiving of one turfe of Earth; if we give way to remove the old Land-marks, who can either fore-see or undertake where they will fix their bounds? As long as none may be shut out from the Sacrament, but for palpable ignorance or notorious wickedness, we know what gives us a good and indefeasible estate of Free hold, and what can forfeit it, but if we must all be se∣questred before we have pleaded and proved our title in their Courts, and at their Bars, and until our fitness and worthiness have been weighed in their beams, without any certain standard set down and determined, but the Laws are only in scrinio pectoris, sure we are all but Tenants at will, or hold only by the copy of their countenance; and if we so far resign our liberty, and subject our selves to such a power (as Philip the 2. said of his Father Charles the Emperour) the second day of our resignation will be the first day of our repentance; and if this people will be so deceived, I will not say with Cardinal Caraffa, let them be deceived; but only, if when the Priests will bear rule, the people will love to have it so, what will they do in the end thereof? And whatever moderation they may pretend, or for a while practise (although sufficient for the day is the evil thereof) yet who can bind the influences to be sweet, or lose the bands if they should be cruel, of those stars that shall arise to morrow, Quenquam posse putas mores narrare futuros? Hic mihi si fueris tu Leo, qualis eris? Neither are we apt to believe that their government which begins so roughly, will
commence more sleek and smooth, or be like that Viper in Chiaca, which is poyson in the morning, but not at night. It is a most impolitick and unstable security which is not rooted in the limitation of the power, more than in the tempers of those that manage it, cui plus licet quam par est, plus velit quam licet, for men are too apt to be like those little Crabs Carinades, which first get into little shells, and pro∣spering there to more growth, remove still from lesse into greater, and are too often found like the Indian Taddy, which is sweet in the morning, but being shined upon and warmed by the Sun, turns sowre. What concernment can it hld with duty to take Physick enforced upon them when they are not sick, and to receive a Salve that is proper for another sore? that which may be a wholesome medicine for curing a disease in one, may cause it in a∣nother; this may be a proper recipe for an ignorant person, but renders a man of knowledge interpretatively ignorant; like as Myrth stops a bleeding vein, & makes a sound to bleed; and Trifolium laid to a wound made by a Viper heals it, but put to whole flesh causeth the same pain that the stinging of a Viper doth What obliga∣tion of duty can it have, to give proof of that which cannot be doubted, to satisfie those that are already convinced, and to translate the Stage into the Church, ma∣king some Histrionically to personate that which they are not, and a knowing man to play the part of an ignorant, only for a shew and in a kind of pageant? And the Marcionites who used to give Baptisme to men after they were dead that had not received it in their life, and set one under the bed to answer interrogatories for him, might have defended their pageant (which Chrysostom and Epiphanius so deride) with this specious pretence, that it served to set forth the necessity of Baptisme (in respect of the Precept) and to excite others that were alive to partake it, as well as the Catechizing of men grounded in and approved for knowledge, is here suppor∣ted by this counterfeit colour, that it conduceth to supple others that may need to undergo this tryal. They cannot by overmuch Charity be prodigal of Church Priviledges, and therein of Christs blood. Aquinas 22. q. 119. art. 3. I shall not remember them that it is determined not only in the Ethicks but in the School, that the Covetous man is more deteriorate than the prodigal, and that upon this score of reason, because prodigality is beneficial to many, and more approximate to liberality, a more plausible and endearing habit, and more easily to be rectified, though these circumstances perchance might not ineptly be applyed to this case; but I shall first deny, that there is any inordination of giving beyond the measure of reason, to whom, and for what, and as it ought not, for time, place or manner (which carries the definition of prodigality) when the Sacrament is ex∣hibited to those that are not cast out for notorious wickedness, but is rather an act of justice, as it respects their debt, and of charity, as it regards anothers good, and to prove this, this whole discourse is a medium. 2. It seems then that Baptisme is no Church privilege, Dr. Morton, Cathol. appeal for Protest. l. 2. c. 22. sect, 15. p. 108. and that Ambrose af∣firming that in Baptisme there is the invisible blood of Christ, and Augustine say∣ing that every one Baptised, before he eat of the Bread of the Eucharist, is notwith∣standing by vertue of Baptisme partaker of the body and blood of Christ, were both grosly mistaken (though our Divines have alleaged those testimonies against the Papists to shew the Fathers spake the same of the Sacramental Element of Water, which they did of those Bread and Wine) Or else in Baptizing all the Infants of their Congregations, they have a commission to be prodigal only of such Church privileges and of Christs blood also in such manner, as they shall think fit and ex∣pedient,
and as it shall be subservient to their ends and interests. 3. Not to insist on here, what hath been considered elsewhere, how farre the partaking of the word and prayers, is a Church-privilege, yet the blood of Christ, is as well held forth and offered to us in the word preached, as in those visible and tangible words, the Sacrament, and we drink the blood of Christ, when we hear his word (as Origen expresseth it) it is the same thing in both, though in a different manner, as hath been formerly demonstrated. Paul was jealous and afraid, Diodat. Annot. in utrumque locum. In locum. Ardenter vos in Deum de∣pereo. Menoc. annot. in loc. yet not uncharitable. Paul had indeed a jealous care of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.2. but it was not so much a distrust as a desire to keep them in union with Christ, Ambio vos Dei zelotypia, metaphora à zelo pa∣rauymphi, pro gloria sponsi, & salute sponsae (saith Piscator) non patier aemulos pseudo∣apostolos qui vos quasi virginem meam ambiunt (as A Lapide) and consonantly A∣quinas and Estius, and Ostendit (saith Calvin) cur desipiat (gloriando) nam hominem zelotypia quasi transversum rapit, and he was afraid of the Galatians, Gal. 4.11. for declarat pro iis suam solicitudinem, saith Estius, and solicitudo is onely rationabile slu∣dium ad aliquid consequendum, but let it be properly fear, which is any expectation of an impendent evill, or ex imaginatione futuri mali corruptivi  dolorem inserentis per∣turbatio quadam ac dolor, there was evident ground and cause sufficient for such a fear, and we do not dream that a just fear cannot be compatible with charity, but nevertheless that fear did onely move to an admonition or reproof, and there did rest, it did not transport him to divine of their estate, and suspend them from the Sacrament, we impugne not all doubtings or suspitions of others, if the signes from whence they result be not light, nay we have conceived that in order to cautell, or admonition, for avoiding a detriment, or applying a remedy, even doubtful things may be interpreted in the worst part, Silvius in 22. q. 60. art. 4. p. 317. not definitively judgeing another to be ill, but suppositively fearing he may be such, and demeaning themselves externally in these respects as if he were such, for such acts neither are nor include a judgement of another as evill, but involve onely a judgement that they ought to be cauious, and wary and tender of them, but we only limit & prescribe them to abstain from what may be defamatory and poenall, for else they will goe farther than the Apo∣stles example, or any line of Scripture will reach or extend unto. What they say of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, his trying some, we have elswhere made triall of, and shewed it can be no Angel tutclar for them or their course. Charity (they say) is not blind, but sure it is so dul-sighted in nothing, as in pry∣ing into, and censuring other mens faults, and especially their state and conditi∣on, it hath eyes clear from all vitiating humors which receive the species according to their tinctures and dispositions, it hath no close nor contracted pupill whereby (according to the Opticks) mens faults seem bigger than they are, but large and dilated, whereby they rather appear less, and is contrariwise affected toward their graces. They are not bound to hope contrary to their knowledge and experience: then it seems they have broken the bands in sunder that Charity laid on them, for it is the pro∣perty and Eulogy thereof to hope that good of men (that it may in future be obtai∣ned) which they cannot discern at present, to hope that which they cannot believe, Etiam si in speciem vita & mores minus respondeant, imò diversum praese ferant, as was formerly alleaged. But we know not by what lights the Apologists behold them (as there are lights
of such composition as set off all that are seen by them in ugly and monstrous shapes, nor through what glasses they look (as there are Dioptricks which repre∣sent things in other postures and forms than in truth they are) or what suffusio no∣tha may be in their eyes, which so depraves the sight, that the clouds and vapours within, seem to be motes without: but unless they can see things invisible, or that which no man else is capable to discern, they can see nothing in the greatest part of their people which may retrench or forbid, not onely a charitable but a rationall hope, that they are such as are admissible to the Sacrament. And whatsoever they may pretend to know by some of them, yet as long as it is onely by a private and no publick and notorious knowledge, it is no sufficient cause to debarre them of the communion. But how many of them have been judicially censured for notorious wickedness? How many of them have they convinced of any great inordinateness in their wayes, persisted in after admonition? Nay how many have they privatly admonished of this or that exorbitancy, before they have rendred them as heathens and publicans? and yet this is evident to us ought to be the method of their duty, and that the light∣ning should precede the thunder, and fulmen monitrium goe before discutiens, and however it seems they think them, (as Aristippus said to Aeschines) so insana∣ble, that they deserve not to be admonished, yet be their hearts Rook, they should first be spoken unto to bring forth the waters of repentance, before they be stricken with the rod. But that which follows renders it evident, that their suspition is not founded in any wickedness or ignorance detected in them, which may be privative of the Sacra∣ment, but because they have not discovered in them some signes positive of grace, for they say it is not against charity to suspect ignorance and unfitness when the contrary is no way discovered, but we hope it is sufficiently confirmed in the pre∣cedent Section; Ʋt quandiu aliquis non sufficienter probatur malus, praesumendus est bonus, & sufficiens ratio ad bene judicandum de proximo est ipsum jus quod habet ut bo∣na opinio de se concipiatur, quamdiu contraria manifeste non probatur, since suppo∣sito quod re utrinque dubia aliquis actus sit eliciendus, ille debet ferri in meliorem par∣tem, and as in other things, so especially in order to admission to the Sacrament, doth this rule hold. But what ever goodness may be in men, yet if they walk not in their way, it is to no end, for they have such an  here, as might make Archimedes leap out of the Bath again; let a man be as learned as Abulensis of old, of whom it was said, Hic stupor est mundi, qui scibile discutit omne, or Scaliger of late, of whom Casaubon saith, Nomen absolutissimae eruditionis, non ho∣minis, yet he is but an ignorant if he submit not to the tryall of his knowledge in their way, for he (they say) shewes his ignorance of his duty. Socrates said he knew this one thing, that he knew nothing, and some have been very ignorant of one thing especially, viz. wherefore they should be accounted so ignorant, but the my∣stery is now unravelled, probus, innocens, &c. cujus unum est, sed magnnm vitium quod est poeta, this is that primo cognitum, that which —Si nescis nihil est si caetera noscis, and perhaps — si noscis nihil est sicaetera nescis, and perchance a lesser mass of knowledge (and sanctity too) will pass for full
weight in one that knows this point of obedience, when a greater will not, where this hath not been learned, as the same Counter in one place stands but for one, in another for an hundred. This must be a thirteenth Article added to the Creed, such as the Popes supremacy is called by Bellarmire, Summa totius rei Christianae, and therefore if Queen Elizabeth would have acknowledged that, she might have had content by indult in other things from Pius 5. other matters may be connived at, but saith Pope Boniface we declare, affirm, define and pronounce, that it is altogether necessary to salvation, to be subject to the Bishop of Rome; and as he told Philip the fair of France, they that maintain the contrary, we hold them mad∣men. If they know any to be an often swearer or guilty of those debauches they speak of, let them be duly cast our, if they go on still in their trespasles, obstinately after admonition, for admonition, veluti est quadam diaeta aegrotantis animae, as Clement, and it is an aphorisme of Hippocrates, Cuicunque potest per alimenta restitui sanitas fu∣giendus est penitus usus medicamentorum, but till a man be cut off for immedicable, if he approach the table, and cry guilty and say he will amend, (as they speak) they have not yet shewed any warrant to reject him, and I think to receive him is more suitable to that which God (our righteousness being but an inchoative imitation and weak resemblance of that in our heavenly father, whose indulgence infinitely furmounteth ours) commands us to do towards our brother, who if he sin a∣gainst us seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to us saying I repent, we shall forgive him, Luke 17.4. Quomodo ergo (saith Bullinger) fi∣deles ministri adeo facile (ut Anabaptistae volunt) a caena excluderent & separarent homines peccatores, Advers. Ana∣bapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 231. sed tamen petentes gratiam dei? & qui hoc testantur eo ipso quod accedunt ad canam, quandoquidem dominus ipse qui optime potuisset hoc faccre, in Juda proditore hoc non fecit, nos autem miseri homines ex depravatione naturae nostrae alioqui suspiciosi sumus & saepe hominibus nullam habemus fidem? &c. And we find in Scrip∣ture also such presidents as may warrant an admission in such a case. The Jaylor from a purpose and attempt to have destroyed himself, came immediately to know what he should do to be saved, and was received to the Sacrament of Baptisme, without time taken to make tryal of the sincerity of his conversion, and such or worse we have shewed was the condition of Simon Magus, who yet found a present reception: besides to doubt of their repentance till the insincerity thereof be mani∣fested by a recidivation, is (I conceave) to judge the heart (which they protest against) seeing there are no internal actions from whence that judgment can result, August. de fide & operib. c. 17 tom. 4. p. 16. Qui seculo saltem ver bis etiamsi factis non renunciant (saith Augustine) veniunt qui∣dem & inter triticum seminantur, & in area congeruntur, & ovibus aggregantur & retia subeunt, & convivantibus admiscentur, and he there thinks, both that an ex∣ternal profession that they will amend, doth render susceptible of Baptisme, and that here is the like reason for admission to the Lords Table as to Baptisme. As I have no propensness to quest after that point which they have sprung here, whether sound conversion may be suddenly wrought, so I have no incumbency to pursue it, not onely First, because though they seem absolutely to deny that it can be a sudden work, yet they again mollifie this hard saying, and affirm that commonly it is not so, and that implies it sometimes is so, and therefore may possibly at any time be, and therefore at no time can they either infallibly or safely conclude that conversion is not sound because it is sudden.
And secondly, because this carries no aspect or reflection upon the point in hand, for they need not in order to admission, require more in any intelligent per∣son than to be free of scandal, and therefore well may suspend their further disqui∣sition whether he be truly converted, the title to the Sacrament being not found∣ed in regeneration, but Church membership with a dogmatical faith; yet since they put this upon our account, that to believe a wicked man may be suddenly made good, is a neglect of Gods revealed will, and a flying to his absolute power, we cannot but summarily tell them, that by their asserting the contrary, they pre∣sumptuously limit and contract his power, and falsly pretend and impose upon his revealed will; his Spirit like the wind blows where (and how) it listeth, and though Naturalists teach us some signs and presages of approaching winds, yet often they rise suddenly without any Prognosticks, and so the Spirit comes suddenly in a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind (and that as well in respect of charis as charisma) the dispensations of God are various, and his workings unlimited, neither doth he alwaies take the same way to the same end, he is a most free A∣gent and restrained by nothing but his proper will, and if we look for the revela∣tion of that will in his Word, we find conversion there set forth under the notion of such things as are not onely subitous but instantaneous: It is called a creation, Aquin. 1. q. 63 art. 5. and not onely the School resolves us, that creatio est in instanti, but Paraeus adds ad creationem tres conditiones requiruntur,, 1. Ut aliquid fiat ex materia nulla 2. Vel ex materia indisposita. 3. Absque motu, in instanti. It is named Regeneration, and generation is by consent of all Philosophers in an instant: tis true though the introduction of the form be in a moment, In Gen. c. 1. v. 1. p. 26. yet there are praevicus dispositions thereunto, and so we grant there is in regeneration, though the form of the new man be produced instantly, and such a disposing hability is the general vocation and common graces in such as they dispute of, what other preparations there may often be, yet as it is not necessary that alwaies there should be some, for God can raise Children out of stones to Abraham, so neither that they should be the same, for the subject and manner of operating is divers, and if the spirit of bondage do alwaies harbenger the spirit of adoption, yet it doth not follow, that he must enter very long before him, or come with any great noyse or publick notice, and therefore neither also is it certain that those preparations can∣not be short and sudden, for grace is an habit infused by Gods Spirit, not acqui∣site by multiplied precedent acts, and Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti gratia, saith Ambrose, Ubi deus magister est quam cito discitur quod docetur, as Leo, and good dispositions as they are but grace in fieri, the Aurora thereof and preludial beames of the Sun of Righteousness rising in their hearts, so they are properly pre∣parations to the manifestation of grace rather than the existence thereof; Arg. in disp. advers. thes. p. 356. 1.2. q. 112. art. 2. operantur ex justificatione non in justificationem, so as we may hold with Camero, Darimedi∣um non inter naturam & gratiam, sed inter naturam & ultimum gratiae complementum, and affirm with Aquinas, praeparatio hominis ad gratiam habendam quaedam est simul cum ipsa infusione gratiae — cum homo ad gratiam se praeparare non possit, nisi deo cum praeveniente & movente ad bonum, non refert utrum subito vel paulatim aliquis ad perfectam praeparationem veniat.
It is thirdly stiled Illumination, light being the first thing in the new creation of the little World, and Aristotls hath taught us, that lux momentanea actione se explicat. It is fourthly entitled a Resurrection from the dead, which is no successive mo∣tion, nor hath any precedent alterations. Camero defines conversion to be velle bo∣num quod noluisti, nolle malum quod voluisti, and Volition is ranked by Philoso∣phers among those mutations which are instantaneous. And if we shall inspect into the works of God in converting men, and for that consult with the sacred sheets, we fall upon examples of Matthew and Zaccheus the Publicans, of the Thief on the Crosse, of Paul and (him from whom some think he borrowed his name, as Scipio the African did his cognomen from the Country he conquered) Sergius Paulus, Lydia, the Jaylor, &c. and not onely single starrs but Constellations of 5000, (whereof some doubtless were converted to a special faith, as all were to a common) that cast beams of light upon this truth, and we cannot suddenly convert our selves to behold the vocation of any, but it was a sudden conversion, and if we shall research for the witness of time and light of truth in other histories, we shall encounter so many instances of conversions wrought even in an instant, as make caena dubia, where we are less troubled where to find examples than which to chuse, being so many — quot flores Sicula nascuntur in herba, Quotque ferat dicam terra Cilissa crocos. But as tria sunt omnia, so I will onely crop three of the flowers of the spring of the Church, which history, as the Herald or Embassador of antiquity, hath record∣ed. First, that lapsed Schollar of St. John, whom he Apostle with one word, when he was turnd thief upon the high way to damnation, made to stand to deliver up his heart to God. Secondly, Genesius who in a full theater under Dioclesian scoffing at Christian Religion, at the same time became a confessor of the faith, and a Martyr of Christ, and with his own blood washt out the aspersions he had cast on Christi∣anity. Thirdly, Anthony, who travelling upon those occasions of the world which ingrost all his heart, passing by a Chappel and hearing that portion of Scripture read, If thou wilt be perfect go sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me, instantly took up a resolution neither to follow on his journey, nor the world, but onely to go after Christ, and to enrich the poor with his wealth (forthwith distributed) and himself with hea∣venly treasure. And if we reflect on later ages, and autumnal flowers of history, we may refresh our memories with the examples First, of Waldus, who had a sudden rise to life by seeing one suddenly fall dead. Secondly, the Marquesse of Vico, who by one elegant simile in a sermon of Peter Martyrs was perswaded to lay down all his honors and interest at the feet of Christ. And thirdly, Junius, unto whom the reading of the beginning of St. Iohns Gospel, without any previous dispositions, was the corruption of an Atheist and the generation of a faithful servant of God.
Not to mention what a malignant influence their contrary doctrine hath to blast all hopes of a death bed repentance, whereof yet as none ought to presume, so none should despair, and whereof we may perchance fitly say, what the Cardinal perversly said of the doctrine of justification by faith, It was a good supper do∣ctrine, but not so seasonable at breakfast; yet I shall offer to be considered, that since our Divines who have listed themselves in defence of Free-grace against the Pelagians (distinguisht by their several regiments) to beat down merit of con∣gruity, the power and good use of Free-will, the acquist of the habit of grace by frequent virtuous acts, have made use of this argument; that God very often doth not onely call those that are furthest of, even the greatest sinners, but stops them in their fiercest carreir, and suddenly turns them in their full course, when they had neither hability, nor promptness, nor inclination to any good, whether then the Apologists their cancelling this Hypothesis, and rasing the foundations of this argument, by denying such sudden conversions of wicked men, be not an im∣beseling of armour and habiliments of warr provided for those souldiers, which is Felony by Statute. What is more raked together in this Section of the prostituting of Gods Ordinance, (sure they have made a prostitute of this reason, tis so commonly abused) Of ampling the blood of the Covenant, (of which no account is made when it is done thereunto as held forth in the word) Of the incompatiblenesse of loving men and suffer∣ing them to drink damnation, (but it may consist well enough with love to let them hear damnation, & to with-hold from them that which in it self conduceth to salvati∣on, and to damnation only by such an accident as they can neither fore-see nor pre∣vent) That the work is not good unlesse the men be good, (the work is good in the kind and object, though not effectually good to him that doth not do it well in respect of the end and circumstances, as no other good work is, and he that doth the material part without the formal, is somewhat more in his way, and not so far off from his end, as he that doth not, nor is permitted to do either, and upon like motives as they keep him from the Sacraments, he may be kept off from all other ordinances and duties) all this is scarce like the entertainment which Flaminius had of his host, for that, though i were the same Pork, yet it had a various dress and different sauce, but this is still se before us cooked in the same nauseous manner, and is more like that African Beast called Dubh, that for some dayes after he hath been formerly killed, his flesh being heated at the fire will move again; only whereas they add in the close, that a freer admission is against charity to the Church, lying under losse and reproach through neglect of Order and Discipline, some separating absolutely, others stay∣ing with grief, I must tell them, that as improper Physick is often more destructive than the disease, Quot Themison aegros Autumno occiderit uno, so the Church was never at more loss and reproach, than since they have intruded upon this way of cure, unless it be neither loss to shrink it from an hundred to one, nor reproach to have but one of an hundred fit or worthy to partake of the Sacra∣ment; and as Egubinus tells us of melancholy, plerique hoc morbo medicina nihil profecisse visi sunt, & sibi demissi invaluerunt, so I presume that not only many in their Churches, but of their Churches many also, might have like Pausanias been
the better, if they had not used these Physitians, and what Hippocrates in his Apho∣rismes saith of Physick, will be more verified of theirs, quicunque pharmacatur in juventute, deflebit insenectute, who when they should cut off an immedicable mem∣ber, hew the whole body in pieces, and with Catiline do extinguere incendium ruina, but it is very pretty that they separate to prevent a separation: Physitians sometimes Ʋt curent spasmum procurant febrim, but I do not find that they induce one kind of Feaver to prevent another, as to cause an hectick to remedy a causon. But it seems the Apologists will take in with the Paracelsians, who though Cu∣ratio sit motus à morbo ad sanitatem, & motus fit per contraria, yet they affirm that similia similibus curantur, and as the Romans to preserve that Target which fell from heaven, in the preservation whereof the incolumity of the City depended, made many others by that patern, so like it, that none could discern the original; so to preserve others from separating, they go along with them and make themselves like them; and as for those that stay with grief, perhaps it may fare with them, as with Standels in a wood, which scarce ever prosper when their fellows are cut down, and themselves left naked, but if there be any scandalous persons, that spring just sor∣row to them by their communion, let them be duly cast out if they merit excision, si sine labe pacis & unitatis, & sine laesione frumentorum fieri potest, but if without checking with these, that cannot be effected, let them take that which is their own, nihil aliud bonis restat quam dolor & gemitus, they must de peccato dolere for a time, but will de dolore gaudere in the end, grieve they may but stay they must, it is bet∣ter to be passive in grief than active in schisme, Eligerent potius fortes esse in toleran∣dis malis, quam impii in deserendis bonis, as Augustine: But when they tell us of such as stay with grief, they forget how many they have cast out with sorrow, like Empiricks that are still recounting the few they have cured, and make no account of the many they have killed, whereas though the Sun must see the one, yet the Earth cannot cover the other: the Romans used to tyth men for punishment, saving nine, and executing the tenth; but they contrary centuriate men or chuse one of an hun∣dred to save from schisme and sorrow, and cut off ninety nine from the means of salvation and comforts of the ordinance.
SECT. XX. Whether the Apologists are charitably suspected, or can be justly charged with Pharisaisme. Whether their actings proceed out tenderness of conscience. A parable between the Apologists and the Pharisees in some things. EVil fame takes the revenge of evil courses, and irregular wayes are made odious by the footsteps they leave behind them, it being just that the complacency in doing ill, be lost in hearing ill; and therefore many that conceit themselves to be fair and are not, are angry with the glass, like Holena that grown old oftered up her Looking-glass to Venus. 'Tis true indeed, though fame and other mens testi∣monies are a Mirror wherein men see themselves; yet as is the glass, so is the re∣flection. And we will also promptly take in the Allegory of the Apologists, That sometime things savour according to the disposition of the palat, and the stomack marres the tast, but shall then desire them to consider, whether the unsavouriness and loathsomness which they seem to relish in others, and for which they spew them forth, may not be as much in the organ as in the object, and perswade them first to purge themselves of some affections, and then perchance they will not find the distempers of the Church to indicate such vehement purging, Prope est ut iniquè puniat. qui nimis. What tast, say they, have the godly ones among them, that so deadly a weed as rank Pharisaisme should be shred into their pot, and yet they find their food savoury, and eate it with blessing. This Coloquintida it seems brings death into the pot; but by bringing meal (whereunto some have allegorically resembled the Sacrament) there had been no harm: If they aim their Preface against those that suspect their way of Pharisaisme, and insinuate their palates and stomack to be imbewed & vitiated with Pharisaisme that tast or savour any such thing in their courses, alas! those are the Publicans not the Pharisees, such as must not be toucht because unholy, not that will not be toucht because holier; but as they tell us, that the stomack marres the tast, so we know by experience, that in marring it makes it conformable to its own ill humors, as those which have the Pica, can well relish, and greedily swallow things not onely not nutritive, but abominable; and therefore Pharisaisme may be in the pot, and yet some may well enough rellish the broth, if the stomack by di∣stemper be comformed and assimilated to such a tast; if there be an intus existens there will alwayes be a prohibens alienum, and there can be no great disrellish where the aliment is suited to the element, and that is true which Dousa commends out of Plautus, Qui amat, quod amat si id habet, id habet pro cibo. This saying, Touch me not, hath been the old attendant of that nick-name Puritan, the label of prophane lips. 'Tis possible they have heard so much, though I have not, who desire not to have my eare so neere in fellowship with prophane lips. But this rather shewes the odium of the name, than the innocence of those that are asperst with it: all men are not alike guiltless, that lye under one common accident, nei∣ther doth it follow that some may not weare this livery, because it hath been un∣justly pin'd upon others sleeves, or because Cato was 46 times accused and ac∣quitted,
that therefore Verres may not be condemned. I wish they had more of the old Puritan, and less of the new Separatists; and then though this charge hung heretofore as a label at never so many lips, yet it should now have had a seal set to it. We know the old Purritan was a maul to beat down, or (as Phocion to Demosthe∣nes) an hatchet to cut off, not a trowel to build up Separation. But if they may not suspect others of hypocrisie, why are they suspected? Are they fallen below all good thoughts and hopes? At the worst, the case would be the same as betwixt Alexander and the Pirate, the one pilfred with a small Bark in a little Creek, the other roved with an Army to rob all the world; but nevertheless we must tell them, that first it is their suspition onely that was suspected, Autores ferunt tela retorta suos. They had not been passive, but for having been active, Oculos rapuit, reddat de sua caecitate solatium; (saith Quintilian) in nllo mortalium praeferre possum secleris sui im∣patientiam; brevissima est justiciae vindictae cum facinus mensura poenae est: Yet be∣cause that may be justly suffered, —neque enim lex justior ulla est, Quam necis artifices arte perire suâ, Which yet may unjustly be done, illi quod meruere, sed quid tu ut insurgeres? Therefore secondly, Comment. in 22. q. 60. arte 4. ad 2. they not onely went before, but go beyond others, who suspect not their estate or persons, but their actions; not that they are unrighteous men, but lest they do some unrighteous things. And Cajetan tells us, that if we think an action evill, not for the intent of the actor, but absolutely because such an act is evill in its kind, that judgement respects not persons but things, whereof we are to judge according to what they seem to be; and though some of his wayes are not warrantable, yet a man may be denominated good, though checked with some evill actions, as we say the Moon shines when a good part thereof is not en∣lightned; and that it is bright when yet it is blemished with some spots; and that it is round when notwithstanding not onely the perspectives but other observations shew that it is indented with gibbous and hollow parts. Thirdly, it is a suspition of such a fault as themselves have publickly taught us is one of the spots of Gods children: for such they say are pride (together with anger and worldliness) though some did think they were not duly cautious to de∣fine and limit those spots, so as might farther tempt some to a suspitious inquiry, whether as that famous Carver formed Iupiter to the similitude of his own Ama∣sius, and the Negroes depaint Angels to their proper colour, and they say, if a beast could limb God himself, he would draw him according to his shape, as super∣stitious men also doe: so in determining what spots might be compatible with the beauty of holiness, they selected such as perchance might be visible in their own faces. Fourthly, though they be suspected, yet they are not suspended, nor thought wor∣thy to be so: suspition that leads onely to admonition may be charitable, when that which is carried on to suspension may be Pharisaicall; as Galvano tells us of a tree in India, the one side whereof, which respects the East, is antidote, and that which looks to the West is poyson: and as the Dates in Egypt which ripened be∣yond such an hight, inebriate, but are otherwise wholsome. 'Tis such a suspition as a Physician may have that observing the symptoms warns of the disease to per∣swade to use of remedies; not such as the Spaniards had towards their slaves, who when through faintness they could not answer expectation, they straight knockt them in the heads, to prevent more trouble with them: 'tis like bath col or the filia vocis among the later Jewes, which though it came with thunder, yet it was alwayes for instruction, and never attended with a thunder-bolt.
Fifthly, all of this way are not suspected to walk with the same affections, there are some haply who (as Whitaker was wont to say of Bernard) doe follow Abso∣lom with a simple heart. Finis operis & finis operantis are not alwayes concen∣trick: there are some callings which sonant in malum, & vergunt in malum, yet some men haply contract not all the evils whereunto all callings are a tentation, and wherewith many are ensnared that manage them; the grapes may be soure, yet all teeth may not be set on edge with them: And howsoever a good intention cannot make that to commence good, which in the kind and object is evill, as an evill end or efficient vitiates that which is in its proper nature good; yet the actors of that evill may not all have the same impulsives and affections, and therefore it may have divers accidentall qualifications and degrees. When the Donatists propt up their heresie with the authority of Cyprian, Lyrinensis tells them, that the authors of the opinions are judged Catholiques, but the followers thereof are Hereticks; the Masters are pardoned, but the Scholars condemned. But peradventure we may in∣vertedly say, that the first projectors and prime leaders are more culpable than those that take after them, who in the mixture and compounding of this discipline may have added some ingredients and infusions, which to the others are not discer∣nable. It is an happy ignorance in those of shallow judgments, that they know not these depths. Clavius hath demonstrated, that in a man walking, his head moves fa∣ster than his feet. The superiors and masters have farther reatches & cōprehensions than those of lower form, and the chief heads goe farther than others follow, and there may be implicite Pharisaisme where is no explicite; as those charmers who undertook to cure distempers by words, or by such applications as have no naturall influence upon the effect, are therein successfull onely by a compact with the Divel, yet the most of those that practise this sorcery know nothing of this covenant, yet proceeding in that way and method which by the first contract being used in order to those ends, the effect followeth by the operation of Satan, and therefore they are said to work by an implicite compact. St. Jerom tells the Pelagians they are worse than the Pharisee, for he gave God thanks, which they seemed not to doe. And Saint Augustine puts the same on their score, because they ascribe to their proper strength that good which the Pha∣risee attributed to the favour of God. Some of our Divines, (and particularly Humfries and Gerhard) have laid the Pharisee at the dore of the Papists: Pharisaism. vetus & no∣vus, loc. com. tom. 5. sect. 6. p. 393. yet Pelagius (they say) was otherwise a man of an humble spirit, and if he were not, yet I am perswaded that many both among the Remonstrants, and the Papists, who have been soured with this leaven, have not much swoln therewith, and are Pharisees not without that righteousness wherewith they may enter the kingdome of heaven. As Bibliander said of Eras∣mus his Enchiridion, there was more devotion in the book than in the Author; so sometimes also there may be pride in the opinion, which hath no influx or diffusion into the person. And therefore when they say, 'tis possible their actings may as well preceed from the tenderness of their consciences, and love of holinesse, as an over-weening conceit of their own purenesse, and that they are perswaded a man may be humble, and yet wa∣ry in his society in Gods Ordinance: we shall concede it is possible, and it may be actually so in some, but we cannot be perswaded that it is therefore consequent hat it is so in all: for the argument follows not à posse ad esse. Its possible the
Milesians may be no fools, yet they doe the very same things which fools commonly doe, and if they be not sick of such a malady, the symptom belies the disease, 'Tis possible that Alpheus, one river among a thousand, may pass from Elis under the earth and sea unmixt to Arethusa in Sicily, and the Danow and Savus may stream together in one chanel, without blending of their waters; but he that shall suspect the contrary of all other rivers, will rather assert the strength of his reason, than betray the weakness of his faith. But would not this Apology have suited with as much handsomness, and soun∣ded with as great grace in the mouth of the Pharisee? (which indeed seems to be of purpose fitted for him;) Might not he have asked why his complacency in not be∣ing as other men, might not have proceeded from an heart raised up in thankfulness to God who had made him to differ, as well as from a spirit lift up in pride? (Proditio est ea tacere quae quis studiosè perfecerit.) That his scoring up his good works might have flowed as well from a desire to have advanced the honor of God, that men by seeing his good works, might have glorified his Father in heaven, and to have excited them to imitate his example, as from an affection to make some sacrifice to ostentation, Camero ad Matth. 19. v. 3. and turn the house of God into the temple of his own honor (Autor est bonorum sequentium qui relinquit exemplum.) That in his pray∣ing by himself farre off from the Publican, seorsim (as Beza and Camero render it) he was humble notwithstanding, but wary in his society in Gods ordinance of prayer, and his despising of him was onely a contemning of him that contemned Gods wayes, and a contempr of a contemner, (as they speak Sect. 18.) It is great pitie that the Pharisee had not retained such an Advocate, or found out such a plea; perhaps he had then never been cast at his arraignment, si —Tali auxilio & defensoribus istis non eguisset. But with what parget soever men may daub, or wth what colour they may depaint those things, seriously when we please our selves too much, we please God nothing; even in this, his wayes are not like our wayes, we condemne our selves, he acquits us, and condemns us when we applaud our selves; not onely other mens eyes, but our own as much, are latrones praemiorū. And as they say Hunters lay glasses for the Panther, that staying to behold himself in them, they may the better over∣take and destroy him: so he that knows that the contemplation of his own excel∣lency with too great complacency was that which cast him down from heaven, useth the same snare as most effectuall to intangle others. And to despise our brethren in our eyes, makes us most desplcable in the sight of God: in other things we ought to imitate God, but in this he imitates us, & in this respect is made in the likeness of Men. Facilius parcit his qui in ipsum offendunt quàm qui in proximum, saith Chryso∣stome. Lines the neerer they approach the center, come the neerer to each other, and they are at greatest distance from God, who are farthest off from each other in pride and uncharitableness. But neither is the beam so upright between tenderness of conscience and love of holiness, and an over-weening conceit of purenesse, or betwixt humility and wa∣riness in society in Gods ordinance, as that a cast of charity may turn the scale to to the better part. Conscience (saith Aquinas) is the order or application of our Science to somewhat, or (it being to be taken intransitively) our science or know∣ledge applied to particular acts: but truly we have yet seen no scientificall demon∣strations for this way, which may beget such a firm and certain assent to the good∣ness or truth thereof: ex mero motu it may be, but not ex certa scientia; and what
principle soever it be, that directs our actions in good or evill, if it have not the force of some law justly obligatory, whereof it is but the cryer or proclaimer, it is not conscience, but fancy it may be (which is an irrationall animall conscience, fancy in bruit creatures being (as Aristotle tells us) that which supplies the place of reason) or humor it may be (and then according to the Hebrew proverb, be∣hold it is Leah, or consonantly to the Greek, it is to court the maid in stead of Penelope) or passion it may be (and that is, as in an Aegyptian Temple, a beast in∣stead of a Deity. We doubt if that be true which they say, That in Peru is a plant called Drakena, whose root is alexi-pharmacous, and the leaves venemous; but it is impossible that so sweet a root as conscience and love of holiness, should give spring to so bitter and intoxicating a fruit as Separation. True morall vertue, and the grace of holi∣ness, have onely some formall difference, and a right Conscience is neer allied to both, and vertue (to which the Synteresis, Quae est notitia principiorum moralium, Lessius de ju∣stit. & jure, l. 3. c. 1. dub. 3. Sect. 20. Malderus in 1, 2. q. 55. dub. 2. memb 3. p. 182, 1. 2 disp. 5 q. 1 punct. 2 p. 405. Vasquez in 1.2. disp 84 c. 2. Sect. 12. p 579 praescribet fines, so as vertue considered according to her essence, supposeth no other dictamen of Prudence, than that of the Synteresis) is that quâ nemo tanquam principio malè utitur: and if an act be thought good which indeed is evill, vertue concurres not to that act, because being materially evil, it remains also formally evil; in that case, neither can prudence dictate it to be done, because that is not circum∣spectly enough judged to be good, whose evill may be deprehended by a just in∣dagation; for vertue tends to no act but prudently and formally it ought to be good, that it may be within the latitude of the object of vertue. As in naturall things (saith Valentia) we animadvert, that the cause produceth no effect but such as is indued with the persection thereof: so vertue which is sometime defined to be dispositio perfecti ad optimum, can be productive of nothing either formally or materially, which bears not its image in perfection. And Vasquez observes, that vertue can never be a principle of an evill operation, because it is an habit of doing things promptly and delectably; but when a man doth an evill thing ignorantly supposing it to be good, since no vincible ignorance can be with ful inconsideration, but it must needs be attended with some doubting of the lesse safer part, wherein is sin, in this respect, that such a dubitation emerging, yet nevertheless he judgeth that not to be sin which he ought so to judge, and so the affection is retarded, and prosecutes not its object promptly and defectably. De bapt. contra Donatist. l. 1. c. 13. epist. 162. But then Separation is such an evill, that Augustine can scarce finde colours black enough to paint it out suita∣bly, Separationis immanissimum scelus: and again, levati altaris horrendo scelere macu∣lati: and more, prepter ipsam separationis sacrilegam iniquitatem innocentes esse non possunt. And he rather assures us, Contra ep Par∣men. l. 1. c. 4. that origo pertinaciae scismatis nulla sit alia nisi odium fraternum. And however they may blanch it yet in the very notion of gathering a Church out of another, is a separation implied from those whom they gather not, De bapt. contra Donat l. 1. c. 11. as Divines argue, that even in the decree of electing some, there is included the ne∣gative reprobation of others. Besides, to say that their rejecting of so many from the communion, results from the love of holiness, insinuates, that to communicate with them will not suit with, but pollute or blemish their holiness. And this is the very spirits and extract of the Pharisee, which they therfore hugg closer to them while they seem to thrust him off, and are like Ovid, who when he said he would make no more verses, made one in saying so. It cannot spring from wariness of their society in Gods ordi∣nances, for then they would be as cautious of their company in other ordinances,
since as we have elswere argued, Quod dicitur per se dicitur de omni. They admit those men to fellowship in other ordinances, whom they separate from in this of the Sacrament; nay, to a communion in the other Sacrament. And to say it may flow from humility, (though they give it forth without the least colour of reason, which yet had been very necessary to perswade us that the course and stream of that vertue, should be upwards, which was not wont to come down to the lower grounds) St. Augustine will stop or turn that current (as well as the other of holiness) by saying Qui si verè justi essent, Contra Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 4. tom. 7. p. 15 Filiucius Cas. Tract. 21. c. 4. Sect. 124. Vasques. 1.2. tom. 1. disp. 60. q. 19. c. 3 p. 421. & humiles essent; si autem humiles essent, etiam si verè malos in su evicinitat is congregatione paterentur, quos ab unitate Christi expellere non valerent, charitate Christi tolerare diligerent. From an erroneous conscience pro∣bably it may proceed, and such a conscience the impurest and most blasphemous of all hereticks, even the Gnosticks, and the wildest and most desperate, even the Circumcellions might have pleaded and pretended to: In such a notion conscience is become the greatest malefactor, or Sanctuary for malefactors in the world, and a tender conscience playes the part of Davus in the Comedy, (and I wish it acted not in Tragedies too) It is the Saviour which inordinate men have set forth in the likeness of their sinfull flesh, who must justifie them, and beare and answer for all their irregularities. But as it was the law of Pittacus, That he which offended in his drunkenness should suffer double punishment, one for his offence, and another for his drunkenness: so it seems as rationall, that he that perpetrates any fault by an erroneous conscience, which is a spirituall drunkenness, should incurre a twofold penalty, one for his error, another for the fault: but however, if it dee not aggravate the evill, yet error in the conscience cannot make the matter commence good: For every vincible error is voluntary, and he acts imprudently that fol∣lows it, and he that is imprudent is not good; and that an action be good, the cause ought to be integrous, but the cause cannot be intire although the object be apprehended as good, but it is also necessary that in the understanding there be an integrous reason of the apprehension of it as good, that is, that it be judged good in the understanding, and that in no manner it may be judged, or ought to be judged evill, which cannot be as long as the error is voluntary, because vincible. But because, Jam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. And as in the Taliecotion rules, when the man dies whose flesh was cut off to be fitted and fastned on another, to supply and repair a mutilated member, forthwith the new part corrupts and perisheth, and as in Burgravius his pretended Lampe, composed and kindled of the blood of a man, when he expires, the Lampe also goes out: so therefore as Moncaeus undertook to purge Aaron from Idolatry, because the golden Calf and popish Images of God made to that pattern must stand or fall to∣gether; so the Apologists seek to reverse the judgement against the Pharisee by a Writ of Error, doubting it seems if he be attainted as principal, that they may be indited as accessory: they tell us therefore that Esay. 65.5. Touch me not for I am holier than thou, is spoken by the people to the Prophets, who had reproved them for their corrupt worship, and this the best think, but they quote onely Muscu∣lus for this interpretation, who though a good one, is but one Expositor, neither Des nominis hujus bonorem that he should be as Scaliger said of Aristotle, Unus super omnes, singulis qui omnes fuit; Yet I shall not deny that there are some others that go in consort with that
sense, but it hath little verisimilitude, that persons so abominably should conceit them∣selves so much holier than the Prophets, as to be in danger of being polluted by their contact, and it carries farre more probability that this referred unto, and was directed to the Gentiles, (as Sanctius, a Lapide, Sa, Menechius, Tirinus, &c.) whom those Jewes contemned, though themselves were more contaminated; which in∣terpretation suits aptly with the context, the Prophet foretelling the conversion of the Gentiles in the first verse, as Sanctius saith is the common judgement of In∣terpreters; and then upbraiding the Jewes in the following verses, who notwith∣standing their odicus defilements, had such proud opinions of their own sanctity, and detestable thoughts of those Gentiles. But however it were, as we should not fail of our end, so neither did we miss our direct way, for the paper did not quote nor referre unto this place of Isaiah, to prove this was the supercitious humor of Pharisee. Many indeed both ancient and modern conceive that the Pharisee was the mark against whom that sht was directed, but it seems the Pharisee is not of so ancient descent and extraction; for the great learned Scaliger affirmes, that the Hasidees had their originall but from the times of Ezra, and the Pharisees were the issue of those Hasidees, Dogmatists, who reduced their formerly free and voluntary observations unto Canons and necessary injunctions, Ipsi impuri cum essent alios ase ut impuros ar∣cebant sicut Samaritas Geographus Arabs clamas∣se ait, ne attin∣gas. Grotius. Annot. in lo∣cum. and thereup∣on called themselves Peruschim, separated both from the other Hasidim and from the vulgar. And besides it is observable that those here inveighed against are char∣ged to eat Swines flesh, which to the Pharisee was abominable, but like enough it is (saith Sanctius) they were guilty to do the same, quod postea feccrunt hypo∣crita illi, qui cum bonamente pudorem deposucre — et ingredi praetorium nolue∣runt ne gentilium consuetudine contaminati, &c. But though these were not formal and profest Pharisees, who thought their ho∣liness would contract a stain by a society with those whom they looked upon as sinners; and that which they hold forth were the more genuine sense, yet it cannot set us at any loss, if we find this doctrine from thence however to result, that they are fastuost arrogants{que} hypocritae, to whom not onely the sincere Prophets, but al∣so Germana ecclesiae membra praeipsis fordent, as Junius delivers i; Late Annotat. so whether they were Pharisees or not, yet the Pharisees were like them, and Interpreters take notice of it upon the place, and though it be not colligible from this text, Origen, Ter∣tullian, Epipha∣nius, Ambrose, Scaliger, Dru∣sius, Pagnin, Montanus &c. yet it is otherwise evident, that the Pharisees thought their sanctity in danger of being defiled by any commerce with or contact of these whom they thought not so holy as themselves; and therefore had their name, as the learned carrie it by vote, from Perushim, because of that separation they made from the vulgar, tanquam egregii Judaeorum, saith Augustine, and they were called by the Greeks  Separatists. That they held it piacular to eat with sinners, appears Matt 9.14. Luke 19.7. It was one of their Canons, He that eats a Samaritans bread, be as he that eats Swines flesh: and it was one of those six approbries to be avoided by the Disciples of the wise, viz. eating with the vulgar, populus terrae. That they held the touch of a sinner pollutive, is manifest Luke 7.39. Camero ad. Matt. 19.3. p. 175. Hall. pharis. and Christ. Pur∣chas pilgri. l. 2, c. 8. Sect. 3. And therefore when they came from the market they washt, because having there to do with di∣vers sorts of people, they might unawares be polluted, they baptized themselves as the word is Mark, c. 7.4. which implies washing the whole body: upon this ac∣count it seems the more zealous did constantly wash themselves before dinner, and this occasioned the wonder of the Pharisee toward our Saviour for not washing, Luke 11.38. And so superstitiously did they tie themselves to this observation, that
Drusius and Buxtorfius tell us, Godwin Moys. and Aaron, l. 1. c. 10. &c. that in case a man had not water enough to wash and drink, he should rather chuse to wash than drink, though he dyed with thirst. We are farre from any odious supposing that there is a symbolizing and confor∣mity between the Pharisee and the Apologists in all parts or degrees of their sepa∣ration, much less in the System of their opinions: there may be a similitude and resemblance though it hold not in all things, but in some; as we say such a man is like another, though he resemble him but in some parts of his face, not all. Ne∣que enim omnis imago habere debet quaecun{que} illud cujus est imago, saith Plato. Things may touch though but in a point, and hang together by a string or two, and Mo∣rea is as well a part united to Greece, though but by an Isthmus, as Thrace that leanes upon it with the whole side. That spice of the Pharisee which their way seems to carry a smack of, was their separating themselves from a Communion of Sacraments with those men who con∣tinue members of the Church, and are not judicially or justly cut off or cast out, and upon this expresse account, that both the Ordinance shall be polluted, and them∣selves defiled by their society. The original of this sin we think was from the Pharisee, and from him derived, not by propagation, but according to the mode of Pelagius, by imitation. Thco∣doret speaking of the Andian hereticks who separated themselves from the commu∣nion of the Church, because Usurers and impure persons were there tolerated, addes, Apud Gerhard loc. Com. Tom. 5. p. 230. Ipsum institutum arrogantiae plenum, et quaedam Pharisaicae doctrinae posteri∣tas est, nam Pharisaei accusabant animorem et corporum medicum, dicentes sanctis Apostolis, cur Magister vester cibum capit cum Publicanis et peccatoribus? et per Prophetam de talibus ait Deus, qui dicunt, Purus sum, ne attingas. Indeed the note is now changed, and is not, Why eats your Master with Publicans and sin∣ners? but, Why do they eat your Master (Sacramentally?) St. Augustine tells the Donatists, Nec mali bonis obesse possunt, cum vel ignorantur, vel pro pace et tranqui∣litate ecclesiae tolerantur, Contra Dona∣tist. post Collat. c. 5. Tom. 4. p. 122. si cos prodi aut accusari non oportucrit, aut aiis bonis non po∣tuerit demonstrari, — ista cum fiunt à bonis, non inquinantier à malis, quia nee corum peccatis consentiendo communicant, & ab eis eisi non corporali segregatione, tamen spiritali vitae dissimiliudine & morum diversitate discedunt, — nam qui hec non spiritaliter observandum puant, arrogantia vanitatis in illud incidunt, quod per eundem prophetam dominus detestatur, dicens, Qui dicunt noli me tangere, quoniam immundus sum, &c. I might perchance draw out these parables to a greater extent and multiply them to fill the whole Charte, but three or four will be enough to make up a Climate wherein to set them together neere about the same height or elevation, and much a∣bout the same distance from the Aequator of truth and peace; as first, that the Pha∣risees would have every holy man of the precedent ages to have been a Pharisee, of one kind or other (whereof there were divers) as Abraham to be a Pharisee of love, Job of fear, &c. So the Apologists will have us believe, that the ancient Fa∣thers have scored and beaten out this way before them, as their guides, or to stand as Mercuries to point them to it. But as Cymon was used to increpate his Atheni∣ans with, At non tales Lacedaemonii: so we have shewed the Ancients were not such, they are not of the linage of the Fathers, not derived from any line of theirs, —Vana fides genus esse Deorum. Had the Fathers in the fervor of their conflicts with the Donatists fallen asleep,
and had not awaked untill this intervall of so ma∣ny Ages, (as they say some in a Cave slept for ma∣ny years in the heat of Dioclesians persecution, and awaking conceived they had taken but a short nap, and to have found things in the same posture they left them, though they saw them in a different con∣dition) so would the Fathers contrariwise think that after a long sleep they found things in that e∣state wherein they left them, when they expected they should have been altered, and that they still heare the Donatists arguing, whom they must a∣gain address themselves to follow in fresh suit, and continue to encounter with. 2. The Pharisees thought none holy but their Sect, and if the Apologists doe not speculatively judge so, yet others not of their way, although such as they cannot track in wicked wayes, they look upon onely under the notion of morall, not godly men, and like the men of Pontus, that thought there was no more Sea but that which washt their shore, and therefore denominated the Sea from their Countrey, so it seems they fancie holiness to be entailed upon their way, not to be discontinued by a recovery by any other, and practically esteem the rest unholy, while they give them not holy things, and judge a com∣munion with them to be contaminative. 3. The Pharisees despicably called the rest of the people of God populus terrae, This people that know not the Law are accursed, so the A∣pologists scornfully name them the dregges of the people, and the rout, with whom they will not
partake, and Bastards, and implicitely and inter∣pretatively account them Dogges, Swine, Ca∣naanites, and the like, for under these notions they argue that they may and doe exclude them. Barradius borrowes this colour from Gregory to paint forth the Pharisees, Dum se omnibus praefe∣runt, alios quidem de fatuis sensibus, alios autem de indignis meritis reprehendunt, id est alios cen∣sent nihil scire, alios non bene vivere. And who that lookes on this Table would not take this to be drawn for the picture of the Apologists, who if they did not suspect, what needed they to exa∣mine, and therefore bring all under examina∣tion, have all in suspition, and shut out such a multitude from their communion, upon the ac∣count of ignorance and wickednesse, per vanas suspitiones, ne dicam factiosas calumnias, as Au∣gustine of his Donatists? as if like the men of China, they thought all the world blind beside themselves, and be they never so learned (yet as they say of the men of Europe) they have but one eye, and that not the right, that shew their ignorance (they say) in this very thing, that they refuse to submit to the tryall of their knowledge, but saith Maldonat speaking of the Pharisee and the Publican, to the four sorts of pride reckoned up by Gregory and Beda, this was a fifth kind in him, Quod tanto studio a∣liorum vitia & suas virtutes enumeraverit, non e∣nim est tam ingeniosa & subtelis humilitas, nec aliorum vitia nec suas virtutes videt.
4. Jansenius tells us, it was the Pharisees fault to condemn him whose heart he knew not, and in whom he might have adverted signes of penitence and amend∣ment, because he saw him enter the Temple with him, and by externall gestures declaring his repentance; and would not the Apologists have contracted the same guilt, had they met the Publican in that place and posture? And are they not still culpable of the same uncharitableness, who in the former Section inveigh against those who having lately beheld a man in his sins, yet if he cry guilty, and say he will amend, can next day believe a change in him? and themselves profess to credit no conversion that is sudden, Homil. de Da∣vide & Saule, tom. in p. 156. whereas though the Publican ad summam pro∣gressus erat malitiam, yet notwithstanding simplici verbo omnem deposuit iniquitatem, — asqe longa temporis mora, saith Chrysostome; and Jansenius to the glory of Gods mercy adds; Quanta sit Dei benignitas qui tam brevi oratione támque parvâ poe∣nitentiâ speratus, mex pniteniem in gratiam recepit! They wish every Pharisee had hypocrisie written with a Sun-beam on his forchead, and then many a worldling and polititian would be detected; but since now fronti nulla fi∣des, there may be yet light enough to read Pharisaisme in the characters of some mens wayes and actions. What is legible in mens hearts, will not appeare till the Son of righteousnesse with the brightness of his coming manifest it to all the world, in the interim they suspect hypocrisie visible in the hearts of most men, or else what need their spectacles and perspectives of farther examinations and trials, whereby to discover more then is obvious to the eye? But as things written with Allom water, are to be read onely when the paper is heated by the fire: so the fire of trouble would give some light to forestall the beams of the Sun, and we might then find some to be Pharisees, Sichemites, that are such onely for the advantage of the times, who like the herba mimosa do send forth their blossoms but in the eye of the Sun, & shed them when he withdraws his light; or like the Heliotrope, which expands & turns her self always towards the Sun, & closeth at his setting. Perchance some that like the Eastern people worship the rising Sun, would then like the Asri∣can Nations, curse him when he scorcheth them: and perhaps if by the motions of superior bodies their aspects should be changed, hypocrisie would not only in some Polititians be written in Court-hand, but in others in text-letters, and with a run∣ning hand after the world as much as in the most. When they sent forth their Sphynx, they should have given us an Oedipus also, I know not how to unriddle the close of this Section, when they say, Many like those in Esays time stand off from them as too holy. By propriety of construction it should seem to be, that they from whom is the standing off, should be those that are thought to be too holy, for holy should referre to that which went immediatly before, and this seems more suitable to what followes, that they yet blame them for stan∣ding off from these as Publicans, but to carry analogy with those in Esay, they which are too holy, should be those that do stand off: for those that thought themselves holier, forbad the other to touch them. And this I rather divine then judge to be their sense. But who those are besides their brethren, (we have built a story higher upon the same foundations) others being driven off from them as not holy enough, I cannot divine by inspection into any other intralls: indeed they are as much Publicanes to these, as others are to them; and therein is seriously considerable First, the irradiations of justice, Lex recta est cum quis patitur quae fecerit ipse,
as others are not permitted to sit with these Adenibezeks at table, but to gather their meat under it, so others requite them as they haue done  and this was the case also of the Pharisee too: for as he would not touch with the people of the earth, so the Samaritan, if he met the Pharisee (saith Drusius) cryes to him, touch me not; and if casually he had suffered a contact, would dip himself under water for expia∣tion. And to the late Dippers the Apologists are also intangible, (viz. the Ana∣baptists) as well as to perfect Independents their brethren, (yet they are a strange kind of brethren with whom they have no communion of Sacraments) and those though not Anabaptists, yet seeing they baptise none but the children of those of their own Church, if others did not wash those children whom they leave in their blood, when they grow up to a desire and capacity to be of their Churches, they must before they admit them, become Epibaptists, and postbaptise, though not re∣baptise them. Secondly, as remarkable is the influence of Separtion, which having broken the banks, knowes no bounds, Nec scit quà sit iter, nec si sciat imperet illis. — Quo{que} eat aut ubi sit piceâ caligine tectus — Nescit, et arbitrio voluerum raptatur equorum, And when there hath been a distillation by one part, yet another thinks that ex∣tract to have some impurity, and so resolves of a rectification (as the Chy∣mists term it) and thus one separation growes out of another, and such multi∣plied soparations of the parts are like in time to be the destruction of the whole, the proceeding of all things from their principles, being resembled to a Pyramis, but the destruction of things obumbrated by an inverted Pyramis, which by de∣grees lessening it self, determines in a point, and that in nothing: Of whose making is the distance between them and others, we hope we have formerly made it so cleer to every mans understanding, that be it said as of him as in the Poet, — Arbitrium litis trajecit in omnes. SECT. XXI. What was Diotrephes? What his ambition? Whether the Apo∣logists exceed not the bounds of ministeriall power by bringing all under triall, excluding and not for scandall, and that so many, and by common continaall practice? Whether this check not with 1 Pet 5.3? Whether those they reject are scandalous themselves, separated and left the Church behind them? Of Ec∣clesiasticall power, what it is, and how far extensive? The duty of Stewards. It is Christs honour to have an universall Church. 1. Their actings not commanded or warranted by Gods word. 2. They act solely. Of their Elders. Of ruling Elders in generall: not by divine right, yet a prudent constitution, requisite to be
continued in some way. The interest of the whole Church in Cen∣sures. The Elders representatives of the Church. Whether the ancient Church knew any such? 3. They act arbitrarily. Of the former Bishops. The Flowers of the Apologists canina facundia, which they cast on the Opposites of their way. The aspersions wiped off, and some of them reflected. Of small things, and whether their Injunctions are such? what may be the conse∣quences thereof, viz their own power and greatness in the inten∣tion, which yet in effect may be thereby lessened. Whether their promiscuous examination be to prevent respect of persons. Of ex∣amining persons known to be knowing. Of the Shekel of the San∣ctuary. Of their aviling of their people, and thereby giving ad∣vantage to the Papists to upbraid us. Of the former Bishops. The lack of light in some places through want of some to hold it forth. Whether the Diatribe aspersed Presbytery to be model∣led, like Popery. The Apologists no friends to Presbytery. Their way hath some analogie with Popery, and accidentall tendencie thereunto. THey first give us a tast of a new dish of Philosophy. As the other section tasted, so this (say they) smels; insinuating that this is more odious than the former, and that implies that the object of smelling is more abominable than that of tast∣ing. But truly he that shall be of such judgement, I shall not envy him to receive a nasty thing into his mouth, rather than take it in his nose. But Nasutus sis us{que} licet, sis deni{que} nasus, what other smell hath it than such as rotten ulcers doe alwayes exhale when they come to be launced and opened? and deal never so gently with such, etiam mel ulce∣rata mordet. Such hard thoughts they are more grieved to read than troubled to answer. The truth is, they do not much trouble themselves to answer, levamentum aliquid est miscriarum, non reniti. And perhaps the Parde hath wounded the Dogge, that though he open, yet he cannot bark. But they may perchance be grieved to read what doth Auriculas teneras mordaci radere vero, and are as impatient to heare the name of Diotrephes, as Caligula that was rough and hairy could not abide the mention of a Goat. They next give us a smell of their flowers of Poesie, Pudet haec opprobria dici, & non potuisse refelli, (say they,) but this is the ill luck of it (to borrow their phrase) that having in all their walk made but this one step on the feet of verse, it falls out to be lame and maimed, and onely thereby have made it more their own, Nam malè dum recitas incipit esse tuus. The Camel (say they) troubles the water that his own deformed image may not be therein conspicuous; so the Papists to set the Pope out of suspition of be∣ing Antichrist, have painted forth that man of Sin with such lines and colours
as carry no resemblance with the Bishop of Rome, and so the Apologists give us a false copy of Diotrephes, lest they should appear to be his counterpart. But as the Co∣ryphey of our Judges and Oracle of our Lawes was wont to say, that if a Pursevant should be sent forth to fetch up Antichrist that were described by such characters as he is held forth in Scripture he would doubtless seise upon, and bring in the Bi∣shop of Rome, if he had power to do it; so if a hue and cry should issue for such persons as carry the marks of Diotrephes, I doubt if some men would not be appre∣hended, and though Apelles convened many beautiful Virgins the better to limbe the picture of Venus, yet perchance fewer would serve from whose com∣portment to draw a perfect image of Diotrephes. They say, we are mistaken of Diotrephes, his ambition rather crossed John than oppressed the people, he was an heritick that depressed John, and would be in the Church above him, but was no rigid imperious Presbyter toward the people; and for this interpretation they alledge Estius Not to make any reflection how incuriously they take Authors in hand, or cre∣dulously receave them on trust, who might else have known that Estius carried on his Commentaries on the Epistles no farther than the seventh verse of the fift Chap. of the 1. Ep. of St. John, & what is additional in that and in the following Epistles, was the continuation of Bartholomaus Petrus; nor to step out of our way to enquire whether Diotrephes were an heretick, because it hath no tendency or aspect toward our end, (there are no records of him more than are extant in this Epistle, and howsoever some have opined, Justinian notwithstanding effers very rational argu∣ments to vindicate him from the guilt of heresie) it beams clearly from the text that he did, Idem Meno∣chius and Tiri∣nus. parvi facere apostolum, se malevolum et infestum praebuisse Johanni A∣postolo, munus Apostolicum et Iohannis authoritatem contemnere, in the words of Petrus which they referre to, but there are as bright irradiations that shew us this was not all his sin or inordinateness. Petrus also tells us, Amat primatum gerere in iis, In locum. — sese in praefecturam illius ecclesiae ingessit (observe, he intruded, he had no call to it) ea{que} praefecturâ delectatur tanquam magno qodam bono — gau det praeesse non ut prosit, sed quia grande aliquid putat presse, but Iustinian, — paulo majora canendo, sets it to an higher key, insolentius et arrogantius principem in ecclesia locum appetiuisse, & Aretius, in sua illa ecclesia solus videriet excellere voluerit, he assured a power grea∣ter than Iohn, comparatively, but upon the Church, objectively, he was ambitious to be above Iohn, but onely over the people, to have preheminence beyond him among them, inter cos qui tunc erant in ecclesia, as Aquinas (or he that bears his name) with whom Menochius, Tirinus, and others consent. A Bishop and a Presbyter I fin syno∣nymous in that age, and to say they read nothing in him over the people above the state of a Bishop (or Presbyter,) and that he was a rigid and imperious Presbyter, is an odious aspersion on that Office, as if to love to have the preheminence, (pra∣esse non prodesse) as Petrus, Se tanquam principem genere, (as Iustinian) inso∣lence, arrogance, the exercise of tyranny, and abuse of the power of the keyes, were but the estate of Presbyters, and therefore they might be, and do all this, and yet must not be accounted rigid and imperious, Citiùs crimen honestum quàm turpem Catonem effeceris, and this is somewhat like that of Valentia, who when he could not well deny the Church of Rome to be idolatrous, he tells us some ido∣latry is lawful, because the Apostle: eter onely condemns abominable idolatries; and upon this account Vasquez thinks a man may with good intention worship a
Stone, or a Stick, or a Straw: so it seems like courses to those of Diotrephes being not easily to be denied to be taken by some of the Apologists or their friends, they must boldly therfore be justified, and avowed not to be rigid or imperious. If this were so, they need not wince so much, for they could not then be galled though Diotrephes were clapt on their backs, if he were onely a Presbyter, and not proud, rigid or imperious, (for here is no St. Iohn that they can despise or ex∣alt themselves above, they must needs be clear of all suspicion of that now.) But Whitaker expresly saith he exercised tyranny; the Centurists impute to him an a∣buse of the power of the keyes, and we need fetch no reflected beams, Contro. 4. q. 5. tom. 2. p. 685. Centur. 1. l. 2. c. 4. p. 116. the text directly yeilds this light, that he was inhospitable, (he receaves not the bre∣thren,) Imperious (forbidding them that would,) using the keyes to open a way to his own designes, and shutting out those that oppose them, (casting them out of the Church,) Exemplum excommunicationis injustae, saith Aquinas. But the glsse explains the manner, Ejicit non de consortio fidelium, sed de loco in quo conveniunt, but Tirinus supposeth, tum de loco et coetu — Ne{que} susci∣pit vel in hospitium, vel ad Euchristi distributtonem, and such also as would in that way receave them, (and permit them to receave the Sacrament) he did eject also, De coetu et congregatione fidelium, (saith he,) Diotrephes would not admit such into association, all which look with an ugly aspect upon some paralel cour∣ses. And Aretius hence gravely observes, Proprium est primatûs alios aspernari, nec aliud quàm sui pectoris judica admirari et magnifacere, reliquos facilè damnare, et ut ineptos exsibilare — meminerint igitur ornamenta quoque ecclesiae qualis est di∣sciplina, et ipsa sacramenta etiam ab impiis saepe rapi, ad suerm affectuum patrocini∣um et muniendam tyrannidem. This was the dir wher ith the Apostle shewes the face of Diotrephes to be defiled, whereof if the Apologists can no better clear them∣selves than they have purged him, they will haerere hec luto. To lord it over Gods heritage is (in their sence) to go beyond ministerial power and infringo the liberties and priviledges of the Sairts. And if we shall receave this description, it will serve as a weapon (though as they have pointed it, it is some∣what a blunt one) wherewith to sight against them, and wounds made by a blunt weapon are worse than those which are caused by an acute one. Not to controvert here whether there be any such ministerial power to keep off from the Sacrament these who are not cast out of the Church, but continue mem∣bers thereof, nevertheless that which falls within ministerial power for the kind, may be an excess in respect of the number & condition of the objects whereupon, and the manner how and the meritorious and finall causes for which it is exercised. First, they constrain to come under examination, not onely such as might just∣ly be suspected to be ignorant, but all indiseretely, even those which are in every mans, and in their own judgement, elevated above any such suspition, which therefore cannot be intended to prepare them for the Sacrament, but rather for subjection, and onely to render them as Tiberius said of the Senate, Homines ad servitu em paratos, and to make a tryall, and take an essay and earnest of their obedience, and to receave their homage and fealty for the Sacrament, which they must hold of this Seigniory or Lordip of theirs, and cannot be allowed to sue forth their livery or Ostre le mane till they have acknowledged upon examination what they hold in Capite. Secndly, they exclude not those onely which have first shut out themselves (as Augustine speaks) by the scandall of nefarious crimes, evident in the fact, or
confessed, or judicially evicted; hitherto they should come and no further, and here ought their waves to be staid, we might then know with what banks to bound their power, and where to keep a secure station, that the water floods might not overflow us, quid potest esse foelicius quàm homines de solis legibus confidere, et ca∣sus reliquos non timere, saith Cassiodore. The saying is good, if Shimei dwell in Jerusalem, and go not forth any whither, let him live; but if he will be straying to Gath among the Philistines, let him surely die. If (as it well appears and is le∣gible in the draught and copy of Presbytery) the Communion be as Chatter Land and Boock Land, which we hold as granted for a certain estate, under ex∣press covenants and conditions, we know our term and interest, we cannot lose or forfeit our Tenement, if wilfully we break not our covenant nor fail of the condition. When men are cast out for scandall, they are convinced of all, they are judged of all, every one, even the parties themselves (being left without excuse) sense the cause to be just, while the merit is manifest; but they reject in a general notion of being unfit and unworthy, and that unfitness and unworthiness is deter∣mined or limitted by no Canon but their will or opinion, and the Lawes (as Wat. Tyler said those of England should do) come out of their mouth, that not onely horned beasts must be driuen from the wood, but every one which the Lyon shall say hath an horn; and when there is no Law for what they do, yet (in ana∣logy to what the Persian Magi told Cambyses concerning their Kings) they have a Law that they may do what they list, and that Themis must sit as near and as con∣stantly by them, as Anxarchus told Alexander that it did by Iupiter, the pattern of Kings, to shew that whatsoever they decree is just, so as this can tend onely to make all men Villanos socknannos (as Bracton speaks,) or as it was of old in Ire∣land, one Freeholder in a Country, and the rest his vassalls, and to make all fall prostrate before their rods and axes; for every one that will not loose the fruit of the Sacrament, must comply with the Dragon that watcheth & guards the Hesperides, and he that will not forfeit his reputation, must sell his liberty to purchase their fa∣vour, whereon his credit dependeth & not only espouse all their opinions, but by all manner of compliances strive to merit their good opinion, which is his title to the Sacrament; and therefore he may not dare do any thing but by their conduct, lest offending these Censors he be motus tribu and put in Ceritum tabulas, ignominiae causâ, and he made aerarius (pendere aera) sit to pay tithes or duties, not to par∣take of the priviledges, and therefore must surrender up his will and intellects to adopt theirs, and have no affections or actions but such as are borrowed, with like superstition to that of Zene his Schollers, who (as Athenaeus tells us) thought that the broth could not be good, that was not made after Zeno's di∣rection, whose use also was to prescribe to the twelfth part of a Coriander seed. Thirdly, they shut out not some few onely that may be peccant, but in a man∣ner all, which cannot every one be culpable, and multis minatur, qui uni fcit in∣juriam, and have obtained what Caligula wisht, that all their people have but one neck, which they cut off at once, nor do they like Chirurgions onely launch tu∣mors, or cut off dead flesh, but like Mountebanks do wound and flash the whole and sound flesh, upon pretence to heal it again, and to bring themselves and their salves into more request and practice, and whereas the terror onely should come to all, they make the punishment (proper for a few) to be universal, not punish∣ing onely those that are necent, but like Theodosius at Thessalonica (for which Ambrose thought he merited excommunication) cut off all promiscously without
discrimination, the innocent as well as the guilty, that when one man perhaps hath sinned, they are wroth with the whole Congregation, (and then notwithstand∣ing Irae suum stimulum, Zelum vocant;) so as the generality and commonness of the punishment, taking away the sense of shame and fear thereof, frustrates the end of it, as it is no odious deformity to be black among Negroes, where all are of that colour, a white man (and some such they have born there) is more monstrous to them, and therefore as Physitian: say, that the disease which all or most men commonly have, must spring from the same common cause, and our Divines tell us, that the corruption of the Masse cannot be the cause of reprobation, ne∣gative, because that is commen, but that which makes to differ is peeuliar; so it cannot be any crime or incapacity in the persons wherein their exclusion is rooted, for all are not incapable or criminous, but there is some cause that is common to all, and that can be no other but that they may have a preheminent power over all, whereinto this is their Inauguration. Fourthly, they exercise not this power onely occasionally and upon an exigent, but make a common and continuall trade thereof, and consequently making the Church such a meddow as Lewis 11. said France was, which he mowed not one∣ly when it was rank grown, but as often as he pleased; nor do proceed as Arnol∣dus saith a wise and a modest Physitian ought to doe, which is never to use me∣dicines but upon urgent necessity and that sparingly too, but their constant pra∣ctice is to keep men under this purging physick, which were it cordial, would ferfeit its virtue by too frequent use, but being purgative medicines must not be used as familiar as meat, when there is no purgative (as hysitians confess) but is contrary to nature, and consumes the very substance of our bodies, so as qui medicè vivit, miscrè vivit, and this is to make the Church, as he said of the State of Thuscany under the Medices, like a body exhausted with continual purgings, the blood and spirits consumed, and nothing left but weakness and melancholly, and we may say of them as Seneca did of others, Moverer si judicio hoe farerent, nure morho faciunt, faciunt non quod mercor, sed quod solent, and judge of their course as Demosthenes did of calumny, Aliquantisper audientium opinionem confirmare, pro∣gressu verò temporis nihil eá imbecillius. Upon these considerations, that which they call ministerial power is Tempestas, non potestas (as the Lawyers speak,) potentia ruinae et incendii (as eneca.) Corna sunt ista ventilantis, non mansuetudo pascentis, (as Augustine.) And if this do not border upon that of Ifidor, which he saith of some, that they bear themselves upon their Priesthood as if they had a tyranny, yet whether it be not the second part of Diotrephes, and the playing over again his ambition of preheminence, and whe∣ther these probations and suspensions be not a kind of hunting of men thereby to make themselves mighty ones in the earth, and instead of the old paternal govern∣ment to introduce a Lording, In 1 Pet. 5.3. (which is the same thing which Diotrephes practised) (as Aretius,) alios vobis imperiose subjectos esse volentes, (as the Commentary as∣scribed to Aquinas,) to be imperious masterly persons, ruling roughly and harsh∣ly, (as Hammomd,) by which prohibition the Apostle reprehends severity, tan∣quam ab ecclefiastica mansuetudine alienam, (as Iustinian,) and lessoneth Parstors and Governours in the Church, magis apparere humilitatem et mansuetudinem quàm po∣testatis ostentationem, ac severitatem, et amorem magis quàm terrorem, (as Estius,) and if their course clash not with this precept, so interpreted, yet whether it check not with that which he thereby prescribeth, ut absit non solùm animus sed species do∣minandi
in plebem subjectam, as Estius, the Apostle saying, Ne{que} ut deminantes, non solùm non dominantes, quia nihil debent exterius praetendere per quod possit de iis opi∣nari, ut videantur velle dominari (as Aquinas.) Though they may be somewhat in passion to hear the quaere, yet we shall not be much out of reason to make it, and we are sure without question, that this rejecting of all till they be proved and ap∣proved by them, as Musculus ranks it with the with-holding of the cup from the Lai∣ty by the Popish Priests, so it is that dominion, which if otherwise it cannot be redressed he saith God will restrain. And whereas they say, To Lord it over Gods heritage is to infringe the liberties and priviledges of the Saints. Whosoever is a Church-member I have formerly demon∣strated to be in Scripture ideom and generall acceptation, a Saint, and to debarre any intelligent member of the Church of communion in the Sacrament, is to in∣fringe his liberties and his priviledges, in the crown whereof that communion is a rich jewell; but the learned unius tells them, Ʋtrius{que} communionis cum Deo in∣quam & Ecclesia ad sanctos omnes promiscue pertinentis, (I might set an asterisck on that for the observation) indici. à Deo data, certá{que} E. clesiae verae documentá, eculis omnium exposita sunt ea, quae communis usus Sacramenta nuncupavit, — at{que} haec qui∣dem communionis genera, quà sunt spiritualia, semper & ubi{que} ab hominibus sanctis per∣cipiuntur, quà autem sunt orporalia coluntur in templo, id est ad to um Ecclesiae corpus conjuctè pertinent, ne{que} ullus ex Ecclesia Dei esse putandus est, qui se ab ullo istius communionis genere ultro subtraxeri, a passage like the pillar of a cloud and fire, which gives light to us, and casts them under darkness. To keep away ignorant and scandalous persons, exceeds not Ministeriall power, is no Lording imperious thing. But first, were they whom they keep away such delin∣quents, yet the number of the guilty should manacle the hands of the Judge, and periculum schismatis send an injunction from the Court of equity. If the one mem∣ber be gangrened, the excision thereof may be just and necessary, potiùs pereat unus quàm unitas, (as Bernard) but if the body be infected with a scab, other medi∣cines may be applied without dis-joynting or dissecting the whole. They plead for Ministeriall power which they have as governors of their Churches, and we should check the thoughts (if any could arise in us) that should oppose or repine at it, while it is regular and limited, and while the head doth not drop acrimoni∣ous defluxions to emaciate and wast the body, for then caput malum est caput mali, and the head is the parent of all diseases, as Physicians say. Defer Deo in nobis, & deferemus Deo in te, as Symmachus in Augustine. But as Furfidius counselled Sylla, Sinendos esse aliquos vivere ut essent quibus posset imperare, so they should not un∣church so many that they might have some to govern; and as he said in the patro∣cing of women, though they could not live so contentedly with them as was de∣sired, yet without them they could not live at all: so though their Church should be lesse pure by the communion of those they reject, yet it will be scarce a Church without them, and the spirits which they shall extract by separation, will not quit the cost of the turning of so huge a substance to caput mortuum; and if we should grant their separations could produce gold, yet it must needs fare with them as Pli∣ny tells us it did with Caligula, Invitaverat spes Caium principem avidissimum auri, quamobrem jussit excoqui magnum pondus, & planè fecit aurum excellens sed ita parvi ponderis ut detrimentum sentiret, — nec postea tentatum ab ullo est. Secondly, to whom are they scandalous? Some four or five are scandalized by four or five hundred, for about that proportion their Church bears to their Con∣gregation,
and those hundreds are more scandalized by their separation, then the units can be by their comportment or condition. Quos projecerunt video, quos unuerunt ipsi dicant, saith Augustine to his Donatists. These centuries were never judicially cast out, but separated from, and how could they regularly be cast forth, when the rest are hardly members enough to constitute and organize the Body? They were rather the Body of the Church from which the separation was made, the denomination being taken from the major part, and what Livy saith in another case is appliable to this, In duas partes discessit civitas, aliud integer po∣pulus, fautor et cultor bonorum, aliud forensis factio tenebat, Contr. Ep. Parmen. l. 1. c. 6. and as suitable is that which Augustine tells the Donatists. The Nations are given to Christ for an inheritance, you would appropriate it to your party, Quasi propter vos Christus apud nos haereditatem perdidcrit suam. Philosophers say, Omnis motus est super immo∣bili: that was the Church rather which stirred not, when they moved a way in their separation, not that which removed, and they were the whole, the separa∣tists but a part; and though one member may be cut off to preserve the whole, yet it is a wild and desperate way of cure to dissect the whole to conserve a part. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 5. tom. 1 p. 1978. Cum Ambroostatuaut, (saith grave and learned Junius) Non tanti esse homines paucu∣los ut propter cos dejiciantur ecclesiae dei, pluris esse aedificationem omnium ecclesiarum quàm praesentem unius conservationem in officio deflectentis, and the same may be said of persons in the Church. Thirdly, Wherein are they scandalous? Non pejores erant Iudâ traditore, cum quo Apostoli receperunt primum sacramentum coenae, cùm tanti sceleris reum inter se jam scirent esse, as Augustine; Cont. part. Donati. Psal. tom. 7. p. 2. as their ignorance lay in not knowing it to be their duty to submit to tryall, so in all likelyhood their scandall consists in their unwil∣lingness to be subject, and standing fast in their liberty. Perchance pro parte Do∣rati tolerarent, quos pro Christi unitate tolerare nolunt: would they acknowledge their power, and submit to their discipline, by this relative without other reall thange, the scandal were removed, as the doggs in the Dictaean Temple at Crete, and the birds of the Diomedes in the Adriaticke, they are onely infestous to those they account Barbarians, but gentle enough to their social Greeks; the Livery of their Church, like the name of Alexander with Caracalla, would frustrate all ac∣cusation; like the papal Chaire, if it find not men good, it makes them such. Ex codem naturae utero continentia nata est, & Cato, holiness and their discipline are twins, and must according to their Hypothesis stand and fall together. Cum hoc Aristide ipsa sanctitas emigrabit, and it will be true of their partie compared with others, what Bellarmine baith of his Catholiques in comparison of Hereticks, Praefat. ad con∣trovers. Si catholicus quispiam labitur in peccatum, — nihilominus quoniam ad∣huc aliquis vitae sensus, adhuc adificii sundamentum, adhuc lumen au∣rorae, multa et magua praesidia ad salutem habet, non ambulat in tenebris, nvit medicum suum — Ne{que} deest illi maternus ecclefiae sinus, et patent quo{que} officinae omnes spiritualium pharmacorum, at homo haereticus nihil horum habet, &c. Fourthly, What evidence is there of their crimes that should produce this scandal? Nam quo eccidit sub crimine, quisnam delator, quibus indiciis, quo teste probavit? nil ho∣tum, — Verbosa et grandis epistola venit. August. cont. Ep. Parmen. l. 1. c. 7. Idem Epist 162. tom 2. p. 142. (I would have said Apologia, sed tu syllaba contumax repugnas.) It seems sufficit accusasse, and therfore quis erit innocens? and they cast them out suspicionibus suis sicut semper damnando, as Augustine of the Donatists, and whereas Incerta cri∣mina pro certa pace dimitterentur, nisi magis falsa factio fingentium quàm ratio vera
convincentium praevaleret: We rather find that objiciuntur crimina malorum hominum, — et ipsa partim incognita, Idem con. Ep. Parmen. ubi su∣pra. quae si etiam vera et praesentia videremus, et Zi∣zaniis propter frumenta parcentes pro unitate toleraremus, non solum nullâ reprehensiene, sed etiam non parva laude nos dignos diceret quicun{que} Scripturas sanctas non corde sur∣dus audiret, but they rather frumenta falsis criminationibus insectantur, dum ipsi ab ecclesia potius tanquam levissima palea variis tumorum flatibus seprati sunt. That which is usually termed the power of the keyes, Polanus thinks ought pro∣perly to be called Ministery, Polanus syntag. l. 7. c. 18. p. 544. In Bell. de translat. impe∣rii. tom. 2. Sect. 27. p. 897. Ames cas. consc. l. 5. c. 24. p. 310. and Junius tells us, Quae potestas propriè appellari po∣test aut Politica aut despotica est, ut rectè in politicis distingunt Politici; Ecclesiae non propriè potestas sed administratio, vel ministerium; But yet as it is called power, 2. Cor. 13.10. so they that carry and exercise it, however considered in them∣selves and in their manner of acting, which respects their persons, they are mini∣sters, yea servants of all, yet considered as delegates of Christ, bringing and executing his Command, they act with authority (as Ames distinguisheth.) A power therefore it is, yet nevertheless the sword must not be the bound of their power, as it was sald to be of the dominion of Sparta; nor is it to be extended as farre as they have strength to carry it, but rather as Pompey said, to be terminated by justice, and not to make that Law which is of the advantage of Sparta, and that honest which is profitable: Iunius in Bell. cont. l. 3. tom. 2. p. 497. their power is, as Junius, Legatiouis, non imperii, nam domini non servi imperium est, mandatoris non mandatarii — et Legatus exhibe∣bit literas legationis suae ad hoc ut credatur ipsi; it is no Dictatoria potestas, neither Praetoria that hath power jus dare, but onely dicere, being restrained to the pre∣script of divine Lawes, Ubi supra Sect. 28, 29. and they to be onely praecones et interpretes, and not im∣perare aut dominari, ne in spiritualibus, sed docere, monere, hortari, obsecrare, mi∣nari, terrere, as Paraeus: They say, They are Stewards in Christs house, and we wish they would remind themselves to be so; for a Steward hath no dominion in the house, Non veluti Dominus res tractat sed veluti aliena et herilia dispensat, non sua esse dicens quae sum heri, sed è diverso quae sua sunt heri esse, as Theophylact takes the hint from Chrysostom, he may not smite his fellow servants, and shut them out at doors at pleasure, he must give their meat to those of the houshold, not keep them hungry to draw dependancies upon himself, by dispensing it onely to such as can evidence and merit his good opinion; this is not fidelis dispensatio sed crudelis dissipatio, this cannot be compatible with that faithfulness to the peoples right, which they speak of, and as little is it subservient to the dignity of the Sa∣crament, (an argument borrowed from the Popish School, who blanch their pri∣vate Masses and maimed Communion with regard to the reverence of the Myste∣ries.) The dignity of the Sacrament is not (as the Abyssiue Princes supposed of themselves) to be shut up from the people (major è longinquo Majestati reverentia,) it consists in the use thereof to those ends it was instituted, to be Communem cae∣nam, et communem mensam, et communes mensas, (as I have brought forth the verdict of the Ancients) and it hath the more honour by being accknowledged, by a greater multitude reforting to it, to be a divine institution, which it is their duty to attend upon the partaking of, and to be a moral instrument of gracious effects: And as the honour of the King is in the multitude of his people, so Christ the King of Glory is more honoured, when so numerous assemblies acceding to the Sacrament do thereby witness their faith in the death of Christ, which is there represented: and as God gave unto his Son the Nations for his inheritance (as Augustine tells the Donatists;) so it his Glory that his Church is Catholique as
well as holy, and is signal for the extent as well as the purity; and that all that have entred themselves into his houshold shall be fed at his table, In Mark. 9.40. while they remain in the house, and that it shall be onely their proper fault if they do him not faithful service. Did they impose any thing not commanded of God, or act Bishop-like in a sole Iu∣risdiction (they confess) they could not avoid this blame; And then first I doubt, — Manet indelebile crimen. For as for any authority from God, though they have framed and brought forth a draught, Grant and Conveyance, yet whether it have the Testo of the Court of Heaven, and be signed and sealed by the Spirit speaking in Scripture, is that which is in issue betweeen us, and after our traverse and pleading let the godly and learn∣ed give their verdict. What their Scripture-evidence is, we shall farther examine in due place, and make experiment; Whether or no perverso corde scripturas non eas faciunt obesse nobis sed sibi, as Augustine to Parmenian, and if or not remanet iis nisi sola infirmitas animositatis, quae tanto languidior est, quanto se majores vires habere aestimat. We know that sometime the clouds seem formed according to mens imaginations, and the Organ makes the species; sometime affection makes promptly credible that which agrees and suits therewith: Quicquid amatur impo∣sturam facit; sometime wit makes a Mercury of a Log, as Carneades having plausibly argued for a thing, could suddenly convert his discourse with as much energy against it; sometime audaciousness that transports themselves, fascinates o∣thers, as Appollonius pretended to understand the language of birds, which no o∣thers could discerne or find out, but yet all these elegant frauds or cunning im∣pestures or deceptions of sight are but like a Magicians feast, which takes the eye with speciousness, but gives no strength nor nourishment; or like the house and furniture of the Lamia at Corinth, which vanisht when Appollonius (a judi∣tious man) entred and surveyed it. If they can produce out of Scripture any com∣mand to injoyn, or warrant to justifie to decoct a Church from an hundred to one, to break into pieces and demolish an established Church, so to patch up a small one out of the ruines thereof, with such parts as they shall approve and be well satisfied of, and so the Pastor to chuse his Church that was wont to be chosen by them; to gather new Churches made up of those which had formerly entred in∣to the Church by the door of Baptisme; to drive men in heards from the Commu∣nion, that the farre greater part of those adult persons that communicate in the one Sacrament, and the Word and Prayers, do not in the Lords Supper; to cast out any that is not convicted of some positive special crime that hath rendred him scandalous, and accordingly is duly censured; to constrain those to come under examination of their knowledge, that cannot justly be suspected to be ignorant; or to debarre any such from the Eucharist that will not submit to be examined: If they can produce such evidence, surely I shall not so much gratulate the felicity of this age, Quod genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes, Perstrinxit stellas, which can read and understand it, as cendole the blindness of former daies, — quantum mortalia pectora coecae, Noctis habent! which could not see or comprehend it: and though it be nothing strange that I — (Oculis qui lippus injunctis,) cannot discover and observe it, yet it is admirable that not one of elder times, though
— tam cernit acutum Quàm aut Aquila aut serpens Epidaurius, should discern or be convinced thereof. Secondly, whereas they disclaim to act in a sole jutisdiction, we know indeed that they have such as they call Elders also, but we have as certain knowledge, that they are not held so necessary to the conduct and management of their Church affairs, as good works are determined to be to justification, wherein they have their presence, but no efficiency; but these are not alwayes so much as present at their Counsels, or of the Qaorum at trials, and hereof we can render particular instances. And however they may set off those Elders to those at distance, — (Ignote reverentia major.) And as it is said of the Athenians, That by the advantage of the feathers or quils of their countreymen, they flew higher in fame than truth; and however they be∣ing beheld with the advantage of the Basis they are set upon, and conjectured to hold out the weight that some others carry of that like notion; yet the truth is, those Elders being so inconsiderable for number, and weight too, in respect of parts and influence, are but as images which seem to bear up the roose of Churches, but are onely for shew, and serve not for support; or like the Characters, which Ma∣gicians and Charmers make use of, that have no reall influence into effects, but serve to amuse & delude men, and fortifie imagination: and as Charles of Burgundy was said to carry all his Councill behind him on horse-back, so all the powers sit in the same Chair with the Minister. I am not so insensible or inconsiderate to strike at, or move against the standing of ruling Elders in the Church, (rebus sic stantibus) which are an excellent compo∣sition for the attempering and restraining the power of the Ministers, which else might become arbitrary and unlimited) and who may perchance serve them in like stead as Gracchus his servant did to his Master Cui orami à tergo adstabat, fistuid concinnatâ — tonú{que} Plutarch de ira cohibenda. suggerebat, quo heri asperitatem, & iracundiam vocis delini∣tam auferebat; Prudence will prompt us, that it is not safe to entrust so great power in the hands of a single person, and it not onley lessons us in the words of Plu∣tarch, Nimis periculosum est velle quae non decet eum, qui quae vult facere potest; but it also cautions us by the voyce of Cyprian, Nemo diuautus est periculo proximus. And divine wisdome hath prescribed in censures,, Tell the Church, and if he hear not the Church, Aug. de verbis Dom. serm. 16. in locum. &. And I hope the Minister will not assume to be as the Pope, the Church virtually. Augustine will check such presumption, who tells us this cor∣reption is to be Coram omnibus, and Paschasius, Coram omni Ecclesia inspectante, or, Tota Ecclesia, as Eucherius, and the Glosse. And Dic Ecclesiae being (in the sense of Hierom) multis dicendum est, and Aquinas interpreting Dic Ecclesiae i. totae multudini, Cypr. Ep 27, p. 62. and Cyprian stating the Church to be in Episcopo & Clero & in omnibus astantibus constituta: And when the incestuous person at Corinth was to be cast out, the Church was to be gathered together, and (they) were to put him away, (they) to whom he wrote, which was not the Ministers onely, but the Church colle∣ctively, Chrysostom in 2 Cor. c. 2. hom. 4. tom. 4. p. 167. Universis in nomine Domini congregatis, saith Theodoret, and Chrysostome very sully, assumpsit illos in ejus sententiae consortium, dicens, Congregatis vobis tradere illum, duas res maximas accurans, ut & proferretur sententia, & ne ne id fieret absque illis ne videretur hoc illos facto laedere, ac neque solus pronunciat, ne videretur Apostolus esse praefractus ipsosque contemuere. And certainly it appeares very liquidly that in
Ecclefiasticall concernments and agitations, the whole Church was consulted, and consentient in the deliberations and resolutions: for when Judas was gone home to his place (whose demrits had made the place of damnation to be his) and another to be chosen in his, which he had unworthily occupied, the election was carried on by common consent of the Church. Idem in Act. c. 1. homil. 3. p. 138. tom. 3. Erat turba nominum (saith Chryso∣stom) simul ferè centum & viginti — Considera quàm Petrus agit omnia ex communi discipulorum sententia, nihil authoritate suâ, nihil cum imperio. And when Deacons were to be chsen, that serving of tables might not be a snare to the Apostles to tie them up from a better work, in the institution and choice of them, the Apostles proceede in the same method, Acts 6.2, 3, 5. Non propriâ sententiâ faciunt (saith the same Father) sed priùs rationem reddunt multitudini; sic & nunc fieri oportebat; whence the interlineary glosse took the hint, consensum quaerunt multitu∣dinis, & quod in exemplum debet ssumi; so conformably it pleased the Apostses and Elders wih the whole Church to send chosen men, Acts 15 22. who being come to Antioch, when they had gathered the multitude together, delivered the Epistle, v. 30. from whence Calvin concludes, Cum tota Ecclesia communicare debent ipsi doctores quod ex verbo Dei statuerint. The like course may be traced down the succeeding Ages, the footsteps whereof appeare not more conspicuously then in Cyprian, who, as it was his resolution Nihil sine consilio vestro & sine consensu plebis meae privatâ sententiâ gerere, Cyprian Epist. 6 p. 17, cp. 14. p. 41. Ex edi∣tio. le Preux secundum Pa∣mel. & Gou∣lart. epist. 12. pag. 37 epist. 31. p. 70. out of the sense he had that Hoc verecundiae & disciplinae & vit ipsi omnium nostrae convenit, ut Episcopi plures in unum convenientes, praesente & stantium plebe, quibus & ipsis pro fide & timore suo honor habendus est, disponere omnia consilii communis religione possimus; so it was his constant practice, Examinabuntur singula praesentibus & judicantibus vobis. And correspondently, pariter & stantibus laicis lapsorum tractare rationem, and he asserts and ratifies the course by this reason, quoniam nec firmum decretum po∣test esse quod non plrimorum videbitur habuisse consensum. Yet nevertheless as the consent of the people is requisite to those laws whereby they are to be obliged, yet that consent is usually, as most expediently, given by their Re∣presentatives; so because the integrall Church now grown to a greater body, cannot alwayes be so easily or fitly convened upon such occasions, nor so well con∣tained together ( Rondoletius his fish, which being little, could be comprehen∣ded in a small glasse, but afterward waxed too great for i,) and some considera∣tions may perswade that they should not be all congregated; and though the head were of goid, and the whole primitive Church was invested with those excellent gifts and graces, 1. Cor. 12.9. Rom. 12.6. which rendred them susceptible of a share in the regiment; yet the feet are part iron and partly clay, Mede Diatribe in locum. p. 207. and the community of Christians are now too apt to be embased with the alloy of violent factions and carnall affections, and so less capable of such undertakings, that therefore Elders should be chosen as Representatives of the Church, is a very prudentiall Institution. And truly beyond that height I cannot derive their off-spring: Chrysostom. in 1. cpist. ad Cor. c. 1. hom. 3. tom. 4. p. 59. for as for that Argument extracted from 1 Tim. 5.17. to prove them to be of divine right, The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially they that labour in the word and doctrine, besides what hath been offered by the most learned Mede, to enervate the force thereof, it is clearly and fully defeated and profligated by that passage in Chrysostom, Siquidem nuncsenioribus quidem qui inutiliores sunt, hoc mu∣nus (baptizandi) tradimus, verbum autem quod doceant senioribus, hic enim labor &
sudor est, quamobrem alibi inquit, Qui bene praesunt Presbyteri duplici honore digni habeantur, maxime qui laborant verbo & doctrina; whereby it is evident that in Chrysostomes time the Church supposed that text to imply two parts or duties of Presbyteriall offices, but not two sorts of Presbyters, neither did the Church know any such duplicity; and there is very pregnant reasons in-laid in the context; which will evince that this is spoken onely of such Elders as received stipends, as an honorable maintenance from the Church, which it is evident that Lay Elders now have not, nor can it be asserted that they ever had: For that doubie honor should he given them is confirmed from Scripture saying; Thou shalt not muzzle the Oxe that treadeth out the corn, De subsidio vi∣ctûs interpre∣tantur veteres Pamel. annot. in Cypr. Epist. 66. sect. 10. p. 196. and The labourer is worthy of his hire. Both which texts are applied in Scripture to prove a maintenance due to the Ministers of the word; the one so interpreted, 1 Cor. 9.9. the other produced Mat. 10.10. and therefore these Elders here mentioned, can be no other than such as were to have maintenance, which were onely Ministers of the word. Therefore neither dare I to assert, that in the way of the ancient Church any plain tracks may be discerned of such Elders, formally, in such a small define number, and in office specially designed to such undertakings and actings. The characters thereof are so obscure, as not legible to the best eyes, without a supply from imagination. That which seems to me to carry the fairest species, Blondel de jure tleb. &c. p. 37. is what Blundel cites out of the Epistle of Purpurius to his se low Bishop Sylvanus (and Albaspinus mentions the like in his history of the Dontists,) Adhibete conclericos & seniores plebis Eccle∣siasticos viros & inquirant diligenter quae sunt istae dissentiones, but it is not evident whether these were called Ecclesiasticall persons for their office or affection, having animes saccrdotales, or for their experience in Church affairs, wherein occcasionally they had been interessed, The Elders of Israel so often assembled, were not all men in office, specially seposited for the occasions whereabout they were convened, and wherein they engaged, Rom. Antiq. l. . c. 5. Elders denoting the principall men for age, wisdome and piety, power and honor, (as Homer useth seniores for optimates, and as Romulus called his great Counclll the Senate, because saith Rosinus, it was composed of such Qui per aetatem maximè superent, & genere praecellerent, and as the old Saxons in this Nation intituled some Eldermen, not say the Lawes of King Edward, propter aetatem sed propter sapientiam & dignitatem, cùm quidem adolescentes essent, jurispcriti tamen, & super hec experti: And in ancient monuments of the Church, when we read of Elders, for the most part it is intended of Bishops or Ministers, though by misprision some places have been construed otherwise: and when we find Elders distinguished from those of the Clergy, very often they signifie civill Magistrates, as in the Council of Carthage holden Au. Dom. 503. de conveniendis per Magistra∣tus & Seniores locorum Donatistis Episcopis &c. And in another Councell there Anno 407. Maurentio reo judices dari decrevit, universas cunctarum provinciarum curatores, magistratus & ordinis viros, nec non & auctores & procuratores vel seniores singularinm locorum, &c. So An. D. 458. A Basilio praefecto principales vel seniores ur∣bium singularium quàm reliquorum corporum compelli jussit Majorianus Augustus. And such acception the word hath in many Councels, where Lay men assisted and subscribed under the notion of Seniores, Verbo Alder∣manuas, p. 28. Selden. titl. h∣nor. fol p. 605. which is most abundantly verefied in those Synods held in this nation in the time of the Saxons (as it is every where obvious in them, as they are fet forth by Sir Henrie Spelman) who also tells in his Glossary, that Aldermen (whose appeilation was derived from Seniores) did signifie prin∣cipes,
provinciarum comites, praefides, senatores, tribunos, generali nomine; so that where it is read, Matth. 20.25. Principes gen ium dominantur suis; the Sax∣on renders it, Aldcrmanni dominantur, as Mr. Selden likewise shews, that Pricipes Judae, Psal. 68.27. are translated Adermanni Juda, as the Emperour Charles the Bald, and Lewis the second, are either of them in ancient monuments called Senior, and from that appellation is Grand Seigneur among the Turkes, and Shaughsch, &c among the Persians, originally deduced. Yet neverthelesse, ut jam sunt res humanae, the same prudent reason which in∣troduced, is of force still to keep up the continuance of those ruling Elders, and there wants not sound reason to perswade that they should be more than two to assist and concurre with the Minister, that more safely so great a trust may be deposited with them, and that there may be more health in the multitude of such Councellors, unlesse possibly there should be some design to have them so few, that the Minister might more easily have an influence upon them, and with more faciy govern them, or carry the more considerable weight in the coun∣ter-scale against them; and if he can make one of the two to be one with him, they two may be all in all. Besides, seeing they are Representatives of the People, no man that hath not forfeited or enslaved his reason, but will judge it most rational, that they should be onely and freely chosen by them whom they represent, without any interposition or Insinuation of the Minister, Cujus nutus pro imperio est, who it he do not im∣mediately chuse the Elders, yet mediately he useth to do it, and in alio, while he selects his Church that elects them, and who are commonly so awed in their electi∣ons, as Piso seemed to be by Tiberius in the Senate, Quo loco censebis C. sar? si primus, habebo quod sequar; se post omnes, vercor, ne imprudens dissentiam. But it is all the reason in the world, that I onely and not another should elect him, whom I must intrust to represent me and speak for me, and we should rather do it in this concernment, because we see some by designe to cause a choice onely of such for Rulers as will be tamely ruled by them, and which will serve onely as Organs to sound by that breath which they infuse by drawing them, and to such a tune as they shall set and play upon them, so that indeed as among the Zaini (those Indian hogs which Nicremberge mentions) the weakest and poorest are chosen to be chiefe of the Heard; so they pick out such Elders as having no eyes of their own, must borrow theirs, and be gladly led by them, and having no substance in them∣selves, hope onely to purchase some esteem by being their conformable shaddowes. Which consideration is seconded by another, that notwithstanding all former pomp and solemnity of a us divinum regiminis ecclesiastici, yet some of them have of late publickly asserted, That the ruling Elders have no foundation in Scripture, but are onely a prudential constitution (which however it be truth, yet the world hath been born in hand with the contrary, that the discipline might enter with a smoother slide,) and then seeing what seems to some to be prudence, and in some circumstances we may be told it may appear to others, and in other circumstances not to be so, therefore this constitution will in effect be arbitrary, and onely ac∣cidental, quod potest adesse et abesse, and like the Pope it will be the Ministers only that have the authoritative power to determine of things whether with or with∣out a Councill: This renders much cause of suspition that this conjuncture and consent of Elders, however they have pared it to lessen and lighten it, is yet such a yoak, as they would be eased and exempt of (and which the Apologists, since
they have new modelled themselves, have quite laid aside, as farre as I can under∣stand) that so like Lewis the 11. assuming an arbitrary power, they may bring the Crown out of ward, & they have begun to study that politick Aphorisme in Tacitus, Eam imperandiesse rationem ut non aliter ratio constet quàm ut uni reddatur, and those ruling Elders are like to run the same fate and upon like motives with those (whatsoever they were) which are mentioned in the Commentaries upon the Epistles, by some attributed to Ambrose, by others to Hilary the Deacon Ecclesia seniores habuit quorum fine consilio nihil agebatur in ecclesia, quod quâ neg∣ligentiâ obsoleverit, nescio, nisi forte doctorum desidiâ, aut magis superbiâ, dum soli colunt aliquid videri. Next, as they are sole, so also arbitrary in their proceeding; as Bodin re∣lates of the Tartar King, that at his Inauguration he tells them, Mea vex prose∣cure et pro gladio crit, and Caligula said to the Consuls, Quid nifi uno meo nutu jugulari utrum{que} vestrum statim posse? so are they loose and absolved from any certain rule, Nos penes arbitrium est, et fas et norma regondi: Their Will is their Law, and their Ipse dixit the Oracle, — Credant de sonte relarum, Ammonis; for they have not yet (that we know) formed any Canons to regulate their judgements, nor determined what is the minimum quod sic, which may render men capable of communion; but they that speak of sealing men, though they must be Keepers of the Seals (and so let them, if they keep them not too fast, and make them Privy Seals, not the great Seals of the Church, nor apply them to wax great, and seal the Patents of their preheminence) have yet sealed no certain stan∣dard whereby to measure men in order to their admission. A visible worthiness they require, but as Aristotle uncertainly placeth that mediocrity wherein Virtue consists, in the judgement of wise men; so this worthiness hath no other determi∣nate weight or measure but their judgment, and this visibleness is intended to be their eyes; for it is all one, not to be, and not to appear to them: so that as the Caxonists say, If the Pope should draw innumerable souls unto hell, no man must say to him, What dost thou? and Bellarmine tells us, That if the Pope should erre by commanding vices and forbidding virtues, the Church were bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be evill: so when they clave errante drive innumerable souls from the Communion, and censure those to be vicious that are godiy, seriously I do not know what remedy they can find, nor where they can fetch their redresse, — nil fecerit, esto! Hoc volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas: Which is certainly a condition as requisite to be retrenched, as dangerous to be in∣curred; Miscra scrvitus est ubi jus est vagum aut incognitum, is a Maxime of Law, saith the great Lawyer Stanford, and therefore Non sinimus imperare ho∣minem sed rationem, saith Aristotle in his Ethicks, and no less prudently in his Politicks, Qui ita{que} hominibus unà cum legibus imperium tradunt, etiam deo tribu∣unt imperium; qui uero solum hominem sine legibus imperare volunt, ji quodam modo belluae tradunt imperium, nam cupiditas tale quippiam, et ira cos qui praesunt, etiam viros optimos, detorquet. And therefore whereas onely, — Praecedenti spectatur mantica tergo;
and though anciently the place stricken with thunder was not afterward troden up∣on; and Pliny tells us, That icti à Scorpionibus nunquam postea à crabronibus, vespis apibús{que} seriuntur: yet to exonerate themselves they transferre this Lording (as o∣ther inordinatnesses in this Section) on the Bishops, — Sequitur fortunam, ut semper, & odit Damnatos: (Though perchance — Idem populus si Nurscia Thusco Favisset, hâc ipsá Sejanum diceret horâ Augustum) I must say, Maevius absentem Nevium cùm carperet, heus tu Quidam ait, ignoras te? an ut ignotum, dare nobis Verba putas? egomet mî ignosco, Maevius inquit, Stultus & improbus hic amor est, dignús{que} notari. How culpable soever the Bishops were, or meriting reproof, yet only Juste alios re∣prehendit qui non habet quod in se alius reprchendat, saith Augustine, Et ille potest face∣re, qui non meretur audire, as Ambrose: and therfore cum mali accusan vitia, alienas partes agunt, themselves have still a Bishop in their belly, as Luther used to say, eve∣ry man had a Pope, and as the Pope complemented the Duke of Florence, that he should be King in Thuscany not of Thuseany; so though they are not Bishops of this or that Church, yet they are Bishops in them, and act as solely and arbitrari∣ly, and suspend more and for lesse, than the Bishops used to excommunicate: if they assume not the pomp, they usurp the power, and as Favonius told Pompey (or as some) Casar, it makes no difference whether he weare the Diadem on his legge or his head, and while the Cailiph weares the Crown, it is no matter though he co∣ver it with a black cloth: like the Sybils Bookes, when one or two are destroyed, yet there lies as heavy a price upon the rest, and the weight presseth more, because we expected to have found it more easie and light. As he that had never lain in Plato's cave, did not so much regret it, as he that having seen some light, and hoped to enjoy it, yet was again remanded to darkness: and as a new wound where there is a Cicatrix, is more dangerous, and recidivations are more destru∣ctive than the first lapse into a disease, so it fares with us in our condition, and did not the equanimity and moderation of some that are of other principles redeem from this infamy, and like a perfume take away the ill odor, we might say, that the lopping off the luxuriant stem of Episcopacy, was onely to let many suck∣ers and spriggs gtow up as exorbitantly out of the same root. And as Lodovieus Suessanus told Adrian the sixth, that if he demolished the statue of Pasquil, and bur∣ning it cast the ashes into the river, they would turn to Frogges in the bottome thereof, and croak worse then before; so the continuous quantity of that enormous power is not abated, but the discrete is enlarged, and not so much the power as the subject was quarrelled at, nor have we changed our bondage, but the efficient thereof. So true is that which Dio Cassius delivers, Longè proclivius est alios reprehen∣dere quàm sibi moderari; saciliús{que} fit, ut quarum rerum causâ poenâ alios dignos judi∣cant, has ipsi easdem admittant. I hope they will be facile to give pardon to any comparisons (much more allu∣sions)
which need to receive it for their own, that are so odious: and if they receive any irritation, will with Dionysius, when he waited long at anothers door in Corinth, recognize whether he had not made others formerly do the like. Those that conform not to their modell of government, they expose under ugly notions, to be bitten dente canino, as the persecutors lapt the primitive Christians in beasts skins, to be devoured by doggs, and other beasts. They first bundle up their opposers with Anabaptists, but I wish they had no more analogy with them in their separation, than we in despising government. Ana∣baptisme is the heretical Metaphysicks, and the principles of other modern here∣sies are, I cannot say, there demonstrated, but derived from thence, and sure their doctrine of pollution by a communion with persons unsanctified, of administring the Sacraments to none but those that give demonstrative signes of holiness, and the like, are but graines of that golden Calfe, some sprinklings of that fountain — Cujus de gurgite vasto Combibit arcanos erratica turba furores: Secondly, we are packt up with the Erastians: but as we have shewed that our E∣lements symbolize not with those of Erastus, so we compassion that Godly lear∣ned man (for that stamp Bullinger and Gualter, and others have imprest upon him) for being still enrolled in the black band of hereticks, and every one that comes by him (as the Jewes and Mahumetans do when they pss by Absaloms pillar in Palestine) cast a stone at him. He confined and limited indeed all Ecclesiasti∣call government to doctrinall direction, and the force of perswasion, and would not have it extensible to censures or coertion, and the tender and timid man, as he thought Antimony rather a poyson than medicine, so he had the like suspition of excommunication in order to purging of the Church, and thought neither the power lawfull, nor the exercise profitable. This was the heresie the good man was guilty of, wherein Bullinger and Gualter, and the Divines of Zurich came in to be his Hyperaspists against Beza; yet for this misprision in every Bulla exnae when hereticks come to be excommunicated, he is thrust into the herd, and for deniall of excommunication, doth as it were suffer it. The Apologists are well reconciled to the Independents, whom they call Their dear brethren, and yet Independency hath been the dung-gate and Port Esquiline not to carry forth, but to let in filthy heresie, but with the Erastians Nullus amor né{que} faedera sunto, But rather Dum terra coelum medialibratum feret &c. Nunquam meus cessabit in poeuas furor: As if when many more pretious truths lie in their blood, this were more worthy to have its wounds tendered and dressed: which shewes how much apter men are to take a tender resentment of things, as they clash with their proper interest, than for∣mally, as they check with Gods truth. So that Father gravely told the Empe∣rour, who reproved him for observing his son with no more reverence, That he had more respect to his sons honor than to the glory of the Son of God, whom he suffered to be dishonored by heretickes; and so Demetrius lest the other Idols, (which to him were Gods) to shift for themselves; but Diana which brought great gain, merited the engagements of all their powers in defence thereof. So the Pope also in his taxa camerae Apostolicae rates the Absolution of falsifying his Apo∣postolicall
letters at 17 groats, but incest with a mans own mother is taxed but at five groats onely. Thirdly, we are mustered among them that opposed Luthers reformation, and professed they had rather live under the dominion of the Turks. But Luthers reformation pleaseth not the Apologists, they must reform the reformation, and gather new Churches, as if we had none before, and theirs are the only reformed Churches. But whereas they speak of living under the dominion of the Turkes, let them consider if their dear brethren do not use those of their Congregation that are not of their Church like Turks, and they themselves deal but little better with them: for though indeed they baptise their children (which the other do not, who therefore practically repute them as heathen) yet they receive them to no other communion then they would do Turks, Vectigal quod per occasionem aedificationis templi fuerat impositum, etiam obsoluto tempio exigcbatur & jam non in res sacras sed profa∣nas expendeba∣tur. Menochi∣us annot. in 3 Reg. c. 12. v. 4 for those they would admit to heare them preaching for instruction, and suffer them to partake of their prayers, if they would with reverence be present (as the Apologists tell us, That the godly have prayed in the presence of the unbelievers, as Paul in the ship in the presence of the passengers.) Fourthly, we are resembled to the factious Israelites, which regretted at Solo∣mons government, and causlesly complained of their burdens which were onely subservient to the building of the the Temple; but it seemeth to us, that they ra∣ther demolish the Temple to build a poor Synagogue, or rather (the major part denominating, if I may so speak) an Apagogue, for they drive away more than they gather, and we have rather had a sadder sense of our burdens, because they are imposed onely to build that which hath more analogy with Solomons Throne, than with his Temple. And it seems they have taken a wrong aim in their exam∣ple as well as in their application, and are as wide in their protasis as in the antapo∣dosis, for the burdens that the Israelites complained, and sought to be exonerate of, were in the judgement of Interpreters, Conseruntur so pressos jugo quia cogebantur ministrare So∣lomoni per menses singulos expensas regiae familiae — Valde grave quia Solomo∣nis mensa sump∣tuosa admodum erat & magni∣fica — prop∣ter fastum in∣explebilem tot reginarum ido∣lolatrarum sumptús{que} im∣mensos. Estius Annot. ibid. not those laid on them towards the edify∣ing of the Temple (Tulerant us{que} tempus extremum Solomonis impositum vectigal, tum quia minus grave, tum quia ad templi sabricam, & Israelitici imperii praesidium & ornamentum, & ad alios communes & publicos usus conferebatur, saith Sanctius:) but this yoak was either the bringing in Corn for nourishing his family and horses, as Junivs and Piscator collect out of the sourth Chapter: or this grievous service was either inflicted on the Canaanites onely, and they onely sought to be aliena∣ted; or the service, which before was common to be done by them to all the people, was now reduced to the King onely, wherein they were wronged (as Diodate:) or they were immania tributa, which they could not patient, because suas potiùs spectaret delicias delirus senex. & faeminarum, quibus erat supra mo∣dum addictus, usibus non semper honestissimis extortas a populo divitias impenderct. (Quomodo enim aliter cum regio fasta 700. reginas & delicatum genus, & 300. con∣cubinas aleret?) ferre non potuit immanes illos & impudentes sumptus, as are the words of Sanctius, and consent of Serrarius, and Estius. Fiftly, They set us in the tents of those wicked men, Korath, Dathan, and A∣biram, and they have opened their mouth to swallow up our name, as the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them: But as we shall hearken unto Moses in all things, only the Lord our God be with him, and we do not murmur against Aaron, nor shall break his Rod, though we cannot worship his Calfe, nor are we ambitious to share any of his powers, but desire he should keep them, so as they keep their regular limits; so with these wicked men the quarrel was not con∣cerning
the power, but the subject that should be invested therewith. The sons of Reubcu thought the principal soveraignty of right appertained to their Tribe, whose Progenitor was the first borne, and the Children of Levi envied the appro∣priating of the Priesthood to Aaron and his off-spring, which they would have had common to the Tribe, or to the first borne, whereof Korah was one, as Theodoret, Isidor, Ablensis, Menochius, Tirinus, and others mentioned by Lorinus, and A Lapide. That which our Translation reads, Ye take too much upon you, Junius, and Tremelius, and Piscator read, satis esto vobis: The Septuogint, Onkelos, the Samaritan and the Vulgar, Sufficiat, nonne satis dominati estis? as the A∣rabick: that is, satis diu cum gubernastis rempublicam, alter politicam, alter Eccle∣siasticam, definite nunc, & aliis quo{que} ad gubernationem idoneis locum concedite, as Piscator wherein Junius concurreth: so as they did not opposed the power but the persons, and sought not to subvert but to divide the dominion, which the Bi∣shops were wont to say was the designe of those that oppose their preheminence, who when they were told, ye take too much upon you, in the words of Korah and his complices, they used to answer in those of Moses, Ye take too much upon you ye sons of Levi, Ep. 164. & alibi contra. Ep. Parmen. and St. Augustine makes frequent use of this example against the separation of the Donatists, being more applicable against Schisme, whereof I shall remind the Apologists. Lastly, We are yoaked with the sons of Belial hat are impatient of Christs yeake, but we desire to take his, though we cast off theirs, we would bear the old yoake, for old yoakes are light and easie, not their new one, for new yoakes are hard and heavy, Willet in 1 Sam. 1.16. R. Kimchi. a∣pud A Lapide in 2 Cor 6 15. & Jansen. in Proverb. 6.12. Pineda. in Iob. 34.18. So the Pentateuch lately set forth. Menoch. in Deutro. 13.13. Hierom in Ezekiel l 11. c. 34. tom. 4. p. 979. neither can we yield to be yoaked; so that we must either draw their Plow, or be prickt with their Goad. As some derive Belial from Beliol, without yoake, so others do from Beli jaal, which is to be without profit, and others from Galath to ascend: We have no tentation to retort that attribute of the sons of Belial upon them as it signifies the sons of iniquity (so the Thargum of Onkelos ren∣ders it, Deut 13.13.) but perchance it may be applicable to them as being without the yoake of law or rule in their arbitrary precedings, Filii Belial (1.) exleges, saith Menechius, and so going on unyoaked, Fortes, lateribus & hume∣ris suis impugnant, at{que} collidunt infirma pecora, & cornibus ventilant, nescientes in lege taurum cornupetam debere puniri; impingebant autem lateribus & cornibus, ventilabant donec dispergerent et ejicerent oves foras: Superbiâ enim majorum & prae∣positorum iiquitate frequenter pelluntur de Ecclesia ut dispergantur quos ipse salvavit, as Hierom complaineth. And whether their way be not then a child of Belial, as being unprofitable to any good end, and conducible onely to make themselves a∣scend, if the truth be not yet apparent, time will bring it forth; but the sons of Heli are plainly called sons of Belial, because they exacted and took by force from the people what they pleased, when they drew near to sacrifice, and thereby made them to abhor the offering of the Lord, and they may try how that parable and re∣semblance may fit them. But when this heat is rebated and the vapours spent, what is the extract and quintessence that can be distilled from this argumentation, save meerly a compli∣cation of fallacies? As that because there must be a government, therefore it must be theirs; Because some powers are just, therefore theirs are not exorbitant; Because some have causelessly repined, therefore we have no cause to complaine; Because some have been reluctant to all government, therefore we will have none that contradict theirs: And also their arguments are not proper to their case,
but common to the opposite, like the tragaedian buskin, subservient to any foot, and those very arrowes have been shot by the Episcopal party against the opposites of Prelacy, and they have sung the same ditty, but whether in the one, with bet∣ter aime to the mark; or in the other, with an apter tune and fitter cadency, and a righter conformity according as truth hath prickt the lesson, — tantas componere lites Non opis est nostrae. But we regret not government, — neq, enim libertas gratior ulla est: We assert and plead for it, but we would pluck up the weeds that the corn might flourish, and cut down the Ivy that the Tree might prosper; for he that spares what is evill, hurts that which is good: We shall ever rise before the hoarie head of ministerial power, and honor the person of that old man, but we cannot with Rehoboam consult with those young men that are grown up with us, and stand be∣fore us: their counsell will but provoke Israel to rebell. When the sons of God espouse the daughters of men; when divine Institutions are perverted and dege∣nerate into a subserviency of humane interest: when the keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven are abused to open a door to secular dominion, then are Gyants in the earth, and they be the Prologue to a flood, and of those Gyants saith Baruch, c. 3. v 27. Non hos elegit Dominus, neq, viam disciplinae invenerunt. Water be∣ing confined within its proper channel runs pure, and is fit to cleanse others; but if it overflow its banks, it contracts filth, and beares down all before it: and fire restrained within the hearth is of necessary use and comfort; but if it get up to the top of the chimney, it puts the whole house in danger. Too much power is alwaies a treacherous and ensnaring thing, especially in some professions; like Helena of old, and Bruhalt of later times, it ruines all that court it, and is like that Sejan Horse, which all that mounted fell unfortunate. To tell us of small matters and small things that are exacted, besides that it is Petitio principii, is a net vainly spread in the sight of nay bird; as Hiltenius said of the Romans, Est proprium Romanae potestatis ut sit ferrea, et licet digiti mino∣ren ur ad parvitatem acûs, tamen manent ferrei. A small needle may prick mis∣chievously, and small things may be great in the effects and consequences. A great Oak is virtually in a small Acorn; an huge sum may be granted in a little earnest. Nullum vitium definit ui incipit, saith Seneca, Et non ibi consistunt ex∣empla ubi caepere, sed quamlibet in tenuem recepta tramitem latissimè evagandi viam sibi faciunt, as Paterculus. If the serpent gets in his head, he easily works in his whole body. He that layes his foundation in the Conscience, shall soon build as high as he will, and he that hath the mintage of same and honor, hath nothing pri∣vileged from his purchase, for not onely Honestus rumor alterum patrimonium, but Fama & vita aequiparantur, as Civilians judge: and we have elsewhere touched the abuse of Excommunication was that which lifted up the foot of the Pope to be set upon the necks of Emperors, and was the stirrup which raised him to that height of power, as to compell them to hold his stirrup; the unbuttoning and get∣ting into the bosome of men (which whether effected by examinations or confessi∣ons will spring no vast difference) and the putting of them under arbitrary pen∣nance, was the very stairs to that throne (which like Solomons was over laid with gold, in the effluence of riches, and guarded with Lyons for the terror thereof,) whereon the Roman Clergy was exalted; And Cajetan advised Adrian the sixt,
That this was a sure way to get an absolute Command over the People, Scire volunt secreta domus a{que} inde timeri: Suarez, who they said speaks more for them than they would have, yet affirmes, that if the Sacrament should be dispensed according to the private knowledge of the Minister, Cited before. it would occasion many troubles, scandals and injuries, and Ministers might defame whom they list, and fain a sin and unworthiness where there is none, and the faithful must often fear and be afraid lest they should be defamed by the Minister. Quòd si ergo novam in Ecclesia tyrannidem his principiis stabiliri posse me∣tuimus, quis nos absq, causa id timere dicet? saith Gualther: and he produceth this reason, Epist. ad Bo∣hem. Epist. ad Co. mit. de Wity∣custem. Est equidem insatiabilis hominum ambitio, & rari inveniuntur qui potestae sibi datâ non insolentiores fiunt: and in another place, Quid ergo fore sperabimus, si quando regnum suum stabilierunt, cum hae disciplinae ejus primiiae pro qua illi tan∣topere digladiantur? And if a power guided and limitted by a certain rule, and ex∣ercised so rarely, as scarce upon one of an hundred, was so suspicible and de∣structive to him, how tenderly would he have resented, and with what indigna∣tion declaimed against this arbitrary proceeding, whereof scarce one of an hun∣dred but complains to be wounded by the pawes thereof? And do but seriously perpend what the judicious assertor of Infant Baptisme delivers, That it would turn all into confusion, Baxer p. 131. — and put the greatest power and opportunity for lord∣liness and tyranny into the hands of the Ministery that ever did any dctrine in the Church, if the Minister onely must judge who shall be baptized, — so that if the Minister be not pleased neither Prince nor People shall be Christians — we must all then stoop and couch to Ministers, and give them what they would have, lest we should be no Christians, nor be baptized. If the Fable of Purgato∣ry drew so much lands and revenues to the Clergy, how much more would this be like to do it? — the Ministers would be indeed as men that carried the keyes of Heaven and Hell under their girdles. So he, and verily as Passus in Lucian bid turn the table and the horse with his heels upward would be passant; so for ought I can discern, the same in some degree and proportion might be applied to the o∣ther Sacrament, and said of Ministers, if they should dispense it onely to those who had approved themselves fit and worthy in their judgement, and what Nau∣clerus falsely said in another case of the voyce heard from Heaven would then fall out true in this, That now poyson is cast into the waters of God and his Church. They may therefore please themselves and impose upon their Prosylites by those species, that theirs are Gods wayes, (by decree and permission indeed, not pre∣cept and approbation, his providence so sweetly disposing and governing all things, that that which falls out against his will, happens not without it:) that they stu∣dy to preserve the priviledges of the Saints, (as the Duke of Florence takes up and keeps safe the commodities of his Country to issue them at his own rates,) and raise a fence that they may not he trodden done by wild beasts, (rather to let no Sheep to enter, but such as they fancy and bear their mark,) that they gather out the stones of Gods Vineyard, (and leave a great one in their hearts to so many of their brethren:) that all that is down is by voluntary agreement of those that freely submit, (true, of them that are in favour to be receaved, not by agreement of those that are wrongfully excluded, and who deny submission, and are no parties to the con∣tract, this may make it somewhat equitable to the one, but their agreement can∣not make it cease to be an injury to the other, no more than when the Anabaptists
harrowed and plundered all the Country about Mnster, it could excuse them for stealing from others to say, they do nothing but by mutual agreement between themselves, for the injured people agreed not to be robbed of their properties:) they excommunicate none (it were wholesomer and better reguled discipline to ex∣communicate those that merited it, and to entertain communion with the rest, but that they have mistaken the boxes where the Antidote lay, and made use of those wherein was the poyson, and have pulled up Gods threshold and set down their own, over which to go in & out of the Temple & house of God:) that they redress a∣buses, (just as he that should tear the whole Ship in pieces with the broken planks thereof to build and trim a cabbin:) and promote the national engagement, (which was never so much vilified as by their brotherhood, who have made it as the bridge of Caligula at Puzol, Quo fine structum nisi ut destrueretur? as Lipsius, or like Scaurus his Theater, Temporarium & vix uno mense futurum in usu, or as Cardi∣nal Cusanus prophanely speaks of the Scripture, that it was fitted to the time and ariably understood, so that at one time it is expounded according to the current fashion of the Church, and when that fashion is changed, the sense also is chang∣ed:) that theirs are Essayes of rule and order, (or rather a rule beyond their order:) tis a fallacy à benè conjunctis ad malè divisa, dividing ruling from well, (which the Monk said spoiled the text,) it is a ruling not ut profint, sed ut praesint, as Augustine. But notwithstanding all these dawbings and pargetings, as in that famous Tower in the Isle of Pharus, the ambitious Architect engraved thereon in Marble this In∣scription, Sostratus of Gnidos built this, which he covered over with plaister, in∣scribing the same with the name of the Founder, Ptolomy Philadelphus, that that soon wasting, his own name might be legible to posterity: so though on this high Tower of Discipline they have set the Name of God, as if it were built by him and for him, yet when Time, and Truth her off-spring hath washt away this plaister, it will be visible and apparent, that for themselves onely, and their great∣ness it was medelled and raised, and all this contention and stirre which they have started about it, is not so much pro aris quàm pro focis, they have sought their own things, not the things of Christ, and as Vignier said of Baronius his Annals, he should rather have intituled the book De Primatu Romani Pontificis; so they might rather have named their writings, An Apology for their Lordliness, than an Apology asserting their administration of the Lord's Supper in a select company. And yet as of pride, Prima est baec ultio, that it frustrates its own ends, and hath a naturall influence to defeat it selfe of what it intentionally drives at, which is honor and esteem, (pride being a most despicable and disobliging quality:) so the Apologists in seeking too much, find too little of Soveraignty, and that which is like to be lesse permanent, and by grasping too much at the Corn-heap, hold less, Vis te Sexte coli, volebam amare: Parendum est tibi; quod jubes, coleris; Sed si te Sexte colo, non amabo. If the Angell of the Church stand at the entrance with such a flaming sword as turns every way (not onely against the scandalous but others also) it is onely to keep out and fright men from approaching that Paradise, not to invite or offer ad∣mission: and he that is an old man in wisdom and experience knowes that he
shall not have the people servants for ever, that doth not serve them this day (of new establishments) and answer them and speak good words to them. Soft drops pierce and enter into hard stones, when impetuous billows are broken without effect upon rocks, You may gently bow and inflect that plant, which per vim ma∣nibus reflexa resilit, saith Nazanzen. Flectitur obsequio curvatus ab arbere ramus, Franges si vires experiare tuas. When one told the Emperour that he had made his Soveraignty by some conde∣scentions lesse absolute, he replyed, But more safe. And when a Roman Senator asked the Carthaginian Ambassador, how long the peace should last? That saith he will de∣pend on the conditions you give us; if just and honorable, they will hold for ever; if otherwise, no longer than till we have power to break them: Moderata durant, but Nec diu potest, quae multorum malo excercetur, stare potentia. To excuse the calling of all to examination, (a promiscuous examination by them that deny all promiscous Communions,) even an examination of such as are more knowing than their examiners, they answer, That duties of Religion are to be used without respect of persons, which is as if when a felony is committed, a Ju∣stice of Peace should send to the Goale all the inhabitants of the town, as well those of unsuspected integrity, as those that are suspected to have committed the fact, and justifie the proceeding by saying, That acts of justice are to be used without respect of persons: Aquinas 22. q. 63. art. 1. Valentia disp. 5. q. 7. Punct. 1. Sylvius in 2.2. q. 61. art. 1. Lessius de iustit. & jure. l. 2. c. 32. dub. 1. Ames cas. l. 5. c. 5. Acception of persons is when in any distribution the merit of the cause is not respected, but some condition of the person, impertinent to that distribution, as the School and Casuists: But when mn are reduced under ex∣amination to make tryall whether they are ignorant, and those are exempted who are sufficiently known to be knowing, it is the cause that is respected, not the per∣son: Consistit enim aequalitas distributivae justitiae in hoc, quòd diversis personis di∣versa tribuuntur, secundùm proportionem ad dignitates personarum: Si ergo aliquis consideret illam proprietatem personae, propter quod aliquid quod ei confertur est ei debi∣tum, non est acceptio person sed causae, as Aquinas. And Valentia therefore resolves, that if in distribution of commen good things the condition of the person be not at∣tended which makes him worthy of the good that is conferred in that distribution, that it is respect of persons; and the same reason holds in distributing punishments also, so at it here will follow, that they rather accept persons, who in examining those that may be ignorant, except not those that are removed beyond all doubt of their knowledge. They think it possible, but not so usuall, that the Pastor may be exceeded in learning by some of his congregation. If it fall not out often, yet if it sometime happen, that sup∣ports the Hypotheis, and in such a contingence, if Phormio were accounted so de∣lirous to dispute of military discipline before Hannibal, it were greater madness for a lesse knowing man to take an overly and suspitious examination of one of more knowledge, and some would unhappily think sus fily joyned with sacerdos, if in such a way sus Minervam, But doth learning (they ask) exempt from obedience? No, but from a Tyro∣nical or rather a Tyrannical examination, and from that obedience which is pro∣per onely for the unlearned. Ministers though less learned, must be obeyed by more scientious auditors, when they speak in his name, and upon his embasly in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: but they are not to expect such obedience of any when they speak of themselves, and seek their own
glory. Conscience is the onely forum divinum, and in that Court they are not Praetors but publishers and interpreters; we call no man Master, In Matt. 23.8. Quasi penes quem esset scripturam pro suo arbitrio exponere & intelligere, as Calvin, or, ut ve∣rum putemus quicquid ille docuerit, quia ab illo prosectum est, as Estius. It is the sla∣vish superstition of the Papists, that (as Gratian tells us) they rather desire to know the ancient institution of Christian Religion from the Popes mouth, than from the holy Scripture, and they onely inquire what is his pleasure, and accord∣ing to it they order their lives: and it is the ambitious tyranny of their Prelates to teach, That if the consent of divers Divines affirme such a doctrine to be the sense of the Church, the people are bound to believe it though it be a lie, (as Va∣lentia) and they shall commit a meritorious act by believing such a falshood, as Biel and Tolet: but nobis non licet esse tam indiscrtis, they might then justly ac∣count and deal with us as ignorants indeed. They must be obeyed in what they derive from Gods Word, not in what they teach as it were inspiredly and voluntary, and in things within the spheare of their power to command, and i what is proper and proportioned to the subject whereon the command is imposed; but it no less exceeds the limit of our obedi∣ence, than the extent of our patience, to suffer men to bring us into bondage (we cannot with these Barbarians in Apian desire to be rid of liberty and spoile our selves potiore metallis Libertate,) and to permit them to devour us and take of us (even our other patrimony, our reputation) by an interpretative rendring us simple ignorants and making us per gradum Simconis to commence catechu∣mens, when we have long been in the degree of the faithful, and to exalt them∣selves, to make us the Basis, and to render us as Jacks in Virginals, to fall down that their usurped keyes may go up. Non bona patientia, saith Bernard, Cumpos∣sis esse liber servum te permittere fieri, nolo dissimules servitutem, in quam certe in∣dies dum nescis redigeris; hebetatis cordis indicium est, propriam non sentire continuam vexationem. Vexatio dat intellectum audiui, sed nimia non fuerit, nam si sit, non intellectum dat sed contemptum. The most learned we grant must still be kept un∣der teaching because we know in part, but not be put under examination if he knowes in part. Every Christian must be a disciple, and in Christ Schoole his Ministers are the Ushers, and those of the highest form that know most, the more do know that they know but little, the greatest part, as one saith, of what we know, being the lest part of what we know not, and all humane understanding being like the vial of Oyl which Xerxes found in Belus sepulchre, which after continual in∣fusions could not be filled up: and besides, he that is skill'd in the doctrine, yet is too often to seek of the application and the use, which is to set home by conti∣nual exhortation, and thereby are the affections to be reconciled to reason, and charmed into a compliant subserviency, and those sailes (for affectus sunt vela a∣rimi,) to be spread and trim'd and filled with a continual breath to carry on the mind to the port designed; but there is no such necessity of our being examined by them, the Church must receave edifying, and they are given for the edifying of the body of Christ, but if they will be wise Master-builders, they will not be still laying again the foundation in those that have gone on unto perfection, nor level the walls after they have been built to some hight to try how the ground∣work was setled, for as it is said to be the madness of jealousie to seek that which it is loath to find, so it is, if not a madness, yet a mockery, to seek that which is found already.
A Wife may have more knowledge than her Husband, some subjects more policy than their Governours, yet this cannnot justifie disobedience nor null authority. Nei∣ther do we dream, that he that hath a richer stock of Knowledge than his Pastor, may despicably extrude or renounce him, or proudly detract his obedience to Gods Commands in his mouth, or presumptuously usurp upon his office, and be deal∣ing with his stock and laying it forth in publick teaching, but can onely claim his privilege to be exempt of such a derogatory examination, and not be apprehended and stopt in his access to the Lords Table as a poor suspected person, till he have gotten their Let-pass. We do not imagine (however it sometimes may be true in some respects, Tu major, tibi me est aequum parere Menalca, and Cyrus was wont to say. Neminem debere sscipere principatum nisi melior his in quos susciperet,) that every superior must be higher by the head than all those subject to him, and that it must be among men, as it is they say amonst Angels of light, that every one of an higher Order is more illuminate than any one of an infe∣rior; the title to superiority hath often another root than an absolute deturdig∣niori; but yet an Husband, if he will dwell like a man of knowledge, must net deport himself toward his Wife as if she were a fool, or interpretatively and impli∣citely make her such, if she be a woman of knowledge; nor a King that will be just, deal with wise men as with idiots, and practically make them such, for ju∣stice partly consists in giving every man his own, and to be so despicably examined is not proper to a knowing but an ignorant person. A King may seise the lands of an idiot, and issue a writ de leproso amovendo, but may not hold every man out till he plead and approve his soundness of body or mind, and obtain his charter of al∣lowance thereof; and though he may remove or keep out a manifest Leper, he must not deal so with every one that hath some other lesse sore. And though (as they say) it be not usual that any è grege of the Flock for knowledge be egregious in respect of the Pastor, yet it is exceeding frequent that they are more knowing than to be degraded from the Temple to the School by an examination proper for tyroes and novices, Ecclesiast. l 1. c. 4. tom. 1. p. 1939. and so be set to School again, Duo instituta snt conventuum sacrorum publicorum{que} genera, (saith Junius:) Unum to∣tius Congregationis, cujus locum docendi causâ Templum nominabimus, veteres Eccle∣siam dixerunt,  &c. Alterum puerorum tyronumq, , cujus locus Schola appellatur graeco vecabulo, Acts 19. The ancient Church knew but these two ranks or degrees of her members, so that he which was not placed among the one, had his station with the other, the one the Catechumens, the other the Congregation of the faithful, and to all the later promiscuously the Sacrament appertained, as was before alleaged out of the same Author. That an humble man may submit (the question is not de facto, what he may, but de jure, whether he must,) to one of meaner abilities to avoid exceptions, (theirs onely, that their commands may be general rules without exceptions; but to a∣void just exceptions, pride should rather not exalt it self, than teach that it is hu∣mility to condescend,) and to incourage others; (rather to incourage them to carry on and go through with their designes, when some yeeld to be as decoyes to lead on others into the snare;) that the able and godly know not their abilities so as to oppose them to their duty, (the more they know, the less they know it to be their duty to follow their triumphall Chariot, and to become accessory to their usurped Lordlines, and their own bondage; it is onely ignorance that can be the Mother
of this devotion;) that being tryed it will adde to their esteem to be found knowing, (it is sure more estimable never to have been questioned and reduced to tryal, as Aeschines justly thought it a greater glory to Cephalus never to have been accused, then to Aristophon to have been 75. times acquitted.) All this, which hath often been set before us, — eadem cantabant versibus jisdem, Occidit miseros crambe repetita magistros, we have elsewhere as frequently (we trust) made manifest to be onely painted and carved dishes, like those of Heliogabalus, which cannot satisfie, and like those seeming fat hoggs which Del. Rio cut of Dubravius tells us that Zyto the Ma∣gician sold the Baker, which though forbidden, he brought to the water to be washt because they looked filthy, and then all proved to be but waddes of Straw. — Cum scclus admittunt superest constantia. They disdaine with Aristippus to die of the biting of a Wezel, they provoke the teeth of a Lyon, they will not pusillanimously excuse one fault, but boldly avow another, Pudor veluti vestis, quanto obsoletior est, tanto incuriosius habetur. They think we mistake that their greatest suspition is of ignorance, it is mens hearts not their heads which they suspect; but they are mistaken of us, not we of them; we know, and through this discourse have taken notice, that they not onely sus∣pend such as are palpably ignorant, but also all which have not upon examination satisfied them of their knowledge, nor those alone that are scandalously wicked, but all that have not upon tryall convinced them of their holiness, and this later we look upon as their axes, on the other but as their rods; that as the chastise∣ment with rods, and this with Scorpions. This we dispute against as the superla∣tive obliquity and inordinateness of their way, that they will allow no mans title to the Sacrament, till upon inspection they have confirmed his evidences, and do disseise every man of his possession, till he do suit to their Court, and acknowledg to hold of them by homage and fealty. So the right is rooted in their favour and approbation, as the next and neerest cause. But whereas they say, that the greatest part that stand off from them, do it upon sus∣pition of their practice, and their not living as they expect, they do but transferre that blame which themselves have contracted, and exprobrate to others their pro∣per faults, they accusing those to stand off, whom they drive or keep off, and like men putting off from land to sea, they conceit the shore passeth away from them, while they go off from it: They say we mistake their suspition to be of one thing when it is more of another, therefore the suspition harbours in their bosom. Those which (stand not off, but) are kept out, know not of scandall by themselves, yet are not thereby justified with them, and therefore if they suspect any thing, it is onely that they are suspected by them, and are therefore passive, not active in the suspition: yet when the water is troubled, the lambe must be accused, though he stand below, and can have nothing come down to him, but from the wolfe at the head, and they deal with their flock as those did with King Richard the 2d. who having meat set dayly before him, was not permitted to eat a bit, and being thereupon starved, they gave out that he was felo de se, and killed himself by a voluntary abstinence. If they knew any susceptible of catechising them (which was onely spoken compara∣tively and by hypothesis,) they might in policy (the great wheele of their motions,)
for bear to call them forth, (lest like Mercury neer the Sun, they might be eclips'd by brighter rayes, and receave less veneration,) and would in ingenuity say as one said to an eminent man in like words with John to Christ, I have need to be taught of thee, and comest thou to me? It seems counting one by one it was but one of a thousand they have found, and one swallow cannot secure us that it is a summer, there may many storms yet be impendent. One Anacharsis cannot redeem and expiate all the barbarisme of Scythia, — Catilinas Quocun{que} invenias populo, quocun{que} sub axe, Sed nec Brutus erit, Bruti nec avunculus usquam. If one did not abuse this power, others may, and our security is to be rooted in the limitation of the power, not the goodness of the person that exerciseth it: Though we hope the best, that he will not hurt us, yet we ought to provide against the worst, that he may not be able to hurt us if he would. And the neglect of this pro∣vident principle hath set open the widest door to tyranny, and hath made good Governours to create the worst presidents, and if in this one this were commen∣dable and exemplar, why do they not all follow the patterne, not onely toward such as have ascended to eminent degrees of knowledge, but in some degree to those also who have stept above the flat of this puny and elementary tractation, unless like the Athonians in the Theater, they know what is just and fit to be done, but can be content the Lacedaemonians should do it? But what can this select example pretend to? Eiher that he was like King Stehen and Richard the third, of whom our Cronicles say, that they moderately used that power which they usurped; or else that he deserved such thanks as Anytus said Alcibiades did merit, for taking but a part when he might have catcht all; Or else that he did onely receave with a particular complement him, whom their general command had laid hold of and brought unto such submission, as the Lord we know did yet use to kiss his te∣nant, when he hd constrained him to kneele uncovered, with his hands jointly together between the hands of the Lord, and so to do him homage. Did he dis∣claime the principle that all must come to be examined? Did he plainly profess and constantly practice to call none but such as were under just suspition of igno∣rance? If otherwise, all this was but mendax humilitas, (as Hierom;) onely a Nolumus Episcopari, (as is the mockery of the Canon) a dissembling to be wil∣ling to do that which was his drift and designe to have done; a looking one way and rowing another, and is but as if that Indian serpent which Niremberg mentions, when by his breath he forcibly drwes a goodly Stagg into his mouth, should turn his head aside, when he takes in his prey to swallow it. In expressing That they honor the Graces above the Muses, they recite what one said of the present estate of Oxford, That there had been more Muses heretofore, but never so many Graces. I could repay them with the saying of another, That the pre∣sent Graces to the former Muses, hold the same proportion that the Graces dee to the Muses, which is Three to Nine: but when ever that famous University is a∣ny way to commence, I shall not dare to deny her Grace, and if that which they repeat be not historicall, I wish it may prove propheticall, and that her pre∣sent Graces were multiplied by her former Muses, and her modern Muses by the number of her ancient Graces: and however, yet for my part I should rather dor∣mire Mcoenati, and abhor with Nero to dissect my mother, lest the womb where I lay might not prove so fair as I expected.
They found no occasion to discusse, and we see no reason to determine, Whether the Shekel of the Sanctuary were greater or lesse than the common, though we suppose both to be equall, which they forget to consider of, though they might have been prompted to it by A. Lapide (if they had looked no further) in the place they quote, and that it was called the Shekel of the Sanctuary, because kept there as in a safe and sacred place, to be the Standard whereby the common Shekels were to be weighed and tryed, (as at Rome the Amphora of the Capitol was that which was there reserved to the like ends.) But whether the common Shekel & that of the San∣ctuary were of equall or different weight and price, it matters not, since an Al∣legory may be bottom'd upon a common opinion of things, and requires not a precise truth to found it on, and to deny this liberty, were to make destruction in the Sylva Allegoriarum, & to root up a great part of Sylva Moralium. Sanctius in I∣saiam, c. 13. v. 5. n. 11. It is the Rule of a learned Commentator, that the Scripture it selfe accommodates its speech of∣tentimes not to the truth of things but opinion of men, which he demonstrates by severall instances and more might be added, as Psal. 5.8.4. and 5. Eccles. 10.11, &c. But I think it niher suits with truth nor common opinion, what they seem to imply, That there were any Shekels of Iron, or Brasse, or Gold, though some pieces of either of those metas, and so also other commodities might weigh a Shekel, or be a pice of so many Shekels (as a Shekel had its name from Shakel, to weigh, or put into the ballance) but a Shekel as a gold or brasse coyn, there was none so called, none but of silver; but whether there were any such or not, yet sure the Bells of Aaron were neither to be of sounding Brasse, nor hard and dul Iron. But this is dolor ubi digitus, they cannot take it for currant payment, that any common Shekel should be greater than that of the Sanctuary this is insufferable, and not to be allowed to passe at their beam, for if the one scale rise up, the other will as much go down: Pompey can endure no equall, Caesar no superior, Ille sa∣pit solus, volitant alii velut umbrae. As the vulgar Muscovites say, The great Duke knowes all, and as the Pasquil said, That the King of Spain had gelded and deve∣sted all others of their honorable titles that he alone might be most high, Nil majus generatur ipso, Nec viget quicquam simileaut secundum; so some men must be as the Phaeix that hath no other of the same kind: For envy is alwayes the proper passi∣on of pride, Estius in 2. Sent. c. 6. sect, 4. for dum affectus alicujus tendit in aliquid ppetendum consequenter reni∣titur opposito, id est ciper quod impediatur ab co quod appetit assequendo, dum ergo quis a petit excellentiam singularem quod est superbae, staim reniti ur excellentiae alienae ta∣quam suae excellentiae, quam singularem esse vult, impedimentum objiienti; and there∣fore there is aliquod malum propter vicinum bonum, as the arbor Tristis sheds all his flwers, and seems withered at the rise of the Sun, Claro invidens, tabescit obscurus videns. But why should it be odious in us to propound such an Hypothesis, when they acknowledge that it is possible that the Pastor may be exceeded in learning and gifts by some of his Congregation, and themselves make an ostent of an example of one that confest he had need to be taught of an eminent person under him, which I hope was neither lying humility, nor complementall hypocrisie, onely per∣chance they may be of like mind with Cardinal Langius, that what Luther said was true, but it was not to be suffered that such a fellow as he should have to doe with it? But the allusion, they say, every one sees reflects on the particular Ministers; rather
none can see it, not those to whom it is visible that those Ministers fall short of the parts of some of their congregations, none but only they to whom my brest is dia∣phanous and my heart transparent, but from my herat I professe that without any such reflex I writ Mathematically, and abstracted my lines from all subjects: but if they will needs have an inherence to be of the essence of this accident, and that this must needs referre and be restrained to certain particular persons, and they will rack me to confesse what I should be contented to conceale, I shall yet onely say, that such a reflection had been no such hainous or piacular offence, and that the Hypothesis (as I meant it though they will perforce make it a Thesis) is as farre from disparagement as impossibility. He that by discourse hath poysed and selt the weight of their Shekels will be easie to believe, that no great mass need to be laid in the counter-scales to ballance them, that some common Shekels may aequiponderate the most of them, and some perchance may need their allow∣ance of some grains to make them passe the Standard of the Sanctuary. And if in any degree they shall be madded at this, sure it is not over-much learning that makes them mad. But be their Shekels whatsoever, yet let them be like those old Israelitish coins, which had on one side stamped the pot of Manna, as well as on the other Aarons rod blossoming, whereas they are all for the one, and forget the other. We run in confort with them, while they sing that not the largest Shekels, (I sup∣pose they mean for extent of knowledge) BUT THE HOLIEST are best, for we preferre the tree of life before that of knowledge, since the one alwayes makes to live for ever, the other sometime casts out of Paradise. But though Gold be more pretious than other metals, yet Iron is more regardable at a Mu∣ster, and when men are examined whether they be ignorant, knowledge is that which is chiefly looked after. And so also though in the definition of an Orator, vir bonus be a better attribute then dicendi peritus, yet that which is proper and for∣mall to a good Orator, is to be skilfull in the Art of speaking, &c. And so it is like∣wise constitutive of a good Minister to have his Shekel of full weight as well as of pure metall, and to be learned as well as godly. And what they say, That knowledge adorned with humility, and engaged to advance piety, of any what ever measure or extent, is after the Standard of the Sanctuary, is not true, if applied to a Minister, for as Gregory pithily, He that is the Pastor ought so far to excell his flock generally, as compared with him, they may seem but of the herd; the Well should be of more capacity than the Bucket, and for the sheep it is enough to drink there, but Jacob ought to be of greater strength to remove the stone, and open the well, (according to Origens allegory) but if in themselves or others so few grains of knowledge may make up a Shekel of a passable weight, why are they so rigid at other times in the tryall thereof in their Scales? and whereas they require that knowledge be adorned wih humility, and engaged to advance piety, we shal so far second them, as to confesse that where there is a weighty Shekel, it depresseth the scale, and sets it lower, and also that all the gold and silver which hath been brought out of Egypt, and all the Ear-rings (what ever the ear hath lear∣ned) ought to be subservient to the building of the Tabernacle, and no Shekels (as too many are) should be (like those of Micah) converted to the making of a Teraphim, but we cannot consent, that onely that piety is pure and passable metall, which hath the touch of the Tower which they are building, or is currant coyn which hath their stamp and mintage, or that as Eagles are tryed by
looking against the Sun, so that it is onely genuine piety which can endure their new light. To that of the paper, That to suspect the knowledge of the generality of their people, is to imply (as the Papists have abusively perverted that of Gregory) that while the Oxen laboured, they were all Asses that fed by them, they answer, They need a paire of tongs to deal with so odicus a comparison. And perchance they need them indeed, lest it be felt so hot as to burn their fingers; but if non dico nugas esse, sed esse puto, if they doe not expressly call them Asses, as they implicitly call them Dogs and Swine, which is worse, yet virtually and practically they judge them such, and deale with them as if they were no other, and make them such by an interpre∣tative declaring them to be so (as in common acception they are said to make a man a foole that use him as if he were one, as also magnifacere is but magnum dicore;) for if they think them to be of knowledge and understanding, why do they doubtingly examine them? Who enquires after that whereof he is already satisfied? if they suppose there is reason to bring them under such a suspitious tryall, then they are not perswaded but that they are (at least may be) these simple ones whereof the Asse is the hieroglyphick, and if they did not imply them to be Asses, they yet hold forth themselves as Lyons, that will have all beasts of the For∣rest, others as well as Asses to prostrate themselves in such obeysance. But per∣chance the quarrell may be, that as the Pope said of England, Etiam asinus meus re∣calcitrat; so the Asse will no longer lye down under his burden, and sure as it is said, nothing will hold the water of Styx, that perforates all other things, save the hoofe of an Asse; so perhaps it may be well supposed, that this doctrine of sub∣mission to their trials can be onely proper to those whom they suppose that animall may emblem. But they will leave the comparison to those from whom it came, Popish Priests and E∣iscopall spirits, who advanced themselves by the ignorance of the Laity. And indeed in the Church of Rome, this was among the Arcana Imperi, and part of the mystery of iniquity too: and as to vent false wares they darken the shop; and to rob the house, extinguish the candle; and to reign like Nahash, put out the right eye; so did they upon this account both canonize ignorance (which Hosius affirmes is in most things best of all, and to know nothing is to know all things,) and by inhi∣biting the Scriptures, (wherwith not, onely great Doctors of Physick were unac∣quainted, as Julius Alexandrinus Physician to the Emperour Charles the fift, hea∣ing Divines alleaging S Paul, replied, Profectò oportet me aliquando legere vestrum istum Paulum, but Bishops themselves were ignorant of them, as Justus Jonas tells us of one that reading the Bible, and being asked what book it was, answered, He could not tell, but it was a book contrary to their Religion) and deterring men from reading thereof. (Thyraus saith, He knew some men possest with the Divel onely be∣cause they reasoned and disputed of the Scriptures) and anciently (for of late in divers things Rome it self is become a reformed Church) neglecting all other wayes of teaching in effect save reading of the Legends to make men laugh, which Beleth commendeth, and asserting, that if a man were asked of the greatest Arti∣cles of the faith, he might sufficiently say, he could not tell, but believes as the Church doth, and that would save him: but that their Church is that people which obey the Pope who is Christs Vicar, must be explicitly believed. But we can∣not henceforth with that confidence lay this at their door, when they will be apt to retort it back by recrimination and tell us, that notwithstanding what ever we
judge of them who know them not, yet their people are not so ignorant as we con∣fess ours to be, whom we have better knowledge of, whereof one of an hundred by our own account, is not capable to partake of the Sacrament; and though Campion said most falsely of our Ministers, Eorum ministris nihil vilius, yet they will say with colour of truth, Eorum plebe nihil vilius, if they are so wretched and unworthy. Erubui, gremiò{que} pudor dejccit ocellos. Whether Episcopal spitits were parcell guilt with this close designe, I shall say little in their condemnation or defence, but this is manifest, that many of them were like the fish called Lucerna, whose tongue Pliny saith did shine as a torch, so did their tongues cast forth light, and they shined by preaching, Ut pura nocturno renidet, Luna mari, Gnidiúsve Gyges. And as the same Author saith, that those calami or reeds whereof paper was made, yeilded flowers whereof crowns were formed; so their calami or pens put to paper, brought forth such flourishing works, as shall crown their names with immortall honor,, and though they are fain and gone, yet the monuments of their learning (which help to make others learned) shall stand for ever, — nec Jovis ira, nec ignis, Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas. It is true that some of them, when they lighted the Lamps did not burn incense, they having no good odor for their indiscrete Ordinations, setting up rusn candles and sometime smoaking snuffes, and withall blowing out and puffing off some clear lights of the Sanctuary, and so might in this consideration seem to favour ignorance, as he that gives a blind or drives away a good guide doth causally or an∣tecedently tumble into the ditch: but this was paucorum crimen, and nevertheless there was not darkness upon the face of the deep before the other lights were crea∣ted in the firmament of this Heaven; but where is Plato's Num-nam & ego talis sum? rather it is true what Salvian tells us, Multi horrent sed paucissimi evitant, in aliis quippe borrent quod in se semper admittunt, mirum in modum & accusatores ec∣rundem criminum & excusatores, execrantor publicè quod occultè agunt, & per hec dum damnare se caeteros putant, ipsos se magis propriâ ammadversione condemnant. It was said of Isocrates and Quintilian, That they pleaded not, yet made ma∣ny Orators, but contrariwise though others do teach, yet have they not made o∣thers become no teachers, and left several places without teaching, and so conse∣quently furthered and promoved ignorance; Let them be lights in the firmament, yet they are but topical starrs, and their beams and influences are limited and confined to certain places, and in many other Horizons the starrs are as thin set as about the Southern pole, and I doubt others beside the Bishops may be culpable in an accidental and consecutive diffusing of dark ignorance by casting down many starrs to the ground and stamping upon them, so as more than a third part of them in some places is darkened, and let them put their hands into their bosome, and see if they come not forth leprous by having been hands in this, if not per se, ta∣men per alios, if not directly and immediately, yet whether not by the guilt of con∣silium, consensus, palpo, recursus, Nutans, non obstans, &c. according to the several wayes of partaking sins, and so have been some part of the tail that hath drawn this third part of the starrs of Heaven, and hath cast them to the earth. However those starrs were not pure in their sight, and some gave not their light, yet neither are
all those in Heaven free from spots, yet are permitted to shine, and some appa∣rently shine not to us, yet doubtless have their light and influence; and if some men have forgot that, Quàm saepe veniam qui negavit petit! and that Eutropius was haled by Chrysostom from that Sanctuary which he would have had the Emperour shut up, yet they should remember that if the lights burn dimme, it is a wildness instead of snuffing to put them out. The Indians when they have no candles are glad of an Cucuji; where there are Ministers, though perchance non Ex meliore luto, nor — nati faelicibus ovis, yet there is a face of publick worship, a convening at the places appointed for it, men are kept in the recognition of their duty, taken off and inhibited from other tentations, not onely in losse of time, (negatively in doing nothing, but posi∣tively in doing evill) but loss of acquaintance with Ordinances, and degenera∣ting into a kind of paganisme. All cannot resort to places very distant to supply the want in their proper Churches, and sometimes the distance is so wide, as few or none can be accomodate for recourse. In a twilight a man can better see his way than in the dark, and if the prodigall had not a while sustained himself with husks, he would not have lived to have eaten his fathers bread. Let the stinking snuffs be trodden out, but my weakness is apt to think, that better suffer weak lights in eve∣ry angle, than set up a few in a vast room, which must needs have many corners under much darkness; better suffer some tares than to root up much wheat, and perchance onely to change the weed but not cleanse the field, as where the corne stands thin, weeds will rise, either empty husks, who (as Hierom speaks) lo∣qui nesciunt, tacere non possunt, docént{que} Scripturas quas non intelligunt, priùs imperitorum magistri, quàm doctorum discipuli, or (as Bernard saith,) Priùs ef∣fundere quàm infundi velint, loqui quàm audire paratiores, docere prompti quod nun∣quam didicerunt, or else venemous and contagious plants, qui pro alicujus tempo∣ralis commodi & maximè gloriae principatus{que} sui causa, falsas & novas opiniones gig∣nunt vel sequuntur, as Augustine. We should like it well, if as Pacuvius told his Capuans concerning the Senators, they could be provided of new, before they sa∣tisfied their anger upon the old, but else we think it better to spare them for the time in hope of amendment hereafter, and that as Aristides advised, Laconico & Perfico more parva multis & minora majoribus condonarent. A good Master (said that Father) may be honored in a bad servant, & mihi accusatio etiam vera contra fratrem displicet, as Hierom, and though Noah were drunken, yet Cham was ac∣cursed for discovering his nakedness, and however perchance illi quod meruere, sed quid tu ut adesses? and Lactantius tells us that we murder him in whose death we take complacency, though executed by a righteous sentence. But though in the natural body the blood and spirits run to cherish any wounded part, yet in po∣litick bodies we find it is rather as in an Arch, where if a stone be loose the whole frame sets upon it with all its weight, and most men are too ready to seeth a kid in his mothers milk, that is, as Philo interprets, to add affliction to the afflict∣ed, — turpes instant morientibus ursi, Et quaecun{que} minor nobilitate fera est. We wisht it were the worst thereof, that some men, like the unspunne silk of Chi∣es, would draw and suck up all moisture; we more fear lest this he some of the
teeth of that worm that lies at the root of Ministery, and that this pretended sweep∣ing and garnishing of the house is onely to make way for seven more wicked spirits, and that some men are so blind like Sampson unawares to grind for the Philistines, and are deceived by the wooife in sheeps cloathing to seek to hang up the doggs upon pretence they are dumb or mangy: and are so fascinated like him at Constantinople whom Nicetas mentions, that supposed he had been pushing upon a Serpent, when he broke in pieces his own earthen vessels; so some may think they are strising at the old Serpent, when they are breaking vessels of the Sanctuary. Certainly the Jesuites will not be decieved or discouraged from attempting upon this Church by a supposall that because we cast out so many, we had Ministers enough to defend the truth against their machinations, as the Gaules were disanimated to pursue the seige of the Capitol, as not reducible by famine, because the Romans cast out o∣ver the walles all their provision of bread. Lastly, They bear false witness against us by mis-interpreting our words, and then spiin our face and buffet us, they accuse us to say that they shape Presbytery to Popery, and this they say is the dreggs of this bitter Cup. And this had been dreggs indeed, yea, — crassi gutta veneni, had it dropt from our pen, and had made it a cup of abomination, if this had lain in the bottome thereof, but sure it is the dreggs of the cup of their fancy, and like to Alexander the sixth, the cup they have mixed for us, will envenome them∣selves, Nihil est Antipho quin male narrando possit depravarier, tu id quod boni est excerpis, dicis quod mali est. The Apologists carry some analogy with the Samaritaus; when the Jewes pre∣spered, then they were brethren, but if they were under water, the Samaritan would drench himself in water if he had but toucht a Jew; so if the Presbyterians be about the Zenith, they are calculated also for the same Meridian, so as (in their own words) to be neerer to them than to Independents, but if in the Nadir, they are Antipodes to them, having fitted their Church way in such a latitude as to suit with every elevation & formed it like the Giraffa made up of a Libbard, Hart, Buff, Camel, that none can well know what to call it of late (though intruth they are onely dow-baked Independents) and like the froggs generated of dust after it is fermented with certain showers are but half made up, part earth and part confor∣med) yet most often they take the livery of Presbytery, and the paper upon that supposition, inferred that their way being obtruded under that notion, gave oc∣casion to some, that took that for the face which was but a vizor, to suspect that Presbytery was modelled and cast into the like mould as Popery, Sands Europae speculum. p. 3. where the Pre∣lates made their greatness, wealth and honor the very rules whereby to souare out the Canons of faith, and then set Clerks on work to devise arguments to uphold them, and this odious suspition in others, was a spring of grief to the friends of Presbyte∣ry, who could not without indignation hear some say of Presbytery as that Cardi∣nal did at the bustling and factions Elections in the Conclave, Ad hunc modum fiunt Romani pontifices. Of this pinch of the inference they will not be sensible, nor do seek to clear their way of this stumbling block, viz. that it is a way which leads onely to their own ends of power and greatness, but turning out of the way, ex∣travagantly tells us, that men that like not the restraint of their lusts (and we must needs be those men) or whosoever else they be perchance, they cannot think fit that their lusts be restrained by giving liberty to others lusts, and letting them do what
they list, as Vives saith Philostratus corrected Homers lies by greater lies,) by any Church government, (for if they like not theirs, of necessity they will not abide any,) cry out of Popery, Covetousness, Ambition, Praelacy, &c. which are but fig leaves to cover their nakedness. But their paper leaves are not worth a figg to vail that cause which they have left naked of defence, for — si hac Pergama dextra, if this plea may defend a government, then all — una hac defensa fuissent, this might be plead∣ed in defence of any the most tyrannous governours, & they might also inferre, that because some like not the restraint of their lusts by any government, therefore themselves do not govern according to their lusts, and Bellarmine might with as much reason conclude, that whereas Cyprian saith Heresies and Schismes have no o∣ther spring, but onely because the Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest and Iudge for the time in the Church is reminded to be In the stead of Christ, therefore the Bishop of Rome usurps no unjust authority, nor is a tyrant in the title or exercise of his power. A man that is not fond of Presbytery (that is such a man as themselves, so cold∣ly and disaffectionately they speak it,) may say this for Presbytery what ever it be else, (a suspitious Aposipesis as if it were somewhat else which Ille quidem caelare cupit, turpí{que} pudore, Tempora purpureis cogit velare tiaris,) is the strongest barre that ever was set against Popery. We shall plead nothing in bar to that supposition, being farre from going about to lessen their good opinion of Presbytery, which we would rather cherish, and do wish they did like and love it better, and were more Presbyters, but we cannot illis dare nominis hjus honorem, and may rather expostulate, — quid pulchra vocabula pigris Obtendis vitiis? or complaine with Cato in Salust, I am pridem equidem nos vera rerum vocabula ami∣fimus, so as Aristippus said of precious ointments, malè sit Cynaedis qui diffama∣rum, beshrew them, that by incrusting their way with that notion have brought Presbytery under such suspitions and censures. We therefore cannot suffer Ahab to set Josias disguised in his habit and chariot, and to expose the King of Judah to the hazard of those arrowes which were intended against the King of Israel, or per∣mit another (as in the Roman story) to be vested with the vestments of Panopio when he was proscribed, and to be slain in his stead, nor allow Zopyrus that his maimes and wounds were inflicted by Darius onely for his love to the Babylonians, when his designe was to insinuate into their favour and compassion, that he might more opportunely betray them. They deal with Presbytery as the Athenians did with Aristides, confess him to be just and then banish him; as Caracalla with his brother Geta, Sit inter divos, modo non inter vivos, and when if they did affectionately espouse and keep faith with Presbytery, they might be happy in a fruitfull issue, and see their seed, which should become a multitude and be established, they rather chuse with Pigmalion to fall in love with a dead image of their own forming. Presbytery may be a barre to Popery, yet the corruption of Presbytery may not be so, the liquor which was sweet in the wine is sharp in the vinegar, and that which is pure in the top, may yet have dreeggs in the bottom; the verdant Juniper Tree gives a cool shaddow, but being inflamed yeelds the hottest coal; the basis may be the same in several medi∣cines, yet the addition of other ingredients doth change the nature and the opera∣tion.
He shall not limbe a man that doth, Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam; Christian Religion checks with many things, which Popery which is a degenerate Christianity, doth countenance; there may be in their modell somewhat thereof, but it is not all or onely Presbytery, and they say of Cantharides that the whole bo∣dy is Alexipharmacous, but some parts single are deleterious, and some do pre∣scribe ex cochlearum et testudinum carne multum edendū aut nihil; so Presbytery in the entire frame may uphold a Church though when some parts thereof be mixt with other compositions, yet may the lump be destructive. No hook will take without some bait, in lotteries their are some few prizes among many blanks to keep up the game, and Alchymists bring forth commonly some true and reall gold out of their furnaces, pretending it made there, which was secretly conveyed thither, to bring their impostures into credit; and so they have given their discipline some tincture of Presbytery to set it off with more plausibleness. But we say not that their way (though the corruption of Presbytery) carries an omnimodous or multifarious similitude with Popery, so as that Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. They are like not as ovum ovo, but as Humani existet simulator simius oris, not like simpliciter sed secundum quld, not in respect of all or many, but some one part, as an Aethiop is white in regard of his teeth. Their way hath a like ten∣dency with Popery to the greatness and pre-eminence of the Prelats, both steer by the same point of the compass, and are upon a like voyage to the Levant (so called ab elevando) the one sayling for Majorca, the other to Cephalany. And though Popery be not much of the constitution of their way, we fear it may be of the consequent, and by accident, if not directly, may introduce it. As Constantine by removing the Legions and Colonies from the Northern frontiers to the Eastern, made way for the inundations of the barbarous Nations, and his translating his impetiall seat to Constantinople, left Rome exposed to their fury: so the digladiations about discipline, have laid open doctrine to those destructive wounds it bleeds under, the discountenancing and depressing of so many learned Champions of the truth, hath been the leaving it without a guard, and with Ju∣stinian in the case of Aetius, the cutting off the right hand with the left, the horrid heresies which have entred at that doore of liberty which Independency hath set o∣pen, do scandalize and confirm Papists in their errors, and the desperate schismes animate them to assault us, and render us lesse united in our strength to resist them, as a house set on fire is sooner robbed by a Thiefe. The unchurching of so many, and separating from them, may tempt men into a facility of being re∣conciled to that Church, which seems to have a larger and a gender bosome, as in a besieged town the scarcity of victuals constrains some to eat unwholsome food, and prompts others to be fugitives into the enemies quarters, where they are like to find a more favourable reception & a freer communion. I pray God their keyes do not help to open the pit for smoak to arise, and out of the smoak those Locusts the Je∣suits to come amongst us: for as persons of honor and integrity have undertaken to assure the world, that actually divers Jesuits have passed incontroulably under the mask and notion of Independents, so it is obvious to any that probably it may be so; for Independency is an apt disguise for a Jesuite, since he that takes on this Livery, may under that Cloak suit himself with other clothes for stuff and
fashion as he list without further question, and may use his liberty of contradi∣ction to believe or not, to come to Ordinances or not, as well as his liberty of contrariety what he will believe, or what Ordinances he will resort unto: So that what was once said of the Jesuit, That he was every man, may now be verified of the Independent, and while the Jesult dresseth himselfe like birds of this feather, he may safely flye together with the flock, and find means and opportunity to decoy them in the snare of Popery, and so like Penelope unweave in the dark what they seemed to have woven in the light, and onely with the adversaries, Ezra 4. weaken the hands of the people and trouble them in building, while they pretend to build with them, and seek their God as they doe. Of all those evils Independency (which is the major part that denominates the Apologists) is that Trojan Horse which they have broken down the walls to bring into the Citie. They stand not much upon the saying of them that voted for Presbytery, and we be∣lieve it (because they stand obstaculous in their way, who stand not for Presbyte∣ry) and no mans sayings must be stood upon, that will not fall down with Dio∣nysius his flatterers, to lick up whatsoever fails from their mouth, Martius anguis erat cristis prasignis & auro, Ac mediâ plus parte leves erectus in auras, Despicit omne nemus. Some, say they, perchance voted and acted for wrong ends, (and all did so doubt∣lesse that would not be carried towards their ends, nothing was just or good that was not of the interest of Sparta.) Perchance some might do so, yet charity should prompt tather to excuse the intention, if they could not the work, rather than to ac∣cuse the intention, when the work they cannot, and rather to hope the best un∣till worse be evidenced: Perchance those which the paper intimated were not such, and without perchance ought to be believed certainly to have been such. But they are sure some were once in a neernesse to act in that way, who were unmeet for the work. It is possible that some might indeed not be fit, for every logge, though it be sound timber, is not fit to make a Mercury. But they have more cer∣tain knowledge of their own hearts, and might be sure of their proper unmeetness, and perchance (as well as they may) they speak this first of themselves by the light of a reflex beam, they had no heart to that work, & quod cor non facit, non fit, they had no love to it, did not set about it con amore, as the Italians say, it was not for their turn, some other way was aimed at, like fierce Racers in the impetuousness of their course, they did over-run and go beyond their Goal: and like the Tyger which Pimenta speaks of, that pursued his prey with such violence, that he over∣leapt it, and fell into the mouth of a Crocodile, it being no new thing to fall from one extream to another, as an eager opposition to the heresie of Manes, occasioned the rise of that of Pelagius. Errant homines non servantes modum, De fide & ope∣rib. c. 3. & cum in unam partem procliviter ire caeperint, non respiciunt divinae authoritatis aliae testimonia quibus possint ab illa intentione revocari, & in ea quae ex utrís{que} temperata est veritate & mo∣dera ione consistere, as Augustine. Or secondly, they say it of those that were of their choyce and recommendation, whose Icarian wings being not naturall, but set on, soon would melt with their shamefull fall when they soar high, or come into much light; or like Barschocab the pretended Messias, who, saith Hierom, had gotten a trick to kindle straw in his mouth, and breath it forth as if he had spit fire; so they for small matters
talk with a fervent zeal, but are as incompetent to carry on the work of re∣formation and settlement, as he was to accomplish the deliverance of the Jewes. Or thirdly, perchance that sum which they cast up to be unfit, were indeed not fit for their spurious and suppositious Presbytery, and unfit for their ends and in∣terest, who would approve of, or like none that were not like those in Tacitus, Qui veri copiam non faciunt, sed suspensa & quo ducuntur inclinantia respondent, and none to act as Church Governors which would not in acting be governed by them as the prime agents, and were unwilling to set up any Oracles that would not Phi∣lippize, and sought to have no planets in the Spheares that will not move con∣centrick with them as the Sun, and receive all their light from them, and if not like Mercury that shewes himselfe but once in thirty yeares, yet like the other pla∣nets when they are in a Diametrall line with the Sun to seem retrograde, and give place and way to him; for those whom they assume to assist in the work, they called with the same intent, with which Xerxes convened the Lords of Asia when he designed the invasion of Greece, to give more luster and countenance alone (as he said) to the expedition, and onely to obey and not to advise him. SECT. XXII. Of Independents their godlinesse, their schisme. The confessed im∣perfection of the way of the Apologists, the desire of an union with the Independents. An admonition to the Presbyterians. The confounding of Churches and Parishes by the Apologists. Their gathering of Churches. Whether they are guilty of dis∣order against Lawes. Whether Magick were laid to their charge. Whether they are culpable of schisme or sedition, or injury to other Ministers. Of their hatching others Eggs like like Partridge. AS Arminius thought it a good Quaere why Semipelagianisme might not be ac∣counted true Christianisme, because if that were false and counterfet coin, Arminianisme could not be currant, both being of like metall though of different stamp: so the Apologists having generally been willing to passe under the vizard of Presbytery, yet being researched, & like to be detected for Independents, when they can no longer keep on the mask, they seem to own the face, at least suppose it need not be disowned, and tell us, That Independents are no such formidable crea∣tures to them. First, and to them indeed they need not seem fearfull, Cognatis maculis parcit fera, And Junius tells us out of Pliny. Animantia in suo genere probe degunt, congregari videmus & starc contra dissimilia, Eiren. part. 1. Leonum feritas inter se non dimicat, serpentum mor∣sus
non petit serpentes, nec maris quidem belluae & pisces nisi in diversa genera non sae∣viunt. Secondly, they are not so formidable indeed to any as the Spaniards were to the Indians, that they could not think it an happinesse to go to heaven in their compa∣ny, nor to consort with them in any good way that leads thither. Thirdly, neither are they so terrible at any Scholastick encounter, as that if — Crispinus minimo me provocat. none should dare with them — tentare peri ula belli; Or that their names like Warwicks at the battell of Banbury, should strike terror enough to win a victory; but I doubt when the light of truth shall hereafter ascend neerer to her meridian, and dispell these mists which now hinder men to see clear∣ly, they will seem Nomina quae ipso sunt pene tremenda sono. Many godly men, say they, lye under that distinction of judgement, and I wish it were onely a distinction without a difference. But first, I doubt the Independents will account this opprobrii loco, because it is frigida & tenuis laudatio: for all of that denomination must needs be very godly, who usurp that definition for their way, which the Chymists arrogate to their Art, puri ab impuro separatio. As all that fire which is spheared on high and separate from commixture, is a pure element; so their Churches are questionlesse pure and clear like Egypts sky, and have not a black cloud in them, and Adam in them seems not to have sinned. But secondly, if we take Independencie in the lump, not in some parcels that may be extracted, and take the denomination from the major part, the notion of Godly and Independent are not onely at distance, but Diametral opposition: for as in tempering medicines, there is somwhat which they call the Basis, whereunto they add other ingredients that have their several qualities and operations: so Independency is the Basis of most modern heresies, and the fertill Africa of these Monsters. And as ubi definit Philosophus incipit medicus: so where Independency ends, there other heresies begin, who are generally Independents, & aliquid amplius, and as after the battell of Salamis, in honor of the victory, every man gave the second place to Themistocles, though he named himself first; so if one be an Antinomian, another a Socinian, another an Antiscripturist, yet every one is an Independent, that as Pacianus said, Christianus mihi nomen, Catholicus cognomen, illud me nuncu∣pat, istud ostendit; so Independent is the praenomen, what ever be the agnomen of hereticks. Thirdly, but I cannot truly deny, nor shall unwillingly grant, that there are some godly men of that notion, yet though I shall not say as Vopiscus relates it was said of good Princes, In uno annulo posse praescribi & depingi; at contrà quae series malorum? nor altogether with Eubulus the Comicall Poet that checkt himselfe for declaiming against womn, for if this were naught, yet that was not good; but soon found, himself at a stand, not being able to find more of the good, but multitudes of the evill, yet I believe those godly men are Rari nantes in gurgite vasto, Like the Israelites, as two little flocks of Kids, but the contrary kind like the Syri∣rians fill the Countrey. And then 4ly, it was no great honor to Sodom that one Lot was their Citizen,
there are some white men among the Negroes, yet is that the land of Blackmoores. Even Mercury, a desperate poyson, hath some parts which being separated from the whole, are Antidote. Fiftly, Those purely meer Independents which have no mixture of other here∣sies or prophaness, and are godly men, yet their light doth not shine so bright, that as in the Sun those lesser starrs that move about him do seem as spots, so their ho∣liness should be defiled by a communion with others less holy; neither are they like the Sun which by his matchless light perstringeth and eclipseth all other starrs and attracts all eyes upon his pearless beauty. Their godliness may onely be an a∣pology for their station and immunity, as Photius tells us, that those which made Sy∣nesius a Bishop before he believed the resurrection, made this defence for so doing, that they found many excellent graces in him, and that they could not but think them useful to the Church of God, and hope that God would not let them all per∣ish. Lastly, as some of them are purged from filthiness of the flesh, so I wish they were also as much from that of the spirit, and were holy as well in spirit as in bo∣dy; yet as heresie, so schisme is ranked also among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. where if it stand not under the notion of heresie, (as indeed Tremelius out of the Syrivck reads Schismes where we do Heresies, and betwixt these two there is such an affinity and complicition as betwixt the Midiauites and Ishmaelites, that one is taken for another, or each intermixt with other, and Schisme saith St. Augustine, is sometime called Heresie, not that it is Heresie but because it disposeth to it,) yet it falls under this comprehension of variance, emulations, wrath, strife, &c. and as Schisme springs from pride, and an overweening conceit of themselves as the efficient, whereof the signum pathognomonicum is a fastidious contempt of others, so the impulsive thereof Gerson tells us what it is, propter quaestum & propter vanam gloriam, sutably to that whereby Augustine defines an Heretick, qui alicujus com∣modi temporalis & maximè gloriae principaùs{que} gratiâ falsas & novas opiniones vel gignit vel sequitur, and I wish Independents could acquit themselves of these Im∣putations, and should be glad if they would set off themselves clear from those ex∣ceptions, who in one respect like the clove tree, drink up all the moisture of the Land, and aswell pretend to ingrosse the very dewes and showers of heaven to them∣selves, as they really intercept the fat streames of earth, and in another respect are like the tree in Ferro (one of the Canaries) from whence must drop all the water, and from thence onely to be conveyed to the whole Island. And therefore what ever may be said of the godliness of Independents, yet since they cannot well traverse or plead not guilty to an indictment of Schisme, I think as the Greek proverb saith, That a good Goat, a good Cat, &c. are bad beasts, so the best Independent is in this respect evill, Contra Donat. post Coll. tom. 7. p. 122. if in no other; for as St. Augustine, Quantumlibet laudabiliter se vivere existimet, yet being separate from the Church, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi unitate disjunctus est, non habebit vitam, Schisme in his judgement being a sin of deeper grain than idolatry, for Qui fecerunt idolum usitata gladii morte perempti sunt, Epist. 162. ions. 2. p. 142. qui vero schisma facore voluerunt, hiatu terr prin∣cipes devorati, & turba consentiens igne consumpta, diversitate paenarum diversitas agnoscitur meritorum. But dissentiunt inter se, contra unitatem omnes consentiunt, (as Augustine of his Donatists,) they see some imperfection in the Independant way, (and they see very little that discerne not much imperfection therein,) and they know not their own to
be altogether free, (and how can the stream be clear when the spring is corrupt?) the one and the other are paralel wayes, trodden out by the same line, and leading down the same precipice, and diffet but as iter, actus & via in the Law, the one is a little larger and more extensive than the other, there may be some little dist in∣ction but no materiall difference between them save in this onely, that the one Baptize the Infants of those that are not of their Churches, which the others deny to do. They here acknowledge, they agree in the greater and differ but in the lesse things, which I think may be restrained and limitted to discipline especially, and they confesse both parties to have the self same interest, or rather it should be, the same self interest; and therefore when they accuse the Independent way of Imperfecti∣on, In tabulam Syllaejam dicunt discipuli tres: and as we see it truth which Tully saith, ut oculus, sic animus Je non videns alia cer∣nit; so it is as true that they are dimme and decaying eyes which can better discerne things at some distance than nearer hand, and apprehend other mens imperfections more clearly than their own. And if they know not their own way to be altoge∣ther free from imperfections, why can they not patiently abide to hear that which may make them know it to be imperfect? how do they so confidently assert that way, & in malis suis defensionis fomitem quaerunt, as Gregory speaks? Non semper corrupta est mens male operantis sed emper corrupta male desendentis: wherefore so violently enforce it, unless as the Pope said he would write Fiatur in despight of Grammer, so they will have a Fiat for their imperfect modell in defiance of truth, and usupre a like power to that which Stapleton arrogates to the Church, that even fabulous and apocryphal things, by their authority may become canonical? But the imperfection is scored up upon their inability to do more, their reformati∣on being not the measure of their will, but their power. Although they otherwhere left weightier things untoucht, yet in the 17. Sect. they cannot let a scruple passe without handling the poyse thereof; but however careful they be of weight, they are injurious of measure, or else they would never have said their reformation was not the measure of their will but power: Though they may suppose themselves so pure as necessarily to be separate from the common Masse, yet their language is not pure from impropriety. But not to run descant in so poor a ditty, I suppose they would have said passively, their reformation is not measured by, or is not ac∣cording to the measure of their will, but their power, and perchance should more truly have said, their will seconded with their power is the measure of their refor∣mation. But if they are conscious that they ought to do otherwise than they have done, but cannot do it, then they should have said they knew that their way is not free from imperfection, not that they knew it not to be free. But as it impresseth wonder to hear that their reformation is measured by their power not their will, since it is with them as the wanton Emprosse said to her lustful Son in law, quic quid libet licet, so it strikes fear to consider it, seeing they have power enough to receed and remit somewhat of their rigor, and if they want power to carry it higher, and go further, then we are in a sad case that are secured onely by that which kept the Christians (as Bellarmine tells us) from deposing heathen Emperours, quia de∣fuere vires. They next set forth their Eirenicon, and first wish an accommodation between them and their dear brethren of the riged Independency. But they agree too well al∣ready to divide and rent the Church, for as the peace of Hereticks is the warre of the
Church, & the war of the one the peace of the other; so the Ceraunia of our quietness might be bred in the midst of their thundrings one against another, & we shall less fear and better deal with their rods and axes if they were single and not in a bundle. Secondly, They professe what they would do propter unitatem Donati, that will do so little propter unitatem Christi, they would go many miles barefoot, to meet peace with them, but I wish they would go with their feet shod with the preparation of peace toward their people. Thirdly, They give their sense of the calamitous consequences of the discords in the Church, and we are as conscious, dissidia nostra sunt amicorum dispendia, hosti∣um compendia, (as Hierom) & publica irae divinae incendia, as Junius, and to sa∣cilitate an harmony between them. Fourthly, They propound the opinion of Mr. Baxter in some branches (it seem; some others of them bear such fruit as set their teeth on edge:) what passage they re∣flect upon I cannot divine, the page quoted by them having nothing of that con∣cernment in that last edition, but to make even with them, I shall desire them to peruse and perpend what is formerly cited, and which he delivers in his Saints ever∣lasting Rest, Part 321. Sect. 7. p. 3. and Part 4. Sect. 3. p. 104, 105. of the e∣dition of 1653. I have elsewhere set down by these waters of Siloam, and not hanged up, but sounded there my poor harp, and I may therefore here — Claudere jam rives, seeing elsewhere I hope, — Sat prata biberunt, I will onely say that however I affectionately vote for unity, (for as Chrysostom, Integrum si in multa dividitur, In 1 Cor. 1. Homil. 3. non modo non multa fiunt, sed unum absumitur, as the Pumice stone swims being whole, and sinks when broken into parts,) and passionately bewail our divisions, who when we are on a light flame, and half burnt to ashes, yet like the flames raised by burning the dead bodies of Eteocles and Polynices we cannot unite and conjoyne; yet I should as passionately regret to see an union made up at the onely cost of the Presbyterian, & that their coaliti∣on with Independents should be like the conjunction of Rivers with the Sea which falling into it lose their names and course, and vitiate their qualities; or that they should become one, as the Picts did with the Scots, where the former were as it were eaten up and digested by the later Nation. Let the Independents returne to them, not they turn to those, nor to be like Pisistratus the tyrant of Athens, who when some of his party had revolted and fortified Phyle against him, he came to them with his baggage, and professed that if he could not perswade them to return to him, he was resolved to abide with them. I know not whether it gives impres∣sion of more wonder or indignation to see old Tragaedies once played between the Orthodoxe and Arians acted over again, under other names and in another Scene, whereas at the Councils of Ariminum and Seleucia, the worse and lesser party outwitted and overacted the better & greater, and they that at first pretended onely to desire Churches for themselves, grew at length to that powerful insolence to deny them to others. And as much ingratitude is observable in it, that those which like the Ivy grew up by embracing the tree, should exhaust the sapp and strength thereof, and like Quicksilver should eat out and consume the mettal they closed with; so perchance somewhat of justice may be considerable therein, that as it was said of Henry the fourth of France, That he fell by that Religion to which
he fell; so all the compliances of the one party have onely occasioned them to suf∣fer from those whom they have too indulgently suffered: and as when that King was wounded in the mouth by Castel, he receaved an admonition, That having denied the truth with his mouth, he was there wounded, and if he cast it out of his heart, he was like to take in the knife there also; so I shall humbly reminde those Presbyterians which have varyed and lapsed toward an Independent model, that since such applications and condescentions have been onely paid with con∣tempt, and have borne no other fruit but obstinacy in the one part, and danger to the other, that they would adhere unto and cherish their proper principles, which need covet no other likeness than their own, (because truth is incomparably fairer than the Graecian Helena, as Augustine,) nor pray in any support from carnal prudence, (because honesty is the best policy,) and remembring whence they are fallen would do their first works, lest their Candlestick be shaken, aswell as their light hath been somewhat contracted and obscured. They would perswade us they comply not with riged Independents, but then it seems they are to be ranked among the gentle Independents. The digladiations of Sects are sometime as eager among themselves as against the truth; the Maximinia∣nists did virulently contest with the Primianists, yet both were under the denomi∣nation of Donatists; they may be all in the same way, which yet run faster and go further one than another. As the Schooles say, that every Angel is a several species, so if some difference or singularity might constitute a several form, we should have among Independents almost as many Religions as men. It is like enough they render no complacency to the rigid Independents, and do yet find no pleasing re∣ception among the right Presbyterians, such a Catastrophe is the result of a mid∣ling indifference, and it fares with men of that temperament as with the hypocrite, the world hates him because he seemes good, and God abhors him because he is not truly such. They leave the rigid Independents to answer that charge of confounding Churches, and then it seemes they depend upon them to be Advocates for them also, aswell as to plead their own cause. For however self love may transfer the guilt, and cen∣sure that in others what it will not see in it self, (as Demosthenes said nothing was so hard as to know, or so easie as to deceave ones self;) yet this charge hath a thou art the man for them also, for he is somewhat confounded in his judgement that cannot discern, or will not confesse, that to constitute, as they do, Polydor. Vir∣gil. de invento∣ribus rerum. l. 4. c. 9. p. 268. Quo quis{que} suis finibus limi∣tibus{que} conten∣tus esset. Pla∣tina in vita Dionys. Selder Histor. of tythes c. 6. p. 8. one Church of persons gathered and extracted out of twenty or thereabout, is to in∣troduce a confusion of Churches, and what is that else but to defeat that ancient and laudable constitution of dividing parishes into several Presbyteries, as proper cures, and making them definite and appropriate, which if not instituted by Dio∣nysius about the year 260. in the Roman Patriarchate, and soon after in other Dio∣cesses by his example, or rather the institution by him revived after the disturban∣ces of persecution, as having been first setled by Euaristus at Rome within little of the first Century, yet profound Antiquaries acknowledge, that in the very first times, Parishes were divided to several Ministers according to the conveniences of Country Towns and Villages, which division and distribution, hath been con∣stantly ratified and supported by our municipal Lawes as necessary to order, and subservient to many expediences. And also the violation of this order, and such appropriation was forbidden by the Canons of ancient Councils, ne{que} confundito Ecclesias, decreed the first Council of Constantinople, Constant. can. 2. & neparochiam cujustibet E∣piscopi,
alterius civitatis Episcopus Canonum temerator invadat, Avern. 9. was the determination of the Synod of Averne. And this is also to remove those ancient land-marks & bounds which was not one∣ly piacular among the Romans (Si quis transerre ausus fuisset aut atollere, Rosin. Antiq. Rom l. 2. c. 19. lege termi∣nali caput ejus his diis devovit, interfectori ipsius tanquam sacrilegi impunitate promissâ & puritate à scelere) but obnoxious to a curse by the Law of God, Deut 27. & 17. In Prov. 22.28. and coming under frequent prohibitions, Deut. 19.14. Prov. 22.28. & 23.10. Sub hoc autem literali sensu, parabolicè intelligendum est — ne quis re∣ctae vitae praescripta, à patribus laudabiliter constituta pro concordia & ordine ac politia inter homines conservanda, violare & immutare novâ doctrinâ & impio contemptu prae∣sumat, saith Jansenius. And if it hath not much of confusion, yet not little of irregularity to commu∣nicate with one Church in the Word and Prayer, and onely with another in the Sacrament, to be common hearers of the Word among those with whom they de∣ny to have communion in the Sacrament, and to partake of the Sacrament with them amongst whom they do not constantly hear the word, to pay their Tythes to them who serve not at the Altar whereof they partake, and to yeeld no Tythes (whatsoever offerings they bring) to those that officiate at those Altars where they participate. And yet Ignatius tells of the ancient Christians, Omnes ad orandum in idem loci convenere — quemadmodum ad unum Altare (they had not then seve∣rall Altars that had one common place of prayer) and a Bishop and an Altar were made correlatives, Mead hCurches in and since the Apost. p. 50. so that every Bishop had an Altar, and but one, and not one Al∣tar among many Bishops, which interfeers with their practice. Those aspersions wherewith they complain to be bespattered, were not (the most of them) cast by the paper, neither were they so blotted by any drops shed there, yet let us try whether it fall not out with them, as we have not onely read in story, but seen by experience, to have happened to some, who commenced suits and brought actions of slander, and upon the traversing thereof, have been convi∣cted of those crimes which they sought to clear, and to get recompence for being accused of, and have contracted those penalties, whereas they might have been quit, if they could have been quiet. They say they are falsly impeached. First, For disorder against Law: And we suppose indeed this confounding of these Parish Churches whereof Law hath determined the limits, and made the ap∣propriation, comes under that denomination. Our lawes have forbid, and do in∣flict penalties for using any artifice to intice and withdraw Pigeons out of anothers Dove-house, and Bees out of others Buts, and therefore doublesse cannot allow the tolling and seducing other mens naturall sheep from their folds. Secondly, For Magick: I think it will rather prove to be for sillinesse, or uncha∣ritablenesse; the paper onely said that their tempting and withdrawing the fruits of other mens labours, and those committed to their culture, to make up their Churches, did carry some analogy with that magicall transferring of other mens corn into their fields, wherof some Romans were falsly accused. A man might suspect that they were indeed passive in Magick, and thereby fascinated hereupon to think, that this Allegory layes Magick to their charge, and therefore while they suppose that we question them properly for that crime, they cannot but leave not onely their wit and temper, but their charity and innocence under greater questi∣on, Ʋlcera ad levem tactum, etiam ad suspitionem tactûs condolescunt; nunquid sine querela aegratanguntur?
Thirdly, For Schisme; Though their way be not schisme in the achme, yet it is more then in the Embryo; and though it be not ripe in all the fruit, yet it is more than in the seed, and if not schisme, yet somewhat schismaticall: They separate from a communion in part of the ordinances, and so it is in part schismaticall (but the part is of the same nature with the whole.) They refuse to communicate or asso∣ciate (as they speak) with those Churches wherein is a free admission to the Sacra∣ment of all those that are not duly cast out, and they will not admit any of those Churches to have communion with them in the Eucharist, untill they be new mo∣del'd, and entred into their Churches. But that Church-fellowship consists espe∣cially in communion of Sacraments, and is principally defined by it, Sect. 9. De unit. Eccles. c. 13. Schismaticos facit commu∣nionis dirupta unitas, Aug. quaest. ex Matth. tom. 4, p 78. Camero oper. Field of the Church, l. 3. c. 5, p. 80, and that the commixtion of evill and good, is intra eandem sacramentorum communionem & con∣nexionem, and that to desert and to deny such a communion with those that are Churches of God, is the dregs and sediment of schisme, we have formerly shew∣ed out of Augustine; that to detrect to receive the Lords Supper with any, is ta∣citly to renounce their fraternity, was instanced out of Altingius; and that to se∣parate from this or that particular Church, that is a particular member of the body (of the Catholick Church) is schisme, we have instanced out of Junius, as it is also to make a separation from that congregation, Ubi Deus colligit Ecclesiam, as may be added out of Camero. Schisme (saith a sound Writer) is a breach of the unity of the Church, which unity of the Church consists in three things; First, the subjection of the people unto their lawfull Pastors. Secondly, the con∣nexion and communion which many particular Churches, and the Pastors of them, have among themselves. Thirdly, in holding the same rule of faith. But they rent and infringe this unity in the first respect, by gathering those into their Church that have other lawfull Pastors. Qui schismata faciunt, saith Cyprian, Epist. 76. p. 247. & re∣licto Episcopo alium sibi foras Episcopum quaerunt. And in the second, by denying to have a communion with other Pastors and their Churches in this Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and it cannot sow up this rent, nor make up this fraction, to say, they communicate in other ordinances with them, for not onely Church commu∣nion is chiefly communion of Sacraments, but (as was cited formerly out of Mr. Ball,) to use one ordinance and not another, is to make a schisme in the Church. Frustra sibi blandiuntur qui panem cum sacerdotibus Dei non habentes, obre∣punt & latenter apud quosdam communicare se credunt, as was alleaged out of Cy∣prian. It is schisme, saith Valentia (and truly, 22. Disp. 3. q. 15. punct. 1. p. 690. if he misapplied it not) Nolle se gerere ut membrum hujus corporis in aliquo vel aliquibus spiritualibus actionibus ad hoc Eccle∣siae corpus pertinentibus, at{que} adeò nolle subesse visibili hujus corporis capiti, ne{que} aliis ejus membris communicant, ut illi capiti subjecta sunt, sed velle agere scorsim ab hoc corpore, & independenter ab ejus capite. And since anciently a Bishop and an Altar were made Correlatives, and a schismaticall Bishop was sayd constituere aut collocare aliud Altare, Mead ubi supra (saith a learned man) therefore they that erect other Altars for them to partake of, which have lawfull proper Pastors, and they that participate at other Altars than those of their own Pastors, tread too near upon Schisme. Nay also, they that separate from a true Church to partake of an Altar in a Church a∣part, do not participate of the Table of the Lord, for in una domo (saith Rivet.) In Exod. c. 12 tom. 1 p. 916. quae est Ecclesia Dei viventis, commedi debet agnus — carnes ejus quatenus cibus no∣ster sunt extra illam domum non efferuntur. And then as the Act of separation, so the Reason thereof denominates schisma∣ticall,
while they affirm the separation to be occasioned by the grossnesse of admini∣strations elsewhere, where no separation is made by exercise of Discipline; which very thing, (viz. that any corruption of manners or want of Discipline (which is among corrupt manners) to expurge those that were corrupt, was a sufficient ground of separation) brought forth and gave rise to the schisme of the Donatists, and was that which rendred them schismaticks, & that which S. Augu∣stine impressed himselfe especially to fight against, as is liquid through the whole torrent of his writings against them, some drops whereof our former discourse hath been sprinkled with. Cited by Mr. Baxters Saints everlasting rest, part. 4. p. 105. marg. I shall here only say as learned Davenant professeth (spea∣king of the Divines of Germany) Haud dubitem affirmare, illos qui falluntur, & ta∣men communionem fraternam cum aliis retincre parati sunt, esse schismate coram Deo magìs excusatos, quàm qui veras opiniones in hisce controversiis tuentur, & mutuam communionem eum aliis Ecclesiis, etiam desiderantibus aspernantur; so I think those Churches more excusable which have not the exercise of discipline in casting out offenders, yet lack not a desire of a fraternall connexion, and mutuall commu∣nion with other Churches, than those that set up discipline, and lay down commu∣nion and unity. To say, That they separate nor from true Churches; First, as it can no more pal∣liate their guilt, than it could cloak that of the Donatists who made the same de∣fence (and indeed this is the Catholicon, the common place and plea of all Schisma∣ticks, that if they forsake one Church they go into another;) so secondly, they do make a separation from true Churches, seeing they separate (as was said) from all Churches that give a free admission to all that are not duly cast out, and if those are no true Churches, then they are not in the state of salvation, for all that shall be saved are added to the Church, and all that may grow capable of admis∣sion into their Churches out of the other, it may seem requisite to baptize before they are admitted, baptisme being a note of the true Church, and therefore agree∣ing thereunto, as proprium quarto modo. They were such Churches wherein many of them received ordination to the Ministery (who are not yet reordained) and by the Ministery whereof faith was wrought in them (wherein I hope they were built up before they laid the foundation of their new Churches) and to believe is to be added to the Church, which is Synonymous with the houshold of faith, and wherein if they had suffered death for the profession of that faith, they would have thought themselves intitled unto martyrdome, (and yet out of the Church are no martyrs;) neither can they pretend to reform the Church, if they acknowledge not those from whom they separate to be true Churches, for then they rather form a new Church, and it is not an alteration which is Motus à qualitate in contrariam qua∣litatem, but a generation, motus à non esse ad esse; and is not mutatio statûs sed essen∣tiae. But this is that root bearing gall and wormwood, which being shrunk and dryed up among the Brownists, hath been watered and cherisht by them to repullu∣late and spread its branches and is grown now to this height, that we are now no true Churches till new gathered. Fourthly, For Sedition, if any laid that upon their score, he may perchance have put them to a heavy reckoning; but if he charged them with it before repealing or antiquating the Statute of 35 Elizab. c. 1. I believe he should neither have con∣tracted any great Fine pro falso clamore, nor they have obtained much dammage up∣on any Action of the Case; and however things yet stand, whether the setting up a new Legislative power in the Nation, by arbitrary Conventions forming Obli∣gatory
Canons, putting out of their communion or association all those that will not comply in a conformable obedience, if it have not some spices of Sedition, yet whether it grate not with the Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 19. is only for wiser Law∣yers and deeper Statesmen to give judgement of. But perhaps he that imputed sedition to them, onely juged sedition to be inhe∣rent in, or complicated with every schisme, Contra Epist. Parmen l 2. c. 18. tom. 6. p. 11. according to the sense of S. Augustine saying, Cùm id facere per seditionem schismatis voluit, priùs à bonis spiritaliter quàm à malis corporaliter separentur; or else considered that as (Camero saith) Sedition is a Civil schisme; so schisme might also be said to be an Ecclefiasticall sedition. But seditious they cannot be, because the present Authority is for them, at least not a∣gainst them, and they are no underminers of them. First, I know not what they mean by (them,) for in short time Ego non sum ego, They are not They, who like the Tornados have in short time shifted many points of the Compasse, and like the Indian plant which Nieremberge mentions, have every yeare different leaves and fruits. They have not now altogether the same way & modell of discipline, which first started this controversie between us, and wherein they walked when the book came forth: so as in some things they have confuted themselves, and might super∣sede me to do it; but yet I dispute against them as they were and acted at the first, and for severall years together. And those that favoured them all that time, can∣not favour them so much now, if they still are favourable to one and the same way, save that they have this help for it, that as inferior bodies depend on the motion of the superior; so they aime to conform themselves to the higher revolution, to be more capable of benigner aspects and influences, and when there is a tempora mu∣tantur, there follows also, nos & mutamur. Secondly, I understand not what they intend by the present Authority; that which was present when they writ this, being past when they prited it, unlesse they in∣tend that all the spokes of Sesostris wheele, turn how they will, cannot but be good spokes in their wheels, and as Nigidius Figulus demonstrated by his wheels, that the higher spheares had speedy revolutions, and therefore did suddenly change their postures; so it becomes not me to be so sawcy as to enquire into the aspects and influences of the superior bodies, who am not skill'd in State-Astrology, but am procul à Jove, and therefore longè à lumine, and desire not to be propè fulmini, by having to do (save in reverence and obedience) with them that command the Le∣gions; onely it is enough for us to know no establisht lawes that are for them, or that authorize their way, and whether the present Powers favour them, or onely connive at them or not. Yet I presume first, as they would have us believe that they are indulgent to them, that so every one else might be Contra libertum Caesaris ire timens, So secondly, I suppose themselves conceive their way is plausible with the higher Powers, or perchance else they might take another, and they being supposed to be shadowed by Greatness, even that shadow (as the Hyaena's doth a Doggs) might shut up every mans mouth from barking at them, for temporall prosperity is a note of the Church with them, (however they are not Papists) which they form some∣what like that Venus, which as Apelles told the Painter, that though he had not drawn it fair, yet he had painted her rich. And like him at Athens they are still falling in love with the Image of Fortune, and like Cassale the famous Painter at Sienna, that drew his own Image in the eye of a great Prince whom he limb'd, they would fain
be still in the eye of Potentates. And thirdly, I suppose indeed their way needs the support of some great powers, being not like to take much or continue very long, unlesse it be held forth like the Alcoran with a sword in hand. Fiftly, For being injurious to other Ministers, I answ. It is some injury to mo∣desty aswell as truth, to outface so palpable a wrong, for is not their course and way of practice in gathering Churches an equivocal or analogical plagium, to rob the spiritual Fathers of their Children, &c? Is it not the coveting of the stones of their neighbours spiritual house which he is building for God, or of his wife, (for the Canons say there is matrimony betwixt a Pastor and his Church,) or of that which is his? Is it not the promoving, occasioning or countenancing many to waive and renounce their own Pastors, and to forsake the assembing of themselves, to adjoin and unite themselves to their Conventicles? Can it be other then a dis∣honor to those Ministers both by a tacite disparagement and despising of their parts or pains, (and so a kind of bearing false witness) and a lessening of their people in the multitude whereof is some honor, and discouraging of them both in con∣tracting their harvest, in the largeness whereof is the labourers incitement? and can this be other than an injury? It is that which the old Canons call Conculcare episco∣pum, and to trample upon another is to injure him, Et tamen alter si fecisset idem, caderet sub judice morum: They would sense it injurious if done unto themselves, and they did so resent it, not onely in the taylor (who going beyond his measure hath cut out in another fashion and stitcht up a Church more straight laced out of some shreds of their Congregations;) but in them also who have outraced them, and gone beyond the goale which they have set up, and separating further from them, have adjoyned themselves in a Church fellowship with them that are full grown Independents. They plead they constraine no man, but First, That is not sufficient, they ought not to perswade or invite any to de∣sert their own Pastors and Churches to engage with theirs, they ought not to re∣ceave them if they came voluntary, they are guilty of that evill which they do not hinder and prevent. Secondly, He that entertaines another mans servant that hath forsaken his lawful master, and hath no certificate of his legal departure, is obnoxious to the penaity of the Statute, though he neither constrain nor perswade him to relinquish his former service, and by a parity of reason and equity, they are as culpable that ad∣mit to their communion without those literae formatae & communicatoriae, such as are under anothers Pastoral charge. Thirdly, The Donatists coacted none to associate with them, (they decryed all constraint, and complained of the Imperial Edicts made for their coercion;) yet this excused not the leaders of that Schisme. Fourthly, But they do constrain men, and in such manner as any other abso∣lute and imperious powers use to do, who constrain men onely by reward and pu∣nishment, and such constraint they practice, for he that will go with them in their way, may come to the Sacrament, and he that will not, must (for them) goe without it. They say, they clock no mans chicken, but to deprave and vilifie other men and their practice, to magnifie their own, and hold it forth as the onely reformation and best advantage of godliness, and theirs as the alone pure Churches and disci∣pline, and their catching after all that they can thereby decoy, and draw in by these like baits, what is it other than a call for the birds to divide them from the
flock, and lime twiggs to hold them fast from flying back, and a virtual (if there were no other expresse and explicite perswasion) clocking of others mens birds from their proper nests, to take their flight with them? Honesta lucra quibus nemo laeditur, saith Cassiodor, & bene acquiritur quòd à nullis adhuc dominis abrogatur, whereas they trim up their Church like Aesops Crow, with others feathers, for they have mewed almost all their own, and are like Antiochus surnamed The Hawke, who patcht up a Kingdom out of what he wrested from others. They think they onely hatch some Eggs of their nest for them; but I had thought they are full grown and high flying birds of Paradise before they can be admitted into their Aviaries, or received under their wings. But secondly, if they have such a dexterity in hatching other mens Eggs, how happens it they bring forth so few of their own, unlesse they resemble Archymists, that can make gold for others and have none for themselves? Thirdly, if they hatch other mens Eggs, Hieroglyph. lib. 24. c 41. it is but like the Partridge mentioned Jerem. 17.11. Fovit sive congregavit, as the Chaldee, Hierom, and Augustine; or incubuit, as Vatablus, O ca quae non peperit, and it may fall out with them, by the bringing forth of truth by time into more light, which Pierius tells us out of Hierom and Ambrose happeneth to the Partridge, Ʋt cum pullos eduxerit, illos amittat, hi siquide auditâ illius voce quae ova pepererat, naturae vegetatione per∣culsi, hac voluti nutrice desertâ, ad eam se conferunt, quae ova illa unde exclusi essent edi∣derat. And who they are that hatch others Eggs like the Partridge, Saint Augustine will tell them, even heretickes, who saith he, Christianos, Contra Faust. Manich. l. 13. c. 12. tom. 6. p. 59. quos maxime Christi nomine seducant, cum per ipsius Christi Evangelium natos inveniunt, & faciunt illos divitias suas, non sane cum judicio, sed cum temeritate inconsiderata; non enim intelligunt ibi esse veram & salubrem & quodammodo germanam atque radicalem Christianam socie∣tatem undeastas separarunt, quas ad suas divitias congregarunt, — — in novissimis suic erit insipiens, id est, qui primò tanquam perpollicitationem & ostentationem excellentis sa∣pientiae seducebat, erit insipiens, (i.) apparebit insipiens. And Pierius adds also, that A∣damantius per perdicemaliena ova confoventem, intelligit haereticos, genus quippe hominum perdicis instar malignum, fraudulentum, callidum, quód{que} decipiendis venatoribus mul∣tum insumit operae, ubi tamen verae matris sanctioris quippe institutionis, vox audita fue∣rit, eos deseri at{que} ità poenas suae insipientiae luere; so that then by owning this com∣formity with the Partridge, in that wherein he is the hieroglyphick of an heretick, they have contracted another similitude with that bird which Augustine also men∣tions, Perdix nimis contentiosum animal, notum est quanta aviditate contentionis currat in laqueum. But to answer this comparison which the paper took out of the ancient reading of that in Jeremy, of the Partridge gathering the young which she brought not forth, they produce onely a resemblance borrowed of another, which though it be an elegant one, yet is no more pertinent to the matter in hand, and hath no more of answer to what the paper insisted on, than if they had rehearsed any of Pierius his other Hieroglyphicks,
SECT. XXIII. Why they have not the Sacrament in their own Churches. Why onely at Pyworthy. Whether it be no great matter to be called or drawn thither. Of their return to their own Churches. How they stigmatize their people and judge their hearts. Of serving the times. They confess the Word and Sacrament to be the same thing. What thereupon follows. HAving thus defended my own works, I might spare to make any sallies, and having born out and repelled their assaults, I need not fall out to attempt up∣on their lines, and think of storming their Forts; but I might now sit down at rest, and enjoy that which Archidamus wished the Elians when they were upon their march, bona quies: For he that is silent, shall every way hold his peace. But I remember it was a politick and successfull counsell that Achmetes Bassa gave to Mahomet the Great, that when he could not take Scodra by forcible assaults, he should block up the Citie with Forts built about it, which would so distress it for want of relief, as it must finally surrender it selfe: so perchance though we might defend the ground we have undertaken to make good, notwithstanding any of their former storms or batteries, yet as long as so many appearing Fortresses, pre∣tending to be built upon Scripture grounds and foundations, stand about it un∣demolished and inexpugned, it may seem straightned and distrest, and the wayes of any further accesse and more aids will be retrenched. I shall therefore examine with what brain they have stuffed these Heads, as they call them, and what they hold in capite, and Qua nitidum tardâ compserit arte caput, which they say (after they have followed the Author step by step (though it be rather sometimes per saltum, having leapt over many steps and not toucht upon them) they have purposed to passe over, though I think it had been better to have stood and insisted upon them with more weight and circumspection. And however as Plato teacheth, De prolixitate vel brevitate scribendi curare nimis ineptum est, non enim brevissima aut longissima, sed optima sunt eligenda. Yet being conscious that my discourse, though it hath been my care with Sydonius, potius cau∣sam implere quam paginam, may for the length thereof have already as much excee∣ded the readers patience, as my intentions, and remembring what the same Plato admonish'd Amisthenes, Orationis modus non est penes dicentem sed audientem, I shal henceforward endeavour to be more concise and succinct, and begin etfi tacere nec∣dum, certe taciturire, and say but little, for breviloquium silentio est finitimum, said Lycurgus, onely I shall aim at such brevity (which Ammianus Marcellinus saith a∣lone is laudable) quae nihil subtrahit cognitioni justorum. Indeed as the wise man tells us, The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water, Prov. 17.14. And as rivers let loose out of a Dam, stream forth at first with a great flood, and afterward more sparingly; so being enforced to break forth
from that restraint which I would willingly have put upon me, my discourse (the subject, whereof also I found like that lake in Sicily, quem si quis ingreditur in latum extenditur) was easily carried into such a profluence, as like Demosthenes, I was more troubled what to take off from it, than to add thereunto, and the rather because I desired that (according to what Gregory adviseth) as a river also, Si valles cavas ex latere contingit in eas protinus sui cursus impetum divertit, um{que} illas sufficienter imple∣pleverit, repente se in alveum resundit; so that my discourse juxta positam occasionem con∣gruae aedificationis, quasi ad vieinam vallē se retorqueat; but hereafter I shal endevour it shal rather stillare quam fluere, and with Phocion, shal be solicitous to abridge or cut short what I shall say, yet so as to reconcile the care not to say so much as may beget fastidiousness, with the study not to speak so little as may argue negligence I professe I was never of Laelius his mind in Seneca, Dic aliquid ut duo simus, I love not to start or multiply quarrels, nor to catch at every thing that may be ca∣pable of exception; De minimis non curat lex (sive charitatis sive prudentiae) though I have nothing of the lofty wing or quick sight of the Eagle, yet I desire to resemble him in not making a stoop to Flies: Yet because the Apologists have made this part of their game (though I hope without making any great prey, or fastning on any Flies that make the oyntment stink) I have sometimes sought to make them sensi∣ble that such Flies stick upon their soares, and rather than remain in their debt, I would pay them with the like coyn as themselves have both minted and lent out, but henceforth I shall forbear to be an Aristarchus upon forms of speaking, and to beat the cloathes in stead of the body, as Artaxerxes was wont to doe in clemency, and I shall be more sparing to trouble my selfe, or attediate my reader with any thing that is not of concernment with the controverted subject, and be cautious to leave nothing unhandled that is necessary, nor yet touch with that which is not pertinent; but however other may be questionable, yet shall give them their pas∣port, interdum non minùs est Oratorum tacere quam dicere; even a golden Ball, if it come a-thwart me like Atalanta, shall not tempt me to turn out of my way. Fan∣túmne est abs re tua otii, aliena ut cures câ{que} nihil quae ad te attinent. If the Apolo∣gists shall onely beat the air, not strike home at me, I shall quietly stand by to hear the sound, while I feel not the stroke; I cannot fear they shall have that power over me which they say Witches have over others, that when they prick an image of their own making, the party that they maligne pines away by it. And when al∣so I meet with any broken troops, which I think I have formerly beaten out of the Field, and yet they will appear again upon some hill, or supposed advantage ground, onely to Alarm, not to Charge, I shall not advance toward them, but march on, and shall speak very little in answer to such passages as have formerly come under discussion: for as Epaminondas told the Spartans, when his successes had set them at a losse, and cast them behind hand, That he was glad he had brought them to long speeches; so contrariwise when we hope we have done the work before hand, we may speak short and Laconically, and may be excused to expend no more spice to correct the flatulency of twice sodden Cole-worts; so neither shal I sprinkle much upon those that are fresh, if they arise from the same ground, and are of like sub∣stance, though growing up in different form, especially seeing as the same Recipe often is subservient to severall maladies, and one true proposition may be destru∣ctive to many false, so out of what hath been delivered upon former occasion, may an answer be fitted to refute or frustrate that which comes in as a second or reserve; so as what I take no notice of, I shall say with Augustine, De fid & ope∣rib. tom. 4. p. 18. Tale esse
arbitratus sum, cui mea responsio necessaria non fuisset five quod ad rem de que agitur non pertinet, five quod tam leve esset, ut a quolib et redargui facillime posset. The first head which they shew forth, is, Why not the Sacrament in their own Con∣gregations? From which head, (upon the former account) cutting off that which is superfluous to it, as the hair to the head, though it may seem to deck or set it out, and which we are deceaved, if they have not already been discussed all to an hair; it is first to be considered what they answer, viz. That it is in some, but then that answer is onely for some, and leaves the most without defence. I do not know that before their Book came forth the Sacrament was publikely administred in any of the proper and peculiar Congregations of those of this association, save in the Cathedral or Mother Church, as I may call it, at Pyworthie, unless they take all that be of their communion to be also of their combination. But if it be in some, why not in all? if not in all, why in some, if the reason why it ought to be in some of them, is common to all? and what special reason can they produce why it cannot be in all? They say, because at home after their intendment and desires of such a work spoken of in the pulpit, there appeared not a competent number to carry it on, which when there shall be found, they are resolved to return; in the interim they were enforced to adjoin themselves to a Church which was formed in one of their Congregations, viz. at Pyworthy. But the covering is narrower than that he can wrap himself in it; the standers by, who commonly do not see less than they that play the game, cannot discerne that there is a greater number of persons at Pyworthy fit and willing to receave the Sacrament, than might have been found at Holsworthie; and it will seem strange to us that where there hath been a succession of topicall Starrs of greater magnitude, that there should be still less light, and less effects of a quickning and fructifying influence; neither can it but eclipse the dignity of those Starrs, seeing causes are best judged by their effects. But perchance they were only not so fit or willing to come to the Sacrament in their way, and to leave their liberty behind them, surrendring up that right which they had to the Sacrament by the character of Baptisme, and being Church members with a Dogmatical faith, to take a new grant thereof by the copy of their countenance, and a tenancy at their wills, and when the Statute Quia emptores terrarum forbids the creating of new civill tenures, to suffer them to erect new holdings in Spirituals. Their pulpit discourses were directed onely to dispose them for this way of subjection, and for their ends, not for the right end, the Sacrament. But secondly, If they at Pyworthie were more malleable free stones and easier to be wrought, yet seeing the stones whereof this Church was to be built and con∣stituted, were drawn forth out of several places, and were brought first to be formed and fashioned at Holsworthie, and some of them hewed out of that rock, why should they be carried thence to be laid in Pyworthie? Quod petis hic est, Ut U lubris, animus si te non deficit aequus. As St. Hierom said, Heaven was as neer Britain as Jerusalem; so they had been as neer to Christ in the Sacrament in the one place as in the other. He was the ma∣ster Architect of the frame at Pyworthie, who first prepared for the edifice at Holsworthie, Ubi Imperiator ibi Roma, — & Vejas habitante Camillo, Illic Roma fuit:
that was the more signal place, why should Pyworthie be the Patriarchal or Metro∣politan Church, and as I may say, the Rome, from which Church all must be de∣nominated, of what place soever they were, and Catholique must be joyned to Ro∣man, or else it is not right, so they must be named of the Church of Pyworthie, of whatsoever Congregation else they be, and why should this be so, especially see∣ing the Pontisex maximus that hath the greatest influence upon the members of the Church, was the proper Pastor of another place, unless also that be here applica∣ble in the resemblance which Bellarmine tell us, that the Apostolical seate may be separated from the Bishoprick of Rome, and what Cameracensis saith, that the Pa∣pacy and Bishoprick of Rome are two distinct things, and not so necessary con∣joyned but that they may be separated? There might be some reasons of thrift in the conduct thereof, which is a principle that hath more influence upon those of the Independent principles, than on the more hospitable Presbyterians; or of Policy, that their own peculiar Churches might be kept for a reserve, and to be modelled according to the mode of the time and exigence of emergencies; for whereas they talk of their being a Church formed at Pyworthie, in the choice of a Pastor, &c. as they were the efficients by whom; and the matter of which it was formed, so though at their first sitting down there was a Pastor duly (I think) ordained, yet when he removed his quarters (the phrase is not improper) he that next assumed that charge, was not for divers years after in Orders, and all that while sure they had no Church formed there according to the rules of Gods Word, in the choice of an appropriate Pastor, &c. and therefore then not to have reverted to their proper Congregations, and rechurched them, is without ex∣cuse. Thirdly, Since there are some of every of their own peculiar Congregations ag∣gregated into their catholick Church at Pyworthie, had it not been, not onely more orderly and decent, but more just and necessary to have modelled them into special and proper Churches at home, where their proper work lay, and which was the spheare wherein they ought to move, and the Sparta which they should adorne? and though by a figurative polygamy hey have taken another wife, and the later is beloved, and the former hated; yet since the first borne sonne was hers that was ha∣ted, he should not have been disinherited, but have had his double portion; and If these Churches would perchance at first have been diminutive, yet should they have been augmentatives of their honor and peace, which as they complaine, doe suffer for neglect hereof, (I fuge, sed poteris tutior esse domi.) and those little Churches have been likelier to grow by apposition of parts contigu∣ous, the corporeal contact facilitating the agents in assimilating, and the sticks ly∣ing in the same pile easily kindling one the other, which they cannot do being se∣parated. As opportunity sometime tempts to evill, so also often doth it prompt to good, and though Bellarmine have falsely thought, That the only efficacy of discriminating grace consists in the annexed congruity, or as Fonseca, the due ap∣plication thereof, yet it is a truth, that the external means of grace are more ef∣fectual by the congruous and fit application thereof, and the circumstances of con∣venient place and facility of resort have some conducency to that congruity and fitness, for wise men have been taught by experience to conclude, that what is little in the cause, may be great in the effect and consequent, and the day of small things is not to be despised.
They deny that they had a competent number for the work, but they leave us to divine what they judge to be a competency, Suarez 3 q. 8. art. 6. disp. 67. sect. 5. Item Vasquez. Junius Eccles. l. 1 c. 4. tom. 1. p. 1936. Maimonides saith, Where ten men of Is∣rael were there ought to be built a Syna∣nagogue. for they determine it not. The Schoole tells that ten suffice to make up a Parochial Church, and this is also the judgement of the Canonists, the Independents contract it to seven, and think so few may con∣stitute a Church. Ecclesia (saith Junius, Grammaticis quoque testibus, vox est syl∣leptica quae non unum aliquem spectat, sed plùres complectitur, divinitus in unum Cae∣tum —in privatis quoque domibus Ecclesia, & ita vocat Apostolus, Rom. 16.5. 1 Cor 16.19. sed ea constat ex familia justa, in qua non minùs tribus animis esse oportere omnes noverunt Oeconomi, ac omnes Philosophi & Jurisconsulti docue∣runt. Correspondently Tertullian, Ʋbi tres sunt, ibi est Ecclesia, & neither of them unsuitably to what the Lord Christ hath promised, Where two or three are gathe∣red together in his name, that he will be in the midst of them. There was a Church in Paradise where there were but two persons, and they had Sacraments there, for such was the Tree of Life, and I suppose that to help forward the saving and sup∣porting but of one soule, is a matter of more honor and comfort, than to engage and lead a Sect. I know they had, (some of them at least) more than three in their appropriate Congregations, that were sealed with their approbation for the Sacrament, why then was it not administred to them at home? I hope they can give spirituall Alms without sounding a Trumpet, and are not like the Nightingall, which they say cannot sing well unlesse she be over-heard; or as they say of the Tortoyse, that she hatcheth her Eggs with her eyes; so others eyes (I trust) are not that onely which must quicken and bring forth their duties. First, they suppose it No great matter that is required, for men to goe out of their Parishes to participate the Sacrament: In Epist. ad Ephes. c. 3. serm. 14. Seneca. but saith Chrysostom, Propter hoc magnum est malum, quod nihil esse videtur: etenim quae nihil esse videntur facile contemnuntur, qae vero contemnuntur, augentur ae multiplicantur etiam, quae autem augentur redduntur iam incurabilia, and therefore upon this account the great Moralist adviseth, Non negligere minimum ne sitibi inter minima. Not to remind them of a frustra fit per plura quod potest fieri per pauciora, when a necessary obedience and submission is ex∣acted in that which they have no power to enjoyn, and others have no obligation to observe, his dat qui cito dat, it creates a president, and begets an encouragement to command more and greater things, and he that once quits his Free-hold to be a Tenant at will, though at first he may fit at an easie rate, may at length be en∣forsed to raise his rent, and hold upon such terms as his Landlord please, or lose his Tenement. Quae nunc virgulta sunt, crunt si negligantur robora; ista quae modo facili avusione dirimantur, postea vix securibus succumbunt, saith Cassiodor. Secondly, they think it no evill, no not in appearance, for them to require it. An appearance of no little confidence and no great ingenuity! however they may struggle to prove it not to be such in realiy, yet who can deny, and not first send a denyall to Modesty, that it hath an appearance, First, levati Altaris, or of a schismaticall separation of themselves from a sacramentall communion with their peculiar Churches? And whereas they say they are joyned to the society of a Church formed in one of their congregations, that doth not stave off or frustrate the appearance of schismaticall separation, for else the Donatists might have clea∣red themselves thereof by the like defence, saying, that though they divided them∣selves from other Churches, yet they adjoyned to the Churches formed in their con∣gregations, to wit, those of Parmenian,, Petilian, Gaudentius, Emeritus, &c. 2. It hath an appearance of Allotrio-episcopacy, of being busie in other mens
Diocesses, and incurious and negligent in their own. And which also appears to be a desertion of their old Spouses, and seeking after new Loves. Thirdly, Of Injustice, 1. toward their peculiar and appropriate Churches to whom they doe not the office, yet from them receive the Benefice. 2. Cum Episcopo portionem ple∣bis dividere (l.) à pastore oves, filios à parente separa∣re, which Cy∣prian con∣demns in Fe∣lieissimus, epist, 38 p. 90. To∣ward other Ministers, whose sheep they allure to stray away to enlarge their fold. Fourthly, of breach of that Canon, whose observation was kept up so religiously in the ancient Church, that none should communicate in another Church without the Formed and Communicatory letters of his own Pastor. Fifthly, Of violation of order, established in the defining and limiting appro∣priate Churches. Sixthly, of transgression of that Rule of Righteousness, Quod tibi fieri non vis, al∣teri ne feceris; for I know they would regret another to put his sickle into their crop, though they make up their harvest of other mens corn, and therefore unless that must seem good in them which appears evill in others, as Quod in alio audacia suerit, in Catone fiducia erat, this must needs have an appearance of evill. Though they proclaim that they are likely to walk in that society to which they are joyned, till they see truth and reason against them yet incoherently they professe, that they have still resolved to return to their places as to this Ordinance, when a competent number shall appear fit and willing to carry on so great a work. And then it seems more light hath arose upon them, and some Collyrium hath cleared their eyes to see the truth and reason against them, and perchance as Epami∣nondas told the Spartans after the battell at Leuctra, That he was glad they were brought now to make long speeches; so some such like occasion may have brought their Prolocu or to return and carry back the Sacrament with him to his proper Church, that hath so long stood under Interdict, and to say expressly that all is Null which was done at Pyworthy: yet I doe not find the number increased of those that are visibly fit and willing more than at the first, nor hath he yet to this day taken into participation above one more at home than followed him abroad: so as he might have at first found as competent a number as he hath since made, if not a greater number, since it is possible that some perchance may have found some more irritation and animosities by having all this while been left lying under con∣tempt and neglect. As Pyrrhus in the judgment of Cyneas might have been as happy before he left Epyrus, as he could expect to be after he had traversed Italy & conquered Sicily and Africk; so I think they might have found the work as facible, and their undertakings as successfull before their going out from them, as they are like to do upon their coming back. If their return be upon the score of resi∣piscence, far be it from me to be such an one as Beza complains of, Hic homo invidet mihi gratiam Jesu Christi; but if it be upon any other acccount, or if when they are come home to their Congregations, they yet come not home to the ancient Eccle∣siastick discipline, but onely Coelum non animum mutant, I shal say as the Turk did to Gentlemen whom he saw walking severall turns up and down a Cloyster, Are you out of your way, or out of your wits? If your businesse lye here, why go you thi∣ther? If it be there, why come you here? and I shall conclude, Levis est malitia, sapè mutatur, non in melius, sed in aliud. In what account they set their people, and how they are obliged to them for their good thoughts and report, is very legible in those blots wherewith their pen hath
here asperst them, putting their non-compliance with their way upon the score of their worldly fear, doubting state-changes, want of zeale, and boldness in the matters of God, and for worse reasons, (and that carries the worst ignominy, for Simpliciter pateat vitium fortasse pusillum, Quod tegitur majus creditur esse malum.) Whether those are endearments and Charientismes likely to charm and winne upon their affections; (Ignosci aliquatenus iguorantiae potest, contemptus veniam nou mere∣tur;) whether this be not a provoking of their children to wrath; (graviùs con∣tumeliam ferunt homines quam detrimentum;) whether this be not obloquious to themselves, that they have not meliorated nor lickt them into a better shape all this while, since by the law Falcidia, the parents were punisht for the continued faults of their children; whether this being a judgment, not of men by external actions, but by the hidden causes thereof and their secret intentions, which cannot be evi∣dent to them by any violent signes, and at most there can be oely a probable suspi∣tion that the actions spring from such a fountaine, be not temerarious judgment and a judging of the heart, since such a suspition is sufficient onely to spring a doubt, not to support an absolute determination, which must be founded onely upon manifest grounds, and as long as things are but doubtful, they are not ma∣nifest, and the most rational doubts are to be interpreted in the better part, (as hath been formerly demonstrated;) and then whether the Apologists have just cause to complaine of, or can have hope to be condoled for the hard thoughts and untem∣pered words which thy say they suffer from others, since Judicium si quis quae fecit perferat aequum est, as Vespasan thought it punishable, Senatoribus maledici, but not regardable re∣maledici, of all these, if the Apologists will not consider, others will take no∣tice. What they diaper their margin with out of Mr. Baxter, of the desperate op∣posing and villfying, and scurrilous railing at desired discipline, is but as Urias his letters in the sacred story, or Bellerophons in the prophane, which are destructive to themselves, for their dear brethren, and such as are germane to them in princi∣ples, are most engaged in that guilt, which in that place is most reflected on, who have endeavoured to make that Oath of union, (according as they have called it,) an old Almanack, fitted to the interest of State, or impiously (as Cusanus saith the Scriptures are) fitted to the time and practice of the Church, so that one time according to the current the they are expounded one way, and when that rite of the Church changeth, then the sense is changed. They conclude the Section with intimation of fear to suffer in their estates aswel as their names and quiet, for adhering to those principles and proceeding in this way. As they have not hitherto felt any detriment, so we cannot see any imminent danger thereof, but whether the pluralities of a Church and a Congregation, which springs an income aswel of offerings as of tythes, have not brought some ad∣vantage and improvement; or whether a pastoral Church and a gathered Church may not countervaile two Benefices, or the Semestrian visitations of some of them, may not ballance the Triennial visitations of the Bishops, especially since as he said of Grotius, Odi sapientem qui sibi non sapit, and also, In steriles campos nolunt juga ferre juvenci, I shall not pretend to know, though I am not ignorant
— quantus tota rumor in urbesonat. I shall onely say, They accuse their people to be time-servers or observers, but can they say soberly as Pope Paul the 3d. did of his son Petrus Aloysius, Haec ille vitia non me commonstratore didicit, for though they suspect them, yet it is manifest of it selfe and very obvious, that there is much Quicksilver in the composition of them, and that mettal doth never endure the fire, and being liquid is confor∣mable to any mould, and I hope therefore they will as did the Romans, make for∣tunam fidei comitem, and as the King of Navar profest to Beza, not advance be∣yond the possibility of a safe retreate: Hectora non nosset, si faelix Troja fuisset, and it is adversity can onely try what friends they will be to their way, and whether they affect Alexander or the King. Sure I am their undertakings are not like the Ceraunia, a Jewel onely bred in a storm. They suppose and publish that authority is for them, or not against them, but if the superiour bodies should have different aspect and influence, whether they would then turn tables again, or not; and whether they would be like the regina aurarum, quae obsistit ventis immobilís{que} contrà nititur adversantibus, as Nieremberge, or like the hedge Bore that having many hoses to his den, doth alwaies stop that which is toward the bleate wind, that would be the question, and in order to some (perhaps) no very difficult question. Contra Ep. Parmen. l. 3. c. 6. Cont. lit. Pe∣til. l. 2. c. 98. But what∣ever they would undergoe, (as St. Augustine to his Donatists,) let them take heed lest perchance Coecis vendatur reprobus lapis pro gemma pretiosa, (l.) carnalis duri∣tia pro spirituali patientia, and that non fortiter sed pertinaciter non timetis, — Quoniam qui pro pace Christi omnibus terrenis caruerit, deum habet; qui autem pro parte Donati vel paucos nummos perdiderit, cor non habet. But I shall for conclusion remark, that to excuse the omission of administring the Sacrament in their Churches, they say it hath been supplied by holding forth Christ in the word, and giving souls to eat and drink his flesh and blood in the word: whence it follows, that it is the same thing that is exhibited in both, but in different manner. All to whom Christ is offered in the word receave him not, nor are qualified to do so, aswell as all embrace him not  he is propound∣ed in the Sacrament, nor are conditioned to do it; those  we not perfect un∣derstanding in the word, yet to all them it is preacht, that they may understand and believe, for it is verbum practicum; why then by a parity of reason should not the Sacrament be administred to those, who by the word have attained an historical and dogmatical faith, & are intelligent of the nature, use & end of the Sacrament, without further scrutiny whether they have a true faith? seeing that true faith may be wrought by reception of that which is signum practicum, why then should the one be the privi∣lege of Saints more than the other? why should it be prodigality of Christs blood in holding it forth to all in the Sacrament, and not when they tender if to all in the word, seeing the same blood is offered in the one and other? unless this be e∣ven such another crotchet as the Papists grate our eares with, who tell us that the blood of Christ represented by the cup is also exhibited with the bread, which sig∣nifieth his body, by a certain concomitancy, but yet the Laity that partake of the bread, may not for some great mysteries participate of the cup, the blood may be some way administred, but they must not drink it.
SECT. XXIV. Whether they are Butchers or Surgeons. Whether guilty of Schism. Of negative and positive Schisme. What are just causes of sepa∣ration. Whether our Saviour separated from the Jewish Church, for instance, in eating the Passover. They condemne what they practise by confounding Churches, and by separation. They grant Professors to be visible Saints, which destroyes their Plat∣forme. Their reasons why all sorts are to be admitted to the word and prayer. Whether there are not better reasons to war∣rant a like admission to the Sacrament: whether the same con∣clude it not. Whether the Churches of England are all true Churches. Sacraments notes of the Church, and therefore com∣municable to all Church members. They grant discipline enters not the definition of a Church, yet they separate for want there∣of. Whether they may not aswell deny Baptisme to the Children, as the Eucharist to the Parents. VVHy they separate not in all Ordinances, is an head that looks not di∣rectly toward us, but respects their brethren of the separation, who have outrun and gone beyond them, and stand at a distance as much further from them, as they from us. For as when Apolles had drawn a fine small line, Proto∣genes cut that in  another, and the former halfed that again; so when one sort have cut  from communion with the rest of the Church, they di∣vide themselves again, and some of them think themselves not refined enough, and as the Chymists say of sublimation, sapius repetenda est operatio, ne{que} enim prima sublimotione res mox satis depuratur; so one separation grows out of another, like the tunal which Nieremberge speaks of, mira frondium facunditas, solium su∣pernasitur solio, si decidt aliquod radices rursus agit surgit{que} altera arbos. And so though as sand conteined in a vessel hath one general figure in the whole Masse, conformable to the continent, yet every grain is inechaerent with other; so though they all come under one common notion of Separatists, yet they are as much sepa∣rate from  other, as from us, and as little agree among themselves as with us, though when they come against us, like Themistocles and Aristides going on Em∣bassie, they lay down their enmities to be afterward reassumed. And as Aristides said, It will never be well with Athens till both the one and the other be shut up in the dungeon; so they intimate in the close of this Section, that in such a condi∣tion they were most likely to close in a mutual agreement, but their present quar∣rels with the other, occasion here the diverting of their armes, which offers us a little truce, who might now stand a loofe and behold the fight among themselves, whom that happily may befall, which Tacitus relates of Apronjus souldiers, dum
singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur, and when they fall out, good men may come by the truth. Discordia in malis tam bona, quàm concordia in bonis; onely we shall ga∣ther up some of those arrowes which they let fly at others, to shoot back upon them∣selves, and if any of those shot at randome seem to fall neer us, we shall endea∣vour to repell or avoid such, as we have not already broken. They separate not in other Ordinances, because they are for Surgery, not Butchery. It seems then they now somewhat odiously set their brethren in the rank of cut∣throats, who will shrewdly resent to be degraded into the company of But∣chers. Secondly, How little conformity or resemblance their practise hath with the rules of Chirurgery, hath been frequently instanced. Thirdly, Chirurgeons neither use nor are able to cut off any one member from an union with the rest in the influence and benefit of one vitall faculty onely, but exscind altogether from the whole body; whereas they make exscision of men onely from a Communion in one Ordinance alone, not all. Fourthly, Let this reason have the most favourable passe, yet it onely can ar∣gue absolutely, why they should separate not in all Ordinances, but in some alone, not comparatively why in this Sacrament rather than in other. Fiftly, It is a strange method of Physick or Chirurgery, to seek to preserve life by witholding the means of life, and the medicine of life and immortality (as the Fathers call the Sacrament;) and if all meanes must be sought to cure before they cut down a Church, we think they have deserted their own Aphorismes, for they have not sought to cure it by this medicine, yet they have cut down their Church, not onely by gathering another, but by a practical judging of them to have no present interest in the body and blood of Christ, nor worthy to have the truth of Gods promises in him to be sealed unto them. The learned (and they quote Camero) distinguish of a twofold separation, po∣sitive and negative, the first they condemne unlesse upon just and weighty grounds, the second they are acting, in making a separation in their Congregations, not separating from their Churches, but some corruptions in them in order to reformation. De Eccles. p. 325. Camero in that place disputes of Schisme (whereof secession or separation may be the ge∣nus,) and Schisme he distinguisheth into negative and positive; the first, Schisma quod non exit in coetum, & societatem aliquam religiosam, quae simpliciter secessio & subductio, cùm non instituitur ecclesia facto Schismate: Schisma positivum tum fit, cum instituitur ecclesia, hoc est, cum fit consociatio quaedam, quae legibus ecclesiasticis & Dei verbo at{que} sacramentorum administratione utitur separatim, quod quadam formula de∣sumpta ex Scriptura dicitur, strere altare contra altare: But as the men of Benga∣la are so afraid of a Tiger that they dare not name him, through fear if they should do so, they should be torn in pieces by him; so it seems the Apologists are so conscious of Schisme, or fearfull to be blasted with it, that they decline the mention of this, and passing over the description he makes of Schisme, they only barely and without any distinct explication tell us of a negative and positive separa∣tion. Abstine epistolis quae sunt instar Edicti, saith Symmachus, facessat omne studium ex quo nascitur cura compendii. Me thinks they should have been able to have understood Camero, had they looked into him themselves, but whencesoever it results, there is an ignorant and wilfull mistake in alleaging him, for they seem to quote him as if he determined that a negative separation were absolutely and u∣niversally lawfull, whereas he affirming that a positive Schisme is that which An∣tonomasticè
and  is called Schisme, he renders this reason, because often (he saith not, alwayes) a negative secession is lawfull, that justly and piously it may be free to depart from some Churches, but it will not be so if it grow into a positive: As for example, some may be cast out by the fault of the Church-Governors, and yet without the Churches fault: If they then gather a Church a∣part, they shal be guilty of Schism. He speaks here of a secession where a man is pas∣sive and cast out, not where he goes off; when there is Anathematismus, excommu∣nicatio injusta & iniqua, certè qui excoetu aliquo ejecti secedunt & se subducunt, seces∣serunt quidem illi, attamen non fecerunt schisma (as he speaks in the former page) but a negative secession, wherein a man is active, he saith is Schisme, (being not one∣ly a Decession but a Discission) if the cause be either temerarious or unjust, and it is temerarious, if it be upon a light occasion, and the occasion is light, un∣lesse there happen first an intolerable persecution (for if it be tolerable the secessi∣on is unjust.) Or secondly, Communion is not to be broken but for Funda∣mentals. Mead. p. 622. tom. 3. that congregation be infected with heresie (for if it be a tolera∣ble error, if the rite, though superstitious, be sufferable, there ought to be no sepa∣ration.) Or thirdly, be addicted to idolatry. Now then, seeing they confess they make a negative separation, as Camero defines it, if they can prove and convict their Congregations to be guilty of such persecution, heresie, or idolatry, they may ac∣quit themselves, but if they cannot (as they doe not attempt or pretend to accuse them thereof) they are then culpable of schisme in the judgement of Camero, to whom they referre, and their separation is not onely temerarious, but also unjust, (& separatio injusta veluti extrema schismatis linea, Camero ibid. à pag. 322. ad 327. saith he) having not so much as a light occasion by any tolerable persecution, or error, or separation, and the scan∣dals being few or none, which were they more or greater, might perchance make the separation more just, but could not excuse it from being temerarious. Besides also, their separation is rather positive then negative, having gathered and constituted a new Church, whereof there can be no just cause, saith Camero, but malum insanabile, lethale & contagiosum, reigning in that Congregation which they desert, or res gravis & momentosa, quae si negligatur tanta est, ut de salute & gloria Dei actum sit,—né{que} enim quicquid verum est, id ipsum continuò necessarium est, ut qui salubres cibi sunt, non sunt continuò necessarii. And it is also a separatin from their Churches, though in them; not of notorious evill members from the body of the Church, but of a Church in and yet from a remaining Church, which se∣paration in a Church from those who remain Church-members, and of the Church, is a principle onely of independent Divinity, and hath no dependance up∣on Scripture, Reason, or Camero's or any good authority. And theirs is likewise a separation not onely by secession in place, but from per∣sons who were never duly cast out by any judiciall processe for notorious crimes, and therefore is not heterogeniarum partium discessio, sed homogeniarum, and there∣fore a Schisme (as Camero sentenceth) and they are besides very few that separate; so as though the cause had some weight, L. 3. contra Crescon. c. 36. Idem contra Parmen. l. 3. c. 21. tom. 7. p 11. yet si pauci sunt, videtur nihil esse molien∣dum, sed expectandum patienter tempus Domini (saith he.) And whereas they say, they separate not from their Churches but from some corruptions, First, they might separate from their corruptions by keeping themselves pure, Non enim qui se castam servat communicat peccatis alienis, saith Augustine, and else∣where, Mixtus reis & obnoxiis nisi per conscientiae maculatam consensionem nullus recte
dici potest. They may and must separate from the corruptions, but they do (which they ought not) farther separate from the Assemblies with whom they will have no communion in the Sacraments, which are Gods Ordinances and not corruptions: And corruption of manners also is no just cause of separation, for (saith Camero) wheresoever purity of doctrine flourisheth, God in that assembly must needs have a Church, though overwhelmed with multitude of scandals, and therfore they that separate from such a Congregation, doubtlesse depart from thence where God ga∣thereth a Church, and therefore saith Augustine, Ʋbi mihi licet in melius commutari, Contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 36. Eiren. part. 1. p. 706. tom. 1. non mihi opus est indeseparari. And Junius resolveth, Non posso quenquam Christianum bona fide renunciare communioni alterius, quem Christus aut adjunxit sibi aut se adjun∣cturum spem facit, — nam qui fratrem suum, servum Dei, membrum Christi protervè abdicat — is eo ipso facto Christum, authorem communionis salutaris nestrae abdicat. And with these or like arguments have their Pulpits sounded a retreat to those of their Town which have separated from them to associate with such as have gone farther in their separation, as if their sight were in this respect also extra mittendo, that they can see the faults of others not their own, nor discern how the same wea∣pons wherewith they fight against others, may be turned back upon themselves. And if they shall say, that the very communion in Sacraments with such congre∣gations is a corruption, besides that this is petitio principii, a begging of the que∣stion, it is Donatisme without question. And whereas Augustine after the precedent words, Non enim qui se castum ser vat communicat peccatis alienis, adds, quamvis non eorum peccata, sed illa quibus ad judicium sibi sumunt Dei sacrament acommunicet cum iis à quibus se castum servando fecit alienum, might not Cresconius with as much truth and reason (as they doe) have replied, That the very communicating with such was the contracting of their corruption and sin? Our Saviour (say they) lived in unity with the Jewish Church in necessary ordinan∣ces, yet separated in regard of cerruptions. Let them then be followers of Christ and we shall no farther pursue them, for the sacrament is a necessary ordi∣nance, and not a corruption, and there may be a non-conformity in a corruption unto them, with whom there may yet be a communion in worship: The Lord Je∣sus lived and died in communion with that corrupt Church saith Mr. Ball, and was so indulgent and graciously applicable to sinners, that the Pharisees called him a companion of sinners, Ipse Dominus Jesus, Aug. contra Epist. Parmen. l. 1. c. 17, Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 41. p. 153. nullâ cogitatione malignitatis in Judaeo∣rum gente pollutus est neque cùm illa prima sacramenta secundum perfectam humilitatis viam factus sub lege susepit, néque cùm postea discipulis electis cum suo traditoe usque ad extremum osculum vixit. And it hath been elswhere mentioned, that one reason why Christ would be baptized among the common sort, is rendred by Spanheïm to be this, Sic etiam jugulatus & confutatus error eorum qui Catherorum, & Anabapti∣starum recentium imitatione, ad S. Domini coenam accedere detrectant, si eandem flagi∣tiosis sua opinione peccatoribus administrari videant. But whereas in the score of these corruptions wherein Christ separated, they set down washings and misobservation of the Passover, First, they cannot but know, though perchance they could be content that others were ignorant, that there is a vast disparity and unsuitableness between supersti∣tions or humane traditions, and divine Ordinances. Secondly, when those that keep themselves pure, doe partake of that sacrament whereof they also participate that in some thing are corrupt, they do not communi∣cate
with the evill men, but with the Altar and Sacraments of God, as Augustine speaks. Thirdly, that there may be a communion without uniformity, and Church-fellowship without a social compliance in accidentall Rites and Circumstances. Fourthly, that to differ in things speculative or practicall, is not to separate, as there may be variety in a garment yet no rent, In illa veste varietas sit, scissura non sit. Then secondly, for Christ his not washing, among other reasons rendred by In∣terpreters, why he declined and omitted those lotions, these also are recounted. 1. To shew that things though decent, yet ought not to be imposed as necessary, or holinesse be constituted therein. And 2. That no pollution could be contracted by a necessary converse with those whom they supposed sinners, if there were no consortship in sin, (the contrary superstitious conceit whereof was that which occasioned the Pharisees often wash∣ing:) And as the former reason may excuse us for non-complying with their in∣stitutions, which some of them may perhaps be conformed to without sin, yet none of them ought to be injoyned of necessity; so the later may convince them, that no communion with such as they are not convinced to be righteous, can defile them, unless it be a society in unrighteousness. 3. But whereas they Magisterially and Dictator-like affirm, that Christ obser∣ved not the Passover at the same time with the Jews, I see, Qui ad pauca respiciunt de facili pronunciant. When the Churches of Christendom, as the Greek and Latine, (for from this difference about the time it comes to passe that the Greek Church celebrates in lea∣vened and the Roman in unleavened bread) and the best learned men in the Churches both ancient and modern (for there were indeed some of the Fathers that supposed Christ and the Jewes did eat the Passover at different times, though not upon that reason whereupon the later Writers do assert it, viz. the translation of Feasts, Exer. 16. Sect. 13. p. 335. whereof Paulus Burgensis was the first authour, as Casaubon opineth, and he flourished so lately as 1430. but upon this account that it was defer'd by the Jewes through their solicitude and incumbrance about the crucifying of our Lord:) When I say the Senate of the learned have divided themselves, and stand at difference about it, and Casaubon (though himself be of the contrary judgment) yet confesseth it is the common opinion of the Roman Church, that Christ and the Jewes did keep the Passover the same day and houre; and three Evangelists seem to minister arguments in favour of that opinion, and but one that checks there∣with, and that Enantiophany or seeming opposition between them, is very plausibly to be reconciled without receding from this opinion, and the arguments whereby it is supported (which on that and the other side (whereunto he propends) are very hand somly drest and trickt up by Maldonat) are so considerable for weight and number, Hammond. an∣not. in Mark 14.12. And Resolut. of . Quaries. p. 223. that even those learned men who settle in the other scale, do it not without some vacillation: And besides all this; some very learned me (as Grotius & Ham∣mond) supposing that Christ kept not at all the Passover by eating of the Lamb which was to be slain, as they suppose, by the Levites, 2 Chron. 35.6. and sacrificed in the Temple, Deut. 16.2, 6. but onely a commemorative Passover, (which they that were not able to come up to Jerusalem to sacrifice, were wont to eat at home, as a memoriall of the afflictions and deliverance out of Egypt, such as was eaten in the time of the captivity of Babylon, being onely unleavened bread and
bitter herbs, and nothing else, and eaten alwaies at the beginning of the Paschal , and which the other was to follow, and to be eaten the next eve∣ning:) therefore I suppose it might have been a greater honor to their modesty, than disparagement to their learning, to have less confidently shot their bolt. Verum nihil securius est malo poeta. But Ludovicus Vives relates of a Jew, that going over a dangerous bridge in the dark, next day fell dead when he had light to see the hazard he was in; so when they have better considered the knots and intricateness of the question, they will have some resentment of their praecipitous determining it, and holding this forth as a principle that needed no proofe. Omnes in admonendo sapimus, (said Euripides) sed cum ipsimet aberramus, haud ad∣vertimus. The Apologists are like men in the dark, they can see nothing about them∣selves, but discerne what others do in the light: they have here good principles, and they can apply them to conclude against others, but they are not aware that in some measure they are applicable to condemne themselves. Sciunt vera esse, sed furor cogit sequi Pejora, vadit animus in praeceps sciens, Remeat{que}. They declaime against renouncing Congregations destreying and confusion of Chur∣ches, scattering flocks, forsaking Assemblies, which God hath not forsaken, and they decry and protest against Schisme and rigid separation, and say they tremble at the de∣struction and confusion of tree Churches: But are they not like that Hannonian facti∣on at Carthage, which still complained of those miseries which their onely Coun∣sells had brought upon the State? If they can see a beame in the eyes of others, they should not be so blind as not to see a rafter in their own; and though they are but little theeves upon the Bench (to invert that proverb) yet they cannot with a just confidence condemne the greater at the barre. They maintain the same principles of Schisme from whence all the particular conclusions are deduced, though some extract them in a gresser threed and spin it out farther; they think mixt commu∣nions unlawful, and make separations in the Church from those that are not cast out from it. And whereas in their preface they tell us, [that they are deceived if ever Church reformation and constitution prove comfortable and successful, un∣less holding communion with other Churches come to be a matter of more weight] nevertheless they deny to hold communion with their own Churches, yea they have renounced their Congregations interpretatively, while they have gathered another, which by appropriation they call their Church, and in part have directly forsaken them, viz. in order to the administration of the Sacrament, though they are not forsaken of God, for I hope they are in a capacity of Salvation by the meanes, and of necessity God must have a Church, where the purity of doctrine flourish∣eth, although almost overgrown with scandals, (as was mentioned out of Came∣ro,) and though they have not wholly demolished their Churches, they have pulled some stones from union with the rest, and transferred them elsewhere, and left the rest he more instable and tottering; and they destroy them negatively, & ut causae deficientes, while they edifie them not by the Sacrament, and though they lay the foundation and build the walls by a communion in the word and prayers, yet they do set on the roofe by the Sacrament, which would keep the rest more firm
together. It must needs be a confusion of Churches, when they support not a distinction of parochial cures and charges, and do fabricate one Church with pie∣ces rent out of many; and they scatter these of their own flock which they do not gather, and those of other mens folds which they do gather. As there are poten∣tial parts of virtues, Aquin. 2 2. q. 48. which are Virtutes adjunctae, quae ordinantur ad aliquos actus secundarios vel materias, quasi non habentes totam potentiam principalis virtutis; so we may say analogically of their vice: and though it be not ripe and full grown Schisme, yet we have shewed it hath somewhat of Schisme, seeing they separate in somewhat, and that wherein the external communion of the Church doth mainly consist, the Sacrament. He that is departed from one Citie, and is ad∣vanced but one mile, is gone off as well as he that is removed to the distance of ten; and one drop of the Sea is water aswell as the Ocean, and he that picks my pocket but of sixpence is a Theefe, aswell as he that robs me of my whole stock, and he that out of malice prepensed puts out a mans eyes, as well as he that takes away his life, is a felon in the outward Court, and a murderer in the interi∣or. If Professors be visible Saints, (as they say here) then the exhibiting of the Sa∣crament unto Professors, (as such are all Church members) is not prostituting the privileges of the Saints; Sect. 5. and there is no great harm done to make them Saints, by affording them the Sacrament (as they would have it elsewhere) who are alrea∣dy Saints by being professors, yet they will heerin seem insanire cum ratione, for they say, All sorts are to be admitted to the word, because the Apostles were sent to preach to the world; and it is wonderful that they did not observe in the words following in that text, that they were aswell sent to administer the Sacraments as to preach the word, to baptize as to teach the nations: and as we have shewed that the ancient Church did immediately upon baptisme admit men to the Sacrament; so there is the same reason in relation to persons adult and intelligent for the administration of the one Sacrament as the other, as St Augustine fully declares in his book, de fide & operibus. Tom. 4. p. 13. Besides, though the Apostles had a general rule to teach all Nati∣ons, yet it was not without an exception, of not casting pearle before Swine, or giving holy things to Doggs, and under that notion of pearle and holy things the word is principally, and as it appears by the context, most properly understood; and why then they should be eager in witholding the Sacrament, and so careless in preserving the Word from those Swine and Doggs, they are still as mute in giving any sound reason, as a Swine laid on his back, or a Dogg bitten by a Pard. And to make them free partakers of their prayers they think they have warrant, because Paul gave thanks in the presence of all the passengers: but as the wheate which sometimes falls from the clouds, is good corn, but was not naturally generated there; so though their conclusion be true, yet it doth not naturally flow from their premises. Paul they say gave thanks, that is, prayed in the presence of them all, Acts 27.35. but it is not said that all did pray together with Paul: to pray in the presence of them, and to conjoyn with them in prayer, are different things: they allow others to be present at the celebration, yet admit them not to partake of the Sacrament. The Author of the imperfect work on Matthew, thinks because here is mention of breaking of bread and giving of thanks, which in the Greek is , that Paul here administred the Sacrament to his brethren in the
faith, yet though all the rest were present, yet that Author did not imagine they did participate. That Elisha prayed with Gehazi is as irrationally collected from 2 Kings 4.33. He went in therefore and shut the door upon them twaine and prayed unto the Lord, and therefore Gehazi it seems must needs be one of the twain; but by common construction it ought to relate to him that was but last mentioned, and that is the Child in the former verse, the child was dead and laid on the bed, he went in there∣fore and shut the door upon them twain; super se & super puerum, Schol. in lo∣cum. saith the vulgar translation, post utrun{que}, ità ut ipse & puer soli in conclavi essent, adds Piscator, and consonantly the late Annotations. Besides, how is it known to them that Gehazi was a wicked man? one or two sinful acts could not so denominate him, at least at this time he had not lapsed into those sins, which are recorded in the sub∣sequent Chapter, and had he been leprous at that time, the Law had not permit∣ted Elisha such a commerce with him, and had he been then notoriously wicked, the piety of Elisha could not have permitted him that wrought deceit to dwell in his house, or him that told lies to remain in his sight, In 2. Reg. c. 5. v. 27. and though after his sin he be mentioned c. 8. v. 4. under the notion of the servant of the man of God, non tamen cratoum Helisaeo (saith Sanctius) & capite sequenti minister Helisaei, non vi∣detur fuisse Giezi, sed alius aetate minor, qui{que} non videbatur satis nosse quam à Deo Propheta virtutem accepisset, but for the Kings talking with a Leper, In locum. studium sciendi molestiam facilè levavit, saith Sanctius, & regem impium legem illam ne∣glexisse, adds Piscator; though others say the Law no way forbids one that is clean to talk with a Leper. But if he after his sin and punishment returned to the Pro∣phet, (as Abulensis supposeth,) it gives the stronger perswasions of his repen∣tance, and upon the sight of Gods displeasure (say the late Annotators, English An∣not. on the place.) and judgment upon him for his sin, he might repent, and upon his repentance have his judgment removed and he cleansed; this was an evidence of his good disposi∣tion, that notwithstanding the punishment inflicted on him by his master, he spake honorably of him. But we may heer as standing upon the advantage ground, take a prospect, that any arguments, though beggerly and vagrant, shall have their passe, yea and letters of recommendation, if they carry but any hard face or weak colour to serve their turn and interest; and we may farther consider, whether they that are so flexible upon such arguments to assent to a free reception to prayer, had they not been blinded by affection to their interest, might not have found, or whether we have not prompted them with farre more convincing arguments in Scripture, to perswade them to a free admission to the Sacrament. But if Scripture lend them no stable foundation, they will buttresse it with Rea∣son, — cognati semina coeli. They say we may pray for wicked men; but to pray for is more than to pray with, and this is an arguing à majori ad minus indeed, for they are fallen from a greater to a lesse forcible argument, for we may pray for those with whom we do not pray, but we cannot pray with any, but we must needs pray for them, and there∣fore the former comprehending the later, this must be the greater and that the lesser, to pray with containing the other to pray for, & aliquid amplius, for he that prayes is the mouth of all the rest, and the hearts of all ought to move with his lipps, in a concurrence in the same common petitions, and it is more specially ve∣tified here what is delivered by Ambrose, Dum singuli orant pro omnibus, sequitur
ut omnes orent pro singulis; so that we cannot pray with any but we must pray for them. We ought to love all men, that have a capacity of eternal blessedness, which is the formall reason of charity; to love is to will good to another, and this con∣sists much in wishing well to him, and a Christians wish is prayer, and upon this account we must pray for all without question, but it is not universally true that we may pray with all, without some exception. The ancient Church did not admit persons excommunicate, nor all degrees of penitents to a participation of all their prayers, and though such others as shall compose themselves to reverence may be receaved, yet I think there will be a combination of piety and prudence to ex∣clude a scoffing Lucian, that shall deride our petitions, or a prophane Ju∣lian, that will blaspheme that holy name which we invocate. They remind us that Simon Magus was bid to pray, but as it follows not that though he were prescribed to pray, that also others were injoyned to admit him to a communion in their prayers, for he might pray alone; so they might have re∣membred also that onely upon the external profession of faith he was received to Baptisme, without any further trial or inspection. Baptizatus est (saith Cyril) sed non illuminatus, & corpus quidem lavit aquâ, cor autem non illustravit spiritu; and it is not improbable, that he might also partake of the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, since it was then the practice, that those who were baptized and continued in the Apostles doctrine, (which was in hearing it preached by them con∣tinually, as Chrysostom, Piscator, and Sanctius, and in professing thereof, as Dio∣date adds,) and fellowship, (viz. of holy Assemblies, as Diodate, and mutual conjunction, as Calvin) did also continually, and perhaps dayly, hold communi∣on in breaking bread (the Lords Supper being so called by a Synecdoche membri, à potiori ritu) and from this Exemplar in the primitive ages, Baptisme was but as it were a spiritual washing before meat, for such as were adult, who forthwith were admitted to the Lords Table: And we read of Simon that he continued with Philip, and he made an outward profession of believing, as Diedate, and Piscator, and they judge not right (saith Calvin) who say he fained to believe, who believed as other faithful did, as Sanctius affirmeth, and therefore in that time of his countinuance with Philip, it is likely did partake the Eucharist, which was then so frequently administed. Their presence at prayer can be no sin, (they say) while it is no more than they are commanded to do, though their own evils at present make them unable to do as they should. It seems there may be perverse judgment aswel in an acceptation of things as of persons, when the same judgment is not given of things, of which there is the same reason, and in those which have no difference between them; why else should not this be as applicable to the Sacrament as to prayer, and the same rea∣son be as apt and subservient to plead for their admission to the one as the other The Apologists in the next precedent Section tell us, the command of Christ (for receiving the Sacrament) is peremptory and the duty incumbent on all Believers, which perchance they will limit to sound Believers, yet we have (we trust) mani∣fested, that as they need not research, so they cannot discern who are true Belie∣vers, the soundness of faith being only necessary to partake the fruit and virtue of the Sacrament, Explicat. cate∣ches part. 2. p. 221. but the sound or profession of faith, (if not disproved by notori∣ous sins) is sufficient for admission to receive the Elements, and therefore Altingi∣us as he determines that of the Lords Supper, the subjectum recipiencs sunt omne∣fideles,
five Christiani adulti & finguli, (making Christians and faithful univocal;) so elsewhere he defines, that though fides objectivè spectata, hoc est quatenus in ver∣bo praescribitur, & praecipitur, pertinet ad essentiam sacramenti, tanquam conditio es∣sentialis, yet nevertheless, fides subjectivè spectata, he est quatenus est habitus vel actus credentis, non est sacramento essentialis, — sed est necessarium organum ac medium percipiendi rem sacramenti. We have formerly produced out of Chrysostom that what indisposeth men and ren∣dreth them unfit for prayer, doth no lesse for the Sacrament; and we have second∣ed that testimony with the suffrage of Chamier, Andrews wor∣ship imaginat. p. 36. and what a third learned man saith of those exceptions, which we commonly alleage to disturbe our selves from that action, (viz. communicating,) may also be verified of those which others make for our disturbance, viz. that they make us no lesse meet for prayers than for i: there are dispositions and qualifications required in him that prayeth as well as him that receiveth, which no unregenerate man (in sensu composito) is capable of, 1 Tim. 2.8. James 1.6 2 Tim. 2.19. and without those conditions, there is a denunciation that their prayers not onely will not be heard, Psal. 66.18. Isa. 1.15. but that they shal be abominable, Prov. 28.9. aswell as that when they eat or drink at the Sacrament, it shall not onely be to no fruit, but to condemnation; and they lie unto God with their tongues when they pray, Psal. 76.36. aswell as others (in their judgment) seem to lie or give false testimony when they give them the Sacrament. And why those reasons then should be of weight to exclude from the Sacrament, but not to debarre from prayer, A Lapide in Levit. 19.36. I know not where to lay the cause, but upon the divers weights and divers measures, which the Hebrewes say pollute the Land and prophane the name of God, and that more truly than they can prove the free admission can pollute or prophane the Sacra∣ment, onely when they are resolved to assume a power to keep whom they please from some Ordinances, that they may better keep them in awe and hold them in subjection. To exclude from prayer, is neither so specious to attempt, (since as among the Heathens to what Deity soever the sacrifice were intended, yet there was an invocation of Janus and Vesta also; so among the Christians whatsoever be the Ordinance attended upon, it is seconded with that of prayer and invocation of God, and this is the Salt that must season all other sacrifices, disposing to and at∣tending on them for improving their fruit and effect, and therefore this species car∣ries away the name of the genus from the rest, and the Hebrew and Greek aswell as the English call this by the name of Service, not without warrant sealed by God himself, who calls his house, an house of proyer, (denominating it from the chiefest service) but also to withold them from prayer is lesse possible to effect, for men may pray without concurrence of a Minister, but not receive the Sacrament with∣out it be consecrated by him. But they have laid an obligation on the Church of England, Perpetuús{que} animae debitor hujus erit, in undertaking to prove that some of the particular Congregations are true Churches. Non tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis Tempus eget, we cannot allow them to be auditors of that sum, nor to cast it up with their new Counters, who it seems suffering none to come to the Sacrament without their Let∣passe, would rise higher to permit none to passe for true Churches, which have not their Communicatory letters,
— Seminibus jactis se sustulit arbos, Exiit in coelum ramis soelicibus; but which are those that are true Churches, and what is that which is constitutiv or destructive to either of them? As Adrian Turnebus used to hit more right when he set down predictions of the weather clean contrary to the Prognosticators; so perchance he may aim nearer to truh that denominates some of those not true Churches which they so call, and some of them true whom they name not such, but seeing they allow the Word and Sacraments for notes of a visible Church, Field of the Church, l. 2. c. 2. p. 51. (whereunto some of our great Divines have appended another, which admitted, might also perchance disfranchise some of those that usurp and appropriate the name of Churches) viz. an union and connexion of men in this profession and use of the Sacraments, under lawfull Pastors and guides, appointed, authorised and sanctified to direct and lead them, Contro. 4. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 2. in consonancy wherewith Bellarmine him∣self defines the Church to be Caetus hominum ejusdem Christianae fidei professione, & corundem Sacramentorum communione ligatorum sub regimine legitimorum pastorum. But indeed the other two being (as they grant) the Inseparable, absolutely proper, peculiar and essentiall notes (for scire est per causas scire) and therefore being both the formall cause of a Church, giving Being thereunto in constituting and conser∣ving it, while it is taught by the Word, and by the Word and Sacraments is gathered together to God, and being the effect of the Church constituted, while it teacheth others, they cannot but demonstrate the Church à priori & à posteriori, and there∣fore being adequate unto the Church, Gerhard loc. com tom. 5. de Eccles. c. 10. p. 306. 309. and inseparable from it, it may firmly and immoveably be collected (saith Gerhard) that where the Word is preached and the Sacraments administred, there is a Church, and reciprocally where there is a Church, there is the Word preached, and the Sacraments administred: upon this ground therefore as the Church of England was a true Church, so were also all the particular congregations, being similar parts of that nationall Church, as that was of the Catholique; and if in respect of that common nature found in them, they were not Species of the Church in general, yet they were members thereof, as it is an integrall body, for they had all of them the Word preached and professed purely without any error in the foundation, which onely nulls a Church, and the Sacra∣ments legitimously administred for matter and form: and had there been some corruption in the doctrine and administration, (yet as totas Ecclesias non esse aesti∣mandas ex solis pastoribus, Whitak. Cont. 2. de Eccles. q. 5. c. 17. p. 541. Iunius Eire∣nic. part 1. tom. 1. p. 715. 716. Animad. in Contro. 4. Bellarm. l. 4. c. 2. p. 1132. Ibid. p. 1131. (nec ex qui busdam paucis (as Whitaker and Gerhard;) so these corruptions had onely made a cease to be a pure Church, not to be a Church; so long as the foundation had stood, it had been the house of God, though hay and stubble were built thereupon, saith Whitaker, (it had continued to be a Church untill Deus renunciaverat iis testificatione publicâ as Junius in the like case) the Word and Sacraments simply and absolutely distinguished a Church from pro∣phane Assemblies and the incorrupt preaching of the Word, and legitimate ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, from hereticall congregations: though properly (as Iunius observes) the preaching of the Word being actus hominum est Index illius notae, non nota primaria, jam enim ante habuit notam Ecclesia Dei veritatem & verbum veritatis à Deo quàm praedicatio exstiterit, so as sure our Congregations were lately all Churches. — Fuimus Troes, & fuit Ilium & ingens Gloria Dardanidum But since their brethren in principles sought to undermine our Churches, and
having made the match, and their zeal giving fire to the hidden mine, by a new powder-plot have blown up these Churches, and thereby not onely rent and dissi∣pated them one from the other, but scorched and mortally wounded them with fundamentall errors, I think now it is not without due caution and circumspe∣ction that they say, onely some of our Congregations are true Churches, for as Diogenes sought a man with a Lanthorn at noon-day at Athens, so amidst all the late new light, we have more need then ever of that lamp unto our feet, to find a Church, and they do therefore ingenuously call themselves of the Congregational way, for they are many of them out of the way of a true Church. And though all that be of those principles are not vitiated with such heresies, yet they are culpable in causa, as he that pulls down the Dam is guilty of all the inundations and brea∣chs made by the flood. But then seeing the administration of the Sacraments is a note of the Church, Oportuit esse signa aliqua sacra quibus distinguerentur cives Jerusalem à civitate Baby. Cit. ab Ames. Bell. Ener. tom. 2. c. 3. p. 63. louis (saith Alexander Hales) sicut videmus in aliis rebus, oves enim unius gregis dis∣cernuntur ab ovibus alterius gregis proprio signo, & sacrae aedes à non sacris proprio sig∣no discernuntur, & civitas nobilis aliquo signo donari consuevit, ut civitas Romana pe∣nula & dignitas militaris accinctione gladii, & officium traditione virgae vel clavium, ex quibus omnibus colligitur quod sacramenta homini sunt necessaria post lapsum, ad hoc ut discerneretur esse civis spiritualis Jerusalem, & deg ege Domini & de militia cius. Ʋbi supra. And although (as Whitaker affirms) Sacramentorum usum non esse semper & simpliciter necessarium, sed possead tempus intermitti — sunt enim sigilla tantum eo∣rum bonorum quae nobis in verbo proponuntur, sigilli vero appositio ad rem nihil addit, sed ad rei duntaxat modum, si sigillum deperdatur res non continuo amittitur, non enim nobis est negotium cum callido aliquo mercatore, ut fraudem motuamus, sed cum Deo qui sal∣lere non potest, non est ergo quod de salutis premissionibus nobis ab illo factis dubitemus eisi sigilla nn hbemus. Yet notwithstanding as this seems onely to comfort those that cannot have them, not to excuse those that will not give them, and therefore he adds, Sinllum necessarium impedimentum fuerit — nec esse ullo modo omittenda, yet I say, if the Sacraments be notes of the Church, how can that be a Church to whom these notes are supposed not to belong? How can these be Citizens of Ie∣rusalem, sheep of the Lords flock, Souldiers of his Militia, who not onely have not, but are affirmed not be in capacity of having the proper signes of such? Ʋbisupra. p. 1131. And seeing, as Iunius asserts, those are notes of the Church, Professione Dei & nostrâ Deitradentis Scripturâ, professione, Sacramentis: nostrâ profitentium recipere Scripturam, professionem, Sacramentá{que} ipsius; qua Deus profitetur jam Ecclesia est; quà homines jam Deum Ecclesiám{que} profitentur, & se Ecclesiae membra, tota haec professio not Ecclesiae est; sed prima illa Ecclesiam constituit & notam essentialem ipsius in se, haec notam Ecclesiae in membris ejus particularibus ostendit, how can they be yeel∣ded to be membrs, that are not allowed this profession? And how can these be notes by their profession in receiving whom they professe uncapable to receive? and if as the same famous learned man delivereth, P. 1133. the word Saltem vocatione communi facit divinae consortes naturae (ut ita loquamur) omnes, quamvis non singulari interná{que} vocatione singu os, how can they that are partakers of the divine nature, be unworthy to participate of the signes of his body? They fairly confess, That discipline enters not into the definition of a Church, but onely of a sound and healthy Church, and to put all or most on this, is unwarrantable. In deed it is disliked by Whitaker in Beza and Danaeus, that they make Discipline a
note of the Church, Si per disciplinam, certam quandam & perpetuam gubernationis Ec∣clesiae formam per Presbyteros & excommunicationem intelligant, Ʋbi supra. falli cos existimo; but we then assume, if it may be a Church without discipline, and all or most is not to be put on this, Sect. 9. how can they excuse those fellows of theirs in the separation who secede from their proper congregations, through offence at the want of Disci∣pline (as they confesse) and thereupon renounce their brotherhood? For as we alleaged out of Altingius to refuse to partake the Supper with them, is a tacite re∣nunciation of their fraternity; or how can these justifie themselves that permit none to be of their Church, that will not submit to their Discipline? I doubt whether Divinity will not as little warrant that assertion as accurate, That the form of a visible Church is the union of the body with Christ, Polanus Syn∣tag. l. 7. c. 2. Bucan. Instit. loc. 41. sect 15. Ames. Medul∣la theol. c. 31. Altingius l c. com part 1. loc. 11. part. 181. aliiq. Epist. ad Be∣zam. which visibly is by living under Gospel Ordinances (for this is not properly and immeditly voca∣tion, and profession of faith, which is generally determined to be the form of the Church,, and hence it is that the Word and Sacraments which are appendages thereunto, being visible words, are the essentiall notes of the Church) as Philoso∣phy will own that saying, That the form of a man is the union of the soul and body, for the soul is the form, though the union thereof with the body, as the mat∣ter, make the man, but that the union of the form with the matter should be the form, checks as much with good sense as Philosophy. As the Word and Prayer, so Baptism also, they think, to be more communicable, and plead for the free admission of Infants, onely the Lords Supper which Christ institu∣ted ad congregandam Ecclesiam, ad communionem societatém{que} must be drawn (as Bul∣linger complins) ad Ecclesiam dispergendam, excommunionem (ut sic dicam) & so∣parationem; but that most of the mediums which they use to entrench the one Sa∣crament, will be subservient to reclude and restrain the other, we have endeavoured for merly to lay open. They ask, Whether they can deny Baptis to the child of any member how off ensive soever, before the sentenceof cutting off poss upon him? Sic tusic breviter, positâ tibi Gorgone Pallas. You cannot justly make such deniall, but then we shall take leave to ask, Whether they can deny the Lords Supper to any member before the sentence of cutting off passe upon him, or some notorious crime done by him that may demerit that sen∣tence? And (if they will cut off all partiall and prejudicious sentencing) they must be sensible that the same reason will command them to give like answer as they re∣ceive, viz. that in justice they cannot deny. The children, they say, are not baptized in their own right, but in the Churches; but what interest in the Churches rights have those infants which is not rooted in their parents, and their relation to them? And the soederall holinesse which they speak of, is by the virtue of the promise made to the seed of these parents that are in co∣venant with God. I know they take not the Church Metonymically, for the Town or Countrey that contains it, for upon such an account the children of Infidels born within that verge, might have right to baptisme. Neither doe I understand how the right which the Church hath to baptize them is derived, but onely from the Church membership of the parents, or one of them. Now as our Lawes tell us, that the derivative right cannot be greater than the primitive; so the Lawes of Philosophy assure us, Quod facit tale debet esse magis tale, and therefore if the child be receaved unto one Sacrament in the right of the Church, why in the same
should not the parents be admitted to the other, the right for the one and other be∣ing founded in the Church-membership of the parents? They look to see so much as may perswade them in charity to take a mans profession to be serious, before they think him fit to come to the sealing & distinguishing Ordinance. Not to reflect on what we hope we have formerly demonstrated, that they onely ought to look (unlesse they will look a-squint upon their own ends and inte∣rest) upon their being Church-members, having a Dogmatical faith, and not cut cut off by just sentence, nor meriting to be cast out for notorious crimes, and that it is the proper duty of Charity to take every mans profession for serious, whose life is not scandalous: I shall onely enquire into the reason why they appropriate the attribute of a sealing and distinguishing ordinance to the Lords Supper, as if that notion distinguisht it from baptisme, which were not capable of like denomina∣tion. Are not both the Sacraments seals of Faith? Contra Par∣men. l. 2, c. 13. Are they not equally Signa sa∣cra quibus distingucrentur cives Hierusalem &c. as even now I alleaged out of Ha∣lensis? Doth not Augustine call them joynty Characteres Ecclesiae, and the Fathers ordinarily tsseras & signamilit, mis Eclesiae? And therefore what argument they extract from their being sealing and distinguishing ordinances, suits with, and may be accommodated to the one Sacrament as well as the other; but if they fancy that both Sacraments equally distinguish the Church from Infidel assemblies, but the one Sacrament onely makes a distinction in the Church of holy persons from those that are not evidently such, we may perhaps for this find their dictates, but look long enough for their arguments, Epist. ad Ionuil. Nec à quoquam hactenus (saith Gual∣thr) idoneis & firmis argumentis demonstratum fuisse vidimus exclusionis aut separatio∣nis symbolum ex ea sieri debere qua Ecclesia colligi, & ejus unitas conservari atque fo∣veri debet quo nomine illam veteres  ixerunt. A remote right may serve to bring in the child; but what is this remote right in this case, is as remote from our understanding as from any clear explication by them. If they mean a right derived from his parents profession of the faith, then that which is a remote right in the child, is a near right in the parent; and if the one may open a way to one Sacrament for the child, it may smooth the way for the parents to the other. If they understand a possibility that the child may here∣after be a serious professor; so may the parents, if at present they be not, and if such a possibility may intitle to baptisme, the child of a Turk possibly may put in his claim thereto. The Apologists might forbear more Essayes of their Philosophy, unlesse they were more lucky in venting them. I doubt they will have as little fruit and as poor an Issue by Hagar as by Sara, and be as successlesse in curting the maid as Penelope. They tell us a nearer right in actu primo, that is present and visible, is necessary to a mans self. It seems they fancy that the first must needs excell the second, and that there∣fore Actus primus is a nobler and perfecter act then Secundus, but as the first act is not so near as the second, (as principium quo is more remote than principium quod) and the first act also cannot be known to be present and made visible (as is their language) but by the second, for actus primus, (saith Scotus out of Aristotle) est fa∣cult as aut potentia rei antequam operetur actualiter, res in habitu, secundus actus dicitur operatio ejus▪ so the second act is more noble & perfect than the first, that being but as potentia in respect of this, and upon this ground when the Neopelagians affirm, that prima radix ex qua gratia vocatur effican in actu secundo, sumenda est ab eventu,
seu libera hominis cooperatione, Deo operante tantum posse convertere, sola voluntate dante ipsum velle convertere; Warde gratia discriminans p. 314. we thus argue to the contrary, that then potiores par∣tes erunt voluntatis quàm gratiae, dei quàm hominis, and to inferre this we assert, that potiores sunt ejus partes qui dat operari, quam ejus qui solum dat posse operari, est enim actus secundus nobilior & perfectior quam actus primus vel habitus, praesertim in spiri∣tualibus & moralibus quae praxin respiciunt, cum habitus tales sunt propter actus, & ordinentur ad actus tanquam finem. Besides, as an Infant hath reason in actu primo, though he cannot actually exercise it, so even a baptized Infant hath in actu pri∣mo a right to the Eucharist. Their instance of a father sequestred whose on hath the right of an heir, is no∣thing opposite, for during the Fathers life the son hath no actual right, whose title begins when his fathers life ends, and then the sequestration also I think de∣termines, or else the heir must compound for enjoyment of his right; I conceive a more apt and paralel resemblance in our controversie might be taken from a fa∣ther executed upon an attainder, Quaest. in V. T. q. 39. in Deut. and then he hath no heir, nor his son any thing inheritable, & hoc nunc agit in Ecclesia excommunicatio quod tunc agebat interfectio, saith Augustine, though with this difference, non datur a morte regressus, at datur ab excommunicatione. It is a question, Whether formal excommunication it self, cut off the seed from all Church privileges, and some think there is a dormant and virtual right still: I sup∣pose their is little question of a dormant or virtual right (especially in order to those qui communionem interuam animo, fide & resipiscextia retinent,) they are still in occulto membra, & jus manet integrum, they being not east out, absolute, prae∣cise, & finaliter, sed ad tempus & sub conditione, otherwise I think it would be re∣quisite to rebaptize them at their readmission: but what is all this to an actual right, which we are disputing of, Ego postulabam rutra, sarcula hi negant, (accor∣ding to the Greek proverb:) for a virtual dormant right he may have, that yet cannot get this possession, and a Child may have a virtual right thereunto with∣out being actually to be baptized, but when the parents are clearly ut off from all actual outward communion, even those qui internam retinent, exclusi communionis signo externo, Junius in con∣ro. 7. Bell. l. 3. c. 6. actu & usu, though they have a right, the use is provisionally taken away, they are cut off materially, & excommunicatione signi secundum quid ordina∣ta, though not formaliter,, and absolutely by the definite sentence of God, se∣cundum ordinem ab hominibus, non secundum finem consilio Dei, Let him be to thee an Heathen, to thee, modum externum homini praesribens, etsi internam formam sibi & veritati reservans; so as though excommunication shut not out from the mystical Church, nor clean from the visible, yet it doth exclude from fellowship with the visible in holy duties and privileges, and therefore when this should be the case of the parents, it is very questionable whether the Child should not be in the same con∣dition with them, for the right and interest which the Child hath unto the privile∣ges of external communion, are rooted in the parents, and are traducted from them, and that also in the immediate parents, Eccles. pol. l. 3. p. 87. for else, (as Mr. Hooker observeth,) many Children of Turks and Pagans might have right to Baptisme, whose mediate pa∣rents from whom after some descents they issued, were Christians. And though not sins, yet the punishments aswel as privileges are traductive, as in Attain∣ders. And seeing they are rules of the Law, the one delivered by Ulpian, Nemo plus ju∣ris ad alium transferre potest, quàm ipse haberet, and another by Paulus, Non debeo
melioris conditionis esse quàm auctor meus, a quo jus in mo transit; wherewith also the rules of Logick and Philosophy are consonant, nihil dat quod non habet, there∣fore unlesse one of the parents were a visible Church-member, (for in that case the matter would have some analogy with that mentioned 1 Cor. 7.14.) it may well be disputed, that if the parents be actually excluded from the act and use of Ecclesiastical Communion, Godwin, Mo∣ses and Aaron, l. 5. c. 2. p. 223. the Child also should be actually suspended from the privileges thereof, for if they be as heathens, sure the Children of heathens have no right to Baptisme, and among the Jewes (from whose patterne some would extract more reverence to Church Censures) the male Children of those that were but under Niddui were not circumcised. Yet I am not ignorant that the ancient Church brought Infants to baptisme, August. Epist. 23. Chamiertom. 4. l. 5. c. 15. Sect 2. which had been cruelly exposed by their parents unknown, as also à dominis servu∣li offeruntur; which the French Churches have justified by a Canon before remem∣bred; but as it was to be presumed that those found within the pale of the Church, were begotten of Christians; so the susceptors and sponsors undertook and en∣gaged for their education in the faith, were their parents as it were by adoption, as the master was a father to his family. And I shall confesse that in this question concerning the baptizing of the Children of persons excommunicate, there is no little reason, and much authority in that scale which propends to the affirmative, but as the case seldome comes to be discussed, seeing it rarely happens that both pa∣rents stand under such Censure; so for my part (who desire to carry more con∣formity to the Spartan, in quibus fidit vix aggrediens, than to the Athenian, au∣dax supra vires,) I shall onely give in a special verdict, and leave the case to be ar∣gued by more learned judges, for if I therein go beyond a sceptick, yet I ad∣vance not further than an Academick, and in this Academy I had rather proceed than determine. But in all these velitations against their dear brethren, surely the Apologists have been pii inimici, they have not drawn much blood, non metuo ne doleat quòd tu ferias, they have onely faced the enemy, and given a pop or two, and raised a smoak, and then retreated without charging through, or engaging any close fight, and indeed have resembled Caligula, who when he should have cut the deep to the conquest of Britain, sounded his trumpets and gathered a few cockle shells on the shore, and sent them abroad as the spoiles of the Country.
SECT. XXV. Their great abuse and distortion of Scripture. With what a train of consequences their arguments are farre fetcht. They are bor∣rowed from the Donatists, Papists, Brownists, Independents. None of them conclude the question as themselves have stated it. The argument raised from 1 Cor. 14 40. examined. Whether it be a glorious and comfortable practice, that none approach the Lords Table, save holy persons. Whether their way be war∣ranted by the Lawes. The moderating of Censures. Whether their way have like ground with the ancient discipline in recei∣ving in Penitents. Whether there be order and decency in mxt Communions. The lesser good to be omitted to acquire the greater. The confusion and disorder of their way. REs venit ad triarios, This is their third head, and their capital fortresse, viz. their pretended Scripture proofes, for pro divisione & discessione non solum loquuntur ips, sed etiam divinos libros loqui persuadent, as Augustine, but to this head which speaks Scripturas sine sensu, (as Hierom hath it) we may justly ap∣ply the motto which he set under the head whereby he represented the world, Capu hellebore dignum, for it is stuft with such wanton fancies and erroneous wild no∣tions, that Nescio an Antyciram ratio sibi destinet omnem. First, They declaime much against polluting and prophaning of the Sacrament, but I wish they had had a more religious care not to have polluted and prophaned holy Scripture by such a lewd and abusive misapplication thereof, so as to make us ashamed and abashed henceforth from upbraiding the Papists with calling the sa∣cred Scripture, a nose of wax, a leaden rule, a delphick sword, a shooe fit for eve∣ry foot &c. when those that pretend to be the great reformers among us, are so guilty of that vitiosissimum dicendi genus (as Hierom calls it,) De invenor. rer. l. 4. c. 9. depravare sententias, & in voluntatem suam Scripturam trahere repugnantem, and as Plidor Virgil speaks by occasion of a misinterpretation of Hostiensis, detorquent sacras literas quo volunt, ac sutores sordidas solent dentibus extendere pelles, for I do sadly profess to think, that scarce in that great Martyrologue of Scripture, the Popes Decretals, shall you find it put to much more torture, or set upon a more violent rack, then sometimes you may see it here in this new body of Extravagants, . so that an equal and unpreju∣diced Reader will be facil to imagine, that upon some other motive they first pitcht upon the opinion, and then set their wits to work to find out arguments the best they could to maintaine it, and so fell upon that magna & usitata hominum peruer∣sitas which Augustine complaines of, In Psal. 48. coucio. 1. tom. 8. p. 93. (eloquia divina) qui volunt ad sui cordis peruersitatem detorquere potiùs, quàm suum cor ad eorum rectitudinem corrigere — & cum debent ipsi vivere secundum voluntatem dei, deum volunt vivere secundum volunta∣tem
suam, & cum ipsi nolunt corrigi, illam volunt depravari, certum non arbitrantes quod ille vult, sed quod illi volunt, but the doctrine must needs be of the generation of vipers, that to be brought forth rents and tears the bowels of that which it pre∣tends to be its mother, and as Architects say a crack in the foundation of the large∣ness of half a Barly corn, makes a huge cleft in the superstructure; so when the foundation is so rent and broken, the fabrick can have no strength or stabill∣ty. Secondly, As Thrasyllus in his distemper at Athens thought every Ship that ari∣ved in the harbor to be his; so what they find of Separation, or of trial, or of es∣chewing evil company, they catch after it and appropriate it to be in order to the Sacrament, and upon such account, I more wonder that their proofs are no more, than that they are so many in number, especially while they are of so little weight, that I think I may say without disparagement of some of them, what Augustine saies of the world, Mundi facies tantâ rerum labe contrita est, ut etiam speciem sedu∣ctionis amiserit. As few, very few of their arguments have any reference to the matter, (viz. the Sacrament) which is neither mentioned nor meant in almost any of the texts alleaged; so some of them have no agreement or conformity so much as in words or terms, not so much as the old Priests paveant illi had to have the Chancel paved by the parish, or the late Quakers, lay hands suddenly on no man, to forbid an arrest: that a man might be tempted to doubt whether the Apologists were of the same mind with Joseph Stephanus, who after his abuse of the Scripture for kissing the Popes feet, concluded, gaudeo five per veritatem sive per occasionem Romanae Ecclesiae digni atem extolli, or with the Author of the tumul∣tuary Apology, who professeth in the case of Bernard, It is no fault to interpret Scriptures bejond their meaning, as long as it is done to confirm (that which they sup∣pose) Godliness. And whereas they may suggest, that though the Sacrament be not expresly mentioned or directly meant, yet by consequence it may be applied thereunto; I shall answer, (besides the deniall of the hypothesis, the falshood whereof shall be evidenced in examination of the particular texts) that when the consequents are of so many links, and the difficulty such to discerne how they hitch and hang together, they cannot bind our understandings in any strong chaines, for if one link lip, nothing holds; & as in ancient pedigrees if in any one descent the mother played false, the stream of succession is stopt or turned, a vitiated blood enters the veins and channels, and that issue is not of the first noble off spring; so if one consequence be not geuine but spurious, it is not the issue of the first principle, nor descended from it, but a bastard generation, and who will not say of this discipline of theirs (which they pretend to be of divine institution, and presse to be so necessary to reformation) as Ames tells the Papists of their Sacra∣ment of pennance; Magnum praejudiium ex co patitur sacramentum paenitentiae, Bell. enervat. tom. 4. p. 202. quod paers ejus primaria (confesso) non potest Scripturae ullo testimonio probari sine tam pro∣lixa circuitione consequnetiarum, & ratiocinationum, quarum vim si firma esset, ut vul∣gus fidelium perciperet, non esset tamen expectandum. Thirdly, They have forgotten that rule of Pythagoras, Ne gustes quibus nigra est cauda, and with more blame remind not the example of the Prophet, not to eat of the dainties of the workers of iniquity. They will have no communion in the Sa∣crament with men that are not evidently good, but they will have communion in arguments with those that are manifestly evil; if they cannot flectere superos (and therefore they disparage and decline the Fathers) they will Acheronta movere, and
fetch auxiliar forces from the Donatists and Papists, Brownists, and (though they will perhaps take no shame at that) the Independents; and like Amazia will hire those Armies to go with them, which the Lord is not with, so that Noscitur exco∣mite, and we may guesse for whom they sow, and who will reap the harvest, by seeing whose heysers they plow withal: and though I do not think that albeit they are symbolizantia elementa, that therefore they are facilè transmutabilia in respect of all those parties; yet as he is in a desperate case that goes to Witches for help, so also —timeo Danaos et dona ferentes, 1. Aug. l. cont. Donatist. post coll. c. 20. & alibi. 2. Contra p. Parmen. l 3. c. 2.3. Ibid. l. 2. c. 21 & cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 106. 4. Brevio. col∣lat. cum Donat. 3. diei. tom. 7. p. 118. 5. Cont. Do∣nat. post Coll. c. 8. & 20. 6. Apud Whi∣tak Contro. 1. q. 2. c. 17. p. 308. & Chamier tom. 1 l. 10. c. 8. 7. Bellar. de Rom. Pontif. l. 4. c. 16. Chamier. tom. 3. l. 2. c. 12. 8. Bellar. de poenitent. l. 3. c. 3. Lorinus in locum. 9. Bayleis dis∣swas. c 7. p. 172. Mr. Bal. answer to Canne part 2. p. 67. and as that splayfooted Graecian when he had lost his shooes, wisht they might be fit for his feet that found and detained them; so it cannot be doubted, that it is no right foot which a crooked shooe will so well suit with. First, That which is the substance of the Argument deduced from 2 Thes. 3.6. viz. The necessity of a corporal withdrawing our selves from every brother that walk∣eth inordinately. Secondly, That of 1 Cor. 5.11. With such a one no not to eat. Thirdly, The 1 Tim. 5.22. Neither be partaker of other mens sins. Fourthly, That of Nahum. 1.15. The wicked shall no more passe through thee. And Fiftly, That of Isa. Non adjiciet ultra per se transire incircumcisus & im∣mundus, (which is materially the same with those texts which they alleage, Joel 3.17. and Zachar. 14.21.) all those were used by the Donatists to confirm their Schisme, and separating themselves from those whom they supposed evil, and were not cast out by excommunication: for though some of those portions of Scrip∣ture, have been alleaged by the Orthodox party, to prove that scandalous and flagitious persons ought to be excommunicated, yet the producing of them to as∣sert a separation from those that are not duly so censured, and from others for a culpable neglect, or prudential omission of such censures, upon pretence of an else inevitable participation of sin, is a symptom of Donatisme and a symbolizing therewith. Sixtly, That of Matthew 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto Doggs, &c. is upon like account alleaged by the Papists to forbid men the reading of the Scripture, as it is produced by them to exclude others from the Sacrament. Seventhly, That of Heb. 13.17. Obey them that hve the rule over you, &c. serves Bellarmine as suitably to prove the Pope may make Lawes to bind the con∣science, and others to support a blind obedience as it can help them to, or esta∣blish them in that power which they claim and exercise. Eightly, That of Leviticus 13.5. is brought forth by Bellarmine and Lorinus upon account of the like reason, to justifie auricular confession, as they produce it to ratifie their examination. And Ninthly, That of 2 Chron. 13.19. is a protrite Argument among the Brownists and Independents to enforce an exclusion from Church fellowship, at it is used by them to evince a repulse from Sacramental communion. Therefore as King Richard the first when he sent the armour of Philip the martial Bishop of Beavoys to the Pope, (who demanded his son of the King when he had imprisoned him,) said, This we found, see if it be thy sons coate or no; so I shall say, those Ar∣guments we found, see if they are proper to Orthodox Divines, or not.
Fourthly, they are so set upon suspensions and castings out, that they have ex∣communicated their question, and wil not touch or have any communion there∣with. They in the ninth Section stated the question in those terms; Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted Church, it be necessary, that all the members thereof do submit to some examination or trial of their knowledge, before they be admitted to the Lords Table.] It seems the question is grown suddenly a Le∣per, and therefore is shut out, and not to be toucht. It hath been shewed in answer to that Section, that this question is concluded in none of their Syllo∣gismes, That none of the texts from which they conclude, mentions or intends examination or the Sacrament divisively, much lesse conjunctly examination prece∣daneous to the Sacrament, (one excepted where the examination is active, not pas∣sive, a man to examine himself, not to be examined by another.) None pre∣scribes a withdrawing from, a noting, a not eating with, shutting up, or giving out, not casting pearls, giving holy things to men ignorant, but scandalous, and all that can be with the strongest heat distilled from those Texts, is onely the casting out of notorious sinners, not the taking in of any untill upon probation they have demon∣strated their true holinesse. Most of the texts forbid a familiar and sociall unne∣cessary conversation with wicked men, not a communion in the Sacrament. Those which may seem to prohibite their partaking of holy things, doe deny them generally, and absolutely, there is no limitation or restraint of the prohibition to the Lords Supper, and as there is no restriction in relation to the matter, so neither any determination or fixing of the time and speciall occasion, as that it must be done onely in the reforming of a long corrupted Church. Many of the com∣mands are negative, and whatsoever their obligation be, obligant semper & ad sem∣per, not only in times of reforming, and the affirmative commands are indefinite and absolute, binding alwayes upon all occasions, they are sure, and stand fast for ever and ever. So the Apologists have herein dealt like the French, who when they have prickt a tune, do not sing after it, and like the Ostrich, when they have laid their egges, they leave them in the earth, and onely warm them with dust. But as we have viewed the generall affections of their arguments, so let us take a survey of what agrees to them in speciall. Of those Texts which contribute more or lesse to warrant their practice, (it seems they are conscious that some pay in but a little contribution, and we are confident that none do much) the first in their (no doubt but) decent order, is 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently & in order. But if this be the capitall proof (as Iustine speaks of Epaminondas, slain at the battell of Mantinaea, The head of the spear being taken off, the trunk would do little hurt; so if this head of their argumentation be so blunt, and the edge thereof so easily rebated, we may more boldly venture upon the residue: for sure this proof might not onely have been removed from the tribe, and been debarred its sufferage, but it is not capable to be among the very Aerarii, it can pay no contribution, it is so poor, onely they will set it among the proletarii to beget one argument the more in number. First, I might rationally enough, if I would raise arguments ad hominem (only arte perire sua) retort their own words, that the Apostles scope is far from the businesse in hand, for as is the judgment of Aquinas, Estius, Piscator, Menochius; &c. all things here mentioned are onely the things spoken of before, Decency referring to the habit and silence of women, Order relating to the use of spirituall gifts, and their speaking not together, but one after another, first one then another for exer∣cise
of them, but I shall acknowledge that generall Rules are applicable to all par∣ticulars of the same kind and nature, and whatsoever can be derived from any thing was contained in it. Secondly, In locum. itis well observed by Musculus, Non est universalis vocula trahenda ad omnia quae temere sunt in Ecclesia introducta — sed quae legitimè & necessoriè gerenda sunt in Ecclesia, decenter & ordine competenti gerantur; So as first they should have proved the matter to be lawfull and necessary, and then suit the manner of doing it to order and decency. Thirdly, from this proposition, All things should be done decently and in order, they can never extract any conclusion for them, but by an Assumption, (which will be whipt away for begging the question) that their doings are decent and orderly; the first is as chearfully as necessarily conceded, the later no lesse strongly denied by us than asserted by them: this is our controversie, and the issue we have joyn'd upon them, and the determination of the question depends upon what hath been produced on either side, and to give in a verdict, there had need bee a view of al the pleadings, and an examination of all the evidence produced. Fourthly, the Text alleaged is but a remote and mediate principle for proof of their practice, the order and decency thereof is to be the proximate and immediate ground of its approbation; for the Scripture onely saith in generall, things ought to be done decently and in order, but that such a particular way is orderly and decent, depends upon the considerations of rectified reason, and godly pru∣dence, and things have their chief dependance upon their nearest causes and prin∣ciples, and upon this reflection it is that they deny that those humane lawes doe pro∣perly bind the conscience, which obliege not in respect of the matter thereof, be∣cause they bind not primò & per se, sed secundariò at{que} mediatè, & per accidens ab ordinatione Dci, not in their proper nature, but in another, viz. that principle, Let every soul be subject, &c. Fifthly, this is an itinerant Topick, and a common argument, and may be im∣prest to serve me against them, and will muster among my Forces, who am as certain to have made it evident, that their way is not decent nor orderly, as they are confident to have proved it to be so. Eccles. l. 3. c 4. And if order be as Iunius out of Augustine, Per quem aguntur omnia quae constituit Deus, and the rules & directions which now or at other times had or should be given by the Apostle, and the Rule of Decency be the custome of the Church, (as Dr. Hammond noteth,) (not the singularities or inno∣vations of privat or particular men) then we are yet to seek of any such rule or di∣rection of Scripture, and by no search can we find, that the Churches of God had any such custome. Sixthly, if they had evidenced their way to be decent and orderly, yet that could onely rise to justifie it selfe, not reach to condemn another, it might warrant the setting up thereof, not condemn the pulling down of all beside, another way might be as orderly and decent as that, for these have some latitude, and consist not in a point, though unum & verum convertuntur, yet one and orderly or decent are not so convertible, In locum. and Ordo Ecclesiasticus aliis atque aliis locis non modo diversus sod saepe contrarius ad aedificationem facere potest, saith Paraeus. Every lawfull or good thingis not by and by necessary, as was before recited out of Camero, qui salubres cibi sunt, non continuò necessarii, there is no necessity incumbent on any man to eate all or any one determinate meat that is wholsome, especially when he hath no sto∣mack to it, or is already satisfied with it.
Seventhly, when this text was produced by the Episcopall party, to warrant some ceremonies, I know who denyed the argument, T.C. and asked why we should hang our judgment upon the Churches sleeve, and why in matters of Order more than in matters of Doctrine? But however this be a rule by which things belonging to the policy of the Church, are to be regulated in Discipline and Rites, and things in∣different, not specially determined by Scripture, yet the matters that fall under such regulation bind not the conscience of themselves, and with such constitutions God is not worshipped, saith Paraeus, In locum ibid. and they are left free and alterable to the will and pleasure of the Church to constitute or abrogate; and that also which this power determines, is not de re aut substantiâ, sed rei externa precuratione, Camero de verbo Dei. p. 463. Contr. 4. de Eccles. q. 7. tom. 2. p. 715. and the determi∣nation binds only quia oportet unumquemque stude epaci, and they are to be obser∣ved, non ut his conscientia implicetur nisi propter scandalum & contemptum legitimae au∣thoritatis, aliàs res ipsas esse medii generis, as Whitaker affirmeth. And therfore though they bravingly avow, That this text well managed will justifie against all the world such courses (as have an excellent and holy use in the Church) (which use that their course hath, is a principle that needs no proof) for want of better managery, that which they have setcht to fight for them, doth convert its arms against them, and surren∣ders up that strength which they set it to keep, for now their Discipline which they held out for the expresse will of God, so great a part of the kingdom of Christ, and so essential and necessary to reformation, and for the introducing of this their or∣der have put the Church so much out of order, is yet become onely a matter of Decency and Order, which owes its spring to the Churches will, and may take its fall at her pleasure, — sic transit gloria mundi. And thus like the Dolphins in an eager pursuit of their prey, they dash themselves upon the rcks. They conceive, and say it is confessed, That it were a glorious and comfortable thing if none but holy persons did draw neer to this holy table, and they assume, A general Rule will bear up a glorious and comfortable practice in the Church. And if that be the Proposition and this the Assumption, what I beseech you is like to be, or what is likely they intend should be the conclusion, which among so many terms we can upon no terms make out? This may be some of Chrysippus his Lo∣gick, which the Gods would have used, but men were too dull to understand the use thereof. If they intend that a glorious and comfortable practice will be born up by this command, to do all things decently and in order, I suppose it would be better supported by its proper strength, formally as it is a glorious and comfortable practice, more than as decent and orderly, but then what is this practice? viz. that onely holy persons draw near the holy table. Be it so, let that be a glorious and comfortable practice, as they can take no glory, so neither can we any com∣sort, if they should thence infer, therefore they may debarre from coming all those of whose holinesse they are not convinced. We have elsewhere shewed, they are severall questions, and of sundry latitudes, who should come, and who ought to be admitted; none may be excluded but for crimes notorious, but it is enough that they are not scandalous to make them capable to be received. And I hope we have sufficiently demonstrated, that al that having a Dogmatical faith are members of the Church, which is Christs family, have a right to eat at his Table, and com∣mon sense will shew, that those that are not cut off from Ecclesiasticall commu∣nion, cannot be kept off from the main part thereof, communion in Sacraments.
If then none but holy persons shall draw to the holy table, all Church members must be holy, really I mean, for relatively they are so, but all the whole visible Church collectively shall be sincerely holy, when any the parts thereof distribu∣tively are perfectly holy, and that shall be onely when we come to eat and drink at his table in his Kingdome. An holy and blameless Church without spot or wrinkle is indeed glorious, but it is gloriae patriae, non viae, a glory reserved for the tri∣umph, not bestowed during the warfare, and it is now so glorious onely in the hope it shall be; here her falrness is but comparative among Women, in respect of the rest of the world, inter animas terrenas, non autem inter evangelicas beatitudi∣nes, saith Bernard. The subject matter therefore of glory and comfort beares resemblance with that of vowes, things possible, lawful, and acceptable to God; but to put all from communion in Sacraments save the truly holy is neither possible, Boni nunquam soli sunt nisi in caelo (saith Gregory,) there will be tares still among the Wheat, even Ʋsq, ad messem, & messores angeli, nor lawful, because contrary to the command, sinite crescere, and saith Augustine, Ʋsurpant sibi homines ante messem, quod angeli in messe facturi sunt; nor acceptable to God, because it cannot be fine eradicatione tritici, sine labe unitatis, sine corruptione vinculi pacis, & pericu∣lo schismatis. Many things may seem glorious and comfortable, which yet are not possible to be effected, nor may sometimes be lawfully attempted. It were a glorious and comfortable thing that Philosophers were Kings, and Kings Philoso∣phers, yet it should be piacular to pull down Kings and set up Philosophers. It were glorious and comfortable that every man which had a title to an estate in the exterlour Court, had also a right in the interiour, and that dominion were found∣ed in grace; yet it is not lawful to disseise or out any man of his freehold, that holds not over by fealty of the high Lord of all. It were a glorious and comfor∣table thing if there were an harmony of spirits between a man and his wife, Nec malè inaequales veniant ad aratra juvenci, but if a man be unequally yoaked and shrewdly matched, yet I think the Apologists (whatsoever their lot be) do not suppose it lawful to turn the wife to grasse, and plow with a tamer heifer. It were I should think, a glorious and comfortable thing, if every one that assumes to be a wise man in print, could justly pretend to much art, and that every one that serves in the Tabernacle had not onely bells of pure gold, but also jewels of Aegypt, wherewith to adorne and furnish it; but though the Apologists say they pretend not to much art, yet they would have sensed it an inju∣ry to have been suspended from the Presse, and much more (and I confesse more justly) resent the wrong to be repelled from their office and Benefice. Lastly, it were a glorious and comfortable thing, if all that were planted and watered in the Church by baptisme, were onely the branches in Christ bearing fruit, and themselves purged to bring forth more fruit; that all that hear did re∣ceave the word with faith, and all that did pray did pray in faith, and lifted up their hearts with their hands to God in the Heavens, but yet the Apologists are not ad∣vanced to such a latitude of separation as to admit none to these Ordinances, but such onely whom they have tryed to be thus conditioned and qualified. It is such another argument that is used by Tapper for merit, It is, saith he, glo∣rious for the Saints to demand heaven as victors and triumphers, as a palme due to their sweats. That diminutive of nothing, Man, will still rob God of his glo∣ry, not onely by want of people, in the multitude whereof is the Kings honour,
(as Augustine to this purpose applies that of Prov. 14.28.) Contra Ep. Par. l. 2. c. 19. but in undertaking to define what is glorious, better than the King of glory, and as if a Noli altum sapere were not sufficient to restraine and bound their presumption, they will be sapientiores Altissimo. Is their way so glorious and comfortable, as that among them none but holy persons draw neer to the holy table? Si verum est, non invideo, at{que} utinam id per∣fectè fiat, as Augustine to his Donatists; but sure if they say that their society is free from all vice, not onely pride (as the same Father,) but untruth will be greater vices. Is there no way so likely as theirs to cause more persons, with more holi∣ness to approach to that holy table? we suppose the contrary, and that — peragit tranquilla potestas Quod violenta nequit. It is (as they say is confessed) the Ministers misery that he must admit all; he is then miser but not miserabilis, for he may in a regular way repel the scandalous and obstinate: but if he will assume a power to exclude those which are not such, he will translate the misery upon the people, yet if the tares stand so thick that they cannot be eradicated without hazard of the Wheat, without losing of the bands of unity, or breaking those of peace, Let him take up my Crosse (saith Christ,) it is Crux Christi, non sua, imposed not contracted, in such a case nihil aliud boni restat quàm gemitus, saith Augustine, and Levius fi patientia Quicquid corrigere est nefas. As the Prophet Shemaiah told Reboboam, ye shall not go up nor fight against your brethren, for that thing is of me; so the sinite crescere is from God which binds them to peace; Non ergo quaerat quis separatos justos, Contra Par∣men. l. 3. c. 5. tom. 7. p. 15. sed cum ipsis potiùs in malo∣rum tem, orali commixtione concorditer gemat — justi gemunt & moerent ob iniquita∣tes quae sunt in medio corum. And therefore whereas they say, it could be no misery but as it is sin, they might have reminded that they were remarkable good men which mourned for that, which though they could not correct, yet it was anothers sin not their own, yet had been their sin also if it had not been their sorrow, Ubi supra. l. 2. c. 3. Quia eos corrigere non potuerunt, nec ab unitate dei se ullo modo separare volebant, pro merito innocentissimae tolerantiae suae signari meruerunt, at{que} in illorum perditorum vastatione at{que} interitu liberari. Tis true every evil of sin in another, that becomes not an evil of pain to us, converts into a sinful evil, but while there is a generation of unregenerate men in the world, though they approach not to the holy table, yet we must go out of the world, or else we shall eat among them the bread of teares, and drink teares, for the dishonour done by them to God; and in the Church, why should it be a greater misery to have fellowship in the Sacrament with men not really holy, than to hold society with them in the Ordinances of the Word and Prayer, I am yet to seek, and the Apologists to shew the reason. Such as are not really holy are the immediate Objects of the first grace, and of the Ordinances of Christ, the conveyances of that grace, and if God will have them saved volunta∣te signi, and hold forth the fruits of Christs death unto them in the promises of grace and salvation, which death is represented, and which promises are sealed, and which graces promised are exhibited by the Sacraments as moral instruments, they (as long as they are relatively holy, and in external Covenant with God, and members of the visible Church,) how can they be thurst out from the inheritance, that possibly may not be the sons of a strange Woman, or be denied the seales,
when they have the writings of that inheritance, unless onely by those whose eyes are evil because Gods are good, and such eyes as cannot abide the son of righteous∣ness to arise upon them, who are but as bad as once the best of them were: Me∣minerint sanè, De Civit. Dei, l 1. c 35. Luke 13.7, 8. (saith Augustine) in ipsis inimicis suos latere cives futuros. When the Master of the Vineyard commanded the tree to be cut down that bare no fruit, the servants interceded, that it might stand longer to be digged about and dunged, but now when the Master would keep it under longer culture, the servants think it cumbreth the ground, and Jonas is fierce when God is patient, and had rather Ninivch were destroyed then his late sprung gourd should be blasted. They are sollicious to legitimate their practice by a warrant from the Lawes which are in force, but as we dispute not now what bears the Teste of the Common-Pleas of men, but the Ʋpper-bench of Heaven, and what hath Commission from him, that is Deus essentialiter, not them that are Dii nuncupative; so we are assured, there is no established Law that was the Mother to bring forth, or the Nurse to cherish this Discipline, which is the Son of a strange Woman, which the Law will not allow to inherit, there being no good Law that hath begot this evil manner of proceeding: For as for the Ordinances which they say authorize the keeping back of the ignorant and scandalous (which are not dismounted (as they pretend) with those that made them) they do no more fortifie their works, nor desend their way, than the Law that commands to hang a thief justly convicted upon a legal tryal, warrants them to hang any one without a judicial process that hath not satisfied them with some evidence that he is a true man. And therefore that the Phantasmes or judgements of any particular men should become the Law of Order and Decency (as Hicrom saith of Origen, Ingenii sui acumina putat Ecclesiae esse Sacramenta) is neither orderly nor decent, and for every man to do that which is right in his own eyes, is rather the consequent of no Law in Israel; and anomi∣am habet omnis autonomia, saith Herodotus. But they hope the higher powers howsoever will satisfie the just desires of the godly herein; and so they do, and yet not comply with their desires which are not just, nor are they the only godly. Perchance such hopes made them like the Tamarynd, to look toward the Sun and disclose themselves, and like Lions to be fierce in a warm Sun; but why should they forestal and out-run the Law which is only in hope, not yet in being, unless they are like Diogenes, who at the rise of the Macedo∣nian Empire, would be buried with his face downward, for when things should be turned up side-down, then should he lye right. They will not undertake to speak the mind of the higher powers; nor dare we to pry into, or re-search it; only we know that annucre is one thing, connivere another: that voluntas signi & beneplaciti are things different; that when men are taken up with chasing the wilde Boar, though they have no vacancy, nor can be distracted to hunt the little Foxes, yet hey do not allow them, and that in the first clearing up and forming of things, though — Congestáque codem, Non bene junctarum discordia seminarerum; yet Hanc Deus & melior litem natura diremit. And then Et quae pressa diu massa latuere sub ipsa, Sydera caeperunt toto fulgescere coelo.
But let them have the power of excluding, yet are they sensible of no conside∣rations that may suspend or restrain the act and exercise thereof? — Desaevit in omnes, Dum se posseputat. Not to mention the judgement of the wisest among the Romans, Cato, though not altoge her impertinent to this concernment, Potentes parcè suâ potestate utan∣tur, fic diuturniores cam habituros, & invidiam evasuros aut restricturos; And what the Poet could say. Ʋtatur toto fulmine rara manus: Saint Augustine had a different sense who hath set up several boundaries, and brought forth some fetters for the limiing and binding up the very power of binding and loosing. Non eo usque progrediatur dementiae potius temeritas, De fid. & o∣perib. c. 27. tom. 4. p. 18. quam severitas dili∣gentiae, ut quasi bonos à malis per nefariaschismata separare praesumat; and he warrants us, That ubi hoc facere pacis & tranquillitatis gratiâ non permittimur, non tamen ideo Ecclesiam negligimus, sed toleramus quae nolumus, ut perveniamus quo volumus, utentes cautelâ praecepti dominici, ne cum voluerimus ante tempus colligere zizania, Contra. Don post Collat. 20. In concord. Evang. c. 72. p. 457. simul cradicemus & tritieum, utentes etiam exemplo & praecepto beati Cypriani, qui Col∣legas suos saeneratores, fraudatores, raptores, pacis contemplatione pertulit talis, nec corum contagione factus est talis And what Jansenius delivers concerning frater∣nal correption, I conceive to be applicable to this way of correction, that it being an affirmative precept, Secundum naturam & conditionem talium, non obligat pro omni tempore, sed pro eo solum tempore & loco quo opportuna & utilis est ejus observatio & executio. The ancients had no particular warrant from the word as to their orders of paenitents and courses about them, besides this general rule of doing things in Order and Decency. We are fully atoned with this opinion, which yet will not advantage the Apolo∣gists. For 1. The Church had a power, founded in Divine Institution, to cast out of the Church such as continued obstinate in Scandal, and to restore them upon their re∣pentance; but the Apologists usurp a power to shut out from the Sacrament such as continue Members of the Church, and are not duly censured for any notorious crimes. 2. When the action was thus warranted, the time of undergoing their pen∣nance, the manner thereof, and the steps and degrees of their restitution, was but the formality and circumstances of the Action, which lying without the comprehension of Order and Decency, fell under the determination of the Church, whose power regularly moves in three Sphears only, 1. To publish the Com∣mandment of Christ. 2. By their Censures to punish Offenders against the same. 3. In prescribing things that pertain to comliness and order. Field of the Church, l. 4. c. 31. p. 396, l. 2. obs. 22. p. 319. Ecclesia (saith Albaspinus) ut ligandihabet, & solvendi potestatem, dubitat nemo quin ratio∣nem quoquo pacto solui posset inire prorsus suo jure potuerit — quippe adjuncta haec sunt & circumstantiae, ipsa paenitentia non sunt; But that which we dispute against in the Apologists, is not any formality or circumstance, but the action it self, and which properly comes not within the list or rank of things of order & decency unless perhaps in a general acception, as whatsoever is agreeable to rule is orderly, & what is contrary thereunto is out of order; Ordini contrariatur quicquid inordinatè agitur, as Tully long since said, Et quicquid peccatur, perturbatione ordinis peccatur, accordingly Quod decet honestum est, et quod honestū est decet; justa omnja decora sunt, injusta contra;
but taking order and decency in this notion, the Church hath no power to make Lawes in things of such concernment; but Order in this place of the Apostle comprehendeth the circumstances of season, time, and place; and comliness in∣cludes that gravity and modesty in the performance of the works of Gods service, which beseems actions of that nature, Field. Ʋbi supra. and such Rites as may cause respect unto the things performed, and thereby excite men to greater devotion, or express such spi∣ritual affections and motions as are or should be in them, but the pretended order and course of the Apologists is of a far different kind and nature. 3. The ancient church held not forth that manner and degrees of pennance as a Divine Institution, nor necessarily implicating the conscience, but as an act of Discipline of a medious and indifferent nature (when abstracted from their posi∣tive Constitution) and therefore it was transitory in respect of time, and ambula∣tory in regard of place, not alwayes nor every where observed. But as their Discipline hath no Ecclesiastical Constitution like a great sum to obtain its free∣dom in the Church, so they pretend it was free born, and is of divine not humane Establishment; and therefore they prevaricate and betray their Cause when they compare it to that Model of Discipline for the Paeniten's, and do interpretative∣ly and virtually acknowledge it hath only a like foundation with that, which also they confess had no particular warrant from the Scripture, save this general rule of doing things in order and decency, which was no special or immediate command for the same, but only a Praecept, That the Church should do what seemed orderly and decent, and in this very particular what seemed so in one age and place, did not in another. 4. There is yet a greater difference between their Discipline and that of the old Paenitents, this being only in a thing not specially determined by Scripture, and theirs is against what the Scripture hath determined, as we conceave we have suffi∣ciently evidenced. They have now distilled the Spirits of this Argument into a Syllogisme, and we must tast the strength thereof. Where is no due order in Sacramental Administrations there Gods Will is not observed; but where all are admitted, there is no Order; Ergo. If we grant the whole, we part with nothing, nor get they any thing; we shall only make them a Magicians Feast, which costs nohing to prepare, nor will any way strengthen them to take; for where are all admitted de facto (infants, madmen, ex∣communicate &c.) or who saith all are to be so de jur? It is only Church-members who have a Dogmatical Faith, which have neither torn the Evidence of their Title, by being cut off, nor bloted it by any such scandal as merits cutting off, whose ad∣mission we plead for The Minor (and their Arguments are all minors) they prove; Where there is mixture, and confusion of good and bad, fit and unfit, there is no Order: but where all are admitted is this mixture. They do not well see what can be denied here; and least we should disparage their eye-sight, we shall deny nothing thereof, but they may put all their gain in their eyes (according to the proverb) but least as bad eyes infect one the other, so some others also be like Tychonius of whom Augustine speaks, Statim quippe amore sententiae suae contra veritatem oculum claufit, and may seem to see this Argument to be unanswerable also, as it looks with an opposite aspect and adverse influence upon our Thesis, and that to admit all in that qualified and re∣strained sense is in consistent also with order and comliness, therefore to undeceive them, advertant, ea quae oculos etiam caecos seriant, intueantur. . Let them borrow the same Proposition, and advance it to a Major; Where there
is mixture and confusion of good & bad, there is no order, and then yoak it with a Minor, where the subject onely is changed, and render it thus, Where all are admitted to Church-membership, to the Word and Prayer, there is such mixture, &c. And then see what a conclusion it wil draw after it, and if they be not now as mute as a Fish, but have any piece of answer found in their mouthes, let them give it for me and them. Let them remind what we have often mentioned out of Augustine, Mixtus reis & obnoxiis nifi per conscientiae maculatam consensionem nullus recte dici potest, and that bonus malis nullo modo misceripotest, so as then first here can be no mixture of good and bad. Thirdly, men may be said to be bad and unfit simply and absolutely, or respective∣ly, according to their sense and construction; if simply and absolutely such as are guilty of grosse palpable ignorance of the very principles of the faith, or of no∣torious crimes, scandals obstinately persisted in, though we should grant them their conclusion, we yeeld nothing of the cause, but if they understand all those to be bad and unfit, who though Church-members and Dogmaticall believers, have not approved by tryall their sound knowledge and sincere holinesse unto them, we shall deny what they have not proved, and we have now had proof that they cannot prove, hat such are bad or unfit, or that where all in this accommodate sense are admitted, there is no order, all such are relatively though not really holy and fit, (and many of those to whom they give admission, are not really worthy.) If they are worthy to partake of the prayers, Quoted before they are not unworthy to communicate of the Scrament in the judgment of Chrysostom And if they are not unworthy, saith Chamier, of the peace of the Church, they are not unworthy of the Sacrament, and if worthy to be reckoned to be of the body of Christ, (hat is members of his Church) thy are not unworthy to feed on him. Besides, although simply the casting out, or non-admission of persons crimi∣nous, may be consonant to order, yet respctively to the procuring or conserving a greater good, or avoiding a more mischievous evill, it may not be orderly. Al∣though we may not doe evill that good may ensue, yet we may and must passe over or omit a lsser good to acquire a greater; And since malus bonum vehementiùs excitat, movet, impellit voluntatem, therefore regularly non potest voluntas inserius bonum eligere quia electio non est nisi ex consultatione rationis, consultatio vero non fit nisi fact â collatione inte multa, ut eligatur quod utilius excteris. & malum quà ma∣lum voluntas velle non potest, at minus bonum cum majore collatum habet mali speciem & rationem. And we see that not onely in rationall creatures, inferior reason which presenteth to the mind of man some circumstances, may incline him to that, which superior reason, that looks into things with all circumstances, diverts him from, and yet there is onely a diversity, no contrariety between the one and other, be∣cause they are not in respect of the same circumstances, and onely a subordination no repugnancy, because the one yeelds to the oher; so even in naturall things we find that particular natures deny themselves in obedience to the universall, and parts renounce their proper interest for conservation of the whole, as we see ayer to descend, and water to have an ascent to avoid a vacuum; so lest the Church should suffer a vacuity by rooting up the wheat, among such a multitude as are pretended to be puld up for tares, August. cont. ep. Parmen. l. 1. c. 11. tom. 6 p. 9. and to prevent Schisme which may arise from the animosity of one part, and the faction and singularities of the other; inferior order in things of lesser concernment, must strike and vail to superior order in things of greater consequence. But apparet facile non esse quicquam graviùs sacrilegio
schismatis, quia praecidendae unitatis nulla est justa necessitas, cum sibi nequicquam spi∣ritualiter nocituros malos ideo tolerant boni, ne spiritualiter sejungantur à bonis, cum disciplinae se veritatem consideratio custodiendae pacis refraenat, aut differt. And whose device it is under pretence of severity of Discipline to introduce and foment divisions, Ibid l. 3. c. 1. St. Augustine tells by occasion of that 2 Cor. 2.11. ut non possi∣deamur à Sathana, &c. saith he, Ipse est qui per imaginem quasi justae severitatis crudelem saevitiam perfundit, nihil aliud appetens venenosissimâ versutiâ suâ, nisi ut corrumpat atque dirumpat vinculum pacis & charitatis, quo conservato inter Christianos vires ejus omnes invalidae fiunt ad nocendum, &c. But that we may not be left, as Cicero saith of himself in the quarrell betwixt Caesar and Pompey, Nosse se quem fugere, ignorare quem sequi debeat, as they have shewed us the wrong way, so now they hold forth the right, and that is their way, That course which doth naturally and directly set up order and holinesse in the Church, is warrantable by this text, but their way doth so tend, Ergo. And the Minor is pro∣ved, Where onely such are admitted, and all such are admitted as can chalenge right to the Sacrament by the word of Christ, there due order and deceny are observed: But so it is with them. Not to bring them under shrift for the Peccadilloes of their Logick, as in the Major of the first Syllogisme, where they say, That which tends to set up order and holinesse, they should have properly said Decency, to have suited it with the conclusion, and in the Major of the second Syllogisme, when they tell us, There due order is observed, if they would have concluded aright, it should have been, That course naturally and directly tends to set up order &c. But because the least prayer for pardon will expiate such veniall sinnes, I an∣swer First, the Minor of the last Syllogisme, though they have too much faith to be∣lieve it will shift for its self, and carry its own passe, yet we think they have some∣what of the Infidel that provide no better for their own, but leave it to go a begging for the question. Secondly, if we concede there is order and decency in their way, the Major of their Syllogisme pretends onely to prove that it is thereby warrantable, but not that it is necessary and obliging to the exclusion of all others, another may be as warrantable as that, because different fashions may be orderly and decent, one as well as another. Thirdly, a course may be orderly and decent in some respects, and so be regular relatively to order and decency, and yet not simply and absolutely good: order may may sometime be in things that are evill, and Physicians tell us, That order in e∣vill pulses are worse then disorder in good, for bonum ex integra causa; the argument may perchance hold negatively not affirmatively. Fourthly it appears not to us, no nor to them, that all those whom they admit are really holy, and it is too apparent that all which are relative holy they admit not; howsoever seeming to themselves so pure, Contra Lit. Petiliani, l. 3. s. 81. they justly fall under that Sarcasme of Augustine to his Donatists, Novum genus arcae vos fecisse gloriamini, aut quae solum triticum habeat, autin qua solum triticum appareat, cui non fit necessarius ventilator sed perscrutator, and yet notwithstanding it is also as true of these, what the same Fa∣ther said of the other, Contra 2. E∣pist. Gauden∣tii, l. 2. c. 27. Habetis res magnas quas inter justitias vestras ventiletis, di∣visionem Christi, rescissionem sacramentorum Christi, desertionem pacis Christi, bellum con∣tra membra Christi, criminationes in conjugem Christi, negationem promissionum. Christi.
Fifthly, But how intollerably and how many wayes doth their way (via devia) check with order and decency? to gather a Church out of a Church, and to admit into the Church those who were added to the Church already; to set up a Church beyond a Church, (like a little England beyond Wales, as was said of part of Pem∣brookshire) and a Church more then a Church, as if were like the fire at Leige, which they say is hotter than fire; that some should be members in their Church, and yet not be members of their Church; or if of their Church, yet not of their Chancel; that they own themselves to be their Pastors, and yet they are not their own particular flock, so destroying the nature of relatives to bring in a confusion of parishes, and their Churches to have extension into and penetration with o∣ther Churches; first pulling down the limits and hedge to make all common, and then to set up a new inclosure, and thereinto draw others flock, and build their Churches by such a confusion, doing by others what they would not have done by others to them; and as the limits of Sparta were said to be as far as their spears could reach, so the bounds of their Churches to be as wide as their tongues can extend, and to make no lesse confusion of Ordinances, while some have one or∣dinary Pastor for the Word, another for the Sacrament, others have a Pastor for the Word, and none for the Sacraments, and they to take the whole Fleece that minister not the whole food, contrary to the equity of the Statute, which propor∣tions Tythes according to the corporeall pasturage; to be admitted to one and ex∣cluded from another Ordinance; not to be cut off from communion, because not excommunicate, and yet to be denyed to communicate in the Sacrament, wherein Church communion mainly consisteth; to enter upon their Churches as it were by conquest, and seise all mens right to the Sacrament (when they have not forfeited it by scandal) and to admit none into possession, that will not hold of them, and at their will, and without any orderly proceeding or censuring men for special scandals obstinately continued in after admonition; to shut out whole Churches because they have not merited their approbation; to admit none but those that shall watch one over another, while some of the Society live twenty, and per∣chance more miles asunder; to forbid those to do their dutie, who they suppose can∣not do it so well as they should, when the duty is essentially good and necessary, and the abuse but accidentall and doubtfull, and the hope of good is founded in the cer∣tain goodnesse of the thing, and the fear of evill raised in an uncertain suspition of the indisposition of the person which is evill, may be corrected by the good he is to partake of: Saepe mihi ignota est humana conscientia, Aug. Contra Lit. Petil. l, 1. c. 7. sed certus sum de Christi misericordia; to dispense also with themselves in a certain duty for an uncertain ha∣zard, and to deny others a good thing for fear it may do evill, upon which account all good things in the world may be suppressed, those and a multitude of other in∣ordinatenesses in their way we have formerly shewed as things came in order in our course, and it will not be decent here to repeat, and to make this Section an Index of the whole Treatise.
SECT. XXVI. Jeremy 15.19. Discussed and vindicated. THe second proofe is from Jeremy 15.19. If thou takest forth the pretious from the vile, &c. but those res secundae, will not be the prosperity of their cause; and if they would separate pretious Arguments from the vise, they might lessen and decrease the number of their proofs as they have done of their Church. We may give them what they conclude out of the premises in this Section, and yet it will be but  (according to the Greek proverb) A giftlesse gift, and be worth them nothing. For after all their vapours what do they lymbeck out of this Text, but this conclusion? More is their duty then a doctrinall separation in applying the word And if this would keep them quiet, they might have this without more crying, either as a duty or as a power. We never have denied them all authority to separate men from the Church by excommunication, as well as from the world by preaching the word, the question is not of the act of Separation, but of the man∣ner and the objects, who are those vile, and how the separation must be made, but to inferre, a separation is warranted by Gods word, therefore their way of Separating is warrantable, is an argument A genere ad specicm affirmativè. Did they put none into the account of vile, but such onely as had given scandall by notorious crimes, and not those also which had not by submission to their discipline, merited their appobation, and become pretious alone at the price of their freedome, and to cease to be vile, must contract a kind of villenage servilly to hold at the will of ano∣ther; did they separate in a judiciall way such particular persons from the Con∣gregations, and not whole Congregations by an arbitrary sentence, or rather not separate themselves from the congregation, we should not interrupt, nor check with them in their way, though it be not drawn out by any line in this Text, and we should grant it were right Discipline, though not rooted naturally in this Scripture, as it might be right Ivy that as Nicrem∣berge tells us, grew out of a Stagges horn, and a right blade of Corn that sprung from a Womans Nose, yet neither was naturalll to that place. What they write therefore of Excommunication, is but as the shedding of inke by the Sepia to escape discovery. It argues the deformity of their way that they dare not shew it in its own face, but with such paint, and under this dilguise; for Excommunication is that which we neither oppose nor they contend for, and for their part there is an observable testimony thereof in that they produce very few of those Scripture proofs which are usually alleaged for, and do pregnantly assert it; but because those are not so aptly conducing to their scope and purpose, they bring forth others little or nothing pertinent to that matter, and from whence it cannot be otherwise deduced then as the Metaphysicks say, that by long circuit any truth may be derived from another, and perchance they withhold those stronger Argu∣ments least they might disparage theirs by comparison, as the Painter that had
grossely pourtraied a Cock, set a Boy by the Tub to stave off all living Cocks that they might not discredit his rude draught. They enumerate sundry kinds or wayes of Separation, but it had been as pro∣per to their undertaking, as sutable to the expectation of reason, to have demon∣strated how all of these were founded in this text, or supported thereby; for when they simply and nakedly affirm them to be so, in magna sermenis latitudine uno bre∣vissimo verbo quod dicitur, proba, in arctissimas coarctaris angustias, as Augustine to Petilian. Though some streames turn another way (as Maldonat expounds the words thus, If O people (to whom he thinks the Lord to speak) thou pick out and make choise of the true Prophets from the salse; and others (whom A Lapide mentions) interpret, If thou sever my precious Word from the vile Doctrines of the Jewes, Prcciosum à vili seperat qui verum & fal∣sum bonum & malum non co∣dem loco habet. Quistorpius annot. in lec. Chrys. in Gen. c. 1. hom 3 tom. 1. p. 4. & in Math. c. 25. h. 27. tom. 2. p. 169. Gregory l. 3. Moral. Willet in Le∣vit. p. 363. Cateri in loc. A verbis Judaeorum minacibus sed levibus, vilibus & infirmis, quia ipsi invalidi sunt, & minas suas explere non poterant, si fortiter & animosè adhaeseris verbo meo, & contempseris Judaeorum minas, as Menochius; or Si verbum meum divinum tanquam pretiosum thesaurum amplexus fucris & custodicris prae vili acervo rationum humanarum ad pusillanimitatem te excitantium, as Tirinus, from whom Sanctius much dissents not, Si discrimen aliquod agnoscas statuasque inter ca quae vilia sunt, quaeque ludus & nugae existimari debent, inter ludentium nimirum consilia & ludrica, & inter me meaque mandata; and this Piscator saith is a fit interpretation, and Diodate assents to it: yet the main current of Interpreters runs toward a Separation of Persons rather then Things; If thou shalt separate or draw out of the vile world the preci∣ous people of God, converting them by the Preaching of the Word; and into this Channel flow the Expositions of Hierom, Chrysostom, Gregory, Theodoret, Hugo, Thomas, Lyranus, VVillet, do Castro, A Lapide, Sa, and Sanctius also; Piscator and the English Annotations think this the more genuine Exposition which Diodate also mentions, viz. If in thy teaching thou put a difference between the godly and the wicked by confirming and comforting the one, and by sharply re∣proving, convincing, and menacing the other: But this still is only a Doctrinal Separation, and though of Persons, yet of them alone in reference to the Word preached, and however some men may happily apply this text in an accommodate and transumptive sense to a Separation from the Sacrament, yet that this should be here properly ment, or ought litterally so to be understood, or especially that it should be so contracted and restrained, to command only a Separation from the Sacrament, and from no other Ordinance, (which though it might better suite with their Model, for otherwise as it might countenance their Separating from one Ordinance, so it should condemn their not separating from other; yet sorts not with their marginal quotations out of Mr. Stock who speaks of excluding from Prayers also, so that they can make no Mercury for themselves out of that Stock:) as for all or any of this they have produced neither reason, nor the authority of any Interpreter (and if they will have their interpretations imitate the Spiders Web, spun only out of their own bowels (nulli debeo) they will also resemble it in this, that they will be soon swept down, and in the mean time serve only to catch flyes) so as well Reason as Authority forbids this sense, for Separation from the Sacra∣ment of persons unfit, is the separating the vile from the precious, not the precious from the vile, and to say they separate themselves from others, is in effect to say they Excommunicate themselves, not others. Separate and Excommunicate be∣ing anciently the same, and passing under one notion of , unless
perhaps they rather separate themselves as the Pharesees did, who indeed had their name from Separation, and were also called by the Greeks  And therefore also whereas telling us elsewhere of a Negative Separation in a Church, not from it (which we have formerly shewed is negatively separated from Reason and the Authority pretended) they speak also here of a Church separating from scandalous Members of her own Body, or separating such as are scandalous from her; the latter we acknowledge may be rightly done, but know it not to be that which they do, but that this and the former expression should be consonant in sense, or the former consonant with sense, viz. That the Body should separate from the Members, the whole from the parts, will be very strange for any sensible man to opine; but indeed it suits not altogether amiss with their way, where they pretend to separate into a new Church from the other Members of the Church, so as Hoc non secundum veram sed secundùm vestram seutentiam vobis rectissime dicitur, as Au∣gustine to Petilian. If the text alleaged allows only a Doctrinal Separation in Preaching and denyes any other, then Excommunication falls. Quae nondum data sunt stulte negata putas? Must the text needs deny what it doth not affirm? If Excommunication be not here asserted, can it no where else be ratified? But surely if Excommunication expect no other support, if it here find none, it hangs by as frail a thread as Dio∣nysius his Sword over Damocles his head. It may be a Plant which the heavenly Fa∣ther hath planted, yet not grow out of this ground, and it disparageth the strength thereof to suppose it hath no better root; and they give it no firmer fastning when they tell us That Church Censures were under the Old Testament, and ask Who knows it not? But because we are so ignorant as not to know it out of Scripture, they might have done consultly if it were so obvious, to have brought forth their evi∣dence, and to have shamed our ignorance; Non semis in conflictu in quo veritas quaeritur, cùm probatio non sequitur, quàm vana & inepta fit narratio? said Augustine to Petilian. We hope we are not forgetful thereof through carnal liberty, but rather think they haue forgotten themselves to use such carnal liberty to censure us, but till they reflect some of their new light upon us, we cannot see any Precept or Ex∣ample of Excommunication in the Old Testament, or of Suspersion in the New, and we think it as likely that in this place Suspension (which is their only way of processe) was Prophesied of, and a Canon made for regulating the administra∣tion of that one Sacrament, when it was not then instituted, nor any other Sacra∣ment expressed or implyed in the context, as that the Society of the Jesuits was (as some dream) foretold in that of 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye were cal∣led into the fellowship of his Son Jesus; 1. q. 32. art. 1. & q 46. art. 2. And we shall commend to the Apologists a good rule of Aquinas, Cùm quis ad probandam fidem Christianam adducit rationes quae non sunt cogentes, cedit in irrisionem infidelium, credunt enim quod hujusmodi ratio∣nibus iunitamur, & propter eas credimus; so as whereas they suppose we limit and straiten the text for our own ends, we think upon such account it had been more sub∣servient to their ends to have forborn to insist upon such non-cogent Arguments, for some might have been facil to believe that men so eager and confident in their way, had better Arguments if they had not produced these, and they might so al∣so have redeemed themselves from that which Augustine calls Haereticorum cavend calliditas, De unit. Ec. l. c. 13. volentium convertere Dei verba à veritate propter quam dicta sunt ad perver∣sitatem in qua ipsi sunt.
But lastly whereas they conclude That if some separation must be made, then exami∣nation and such proper means must be also, these are not only ten times sodden Cole∣worts, but grown so faetid and rancid that the very stirring of them, though but to remove them, may offend, and therefore we shall refer the Reader to what we said to correct them, when they were brought forth fresh. SECT. XXVII. 2 Thess. 3.2. and 6. opened, and redeemed from their misapplications. Whether anciently the Commerce with any, not Excommunicated, were avoided. What Soc ety Excommunication cuts off from. How Suspension might be used, and is abused. AElian tells us of one Mizaldus that was so light, that they were constrained to hang Lead at his heels least he should be blown away by every puffe of wind. As light verily is that Argument which appears in this maniple, drawn from 2 Thess 3.2. which the least breath will easily fanne and winnow, and suddenly dissipate. Baptista Porta relates of Candles made after a certain Composition, which will make things seem to be, that are not, and to appear otherwise than they are: and sure it must be some such strange new light that can make it apparent, that to be delivered from unreasonable and evil men, is to suspend them from the Sacra∣ment, as if deliverance could be no otherwise obtained but by suspension: Can they produce any one Interpreter that ever thought this to be the meaning of the Apostle, or sense of this place? Or is it consonant to the phrase and idiom of Scripture, or indeed of common understanding, that to be delivered from men is to separate them from the Communion? They are so set upon Separation, that it seems they will be divided in their Expositions from all Interpreters. Hath not this somewhat of Bernard his Abelardus? Omnes sie, Ego autem non sic; In Joh. 6.62. or per∣chance as Maldonat confesseth, though he had no Author for his Exposition, yet he embraced it because it checkt most with the sense of the Calvinists; so they with∣out any Authority take up this sense, because it will serve to oppose against their Antagonists. The Synod of learned Interpreters by unreasonable and evil men, Calvin. Aquinas. Diodate. Slater. Estius. A Lapide. &c. think the Apostle meant the contradicting and persecuting Jewes, who were not capable of being driven from the Communion, that were never received thereunto, vagrant or va∣gabond Jewes,  as in the word in the Original, that need not be kept off, being still running about and no where settled, and Dr. Hammond conceives the vil∣lanous Gnosticks to be here understood, as others also do Hereticks in general, as Gagnaeus out of Chrysostom, and that to be delivered from them, was to be rescued out of their malicious hands (cripiamur, as the Syriack, Beza, Piscator; defen∣damur, as Castalio; (it is not ut illi cripiautur,) that his Preaching might be
successful and prosperous, meeting with no such obstacles as might hinder the pro∣gresse thereof, and Calvin supposeth that the Apostle being now on his journey to Jerusalem, and having been Prophetically admonished of the persecutions there attending him, desired their Prayers for his deliverance, &c. This is the only proper collection from the text, and therefore when they would impose upon us such irrational and impertinent Arguments, we had need wish to be delivered from un∣reasonable men, and evil Disputers. But that which they lead up in the next ranck may seem to be gravioris armaturae, the proof taken from the 6, 14, and 15 verses of that Chapter, which they say the best Divines expound of Church Censures. And I will not be refractory to that Exposition then, nor shall it be said of me — Direxit brachia contra Torrentem. Notwithstanding there is a strong and deep current tending the other way, for o∣thers think the 6. verse not pertinent to Church Censures, non ad publicam excom∣municationem pertinet, sed ad consuetudinem privatam, vetat enim ne quid familiarita∣tis babeant, &c. saith Calvin; and Chrysostom hath a singular conceit, that by sub∣duction should be meant a with-drawing of Eleemosynary relief from the lazy and idle, whereupon the subsequent verses reflect some colour: The 14 and 15. verses are by Sa and Menochius interpreted also only of declining Commerce and Conversation with such as are evil; and Grotius (in which sense many concur) supposeth that to note is not immediately to censure, but to depaint him out by his marks in an Epistle to be written to the Apostle; and others interpret both ver∣ses to be only such a command to abstain from all voluntary, open, and pleasing conversation and communication with scandalous persons, as Aretius, A Lapide, Diodate, &c. And this interpretation is not without some roots in the text, from whence it may spring; As 1. It is said, With-draw your selves; but in Church Censures the inno∣cent do not with-draw themselves from the criminous, but drive out these from them. 2. The command is to have no company with him, which in propriety of the phrase and immediately seems to resent a familiar conversation and consortship in civil things, though I am mindful that such refraining of commerce also is the con∣sequent of the greater excommunication. 3. The Apologists themselves do not extend this Censure to a with-drawing of themselves in all Communion from every one that walketh disorderly and obeyeth not, or having no company with him in any case, or noting him universally, for they admit those whom they note for such, not only to a civil society, but to a fel∣lowship in the Word and Prayer, and that this with drawing, not companying, and noting, should be restrained and appropriated only to the Lords Table, hath no colour of ground in these Scriptures; and if this duty of with-drawing and not companying and noting may be complyed within any other possible lawful and con∣venient way, it is not necessary that it should be only at the Sacrament by Suspen∣sion. Erastus himself allows privati convictûs & commercii interdictionem, but where∣as amongst the Reasons rendred for this precept of with-drawing, not companying and noting, one is expressed in the text, That he may be ashamed (and thereupon amend,) and another rendred by interpreters, to avoid contagion: For the first,
Erastus supposeth, that a brand inflicted by some punishment from a civil Magi∣strate, would strike and impresse more shame than any note by Church censure, which profligate persons will little reckon of, and that it were a more prompt and effectual expedient in order to amendment, to impart unto them the means of Grace, rather than to with-hold them. And for the second, A man that will stand in an higher place, and signifie more in their account than Erastus, viz. Aretius in∣terpreting those texts, affirms, That private familarity corrupteth the manners of those that converse together, but the common use of the Sacraments doth not so. — I must eschew his familiarity, whom I ought not to avoid at the Sacrament, for at the Sacra∣ment he will not corrupt me, that may do so at a private supper. And this opinion is fortified with pregnant Reasons which we have elsewhere produced, In the diatribe and which may be farther backt and seconded; for at the Sacrament evil men take truce with all ex∣amples of evil influence, from whence others may contract or suck in contagion; and Saul himself did prophecy whiles he was among the Prophets, and there we converse (externally at least) and have to do with God, not men, and we may chuse and must discreetly make choice of our familiar companions, but it is nei∣ther in our power nor of our duty to make such discrimination of our company at the Sacrament, for we finde only a command that every man should examine him∣self, in order to communicating, but if we were patible of any insection to be at∣tracted, or pollution to be incurred at the Sacrament, we should have been put un∣der a command of examining every man one another; but themselves do not think it an incumbency upon every man to try another, but only that they or the Elders should make this tryal of all: but as when Brasidas was slain, his Mother said, That though he were a good man, yet Sparta had many better; so if these texts were taken off from the support of Church censures, yet other Scriptures would better bear up and confirm them; and also though Hierom, Augustine, Ca∣stalio &c. read, signifie that man by an Epistle (which is the marginal reading of our Bibles) yet, since that indication to be made to the Apostle, was only that he might thereupon inflict the censure, and so would finally and in effect be the same thing with note him in their sense, therefore let it be yielded that these texts are properly to be understood of these censures. And we grant (what they alleage) that Augustine so interprets them, though they mistake the place, as if they had not had inspection into the text, but as he there approves only coertiones licitae and allowed (which we deny theirs to be) so he also permits such censures salva unitatis pace in ecclesia, Cont. Dona∣tist. post. coll. c. 4. not lib. 4. as they cite in words at length and there assures us that as the Church unto the end of the world is to have good and bad, Ita nec mali bonis obesse possunt cùm vel ignorantur, vel propace & tranquilitate ecclesiae tolerantur, si eos prodi aut accusari non oportuerit, aut aliis bonis non potuerit demonstrari. And so also he elsewhere saith, Longè aliter vitiosa curanda & sananda est multitudo, ne fortè dum plebs separetur per scismatis nefas etiam triticum eradicetur; Ibid. c. 20. and in such cases (which is clearly and evidently their case) we (saith he) understand the with∣drawing to be only spiritual, and the Donatists (as do the Apologists) take it for a corporal, the contact forbidden is Cordis non corporis, De verbis dom. in Evang. Mat. serm. 18. tem. 10. p. 18. the separation injoyned is factis non locis, animo non templo, moribus non altaribus, and thus men may be in uno permixti & separati, permixti quippe corporali contactu, separati autem volun∣tatis abscessu. Augustine also expresly in the place they alleagè affirms, That the text respects Excommunication; and such is the judgement of many interpreters, the School,
the Casuists and Modern Divines, who have laid this as one stone in the founda∣tion of excommunication, even the greater; but because this current will not run to their Mill, nor this stream make glad their City, they work out another channel and turn the sense into another course; It cannot (they say) be a casting out by Excommunication; For 1. That is too much at first, but what the text commands to be done, doth it injoyn to be done at first? Or may we not do, what we may not first do? Or have they forgot that Canon of the Apostle which they so lately produced, That things are to be done in order? Or do they not know, that excommunication may not at all be inflicted until first admonition precede, and obstinacy in sin follow after. 2. They say the excommunicate is to be accounted as an Heathen, not as a Brother; but he may be both in sundry respects, as an heathen and yet a brother too, a brother formally not materially, in secret not apparently, in right not in possession; as an heathen because provisionally excluded from the sign, external act and use of com∣munion; but a brother because not absolutely, precisely, simply and finally cut off, but only for a time and upon condition, and secundum quid in some respect; and therefore saith Ames, Cas. cons. l. 4. c. 29. sect. 28. Idcirco ex ordine (excommunicatio) singulari spe resipi∣scentiae adhibetur & aliquam differentiam ponit inter excommunicatos & meros ethni∣cos; As an heathen, he may be forbidden the Communion of Believers as heathens were among the Jewes, the consequent being here put for the antecedent, as Pa∣raeus and Camero observe, In 1 Cor. 5.10 habeto illum eo loco quod ad exteriorem conversationem per∣tinct, quo Judaeihabent ethnicos & publicanos, as Estius, and yet a brother in respect of that tender care we have of his good and salvation; Paraeus in loc. and therefore saith Came∣ro, Eos velit haberi pro exofis sed non haberi exosos; Valemia tells us, that Ecclesia erga ej smodi ethuicum ita solet se gerere, Camero praelect in loc. p. 155. 3 Disput. 7 q. 17. punct. 1. ut cum illi communicet bona quaedam spiritualia communium suffragiorum, neque etiam cam cum illo consuetudinem conversationis exter∣nae habeat; and Camero affirms, Ita subductio est, ut non sit simpliciter subductio, nam hortatur nos Apostolus ut eum moneamus cum quo non vult nos habere commercium, quî autem monere possumus nisi adeamus hominem, & studeamus eum in viam revccare? and therefore out of the proper signification of the words , he concludes only too much familiarity is forbidden and all commerce, save when and where it shall be necessary. And therefore saith Chrysostom, the Apostle having said, In Psal. 100. p. 234. tom. 8. With-draw your selves, have no company, veritus ne hocipsum è fraternitate illum excidat, he sub-joyns, yet hold him not as an enemy, &c And Augustine, Nos qui∣dem fraires propter correptionem aliquam tenemus, nos etiam à fratribus nostris & nen cum iis convivamur ut corrigantur, and then he cites this of 2 Thess. 3.14. they are brethren still whom we may not accompany or be familiar with; In Psal. 54. p. 111. à quo indixit sepa∣rationem, non praecidit dilectionem; and to the like effect other interpreters, though they expound the text to be meant of excommunication. It cannot be meant of leaving his society in civil things, that is too little, and hardly to be done, such may be his relations. Those Censures being acts of justice, and justice consisting in an equality, who can determinately conclude a punishment to be too great or too little, but relatively to the special offence for which it is inflicted? Yet I shall not be hasty to suffrage with them, That Interdiction of all Com∣merce in civil things is a lesser punishment than Suspension from the Lords Table. A very learned man that contents not himself with the Dichotomy of excommu∣nication into the greater and lesser, Estius in loc. adds a middle kind, viz. to be proscribed the
company and commerce of the faithfull, which was lesse than a delivering over to Satan, by precision from the body of the Church, their crimes being not so enor∣mous to merit that, and was greater than the lesser excommunication, which one∣ly removes from the Sacraments, but not from the society of the faithfull; and to this opinion inclines Dr. Sclater, who is therefore here quoted by the Apologists, Fide Independenti, In locum, p. 284, 285. and to no other effect but to make us Independents upon their fidelity, when they produce his authority to prove that this is meant of a withdraw∣ing in sacris, when he demands, Quid boc ad sacra? Epist. 64. tom. 4. p. 61. Whether there were anciently such a kind of censure in the Church, and whether such thus censured, were those with whom they might not eat bread, yet might take the body of Christ with them, (as Augustine affirmeth of some) I shall not dispute, and though Estius tell us that Chrysostome complains this censure was antiquated in his time when the greater excomunication was in use, yet let the learned advise if some such thing be not hin∣ted at in Augustine to have been practised in his time, when he saith, Contra Donat, epist. allat. c. 2. Quos acrius corripimus etiamsi in corum possessione sumus nihil ibi apud eos contingimus, ut sentiant quan. um peccata corum doleamus. And whether it may not be confirmed by the first Councell of Toledo (which if it were held An. Dom. 402. 1 Tolet. Can. 7 (as Marianus affirmeth) was six years before Chryso∣soms death, for Nuclerus tells us that be died An. Dom. 408. or if it were cele∣brated Anno 420. (as Cassiodore and Prosper would have it, was twelve years after his decease) where it was decreed, Ʋt si quorumeúm{que} Clericorum uxores peccaverint (ne fortè licentiam peccandi plus habeant) accipiant mariti corum hanc potestatem, praeter necem, custodiendi ac ligandi in domo suâ ad jejunia salutaria, non mortifera eas cogentes. — cum uxoribus autem ipsis quae peccaverint, nec cibos sumant, nisi forte ad timorem Dei, acta poenitantia revertantur. And that this was not always done by the publick sentence of the Church, but sometimes upon the pious discretion of private Chri∣stians, (as may seem to be insinuated by Augustine, where speaking of the Apo∣stles prohibition, not to ear with a brother tha is called a fornicator, he saith, Contra Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. Quod multi boni Christiani faciunt, de iis de quibus familiarius curam gerunt, ut a quorum confortio se potueriut separare, and afterward Nam in domibus suis quique boni fideles ita disciplinam sorum moderantur & regunt) I say therefore this could not be accompanied alwayes with suspension from the Sacrament, which could not be in∣flicted but by publick judgment of the Church, and which doth not debarre com∣merce in civill things, and I do still professe my selfe to seek of all evidence in an∣tiquity, that any man was kept from the Sacrament that had not been cut off from the body of the Church: for however they might withdraw themselves from men that were evill, yet they did not withdraw the Ordinances, whereby they might grow better, but what ever be the sense of the Senate and people of learnings Common∣wealth in this particular, yet it shewes it to be the judgement of learned Estius, That interdiction of all civill lociety and conversation, is not a lesse punishment then suspension. And whereas they say, That because of mens relations their society can hardly be left in civill things, by the same reason it will be as hard to proceed to the greater ex∣communication, Baldwin. Case Consc. l. 4. c. 10 p. 1131. Davenant de∣terminat. q. 48. whereof the abrenunciation or desertion of civill commerce is a consequent. But they might have understood, that as neither excommunication makes any divorce of those whom God hath conjoyned, but only a separation from some particular Church, nor cancels or looseth from any bond of Divine, Natu∣turall, or Civill Law, nor any Pollticall or Oeconomicall communnion founded
upon either of them, but prohibits onely undue and voluntary commerce, and that also alone by positive Law, and by generall consent allows a mutuall con∣versation in those cases which are sum'd up in that verse mentioned almost in every Schoolman and Canonist (who I wish had had commerce with some bettsr Poets, and not to have given us, as Virgil said of Ennius, their gold in dung) Ʋtile, lex, humile, res ignorata, uccesse; so though a contaglous person may be prudently eschewed by the generality of the faithfull, so as to have no open, voluntary and familiar converse with him, yet this hinders not but that those which have speciall relations may be conversant with him, and generally any one may be so in things profitable and necessary. But are the Apologists as light as the leaves they write upon? — sententia vobis Versa retro, non sic incerto flamine Syrtes Mutantur. Just now they told us, this withdrawing, noting, not companying, was casting out by excommunication, now presently they conclude, it must be excommunication the greater or the lesser: or have they more than an omnipotent power to make both parts of the contradiction true? for omnipotence it self cannot do this, but the grea∣ter indeed it may be (& the Apostle here useth the same word which he hth, 1 Cor. 5.9 viz. ) And if there it be meant of excommunication, it is probable it ought to be so understood here, and if not so in the one, then in neither, but the lesser it cannot mean; for that doth not exclude from the company of the faithful, but onely à sacris, and that is contracted too, and it now deprives onely of the Lords Supper. But if we should bestow this alms upon them in their ne∣cessity, and concede that the lesser excommunication is here intended, yet it will not suit with their intent, nor contribute to their advantage, for this censure is an act of justice, and therefore must proceed in a judiciall way, Proculdubio mens Apo∣stoli est, saith Estius speaking of this Text, and that of 1 Cor. 5.11, Id quod hîe prae∣cipit agendum ordine judiciario, there must be some crime particularly charged, No∣minatim exprimendum, saith Baldwin, and sufficiently proved, and the sentence must come forth ex foro contentioso, as the Casuists speak, a man must plea for him∣self as well as others against him, and particular persons distinctly, not multitudes confusedly and indiscriminately are to be thus censured; and that after admoni∣tion, after due knowledge is taken of them by the Church, and they being adme∣nished remain disobedient still, say the late English Annotations on the text. And then the Apologists will get as much advantage by this as he doth wealth when he awakes that dreams of golden mountains, for their way and this method doe as much differ as a Bristoll stone and a perfect Diamond, and are no more the same, than the suppositions Reliques shewed forth among the Papists, are really the same things which they are held out for, for they suspend not single persons, but a multi∣tude, withdrawing not from a brother, but the brotherhood, so frustrating the end of the Apostle, (that they may be ashamed) while the number and quality of those that are expelled, defeats the shame of expulsion, and not because they have forfeited their right, but because they have not satisfied them in proof thereof; not those that walk disorderly, but all that will not walk according to their new orders; not for not obeying the Divine Word, but for not yeelding obedience to their word as to a law, not in any judicial order, but by an arbitrary sentence per saltum without admonition, proof, or other due processe,
Et tamen ignorant quid distant aera lupinis. And therefore though we think Suspension to be no Cathartick prescribed by the heavenly Physician, which Ames, though a severe assertor of Discipline, Cas Conscient. l. 4 c. 20. Sect. 20. confesseth non ex singulari Christi-instituto (onely he saith in equality, and in the nature of the thing it is to precede excommunication) yet if the Apotheceries by wel tempering the ingredients, had made a good medicine thereof, and rightly proceeded according to the indication, we should not prescribe it as Deleterious, but while these Empi∣ricks onely prove practices, magisterially compound their Receipts as they please, purge-those that are not peccant humors, and by continuall purging, bring the body into a consumption, and yet as Lewis the 11. his impostorous Physician assu∣red him, that he could not live one dy without his Medicines; so they would perswade us, Serrarius ex Nounis, & Plinio in l. 3. Reg. p. 266. that all hopes of Reformation would dye without their appli∣cations, no wonder then if we abhor the Physician, because we love health, and take no physick because we would live, because Insoeli iter aegrotat cui plus est à medico periculi quàm à morbo, and now we find that it is not without reason that Pharmaca among the Greeks, and Mediamonta among the Latines, are sometimes taken for poysons. But the sting of the Bee is in the tail, and perchance their acutenesse may be in the close, which is a Syllogisme, Noting offending brethren, so as to shame them, is holy and necessary; but such is our suspension of mis-living men, Ergo. [Saepe mihi du∣biam traxit sententia mentem;] Is the Major universall? if they intend it so, we shall deny it, for the command of the Apostle will not warrant or bear out all kinds of noting, but onely such as he specially intends; there may be a noting of men by some infliction upon their bodies, estates or liberties, which may impress shame, since every punishment carries a connotation of shame, Judg. 18.7. Acts 15.41. Heb. 12.2, &c. and yet be unjust or unfit; some other may be lawfull also, and yet not be holy and necessary, such is the mulcting of offenders in Helvetia (where excommunication is not Civitate donata, hath no freedome to set up) by losse of some common civill privileges, as Bullinger informs us, and such was the Nota censoria among the Romans, where when a Senator was removed, a Knight had his horse taken off, or a man was thrown out of his tribe among the Aerarii, he was said to be noted, and to this usage Piscator thinks the Apostle here hath refe∣rence or allusion. If they mean it particularly, that some kind of nothing, &c. is holy and necessary, they check with the law of Syllogismes, which ownes no parti∣cular Major in the first Figure, and if some kind be holy and necessary, they are to seek for proof that theirs is of that kind, some other may be so qualified as theirs is not. If they shall dilate the proposition, and extend it to such an accommodate universality, [All such noting as the Apostle prescribes is holyct necessary] yet then the Assumption, that their way is such, will be onely Petitio priucipii, and so still they will shew themselves noted Disputers.
SECT. XXVIII. 1 Cor. 5.11. Ventilated, and the chaff of their interpretation disper∣sed. Whether we may have communion in sacred things with such as we may not have society with in civill. WE need here onely glean and gather some few ears, having formerly cut down the harvest, not onely because elsewhere we have ventilated the ar∣gument drawn from this Text, but because also the answer shaped to the argu∣ment of the former Section, will sult in great part for a reply to this, as if it had been cut out for it. If we should concede, that the eating, 1 Cor. 5.11. were of that kind, which I confesse it tasts and relisheth to be in many learned palats, yet it will not give fat and strength to their cause, but will prove to them like Zeuxes his painted grapes, which will do those high flying birds no good. Many judicious men indeed understand this of casting out of communion, and avoiding the excommunicate, but the Apologists unjustly add a Byas to them, to bring them to their mark, when they restrain and limit it to an ex∣clusion from the Sacraments, which the very Authors they cite (as the Cen∣turists, Aqulnas, &c.) do affirm of an expulsion from Ecclesiasticall com∣munion in generall, and some of them in terms expressly speak of excommu∣nication. But is the power of excommunication the subject matter of our controversie? or are those whom they debarre the Sacrament actually excommunicate, or so much as formally suspended? Can they — vitiis nigrum praefigere Theta? convince them to merit to be inscribed into the black Roll of either of them? the Sword or the Dagger (as Caligula called his mischievous Books?) are they all fornicators, covetous, extortioners, idolaters? will themselves call them so? — atrisque lapillis His damuare reos, And not rather, — niveis absolvere dignos? The onely crime that the most of them can be charged with, is somewhat like that of the Indians, who when as De las Casas tells us, the Spaniards made proclamation, that they should come quickly & do their homage, they came not under subjection, & therefore onely were they fallen upon. Why do they then lurk under the subter∣suge of excommunication, as if that were the thing controverted, which yet is nei∣ther practised by them, nor gainsaid by us? Quid obsecro quia incidisti in defensio∣nem temerariae falsitatis, nebulas manifestis rebus coneris offundere? as Augustin to Cresconius; and from the lawfulnesse of that discipline to seek to legitimate theirs, is as if because the Lord hath created medicines of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them, therefore immethodical and ignorant Empyricks, Causifici & sanicidae may warrant their practice, qui per mortes agunt experimenta. There be also notwithstanding many learned palats that cannot relish such kind of eating here, nor digest this sense, Calvin, Bullinger, Piscator, Musculus, Paraus, Aretius, Hammond, Grotius, a Lapide, Menochius, Tirinus, &c. who rather suppose,
that by a Trope under the notion of not eating, De pudicitia, c. 18. p. 738, 739. Ad uxor. l. 2. c. 3. p. 189. Edit. Rigaltii. is signified the not having fami∣liar conversation, or an intimate friendly society. Tertullian when he writ against the Church, understands it in the sense of the Apologists, non cibum, nedum Euchari∣stiam, but when his writing was in the behalfe of the Church, be interprets it Arcendos esse ab omni communicatione fraternitatis, and clearly that it cannot be un∣derstood of eating at the Lords Table, there are irrefragable reasons. For first, This not eating is evidently consignificant with companying, v. 9. and the beginning of this verse, is onely a redoubling of the prohibition with a kind of amplifying, Epanorthosis; not to company, no not so much as to eat, Muscul. com. in locum. though it might seem no great or long society. Non simpliciter dicit, saith Musculus, cum ejus∣modicibum non esse sumendum, sed nè cibum quidem, innuens omnem vitae consuetudinem illis denegandam esse, ita ut & id quod minus videtur habere periculi illis imputetur, Grot. Annot. in locum. and correspondently Grotius, Cum talibus (id est) adcò vitiosis & Christianorum no∣men usurpantibus ne epulas habere communes, quodminimum est inter amicitiae signa. Secondly, Because there is nothing in the context that may incline and manu∣duce to such an interpretation, nor any such Scripture Ideom or parallel place where eating simply doth signifie partaking of the Lords Supper, nor is there any mention of the Sacrament, nor any thing relating thereunto in that Chapter, for that to keep the feast, not with the old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickednesse, should be meant (as some would have it) of celebrating the Eu∣charist, without mixture of scandalous persons, our faith hath neither such an O∣strich dull appetite to swallow, or strong stomack to digest. The Sacrament is there no more reflected upon, or intimated, than any other act of a Christian lise, which onely can be therein comprehended as particuiars are in generals, but is not especially or directly, much lesse primarily or chiefly respected. The Apostle had much shrunk and let fall very low the influence and efficacie of that reason or mo∣tive, Christ our Passover is sacrificed, if he had onely inferred, therefore partake the Eucharist without the society of persons scandalous. And though the purging out of the old leaven, may consequently include the casting out of the incestuous per∣son (as some Interpreters consent) yet that is not it which was principally or di∣rectly intended; for the purging out of such offenders could not make them a new lump; but rather the cleansing themselves from the old man, and the corrupti∣on thereof, Quicquid in iis superbiae de veteri homine remansisset, saith Augustine, and to the same effect Hierom, or, vitiosos naturae veteris sen corruptae affectus, as Piscator, and whereof their fornication, being pust up, glorying and not mourn∣ing, and relaxation of discipline was a part. That incestuous person, however he might be as leaven, yet why the old leaven? And as it would be a very harsh interpretation if by neither with malice and wickednesse, should be meant, not with society of wicked and malicious men, and consequently to suit the Antithesis, the sweet bread of sincerity and truth, should signifie holy or worthy communicants; so also the feast may not be kept as it ought, though the one were cast out, and the other only admitted, for this alone comprehends not all that is here commanded, other sins might leaven them, though this were reformed; and since the Apostle saith, As ye are unleavened, the purging out of the old leaven cannot be the casting out of the incestuous person, for they had not begun to do that, they were in that respect not in part unleavened, but they were blamed for altogether neglecting thereof: but it suits well, and followes fitly according to our sense, purge out the vitlous affections of your corrupt old nature, as you have begun to mortifie that
old man, as Piscator expounds it. Beside, the leaven had but a little influence if it had leavened them onely by a mixt communion at the Lords Table, and if the scandalous must be purged lest they corrupt others, it must be don universally where∣soever that corruption may be diffusive, which is in other kinds of communion and fellowship more than at the Sacrament. More rationally therefore Martyr (and Bullinger also) teach us, A singulari causa persuadendae excommunicationis orationem transfert ad generalem, quâ omnes hortatur ad innecentiam vitae, & abnegationem vitae prioris, and saith Piscator, Ex hypothesi deducit ad thesin, exspeciali exemplo admonitio∣nem generalem, ut fugiant peccata & studeant pietati: And to the same purpose Calvin, Because Christ our Passover is sacrificed, let us keep the feast, saith the A∣stle, that is, be holy. Quantum superest temporis hujus vitae, saith Martyr, not onely at certain times or occasions, omne tempus, epulationis esset tempus Christianis propter collatorum beneficiorum excellentiam, saith Chrysostom: and Musculus tells us, Habet autem mystica ista festi celebratio primùm ferias ab operibus mortuis, deinde publicum gaudium, as the Jewes abstain from leaven seven dayes, so we must from sins, all our life; Est enim numerus septenarius perfectionis symbolum, donec advenerit dies octavus, qui futurae quietis est, saith Musculus, to whom Hierom gave that hint, which also Alapide, Gagnaeus, Sa, Tirinus follow, and this way indeed runs the current of In∣terpreters, and Paraeus in terms delivers himself, Neque enim de sacra coena hic a∣gitur, sed de cultu morali seu vita Christiana; onely some Papists, to whom our Antagonists, it seems, will lay a foundation to build upon, will needs understand this feast of the Eucharist, that some of them may thereby prove a proper sacrifice of Christ in the Masse, and others the celebration with unleavened bread, & certainly the expositions given by those that fight against us in this subject, must needs scan∣dalize, and confirm the Papists in their opinion of the Scriptures obscurity, see∣ing the senses which they render, are involved under such dark expressions, and so much beyond common apprehensions, and drawn forth with so much hardnesse and difficulty; and doubtless they that can digest this interpretation of a Feast here, are so hungry after Arguments, that like the Prodigall they can think husks a Feast. Thirdly, This is such an eating as the Apostle did not altogether forbid them to participate in with the fornicators of the world, but he could not but have prohibi∣ted them to partake of the Sacrament with those heathens of the world, though they had not been fornicators, &c. Fourthly, it is such an eating as if we should not have society in with the men of the world that are without, we must go out of the world; but we nee not go out of the world though we should have no fellowship with them in eating of the Lords Supper, for no Christian in the world hath such a society in eating, since men of the world do not communicate therein. Fifthly, If to company and to eat are here Identicall, then by an Argument ad hominem, it cannot be eating at the holy Table, for they admit of their company there, (they may be present and look on) but will not permit them to eat. But they think it followes à minore ad majus, If we may not eat common bread then much less sacred with them, and they produce the judgment of Parus, Quanto magis convictu sacro, Triall of grounds ten∣ding to Sepa∣ration, c. 10. p. 200. but we have over-balanced that testimony with the authority of others, and among them of Augustine in the precedent Section, who directly as∣sures us that we may take the body of Christ with those with whom we are for∣bidden to eat bread, and we have there and elswhere laid weighty reasons, beside in that scale to make it preponderate. There is not the same reason, saith Mr. Ball, of
breaking off private familiarity with an offender, and separating from the Lords Ordi∣nances, if he be admitted, whether respect be had to the glory of God, our own safety, the avoyding of offence, or the good of the party fallen. For in coming to Gods Ordi∣nance, we have communion with Christ principally, and with the faithfull, with the wicked we have no communion, save externall and by accident, because they are not, or cannot be cast out. Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam, it is necessary that I goe to the Sacrament, not that I live in any mans company; my communion with Christ and the faithfull is not free and voluntary, but necessary, with the wic∣ked in the ordinances unwilling, suffered and not affected, civill commerce with the wicked is lawfull when necessary, and much more external communion in those things of God which must not be neglected. Every man till he be justly cut off from the commuion, Calvin. advers. Anabapt. hath a title to that wherein Ecclesiasticall communion mainly consists, but no man can put in a claim to my familiar society. I may chuse my friends but not my fellows in that which God commands others as well as me. I am obliged to eschew evill company, lest I become evill by the diffusions of their example and insinuations, or be re∣puted evill by an argument taken from my consorts: For even the Heathen (a Charondas) enacted by Law, That no man should converse with wic∣ked persons, lest they contracted a reproach, as if he were like them, or de∣lighted in them; but no obligation is incumbent on me to separate from them in that which is good, and may help to make them better, and wherein they disco∣ver no exemplary evil, whereby I may be made worse, and where I have a command to examine with what heart I come, but none to make any examination with what affections others approach. Epist. 164. tom. 2 p. 144. Manifestum est (saith Augustine) bòc non affici ho∣minom quòd est malus quisquam cum quo ad altare Christi acceditur, etiamsi non incogni∣tus, si tan um non approbetur & à bona conscientia displicendo separetur. Secondly, this argument carried from forbidding society in civil, to denyal thereof in things sacred, is extensive to all sacred things, or some onely: if to all, then themselves comply not with the duty, who hold communion in all holy things save the one Sacrament: if to some, where are they warranted to distinguish in that which the Precept distinguisheh not? Thirdly, We conceive we have in the precedent Section made some discoveries that the ancient Church had no fellowship with some in civil things, to whom they denyed not society in sacred, and that this was no strange or unusuall thing among the Jewes, hath some footsteps in the parable, where the Publican prayed with the Pharisee in the Temple, yet the Pharisee would not eat with or touch a Publi∣can, and where conversation was forbidden in civill things, yet in order to the good of the parties, or any spirituall end, a commerce was allowed, as no man might come near the Leaper, yet the Priest might have recourse to him, and when the A∣postle 2 Thess. 3.14 willeth them not to have company with him that obeyed not his word, yet verse 5, 15. he adviseth them to admonish him as a brother, which could not be done without a society and converse together in order to that end; yea, L. 2. Observ. 4 p. 241. Observ. 24: & 29, though in the primitive Church excommunicate persons were a∣voyded as polluted, tantâ curâ tantó{que} studio ut ne quidem eos non dico alloqui, sed nec intueri satis tutum & honestm iis videretur saith Albaspinus, yet he shewes us, that they might at some times enter the Church, and stood among or near the Ca∣techumeus, and might there heare some portions of the Word, and expositions thereof, and make their prayers.
4. Though sometimes the same reason perhaps that may be a motive to their ex∣clusion from our familiar company, may become also an inductive to their expul∣sion from Ecclesiastick communion, yet still they are thence duly expelled, though we decline them in the one, we may not divide our selves in the other, simul edimus, simul bibimus quia simul vivimus, saith Augustine, while we live together in the same house of God, we may eate together at the same Table of the Lord, and also many emergent circumstances may sometimes prohibite such a casting out. Au∣gustine tells us, Cont. ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. Cùm mul os comperisset & immunda luxuria & fornicationibus in∣quinatos, ad eosdem Corinthios in 2 Epistola scribons non itidem praecipit ut cum talibus nec cibum sumerent, multi enim erant, saith Augustine; And farther he askes, Quemadmodum Cyprianus & caeteri similes implebant quod praecepit Apostolus, Si qui frater nominatur, &c. Quando cum his avaris & rapacibus — qui sundos infidio∣sis fraudibus raperent, usuris multiplicantibus foenus augerent, panem domini manduca∣bant, & calicom bibebant? And he answers, Antiqui non poterant ab iis corporaliter separari ne similiter eradicarent & triticum, sufficiebat iis à talibus corde sejungi, vi∣tâ moribusque distingui, propter compensationem custodiendae pacis & unitatis, &c? In those cases when as the Physiian ut curet spasmum procurat sebrim, so the Physiti∣ans of souls, to prevent a schisme suffer an offending multitude, or such as they cannot cast out without danger of schisme, to retain communion and to commu∣nicate at the Sacrament. Though others may not without turning schismaticks se∣parate from their fellowship in sacred duties, yet I think not only by the dictate of prudent counsel, but by the force of a just precept, they ought to sever themselves from an unnecessary, pleasing, and intimate familiarity There are many persons, saith Mr. Baxter, Saints everla∣sting rest. part 4. p. 106. De Eccles. p. 316. whom we may not avoid or excommunicate out of the Church, no nor out of our private society, judicially or by way of penalty to them, whom yet we must exclude from our too much familiarity in way of prudence for preser∣vation of our selves. And Camero reminds us of another case also, Saepenumero accidit ut illius consortio privatim abstinendum sit, cujus consortio in communione sacra non erit abstinendum, nempe nos eorum fratris pecatorum aliquando conscii sumus quo∣rum Ec lesia nn est conscia. But they finally deny the hypothesis, that hereby is understood familiar and inti∣mate fellowship, and they will not swallow that opinion, or have company with those of this judgement, and they reason for sacramental eating 1. From the Context, the whole Chapter concerns Church Censures, and begins and ends therewith. Suppose it did so, yet it is not consequent, that the eating forbid∣den can be only eating at the Lords Table, it may rather be a prohibition of con∣vict and commerce, which is a part or appendage of excommunication: And though that also be a Church censure, yet seeing so great a part of the Chapter con∣cerns the delivering over the incestuous person to Satan, if but one thing can be the subject of the Chapter, then sacramental eating is not treated of formally and im∣mediately, as sacramental eating, there being a great disparity between that and tradition to Satan. 2. How usual is it with the Apostle, especially in the Epistles to the Romars and the Hebrews, to enter upon a special subject, and then by a real kind of hyperbaton to transfer his discourse to some other that occasionally emergeth, and afterward to revert to his first matter, so oftentimes chequering his writings, and especially when there is some affinity between the things though not the same? And to a∣bridge and confirm the research, we may find an instance hereof in the 7. verse of
this Chapter, where we have shewed that from a particular occasion, he passeth to a general exhortation, &c. This, saith Paraeus, is illatio generalis ex superiori, hor∣tatio in thefi ad puritatem vitae; And Estius affirms, auforte malum ex vobis ipsis, di∣versum esse ab ea quae paulò ante dixerat, Si quis, &c. cum ejusmodi nec cibum sume∣re: and the abandoning the conversation of some offending brethren was pre∣scribed by the Apostle, and may be by the Church, though they judge it not expe∣dient to cast them out of communion, which makes it cohaerent and apposite e∣nough to follow, what have I to do to judge them that are without? 2. They pretend to prove it by the text, 1. If meant of common bread, they may not then dine or sup at an Ordinary, if an ungodly man be present, and this would be a snare to mens consciences. No more sure than that prohibition, 2 Joh. 10. not to salute an heretick; neither did the ancient Councels intend to twist snares out of their Canons, when they decreed not only, That none should take meat or partake of banquets with Jewes, as did the Councel of Eliberis, Elib. can. 50. Constant. 6. can. 11. Matiscon. can. 15. Ilerdens. can. 14. & 4. Estius in 1 Cor. 11.27. Grotius annot. in Joh. 13.18. Alii in loc. A∣lexand. Dier. Gen. l. 3. c 5. L. Gyrald. Pythago. symb. tom. 2. p. 479. Mr. Balls tryal of grounds ten∣ding to separate c. 20. p. 200. De pastor, c. 15. and the sixth Councel of Constantinople, when reassembled by Justinian, and also that of Matiscon; but also not to eat with any persons, rebaptized, or new dipt, as now the phrase is, as did the Ilerden Councel, and the same Synod, forbidding to take meat with the incestuous, according to the Apostles command, declares they took not eatiag here for not eating common bread, and not sacramental. — But we un∣derstand the words rather Tropically than literally, and eating synechdochically, or symbolically, to signifie a familiar, friendly society, and indearment, the Table being a symbol of friendship (as Bullinger, and Eplius) among the ancients, and a note of intimacy, as Paraeus, Etiam apud genies sacrum amicitiae signum, saith Grotius, and Alexander ab Alexandro instances in very many Nations, whose leagues and covenants were concluded, and ratified by the ceremony of eating to∣gether, and Lilius Gyraldus inteprets that symbol of Pythagoras, break no bread, to intend break no friendship, for (saith he) our of Jamblicus and Diogenes) ad panem veteres amici coibant; and the learned in the Hebrew tell us, that in that language a Covenant is derived from a word that signifieth to cat, which is al∣so a token of love and friendship in phrase of Scripture, adds Mr. Ball; as Psa 41.9. not to partake of, or to be shut from the Table being a sign of familiarity broken off, and therefore those esserae hospitales which were the pledges of friendship, gave those that had them a right to comestion and entertainment, and fellows or associates had their name among the Latins from eating together, Latina lingua sic dicti so∣dales, quasi simul edales, quia simul edunt, saith Augustine; but it they were re∣trenched from sitting at an Ordinary with wicked men, yet they need not borrow No∣vatus (they might have said Acesius the Novatian) his Ladder to go to heaven a∣lone, for the way to heaven doth not lye by an Ordinary, but the Lords Table is in the way, and there indeed they would take a ladder to go to heaven alone, or else turn that table into a ladder whereby to mount up to some other height above o∣thers. 3. He writes to the Church, and therefore intends Church eating, (Quàm arguto faciunt verba diserta sono?) Not with-drawing off civil sociey by particular persons in a private way; Videte quàm multa dicunt non habendo quod dicant. It seems then the A∣postle writing this Epistle to the Church, nothing thereof concerned any particular persons distributively but the whole Church collectively, or else vir∣tually, viz. the Elders, and in the 7. and 8. verses of this very Chapter, when
he dehorteth them from malice and wickedness, and perswades them to sincerity and truth, this duty hath no reference to, or concernment with particular persons, by them to be done privately, but only belongeth to the Church in publick. 4 The nature of the recited sins shewes he intends scandals calling for Discipline, and comming under like censure with incest. Whether covetousness not pregnant with, or waited on by other sins for explering the desires thereof, may merit either excom∣munication, the greater or the lesser I shal not now discuss with any Arguments ad rem, but I shall propound one ad hominem, that their Prolocutor hath publickly de∣termined that worldliness (which is consignificant with covetousness) is one of the spots of Gods children, and therefore cannot of it self deserve those censures. But, 2. Though all those crimes might render obnoxious to such censure meritoriously, yet the persons might not be effectively censured, the Church might have no pub∣lick and notorious knowledge thereof; yet many might have private notice, and if the Church had such evidence, yet some obstacles from the number of the offen∣ders, or the danger of schisme and the like, might send a prohibition to proceed∣ings, and yet in such cases the avoiding of voluntary familiar commerce with such may be necessary or expedient. And whatever censure the offences might merit, it doth not follow, that in this place the Apostle must needs lay down his command for censuring the offenders, neither is it likely that incest (which the Ecclesiastical Canons have censured with excommunication without hope of absolution) was only sentenced by the Apostle unto suspension from the Lords Table. 5. He had spoken of keeping company before; This last Argument is like the top∣stone which children set on the Castles they build too high, whose weight casts down all the pile, and it self falls with them; for if the Apostle spoke of keeping company before, then the whole chapter doth not concern Church censures; This defeats the 1. Reason drawn from the context: 2 He then also writes not only of what is to be done by the Church, but by particular persons in a private way; this nulifies the second reason extracted from the text. And yet as this Sampson pulls down the house upon the Philistims above, so it self fals under the ruines al∣so, and this Argument cannot stand: For, 1. If the Apostle had formerly spoken of keeping company, may he not again second and reenforce that exhortation? 2. Doth he not in this very chapter prescribe the taking away from among them the incestuous person, vers 2. and 4. (and in their judgement also, verse 7) and yet ingeminates that command, vers. 13. put away from you that wicked person? and might he not vary his phrase and deliver the same matter under sundry forms, or explane what kind of company he meant; even contubernium aut interiorem con∣victum (as Bullinger) whereof eating together was a symbol, as was shewed be∣fore?
SECT. XXIX. Matth. 7.26. The sense thereof enucleated and shewed not to be subservient to their purpose but odiously abused. Whether Mi∣nisters may act in Censures alone, and upon their own know∣ledge. VVE have elswhere taken off the sting of the Argument raised upon Matth. 7.6. so as though it hisse here, it cannot hurt, and in truth they cast us no pearles here, they dive not deep enough to fetch them, but onely gather us a few Cockle-shels, which not onely bordure but fill up the current of their Dis∣course throughout, which we cannot like the filly Indians take for fine things: such is that of their keeping pure the Ordinance and not prostituting it, and of excla∣ding the scandalous, &c. Which fallacies of petitio princi ii, fallacia consequentis, & ignorantia clenchi, they cannot part with, nor live asunder from, but are bewitcht to dote upon, as much as Charles the Great was upon his old Hagge. We looked they should have demonstrated that the holy things and pearles here spoken of, were meant of the Lords Supper, and that all those whom they admit not to partake thereof, are dogges and swine, but here — vox facibus haesit, we expected Rachel, and behold it is Leah, according to the Hebrew Pro∣verb. The Divines of our part, disputing against the Papists, argue that the eating of the flesh of Christ, John 6. cannot be understood of Sacramentall eating, because the Sacrament was not then instituted, and by congruity of like reason, the holy things and pearles here mentioned, cannot be meant of the Sacrament, because it was not yet ordained, nor were the Disciples likely to be cautioned to whom they should administer that, which was not yet in actuall being (non entis nulla sunt ac∣cidentia) neither had they ye been disciplined what was the nature or end of the ad∣ministration. There is a Diapason among Interpreters striking harmoniously together in one sound, that the doctrine of the Gospel is properly signified by these holy things and pearles, the mysteries of the holy or Christian saith or truth; so Dionysius, Chry∣sostome, Euthymius, Eucherius of Lyons, the Author of the imperfect work on Matthew, De adult. con∣jun. c. 27. Estius in 4. Sentent. d. 9. sect. 4. p. 123. Aug. de serm. Dom in monte, l. 2. tem. 4. p. 259, all cited by Barradius, so Aquinas and Estius also, so Hierom expounds it of the pearles of the Gospel, and Paraus of the treasures of heavenly wisdome; and be∣cause the Sacraments are also among such mysteries, and usually so denominated, therefore Augustine contracts and limits it to the doctrine of the Gospel, Euthy∣mius specifies them to be pretiosa dogmatae, Estius and Janscuius define it to be onely the doctrine of the Gospel (exclusively to the Sacraments.) The holy and pretious truth (saith Diodate) the excellent unsearchable riches of Christ opened in the Gospel — and those spoken (as the English Annotations.) And Augustines reason of the Me∣taphor
manifests it, that he onely understood the word by these mysteries, Marga∣ritae, saith he, quia in abdito lateut tanquam de profundo eruuntur, & allegoriarum in∣tegumentis quasi apertis conchis inveniuntur. Annot. in lo∣cum. The learned Grotius informs us, Quod autemin universum de omnibus sapientiae praeceptis dici solebat apud Hebraos, id Christus suae sapientiae praeceptis praesertim interioribus applicavit, docens qua cautione ea aliis sine impertienda. And since Interpreters explain the sum of the command to be thus, hoc loco vult ne prodige effun∣dantur etiam infidelibus ab∣strusissima my∣steria sed pede∣tentim instil∣lentur, ne my∣steriorum sub∣limitate de∣terreantur, Quistorp. an∣not. in locum. Doctrinam divinam non evulgantes, as Augustine; de mysteriis sidei non propalandis and ne pandite, ut occultentur, as Barradius out of the Fathers: if the Sacraments be the holy things and pearls intended here, then neither they comply with the command onely by ex∣cluding men from partaking, for by admittting them to see and hear at the admini∣stration, they publish and reveale the mysteries, which clasheth with non evulgantes, non propalandis, ne pandite. That this place appertains not to the administration of the Sacrament, but onely (or chiefly at least) to doctrine, and the dispensation of the word of God, Janse∣nius saith is apparent by that which precedes, Quoniam mox superius docuit qui non de∣bent alios judicare, corripere docere, hîc etiam docet, qui non debent orripi & doceri, and also by what follows, for there is subjoyned, ne fortè conversi disrumpant vos, but saith he, non est periculum, ne si petentibus peccatoribus dentur sacramenta, converst disrumpant largitorem, sed contra potius periculum ne disrumpant ne∣gantem. It cannot be denied nevertheless that many learned men have referred this to the administration of the Sacrament in an accommodate sense, but none that I know have denied that properly and principally it is meant of the dispensing of the Word. Chrysostome who in other places takes in the Sacrament, yet in his Ho∣mily upon the Text fixeth onely on the holy Dctrine. But because it may be objected that the Genus includes all the Species, and quod particulariter dictum est universaliter applicandum, and therefore if holy things are to be kept so sacred, therefore also the holy Sacraments; I shall say howsoever, that since as the Eccho is more faint and remisse alwayes than the first voyce, so while that which is pro∣perly and primarily intended in this text, may be dispensed to the people without violating the command, why must that which is not directly but secondarily and by consequence onely reducible thereunto, be with-held from them by force of this very precept? May they do that which is immediatly forbidden & not that which mediatly onely is prohibited? If holy things and pearls formally as pearls and holy things, are not to be given to Dogges or cast before Swine, then since quod con∣venit per se convenit omni, See before, Sect. 15. no holy things, no pearls are so to be prostituted, there∣fore either the word is no holy thing, no pearle, or some pearls, some holy things may be so prophaned. Are their people Dogges and Swine? Why are they ad∣mitted to the word? Are they not? Why are they excluded from the Sacrament? If they are not such Dogges and Swine, but that the word here properly and pri∣marily forbidden to be dealt to Dogges and Swine, may be dispensed to them, they are not then such Dogges and Swine, but that the Sacrament, which comes in se∣condarily onely, and by participation of the like holy and pretious nature with the word, may be distributed to them. Nay, why are any admitted to the other Sa∣crament of Baptisme untill tryall whether they will prove Dogges and Swine, De fide & ope∣rib. c 6. tom. 4. p. 13. since saith Augustine, utrum ad percipiendum baptismum sic admittendi sunt homines ut nulla ibi vigilet diligentiane sanctum canibus detur. The Word is as holy and pretious as
the Sacraments, and one Sacrament as the other; and what Grotius notes upon the words (sicut horum solorum, scil. canum & porcorum, causâ non vult proponi sacram do∣ctrinam, ita nec illorum causâ eam vult reticeri) may be in some sort applicable to the Sacrament: though it were not to be administred to such alone, so neither to be in∣termitted or with-held, because there may be such mixt in the Congrega∣tion. But though quid ad hoc dicis nisi non est sanctum, non est mundum nisi quod voluero? August. as Augustine tells Cresconius, yet they have somewhat to say (though multa dicendo nil dicunt, aut nil dicendo potiùs multa dicunt) viz. That the reason is not the same, because the word is necessary to conversion, to make Swine become Sheep, and Dogges Lambes. But sepositing without farther reflection, that we have not onely elswhere retrencht their retreat thereto, but also demolisht this fortresse by demonstrating the Sacra∣ment to be a contrary ordinance; since they pretend not to give Oracles, and we profess not to receive their dictates, they should have shewed forth some warrant, that such holy things and pearls as may convert, may be exhibited to Doggs and Swine, but such as conduce not to conversion, may not be so. The text prohibits all holy things, and pearls to be made so obnoxious, and doth not limit this cautell to any one or more kindes, nor affords any countenance to this distin∣ction. If this be the formall reason of the giving thereof, viz. the capacity and power to convert, then all such holy things and pearls as are effectuall to conversion, may be dispensed to all, though Dogges and Swine, and onely such and no other may be so dispensed. But they grant here, That some are so dogged and swinish, as this text will warrant their silence towards them, therefore all holy things and pearls, though subservient to conversion, are not to be distributed to all: and they admit to a communion in prayer those who are Dogges and Swine in order to the Sacrament, and those to Baptisme who may prove Dogges and Swine, and are the litter of such, but neither prayer nor baptisme in their judgments are instruments of conversion: therefore also some holy and pretious things which conduce not to conversion, are yet communicated to all. 2. Thirdly, if for this reason, because they are operative toward conversion, some holy things and pearls may be imparted to Dogges and Swine, perchance some o∣ther reasons may occurre, & there may besome other rational motives, why some o∣ther holy things may be also so dispensed, as if they do not perfectly turn men to God, yet they may somwhat reclaime and make them lesse evill, and if they exhaust or ex∣siccate not the fountain of sin, yet they may stop or lessen the current, and if they serve not to introduce the form, may yet nevertheless conduce to beget some sub∣ordinate and previous dispositions (as adjumentall things do) unto regeneration. God doth something also for for greater conviction also as well as conversion, and Chrysostome tells us, August. Cited by A∣quinas in Ca∣ten. aur. in locum. Frequenter etiam benedictionem damus peccatorum more viventi∣bus Christianis, non quòd merentur accipere, sed nèfortè plenius scandalizati dispereant, and as sometimes the word is preached even to those who are indeed Dogges and Swine, non propter eos sed propter alios in quibus fructus aliquis meritò speratur (as Estius, or as Augustine, Chrysostome and Jansenius, propter electorum & bonorum utilitatem, aut propter Dei gloriam, and then also they say, non canibus & povcis sancta dantur sed potius Deo & electis ejus; so by proportion of clearer reason, Estius in 4 d. 9. sect. 4. p. 123 may the Sacra∣ment be promiscuously administred to those intelligent persons who by a common faith are become members of the visible Church, though there be no evidence of
their special sound faith, which hath incorporated them into the visible Church; and if that of Augustine will hold out weight at the standard of truth, Nos vero ad piam doctrinam pertinere arbitramur ex utrís{que} testimoniis tutam sententiam moderari, De fide & operib. tom. 4. p. 13. ut & canes in Ecclesia propter pacem Ecclesiae toleremus, & canibus sanctum, ubi pax Ecclesiae tuta est, non detur, much more for peace and unity, (which cannot but be infringed or disturbed by the excluding from the communion near a hundred of their congregation to one whom they admit) should all those have their way free and clear to the Lords Table, who yet are not onely free and clear from blasphe∣ming and persecuting the truth (which are the proper passions of those Dogges and Swine that are here described) but from being convicted of any such notorious crimes whereby the Church might be scandalized. For secondly, though we should surrender what they cannot win by force, That the Sacrament not onely falls within the notion of those holy things and pearls, but was properly, and primarily understood thereby; yet it is farther questionable who those Dogges and Swine are, and what constitutes and denominates them such. The main current of Interpreters runs strongly this way, and not to be with∣stood, that hereby are intended such as blaspheme the truth, which is set forth by trampling it under feet; and those that persecute it signified by renting them that propound it. Chamier. tom. 1 l. 10. c. 8. caetcri in lo∣cum p. 187. Bullinger ad∣vers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9 p. 229. Let Paraeus be as Plato in hearing whom you hear all the rest; he speaketh (saith he) of the professed obstinate enemies of the Gospel, who being con∣vinced of the truth therof, yet cease not either to blaspheme or violently persecute the same; and the same way run Augustine, Chamier, Bullinger, Perkins, Diodate Grotius, the English Annotations, Jansenius, Maldonate, Barradius & Estius, who adds in his Annotations, Huic praecepto obtemperavit Paulus Apostolus quando Judaeos videns insua perfidia obstinatos reliquit eos & transivit ad genies. Art. 13. Such obstinate professed and impure enemies of the Gospel, and the Ministers thereof, persecuting them for their message, (as the late English Annotations de∣cipher them)) we cannot but consent (Idem omnes simul ardor babet) should be kept not onely from the the Sacrament, but out of the Church (at least if they would yet be willing to enter) and we suppose it imports them in duty to have no Doggs or Swine among their Flock, as well as it concerns them to have none at the Lords Table, and that therefore and if it were possible there could be any such within it which Vixisset cauis immundus, vel amica luto sus, that they ought to be cast out of the Church, which like the aire of Arakia is too sweet to nourish any such swine, and which can give no admission to Dogges, which were not suffered to enter heathen Temples, as Minerva's at Athens, and Diana's at Delos, nor to be toucht by the Flamen Dialis at Rome. But as Junius applies the text to those that voluntariè certáque malitiâ sunt inimici veritatis, Eirenic. part. 1. p. 727. tom. 1 so he gives us two cautions, Nè tomere judicium feramus de ullo homine, quòd certâ maltiâ & deliberatâ — oppugnet Deum, & verit tem & Ecclesiam ejus; alera est, si judieandum est, ne ex frustu uno aut altero putemus arbores illas malas ce∣gnoscere, sed potius ex fructibus plurimis & gravissimi diseamus cognoscere quod satis est ad cautionem nostram, non autem ad istorum condemnationem. But then next, 1. Are those whom they admit not to the Sacrament, to be stigmatized with those odious attributes, as being culpable of those desperate af∣fections and actions? Do they reproachfully despise and revile the Sacrament, or not rather reverently prize it, and humbly desire it as pretious, and the worst of
them hath some devotion toward it, & qui possunt aliquam devotionem hujus sacra∣menti habere, non est iis denegandum, in the judgment of Aquinas? Part 3. q. 80. art. 9. Is there any dan∣ger of their doing mischief to those that should exhibit it, would they not rather thank and honour them for it? and is it not the rise of the quarrel because they cannot have it, and the rent is made for not distributing thereof, and they that should give, they turn away and rent those that would gladly receave? we may ther∣fore assume, what Whitaker saith to the Papists, who allege this text to justifie their with-drawing the Scriptures from the people, Controver. 1. q. 2. c. 17. p. 308. as the Apologists do for with∣holding the Sacrament, Certè populus parum illis se debere putet, de quo tam abjectè & parum honorificè sentiunt, ut eos canum & porcorum loco habeant. Secondly, is not this as odious a dishonour to the Churches of God, as a dis∣paragement to particular persons, that they should be made as kennels or hogsties by having about ninety nine doggs or swine to one holy Christian? How great a blasphemie is this saith the great Chamier to the Papists, ubi supra. (upon the same occasion with Whitaker,) that whom God calls his sons, any one should name doggs and swine? to what end therefore do we believe the holy Catholick Church, if the far greatest part thereof be doggs and swine? We confess notwithstanding among Christians, not a few there are which lead a life too much depraved, but we deny any of them that are to be reckoned of the Church, to be in the number of those that are here signified by doggs and swine, although they live wickedly. So he. This will be indeed musick in Gath, and a pleasant song in Askelon, and if the Apologists and their brethren, will not with some animals cover their excrements, the Papists will find it out by the strong scent, and cast it back in the face of our Church, and of the dung that such black birds do drop, they will make birdlime to catch and ensnare other birds. But they plead, that sin and contempt of Gods waies make them deggs, the Scrip∣ture interpreting this expression to signifie men of a prophane life; 2 Pet. 2.18, 19 20, 22. Prov 6.1. The very inspection into the text may check their asserti∣on, for in that of Proverbs it is said, that as a dogg returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth to his folly, but may a man be denominated from every thing whereunto he may in any respect be assimilated? or can a likeness secundum quid warrant an appellation simpliciter? If so, then as the Chymists fancy, that there is nothing in the great world, which is not represented in the little, and there is really nothing within the clasp of the universe, but man doth in some regard resemble it, then as Adam, once gave names to the creatures, so now they might denominate man, and man is all things, and you may call him what you will. That of Peter is but a rehearsal of that Proverb, with an enlargement concern∣ing the sow, and if I should concede that here wicked men were called Doggs and Swine, yet let them recognize what those wicked men were, viz. Simon Magus and his Gnosticks, the dreggs and fink of mankind, Christians onely in name, So Estius, Ju∣stinian, Ham∣mond, &c. and baptized Pagans, who had the name of Borborites, from dung and durt saith Au∣gustine, they were so filthy and contaminate with impurities (beyond all that ever the Sun discovered or darkness hid) which are like a dead carcass fitter to be buried than stirred; such they may without offence to us call Doggs and Swine, and spare not, but have they no warrant to give any such appellations to those that appertain to the Church of God, the Doggs are without. But did they onely drive from men to have their dwelling with beasts, those that by vice (the worst Circe) are transformed into beasts, we should not contest against it; but when by such false lights as Pliny and Porta speak of, they shew forth men as beasts and monsters which
are not such, (like the old persecutors lapping Christians in beasts skins to be the sooner devoured,) this we cannot tolerate, let them be justly convicted of flagiti∣ous crimes and be duly sentenced unto punishment, and then — mens omnibus una sequendi. But they deny it as a shift, that because Government is unsettled, none may be ta∣ken or looked on as Doggs or Swine, because in such unsettlemeut they are not such actu¦vel potentia. Omnis homo ex se aestimat alterum, saith Chrysostome. Perchance they are not without reason to suspect, that those which have long conversed in their writings may contract somewhat of their drosse, whose whole discourse is a shift∣ing off the main matter in difference. But if they are not Doggs and Swine in actu, being not censured in any way of settled discipline, they may yet be such in potentia, because discipline may be settled, and upon settlement they may be cen∣sured, and that is in potentia passiva, which never may be reduced into act. St. Augustine was no shifter, Epist. 164. tom. 2. p. 144. Contra Dona∣tist. post collat. c. 4. and yet he affirmed cognitos mlos bonis non obesse in Ec∣clesia, si eos à communione prohibendi aut potestas desit, aut ratio conservandae pacis impediat, and in another place, Si eos prodi aut accusari non oportuerit, aut aliis bo∣nis non potuerit demonstrari; but howsoever, on whom will they shift the non-settle∣ment of discipline? why might it not have been established aswel in their proper Congregations, as in the Metropolitan Church of Pyworthie, by the same men, and the like undertakings? was the air there such, as at Athens, that mens wits were not elsewhere so acute and elevated? or were their genii there more sub∣lime and lively, as Anthonies was at distance from Augustus? but whatever the mystery be, all their sidling cannot make that smal town a great city. But secondly, why have not those few that have submissively tendered themselves with desire of communion with them at Pyworthy, and yet were arbitrarily reje∣cted, been duly proceeded against there, where their discipline is pretendly settled, and the rest of their Congregations from whom they have separated, been called thither to purge and vindicate themselves (if they could) from such exitious crimes as they could be charged with, who though they had not appeared, yet by such a countenance of regular proceeding, the world might not have been altogether unsatisfied, but that at lest they might lie under suspition of such bestialityes and brutish acts, as that holy things might justly be denied them? They believe that Ministers of the Gospel may act by vertue of their Commission from Christ, upon their own knowledge or conscience as to censuring. But as we shall ever deny, so they have formerly disclaimed that any such commission was ever passed by the Keeper of the seales of heaven, (the holy Ghost that made them Overseers of the Church of God) In the eighth Section they renounce the censuring by the Minister alone, and in the fifteenth, they waive that power which they (falsely) suppose the Schools allow them to censure upon their proper judgment and know∣ledge, (notwithstanding we know this is that power which they pretend to of right, and practice in fact) but though at first they were like Pompey, occultior non melior; yet now at last they fear not to put off the mask under which they first walked, so confident they are become it seems in their command of Legions (of arguments) and like the humble Monke and proud Abbot, they look higher when they think they have found the keyes, and now — Paulò majora canamus, and like the Turkes in the Divano, presuming to carry on things by strong hand, openly debate of Arcana imperii: and as this renders our fears not irrational, that
as they are cherisht into more wramth, so like the serpent in the fable, they will put forth their sting, which pincht with cold they could not make use of; so it shews to what use and of what influence their Elders are, onely to asmuch as false windowes and chimnyes serve in edifices, alone for ornament and uniformity, and their Elders serve but to make such things as childrens gunns, to shoot the pellets which they put into them, and give a pop sometimes with that breath which they blow into them, and that their Elders are but such wood as Martial's Priapus was, which if he answered not expectation, Alioqi & ipse lignum es, for they can do all alone. Secondly, If the Minister alone should onely put back such persons whose crimes were notorious and scandalous to the whole Church by evidence of fact, confessi∣on or sentence in any civil judicatory (where is no ecclesiastick) ubi crimina ità manifestantur ut nullâ possunt probabiliratione desendi, as Augustine speaks; Cont. lit. Pe∣til. l. 3. c. 37. and quando crimen notum est omnibus, & omnibus execrabile apparet, (as other times he expresseth it) such a man being jure, in fieri, actu signato & demeritoriè excom∣municate, as this might have been warranted both by the Canon and Rubrick in this Church, as it lately stood established, (and was then indeed more warrantable, Can. 26. be∣cause if any one sensed himself injured there lay an appeale to the Bishop to whom the Minister was responsable, but now I know no such present way of redress) yet h wv others might fight against this course, and its day might come to die, or it might descend to battle and perish, yet my hand shall not be stretcht out against it, but when they inflict a publick censure upon private knowledge, and for a crime not notorious, nay, not for special crimes, but for non-manifestation of their worthiness, and of that worthiness they are the onely and arbitrary Judges, and so devest men of their right not onely to a good name, (a secundary patrimo∣ny, a depositum in other mens minds, whereunto every man hath a natural right till he forfeit it by offences manifestly proved) but also to the Sacraments, which the School told us before every man hath a right to demand, until he be by judici∣al order or evidence of his delicts deprived thereof; this is not onely repugnant to the common good and convenient Government of the Church and Common∣wealth, requiring that common good thing and publick benefits, which are to be distributed according to the merit of particular persons, should not be dispensed ac∣cording to the private but publick and notorious knowledge of the administer; but also contrary to a principle of nature, which if it should not be observed would fill the world with scandals, troubles and injuries, and leave an inordinate, arbi∣trary and unlimited power in the Minister, subservient to exalt himself and trample upon others, as hath been fully demonstrated in the fifteenth Section, which I spare farther to recapitulate, because semper abundamia contumeliosa in semetipsa, and especially Si bis idem facimus, nimium tibi Stella videtur. But though no Dogs were admitted into Diana's Temple, yet her image had al∣wayes a Dog chained by her, and so those whom they mark for Dogs may per∣chance be admitted, most of them, if they would be bound in their chains; but now they are Dogs because they bark at those that break the house; only at shearing∣times they are not Dogs, unlesse perhaps such Dogs as are in Angola, where they bear wool, and so when they shear those Hogs there is wool with this great cry; Yet though they put the Dog on the people, it seems they keep the teeth to them∣selves,
the dentem caninam, and such odious calumnies have nothing of the sweet influence of the Pleiades, but too much of the rage and malignity of the Dog∣star. SECT. XXX. 1 Cor. 11.7. and sequent discussed. Of eating and drinking unwor∣thily. Whether there be a necessity of examining all because some cannot examine themselves. Whether any irregenerate man can examine himself. Whether this tend not to introduce auricular confession. Jude 3. opened. THis Argument is dead born, having been elsewhere strangled and suffocated before it was brought forth here, and though they produce it now as a sa∣crifice to that Altar which they have erected against an Altar, yet in the diffection and unbowelling thereof, we have discerned no auspicious signs of any victory for them, but the contrary. We shall not here repeat what hath been formerly declared; to do the same things so often, Seneca thinks were enough to make life wearisome, and repetiti∣ons are more likely to make a Book disrellish, like meat twice sodden, for — sordet quicquid spectavimus olim; only Rara juvant, primis fit major gratia pomis. Neither shall we enlarge or adde unto what hath been already delivered, least — obstat nostris sua turba libellis, Lectoromque frequens lssat, & implet opus; Yet as Amasa though wallowing in blood, as long as he lay in the way, caused those to stand still that came neer him; so though (we think) we have mortally wounded the Argument, yet if it lie here unremoved, it may put some to a stand, therefore we shall only digitum ad fontes intendere, and deal like the Merchants a∣bout Smyrna who stive and presse together their Cotten so close as to enforce a Sack as big as a Wool-pack into a room at first too narrow for an arm. Sands. In that of 1 Cor. 11.27. the end of the Chapter, there is first a fiery danger repre∣sented and detected in unworthy receiving. 1. There is no less peril in unworthy partaking other Ordinances; an equal hazard challengeth an equal cautel, why then should not the wayes of preventing thereof at other Ordinances be as sub∣servient
to remedy it at this of the Sacrament, yea, this one Sacrament? when as one tells us sicut qui manducat & bibit sanguinem domini indigne, judicium sibi man∣ducat & bibit, sic qui accipit indigne baptismum, judicium accipit non salutem. Why then is not the Baptisme of Infants suspended until tryal of their Graces, and why do they not pursue their principles as far as those have carried them, from whom they borrowed them, viz. the Anabaptists? but they practise no such previous ex∣amination before admission to other Ordinances, why do they engage their pru∣dence only in the one, not the other? why should the danger be common and the defensative be special and appropriate? 2. He that eates us worthily, eates damnation to himself, sibi non aliis, as Au∣gustine sets the Emphsis. 3. That unworthinesse in not rightly esteeming of, and duly preparing for the the Sacrament, would damne him if he eat not, and not eating would aggravate the damnation, because he neglects all his duty, the matter to be done, as well as the form and manner of doing; he that doth the one, doth part of his duty, and shall prevent part of the punishment; a frigid accession (saith Chrysostome) is dangerous, but not to accede is death, and duties are not to be dispenst with, be∣cause they cannot be don as they ought, and as in doubtful things the safer part is to be chosen, so it is safer to do the duty where good may ensue, than to omit it upon fear least evil may happen. 4. The unworthinesse which the Apostle thus meaneth, seems not to be indigni∣tas simpliciter sed indecenti specialis, an indignity opposed to worthy receiving by way of contrariety, not of negation; not a personal unworthiness in the recei∣vers, but an actual unworthiness in receiving, not only through lack of reverence and devotion, but a positive contempt of the Sacrament, making no difference be∣tween eating at the holy Table and common refections, and coming thither to drink the blood of Christ in their drunkennesse, indigne Domino edit vel bibit, qui in hoc actu curat quae sua sunt, non quae Domini, saith learned Grotius; and therefore Gag∣naeus out of Theodorus and Theodoret, interprets that of the Apostle, Let a man examine himself, unusquisque mentem suam scrutetur, qualem nimirum de his mysteriis opinionem habeat, ita participet & communicet, quod enim ait seipsum, positum est pro mentem & sententiam, vult enim nos recte sentire de hujusmodi mysteriis, ne carnale aliquid tantùm suspicemur inesse. Such an unworthiness, I cannot believe that any of our congregations are guilty of; where none approach the Table without an impression of some reverence, and come not thither in the act of other sins, how∣soever they do in the habite, and they joyn in the confession of their sins and vows of amendment, & though like the serpent they afterward resorbe their poyson, yet for the time they seem to lay it down when they come to drink of this cup, and they renew and quicken some notions of the death of Christ for the remission of sins, and however the heart answer not the face, and all this be only in a form (and per∣chance no very lively form) of godlinesse without the power thereof, yet as the Sacrament may be instrumental to enliven those that have this name that they live and are dead, and this smoking flax (though it have much darkness, and little warmth, and perchance no very good odor) by the breath of Gods gracious spi∣rit assisting his Ordinance, may be blown into a flame, and may make those truly faithful whom it finds not such; so in the interim, this outward reverential con∣formity, puts them into a capacity of the signs, though alone it cannot give them interest in the things signified, and though it will not be accepted by God, yet it
should satisfie the Church, who only may judge of what is scandalous, not take cognizance of what is secret, de occultis non judicat Ecclesia. 5. Whatever this unworthinesse were, yet the Apostle gives neither command nor caution for any other save self-examination; he bids not the Ministers of Co∣rinth to examine, nor wills them to admit no more without examination, though that Church were now corrupt, and he set about the reformation thereof, and when (as Gualther saith) there was great occasion for injoyning thereof, had it been necessary, when professedly he discoursed of the right administration of the Sacrament, to them who were polluted with numberlesse errours and vices, and had prophaned the Sacrament with horrible abuses. But because men must examine themselves, therefore they must be examined, since for lack of knowledge and grace, unconverted men neither can nor will examine themselves, and that such ignorant and impenitent persons may be excluded, therefore they ought to ex∣amine them, for upon this ground, infants, fools, and madmen are not admitted, because unable to examine themselves; 'Tis well those whom they exclude have gotten one stair higher to be ranked with infants, fools, and madmen, for that is a degree above dogs and swine. But infants, fools, and madmen, have a natural incapa∣city, whereby we know they are not able to examine themselves, the rest we know may be able, and we are to presume they have that ability, unless their converse and comportment manifest the contrary, it being a rule among the Casuists, Quis∣que apud omnes debet esse bonae existimationis quandocunque manifestè malum de ipso non constat. But as to discover fools and madmen, we do not bring all to a special exa∣mination, so mens gresse ignorance and incapacity to discern the Lords Body may be detected by their conversation, or at least violently suspected, and then only may be reduced under examination. But the Apologists are miraculous disputers (pro miraculo crit ipsos audire loquen∣tes, as he said of Amalasunta) that can derive a conclusion from contrary means, as from a command to examine himself, and so to eate, to infer a precept that he must be exmined by another, and if not so, not to eat. This is a kind of An∣tichristianisme to exalt their sense above Gods, turning the active into a pssive, and himself into another. We find a command for a man to examine himself, none that self examination must come under anothers examination, though here had been the proper seat of that Doctrine; but there is not only a silence thereof, but an expression of that which cannot consist therewith, for liberty of communi∣cating upon self-examination cannot stand with a necessity of being examined by another. Let a man examine himself and so let him eate; if any other examination were requisite, then he that had examined himself could not so eate, this were not e∣nough, somewhat else must be done, which the Apostle thought not of. An unconverted man cannot perform (they say) this duty of self examination; and should we consent with them, yet so neither can he hear or pray as he ought, nor take heed to his feet when he goes to the house of God about any part of divine Worship, why then should they not by parity of reason research, into mens abilities in order to the discharge of these duties, and the excluding them from partaking thereof that are insufficient? But if unconverted men cannot examine them∣selves, they are set under a perplexity that they can neither approach nor refrain the Lords Table, nor come there, nor yet stay away; for they may not refrain un∣lesse
they find themselves unworthy, and they cannot so conclude of themselves if they cannot examine themselves; neither can they be warned to stay away upon want of Faith and Repentance, if they be under an incapacity of discerning this want. Besides, all men lye under the command to search and try their wayes and turn to the Lord, Lament. 3.4. to prove their own works, Gal. 6.4. to prove all things, 1 Thess. 5.21. unconverted men are not more susceptible of this task that is requi∣site to repentance, which is a grace necessary to qualifie men for the Sacrament; may they not then upon the like cogency of this reason reduce men under a necessi∣ty, not only of seeing all with their eyes, and ballancing every thing by their weights, so as they must in effect prove all things for them, and they shall hold fast onely what these shall think good, because themselves cannot sufficiently judge of it; but also of unlocking their consciences to them, & to make confession of all their wayes as well as their faith, that they may make judgement of their fitnesse for the Sacra∣ment, and repel the unfit? Do not the Papists set the necessity of auriular Con∣fession upon this bottom? Doth not that bitter water of jealousie flow from the same fountain? However they may be startled or enraged to hear it, those are but hidden seeds, which fomented by success and quickned by any superiour influence, will in the end bear such fruit. Did they not do their own work in this, they would sense the proper duties of their Ministery (that Ars artium & Scientia scientiarum, as Gregory calls it) of such incumbency, as being scarce idoneous for them, they would not fetch in and make perergaes and heterogeneal work to themselves. Suspen∣sion is a punishment which ought not to be inflicted but in judicial wayes; self∣examination is a secret work of the heart: who authorized them to set up any judi∣catory there, or to usurpe that which the Church ever disclaimed to judge of. viz. occult things? They are open scandals only which they ought to proceed upon, but whereas they say, unconverted men have not knowledge to examine themselves, we shall concede they have not, so as to approve themselves to God, but they may have so much as to acquire an applause from men, and many truly regenerate Christians also may sense that in the heart, which they cannot yet make out plausibly through the mouth, as they say one kind of Cedars bears fruit but no flowers, and a∣nother brings forth blossoms but no fruit, and some may be like the Sentida which seems withered if you touch or come neer it, and others like that Plant at Sombre∣ro which above ground is verdant, and the root but a Serpent; and this may tend to set up the best talkers for the best Christians, and put those out of countenance that are less bold and talkative. For that of Jude the 23. Where (they say) is a duty toward them that are apt to run into this danger; I suppose it cannot suit with any pertinency to their purpose, un∣less to save with fear, were to be afraid that men should use the means of salvation; to pull out of the fire, be to repel from the Sacrament; and the garment sposted by the flesh, be those that are not compliable with a submission to be examined; In good earnest do they think that the Apostle here gave any command to exclude from the Sacrament those that might else receive unworthily? Hammond P. Paraeus. Estius. Justinian, &c The Apostle speaks of that perverse — faex improbacoetûs, which was —seclere ante alios immanior omnes, the Gnosticks, and though it be extensive to all such atrocious and profligate offen∣dors, whose crimes in the kind and object of them, are abominable, yet it is not
applicable to the with-holding men from doing that which is good, and their duty, though they do it not duly. Such men are in Scripture only quickned to amend, but not forbidden to do the duty; they are reprehended for their defects, but not willed to give over, and told that in vain they do that work of whose fruit they shall be frustrate, that they may strive to do it better. And if this saving with fear be to affright men with the denunciation of Gods formidable judgements, and especially of Hell fire (as interpreters expound it) and this to be done with making a difference, P. Paraeus. Estius. Jstinian. Gugnaeus. those that were weak and infirm be∣ing gently to be reproved, but the contumacious and refractory only to be more severely increpated, or this to be done when they are judged, arguite judicatos, or arguite disputando, according to the Greek copies; or disputatos, as Lorinus, that is disputationis rationisque vi convictos; if this pulling out of the fire be the bringing off from heresies, as Menochius; or the obscoenities of the Gnosticks, as Justinian and Tirinus; or if it be Hell fire (as the most interpret) from which men ought to be hastily or forcibly rescued, as Lot was from the fire of Sodom, which typed the everlasting flames: and this garment spotted by the flesh be the manners, society, and filthy carnal conversation of the Gnosticks (and consequenly of such like Hereticks and impure wretches) and whatsoever belongs to them, whence contagion may be feared; (as we avoid not only men infected with the plague but their vestments, or as they declined the touch of their cloaths that were legally impure because it de∣filed; or else be the external shew of holiness which they carried, which was to be devested as a garment polluted with filth and impurities (as Justinian:) then this text can conduce to no advantage of their purpose, who are not pleading for the necessity of increpating and menacing sinners, by denouncing of Di∣vine vengeance, nor do make any difference (among such as they suspect or hold to be sinners) but cast them all off, and neither duly judged nor charitably disputed with, and when also they are undefiled with such odious errors or impuri∣ties, and through Ecclesiasticall censures may fall under the notion of redargution, yet ought they to be inflicted onely on the contumacious, when they have been duly judged, and for the rest, to pull them out of the fire, is to take them off from acts in their kind and object sinfull, nor from those which are good in their nature and matter of them, and which are mens duties to do, though they do them defectively, especially when the frequent doing of them may help to make the man better, and better able to peform the duty, and amend the defects: and lastly, no contagi∣on can be contracted by a communion with any in what is good, and there where they render not any infectious examples, and when they suspend the practice of any whatsoever evils may be in them.
SECT. XXXI. 1 Tim. 5.22. interpreted and answered. Of Principals and Acesso∣ries. 1 Tim. 3.10. considered, not like reasons to examine those that are to communicate, and those that are to be or∣dained. WE shall need to make no great defence against this argument also, not one∣y because we have elswhere grappled with it, but because it long since fell — Aeneae magni dexirâ, St. Augustine giving it so many mortall wounds in his disputations with the Dona∣tists, who alleged that to partake of the Sacraments with evill men was to be par∣taker of their sins, and contrary to this of 1 Tim. 5.22. so as this argument being long since killed by him, it is onely its ghost that walks in the Apologists, to make us know, that they in meer contrariety to the text, pyrtake with the Donatists in their sin of schism. And having already spoken so largely upon this Theme, perchance it will be ra∣ther necessry to cut off much of what is there, than to adde more here, and there∣fore we shall with Tarquin onely cut down some few heads of wha grows copiously elswhere, as wel to further brevity as to prevent saciety, for as the second draught of fancy in picture never takes like the first, so quod voles gratum esse, rarum office, saith Seneca. We shall close in consonance with them, That bare reproving sinnes is not al∣wayet sufficient; those that are culpable of such offences as the Civilians call Atro∣citates sceleris et facinoris, wherewith the Church is scandalized by the notoriousnesse thereo, it may perchance be expedient to suspend, and if they continue contumacious, it is requisite to excommunicate. I shall fay in the words of Augustine, Neque ideo hoc dixerim, ut negligatur Ecclesiastica disciplina, & permittatur quisque facere quod vo∣lat, sine ulla corteptione & quadam medicinali vindicta & ierribili lenitate & chrita∣tis severitate — non malum est correptionis poena, cùm sit malum culpae, and shall confesse, Ʋbi fieri permittit ratio pacis & non fit, ipsa negligentia trabit, & in peri∣culo consentiendi est per desidiam corrigendi; But when the faults are not atrocious, when they are a multitude that offend, when they cannot be separated without the stain of peace & breach of unity, when their offences are only known to a few, not at all by publick & notorious knowledg, when they are not yet censured for crimes evi∣dent in the fact, or confessed, or verified by a judiciall sentence; to permit such to have accesse to the Lords Table, or to come thither to participate with them, is not at all to partake of their sins. To ratifie this conclusion, we have not onely the authority but the reasons of Augustine, who was the Champion and prolocutor of the Church against the Donatists. Contra Crese. l. c. 36. Take a few rays of his light & sparks of that flame which elswhere shines more amply Nec causa cansa praejudicat, nec persona personae, unusquisque portabitonus
suum, liberet te ista sententia, Qui se purum servat non communicat alienis peceatis, immundum non tangit qui ad peccatum nulli consentit, and while men are non consen∣tientes quibus haec placent, Contr. Cresc. li. 3. cap. 36. sed tolerantes quibus haec displicent, non operantes per morbi∣dam cupiditatem, sed tolerantes per pacificam charitatem, in communione sacramentorum, non participatione operum; he affirms that communicant Altari Christi, non alienis pec∣catis, non facta cum talibus sed Domini sacramenta communicant, and confidently gives this Corollary, Manifestum non contaminari alienis peccatis quando cum iis sacramenta communicant. Epist. 48. tom. 2. p. 36. And as in answer to this text urged by Cresconius, he saith, Ʋt osten∣deret quemadmodum quisque non commuicaret alienis peccatis, ad hoc addidit, Te ipsum castum serva, non enim qui se castum servat, communicat alienis peccatis, quamvis non co∣rum peccata, sed illa quae ad judicium sumunt Dei sacramenta communicet cum iis à qui∣bus se castum servando facit alienum, alioquin etiam Cyprianus (quod absit) peccatis raptorum & soeneratorum collegarum communicabat cum quibus tamen in communione divinorum sacramentorum manebat. So elswhere he tells the Dona ists upon this oc∣casion, Contra lit. Pe∣til. l. 2. c. 22. Non dixisse Dominum praesente Juda, nondum mundi estis, sed jam mundi estis, addidit autem, non omnes, quia ibi erat qui mundus non erat, qui tamen si praesentia sua caeteros pollueret, non iis diceretur, jam mundi estis, sed diceretur (ut dixi) nondum mundi estis — certè si putatis apud nos similes esse Judae, haec verba nobis dieite, mundi estis sed non omnes, non autem hoc dicitis sed diciis, propter quosdam immundos, immundi estis omnes. Whereas they say that as in Civill Judicatories there are Principals and Accessories, so before God there will be too, non-examiners are accessories before the fact. But the Law wil supply them with as little aid as the Gospel, for in Law he is onely an ac∣cessory before the fact, that abets, precures, consents to, or commands a felony or any evill act from whence a felony proceeds; but first as the lowest offences in∣volve no accessories (as trespasses;) so by proportion where the faults are not ex∣itious or scandalous, dalous, there should be no accessories by commuunion with such as are onely so faulty. And secondly where the action is naturally good that is commanded, though in pursuance thereof a Felony may be committed, the commander of the act is not accessory to the Felony; so the receiving of the Sacrament being in its own nature a good and necessary duty, he that consents or should enjoyn them to receive, who become unworthy receivers, is not accessory to the unwor∣thy reception So thirdly, since participation of sin is onely in those acts which are evill in the kind and object thereof, not in those acts which are good, and the deficiency is onely in the well doing, and that defect neither caused or consented to by another, they therefore that suffer those to come to the Sacrament that partake unworthily, and participate with them but not in unworthinesse, neither abet, procure, con∣sent to or command the unworthinesse, nor are accessory to the Ataxy but the act, not the formall but the naturall part thereof, and the physicall not the moral action, as long as he that administers or permits any to come to the administration, is not the cause of their unworthy receiving, nor the unworthi∣nesse of the person known to him in that way wherein it regularly ought to be, viz.  nd notorious knowledge, though it be evill of the part of the receiver,  he part of the giver, nor is any fault to be imputed to him, who cannot be  another partakes with an evill, Suarez as be∣fore. what he distributes with a good in∣tent and affection. And with the action of receiving, there is not conjoyned ne∣cessarily
and of it selfe, the unworthinesse of receiving, for he may partake worthily if he will, so as there is no co-operation in evil but a permission, which mo∣rally cannot be avoyded, the co-operation being onely to the receiving, not unworthy reception, neither doth the administer doe against his conscience in admini∣string, for the Dictate thereof is not to be regulated by his private and speculative knowledge, that this man is unworthy, but by his practical knowledge, conside∣ring what he ought to do for time and place in concurrence of such circumstances; of the mans coming to demand the Sacrament, and his occult unworthinesse, and the administer doth not dispense it in his own name, but according to order established by God, forbidding any Church-member to be denied his right to holy things upon the private knowledge or will of the administer, who is to distribute it not formally as to one worthy or unworthy, but to one undivided from the Church, and to exhibit that which is the witnesse of Christian profession, to them professe the Christian faith, the Sacraments being notes of the true Church; and the receiving thereof an act of communion with the true Church. And if this can support and justifie the dispensing of the Sacrament to such as by private knowledge onely are known to be unworthy, much more will it bear out the dispensation thereof to those that are only suspected, or have onely not upon tri∣all given demonstrative signs of heir being worthy. And seeing also unconverted men can neither hear nor pray with faith, and consequently sin in both, as well as when they partake of the Sacrament; it must consequently be asmuch a partaking of their sins to admit them and communicate with them in the one, as in the other. What they tautologize, (and thereby constrain us like Mercury reasoning with Battus, to conform to them because — admisso sequimur vestigia pssu) of the telling them that are unworthy, and yet are partakers, that they are aints in∣teressed in Gospel privileges and promises, and justified persons by giving them the seales of the now Covenant, is neither pertinent to this subject of partaking their sins, nor as (hath been formerly manifested) is consonant to truth or sound reason; it makes them relative Saints, and so are all Church members, not effectively or me∣ritoriously cut off. The Sacrament es not men but the promises to them, and upon condition of believing, and that they may do to those that believe not, and in the condiional promises all of the Church have interest, which are the same pro∣mises in the word and in the Sacrament, (though differently applied) and the one and the other hold forth justification in the same way of believing, and upon such condition and not otherwise. They are not assured that all those are justified to whom they impart the seales, and why are any made saints interessed, in the promi∣ses, and justified more by this Sacrament, if they should have it, than by the other which they have? That non examiners are accessories before the fact, is one of their Dictates, but none of their demonstrations. That those who are under violent suspicion of grosse ignorance shall come under examination, we deny not; that those who are vehemently suspected of scandals may be examined, and witnesses may be so al∣so concerning them, we grant, but that they may examine of the sincerity of grace, or soundness of conversion, such a power God never gave, nor can we suffer them to usurp. As what have I to judge those that are without, so to judge that) which is within, the Church judgeth onely of scandal, not that which is se∣cret in the heart. Suspension is a penal act, and therefore not to be inflicted but
by judicial sentence, upon evidence of crime, nor for want of evidence of sound grace. Every one (as is the rule of the Casuists) is to be esteemed good, untill some manifest evil appear of him. He that is a Church member, hath a right to holy things, & to admit him to partake them, it is enough not to know the contrary. We need not seek positively to know his worthiness, they must not set up their thrones of judgement in Gods peculiar, Contra Epist. Parmen. l. 2.  6. Contra lit. Pe∣til. l. c. 23. Coutra Douat. post. Coll. c. 4. the heart. Had the ancient Church sensed or practised such a necessary duty, Augustine needed not to have feared the eradi∣cation of the wheat with the tares, upon a denial of communion of Sacraments with evil men, for such a curious examination would have distinguisht one from the o∣ther, and the one might be puld up and the other left standing, and there would scarce have been place for those expresses, Bonis malinon oberunt qui ignorantur, and also quandoquidem malos in unitate catholica vel non noverant, and likewise aut aliis be∣nis non potuerit demonstrari, for they and their condiion might well then have been detected and manifested. The Apostle speaks of Ordination of Ministers, wherein by not examining the persons to be ordained, guilt is contracted, and when done without proving, as 1 Tim. 3.10. then it is sudden. That the words are to be understood of laying on of hands in Ordination, I confess hath better authority, but they seem to have more reason, who take it for imposition of hands in absolving of penitents, Abbispin. l. 2. obs. 31. p. 400 & obscr. 32. p. 412. See Dr. Ham∣mond Annot. as do Tertullian and Cyprian among the ancients; to which sense the context before and after is more su∣table, and that part of the precept keep thy self pure is by some of this judgment thus paraphrased, that by knowing what is committed by other men, he be not cor∣rupted or defiled and drawn into the like, but remaine pure and undefiled,  and  signifying to commit the sins, not onely to be blamable for others guilt. But let it be meant properly of Ordination, If they could give us such another text, administer not or admit not to the Lords Supper sud∣denly, they would as Scaliger saith of Mamonides, desinere nugari; but as there is no such like precept, so there is not like reason for the one or other, or else the Apostle doubtless when he gave directions concerning the administration would have held it forth. First, There is no command generally obliging all intelligent Christians to take Orders, Addit ad A∣quinat. 3. q. 36. butt. 4. Nugnus ibid. there is to take, eat, do this. Secondly, No man hath such a claim to Orders, but that it is not sufficient that the Ordainer knows not the contrary, but he must positively know his worthiness, but a Church member hath such a right to the seales of that faith which he professeth, and to the notes of that Church wherein he is incorporated, as to receive them unless he be publickly known to be unworthy, the one requires special Charismataes, the o∣ther onely common graces to entitle to the signs (though special be requisite to ob∣tain the things signified.) Thirdly, Often the persons to be ordained are not known unto or familiarly ac∣quainted with the Ordainer, but the Pastor should be more conversant with his flock then to be ignorant of their condition. Fourthly, Filvicius Cas. tract. 9. c. 4. Sect 88. Part 1. dist. 25. nullus or∣dinetur. No grace is now usually given by Ordination to meliorate the persons, but grace is conferred by the Sacrament adjumental to their amendment. Fifthly, Notwithstanding all this, those that are notoriously worthy the Ca∣suists say are not to be examined before Ordination, and the glosse on Gra∣tian tells us, Testimonium populi aequivalet examinationi, verum sufficit quod clericus or∣dinandus habeat famam perse, & per hoc etiam patet, quod noti non sunt examinandi, sed
tantum ignoti; but they exempt none though of known worthiness from examinati∣on before admission to communicate, which shewes it is not their worthiness they seek to be assured of, but to make sure of them. Beside, the prohibition here to partake of other mens sins, in the judgment of Cal∣vin and others, is onely this, Although others break forth into this rashnesse (to ordain persons unworthy) do not thou follow, or have fellowship with them in such acts, not those of the ordained but ordainers. And whereas they alleage 1 Tim. 3.10. That ordination was not to be made without examining or proving; we grant a proving was there required, but it was a probation by long experience, not by a personal examination, as Chrysostom expounds it, Multo jam tempore explorati, as Bullinger; Probatio constantis fidei & vitae inculpatae, as Estius; Praesertim quod Dia∣conis etiam dispensatio thesaurorum Ec lesiae committeretur; and a Lapide to the like effect, Quorum virtus diu spectata & probata; so as this arrow may be shot back against them to demonstrate that knowledge and proof of men may be had with∣out personall examination, viz. by observing their coversation, and that therefore it is but a paralogisme when they argue, The worthy must be admitted, and the unwor∣thy excluded, therefore all must be examined. SECT. XXXII. 1 Pet. 3.15 Heb. 13.17. discussed. What obedience is due to Mini∣sters, and what power they have. VVE have formerly also defeated the force of their Arguments levied out of those Texts, and we shall not actum agere, Diatribe sect. 3 since even the too frequent use of Cordials makes them lesse efficacious. Concerning that of 1 Pet. 3.15. I have elswhere shewed, that this is to be understood of a defence of the faith against despisers thereof, or disputers against it, or a confession thereof under persecution, opposite to dissembling, or as Grotius, Grot. Anno. in locum. of a preparedness causam reddere cur sitis Christiani: Sic  habemus, Phil. 1.17. 2 Tim. 4.16. Acts 22.1. not so much to professe what, as wherefore we believe (as Tirinus also concurreth;) neither is it an answer subsequent unto, or drawn forth by any probatory exami∣nation, nor confined or contracted to a disposing men for the Sacrament, nor any way respecting or appertaining thereunto; it is so far from being to be done onely there (as they obtrude it) as that thereunto there is here no reference at all, much less is there any command or warrant, that for neglect or refusing to do this, the Sacra∣ment should be denyed, and this answer is to be given to every man, not onely to the Minister and Elders, and they are as much obliged to give as to take this an∣swer, and by force of this Scripture are no more impowred then any others to exa∣mine, and are as much liable to be examined by every one, and Didymus thought that the Pastors of the Church were those indeed that were principally concerned
to give this answer, as best qualified to defend the Christian faith, and most enga∣ged to do it. Whereas they say, That if this were to be done before enemies, then much more and easier to be made before friends, it follows not, because there is not the like occasion to do it before the one as the other; there God calls us to be Confessors, to own and bear witnesse to his truth, Aquinas 22. q. 3. art. 3. Valentia, Sylvius. First thereby to glorifie his name, from whom some honor would be substracted by the erubescence of him that should be silent. 2. To instruct or confirm our brethren, who by our tacitnesse might be scandalized, and either averted from the faith, or retarded therein. And 3. to covince the unbelie∣vers and represse their Insultations. Here is neither call, nor need of such testi∣mony, where we and they do all make open and constant profession of the faith without opposition; there not to give such answer, is (Interpretatively at least) to deny and disclaim the truth of the Gospel, and disown our profession, as if we had not faith, or the faith were not true and worth the suffering for or defending, or an instable and uncertain faith, which we might at pleasure professe or deny, and so to make our selves obnoxious to be denied by the Lord Christ; here we onely de∣ny their usurped authority, Cas. Cons. l. 2. c. 1. Cas. 81. p. 13. and disclaim subjection, and are out of any the for∣mer cases. When our faith is otherwise well enough known, there needs no iterate confession, saith Baldwin, which if, as he saith, it be vain boasting rather than a Christian vertue in us to offer it, it can be no lesse than needlesse, imperious usurpa∣tion in them to call as to it. That which followes, Of their desires to be helpers of mens faith, not upbraiders of their weaknesse, of their hope to shew as much meeknesse and gentlenesse as they ex∣pect submission, is but a Fistula dulce canit, and onely a — mittit in hamo, some musick to make the Camel go on with his burden, and a clawing the horse the easier to mount into the Saddle. They have well helped their faith, when one of an hundred scarce is fit for the Sacrament, and they are like to cherish the weak that will not receive the strong, and do hold them in the account of Fools and mad∣men, yea Dogges and swine, and when they cast off an hundred for one they ad∣mit, their meeknesse and gentlenesse is somewhat of kin to the lenity of the Duke of Alva, too much whereof had lost the Low-Countries, and this profession there∣of was learned from Domitian, Qui nunquam tristiorem sententiam sine praefatione clementiae pronunciavit; Non est fides ubi contrarium vides; But let their temper and frame of spirit be such as they would set it off, yet those are in a perillous con∣dition that lye under an exorbitant power, from which they have no security but the goodnesse of those that exercise it, who are men neither immortall nor im∣mutable Concerning that of Hebrews 13.17. they first tell us, That they forget them∣selves very much that construe this of the Magistrate (though Chrysostome were one of those that here took a nap and forgot himself, — bonus hîc dormitat Homerus:) but that we may not be thought to sleep also, we shall grant that those that watch for souls, were the Pastors and Governors of the Church, and consequently yeeld, that we must be ruled and governed by them in all due obedience. Yet what we give them will prove like to the purse of Maravidis,
which the Biscainers present to the King of Spain, which he shall be never the richer for. For first, had the Bishops alleaged (as they did) this text for support of their Ordinances, let them contemplate what answer they would have rendred, and we shall beseech them to lend it to us upon good security that it shall be repaid them a∣gain with interest. Secondly, If those which they say are offended with the grosnesse of the admini∣strations at home, and deserting a communion in the Sacrament with their own Pastors, are gathered into an association with the Apologists, contrary to the will of their proper Pastors, should be pressed with this text, and admonished, or incre∣pated that this suits not with the obedience they owe unto them, that they being that portion of the Flock assigned to them, and which they ought to rule in the words of Cyprian, I shall presume the Apologists would appeare to be their Ad∣vocates, and we shal desire to retain them also to make the same plea for us, and if affection can make them cloquent in the one, the cause may in the o∣ther. Thirdly, this text doth give no immediate or proper confirmation to their way in it self, but onely proves it in alio, and by a remote principle, but the effect is at∣tributed to the immediate cause which contributes or disposeth to that form which denominates, as we say, Sol & homo generant hominem, yet the man is onely said to be the father, though he be quickned to generation by the Suns influence; so though Governors are animated with power by God to make Lawes that must be obeyed, yet those Lawes cannot properly be said to be commanded by God, but by men, onely secundarily and by accident from God: and I may as well say, that every statute-law is to be proved by the word of God, because it enjoyns obedience to Magistrates, as they can confirm their discipline by this text, because it commands submission to Pastors. Fourthly, If by force of this Scripture they are to be obeyed simply, absolutely, and without any condition (as the Papists say of the Pope) then truly we may say farther of them as the Canonists do of him, That God and he have but one Consi∣story, and we may not appeal from him unto God, and with Dr. Stapleton that we ought onely to look not what is spoken but who speakes, and we must be enthral∣led to that servile faith prescribed by he old Rabbins who because the Law com∣mands not to decline from the word which they shall shew thee to the right hand or to the left, infer, that when they say of the right hand, it is the lest, & of the left that it is the right, we must believe them, or be modelled to that blind obedience of the Iesuits, sicut jumentum obedit Domino, & siut baculus in manu senis and they may command what they list, and this text will be a common Repertory to fit them with proofs for it, as indeed it is such a Catholicon among them that usurp the name of Catholiques, being urged by Bellarmine to prove the Pope may make lawes to bind the consci∣ence; by others, for blind obedience, and by some for the infallibility of Coun∣cels; But the answer which Whitaker gives Bellarmine, may suit well to be retur∣ned also to the Apologists, Obediendum esse prapositis (i) Episcopis, quis dubitat? sed non proptere a sequetur licere illis sanctiunculas nescio quas excogitare, Contro. 4. q. 7. tom. 2. p. 722. & easdem no∣bis obtrudere tanquam divinas & ad salutem necessarias, iisdém{que} conscientias nostras obligare: nequaquam obediendum ergo est, sed cum cautione, fi praeeant illi in Domino, & nihil suum tradant. That they may know what obedience to expect, we must tell them what power
onely they can chalenge. They are not Mandatores, sed Mandatarii, and must first receive before they give the commands. Their power is not Imperii (nam Domini non servi imperium est) sed legationis, and must as Ambassadors shew their Letters of Credence, and not goe beyond their Commission, they have no Dictator-like, Praetorian or legislative power, Junius ut ante Anton. de Dom. de re∣pub Eccles. l. 1. c. 2. but Ministeriall and executive onely, jus dicere, & non dare, qualis est doctoris non judicis, nec imperii sed consilii, and have only a declara∣tive not an effective sentence, and a directive not coactive, an accessory rather than proper jurisdiction, and Ministeriall not authoritative, even in excluding from the Sacrament those that are scandalous, and therefore may not repell any according to their judgement but according to the sentence of the Lord the righteous Judge, they are therefore onely to be obeyed as publishers and interpreters of Gods word, and alone in what they speak according to that rule. If they shall confesse it, and say they pretend to no more than this, then they might have spared to alleage this text to prove they are to be obeyed, for we deny not that proposition, but if they assume that the obedience which they require in this particular is of that kind, we cannot by granting it give up our liberties, which as Alexander answered Diogenes, is a talent too great to be bestowed upon beggars (of principles.) And we shall be bold farther to remind them, That though they have now rai∣sed an inundation and an unlimited over-flowing of their power, yet anciently it was restrained within narrow banks, and ran so sparingly, that it might be easily stopped or turned, and they that now renounce and cast off the Church, were of old, Cyprian Epist. 68. p. 201. subject to be rejected and cast out of the Church, à peccatore praeposito separare se debent, saith Cyprian, nec se ad sacrilegi sacerdotis sacrificia miscere, quando ipsa maxime potestatem habeat vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes vel indignos recusandi, and they that solely and arbitrarily drive away the multitude from the Church of their chusing, it was then thought to have more of righteousness and charity for them to go off from the Church at the command of the multitude, De jure pleb. 2.24. for so Blundel alleageth Clemens speaking to the Pastors of Corinth, Quis inter vos generosus, quis misericors, quis charitatis plenus? diat, si propter me seditio & contentio & schismata oriantur, excedo, abeo; quocunque volueritis, quaecunque à multitudine praecepta sunt facio? Neither can we concede what they conclude, That Ministers must doe all beside preaching and exhortation, which may conduce to the peoples salvation, unlesse they re∣strain & limit it to that which ought to be done by Ministers, and for which they are impowred, (for Magistrates, parents, &c. have somewhat to do adjumentall to the salvation of others, which Ministers may not usurp or intrude into) and when we have granted thsi Thesis so limited and restrained, yet we shall deny the Hypothesis, that the course they thus plead for is conductive to salvation; we shal notwithstanding yeeld what they inferre, That Ministers must give account of them which cannot be well done without taking knowledg of their estates: But we cannot farther concede, that this they cannot do by any other way without speciall examination antecedently to the Sacrament, or that because they must give an account of them, that therefore they must take a particular account from them, because they are to be accountable onely for their teaching, not our learning; of the undertaking, not the successe, pro cura non curatione, otherwise we should not at all wonder at that of Chrysostom, Miror si quis Rectorum possit salvari. The civill Magistrate must be also an accountant for the people under his government, yet though he may call them to reckoning for the manifest breaches of his Lawes, yet he neither useth nor needeth to take an account of them how perfectly they keep them. And it will not much facilitate the Mini∣sters
account, nor help to perfect it to take this account of men, once alone (for so they pretend to do) and at their admission to the Sacrament, Whitaker con∣tro. 2. c. 17. Gerhard. de Eceles. c. 10. sect. 126. and to make triall how they are disposed for one ordinance onely. Their Cardinall duty is to preach the word, ours to hear and receive it with faith, the Sacraments being but visible words and appendices of the word heard, and not efficacious without it, the word being as the Sunne to all other Stars, which though they have proper speciall influen∣ces, yet all have their light from that, or as some Philosophers think of the soule of the world, which quickens and actuates all particular forms in their specificall operations. Why then should they not take account how we are prepared for, or do attend un∣to, or profit by hearing, (and so by proportion for praying) as well as for Sacra∣mentall communicating? They shall not give account for us as we are onely at one time, viz. at our first admission to the holy Table, but for the constant course of our lives, and not for our discharge of that one act onely, but for the whole se∣ries of our actions, and therefore by the like consequence of this reason, they should examine and take account from us continually of all our doings, and reduce us un∣der a necessity of auricular confession, for which all their principles are very pre∣gnant with conclusions. SECT. XXXIII. Levit. 3.15. 2 Chron. 23 19. Joel 3.17. Nahum 1 15 Zechar. 14.21. brought off from the rack whereon they have set them. The difference between Legall and Morall uncleannesse: what the former typed. AS he at Atheus that hearing the various Disputes of the Philosophers about Summum bonum, went to the Market and bought somewhat of all sorts he met there in an expectation to find it in some one thing or other; so the Apologists have collected and aggregated into one Argument sundry texts, in hope some a∣mong them may fit their turn, and help to prove their way, Ʋi si non prosint singula juncta juvent. But as he that bought a pound of Sugar to perfume his chamber, if he had doubled the weight, could not have meliorated the scent, because though Sugar was sweet, yet it was not proper for that sense, nor in that way to be used; so their multiplied texts will bring no advantage to their cause, because they are so extreamly disso∣nant, and so infinitely wide from the purpose, that even the Cloak which Paul left at Troas (had that text been alleaged) would have served as well to co∣ver their nakednesse, and it might justly be said of them, O miseros! qua vos necessi∣tas huc adegit? That which first appears in this maniple is Levit. 13.5. but sure they might
have dealt with this multifarious argument, as was used to be done to the Leper, even put a covering upon its lips (for it can speak nothing to the purpose) and have set it without the camp, for it will not militate for them. But they are either very forgetful, (Sccuros latices & longa oblivia potant) or very immutable, Non ita Carpathiae variant Aquilonibus undae:) For in the tenth Section they admonish us, That he that builds Arguments upon the Fathers Allegories and Morals on Scripture, will come off weakly in his conclusions; And therefore unlesse they think their own Allegories & Morals to be a more stable foundation to build upon, then are those of the Fathers, or else have no beam whereby to weigh things, but their interest, so that as with them Tempus est men∣sura motus, and their motions are measured by the times; so also verum, bonum, & finis convertuntur, and that onely is true and good which suits with their ends, I wonder they could now hope to raise any strong conclusions upon the weak ground of Allegores and Morals. But to answer ad rem as well as ad heminem; Rivet. in Psal. 19. tom 2. p. 74 & in Hoseac 11. p. 742. Sal. Glass. Philolog. sacr. l. 2. p. 1. tract. 2 sect. 3. p. 192. Idem Gerhard loc. tom. 1. sect. 139. and in answer to this very place alleaged by Bellar. for confession, t. 3. sect. 113 First, Allegories which are not in∣nate in Scripture, and there expressly delivered, but ilate onely, and raised and brought in by Interpreters, though if seberly used, have their profitable use in morall doctrines (and they were no otherwise made use of by me where the Apo∣logists took up the exception) tamen horum documenta non sunt necessiatis, sed tantùm contingentiae itá ue delectare & illustrare in docendo possunt, probare autem minimum, saith Rivet, and are onely like to pictures (as Glassius affirmeth) which onely serve for secundary ornaments to the house whose strength riseth from litetall expo∣sitions as from stone walls, and he commends a saying of Percrius, Sensus allego∣ricus praeterquam quòd non est ad decendum quippiam probandúmque satis idoncus. & firmus, est etiam varius, multiplex & incertus, tantáque in varictate constitutus quanta est hominum ad eos sensus singendos solertia & ubertas ingenii. And seeing a so it is a Maxime among Theologues, Theologia symbolica non est argumentative, we shall say to them as Augustine to his Donatists, Haec mystica sunt, operta sunt, figurata sunt, aliquid certum quod interprete non eget, flagitamus, But secondly, pssing over the Thesis, to consider the Hypothesis, they inferre from this text, That if the Priests were made Judges of the peoples fimesse, as to legall qua∣lification, then may Ministers try and discern of mens sitnesse for spirituall communion. First, let them take that answer which Gerhard gives the Papists producing this ar∣gument to warrant confession, Ʋbi supra. Epistola ad Hebraos Levitici Sacerdtii typum dili∣genter exponit, nuspiam autem ex eo ministris Novi Testamenti talem judiciariam pote∣statem assignat. Secondly, Let them learn from Calvin what he delivers upon the same occasion, Translato sacerdotio necesse est legis translationem fieri, omnia Sacerdotia ad Christum translata sunt, Instit. l. 3. c. 4. sect. 4. p. 222. Willet. Synop. contro. 14. q. 6. p. 733. & Tetrastyl. pap. p. 299. Piscator obs. in locum. in eo implera & finita, ad eum igitur unum jus omne & honor sacerdotii translatus est, and to the same effect may they hear Dr. Willet, Who knowes not, saith he, that herein the Priesthood of the Law did decipher the Priesthood of Christ by whom our spiritual leprosies are discerned and cured? And both whose testimonies will be somwhat cleared and confirmed by Piscators observation upon this Text, Quòd judicium de lepra attributum fuit summo sacerdoti, perid videtur significatum fuisse Christum, qui per summum sacerdotem praefiguratus fuit, de lepra nostra spirituali, id est, de nostris peccatis recte cognoscere atque judicare, ita scilicet ut poenitentes quidem mun∣dos
pronunciet, impoenitentes vero immundos ac proinde societate poenitentium exclu∣dendos. Thirdly, though the leprosie may signifie grievous and notorious sins, as not on∣ly Divines have applied it in Allegories, L. 58. c. 32. but Pierius also hath put it among his Hieroglyphicks, and though the removing of the Leper to dwell apart without the Camp, while they were in the wildernesse, and out of the Citie when they came to fix in Canaan, may perchance type or shadow forth the excommunicating of the scan∣dalous & impenitent, yet what Analogie hath the Leper with him that by submission to their Disciplinarian triall hath not approved to them his true grace or worthiness? and what resemblance hath the putting out of the camp (nay or keeping out of the Temple) with suspension from the Sacrament onely? To conform their way to a similitude with thrusting out of the Lepers, they should shut those whom they su∣spend not onely out of the Church, but the town also. Dr. Willet who puts this a∣mong the loose arguments of the Papists, (being produced to assert Confession) in answer tels them, That the Priests might not take knowledge of every infirmity or diseas, but of that which was notorious or contagious And Calvin consonantly, Neque de morbo occulto voluit Deus sacerdotes cognoscere, they had no commission to search or strip eve∣ry one of the people, to try if he were sound or leprous, as they would examine every man to make tryall of his fitnesse. Leprosie as Fernolius tells us, Fernel. pathol. l. 6, c. 19. R. Riolan gen. method. me∣dendi, c. 9. est morbus venenatus in terrena substantia totius cor∣poris naturam immutans, and as Riolan affirms, Cancer totius corporis proinde insanabi∣lis, which is called Elephantiasis, quia situt Elephas omnium animalium; sic Elephantia sis omnium morborum maximus, and so infectious, that qui bibit in eodem vitro cum Ele∣phantiaco inquinabitur. And therefore though the judging of, and exterminating the Leper may perhaps in a more tolerable Allegory bear some proportion to the consuring and excommu∣nicating nefarious and notorious sinners, obstinately persisting in impenitence, who do give scandall and may spread infection; yet what conformity carries it to the suspending of those who have not satisfied them of their fitnesse or worthinesse, and who are innocent of such great transgressions. The Priest was to take curions view and to make severall inspections, not ar∣bitrarily and precipitously (as is their use) to pronounce men Lepers, and he was to distinguish between a Scab & a Leprosie, verse 8. for a scab did not shut out of the Camp, neither must small faults from the Church or Sacrament, Si quis suspect sit infirmitatis (saith Ambrose) indulge aliquantulum; medendi periti cum vident notas aegritudines, non primò medicinam adhibent, Willot. in lo∣cum, Doct. 2. & 5. sed tempus expectant. And again, Diu tractatur putrida pars, si sanari potest medicamentis, si non potest à bono medico abscinditur; sie Episcopi affectus boni est, ut optet sanari infirmos, serpentia auferre ulcera, adducere aliqua, non abseindere, postrumò quod sanari non potest cum dolore abscindere. But while they use a contrary method, sure the plague of leprosie is a∣mong the Priests, who have the signes thereof not in the rent of their clothes, but in the rent of the Church, The next Scripture is 2 Chron. 23.19. another Allegory (and therefore no Ar∣gument) as Hierom saith of Origen, Praefat. 10. Isai. ad Ama∣bil. Episcop. while he wanders in his free course of Alle∣gories he makes his wit the Churches Sacraments; so they make their Allegories the rule of their distribution of the Sacraments in the Church: But if a clear and impartial judgement had been the Porter, this Argument drawn from Jehosaphats Porters, &c. had not been suffered to enter, not only because to reduce their pra∣ctice
of Discipline to a resemblance and conformity to what was done to those that were unclean under the law, they should not only debar those whom they think im∣pure from coming to the Sacrament, but from entring the Church; yea from civil commerce, Instit. Moral. tom. 3. l. 10. p. 679. for polluti praescripto legis arcebantur ab ingressu in templum & ab aliorum convictu & consortio, saith Azorius, comfortmably to Scripture, neither were either of the legal Sacraments made or given in the Temple, (for if the Paschal Lamb were there killed and sacrificed, yet it was eaten at home;) so that the keeping out of the temple was not the keeping off from the Passover, however that which did prohibit the entry at the one, might forbid the eating of the other; and though Je∣hosophats Porters suffered none that were unclean in any thing to enter the house of the Lord, yet this must be understood of evident and apparant uncleanness, and of such as were notoriously known to be defiled; for we do not find, nor can imagine that they searched any men or women, or made tryal of them by denuding them, and some kinds of uncleannesse contracted by contact were not discernible by any re-search. But chiefly because neither the Porters can rationally be supposed to Type the Church Officers, nor the Temple only to signifie the Lords Table, nor indeed is there any colour or proportion for it (so as there can be no beauty in the Allegory) that legal uncleanesse should be a figure of, or bear resemblance with moral filthy∣nesse contracted by sinful actions; Philo makes the Temple to be an image of the world; some more probably a Type of Christs natural body; others of his my∣stical body, the Church: But if of the Church, yet whether of the true Catholick or the Visible Church, or of the Militant or triumphant Church, which, or whe∣ther of these is not clear and liquid, Mr. Ball. answ. to Canne, part 2. pag. 67. August. contra 2 Epist. Gau∣dentii l. 2. c. 25 without some divine light; for as it is only ap∣pertaining to God to design a Type, so it is peculiar to him alone to expound and make known the signification thereof, Homo vobis dixit an Deus? si Deus, legite hoc nobis ex lege, Prophetis, Psalmis, Apostolicis & Euangelicis literis: — so autem homines dixerunt, ecce figmentum humanum, &c. But certainly it is evident that the Temple did not Type the Table of the Lord, no man ever fell upon that fancy, Tam vana nullum decepit imagine somnus: And therefore however this Argument might seem subservient to prove the casting out of the Church by Excemmunication, or might reflect a little superficial glosse on the Independent way of admitting none into the Church but manifest Saints, yet it bears no colour to paint over their practice, who permit them to be Members of the Church and partakers of other Ordinances, whom they exclude from the Lords Supper: And if hereby the Church had been figured, and also that no wicked person should enter therein, yet either the Church was thereby described, as women were by Sophocles, only what they ought to be, not what they were; or as they shall be in Heaven, that new Jerusalem, where no unclean person shall enter; for otherwise it can be no true Church whereof any wicked persons are Mem∣bers. So likewise legal uncleannesse is clean wide from figuring or obumbrating either scandalous sins, which may merit casting out; or irregeneration, for which pre∣tendedly they let not in. For 1. There might be legal uncleannesse without any sin, as in some diseases of men and women, and in some necessary or casual contacts; and there might be o∣dious sins without any legal uncleanesse: sins did not make legally upclean, nor
legal uncleannesse alwayes sinful, unlesse a man did wilfully neglect his clean∣sing. A holy man might be unclean, and a wicked man clean. 2. All sin was forbidden by God, and no sin was necessary, but all unclean∣nesse was not prohibited, and some was of necessity to be contracted, as that which grew from Burial of the dead, Numb. 19.11. or removing dead Carcasses, Levit. 11.39. and making of the water of separation, Numb. 19. vers. 7. 3. No man could sin unwillingly, every sin is in some respect voluntary, but a man might be unclean against his will, Leviticus 15.8. Numbers 19. vers. 14. 4. The least uncleannesse shut out from the Tabernacle and Temple, but the least sin excludes not from the Church or Sacrament, even our enemies being judges. 5. Things as well as persons were lyable to uncleannesse, but only rational crea∣tures are capable of sinning. 6. He was clean that was most defiled, as he whose leprosie covered all his skin from head to foot, Levit. 13.13, 14. but the Analogie holdeth not in the most leprous sinners. 7. He that sprinckled the water of Separation upon another for his clensing, as well as he that confected it, became unclean, Numb. 19.19. and then to sup∣port the resemblance, they that by censure cast out the scandalous or re∣store the penitent should contract some of the guilt and punishment. 8. He that was unclean was left to clense himself by absolution, there were no tryers to make judgement how exactly he had performed it, and then for correspon∣dence, every man ought to be left to examine and judge himself. 9. He that in many cases was unclean might soon and easily wash himself, and his uncleannesse was but an Ephemeron, and lasted but till even, and he might not dispense with, nor be prohibited eating the Passeover, notwithstanding his present uncleannesse, he only ought to wash before he eat, Numb. 19.10. But as we can∣not suppose that sins are so easily absterst, so they will not grant, that their censures are so facilly to be removed. 10. Bayly diswas. c. 7 p. 172. There was no positive command to exclude the greatest sinners from the ta∣bernacle or Temple. It is a question, (saith a learned Presbyterian) whether very scandalous sins did keep men ceremonially clean from the Temple and Sacrifices; but out of doubt the doubt of irregeneration alone was never a bar to keep any from the most holy & solemn services, but it is put out of question not only by Augustine, Illud Templum quod ab eo vocatur spelunca latronum, certe & boni intrabant & mali, Contra Epist. Parm. l. 2 c. 17 and elsewhere unum templum fuit quo universi utebantur, nec quenquam Prophetarum qui tanta dixerunt in malos, constituisse aliud templum, sacrificia, sacerdotes; and again Prophetas sanctos cuminiquis in uno templo sub iisdem sacerdotibus inter eadem sacramenta versatos, quia novcrunt inter sanctum & immundum (non sicut isti sentiunt) corporaliter populum dividendo, sed bene judicando & bene viven do discernere; Brevicul. collat. cum Donat. 3. Diei. p. 118. tom. 7. but al∣so this is made evident by clear evidence of Scripture, for we hear of the Publican praying in the Temple, and there we find the Woman taken in Adultery to be brought in, and though the Pharisees odiously condemned our Saviour for a false Prophet, a blasphemer, to have a Divel, and to work by him, yet they never pre∣tended to drive him out of the Temple, In lege olim, saith Gualther, eos qui pec∣caverant non à tabernaculo, à sacris communionibus exclusos, sed potiùs jussos fuisse
legimus, Epist. ad Be∣zam. ut pro delicti retione sacrificia facerent, & cùm ob legalem immunditiem quae in corpore, haerebat, à sacrorum usu arcerentur, neminem tamen propter delictum aliquod rejectum fuisse constat—Prophetas quidem legimus graviter eos corripuisse qui indigne sacris communicabant, at censores constitutos fuisse ab illis qui sacrificaturos singulos vel publice vel privatim probarent, & prout ipsis videretur vel admitterent vel reji. erent, nuspiam me legisse memini. And as those that had finned, were so far from being excluded from the Temple, as that they were commanded to come thither to offer their Sacrifices for sin, and that without any censors to try their worthinesse, and to admit or reject them as they judged fit, so that the Lords Supper succeeded those Sacrifices in signification and effect, is confessed by Beza, and elsewhere proved by s. To argue that if those who were ceremonially unclean, were in fact kept cut, that therefore much more those who were sinfully defiled ought of right to be exclu∣ded, is a fallacious Argument, because it carries a transition à genere in genus, and is as if I should reason, that because to keep my cloaths from being smootted by a Chimnie-sweeper, or defiled by a Scavenger, I shun all contact with them, therefore I must also decline to touch any Drunkard or Adulterer thereby to preserve my garments clean, because Drunkards and Adulterers are more filthy than Scavengers and Chimnie-sweepers. That which Philo and others suppose of legal uncleannesse carrieth more proba∣bility, that it figured and denoted the habitual pravity and corruption of our na∣ture (as qualities are better signified by qualities then acts) and this uncleannesse is alway diffused and traducted, as legal uncleannesse also was; for when nature is corrupt, that which is generated is also corrupt; a sinful man begets a sinful man, but actions are not so propagated, as a thief doth not alwayes beget a thief, and this corruption of nature shuts us out of heaven, as the other did out of the Temple (which in this respect was a Type, not of the visible Church, but of that holy Jerusalem where in no wise enters any thing that defileth) until (as others have improved the Allegory) it be washed by the Bloud of Jesus Christ. Concerning those other Scriptures of Ioel. 3.7. Nahum 1.15. Zach 14.21. we suppose we are at the building of another Babel, and hear such tongues as we cannot understand, for we know not in what language, or rather by what canting, a stranger or a Canaanite doth signifie a person that hath not satisfied another of his worthinesse, or will not conform to some mens way of Discipline, or tryal, or that Ierusalem, Iudah, and the house of the Lord, Imports only the Table of the Lord, and not to passe through, and not to be there, to be utterly cut off, denotes the not coming to that Table. He must have somewhat of Antiphoron in Aristotle, who by the distemper of the Organ, seemed to see his own image wheresoever he did go, or doth vainly sup∣pose that every thing suits with his inbred imaginations, that can surmise that those Texts were Prophecies of the Sacrament, and that it was here promised what per∣sons should approach thereunto, and he must have an imagination strongly fortified above all that magical helps can vainly pretend to for elevation thereof, that can hope to bind others thoughts to fancy, that the Stranger and the Canaanite who were not of the Church, much less were partakers of Sacraments, could type those who were af∣terward to be excluded from the Sacrament, & that they should be fitly said no more to do that, which they never yet before were permitted to do, viz. partake of Sacra∣ments.
That of Ioel 3.17. Interpreters determine to signifie, that strangers shall no more destroy the Church of God, nor pollute or prophane it, as formerly they had done, when it was given up as a prey unto them, Lament. 1.10. as the English Annotations deliver it, Quod extranei (1)  seu infideles & ipsius hostes eam non proculcant pro animi libitu, sed cos ab illa arcet vel abigit dum illam tuetur adver∣sus vim & impetum corum, as Danaeus: And so in that of Isa. 52.1. There shall no more come unto thee the uncircumcised and the unclean, which is consignificant with this of Ioel, Cyril (as Bellarmine cites him, Bell. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 9. (i.) Hostili exercitu simile loquendi genus Isai. 52.2. Grotius An∣not. in locum. and from whom he saith Hierom is not much discrepant) saith, secundum historicum sensum agi de temporali persecutione Iudaeorum, ut sensus sit, cùm à captivitate redieris, non adliciet ultra, id est in longum tempus aliquis infidelis persecutor per terr as tuas eas vastando pertransire, secundum my∣sticum sensum agi de Ecclesia, & praedicere Isaiam fore ut portae inferi non praevaleant adversus eam; and though others understand this of Ioel to be meant of the purging of the Church from Hypocrites or prophane people, yet they think this to be the proper happinesse of the Country, not the way, and the peculiar felicity of the hea∣venly Ierusalem, and do adjourn the complement of the Promise to the last judge∣ment (as Augustine likewise doth that of Isaiah) and some discern some light thereof glimpsing from the precedent verses of the Chapter, Cont. Donat. post coll. c. 8. & 20. telling of the gather∣ing of the Nations, and bringing them down into the valley of Ichosaphat, where they imagine the last judgement shall be made, and most do conceive that this Chapter is as a counter-part to that of Revel. 20. and 21. where the blessed estate of the new and heavenly Ierusalem is described, so Hierom, Piscator, Diodate, Montanus, Paulus de Palacio, Sanctius, A Lapide, Sa, Menochius and Ribera, which later also tells us, that this is the sense of Rupertus, the Glosse, and of the Hebrew Doctors, and Tirinus addes likewise of Remigius, Haymo, Hugo, Lyranus, A Castro, and himself concurs with them. That of Nahum carries onely a description of the Churches joy at the news of the Assyrians ruine, (so the English Annotations) by means whereof she might in peace, security and mirth attend upon Gods Service, and give him thanks, Nec ultra ad te perveniet ille ciequam Assyrius qui Deum despexit. Grotius An∣not. in locum. as Diodate enlargeth the Exposition, and the consort is augmented by the symphony of Hierom, Danaeus, Sanctius, Ribera, Sa, Menochius, Tirinus (who encreaseth the harmony by bringing in Hugo and Vatablus) and Paulus de Palacio, though this man run discord concerning the person, and will have it be upon the destructi∣on of Darius not Senacherib, whose Reign happened before those times. Piscator agrees in substance, but Montanus may well be praecentor chori, who by occasion of the former part of the verse, behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bring∣eth good tidings, &c. instructs us, that it was the use, what they would have pub∣lished to the people, to take care it should be proclaimed on the mountains by the voice of a Cryer, and of this the Magistrate took care, and thus the Festivals, new Moons, and Fasts were promulged, and that here the sense of the Prophet is this, celebra Iuda festivitates tuas — quas hactenus hostium metu perterritus per pagos & per oppida celebrare non licuerat, nunc publieos laetitiae dies cum summa hilaritate celebrare, &c. integrum erit, redde vota tua, quaecunque pro optata ex horum hostium metu liberatione tibi fuerant nuncupata, illud autem indicendorum festorum & totius laetitiae annunciatae elogium eodem praeconio exponendum erat, — quia non adiiciet ultra ut pert anseat in te Belial (quod nefastum quoddam vitiosum apud Hebraeos no∣men) universus interiit, Senacherebi impium & sacrilegum genus prorsus entinguen∣dum, nunquam amplius satrae Dei religioni insultaturum esse affirmat.
That of Zachary 14.21. the late English Annotations interpret to be a promise, that though now in the sad estate and calamitous condition of all things, the Sama∣ritan, Canaanite, and other heathens were mixed among them, who scorned them, and their religion, and opposed them, Ezra 4. and 5. chapt. and Nehem. 4. and 6. chapt. yet God would in that day cleanse and purge his Church of them. O∣thers here take the Canaanite not properly but appellatively for a merchant, so the Chaldee, the Vulgar, and Hicrom (following Aquila) and Estius, and they ren∣der the sense thus, Sylvius 22. q. 77. art. 4. p. 551. Nemo qui ven∣dant sacerdoti∣bus lebetes, phi∣alas vinum, ole∣um, thus & si∣milia omnia e∣nim ista ab ad∣vemis dono da∣bantur plus∣quam satis. Grotius annot. in locum. There shall not be in the Temple merchants, or those that traf∣fick, as in the Temple at Ierusalem were some that sold Oxen, Sheep, Doves, and the like; so this Scripture carries conformity to the fact of Christ, Iohn 2. and Matt. 21. thus a learned School-man interprets it, and so do many Expositors, Diodate, Montanus, Sanctius, Ribera, Paulus de Palacio, &c. and the reason why there should be no merchants there, is rendred by some, because major im∣pendetur a fidelibus templis honor, & ipsi ultro sine ullo precio vistimas impendent, max∣ime cum unum fit pro omnibus sacrificium, Christus &c. so Sanctius, de Palacio, &c. by others, because ingens eui{que} sacrarum & spiritualium ad divinas laudes celebran∣das copia affluet, as Montanus, (and Grotius, Tirinus, and Sa agreeably) & ado∣rabitur Deus in spiritu & veritate — nemo propter inopiam offerre victimas desinet, as Ribera. And whereas some by the Canaanite in a figurative sense understand a wicked person, per synechochen speciei, as Piscator, or per metalepsin, the person being ta∣ken for the quality, as Danaeus, and so expound the promise to be, that no wicked person shall remain in the Church, (it is not, onely not to approach to the holy Table) yet they referre the complement thereof to the next life, and the state of the Church in heaven; haec promissiopertinet tantum ad futuram in coelis ipsis Ecclesiae statum, nam quandiu hic erit Ecclesia Dei, semper habebit malos bonis permixtos, ne in bis terris Ecclesiam puram putam mere Donatistarum, Circumcellionum, & Ana∣baptistarum frustra quaeramus, in the words of Danaeus. To fortifie those feeble arguments they rivet and inlay them with a testimony of Camero, That however in the old Testament such as were Jews outwardly, though in∣wardly and really prophane, were called Gods people, yet never in the new is it so sound unless, as they add, by anticipation, Though I cannot upon research meet with this in Camero, for of that edition in the 3 Tomes (which they cite) neither of them hath so many pages as they quote, and that in folio hath nothing in the page quoted, yet in answer. First, To correspond with what they can here infer, they should permit none to be of the Church but such as they were convince, to be really holy, and not onely ad∣mit no others save such onely unto the Lords Table. Secondly, Bayly, disswas. p. 157. The Church in the daies of Moses and the Prophets, was one and the same with the Church in our daies, (saith a learned Divine,) the house of God, the body of Christ, the elect and redeemed people, the holy Nation, the peculiar treasure and spouse of the Lamb, and from thence he argues, what was not a suf∣ficient cause to separate in that time, is no sufficient cause of separation in our daies. Thirdly, In the old Testament prophane people were not distinctly in themselves called Gods people, August. de doct; Christi∣l. 3. c. 32. but the Church and society wherein they were permix was so called, quando Scriptura cum ad alios loquatur tanquam ad eosps ad quos leque batr videtur loqui, vel de ipsis cum de aliis jam loquatur: tanquam
propter temporalem commixtionem & communionem sacramentorum, and in the same respect and notion wicked men under the new Testament are also called the people of God, as the Church of Corinth is called the Church of God; they that were incorporate thereunto are said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, (which are attributes equivalent to the people of God) and yet that body had many rotten ulcers and odious excrements. They with some complacency or confidence in their undertakings conclude, who knows what all these lights will do being set up together? But we must tell them, that their arguments have no other light than such as putrified wood hath, which on∣ly shines in darkness, and being brought into a clear light, nothing appears but rottenness, but if any take them for lights, and will be guided by them, they are like to do but what was done by the lights which Nauplius hung out at Eu∣boea, for the Greeks in their return from Troy, which served onely to draw them among the rocks thereby to suffer Shipwrak. SECT. XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII. Their repeated Fallacies. The complacency of their close, which is destructive to their main discourse. CRebrescunt optatae aurae, portus{que} patescit Jam proprior. I may now strike saile and cast anchor, not onely because I may justly fear lest the Reader will no longer fill my sails with a favourable breath, being like to have been tired with so tedious a voyage; and even bonum & longum, minus bonum, there∣fore much more longum & malum, duo mala; but also because what occurres of con∣cernment in the remaining Sections, are but the same forces which we have proffi∣gated in another field, and here they rally them together again, either like some politick captains, who to set out the multitude of their Armies, when they are to march through a City, cause them to enter at one gate and go out at another, and then to pass round and come in again at the first port; or as Francis the first thought that the stile of King of France alone, being often repeated, would bal∣lance all the numerous titles of Charles the Emperour, so they think the same ar∣guments reiterated may be instead of any other, or more that might be expected, and that if they pierce not by their force, yet they may by their continual drop∣ping, — non vi sed saepe cadendo; or that if in one place or time they take not, they may in another, as Astrologers say some things work not their effects unless they be applied under such a constellation, and in such a juncture of time: and as the Iesuits tell us that the same moral per∣swasion, that at sometimes is not, yet anothers is efficacious in respect of s an∣next
congrulty and due application: but upon what account soever they bring the Arguments, they have been elsewhere broken, and come here as Gonsalvo said of a Captain shewing himself after the battel, That it was St. Elmo that appeared af∣ter the storm was past. But however the Apologists may suppose the things very fair, & that therefore by the allowance of Plato they may be twice or thrice repeated, or to be as the works of Aristotle were to Alpharabius, which he had read forty times, and could as of∣ten read again without fastidiousness; yet we rather suppose with Plutarch, Ubi{que} unius tenoris cantilena satietatem affert, & offendit, and are very sensible — sunt talis quoque taedia vitae Magna, Voluptates commendat rarior usus. In the 34. Section are their arguments which they call Convincing (but sure if the convincing signes they require of holiness in men need to be no more forcible than their convincing arguments, we shall not much complain of their rigor in trying, or their strictness in admitting) as that this Sacrament belongs onely to godly ones; That they which partake it without true grace, have the seal set to a blank; The inference from Christs first administring onely to his peculiar disciples; That an unregenerate per∣son cannot examine himself; The similitude of the Legacy bequeathed to the persons of such a condition: That because the ignorant and scandalous are to be repelled, therefore examination is requisite, as a means in order to that end: And in the 35. Section, their motives drawn from the eating and drinking of their own damnation by the un∣worthy, from the abuse of Christs blood by being too prodigal thereof, from obstructing the reformation, crossing the desires of the godly, and the actings of the State, from the degenerating from the primative times and all true antiquity. And in the 36. Section, what they answer to the objections of Schisme (which constitutes) and troubles (that sollow) their way. And in the 37. Section, among their Quaeries, whe∣ther Ministers contradict not themselves in giving the seales of Salvation to those in the Sacrament, whom hey have damned in the Word? Whether ary other way than theirs or like it, can be walked in to answer the holy courses of the ancients? (But if any like it may serve the turn, it seems they have no such faith in their way, but that ano∣ther may be as good, and therefore theirs not absolutely necessary, and another in most things different may in somewhat be like theirs, seeing as Synesius, In om∣nibus iis quae in se differunt, convenientia est & similitudo) and what Ministers should do while government is unsetled? All this, and much more of this sowr and swel∣ling leaven, is onely like the trunks which Cardinal Campeius his Mules carried, be∣ing stufft with old clothes, shooes, and raggs, for all hath been formerly worn out, cast off and torn to pieces, as we met with it heretofore very frequently in their dis∣course. And if any rational and ingenious man shall prompt me to any thing among this frippery, to which I cannot prompt him to find a sufficient answer, in what I have delivered, I shall soon hoyse those sails I have stricken, and weight that anchor I have cast out, and set to Sea again, seeing it is like to be no difficult voyage, nor to be imperilled by any acute solid rocks, or very quick-sands: most of it I think could be onely (in their intention) produced for what they slight in others viz. Rhetorick, and for such it may pass, by a favourable interpretation, Rhetorick in her old clothes and homely dress, being in truth words of vanity, without any great swelling, and al populum but scarce Phaleras. But upon an Anclysis, and reduction to argument of what is packt up, we
may find them in conspiracy with almost the whole knot and pack of fallacles. Upon ignoratio clenchi dasheth all their discourse concerning the power of casting out of the scandalous, for this is not the thing in question, because it is not their way or practice, who content not themselves onely with removing such, nor are any of those whom they exclude consured for scandal. As at Delphos usurpatum, ut cultro quo diis immolabant, de nocentibus supplicium sumerent; so it shall be an acceptable ser∣vice to God when they offer this spiritual sacrifice, by censure to exclude such as are scandalous, for notorious sins obstinately persisted in, — truncentur & artus, Ut liceat reliquis securum vivere membris; but yet we cannot patient those, qui per calumnias criminum alienorum sacrilegium sui schismatis excusant, and therefore we inquire into the justice of the censure and the mode thereof, and ask — meruit quo nomine scrvus? Quis testis adest, quis detulit? audi, Nulla unquam de (hac) morte hominis cunctatio lovga est: and we fear to grant that a visible unworthiness is a sufficient ground for exclusion, when their eyes onely (however the organ may be distempered) must try that visible∣nesse, and that alone must be unworthinesse which they account such, when per∣chance of the same counters one may stand for one and the other for an hundred, according to the place wherein they shall please to set them; or when the medium may be onely rumors and reports, Cont lit. Pe∣til. l. 3. c. 59. for not onely Quintilian warns us in rumore cu∣jus probationes, cujus argumenta non habes, calumniae genus est primm mcredere, but Au∣gustine also admonisheth, neminem rectè judicari puto nocentem, qui hominem non con∣victm crediderit innecentem, and we think he determined likewise with as much piety as prudence concerning such power, in omnibus tenendus est modus, aptus hu∣manitati congruus charitati, ut nec totum quod potestis exeratur, mansuetudo monstretur, Contr. Crescon, l 3. c. 5.1. ubi vero nulla ex divinis humaxisque legibus poestas coneditur, nihil improbè at{que} im∣pudenter audeatur. And under this head we may incorporate what they suggest of the holinesse and purity that should be in the Church, which looks altogether beside their scope, who dispute not for the holinesse of the members of the Church (therein not coming sully up to their Independent brethren) but for the purity of those that communi∣care of the Sacrament, and retain those as Church members whom they exclude from the holy Table, and to prove that such holiness ought to be, if they argue from the holiness of the Camp, where was to be no unclean thing, I suppose by proportion of this reason, they should conclude to eject out of the town those also whom they repell from the Sacrament. And because Discipline is necessary and profi∣table in the Church, therefore to conclude the necessity and utility of theirs, and that because there is requisite some separation of the scandalous from them by cen∣sure, therefore they may separate from such as are not censured to be scandalous; and that because we have covenanted to endevour a reformation, and establishment of Discipline according to Gods word, therefore we must submit unto, and co-ope∣rate in advancing their Ecclesiastick Oeconomy: All these are Paralogismes à genere ad speciem affirmativè, and fallacies à dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, and also fallaciae consequentis, and is as if because both the harlots had children, there∣fore the dead child must be sentenced to be laid in the bosome of her that was mo∣ther of the living, or the living to be given to her that had over-laid her son.
To non causa pro causa and petitio principii is reducible what they say of the good ef∣fects which the excrecise of their discipline will produce, and the evill consequences which the want thereof would introduce, and this concelt is not onely like that of the Siennois (which Laurentius speaks of) who supposed his making water would save the town when it was on fire, but would have drowned it if he should have shed it at another time, but also hath somewhat in it of Cambyses, who would have Praexaspes to commend his skill in Archery when he shot his son at the heart; or like the daughter of Appius Caecus, who being troubled with the crowd at the Theater, for her ease wished that her brother were alive again to have carried them to be slaughtered at Sicily, And under petitio principii also falls almost all those Harangues, That the Sacrament only belongs to the godly (whom they call Real Souls as if the souls of hypocrites were fictitious as wel as their holiness) That free admission (of such as are not scandalous & justly censured for such) is to be prodigall of Christs blood, and to crosse the desires of the godly and actings of the State, and to degenerate from the primitive patern, Tha the troubles and contentions attending upon their courses, are the effects of mens lusts onely, not of their actings, with the rest of that bold strain, and those brasse stamps. And after all their boasting of the clear prooss of their mode of discipline, and specious pretences to engage men to submit thereunto, yet so frequently to beg the question, is to hazard the contracting of such a censure on their way, as hath been cast upon Chymistry, Principium est jactare, medium decipere, finis mendica∣tumire. There be some things wherein they answer for us, and therefore we must rather second than contradict, Vereor ne quisquam in hoc opere nostro scriptorem arbitretur orrasse, & illic fecisse, Petilianus dixit, ubi debuit facere, Augustinus respondit, they say, the wicked eat papanem Domini, not panem Dominum, But I think eey man wil see that they could not eat the bread of the Lord, if they must not be suffered to approach at the Table. They tell us, that Men upon good grounds to be admitted, are supposed godly in the judgement of charity: and if upon such judgement of charity they are admissible, why do they trouble us with their probations to get a judgement of verity? Charity thinketh no evill, believeth all things, and presumeth every man to be good that is not manifestly wicked. But when they have dictated, that to say bare profession with∣out evidence of the seriousnesse thereof, is enough to make the Church to own men for members, is in their conceit, not to speak soundly. As their bare imagination without reason is not strong and mastering enough to bind and impose upon ours, (sequor te quo trahis, non quo ducis, as Scaliger to Cardan;) so their practice answers for us against them, for upon such profession they own many as members of the Church, and correspondently baptize their infants, though they shut them out from the Sacrament, which is appropriated onely to those of their Church, not to o∣thers of the Church, for those are different in their language, as if that of Plautus must hold in mysticall Shepheards and their Flocks, Etiam opilio qui poscit alienas oves aliquam habet peculiarem quá spem soletur suam. For their qualifications required in communicants, as it was said of Gregories commentaries upon Job, They were good things, but might have been written upon any other book of Scripture as well as that, so these qualifications are as needfull to other duties as to the partaking of the Sacrament, and other qualifications are as ne∣cessary to sacramentall participation, as these.
But that which sounds with most complacency and makes the sweetest musick is the close, and therein we shall goe in consort with them, for definit in mulierem formo∣sam, and as the Historian saith, that Nerva having adopted Trajan soon after expi∣red, lest he should by any lesse glorious speeches disparage or contaminate what he said upon that concernment; so they doe very well to conclude suddenly after they have told us, that they place not the life of Religion in any outward way or more re∣fined course of Gods worship, and so much earnestnesse and confidence needs not in exter∣nall fellowship, as to be members of Christ, for unlesse men take care how they live, it is no great matter how they worship. And this is in some degree to unravell Penelopes web, and is not unlike Bellarmines Tutissimum est in the close of his books of Justi∣fication, which frustrates all his former dispute; for if they are sensible and really perswaded of this truth, how can they with any consistence herewith, lay down this course of discipline as the onely ground of reformation, and that without which it cannot be carried on and advanced, as the way alone wherein holiness and peace can meet together, and kiss each other (as in effect they affirm Sect. 36.) and so earnest∣ly and confidently drive on this way, as to separate from all such as will not walk therein with them, which consequently is (as we have shewed in Sect. 24.) to conclude the want of this discipline of theirs to be malum insanabile, lethale & con∣tagiosum, and so interpretatively to place much of the life of religion therein. But notwithstanding this it is hath been even the bane of peace and truth, and the matter of most earthquakes that have shaken the Church of God, that indiffe∣rent things have been with such animosity pressed as necessary, as well as that things deletorious have been held forth for Alexipharmacous, and too many like Augustus take on them to tax the world to pay tribute to their opinions and institutions, and (according to what Mindanes the mother of Cyrus dreamd) what is cōceived in their womb must be a vine to spread all over Asia, nay their very urine to over flow the Citle, like Pope Alexander they must rule from Sea to Sea, though all they write like him be but in chips, and like Charles Duke of Burgundy, they must fight it out to the hazard of all, though but for the tribute of a load of Calves-skins, yea though the fruit of the victory, if acquired, cannot be worth the Bits and stirrops of the armies they engage. And as Grotius in the like case observes, They call that peace when they have made a solltude, Si Ecclesia una (as Junius complains) si plures in circumstantiis, ri∣tibus, ceremoniis non planè judicio nostro aut moribus conformantur, plerique omnes cla∣mant de pietate, de Christianitate actum, atque ulinam clamarent solum, etsi hi clamores tot sunt infesta tela quibus imperitorum mentes obsirmantur & labefactantur infirmo∣rum, sed cum accedunt contumeliae, proscriptiones, condemnationes & alia id genus, puidsne mi homo illud institutum à Christo esse aut à Christiano sui compote probari posse? non vi∣des dum ordinem externum propugnas verbis, eundem ordinem à to ipso ante omnes p∣pugnari, destrui, quod ais extruendum. In going off from me, they justle with Mr. Teanes, that they may like Caetiana in Ta∣citus, majoribus inimicitiis ineirescere, but it is never the esse with a tender and gentle touch, reflecting happily on him (as Erasmas said of Luther) as a man too great for them to deal with. Every help lesseneth and detracts from him to whom it is contributed; so plenus extra quid cupiat? as therefore Quintilian said of Tully, Ad laudandum Ciceronem Cicerone opus esse, so there needs none to defend that learned man but himself.
But they fall on Mr. Humfryes with a full carrier, and because two are scarce sufficient for such a Hercules, and Si vis celeri gloriari cursu, Tigrim vince, levémque Passerinum, Nulla est gloria praeterire ascllos; Therefore since it is like to be of little honor to vanquish me vix nomi e notum, they seek to improve their victories by incountring him Qui legitur toto orbe frequens, & dicitur hic est. It concerns not me to undertake his defence which can be much better made by himself. As the Vestal flame going out, was to be rekindled onely by the like sacred fire; so if they would have damped that fire which hath reflected so much light, it is onely proper for himself to revive and foment it; but I am apt to believe, that as Socrates being incited to vindicate himself from such aspersions, said he had done it already by his former course of life; so Mr. Humfryes will think himself super∣seded of his defence by the second book which he set forth, which it had been more opportune and handsome for them to have assaied to answer (Ecce tacent omnes, Naevole dic aliquid) then to be nibbling at this, and thereby to deal with him as Robinet de Bourneville did with King Henry the fifth after the battell of Agincourt, who when he durst not encounter him in his full strength, fell upon the Camp which the King had left lesse fortified, and formerly marcht out of, to obtain a glorious victory against a braver enemy. And therefore however their ambition may be observed, yet their expe∣ctation may be frustrate of answer, Desperanda tibi est ingentis gloria fati, Non potes hec tenuis praeda sub hoste mori. and even pitie will with-hold the laying of any violent hands upon such a faint and feeble object which will soon die of it selfe, and came forth into life onely to add more credit to Mr. Humfryes Tract, and may serve as a foile to reflect more luster upon that Jewell Though the Gentleman be known to me onely by the image of his mind pour∣traied in his sheets, yet it is a due tribute of the mouth (like that of the fish,) to say of that picture (his bok) what Apollodorus did of that which he drew, facilius quis culpabit haec quam imitabitur, & however Catonem sua aetasnon intel. exit, and after he hath driven so well, his reward with many hath been a draught of wormwood, (which was upon another account given to those that wonne the Goal in Chariot-running at Rome) yet as Phidia's's statues shewed more beautiful with age, so fu∣ture time may lay up that honor for him which the present envy, and perhaps be sen∣sible, that as the Historian saith, Sicut Marcelli praelio ad Nolam populus Romanus primò se erexit, postea multae res prosperae consecutae sunt, so from the setting up this truth by him (though in some mens accounts a Samaritan) and his binding up its wounds, and taking care thereof, which the Priest and Levite had left half dead, it may recover life, and by some others, spending more beside his two-pence upon it, acquire such strength as to flourish and beat down all gainsayers, and be fruitfull in begetting more peace and union in the Church of God. FINIS.
