R2061 E40_31 99859076 111140
The fatal BLOW Given to the EARLE OF Newcastles Armie, BY THE SCOTS, Certified by Letters read in the House of Commons this present Munday, Aprill. 8. 1644. 500 Slain of the enemy upon the ground, A numerous company taken prisoners, Sir Marmaduke Langdale and most of his chiefe Commanders slain. All their Ordnance, Bag and Bagage, And the whole Armie utterly ronted. With A Report by a Messenger sent from the English Commissioners at Sunderland, with Letters By William Row. Secretary to the Commissioners. Printed by Andrew Coe, and published according to Order, MDCXLIV.
The last proceedings from the Scots Army MAach the 25 and 6 there was a great fight neere Sunderland, there was of the Scots about 300 wounded, some of them slain, and others since dead to the number of about 60, this was all the losse we sustained in that fight, which was within some 2 miles of the north of Sunderland: But of the Earl of Newcastles men there were slain at the least 1500 a∣mongst which were divers of great quality: Sir Mar∣maduke Langdale was slain and divers of great note, some of them his Excellencie Generall Lesley gave them the credit of an honourable buriall according to their degreea, amongst which were at the least 30 Co∣lonels, Majors, Captains, and Lievtenants, besides other Officers, and there were taken prisoners from the enemie almost a hundred. They retreated towards Newcastle, the Scots pursued them very close, Then the Earle of Newcastles Forces spread themselves and disperced towards Chestry streete and so to Durham, and quartered towards Bishop Anckland, and Brans∣pith to see if they could rally their men, but the Scots still pursued them, cleering the way up the River as they went.
March the twentie seventh, the Scots marched to wards Lumley Castle to cleer the River for Coals, his Excellencie the Lord Generall having then eight pee∣ces of Ordnance carried from the ships, for before hee had only two peeces, save only his small pieces where∣with good execution was done. From the twentie seventh of March, to the end of the moneth, the Scots were and so are still in pursuit of the enemie: the Earle of Newcastle all this while: not having taken a man of the Scots Armie to my knowledge, but there are daily many that desert the enemie, and come into us both from Newcastle, and also from the Armie, seven or eight everie day: some daies more, who take the Covenant and join with our forces: there hath thus come in at the least 200 and more come in daily: declaring that they were forced against their wils to fight under the Earl of Newcastle, and that in the fight the Earl of Newcastles horse did force them to fight, and kept them in with their Canes and Swords: & hurt, pistold, and slue many that retrea∣ted: and they do also affirm, that there are many more in the Earle of Newcastles Armie that would faine come away, if they had an opportunitie. Since there hath been many skirmishes, but none considerable before the date hereof, but the Scots still pursue the enemie to prevent them as much as they can from Rallying. The Commissioners are come from Morpeth, and are all at Sunderland. The last of the Commissioners came to Sunderland this present Munday, being the first of April: which is a place where is great strait of provision, so that from thence Thursday before, Ge∣neall
Leshley removed his Quarters, and carried away bag and bggage: only 3000 he left for that Garrison, and, and er neere it, and hath fortified the Town verie wellr parsecured all places as he leaves them. But an∣othe hint of the enemie lying towards Lumly Castle; hath ipsdred the Lighters from carrying the Coals to the shto; but there was a Convoy to have gone with them, the ships, had not the battle prevented, but there is no doubt but the enemie will be removed so∣dainly, and Coals sent speedily to London: There are about 120 ships that ride in Sunderland Harbour for Coals, and there is so great a quantitie of Coals alrea∣die above the ground at the Pits readie to be taken a∣way, that they are not to be valued: there is so vasta quantitie: and the Commissioners are resolved upon this course, to serve those ships first with Coals that bring provision; which is but reason, their being such want of provision amongst our men, not only to sup∣ply the Armie; but also to encourage others that come for coals thither to bring provision with them. Sir Tho: Glenham is in Newcastle, but few cōsiderable men of note, nor as some that come out from thence to our men, certifie not above 120 Souldiers besides the Inhabitants, and they have denied the Earle of Newcastle to come in or any of his Forcrs: more then what are in the Town already, till they see who shall win the field. The Town begins to be much straitned of provisi∣on, and are out of hope to have any reliefe, especially since the Earl of Newcastle is driven Southward, and the Scots compasse the Town both by Sea and Land, in Northumberland and in the Bishodrick, and they
are blockt up by water, our Forces commanding the River. The Scots are every day at Gatehead which they take great care to prevent the enemie from burning themselves being possest thereof, but the enemie Works there are all pulled down and demolished, on∣ly a partie are placed to prevent the enemie from issu∣ing out of the Towne to deroy those Suburbs, and houses at Gatehead. By all probabilitie, it is not any ways likely that Newcastle can hold out long; and the Scots do daily eapect when they will sound a parley about the deli∣vering up thereof. Generall Leshley is marched towards Durham, and the Marquesse of Argile goes along with him, and ma∣ny of the Nobilitie: pursuing the Earle of Newcastle. A Regiment lies at Blyth, and two Regiments at Mor∣peth, who doe often issue out to face Newcastle, and to keep the Countrie from being further wasted and spoiled by the enemy. There are are two Regiments that lie at Sunderland and a Regiment about a mile off: In Sunderland are about 100 prisoner of the Earl of Newcastles Forces, Colonels, Captains and other Officers, for common men, they turn them away and will not charge them∣selves with keeping of such only those of note. Generall Leshley is still in pursuit of the Enemie, not permitting them to rally. Thus far the report of John Hardy.
(There is a report that the Earl of Newcastle should fall upon the Scots on Sund ay last neer underland, and that the Scots gave them a repulse, slew and tooke prisouers a numerous company of them, & utterly routed them, but this the Mes∣senger reporteth not, nor knoweth of it.) By the Committees and Commissioners of the honourable houses of the Parliament of England. To all Commanders and Officers in the Parliament service both by sea and land. WHereas the bearer hereof Iohn Hardy was sent from the Parliament to us in Scotland, and hath since continued with us
untill now that hee is to returne to London, these are therefore to require all Comman∣ders, Officers, and Souldiers, both by sea and land, to suffer him to passe quietly without let or molestation. And Francis Dobson Mr. of the willing Minde of Hull, is hereby desi∣red to give him free passage for London. VVilliam Row, Secretary to the Commissioners.
This present Munday Aprill the eighth, Letters were read in the House of Commons from the Scots Army, certifying that there hath been a great battail between his Excellencies the Lord Generall Lesleys Army of Scots, and the Marquesse of Newcastle. By which Letters it is cerfied, that the Scots have given the enemy a great overthrow. Slain 500 dead upon the ground. Taken a numerous company of them. Divers of their chief Commanders. All their Ordnance, bag and baggage, and utterly touted them; and are still in pursuit of them. So that it is verily believed, that this wil prove the fatall blow in the North to the enemy: who it is verily believed will never be able to rally again. Published according to Order.
