R95 E37_3 99859095 155021
AN EXACT RELATION OF The last Newes from the Quarters OF His Excellency, The Lord Generall of The Scottish Army. Dated from Sunderland March 12. 1643. Fully relating every dayes Passage, from their pas∣sing over the River of Tine, their taking of Sunderland, and a vast quantity of Coales appertaining to Delinquents. With Propositions to the City of London for the sending out Shipping for Coales from thence: And sundry other Proceedings of that Army in their marching towards Duresme, and in mannaging the Siege against Newcastle. From February 27. to March 12. 1643. Printed for L. BLAIRLOCK, and are to be sold at his Shop neere Temple-Barre. 1644.
SJR, IT hath not been want of good will, but of leisure and opportunity to ac∣complish my promise, whereto I obliged my self when I parted with you: I wish you knew how often I have fancied thankfulnesse to you in my minde, for that great favour I found from you, but a stranger to me: Pardon my inability hi∣therto, and accept of this inclosed Accompt of the condition of this Army, and of the affaires of it. I am put into much hastinesse, otherwise I might add much of circumstances, and relations of sundry o∣ther matters: For the present you may know that we are Masters of a vast quantity of Coals belong∣ing to this Port, most of it appertaining to Delin∣quents, which wilbe (I hope) a comfortable supply to LONDON: But if you have any friends that in∣tend hither for Coales, advise them to bring some provisions for the Army, especially six-shillings
Beer, Hay, or Oates: The Army is this day march∣ed towards the Enemie at Duresme, and his Excel∣lencie intends to visite them if they will stay by it; The English Commissioners intend to remaine here till it please God we can get Newcastle, which by Gods blessing, either when the Enemies Ar∣mie now in the field is defeated, or the weather a little warmer, will be suddenly. Sunderland, March 12 1643. Sir I am Your very affectionate friend. W. R.
An exact Accompt of the Scots passing over the River Tine, taking of Sunderland, and other Proceedings: With the present Condition of the SCOTS Army: From the 27. of February till the 12. of March. 1643. IT being resolved as most conducible to our af∣faires, that the greatest part of this Armie should passe the River Tyne, that so we might the better understand, what course the Enemy meant to take, and doe accordingly. On the 28. of Febr. with 15. Regiments of Foote, and 6. Regiments of Horse, we passed the River Tyne at se∣verall Fordes near Bywell and Oringham, which if wee had not done that day, the sudden alteration of the weather had made it for some time impossible to us, leaving behind 5. Re∣giments of Foot, and some Troops of Horse, under com∣mand of Sir Iames Lumsdaine, Generall Major of the Forces on the other side Tyne: After we had passed Tyne, we found the River of Darwen so high by the sudden thaw, that onely half of the Armie could passe it on Thursday, the other part being forced to stay till Friday, when they also passed over with the Carriages, and so we directed our March toward Sunderland, it being very necessary for supply of the Armie, and receiving Intelligence, that wee should have that Haven
secured, near which we came on Saturday night, March the second: And resting the Lords day, the Enemie crossed the River and left it, so we entred on Munday without striking one blow. In this March from Tine to Sunderland, notwithstanding the many straight and disadvantagious passages (which were so narrow, that sometimes the people were: constrained to march one by one, as in a string: and if God had given our enemies hearts, we might either have beene cut in peeces, or stopped) but we found no opposition from the enemy, and scarcely obtained a sight of them, onely a Body of Horse appeared upon our Reare, at our passing over the River of Weare, at New-Bridge, but interrupted us not. We remai∣ned in our Quarters on Munday and Tuesday, taking what care wee could for supply of Provisions in this Enemies Countrey, for so we finde it, not receiving any intelligence or willing supply from them. But it is no wonder wee finde not many friends, when there are so few men, the whole Countrey being in Armes, either willingly or forcedly: so great a power hath the Cathedrall here. On Wednesday the sixth of March the Enemy having united their Forces, and received an accession of strength by Sir Charles Lucas, who brought 21. Troopes from Yorke-shire, and by 1500. Foote, from Cumberland, they drew their Forces to a place about two or three Miles to the West of Sunderland, and shewed themselves upon the top of Worme-Hill: This Army was accordingly drawne forth; and both lay at about half a miles distance, on Wednesday night in the fields, on thursday mor∣ning they were againe drawne up something nearer, the Ene∣my still keeping to the advantage of his ground upon the Hill, so that notwithstanding the nearnesse of some part of both Armies, being not above a quarter of a Mile distant, we
could not without very great disadvantage engage this Ar∣my, in regard of the impassable Hedges and Ditches betwixt us, so that likewise after the Armies had faced each other that day, they remained in the fields that night also: on Friday morning some little Skirmishes there was, betwixt some small parties of Horse, wherein that little advantage that was, fell to us, taking some few Prisoners, by whom wee understood, that they had on Thursday night drawne off their Ca∣non, and withdrawne their Foote, and left a full body of Horse which faced us in the morning till about tenne of the Clocke, and then taking the advantage of a very thicke storme of Snow, which lasted two or three houres, (and in as sore a manner sure as ever was seene) marched a∣way, and this Army, through the ilnesse of the weather and wayes, rendred uncapable of pursuing; they also having so great a strength of horse in the Reare, and we not supplied with Provisions to  whereupon  Friday night this Army returned to their Quarters. We since understand by good hands, that the Enemies lying in the field two nights, was almost as bad as a Battell to them, many of their Men and Horse dying, but more running away. Wee likewise sustained some little losse by the extremity of the weather, but nothing neere theirs. We heare they lost eight hundred Horse one way or other these two nights. They are now in Durham, and this Army as yet a∣bout Sunderland; onely seven Regiments are (for the in∣larging the Quarters by reason of the want of provision) on the North side of the River of Weare, toward New∣castle. The Enemy on Friday night cut the New-Bridge, but it can be little disadvantage to this Army, which (being
now supplied with some Provisions, which came happi∣ly yesterday in two ships with meale from Scotland, and Captaine Carres ship of Cheese and Butter from London) will march to morrow, being the 12. of March, upon some Designe not certainly knowne by any but the chief Commanders. The Lord go along with them. FINIS. This is Licensed, and Entred according to Order.
