R981 E684_8 R207045 99866121 166395
A REMONSTRANCE From HOLLAND, To all true and loyal Christians within the Commonwealth of England: With a Narrative of the proceedings of foreign Princes, touching the King of Scots, the Parliament of England, the Lord Gen. Crom∣wel, and the immediate Power and Government, with∣out a King, &c. Likewise, the Tryal of famous Captain Vere, an Englishman, before the great Councel of the United Provinces; the dreadful Sentence denounced against him; and his Speech immediatly before his deth in the presence of the Queen of Bohemiah, the Princesse of Orange, and divers other Lords, and Ladies. lion rampant guardant London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.
SIR, GReat and mighty are the Resolves of the high and imperious States of the Netherlands: no less then 50 new Frigats more are voted upon the stocks, to put forth against the Spring, unless your Parliament can find out a way to repeal that vigorous Act: Where is power and policy? Or Right and Supe∣riority; I hope they are not like twisted snakes linkt in conspiracy: God forbid! for now is the time for every true English man to put his hand to the plough, rather then to be allur'd by the rowling flouds of the World, into the common stream of Error and Convenience: Alas! this would be a
meanes to dray you to a declension from Freedom; to a Chaos of Confusion. Therefore, to draw a little nearer home to the ex∣amination of your own dangers, I conceive it very requisite to remonstrate unto you the warlike pre∣parations of forreign Nations; which summarily, I shall thus contract; to the end, that it may be com∣municated to all Christian people within your Ter∣ritories; for by all humane apprehension, Europe renders you in a sad condition; and most of her Princely Powers seem very forward to array them∣selves in a Military posture against your Supremacy and Authority. In short, there's old listing of Soul∣diers in the English court in France, and mighty pro∣visions making to bring an Army into these parts; that if possible ere Spring they may be in a capacity and condition to land in England. For the more fa∣cile accomplishing whereof, Prince Rupert is gone to the Swedish Court to incite the aid and assistance of the Royal Queen Christiana, and her great coun∣cel, for their friendly assistance in carrying on the design of his distressed Kinsman; And, to deal in∣genuously, so much his Rhetorick has wrought up∣on them already, that he is entertained like a Prince, and his Captains feasted most nobly at the cost and
charge of the Nobles; and withall much importu∣ned to spend some few dayes more in conference; the result whereof produced these Effects, That so soon as there is a firm League concluded between the Crown of Sweden, and the Duke of Branden∣burgh, her Majesty was resolved to answer his ex∣pectation. But his Highness being loath to detract any further time, resolved for the Baltick seas, and accordingly with 26 Men of War hoysted sayl, and spread his Canvass, upon his launching forrh into Neptunes Ocean. Which Frederick King of Den∣mark hearing of, immediatly gave Order that 30 of his best Frigats should be put into an equipage to receive him, and according to Commission and In∣structions to reinforce the King of Scots Fleet, com∣manded by Sir George Carteret, and Sir Marma∣duke Langdale; which done, to act as occasion shall be offered from the English. These things were thought worthy of your Ge∣nerals observation, whose great soul I presume will rather descend to look into this business, wherin his Countrey is so highly concerned, that in respect he hath been a fiery wall for it abroad, so at home he is to become her great Intelligence, to guide those happy motions of her peace and security.
Truly sir, I conceive it to be a piece of publike gratitude, besides private, to com∣municate the Negotiations of your Com∣mon-wealths Enemies; so that you may see by what Engines the wheel of the Roy∣al Interest moves; whose Cause is so hand∣somly bandied on all sides, that the Gran∣dees are opiniated to grow great by the re∣stauration of young Charles; but, indeed, that which casts an odium upon their pre∣sent transactions, is, their previous tortures against the English, who contrary to due course of Justice, feigned an Accusation a∣gainst one Captain Vere, a Low-countrey souldier, but a faithful Englishman, and one who endeavored to make up the breach be∣tween the two Republiques; and at a try∣all before some of the Lords, received that dreadful sentence to have his head separated from his shoulders; Upon the pronouncing whereof, he delivered himself to the Judges as followeth:
Gentlemen, As your inventive sentence is founded upon the Criticisms of sin, so is it the The∣ory of a bloudy Tragedy; and one day you will find that a good Conscience is far more precious then a passionate Revenge. But being interrupted, and receiving a Gag from the President, he was immediatly carryed to the place of Execution, and before the Palace-Royal received the fatal blow, in the presence of the Queen of Bohemia, the Prin∣cess of Orange, and divers other honorable Personages; who seem'd not a litle astonish'd at his undanted deportment; for indeed Death was not in the least terrible; his suf∣ferings he accounted Martyrdom, and his Change glorious. His loss is much lament∣ed, and it is conceived those who were the chies Instruments to cloud and asperse his innocency, are now the greatest Anticipa∣tors if it were possible to apply a salvatory
means to the Malady; but alas! too late; though they fain would cloud it with the veil of Apostacy, merely under the type & shadow of Treachery and Conspiracy, &c. But if ye consider, how loud and pressing the cry of bloud is, or with what high seve∣rity God ever proceeds against it, though his wrath for some small time may seem to be asleep, yet there is just cause to fear, that there is a heavy account must be given by the Dutch for that execrable Tyranny of theirs executed. From the Hague, December 17. 1652. THE END,
