S1286 E607_19 R203718 99863564 165688
A Letter from the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND, TO THE PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, ASSEMBLED AT WESTMINSTER: CONCERNING The advance of the English Army, and their pleading of the Covenant, and the Articles of pacification. Brought by Col. Grey, formerly a Member of the late Lord Generall Fairfax's Army. ALSO, Their further Proceedings, touching the new Levy of 12000 Foot, and 4000 Horse; their sending of Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition to St. Johnstons, and their Resolution in case the English Army advan∣ceth over Tweed. Likewise, the arrivall of their Declared King, at the Holy-Island, and the preparation that they have made for the receiving of his Person. TOGETHER, With the dangerous Declaration of the Ʋlster Army in Ireland, against the Parliament of England, and their Resolution in Order thereunto. LONDON, Printed for G. H. 1650.
A Letter sent from the Parliament of Scotland, to the Parliament of England, assembled at West∣minster. SIR, THe Ʋlster forces grow resolute, and endeavour to embody, and have lately faln upon some of our men, as they were marching to their Colours, having (by sickness and the like) been retarded from their former march; they have summoned in all that are able to bear arms, and have set forth a Declaration, wherein they unanimously resolve to advance their Kings service, with the loss of lives, estates, and fortunes; a Copy whereof I have sent you enclosed: Yet notwithstanding all their combinations and confederacies, our men are resol∣ved to fight them; but that which strikes the greatest astonishment, is, the raging of the pestilence in these parts, which sweepeth whole families away, and lea∣veth many Towns almost unpeopled, the like mor∣tality was never known in Ireland, nor I think ever
heard of in England: The Lord is now pleased to lay his hand of affliction upon us, having visited our Camp with this terrible and grievous sickness, espe∣cially in the City of Dublin, where they now die 200. a week, and spreads daily: It hath been very vehe∣ment in the Irish Quarters; from whence we hear, that many thousands have lately perished. Cork, June 24. 1650. The Declaration of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commanders of his Majesties Forces of the Province of Ulster. WHereas we are given to understand, that some ill-affected Members for private respects of their own, and malice to our party, have endeavoured to sow sedition and discord betwixt us and such as are well-affected to his Majesty, both of the Scottish Nati∣on and others, alluring many of them from time to time, to harbor very prejudicious and jealous thoughts of our proceedings, by casting the Calum∣nies and aspersions on us, that our intentions and actions tend rather to our own particular ends and private gain, than to the advancement and preserva∣tion of His Sacred Majesties Interest, Crown and Dig∣nity in this Land; Which evill practice can produce nothing but sad, destructive, and lamentable effects, as it is two wel known already by woful experience; for it is most palpably evident, that the like unhappy misconstruction enforced the Scots at first to rise in Arms, and invade England against his Majesty, their own flesh, and blood, that occasioned the falling out
of the Irish and Scots in the beginning of these Wars; the occasion whereof, was only and solely the cause of the beheading His Majesty of happy memory, all these mischiefs being perpetrated by the practice and policy of the Up-starts of England, that this day tramples under-foot in misery, thraldom and slavery, the Nobility and Gentry of England, by raising and ex∣alting the basest abortive scums of that Kingdom, to the greatest height of Honour, Power and Command, that allured the Scots hitherto to endanger their lives, endeavors and fortunes, first in England as aforesaid, and secondly in this Kingdom against our Nation, when we little suspected ever any such sedition, or quarrel could be fomented betwixt us and them, or that they having once in their hands all the Forts and Garrisons in this Province (excepting a few) should be so far deceived by the sinister practice of the Parl. of England, as that they have not at present the Com∣mand of any of them in all Ʋlster, so as consequently it is to be feared none of the Scots will be suffered, ei∣ther Gentry or Communalty, to inhabit in any part of this Province, bordering on their Native Kingdom of Scotland. All which we cannot but sadly take to heart, and that the rather, because we see our fellow subjects so mislead, and withdrawn from their obedience to his Majesty, in not siding with us in the present service misconstructed by the evil suggestions of others, our endeavours and intentions, which might sufficiently give occasion of discouragement, where their commu∣nity and assistance in the prosecution of this War in his Majesties behalf, was unfeignedly expected by
our Party and Nation, for the cleering and removing of all past mischievous practises of that kinde on our parts, and prevention of any the like jealousie and discord hereafter; We thought it necessary, and do accordingly declare and avow, in the sight of the great God of heaven, and the world, that our intentions and resolutions, are to the last man to endeavour with the loss of our lives, estates, and fortunes, the advancement and preservation of his Majesties ser∣vice and interest in this Kingdom, and of all those whosoever, that prosecute his quarrel, so far forth as we be not troubledled in the free exercise of our Re∣ligion, as we will no way hinder or trouble any per∣son or persons of what Nation or uality soever ad∣hering to his Majesty to exercise and embrace his or their own profession or Religion, all which (with Gods assistance) our actions shall ere long ever ex∣presly manifest in the view of the World. Finally, it is our intention, that we shall make no distinction or difference between our selves and so many of the Scot∣tish or other Nation whatsoever, that now shall (as we invite them with heart and hand) joyn to his Ma∣jesties service, or any way freely contribute to, or countenance the same, but as becometh Brethren and fellow-Subjects, ingage in one quarrel for their true and lawful King. Dated at Charle-mount May 20. 1650. Emerus Clogherensis Richard Farral J. Loagh Inskillin, Arthurus Dunmere and Conc. Ter O Seal, Alex. Mac Donnel Shane. O Cahane Hugh Maguire Tur. Boyle Brian O Neale.
Miles Swine, Hugh Mac Mahone Cormack Mahallen Cullo O Donnel Jo. Mac Donnel Jeron: Mac Donnel. Owen O Dougherty, Turl. O Quin Brian O Neale Ter. O Boyle Brian Mac Mahone. An Abstract of a Letter from Scotland. SIR, THe Parl. of Scotland having ordered, that the Pallace of Hallyrad should be made ready for the creation of their King, have now intermit∣ted it, conceiving that the Northern Castles, and the advantagious passages in that Climate, will be a bet∣ter security for his person, against the English Army: But many suppose, that they begin to change and de∣viate from their former principles, fearing he will be no obedient sonne to the Kirk, or that he will not forget how they used his wel-beloved Cosen and Counsellor, Generalissimo Montross, and therefore cold wish he might lose his way, and aime any where, ra∣ther then in Scotland. And perhaps they may think it needless, to proceed any further in preparation; be∣cause they may think that he, or some about him, may have jealousie enough, to suspect that which they know to be true; That it is not safe for him to trust his person with them, and that they mean to serve their turns of him, if he will not serve all their turns. We hear that the Dutch Ships that were appointed for his Convoy, stand very firm and true, and that upon the 16. in∣stant, arived at the Holy-Island, upon the River of Elbo, near the Confines of Denmark. There is a great divi∣sion between the Lords in that part, and the Barons
and Burgesses there; the Lords would have a further Levy of an Army for their defence, and the arons would have their present Army to be (yet) better purged from Malignants and Sectaries: which debate occasioned a great Conference on the 18. of June last, divers of the Nobility and Clergy, voting for a new Levy of 12000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, to be presently listed and brought to a Randevouz, and then to return to their own dwellings; to the end, that they might be raised upon any small warning, for any service. The Contest in Parl. seemes to be very high, and there is great talk of purging the House: Great store of Pro∣vision, Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, is already sent to Strineving Castle, and to St. Johnstons, two pla∣ces very considerable, and of great strength, where the Parl. of Scotland intends to take Sanctuary, if the Eng∣lish Army allarms them at Edenburgh. The Par. of Scotland hath sent a Letter to the Parl. of England, by one Col. Grey, (an Englishman) directed to the Right Honourable, William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons: Wherein they plead the Covenant, and Articles of passification, That they should not be inva∣ded under three Moneths warning, &c. There is great talk that their Declared King is landed in the North of Scotland; but we have not received any Letters to assertain the truth thereof: Of which I shal particu∣larise more by my next, Vale. Carlisle, June 27. 1650. FINIS.
