S2029C E446_31 R204848 99864306 161793
THE SCOTS RESOLUTION, WHEREIN, They expresse their Intentions to come to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, ABOUT The 15. of this present month of June, 1648. ALSO, Three Votes of the House agreed on by the Lords and Commons, to be sent to Scotland for their agree∣ment thereunto, and so to be presened to His Ma∣jesties Royall Person, to be enacted before any Personall Treaty. WITH, A true Relation of the proceedings of Lieute∣nant Generall Cromwell against Pembrooke Castle in WALES. WHEREUNTO Is annexed the manner of the regaining SKIP∣TON Castle, by that renowned nd faithfull Souldier, Major Generall Lambert. Imprimatur G. M. LONDON, Printed for J. J. MDCXLVIII.
A Letter from Pembroke, concer∣ning the proceedings of Lieutenant Generall Crumwell, against Collo∣nell Poyer. Sir, THe condition here with us is ve∣ry good, wee lye now before Pembroke Castle, and have taken a Village which do command the Towne, and part of the Ca∣stle, in which wee have placed Batteries, that play into the Towne daily; I question not but in a short time we shall give a good account of it. The greatest part of our Forces may be conveniently spared, accor∣ding as the Parliament and the Lord Generall shall thinke fi to appoint. In Pembroke, they are forced for want of Provi∣sions, to feed their Horse and other Cattle with the thatch from their Houses. But for Col: Poe
still stands out on his old pinciples, not to deliver the Castle; and certifies, that he never had any hand in the businesse, concerning Lughorne and Pwel, in that Rebellion lately committd in Southwales, Poyer lies (as is conceived) in great feare of being surprized, and colours the businesse so in the best nature he can, but all to little purpose. For the businesse of Tinby C stle, it was delivered to Col. Herton the 31 of May, withll the Armes & Ammunition, the chiefe Ringleader f this busines was Colonell Towel, most of these Gentlemen were of Southwales, that were in this Rebelion a∣gainst the Parliament. The number of those Souldiers and Gentlemen that were taken, were 5. or 600. who are now priso∣ners in Tinby uner Col. Horton, So desiring to be excused, by reason of my hast, till the next opportu∣nity, I shall continue Your trusty friend T. W. From our Quarters neare Pembrooke this 4. of Iune 1648.
A true Relation of Langdales procee∣dings in the North, and the Scots intentions to come in to him this present Month of June. SIR, ACcording to your dsire, I have set you the best intelligence (for the prsent) which is stiring in these pts as in briefe is thus. Ma∣jor Gen. Lambert doth proeede with much gallan∣try, and is now taking the field, being in number a∣bout 7000. Langdales men doe decrease from him daily, which is a great incouragement to our party, and a discouragement to him; some say that Duke Hamilton hath disappointed him of wh t they expected. The Major Gen. Lambert marched this day to∣wards Skipton, and hath regined the Castles Lang∣dale by report of all, hath 16. Troops of Horse, and 2000. Fote, and hath taken a house in the Coun y of Westmerland which he Committee had made the chiefe Magaze for those parts, wherein were 4 00 Armes, and much Powder, yet our Souldiers are not a jot dunted by reason thereof. Likewise, we have it certainly reported, that the Scots will be with Langdale, about the 15. of this present mneth of June, except some suddain deseit be given to Lang∣dales forces, before they are uited together.
Sir, for the present I have but little other newes to write, but God willing, by the next you shall heare further, So in the meane time I remain, Your humble devoted Servant H. W. From Yorke June 1. 1648. A Letter from New-Castle, concer∣ning the proceedings of the SCOTS Armie. SIR, I Have in these enclosed Papers, acquainted you with the condition that we are in, which is to this effect. The great differences in Scotland, doth retard, yet is not like to hinder an Amies comming for Engl: and what more encouragement can be given, then that there comes not Force enough from Parl. to suppresse the English gathered under Langdale; that the Design goes on, appeares in that Barwick and Crlisle is supplied with Armes, and other things from Scotland, L. Lotherdale sent lately 22 horse load into Barwick; its conceived they are well armed in Cumberland, a party from thence last Friday, took Major Shafto, with 16. of his men, he was rai∣sing a Troop of Horse about Beywell, these were surprised by Colonell Carnaby, and other of the Countrey that knew the way to them, the Major is carried prisoner to Carlisle, this is a great discou∣ragement to others that were arming. Langdale had
musters about Hetursell, and Grindon, and news is come, that his maine body will quarter at Heman this night or to morrow, they may come whi∣ther they will, or goe whither they will, nothing comes to us wherewith to oppose them. Colonel Lilburne, now with Major Generall Lambert, going towards the quarters of Sir Marmaduke Langdale, saed a considerable party of them, but they had no minde to engage. Sir Marmaduke Langdale is still estimated 10000 able fighting men, it is reported he wants mony, and will suddenly remove. The third of Iune, The Commons agreed, that the three Votes be drawne up into Propositions, not Bills, and so sent to Scotland, and they agreeing, they are to be sent to the King, and he to make them Acts before any Treaty, and that done, they are to treate, the Lords agree to this, and also discharge the Lords formerly charged. For Pembrooke (before which the Lieutenant Generall is, with Colonell Prides Regiment of foot, and Col. Deanes, Col. Hortons horse, some of Col. Scroopes, and some of Col. Okeyes Dragoones) it hah in it, besides what Poyer hath in the Castle, three hundred Gallant Horse, and many resolute Foote. Honest Mr. Peters (who was buried in Es∣sex, s now risen up in little England beyond Wales) went to the Lyon, a Ship of the Parlia∣ments, riing in Milford Haven, not ingaged with the Kentish men, got from it two Drakes, two De∣y Culverins, and two whole Culverins, with all
accoutrements belonging to them, when but two of them were planted, they were lett off against the Castle; at the same time was stormed, and some three nights since, a Village adjoyning to the South gate of the Towne, which being obtained, keepes both Horse and Foot in the sowne and Ca∣stle, that a man dars not stand upon either wall to shoot without a blinde: which Poyer perceiving, pulled in his red Fagge: Their Horse in the Town make desperate sallyes, but not without command of the Guns, and are beaten in, though not with∣out losse on both sides; and their rage is so much the greater, because desiring to come out, it would not bee granted, but upon mercy; They give no quarter to our Dragoones, they are so enraged a∣gainst them for the last defeat of their Army; nor doe our Dregoones give qurter to any of them: These resolutions joyned against a Forraigne ene∣my, What glory would they be to England; our Batteries will be finished this night; the Forces be∣fore Ten by come up to us, it will then be a round siege, and we hope to give you a good account of ths Town, and to leave the Counties in good de∣votion to Parliament, which will, no doubt, conti∣nue, if they be severe enough to the ring-leaders, to whom the peope are pure slase; but if acts of in∣demnity and favour be shewed to them, or any trust reposed in them, expect new worke before Micha∣elmas. FINIS.
