S259 E443_41 R203450 99863403 161727
Sad Newes out of KENT: Certified in a LETTER from CHATTUM: Of the Rising at Maydstone, Rochester, and other parts. Their Resolutions concerning their joyn∣ing in ARMES. AND Their Intentions to Randezvouse at Blackheath. May. 24. 1648. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbott. LONDON, Printed for H. Becke, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.
SAD NEVVES OUT OF KENT. Certified in a Letter from Chattum. OF THE Risings at Maydstone, Rochester, and other parts. SIR, I Am sorry that I have no better newes to salute you with, then our sad divisions, by which we are much distracted, you may
make as slight of it as you will in London, but I can assure you, I feare the conclusion will carry sorrow enough. The Petition is daily signed by additionall hands, the number is great that have joyned in it. Since their seising of Rochester, and the Magazine, (which it was thought had been well over on the last Lords day at night, and that they would have been satisfied) they have increased, divers, both Gentlemen, Servants, Souldiers, and men of all sorts come in, and stand upon their defence There are also divers others, gathered at Maydstone, and in severall other places of this County. And many of them are armed. They say that they will have the King to come to London, and a Treaty. And the Ar∣my of Sectaries (as they call them) disband∣ed. They have seized on a Packet of Letters, that came from the Committee of the Navy, and other Letters that were sent from the Vice-Admirall Rainsborough, to the Parlia∣ment, caused them to be opened, and read
them, and delivered many of the Letters back again. They stop divers passengers, and examine them, but let them goe again, without doing them hurt. But for Souldiers they put all out of the Country, and permit none except only such as comply with them. And they have prevailed so farre with the Horsemen of the Country, that they are al∣most all the Troope gone in to joyne with them. And the Trained Bands are too cold to oppose them. And they will grow now (for ought I see) too numerous, if speedy course be not taken. They intend their Randezvous, as is given out in these parts, next week at Black-heath, and the Committee know not what to doe, nor where to sit in safety. Upon the rumour of Prince Charles his be∣ing come to Sandwich, (which was at first be∣leeved; and many labor still that it may car∣ry credence) many came in out of a pretend∣ed affection to him, and it was rumoured that he was come over to joyn with them to re∣lease
lease the King and bring him safe to London. But we are since satisfied that it is not Prince Charles, but a poore ras∣cally fellow, not fit for Gentlemens company, The Officer of the ship that caried the Prince away, was to see him, & saying he was not the Prince, the fellow told the Mayor that hee came to kill him, and desired he might be secured, which was done accord∣ingly, and others are committed also for saying that he is not the Prince. A great deale of money is sent in by severall persons of the County to him, And he faires like a Prince, And still stands stifly in it, that he is Prince Charles. Hee came hither with poore cloathes, and a course dirty shirt, but he had other apparrell provided pre∣sently.
If the Parliament send for him, I know not whether those who are risen in this County will let him goe, for (so farre as I can understand) he was appointed by the Royalists, to en∣courage the Country, and joyne with them to disturbe the Parliament. I pray God that this fire may bee quenched before the flames burne out so, that neither the Parliament nor the Country can be able to quench it, Oh Sir, That God would move all mens hearts to peace, and that we could all learne to lay aside malice, and selfe-seeking, and sin, and seek to God for peace, and labour together in love for the glory of God, the propagation of the Gospell, the Amity of the King∣domes, and the ends of the Treaties and the Solemne League and Cove∣nant.
These poore wretches (in this County) go on in an heady resolution, and they say they will have this and that, and they will because they will; but by what primum mobile they move God knows. There are in Rochester, and the parts here∣abouts (I doe verily beleeve) at the least a thousand that are risen, besides their interest in some Sea-men; and others at Maydstone, and other parts. Here are abundance of Ordnance, and ma∣ny ships, a great number of Armes, much powder in the Ships, the Soveraigne neere; if some speedy course be not taken herein, it may be repented when it is too late. God send us all well setled. Chattum May 23. 1648. FINIS,
