S2812 E1055_1 R207988 99866997 168991
THE Several Speeches, DISPUTES, AND Conferences, BETWIXT The Gentlemen of the Black Roll (Actors in that most horrid and bloody Tragedy, against our late Gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles of ever glorious Memory) and divers of the Independant party, in the Common Dunge∣on at Newgate. WITH Several Remarkable Passages and Observations on the Lives and Practises of those unhappy and Trayterous Politicians. ALSO The Names of divers; And their private procee∣dings and instructions to their Friends. London, Printed for George Horton, 1661.
The several Speeches, Disputes, and Conferences, betwixt the Gentlemen of the Black Roll▪ (Actors in that most horrid and bloody Tra∣gedy, against our late Gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles) and divers of the Indepndant party, in the Common Dungeon at New∣gate, &c. NOt to insult on the miseries of the late Actors in that black and bloody Tragedy of our Martyr∣ed Soveraign, but clearly to undeceive such light judgements which are blown by every Wind into a several Opinion; I shall here insist upon some observati∣ons on sundry of their particular behaviours, where the Candid Reader weighing in an equal Ballance their black and bloody lives, will easily finde that their burning zeal was but an iguis satuus to lead the rest of their Crew to the same destruction: But I hope they will be more wise, and by these mens deaths learn some other way to happiness then through the ruines of their King and Country. Blood will have Blood, and murther (especially of Kings) never passeth unrevenged; as appears by these Gentlemen of the Black Roll, whom we shall trace according to their lives
and actions: And first we shall begin with some observa∣tions on Col Jones: If old Age could free a man from punishment, then had Mr. Iones a good plea in the Court of Antiquity; his gray Hairs shewed much Gravity, but Reverence is not due to Traytors: To be zealous in a bad Cause, argues a Conscience fit for Villainy, and this was his condition; so zealous was he for the Cause, that rather then Treason should cool, and the stonie hearts of the Kings unrelenting Judges by delay melt into pity, or fall back unto their own obedience, he not onely urgeth a speedy murther, but least they should want a Jury, he himself will be Fore-man: To shew that he was not onely Old in years but Vice; and had learned that delay was dangerous in a bad cause. But gray Hairs must not goe down with peace to the Grave, when Murther and Trea∣son rest unaccompted for: Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? such peace may all Traytors sinde! To kill a man had been a sin unpardonable by the Law of Nature and the Land; But to kill a King! Nay, a Gracious King, under whose Wings some of these Traytors sought pro∣tection, was a Villany that Future Ages will blush at.—But now to speak of the rest of these Traytors. The Life of Gregory Clement. Gregory Clement was a man hardly, worth the mention, considering the wickedness of his lewd life; He was a Mer∣chant by his first profession, but failing therein, and gro∣wing into a desperate fortune, thought to thrive by merchandizing in Bishops Lands, wherein he got a consi∣derable estate: He was turned out of the Rump Parlia∣ment for lying with his Maid at Greenwich, but was received amongst them again at their return after Olivers interruption. His guilty Conscience and his Ignorance to∣gether, would not suffer him to make any plea at the Bar, or speech or prayer at the Gallowes; for being there, he
was asked whether he had any thing to say before the Hangman did his Office, he said, No; upon which Exe∣cution was done, and being quartered, his Head was set upon London Bridge, and his Limbs disposed of on the Gates of the City: But something touching Mr. Gregory Clement take as followeth. Perhaps the Reader may think it strange that there is so little said of Gregory Clement, who suffered with the rest; therefore this onely is to be said more, (which is known to many) That Mr. Clement was very silent both at the time of his Imprisonment in Newgate▪ and at the time and place of his Execution at Charing Cross: Onely thus it is said, That he exprest his trouble to some friend, in the Prison, for yielding so far to the importunity of his Rela∣tions, as to plead guilty to the Indictment: And though he spake little at the place of Execution, yet so far as could be judged by some discerning persons that was near him, he departed this life in peace. Observations on Gregory Clement. Were there a Counsel so learned in the Law that (con∣trary to that old rule, Causa patrocinio non cuna major erit) could cast so fair a gloss on a bad Cause, that Justice it self would stoop to his Rhetorick, questionless he might have found a Client: See here a man called to the Bar to an∣swer Treason in the highest degree that thought can fan∣cy, struck mute with the horrour of his Conscience: Happy had he been if Nature had forgotten to have made a Tongue, but far more happy if he had never needed one to plead his own Guilt at the Bar of an offended Ju∣stice: I can say but little, where he scarce saith any thing himself; onely this, That if dying for the Good Old Cause, dipt in the Kings blood, only can make a Saint-like Martrydom, and Martyrdom be the onely way to be sa∣ved, I shall never go to Heaven.
Some additional passages of Col. Scroops, Col. Jones, and Mr. Cooks, with his Letter to his Daughter. Col. Scroop when a friend asked him at parting, How he did? answered him, Better and better I thank God every moment, my life doubles upon me and multiplies. He al∣so heard him say when there was mention made that there were some endeavours for his pardon▪ That onely would prove a snare to him, but he was fully satisfied what to do, and would not prejudice his Conscience to save his life. He also heard him when one was discoursing to him of the happiness of Heaven, and telling him it consisted in 3 things, viz. A perfect Communion with God, A perfect Conformity to God, and, A perfect Enjoyment of God. He made this answer▪ Those three things you mention are but one, we are entring into it, and can tell. And that friend asking him further about it, he said, That God was but one pure Act, and in whom there was no succession or distinction of acts, and that Souls led forth in his Spirit were in a manner made like to him, for their enjoying was their conformity and communion, and one was all, in which he seemed to be swallowed up, and even then got so far into Heaven, that all seemed to be but one Act with him. Some friends being present, heard both him and Col. Jones say: You can say, God is better then all the World, and say it truly; but you cannot say it with so much eeling and experience as we can; we finde he is so indeed. Remarkable passages of Col. Jones in Prison. Col. Iones the night before he suffered, told a friend, he had no other temptation upon him but this, Least he should be too much transported and carried out to neg∣lect
and sleight his life; so greatly was he satisfied to dye in that cause. The day he suffered, he grasped a friend in his Armes, and said to him: Farewel, I could wish thee in the same condition with my self, that thou mightest share with me in my joyes. Mr. Cooks speeches to his Wife. Mr. Cook speaking to his Wife a little before his death, said: My Lamb, now I am going where I shall meet the Saints all of one minde, which thou knowest was the de∣sire of my heart, to see thee at another time saith he; in∣deed, my Lamb, if I might have my choise now, I would not desire life, for I could not live where I might not en∣joy the Liberty of my Conscience, and when I can do no∣thing for God, what should I live for: O welcome sweet Death, thy sting is out, blessed be God, I do embrace thee with rejoycing: Thou art a good Porter that will sud∣denly open to me the Gates of Eternity; O those everla∣sting Gates will my Father set open to receive me: O bles∣sed be God for Jesus Christ the Fountain of all Mercies; Lord Iesus I come flying to Thee upon the wings of Faith, I come Lord full sail to Thee, Lord Iesus receive me: That which the World counts shame, saith he, I count it my Ioy, my Crown, and my Glory. A little before his parting with his Wife, she laid her head in his bosome and wept, whereat he said: My dear Lamb, let us not part in a shower, God hath wiped away all tears from my eyes, blessed be the Lord. Mr. Cooks Letter to his Daughter Free-love Cook, October the 15th. 1660. a little before his death. My dearest Child, Let thy name Free love, put thee in minde of the free love of God in Christ, in giving thee to me and thy dear mother, and
know▪ so soon as God gives thee any understanding, that thou art the childe of one that God counted worthy to suffer for his ske, and to seal to the truth of his Law and Gospel with his blood, which will he a great honour to thee in the judgement of all that truly love and fear God: I leave thee to the Lord, who I know will take care of thee, and be thy Portion, so thou shalt never want: Learn with all speed to read the Scriptures, and to un∣derstand them, and have a great care to serve God, and study to love Iesus Christ, and be obedient to thy dear Mother, and good Grandmother, and thy loving Ʋncle and Aunt Massey: I pray thee never learn any pride, but be humble and meek, and corteous, and wait upon Gods Ordinances; love the Word more then thy appointed Food: When the Lord shall please to alter thy condition, be sure to marry one that is Gracious, and a man that feareth God; be sure to prefer Grace before Wealth and Parts; for a little wih the fear of God, is better then great Ri∣ches with an ungodly man. The Lord make thee Religious, for Beauty is vanity, and Favour is deceitful; But a Woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. If the Lord give thee Children, be sure to bring them up Ʋirtuously and Religi∣ously, in the Nurture, Admonition, and fear of the Lord: I charge thee never to marry without the consent of thy dear mo∣ther, if she be then living: In all thy Actions have an eye to Eternity, and never do any thing against the light of thine own Conscience; know that thy dear Father is going to Heaven to thy dear Brother, and be sure so to live, that by Gods Grace thou myest follow after. If God give thee ability, I charge thee to do good to thy Friends and all Gods people; and if my last Will may be of force, do not violate it in the least. So I leave Gods blessing with thee, p-aying for thy Temporal and Eternal hap∣piness, and rest, Thy loving Father, John Cook. FINIS.
