T2759 669.f.15[81] 99870746 163155
The True Manner of the Crowning of Charles the Second King of Scotland, on the First day of January, 1650. Together with a Description of his Life, and Throne; And a cleare view of his Court and Counsell. The Manner of Crowning CHARLES the Second King of Scotland. THe Crown, Sword and Scepter, being brought to Scoon, by the Estates of Parliament, their King sitting in his Chaire of State, and the Nobility, Ba∣rons and Burgesses of Parliament about him, in the Presence Chamber. The Marquesse of Arguile made a Speech, advertising the King, that the Parliament of Scotland were come to present his Majesty with the Crown, Sword, and Scepter; But that before he received it, he was to take an Oath, and sweare as his former predecessors had done before him, which Oath was ten∣dred to the King and he sware to it as follow∣eth. The Oath sworn by CHARLES the Second, King of Scotland, at his Coronation, 1 Jan. 1650. I Doe Promise and Vow in the pre∣sence of the Eternall God, that I will maintain the true Kirke of God, Reli∣gion, right Preaching, and administra∣tion of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached within this Realme in pu∣rity. And shall abolish and gain-stand all false Religions and Sects contrary to the same. And shall rule the people committed to my charge according to the will of God, and laudable Lawes and Constitutions of the Realme; causing Iustice and Equi∣ty to bee ministred without partiality. After this one of the Lords, viz. the Mar∣quesse of Arguile and one of the Barons, and one of the Burgesses, (which are three of the three Estates of Scotland) held the Crowne, which they offered to the King, which they de∣livered to three Ministers of the Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, advertising them that they were appointed by the Estates in the Parliament of Scotland, to see the Crowne and Dignity of the Realme of Scotland, pre∣sented unto Charles the Second then present, the right Discended Inheritor thereof. One of those Ministers made a Speech to the King, and an expresse condition of his duty was laid down, before he received the Crown, and in answer to the same he made this follow∣ing Speech. A Speech made by CHARLES the Second, King of Scotland at his Coronation on 1 January 1650. I Will by Gods assistance bestow my life for your Defence, wishing to live no longer, then that I may see this kingdome flourish in happinesse. Then the Scots King stood upon a place where he might shew himselfe to the people and made protestations of great love and af∣fection to them; and the Crown being ten∣dred to the King, by three Ministers of the Assembly, one of them spake as followeth. The Ministers Speech at the tendring of the Crown to the King. SIR, I Doe present unto you King Charles the Second, the right Descended Inhe∣ritor, the Crown and Dignity of this Realm, (then turning his face towards the peo∣ple, the Minister said further) Are ye not willing to have him for your king, and become subject to him? At which time the Crowne was held be∣fore the King three Ministers of the As∣sembly being present, then the King turned himself to be seen of the people, who cryed with a great noise, God save King Charles the Second. And then he had the Crown put up∣on his head, by the Marquesse of Arguile, and he took the Scepter in his hand, and the Sword he gave to a Lord of Scotland to bear it before him. A Description of the Life and Throne, and a e view of the Court and Councel of CHARLES the Second King of Scotland. This glittering Commet is not to be numbred amongst the fix∣ed Starres, his Crown carrieth no luster, but what assumes a fain∣ed aspect to the pur-blind Jockeys, between Fife and Orkney, who deale with him, as their predecessors did with their simple ignorant King Ethodius the second, whom they Crowned for reverence to the Race of Fergus, to carry the name of a King, but the Estates governed him by a guard of Tutors, yet he himselfe acts his designs like Nathalocus, their thirtieth King, who corrupting their Grandees with buds of faire promises, obtained the Regall power. This Artificiall Meteor, is only a Scottish vapour, exhaled by French distillation, and with clensing thunder shaken out of the English horizon, fallen into the bosome of the Kirke of Scotland, and made their Baby in the Stoole of repentance, swearing as once Galdus did in the same Thron, Se majorum consiliis acquieturum. They having poured the oyle of the Presbytery upon him, and given him the Crown and Scepter to weare for them (though Ar∣guile had not power to hold it right and easily, on his disturbed and a king head) whilst they devide the rags of his tattered Throne be∣tween the Kirke and Cavaliers, whose actings towards their new Soveraign, puts him into a worse condition in the Charles-Waine, they make him draw, then an honest English Carter that hath a Team of Horses to pul for him. His unhappinesse in his fatall Progenitors, he may read in Capi∣talls, engraven even on the Throne he sits in, where is legible to his eyes, the ecodemical disasters of the Family out of which he sprang, His Father was beheaded, His Grand-Father (as some Phisitians have declared) poysoned, His great Grand-Father, and so on to severall assents before, successively cut off, by disastrous deaths. And for himselfe, His niger haire, and swarthy complexion is a visible heroglifix of his gloomy motions, in which he followes the dictates of his mothers counsels and the Scots commands, resolved into politickes, as furiously as his obstinate Father did the humor of is own will. He hath designed popularity from a child, and even in his tender years expressed passion against his maidens, that disturbed those boys that came to play with him. And he did often in the City of London (the metropolis of his fathers Teritoryes) to draw the peoples affections to be as fixed on him as their eyes, scatter many handfuls of silver in smal coyne, from se∣veral Windowes and Belconyes in Cheape-side and other places, a∣mongst the vulgar, and (as if he had Roman Royalty bred in his visage) forced himselfe to triumph in this liberality without any vi∣sible change in his countenance. But the words of Augustine con∣taine the Encomium of charity: Charitas est amor rerum quas non nisi volentes amittemus. In his fathers presence, he seemed to admire his Throne, and be∣fore his mother, her Idolls, yet to persons popular, hee had many glances against the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury and others, whom the peoples discontents struck at; as if Absolom-like, he cheifly stu∣dyed the Preparation to his Fathers Kingdomes. But herein, he did but delude those poor dreamers, (as he doth now the Scotch Presbyters) who being rich onely whilst they sleep loose all as soon as they awake, their dreames inrich them, but when they awake they are plundered of all, and reduced to their former poverty. During the late bloody warres of his Fathers waging, against the Parliament of England, he was either with him actually, or (in his absence) carried on by the advice of Cottington, Barkley, Culpepper, and others by his Father appointed for his absolute Councellours, and after his Fathes death, he wholly prostrated himselfe to the for∣tune of his mothers and the Jesuites, and Popish Priests resolutions, as Culenus did to the Monastery of St. Andrews. And after a foundation to act his designes upon, which were laid with great consultations by power and policy to subdue England, Scotland, and Ireland to his obedience which gave him some seeming promises (but no conclusion) at Jersey. His brother of Orange was thought to have more sublime wings to give influence to those cockatrise egges; who brooded so effectually that the Treaty at Breda patched up a publicke agreement with Scotland, as wel as a private one with Ireland (though the Dutch Prince so wasted his spirits in it, that he soone dyed after) and Charles Stuart (upon his ill successe against England) being forced to keep beyond Fife, and the Scots cooped up with him, they are like Pilate and the Jewes, (though averse to each other) joyned in combination against England. And in this fury he hath snatched up the Crown of Scotland. And with great difficulty doth he divide himselfe to play his part that he may sit fast on that frozen Throne, To the Kirk he bequeaths his Tongue, to the Cavaliers his Armes, to the English Courtiers his Back, and to the pure Malignants his Brest; which makes mee remember him that said, All the good Princes may be engraven in a ring. The Commonwealth of Scotland find fault with many unnecessary pleasures of his yourh, the Nobility censure his too much abasing both himself and them, the Kirke peirceth even his very thoughts, which they take upon them to divine and judge of; and yet none deales so plainly with him as the horse he rides on, who gives war∣ning by careering, that (being neither flatterer nor Courtier) hee wil cast him to the ground, as wel as the poorest Groome of his Stable; and as for the common people (especially the women,) as wel as the Ladyes, though not with so near reception, they are daily and hourely soliciting, visiting, or (at least) gazing upon him, so that he may say with King Alphonsus, that the Estate of an Asse, is better then his condition, And for the better advancement of their cause, as pure Cove∣nanters (they being a dissembling people (from whence ariseth the proverb, as false as a Scot,) they suffer him not truly to know the state affaires, themselves not acknowledging the truth though never so transparent, which made them before their rout at Musleborough, to sit in consultation what conditions it was fit they should offer to the Eng∣lish, (then in Scotland which they said were flying away home∣ward) whether or no, quarter was to be allowed to any for their lives, and to whom only, and upon what termes. But this dispute was ended for that time, by the defeate given to the Scots by the English, who slew about 4000. took above 10000 private Souldiers prisoners, 2000 of their Horse killed, spoyled and taken 290 Colonells and other Commission Officers. And two of their Committee of Estates, the Lord Liberton and Sir James Lumsden (Lieut. General of the Foote) and some of their Ministers taken prisoners, and there was taken besides 15000 Armes, 200 Coulours 32 peece of Ordnance, and al their Ammunition Bagge and Baggage. And this was done but a day or two before their inten∣tion to have received him into their Army. And now since they have Crowned him, and made him Generalis∣simo, as wel as Rex, they carry him on as hood-winkt as before, Mas∣sey, and the rest of the English (in hopes to find their own subsist∣ance in his fortunes) pretend a great interest and power in England to concurre with his designes, by which they squeeze some favour from him (by the leave of the Kirk, upon the Presbyterian account) for imployment and maintenance in the interim. Arguile and the Scots they promise him greater things to be revealed to them, to be accomplished in the influence of St. Patricke, then any of St. Georges hobby horses. But the Gourdons and Papists tel him that it is most conducing to make him great and glorious, to satisfie the Irish, and all other Ro∣mish Catholickes in the three Nations, and speedily to dismisse the two Irish Lords Ormond and Inchequeen, with ample returnes full of satisfaction to the Assembly, that so they being capable to reduce Ireland, they may, having accomplisht it, come over and go on hel∣ping to carry on the work effectivè in the three Nations. But why doe the Papists rage, and the Kirke imagine a vain thing the King of Scotland set himself, and the Estates take councel toge∣ther, after so great appeales, and such evident manifestations of the Lords so visibly owning of his cause against them? He that sitteth in the heavens shal laugh, the Lord shal have them in derision. If so many Emperours after Pompey the great, and Caesar, could not but fall when the decree was gone out, if the Queen Mary of Scotland, if his own Father the late King, their heads were both cut off with the Executioners hatchets, how can the son thinke to escape? What are the great fruitlesse boastings of English Malignants the vaine hopes of Irish Papists, and the Royal Musters in the North of Scotland (for the South of Fife and Sterling they dare not attempt) since even Henry the third (one of the Predecessors of his mothers Family) of France, was murdered wilfully by a little Monke in the middest of 40000 armed men. FINIS. Published by Authority. London Printed by Robert Ibbitson, 1651.
