T699A 36273012 150319
His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Letter to the Reve∣rend Dr. Batteley, Archdeacon of that Diocese, concerning the late Act against Popery, to be communicated to the Clergy of his Archdeaconry. Reverend Sir, IT is well known to you, and indeed to the whole Nation, how the late Act for the further preventing the growth of Popery, was extorted by the provoking behaviour of divers of the Members of that Church. Of this, frequent Complaints were made from all parts of the Kingdom; represent∣ing the openness of their Assemblies, their dai∣ly
endeavours to pervert His Majesty's Natural-born Subjects, and other publick Affronts to the Laws of this Realm. The Parliament, not∣withstanding, in the method of restraining them, hath us'd such tenderness both to their Persons and Estates, as was consistent with the preservation of our Religion, our Laws, and the publick Peace. Particularly, the Favour that is offer'd to all who shall embrace the Pro∣testant Faith, with the allowance of reasonable Time and Opportunities in order thereunto, are sufficient Arguments that His Majesty and  Two Houses did principally intend, not eir Punishment, but their Conversion. In pursuance of which good design, it will become the Clergy, both in Conscience and Humanity, to endeavour their exemption from the Penalties of the Act, by their readi∣ness on all Occasions to convince them of the reasonableness of the Change. An Of∣fice the more charitable and necessary, con∣sidering how they are train'd up in a blind Obedience to their Church, and not per∣mitted by their own Guides to search into the true grounds and reasons of their Faith.
Wherefore, I thought it incumbent on me, especially at this juncture, to desire you to move the Clergy of your Archdeaconry care∣fully to observe the LXVI Canon, and not to be wanting in any assistance of this kind, ei∣ther where they are invited to give it, or where on their part it may regularly and con∣veniently be offer'd: But that they be ready upon all fitting Occasions, as well to lay open the many dangerous Errors of the Church of Rome, as to shew the Agreeableness of the Doctrine of Our Church to the Holy Scrip∣tures, and the purest Ages of Christianity. The successful Management hereof will re∣quire great Caution and Prudence; but (be∣ing well assur'd of your Ability) I leave it to your Consideration to suggest to the Clergy aforesaid such Directions as may seem necessary for their conduct in an af∣fair of this nature. I would further desire you to give them notice of a Book entitl'd, An Address to those of the Roman Commu∣nion in England, occasion'd by the late Act; written at my Request, and now in the Press.
Not doubting of your readiness to use all proper means for the promoting a Work of such Importance; I remain, Lambeth, May 8th. 1700. Sir, Your Affectionate Brother, Tho. Cantuar. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1700.
