v384 e592_9 99863681 115892
Regimen Sanitatis Salerni: OR, THE SCHOOLE OF SALERNES REGIMENT of HEALTH. CONTAINING, Most Learned and judicious Directions and Instructi∣ons, for the Preservation, Guide, and Government of MANS LIFE. DEDICATED, Unto the late High and Mighty King of England, from that University, and published (by consent of learned Physicians) for a generall good. Reviewed, corrected, and inlarged with a Commentary, for the more plain and easie understanding thereof. By P. H. Dr. in Physicke, deceased. Whereunto is annexed, A necessary Discourse of all sorts of FISH, in use among us, with their effects appertaining to the Health of Man. AS ALSO, Now, and never before, is added certain precious and approved Ex∣periments for Health, by a Right Honorable, and Noble Personage. LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP, dwelling in Grub-street ne the Upper-Pump, 1649.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY much honoured, and nobly accomplished, Sir SIMONDS D'EWES KNIGHT and BARONET. SIR, MAy it please you, Your singular love to Lear∣ning, and vnparallel'd studious collecting, and preserving of venerable Antiquities in generall, and particularly of the An∣tique Coines and Medals of this (whilome) flourishing (now) forlorn Kingdom of England, idque magnis sumptibus, and my poor and vnworthy self being lately made known vnto your worthy Self, have induced and emboldned me to inscribe or dedicate this Book vn∣to you: It being a work that hath heretofore passed the Presse, more than once; but never so compleat, as now it is, it having my deceased learned Father Dr. Holland his many emendations and additions.
And albeit it is in a subject of Physick, De sanitate tuenda, and so out of your studious Element: Yet the ori∣ginall Verses are as pleasant as profitable to read, for all degrees of men; and no less, but more (for such as have not bin in Latio) in English than in Latin. The Stock-fathers of this work in Verse, were The School or University of Salern; Inscribing, writing, and sending it to one of our famous English Kings, And in those very Verses (as I have heard my said venerable Father eft-soons say is couched the whole Body of Physick, Ad valetudinem conservandam, And the Comment vpon the same, in Verses, very profitable for the beter vnderstan∣ting of the Verses, was the work in Latine of the famous Physician Arnaldus de Villa nova, a man well known by his writing to all of th'Apollonian Art in Europe. Vnto which Work, there is an Addition of Fishes, the more to illustrate the Work, not vnprofitable to read, and take notice of; as also some observations of a Noble Per∣sonage. Now, Noble Sir, Pardon, I beseech you, of your innate goodnesse, my boldnesse herein; and vouchsafe or deigne the Patronage of it, which a victorious King (of famous memory) hath done to its Originall: In an assured (pre∣sumed) hope whereof most humbly taketh his leave, and subscribeth SIR, Your aged, devoted, and vowed Eleemosynary Servant, H. H. Φ. F. Londinopolitanus.
THE REGIMENT OF HEALTH, OR A Direction for the life of Man. Anglorum Regi scripsit schola tota Salorni, Si vis incolumem si vis tereddere san: Curas tolle graves, irasci creda prophanum, Parce mere cenato parum non sit tibi vanum: Surgere post epulas, somne uge meridianum, Non mictum retine, non comprimo fertiter anum: Haec bene si serves, tu longe tempore vives. All Salern School thus write to Englands King, And for mans health these fit advises bring. Shun busie cares rash angers, which displease; Light supping, little drink, do cause great ease. Rise after meat, sleep not at afternoon, Urine and natures need expell them soon, Long shalt thou live, if all these well be done. THis right fruitfull and necessary Booke, was compiled at the instance, and for the use of the most noble and victorious King of England, and of France, by all the Doctours in Physick of the Vniversity of (Salern) to the intent, that a man should know how to kéep his body in health,
The author in the beginning of this books, teacheth sight generall doctrines, the which hereafter he specissed, and also de∣clareth at length. The first Doctrine is, that he that destreth health of body, must eschue and avoyd great charges, thoughts and cares. For thought dryeth up mans body, hurting and leaving the spirits, in desolation and comfortlesse: which being to lest, and full of heaviness dryeth vp the bones. In this doctrine are compre∣hended melanchollinesss and heavinesse, the which do greatly hurt the body: for by their operation the body waxeth leane, and cold, the heart shrinketh us, the wit and understanding waxeth dull, the reason is troubled and the memory utterly marred. Yet neverthelesse, it is very expedient for sat, and cor∣sle folk, to be sometime pensive and heavy, that thereby they may moderate the rank heat of their spirits, and make their bodies leaner and more flender. The second doctrine is to eschue anger. For anger (in like manner) dryeth up the body, and excessively chaseth and infla∣meth the members▪ And too great heat as Avicen sayth,avidisi. 1 cap. . doct. 3. dryeth up mans body. Secondly, anger hurteth, through heating, and inflaming of mans heart, and it setteth also the operations of reason. Some there be that naturally, either by sickness, or chance of poison, are cold; for such folk to be angry, is very necessary, for their bodily health, that their naturall heat (by such means) may be stirred vp gotten and kept, The third doctrine is, to eat and drink soberly: for eating and drinking excessively, causeth vs to be unlusty, drowsse, and slothful hurting & inséebling the stomack Many other inconve∣niences, as Avicen sayth,avi cap. de vi∣no & aqua. grow and change through excess of meates and drinks, as hereafter shall be declared. The fourth doctrine is, to make a light supper. For too much meat veing taken at night, causeth and ingendreth gnawing and pain in the belly, vnquietnesse, let of naturall rest, and o∣ther griefs, which we féele and see by experience, the which hereafter shall be more plainly declared.
The fift Doctrine is, to walke after meate moderately. For thereby, the meate descendeth to the bottome of the sto∣mack, where (as Avicen sayth) resteth the vertue of digestion. For the mouth of the stomack destreth food, and maketh dige∣stion. The sixt doctrine, is to eschew Sléeps immediately after meate, which causeth health, and avoydeth divers jusirmities, as it is after shewed in these verses; Febris Pigrities &c. The seventh doctrine is, to make water as oft as needeth: For be that keepeth or holdeth his water longer then nature requireth; shall avoyd it with great paine, and so it may chance: That death should follow thereon as Avicen sayth. Also to keep the dregges and superfluity of mans food any longer then nature requireth;avi dist. 9. li. 3. ca. de diffi∣cultate min∣gendi. engendreth many inconveniences in the body. For the liver, and veing called, Meseriakes, do dry vp for the most part, the humors of the foresaid superfluity, and so they be made hacd and cannot be avoyded, & this causeth opila∣tions in the guts, and ventostries: and so it may chance, it bréedeth Impostumes: as after shall be shown. The eight Doctrine is, that one doing his easement, and a∣voyding the ordutes and filth of the body, should not much force and constraine his fundament: for in so doing, the Hemo∣roids, and Fistula shall gréeve him, and the fundament many times is misordered and thrust out of his proper place finally, the author sayth, that who so will observe the foresaid doct∣rines, shall live long in good health and prosperity. Si tibi deficiunt medici, modici tibi fiant Hac triamens laea, requies, moderata dieta. When Physick needs, let these thy Doctours be, Good dyet, quiet thoughts, heart mirthfull free. Here are taught thrée generall remedies, whereby to con∣fothe in health all creatures, and especially noble men. The first is. to live joyfully: for joy and mirih causeth man to be young and lusty. By moderate joy and mirth, youth
is conserved, naturall vertue comforted, the Wit sharpened, and stirred up, and thereby man is more prompt quicke, and of ability to do all good and honest operations, For if is not said without a cause, that our joy and mirth ought to be mo∣derate; for when it is without measure, it ingendreth death, both bodily, and ghostly. This moderate joy is most couve∣nient for them that have much care and trouble, which joy may be got by the use of delicate meats and drinkes by avoi∣ding of such things as ingender and cause melancholy, and al∣so (as Avicen saith in his eleventh Book and Chapter) of the failing of mans heart,Avi dist. 2 cap deff. cor. By dwelling and accompanying among our friends. The second remedy is Tranquillity of mind, of understan∣ding and of thought; for Noble men, through their great bu∣sinesse and charges, are much more grieved and troubled then other meaner persons: Great cark of mind and understan∣ding, destroyeth the naturall rest of man, which is most expe∣dient for Noble men for they most commonly are naturally dry and cholerick, and therefore for them, rest and quiet is right profitable and convenient. The third remedy is moderate dyet, that is, to cate and drinke moderately, as after shall be declared, what inconveni∣ences grow through excesse of meates and drinkes. Lumina mane manus surgens gelida lavit unda. Hac illac medicum pergat, medicum sna membra Extendat, crinem pectat, dentes fricet, ista Confortant cerebrum, confortant caete a membra. Lote cale, stae, pasce, vel insrigisce minute. Sleep not too long in mornings, early tise, And with coole water wash both hands and eyes, Walke gently forth, and stretch out every limbe, Combe head, rub teeth, to make them cleane and trim. The braine and every member else these do relieve, And to all parts continuall comfort give.
Bathing, keep warm walk after food, or stand, Complexions cold, do gentle warmth command. Here are declared fix Doctrines which comfort mans brain and the other members of the body. The first is, when we rise in the morning early, to wash our eyes' with clear cold water. The eyes would be washed, to clonuse away the ordure and filthinesse that hang in the bries of them. And Avicen sayth,Avi dist. 13. li 3 cap. de con∣serva O culum Idem dist. 3. cap. dede. 6. Galen, li 3. That the soveraignst thing to mundisie and cleanse, and to make sharpe of sight the eyes, is to open them, comforteth, and conseveth sight, and specially of young folk The reason why the eyes must be cleansed with cold water, is, because every thing must be conserved by that is like it. For Galen sayth; That hot bodies have need of hot medicines, and cold bodies of cold medicines; Considering then that mans eyes be cold of nature: it standeth with rea∣son, that they should be washed with cold water, and not with hot. The second Doctrine is, to wash our hands when we rise in the morning, for they be instruments ordayned, where∣with to kéepe and mundifie those Members, by the which the super sluities of the brain be expulsed and avoyded, as by the nosethrils, the eyes, the eares, and other natural conduien, And therefore, the hands specially ought to bee washed with cold water, for the washing of the hands with hot wa∣ter, engendreth wormes in the belly: and specially to wash them in hot water immediately after meat,Avi dist. 16 li 3 tra. 5. cap de lumbri. as Avicen saith, For the washing of the hands in hot water, presently after meat draweth the inward and naturall heate of man to the exte∣riour parts, and so the disgesting is unperfect, the which vnper∣fect digestion is the principall cause that Wormes be engen∣dred. The third doctrine is, to walk a little hither and thither, when we are risen front rest that so the superfluities of the stomache, guts, and liver? as the grsse matter of vrine) may the more speadily be thrust under.
The fourth Doctrine is, competently after rest or sleep, to extend and stretch out our hands, feet, and other limbs, that the lively spirits may come to the utter parts of the body, and s cause the spirits of the braine to be more quick and subtile. The fist doctrine is, to Combe our heads in the morning, that the pores of the head may be opened to avoyd such vapors as yet by sleep are not consumd: and also to quicken the, spi∣rits of the brain. Furthermore to comb the head is very whol∣some especially for aged men.avi dist. 3. li. 4. cap. de debi∣li visus. And Avicen sayth. That to comb the head is wholesome, specially for old men. Therefore one should daily and oft comb his head. For oft combing draweth vp the vapours to the superiour parts, and so divideth them from the eyes. The fist doctrine is to wash and purge the Teeth. For the fil∣thinesse of the Teeth causeth the breath to stink. And of the fil∣thinesse of the teeth groweth certain vapours, that greatly do annoy and hurt the brain. Furthermore the filthinesse of the teeth mingled with the meat, causeth the meat to corrupt and putrifie in the stomack.avidist. 7. li. 3. cap. de con∣dent. Avicen instructeth and teacheth us, how we may keep the teeth from ach and tinch. That is; To wash the mouth with wine twice a month: but to make the breath sweet, it must be boyled with the root of Spurge: whosoever useth the aforesaid decoction and medicine, shall nover have the Tooth-ach. In the last verse are certain general rules: the first is, that after we have washed and bathed our selves, we must kéep us warm, For then the conduits of the body that is the pores are open: by the which cold will pierce into the body and in∣gender in us divers diseases. The second is, that after we have dined or taken our repast, we must for a while stand vpright, that so the meat may dis∣cend down to the bottom of the stomack, & then to walk a little softly: for hasty moving driveth naturall heat from the ine∣riour parts to the outward, and causeth ill digestion. The third is, that one of cold complexion, should not warm himself too suddainly, but by little and little, for suddain
change hurteth Nature: as Galen saith in the glosse of this Canon, Secundum mulum & repente, &c. All strong things and of extream nature, doe corrupt the body. Sit brevis ant nullus tibi somns meridianus, Febris pigrites, capitis dolor, atque Catarus: Haee tibi provenient ex somno Meridiano. Let little sleep, or none at all suffice, At afternoon, but waking keep thine eyes. Such sleep ingenders Feavers, Head-ache, Rheumes, Dulnesse of Soul, and belcheth up ill fumes, From forth the Stomach. All these harmes ensue, By sleep at afternoons, beleeve it true, Here he teacheth, that four inconveniencies are ingendred by sleeping at afternoone. First, the afternoon, sléep. causeth and engendreth Fevers, by reason of opilations. For the naturall heat and spirit of man by day, draweth to the outward parts of the body, and therefore digestion by day is but feeble: But when the natu∣rall heat and spirits of man draw to the inward parts of the body, then through their motion, the naturall heat is stirred vp, and therefore the night is the very season of perfect digesti∣on, and the vndigested and raw humours are the cause of opi∣lations, which opilations ingender Fevers, as Avicen sayth. Secondly,avi dist 1. li. 9. cap de patri. the afternoon sleep causeth a man to be slothful in his operations and businesse, by the reason aforesaid, for grosse humors and undigested, cause mans spirit flowly to move the body. For as a subtile quick spirit causeth lightnesse of body, so a lumpish or a heavy spirit causeth a sluggish body. Thirdly, the afternoone sleepe ingendreth the head-ache.The cause of head-ach. For the grosse and vndigested meate that remaineth in the stomack, doth lift vp to the brain grosse vapors, the which trouble and grieve it And of very consequence, if vapours of grosse matter bee stirred vp and caused, they must also bee grosse: For Galen saith in the glosse of this Aphorisme, Qui
crescunt, &c. That it must needs follow, that all things be like those things of whom they be engendred. The fourth inconventence, is the pose and Rheums. Rheums be humors, that run from one member to another, and as they run to divers parts of the body, so they have divers names. For when the Rheume commeth to the lights, they be called Catarri: and when they run to the cheeks, they be called Branchus, and when they run to the ose, they are called Coriza: as it ap∣peareth in these verses: S fluit ad pectus, dicatur rheuma Catarrus, Ad sances branchus, and nares dico Corizam. Rheume, from the breast, ascending through the nose: Some call Catarihes, some Tysick, some the Pose. But besides the reasons of the Diseases before rehearsed, there be many other reasons and more effectuall.The diversi∣ties of Fevers. The cause of the first inconvenience, that is of Fevers, which sometime are called putrified Fevers and sometime Fevers Effimeras. A Fever Effimere.A Fever Effi∣meras, is a day ly Fever. is tagendred of vapours and smudge fumes kept and reteined after the afternoon sleep, the which abstaining from sleepe. is wont to consume. Galen sayth, That these Fevers Effimeras, came through faintnesse, drun∣kenness,Galen de arte curativa ad Glauc. 1. anger, furiousness, inward sorrow, and other vehe∣ment cares of the mind: and the Fevers that come by insla∣mation of the privy members, are of the same kind. These Fevers be soon cured, as by bagrning and customable Dyet. The putrified Fever is ingendred of the humidities in man vndigested, and augmented by the afternoons sléepe. Calen sayth,Gal de arte curativa ad Glauc. 1. That Fevers ingndred of corruptions of humors, are called pu∣trified Fevers. The second inconvenience, that is, to be flow in operation and motions chanceth by reason that by the afternoone sléepe the humidities and fumes in man, are reteyned about the Mushlas, Weyn, and Joynis, and also causeth the foresaid
members to be astonyed and asléep, and therefore the vody af∣ter dinner is slow and heavy in operations. The third inconvenience (that is the Head ache) commeth as is before declared in the second inconvenience: that is to say, by the humidities and vapours retained in the Body, through sleep and rest, which by such means, are troubled and moved toward the brain, The fourth inconvenience, that is Catharre, signifying all manner of Rheumes, chanceth to a man, and greatly grieveth him through vapours and fumes, which are wont to be dissolved and consumed by watch, and by reason of sléep, they draw to the inward prts of man-and fume vpward to∣ward the brain: which fumes ingrossed by cold, return to the low parts or Caterrisans of mans body, Avicen alledgeth many other inconveniences,avi dise 1 t. 1. doct. 2. cap 9. and diseases engendred of the afternoon sléep. The first disease is the Gawt and Palste, the which grieve vs, by reason that the humidityes, that are wont to be dryed vp and consumed by the heat of the sun, and by watch, be remain still in the body. The second is the colour and corruption of the face, through the waterish humidities, like unto mans vrine mingled, with the bloud; which waterish humidities are wont to be wasted and consumed by watch, and by reason of sleeping; they as∣cend with the bloud toward the brain and the face, and so they cause the face to swell, and to wax pale. The third inconvenience is, that afternoon sleep engendreth the spleen and that by the keeping of the grosse melancholly humours by the day rest. For as watch with the hear of the day (which doth open) giveth moving and may to melanchol∣ly humours, by the streight conduits of the body: in the day sleep, letteth and destroyeth the passages and proper wayes of them, and specially it destroyeth, and stoppeth the conduties, that come from the Spleene to the mouth of the Stomacke, which are ordained to provoke mans appetite, by which con∣duits all melancholly superfluities are wont commonly to be larified,
The fourth hurt is, that the afternoon sleep molifieth the deyns because that the humidities, the which are went to be dissolved by the day watch, cannot be restored; which so remai∣ning in mans body do dry up the veins. The fifth inconvenience is, that man by reason of rest or sleep, looseth his appotite, for lack of resolution of the humors: which resolution is the chief and principall cause of the appe∣tice. Another reason is, that the replenishing and filling of the stomack with fumes and humidities, molifieth and shut teth the mouth thereof. The sixt inconvenience, that afternoon sleep doth ingender are Impostumes, by means of humidities encreased by the day sleep, the which draw to one member or other, and so cause it to swell. Avicen saith, that besides all these aforesaid there be two other speciall causes, that prove the afternoon sleep to be hurtfull. The first is, that the day rest is soon corrupted, because the beat of the day, draweth the corporal heat to the exteriour parts of man: but the night rest doth clean contrary, for it draweth the corporall heat of man toward the inward parts. Of the which two motions there is ingendred a violent motion that disturbeth nature. And therefore they that wil sléep and rest them by day, are councelled to sleep in dark places and in some shadow. The second cause is, that the day rest maketh a man, vn∣lusty, drowsie, and as half afraid, and that by the changing of nature from his old custom that is, from digestion of his meat; yet notwithstanding: that the rest or afternoon sleep, is gene∣rally dispraised, and the night rest greatly commended and prai∣sed; yet the sleep that is taken in the morning three hours before sun rising and three hours after the sun rising, is not to be dis∣praised:A note well worthy of the observing. Hypoc. in l. 2. Prog. in his as Hipocrates saith, second book of Prognost. Sleep convenient and naturall taken by night or by day, is allowable, and contrary is hurtfull: but the morning sleep of all the day is least worthy dispraise.
And albeit the day sleep, and at afternoon, are forbidden by Old Fathers and Doctors: yet for all that, now a dayes, sleep taken in the day time is not greatly to be blamed, speci∣ally as Bartrutius sayth, if these five conditions therein be dill∣gently observed, The first is, if it be customably used.Five conditi∣ons of sleep. The se∣cond is, that it be not taken immediatly after dinner. The third is, that one sleep not with his head lying low. The fourth is, not to sleep too long. The fifth, not to be waked ouer suddainely and fearfully, but with good moderation. Quatuor ex vento veniunt in ventre retenis, Spasmus, Hydrops, Colica, vertigo quatuor ista. When wind within the belly is restrain'd, The body is by four diseases pain'd. Cramps, dropsie, collick, giddiness of brain, Wheeling it round: break wind and not refrain. Here are declared four inconveniences or diseases, that come by long holding of wind in mans body. The firsst is, called the Cramp. The ventosities of the body run oft amongst the Joynts and veins, and filleth them with wind. Of the which filling, commeth retraction and wrinck∣ling together of the veins And Avicen saith, That the cramp is a disease that lyeth in the veines,Avi. dic.  by the which the members of man move and extend themselves. This cramp is in divers kinds, One is caused by replenishing, whereby the member is made short and great, and wrinkling together like leather, or a Harp string, through the matter replenishing the members. This manner of cramy cometh so dainly There is another kind of the cramp much like a Taboret, which enforceth the member (af∣ter his length and largeness to crumple together like parch∣ment cast in fire, This manner of cramp commeth slowly,
The second inconvenience is called the Dropste, a mate∣riall disease ingendred of a very cold marter, which entreth & inflameth the members or places of a mans body, in which is the regiment, that is, the digestion of ments and humors, as in the stomack, the Liver, and the oyd places about the belly. For dropsie never engendreth, but when the Liver is corrupt by reason of bloud. There be three spices of Dropsie, Iposarca, Asciides, and Timpanites, and of the Timpany these two inconveniences are vnderstood. A Timpany (as saith Master Baruce) is engendred of an ill complexion, by coldnesse of the stomack and liver, which will not suffer mans drink or meat to bee convarted into good humours, but turneth them into vento∣stries, which if they be not avoyded by belching, by sweat, or otherwise, they will stop the was of voydance. Also these Uentosities gather together between the places of the belly called Mirach,Idem quod a∣donian. and Siphach, and there they engender the Drop∣sie. The third inconvenience is called the Clolick, a peril∣lous and a painefull disease, it is engendrod in a gut named Colon. Like as the disease called Iica, is ingendred in one of the guites called Ylion. And these two diseases, are engen∣dred by ventosities closed in the guts. The fourth inconventence and disease, is the Head ache, called Vertigo, the which maketh a man to thinke that the world turneth round: by the ventosities wich draw to the brain and mixe them with the lively spirits and so cause the sayd disease, called Vertigo, which as the name declareth is a turning of swimming in the head. And as Galen sayth. They that have the sayd infirmity, are soon astonied, and with a little turning about they fall downe. And Avicen rehearseth these incoveniences with other,Gal. de loass. cap 8 avi. dist. 1. and he saith. That ventosities kept long, do cause and engender the Coicke, by reason they ascend up, and gather together, enfeebing the Guttes. And sometimes they engender, the Dropsle, and sometime darkenesse of sight, and some∣time
the megrim, and sometime the failing evil, and sometime it runeth vnto the joynts, and causeth the cramy. Ex magna caena stomacho sit maxima poena, Vt sit nocte levis, sit tibi caena brevis. Great Suppers put the stomack to great pain, Sup lightly if good rest you mean to gain Here we be taught to make a light supper. For too much meat letteth mantiaturall rest, and causeth anguish and gnawing in the belly, and causeth the face to break out: and maketh one to have a heady head in the morning, and an vnsa∣vory mouth. Here this question commeth well to our purpase, whether a man should eat more at dinner, or at Supper. For dafini∣tion hereof is to be noted: that after the quantity of the bo∣dy (more or lesse) meat is convenient at supper or at dinner. For either the bodies be whole and sound, or else sicke. If they be sicke, either they incliue to materiall sickenesse or vnuateriall. If the sicknesse be not caused through some humour: one may eat the more at supper because in such sick∣nesses, nature only endeavoreth to digest the meat. If the sick∣nesse be material, one may eat the more at dinner, as it is de∣clared in the fourth Treatise, in the fift Chapter of the curation of falling sickness  this wise. He that cannt be sufficed with one meal in a day because he is o∣therwise accustomed, must divide his meat into three parts,in Trat 8 Moch cat. dut cap. 5. and eat two parts at dinner, and the other part after temperate, exercise at Supper. The reason hereof is this at such season the feeble nature hath help by the naturall heat of the Sunne to digest, and the superfluities thereby are more resolved, wherefore the refecton should be larger at dinner then at supper. And more∣over, because the heat of the day, which causeth digestion,
joyneth with the naturall heat of mans body, (are there by day time) two Cundry beates to help the digestion: but it is not so in the night. Likewise nature endeavoureth her self most by night, to digest the superfluities. And therefore she should not be hindred with the digesting of too much meat: And though it be so, that the naturall heat of man is in many things fortified in the night, as by retraction of the Spi∣rits, and reduction of sleepe: yet that selfe same heat can∣not digest two divers things,  the meats, and the super∣fluities. Then it followeth, that such folke should ease lesse at supper then at dinner. At the bodye of such folk, séeme whole, or else if they be very whole, strong, and without any sensi∣bility of superities, avoiding all through their vigour and strength as mighty bigge men: such may eat more at sup∣per. For the nature of these bodies labour only by night to di∣gest the meat received: and not to ripe the superfluities, for (in a manner they have none. Also they labour only to fortifie their Bodies, which wareth more stronger by night then by day: because the blood and corporall spirits be engendred by night in a more quantity, and better divided throughout the bo∣dy. If the bodyes be not greatly disposed to health (as it is rehearsed) but are disposed to be lightly sicke: then, whe∣ther they travell and labour sore continually with their arms and hands, or not, it is best they eat more at dinner then at supper. For meate is not onely taken to nourish and restors the body, but also to make moyst and to over-sprinkle and water the members that (through great labour and travell) they war not dry and likewise to withstand the dissolution of natural heat. Nor such labour and travell letteth not thir true digstion. For we se by experience, that they eat twice or three in a day with good appetite and good digestion. If the bodies be not apt nor disposed to labour continually as the doies afore rehearsed, it may chance two wayes: for of er they labour very sore, but not continually, or else they
labour féebly whereby superfluities iucrease. They that travell much, as in riding or going about their wrldly businesse should eat more at supper then at dinner: be∣cause the unacenstomed great travail, will not suffer the meat taken at dinner to digest but doth corrupt it. Yea and fur∣ther, through superfluous motion the naturall heat is dissolved and spread into every member of the body, which in the night-draweth to the inward parts of the body, and is the principal cause of good digestion. And therefore a good and large supper, is more expedient for them, then a large dinner. Also, the same persons were not brought up (before this season) in such great travail and therfore their bodies are ful of bumidities: which little meat at dinner, may resist the revolutions, caused by great motions and tra∣vail. But in case they travall little and-easily by the way, to eat more at dinner then at supper is best: as it is declared in sick bodies, for they most commonly are féeble both of complexi∣on and of digestion, and the heat and light of the sun doth com∣fort their naturall heat and spirits. Also the reason hereof is this the corporall conduits, and passages by day are open, wher∣fore the superfluities of the body, are sooner expulsed by day then by night, Further, they ought to eate but little meate by Night, for then, nature is greatly busted to digest and bring to good point. And though the digestion to digest, and great repleti∣ons of meats and the superfluous humors: be holy by the night, yet neverthelesse, the strengthning thereof is not sufficient to digest great repletions of meats, and also super fluous hu∣mors, And know withall, that the custom in eating much or tittlet adinner or supper, ought to be regarded and kept, For custom is good and necessary, both for the health of the body,Galen l. 9 de morbis curand. and to cure sickness, as Galen saith. For suddain change of custome is very hurtfull and specially for old folkes. For nature cannot cannot bear, nor yet suffer suddain mutation. But as Galen sayth; The alteration that is done by little and little,Galen in seeun∣o Aphor. Hy∣po. is sure enough.
And thus it is well proved that we ought to eat more at dinner then at supper, and that, because sicknesses are most commonly materials; yet for all that, if a man could be consen∣ted with one repast in a day, it were better to take it at a din∣ner then at a supper. For the repleation of the supper hurteth fore the braine and the eyes. And know beside, that not only the repleation of the Supper hurteth the stomacke, but also all manner of other repleations; For they ingendes Opila∣tions. Fevers, Putrifactions, the Lepry and vndigested hu∣mors. And Avicen sayth,avi. dist. 2 li. 3. cap. de his que nocent sto∣mache. That all manner of repleations hurt the stomacke. For the great eater (by repleation) augmen∣teth not his body, because he digesteth not his meat: but he that eateth mode cately hath always some appetite, and encroaseth his body. in regard he digesteth well his meat. Therefore we ought to take heed. that we hurt not our sto∣mach by over much repleation, nor that we make not our selve purfle and the pulse to beat over vehemently. In like manner, Repleation that engendreth loathing of meatought principally to be eschewed, but especially when it commeth of ill meates. For if it come by ill meates, it engendreth paine in the Joynte, in the reynes, in the Ly∣ver, and the Gowt, and generally all other phlegmatick disea∣ses. And if it come by clean meats it engendreth sharp Fevers and bot Impostumes It followeth then that this repleation must bee eschewes above all other things For as Galen saith overmuch repleation,Galen in 3 apho. Hip. portended strangling or suddain death. Secondly, wee must take herd, that wee over till not our stomackes and utterly destroy our appetite: but wee must keep some appetite: and in especfull they that have a strong and a good ppetite. Some there he that have a feeble appetite, and they ought to eat more then their appetite requireth.
Tu nunquam comedas stomachum nisi never is aute, Purgatum vacunmque cibo, quem sumpseris aute. Ex desideriopotere cegnoscerecerte, Haec tria sunt signa, subtilis inore dieta. Thou should'st not eat untill thy stomack say, The meat's digested, which did passe that way. For the true use of appetite to feed, Is natures dyet, no more then shall need. Here are certaine commandements, the which he that destreth his health, must of necessity observe and kéep more duely, then eat or drink. The first is, he should eat no manner of til meats, without his stomack be neat and purged from all ill humours, by vo∣mit or other convenient wayes. For if a man receive meat in∣to his stomack, in the which are corrupt humours; they will mingle themselves together, and cause the meat nowly enten, to corrupt. The second is, to eate no more till the first meate that is eaten, be digested and avoyded out of the stomack. For there is nothing more hurtfull to mans body then to receive meat upon meat that is but onely begun to be digested. For the meat last taken, shall let the digestion of that that was first eaten, and the digestion of the meat first taken, shall be first finished, which departeth to the Liver by the veins called Meseriakes, and therewith carryeth the meat last taken, not yet well digested, whereof raw humors, and vndigested, are mul∣tiplied in mans body. Further, in the Text are put two tokens, to know when the stomack in void of the meat before eated. The first, is very hunger. And for a knowledge heteof, know assuredly, that there are two manner of hungers; very hun∣ger, and fained hunger. Very hunger is described by Ga∣len, in this wise.Galen in apho. Hip: Very hunger (saith he) is when a man nee∣deth
meat: but fained hunger is an appetite to have meat, though the body have no need thereof. And as very hunger commeth by contraction, and corrugation of the veines, proceeding from the mouth of the stomacke, by suggillation of the members needing meate, so in like manner, sayned hun∣ger is wont to bee caused of them, that constratue, that they should provoke the mouth of the stomacke (the mem∣bers having no need of food) as by cold things, hard, or sharp. And of this sign and secand precept precedent, Avicen sayth. No man ought to eat but after he hath a lust: Nor he should not tarry long therein when lust pricketh,Avi. 3. doc. c. ca. de co qup. &c. unlesse it be a fained lust; as the lust of Drunkards, or such whose stomackes abhorreth meat. For to endure hunger long, filleth the stomack full of putri∣fied and corrupt humours. And after in the same Chapter he sayth. That whosoever do love their health, should never eat till they have a true lust, nor till their stomack and uppermost entrails be voyded of the first food that they took, For the most dangerous thing that may chance to a mans body, is to receive meat up∣on vndigested meat. The second thing that signisteth true last,The know∣ledge of true lust, or very hunger. or very hunger, is stender dyet precedent: that is: small sustenance before ta∣ken, for when hunger followeth thereupon, it is very trus hunger, Furthermore, ye shall vnderstand, that to eats much, and of sundry meats mingled together at one repast or refection, is worst of all: as of flesh and fish. Chickens, and Pork, and afterward, to prolong the time in eating, For the first meat, beginneth but then to digest, when the other meates are served into the table: and so the parts of the meat be unalike in digestion. So that the first taken are digested. ere the last that is eaten, can come to the middest of their digesting, and this causeth that some parto corrupt other some. And of thie thing Avicen war neth vs, saying: There is nothing more dangerous, then to mingle divers meats and sustenances together, and afterward to prolong the time in eating: for
when the last meat is received, the first is well near digested.Avi. 3 1. doc. c. ca. de co, &c Thore fore, the said meats in divers of their poets (as touching dige∣stion, be not alike. But yet know, that prolonging of the time in eating mode∣rately (as an hours space to chaw & swallow our meat, is al∣lowable, and helpeth much to the conservation of health. For good chawing and swallowing down is as good as half a di∣gestion, or else doth greatly hinder it, but prolonging of time in eating with talking and telling of tales, of the length of two or three hours; is very hurtfull, and therefore are engen∣dred the diseases before rehearsed. Persica, poma, pira, lac, caseus, & caro salsa, Et caro cervina laprina, caprina, bovina, Haec melanchollica sut, infirmis inimica. Peares, Apples, Peaches, Cheese and powdred meat. Venison, Hare, Goats flesh and Beef to eat. All these breed melancholly corrupt the blood, Therefore not feeding on them, I hold good. Here are delared tenne manner of meates or foods, that engender melantcholly, and are unwholesome for stk folks. Of the which the first of eating of Peaches:Gal. 2. alie∣ment cap p. Whereof Galen saith. The juyce of Peaches, and their materiall substance, is soon corrupted and utterly ill. Wherefore they ought not as some say, to be eaten atter other meates: because they swimme above, and soon corrupt. But this ought to be minded which is a comon thing, that all things that are moist, slippery & lightly goeth vnder, should be eaten first, and so should Peaches, which swiftly go to the bottome of the stomack, and make way for the meates that shall come after. But when they be eaten last, they both cor∣rupt themselves, and also the other meats, And thus it appea∣reth, that this saying ought to be understood of Peaches,
eaten after other meates. For when they be eaten before meat, they be good for the stomack, and they moliffe the bel∣ly,avil 2 cap. de perficis. and provoke the appetite as Avicen sayth: Ripe Peaches be good for the stomack, and causeth one to have an appe∣tite to meat. And further he sayth: They ought not to be ea∣ten after other meat, for then they corrupt, but they must be eaten be∣fore. Likewise Serapion, in the Chapter of Peaches by autho∣rity of Dioscorides,Serap, & Di∣oscor. faith, ripe Peaches are good for the stomack, and they molifie the belly: but when they be not ripe, they make a man costive and when they be dry they bind sorer. And a decocti∣on of dry Peaches, and so drunken doth let the flowing of hu∣midities to the stomack and belly.To stomach blood. And the powder of Pea∣ches being cast upon the place where one bleedeth, stauncheth the bleeding. And although Peaches have these medicinable vertues a∣foresaid: yet because they ingender putrifted humour they be hurtfull to sick folks, & specially when they be not taken culye. Peaches be cold in the first degree and moyst in the se∣cond.Dios, li, 1 de medi mat. Dioscorides sayth. That ripe peaches are wholesome, both for the stomack and belly. The second thing,Eatig of Pears. is Pears, or eating of Peares. The cause is, because Peares, and generally all manner of new, and raw fruit, do fill the Bloud with water, that boyleth up in the body, and so prepareth and causeth the Bloud to putriffe, and by consequence, is hurtfull for sicke folkes. Peares as Avicen sayth, Engender the Chollicke, But yet Peares (above all fruit) make folke fatte.avic. 2 can cap a pyris. And therefore Hogges fed with Peares, are made fatter then with any other fruit. And because Peares engender ventosities, and so cause the Chollick therefore they are vsed to be eaten with such fruit, that do break or avoyd ventosities: or else to withstand the ill operations of these fruits, drink after them, a draught of old wine of good savour. And the sweeter savour that Peares have, and the more ripe, the better they be. And also sodden Peares be better then raw, and they
may be sodden with Anis seed, Fennel séed, and Sugar.Dios li. 1 de medic Plini in de nat hst li. 23. ca: 7. avi. 2 can, co. prim Dio∣scorides saith, That it is hurtfull to eat Peares fasting. Plinie saith. Peares is an heavy meat of all other, though they be in health that eat them, The third thing is eating of Apples: of which, as Avi∣cen saith. To eat often and much, causeth ache of the sinewes. And also Apples have an ill property, for they engender ventosi∣ties in the second digestion, wherefore they be unwholsome for sick folks, and also for the like cause as it is before rehear∣sed of Peares. And these sayings touching the vnwholsome∣nesse of Peares and Apples, ought especially to be understood when they be raw, and not when they be sodden or tosted, and not only these fruits should be eschewed of those that be sick, but also all other fruits that fill the bloud with boyling water, as new fruit, of which the juyce boyleth in a mans bo∣dy, as if it were Must or new wine; for you may seeby ex∣perience, that the juyce of new gathered fruit boyleth when it is put into a vessell, by reason of the heat of the Sun that re∣maineth in them after their riping. These new fruits, through boyling of their juyce doe cause the bloud to putrify, although they comfort a mans body with their moysture, when they be eaten. And for this cause most especially. Avicen forbiddeth them the eating of fruit, which have the Ague, for he saith, That all fruits hurt them that have the Auge,avi di. 4 ca, de vnivers. cura through their boyling and corrupting in the stomack. The fourth thing, is eating of Milk: the cause why ea∣ting of milk is not good, is because it is lightly corrupted and turneth unto fume or sharpenesse in the stomack, as in their stomacks especially that are diseased with putrified Fevers, and therefore they that have a putrified Fever, are forbidden eating of milk. And as Hipocrates saith,Hip: ophe: lac dare. It is hurtfull for them to eat Milk that have the Head-ache, for them whose Gutts suspensed to rumble, and for them that be very thirsty. Yet notwithstanding, in some dis∣eases, Hippocrates saith, Milke is agreeable for them that have
the Tysick,caput dolenti, &c. the Fever Ethick, and for them that be in a Consumpti∣on. And also hereafter following, something more shall be said when we come to Lac Ethicis, &c. And although milk in the foresaid diseases is blamed, yet in them that be whole, it is allowable, and that if it be well digested in the stomack and liver And Galen saith. That milk well sod doth both nourish and ingonder good humors.Gal. in ap hip. lib. . Also milk by reason that it is waterish it washeth the in∣tr & by reason it is bttry it mundifieth, & strivth against venemous humours, and moystneth the members, and allienateth the greifes of the breast and it doth mittigate the shooting or pricking of the Lungs, Guts, Reins, Entrails, and the bladder, and it is good against pricking humours in the Entrails. Furthermore milk is good for temperate bories, whose stomark is clean from cholerick and flematick humours. For unto such folkes. Milk well digested is great nouri∣shing, it ingendre good blood, it nourisheth the body, and conveniently moystneth and maketh fair the exteriour parts, as Isiac saith, in the universall dyets. And there also he sayth by authority of Ruffus. That they that will drink milk, must drink it fasting, and it must be drunk hot from the Cow: and to eat nothing  that be digestednor one should not then labour, nosur about much. Yet seldome or at any time one would forbear walking: but then one must walk aneasi pace till be per∣ceive it be descended to the bottome of the stomack. But milk is vnwholesome for those bodies that be distem∣pered: for in hot bodies it is soone turned into chollericke sumostly. In such as be cold, it turneth to sharpenesse and putraction. Also milk is vnwholesome for an vnclean stomack, for therein it corrupteth. Galen saith. That he knew a man,Gal. de sanit∣e  in lib. that by the dayly use of milk had a stone bred in the reines of his back: and another that lost all his teeth. And some he knew, that used to eate milke continually, without hurt. Yet to some it was very wholsom, as to an husbandman, that
lived above an hundred yeare, and his mast food was milke: and another, that thought to do so likewise sound it alway hurtfull to him. Touching the choise of milk,choise of milk. it is to be noted, that meane milk is to be chosen for nourishment, and not thin milk as milk of a Camell, or of an Asse neither the most fat and grosse is to be chosen, as milk of kine and sheep, but rather Goats milk should be chosen. For it is not so waterish as Camels milk, the which is not apt to nourish, by reason of humidity, and it maketh a man to lask. Nor it is not so fat, nor so grosse, nor so full of cruddes and butter, as Cow milke and Sheepes milke is: which by reason of their fat∣nesse stoppe the veines, and engender ventosities, and is stoppe the veines, and engender ventosties, and is more harder of digestion, then is requisted in the governance of health Therefore milke of a Goat not too near kidding time, nor too farre from it, and that goeth in a good pasture and when pastures be at the best should be chosen.Gal. de sanita∣t li. 5. The past∣ures as Galen saith, where the beasts go do help much the goodness of the milk. The fift thing is eating of Chéese:Eating of cheese. and it may be vnder∣stood of all sort of Cheese but especially of old cheese. The reason is because new Cheese is cold moyst, and of grosse substance and hard of digestion: and ingendreth epilations of the stone and helpeth or conserveth mans health (y way of nourishment) but very little or nothing. And old Chéese is hot and dry, and by reason of the salt therein, it causeth degestion; but yet of it self it is hard of digestion, and of small nourishment, and hurteth the stomacke,Wat cheese iest. and dryeth over sore, and agreeth worse then new Cheese. But Cheese btwetne both, neither new nor olde, nor too tough, nor for bittle, too hard, nor too soft, too swéet, nor too sower, not too salt, nor too full of eyes, of good tallage and of good savour when it is cut, which tarryeth not long in the stomack, made conveniently of good milke sufficient∣ly oylie: is good, and should bee chosen before all other,
whereof (after meat) we should eat a little quantity, for much in quantity, in way of nourishment, is vniversally ill, and hur∣teth the stomack and will not digest, but engendreth epilations, the stone in the reines, grosse humours in the body, and ven∣ta sties, Therefore that Chéese'is only good, that commeth out of a niggārds hands. The sixt thing,Salt meat. Gal, de locis affect, li. 3. avi 3, do, 2. ca, 15. is Saltmeat, dryed with salt or smoke, or of what kind of beast soever it be, it engendreth grosse blood and melancholy, and so per consequens, It is not wholesome for sick folks: nor is it not wholsome for them that he whole. For as Avicen saith, Salt flesh nourisheth but little, and it is gross and ingendreth ill blood. The seventh thing is Haris-flesh, which likewise engen∣dreth melancholy blood,Harts-flesh: as witnesseth Rasis Alaman, 3. Chapter de animalibus silus stribus & domesticis. The eight thing is Hare flesh,Hares, Gal. de locis affect l, 3 which likewise engen∣breth melancholy blood, as Rasis sayth in the place before al∣ledged. This flesh engendreth more melancholy then any other as Galen sayth. And of this Jsaac, in dietit vniversa∣libus, saith, the Hares-flesh, should not be eaten as meat, but only used in medicines. And know beside, that Hares flesh, and Harts flesh when they be old, ought vtterly to be eschewed, yet neverthelesss they may be eaten, and they be best before calving time, that their drinesse may be tempered with the age. And yet they ought to be eschewed, except they be sat: for their drinesse is tempred with their fatnesse. The ninth thing is Goats flesh. The tenth is Oxe flesh:Goats flesh. Oxe-flesh. for both these be melancholy fle∣shes, For Isaac. in de univers. saith: Goates flesh and Oxe flesh bee worst, hardest, and slowest of digestion, and when they bee digested they ingender grosse blood, and melancholly. And Avicen, in his second Canon of Goates flesh, saith: Goates flesh is not very good, and perchance the humour is very ill. And likewise yee shall understand,
of Goats flesh and Cowes flesh,Goats flesh, Oxe flesh. avi. 2. can: ca, de Cor. the which are worse than the foresaid fleshes, Goats and Oxe flesh. For of them. Avicen saith. Cow flesh, Harts flesh, wild Goats flesh and great Fowles, do engender Fever Quartains. And yet further be saith of Cow. flesh. That Cow flesh nourisheth much, and engendreth grosse melancholy, and melcholy diseases. And he saith further, Cow flesh engendreth Lepry. And of Goats flesh he saith, That it is absolurely ill, And forasmuch as it is touched in the Text what Fleshes should be eschewed, especially of four-footed Beasts: me thin∣keth it were convenient to shew, what flesh of soure footed Beasts are to be chosen. Yet in the choise of fleshes, Physiti∣ans agrce not. For Galen and certain other say,choise of flesh that Pork is best. Some other, as Avicen, Rasis, and Averrois say. that kids flesh is best. Yet notwithstanding, Averrois in the first Col. blameth Avicen because he saith that Pork was best: yet he said it not, as though he held therewith, but after the Chri∣stian opinian. Some other praise Weale above all othr. A man may know the best flesh of four-footed Beasts, and the goodnesse thereof by many manner of wayes. First by great nourishing, which thing be tokeneth hard digestion and by the likenesse of mans flesh, and in this trise Pork is bet∣ter than any other flesh. First, for the likenesse vnto mans flesh, as witnesseth Ga∣len 3. Alimentor, where he saith, That Pork is like mans flesh. and may be knowne, by that many have eaten mans flesh in stead of Pork, and could not perceive it. neither by the savor nor by the taste, but that it had been Pork.avi: 2. can: ca, de: san, And Aviced saith Mans bloud and Hogs bloud be like in every thing. So that there have been, that have sold mans flesh in sead of Pork, which thing was not spyed till a mans singer was sound among the flesh, Averrois writeth the same. Secondly, Porke nourisheth greatly. For Galen saith 3 Alimoncor,aver. 5 col. cap de cor. That Porke above other flesh nourisheth
most? whereof those that be called Athlete, have best experience. And after in the same book he saith: One can cat no meat, that nourishtch more then Pork. Thirdly, Porke engendreth a stedfast and a strong nou∣rishment, that resisteth resolution. This is Galens opinion, in the places afore rehearsed, where he preferreth Porke a∣bove all other flesh: and in his 8. book, Deigenio, he sayth, Pork of all Flesh is most laudable so that it be wild brought up on Mountaines: and next unto Pork is Kid flesh. And like wise in 5. tea. hee sayeth. Of all flesh of four footed Beasts, Porke is most laudable, which is temperate in heat and moysture, and in∣gndreth better bloud then any other flesh: so that it be of young Swiae, that is of a year or two old, whether it be will or tame. Nor young Suckets are not so good: for their flesh is most moist And of a more likelyhood, wild Pork brought vp in the Woods, is better then tame brought up at home, for same Pork is more clammy then it ought to be. And of Wild Hg Flesh, or Boe. Avicen ath: Christian men and their Followers say,avi, 2 can de cap. The best Hog-flesh. that the best Wild Flesh that is, is of Wind Swine. For besides that it is more light then the tame Swines Flesh, so it is of more strength. and much more nourishing and more sooner digesteth: and in winter there can be no better flesh So then it followeth, that Hogs flesh is right good and wholesome for their bodies that be young, whole, strong, oc∣cupied in labour, and not disposed to opilations, and for them that desire to be fat:man ca vin t carnium. avi 3  capi dgim eius quod comdoi∣jur. for such have need of much nourish∣ment, and are hard of digestion. And therefore Rasis sayth: Grosse flesh is convenable for them that labour much: clean flesh, is best for them that do contrariwise. Avicen willeth the tame, saying: They that labour much may better away with grosse meats then other. The choice of good Flesh standeth in three things in tem∣perance of complexion, in lightnesse of digestion, and ingen∣dring of good bloud: that is to say, the better flesh is of tem∣perate complexion, it is lightest of digestion, and tempe∣rate
eat in ingendring bloud between hot and cold, slendernesse, and grosseness. And for this cause Kids flesh is better and more laudable then any other flesh after the mind of Rasis,Rasis 3 a ca de adima silvestrious  omes. Avicen, and Averrois. For Rasis sayth: Kid flesh is tem∣perate, without any ill mixtion; the which though it engen dreth temperate blood, yet it is not convenient for Labou∣rers, but yet for all that there is none other flesh should be pre∣ferred before it. It is not so weak that a mans strength is di∣minished thereby, nor the nourishing thereof is not so much gross, that repleation should come of it, or gross bloud be in∣gendred. The bloud also that is ingendred thereof, is between subtile and grosse, hot and cold: nor this flesh is not meat for great Laborers, but yet for temperate young folites, the which vse mean exercise. For this flesh ingendreth bloud, that by mighty exercise or labour is soon resolved but not with mean travail. And Galen sayth:Gal de samia∣te tuendali 5 That Kids flesh is not wholesome for an old man: And touching the intention, as Kid flesh is better then any other Houshold Flesh; so Goates flesh is better then any other bred in the Woods. And next to Kids flesh, many Physteians as Rasis and Averrois, put Mutton. And Aver∣rois sayth, that most part of Physirians are of this opinion,averrois 5. cl ca decarae. Gal de samia∣te tuendali.  save Galen, who commends not Ptton. For be sayth, That Mutton is notill for young folkes, but it is unwholesome for old folke. And he thinketh that Veale nourisheth more then Mutton. And peradventure. Galen vnderstandeth here the bitterness of nourishment, of that that is to nourish much and to give nourishment more hard of Resolution, which more agreeth unto Veal then Mutton since Mutton is of more humidity. Thirdly, the goodness and choice of Flesh, may be taken by reason of their small clamminess, and by their good sa∣vour: And herein Veale is better then any other flesh. And Averrois to this agreeth, saying: Veale is good Flsh, for as much as it is not clammy, cold, nor dry, as Beef is.averrois 5 e. cap de carne. And Veal hath sweeter savour then any other flesh, and in these
points it is better then Ridde flesh; for in Hid flesh one ay perceive a clamminesse before it is sodden, and because Veale ingendreth better humours, it is betier then Ridde Flesh. And thus it appeareth plainly, what thing causeth contro∣versie among the Phsitians, touching the coice e∣shes. The contro∣versie in choise of flesh. Further know, that the flesh of a dry complexion, is better hear calving time then far from it: And there fore kids and Calves be better then Goats and Oxen because their driness is ahated with the humidity of their youngnesse. But flesh of beasts of moist complexion, is better and more wholesome in age then in youth for great part of their over much humidity is dried away as they do increase in age; and therefore Wea∣thers of a year old are lesse clammy, and more wholesome then tucking Lambs. And likewise Porks of a year or two old, are better then young Pgges. And therefore Avicen sayth: It behooveth that the Meat that conserveth health should be such as the flesh of Kid,avi 3.1. ca de re erus; quod comeditur. or a sucking Cals is, or Lambs of a year old. Then by these rea; sons it appeareth, that the flesh of Goats Male and Female, of old Mution, of Beef of old Pork, and especially of Brawn, of Pigges, no of sucking Lambes, is not very wholesome for the conservation of mans health: but the flesh of young Calves, of pearling Weathers, and Porke of a peare or two old, is conveniene enough to eate, to prolong mans health. And it is to be well noted that the flesh that is inclined to drynesse must be sod, and the flesh that inclined to humidity. must be roasted, thereby to temper their drinesse and humidity. And therefore the flesh of Conies and Hares, Harts, Calves, Kids should be sod: and perk and lamb roasted. And by this reason it appeareth that in moyst seasons, for moist complexi∣ons, flesh disposed to drinesse should be roasted: and in dry sea∣sons, and for complexions, flesh dry and old, moist meats be more convenient.
Ovarecertia vina rubentia pingnia jura, Cum ijs simtlia pura natura sunt nalitura. Your new layd Egs, brisk, cheerfully coloured wine, And good fat broth in Phisick we define. To be so wholesome, that rheir purity, Doth nourish nature very soveraignly. Here in this Text divers nourishing meates are expressed, The first, is new layd Egges, which be of that sort of foods, that in a little quantity nourisheth much. For Avicen saith, That things small in quantity, and great of nourishment,Avi. 2. caned. dc ovis &  ca. 1 are Egs and Cock stones, Touching the choise of Egs, know that the Egs of Hens, Partridges, and of Pheasants young and fat are very good in the Regiment of Health and simply better then any other egs: for the Priests daughter said. That long Egs and small, were the best of all, as in Verses. Filia presbyteri jubet pro lege toneri, Quod bona sunt ov, candida, long a, nova. The Priests fair Daughter, held it a Law most true, That Egs be best, when they are long, white, new. Further, potched Egs, are better then Egges roasted, bard or ters, and they be of great nourishment, and of good & light digestion, and they ingender bloud, specially proporti∣onable to the heart: wherefore they be exceeding good for such as be recovered from sicknesse, for aged folk, and for weak persons, and specially the yolk. For Avicen sayth:av. in tract de virihus cord. That the yolke of Egges, and of Fowles, whose Flesh is good to be eaten, as of Hens, Partridges, and Pheasants, though they be not medicinable for the heart, yet they comfort it very much. And has addeth following: That they be lightly turned into
bloud, and after they qe turned, there remaineth of them but small su∣perfluity. And therefore, they comfort most especially the heart. And further be saith: That they be excellent good to restore the spirits and bloud of the heart. Rere roasted Egges are lightly digested, and they ease the Lungs and the breast, and mollifie the Belly temperate∣ly; but they nourish not so much as poched Egges do. Hard Egges sodden are hard of digestion, and they nourish the body grossely, descending slowly to the Stomack, and slowly they enter therein. Further know, that the Egges (by the dressing of them) are made better or morse:Dressing of g, For ei∣ther they be roasted, sodde alone, or fryed, or sodde with some broath. Roasted Egges bee more grosse then todde, and more bard of digestion; for the Harth or fire dryth vp the Sub∣stance of their humidity And they be roasted two wayes: One is in the Shelles taken in the hote Imbers: Another way is they be roasted standing on Imbers, with their shels a little broken. But they that be broken, be worse then the other, and they that in the shels be raked in bot Imbers, are done two manner of wayes, either they be all raked in the Imbers, or set vpon Imbers and Coales, with part uncove∣red. They that be all covered, are worse; for by reason that the heat of the fire goeth about them, the fumosities are kept still in and they that be set upon the Imbers and part vncove∣red, aboyd out the sumosities, whereby they bée purified. They be better sodden in water then roasted, for the humi∣dity of the water, striveth with the heat of the fire, that drieth by their humidity. And thus they be dressed two wayes: for either they be sod in the Shels or elle broken in the water. They that be sodden in the Shels, are worse then the other. For the Shels do let the dissolution of fumosityes and grosse∣nes. When they bee poched, the bent of the Water tem∣perately pierceth in, and maketh more pure their grosse∣nesse, and taketh away the ill smell and savour. Wherefore
poched Egges be most wholesome: for when they be tryed,Rasis opinion indict vnivers. they ingender most ill humours, and hurt the stomacke, and causeth sumosity and corruption, and maketh one to loath his ment. But good egs sod in some good broth, are betweens both roasted and poched. Also know that there is a Diversity in one Eggs,Gal de mords curndis li 12. Rasis 3 almen. ca de virtute Oce. rum tou∣ching his compound parts. For the Yolk is temperatel hot: The white is cold and clammy, and hardly digesteth and the bloud also thereof ingendred, is not good. And as the foresayd Egges, that is to say of Hennes. Partridges, and of Pheasants, be more couvenable in the Regiment of Health; so Egges of Duckes, Géese. Shovelards, and such like fowls are vnwholesome in the Regiment of Health and should be eschewed. The second thing, is red, or Cheerefull coloured Wine,Gal super 1  3 part Reg acuterum Red-wine. And here ye shall understand that Wines differ in their to lour, for some Wines be White, some be Claret, some bee Citrine, and some be black. White Wine is séebler then any other, colder, and lesse no arishing, but it doth least hurt. the head & it doth provoke a man to his vrine, better then any other wine. That White Wine is weaker then other wines, it appeareth by this that Galen sayth: Weak wine is it, that least heateth or inflameth, and lesse grieveth the braine then other. And Garen sayeth: It is impossible, that White Wine should greatly inslame any man. And bee sayeth, White Wine inflameth or heatech least of all Wines. Which thing is true, if one will make comparison between White Wine and Red, both of one Courtry growing, and none otherwise. For the Red Wines of France are not so hot nor yet so strong, as the White wines of some other Cenutry. And therefore, the comparison must be made, betwóene the Wines of one manuer and Country, and White Wine nourisheth lesse then other Wines doe.Gal. in Hip aph. iih 2. For Galen sayth Waterish, slender, and White Wine. is universally, neigh∣bour to Water. and as touching nourishment, is like Wa∣ter
whereby it provoketh one to Urine,Gal. in Hip. Aph. ib. 2.1 avi. 3.1. doc. 2 ca. de reg. aqua & vini. Gal. in con. 3. part. reg. acu. and nourisheth the body but little. And likewise Galen saith. Watrish Wine nourisheth the body least, whose liquor is as slender as water, and colour white. And Avicen sayth, White slender wine is best for them that be cha∣fed and hot. For it doth not fume, nor cause the Head to ake: but it moistneth the body and easeth the head-ache. To this a∣gréeth Galen. The reason why White wine least burteth the head, is this, because it is lesse tumish, and lesse vapourous than o∣ther. That it provoketh or causeth one to his urine, more than other, appeareth by this saying of Hippocrates. The passage or entrance of this White wine into the bladder is easier than of any other drink:Hip. 3. par. reg. acntorum. whereby we may perceive that it hath strength to open. By this it well appeareth, that White Wine is better for them that be hot and chafed, than other wines are, whe∣ther they be hot of nature, as Cholerick and Sanguin folks, or else by accident, as hot chafed by anger, and biding in the Sunne. And likewise it is better for them that study, who ought to vse such wine as will not distemper the braine. And like∣wise it is convenient for them tht have a féeble brain, whe∣ther it be naturall or accidentall.avi. 4. don. ca. de reg. |aqua & vini. For strong wine maketh them soon drunk, that have a weak brain▪ as Avicen saith. And therefore, If such Persons will drinke strong Wines, they must allay them well with Water, And also it is good for them, whose Liver and Stomacké is hote, and for them that dwell in a hot Country, because hot and strong Wines will together inflame, and burne their Bodies. Red wine and Claret, as of the Country of Bern are hot∣ter then other.Red wine and claret. Cap super can: de hin etenim albo. Gal, in Hipp,  rho, lib, 2. And Galen saith, Wines that are red of colour, and Claret, are very hot, and they nourish much more than other Wines, And again he saith, That the Wines that be gross and ruddy of co∣lour, nourish more then other Wines. And they soon fill or reple∣nish
or feeble bodyes, that are empty or voyde of sub∣stance, And here it is to be noted, that it is sayd, Red wines nourish more, because (for the most part) they bee turned in∣to the substance of mans members. Yet for all that, the Wines black of colour, may be called greater nourishers then other: for they give more constant nourishment, and more slowly be resolved from the members, Wherefore Ga∣len sayth: That grosse Red wines nourish more then waterish,Gal. in Hi. aphe li. 2. Isa. in d∣eris part. but yet they nourish lesse then black coloured wines. And on his wife, the saying of Isaac, is understood, when he sayth That black coloured wine nourisheth more then red, And these red wines, hurt the head more then White, and lesse provoke one to vrin, & this is the cause, that strong wines be not convenient for feeble brained folks, as is aforesaid: but it agreeth well with them that have a strong braine. For a strong brain resisteth vapours, when they smite up thereunto, as Avicen saith. And here observe that the wit of a man that hath a strong braine, is clarified and sharpned more, if he drinke good Wine, then if he drink none, as Avicen sayth,avi. 3 1 ca. pre al. And the cause why, is by reason, that of good wine (more then of any other drinkes) are ingendred and multiplyed subtile spirits, clean and pure.avi. 3. 1 ca. pre al. And this is the cause also, why the Divines, that imagine and study vpon high and subtile matters. love to drink good Wines and after the opinion of Avicen; These wines are good for men of cold, and flegmaticke complexion.avi 3 1 ca. pre al. For such wines redresse and a∣mend the coldnesse of complexion, and they open the opilati∣ons and stoppings, that are wont to be engendred in such persons and, they digest phlegme, and they help nature to convert and turn them into blood, they lightly digest and convert quickly, they increase and greatly quicken the spirits. But wine Citrine is not so much burning, as Redde
Claret as Galen sayth Red wines be hotter then white,al in h aph  2. and therefore they grieve the head more, as Galen sayth. Al∣so Claret Wine, nourisheth lesse then Redde, and more then White. And in some places they cal Claret wine white, and that is the cause that some say white wine deth quickly inflame mans body he black wines be not so fervent hot as the red wines be: and therefore they hurt the headlesse. But for as much as they descend more slowly into the bell and pro∣voke more slawly mans vine▪ they grieve the head more slow∣ly as Galen sayth.Gal super can. p a  duls. suppings or broaths. The third thing is supping or spoon meat, made of good broath of flesh but specially of Chickens, for such broathes are very kindly to mans nature, and are lightly converted unto good blood and they ingender good bloud. especially, when they be made with fine flower. For flower principally of Wheat is a great nourisher, and causeth great nourishment, as Rasis sayth. And of these three foresaid things Avicen saith,Rasis 3. Almen Avic. 3. do. 2 n 1. cap 15. Example of clean and good nourishing mears and humours, be tho yolkes of Egs. wine, and broathes made of flesh. And thereupon he concludeth: That these three foresaid things are comfortable, and of restorative help for mans body. Nutrit & impinguat, triticum, lac, casus infans, Testiculis porcina caro cerebella medulla, Dulcina vina, cibus gustu jocundier, eva Sorbilia maturo sicus vnaequerocentes. Bread of Red wheat, milk, and new made Cheese, Beasts testicles, Pork Marrow, brain of these. Sweet wines, delicious meats, egs that are rear, Over-ripe Figs and Raisins, these appear, To make the body fat, and nourish nature, Procuring corpulence, and growth of stature.
Here are touched, twelve manner of things, the which do greatly nourish and make fat mans body. The first is bread made of wheat, which as Avicen sayth,Bread, avi. 2. can. ca. de pan. Rasis 3 alman. Fatteth swiftly, |specially when it is made of new red Wheat. Ra∣sis sayth. Wheat is neighbour to temperance, although it incline a little to heat, and the heaviest and soundest Wheat doth nourish best; and of all grains, it is most wholesome for all folks: and the blood that is ingendred thereof, is more temperate then of any other grain. As touching the choices of Wheat, ye shall vnderstand, that the election is to be considered in two things. First, the substance of the Wheat ought to be considered and secondly; the preparation thereof. And of the choice, touching the sub∣stance, Avicen sayth. That that Wheat is best,Choise of Wheat. that is neither hard nor soft, great, fat, and new, and not too old, and between red and white. Black wheat is an ill nourisher. Rasis saith it is hea∣vy. Now of the Choice, concerning the preparation, know, that all things made of Wheaten flower, do descend from the stomacke slowly, and they engender grosse humours. and do cause opilations about the liver, augmenting the Splene, and engendring the Stone; for when it is di∣gested, it nourisheth much. Wheate sodden, is heavy meat, and hard to digest: but when it digested, it nou∣risheth strongly, and straineth a man much. But wheat made in bread, well leavened and baked in an ovell, eated with a moderate fire is marvellous wholesome. All these things are gathered out of Galen.Gal dealimen, The second thing is milk and after the mind of some Doctors,Butter Milk. it is understood by the Butter-milk called Odor and commonly called Baluca. There is nothng nourisheth more then this Milke, when t is new supped up, and with new hote bread. It may also be vnderstood by Goates Milk: which nourisheth as much, and whereof we have large∣ly spoken before The third thing is, greene Cheese,Gree chse. which as Avcn saith
Is a nourisher and a fatter, And although greene Cheese doth nourish and fat; yet it is not wholesome in the Regiment of Health, for thereof come the inconveniences before decla∣red. The fourth thing is Testicles or Stones,cocks stones. avi 2 can de test. and especially the stones of fat Cockes, which as Avicen saith, Be very good. and great nourishers. And he saith, That in a small quantity, they nou∣rish much. This also may be understood of Hogs stones very fat that hath not boared Sow; for as Porke, of all four legged beasts (touching nourishment) is best: in like manner the stones, in regard of other beasts stones, are the best, And here is to be well noted, that the stones of aged beasts, whose seed is fer∣mented, be nothing nourishing but the stones of young beasts that be not able to do their kind, & whose seed of generation is not yet ripe, be meetely good nourishment, if they be well di∣gested. The fift thing is Porke,Pork. in choosing whereof, and of the ef∣fect of the same, hath been largely declared before; whereof Galen saith.Gal. de moribis curandis li. 6 Eating of braines. That of all foods Porke is the greatest nourisher. The sixt thing is eating of Brains: and understand that braines be ill for the stomacke, and they cause loath somnesse by taking away a mans appetite: and braines engender grosse humours; yet neverthelesse it nourisheth the body, if it be well digested, but in no wise it should be eaten after o∣ther meates, And if it be dressed with Penyreyall or Nept, to attemper the clamminess and cold thereof, or with things that by their vertue have heat;Rrsis 3. alman ca de. de vir membrorum a∣nimalium. it is wholesome, as Rasis saith. And briefly to speak, braines are forbidden in foe Regiment of Health. But yet sometime they do well in Medicines, as the braine of a young Goat is good against venome and against venemous biting. And a Hates braines. is good against trembling: And some say, that the braine of Chickens and Capons, is good for the memory, and comfor∣teth the wit.choice of brains, Yet touching the choise of braines, it is to bee
known, that the best braines be of Foules that flie, and pro∣perly about mountaines. And of four-footed beasts, the best is of a Ram and next of a Calf, as Avicen sayth. The seventh thing is Marrow, which being well digested nourisheth much, as Avicen sayth, and it is lightly turned into blood.avi 2 cau ca de cere avi ibi dim ca. de medula. Yet neverthelesse, it destroyeth the appetite & maketh one to loath his meat: and therefore Avicen teacheth us, to eat it with Pepper, Now touching the choise of Marrow, Avicen sayth, That the Marrow of Veal, of a Hart of a Bull, of Goates and of sheep, is most wholesom. And some say, the marrow of young white bulls is very wholesom and good. The eight thing is, swéet Wines, whereof we shall intreat more hereafter. The ninth thing is delicious meats:Marrow. Delicious meats. Gal, in 2. Par: tic. aphos. for such do most especially nourish, as Hypocrates saith. And Galen saith. That all savory meat, wherein one hath a delectation, when he eateth it is of the stomack received, reteined, and digested, with a more fervent de∣sire then any other. But if the meat be loathsome, the stomack will not abide, it whereof vomit, abborring of meat, inflation, and belching are engendred, & this is the reason, that we sée some more healthy, being fed with course meat then with good, because such course meat is more delicious vnto them. The tenth thing is Rere Egges:Rere-egs. which in small quantity do nourish much, and whereof we have spoken before at large. The eleventh thing is ripe figst which (though their swéet∣ness) nourish and fatten much. As touching Figges, though they nourish not so strongly as flesh and graine; yet there is no fruit is strong a nouri∣sher: as Avicen sayth,avi. 2. can ca. de sicubus, avi. in re civs, quod comedi. That Figges nourish more then any other fruits. And beside he sayth, That fruits of most nourishment, and most like and neare unto flesh in nourishing, be Figges, very ripe, Raysins, and Dates. As concerning the choice of them know, that as Avicen sayeth:choice of figs. The white figges bee best
for they be lighter: and next vnto them, be the ruddy or Ci∣trine Figs, and then the black, for they that be ripe are best. Also the moyst and new figs are greater and swifter, nouri∣shers, then the dry, and sooner passe from the stomack to the Li∣ver, and they moyst the Liver more, and are more mellow then the dry figs. But yet the dry Figs cullats not so much, and are more wholesome for the stomack, then the moist, for Avicen sayth. The dry Figges (in their operations be laudable, but the bloud which of them is engendred is not good because therof lice be ingen∣dred: but eat them with nuts and Almonds, and their humour made good. And he saith also. The operation of Figs is maryellous nourishing, if they be taken fasting with nuts or Almonds; for they open and prepare the way for meat. But yet the Fig that is ea∣ten with a Nut, nourisheth more then the Fig which is eaten with an Almond. And know withall that all figs do enfiate, mellow and expulse superfluityes to the skinue: and they pro∣voke sweat, and avoyd or remotine away sharpuesse of the throat, and they cleanse the breast, lungs, and pipe of the same, and open all manner of opilations of the Liver and spleue. The twelfth thing is Grapes,Grapes. that is to say, such as are sweet and ripe: for ye shall vnderstand, that there are three manner of Grapes. Some bee greene and sowre, whereof verjuyce is made; these Grapes bind fore, and represse the ruddy colour and Sanguine, and are wholesome for a cholle. rick lask. There is another sort naturally green and new, whereof wine is made. Those Grapes (specially if they be white, and the graines and bucks set apart or taken a∣way) do cause one to have a Lask, and they nourish more then the other fruits,avi. 2. can. ca di vna. but not so much as figges, as Avicen sayth. Yet of truth, they engender ventosties, inflations, and ache of the belly. But if they remains two or three dayes after then be gathered, till the husk be somewhat as∣swaged they nourish the better, and are lesse laxative, for then they inflate not.
And they whose stomack is tull of meat, and vncleane with ill humours, should in no wise eat Grapes, especially if they be new, and without graines or kitues: for in such a stomach they corrupt soone, because they are oversoon di∣gested, and cannot avoyd out of the stomacks after they be digested, by reason of the meat, that is not et digested. Wherefore when they both be corrupted in the stomack, then they corrupt the other meat, as likewise it is to be under∣stood of other fruits larative. And he that will eat Grapes green and new gathered, it is good to lay them first in warm water an hour, and after in cold water, and then eate them. Rasis sayth: That Grapes sweet and new, do soon fat the body,Rasis 3 alime and argment the rising of a mans yard. And further he saith, That the Grape that hath the thinnest husk, descenderh soonest from the stomack, and the thickest husk the slowlier. There is another called a dry Grape, or a Raisin of Lent, and though the Grape be numbred amongst his equalis, yet it is a little inclined to heat. Afterward, Rasis in the places before alledged saith; It nou∣riseth wel, and comforteth the stomak and liver, and avoideth opila∣tions, And thus the foresaid Text may be vnderstood of a fresh gathered Grape or Raisin: or dry grape called Passula. Vina probantur odore, supore, nitor, cosore, Si bona vina cupis, haec tunc probantur in illis, Fortia, formosa, fragentia, frigida, frisca. Smell savour, colour, chearfull, fine, These are the best proofs of a cup of wine, In choice of good wine these are ever speaking.
Strength, Beauty, Fragrance, Coolnesse, Sprightly, leaping. Here in this Text are declared, five manner of proofes of good wine. The first,The tokens of good wine. is the smell for wine of good odour, and savour, multiplyeth or encreaseth a mans spirits, and as Constan∣tine faith. It nourisheth well, and ingendreth good blood: but stincking wine is vnwholesome for mans nature, and doth engender grosse and melancholly spirits. And after the mind of the said Constantine,Constant. 5. Theoric. Gal. con 3 1. part. reg. acu. It engendreth ill bloud, and head ache, that of the ill sume ascendeth to the head. Galen sayth: That wine that hath good smell, engendreth good blood: but it filleth ones bead full of sumes and vapors by reason of the subtility and and heat thereof: but wine of ill smel, after the quantity of ill bloud ingendred thereby, doth hurt the head very little, by rea∣son it is cold and grosse. The second thing is favor: for like as good savory meat nou∣risheth best, and is better received of the stomack then other as is aforesaid: so in likewise doth wine. But ye shall vnderstand, that Wines differ in savourings, for some that be sweet, are more nourishing then other, and they engender grosse blood, and moist the belly, and yet they be hard of digestion and make one thirsty. There is another sort of wines called Spontica or Stiptica, which comfort the stomack and ease the belly: but they hurt the breast and purtenance, as the lungs and pipe thereof they he wholesome for the entrails, and are hard of ot digestion. There be other wines, that are sharp or sowr, the which provoke one to brine, they do not engender humours, but they dissolve them. There be other Wines that are bitter:Constant. 5. theoric. But they be not so hot as Constantine sayth. The third thing is clearnesse or brightnesss, which she she booth the purenesse of the wine, and so consequently of the spirils engendred. The fourth thing is the colour. An their colour Wines
very and differ greatly in their nourishing. For the ruddier Wines of the same, do nourish more then while. And there∣fore they be more wholesome for leae fath then white be, and white more wholesome for them that he sat. And tou∣ching the diversity of Wine in ct we have spoken before of Ova recentia. Further, in the Text are rehearsed five speciall things by which a man should prove and know good wine. The first is the strength, which is known by the operation.Gal. 3 Reg. a. culo con. Culo. 1 For as Galen sayth, Strong win is that, that vehemently milameth a man; body, and repleaeth or filleth the head. This strong wine is a speciall increaser of the spirits, and a great nourisher. But yet I advise them that have a weak braine to beware how they drink strong wine except it be wel allayed with water: For the fumishnesse thereof, hurteth the head. The second thing is, fairnesse of the Wine. For the fairnesse or goodlinesse of the Wine, causeth one to drinke it desirously, which doth cause it better to digest, and better to nourish. The third thing is fragrant, and of good odour. For fra∣grant and redolentwine comforteth most, and engendreth subtil spirits, as it is aforesaid. The fourth thing to, Wine ought to be cold, touching the taste, but hot in effect and operation. For Wine made hot by reason of the clearnesse and sinenesse, doth overcome a mans braine the sooner. and enseebleth the sinews, and hurteth the head, except it be taken moderately. The fifth thing, is that wine ought to be strisk and sprink∣ling, and with the spuming to make a little noise and the spume to be then and soon flashed and the spume to remain in the mids of the cup For if it have not these properties, it must be called hanging (that is suable wine: and specially, if it make no sound, and hath great bubbles and spume, that remain long by the sides of the Cup.
Sunt nutritiva, plus dulcia candida vina. The sweetest wines do most of all revive, And cheer the spirits, being nutritive. Here is one doctrine of wine declared: the which is, that grosse and sweet wines do nourish more, then any other of the like sort.constant. 5. theoric. aug 3 1. de reg. aquae & vini. avi 2. tract. 1. ica. 3. To this agreeth Constantine: and so doth Avicen, saying on this wise. Grosse wine that is dulce is best for him that would be fat. The reason is; because the dulce Wines, through their dulcetnesse are vehemently drawn of the mem∣bers, wherewith Nature rejoyceth. For Avicen sayth: That the operation of dulce wines do digest, mellow, and increase nourishment, and nature loveth them, and the vertue attractive draw∣eth them. And although this Text may es verified by all dulcet Wines, yet the moderate dulce or sweet wine is chosen, and not that that exceeding dulce, as Muskadell: for such wines do corrupt the blood by reason that nature draweth it vi∣olently from the stomack to the Liver, before it bee well di∣gested and before the superfluity thereof be riped & (through the great dulcetnesse thereof, it filleth the bloud with vndige∣sted watcinesse, that maketh the bloud apt to boyle, and pu∣trifie. And this also should be understood by other meates, that are excéeding sweet. And further know, that by the use of swéet wines, and other dulce nourishments three inconveniences are to be feared, es∣peciall in them that are inclined thereto. The first is Loathing: for all sweet foods, through their heate and moysture,Three incon∣veniences in∣gended of dulce foods. do Supple and fill the mouth of the Stomack, and there ingender a disposition, contrary to the va∣cuation and corrugation of that which should cause hun∣ger. The second thing is, these dulce foods do swiftly enflame and turn into choller for dulce things are most apt to
ingender choller. Therefore honey (above all other things) soonest ingendreth choller, because it is of sweet things the most sweetest; And next to Honey is sweete Wine. (as Galen sayth.) And hereupon riseth thirstinesse:Gal. in comen cau. 3. par. reg. acul. for it is not wholesome for them that have the Ague, nor for chollericke folks. The third is Opilation, or stopping of the Lyver and Splene: For these two members (and especially the Liver) do draw dulce things with their Dregges unto them by rea∣son of the great delight that they have in them before they bee digested. Wherefore in these partes they lightly cause Opilations: Through the help & operation of the grosse substance. wherein the se∣vourinesse of sweetnesse is grounded, as Avicen sayth.avi. 2 ca. tract 1. ca. 1. And this is the cause that sweet wine doth lesse provoke one to vrin, then other Wines. Against these three nocnents, eager, sharp, or savory things are very wholesome: for with their Tarinesse, they provoke the appetite, and with their coldnesse they quench in∣flamation, and with their finenesse of substance, they open opilations. Further know, that although sweet wines and other dulce nourishments, do stoppe or shut the Lyver, and Splene; yet they unstop the Lungs. And the reason why they stop not the Lungs as well as the Liver and the Splene Galen declareth: Because dulce things (in their passage) reside notihng thereto, but that which is fine and pure:Gal. 3. per reg acut. and the bloud in∣gendred of dulce things, commeth to the Lungs, putrified first in the Liver, and fined in the heart, Also, as Hypocrates sayth:Hi. 3 par reg acut ca, Men∣tem levins, &c Dulce wines do least make one drunk, Thus we may conclude, that if Wine be drunke for nou∣rishment, for a restorative of the Body, or to make them fat that be lean, whether it be naturally or accidentally; then dulce wines and grosse, sufficiently coloured, are wholesome. For such wines as are nourishments and restoratives, for such
as be low brought: wherefore they are most convenient to make lean bodies fat. But such as will not nourish, restore, nor make fat their bodies as they that be corsie and fat alrea∣dy: then, though they may not use sweet wines, but subtile, yet they ought to chuse such as be amiable, and have a good swo and flavor and are inclined to whitenesse, and be suffici∣ently strong. I one drinke wine to quench his thirst, then hee must take white wine, thinne, and feeble: For such Wines, do msten better, and cooleth more, and so consquently do better quench thirst then any other. And the greater the thirst is, the wholesommer such wi is But if so be, wine is drunk to refresh the Spirits and to comfort the cor∣porall vertue; then it should be subtile sweet and of delecta∣ble savour, of mean colour, And of sufficient strength. And such Wre ought to be tak with a little meat, and it must be deputed from all sueflity, and also be taken in small quantity. But dulce Wines of mean substance, and of good flavor should be chosen to scowr the breast and lungs, and to cause one to ask. Si vinum rubum nimium quande{que} bbatur, Ventes stipatur, vox lampida turpisicatua. When too much Red wine carelesly we drink, It bindes the belly makes the voice to shrink. This Te sheweth to vs, two hurts, that come by overmuch drinking of Red wine. The first is, that over much drinking of Red wine ma∣keth one costive. The eason, as some say is: because such Red wine heateth re hen other of that sort, and is more nutritive For in th tha is better it dryeth more: and in that, th it is more netive, it is more desirously receiued of nature But e this Text may be best vnderstood, by o∣vermuch drinking of binding Red wine, which is somewhat
eager sharp, and costive. And conening this, know, that if the stomack or the guts be feeble in their naturall operati∣on; that then red or black wine called Stiptick, which is some∣what tart ought to be used and drunken as they vse to do, (that by debility of stomack are laxative and can hold nothing. Thus saith Hypocrates in the Canon. Palm us quidem, &c. And also Galen in the comment of the same. But he that wil comfort the vertue of digestion, the cleane Wine or mea∣nest in substance and colour of a good and convenient savour and of sufficient strength, and somewhat stiptick, is most whol∣some. The second thing, is hearsenesse of the throat, the which hoarsenesse some red Wines do cruse and nduce, onely tho∣rough their drinesse and earthinesse. And this hurt commeth also by drinkink red wines that grow in the parts of Brba, through their stpticity and earthinesse: and especially this griefe chanceth, when the said Wines be not well fined. But yet they make not a man costive, because Must that is very red, is wont to cause the Flixe by reason of his earthy dregs mingled there withall: the which byteth and gnaweth the guts, of which gnawing commeth the Flixe, and such Wine should not be drunk till it be fined. For so long as it gnaweth through the earthy dregs thereof a byting time is raised to the brain: which gnaweth and biteth the eyes, and maketh them red. Such inconveniences are ingendred by new vnflued Wines of Brabant, Whether they be white or red, through their earthinesse. The cause why this fume is mordicative, is, by reason that the Wine that it commeth of, is mordicative. For Galen sayth:Ga. in com∣mno ii is pha: & qui cescuut, &c. Whatsoever is dis∣solved from a thing, must needs be like the thing from which it is dissolved. Allia, nux, ruta, pira, raphanus, & theriaca. Haec sunt Antidotum contra mortolevnenum.
I reade from Garlick, Nuts, Hearb-grace, or Rew, Pears, Radish-roots, and Treacle do ensue: Such vertuous qualities, that they all serve As Antidotes against poyson to preserve. In this Text are comprised six Remedies against Venom. The first is Garlick which is very medicinable against such inconveniencies as are wont to be sugendred of water,Garlick. and e∣specially it is wholesome,Sap.  segre cp. de alleo Avi. 2 can. ca. de alo, &c. if one hap to drink naughty corrupt water, wherefore Serapion saith, That if one eate Garlick first, and drink corrupt water after, it shall not hurt him. Whereunto Avicen agreeth. The same operation is also in Onyons, as Avicen saith, and so Oayons may be comprehended under Garlick. And Avicen saith, That an Onyon is subtile, piercing, and scowring with stipticity, and openeth strongly. Also it is hot in the third degree, wherefore it heateth ill waters, and letteth that they with their coldness hurt not the stomack: and it maketh gross humours pure, and causeth them lightly to issue: for Vinegar being mixt with an Onyon, doth greatly sortis his subtill piercing or entring vertue and kee∣peth one from thirstinesse, the which eating of Onyons is wont to cause. The very same is veriffed of Garlick. And Avicen saith, That after one hath drunken grosse and troublous waters, he should eat Garlicke: because it fineth them, and maketh them lightly to descend, and letteth, that they hurt not the Stomack and Entrayl, in regard that they stop not the Veines. Also, Garlike is good to eats before one take his Iourney, and it is one of the best and most wholesomest things, for them that come out of a cold ayr,Avi. 1, 1 cap. de regendo in∣ter. or go into it. as Avicen saith. And by this it appeareth that Garlik is specially good for them that journey, and wander over divers Countries, and vse divers Drinkes, according to these Verses.
Allia que jejunio sumpserit ore, Hunc ignotarum non laedit potus aquarum, Neediversorum mutatio facto locorum. He that takes Garlick early in the morn, Needs let no drink by him to be forborn, Diversity of countries he may see, And well enabled if his mind so bee. Moreover. Garlik (drunke with Wine) is good against the stinging of venomous worms, and bytings of Serpents, which thing Avicen sayth, that he proved;avi 2 can. ca. de allic. also it is good against the biting of madde Dogges: and a platster made of Garlick, Fig-leaves, and Comine, is good to lay to the place that is bitten with a venemous beast called Mugall. Also an Onyon as Avicen sayth, is wholesome to annoynt the place that is bitten with a mad dog, either with the juyce thereof, or a Plaister thereof made with Salt and Rew. And an On∣nyon eaten, expelleth the hurt of venemous things. And some say that they ingender in a mans Stomack a moyst hu∣mour, very wholesome against the hurt of venemous things. Now here is to be noted, that Garlicke, Onyons, and also Leeks, are not wholesome for temperate bodyes, nor hot, and specially when they be eaten raw. For then they nourish very little, and ill, and they ingender sharp pricking bloud: yet they make grosse humors subtile, and break or cut clammy hu∣mours. And when they be sodden, they lose the pricking, and yet then their vertue inciive, cutting and subtilative, remaineth. Therefore when they be sodden, they be wholesommer then raw. Leeks he hot and dry, and their nourishment is naught, they hurt the eyes,Eating of leeks. and ingender black melancholly bloud and cause terrible dreames: they hurt the news with their pricking, and they hurt the Tth and ummes, and cholle∣rick
and melancholly folkes should not use to eat them, and specially raw. Onyons be hote,Fating of ony∣ons. and they have an earthy superfluous heat, and a waterish moustnesse, subtile, and vndigestd, If they he eaten raw, they ingender ill humours, and cor∣ruptible putrifaction in the stomack and they cause ill dreams and dreadfull, and also head-ache. And if they be too much used, they marre the memory, and trouble the understanding, and make one beside himself. But when they be sod with the broath of good flesh, and so aten they cause good digestion, and ther hurtfullnesse is diminished, and they moderate the coldness of meats, wherewith they be sod: but the best is, not to use them. Garlick is hot,Eating of Gar∣lick. declining somewhat to humidity, but lesse then Onyons, it is medicinable against ventesty, and al∣so to the Cough. And it maketh one to spit well; but it hur∣teth the sight and breedeth head-ache, and yet it is treacle for vlandish me. And thus the foresaid things are wholsom for them onely, that have in them phlegmatick, grosse and clammy humours, but chollerick folks ought to abstain from them. The second thing, is Walnuts,The use of nuts.  2 can, ca. dene nue. Disease in∣endied by eating of nut. whereof Avicen sayth, That they with Figg, and Rew, are medicinable against all manner of Venome. And of Walnuts, of Onyons, and of Salt, is made a later to lay to the biting of a mad Doyge. And this speciall is vnderstood of a dry nut, that is eaten before meat, in forme as is aforesaid. And know that dry Nuttes are wors then new and moyst. For the dry are more Oie, by reason whereof they turn to choller, and in∣gender headach they hurt the eyes and cause swimming in the head, and specially if they be eaten after meat, they cause the Pasie in the tongue; and provoke one to vomit, and make bliers in ones mouth and they that have a holletick stomack, ought specially to eschew dry Nuttes, and the older they be, the worse hey be. The new nuts have less of ill
Oylinesse, and therfore they ingender not the ache or swiming in the head, and such like diseases as the dry doe, and by reason of their slippery humidity, they make one to have the lask, and if they be a little warmed at the fire, and eaten after dinner, they presse and drive down the meat. And thus it appeareth, that new Nuts are more wholesome for folkes in health, then dry. The third thing is Rew whereof Avicen saith,R. That it resi∣steth poyson. And after he saith: If one fear least he should drink poyson, or be stung of a venemous Beast, let him take, 1 of the seed, with the leaves thereof, and dnk it with Wine, and a Nut stamped and mingled together. And Aristotle saith, That when the Wea∣fell will sight with the Adder or Toad, she eateth Rew first, and by reason thereof sleyeth the other: For the smell of Rew is a foe to poyson. The eating of Rew in the morning with Figs and sweet Almonds,Two kinds of rewe preserveth one from poyson. Here is to be noted, that there be two kinds of Rew. The one is Garden Rew; the other is wild Rew. The Garden Rew is better then the field Rew: for the field Rew is excee∣ding dry. It is hot and dry in the fourth degrée, wherefore it is hurtfull to make much thereof. The Garden Rew is moyst, hot, and dry, in the second and third degree: it pierceth and re∣solveth ventosity, and specially if it be dry. For Scrapian saith, That dry Rew, of all Medicines for ventosity, is the best and most wholesome; but moyst Rew engendreth ventosity. Also, Rew doth vehemently quicken the sight, and especial∣ly the juyce thereof, with the juyce of Fenll and Hony, made in an Oyntment, or else aten, as Avicen saith. But yet foras∣much as the juyce of Rew hath a property hurtfull to the eves, it were best to an wind vpon your eys therewith; and in no wise to touch your eyes with the materiall Rew. The fourth thing, is Peares: whereof Avicen saith,Peares! That they be wholesome against Diseases, that be engendred by Mush∣romes or Toad-stooles. For Pears sodden with Mushromes, doe
allay their hurtfulnesse; Or else this Text may bee vnderstood, by Peares Aromatickes, which by reason of their sweet smell comfort the spirits, and so they avoid poy∣son. The fifth thing is radishes,Radish roots. avi. 2 can. ca. de rad. whereof Avicen saith. That they be wholesome against the byting of a Snake: and when they be drunken with wine; they are good against the biting of the beast called Cornte: the seed whereof is good against all venome. And when the seed of Radish is layd upon a Scorpion, it stayeth him, and the water thereof hath in that behalf béen proved; and it is stronger then the séed: and if so be a Scorpian byte one that hath eaten Radish, it shall not hurt him. It is also very good against the choking of Mushromes. Or it may be said, it is good against poyson, because it pro∣veketh one to vomit and so by reason of vomit the stomack is purged of ill humours, And here is to be noted, that Radish, and Radish-roots are like of complexion, which are vnwholesome for chollericke folks: for they ingender a sharp pricking bloud, and Radish is vnwholesome for the stomack because it maketh one to bech much, and ingendreth grosse humours; and if the dige∣stion be féeble, it ingendreth raw humours: yet it is subtile and of a pering nature. Some men vse to eat Radish after other meats, to comfort digestion, whereof Galen marvel∣leth: and yet cunning Phystians say, that it a Radish be eaten after other meats, it belpeth digestion, and vnlooseth the belly. But if Radish be eaten before other meats, it lis∣teth vpward the meat, and causeth one to vomit: yet it is wholesome after other meats, to eat a little quantity of ra∣dish: but neverthelesse they hurt the eyes and the head. Rasis saith. That Radish lying long in the stomack avoideth phlgm, and the leaves thereof do digest meat, and help the appetice, if they be taken in a small quantity. The sixt shiner,Treacle. is Treacle which of every sort is good a∣gainst poyson and therefore it is good both for man or beast as well cl as hot. And vnder the name of Treackle, the
noble medicine Mitridatum, may bee compvended, which two be like in operation.avi. 6 4. a.  ca 1. For Avicen of Treacle  saith Ye shall understand, that the greatest rule in cuting of poyson, is to comfort naturall heat, and to labour to drive it out as Treacle doth And of Treacle and the medicine Mitridatum together,avi. 6.4. ra. ca. de med. cn Avicen sayth. There be certaine Medicines contrary to purpose, which wll not suffer poon to approach near the heart, as Treacle and Mi∣ridate. Ar sit mundus, habitabilis, ac luminosus. Nec sit infecius, nec olens soetere cloacae. Dwell where the ayr is clear, sweet, wholesome, bright, Infected with no fumes, that hurt the spright: For sweetest Ayrs do nature most delight. This text declareth four things, touching the choice of whole some ayr. Of which the first is, that one ought to chuse a clean ayr, that is not infected with vapours.choice of wholsom ayr. For unclean ayr doth alter the heart, after the nature of the complexion, that it is mingled with, as Haly sayth. The second thing is, one ought to chuse a light ayr, for dark ayr maketh a man heavy and dull spirited, because such ayr mingleth it self with the humours in mans body, and so being troubled, it runeth to the heart: of the which and of the humours, grosse and troublous spirits are engendred the which doe make one lumpish and slow. Therefore there is nothing maketh a man more ocund or merry, and lesse heavy then to walke in a faire cleare ayre and to rise ear∣ly. The third thing is that we ought to echew in fected oyre, that is: where slaughter of people hath beene: for commanly in these places whereas great slaughter of people hath beene, and in places neare thereunto, followeth great Pesti∣lence: for when we draw in the infected yre, it infecteth
the spirits in our body. The fourth thing is, we should eschew Gunges. Sinkes, Gutters, Channels, stinking Ditches, and all othe particular places that are infected with Carrion, and places where as dead carkasses, or ead folkes bones are cast, and placed where Hemp and Flax is watered. For the ayre so infected doth insect the spirits of our body, and specially hur∣teth the brain. And therefore Avicen saith. That so long as the Ayr is tempe∣rate and clear, and no substance according to mans nature mingled therewith, it causeth and conserveth a mans health. But when it is changed it doth contrary to the operation thereof. And for a more perfect Declaration of the foresaid things, know, that the Ayr (in the Regiment of Health) is necessary two wayes. First, for the refreshing of the heart. Secondly for the abo∣ding out of furnish superfluities, that trouble the spirits and naturall heat. For likewise, as we see by exteriour things, as the fire (without fanning of the ayre) is choaked and quench∣ed: so likewise we may imagine that the spirits and naturall heat in man, had need to be nourished, conserved and attem∣pred The at temperance of the naturall heat is caused by draw∣ing of the ayr, and the purging thereof is caused by expulsing of the ayr: The first, is done by motion of the attraction, and the second, by motion of exulsion. Therefore, if we draw in stinking and unclean ayr, it corrupteth in us the naturall heat and spirit. Therefore, the ayre should be faire and clear, without vapours and mists: it may not be troublous and cloudy, nor mixed with ill vapours. For such ayre troubleth the Humours, and mketh a man heavy and sad, as is afore∣said. The open ayre ought to be chosen, and not between walls, or houses: and to speak truly, the close ayre should be eschew∣ed. Yet neverthelesse, in the time of pestilence, when the ayre chanceth to be infected, the close ayre is to be chosen. I herefore at such seasons it is good for us to abide within our houses, and
to kee our windowes fast shut, least the putryfied ayr should enter in; but otherwise the open ayr is best. Further, in the Regiment of health, the ayr ought to be es∣chewed, the which is mixed with vapours of Lakes and deepe Pits, containing stinking Waters, and also of certain Heaths as Coleworts Hemlocks, and such like: and of trees, as Fig-trees and Walnt trees. Further, that ayr is to be chosen, wherein the wind bloweth from high or equall ground. And also we ought to take good heed, that the ayr exceed nt in any of his first quallites; that is to say in heat, cold, moystre, or drought, which if it chance, it must be tempered by craft, as much as is possible. These things Avicen teacheth. Si tibi soritina noceat potatio vini, Hora macutina rebibas, & e medicia. If overmuch Wine hath thy brain offended, Drink early the next morning and its mended. This text teacheth one doctrine, the which is this, if a man be diseased by drinking of Wine over night, let him on the morning afresh drink Wine again. For either drinking of wine over night causeth drunkenness, thirst in the morning, or else inflamation of the body: If it enflame the body, then it is right vnwholesome, again in the morning to drink Wine afresh, for that were as one should lay fire to fire: but if one happen to be drunk, and therewith pereak a little, then it were wholesome for him to drink wine a fresh again in the morning: For the drinking of wine then again doth lightly cause one to vomit, whereby the stomack is cleansed: and by reason of cleansing of the stomack, the hurt of drunkenness and parbreaking goeth away lightly. And therefore, Hypocrates councelleth us to be drunk once a moneth, that of the drunken¦ness
come vomit: which thing preserveth us from all diseases of long continuance, If the drinking of VVine overnight doth hurt one, by reason that he is not accustomed to drinke Wine: then he may drinke VVine again in the morning, to accustome him, and so the drinking of VVine shall lesse hurt him. For as Hypocrates saith.Hip. 1. aph. ex multo tempore &c: Of a customable thing commeth lesse grief. But in case that thirstinesse in the morning, doth follow on drinking of wine over night, to drink water in the morning is best to cool his thirst. And for as much, as we have spoken of hurt that commeth by drinking of wine, understand that he that hath a éeble brain, of what condition soever it be,avi. 2. cap, de regimine aquae & vmi. six inconveni∣ences engen∣ted of drun∣kennesse. he ought to be well ware of drunkennesse; For to be oft drunk, as Avicen sayth, is cause of six inconveniences. Of which, the first is is corruption of the Livers compleri∣on: for Wine excessively taken, commeth to the Liver, and resolveth the heat thereof, whereby the Liver looseth his na∣turall generation of bloud, and instead of bloud it engendreth watrishnesse, and causeth the Dropsie, or else, it utte the Liver or the humors thereof, whereby Lepry or madnesse is engendred. The second thing is, the corrupting or infecting of the braines complexion, by reason that thick and continuall fumes of the wine do ascend up thereto the which dispoe the bore brain to madnesse and renzy, and the cold to the falling Evill, forgetfulnesse and palsie. The third thing is, weaknesse of the sinewes, as we set commonly, that dayly drunkards the have palsie in their head and other members, as well in youth as in age. The fourth thing is Diseases of the Sinewes as the Crampe and Palsie. For superfluous drinking of VVine, oftentimes thineth to vinegar in the stomack, which hurteth the Sinewes. Also oftentimes, for fault of digestion, it tur∣neth into undigested washnesse, which doth mllie the Si∣newes,
and oftentimes it induceth or draweth grosse humors to the sinewes, whereby they be stretched out, or drawn toge∣ther. The fift thing, is the Paley, that the humidityes of the braine (increased by Wine) do ingender, so that they stoppe wholly the wayes of the lively spirits, which proceed from the braine to the other members. The sixt thing, is sudden death, for while the drunkard sorteh or sleepeth, his wind-pipes are closed or stopped, either with the abundance of wine, or humidities thereof engendred, whereby he is so dainly strangled. And although the immoderate drinking of Wine causeth the aforesaid inconveniences: yet Wine moderately taken is wholesome divers wayes. And Avicen rehearseth five benefits ensuing by ine moderately drunke. The first is,Five benefits by wine mo∣derately drunk. that it easily conveyeth the meat that is min∣glad with it, to all the members of the body, through the hot subtilty, and hid convenient property therof. The second thing is, it digesteth and resolveth Phlegme, through the heat and subtilty of his substance, and maketh it apt to avoid o, openeth the wayes, and comforteth nature to drive it out. Tho third is, it avoydeth red choller by vrine, and by other insensible evacuations, as sweat and such like. And this is to be under shood of Claret or VVhite wine the which are fee∣ble of nature, or else allayed with water: for otherwise it will increase choller, by turning it selfe into choller, and inflama∣tion of the Lyver. The fourth thing is, it causeth melancholinesse (the which is grosse and moveth slowly) eastly to passe through the pipes or conduits thereof, from the Lyver to the Spleene, and from the Spleene to the brimine or mouth of the stomacke, and at last, with the dregs to avod out of the body.Properties of mlanchely and of Wie. And if dec∣neth or repesseth the hurt of melancholinesse, through con∣trariousnesse of complexion, and manner of substance in the effects thereof. For melancholy engendreth heavinesse, faint∣nesse
of heart, and covetousnesse, but Wine engendreth joy, boldnesse, stoutnesse of stomack and liberality. The fifth thing is, it resolveth all causes of wearinesse, ex∣cept it be mixt with some other meat. For Wine reviveth the resolute spirits again abundantly, and doth comfort naturall vertue and taketh away or diminisheth humidities that be left or remain in the muskles, in the sinewes of the hearts, or in the joynts. And if the body be dryed by weariness, and need∣eth moystning. Wine moystneth quickly, so it be allayed with water. Furthermore, besides these things, Wine hath many other good properties. For above all other things, Wine is a swift and a sudden nourishet: it comforteth the heat and naturall spirits, and heateth all the body: it cleareth the wit, it appea∣seth anger, it driveth away headinesse, and provoketh bodily lust. And no drink digestth raw humors so well as Wine: because Wine maketh one manly both in stomack and body. And they that drink no Wine, are nothing in regard of their equals that drink Wine neither in stomack, valour and cou∣rage. Gignit & humores melius vinum melior es, Si fuerit nigrum, corpus redait tibi pigrum. Vinum sit clarumque vetus subtile, maurum, Ac bene limpatum, saliens, midera mine sumptum. The better that the Wines in goodnesse be, The better humours they beget in thee. If Wine look black, it makes thy body dull, If it be cleer, old, subtile, ripe and full, Well qualified, leaping drunk discreetly; Then with thy body it agrees most sweetly. This Text declareth one speciall Doctrine of Wine, and that is this; The better that Wine is, the better hu∣mours it engendreth. The reason is, because black Wine is
more grosse and earthy, then any other: and therefore the Spirits thereof ingendred must needs be grosse. And Galen sayth: Grosse Spirits make the Body heavy, or flow. And fur∣ther, there be seven doctrines rehearsed, touching the election of wine. The first is Wine ought to be clear, because wine,VII doctes to chuse wine. (by reason that it is subtile) ingendreth subtile and clear Spi∣rits. The second is, it ought to be old and not new, For new Wine or Must, doth sooner overcome ones brain, and make one have the task; then any other of the like. It ingendreth the collick and other accidents, that shal he declared after when we came to Impedit vrinam. Here yoe should not vnder∣stand, that wine ought to be over-ald.avi. 3.1. ac rey, aquae c∣vini. For such Wine as A∣vicen sayth, is a medicine and not as a drink. And such wine doth rather alter a temperate body to beat and drought, then any way nourish it. For when it is so very old, it receiveth again his first naturall verdure and sharpenesse, and is then all fiery Wherefore the Aggregator writeth.Aggregator cap de vito. That it is hot and dry in the third degree, The third lesson is, that Wine ought to be subtile. For sub∣tile wine maketh the spirits of man subtile, and gross wines ingender grosse spirits. The fourth doctrine is. Wine should be ripe, and not vert, or eager, or else it will deprive man of his naturall vacu∣ations, and good health, as Galen sath, And therefore it is hurifull for them that want evacuation by vrine. and all o∣ther their vpper Members. Yet as Galen sayth,Gal. in com∣meno. 2. ca. 3. pa. reg. acute∣rum. Such sup∣ticall Wines, is wholesome for diseases that chance in the Guts. And the stipticalness of Wine may be put away, with much mingling of Water. The fifth doctrine is, that wine should be allayed with Water: for thereby the sumosity of the Wine, is put away, and so it doth lesse over-come the brain. This is  truth if the Wine be subtile; but if it be grosse it er commeth the brain the sooner, for thereby it is made subtile, and more
fumish And of this Wine, Avicen vnderstood, when he said, That Wine allayed with Water, doth sooner overcome the Brain then clean Wine. The sixth Doctrine is, Wine should be sprinkling when one tasteth it, aad this is one of the conditions of good wine be∣fore said. The seventh Doctrine is considered in the Drinkers con∣dition, and not of the Wine; that is, one ought to drink wine temperately. For, Wine temperately taken sharpeneth the wit, and ingendreth all the wholesome things before decla∣red. By all these things here expressed, we may conclude, that wine that ought to be chosen, and is best in the Regiment of Health, if it be meane Wine, equall betweens old and new, cleere, somewhat red, of good odour and flavour, of equall savour; that is, neither eager, sharp nor sweet, which is not grosse nor too much subtill, and beside; that it be not too strong, nor too weak, and that it grow not on stony and hilly ground, nor on simple, plain, and arable grounds, but on high ground, lying open towards the South, in a Country not too hot, nor too cold. Touching the Regiment of Wine concerning the ages: the Rules that Avicen giveth are to be well noted. The first is to give Children to drink Wine, is as it one would lay fire to fire, made of dry Wood. For Children be tender, and soon enflamed, through the abundance of their naturall heat, and their sinewes and braines be weake and feeble. Wherefore Wine hurteth them many wayes, but speci∣ally by quick inflamation by hurting of the Brain, by lightly piercing of the sinewes, and abundant sumosity. Therefore, when giving children wine to drink, the enflaming heat of the wine is added to the flaming heat of their bodies, which are of as small resistance, as dry Sticks, Reed, or Tow, is against the fire. The second Rule is, that one may give an old man as much Wine to drinke, as he can heare without hurt, that is,
as much as is naturall and due appetite desireth. For like as old Bootes and Buskins (that be dry and wrinckled) are made supple and plain with oyling: fo likewise old Folkes by drinking of chosen Wine, as Wine of Benvoys. Ancient folkes are cold, and wine heateth: their spirit is heavy, and they be full of Melancholly, and VVine maketh them merry, and represseth Melancholliness. And commonly, old Folkes sleepe ill, and Wine maketh them sleepe well, Old Folks be disposed, to Oyllations, and Wine openeth. And like as Wine is to children most contrary, so for old folk it is most wholesome. The third rule is, that young folks should drinke Wine temperately, which temperately is to be vnderstood in mea∣surable quantity, and with convenient allaying with water, And although that young folks are as hote as Children, yet their Members are more sound, and their sinewes and brain farre more stronger, whereby they may the stronglyer re∣sist the hurt that commeth by drinking of Wine. Much good comes by drinking of Wine soberly, thet is to say; the voiding of cholier, the quicking of the corporall might, and wit, and the abounding of the subtile spirits. Mon sit acetosa, cervisa, sed bene clara. De validis eotagranis satis, ac xeterata. For drinking Beer or Ale, thus we advise, Not to be sharp or sower in any wise, Let them be cleer, well boyl'd corn found and good, Stale, and not new; All these cause healthfull bloud. This Text declareth five things, by which one may know good Ale and Beer. The first is that if it be not sower for that hurteth the sto∣mack. A sower thing (as Avicen saith in many places) hurteth the sinewes. And the stomack is a member full of sinews, especial∣ly about the brim or mouth.
The second thing is, that Ale must be clear: for trou∣bled Ale is a stopper: and burteth them over much that have the Stone it fatteth and inote it makth one short win∣ded, and ingndreth much flegme. The third thing is, that Ale should be made of good corn, that is not corrupt, that is to sa of the best Barle Wheat or Dates for the better the Corn is, the better are the hu∣mours thereof ingened. The fo th th is, that Ale ought to be well sod: for that causeth it the better to be digested, and more amiably to bee recved of Nature for the inconveniences thereby growing, are the better to be born. For if the Ale be not ell sod, it ingendreth ventoties in the belly, gnawing, infltion, and ollick. The fifth thing is. that Ale ought to be stale and well purged For new Ale ingendreth the same hurt that Aledoth, the which is not well sod: and so doth light bread ains the oyion. De qua potetur stomachus eninde gravetur. Of whatsore you drink, see no offence, Unto the stomack be procured thence, Here is taught one lesson touching the use of Ale That is one ought is drink it moderately, so that the Stomack be not urt thereby, nor drunkennesse caused. For it is worse to be drunk with Ale then with Wine, and endureth longer: and the tumes and vapours of Ale that ascend to the head, are grosse, wherefore they be not so soon resolved, as they that be mounted up b wine. Whereupon it is to be noted; that in the beginning o dinner or supper, it is whole∣some to drink ale before Wine, the cause is for at the be∣ginning of out repast or dinner, the body is hungry: so that the Stomacke before wee began to eats meate, was hun∣gry, and so drew superfluityes from the members: There∣fore
if we begin with wine, by reason that Nature greatly desireth it and for the great nonhment thereof the super∣uities together with the ne) are drwe off the Sto∣mack and thence conveyed to the paris of the bo: but Na∣ture doth not so desirously draw Ale. And also ale washeth away the humours that hang about the brim of the Stomack. And for thi cause Pstians counsell, that where one is most hungry, he should first assay to vomit ee he eat an meate, that those superfluities that be drawn together h the hungry Stomack, may be voyded out, lest they be minged with the meat. Likewise, he that feareth to in sty, by superfluous drinking of water, should drink ale, because it quancheth vnua∣turall thirst. Temporibus veris modicum prandre juberis, Sedcalcor estais dapibus  ocet immoderatis, Autumni fructius caveas, ne sint tib ctis: De mensasume, quantum vis tempore Brumae. The Spting-time doth command our dinners be, But light and little sparing in degree, The Summer season being soultry hot, Immoderate feeding should be then forgot. The fall of Leaf or Autumn doth deny. Eating much fruit great harm ensues thereby, But in the winter, cold doth then requie, Such a full meal, as nature can desire. Here the Author determineth,Dyer after the 4 seasons of the year. what quantity of Meat should be eaten according to the diversit of the four season of the year that is to say Ver, or Spring time Summer, Au∣tumn and winter. He sayth that in the time of Ver. or Spring wee must et little meat. To this Avicen agreeth and saith. The reason is because in Winter, mans body is not greatly gi∣ven to labour and exercise: Red humous are increased,
and specially legmatick, which (after the proportion of the season) then specially are ingendred: which humors by reason of cold are ingendred in the body, and when Ver or Spring-time commeth those raw humours so gathered together, doe melt and spread through all the body: wherefore Nature is then greatly busie in digesting them And therefore in Ver sea∣son, if one eat much meat, it letteth Nature to digest such fleg∣matick humours and causeth them to divert or turn another way: For by those humors and great quantity of meat, Na∣ture is oppressed. And so (thereby, such humors shall remain in the body vndigested, and run to some member, and there breed some disease: and therefore we ought to take good heed, that we eat not any great quantity of meat in Ver, For little meat in this season is a speciall preservative from Diseases that then rign as Avicen saith. And this saying is of a truth, from the middest to the end of Ver, and not in the beginning, because the beginning of Ver is likened to Winter: wherefore then one may nourish his body as well as in winter. And this also may be thus vnderstood: If the body be full of humours when Ver cometh, then meat is to be given after the naturall heat and resolution, that is caused of the Body: for then the cause is avoided, for which, meat should be dimi∣nished To this Hypocrates agreeth, saying: Bellies in Winter and Ver are most hote and sleep most long. Therefore, in those Seasons, by reason that naturall heat is much it needeth much nourishment. Secondly, he saith, that to eat much meat in summer is hurtfull, because that then the vertue of digestion is most feeble. For the spi∣rits and naturall heat (which are the instruments of corporal operation) are then right feeble sparkled, and resolute, by rea∣son of the outward heat, the whch doth vehemently draw them to the exterior parts, and so causeth, that much meat can∣not (as then) well digest. And here is to be noted, that for as mce as the vehement resolution of humidities, (as well substantiall, as nutrimen∣tall)
of the body is great, and therefore grosser, more meat in Summer should be eaten, if the digestive might digest it But because nature cannot-digest much at once, we must then eat a little and often: as Galen sayth. In Summer we must eat many times, and little: because the body hath often need, by reason of often dislolution. And although little meate should be eaten in Summer, yet one may drinke much, by reason of the great resolution, and drought of the body,The reason that one ought to eat little meat in sum∣mer. and because the naturall heat of the body exceedeth the moysture thereof: and man is then more thirsty then at other, times, But yet, then one ought to drink lesse wine, specially if it be not pure, because such wine doth soon inflame and causeth the naturall heat (augmented by the ardent heat of Summer) is burn. And therefore he that will drink wine in Summer, should mingle it well with water, and forbear old and strong wine. Thirdly, e saith, that in Autumn we ought to beware of fruits, especially of the same Season as Grapes, Peaches, Figges, and such like: or (at least) to eat but little of them: because such fruits to engender bloud that is apt to putrifie, by reason of humors and boyling that they make in the body, and specially it they be received into an vnclean stomack or corrupt body, which for the most part chanceth in Autumn: and so then, ill and l∣thy Diseases are ingendred as the Pocks, and other pestilent Diseases. Know also that in Autumn, hunger and thirst should be es∣chewed, or to eat much meat at one meal, as Rasis saith. The wine also that is drunk in Harvest should be allayed with wa∣ter that it may moyst the Body, and cool the heat: but unt so superflously allayed with water, as it is in Summer nor to be drunk so superfluously. For by reason that nature is then but féeble, it is not able to weld and digest it: and too much allaying with water, de∣stroyeth naturall heat, and increaseth ventosities, whereby the collick is ingendred. Fourthly, he saith, that in Winter one may eat as much
o he will, that is to say, more then in other seasons, after the mind of Avicen. And Galen sayth: In Winter, much meat lei∣surely should be eaten.Gal in caaph. & quthus se∣mel, &c. The reason is because the heat of our body in Winter is strongest, both by reason it is congea∣led together, and fortified by position of his contrary: that is to say, the coldnes of the ayre, environing our bodyes about. And this is verified in big bodyes, and fleshy and not in bare and féeble: for in such bodies coldnesse of winter being inclined, doth not comfort them with heat but rather maketh them more féeble: For in Winter, as Hypocrates sayth, Bellyes be hottest of nature and sleep most long. Whereby it appeareth that the grosse nourishments and hardest of digestion, are more wholesome in winter then in other seasons, because the heat is stronger. But the Wine that is drunke in Winter, should be as red as a rose, and not white, and allayed with a little water. Here is to be noted, that although by the strength of heat, and vertus of digestion in winter, the gross and strong meats are most wholesome: yet because the season is disposed to opi∣lations and repleations, by reason of much phlegme, it were wholesome to use mean meats between heavy and light gross and subtile, as kid veal, mutton pikes perch and evesses. And they that vse gross meats as beef pork veiso goats-flesh, and such like: should eat but one meal a day, or else to vse Meats larative, as parsely, cresses, mustard and such like, and to use great labour. Salvia cum ratae faciunt tibi pocula tutae, Adde rosa floram, minuit potenter amorem. If in your drink, washt Sage is mixt with Rew, It is most wholesome poyson to subdue: Adde thereto Rose flowers if you feele the heat, Of Venus to wax wanton, o grow great, Here the author, desibeth two remedies, against ill drink.
The first, is Sage-leaves, Sage put into the drink hindereth: be hurt of it, and also it comforteth the sinewes and brain, the which being comforted doth the better resist the ill smes, that (of the ill drink) ascend thereunto. The second Rmedy is Rew, whereof it the whole leaves be put into the drink the vertue of it over commeth the malice of the drink. And how good and wholesome Rew is against poyson, it hath been declared before at Allia nux, ruta, &c. And this Text saith, that to the two foresaid Hearbs, we may put the Rose flower, which ought especially to be understood of a Red∣rose because the sweet smell and stipticalnesse thereof, amendeth the malice of the drink. Nuasea non poterit quemquam vex are marina, Aurea cum vino mixtam, si sumpserit illum. Sea-water drunk with Wine doth well defend thee, If on the Sea casting chance to offend thee. Here the Author teacheth a remedy how they that are not accustomed to passe the Sea,A remedy o perbreaking on the sea. may avoid perbreaking or cast∣ing. He that will passe the Sea, must (a few dayes before he ake shipping) mingle the Sea water with his wine. This is a remedy for them that be rich but if it be a poor man, then he must drink Sea-water only, that he may the easier eschew ca∣sting. The reason hereof is, because the Sea-water is salt, and so with his saltnesse and stipticity, that followeth saltnesse, it closeth the mouth of the stomack, and thereby avoydeth ca∣sting. And here is to be noted, that as Avicen saith, A Traveller on the Sea should not much go about to withstand, or to forbear perbreaking or casting, at the beginning, but to vomit, untill he think himself well purged, because that it preserveth him from many Dis∣eases. And yet not onely preserveth, but also healeth or alleviateth grievous and great Diseases, as Lepry, Dropsie, Coldnesse,
and swelling in the stomack. Thus Avicen saith. But in case that the traveller on the Sea do coast so much, that he thereby is right greatly feebled: then he must refrain himselfe by eating of stipticall and sowre fruit, as vntipe fruit. Crabs, sowre Pomgranates and such like, wherewith the mouth of the sto∣mack is comforted, and the humors expelled down; as also the stomack is therewith comforted, and the humours (flow∣ing thereunto by taking of the water) are driven away. Or else we may take Mustard seed dryed by the fire, and drinke it with Wine, or Wormwood may be eaten and drun∣ken or a toast wet in redolent Wine is good to eate. And ge∣nerally, tart meats are good for travellers on the Sea; for they com∣fort the stomack, and prohibit vapours and fumes, that would ascend up into the head, as Hearbs sod in Vineger, or in the juyce of sowre Grapes. Savia sal, vinum, piper, allia petroselinum: Ex his fit falsa, nisi fit commixio alsae. Sage Salt, and Wine, Pepper therewith applyed, Garlick and Parsley, these have well bin tryed: To make good sauce for any kind of meat, Procuring appetite when men would eat. Here the Author teacheth us how to make a common sauce, it we lack a better, and five thinge goeth to the making of this sauce. The first is Sage,To make a common sauce. wherewith we may make sauce for a Goose rost or sod. For commonly a Goos or Pig roasted is, stopped with Sage, to dry vp the humidities and clamminess of them, and also because the flesh should smell somewhat thereof: but yet after it is roasted, the Sage would be cast a∣way, and not eaten. Likewise of Sage, vplandish folke make a sauce to eat with a Moose: for they stamp Sage and Garlike together, that the
Sage may abate somewhat of the Garlickes favour. The second thing, is salt mixt with wine, and this Sauce is for rich and Noblemen. For when they want Mustard, or ver∣uyc they put Wine in a Saucer, and mingle it with a little Salt. The third thing, is Pepper, a Sauce for vplandish folks: for they mingle Pepper with Beanes and Pease. Likewise of toasted bread with Ale or Wine, and with Pepper, they make a black sauce, as if it were Pay, that is called Pepper, and that they cast vpon their meat, flesh and fish. The fourth is Garlick; whereof the vplandish People make a Sauce, for they mingle soft cheese and milk and stamp Garlike together, and so they eat it with their meat whether it be rosted or sod, salt or fresh and with hard Egges. The fift thing is Persley; of Pesly leaves stamped with Merjuyce, or white wine, is made a gréen Sauce to eate with roasted meat. And here is to be noted, that Sauce or Sauces do vary, according to the Seasons of the Year. For to hoe Seasons Sauce must be made of cold things, or of stuffe of little heat; and in cold seasons contrariwise. Therefore Summer Sauce should be Verjuyce, Eyzell or Vinegar, the juyce of Lemons or of Pomgranates, with Rose-water and such like And o∣ther while in Sauces made in Summer, one may put a little Pellitory and Parsley to attemper the coldnesse of the foresaid things. But the matter of comperent Sauces in Winter is Mustard Carloke, Ginger-Pepper, Cinamon, Gellflowres, Garlick, Sage Mints, Pellitory and Parssey: Wine, Water of flesh Vinegar not so strong, but very eet to the nature of Wine. And in mean seasons the Sauces should be mean, nei∣ther too hot nor too cold. Secondly, Sauces differ by reason of the meats for which they be made: for one meate will haue one Sauce; an other meate an other Sauce; as Lords Cookes know. Sauce for Mutton, Meals and Kid, is gréene Sauce, mad in Sumer
with Vinegar or Verjuyce, with a few spices, and without Garlick. Otherwise with Parsley, white Ginger, and toasted bread with vinegar. In winter the same sauces, are made with many spices, and little quantity of Garlick, and of the best Wine, and with a little Verjuyce or with Mustard: Sauce for roasted bref is made with pepper, toasted bread, broath of flesh and Grapes, and the same sauce is good in Winter to once with Pork, Also Pork in summer may be eaten with vinegar and parsley at the beginning of dinner. But in case, that the foresaid meats be baked and specially beef and pork, and in winter, then serve in a white onion and a small quantity of swéet spice, beaten in powder But in sum∣mer serve it in without onions and with verjoyce or else with a few smal onions. And if the pasties, be made of more tender fresh, and lighter of digestion, then serve no onions therewith: but in summer, Almond milk with verjuice, and a little blanch powder and at the last you may put thereto an Eggs broken with verjuce. But in winter instead of verjuyce, take wine and more spice, with roasted rabbets and chickens, sauce made with Ci∣namon crums of bread, and with verjuce, in summer season is wholesome and in winter with wine. For roasted Pork in winter take of the dropping tempered with good-wine and onions:Divers good Pces for dry meats, and in summer, take the greene sauce above named. For roasted seasants, pigeous, and turtles take none other sauce but salt. For boyled Capons, and Cockes take of the same broath with a little blnch powder. And namely in Winter, if they be botled, with Sage, Isope, and Parsley this is good sauce: and in summer the broath of the Capon and a little verjuice mingled together, is a whol∣some sauce. For fat Capons and bens baked, serve in none other, sauce, but a small quantity of blanch powder, and at the end the above named green sauce in summer, and in Winter good wine. But fish, the grosser it is, the harder of digesti∣on
on the more superfluous, and moyster of nature, the more it needeth hose sauces and sharp. And the same came rule is likewise true in all manner of feh. Si fore vis sanus, ablue sapemanus, Loti pose mensam tibi confert munera bina, Mundificat palmus, & lumina reddit acuta. If thou wilt walk in health, let me advise, Oft washthy hands, chiefly when thou doest rise, From feeding at the Table: for thereby, Thou gain'st two benefits, It clears the eye, Gives comfort to the palmes, both which well tended, Our health (thereby) the better is be-friended. Here the author teacheth two wholesome things, that com∣meth by washing of out hands and feet. The first is, the palmes of our hands are thereby greatly cheared and comforted. The second is, out sight is sharpened thereby, and that is specially by accidents because the hands be the instruments to cleanse the eyes, and it is right wholesome for them to be kept very clean: whereof we have spoken before at Lumine ma∣ne manus. Panis non callidus. nec, sit nimis inveteratus, Sed fermentatus, oculatus, sit coctus. Modice saitus, frugibus validis sit electus. Non comedas crustum, coloram quigignit. adustam. Panis salsatus, formentatus, bene coctus. Parus sit sanus, quia nun it a sit tibs vanus, Not over cold nor hot let be thy bread, Hollow and light, but easily leavened, Sparingly falted, and of the purest wheat, And see that Crusts thou do forbear to eat.
Because that angry choller they beget, Thy bread well bak't, light salted, sound of grain: All these observ'd, thou dost not eat in vain. In this Text two things are touched or remembred con∣cerning the choice of bread. The first is heat;Five proper∣tles of good bread. because Bread ought not to be eaten hot. Hot bread (as Avicen saith) is not convenient for mans nature, and bread that commeth hote from the Oven is now unwholesome: the reason is; because it stoppeth much. And again after he saith; That hot bread causeth thirstinesse, by reason that it is hot: For it swimmeth in the stomack by reason of his vaporous humidity: yet it is of quick digestion, and desendeth down stoutly. And although that hot bread in the Regiment of Health be unwholesome to eat: yet the smell thereof is right wholesome; for it relieveth one in a swound: and it is possible that some folk may live by the smel of new Bread. The second thing is, we ought not to eat bread that is very stale or mouldy; for such bread is vnwholesome for the nou∣rishment of mans nature: because it dryeth the body, and in∣gendreth melancholy humours; whereupon it followeth, That bread should not be too new, nor too stale, but a day old. Further, this Text declareth five properties of good bread. The first is, it must be well leavened as Galen saith. The Bread of digestion is it that is well leavened, and baked in an Oven that is heated with moderate fire. And again he saith; Unleavened bread is wholesome for no body. And after the mind of Avicen, Bread made with little leven nourisheth much; But the nourishment thereof is a stopper, except they eat it that labour much. The second thing is, that bread ought to be light; for there∣by it is known that the clamminesse thereof is gone: Yet ne∣verthelesse this kind of bread after the mind of Avicen, Is the swift enterer, and of lesse and worse nourishment, even as bread that is made of suth Bran.
The third thing is, that Bread ought to be well baked, for bread that is ill baked, is ill of digestion, and engende∣reth griefe in the stomacke And Avicen sayth. That bread ill baked nourisheth very much but the nourishments causeth opila∣tions, except they labor much that eat it. And bread baked on a stone or in a pan is of the same fashion: for it is never wel ba∣ked within. The fourth thing is, that bread ought to be temperately salted. For bread over-sweet it a stopper▪ and bread over sal∣ted is a dryer: but bread moderately nourisheth best, is that if have the other conditions. The fifth thing is, that bread should be made of the best grain that is to say of the best wheat. Moreover the Author in this Text warneth us, to be∣ware of crusts eating because they ingender a dust cholor, or melancholly humours, by reason that they be burned, and dry. And therefore great estates, the which the chollerick of nature, cause the crusts above and beneath to be chipped away wherefore the pith or crumme should be chosen, the which is of a greater nourishment, then the crust. Yet notwithstan∣ding the crustes hee wholesome for them that bee whole, and have their stomacke moyst, and desire to be leane, but they must eat them after they have dined, because they enforce the meate to descend downe, and comfort the mouth of the sto∣mack. Further in the two last verses is shewed, that good bread ought to have these five conditions, that is to say. It must be well salted, leavened well baked made of good clean corne, that us ipe gathered bound vp in sheaf and housed in due sea∣son And here is to be noted, that if one desire to nourish his body, be must have his bread made of pure flowr, the bran clean taken out but he that destreth to be lean, must leave some bran therein: for bran nourisheth but little, and vnlooseth the belly, and flower doth contrariwise.
Est car pocina sine vino pojor cuina, Si trbus vine tunc est cibem & medicina. To feed on Pork, wherher we sup or dine, Is worse then Mutton if we have no Wine: But dinking Wine therewith, it is sound food, And Physick for the body very good. Here in this Text, the Author compareth Pork with Mu∣ton. If Pork be eaten without wine, it is not so wholesome as Muton; but if Pork be eaten with wine, it nouheth bast and is medicinable, because it moystneth much. And this is to be vnderstood, especially of roasted Pigges and Brawne well dight. And here is to be noted that Pork salted, or dryed in the smok such as men to the Countrey vse, called Bacon, is in no manner so wholesome as Mutton, whether it be eaten with wine or no; but it is vnderstood by roasted Pork, or Pigge, or Brawn, as is beforesaid. Ilia porcorum bona suut, maa sunt reliquorum. The Tripes or Inwards of the Hog is best, And better then of any other Beast. Here the Author saith that Hog Tripes be better than of other Beasts. The reason is, because we eat few Entrayls, ex∣cept they be full of bloud, and of very at Beasts, as Hogs be. Now onely Hogs bloud, through the imilitude of complexion to mans Nature, is bloud of which the Bowels be filled. And likewise Hogs be sooner fat then any other Beasts: therefore we eat rather the Tripes and Chitterlings of an Hogge, then of other Beasts.
Impedit vrinam musium solvit cito ventrem, Epatis emphraxim & splenis, generatque lapillum. Sweet Wine to Urine is a stop or stay, To loosenesse in the belly, it makes way. It harmeth both the Liver and the Spleen, Causing the Stone, as hath by proof bin seen. Here the Author she weth five inconveniences that breed by drinking of new Wine or Must. The first is that Must hindereth or letteth the vrine: and this may be vnderstood two wayes. First by reason that Must is thick and grosse, it mingleth wita the dregs, and so stoppeth the Liver and the Reynes; so that the vrine cannot easily have his course. Secondly, it letteth the brine to have due course, even as Renish Must doth, and certain other subtile Wines likewise. For there is some Renish Must, of the which the Les are mordicant and biting: and while it runneth into the Bladder, and constrain one to vrine contrary to the due order and man∣ner that he was wont to do. The second is, it loseth the belly, by reason that it scoureth the entrayls and through sharpnesse of the Lees it pricketh the guis, and causeth the orues to avoid out: First, by reason that the Lets be mordcative: Secondly, thorow the ventosity, which such Wine causeth: and thirdly, by reason that it ma∣keth the guts slippery by way of vndigestiblenesse and grief of the stomack. Wherefore the stomack loseneth and openeth the ways that were shut. The third inconvenience is, that must burteth the good complexion of the Liver: For it stoppeth the Liver through much mingling of the Lees, and causeth a disease in the Liver, called Disenteria, onely through swelling, whereby the Liver is enseebled. Thus Avicen saith. And thus it
ingendreth all ill colour, and all diseases of the Liver, that is to say, spices of the Dropsie. The fourth inconvenience is that most hurteth the Spléen and the disposttion thereof, through the same cause that it doth the Liver; for it stoppeth the Spleen, and so causeth it to be hard. The fifth hurt is that Must ingendreth the Stone, land espe∣cially that which is in the Rains, which is ruddy, and lightly tangble, by reason of opilation, that it causeth through the grosse substance thereof. And this is very certain, it the Must be of very swéet Wines, whose Lées be nothing biting or sharp. For Must that hath sharp and biting Lées, preserveth a man from the Stone, because it maketh one to vrine often: like as some Renish Must doth, that causeth Sand or Gravell to be seen in the vrine: the which doth often provoke one to make water. This often making water; washeth away the small Gravell that cleaveth to the mans Reyns, and so be a∣voydeth it. Potus aquae sumptus sit elenti valde nocivus, Infrigidat stomachum, ibum nititur fore crudum. He that drinks water when he feeds on meat, Doth divers harms unto himself beget: It cooles the stomack with a crude infesting, And voids the meat again without digesting. Hures that ome by drin∣ving of water. Here are declared two hurts that come by drinking of Wa∣ter. The first is, drinking of Water hurteth ones stomack that eateth: by reason that Water cooleth and looseneth the stomack and especially it destroyeth the appetite. The second hurt is, dringking of Water with meat, letteth digestion, for it maketh the meat that is then eaten to be caw∣ish after the mind of Avicen. For as Avicen saith Much Water should not be drunk after meat; because it divideth the stomack and
the meat, and causeth it to swim in the stomack. And he saith, That when Nature dath digest meat, and that a sufficient quantity of wa∣ter is mingled therewith: then it we drink more Water after that, it letteth very much the digestion that was begin. And again Avicen saith, Avicen car, tract. 11 cap. 4. vin. That drinking of water should be es∣chewed, except it be to help the meat down, when it slicketh or des∣cendeth slowly; but with meat water should never be taken or u∣sed. Averroes in his Comment, sheweth the reason, and saith, To drink water upon the meat maketh the stomack cold ere it be tho∣row hote: and maketh the meat rawish, and also it causeth the meat to swim in the stomack, and will not let it stick fast, whereas it should conveniently digest. The operation of the stomack is, to make a good mixtion of things received therein and to digest them well. That done, there followeth an ordinary and a naturall sepa∣ration of pure and vnpure things. And as agreat quantity of water being put into a Pot, slaketh the seething of the meate therein: so likewise it chanceth in the stomack by drinking of much water. But to drink a little quantity of water without meat before it descend down into the stomack, is not forbidden but allowed especially if one be very thirsty: for a little quantity of cold water taken after the foresaid manner easeth the stomack, and quencheth the thirst. The coldnesse of the water enforceth the heat of mans body to descend to the very bottome of the stomack, and so fortifieth the di∣gestion thereof. Thus saith Avicen. But know withall, that though water be more conve∣nient to quench thirst then wine: yet ine for a mans health is more wholesome then water. And though water vniver∣sally quench thirst better then wine, because it in cold and moyst: yet to make a naturall and good comoxtion of meats and to convey them to the extreame parts of mans Body.
wine is better then water. For wine (through his subtile sub∣stance and operation) mingleth it self better with meat then water doth and nature delighteth more in wine then in water therefore the members draw wine more sooner vnto them, min∣gling it with the meat. The miring in this manner, is as a boyling or séething of things together which is greatly hope by the heat of the wine: but coldnesse of the water letteth it. So then it appeareth, that wine in mingling with meat, and dilating of the same, is better then waer. For wine, by reason that it is subtile of substance, and of a vertuous heat, is a marvellous piercer. And so it followeth, that wine dilateth or spreadeth more then wa∣ter, wherein is no vertuous heat, nor substance of ayre nor fire. Furthermore, water is not so wholesome drink as wine is for water hindreth the nourishment of the body,avi 2 1 ca. de re aqua & vi∣i. by reason that it nourisheth little or nothing at all, so that the more wa∣trish that the meat is. the lesse it nourisheth. Therefore it is ve∣ry wholesom to drink wine without meat. For wine is a great and a speciall nourishment, and are restorative, for it nouri∣sheth swiftly as it is aforesaid. Further ye shall vnderstand, that to drink water with meat, is not onely hurtfull but also in many other causes, which are declared by Avicen. First it is vnwholesome for a man to drink fasting, because it pierceth into the body by all the principal members thereof, and it destroyeth the naturall heat: This is of a truth, if one that is truely fasting drink it. But it a drunken man drink it fasting, it doth not greatly hurt him: for a drunkard fasting, is not vtterly fasting because his stomack is not vacant, but some∣what remaineth of the other days ingugin and the drinking of water in the morning, doth both wash the stomack, and re∣presseth the vapors, and fumes, and disposeth it to receive a new sustenance. The second hurt is, to drinke water after great labour and travell, and likewise ater the fleshly act between man
and woman: for then the pores of the body be very open, whereby the water entreth into the bottome of the members, and mortifieth the naturall heat, which heat also (after the fleshly act) is weakned. The third inconvenience is, to drink water after baining, specially if one bain himself fasting: for then the candites and passages of the body he very open; wherefore the water then entring into them, hurteth much, as is aforesaid. And Avicen saith. That it is to be feared, lest drinking of water,Avic. 6 quar∣ti. suma 2 cap. ultimo. fasting after baining, and after carnall copulation, should corrupt the complexion and breed the Dropsie. Fourthly, it is hurtfull to drink cold water, to quench fai∣ned thirst in the night, as it chanceth to sureytures and drun∣kards: for by drinking cold water, the resolution and digesti∣on of the salt humour is prohibited. But in case that one be so exceeding thirsty, that neither the coldnesse of breathing, nor washing of his mouth with cold water can suffie: then let him drink cold water out of a cup that hath a narrow mouth, or supping it, that the water may more slowly come vnto the brim of the stomack: for so it shall best quench his thirst, and lesse thereof shall be drunk, and then it shall not vtterly destroy digestion. Fifthly, it is genrall ill for whole folkes to drink much cold water, for it quencheth naturall heat, it griedeth the breast, and marreth the appetite of the stomack, and it is very hurtfull to all the sinewy members. Yet neverthelesse. Water that is temperately cold, doth sometime (per accidence) stur one to have an appetite, and maketh the stomack strong in helping, opening, and clesing the wayes thereof. Sunt nutritiva multum carnes vitulina. Flesh of young Cales, on Veal is very good.
Quick in digestion nourishing the blood, Here the Author sayth, that Veale nourisheth very much. And thus Avicen affirmeth saying. That meat that conserveth health, must be as the flesh is. For they are of like nature, and very apt to be converted into bloud: and specially Kid, young sucking Calves and deatling Lambs. And Galen saith. That roasted Veal of six or eight weeks old,Gal. 3. ali. The best veal. is more wholesom then Mut∣ton, and it is sooner digested and nourisheth very much. Both of these fleshes we have spoken off before. Sunt bona gallina, capo, turtur, sturna, columba, Quisula vel mervia, phasia na, ethigoneta, Perdix frigillus, or ex tremulus amarillus. The Hen, the Capon, Turtle and the Stare. The Ring-dove, Quaile, Lark, Owsell fat and fair, The Partridge Robin Red-brest, Cock of the wood, The Pheasant, Heath-cock Morehen, all are good, So the wild Mallard and green Ploover too, Eaten with wisdome as we ought to do. Here the Authour sheweth,The best Foules to eat. that wild Fowles are most wholesome, to eat, to nourish mans nature, and the number of them is fourteeen. The fith is,Gal. 1 can. do gallinis & Ga. consiliator. 18 quest. a Hen, the which is very wholesome to eat, Haly, Avenzoarre, and Mesuus say, that the best Flesh of Poultry, is of a Hen that never layd, and of a Cock that ne∣ver trod Hen: for they (without superfluity) are soone turned into bloud because their property is to temper mans complexion, and their broath is the best Medicine that can be for Lepers. As Gale sayth: That the flesh of young Pullets aug∣menteth intellection, and cleareth the voice, and  the sed of generation.
The second is a Capen, the flesh whereof Consiliator num∣bred among the wholesome fleshes: and those fleshes with the other aforesaid, the stomack (of his own property) doth di∣gest. The third is a Turtill, which also nourisheth well, and ingendreth good bloud: wherefore Avicen saith, There is no fowls flesh better then a Tules or Hens, nor more subtile: but yet they nourish not so much as the Partridge. The fourth (after the opinion of some) is a Stae: this Bird should be eaten gonng. Some other call this Foul Starna,Avi. 2 cap. ca. de cane. the which Rasis prayseth above all other Fowls, saying, A Sterling flesh is lightest of all other Fowls,Rasis 3. alin. i and wholesome for them that will keep a slender dyet. And by this may be vnderstood a great Fowle, as a gray Goose, whereof the flesh is right commendable, and specially when it is young. And on this wise Alman, vnderstandeth, preferring this flesh before other. Or else by a Stare may be vnderstood certain smal Partridges, whereof Moyses seemeth to vnderstand, where he saith to the Iewes: Likewise Stares are unwholesome for our King for they constrain and indurate the belly. And this propriety some ascribe vnto Partridges also because their flesh (as Rasis saith) doth bind the belly. The fifth is a Ring-Dove, or other Dove, whereof the flesh is Cholerick and as Rasis saith, is exceeding hot, and lightly ingenoreth the Ague. And therefore Pigeons be better baked with sowre Grapes then rosted: because by the sowre Grapes the heat ingendred in the bloud is allaid. And the young Pigeons ready to fly be the most wholesome to eat, for such be of light digestion and of better humour. For the young Pigeons not yet able to fly, are superfluously hot, and moyst: Whereby they engender grosse humours, as Avicen saith. But old Pigeons for their over great heat, drought, and difficulty of digestion are to be eschewed, and likewise old Turtles.
The sixt is a Quail: some Doctors say that a Quail is of light substance,Avi. 2 can. cap decolumbis. and ingendreth good bloud, and is very whole∣some for whole folkes. After the mind of Isaac. Quails are worse then any other wild Fowls: for they are not to be praised, nei∣ther for their nourishment nor for digestion. For through eating of their flesh the Cramp is to be feared,Avi 2 can. ca. de cor. as Avicen saith. And be saith, that the reason is in the substance of their flesh, that they ingender the Cramp. And for this cause French-men bake and eat Quailes with soft buttery cheese. Yet by the Quail may be vnderstood ano∣ther Bird, a little bigger then the aforesaid Partridge, of the same colour, with red feet and bill, and of a deliciou savour. And on this wise Rasis taketh a Quail, when he preferreth the flesh thereof above the flesh of a Stae, and all other Fowles. The seventh is an Owsell, which likewise should be eaten young. The eighth is a Pheasant, which of all Physitians is num∣bred for one of the best fleshes. For the flesh of that Fowl is most wholesome for mans nature, and it is meat for Princes and great Estates. Consiliator saith, That the wild Pheasant is both best for health and strength. And also peradventure vniver∣sally, for as much as they be like vnto Hens, and well near of the same shape: and they be dryer of ayr, and of seeding, and of larger exercise. The ninth is a Woodcock, the flesh of this Bird is speci∣ally wholesome. The tenth is a Partridge,Avi. 2 can. ca. de cubigine. Gal. 3 alim. c. 1 & 11 de in∣genien ca. 2. Whose flesh, as Avicen saith, is subtill, and a great fatter, yet it scowreth away the Dropsie, comfor∣teth the stomack, and also augmenteth carnall lust, and neverthelesse it is a binder. And this flesh Galen preferreth above all other, because it is said. that the customable eating of this flesh comforteth the memory. The eleventh is a Ruddock, called Robin red-breast,
it eateth grapes, and fléeth swiftly as a State doth: but it nou∣risheth better then a Stare doth, and they haunt much about the Wines, and they be drunk by eating of Grapes, and they be best in season to eat about Halotide. The twelfth is Orex, which (as some say) is a Phea∣sant Henne, or a More Henne, the flesh is of good nourish∣ment. The thirtienth is a Bird called Tremulus, which Bird commonly abideth near the Sea-coast, and is lesse in quan∣tity then a Henne, and russe of colour, it cryeth loud, and fleeth swiftly, and when it plumeth vpon the earth, the ayle waggeth still, and therefore is called Tremulus, or the green Ploover, and vpon the head groweth a long tuft of feathers, yet it is not the same bird, the which is vulgarly called a wag∣tayl. The fourteinth and last is, Amarillis, which also is a Water-aule, like vnto a Ducke, but it is wild, And to speak generally, among soules to eat, they be best praised, that be swiftest in flight. And as the flesh of the foresaid foules are of a commendable nourishment and of case digestion: so likewise the flesh of some Foules is of a discommendable nourishment, and hard to digest, and of vnequail complexi∣on. As the flesh of Oese, Peacocks and ame Malards, and vniversally of all foules that have long necks, long bils, and live vpon the Water. And so is the flesh of Sparrowes, which are exceeding hot and vntemperate, and stirreth to bodi∣ly lust. But touching the election of foules flesh, yee shall understand, that their naturall nourishing must be conside∣red that is, whether they be restorative, light of dgestion, light of sustance, or of subtile operation, and so after their divers properties) to prayse them. Wherefore Galen be∣holding the easie alteration and subtilty of Partridges flesh preferreth them But Rasis with Israc, considering the sub∣tility and lightnesse, of the State prayseth the best. Isaac also, after the divers intentions of Wild Foules flesh pray∣seth
divers. Avicen commendeth the Turtles flesh above other, either in having respect to the propriety, whereby it strength∣nth or comforteth a mans vnderstanding, or else by the Coun∣try of Arabia where Avicen was born for their Turtles, are bet∣ter then in other Countries. Furthermore know that the flesh of oules is more whole∣some then of four legged beasts; especially for them that for∣sake labor, and give themselves to study and contemplation, be∣cause it is sooner digested. Galen sayth: That the flesh of foules is sooner digested then of beasts and especially of Partridges;Gal. 3 Ali∣men 1. which ingendreth clean and pure bloud, that is disposed to augment, and sharp the operations of the brain, the which is mans vn∣derstanding cogitation and memory. Si pisces molles sunt magna corpore tolles, Si pisces duri parvi sunt plus valituri. The Fish of soft and biggest body take, If hard and little do not them forsake. This Text teacheth vs two knowledges, touching the choice of fish. For either Fish is hard or soft: if it be soft, then the elder is the better. The reason is, because softnesse commeth of humidity, the which is more digested, in old fish then in young: and so when such Fishes be young they ingender much more phegm then when they be old. And so it appeareth, that an old Els is wholsomer then a young, as some say. But if such Fish be hard, it is wholesomer then young, that is to say, it is sooner digested, as Pkes and Per∣be, because their hardnesse ressieth digestion. For Avicen sayth: Of hard Fishes take the smallest: and of soft Fishes chuse the greatest.
Lucius, & Perca, laxaula, & alblca, tinea, Gurnus, plagicia, cum capa galbio, truta. Pike, Pearch, and Sole, are known for dainty Fish, The Whiting also is a Courtly dish: Tench Gurnard and a well-grown Plaice in May, Carp, Rochet, Trout, these are good meat I say. Here are rehearsed ten sorts of Fishes, that he very whole∣some for mans body. The first is a Pke, called the tyrant of fishes, because he not only devoureth fishes of other kind, but also of his own kind: and therefore on him these verses were made. Lucius est piscis Rex & tyrannus aquarum, Aquo non differt Lucius iste parum. Among our Fish, the Pike is King of all, In water none is more tyrannical. The fish of Pike is hard, and a Pike is swift in smim∣ming. The second is a Perch derived of this Verb Parco, pardis to forbear, or to spare, but by a contrary sense: for a Perch spareth no fish, but woundeth other fishes with his fins on his back, nor a Pike dare not adventure vpon a Perch, but as Al∣bertus saith, There is a naturall amity between the Pearch and the Pike. For if the Pike be once hurt of another fish, he is healed with great difficulty. And when he is hurt he goeth vnto the Pearch, the which seeing him hurt, toucheth and sucketh his wound, and so the Pike is healed again. And the Pearch is likewise an hard Fish, The third is a Sole or Sea Fish, called a Sold, which is a special good fish.
The fourth is a Whiting. The fith is a Tench, which is a fresh water fish, and the skinne thereof is slippery and slimy, and somewhat black, and the meat thereof is hard. Whensoever one will dresse a Pike, a Pearch, or a Tench, hee must take the skinne away. The sixt is a Gurnus, which is a Sea fish. This Fish is as great in quantity as a mans middle finger, the which is eaten with the head and fins, The seventh is a Playce. The eighth is a Carpe, a fresh water fish, the which is much slimy: but great estates have them sod in wine, and so the sliminess is away. The ninth is a Rochet a Sea-fish, and it is a Fish of hard meat and wholsome. Some other texts have Govio, that is a Goon, which is a very wholsome fish. The Tenth is a Trout, the which (in eating) is like a Salmon, and yet it is no Salmon: It is long and not grosse, it is taken in great Rivers, and will suffer it self to he rubbed and clawed, being in the water, and so it is ta∣ken, and thereof Pasties be made with spices, and it is a right dainty fish. Now as touching the choice of fish, yee shall first vn∣derstand, that fish (if it bee compared to Flesh) is of lesse nourishment, and is lighter of digestion, and the nourishment thereof is full of phlegmatick superfluities, cold and moyst, and they be hardly digested, and abide long in the Stomackc. And by reason that the Stomack laboureth in digesting them, and that otherwhile they bée corrupted in the Stomack; they retaine a certain putrified quality, and engender thirsti∣nesse. And surely, the nourishment of wholesome flesh is better then fish. Secondly, know, that Sea-fish is better in the Regi∣ment of Health, then any other of the same sort, which is taken in fresh water. For their nourishment is not so su∣perfluous, and yet is more nearer to the nature of flesh.
But because Sea fish is harder, then other of the same sort,Conditions of good fish. that is taken in fresh Water; therefore it is of more difficul∣ty in digestion, and of more pure nourishment. Yet notwith∣standing fresh water fish is more wholsomer for sick lk by reason of their feeble digestion. Thirdly fish, as well of Salt water as fresh, should be dis∣creatly chosen: the which when it is dressed is white, and not clammy, that is brittle, and not very grosse; it must have a good savour, that doth not soon putrifie, and of a good colour. Nor it may not be bred in Lakes or ponds, nor in filthy places nor in water wherein groweth ill weeds. And they ought not to bet too old nor too young, they should be swift of moving, and o small clammishnes. But if it be Sea-fish, we must choose such as are taken in ri∣vers a good way from the Sea, and such as have the other afore∣said conditions. And the more skaly that Fish is, the better it is, and so it is likewise vnderstood by the fins; for many fins and skales betoken the purenesse of the fishes substance. Also among sea fish, they be best that that are bred in the déepest wa∣ter, the which ebbeth and floweth. And therefore the Fish that it taken in the North Sea, that is more surging, and more tempestuous, and more swift in ebbing and flowing is better, then the fish that is taken in the dead or the South Sea. And ye shall likewise vnderstand of fresh water fish: for fish bred in deep water is better then the other of the same sort being bred in shallow waters, and little brooks. And here∣by may sufficiently be known, what kind of fish should be chosen. For bestiall fish, such as the Sea Swine, Dog-fish and Dolphin, are vnwholesome in the Regiment of Health, because they be hard of digestion, and of superfluous hu∣mours. Nor in the meate of the aforesaid Fishes, the above numbred conditions appears not, as whitenesse, subtility, no such other. For it those Fishes (and such like) chance to be eaten, they should not be sod so soone as they bée taken:
but they should be kept a few dayes after, till time the meat of them do mollifie and ware tender, without corrupting of their substance. And also the aforesaid fishes be heifer, be∣ing a little corned with Salt, then fresh, or viterly salt, Now among all Sea-fish (the aforesaid conditions con∣sidered) the Rchet and Gurnard some to be most whole∣some: for their meat and substance to most pure, and next to them is a Place and a Sole. But the mat of those two is more clammy, lesse frangible, lesse white, more grosse; and lesse subtile: Nor the savour and smell is not so delici∣ous. Some hold, that the Whyting is more commendable then the rochet. It is not so clammy as a Plaice and a Sole and the meat thereof is frangible enough, but the relish smel, colour, purenesse of substance and mobility considered, it is not to good as a rochet and gurnard, The like ye shall vnderstand of Herring, and the fish called Morua, being young enough, they draw neare to the fore∣sayd fishes in goodnesse, so that they have the above sayd conditions: yet they are grosser and more clammy then the fore∣said ashes. But as for Salmon, Tuthut and Makerell, they are not so good, because they be much grosse, more clammy, hard of digestion, and fuller of superfluity. Therefore they bee onely wholesome for Labourers, and young folkes of strong complexion: and their clamminesse, grosse∣ness, and coldnesse may be taken away with certaine sau∣ces. Among fresh Water Fish (the foresaid conditions conside∣red) the earch and the Pike are the best, so that they bée fat: and next to them are the Vendosies, and then Lobsters. And though the Pearch be more shaly then the foresaid fishes: yet the meat thereof is as white frangible, and subtile, as the Pike and Carp, as it is oft found in ponds.
Now vniversally the best fresh water Fish of the same sort, is that which is taken in water that is stony in the bottom, running Northward, deep, and labouring much whereunto runneth no ordures of the Cities, and wherein no Weedes grow, Crevesces both of the sea and rivers, are very nutritive, be∣cause they do not lightly corrupt the stomack: but they be hard of digestion. Furthermore note, that fresh Fish doth myst the body, and engendreth milke and séed of generation: and is very wholesome for chollerick folkes. Also after great travell or much labour, we should not eat Fish, for then it soon cor∣rupteth in the Stomack. And they that have a weak Sto∣mack, or full of ill humours, ought to beware of eating of fish. Moreover, grosse fish corned with a little salt is better then fresh fish: and fish of any long time salting, is vnwholesom.Eating of Fish good and bad. Also fish and flesh together should not be eaten, nor fish and white meats nor fish should not be eaten after other meats. Also fish a little salted, and a small quantity thereof is wholsome: it stirreth up the appetite, and fortifieth it, if one have an appetite thereto, Vocibus, anguilla pravae sunt, fi comedantur, Qui physicam non ignorant, hac testificantur, Caseus anguill nimis obsunt fi comedantur, Ni saepe bibas, & rebibendo bibas. Who knowes not Physick, should be nice and choice, In eating Eeles, because they hurt the voice: Both Eeles and Cheese without good store of wine, Well drunk with them, oftends at any time. The Authour sayth here, that the Eele is an vnwhole∣some Fish, and specially it hurteth the voye. And this he
proveth by the saying of Physitians, and Students of natu∣rall Philosophy. The reason is, because an Eele is a slip∣pery fish, clammy, and specially a stopper: and it wanteth much much of the conditions of good fish before spoken. Also this that is said by an Eele, may be vnderstood of Lam∣preyes: although Lampreys be a little wholsomer then Eles and lesse jepe rdous, because that ther be not so clammy and gross, at Eles be. And though these Fishes be delicious to taste, yet they are very perillous: because their generation in the water, is like the generation of Serpents on the earth. Wherefore it is to be doubted lest they be venemous: and therefore the heades and tayles, in the which the venome is wont to bee, and likewise the String within, should in no wise bee ea∣ten, Also it is very good to plunge them alive in good wine, to take away their clamminesse, and to let them lye still therein till they bee dead. And then let them bee drest with Galendine, made of the best spices, as great Estates Cookes are wont to de: but it is good to perboyle them (twise be∣fore) in Wine and Water, and that broath being cast away, to séeth them throughly: and to make Galendine for them: or else to bake them, or fry them in green Sauce with strong Spices, and a little good Wine in Winter: but in Som∣mer, to dresse them with a little Wine Verjuyce and Vine∣gar: yet hee that can forbears these two Fishes, doth best. Further the Text sayth, that Chéese, and Eeles doe hurt much when they bee eaten: but this is to be under∣stood, it yee eate any great quantity thereof. The cause of Cheese is before shewed, at Persica, Poma, &c. and of Eeles here now before. At followeth in the Text, that if these things hee taken with oft drinking of Wine; their hurtfulnesse is amended: yet this should not be understood of subtile and piercing wins, nor of wine that is given in way of drinke conductive: be∣cause
such wine should not be given vpon'any meat the which meat engendreth ill humours when it is eaten: nor yet before nor after is digested, as Avicen sayth.avi, 3 ca. de reg. aqua & vini. For then such wine indu∣ceth great hurt, for it causeth ill humours, which are engendred of that drink, to enter into the extream parts of the body; which peradventure were not able to enter, without help and leading of the wie. But this, is to be vnderstood of strong wine, not greatly pier∣ring, oft and in small quantity given or taken to the intent to mix the meat together: for such wine doth allay the malice of the meat, and comforteth digestion, and directeth the phlegma∣tick cold humors. Wherefore it helpeth the digestion of ches and Eeles, which are of very ill digestion. Inter prandendum sit sope parumque bibendum, Si jumas Ovum, molle sit arque novum. In feeding at our meals some Doctors think, Oft-times, and yet but little, we should drink. In eating Egges chuse them are soft and new, For otherwise, great perils may ensue. Here the Authour teacheth two things. The first is, that one at dinner and supper should eate well, and drink oft, and yet but a little at once: and not to do as a bruit beast doth, that eateth hie fill of meat, and drinketh after∣ward: for the better the drink to mingled with the meat, the sooner the meat is mollified, & the more capable of digesti∣on. Now here is to be noted, that there are three manner of drinkings. The first is that which mingleth the meat toge∣ther. The second is that which dilateth. The third is that which quencheth the thirst. The first that wée speake of, is to bée vnderstood of
drinke mingled with our meate, though wee bee not thirsty, Thus we ought to drinke, even as we have eaten a little. For (except a better reason) I say, we may not abide till the meates end, nor till we be a thirst. And this manner of drinking is specially good for them, which féed on meat that is actually dry: as appeareth by sick folkes, that eat dry bread. But such as be in good temper, should not drink to quench their thirst, till the meals end: for then commeth the true thirst, by reason the meat is hot and dry. It is not very reasonable, that thirst and hunger should assayl us both together: for they are of con∣trary appetite. And thus one should drink, according as the thirst is more or lesse. Drinking dilative, is most convenient after the first digestion regularly, and a little before wee take other meate. And this manner of drinking is wholesome, when the meates (before taken) be grosse in substance: nor thus to drinke we may not tarry till we be thirsty. For this drinking pre∣xareth the stomacke to receive other meate, and causeth the meat that is digested, to depart from the stomack to the Li∣der: nor this drinking should not be in any great quantity, to the end it may be the sooner digested. For before it be dige∣sted, it goeth not to the liver: And this is of truth, except such drink dilative be water, in which we must not tarry till digestion, be∣fore it come to the Liver. But regularly, convenient drink dila∣tive or permixtive. ought to be wine, Ale, Béer, Perry, or such like, but wine is best of all. Secondly, the grosser, dryer, and colder the meat is, the stronger the drinke permixtive and dilative should be. And contrariwise, the btter, subtiler, and moister the meat is, the weaker the drink permixtive and dilative should be. And the more subtile, hote and digestible the meat is, the weaker the drink or wine ought to be. Wherfore one ought to drink stron∣ger wine with beef then with Chickens, and stronger Wine with fish then with flesh.
The last doctrine, is, that if wée will eat an Egge, it must be rere roasted, and new. The cause thereof is before shew∣ed. Pisam laudare decrevimus ac reprobare, Pellibus ablat is est bona satis pisa Est inflativa cum pellibus atque nociva. Pease may be prays'd, and discommended too, According as their nature is to do. The Huskes avoyded then the pulse is good, Well nourishing not hurtfull to the blood. But in the Husks they are gnawing meat, And in the stomack cause inflations great. Here the Authour saith, that Peason some way may bee vnwholesome. They bee very wholsome to eate when the huskes be taken away: for if they bee eaten in the huskes they inflate. And therefore it is not artificiall to eat them in the husks, because the nature of that within, and the husks do disagree: for the one laboureth to bee loosed and to goe out, but the other withstandeth and bindeth, as Isaac say∣eth. Wherefore they cause a rumbling, gnawing, and in∣flation in the belly. Yet Peason onely do not this, but al∣so all Pulse, as Beanes, Chyches, Chestons, and such like, and specially such as have much huek, as beans and black rice. Also the husk of them all nourisheth worse then the pith with∣in. Now here is to be noted, that there is a manner of white round Peason, whereof the cod is very small and thin: and one may eate these Peason (with the husk) more surely then other, although it were better to hull them. And albeit that the reason aforesaid is true, touching all pulse, yet ye hal vnderstand, that the huls of green Pulse is lesse, and lesse of. versity is between the husk, and the pith within, and more easse to digest, And therefore some say they be more whole∣some
for folks in health; but yet it is not so, because gréen Pulse is of great superfluity, and corruptible substance, wher∣fore they be lesse wholesome for whole folks. And note this for a truth that dry pulse if the viter husk be taken away, is more wholsome then green but green is better then dry vnhus∣ked. Further the substance of all pulse is inflative, and hard of digestion, and their ill nourishment is vnwholsome in the Re∣giment of Health: but the broth of them is wholesom, because the broth maketh the belly laxative, and precureth vrine, and vnstoppeth the veins. Wherefore it is wholsome at such times as folks vse grosse and opilutive meats, as on fasting dayes. For this broth or postage conveniently made, is not so hurtfull as the substance therein is no inflation, nor difficulty of nourish∣ment or digestion. This broth is made one this wise. The Rice Peason must be layed in warm water, and therein to be all rubbed with ones hand a good while then after, in the foresaid wa∣ter, they should be tempered all the night: and therein (the next night following) to be boyled twice or thrice, and then dreff, and so served. But when the hour of dinner draweth near, you may dresse it with Cinamon and Saffron, and a little quantity of wine put thereto, which done then boil it once, and to eat it at the beginning of dinner or supper, and the broth or poage of Rice and of round white peason is very wholsom, and friendly to mans nature, and so likewise is their sub∣stance. La Ethicis sanum, Caprinum post Camelinum, Ac nutritivum plus ombus est Asnium, Plus nutritivum Vaccinum sit & Ovinum; Si febriat caput, & doleat, non est bene sanum. Goats milk, nor Camels milk to drink is good, When Agues or Consumptions touch the bloud,
They nourish well. But (beyond all) some say, Milk of an Asse doth nourish more then they. Yet when as Head-ach or hot Fevers fall. The milk of Kine and sheep are best of ail. Here the Author teacheth us certaine lessons,To chusemilk whereby to choose milk. First Goats milk is wholesome for them that be in a con∣sumption, or are leane, or that have a consuming Agu. And Avicen saith;Avi. 1 can cap. dela. & 1 3. trait. 2 cap. de remor. medic. enmact. Ethi∣cos. That Goates Milk and Asses Milk is good for them that bee in contemplation, by reason that the Goate, milke is temperate and nourisheth much. And next to this is Camells milk: because it is subtile very to trish, and moyst, and by rea∣son that it is very moyst it nourisheth but little: and therefore it is not so wholsome for them as Goats milk is: But yet Ca∣mels milke, newly after following, is wholesome for them that have the Dropsie, and for them that have any disease in the Li∣ver;Avi. 2 can. ca. de lect. Because it reviveth the liver as Avicen saith. Secondly, he saith, That Asses Milke is most wholesome for dry folkes in a Consumption. This is of truth, if ye will compare Asses milke with milke of other bruit beasts: because it inclineth to coldnesse and humidity, and is subile, it sooner entreth and more slowly congealeth, then the milk of any bruit beast, as Galen sayth. The same sayth Avicen, and that next to Womans milke, there is none like to Asses milke. And hée saith, If any helpe the Fever Hectick, it is Asses Milke: yet to compare Asses milk with a Womans milke, it is not so wholesome. For a Womans Milk, ta∣ken by sucking, is most wholesome, as Avicen sayth. By reason that a Womans milk is cold, moyst, and more like to mans nature, it entreth more swiftly, and is digested more sooner, and nourisheth better. And this milke is to be given to them that be in a consumption, that should bee milked as neare the Patients bedde-side as is possible and
forthwith to minister it unto him, least the ayre corrupt it. And here is to be noted, that in some cases, sowre or butter milk is better for some folks in a consumption, then ei∣ther a womans milke, or Asses. First, when by this Fever Ethick they be cast in a lake. The second is, when they suspect ceagulatien of the Milke in the Stomacke, ei∣ther by vehement heat of the Fever, or else, because the sto∣macke of it self is chollerick, the Milke should turn to cho∣ler. The third is, when the Ethick Fever is coupled with a putrified Fever: specially, when there is not many opi∣lations in the interiour paris. For sows milke restraineth the belly and doth not lightly turn into choller, because the buttrinesse of it is gone, whereby the milk doth lightly en∣flame: nor in a putrified Fever it is not soon putrified. The The fourth, if the Stomack be foule, milke doth lightly corrupt therein. The fifth is, when he that hath the Ethicke disease, abhorreth the dulce and clean milk, but not the sowr or butter milk. The third lesson is, that Cow milk and sheeps milk are more nutritive, for they be fater and grosser then other, as Avicen sayth.Avi 2 can. . de Lacte. And all those beasts Milk that in bringing forth their young continue longer then a woman is unwholesome: but the milk of those that bear equally with a woman. is most wholsome, as Cow Milk. But Rasts sayth, That the Cow Milk is the grossest milk that any beast giveth: and therfore is wholsomer then any other, for them that desire to be fat. The fourth Lesson is, that milke hurteth them that have the Ague or the head ach: The cause why is before shewed at Persica Poma. Lenit & humectat, soluit sine sebre butirum, Butter doth soften; moisten and make loose beside,
Those bodies where no Fever doth abide, Here the Author sheweth thrée properties of butter. The first is, Butter mollsieth the belly and maketh it slip∣pery by reason that it is oyly.The proper∣tioo, butter, The second is, that butter is moist, for it is made of the best parts of the milk, wherefore it must needs be moist, seeing that the milk is moist whereof it is made. The third is, that it looseth the belly, and that is by the slip∣perinesse that it causeth in the gus. These three properties Avicen rehearseth. And these three properties Butter induceth in a body, that is not sicke, of a Feaver: for it hurteth them that have an ague, by reason that the vntuosity of the Butter augmenteth the heat of the Fea∣ver. And albeit that butter causeth the foresaid properties: yet by reason that it is over moist and vntlous, it is vnwholesome in the way of meat, and specially to eat much thereof. For it in∣gendreth loathsomnesse: and maketh the meat to swim about the brim of the stomack: and laxeth the belly out of measure, and provoketh one to vomit: therefore butter should in no wise (as meat) be eaten in any great quantity and specially it should not be eaten after other meat, but to vse it with other it is very wholesome. Incidit aqua lavat et penetrat, mundat quoque laectis. Whey is incisive washing piercing too, Cleansing, and purging where it is sit to do. Here the Author sheweth four properties of Whey.The proper∣ties of whey. The first is it is incisive or subtile. The second, it is washing or scouring. The third, it is piercing, which property proceedeth of the first.
The fourth is, it cleanseth or purgeth. Avicen reciting these properties saith. That Whey is subtila∣tive, washing and loosing, and therein is no mordication. Rasis saith, That Whey doth expell ruddy choler, skabs, and pushes, and also pimples in the face. And also it is wholesome for them that have the Iaundes and also for them that be distempered by too much drinking of wine. Caseus est frigidus, stipas, grossus quoque durs. Caseus & panis bonus est cibus, hic bene sans. Si non sunt sani tune hunc non iungite pani. Cheese is by Nature cold, stuffing, grosse and hard: Yet good with bread, where sicknesse is debar'd, When being sound in health, for them it's good, But if not joynd with bread, unwholesome food. Here the Author reciteth four properties of Chéese.Four proper∣ties of cheese. The first is that Chéese is naturally cold. And this is to be vnderstood of gréen Cheese, the which is cold and moist, and not of old Cheese, the which is hot and dry, as Avicen sayth. Or else it may be vnderstood of Chéese that cruddeth onely of the milk, without mingling of any other thing, for there is some Chéese naturally hot, that heateth the stomack and biteth the tngue, by mingling of other things therewith, as some cheese that is gréen in colour, of which if one eat much in quaun∣tity it doth heat and inflame the body. The second property is that Chéese maketh one costive, and this is of truth specially if it be hard and made with much renles. The third property is, that all Chéese engendreth grosse hu∣mors: for all Cheese is mae of the grosser and more earthy part of the milk. The fourth property is, that Cheese bindeth the wombe
and this, and the second is all one. Further the Text sayth, that though Cheese that is eaten alone, be vnwholsome by reason that it causeth ill digestion: yet if one eat a little thereof with bread, if shall digest with the bread, and not otherwise. And this is of truth, for whole folks and not for sick folks to eat. We spake before of Cheess, at Nutrit & impinguat, &c. Ignari Medicime dicunt esse nocivum, Sed tamen ignorant cur nocumenta feram. Languenti stomach Caseus addit opens, Si post sumatur terminat ille dapes, Qui Physicam non ignorant haec testificantur. Cheese doth Apology his own defence, When they (unskild in Physick) urge pretence That is hurtfull yet through ignorance: Know not whereby his hurtfulnesse doth chance. The stomack languishing, Cheese doth releeve, And (after stuffing cates) great ease doth give, A modicum thereof, after all other food, By best Physitians, is allowed for good. Here the Author blameth them that absolutely reprove the use of Cheese, and expresseth two utilities thereof. First, Cheese comfortth a sicke stomack. But know then, that all Chéese doth not ease every diseased stomack. In some cases, all Cheese hurteth the stomack by seldome knitting, and every stomack which is weakned by long sicknesses. But new greene Cheese, and of small clammi∣nesse, comforteth a hotte stomacke, as Rasis sayth, and it represseth his browninesse and heat. And also it com∣forteth a dry stomack that is moyst. And old Cheese, or very tart, or much cruddy, burieth much such Stomacks. But old Cheese, or very cruddy Cheese comforteth the sto∣mack, about the which hangeth much phlegm; for such
cheese with his tarnesse cutteth and scoureth away the flegm. But new and soft chéese hurteth such a stomack right much. The second vtility is, that cheese that is eaten after other meat, maketh it to descend down into the place of digestion, that is into the bottome of the stomack. All this they know that have the very science of Physick, and Rasis saith, That a little quantity of tart Cheese, eaten after meat, fortifieth the mouth of the stomack, and taketh away the overmuch society and loathing, the which sweet and unctious meats are wont to ingender above the stomacks mouth. Inter prandendum fit saepe parumque bibendum. Vi minus aegrotes, non inter fercula potes. Often, yet little, drink in dinner time, But between meals, you must from drink decline; That sicknesse may in power lesle prevail, Which else (through drinking) sharply doth assayl. Here the Author teacheth two lessons. The first is, that a man (at his meat) should drink little and often: but this thing is already declared. The second lesson is, that between meales one must forbear drink, especially, if the meat that he did eat be vndigested in the stomack except necessity constrain him to drink; for drin∣king then, lotteth and breaketh digestion of the meat that is before eaten. For it causeth the meat to descend from the sto∣mack vndigested, and marreth the appetite, it grieveth the bo∣dy, and engeadreth the Fevers, and other Diseases. Vt vites paenam, de potibus incipe coenam. Physicians much contend about this Text, If that with sicknesse thou wouldst not be vext.
With drink begin thy Supper. Others say, Till thou have eaten first, keep drink away. The Comment therefore yeelds the best direction Of drinking when we go to our refection. Here the Author saith, that one ought to begin his Sup∣per with drink Some expound this verse thus. If thou w eschew sicknesse, drinke at Supper ere thou begin to eat. But this exposition is reprooved. For after the judge∣ment of Physstians a man should begin his Supper with meat. and not with drink. And although this book was made for Englishmen yet they keep not this rule: for at what hoar of the day soever they drink, they eat first a morse of bread. Therefore this verse may be expounded otherwise: taking drink for meat moist and easse of digestion, as Hypocrates ta∣keth drink when be sayth, It is easier to fill one with drink then with meat. So that the sentence of this verse should be thus. It is better to begin our supper with drink, that is with meat moist and easse of digestion, then with meat that is grosse, hard, and of ill digestion. The reason is if one eat meat, that is moist and easie of digestion, after meat that is gross, and hard of digestion, by reason of the digestive heat of the night, it will be digested long before the gross meats. And when it can∣not (for the gross meat that is vndigested) have issue it burneth over-much: or if it get issue, it plucketh with if some part of the grosse meat that is vndigested. Therefore it is best to begin with meat moist and easie of digestion: that when it is digested, if may (without let) issue out. Singula post ova pocula sme nova, Post pisces nux sit, post carnes casens adsit. Vnicanux prodest, necat altera, tertia mors est. A new laid Egge craves a good cup of wine, Drunk after it, it will the blood refine.
Nuts after fish, Cheese after flesh, is best, In both these, they ate helpfull to digest, One Nut doth well, the second doth offend, Beware the third, it brings a deadly end. Here be certain lessons. The first is, to drink a good draught of Wine; after one hath eaten a new laid Egge rere roasted, is very whole∣some. The reason may be, because a new laid Egge rere roasted, is of right great nourishment, and easily digesteth, and it is of that sort, that in smal quantity it nourisheth much: and principally the yolk, as is before sayd at Ova recentia. So that the wine, which is friendly of nature, causeth that the E is more destrously drawn by the nourishing members: and hel∣peth it to enter. Another cause may be. An Egg descendeth slowly down: and drink helpeth it to descend. The second Doctrine is, to eat nuts after Fish instead of chéese. For ts, by reason of their drinesse, hindreth the engen∣dring of phlegm, that is wont to be engendred of fish. And for this cause, nuts are the last service in Lent. The third lesson is, that after flesh, we nust eat Cheese and not nuts, for nuts do dry over much, and so doth not chéese: but it causeth the meat to descend to the bottom of the stomack where the vertue of digestion is. And this is certain, it the cheese be neither too old, nor too new. Further,a Nutmeg. the Text hath in the last verse, that a Nutmeg is wholesome for the body: It maketh the month to favour well it comforteth the sight▪ and likewise the Liver, and the spleen, and specially the mouth of the Stomack, as A∣vicen saith. But the other common nut called a Walnut, is hurtfull. This Walnut, as Avicen sayth, Doth in∣state, it engendreth Ventositie in the Wombe,avi. 2 can ca. de nuc. musen∣a it is hard of digestion, and stirreth one to vomit, and that is, by rea∣son
that it is hot. But the third Nut, that is the nut of the cross-bow, is death, for the Crosse-bow killeth men. Or else we may understand the nut Nethell: which as Avicen sayth, is vene∣mous, wherefore it sleyeth, Adde potum piro, nux est medicina veneno, Fert pira nostra pirus, sine vino; sunt pira virus. Sipira sunt virus, sit maledict a pirus. Si coquus, antidotum pira sunt, sed cruda venenim. Cruda gravant stomachum, relevant pira cocta gravatum, Post pira da potum, post pomum vade cacatum. When we eat Pears, boldly we may drink wine, Nuts against poyson are a Medicine. Pears eaten (without wine) are perilous, Because raw pears are counted venemous. Being boyl'd or bak't, weak stomacks they do chear, Because restoratives they then appeare. By being raw, the stomack they offend. But comfort (otherwise) doth them attend, Drink after Pears, and after Apples, use The course that nature no way can refuse. In the first verse here the Author teacheth us to drink Wine after Pears, for Pears (as it hath been before sufficiently de∣clared at length) ingender ventosity: and of their property they cause the chollick & engender blood full of aquosity. And there∣fore with them, one should drink strong wine, which consumeth those ventosities and auosities ingendred of Pears. Secondly he saith, that nuts are a remedy against venom: as it hath been shewed at Alia nux, &c. Further, in the second and third verse; he sheweth, that Pears that be eaten without Wine, are denemous, that is, hurtfull to mans nature, The cause is shewed in the first
verse. Yet for all that, Peares be not venemous simply, for if they were they would kill us, and Pears (so doing) are accur∣sed. In the fourth verse be sheweth that raw Peares, are vene∣mous, that is to say, hurtful: for they make the humors to boil, and breed the chollick, fleam, and scab: yet if they be sod, they be medicinable, in manner as is before said, that is to say▪ with wine: and specially if they be eaten after other meat, for they expulse the dregs. In the fifth verse he saith, that raw Pears grieve the Sto∣mack; for they hinder digestion, and enflate: but sod Pears relieve the Stomack that is grieved, and dispose it natural∣ly, In the last verse are two things. The first is, after Pears we must drink for the cause before said. The second is, that after the eating of Apples, we must go to siege: for Avicen saith.av. 2 can. ca. de po. If sweet or sowr Apples find any grosse humors in the stomack, they force them to descend from thence to the guts: because Apples are much inflative and ingender ventosi∣ties, which nature expelleth to the inferiour parts. Cerasa si comedas tibi coufert grandia dona. Expurgant stomachum, nucleus lapidem tibi tllit. Et de carne sua sanguis critque bonus. By eating Cheries, great good doth arise, To such as use them, for the learned wise Say, that they purge the stomack, and beside, The broken stones ond kernels have been tried, To break the bladder stone, breed wholesome bloud, To fat and feed the body they be good. Here the Author declareth three commodities that come by eating of Cherries.
The first is, that Cherries purgeth the stomack.Eating of cherries. This some say is truth, when that the stones he broken and eaten withall: for these two together by their naturall property, do secure and cleanse. The second is, that the kernell of the Cherry stone, by self-vertue, breaketh the stones in ones reins, for bladder, and if it be eaten dry or made in milk. The third is, that the substance, or meat of Cherries en∣gendreth very good bloud, and it comforteth and faeth the body. And this is proved by experience, for we sée that Spar∣rowes, which are great eaters of Cheries, in Chery-time their livers be far greater then in other seasons, whereby it appea∣reth, that Cherries increase and comfort the Liver. Yet here is to bee noted, that there bee two sorts of Cher∣ries, grosse and small. And also of the grosser, there are two sorts some are sweet, and some sowre. All dulce, and small Cheries are vnwholsome, for they be lightly corrupt, and bréed vermine. The grosse, and sowr Cheries are called Cina, and of these are two sorts. Some be ruddy and soft of substance, and such must bée eaten fresh and new gatherèd, and at beginning of dinner, their nature is to scowr the stomack, and to provoke the appe∣tite. The other be black, grosse, and hard of substance, and spe∣cially the sower. And these should be eaten after dinner, or supper. The cause is, for by their sowernes they close the month of the stomack, whereby the better and speedier digesti∣on followeth. Infrigidant, laxant, multum prosuus tibi pruna. Prunes cool and loose the body very kindly, No way offensive, but to health are friendly. Here the Author reciteth two utilities, that come by eating of Prunes.
First, Prunes coole the body, and therefore Portugals that dwell in a hot Country, seeth Prunes alway with their meat. Secondly, Prunes make one to lask, by reason of their humidi∣ty and clamminesse, as Galen sayth. This is truth, if they be ripe.Gal. 2 alimen. For Prunes that be ripe, be Stipticalli and nourish little, as Avicen sayth. And though Damask-Prunes have the foresaid vtility, yet properly they be ascribed to Prunes of Armenia. For Prunes of the Country of Armenia, are better then any other, And they unbind the womb more vehement∣ly then any other,Avi 2 can. ca. de pru.  as Avicen sayth: yet know, that ripe Prunes are to be used, and not vnripe. The Prunes most wholesome for mans Nature, be the long ones, that have little substance about the stone, small, hard, and in manner dry, and the butter skin thin, and they should not be sweet in taste, but somewhat sowre, and of this sort are Damask Prunes:The best Prunes. and these do refresh and cools the body, as is said. There be many other sorts of Prunes, whose use is not ac∣cepted. There be also Prunes, called wild Prunes, the which grow in the woods; these be not laxatide: of them water is distilled to bind the womb. Prunes that be taken to make one lask. must first be layd in cold water, for then they cool and moyst more perfectly, and by their slipperinesse they loose the choller that they come to: and so the Stomack is better disposed to receive food. And here is to be noted, that moist Prunes and new, are more alterative, though they be of less nourishment, and of more superfluity: but dry Prunes comfort more, and better nourish the body. And as it is by Prunes, so after the same manner it is vnderstood by Charries. Yet notwithstanding, the humidity of Cherries is subtile, and not clammy, whereby they nourist lesse then Prunes.
Persica cum musto vobis datur or dine justo. Sumere sic est mos, nuethus soc nd racemos. Passula non spleni, tussi valet, est bona reni. Must or sweet Wine, with Peaches we should drink Else harm will happen by them, as most think, And shew good reasons why it should be so. With dry old Nuts a Raysin still must go; Because in cooling they are dull and slow. Yet Raisins hurt the Spleen by opilation: As Nuts are divers, and cause inflammation, Here the Author teacheth thrée Doctrines. The first is, that with Peaches we should drink Must,To drink wine with peaches. for two causes The first is, because Must is hot, and boyleth in our body; which hoyling and heat fordeeth the coldnesse of the Peach. The second reason is, Peaches veright cold and cool the bo∣dy very much. Therefore, that wine should be drunk upon them, which beateth more then other, and that is Must which is known by experience. The manner how we should eat Peaches and other fruits, is declared at Persica Poma, &c. The second doctrine is, that with old dry Nuts we Nust cat Raysins. For new gathered Nuts are wholesome alone: but old dry Nuts are great dryers, and through their vnctuosity they lightly inflame the body: wherefore Raysins with them must be eaten, which restrain inflammation and drynesse, by reason that they myst. And of Nuts is spoken more largly as Alia nux, &c. The third Doctrine is, that Raysins or Corans hurt the Spleen, for they cause but opilation thereof: yet they are wholesom for the Rens, for by their provoking of vrine, they purs the Keyns.
Scrosa, tumor, glandes sicus cataplasmate edit Iunge papaver ci; consracta foriss tenet ossa. The evill that is tearmed by the Swine, Under the chin doth to the throat encline; Swellings boyls, Kernels, all these holpen are, If you a plaister made of Fags prepare. But if the same with poppy mingled be, Broke-bones it knits and strengthens perfectly. Here the Author sayth that Plaisters made of Figs are wholesome gainst three diseases: that is to say, the Swines evill, Kernels and Swellings. By Swines evill is under∣stood Instation under the chinne about the throat. And it is called Scrofula a Scrofa: that is to say, a Sow or a Swine,avi 3 4 traw, 2 ca de scrosu∣lis. Either because this disease chanceth many times to Swine, through their gulosity, or else because the slape of this disease is like to a Swine, as Avicen saith. By Kirnels are vnderstood Impostumes, which commonly chaunce vnder the arme-pittes, and in the gruyne. And by swelling may be understood Inflations vnder any part of the body.A plaister made of Figs. Wherefore to heale Impostumes, and specially to ripe them, Figges should be sodden in water, and with the water should be mixed a little quantity of Vineger, the which hel∣peth the vertue of figs to enter. And when it is sub, the Figs must beaten in a Morter: and then mingled with a curti∣sle of water, that they were sod in and so make a Playster. A Playster is properly a Medicine made of some Herb or slow∣er and the juyce thereof, as this verse saith. Cum succum ponis & herham, tune Cateplasma facis. The second vtility is, that a Playster made of Figs and Poppy sées joyneth or setteth broken bones together again,a plaister of Ags and pop∣py seed. and they must be sod together in Water, without Vineger: and then slamp it in a Morter, and put thereto a little of the
water that it was sod in and so lay it to the sore. The reason hereof may be, because Poppy séed both taketh away the sensiblenesse of the members whereby the ach (that is wont to chance in breaking of Bones) is done away, and proveketh one to sléep. And the Figs do draw the humidities of the body to the vtter-parts: which humidities brought to the Bones will draw, retain or hold them together, but never perfectly knit them. Know withall, that there be thrée kinds of Poppies white, red, and black. The red is venemous, and groweth among Corn Young schollers are wont to stamp the flowers there∣of, and so make red Ink. Pediculos, venerem{que} facit, sed cuilibet obstat. Both Lice and Lust by Figs engendered are, Of those corrupting humours they prepare, Here be declared two operations of Figs. First much eating of Figs maketh one lousse;Eating of igs Avi 3 can ca. de sicubus, and this is certain, if the Figs be dry as Avicen saith, the cause is, by rea∣son of the maliciousnesse, and corruption of the humour that is of them engendered. Another cause may be by reason that figs stir one to sweat much whereof Lice are engendred The second operation is, Figs stir one to carnall lust: and likewise they have many superfluities, and augment the seed of generation. Multiplicant mictum, ventrem, dant mespila strictum, Escula bona dura, sed mollia sunt meliora, Medlars do bring very much increase, And loosnesse in the belly makes to cease: The hardest Medlars therein you may use, But get to nourish: then the softest chuse.
Here are declared two vtilities of Medlars. The first is, that they increase vrine: that is, by reason that they make the dregs hard, and so their waterines turns into much vrine. The second vtility is that Medlars make one costive, by reason of their sowernesss and Stipticity and therefore the text sayth, that hard Medlars be the better to stop the lask: but yet the soft Medlars be better then the hard: for they nou∣rish more, and bind lesse. And here is to be noted, that Med∣lars nourish lesse then Apples, Peares, Peaches, Figges, and such like; which thing appeareth plainly, by the eagerness of relish or taste, and hardnesse of their substance, after they be ripe on the tree, and therefore we should eat few Medlars, and rather in way of medicine, then meat. And because Med∣lars ripe not on the tree soft enough to eat, they must be laid in straw, till they be soft: and then they be more delectable, and lesse stipticall. Provocat Vriam Mustum, cito soluit, & inflat, Must doth provoke much vrine, and some say, It doth inflate, and quickly scours away. Here the Authour reciting three properties of Musse, sayth, that it provoketh one to vrine, by reason that the earthy parts (scouringly) bite the bladder, when they come thereto: the which constraineth the bladder to avoyd the vrine. And this property is vnderstood of Musts, that have biting lees, as much Rhenish Must hath, For Musts that have grosse lees, do not nip, but rather stop and let the vrine, as is before said at Impedit vrinam, &c. The second property is Must maketh one lightly to lask, the reason why is shewed in the first property. Thirdly, Must is inflative: for the holing that it
maketh in the body, raiseth up ventosities. The causes of these two properties, are shewed before at Impedit vrinam, &c. Grossos humores nutrit Cervisia, vires Prestat, et augmentat carnem, generat que ci Morem; Provocat vrinam, ventrem quoque mollit et inflat. Infrigidt modicum sed plus desiccat acetum. Infrigidat, macorat, melan. dat. sperma minorat, Siccos infest at nervos, & pinguia siccat. By drinking Ale or Beer grosse humors grow, Strength is augmented, bloud and flesh also Encreaseth dayly, vrine they do procure, Enflate the belly, as the learn'd assure. And furthermore, of vinegar, they say, Although it drieth, yet it cools his way In passage, and ir makes one lean Being received fasting, so I mean, It causeth melancholy, harms the seed Of generation, and doth shaking breed. Lean folk it hurteth, drying up their bloud, And unto fat folks, greatly doth no good. Here the Authour rehearsing two things, declareth eight properties of Ale or Beer. First, he saith, that Ale ingendreth grosse humours in mans body, which is of truth, in regard of Wine, And after the diversity of corn or grosse substance, that the Ale is made of; the grosser humors it engendreth. Secondly, Ale augmenteth mans strength: and this doth Ale that is made of the best grain, and well sod, for by reason that it nourisheth much, it increaseth strength. Thirdly, is encreaseth flesh, by reason that it nouri∣sheth
much: and for the same cause it encreaseth the bloud. And these thrée last properties be in stale Ale, that is well sod and made of the best Grain. Fifthly, it stirreth one to vrine. Sixthly, it maketh one to lask. And these two properties be in clear Beer that hath much of the Hag, as Beer of Ham∣burgh, which by reason of the Hops, it bringeth one in a lask: But it is not good for then: that have a weak brain: For, this Beer by reason of Hops, doth lightly overcome the Brain. Seventhly, it inflateth the belly: this is of truth, if it be ill sod, as Holland Beer doth which inflateth most, and stoppeth; and therefore it fatteth right much. The eighth is, that a little curtisie of ale cooleth: So doth Béer of Holland, Braband, Heynault, and Flanders; and this is that we vse daily, and this property is for certain, in respect of Wine. Here is to be noted, that Ale may be made of Oats, Bar∣ley, and Wheat; and as the Grain is altered, so is the com∣pleion of the Ale. Yet that which is made of Barley, inclineth more to cold, for Barley is cold. Yet that which is made of Barley and Oats stoppeth lesse, and lesse engendreth ventosies, and nou∣risheth lesse. But Ale made of Wheaten malt, enclineth more to heat, it nourisheth more, and stoppeth more. And the grosser the Ale is, the worse it is the subtiler the better. Further, Ale that is made of things that maketh one drunk, is worst, as of Darnell. For this Grain specially en∣gendreth head: ach d hurteth the sinews. Further, in the ext are five properties of Vinegar. The first is,Avi. 2. ca ea. de aceto. Avi. 3 1 a in ca. unico. doc v. it dryeth. For Avicen saith, It is a strong dryer, And therefore Physitians id (in the time of Pestilence) to vse it with meat and drink. For, Avicen saith, He that useth Vinegar in his meat and drink in Pestilence time, needeth not to dread the sicknesse. The second is, that vinegar of his own property cooleth.
Thirdly it maketh one lean, by reason that it dryeth: and and this is for a very truth. If one take it fasting,avi, 3 8 dec 4 ca. v. as Avicen sayth. Yet neverthelesse, the continuall vse of Vinegar, specially fasting, breedeth many inconveniences, it féebleth the sight, it hurteth the breast, and causeth the Cough: it hurteth the stomack and Liver, and vehemently oppresseth the sinews and joints, vering them with arthreticall griefs, with trembling and shaking. Fourthly, Vinegar ingendreth Melancholy humours, by reason that it cooleth and drieth. Fifthly, Vinegar diminisheth the seed of generation, for as much as it cooleth, dryeth and maketh one leane. These sayd properties Rasis putteth, saying. Vinegar is cold and drie, which maketh one lean, it destroyeth the strength, it diminisheth the seed of generation it enforceth black choller it maketh uddy sanguine colour and maketh meat subtile that is mingled with. In the last verse the Author putteth three things. The first is, that Vinegar hurteth lean folks, by reason that it dryeth, and the tartnesse maketh it to dry the more: For like joynd to like, maketh one the more surious. And also eve∣ry decayed complexion is holp by the contrary, and by the like it is brought into worse case. Secondly, Vinegar hurteth the sinewes, and thirdly, it ma∣keth one lean, as is before said. Rapa juvat stomachum, novi producere ventum, Provocat vrinam faciet quoque dente ruinam, Si male cocta datur, hinc tortio tunc generatur, Turneps do hurt the stomack, breaeth wind, Provoketh vrine, as by proof we find, They comfort sight, but yet the teeth offend, And gripes into the belly, they do end. Here the Authour declareth three vtilities of Rapes, tem∣perately
sed, and one inconuenience of the same. First. Rapes comfort the stomack: for the stomack dige∣steth them well and is not grieved therewith. Secondly, Rapes breake wind, as appeareth by experi∣ence. Thirdly, Rapes provoke the vrine. Yet besides these properties, Averroes saith, That Rapes greatly comfort the sight. The ill of Rapes is, that the continual eating of them hurt∣eth the teeth. In the last verse be saith, that Rapes cause throwes or gnawing in the belly, by reason that they multiply ventoscies, as saith this verse. Ventum saepe ramia, si tu vis vivere rapis. Rapes are the best to nourish, so some say, And for our Urine they do clense the way. The tayls of Rapes loose the belly. Furthermore note, that of all roots Rapes do best nourish mans body, as ap∣peareth by the sweetnesse that is found in their savour, for all sweet meats nourish more the body, then sowre, bitter or tart. Therefore because Rapes be the sweetest of all roots, and lesse sharp, they be most wholesom in the way of meat: but yet they ingender grosse melancholy bloud, if they be not well di∣gested. And it is good to purifie them from the first water, and in no wise to eat them raw. They stir one to bodily lust.  cleanse the ways that the vrine runneth. Egritur tarde cor, digeritur quo{que} dure, Similitr stomachun metior sit in extremitate, Reddit liagua bonum nutrimentuu medicinae: Digeritur facile pulme, cito labitur pse, us r brum gallinarum reliquorum.
Prescriptions for the inwards of a Beast, The heart is held but hardly to digest. The Maw is of like nature, slow in descent, And therefore is no wholesom nutriment. The Tongue is said to be of good digestion, And therefore is allow'd in our refection. The like opinion of the Lights we hold, Though Nature is sometime by them control'd. Of Brains, a Hen's is best of all to eat, And those of Chickens are most wholesom meat. Here the Author reciteth five things. The first is that the heart of Beasts is slowly digested,avi. 2 can. cap. de all. by reason that the Heart flesh is melancholious, which is hardly digested, and slowly descendeth; and as Avicen saith: Is unwhol∣som flesh; and as Rasis saith: It nourisheth little. The second is, that the Maw likewise is ill of digestion, and slow of descending, by reason that it is a sinewie mem∣ber, and gristly, wherefore it digesteth ill, and engendreth ill bloud. Further the Text saith that the extream parts of the Maw, as the bottom and brim, are better digested, by reason that those parts are more fleshy and fat. The third is, that the tongue is good nourishment, and that , touching the root as Avicen saith,avi. x can. cap. de carne. By reason that it is fleshy and easie of digestion: and among all other a rosted Pigs tongue the skin scraped off, is like Brawn, as Princes Carvers know, A Neates-tongue, by reason that it is moyst, is not very wholesom. But for all this these delicate fellows, before they rost a Neats-tongue, they stop it with cloves, whereby the moyst∣nesse is diminished, and the meat is apter to eat. The fourth is, that the Lights are easie of digestion, and easie to avoid out, and this is by reason of their naturall soft∣nesse: yet their nourishment is little, and vnwholesome for mans nature, because it is egmatick, as Avicen saith. And
here is to be noted, that though the lights of a Tupp be vn∣wholesome to eat, yet it is medicinable for a kybed or sor heel if it be layd hot thereunto, as Avicen saith. The fifth,avi. 2 ca, de pulmone. is that a Hennes brain is best, which (as Avi∣cen sayth) stauncheth bleeding at the nose. It must be eaten ei∣ther with salt or Spices, for (of it self) it provoketh one to vomit. And Phisitians say, that Chickens braines augment the memory. The brains of hogges are vnwholesome for man. But the braine of a Sheep, of a Hare, or of a Co∣ny, may be eaten with salt or spices. And of braines, we have more largely spoken before, at Nutrit & Impinguat, &c. Semen Feniculi, fugat & spiracula culi. Of Fenell-seed, our learned Physitians say, For breaking wind, it makes a ready way. Eating of Fennel-seed. Here the Author rehearsing one doctrine of Fenell-seed, saith it breaketh wind: by reason that it is hot and dry. And Physitians say, that the eating of Fenell-seed ingendreth four commodities. First it is wholesome for the Ague. Secondly, it avoydeth poison. Thirdly, it cleanseth the stomack. And fourthly, it sharpneth the sight, These four vtilities are rebearsed in two verses. Dis duo dat marathrum, febres fugat, at que veninum, Et purgat stomachum, Lumen quoquereddit acutum, Four vertues in the Fenell are allow'd, It quails the Ague, when it growes to proud, Poyson it soon expels, the stomack cheareth, Sharpens the sight, and comfortably cleareth.
And Avicen rehearsing these four properties, saith Democri∣tus deemed, that venemous Worms desire new Fenell-seed to com∣fort and sharpen their sight: and Serpents (after Winter) issuing out of their Caves, do rub their Eyes against Fenell, to clear their sight. Further note, that Fenel digesteth slowly, nd nourisheth ill and little: and therefore it is vsed as a medicine, and not as meat: wherefore it ought not to be vsed in the Regiment of Health, but to expell the vnwholesomnesse of their meats: as we vse sometime to eat Perfly with Lertice so likewise Fe∣nell may be sod with Gourds and Rapes, to withstand the vnwholesomnesse of them. Emedat visum, stomachum comfortd Anisum. Copia dulcoris Anisi sit meli is. Anni-seeds for the stomack wholesom are, And quicknesse of the Eye-sight they prepare. In sweetnesse goodnesse, look how they exceed, The better bloud, and humours still they breed. Here the Author reciteth two vtilities of Au-séeds.Most hurtsul for the sight. First it comforteth the light; and secondly the stomack, by reason that it hrteth and mundieth the stomack; and also (for the same reason) it comforteth the sight: for, nothing butteth the sight more then vncleannesse of the stomack. For, from the vnclean stomack,avi 2 can. cap. de aniso. vnclean vapors ascend to the Eyes, that trouble and hurt the spirits. These are the two properties of dulce Aniséed. And beside these, Avicen rehearsing many other profits of Aniséed, saith: That it asswageth dolours, breaketh wind, and quencheth thirst, cau∣sed of salt moystness: It openeth opilations of the Liver and Spleen, engendred of humidities; and likwise of the Reyns, Bladder and Matrice: It provoketh vrine, menstruous ux: It clean∣seth
the Matrice from white humidities, and stirreth one to carnall lust. Si cruor emanat, Spodium sumptum cite sna. If flux of bloud at any time abound, Spodium doth instantly that flux confound. Here the Author putteth one commodity or Spodium, and that is, that Spodium taken healeth the bloudy-flux: by reason that the vertue thereof comforteth the liver, and so the liver fortified (which is the originall fountain of bloud) the bloud is there better retained. And Avicen saith, That Spodium is the roots of Reeds burned. And it is said,Avi. 3. can. a. de aniso. that those Réeds moved by the wind, and rubbing themselves together, burn one another. Yet Simon the Genoway saith, That Spodium is a thing, whose beginning is unknown unto us: it seemeth to be a thing brent, and divisions of Reeds burned. And it doth not only help the bloudy-flux, but also the lask and purging, as Rasis saith. It helpeth also a sharp Ague, and is comfortable against the shaking thereof, and for over much avoiding of choller: it helpeth the stomack, as Avicen saith. And as Spodium doth help and comfort the liver, so there be other medicines that have like effect, and like pro∣perty to comfort other speciall members. As Mace the heart, Musk the brain. Licorice the lights, Capers the splene, and Gallingale the stomack, as appeareth by these verses. Gaudet Epar Spodie, Mace cor, Cerebrum quo{que} Musco, Pulmo Liquiricia, Splen Epar, stomachus{que} Galanga. Vas condimenti praeponi debet edenti, Sal birus refugat, cibum speciem{que} saporat. Nam spit esca male, qua datur abs{que} sale. Vrunt perfalsa nisum sperma{que} minorant, Et generant sabiem, puritum, sive vigorem.
Spodium the Liver worthily doth please, And Mace the heart, if ought do it disease. Musk is a wondrous comfort to the brain, And Lycoris keeps the Lights from any pain. Gallingale helps the stomack, Capers the Spleen, All these are wholesome Physick, as I ween. Concerning Sauce that doth our Table fit, Salt is commended best by men of wit. Poyson it doth resist, makes savoury meat, Whets on the stomack with desire to eat; For without Salt, our food can yeeld no tast, Yet over-salted, mears are bad repast. They instate the face, diminish Natures Seed, Itch, Scabs, and pushes, they do daily breed. Here the Author teacheth thrée things; saith. That before all other things, Salt must be set vpon the Table, as the vul∣gar verses teach vs. Sal primo poni debet, primo{que} reponi. Omnis mensa male ponitur abs{que} sale. Salt should be first vpon the Table set, And last tan'e off, when we have done with meat. Secondly, he saith, that salt resisteth venome, for two cau∣ses. First, for that salt is a dryet: and so dryeth vp the humi∣dities that would corrupt. Another cause is, that salt dryeth and suppresseth the humi∣dities, drawing them out of the body, and so shutteth the poors, and consequently stoppeth the entrance of Venome, which is wont to enter by the poors. Secondly, he saith, that salt maketh mans meat savoury. For, commonly, we see no meats savoury without salt, as saith the third verse. Thirdly, the Authr openeth four inconveniencies of salt, & meats too much salted.
First, very salt meats mar the sight, for two causes. The first is, that salt things dry over, much, which is con∣trary to the eyes the instruments of sight: For the Eyes are of the nature of water,Phi. 1. de sen∣su & sensato. as the Phylosopher saith. The second cause is, for that meats very salt do engender Itch and nipping in manner as is aforesaid. Of mordicative meas being in the stomack, umes mordicative are lifted vp, which by their nipping hurt the eyes, and make them very red. And therefore we sée that they that make salt, have common∣ly red eyes. The second hurt is, that very salt meats diminish the séed of generation, by reason that very salt meats do dry very much all the humidities of the body; whereby the séed of generati∣on is dryed vp, and so made lesse. The third hurt is, it engendreth the skabthy reason that salt engendreth a sharp by ting humour adust, which causeth the skab. The fourth hurt is, it augmentoth Atch, by reason that it en∣gendreth a mordicative itching humour. And of these four hurts Rasis speaketh. Further, it burneth their bloud that take great quantity thereof: it féebleth their sight, it diminisheth the seed of gene∣ration, and engendreth itch and scab. And besides these hurts, very salt meats engender Ring∣worms dry scuphs, morphew, lepry, in them that e disposed thereunto, and fleateth the passage of the vrine, when they are long continued: yet when meat is a little poudred, it taketh away loathing, and maketh one to have a good appetite. Hi fervore rigent tres, saisus, amarus, acutus. Alget acetosus sie stipans, ponticus a que Vnctus, & insipidus duleis dat temper amentum. Three kind of tasts do soon the body heat, Salt, bitter, sharp, and divers harms beget.
Three other savours cool in moderate kind, Tart, Stipticall, and Pontick, as I find. Three more, unsavory, unctuous, and sweet, Nor heat, nor cool, and therefore held most meer, Here the Author reciteth the qualities of all savorinesse, First, he sayth, that these thrée savorinesses or relishes, salt bitter, and sharp heat the body that receiveth them, Secondly, he saith that these three savorinesses, fart, stip∣ticall, and pontick, cool. Thirdly, he sayth, that these three relishes, vnctuous, vnsa∣vory, and sweet, are temperate, they make the body neither hotter no colder, Further, according to Avicen there be eight talages,avi li. can. tract. 1. ce 3. or so vorinesses that follow vnsavorinesses: And they be sweet, bit∣ter, sharp, tart, pontick, stiptick, and vnctuous: and to number vn∣savorinesse for savorinesse, as the text doth, there be nine: and then savorinesse is taken for every thing judged by tast. And among these talages, there be three hot, as saith the text, salt, bitter, and sharp: and as Avicen saith. The sharp is the hotter, and the next salt, and then the bitter: for as much as sharp, is stronger then the bitter is, to resolve and scour the incidents. And then salt is like bitter, broken together with cold humidity, And of these tallages three be cold, eager, stiptick, and pontick. But pontick is colder then the other: and next thereto is stiptick. And therefore all fruits that come to a∣ny sweetnesse, have first a tallage pontick, of a vehement coldnesse, and after that the fruits, by the heat of the Sun be digested, there appeareth in them stipticity, and after∣ward they decline to sowrnesse as Grapes, and then to sweet∣nesse, And though tart be not so hotte as stiptick, yet by reason that it is subtile and piercing, it is in many of more coldnesse. And after Avicen, Ponticke and Stipticke are in talage very like, but yet the Stipticke causeth the upper
part of the Tongue to be sharp and rough, and pontick causeth the tongue to be rough within. Three of these tallages are temperate, neither exceeding, hot nor cold, as sweet, vnctuous, and vnsavory, for though sweet be hot, yet therein appeareth no mighty heat, as Rasis sayth: and every tallage hath his own operations, as Avicen and Ra∣sis say. The operations of sweetnesse be digestion, soking and en∣creasing of nourishment, and nature lovingly desireth it, and the vertue attracttive draweth it. And Rasis sayth. That sweetnesse engendreth much ruddy colour, and opilations of the Li∣ver and spleen, specially if the said Members be apt thereunto, and thereof followeth the fluxe. It mollifieth the stomack, and com∣forteth the brest and lights, it fatteth the body, and augmen∣teth the seed of generation. The operations of bitter, is to sharp, and to wash away. And after Rasis, Bitter heateth and dryeth strongly, and lightly re∣duceth the bloud to a dust malice, and augmentetha ruddy colour in the bloud. The operations of pontick tallage, after Avicen, Is contracti∣on, if the ponticity be feeble, or else expression, if it be strong. And af∣ter Rasis. Pontick cooleth the body and it drieth the flesh, and diminisheth the bloud, if one use it oft. Also it comforteth the sto∣mack, it bindeth the womb, and engendreth melancholy blood. The operations of stiptick talage after Avicen, Is contrary, thicking, hardning and holding. And after Rasis, the operati∣ons thereof are like pontick, though they be weaker: for he seemeth to comprehend stiptick tallage vnder pontick for of stiptick he saith nothing expressely. The operations of vnctuous talage (after Avicen) Are so∣king, slipperiness, and small digestion. And after Rasis. It mollifieth the stomacke, it maketh one laskative, and filleth one before he hath taken any necessary quantity of meate: And it heateth, specially them that be vexed with a Fever and that have a hot Liver and stomack. It moysteth and softeth
the body, but it augmenteth phlegm and sleep. The operations of sharpnesse. Are resolution, incision, and putrifaction, after Avicen: And after Rasis, It encreaseth heat, and lightly enflameth the body, and burneth the bloud, and tu∣neth it into red choler and after into black. The operations of salt talage, after Avicen: Is to scour, wash, and dry and it letteth putrifaction. The operations of sharp talage, after Avicen: Is to cool and divide. And after Rasis; It refraineth choler and blood and restrai∣neth the belly, if the stomack and guts be clean. But if there be too much phlegmatick matter, it maketh the belly to lask, it coo∣leth, the body and also weakneth the vertue of digestion pro∣perly in the liver It hurteth the sinews and sinewy members, it drieth the body, but stirreth vp the appetite. And Rasis saith, That some vnsavory thing nourisheth well, and that is, such as is temperate. There is other some that heateth temperately. And another that cooleth temperately and if moistnesse be joyned therewith it moisteth, and with a dry thing, it drieth. Bis duo vipa facit, mundat dentes, dat acutum Visum, quodminus est implet, minuit quod abundat. Four benefits come by our sops in wine, They purge the Teeth they make them clean and fine. They sharp the sight, cause good digestion, Remove superfluous things, that breed infection. Here are declared four commodities of wine-sops. The first is they purge the Téeth, by reason that they stick longer in the téeth then wine alone, or bread alone: therefore the filthinesse of the teeth is the better consumed and the teeth the better purged. The second commodity is, that they sharpen the sight: for they let the ill fumes ascend to the Brain, which by their mingling together darken the sight. And this is by reason
that it digesteth all ill matters being in the stomack. Thirdly, it digesteth perfectly meats not well digested: for it closeth the mouth of the stomack, and comforteth digesti∣on. Fourthly, if reduceth, superfluous digestion, to a mean. And all this is of truth, so that the bread sopped in wine, be first tosted, or dryed on imbers, Omnibus assuetam jubeo servare dietant. Approbo sic esse, ni sit mutare necesse. Est Hypocras testis, quoniam sequitur malapestiis. Fortir est mata Medicinae certa dieta, Quam non si curas, fatue regis, & male curas. To keep a customary dyet, is the best, Both for our health, and for mild natures rest. Custome observ'd, we may not lightly leave, A dietarie custome will receive No giddy imperfection. Grave Hypocrates Gives good advice, for health and Natures ease. It is a better way to cure by dyet, Then lavishnesse, which brings all out of quiet. He that is carelesle for his proper good, By such a one, no danger is withstood. Here the Authour reciting certain doctrines sayth:To keep dyet. That it is good for all folks to keep a customable dyet. And by dyet is vnderstood the ministring of meat and drinke. The breaking from customable use, hurteth grievously: for custo∣mance is another Nature. Therefore as it behooveth vs to keep nature, so likewise it doth custome: and spcially if the cu∣stomable use be laudable. And as it behooveth vs to keep the customable administra∣tion of meate and drinke: even so it behooveth vs to ob∣serve custome in other things not naturall, for the self same reason. Wherefore i a man that is wnt to labour much
will forgo this custome, and live idely, or labour much lesse, or go in hand with other labour, or take another time, or another way: vndoubtedly it shall right much inféeble him. So in like manner it is in mans dyet, in his sléep, in his watch, and such like accidents. For truly, good custom in all things must néeds be observed, if it be laudable, or indifferent in goodness or hurtfulnesse, in respect of that whereto the change is made. And know withall, that they that be accustomed to la∣bour, and exercise themselves in any kind of labour: albeit that they be féeble or old, yet it grieveth them lesse, and they labour more strongly, then if they were young fellows vnac∣customed, as Hypocrates saith.Hip. 1 apho. By reason that these feeble or old persons have more inclination and custom to those labours. For then the custom before taken is lighter, as is said in the aforesaid Aphorism. And this is the cause, why we sée old and féeble Craftes-men, to do that which stronger and younger men then they cannot do, in regard if grieveth them lesse. As a feeble old Miller, to lift a great weighty sack: a Smith to wéeld and labour with a great Hammer, then a younger man not there∣to accustomed. The second Doctrine is: That great harm followeth chang of Dyet, as Hypocrates saith:Hip. 1 apho. Except it be needfull to change it. First, it is néedfull to change it, when grievous diseases should grow thereby: as custom to feed on ill meats, which at length (of necessity) will breed in vs old diseases. Such a custom, and other like must néeds be amended and changed by little and little, but not suddenly. For all sudden changes hurt vehemently, specially from a thing customable, to a thing vnaccustomable. Secondly, it is needfull to change, to the intent if should lesse grieve vs, if we happen to change our dyet. For he that vseth himself to all manner of dyet, shall hurt himself the lesse. And this must be vnderstood of other things not natu∣rall,
for as Hypocrates saith.Hip. 1 aph. A thing long accustomed, though it be worse then those that we have not used, hurteth the body lesse. Therefore it behooveth vs to use things vnaccustomed. And here is to be noted, that every man should take heed, how he accustometh himself to one thing, he it never so good, which to observe were needfull. For example: If a man cu∣stom himself to one manner of meat or drink, or do abstain wholly from them or to sleep, or to know a woman carnally: it were very dangerous if he otherwhiles must abstain from his custom. Therefore every body should be disposed, to endure heat and cold, and to all motions and nourishments, so that the hours of Sleep and Watch the House Bod, and Gar∣ments, may be changed without hurt: which things may be done: if one be not too near in obseruing custome. Therefore otherwhiles it behooveth to change customable things. Thus saith Rasis,Rasis 3 alea. de conservan con∣sue 1. The third Doctrine is, that the stronger and nearer way inhealing a Patient, is to minister a certain dyet: for which if the Physitian doth not care, but will minister another vndue dyet: he governeth his patient foolishly, and healeth him ill. And note, that there be three manner of dyets, grosse, which is whole folks dyet,Three man∣ner of dyets. slender dyet, which is to give in manner nothing, and the third is mean dyet, which absolutely is called slender. And this dyet is divided into slender dyet, and de∣clining to grosse dyet as the broth of flesh, rere roasted Egs, small Chickens: and declining to slender dyet, as Mellicra∣tum and wine of Ponigranades: and mean dyet, which is cal∣led certaine dyet, as Barley, juyce, not beaten together. And this certaine dyet is wholesome in many diseases, but not in all. It is not wholesome in long diseases: for in such diseases, the might of the patient, with such mean dyet, cannot endurs to consume the sicknesse, without great debility. Therefore in such diseases the meat must be ingrossed, Likewise it is
vnwholesom in sharp diseases, as those that end within three days space or sooner: For in such sicknesse, most slender Dyet is best, as Hypocrates saith. The most soveraign help, is to dyet the Patient after his strength and corporall might. Quale, quid, & quando quantum, quoties vbi dando, Ista notare ibo dobet Medicus dietando. Six things in dyet should observed be, First, to respect the food in quality. Next, what it is in substance; and withall, What time for ministration best doth fall. Fourthly, the quantity requires a care; Fifthly, how oft we should the same prepare. Lastly, the place is not amisse to know, And where such Dyet best we may bestow. Here the Author rehearseth i things to be considered of the Physitian, in ministring of dyet. First, of what quality the matter ought to be: for in hote sicknesses, he must dyet the patient with cold meat in moyst sicknesses with dry meat, and in dry sicknesses with moist meat Pet the naturall complexion must be observed with diet like thereunto. For Galen saith.Gal. in 1 reg. The hotter bodies need the hotter medicines: the coldrr bodies, the colder medicines. The second thing is of what substance the meat ought to be. For they that be strong and lusty, and exercise great labour must be dyeted with grosser meat because in them the way of digestion is strong, and so the ought not to use slen∣der meats, as Chickens, Capons Veal, or Kid, For those fleshes in them will burn, or be disested oversoon: wherefore they must needs eat oft. But noble men, and such as live restfully, most vse dyet of slender substance, for in them the vertue Digestive is weok, and not able to digest grosse meats, as Bacon Beefe, and fish dryed in the Sunne. Likewise, they that be sick of sharp diseases, ought to vse more slender dyet, then they
that be sick of long diseases, as a Fever-Quartane. The third is, what time dyet ought to be given: for they that be in health, ought specially to regard custom, Wherfore they that rise early in Summer, and eat but two meals a day, ought to eat about the hour of ten, or a little before: and not to abide till noon, because of the over-great beat. Likewise, they ought to sup about the hour of six, or a little after. But in Winter, they ought to dine at eleven of the clock, or at twelve, because of the long sléeping: and then to sup at se∣ven a clock, or a little after, and especially custom should be kept. Time also (in dyeting of sick folks) must be considered: for they that have an Ague, when it beginneth to vex them, or a little before or after they should eat nothing: For if one eat a little before, or when the fit cometh: thereby Nature (that should extend to digest the meat) is diverted another way. It be should eat soon after the fit is gone, it were vnwholesome: because the vertue of digestion is very weak, by reason of the fit past, Therefore he must eat so long before as the meat may be digested ere the fit come: Or else so long after the fit is gone, when as Nature is come to due disposition. This is of truth, except ye dread great feeblishing of Na∣ture: For then at all times he must eat. For whensoever mans strength is feebled by any chances, he should eat forthwith as Ga∣len saith.Gal. in con: Aphorismi, contemplari, autem, &c. Fouthly, the quantity of the meat must be considered: For, as it is before said, in Summer we must vse a small quantity of meat at every meal, for then the naturall heat is feeble, through the over'great resolutions. But in Winter, one may eat a great deal of meat at a meal. For then the ver∣tue digestive is strong, when the naturall heat is vnited through circumstant cold, as we said at Temporibus Veris, &c. The fifth is how off we should eat in a day. For in Sum∣mer we must eat oftner then in Winter, in Autumne and Ver, a little at each meal, as is beforesaid. Likewise if the
vertue digestive be weake, we must eat little and off: but if the vertue digestive be strong, we may eat much, and make few meales, &c. Sixtly, the eating place must be considered: which should not be too hot nor too cold, but temperate. Ius caulis soluit, cujus substantia stringit. Viraque quando datur, ventrem laxare putatur. Broth made of Cole-worts doth both loose and bind, According as their nature is inclin'd: Yet if the broth and substance both you take, Digestion the more sollid they will make, Here the Authour declaring three things, sayth: That the broth of Cole-worts, and specially the first broth, if they be sodde, loaseth the belly, by reason that in the leaves and ut∣ter parts of the Cole-worts, is a sopy scouring vertue, weak∣ly cleaving, and lightly separable, by small decoction or boy' ling, which being spred abroad by the same water, is made Laxative. And this is the reason that the first water, that Coleworts be sod in, doth make one Laxative, rather then the second. The second is, that the substance of Cole-worts after they are boyled, restraineth the belly: by reason that all their vertue Laxative is taken by the decoction, and the earthy dry substance remaineth, which bindeth the womb. The third is, that both taken together, the broth and sub∣stance of Cole-worts, looseth the belly: by reason that the scowring sopy vertue remaineth in the water, which looseth all. And note, that coleworts engender melancholly humours and ill dreames, they hurt the stomack, they nourish little, and dusk the sight, and cause one to dream, and they provoke menstruosity and vrine as Avicen and Rasis say. Futhermore note, That the decoction or seed of Cole-worts
keen one from drunkennesse,Aristo. 3. part problem Avi. 2 can. Rasis 3. ale as writeth Aristotle. And this thing is affirmed of Avicen and Rasis. The reason (as some think) is the grosse fumes, that by eating of Cole-worts are lifted up to the brain, engrossing the sumosities of the wine, which ingossing doth let them enter to the brain. Aristotle sayth. That all things that draweth to them the moist∣nesse of the wine, expel it from the body and that that cooleth the body, keepeth it from drunkennesse; Cole-worts are of such na∣ture Ergo &c. And that the Coleworis are of this nature, he proveth thus: By the juyce of cole-worts, the undigested humidi∣ties of the wine are drawn from all the body into the bladder: and by reason of the cold, nice that remaineth in the stomack, which cooleth all the body the piercing of the wine is prevented. And so by this mean it keepeth a man sober. For the subtile super fluities, that naturally could not descend, by reason that the heat of the wine stirreth them to ascend vpward to the brain are repres∣sed down, and (by vertue of this juyce) are drawn to the Blad∣der. Dixerunt maluam veteres, qui a molli at alnum, Sed Maluae radices rase dedere feces, Vuluae moverunt, & fluxum sape dederunt. Malowes the belly much do mollisie. And their roots shaven, Physick doth apply: For sound purgation; hereof I am sure, The menstruous flux in women they procure. Here the Author rehearsing three properties or effects of Malows, saith: that they mollifie the belly. There be four that mollifie:Malowe. Malowes and double Ma∣lowes, Branca, Ursina, and Mercurie, of which most com∣monly Clisters be made, to mollifie all induroe and hard matter in man. There be two sorts of Mallowes, the one
heareth a bloud-red flower, the other a white flowre, and this last properly doth mollifie more then the first. The second effect of Malowes is, that Malow-roots sha∣ded, and suppositories made of them, such as Physitians are wont to make of Mercurie, draw out of man the indurate mat∣ter and dregs. The third effect is, Malowes cause the menstruous flu in women, and that through the gret moistning and slippe∣rinesse thereof: whereby the veins about the Matrix soon powre out, as Platearius saith, and as appeareth by experi∣ence. Mentitur Mentha, si sit àpellere lenta, Vents is lumbricos, stomachi vermes{que} nocivos, Mint were bely'd; if it should want the might, The stomack, worms, and belly to kill quite. As Worm wood juyce, it works in operation, And is to health a soveraign preservation. Here the Author saith, that a Mint should not be called a Min,Mint. except it have might to kill worms, in the belly, and stomack. A Mint hath a great strong savour, and is right bitter and therefore as Worm-wood killeth worms, so doth the Mint. And the juyce thereof (as of wormwood) must be drunk, and not the substance. And because it is hot and dry, and burneth the bloud, it is vnwholesome in the way of meat in the Regiment of Health. But yet in medicines it is whol∣some, for it comforteth the stomack, and heateth it, and stan∣cheth yexing, and digesteth, and prohibiteth vomit phlegmatick and sanguine, and through inflation stirreth one to bodily ust, and prohibiteth the spitting of blood; It is very wholesome against the byting of a mad Dogge: and if yee crimble Mint into milk. it will never turn to make a Cheess,Avi 2 can,  de Menta. as Avicen saith,
Cur moritur homo, cui Salvia crescit in Hrto? Contra vim mortis, non est Medicamen in Hortis. Salvia confort at nerves, manum{que} tremorem Tollit, & ejus ope febris acuta fugit, Salvia, castoreum, lavendula, primula veris. Nastur, Athanasia sanant Paralytica membra, Salvia saluarix Naturae concilarix. Why should man dy (so doth the sentence say,) When Sage grows in his Garden day by day? And yet all Garden-Phisick not Prevailes, When deaths stern power our chiefest health assails, Sage comforteth the nerves both sweet and kindly, The Palsie-shaking hands it helpeth friendly. His power is soveraign gainst an Ague fit, Sage and the Beaver stone, by learned writ. Lavender and the Prime-rose of the Spring, Taney and Water, cresses comfort bring, To all such members as the Palsie shake, When in the very greatest kind they quake. Sage doth both councell, and keep Nature sound, Where Sage then groweth, happy is the ground. Here the Author touching principally four things, shew∣eth the great vtility of Sage,Th bountyer goodness of sag. asking as though he doubted) wherefore man dyeth, that hath Sage growing in his Gar∣den? He answereth, in the second verss, that no medicins growing in the Garden, can withstand death, although in the Garden grow medicines that kéep the body from putri∣factionn, and defend, that naturall humidity be not light∣ly consumed away, as teacheth Avicen, saing. The science of Physicke doth not make a man immortall,avii 3 1 ∣sing. nor it doth not sure∣ly defend our bodies from outward hurtfull things, nor can∣not assure every man to live to the last terme of his life. But of two things it maketh us sure, that is, from putrifaction and corruption: and desendeth, that naturall moysture bee
not lightly dissolved and consumed. Secondly be putteth three effects of Sage. The first is, that sage comforteth the sinews: for it drieth the humidities, by which the sinews be let and loosed. The second is, that it taketh away the shaking of the hand:The vertue of Sage. by reason that it comforteth the sinews (as is said:) Now all thinges that comfort the sinews remove trembling: because trembling commeth of féeblenesse of the sinewes. And there∣fore, some old men and women, specially put sage leaves in their meat and drink. Thirdly, Sage letreth the sharp ague that would assail vs by reason that it dryeth humors, it letteth them to putrifie, whereby a sharp Fever might be engendred. Further note, that Sage is hot and dry, and therefore it is not very wholsom alone in the way of meat, Yet because Sage comforteth the sinews greatly, folks in hearth do vse it much two manner of ways. First, they make Sage-wine,sage-wine which they drink especially at the beginning of dinner or supper. This wine is wholesome for them that have the falling sicknesse, moderately taken, and after the purgation of the accident matters, Secondly, they vse Sage in sauces: for it stirreth up a mans appetite and specially when the stomack is full of ill humors, raw, and vndigested, There are two kinds of Sage:Two kinds of sage. One that hath great broad leaves, and another commonly called Noble Sage, whose leaves he more narrow, and lesse: Phisitians call it Sili∣fagus. Thirdly, the Author reciteth sixe medicines good for the Palsie. It is said, that sage, Castorie, that is a Castor stones, Lavender, Prime-roses, Water-cresses, and Tansey, cure and eal members insect with the Palsie. Why Sage doth help it, we have shewed already, because it comforteth the sinewes, which the Palsi weakneth. And also because Sage is hot and dry, it consumeth the phlegmatick matter that remaineth in the sinewes, whereof the Palsie bréedeth.
And that Castorie is wholesome for the Palsey, appeareth, in that it is most comfortable, in heating and drying the sinews: For Avicen saith thereof: That is subtiler, and stronger then any other that heateth and dryeth.avi. 2 can. ca, de cast. And after he saith, That it comforteth and heateth the sinewes, the shaking, the moist cramp, and benommed Members caused of the Palsie. Also he saith: There is nothing better for ventosity in the care: then to take as much as a Pease, and temper it with oyl of Spike, and so let it drop into the ear. Castōry hath many vertues, which Avicen rehearseth. Castorium is the stones of a Sea beast called Castor. The Oyle also of Castory is as specially good for the Palsey, after the voyding of the matter that remaineth, and comforteth the Sinews. Of Lavender it appeareth, because the sweet savour thereof doth consume the Palsie matter. And also of the Primrose it appeareth: because the sweet sa∣vour and heat thereof comforteth the Sinews. This flower is called Primula Veris, because it is the first flower that spring∣eth in Ver. The fifth is Water-cresses, for they are hot and dry sub∣tile, incisive, and resolutive: whereby it taketh away the mat∣ter of Palsie. And Avicen saith. They comfort all llification of the sinews. Because they heat and draw out flegme, and clense the sinews from flegme. Besides, Physicians counsell vs to eat Water-cresses in Lent, because Lenten meat is flegma∣tick. Water-cresses is a common heth, growing in cold, stony, and waterish places, where be many Well springs. The sixth is Tansie. The vertue of this herb is to purge flegme, and the heat thereof dryeth the sinews. Also it purgeth a man from wos, and from the matter whereof they be en∣gendred. And therefore French-men vse htenly to fry Egs therewith in the Camer-week, to purg away the flighte en∣gendred of Fish in the Lent, whereof won are engendred in them that be thereto disposed.
In the Text, the Author saith, that Sage is called the sa∣ver and keeper of Nature. Nobilis est Ruta quia lumina reddit acutae. Auxilio Ruae vir quippe videbis acute. Ruta vris coitum minuit, mulieribus auget. Ruta facit castum, dat lumen, & ingerit astum, Cocta facit Ruta, de pulicibus loca tuta. Needs must we call Rew noble, by due right. Because it clears and perfecteth the sight. Carnall-desires (in men) it doth appease, But yet to women giveth no such case. Rew-water sprinkled in the house, kills all the fleas, Rew, as it causeth chastity, it whets the wit, And for the Eye-sight alwayes counted fit. Here the Author declaring four properties of Rew, saith,Four proper∣ties of Rew. avi, 3. cas. if sharpneth the sight and properly the juyce thereof, as Avicen saith; and as is before said, at Allia, nux, ruta, &c. The second is, Rew diminisheth the desire of Carnall lust in men, and in women Rew augmenteth it; for by reason that Rew henteth and dryeth it diminisheth the seed of men which is subtile, and of the nature of the ayr. But in women Rew maketh subtile, and heateth the seed, for in them it is waterish and cold, and therefore it stirreth them more to Carnall lust. The third is, Rew maketh a man quick, subtile, and ingeni∣sus: by reason of the heating and drying and so cleateth the wit. Tee fourth is, That the water that Rew is sod in,To kill flea. Avi. vi. 4.3. c. de effug puli, cum. cast and sprinkled about the house, riddeth away fleas, and as Physiians say; it killeth them. And after Avicen: When the House is sprinkled with the Water of wild Gourds, the Fleas leap and flee away: and so likewise doth the Water that
black thorn is sod in. And Avicen saith, That some have said, that if Goats bloud be put into a pit in the house, the Fleas will get them thereunto and dye. And likewise if a log be annointed with the grease of an Vrchin the fleas will gather thereto and dye. Fleas cannot abide the savour of Cole-worts, nor leaves of Oleander. Some say, that nothing is better to avoid Fleas, then things of strong savour, and therefore Rew, Mints, Horse-mints, and Hops he good, and above all things Horse-dung, or else Horse-stale is the chief. Also the house sprinkled with the de∣coction of Rape-séed, killeth the Fleas. And the persuming of the house with a Bulls horn, driveth away Fleas, Yet to take Fleas, nothing is better then to lay blankets on the Bed, for therein they gather themselves. De Caepis Medici non consentire videntur, Cholericis non esse bonas dicit Gaelinus: Flegmaticis vero multum doect esse salubres, Praesertim stomache pulchrum que creare colorem. Contritis copis loca renudata capillis Saepe fricam poteris capitis reparare decorem. Onyons (in Physick) winneth no consent, To cholerick folke, they are no nutriment By Galens rule. Such as flegmatick are, A stomack good in them they do prepare. Weak appetites they comfort; and the face, With cheerfull colour evermore they grace. And when the head is naked left of hair, Onyons (being sod or stamp'd) again repair. Here the Author speaketh of Onyons,Of Onyons, and declareth five things. First, touching their operation, Physicians agrée not. For some say they be good for flegmatick folkes, and some say nay: as Rasis, which saith: That they engender superflu∣ous
and phlematick humours in the stomack. Secondly, Galen saitht They bee right hurtfull for chole∣rick folks because, as Avicen saith: Onions be hote in the third degree, and therefore they hurt hote folkes as chollericke be. Thirdly, onyons be wholsome for phlegmatick folks. For they be hot, piercing, subtile, scouring and opening, wherefore they digest, cut make subtile, and wipe away phlegmatick and clammy humours, growne in the bodies of phlegmaticks folks. Fourthly, Onyons be wholesome for the stomack, for they both heat and mundifie it from phlegm.avi. can. 2 ca de ireal & 6 4 ca. de curati∣one alopecie. And therefore Avicen faith: That that which is eaten of the oynon, through the heat there∣of, comforceth a weak stomack. And therefore they make a man well colored. For it is im∣possible for one to have a lively colour, if his stomack, be ve∣ry phlegmatick, or silled with ill, raw, and phlegmatick hu∣mours. The fift is, that Onyons sod and stamped, restore haires again, if the place where the hairs did grow, be rubbed there∣with. This is of truth when the haires go away through stopping of the Pores, and corruption of the matter vnder the skinne. For the onyons open the Pores and resolve the ill matter vnder the skinne, and draw good matter to the same place. And therefore as Avicen saith: Oft rubbing with o∣nions is very wholesome for bald men, Wherefore the text concludeth, that this rubbing with o∣nions, prepareth the beauty of the head: for hairs are the beau∣ty of the head. Furthermore, onions stirre one to carnall lust, and they drovoke the appetite, and bring colour in the face, and when they be mingled with hony, they destroy Warts they engen∣der thicst, and they hurt the vnderstanding: because they en∣gender an ill grosse humour: They engender spittle, and the uyce of them is good for watering eyes: and doth clari∣e the sight, as Avicen saith. Further note, that Onions,
Hony, and Vinegar stamped together, is good for the byting of a mad dog. And therefore some do adde these two verses, vnto the foresaid text. Appsitas prhibeut morsus curare Canin. Sitritae cum melle fuerint & aceta. A mad Dogs byting may recured be, With Onyons, Hony, Vinegar, these three. But of this is spoken before at Alia nux, &c. Est modicum granum siccum calidum{que} Sinapis, Dat lachrymas, purgat{que} caput, tollit{que} venenum, Though Mustard-seed is held the smallest grain, His Powerfull heat and strength is not in vain. By causing tears, it purges well the brain, And takes away infecting poysonous pain. Here the Author reciting two things,Of mustard-seed. avi. 2 can ca. de sinapi. sayth: that Mustard∣séed is a little grain, which is hot and dry, vnto the third degrée, after Avicen. Secondly, he putreth three properties or effects of Mustard-seed. The first is it maketh ones eyes to water: for by reason that it is very hot, it maketh subtile, and looseth the humidityes of the brain, whereof then by their flowing to the Eyes, the tears come. The second effect is, it purgeth the brain, and cleanseth away the phlegmatick humidities of the head. And also is it be put into the Nosethrils, it purgeth the head by reason that it provoketh one to neese. And therefore it is put into their nosthrils that have the Apoplexie, for the neesing purgeth the brain. And likewise Mustard-séed, by reason that it is hotte, doth dissolve and loose such phlegmes, as stop the conduits of the
brain: of which followeth Apoplexie. And thus it appeareth, that Mustard-séed is a great looser consumer, and cleanser of fleginatick humidities. The third effect is, it withstandeth poyson:Ay. loco pral. For Avicen saith, Thar the venemous Worms cannot abide the smoke of Mustard-seed. Crapulad scutitur, capitis dolor, at que gravedo, Purpuream dicunt violam curare cducos, The heavy head-ach, and that iksome pain, Which drunken surfciting doth much constrain: The sinell of Violets doth soon allay, And cures the Falling-sicknesse, as some say. Here the Author reciteth thrée properties, or effects of vio∣lets.Three pro∣perties of vio∣lets. First▪ Violets delay drunkenness, by reason that violets have a temperate swéet savour, which greatly comforteth the Brain. For a strong brain is not lightly overcome with drink, but a weak is. Also Violets be cold, wherefore they cool the brain, and so make it vnable to receive any fume. The second is, Violets slake the head-ach, and grief that is caused of heat, as Avicen, Rasis, Alman, and Mesuus say: For by reason that Violets be cold, they withstand hot causes. The third is, that Violets help them that have the fallingsicknesse. Though some say thus, yet this effect is not com∣monly ascribed vnto Violets. And therefere, if Violets have this property, it is but by reason of their swéet smell that comforteth the brain: which being strengthend, is not hurt by small griefs, and consequently faleth not into Epilepsie, which, is called the little Apoplexie, chancing by stopping of the sensible sinews. Vrtica dat somnumque aegris, vomitumquoque tollit, Compescit tussim veterem, colicisque medetur, Pellit pulmonis frigus, ventrisque tumorem, Omnibus & morbis subveniet ariculorum,
The Nettle Soveraign is in his degree, It causeth sleep in bodies sick that be. Casting or vomiting it clears away, And flegme that hurteth Nature day by day. An ancient Cough it quickly doth prevent, For flegme thereby is soon dispatcht and spent. It cures the Chollick, a most cruell pain, Diseases in the Joynts it doth restrain. Cold in the Lights, the Bellies tumors too, And other hanns the Nettle doth undo. Some say beside, that it doth cure the Gout, Though divers Doctors thereof make some doubt. Here the Author reciteth eight properties of Nettles. First Nettles cause a sick body to sleep. For a Netle is subtiliative, and cutteth and scoureth flegme and grosseh mors, that grieve nature, and let sleep. Secondly, it doth away Vomite, and custome thereof: by reason that Vomite and parbreaking, is caused of a clammy humor which the Nettle cutteth. Thirdly, the Nettle preventeth an old cough: and specially with honey, wherein Nettle-seed is to be tempered. For the Nettle avoydeth clammy flegme out of the breast, as Rasis saith. And. Avicen saith,avis. can. ca. de urtica. That the Nettle, when it is drunk with water that Barley is sod in, doth mundifie the breast: And when the leavs thereof are fod in Barley-water, they draw out grosse humors, that are in the breast, but the seed thereof is stronger. Fourthly, it is wholesome for them that have the Collick. For a Nettle is a Cutter, a subiser, a resolver, and a scourer of flegmatick humidity, or grosse ventosity, which engender the Collick. The Collick is a painfull grief in a Gut called Colon, as the grievous disease Iliaca, is named of the Gut Ilion. Fifthly, the Nettle with his heat, driveth cold out of the Lights.
Sixthly, a Nettle asswageth the swelling of the belly: for it resolveth wind, whereof for the most part of the swelling of the belly cometh. The seventh effect is, the Nettle helpeth the diseases in the joynts, as the Gout. This is of truth, when it cometh through matter that is cold, flegmatick, and grosse; by reason that Nettles heat, cut, and make subtile such matter. And besides these effects, after Avicen: The Nettle stirreth one to carnall Lust, and properly the seed thereof, drunk with wine, openeth the close of the Matrice, and in loosing, draweth out flegm, and raw humours, by his vertue abstersive, and not resolutive.avi. 2 can. ca. de 3. urtica. Yet least taking of the Nettle or the séed should hurt the throat, it is good to drink after it a little Oyl Rosate. A Nettle is hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in the second, Avicen. Hisopus est herba purgansa pectore Flegma. Adpulmonis opus cum melle coquatur hisopus. Vultibus eximium fertur reparare colorem. Hysop a purging herb is hold to be, And flegme from forth the breast it sendeth free. Being sod with honey, then it comfort sends The stomack, and the lungs it much befriends. Purgeth the lights from flegme, and addes a grace, By a most clear complexion to the face. Here the Author reciting the effects of Isope, saith: First,Of Isope. It purgeth the breast of flegme: by reason that Isope is an herb hot and dry in the third degree: it is a great wiper, loo' ser, and consumer of flegmatick humidity, and hath a singular respect to the parts of the breast: and therefore Hysope most properly is said to purge the breast of flegme. Secondly, it is also good to purge the breast from flegme, for the same cause, and properly if it be sod with Honey: for Honey is a scourer: and the Hysopes scouring is augmen∣ted
with the honey. The same willeth Avicen, saying: Hysop comforteth the Brest and Lights, diseased with the Cough and Thi∣sick of old continuance, and likewise doth the decoction thereof, made with Hony and Figs. Thirdly,avi. 2 can. cap, de Hysopo. Hysop maketh one well coloured in the face: for Avicen saith: That the drink thereof causeth good colour. And be∣sides these effects Hysop avoideth flegme and worms, as Avicen saith And after Platearius, Hysop sod in wine, cleanseth the Ma∣trice from all superfluities. Appositum canc, is tritum cum melle medetur, Cum vinum poto poterit sedare dolorem. Saepe solet vomitum, ventremque juvare solutum. Chervill or Cinquefoyl call it which you will, Being steept with Honey doth a Canker kill, Drink it with Wine the belly-ach it healeh, And doth asswage inflation where it swelleth. Lastly, when lask or vomit shall oppresse, she power thereof doth heat and makes to cease. This Text declareth thrée operations of Cherfill or Cher, vill or Cinquesoyl. First, Cherfill stamped with honey,Of cherfill. and laid plaisterwise to a Canker, healeth it. Thus saith Platearius in the Chapter thereof. A Canker is a melancholy impostume,A canker; that eateth the parts of the body as well fleshy as sinewy. And it is called Can∣ker because it goeth forth like a Cab. The second effect is, if Cherfill be drunken with Wine, if healeth the ach of the belly. For it asswageth inflation that is caused of grosse ventosity, whereof ach cometh, and loseth the ventosity of the stomack, and all other guts, and openeth stopping and thereunto the wine helpeth. Thirdly, Cherfill ceaseth vomiting, and the lask: and by reason that it is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, it digesteth and dryeth that matter, whereof vomit commeth.
And this is very truth, when Vomite or the Lask come of cold flegmatick matter. And besides these effects, it provoketh Vrine and Menstru∣osity, and asswageth ach of the sides and reines, and especial∣ly taken with Mellicratum. Enula campana redi praecordia sana, Cum succo Rutae, si succus sumitur hujus: Affirmat ruptis il esse salubriu itis. Of Enula campana thus we say, It cheers the heart expelling grief away. The juyce of Rew and this so well agree, That they are good for such as bursten be. Wine made thereof doth clearly clense the brest, Expelleth wind, and helps well to digest. Here the Author declaring two effects of Enula campana,Ele, seab-wort, or Fle-heel. saith: First, it comforteth the heart-strings, (that is) the brim of the stomack, which is properly called the Heart strings, or else the vitall members, that is. the windy members, which be néer the heart, and especially the heart-root. That it comforteth the brim of the stomack, it appeareth in that the sweet smelling root of Enula comforteth the sinewy members. For the brim of the stomack is a sinewy member. That i comforteth windy members, appeareth; For Wine made of Enula called Vinin Enulatum, cleanseh the Breast and Lights or Lungs, as Avicen saith. Also Enula swallowed down with Honey, helpeth a man to spit, and it is one of those hearbs, that rejoyce and comfort the heart. The second effect is, that the juyce of this hearb, with the juyce of Rew, is very wholesome for them that be burst, and that is specially,avi. 2. can. i. de enula. when the burstnesse cometh by ventosity: for these two juyces dissolve that.
And besides these effects, Aenula is good for a stomack filled with ill humours, and it openeth opilations of the liver and splone, as Rasis saith. And it comforteth all hurts, cold griefs, and motions of ventosities, and inflations, as Avicen saith. De Pulegi. Cum vino choleram nigram potata repellit. Sic dicunt veterem semptum curare podagram. Hill-wort, or Peneriall steept in wine. Purgeth black choller, as the learn'd divine. Beside, our Elders say, and make no doubt, That it melts flegme, and cleerly cures the Gowt. Here the Author rehearsing two effects of Hill-wort, saith. That principally the water thereof, or Penyriall (taken with wine) purgeth black choller.A remedy for chollor. Secondly, Hill-wort healeth an old Gout: for the property of this heath is, to melt and dissolve flegme, where of very of∣ten the Gowt is wont to be engendred. And note, that after Pla∣tearius, Hill-Wort is hot and dry in the third degree. The substance thereof is subtile, the vertue comfortable, through the sweet smell: the substance thereof openeth, and the qualities do draw, the fiery substance or nature thereof, consumeth by burning and drying. De Nasturtio aequatico. I ius succo crines retinere fluentes Alitus asseritur dentisque curare dolorem. Et squamas succus sanat cum melle perunctus. Of Water-cresses, most opinions say, Hair they retain, when it doth fall away. The tooth-ach that tormenteth grievously, They give thereto a present remedy. They cleanse all skales that cleave unto the skin, If Honey to the Oyntment you put in.
Here the Author rehearsing thrée effects of Water-cressies,water-cressies saith: First, they retain hairs falling away, if the head be annoin∣ted with the juyce thereof: or else if the juyce or water there∣of be drunk. This effect Avicen toucheth, saying;Avi 2.2 can. ca. de Nastu. cio. The drinking or annoincing with Water-cresses retaineth hairs falling away. The second effect is Water-cressies doth cure the tooth-ach, specially, if the ach come by cold, for it pierceth, resolveth, and heateth, as appeareth at Cur morur homo. Thirdly, the juyce of Water-cressies taken with honey, or the place annointed therewith, doth away skales that cleave to ones skin: by reason that such skales be engendred of falt flegme. Water-cressies (as is said) purgeth all flegme: therefore if it be drunke, it resisteth the cause of skales: and honey, which is a cleanser, helpeth much thereto. Beside these effects Water-cressies dry vp the corruption of the belly, and clean∣seth the lights, it heateth the stomack and liver and is whole' some against the grossenesse of the splene. Namely, When a plaister is made of that and of honey, it causeth one to cast up chol∣ler, it augmenteth carnal lust, and by dissolving, avoideth out worms, and provokdth menstruosity as Avicen saith. De Chelidonio majore. Caecatis pullis, hoc lumina mater hirundo. Plinius vt scribit, quamvis sint, eruta reddit. Young Swallows that are blind, and lack their sight, The Damme (by Celendine) doth give them light. Therefore (with Plinie) we may boldly say, Celendine for the sight is good alway. Here the Author saith, when young Swallows be blind, the Damun bringeth Celendine,Of celendine. and rubbeth their eyes, and maketh them to see: whereby the Author sheweth, that it is
wholesom for the sight. And this appeareth to be true: for commonly it is a medicine against feeblenesse of sight. Celen∣dine hath juce, which is well known. And why Swallowes know it better then other Birds, may be, because their young be oftner blind then any other. Swallows dung doth make them blind, and so the Dam dungeth sometime in the youngs eyes, and maketh them blind. And after Pratearius. Celendine is hot and dry in the third degree. And the qualities and substance thereof, hath vertue to dissolve consume, and draw. And the roots thereof stamped and sod in wine, are good to purge the head, and a womans privity from broken mayst humours: if the Patient receive the smoke thereof at the mouth, and after gargarise Wine in∣to the throat. Auribus insusus vermes succus necat ejus. Cortex verrucas in aceto coctaresolvit, Pomorum succus, flos partus destrui: ejus. The juyce of Willow put into the Ear, Doth kill the Worms which are engendred there. The rind of Willow sod in Vinegar, For taking Wares away, the most prefer. Let teeming-Women cast Willow-flowrs away, Because they hinder Child-birth with delay. Here the Author rehearsing three things of Willow, saith. First,To kil worms the juyce thereof, powred into ones Ear, killeth Worms: by reason of the stipticity and drying thereof and af∣ter Avicen, Nothing is better to heal all mattering at the Ears, then the juyce of Willow leaves.Av. 2 can, cap. de salites Secondly, the inde of Willowes sod in Vinegar, taketh away Warts. And Avicen saith: Willow ashes with Vi∣negar, dryeth up Warts by the Roots:To void wars. by reason of the ashes vehement drying. Yet to destroy Warts, nothing is better
then to rub them with Purslain This the property, and not the quality of Purslain doth, after Avicen.avi. 2 can. cap. de poriaca. Thirdly, Willow-flowers, and the juyce of the fruit ther∣of, letteth the birth of a child: for through stipticity, and brought thereof, it causeth the Child to be born with great pain. Confortare crcus dicatur laetisiando, Membra{que} defect a confort at, epar reparando, Saffron doth glad the heart being sick and ill, But yet too much endangereth to kill, Defective members it doth comfort kindly: And next, restores the Liver very friendly. Here the Autho saith that Saffron omforteth mans bo∣dy,Of saffron. in gladding it. But know withall, that Saffron hath such a property, as if one take more thereof then he ought: it will kill him in rejoycing or laughing. Avicen sayth: That to take a dram and a half wll kill one in rejoycing. Secondly, Saffron comforteth defective members, and principally the heart. It comfortth the stomack, with the stip∣ticity and heat thereof: and for the same cause restoreth the liver, for it will not suffer the liver to be dissolved. Yet to use it over-much, induceth parbreaking and matteth the appetite. Ot this Avicen warneth vs, saying: It causeth parbreaking,Avi. 1 capit de croco. and marreth the appetite, because it is contrary to the sharpnesse in the stomack, which is cause of appetite. Besides these properties, Saffon maketh one sleep, and dulleth the wits, and when it is drunk with wine, it maketh one drunken: it cleanseth the eyes, and letteth humors to flow to them and maketh one to breath well: it stirreth to carnall lust, and maketh one to vrine well. De Perro Reddit facundas premansum sape puellas, Iste stillantem poteris retinere Cuorem.
Leeks if their property is not belyde: To make young women fruitful, hath been tryde. Beside they stint the bleeding at the nose: In greatest violence, as some suppose. Here the author reciting two commodities of Léeks, saith that often eating of Leeks maketh young women fruitful by reason, as Avicen saith; Leekes dilate the Matrice, and take a way the hardness thereof, which letteth conception. Secondly, Leeks stint bleeding at the nose as Avicen saith: and any other effects of Léeks are rehearsed at Allia, Nux. &c. Quod piper est nigrum, non est dissolvere pigrum, Flegmata purgabit, digestivamque iuvabit. Leucopiper stomacho prodest, inssis{que} dolors, ile praeveniet motum febris{que} regorem. Black Ppper in dislolving is not slow, But quickly purgeth Flegm, as many know. Beside, 'is very good to help digestion, When other things may fail that are in question. White Pepper, to the stomack comfort sends, And many wayes it from the Cough defends. For divers griefes it yeeldeth good prevention, And with a Feaver stands in stout contention. Here the Author declaring many cōmodities of pepper saith. First black Pepper, through the heat and drinesse thereof, looseth quickly: for it is hot and dry in the third degrée. Secondly, it purgeth phlegme, for it draweth phlegme from the inner part of the body, and consumeth it. Likewise it a doideth phlegm out, that cleaveth to the breast and stomack, heating subtiling, and dissolving it. Thirdly, it helpeth digestion. And Avicen sayth: That
Pepper digesteth and causeth appetite:avi. 2 can. ca. de pipere. and specially long Pepper which is whorsomer to digest then either white or black, as Galen saith. Secondly be declareth. 5. wholsome things of white pepper First, White pepper comforteth the stomacke:Gal. 3 de reg. sanita is ca 7 avi. loco preal. for Galen sayth: That it comforteth more then the other two. And Avicen saith: That white pepper is more wholesome for the stomack, and more vehemently doth comfort, The second is: pepper is specially wholsome for the cough, that commeth of cold phlegmatick matter: for it heateth, dis∣solveth, and cateth it. And Avicen saih: When Pepper is mini∣stred in Electuaries it is wholesome for the Cough, and aches of the breast. Thirdly, white Pepper is wholesome for the ach, and that is to wit of the brest and vennoks pain. And for that, all pep∣per is good: for all pepper is a diminisher and avoider of wind And Avicen sayth: That white pepper and long,Against the belly-ach. is wholesome for pricking ach of the belly, if it be drunk with hony, and fresh Bay∣leaves. Fourthly, Pepper withstandeth the causes of a cold Fever, for it digesteth and heateth the matter. Fiftly, Pepper is wholsome for a shaking fever, by reason that the heat of the Pepper comforteth the sinews, and con∣sumeth the matter spread on them. And Avicen saith: In rubbing it is made an oyntment, which Vguentum is wholesome against shaking. These five properties are ascribed to the other kinds of Pepper as Avicen saith. And besides these effects; Pepper heateth the sinews and brains of mans body: it mundifieth the lights, and a little provoketh the vrine, but much looseth the belly, as Avicen. saith: There be three sorts of Pepper: white-Pepper, called Leucopiper, long-Pepper, called Macropiper, and black-Pepper, called Melanopiper. It is called white-pepper that is very gréen and moist: and when it is a little dried, and not per∣fectly ripe, it is called long-Pepper. But when it is perfectly ripe, it is called black-pepper.
Et mx pot escam aormire mi{que} moveri, Ista grevare solent auditus; ebrietas{que}. If after meat we fall to sudden sleep, Our food from all digestion it doth keep. Over-much moving is s hurtfull too. And drunkennese doth most of all undo. In all these, let us use discreet forbearing, Being enemies that do offend our hearing. Here the Author reciteth thrée things that grieve the hearing.Hurtfull to the hearing The first is immediate sleep after meat, and that is, if one eathis fill. For the immediate sleep will not suffer the meat to digest, and of meat vndigested are engendred grosse undige∣sted fumes, which with their grosseness stoppe the conduites of hearing: and they engrosse and trouble the spirits of hea∣ring. The second is, too much moving after meat for that also lt∣teth digestion and the due shutting of the stomacks mouth: by reason that then the stomacks mouth closeth not so easily, as by a little walking, whereby the meat descendeth to the bottom of the stomack. For when the stomack is not shut, many fumes ascend to the head, that grieve the hearing. The third is drunkennesse, whereof many fumes and va∣pors are engendred, which ascend to the head, and the Organ of hearing, and troubleth the spirits thereof, and grieveth the hearing. And drunkennesse doth not onely hurt the hearing but also the sight and all the senses, for the same cause as is before said. There be three things,avi 4.3 ca 2. de conse sanit. anric. as Avicen saith. That hurt the ear, and other senses, lothing, repletion, and sleep after refection: and some text hath this verse, Balnea, sol, vomitus affert, repletio, clamor. Which things grieve the hearing, but specially great noise. For Avicen saith. If we will hear well and naturally, we must es∣chew the sun, laborious baining, vomit, great noise, and repletion.
Metus longa fames vomitus percussio, casus, Ebrietas, frigus, tinnitum causat in aure. Long-fasting, vomiting, and sudden fear, Are hurtfull to the Organ of the ear. Blowes, falles, and Drunkennesse are even as ill, And is so cold, beleeve me if you will. Such as would noises in the ear prevent, To shun all these, think it good document. Here the Author reciteth seven things, which cause a hum∣ming and a noise in ones ear. The first is, fear, specially after some motion. The rea∣son is, because in feare, the spirits and humours creep in∣ward toward the heart suddenly, by which motion, ventosity is lightly engendred, which entring to the Organ of the hea∣ring, cause the tinging and ringing in the ear. By corporall moving also humours and spirits are moved, of which moti∣on, ventosity is lightly engendred, which coming to the eas, causeth ringing. For ringing is caused through some moving of the vapour or ventosity, about the Organe of the hearing, moving the naturall air of those Pipes or Organes, contrary to their naturall course, The second thing, is great hunger, Avicen sheweth the rea∣son,avi. 4 3 ca. 9. saying: That this thing chanceth through humours spread, and resting in mans body. For when nature findeth meat, she is converted unto them, and that resolveth and moveth them. The third is vomiting: for in vomiting (which is a labori∣ous motion) humours are specially moved to the head. In to∣ken whereof, we see the eyes and face become red, and the sight hurt. And thus also by vomiting vapours and vento∣sities are soon moved to the organ of the hearing. The fourth is beating about the head, specially the ares, for thereby chanceth vehement motion of naturall air, being in the organe of the being. For when any member is hurt,
Nature immediately sendeth thereto wind and bloud, which two be the instruments of nature, by which then motion is caused in the ear. The fift is falling, especially on the head, for the same cause that is shewed of beating. And of a fall (whatsoever it be) a moving of the humours is caused in the body. The sixt is drunkennesse: for drunkennesse filleth the head with fumes and vapors, which approaching to the Organe of the hearing, troubleth it and maketh a noys in the ear. The seventh is cold, for by great cold the organe of the hea∣ring is feebled, wherefore of a small cause by cold, ringing in the ar chanceth, for great cold causeth ventosities. And ringing in the ears chanceth not only by these causes, but also of many other, as ventositie engendred in the head, and therein moved, or else by some matter engendred in the head, of else by motions of ventosities, chancing oftentimes in the opening of the ear, as they that have an Ague: or by the great repletion of the body, and most especially of the head or by some clammy matter resolved into a little ventosity, or by medicines, Whose property is, to retain humours and ventosities in the parts of the brain, as sayth Avicen. Baluea, Vina, Venus, ventus, piper, allia, fumus, orri cum Caepis, les, Flotus, Faba, Synapis, Sol, coitus, Ignis, ictus, acumina, puluis, Ista nocent nlis, sed vigilare magis. Bathing, Wine, Women, boystrous wind, To harm the eye-sight always are inclin'd. The like doth Pepper, Garlick, dusting Smoak, Leeks, Onyons. Lenils, draw the sight aslope, And dims it as Beans do. Such as use weeping, I would not have mine eyes in their moist keeping. Mustard, and gazing much against the Sun,
The sight thereby is vtterly undone. The violence of lust in hot desire, Spoyles them outright, and looking on the fire. Extremity of labour hurts the eye, And the least blows, blood-shot it instantly. Tart and sharp sauces needs offend them must, As also walking in a windie dst. The last is too much watching; these, believe me, Avoyd and then thine eye-sight will not grieve thee. Here the Author rehearseth one and twenty things,One and twen¦ty things hurt∣full for the eyes. hurt∣full to the eyes. The first is baining, or bathing whether it he moyst or dry, called hot-houses. For baining greatly heateth the eyes, and so hurteth the complexion: for the eyes be naturally cold, and of the nature of water. Secondly, Baining dryeth and resolveth the subtile humi∣dities of the eyes, with which the fighty spirits that are flerie. should be refreshed and tempered. This hath made many blind in Almaine, where they vse many Baines and Hot-housed. Like as in Holland are more Lepers, then in any country, on∣ly by fault of good governance. The second is, wine immoderately taken: for that féebleth the eyes & sight by reason that it filleth the head with fumes and vapors, which dull all the wits. The third is, over-much carnal copulation, which all Phy∣tians say feebleth much the sight.Aris. 4 part problema. And Aristotle noteth the cause: For by carnall-copulation, that, that is behovefull for the eyes, is taken away. There must bee in the Eyes moist waterish subtilty, which fortifieth the visible spirits. For the eye is naturally moyst.arist de snsu & sensao & v. danimal. And therefore Aristotle saith: That our Eyes be of the nature of water. But when naturall moystures are drawn and voyded out, the bod wareth dry; and withereth away: the Eyes then loose their proper nature, which they retaine and keepe by humiditie, and not without a cause: for by flery spirits (which are in
moving) the sight would vanish away, ere that it were succou∣red with moysture. Thus it appeareth plainly, that Carnall-copulation, by drawing away the moystnesse, dryeth up the superior parts of man whereby the quick sight is hurt. The third is wind, and specially the South-wind. For Hypocrates saith: The South-wind is mystie, and dusketh the eyes for that wind filleth the head with humidities, which dull the wits, and dark the sight. The fifth is pepper, which through eht sharpnesse thereof, ngud mes that bite the eyes. The sixt is Garlick, which also hurteth the eyes, through sharpnesse, and vaporosity thereof, as is said at Aia, Nux, Ruta, &c. The seventh is smoke, which hurteth the eyes, through the mordication and drying thereof. The eight is Léeks: for by eating of them, grosse melan∣choly fumes are engendred: whereby the sight is shadowed, as is before said at Allia. Nux, Ruta &c. The ninth is Onyons, the eating of which hurieth the eyes, through their sharpnesse. Te tenth is Lens or Lentils: The much eating whereof, as Avicen saith: Dusketh the sight, through the vehement drying thereof. The eleventh is, too much wéeping, which weakneth the ees for it causeth devility retentive of the eyes. The twelfth is Beanes: the vse whereof, engendreth a gross melancholy fume, darking the visible spirits as Léeks do: and therefore the eating of Beanes; induceth dreadfull dreams. The thirtienth is Mustard, the vse whereof féebleth the sight, through his fartnesse. The fourtienth, is to look against the Sunné: and that is through the vehement splendor and brightnesse thereof: whereby the sight is destroyed, as appeareth by experience. For the vehement sensiblenes of a thing, not proportioned to
mans sense, as the Sun Beams corrupt mans sense. The fifteenth is too much Carnall copulatien and specially after great feeding or repletion or after great voyding or em∣ptinesse: but this is already declared. The sixteenth is fie, the beholding whereof causeth vehe∣ment drynesse in the Eyes, and so hurteth the sight: and also the brightnesse thereof hurteth the Eyes. And therefore we see commonly, that Smiths, and such as work before the fire, be red-ey'd, and feeble-sighted. The seventeenth, is great labour: for that also dryeth ve∣hemently. The eighteenth is smiting vpon the Eyes, which hurteth the sight, for it maketh them blous-shot and troubleth the vi∣sible spirits and otherwhile engendreth Impostumes. The nineteenth is, too much vse of tart or sharp things, as Sauces, and that is, through the fartnesse of Fumes, of them engendred. The twentieth is dust, or walking in dusty places: in which dust flyeth lightly into the Eyes, and dusketh the sight. The one and twentieth (and above all other hurtfull to the Eyes and Sight) is too much Watching: For too much wat∣ching induceth too much drowsines in the eyes: and generally all repletions hurt the Eyes, and all that dryeth by Nature, and all that troubleth the bloud by reason of saltness, or sharp∣nesse. All Drunkennesse hurteth the Eyes: Vomiting com∣forteth the Sight in that it purgeth the Stomack yet hurteth it, in that it driveth the matters of the Brain to the Eyes: and therefore if it be needfull to cast, it must be done after meat and without constratning. Also, Too much sleep immediately after meat, and much bloud∣letting: and namely, with ventosities, hurteth the sight, as Avicen saith. Foeniculus, Verbena, Rosa, Chelidonia, Ruta. Existis sit, quae lumina reddit acuta.
Of Fenell, Vervein, Roses Celèndine. Wih Rew among them water stilled fine, They are most wholesome for to clear the eyen, Here the Author reciteth five heaths,To clarifie the eyes. whosé water is very wholesome for the sight. The first is Fenell: Whose juyce put into the Eye sharpneth the sight, after Rasis. The second is Vervein, wherof the water is of many Phi∣sitians put in receipts, wholesome against feeblenesse of sight. The third is Rose-water, which doth comfort the living spirits and sight. The fourth is Celendine whose juyce is cine, it is cal∣led Celidonia (that is) giving celestiall gifts. The fifth is Rue, the water of these heaths is wholesome: for the sight, as Phisitians commonly say, Sic dentes serve porrorum collige grana, Né careas jure cum insquiame simul vre,vs. 3. tar, , a. 4. Sis{que} per embotum Funum cape dente remotu. To cure the tooth ach, take the seed of Leeks, When that fell pain annoyes, and swels the cheeks: But seed of Hen bane mst be mixt among. And burn them both to make the smoke more strong. Hold thy mouth ore and so receive the fume, The pain it slakes, and worms in teeth consume, If through a Tunnell you the smoke assume. Here the Author reciting certain Medicines,For tooth-ach. A.  can. cap. de perro. for the tooth-ach faith. Leek seed and en-bane burned together is good for the Tooth-ach. But they must be minisied on this wise. The juyce of Henbane▪ with the Leek-seed must be burned toge∣ther, and the smoke must be received, through afnunell on the sid that the ach is,
The vertue of the Hen-bane, taketh away tho feeliing of the pain. And the vertue of the Leek-seed-fume killeth the worms, which o∣therwise living in the concavities of the teeth, causeth intollerable pain as Avicen saith. Nux, olcuns, frigus capitis, anguilla{que}, pous, Ac pomum dum faciunt, hominem fore raucum. Nuts, oyl, and cold, which strikes into the head, Eeles, and raw Apples, drinking late towards bed, By all these hoarsenesse in the voyce is bred, This text declareth six causes of Hoarsenesse. The first is eating of nuts, for nuts dry much, and there∣fore they exasperate the voyce and make it like a cranes voice. The secod is oyl, the use whereof may engender Hearse∣nes: for some parts therof cleave fast to the pipe of the lights, causing hearsnesse. Secondly, it maketh Chollerick folk hoarse by reason that in them the oyl is lightly inflamed, and so the inflamation causeth exasperation and hoarsenesse: but the first cause seemeth better. The third is cold of the head; for cold of the head doth presse together the brain, whereby the humours descend to∣ward the throat, and pipe of the Lights, and induceth hoarse∣nesse, through too much moystnesse of the pipe. The fourth is eating of eles: for the eating of them mul∣tiplieth clammy flegme, which comming to the Lights, stick there still, and cause oarfensse. The fift is overmuch drinking, especially toward bed; for then the vehement wetting of the pipe of the lights, doth chief∣ly cause hoarsenesse of the voice, as all Physitians say. The sixt is raw Apples: for by reason that they be raw, they increase phlegm, and if they be not ripe, but sharp and sower, they make the thrt rough. ejuna, vigila, caleas dape, valde labora.
Iuspira calidum modicum bibe, comprime statum, Haec bene tu serv si vis depellere reuma. S stuat ad pectus dicatur reuma catarrns, Ad fauces branchus, ad nares esto corisa. Use fasting, watchings, if the Rheum possesse thee, Hot meats and drinks avoyd, they not redresse thee, Labour thy body and thy breath restrain, Inspire warm air, if the Catharre do pain. Beware of drinking much, it doth offend, These (gainst all Rhumes) to thee I do commend. To know these Rhumes, this is an observation, If to the brest they flow in exaltation. Th'are call'd Cathares. But running through the nose, Its called Corisa: Others say the pose. When by the neck it doth it self convay, They tearm it Branchus as Physitians say. Here the Author derlareth 7 things that cure the Rheume. The first is,For the Rheume, abstinence from meat, or tasting, for thereby the matter is oinihed because abstinence dryeth, and the matter is better ryped and consumed: For when nature fin∣deth no matter of food whereon she may work, she worketh on Rheumatick matter, and consumeth it, and the head is lesse filled ther with. Wherefore Avicen saith: That a man having the Catharre or the Pose, should take heed that he fill not himselfe with meats. The second is Watch for watching dryeth the brain, and withstandeth that the vapours ascend not to the head. The third is hot meats and brinks; for with their heat, the cold water of the Rheum is digested. The fourth is to labour much: For thereby the matter Rheumatick is consumed by reason that much labour dryeth vp all superfluityes of the body. But in stead of Valde, some texis have Vste. And then the sentence is, that warm Gar∣ments is wholesome for the Rheum, specially when it com∣meth by cold matter.
The fift is inspyring of hot ayr, and specially if the Ca∣tarre proceed of cold matter: for by breathing of warm ayr, the matter is warmed and riped. The sixt is to drink little, and to endure thirst: for there∣by the Rheumatick matter is consumed: For little drinking filleth not the head, as much as drinking doth. The seventh is to hold ones breath, for that is specially good in a Catarre, caused of a cold matter: By reason that this hol∣ding of the breath heateth the parts of the brest, & so the cold phgmatick matter causing the Catharre, is better digested. Avicen rehearsing these things, saith:avi. loco. pre∣al. It behooveth to keep the head warm continually. And also it must be kept from the wind and namely that of the South. For the South wind repleteth and maketh rare: but the North wind constraineth. And he must drink no cold water, nor sleep in the day time. He must endure thirst, hun∣ger, and watch as he can: for these things (in this sicknesse) are the be∣ginning of health, Furthermore Rasis biddeth him that hath the Rheum:Rasis. 3. al. To beware of lying upright: For by lying upright the Rheumatick matter sloweth to the hinder parts of man, where be no manifest issues, whereby the matter may avoyd out. Therefore it is to be feared, least it flow to the sinews, and cause the cramp or pal∣sey. And likewise he ought vtterly to forbear wine: for wine is vaporous, and in that it is very hot, it dissolveth the mat∣ter, and augmenteth the Rheum. And likewise he must not stand in th sun, or by the fire, for the sun and the fire loose the matter, and augment the Rheum. In the last two verses, the Author putteth difference be∣tween these 3. names, Catarrus, Branchus and Corisa. And the difference standeth in the matter flowing to one part or ano∣ther of the body. When the matter runneth to the brest-parts it is called Catarrus, when it tunneth by the nose, it is called Corisa, when it runneth by the neck, it is called Branchus. But this word Rheum doth note and figifie generally all manner of matter, flowing from one member to another.
Auripigmentum sulphur mescore memento, His decet apponi calcem, comsc saponi. Quatuor haec misce, commixtis qua noristis: Fistula curatur, quater ex his sireplea: ur. Auipigmentum, which some Arsenick call, Remember to mixe Brimstone therewithall, White lime and Sope: these four by way of plaister, Are able any Fistula to maister. Observe these sour then, if thou wouldst be cur'd, Many (thereby) of help have been assur'd. Here the Author rehearsing a curable medicine for the Fistula,For the Fistu∣la. saith. That a plaister made of Aurpigmentum, Brim∣stone, while Lime, & Sope mingled together healeth the Fi∣stula. Because these things have vertue to dry and mundifie: which intentions are requisite in healing a Fistula. Platearius saith: Auripigmentum is hot and dry in the ourth degree: it dis∣solveth and draweth, consumeth and mundifieth. Brimstone and Sope as he saith) are hot and dry, but Brimston is more vehement, because it is hot and dry in the fourth degree; but Sope is not. A∣vicen saith: That Lime washed dryeth without mordication, and maketh more steddy. The Fistula is a running fore, which avoydeth matter more or less, after the diversity & corse of the moon. Auripigmentum is that which gravers fasten brass & mettals withal in stoue. Ossibus ex denis bis certenis{que} novenis, Constat homo denis bis detibus & duodexis, Ex recennis decies sx quinque{que} venis. The bones, the Teeth and veyns that are in man, The Author here doth number, as he can. Two hundred nineteen benes agree some men, Two hundred forty eight, saith Auicen. Numbring the teeth, some two and thirty hold, Yet four of them by others are controld.
Because some lack those teeth stand last behind In child-hood. Others till their greatest age they find. The Ginders, and Duales, Quadruph, And them above, beneath called Cani. That grind that cut, and hardest things do break, And those cal'd Sensus, Nature these bespeak To grind mans food. The veyns in man we count, Three hundred sixty five, which few surmount. Here the Author numbreth the bones teeth,The number of bones. and veines in mans body. First be saith there be CCi-bones: yet after the Doc∣trs of Phick Hypocrates, Galen, Rasis, Averroes, and Avicen, the bones in man be CCxiviii And though herein be variance, yet there is a master of Phisick that saith: Ossa ducent a sunt, ai{que} quater duodena. Secondly,The number of Teeth: the Author saith that a man most commonly should have xxxii. Teeth. But yet it chanceth, that some lack those sour last Teeth, which be behind them, that we cal the Grinders, and those have but xxviii. Teeth. Some lack four of the last teeth in child-hood only: some other lack them till they be very old; and some all their life. Here is to be noted, that after Avicen, The two foremost teeth bee called Duales, and two on either side of these twain, bee called Quadrupli. There bee two in the upper jawe, and two in the nether: all these teeth be ordained to cut, and therefore some call them Cuters, and specially the Duaes. Next vnto these Quaruples, are two Teeth a∣bove, and two beneath called Canini, whose office is to break hard things. After these, be four other on either side called Grinders, four above and four beneath. After these, same have a Tooth called Sensus, on either side, and as wel above as beneath: These also are ordained; tgrid mans meats. And so the whole number of the Teeth is xxxii. or else xxviii. in them that have not the teeth called Senu. There is then four Duales, and four Quadruples, fours Dog-teeth, six∣teen
Grinders, and four Sensius. Thirdly, the Text saith, that there is in man CCClxv. veyns, as appeareth in the Anathomy. Quatnor humores in humane corpore constant, Sanguis cum cholera flegma, melancholia, Terra melan. aqua fleg. & aer sanguis, choler ignis. Four humours in mans body always are, Bloud, Choler, Flegme, Melancholy. And compare These, unto those four severall Elements, Whereof they are continuall presidents. To Earth Melancholy, to Water Flegme, The Ayr to Bloud, Choler to fire extream. Here the Author declareth the four humors in man, as Bloud, Choler, Flegme, and Melancholy. And shewing the Nature and complexion of them, he compareth each to one of the four Elements. Melancholy is cold and dry, and so compared to the Earth, which is of like nature. Flegme is cold and moyst, and so compared to water. Bloud is hot and moyst, and so compared to the ayr. Choler is hot and dry, and so compared to the fire. These things are declared in these verses. Humidus est sanguis, calet, est et vis acris illi, Alget, humet flegma, sic illi vis fit aquosa. Sicca ealet Colera, sic igus sit simulata, Melancholia friget, sicat quasi terra. The bloud is hot and moyst, like to the ayr, And therefore therewith carryeth best compare. Flegme cold and moyst, even in his chiefest matter, Bearing his best resemblance with the water. Sullen is Melancholy, cold and dry.
And to the Earth it self doth best apply, But Choler being hot and dry, desires To meet (he cares not) with how many fires. For a further knowledge,avi. 1. doe. 4. c. 1. know beside that after Avicen, There be four humors in mans body, Bloud, Fegme, Choler and Melancholy, as is said. The best of them is Bloud; First, because it is the matter of mans spirits, in whom consisteth mans life and operations. Secondly, because it is comfortable to the principles of mans life, it is temperatly hot and moyst. Thirdly, because it restoreth and nourisheth the body more then the other humors. And it is called the treasure of Na∣ture: For if it be lost, Death followeth forthwith. Next to bloud in goodness, is Flegme. First, by reason that if need be, it is apt to be turned into bloud. Secondly because it is very neer like humidity, which is as the foundation of life. After Flegme in goodness is Choler, which is partner with natu∣rall heat, so long as it keepeth convenient measure. Then followeth Melancholy, as dregs and dirt removed apart, from the principals of life, as enemy to joy and liberality, and of neer kindred to age and death. Secondly note, that in the division of humors, there are two kinds of bloud (that is to say) naturall and vnnaturall. Na∣turall bloud, that is to say, Veyn bloud, which is ruddy and obscure; and Artery bloud is ruddy and clear, without ill sa∣vour, and (in comparison of other humors) it is very sweet. Of vnnaturall is two sorts, the one is vnnaturall in quanti∣ty that is to say which is changed from good complexion in it self, or else by mingling of another humor. There is another vnnaturall bloud, which (through min∣gling of other humors) is ill, both in quality and substance, quantity, and in proportion of the one to the other. And this is double, for the one is not naturall, by mingling of an ill hu∣mor that commeth to him from without, The other is vnna∣turall, by mingling of an ill humour, engendred in the selfe
blood; as when part of the blood is putrified, and the subtile part thereof is turned into Choler, and the gross part into melancholy: or else into Choler or the melancholy or else both remaineth in the blood. And this vnnatural blood by mingling of an ill humor, va∣yeth from natural blood many wares, First in substance: for it is grosser and fowler, sith melan∣choly is mingled there with: or lse it is more subtile, when watrishnes or trine choler is mingled therewith. Secondly in colour: for sometime when phlegm is mingled therewith, it inclineth to whiteness or through melancholy to blackness. Thirdly in favor: for by mingling of putrified humors: if is more stinking or else by mingling of raw humors, it hath no savor. Fourthly in tallage: for by mingling of Choler it inclineth to bitternes, and by melancholy to sowernes, or the phlegm of unsavorines. Also of phlegm there be two kinds, natural and vnnatural Natural is that which (within a certain space) wil be bloud, for phlegm is vndigested blood, There is another spice of phlegm which is sweet, and som∣what warm, if it be compared to the bodily hear. But compa∣ring it to the ruddy bloud, and choler, it is cold. Flegm is naturally white: and this is called sweet phlegm, exten∣ding this name sweet to all the talages, delighting the taste: for otherwise the naturall phlegm is not sweet, but unsavory and waterish and very neer the allage of water. And to this phlegm nature hath not given a proper Mansion, as she hath done to Choler and melancholy: but nature maketh it run with the blood, for it is a very néer similitude to blood, And of this phlegm there be two necessityes, & one vtility. The first necessity is that it be near the members, so that their vertue may digest it, and turn it into bloud, and that the members by it may be nourished, when they have lost their naturall food: (that is for to say) good bloud, through
restraint of material blood, which restraint is caused through the stomack and liver through some cause accidentall. The second necessity is, that it mingle with the blood, and make it apt to nourish, the memhers of phlematick complexi∣tous as the brain and such: for that which must noush these members must be mingled with phlegm. The vtility of phlegm is, that it moysten the joynts, and members that move much, least they ware ry through the heat that cometh of their moving and rubbing. Vnnatural phlegm may be divided first into the substance, and to some thereof is Muscilaginosum, and that is phlegm, (to ones seeming) divers for in some part it is subtile & thin, and in some other gross and thick: is called Muscilaginosum, because it is like Muscilages, drawn out of seede. There is an other phlegm, that appeareth equall in sub∣stance: that is in subtility and grosseness to one deeming, but for a truth it is divers in every place this is named raw phlegm, and this, increaseth in the stomack, and entrailes. And to avoid it out of the stomack. Hypocrates, biddeth us, To cast twice a moneth, and to avoid it out of the guts: Nature hath ordained Choler to turn it from the chest of the Gal to the en∣trail Iejunium, and so sorth to the lower guts, to scowr away the phlegm from the brims of the entrails, and cause it to descend down with the other dregs and filth. Sometimes the flegm is increased in the veins, special∣ly of old folkes, by diminishing of their digestion, and there remaining, is by little and little augmented and engrossed, and hurteth nature, which cannot (by the veins thereto ordai∣ned) avoid it out. Yet it doth all that is possible, to keep it from the hearts, and other inward mmbers, and driveth it to the outward members, and specially to the Legs: for by the heavinesse thereof it draweth naturally to the lower parts of man. And this is the cause why old folkes legs are swlne, and that if one press downe his finger therein, there tarry∣eth
a hole, specially towards night, most in fat folks and such, as were wont to be nourished with moist meat. There is another spice of phlegm, very subtile and watrish like vnto water, and somewhat thick: this phlegm is often mingled with their spittle that have ill digestion, and of those that be great drinkers: it removeth from the brain to the nose, as it is wont in the beginning of the pose, and when by decoction and boyling in a man it becommeth grosse, it is tur∣ned into phlegm grosse, white and musclage. There is another phlegm grosse and white called Gipseum the subtile parts of this phlegme, is dissolved through long biding in the joints: and the grossenes thereof remaineth in the joynts as hard as stones. This phlegme engendreth the Gowt vncurable. There is another phlegm thick and grosse, like to the mol∣en glasse, in colrr, clammines, and weight. Secondly, vnnaturall phlegm differeth in Tailage: for there is certain phlegm that is sweet, which is by mingling of blood with phlegm. And vnder this is cōtained the vnctuous flegm, which is ingēdred by mingling vnctuous blood & flegm. There is another manner of vnsavory phlegm, caused of rawnesse as certainly glassy phlegm. There is another salt phlegm caused by mingling of choler And this is more biting drier, and lighter then any other flegm through the choler mingled therewith, which is dry, light, and sharp. And this phlegm is often found in their stomacks, that be phlematick, that drink much strong wine, and that vse salt and sharp meats; because it cleaveth to the stomack, and cau∣seth other while thirst intollerable and running by the guts, if it sometime fleeth them and causeth the blood menn: and in the fundament oftentimes induceth strong costivenesse. There is another phlegm, that is sharp, by mingling, of sharp melancholy therewith: and sometime through boyling of figine, as it chanceth in the swéet juyces of fruits, that first boyl and after, wax ripe. And this phlegm appeareth oftner in their stomacks that digest ill, then in other parts: for na∣turall Choler floweth to the mouth of the stomack, to stirre
vp the appeite, which desconding downward sometime min∣gled with flegm, maketh it sowre and this is perceived by sowre belchings. And otherwhiles this phlegm is engendred in the stomack by boyling with a weak heat. There is another phlegm called Pantick, which is sometime caused by mingling of pontick melancholy. But this is sel∣doms, by reason that pontick melancholy, so very scarce. It is sometime caused through vehement coldnesse thereof, whereby the moistnes thereof is congeled, & somwhat altered to earth∣lines, and thereupon commeth no weak heat, which causing it to boyl, should convert it into sharpnes: nor no strong heat, which digesting it should turn it into blood. There be two kinds of Choler, naturall and vnnaturall. Vnnaturall Choler is the some of bloud, whose color is ruddy and clear, that is ctrine, in the last degree of citrines as Saffon heads, and it is light and sharp: and the hotter, the more redder it is. And after this Choler engendred in the head it goeth wite the bloud into the veins the other goeth into the purse of the gall. The part that goeth with the blood endureth therewith both for necessity and profe. It is needfull that it mingle with the bloud, to nourish the cholerick members It is behooveful that it make the blood subtile and cause it to enter into the veins. The part that goeth to the purse of the gall, goeth thither for necessity and profit. The necessity is double. The one is néedful for all the body, to mundifie it from cholerick superflu∣ities. The other necessity is in respect of the gals prs. The prest also is double. The one is, to wash the E∣drails from dregs and clammy phlegm cleading to them. The other is to wash the guis and Muscles that they may féele, the thing that hurteth them, and voyd all other filthines The proof of this is that the cholick chanceth often times, by stopping of the hole that commeth from the purse of the gall to the guts. Vnnatural choler is double. For one is vnnatural through outward cause mingled therewith. The other is vnnatu∣rall,
through a cause in it self, for the substance thereof is not naturall. Choler vnnaturall through an outward cause, is another known and fame as: and is is that, that phlegm is mingled with, and it is called famous or notable by reason that it is often engendred. And of this kind of Choler commeth the third, that is wel known. There is another that lesse famous, and that is it wherewith melancholy is mingled. Famous Choler is either tme, and engendred by min∣gling of subtile phlegm with naturall choler, or else it is yol∣ky, like to the yolks of egs, and is engendred by mingling of gross phlegm with a naturall choler. Choler of lesse same is caused two ways. One is, when the choler is burned in it self and turned to ashes, from which the subtile part of the Choler is not separated, but mingled ther∣with, and this choler is the worst. Another is, when melan∣choly commeth from without, and mingleth it with the cho∣le. And this Choler is better then other, & is ruddy in color, it is not clear nor lowing but more like to vein-bloud. This vn∣natural choler having his own proper substance without min∣gling of any other humor, is often engendred in the liver, by reason that the subtilenes of the blood burneth it self & turneth into choler, and grossely into melancholy. Another choler is engendred in the stomack of ill meats not digested but corrupted: or is it is engendred in the veins, by other humors. And of this choler be two kinds: for one is cal∣led Choler Praslive, like the color of the bearb called Praslion, which is engendred of the yolkines when it is burned: for bur∣ning causeth a yolky blacknesse in the choler, which mingled with choler citrine, engendreth a green cholet. The other is called rusty choler, like to rusty Iron, and it is engendred of Prassive, when Praslive is burned only, til the hu∣midity thereof be dryed away: and of the drinesse beginneth to war white. And these two last Cholers be ill, and venemous, yet rusty, is the worst.
Likewise there be two kinds of melancholy, naturall and unnaturall. The naturall is, the dregs and superfluity of good blood, whose tallage is between sweet and pontick. And thus me∣lancholy when it is engendred in t ver, is rted in two paris Of which one entreth with the bloud and the  re∣maineth in the veins, the other is conveed to the splen. The first part entieth with the bloud for necessity and profit: It is néedful that it mingle with the blood, to nourish the melan∣choly cold and dry members as the bones. The vtility is to make thick and then bloud to stint the su∣perflous tunning thereof: to make it strong and to strength∣en those members into which it must be converted. The other part that néedeth no blood goeth to the spine, both for neces∣sity and profit. The necessity is double one vniversall through out the body, to purge it of melancholious superfluity. The other is but particular onely to govern the slent. This melancholy is also profitable for mans body, for it tinneth to the mouth of the stomack, straining out the hu∣midityes, that is findeth there, as a woman strayning a cows dugs, draweth out the milk: this vtility is double, First, it constraineth, thicketh and comforteth the stomack. Second∣ly, by reason that the eagernesse thereof, moveth the mouth of the stomacke, it maketh one to have an appetite to meat. Vnnaturall melancholly is a thing burned, or ashes in respect of other humors. Of this there are four famous kinds, though there be many not famous. The first is ashes of Choler. The second is ashes of flegm, & if the phlegm that is bur∣ned wer very subtile and watrish, then the melancholy ther∣of engendred, will be salt in talge. But if the phlegm be gross that is burned then the ashes thereof, or the melancholy of it engendred inclineth to sowernes or ponticity. The third is ashes of bloud, and this melancholp is salt, a tle inclining to sweetnesse.
The fourth is ashes of naturall melancholy. And if naturall melancholly (whereof soever it be) be subtile, then it will be very sor. And when it is cast out upon the ground it boileth and laboureth of the ayre, and causeth both flies and beasts to avoid the place. But if the naturall melancholy be grosse, the vnnaturall thereof engendred, shall not be sower. Sanguieorum signa Natura pingues isti sunt aquejocantes Sempor rumores, upunt audire frequentes. Hos Venus & Bacchus delectant, fercula, risus. Et facit hos hilares, & dulcia verba loquentes. Omi us his studis habiles suxt, ac magis apti. Qualibes ex causa, nee hos leuitr moves ira. Largus, amans, hilaris, ridens ruber{que} colo i. Cantans carnosus satis, audax atque benigus. To Sanguine men, Nature hath much commended, First, with a jocond spirit they are attended. Desirous to hear tales and novelties, Women, nor wine, they gladly not despise. Their looks are chearfull and their language sweet, For any study they are prone and meet. No common matter kindles angers fire, Contentious company they not desire. They are liberall loving mirthfull: and benigne, Fleshy and fat, capring and apt to sing. No muddy countenance, but smiling chear, And bold enough as causes may appear. Here the Authour teaching vs to know Snguine folkes, sth, that a sanguine person is naturally sat. But yet wee may not understand, that sanguine ks be properly fat: For that is a token of a cold complexion, as saith Avicen, But they be sat and fleshy withall: orfat in Sanguine persons is taken for Fleshy. Avicen saith, That aboundance of all
ruddy flesh and stiff, signifieth a hot and a moyst complexion, as a sanguine person is For the aboundance of ruddy flsh, witnes∣seth fortitude of vertue assimulative, and multitude of bloud, that work and war by heat and moystre, as witnesseth Ga∣len, saying: The aboundance of flesh is engendred of the aboun∣dance of bloud. For heat perfectly digesting, and the like ertue to flesh, maketh the flesh fast and stiff. Also Avicen saith. Every fle∣shy body without aboundance of fat and greace, is sanguine. Whereto Galen assenteth. Secondly, the sanguine person is merry and jucond, that is to say, with merry words he moveth others to laugh, or else he is glad, through benignity of the sanguine humour, provo∣king a mall to gladnesse and ocondity, through clear and perfect spirits engendred of bloud. Thirdly he gladly heareth fables and merry sports, for the same cause. Fourthly he is enclined to hery through heat and mois∣nesse, provoking to cauall-copulation. Fifthly, he gladly drinketh good wine. Sixthly he delighteth to feed on good meat, by reason that the sanguine person deseth the most like to his complexion, that is, good wines and good meats. Seventhly, he laugheth lightly, for bloud provoketh to laughing. The eight is, the sanguine person hath a gladsom and an amiable countenance, through likelinesse of colur and fair∣nesse of complexion. The ninth is, he speaketh sweetly, through amiablenesse of sanguine nature The tenth is he is at so n any manner of Science, through livelinesse and peripicuity of wit. The eleventh is be is not , and this commeth through moysnesse, abating the fve of choler provoking to anger. The last two Verses rocie some of the foresaid tokens,
and also some other. First, a sanguine person is free, not covetous, but liberall. Secondly, be is amorous. Thirdly, he hath a merry countenance. Fourthly, he is most part smiling, of all which the benig∣nity of the bloud is cause and provoker. Fifthly, he hath a ruddy colour. For Avicen saith, That rud∣dy colour of the skin signifieth aboundance of bloud. And this must be vnderstood bright ruddy colour, and not dark such as is wont to be in their faces that drink wines aboundantly, and that vse sauces and sharp spices, for such colour signifieth Lepry to come. Sixtly, he gladly geth and heareth singing, by reason of his merry mind. Seventhly, he is fleshy through the causes beforesaid. The eight is, he is hardy, through the heat of the bloud, which is cause of boldnesse. The ninth is, the sanguine person is benigne and gentle, through the bounty of the sanguine humor. Flegma vires modicas tribuit, latsque brevesque, Flegma facis pinges sangisreddit mediocres. Sensus hebes, tardus motus pigritia somnus. Hic somnolentus piger & sputamine multus. Et qui sensus habet pingues, facit & color albus. Men that be flegmatick, are weak of nature, Most commonly of thick and stubbed flature. And fatnesse overtaketh them amain, For they are slohfull and can take no pain. Their fences are but dull, shallow and flow. Much given to sleep, whence can no goodness grow, They often spet: yet natures kind direction, Hath blest them with a competent complexion. Here the Author sheweth certain properties, concer∣ning
the complexion of phlegm. First phlegmatick folks be weak, by reason that their na∣tural heat, which is the beginner of strength, and operation, is but feeble. Secondly, phlegmatick folks be short and thick: for their naturall heat is not strong enough to lengthen the body, and therefor it is thick and short. Thirdly, phlegmatick folks be fat by reason of their great humidity. Therefore Avicen saith, That superfluous grease sig∣nifieth cold and moistnesse, for the bloud and the unctuous matter of grease, piercing through the veins into the cold members (through coldnes of the members) do congeal together, and so ingender in man much greate, As Galèn saith in his second book of operation. He saith also: That sanguine men are midle men, between the long and the short. Fourthly, phlegmatick folks are more inclined to idlenes and study, then folks of other complexion, by reason of their coldnes that maketh them sleepy. Fiftly, they sleep longer by reason of their great coldnesse, that provoketh them to sléep. Sixtly, they be dull of wit and vnderstanding: for as tempe∣rate heat is cause of good wit and vnderstanding, so cold is cause of blunt wit and dull vnderstanding. Seventhly, they he slothfull, and that is by cold: for as heate maketh a man light and quick in moving, so cold maketh a man heavy and slothfull. The eight is, they be lumpish, and sleep long. Est et humor cholera, qui competit impetuosis, Hoc genus est hminum, cupiens pracoliere cunctos. Hi leviter discunt, multum comedunt, cito crescunt. Inde maganimi sunt largi, summa petentes: Hirsutus, fallax, irascous, prodigus, audax, Astutus, gracilis, siccus, crocei{que} coloris.
Choler, is such an humor as aspies, With most impetuous, insolent desires, He covers to excell all other men, His mind outsteps beyond a Kingdomes ken. Lightly he learns, eats much and soon grows tall, Magnanimous, and somewhat prodigall. Soon mov'd to anger though upon no cause, His own will is his reasons largest laws. Subtile and crafty, seldome speaking fair, A wasting unthrift, overgrown with hair. Bold-spirited, and yet but lean and dry, His skin most usual of a Saffron die. Here the Author teacheth us to know a person of ahole∣rick complexion. First, he is hasty, by reason of superuous heat that moveth him to hastinesse,Avi. 2. doc. 4 ca. 4 and therefore Avicen saith, That deeds of ex∣cessive motion do signifie heat. Secondly, the Cholerick person is desirous of honor, and coveeth to be vppermost, and to excel all others, by reason that superfluous heat maketh mans mind prone to arroganey and fool-hardinesse. Thirdly, they learn lightly, by reason of the cholerick hu∣mor, and therefore Avicen saith; That the understanding, prompt∣nesse, and quick aglity to intelligence,Avi. 2.1. lo. 3 ca. betokeneth heat of complexi∣on. Fourthly, they eat much for in them the heat digestive is strong and more resolutive thn in other bodies. Fiftly, they encrease soon through strength of naturall heat in them which is cause of augmentation. The sixt is, they be stout stomacked that is, they can suffer no injurits, by reason of the heat in them. And therefore Avicen saith, That to take every thing impatiently, signifieth heat. The seventh is, they be liberall to those that honour them.
The eight is they desire high dignities and offices. The ninth is, a cholerick person is hairy, by reason of the heat that openeth the pores, and modeth the matter of hairs to the skin. And therefore it is a common saying. The cholerick man is as hairy as a Goat. The tenth is he is deceivable. The eleventh is, he is soon angry, through his hot nature. And therefore Avicen saith, Often angry and for a small cause, be∣tokenth heat, through eaie motion of Choler, and boyling of the bloud about the heart. The twelfth is he is a waster, in spending largely to obtain hous. The thirtienth is, he is bold, for boldnesse commeth of great heat, specially about the heart. The fourtienth is he is wily. The fiftien his  is slender membred and not fleshy. The sixtienth is he is lean and dry. The seventienth is e to Saffron coloured. And theefore Avicen saith, That choler signifieth dominion. Resta adhuctristis cholerae substantia nigrae, Quae reddit pravos, pertristes, paca loquenes, Hi vigilant tudis, nec mens est dedita somno. Servant propositum sibi nil reputant fore tutum. Invidus & tristis, cupas dextraeque tenacis. Non expers raudis, timidus lutei{que} coloris. Where melancholly bears the powerfull sway, To desperation it inclines alway. The melancholy spirit is dark and sad, Sullen, talks little, and his sleeps are bad. For dreadfull dreams do very much affright them, Start out of sleep, and nothing can delight them. Their memory is good, and purpose sure, All solitary walks they best endure. Because to study they are still inclin'd, And being alone, it fitteth best their mind.
Simple, and yet deceitfull, not bounteous. But very sparing, doubtfull, suspitious, Earthly and heavy looks: By all opinion, Here melancholly holds his sole dominion. Here the Authour declareth some tokens of a Melancholy person. First, melancholy maketh men shrewd and ill mannered, as they that kill themselves: Secondly, melancholy folks are most part sad through their melancholy spirts, troublous and dark, like as clear spirits make folks glad. Thirdly, they talk little by reason of their coldnesse. Fourthly, they be studious, for they covet always to be alone. Fiftly, they steep, not well by reason of the over much dry∣nesse of the brain and (through melancholy fenmes they have horrible dreams, that wake them out of their sléep. Sixtly, they be stedfast in their purpose, and of good memory and hard to please. Seventhly, they think nothing sure, they always dread through darknesse of the spirits. In the two last verses he reciteth some of the foresaid signs and other. First, the melancholy person is envious, he is sad, he is co∣vetous: he holdeth fast, and is an ill payer, he is simple, and yet deceitfull: and therefore melancholy olks, are devout, great readers, fasters and keepers of abstinence. Sixtly, he is tearfull. Seventhly, he hath an earthy brown colour: Which colour if it be any thing green, signifieth the Dominion of Melancholy, as Rasis saith. Hi sunt humres, qui praestant cui{que} colores. Omnibus in rebus ex slegmate fit coloralbus. Sanguine sit rubes, colera rubea quo{que} rusus. Sipecct sanguis, facies rubet, extat ocell,
Inflantur genae, corpus nimim{que} gravatur, Epuls quam frequens plenus, mollis, dolr, ingens. Maxime fit frontis, & constipatio ventris, Sicca{que} lingua, sis{que}, & somnia plenarubore, Dulcor adest sputi, sunt acria dulcia quae{que}. The humours that complexion do extend, And colour in our bodies, thus they lend. To him is Phlegmatick, a colour white: Brownish and tawnie, under Cholers might. The melancholy man is pale as earth, The sanguine ruddy, cuer full of mirth, Yet where the Sanguine doth too much exceed, These inconveniences thereby do breed. The bloud ascends too proudly to the face, Shoots forth the eyes beyond their wonted place. And makes them swell. The body lumpish growes, The pulse beats thick, by vapours them inclose. The head will ake, and costivenesse ensues, The tongue is dry and rough, can tell no news. Extremity of thirst, caus'd through great heat, And bloody coloured dreams, which make men sweat. Here the Author reciteth the colours, that follow the com∣plexion. A phlegmatick person is white coloured: the chole∣rick is brown and tawy: the Sanguine is ruddy: the melan∣choly is pale coloured like earth. Afterward, the text declareth twelve colours, signifying superfluity of blood. The first is when the face is red, by the ascending of blood to the head and face. The second is, when the eyes bolle out further then they were wont. The third is, when the eyes are swolen. The fourth is, when the body is all heavy for nature can∣not sustain nor govern so great a quantity of blood.
The fift is, when the Pulse beateth thick. The sixt is, when the Pulse is full, by reason of the hot and moyst vapors. The seventh is, when the Pulse is soft, through too much humidity that moifieth the matter. The eight is, ach of the head. The ninth is, when the belly is costive, through great heat that dryeth vp the stichy matter. The tenth is, when the tongue is dry and rough for the like cause. The eleventh is, great thirst through drinesse of the sto∣macks mouth engendred of great heat. The twelfth is, when one dreameth of red things. This Avicen affirmeth, saying: Sleep that signifieth aboundance of bloud,avi. 2.1. c. 7. is when a man dreameth he seeth red things: or else that he sheddeth much of his bloud, on else that he swimmeth in bloud, and such like. The thirteenth is, the sweetnesse of spittle through sweet∣nesse of bloud. Here is to be noted, that like as there be tokens of aboun∣dance of bloud, so therebe signes of aboundance of other hee∣mors, as in these Verses following. Accusat choler am dextra dolor, aspera lingua, Tiunit us, vomitusque frequens, vigilantia multa, Multa sit is, pinguis egestie, torsio ventris, Naus a fit morsus cordis, languescit orexis. Pulsus adest graetlis, durus voloxque calescens. Aret, amarescis, incendia somnia fingit. Where Choler rules too much, these signs wil shew, The Tongue grows sharp and rough in speaking slow. More wak fulness then needs, tigangs in the car, Unwonted Vomits, hatefull dy ap. Great thirst, the excre de quickly void, The stomack is too nice, as over-ord.
The heart is full of guipes, and extream heat Compels the pulse impatiently to beat. Bitter and sour our spetle then will be, And in our dreams, strange fires we seem to see. The tokens of aboundance of flegme are contayned in these verses following. Flegma supergrediens proprias in corpore leges, Os facit insipidum, fastidia crebra, salivas Costarum, stomachi, simul occipitisque dolores. Pulsus adest rarus, & tardus, mollis, inanis, Pracedit fallax fantas;mata somnit aquosa. Where Flegme superabounds, these signs will tell▪ The mouth distastfull, nothing can rellish well, And yet with moysture over-floweth still, Which makes the stomack very sick and ill. The sides will ake, as if they beaten were, Loathsome will all our meat to us appear. The pulse beats seldom. The stomack and the head, With gripes and pangues do seem as they were dead. Our sleeps are troublous, and when we dream, Of brooks and waters, then we see the stream. The signs of aboundance of Melancholy are contayned in these verses following. Humorum pleno duns fex in corpore regnat, Nigracutis, durus pulsus, tennis & vrina, Solicitudo, timor, tristitia somnia, tempus, Acerescit rugitus sapor, & sputaminis idem, Levaque pracipuc tinnit & sibilat auris. When Melancholy in the body raigns; It doth indanger many dreadfull pains.
It tills it with corrupting filthinesse, Makes the skin look of blackish fulsomnes. The pulse beats hard, the vrin weak and thin, Soltcitude, fear, sadnesse, sleep it droweneth in. It sases bitter belches breeds much Rheum. And in the care oft breeds a tinging cune. Now concerning the letting of blood this Text is abouch∣ed. Denus septenus vix slebothomians petit annus. Spi us vberior erit per flebothomiam. Spiritus ex potie vini mox multiplicatur. Lumina clarificat, sincerat slebothomia Mentes, & cerebrum, calidas facit esse medullas. Viscera purgabit. stomachum ventrem{que} coorcet. Puros dat sensus, dat somnum, toedia todit. Auditus, vocem, vires producit & auget. At seventeen yeers of age, safely we may, Let youthfull bodies bloud, the learned say. The spirits are restored by letting bloud, And to encrease them, drinking wine is good. After blood-letting little good they gain By present eating meat, that is but vain. Phlebothomy doth purge and clear the sight, Cleanseth the brain, and makes the marrow right. The stomack and the belly it doth clear, And purge the entrails throughly every year. It sharpens wit, and doth induce to sleep, And from the heart all painsull grief doth keep. It comforts hearing, and relieves the voice, Augmenting strongth, wherein the most rejoyce. Here the Author speaking of bloud-letting, sayth, That
at seventeen years of age one may be let bloud. And touching this, Galen saith,Gal de ingenis That Children should not be let bloud, before they be 14 year old at least, because Childrens bo∣dies be soon resolved from outward heat, and therefore by voiding of bloud they should be greatly weakned. Also, for that they need to nourish their bodies and augment them, they should not diminish their bloud. And also, for that they be soon dissolved from outward heat, it sushceth that they need not be let bloud. Know likewise, That as bloud-letting is not convenient for Children, so it is unwholesome for old Folks, as Galen saith:Gal. 9 reg! For the good bloud is little, and the ill much. And bloud-letting draweth away the good bloud, and leaveth the ill, as Avicen saith:Av. 4.10. cap. 10. and therefore bloud-letting is vnconvenient for such persons. Se∣condly be putteth the hurt of bloud-letting, of necessity with voyding of bloud, done by bloud-letting, mans spirits being in the bloud, do then avoid. Thirdly, he sheweth how the spirits should be cherished and restored, and that is by drinking of Wine after the bloud, let∣ting: For of all things to nourish quickly, Wine is best, as is before said: The Spirits also be cherished and restored by meats, but that is not so quickly as by Wine. And the meat after bload-letting must be light of digestion, and a great en∣genderer of bloud, as rere-rosted Egges, and such like. And although meat restore tha spirits after bloud-letting, yet let the Patients beware of much meat the first and second day. For Isaac saith In dictis. That they must drink more then they eat, and yet they must drink lesse then they do before bloud-letting, for digestion is weaker. Fourthly, the Author putteth eleven profits of bloud-let∣ting, when it is duly done. First, temperate bloud-letting comforteth the sight: For
diminishing of humors doth also diminish fuming to the head, and the repletion thereof, that darketh the sight. Secondly, it cleareth and maketh pure the mind and brain, through the same cause. Thirdly, it heateth the marrow: for it mingleth the super∣fluities that thereto come, and cool it. Fourthly, it purgeth the entrails: for Nature (vncharged of bloud) digesteth better the raw humors that be left. Fiftly, bloud letting restraineth vomiting and the lask, for it diverteth the humors from the interior parts to the out∣ward, and specially the letting bloud of the arms, as Avicen saith, for letting bloud of the féet stoppeth not so well. Yet perchance the Bloud-letting shall augment the lask. end that two ways. First, by Bloud-letting. Nature is dis∣charged of her burden, and being comforted, it provoketh other hacuations. Secondly if the Lask be caused by great weak∣nesse of vertue contentive: for then, by reason that by Bloud-letting vertue is weakned the lask is augmented. Sixtly, Bloud-letting cleareth the wits: for it minisheth vaporation that goeth to the head, and troubleth the wits. Seaventhly, it helpeth one to sleep, for thereby many hu∣mors be voyded, of which divers sharp vapors are lifted up, that let one to sleep. The eight is, it taketh away tediousnesse and over-great grief, for thereby vertue is vnladen of grief: for with the me∣lancholy bloud, the dreas of bloud (which induce tediousness and grief) are drawn out. The ninth is, it comforteth the hearing: for thereby the va∣pors and humors that ascend is the head, and let the hearing, are diminished. The tenth is, it comforteth the doyce: for thereby the su∣perfluities and humidities that would come to the Breast, or pipe of the Eights, and let the doyce are diminished. The eleventh is, it angmenteth the strength, for thereby the body is discharged of grief, wherefore the vertue is ang∣mented.
Tres insun itis Majus, September, Aprilis, Et sunt Lunares sunt velut Hydriades, Prima dies prim postremaque posteriorum. Nee sarguis miu necarnibus Anseris vti, In senevel juvene, si venae sanguine plenae. Omni mense bene confort incisio Venae. Hi sunt treimenses, Majus, Septembris, Aprilis, In quibus eminuas, vt longo tempore vivas. Three speciall Moneths, our text doth here remember, For letting-bloud, Aprill May, and September, The Moon rules most these Moneths, yet certain days, Some do deny and other some dispraise The first of May, and the last of Aprill, As also of September they hold ill. Days of these Moneths they do forbid to bleed, And think it dangerous on a Goose to feed. But this is idle, for these Moneths are good. And for our health in these to let our bloud. For old or young if bloud abounding be, All Moneths it may be done advisedly. If length of days and health you do desire, These are the Moneths that bleeding best require. Here the Author saith, that these thrée, May, September, and Aprill are the moneths of the Moon, and in them are days for∣bidden to let bloud: that is, the first of May, and the last of Sep∣tember and April. Though this be a common rule, yet it is false. For the foresaid days may be as good, and as worthy to be chosen as the other, after the diversity of the Coustellation in them. Farther he saith that in those days one should not eate flesh, which is also false and erroueous and very withchcraft. I think the Author had this saying of the Jews, which observe such manner. Secondly, he saith. That men of middle Age, and young solkes, whose Veyns be full of bloud, may be let bloud every
moneth, for those may well re resolution, and in them is great quantity of good bloud. Thirdly, he saith, that bloud-letting for mans health must be done in one of these three moneths, May, September, and April. But yet with difference, for in April and May the Liver-veyn must be let bloud, because then in Spring the bloud encrea∣seth: And in September in the splene-veyn, because of Melan∣choly, which then in Autumn encreaseth. Frigida natura frigens regio, dolor ingens, Poit lavacrum, cottuns, minor aetas atque senilit, Morbus prolixus, replei potus & escae, Si fragilis vel subtilis sensius stomachi sit. Et fastditi, tibi non sit slebothomandium. A cold complexion, and a chilly ayr, Aches, or ingreams that to inslame prepare, Bathing and wanting dallying in that sport, Where Venus most delighteth to resort, Too young or else too old, A long disease, Eating or drinking, nature to displease. Sea-sick feeling, when the stomacks weak, And empty Veyns, that loathingly do speak. All these forbid bloud-letting, and advise, Not then to deal therewith in any wise. Here the Author setteth dawn twelve things that do hinder bloud, letting. The first is coldnesse of complexion: For, as Galen saith, Bloud letting cooleth, and augmenteth coldnesse. Because as Isaac saith, bloud is the foundation of naturall heat: and in regard that bloud-letting voydeth the bloud, it voydeth heat, and so consequent∣ly cooleth. The second is a fervent cold Countrey, vnder which a cold season should be comprehended, which also letteth bloud-let∣ting:
for in a Country and Season very cold, the bloud is clo∣sed in the deepest parts of the body, and the bloud that carrieth in the vpper parts, the cold maketh thick which to avoid is no wisdome. The third is fervent ach vnder which also may be compre∣hended great inclamation of the body; for if one in such acci∣dents be let bloud, there followeth great motion agitative contrary to nature, and greater inflamation, which weakneth nature more. The cause of this motion agitative is attraction to divers parts: for by bloud-letting) attraction is caused to the place that is let bloud: and by great ach, attraction is cause to the place of ach. The cause of greater inflamation is, that by bloud-letting the humors be moved, whereby they be the more inflamed. And this is truth when blou-letting is little and artificiall: yet if it be done till one swound, it is wholesome in the fore∣said cases: For this bloud-letting when it overcommeth the attraction of the ach it causeth not motion agitative and like. wise it taketh away inflamation when there be no humours, that should move heat, and cause more inflamation. This is Galens mind, saying;Gal. comments illius apli. qua geruntur. There is no no better medicine for an impo∣stume of fervent inflammation, Fevers, and a great Ach, than bloud-letting. The fourth is bayning, specially resolutive, for that denyeth Bloud-letting, because that were vacuation vpon va∣cuation, which Nature cannot easily bear. The fifth is carnall copulation: for immediatly after that, one should not be letten bloud, because of double weak∣ning of Nature. The sixth is, too old or too young, as it is before touched. Of this Avicen sayth, Take heed how thou lettest one bloud in any of the foresaid cases, except thou trust in the figure insolidite of the mus∣cles, largnesse of the veyns, the fulnesse of them, and ruddy co∣lour.
The seventh is long sicknesse: for by such letting of bloud Nature is doubly feebled, both by long sicknesse and dimini∣shing. This is truth, sayth Avicen, except there be corrupt bloud, for then bloud-letting is wholesome. The eight is great repletion of drink. The ninth is to eat too much meat: and vnder this is comprised meat vndigested. The cause whereof (as Avicen sayth) is this. There be three things that draw to them, that is, emptinesse, heat and secret vertue or property. Then if the veyns be empty through voyding of bloud, they draw to them from the sto∣mack or liver undigested or supersluous meat or drink, which undi∣gested meat when it commeth to the members, cannot be amended, that is digested: for the third digestion cannot amend the fault of the second, nor the second of the first, if the fault be so great that it cannot convert into the members, and it there remaining may cause some disease. The tenth is feeblenesse for bloud-letting is a strong voy∣der as Galen saith; therefore a feeble person may not endure great diminishing of bloud. The eleventh is subtile sensiblenes of the stomacks mouth, which is called the heart-string, for of such bloud letting sow∣ning followeth lightly. And vnder this wesknesse of the sto∣mack is comprised an easte flowing of choler to the mouth thereof inducing vomiting, wherefore they that have the fore∣said accidents, should not be let bloud: for by bloud-letting, the humors moved, be endured to the stomacks mouth, as to a place accustomed: And because it is a weak and an impotent member to resist that flixe; therefore by such letting of bloud, many inconveniences chance. This is one cause, why so many sound when they he let bloud by reason that Choler floweth to the stomack, which biting the stomack, paineth the heart and stomack so, that it causeth one to sound. The twelfth is loathing: for if in this loathing one be
let bloud, when the veyns be empty, they draw to them ill mat∣ter, that causeth loathsomnesse. And besides the foresaid accidents th be yet other that hinder bloud-letting. First, voyding of menstruous stire, or the Emrauts, for one diseased with either of these, should not be let bloud: yet it may be done to divert the flix or matter another tray. The second is rarenesse of composition: for in rare bodies is much dissolution; And therefore this dissolution sufficeth them without evacuation, as Galen saith.Gal. 9. Res. The third is rawnesse and clamminesse of humours, for then beware of leting of bloud because it encreaseth rawnes of humors: & therefore in long sicknesse ye should not be let bloud for of rawnesse, humors encrease, strength séebleth, and the sicknesse prolongeth. And therefore Avicen saith, That in long sicknesse, before one is let bloud, he should take a laxative, although he need both. Rawnesse of humors is caused two ways. One is through aboundance of humors that choke natural heat, which choking breedeth raw humors and then bloud-letting is wholesome. Wherefore Alexander saith, Letting of bloud in the beginning of dropsie is wholesome,Alex, 2. l. cap. hydropic. when it commeth by aboundance of men∣struous bloud, that through some cause is prohibited to issue, or by aboundance of the Enmauds For like as a little fire is quenched un∣der a great heap of wood, so likewise naturall heat is suffocated with aboundance of humours. The second cause of raw humors, is féeblenesse of naturall heat, as in folks of feeble complexion, or such as have him long sick, or be very aged; for then the said bloud-letting is vnwhol∣some, because it augmenteth rawnesse: for the bloud that con∣serveth heat is drawn out and so the body is made cold, and the humors more raw. Therefore the bloud must be left to di∣gest raw humors.
The fourth is, vndue disposition of the ayr, either too hote or too cold; for much heat causeth strong resolution: and great cold maketh the bloud thick, and vnapt to issue or a∣voyd. Quid debes facere, quando vis stsbothomari, Vel quando minuis, fuer is vel quands minutus. Vnctio, siv; potus, lavacrum, vel fascia, motus, Debent non fragili tibi singula mente teneri. What should we do when we to bleeding go, These faw instructions following will show, Before and after, unction will do well, Lest the incision, or the veyn should swell. Yet unction (without wine) is not so good, It prevents sowning, and begets new bloud. Bathing is wholesome, in divers times observed. And linnen cloths ought well to be reserved. After bloud-letting be discreet in walking, And trouble not the brain with too much talking. This Text declareth five things that ought to be done about Bloud-letting,Five things in letting bloud. some before, some at the time, and some after. The first is annointing, which otherwhile is vsed in the Bloud-letting, as to annoint the place or veyn that is opened, to asswage the veyn: Sometime it is vsed after Bloud-let∣ting, to keep the gash that it close not vp too soon, that the humors that be lest in the veyns, may have some respiration and some ill fumes voyd out. The second is to drink, and specially wine, which is good in Bloud-letting, if one happen to sown, add also it is very whol∣some (after Bloud-letting) to revive the spirits, and engen∣der new Bloud, which thing, in practise all Physicians ob∣serve. The third is bayning, which is wholesome thrée days be∣fore,
and thrée days after, and not the same day. It is good be∣fore, if one think he have grosse humors within him: for bay∣ning looseth and moveth the humors, and for the same cause it is wholesome to take a sharp strupe before, to move, dissolve and make subtile the humors. And therefore, when ye will let one bloud, ye must rub the arm, that the humors in the veyn be made subtile and prepared to issue out more eastly. It is wholesome after bloud-letting, that the residue of humors and vayors that be left behind, may be loosed. It is not wholesome the same day, for bayning maketh the skin linnow or supple, which made linnow, will not abide the stroke that is given in bloud-letting, and that is dangerous. The fourth is, binding with linnen cloaths, which is very wholesome, to stop the bloud after often evacuation thereof, and before bleeding to draw the humors in the veyns, and to cause them to swell and better to appear. The fift is, moderate walking after bloud-letting, to dis∣solve and make subtile the humors, and afterward to loose the residue of the humors that be left behind. Some vse to let bloud fasting vut some other say, it were better to eat a rere rafted Egge first, and thereto drinke a draught of wine, about the hour of nine or ten before dinner, and forthwith to let bloud because when the stomack is empty nature retaineth still the bloud more strongly, lest she should lack nourishment. But when they have eat a little nourishing meat, as wine and egges is, then nature suffereth the bloud better to issue. Exhilar at tristes, iratos placat, amantes, Ne sint amentes, flebothomia sacit. Bleeding removes sad motions from the heart, Asswageth anger, being too mallepart. And those distempered fits procur'd by love, Bloud-letting gently doth them all remove.
Three effects of bloud, let∣ting. First, it maketh a sad person merry. Secondly, it pleaseth angry folks: and the reason is this, because much melancholy mingled with blood, causeth heavi∣nesse, and much choler causeth anger: which two humors as they be mingled with blood, are drawn our by blood etting. Thirdly, it keepeth Lovers from furious raving for i re∣moveth the blood, from the head: and avoideth is by other exte∣terior parts. Furthermore, there be five cause of blood-letting. The first is, that the aboundance, whether it be in quality or quantity, or both, should be voided. For as Avicen sayth; Two manner of folks must be let blood. One are such as be disposed to be sick, that have aboundance of bloud in quantity. The other are they that are sick already, through the malice of humours or blood. But there is a difference in these bloud-lettings For bloud-letting for the aboundance of bloud, ought to be much; but when it is done to avoid ill bloud, it must be moderate, as Galen saith, And therefore they do very ill, that let themselves blood till they perceive the good blood issue: for (peradventure all their blood shall run out, ere they see any good bloud appear. Therefore they should void a little at once: and after the mind of Galen in this case Before they let one bloud, they should give him good meats to engerder good blood, to fulfill the place of the ill blood, that is avoided, and after (within a little space) to let bloud a little, and a little. This is called direct letting of bloud, for it is done to avoid aboundance of bloud, and of such humors as should be avoided. The first indirect cause, is the greatnesse of the disease, and greatnesse of the apparent vehement inflamation; for as Ga∣len saith. There is no better Medicine for an Impostume of vehement inflamation, Fevers, and a great ach, then bloud-letting. The second indirect cause is, that the matter which is to bee avoided, be drawne unto the place from whence it
must be avoided. And therefore in retention of the menstru∣ous flix & Emetauds: The great vein in the feet called Saphena, must be opened, as Galen sayth, to draw down the matter of the bloud. The third indirect cause, is to draw the humours to the place, contrary to the place that they flow to, to divert them af∣ter from the place. Therefore, for too much aboundance of menstruosity, the vein Basilica must bee let blood, to turns the matter to the contrary part, and so to void it from the proper course. And therefore, he that hath a Pluresie on his left side, must be let bloud on the right side, to divert and draw the matter to the place, contrary to that place, that it enclineth so. And likewise if it be on the right side, to let blood on the left. The fourth indirect cause is, that by letting of blood, one portion of the matter may be avoided, that nature may be strong upon the residue, and so letting of blood is wholesome when the body is full least impostumes grow: for the regi∣ment of nature is feeble, in regard of these humours. Where∣fore when a portion of matter is voided, nature governeth the matter so, that it should not flow to some weak place, and breed an Impostume. Fac plagam largam mediocriter, vt cito fumus. Excat vberius, liberius{que} cruor. The Orifice (or as some say) incision, When as for bleeding you do make provision, Ought to be large, the better to convay Grosse bloud, and sumes which issue forth that way. Grosse humors and grosse bloud must needs have vent, In cold or hottest times by good consent, Here the Author saith that the gash or Orifice, made in letting of bloud, ought to be of a mean largenesse, that the grosse blood may easily issue out: for when the gash is straight
the pure blood only goeth out, and the gross abideth stil in. And note that sometime the gash must be great, and sometime smal The gash must be great for thrée causes. First, because the humors be gross, and gross blood must be voided, as in them that be melancholly. Secondly, in winter the gash must be great, for cold engros∣seth the humors. Thirdly, for the aboundance of humors, for they avoid bet∣ter by a great gash then by a smal. But the gash must be smal when the person is of weak strength, that the spirits and na∣turall heat avoid not too much: and likewise in a hot season, and when the blood is pute. Sanguine subtracto sex hris est vigilandum, Ne somni fumus laedat sensibile corpus. Ne nervum laedat, non sit tibi plaga profunda. Sanguine purgatus non carpas protinus escas. When bloud is come away, ye must be sure, Six hours after watchfull to endure: Least sleep raise fumes, or turning on that arm, Impostumes breed, by doing it least harm. The nerves, and sinews, Arteries also, Offend not, if in health you mean to go. The blood thus purg',d you instantly may eat: So that the humors be in quiet set. Three things must be considered when one is let blood. First, that bee sleeps not in sixe houres after; least the fume (engendred by sléept) ascend to the head, and hurt the brain. Furthermore, least in his sleep he turns him on the arme that in let bloud, and thereby hurt him, and least the humors (by sleep) flow to the painfull member, by reason of the in∣cision, and so breed an impostume. For Galen sayth, Im∣postumes
breed in the body, or in a member that is hurt: the humors will flow thereunto. But Avicen assigneth another cause; That by such sleep may chance confraction of the members, The cause may be as Galen saith. That sleep is unwholesome in the Ague-fit:Gal. 2 aph. super illo. In quo. & c. because naturall heat goeth inward and the outward parts wax cold and the fumes remain unconsumed, whereby the rigor is augmented and the Fever-fit prolonged. Also by moving of the humors in letting of blood, fumes are aised up to the sinews and brawns of the arms: which remai∣ning vnconsumed, wax cold in sleep, and ingresse in the viter parts. And therefore, it one sleep immediately after letting of blood, they cause confraction of the sinews and brawns of the arms. And he saith further, That one in letting of blood, must beware that he make not the gash too deep, least he hurt a sinew.Gal. coniu aph. que re∣guntur. or an arterie-string under the vein: for hurting of a sinew causeth a mortal cramp, or loss of a member, as an arm, or a finger, and hurt of an artery-string, causeth bleeding uncurable. And one ought also not to eat immediately after he is let bloud, but he must tarry til the humors in him be at quiet, least the meat before it be digested, be drawn together with the blood to succor the hurt member. Omnia de lacte vitabis rite minute. Et vitet potum flebothomatus homo. Prigida vitabit quia sunt inimica minutis. Interdictus erit minutis unbilus acr, Spiritus enultat minutis luce per auras. Omnibus apta quies est, motui valde nosivus. Shun milk and white meats, when we are let blood, Because (at such times) they are never good. And drinking then perforce we should refrain, With undigested drink ne're fill a vein. Cold and cold  with all cold things beside,
Are then our enemies by proof well tryed. Cloudy and troubled Ayrs are likewise ill. With melancholy bloud the veyns they fill, Too stirring motion, or excessive labour, Avoid, and with soft ease the body favour. Here the Author saith, sive things must be eschewed of him that is let bloud. The first is milk and white meats: for by stirring of hu∣mors (caused by letting of bloud) oft times some humors slow∣eth to the stomack: therefore if he should eat milk by mingling with the humors it would corrupt in the stomack sith of it self it is very coruptible. And also by reason that it is sweet, the milk may be drawn to the veyns undigested: and through stirring of humors lightly corrupt. Secondly he must beware of much brinking, for by reason that the dryns be empty, the drink vndigested is lightly drawn to them as is before said. Thirdly be must eschew all cold things, as well outward, as inward, as meats, very cold, ayr cold hathing, thin clothing, resting on stones, colonesse of the head and séet: for by reason that the naturall beat is feebled by setting of bloud, the body will soon be too cold. Fourthly, he that is let bloud, shouls not walk in dark cloudy or troublous ayr: for that maketh him heavy and vn∣insty, as is before said at, Aer sit mandus. &c. And heavinesse is cause of melancholy bload. Therefore he must walk in a faire clear ayr: for that recreateth the naturall and lively spirits. Fiftly, he must esch, excessive labour, and vse moderate rest: for excessive stitting about (then specially) weaketh and moveth humors, but temperate rest swageth motion.
Principio minuas in acutis & peracutis. Aetatis mediae multum de sanguine tolle, Sed puer atque senex, tollet vterque parum, Ver tollit duplum, reliquum tempus nisi simplum. In the beginning of a sharp disease, Then letting bloud is good, if you so please. The middle age doth favour bleeding best, Children and aged folks may let it rest, Or take but little from them. In the Spring, A double loss of bloud, no hurtfull thing, At other times, to take but indifferently, And still let good advice keep company. Here he speaketh of four things. First, the letting of bleod should be done in the beginning of sharp diseases, which are ended the fourth day. For such be short, and make no delay: therefore they must be remedied at the beginning. The second is, that from 30 year to 45 or 50. one should be let bloud most, for at that age Bloud encreaseth most of all: nor the diminishing thereof letteth not the growing, nor the bodily strength is not lessened therevy, because the Bo∣dy in that age groweth not, but seemeth to stand still at one state. The third is, that old folke and children should be let bloud but little: for young children need most bleed to nourish and encrease them and aged folks strength decayeth from them. Fourthly, in Spring-time double quantity of Blood should be boyded, in regard of other seasons: for that time specially enereaseth bloud, as all Physitians say. Touching the first saying, a few rules concerning letting of blood would be given. The first is, that at the beginning of the sicknesse, one should not be let bloud: for as Galen saith, That Nature is wor∣ker
of all things, and the Physician is Minister. But he saith, That no vacuation at the bening of sickness,Gal. 3. reg. Idem 3 Ape. in consu agritu dini. Ga, in pho. Inchoanti∣bus morbi. is naturall: for as Nature in the beginning of sickness avoideth nothing, likewise no more should the Physitian. Yet three things withstand this Rule. The first is, furlo fity or sterceness of the matter. For Avi∣cen saith, That when the sickness beginneth, one should not be let bloud, because letting of bloud shrreth the humours, and maketh them subtile, and to run throughout all the body, except the matter be furious. The second is aboundance of the matter: for Galen saith, That it is then behovefull to be let bloud: or take a Medicine laxa∣tive, to alleviate Nature loaded with aboundance of matter. The third is, greatnesse and sharpness of the sickness, as when there is a great and an achfull imposiume, though the matter be little. For Galen saith, If the Impostume be great, ye must be let bloud at the beginning, though there be but little matter, least it break, or open before it be ripe: therefore to eschew many inconveniences, bloud-letting must be done. The second rule is, that bloud-letting may not be done on the day of motion of the sicknes,erists is a sudden indica∣tion either to hea'th or deaths mutati∣on. as in Crisis, nor no other vacu∣ation, nor diverting of matter from the place that nature sen∣deth it to &c. Nor likewise in the Ague fit. For Galen saith, That when the sickness is in his estate, neither bloud-letting, nor laxative should be done. For then the matter ripeth, which ripeth better by quietnesse then by stirring. The third rule is, that bloud-letting should not be done in be∣ginning of the sicknes, when Crisis is removed. For Isaac saith, in his Book of Vrines. That though the Heart be the Engenderer of the bloud and spirits, yet the bloud is foundation of Natural heat, and sustaineth it, for the heat is naturally thereof engendred. And therefore, be that voydeth Bloud, voideth heat, which should digest the matter of the sickness,
and so consequently the sicknesse is prolonged; and strength weakned. And therefore it is to be feared, least through the lengthning of the sickness, and weakning of the strength, nature would sail. The fourth rule is that the body (having dregs of filth in the guts) should not be let blood. The cause is, there be thre things that draw to them heat emptines, and all things sharp: so when as the veins be emptied by Letting of blood, they draw to them from the next member, as the guts and stomack, whereby the belly is judurated, and the matter in the Veins is more infected the Meseraike drawsth the humidities of the or∣dures and the ordures are dried the more, therefore you must first mollifie the belly with Clisters or Suppositorie, except it war laxative alone. The fift rule is, that letting of blood should not be much vsed; for by oft vsing thereof, one drawing on in age, falleth into divers diseases, as Epilepsie, Apoplexie, and Palsey, for by re∣moving of the blood and heat, many phlgematick super flutties are engendred that cause these diseases. The sixt rule is, that a woman menstruate, or with child, should not be let blood. A Woman with Child should not: for thereby the heat, that digesteth meat, is diminished, and the food of that she goeth with is taken away specially when if that she goeth with waxeth great: for then it needeth more food. Thus saith Hypocrates: When the menstruosity keepeth due course, and avoidoth naturally enough, letting of blood should not be done: but when it avoydeth too much, then (to divert the matter) it must be done, for nature would not be let of her operati∣on. The seventh rule is that after the Chollicke passion, one should not be let blood, for by reason that Letting of blood stirreth vp the humors: a Cholerick humor may flowe to the stomack, and enflame it: Nor after vomiting, least hu∣mors likewise flow to the stomack: Nor after the Flixe, nor after great watching: nor after much travell: nor after any thing that greatly hurteth or dissolveth: for in these two a∣ses,
letting of blood should greatly move the humors, and en∣féeble the strength. Now it is to be considered, who are meet to be let bloud: and therefore we shall declare a few rules. The first rule is, that letting of blood is very expedient for delicate idle, and corste folks, and that vse meats engendring much blood. The second rule is, it is wholesome for those that have a∣boundance of bloud, which aboundance is known by the thick∣nesse of the brine: for aboundance of bloud maketh it thick, and aboundance of Choler maketh it thin. The third is they should be let bloud, in whom melan∣choly aboundeth: For when much naturall Melancholy run∣neth with the bloud throughout all the body not puristing the ill bloud: then letting of blood is wholesome. There be two kinds of melancholymatural, and vunafural, Naturall is the dregs of bloud which when it aboundeth, it runneth with blood, and in letting of bloud is votded there∣with. For, of the same temperate beat, blood and melancholy, the dregs thereof is engendred. The fourth rule is, that when boyling conturbation, and calefactions of humors is feared, it is wholesome to let blood: and those persons, as soon as they feel themselves inflamed, should be let blood, to avoid the foresaid motions, caused by the great aboundance of humors. Yet otherwhiles some e deceived by this rule, for forth∣with when they feel calefaction, and fear boyling of humors, they let them blood. And when this commeth of beat calefacti∣on and incision, the calefaction or boyling ceaseth not by Blood. letting, but it is rather augmented: for bloud-letting mo∣veth the humors, and maketh them run thorough the body. Therefore letting of Blood is not wholesome, except it be for aboundance of humors, which is known by much sweat, espe∣cially in the morning, for there be some that sweat not except they need evacuation. The fift this is, they that be mighty and strong should be
let bloud and not they that be cold and dry. For Rasis saith: That those bodies are apt to be let bloud, which have great apparent veins that be hiry and coloured between brown and red, and folks not too young, nor too old, for children and vnweldy aged persons should not be letblod except necessity require ie. Many of the said rules be gathered out i Avicen. Aestas, Ver, dextras, Autumnus, Hyems{que} sinistras, Quatuo haec membra, cephe cor pes epar vacuatur. Ver Cor, Epar Aestas, ordo sequens reliqua. Spring-time and Summer, if we intend to bleed, Veins on the right side do require as need. Autumn and Winter, they the left side crave, In arm, or soot, as they best like to have. The Head, Heart, Foot, and Liver, all these four, Emptying require themselves best to restore. The Heart calls for the Spring, Summer the Liver, Order vnto the rest is a due giver. Here the Author reciting certain things, concerning the members that be let bloud, saith: That in War and Summer, the veyns of the right hand, arm, or foot should be let bloud: But in winter and Au∣tumn, the veyns of the left hand, arm or foot must be dimini∣shed. The cause hereof may be, for that Her encreaseth Blood, and Summer Choler, therfore in Uer and Summer vs should diminish those veins in which bloud & Choler abound, which be on the right side of the body, near to the member that en∣gendreth good bloud (that is the Liver) and the receptacle of choler, the Gall. Autumne engendreth Melancholy, which is gathe∣red together, and not resolved by Winter: therefore in War and Winter, these two Ueyns should be let-bloud, in
which melancholy hath dominion, which be the left side voins, for the spleneis on the left side of the body, which is the recep∣tacle of Melancholy. Secondly, be saith, the Head, the Heart, the Foot and the Liver (according to the four Seasons of the year) must be em∣pled: the Heart in Uer, the Liver in Summer, the Head in Win∣ter, and the Foot in Autumn. Dat saluatella tibi plurima dona minuta, Purgat Epar splenem, pectus praecordia, vocem, Iunaturalem tollit de corde dolorem. Saluatella, the opering of that Veyn, In any man five benefits doth gain. The Liver it doth purge from all offence, And from the Splene commands annoyance thence. Preserves the stomacks mouth, and clears the Brest, And keeps the voyce from being by harms opprest. Here the Author reciteth five commodityes that come by letting of blood of the vein Saluatella. It is the vein on the back of the hand, between the midle singer, and the King-sin∣ger, it purgeth the lyder, it cleanseth the Splene, it mundifieth the brett, is prserveth the stomacks mouth from hurt, it doth away the hurt of the voice. The reason of all these commodi∣tyes is because the foresaid vein avoideth blood from all these places, as after it shall appeat. For a more ample declaration, you are to understand, that in letting of blood, other whiles the veynes be opened, and sometime the Artryes. The opening of the Artery is dange∣rous, the cause here of is, the overmuch bleeding which is cau∣sed two wapes. One is through fervent heat of the Artery blood, for a hot thing is soon moveable, and dilateth and openeth the Artery, and therefore t helph much to void the blood, in letting blood the Artery.
The second cause, is mobility of the Artery, and therefore the wound or gash in it is slowly healed. Yet this letting of blood is wholesome thrée mannet of ways. First, when there is aboundauce of subtile blood in the body. Secondly, when the blood is vaporous. Thirdly, when it is hot. For subtile blood of which natural blood and spirits be engendred, rest each in the artery: but gross blood that nourisheth the members, resteth in the veins. Like wise the vaporous blood is contained in the artery, and sanguine blood in the veyn. Also the hottest blood, the which is of the heart (the hottest member) engendred and digested, is contained in the Artery, and the other Blood in the Veyns. Secondly note, that the veyns are opened in many members, sometime in the arm or in the hand great or small, sometime in the foot, sometime in the nose, sometime in the fore-head, sometime in the lips sometime vnder the tongue, or in the roof of the mouth, sometime in the corner of the Eyes toward the fore-head. From the Arm-pit to the Elbow, are five veyns to be opened as Rasis and Avicen sayth. The first is called Cephalica, which is the Head-veyn. The second is Basilica, which is the Liver-veyn. The third is called Mediana, or Cardiaca, or Nigra, after Avicen, or Matrix, after Rasis. The fourth is called Assillaris. The fift is called Funis brachij. In the left hand is Saluatella. so that in the arm, in that it contayneth the more and the lesse hand, are six veyns to be o∣pened, Cephalica emptieth the parts abont the neck, and there∣fore to open that veyn, it is good for the diseases of the head as the Megrim, and other hot griefs, caused of hot matter. This veyn beginneth at the shoulder, and goeth forth soward the left side of the arm. Basilica emptieth the parts vnder the neck, as from the Bre and Liver: and therefore the letting blood of this veyn
is wholesome for diseases of the Brest and Liver, and right good in a Plurisle This veyn beginneth at the arm-hole, and goeth along to the bowing of the arm. Mediana is betwéen these two said veins, and is compact of them beth for it is the branch of each. And it is also Median in vacuation: for it voydeth from all about, vnder, from and a∣bout the neck. Wherefore it is the vniversall veyn to all the body in voyding: but not vniuersall (as some say) because it beginneth at the heart, but because it is the branch of Cephali∣ca, and Basilica. Therefore when you will let Cephalica bloud, and it appeareth not ye should rather take Mediana, then Basi∣lica. And likewise when ye will let Basilica bloud, and it ap∣peareth not ye should rather minish Mediana, then Cephalica. For it agreeth better to both, then one of them with the other. Saluatella is the veyn between the middle finger and the ring-finger, more declining to the middle finger. It beginneth of Basilica. This veyn is opened in the right hand, for opilation of the Liver, and in the left hand for opilation of the Splene. There is no reason why it should be so, as Avicen saith, but only Experience, which Galen sound by a Dream (as he saith.) He had one in cure, whose Liver and Splene were stopt, and he dreamed that he did let him bloud of this veyn, and so he did, and cu∣red the Patient. When this veyn is let bloud, the hand must be put in warm water to engrosse and dilate it, because it is suvtile; and that the gash should not close too soon, and to make the gross bloud thin. Assillaris is vnder Basilica, and appeareth in binding the arm: and the like judgment is of it as of Basilica. Punis brachi, is over Cephalica, or else the bindermost bone: and is of one judgment with Cephalica. Therefore, as Avicen and Galen say: Though in opening of veyns be universall vacuation of all the body yet not from all the veyns equally, nor like jeopardy is not in all. For Rasis saith, That Cophalica is the surer, and Basilica, more to be seared,
and Cardiaca, is to be feard, but not so much as Basilica. Cephalica, is surest, for there is neither sinew nor Artery above nor under it, but vnder Cardiaca, there is a sinew, and vyper above it is a subtil sinew: therefore it is to fear, least it should be cut. Basilica is very jeopardous: for vnder it is an Artery, and near it a sinew and a muscle. Saluatella is not jeopardous, and therefore the better to open it, it would be put in warme water. In the feet he three veins, Scyatica, Saphena, and the Ham-veyn These veynes be opened, to draw the bloud to the lawer paris as in provoking menstruosity, and the Hamme veyn is better then Saphena, or Scyatica; because it is nea∣rer the matrice. Saphena draweth blood from the yard, cordes and matrice, and Scyatica from the ancles, reynes, and other members towards mans left side. Saphena from the Matrice, and members there about, they be branches of one veyn. In the midst of the forehead, is a veyn, which is opened for old diseases of the face, as Morphew, dry scutse, and Scab, and for diseases of the eyes, but first Cephalica must be mini∣shed. There is likewise a veyn in the nose, & when any of them is opened the neck must be bound, & one opened after another: and by binding of the neck they will better appear. There be veyns in the lips, which be opened for impostums in the month or gns, but Cephalica is first minished. To open the four veins in the rooffe of the mouth is whol∣som against the rheums that flow to the téeth and cause them to ak. These veins appear plainly and must be opened when the matter is digested. There be veins in the corners of the eyes towards the fore∣head, and they be opened for diseases of ths eyes: but first, Cephalica must be minished. The veins in the Temples, be let blood for the Megrim, and for great and long Head-ache. And those bee she veyns that Hypocrates, and Galen call Iuveniles, the incision of these veynes maketh a man vnapt to get Children.
Also in the neck be veins called Guides which must be ope∣ned in the beginning of epry, and specially for stopping of the wind-pipes, and in the Squinancie, which letteth one to draw his breath. Si dolor est capitis ex potu, limpha bibatur, Epotu nimio nam Febris acuta creatur. Si vertex capit is vel frons aestu tribulentur, Tempora froms{que} simul moderate saepe fricentur. Mirtella cocta nec non calida{que} laventuo. If head-ach come by drinking too much wine, Or any other drink that may resign, The bodies danger to an Ague fit, Ingrossing fumes that much perplex the wit, To drink cold water let him not refrain, Because it hinders all that hurts the brain. Crown of the head, or fore-head being vext, And with extremity of heat perplext: Chafe then the temples with mild moderation. And wash them with warm water in good fashion. But seething Motherwort therein is best, Because it gently cools, and causes rest. Here the Author noting two things, saith. That if the head-ach come by too much drinking,Head-ach cau∣sed by drin∣king and re∣medy there∣fore. and spe∣cially of wine, or of any other drink, that maketh folke drun∣ken, one must drink cold water upon it, the which with the cold∣nesse thereof, ingrosseth the fumes that are lifted up, & letteth them to hurt the brain. The second thing is, that if the top of the head or forehead be grieved with too much hear, then the Temples should be moderately chafed, and after washed with warm water, in the which Mother-wort is sod, for Mother-wort is cold, and ooleth,
Temporis Aestivi jixnia copora siceant. Quolibet in mense confert vomitus que{que} purgat Humores nocnos, stomach lavat ambitus omnes, Ver Autumnus, Hyems, Aestas dominatur in anno. Tempore vernali, calidus sit aer humidus{que}: Et nullum tempus meltits sit slebethomi, Vsus tunc homim veneris confrt moderatus, Corporis & motus, ventris{que} sni sudor, Balnea, purgentur turc corpora cum Medicinis, AEstas morocalet, siccat, nascatur in illa, Tunc quoquam praecipue coleram rubeam dominari. Humida frigisla, fercula dentur, sit Venus extra. Balnea non prosunt, sit rra Flchothomia. Veilis est requies, sit cum modoramine potus. In summer season, fasting is not good, Because it dries the body and the bloud, To vomit once a month wholsom some hold. For hurtfull humors thereby are controld, And voided quite away. The stomack clear, Beware what next annoyance commech there. Spring, Autumn, Winter, Summer rule the year, And all their severall hours in them appear. The Vernall season is both moyst and hot. And for bloud-letting no time better got. Let men with Venus meddle moderately, For then they best any spare such company. Then temperate motion lask, nor sweat offends, To purge by bathing Phisick then commends. Summer is hot and dry, red Choler then Encreaseth, and dries all thats moist in men. Meates moist and cool, do best become that season, And wantoning with women shews small reason. Bath not at all, and seldome open a vein, Vse little motion labouring much refrain, And drink but little, least it prove to pain.
Here the Author noting divers things saith: That much falling in Summer dryeth the body, for in that that Summer is of nature hot and dry, it resolveth the hu∣mors: the which also be resolved by oft sweating in Summer, and so falling thereupon dryeth the body much more, for when the humidity of meates is gone, the heat of the body wor∣keth upon his own humidities, and dryeth them clean away. Wherefore Hypocrates saith: Hunger is expedient for those that be very moyst, for hunger dryeth the body. The second thing is that vomiting once a moneth is whole∣some, for thereby hurtfull humors, that be contained in all the circuit of the stomack are voyded. To this agreeth Avicen, saying. Hypocrates biddeth one to vomit every month twice, two days one after another that the second day may avoid it, that which the first could not; this conserveth health and scoureth the stomack from flegm and choler. The stomack hath nothing to purge it like as the guts have red choler. Avicen putteth other prests of vo∣miting that it is well done. First, it is good for head-ach, caused of moyst vapurous matters that ascend from the stomack to the head, but if head-ach come of his own hurt of the brain, then vomiting doth ra∣ther hurt then proffe. Secondly, it cleareth the sight, darkned with vaporous matter of the stomack or else not. The third is, it doth away wambling of the stomack, in that it avoideth the hum is that cause it. The fourth is, it comforteth the stomack, into which choler is descended, the which corrupteth the meat. The fift is, it doth away loathing or abborting of meat. The sixt is, it doth away the cause that maketh one have a st to sharp, pantike and sower things, the which cause (by these dispositions being removed) putteth or doth away the effects thereof. The seventh is, vomiting is wholesome for the lask that commeth before the Dropsie, for it avoydeth the matter of the
said lask and purgeth the stomack. The eight is, it is wholesome for the grief of the reins and bladder, for it diverieth the matter that sloweth of those parts another way. The ninth is, if vomiting be done by constraint of Elchory, it avoydeth the matter whereof Lepry groweth: it amendeth the first digestion, that the other digestions may the better be done. The tenth is it maketh one to have a good colour. The eleventh is, it purgeth the stomack of a humor that causeth Epilepcy. The twelfth is, by strong constraint it removetth stopping matter, the which causeth Ictericy. And likewise it avoydeth a slegmatick matter, the which commonly is cause of stop∣ping. The thirtéenth is, it avoydeth the matter that causeth As∣ma, a disease that causeth one to draw his breath painfully, and also it comforteth the spirituall members, by whose heat the superfluities that cause Asma, are consumed. The fourtéenth is, it is wholesome against shaking and palste, for it avoydeth the matter that is cause thereof. The fifteenth is, it is whelesome for one that hath great black sores on his lower parts: for it turneth the humours from thence. Now although vomiting duly and well done, because of these commodities, yet when it is vuduly done: It induceth many hurts, for it feebleth the stomack, and maketh it apt for mat∣ters to slow into: it hurteth the brest, the sight, the teeth, causeth head-ach, as Avicen saith. The third thing that is noted in the text is, that there bée foate Seasons of the yeare, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. Spring time in respect of the other Seasons is vote and moyst, though it be temperate in it selfe, as Galen saith in his book of Complexions, wherefore it followeth, that this Season is more apt to let bloud, then the other: for it doth more enerease humours. And therefore in this Season, mode∣rate
vse of carnall copulation, temperate motion lask stire, and sweat is convenient. and likewise temperate bathing to diminish repletion. This Season is good to take purgations in. The fourth is, Summer heateth and dryeth: and there∣fore it encreaseth red Choler hot and dry. And for this cause, is Summer we must seed on cold and moyst meats, to dimi∣nish the ferventnesse of the heat and drought. and then too ought to abstain from carnall copulation, the which also, dry∣eth and from oft hayning, and be let blaud seldome, nor like cause. We must vse quietuesse, and littie motion, for quiet∣nesse doth moyst, and much motion dryeth. In this season especially we must vse moderally to drink cold brink: for superfluous drinking of cold drink (by rea∣son that the pores be open) doth make the body suddenly to take cold, or causeth the Palsle, or laraty of the members, or else sudden death. From the which. He defend Vs, that liveth and raigneth eternally, A MEN. FINIS.
THE TABLE. A A Light supper, pa. 2.13. Ale not well sod. pa 60. Ale moderately drunk. pa. cadem. Anger. pa. 12. Anger for certain folks is neces∣sary. pa. cadem. Avoid water as often as needeth. pa. 13, Apples, pa. 21. A strong brain. p. 45. Ayr is necessary two wayes. p. 51. Ayr temperate and sweet. p. cad. 52.159. Amity between a Pike and a Perch. p. 83. Asses milk. p. 93. Amarillis a Bird. p. 81. Auripigmentum. p. 158. Anise-seed, with the vtilities thereof. p. 115. Aboundance of blood is known by the thicknesse of the Urin. p. 76. Artery bloud. p, 181. Assellaris the vein, p. 164, B Bacon. p. 72. Bayning. p. 182. Basilica the vein. p. 199. Best hog-flesh. p. 26. Begin thy dinner and thy supper with Ale. p. . Begin thy meal with moist meat. p. 99. Bean. p. 91. Beware of fruits in Autumn. p. 63. Birds that she most swiftly are most praised. p. 82. Bestiall fish. p. 85. Be not too neer in observing cu∣stem. p. 123. Bloud the treasure of Nature. p. 179. Bloud provoketh to larghing. p. eadom Bloud-letting. p. 181. Black rice, p, 91. Black wine. p. 39. Bodies wax more stronger by night then by day. p. 14. Brawn, p. 39. Brain of hens, chickens, hogs, sheep, hares, and conies. p, 113.
Brains. p. 36. Braines well digested, and for whom they be wholesom. p. eadem. Brains are medicinable, and for whom. p. 156. Branchus. p. 8. Brimstone, p. 134. Broth of Coleworts. p. 127. Bread. p. 35. Bread made with pure flower and some bran. p. 71. Riting fume, p. 35. Butter milk. p. 35.95. Butter. p. 94. Bulls hom. p. 144. Bloud letting, restraineth vomi∣ting and the lask. p. 180. Bloud-letting may augment the lask two ways. p. ead. Bloud letting cooleth and aug∣menteth coldnes. p. ead. Bloud-letting is good for fevers and great aches. p. ead. Bodies that are apt to bee let bloud. p. 168. C Care of mind. p. 4. Catarri. p. 9. Camels milk. p. 93. Castorum. p. 131. Canker, p. 140 Causes of hear senes. p. 155. Carnall copulation. p. 149.183.151. Celendine. p. 146. Cephalica the vein. p. 199. Certain commandements to ob. serve health. p. 15. Chawing, and swallowing of meat. p. 19 Choise of milk, p. 23.93. Choise of good flesh standeth in three things. p. 25 Choise of egs. p. 29 Choise of wheat. p. 35 Choise of brains. p. 39. Choise of wholsome ayr. p. 51 Choise of fowles flesh. p. 78 Charvill and his three operations p, 140. Cheese. p. 88 Cheese engendreth grosse hu∣mors. p. 96. Cheese with bread doth digest. p. ead. Change of dyet. p. 123. Cheries with their commodities. p. 103 Cheristous. p. ead. Cheries are of two sorts. p. ead. Children should drink no wine. p, 58.162 Children and old folkes should be let bloud but little. p. 179. Claret wine, p. 33 Clisters, p. 195
Cockstones. p. 39.33. Constrain not the Fundament. p. 3 Close ayr. p. 52 Combing the head in the mor∣ning. p. 5. Coriza a Rheum. p. 8. Collick and the inconveniences thereof. p. 12.195. Condition of good fish. p. 85 Coleworts. p. 127. Cold of the head. p. 130. Clean, and a corrupt stomack. p. 18 Cow flesh. p. 22.25 Cow milk. p. 94. Cramp, and the diversity of cramps. p. 11. Crevices. p. 87. Crysis. p. 194. Crusts must be eaten after din∣ner., p. 71, Custom is another nature. p. 122 Customes ought to be kept. p. ead. Customs in eating and drinking. p. ead. D Dayes forbidden to let blood, p. 181 Darnell. p. 95. Damask-prunes. p. 13. Delicate meats and drink. p. 34. Delicious meats. p. 34 Decoction of Peaches. p. 20. Decoction of rape seed. p. 136 Definition, whether a man should eat more at dinner then at supper. p. 13. Dissenteria. p. 66. Divers fauces, for divers meats. p. 6.67. Digestion by day is but feeble. p. 8 Diseases engendred of the after∣noons sleep. p. 8 Dressing of brains. p. 39 Dyet, and the diversity of dyets. p. 122. 123. 124. Dry figs, p. 38. Dry. grapes. p, ead. Dry Nuts, and hurts that they engender. p. 46 Drink so that once in a month thou mayst vomit. p. 53 Drink a little at once. p. 89, Drink little and oft at meat. p. 98 Drink not between your meales. p. ead Drink after a new layd Egg. p, 100 Drink wine after pears. p. 20. Drunkennes is cause of sixe in∣conveniences. p. 73 Drunkards are infected with the palsey. p. ead.
Dropsie and three spices thereof, p 45 Dulce and sweet things engen∣der choler. p 42. E Eat and drink soberly. p 2 Eate not till thou have a lust. p 18 Eat not much of sundry meats. ead. Eat little Cheese, p 23 Eat no great quantity of meat in Ver. p 61 Eat little in summer and much in winter. p 67, 18 Eat no crusts, p 64 Eating of fih good and bad. p 85 Eat nuts after fish. p 102 Eating of Eles. p 87 Egs roasted. p 29 Egs are roasted two wayes. ead. Egs sod in water two wayes. p 30 Egs rere roasted engender bloud p 59 Eyes and 21 things hurtfull un∣to them. p 151 English men do first eat, or ever they drink, p 99 Ennula campana and the effects thereof. p 144 Excessive eating and drinking. p 2 Exceeding sweet wine is not to be chosen. p 73 Emptinesse, p 61. 195 F Fat corsie flks. p 2 Fatness is a token of a cold com∣plexion. p 168 Easting in Summer. p 179 Fesants p 80 Fenell-seed and the properties thereof. p 114 Fenel sharpneth the sight of Ser∣pents. p 115 Fevers. p 7 Figs and the choise of them. p 38 Figs with nuts and almonds. p. ead Figs must be aten fasting. p ead. Fistula and remedy for it, p 158 Filth of the teeth. p 5 Fish is lighter of digestion then flesh. p 84 Fish taken in the North Sea. p 8. Fish should not be eaten after travell. p 87 Fish corned with salt. ead. Five conditions of day sleep. p 11 Five things by which good wine is proved. p 40 Five bounties of wine mode∣rately daunk. p 67
Five things to know good ale. p. 59, Five properties of good bread. p. 70 Five inconveniences that breed of drinking of new wine. p. 73 Five things that ought to be done about bloud-letting. p. 178 Five causes of bloud-letting. p. 180. Five things that must be chew∣ed of him that is let blood. p. ead. Five commodities that come by letting of blood of the vein Sa∣tuatella. p, 161. Fleshes that endender the Fever Quartain. p. 22. Fleshes that should be sod and rosted. p. 26 Fleshes of fouls is more whole∣som then of four legged beasts. p 79, Flegm of two kinds. p. 160. Fresh water fish. p, 85, Fish is lighter of digestion then flesh. p, ead. Flower of wheat. p. 35. Fryed egs. p, 30. Four properties of Cheese. p. 96. Four things that mo Iliie. p. 121. Fruits should be eschewed, p. 19 Fruits hurt them that have an Ague. p. ead. Funis Brachij. p. 199, G Garäck: p. 46.47, 48. Gash made in blood-letting. p. 199. Gall the receptacle of Choler. p. 172 Good wine is proved five man∣ner of ways. p 40, 41. Good wine sharpneth the wit. p. ead. Good medicines for the Palsie. p. 144. Goats milk p 23.24. Goats flesh. p. 25. Grey goose, p. 80 Gross flesh is best for labourers p. 26, Grosse nourishment is best in Winter, p. 64 Gross meats. p. eod. Green cheese, p. 32, 86 Grapes. p. 35 Gurnard. p. 64 Gowte. p. 9.138 H Heart of Beasts. p. 113 Heart is the engenderer of bloud. p. 178 Harts flesh. p. 25 Hare flesh. p. eod. Hard Eggs. p. 29 Head ach. p. 8, 164 Headach called Vertigo. p. 12
Hen. p. 78 Heat is cause of augmentation. p. 144 Herbs wholsom put in drink. p. 64 Herbs whose water is wholsom for the sight. p. 154 Herbs sod in vinegar. p, 67 Hearing. p. 76 Holding of wind. p. 11 Hogs fed with pears. p. 11 Hogs flesh. p, 25 Hot bread. p. 70 How Grapes should be eaten. p. 38 How to be let blood for a Plu∣resie. p. 178 Hony. p. 39 Hill wort. p. 142 Hunger. p. 168 Hunger is after two sorrs. p. 17 Hunger long endured. ead Horse-dung. p. 128 Hogs stones. p. 39. Hurts of red wine. p. 64 Hurts that come by drinking of water. p. 74 Hurts of Salt meats. p. 117 Hurts of Coleworts. p. 127 Hurts of vomiting. p. 140 I Iuyce of Peaches. p. 19 Iuyce of new gathered fruit. p. 21 Iuyce of coleworts, p. 128 Iuyce of Water-cresses. p. 143 Inaca. p, 12 Incision of the veins. p. 167 Ioyfull life. p. 3 K Kernels, p. 106 Kernel of cherystones p. 103 Kid flesh. p. 25 Know ledge of the best flesh of four footed beasts. p. ead. L Lampreys and dressing of them. p. 88 Lavender. p 132 Lask. p. 63 Laxative meats. p▪ead. Leeks raw and sodden. p. 7 Light supper. p. 2 Lights. p. 113 Lights of a tup. p. 114 Let not bloud in long sicknesse. p. 193 Letting of bloud is wholesome in the beginning of the Dropsie. p. 194 Letting of bloud keepeth Lovers from surious raving, p. 195 Letting of bloud may not be done in the ague fit. p. ead. Letting of blood should not bee much used. p. 196 M Making of water. p, 2 Marow and the choise thereof. p. 37.
Many good things come by drinking of wine toberly. p. 55 Man may live by the smel of hot bread. p 70 Malard. p. 80 Maowes and three properties of them. p. 129 Maw of beasts. p. 113 Meat a little powdered. p, 118 Meat, and why it is taken. p. 13 Meat upon meat is hurtfull. p. 15, 16 Meats that engender melancho∣ly. p. 17 Meat that conserveth health: p. 27 Meats vnwholsome, p. ead Mean and thin milk. p. 32 Mean meats. p. 6 Medlars and their utilities. p. 108 Mediana the veyn. p. 199 Megrym. p. 165.167 Medicine to stanch blood, p. 18 Medicine against the pestilence. p. 73 Medicines to comfort divers members. p. 114 Medicine for the ventosity of air. p. 21 Medicines to kill sleas. p. 133.134 Medicine to restore hayr again. p. 135 Medicine for Warts. p. 135 Medicines for the tooth-ach. p. 143 Medicine for the Fistula, p. 154 Medicine to avoid the tooth, ach. p. 6 Melancholy. p. 173 Milk and for whom it is good and no good. p. 20 Milk must be drunk fasting. p. 21 Milk of it self is very corruptible. p. 124 Mint. p. 129 Milk daily used engendreth the stone. p. 32 Moderate joy. p. 3 Moderate dyer. ead. Moderate eatings encreaseth the body. p. 14 Morning rest. p. 9 Must that is very red causeth the flixe. p. 44 Must lettech the vrin. p. 35 Must engendreth the stone, and preserveth a man from the stone. p. 49 Must and his three properties. p. 53 Mustard-seed, and three pro∣perties thereof. p. 136. Mutton. p. 27. Mushromes. p. 49. N Naturall rest is most meetest for noble men. p. 3. Naturall heat is in many things
fortified in the night. p. 15. Naturall heat is suffocated with aboundance of humors. p. 164. Nature cannot suffer food in im∣mutation. p. ead. Nature is the worker of all things. p. 168. Ne its tongue. p. 113. Nettles and eight properties of them. 138 Night is the very season of per∣fect digestion. p. 6 Noble men are dry and cholle∣rick p. 2. Nourishing meats. p. 15. Nuts. p. 105. Nutmegs. p. 109. Number of bones teeth and veins. p. 19. O Oft angry. p. 159. Oleander. p. 125. Old wine is all fiery. p. 71. Onions. p. 46.47. Oyl of Castory. p. 132. Operations of tallages, p. 146. Opilations engender fevers, page 6 Oxe flesh, p. 24. P Parbreaking healeth great dis∣cases. p. 25. Pensivenesle is expedient for fat men, p. 1. Peaches and when they should be eaten, p. 19. Peaches are hurtful to sick folks, p. 20. Percely, p. 46, Peares, p. 19.101. Peares make folk fat, p. 19. Peares fod with Mushromes, p. 50. Pears without wine are hurtfull. p. 101 Pigeons baked are better then tosted. p. 80. Perch. p. 83. Peasen and how they be whole∣some. p. 91 Pike. p. 64. Partridges. p. 60.61 Pepper white and black, p. 147. pig. p. 26. playster made of Garlick. p. 48. plaister made of an onion. p. 48. plaister made of Walnuts. 49. plaister made of figs. p. 100. plaister made of figs, and Poppy feed. p. 107. Physick maketh a man sure of two things. p. 128. Plurisie. p. 185.186. Pork. p. 25.26. Poched egs. p. 29.30. Pork with wine nourisheth. p. 27. Poppy-seed. p. 115. Powder of Peaches, p. 20. Prolonging of time in eating mo∣derately
p. 17. Properties of melancholy and wine. p. 59. Properties of butter. p. 95. Properties of phlegmatick folk. p. 170, Properties of cholerick men. p. 172. Profits of blood-letting. p. 149, Profit of vomiting, p. 172. Putrified fevers. p. 7. Pulse. p. 61. Primrose. p. 131. Pruncs and their utilities. p. 164. Purslain, p. 132. Q Quails are not to be praised. p. 79. Qualities of all favourinesse. p. 119. Quietnes of mind. p. 3. R Radish roots. p. 46.47. Raw pears. p. 101. Raw Apples. p. 155. Rawnesse of humors is caused two ways. p, 176. Rapes with their utilities. p. 112. Red wine. p. 42, 43. Renish must. p. 74. Remove a little after meat. p. 5. Remedy for the tooth-ach, p. 5, 154. Remedies against venom. p. 46. Remedies against ill drink. p. 67. Remedies for casting on the sea. p. 65. Remedy for Choler. p. 166. Remedies against the Rheum. p. 156. Reums and pose. p. 7. Repletion of the Supper hurteth. p. 14. Resolution of the humors is the chief cause of the appetite. p. 9. Rest of the day and night. p. 9. Rere rosted egs. p. 29.30. Rew. p. 46. Rew and four properties thereof. p. 133. Rochet. p 86. Raisins and currans. p. 105. Rice. p. 91. Rose-flowers. p. 55 Rose-water. p, 154. Ruddock. p. 78. Rules concerning letting of blood p, 178. Rules declaring who be meet to be let bloud, p. 179. S Salt meat. p. 24.118. Sage. p. 64.130. Sances vary after the seasons of
fthe year. p. 66 Salmon. p. 84 Salt. p. 116. Sage wine. p. 131. Sastron, p. 145 Sanguine persons and their pro∣perties. p. 168, 169. Seven doctrines to choose wine. p. 32. Sea-fish. p. 85. Seed of Coleworts. p. 127 Sleep not after meat. p. 2. Sleep is unwholsom in the ague fit. p. 187 Sleep not by day. p. 6 Sharp wines. p. 47. Saluatella, the vein. p. 198 199. Sodain change of custome. p. 114.122 Sodden Eggs. p. 30. Soles. p. 83. Sower miik. p. 84 Stand after meat. p. 5 Stretch thy self after sleep. p. ead Strong things corrupt the body. p. 6 Stones of aged beasts. p. 39 Stones of young beasts. p. ead. Stale bread. p. 70 Starling. p, 79 Sparrows. p. 80 Spoditan, p. 116 Splene the receptacle of melan∣choly. p. 163. Suppings of chickens, p. 81 Subtile and grosse blood. p. 164 Swimming of the head. p. 11 Sweet wines. p. 47.48. Swines evill. p. 106 Swallows dung. p. 144 Swounding. p. 177. T Tart meats. p. 63 Tart cheese. p. 98 Tansey, and why it is eaten after Easter. p. 132 The best hog flesh. p. 26 The yolk and white of an Egg. p. 29 The inconveniences of too much meat. p. 11 The properties of sigs, p. 38 The tokens of good wine. p. 40.41. The wholesomnesse of eager and sharp things. p. 49. The seed and water of radish. p. 50 The best fouls to eat. p. 79 The best time and age of letting of bloud. p. 178 The smell of new bread. p. 71 The broth of a hen and a cock, p. 78 The operations of figs. p. 107 The things that a Physitian should consider in ministring of dyers. p. 126 The four humors. p. 160
The cause why old mens legs are swoln. p. 160 The months of the moon, p. 181. The cause why many swound when they be let blood. p. 184. The profits of vomiting. 168.169. Things hurtfull to the hearing. p. 148.149. Things causing a humming in ones ear. p. 151. Things hurtfull to the eys. p. 151.152. Things after which blood is not to be let. p. 161. Three inconveniences engendred by dulce and sweet foods. p. 42. Three manner of drinkings. p. 89 Three kinds of poppy-seeds. p. 97 Three manner of dyets. p. 224 Three things that draw unto them. p. 195.196. Three indirect causes of letting-bloud. p. 179. Three things are considered when one is let blood. p. ead. Thought and care dryeth up a mans body. p. 1. To walk in a fair ayr. p. 51. To rise early. p. ead. To kill worms. p. 129. Tokens of a holyminded person. p. 173. Tench. p. 84. Tranquillity of mind. p. 3. Treacle. p. 46. Tympany. p. 12. Tongue. p. 113.114. Tripes. p. 73. Trout. p. 84. Two kinds of Rew. p. 49: Two knowledges touching the choise of fish. p. 84 85. Two valities of cheese. p. 97. Two kinds of Sage. p, 131. Two kinds of blood. p. 161 Two kinds of choler. p. 165 Two kinds of melancholy. p. 167 Two tokens to know when the stomack is voyd & empty. p. 18. V W Walk after meat. p. 3. Washing of the eys. p. 4. Washing of the hands. p. 4, 69. Washing of the teeth. p. 5, Warm not thy self too sudden∣ly. p. 6. Walk sofely after meat. p. 6. Water destroyeth the appetite. p. 74 Water should not be used with meat. p. ead. Watrish meat doth not nourish. p. 75. Walnut, p. 100. Water-cresses, and when they should be eaten. p. 143 Water wholesome for the eyes. p. 154. Wethers and hogs of a year old, p. 28. Wesill. p. 53. Veins Meseraiks, p. 3.
Veins, and when they should be let blood. p. 182. Veal. p. 27.72. Vinegar mixt with onions. p. 46. Vinegar and the properties ther∣of. p 109. Vinegar continually used, bree∣deth many inconveniences. p. ead Vnclean stomack hurteeh the sight. p. 112 Vnwholsom egs. p. 30. Violets and three effects of them, p. 137. Vtility of flegm. p. 177 Vomit every month twice. p. 180 What things should be eaten first. p. 18. What loathsome meat doth en∣gender. p. 34. What time a man should dine and sup in summer and win∣ter. p. 126. Wheat of all grain is most whol∣som. p. 38. Wild pork. p. 26. White wine. p. 41 42. Why white wine provoketh to vrin. p. 43. White wine quencheth thirst. p. 43. Why divines love to drink good wine. p. 30.33. Whyting. p. 86. White peason. p. 91 Why Nuts are the last service in Lent. p. 100. Willow. p 144. Whey and the properties there∣of. p. 95. Wine Citrine. p. 31. Wine allayed with water. p. 57. Wine hurteth children many ways. p. 38. Wine for old folks is most whol∣some. p. ead. Wine is a marvellous piercer. p. 76. Wine sops and their commodi∣ty. p. 121. Womans milk. p. 93. Women with child should not be let blood. p. 195. Vomit ere thou eat. p. 63. Wormwood. p. 129. Worms in the teeth. p. 154. Y Yeels. p. 87.88 Yeels are of the nature of wa∣ter. p. 155. Ysop & the effects thereof. p. 139 Here endeth the first Table.
Here follow certain excellent and approved Re∣ceipts, abstracted out of the originals of divers learned Doctors and Physitians both of England and Holland. To make Meath excellent good, to clense he stomack, preserve the Liver, and very good against the Stone. TAke fair Spring water, and put honey to it, so much that when its warm and well strirred to∣gether, it will bear an egge the breadth of a great above the water: let it stand so all night close covered, the next day set it on a clear fire and boyl it, still scumming it as long as any will rise; then put into it thrée handfuls of Egrimony, and two of Dellitory of the wall. Cinamon thrée ounces, Ginger two ounces, and four or five Nutmegs grosly bruised, put the spice into a lit∣tle bag, with a bullet of lead or a stone to make it slick, put it the heaths and spice into the kettle together, and let them seeth about half an hour, then take out the heath when you take off the Meath from the fire, let the bag of spice he put into the barrell with it, but it must stand till it be quits cold before you tun it; this quantity of heaths and spice will serve ten or twelve Gallons of Meath.
An excellent Receipt to make one sleep. Take one ounce of Conserve of Red-rases, and half a dram of Alkermis, and a dram of dius cordium, mingle them toge∣ther, and eat them when you go to bed, as much as a Nutmeg at a time. To stay a flux of bloud. You must still frogs as you do hearbs or flowers, or any thing else, but you must put nothing vnto them but the frogs; take two or thrée spoonfuls of this water in any thing that you will drink. To take out a Burn. Take Lambs bloud if you have it, or Chickins bloud, if you can warm from the Lamb or Chickin, and if not, warm it, and so bath the place burned therewith. For an Ague. Take Dragons, Sallendine, Burredge Buglas, Angelica. Succory, Endife, Sortill Bittony, Pimpernell, Scabius, E∣grimony, white honey, Suckles that grow among the grass, and red boncy Suckles of the same sort, of each of these one handfull; of Cardus Benidict. two handfull, dry'd or green, shred them and brnise them very small; then lay them in steep in a pottle of white wine over night, and still it the next day in a dry Still the first is the best, and the small water is very good though not so strong; then give it to the sick party one hour before the sit doth came six or seven spoonfuls, warming it first and let the Sick go into a warm bed to sweat present∣ly after it. This Medicine is to be vsed thre severall times when the fit is to come. This water is very good also to expell any thing from the heart. To make an Issue. Take Re-flower and Mustard-seed heaten to powder, and with water make a little paste, and lay a ring vpon the place made of a rush and apply it.
For the heat of the back. Take Oyl of Roses six ounces and a half, and put to it I little Wor, and four drops of Vinegar and annoint the back therewith. For the Gowt. Take Ivie that grows an a wall two handfuls, and put is into raw milk, and put thereto Bores grease, and Oatmeal. and boyl it together to a Plaister. For all manner of Swallings. Take Smallage and boyl it in milk with crums of bread and apply it. A speciall Powder for the Memory. Take three ounces of Senae-leavs, Sednarij, Commin, Par∣siey, and Dill-seed, of each an ounce, Ginger tell ounces and a half, Cloves Nutmegs, Galling all, Pimpernill roots, Sage, Rew, Walerian, Annis seeds of each one quarter of an ounce. Sugar three ounces pound all these small, and temper them together, and take thereof morning and evening 31 at one time. For the Redness of the Eyes. Annoint the eyes three nights together with thin Cream, and then annoint them other thres nights with live honey. For heat in the mouth or throat. Take a quart of Spring water, and put it into a Pipkin, and put therto two sticks of liquarish, and some violet leavs, then hayl it to a plate, and strain it, then gargle therwith of∣ten.
For an extream head-ach, and to cause quiet sleep. Take Wormwood, and bruise it finely in a Morter, and boyl it well in water, then put it into a linnen cloth, and ap∣ply it to the head. For a heat in the face. Take Camphere, and lay it in fair water four or five hours then take a piece of Camphere, and some of that water which it lyeth in, and a spoonfull of Capons grease, and stir them well together half an hour, then annoint the face there∣with twenty times a day. A Diet Drink against any desperate Disease that is curable, prescribed by three Dutch Doctors. Take of Harmodactills two ounces, of Salla perilla four ounces, of Sen Alerandrina sour ounces, of Sasafras two ounces, of Liquorice one ounce, of Anni-seeds one ounce, of long Pepper half an ounce, of the leaves of Seabious, a great handfull, of Egrimony half as much, of Bittony half a hand∣full, of Water-cresses and Brock-lime, of each one great handfull, of Sea-scorvey-grass two great handfuls of good Nutmegs one ounce; let all the weeds be slit and cut small and the heaths shred, and put into a hag, and hang it in a harrell with six gallons of new Ale and let if stand and settle eight days: then drink continually of it, and no other Drink while it lasseth, and eat Bakers mead with Corianders seeds, and keep a good Diet; vse this lix weeks. A Posset-drink to cool the Liver. Take milk, and put therein a Succory root well bruised, and boyl them, then make a Posset thereof with two spoonfuls of vinegar, and boyl therein Carrants, Reasons of the sun, and Cinamon.
To heal a Fellon. Take the grounds of Ale, and a handfull of groundfell, with a piece of tower Leaven, boyl them together to a salve, and apply it. To open the obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the Dropsie. Take every day half a dram of fine Rubarb, thin sliced, with a spoonfull of Currants sleeped and washed in White-wine two hours: then chop them finely with the Ruharb and eat them fasting nine mornings together at the Spring and Fall. For an ach in the Bones. Takered Fennell, Parsley, with the roots, Rew, Worm∣wood, of each in like quantity; of Commin-seed half a quarter of a pound feeth these in stale vrine, and wash your grief with that liquor, and make a plaister with the substance. An excellent Electuary, to warm and dry a cold and moyst brain. Take conserve of Roses two ounces, and a half, Conserde of Bittony one ounce and a half, green Ginger two ounces, Cinamon. Cloves and Anniseeds, of each a half leaf, and mix them all together, and if it be too dry, and some of the syrop of Citrons or any other syrop. For the mother, and wind about the heart. Take Liquorice, Fennell-seed. Anniseed, Alirander seed, of each a like quantity, and heat them together, and then take Cinament and Saffron, and beat them to powder, and temper
it with clarified honey or sugar, and make thereof an Clectua∣ry, and eat thereof morning and thening. For the Wind Chollick. Take Saraprase, Parsley, Lime, and Archangell, of each a like quantity, boyl them in stale Ale, from a quart to a pinte; then strain them, and let the Pattent drink thereof morning and evening and fast an bour after it. To make a bag to lay to the Stomack, to comsort it, and expell wind. Take Cimon, Ginger, Mace, Cubebes, Gallingall. An∣nis-seeds. Commin, seeds and Parslep-seeds, with powder of Bayes, Camomill-flowers, Wormwood, Mints, and Rew, the which being mixt together, put them in a cup of Beere, drink the same morning and evening, and it will give speedy remedy. For a pain in the head. Take Violet, leaves and flowers and bruise them, and ap∣ply them alone to the head or mingle them with oyle, and it will case the head-ach and provoke sleep, moysten the Brain, and is good against melancholy. To make a Water to drink with Wine in Summer. Take a Gallon of Spring-water, or as much as you will, a pinte of Straw berries two ounces of Cinamen, three or four cloves, one grain of Musk, still these with a soft fire, and it is very cooling and pleasant. For a scal'd head. Take a sandle, and let it drop vpon if as hot as you can, and in so doing, it will ls ; then take the stale of a Cow
and the furring of o whole chamber pot, and boyl it together, and wash the place, and it will be a present remedy. Anapproved Receipt to cure children that are weak, and cannot go. Take of Sage, sweet Marjorum, of each a like quantity, beat them a long time together, stir out the juyce, and put it into a double violl glasse, filling of it full: then stop it with paste very close, and cover it with thick paste all over: then set it in an Oven, and there let it stand so long as a great loaf requires time to be throughly baked: then take it out, and let it be cold, then break the Paste cound about it and if the juyce be grown thick, break the glasse, and take it in a dish, and keep it in a Galley-pot, when you will vse it take the quantity of two spoonfuls at a time, and as much marrow of an Ore leg, melt them together, and mingle them well; and morning and evening annoint, as warme as can he, the tender parts of the childes thighs and legs, as also thin knees, crafing well with your warm hands and so in a short time (through Gods blessing) he will be able to stand and go. For a loosenesse. Take a pint of milk of a red or black Cow, set it on the fire and when it boyls vp, powre in a spoonfull of Spring-water: then let the milk boyl vp again, and do in the same manner 9. times; drink hereof when it is boyled morning, afternoon, and evening. Another approved Receipt for an Ague. Take Dragons, Sallendine, Burredge, Buglas, Angelica, Succory, Cudife, Sorrill Bittony, Pimpernell, Scabius, E∣grimony, white honey, Suckles that grow among the grass, and red honey Suckles of the same sort, of each of these one handfull; of Cardus Benidict. two handfulls, dry'd or green.
them, and brise them very small; then lay them in sleep in a pottle of white wine overnight, and still it the next day in a dry Still, the first is the best, and the small water is very good though not so strong; then give it to the sick party one hour before the fit doth come six or seven spoonfuls, warming it first and let the Sick go into a warm bed to sweat present∣ly after it. For a Web or Pearl in the Eye. Take the white of a new laid egge, beaten to an Oyl, and the juyce of Deafie roots and leaves, and of the inyce of the toos and leaves of brown founell, and of the juyce of the leave and roots of the white honey-suckle, with the three leaves; take of these juyces two good spoonfull, and put to the white of the egge, and a litile spoonfull of pure honey, and a oonfull of womans milk, and one spoonfull of Rose-water, and a half peuy worth of Sperma-city, and as much white Sugary heat, and as much white Coperas as a good Nut made into fine powder, labour them all well together with assiver spoon and scum of the fount, and put it into a glusse, and loose slop'd and lying on your back, with a feather drop two or three at a time into your eye, vsing it so three times a day till it be well. Another precious and approved experiment for health, by D.D. an English-man. Take of  two ounces, of Salfa perilla four ounces, of Sea erandrin four ounces, of Sssas two ounces, of Liquice one ounce, of Auni-seeds one ounce, of long Pepper ol an ounce, of the leaves of Seabious a great handfull, of Egismony half as much, of Bittony half a hand∣full, of Water-eresses and Brook-lie, of eath one great handfull, of Sea-scory-grass two greath fuls, of good negs ne ounce; let all the  be flit and , and the  shred, and put into a bag, and  it in a barrell with six gallows of new Ale, and let it stand
eight days; then drink continually of it, and no other Drink while it lasteth, and eat Bakers bread with Corianders seeds, and keep a good Diet; vse this six weeks. A soverain medicine for the pain at the heart. Take milk, and put therein a Succory root well bruised, and boyl them, then make a Posset thereof, with two spoonfuls of vinegar, and boyl therein Currauts, Reasons of the su, and Cinamon. Another for the same. Take Liquorice, Fennell-seed, Anniseed, Alirander seed, of each alike quantity, and beat them together, and then take Cinament and Sassron, and beat them to powder and temper it with clarified honey or sugar, and make thereof an Electua¦ry, and eat thereof morning and evening. For those that cannot hold water. A slain mouse rosted, or made in powder, and drank at once, doth perfectly help such as cannot hold water, especially if it  vsed three mornings together. For those that cannot void water. Take Saxaphrase, Parsley, Time, and Archangeli, of each a like quantity, boyl them in stole Ale, from a quart to a pte; them strain them, and let the Pationt drink thereof morning and evening  an hour after it. To take away freekles of the face. Take the bloud of a white Hen and annoint the sacethere∣with and after three or four times dressing, it will take ay all the spo  freekles.
An excellent Receipt for the Eyes. Take celandine and dastes, of each a like quantity stamped, and a little sugar and rose water, and out thereto a drop with a tether into the eyes it taketh away all manner of inflamma∣tion, spots, webs, itch smarting or any grief whatsoever in the eyes yea although the sight be nigh gone, it is proved to be the best medicine in the world. An excellent medicine for the head. Take conserve of Roses two ounces, and a half, Conserve of Bittony one ounce and a half, een Ginger two ounces, Cinamon. Cloves and Auniseeds, of each a half lead, and mix them all together, and if it be too dry, add some of the syrop of Citrons, or any other syrop. A present Remedy for the Itch. Boyl the roots of Elecampane which boyl very soft, and mix in a Morter with fresh butter, and the powder of ginger, ma∣keth all excellent Oyntment against the Itch, Scabs, and such like. For a Bruise. Take red Fennell Parsley, with the roots, Rew, Worm∣wood, of each a like quantity; of Commin-seed half a quarter of a pound, seeth these in stale brine, and wash your grief with that liquor, and make a plaister with the substance. A soveraign Remedy for the Cough. Take Brimstone beaten in powder, half an ounce and put it in a new-laid egge soft rosted, mingle it well together; then drink it in the morning at your breakfast, make as much a∣gain
at night when you go to bed, and you shall be well at the second or third time; but if the cough have holden you long you must take if so much the oftner. A Practioner in London who was famous for curing the Fensie, after that he had performed his cure by due observation of Physick, accustomed every year in the month of May, to diet Patients after this sort. Take the leaves and flowers of Primrose, boyl them a lit∣tle in Fountain water, and in some Rose and Betony water, adding thereto Sugar, Pepper, Salt and Butter, which being strained, he gave this to them first and last. For the Palsie. The distilled water of Daffodils, doth cure the Palsie, if the Patient be bathed and rubbed with the said liquor by the fire. For the Dropsie. Take every day half a dram of fine Rubarb, thin sliced, with a spoonfull of Currants steeped and washed in White wine two hours: then chop them finely with the Rubarb and eat them fasting nine mornings together at the Spring and Fall, and it will preserve them from the Dropsie. For a green wound. The coales of a Birch-fire made in powder, and put into the wound or sore healeth it perfectly without any other thing, in few dayes. For the Rheum in the Eyes. Annoint the eyes three nights together with thin Cream, and then annoint them other three nights with live honey.
For a Woman that hath great Breasts. If a woman annoint often her paps with the juyce of suc∣cory, it will make them round and hard; if they be hanging or bagging, it will draw them together, whereby they shall seame like the Paps of a Paid. For new Swellings. Take Smallage and boyl it in milk with crms of bread and apply it to the grief morning and evening, and the rage thereof will seen abate. To make a Water to drink in Summer, for preverting of the Surfeit. Take a aon of Spring-water, or as much as you will, a pe of Straw, bties, two ounces of Cinam, three or four cloves, one grain of Musk, still these with a soft fire, and it is very cooling and pleasant, and very sverain to qualifie heat, and prevent surfeit. For an ach in the back. Take yl of Roses x ounces and a half, and put to  little War, and four drops of eg and andit the ba therewith. For the Cramp. The little Bone in the knée-joynt of the hinder, leg of a  oth presently help the crump, if you touch the grieved pla therewith. To draw out a thorn. A little piece of the tongue of a For being moystned and  it be laid po .
For the Hickup. Stop both your ears with your ngrs, and the ekp will presently leave you. For a pain in the head. Take Uolet leaves and flowers and bruise them, and ap∣ply them alone to the head, or mingle them with oyle, and it will case the head-ach and provoke eep, myn the Brain, and is good against melancholy. For a deafness in the ear. Black shéeps-wooll mixt and chased by the fire with fresh butter, and the deaf ear stopped therewith at night, and thus vsed nine or ten nights together, it helpeth the deafnesse per∣fectly and speedily. For the morphew. Whosoever doth vse to drink the water of Straw-berries distilled, it will certainly kill the Root of any Morphew that is within the Body. To take away a Weft from the Eye if it be quite over. Take the juyce of Fennell and put it into the eye, and it hel∣peth perfectly. An excellent drink. Take the roots of Monks-rubarbe, and red madder, of each half a pound, Sena four ounces, Annis-feed and Licoriet, of each two ounces, Scabious and Egrimony, of each one handfull, slice the Roots of the Rubarb, bruise the Anniseds
and Licorice, break the heaths with your hand, and put then into a Stone-yet, called a Stean. with four gallons of stron∣le to stéep or infuse the space of thrée dayes, and then drit this Liquor as your ordinary drink for three weeks togeth at the least, and the longer you take it, it is the better: prov∣ded you have alwayes one Stean vnder another being always carefull to keep a good diet: It cureth the Dropsse the yellow Iaunders, all manner of Itch, Seabs, of breaking out and mainginesse: It purifieth the blond from all corruption, pre∣vaileth against the Green-sicknesse very greatly, and all oppi∣lations or stoppings, maketh yong Wenches to look fair, and cherris-like, and bringeth down their tearms, the stopping thereof hath caused the same.
THE TABLE OF The Additionall Receipts, and approved Experiments, annexed unto the Regiment of Health. TO make Meath excel∣lent good to clense the Stomack, preserve the Liver, and very good against the Stone. pag. 207. An excellent Receipt to make one sleep. p. 208. To stay a flux of bloud. p. ead, To take out a Burn. p. ead. For an Ague. p. ead. To make an Issue. p. ead. For the heat of the back. p. 209. For the Gowt. p. ead. For all manner of Swellings. p. ead. A speciall Powder for the Me∣mory. p. ead. For the redness of the Eyes. p. ead. For heat in the mouth or throat. p, ead. For an extream head-ach, and to cause quiet sleep. p. 211. For a heat in the face. p. ead. A Diet Drink against any des∣perate Disease that is curable,
prescribed by three Dutch Doctors. p. ead. A Pollet-drink to cool the Li∣ver. p. ead. To heal a Fellon. p. 211. To open the obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the Dropsie. p. ead. Eor an ach in the Bones. p. ead. An excellent Electuary towarm and dry a cold and moyst brain. p. ead. For the Mother, and wind about the heart. p. ead. For the Wind Chollick. p. 212. To make a bag to lay to the Stomack, to comfort it, and expell wind. p. ead. For a pain in the head. p. ead. To make a water to drink with Wine in Summer. p. ead. An approved Receipt to cure children that are weak, and cannot go. p. 213 For a loosenesse. p. ead. For a Web or Pearl in the Eye. p. 214 Another precious and approved experiment for health by D. D. an English-man. p. ead. A soverain medicine for the pain at the heart. p. 215. For those that cannot hold wa∣ter. p. ead. To take away freckles of the face. p. ead. An excellent Receipt for the Eys p. 216. An excellent medicine for the head. p. ead. A present Remedy for the Itch. p. ead. For a Bruise. p. ead. A soveraign Remedy for the Cough. p. ead A Practioner in London who was famous for curing the Frensie, after that he had per∣formed his cure by due ob∣servation of Physick, accusto∣med every year in the month of May, to diet Patients after this sort. p. 217. For the Palsie, p. ead. For the Dropsie. p. ead. For a green wound. p. ead. For the Rheum in the Eyes. p. ead. For a Woman that hath great Breasts. p. 218. For new Swellings. p. ead. To make a Water to drink in Summer, for preventing of the Surfeit. p. ead. For an ach in the back. p. ead. For the Cramp. p. ead. To draw out a thorn. p. ead.
For the Hickup. p. 219. For a pain in the head. p. ead. For the morphew, and other impediments. p. ead. For a deafness in the ear. p. ead. To take away a Weft from the Eye if it be quite over. p. ead. An excellent drink to cure, the Dropsie, the yellow Jaunders all manner of Scabs and mainginesse. p. ead. FINIS.
