V741A 99896042 153719
A VOYAGE OF THE Sieur Le Maire TO THE Canary Islands, Cape-Verd, Senegal and Gamby, UNDER Monsieur DANCOURT, Director-General of the Royal Affrican Company. Printed at Paris this Present Year 1695. And now faithfully done into English. LONDON, Printed for F. Mills and W. Turner, at the Rose and Cown without Temple-Bar. 1696.
THE PREFACE. IT is now a considerable time, since this Relation was put into my Hands by my very good Friend the Sieur Le Maire, upon his return from the Voyage which he perform'd into those Countries, whereof he has given us a Descrip∣tion. The Reading of it seem'd so diverting, and the Account so singular, that at first sight it appear'd to me not a little suspected, since it differs in many Essen∣tial things from an Author of this Age, in a Collection which he has made Pub∣lick.
These Important Contradictions, made me resolve to be satisfied of the Truth, by those who accompanied my Friend in his Travels: I made it my business to have particular Conferences with each of them, especially upon those Heads which seem'd so opposite in these different Re∣lations; and I found them so correspond∣ing in the Matters of Fact, which crea∣ted my Scruples, that I believ'd I could not better repair the Injustice I had done my Friend, than by revoking my Doubts, and reposing a Confidence in him, which till then I had suspended. Monsieur Dancourt, Director-General of the Affrican Company, under whom my Friend made this Voyage, who has acquir'd a perfect knowledge of the Lives and Manners of the Inhabitants of these Islands, and of the Curiosities of these Countries, by his long Travels, almost through all the Parts of the World; (which has procur'd him the Esteem of the Messieurs Colbert and Soignelay) the Conferences (I say) which I had with
him, did not a little contribute to deter∣min in favour of this latter Relation, which he found to be very exact, and that the Author had enter'd into Parti∣cularities, which till now were never touch'd upon by any Person whatever. My Friends, who had look'd it over, concluded that I had injur'd the Publick in concealing this Novelty so long, and did at length perswade me to alter my Resolution of not Publishing this Piece till the return of the Author, who would, no doubt, have made a considerable Addition of new Remarks. But since 'tis four or five Years since I heard any thing of him, I thought I should do him no wrong in Publishing the Fruits of his first Voyages, which may bespeak a good Reception of what he himself shall think fit to give us for the future; and, perhaps, the Applause of this Work may the sooner engage him to Publish his Remarks of his later Travels. Indeed, the Industrious Care which the Author has taken to penetrate into the par∣ticulars, of the Manners, Religion, and
Politicks, of the People, who Inhabit the Coasts of Affrica, does very well merit an Universal Approbation. One may take a view here of their Ori∣ginal, of the Tyranny which the Kings ex∣ercise ever their Subjects and Neighbours, of many Petty Kings Tributary to each other, their Policy, and their manner of making War. One may find here the perfidious Deal∣ings of these People towards the Europeans in respect of their Traffick; the Fertility of a Country that is in no manner Cultivated; their Miseries for want of Industry and Forecast; what Animals are common in this Climate; And, in short, all things that are the most Remarkable in these Islands, and not to be met withal in other Places.
THE VOYAGES OF THE Sieur Le Maire TO THE Canaries, Cape-Verd, Sene∣gal, and Gamby. I Had serv'd in the Capacity of Chi∣rurgeon to the Hotel-Dieu of Paris near the space of three Years, when I receiv'd intimation, that Monsieur Dancourt was ready to set forwards for Cape-Verd, as General Director of the Royal Affrican Company. This News created a Desire in me to make the Voyage along with him. He seem'd glad at the
opportunity of my Company, and after having determin'd our Agreement, he Presented me to the Members of that So∣ciety on the 14th of January 1682. who readily ratified the Articles we had before concluded. After having spent some time in settling my Affairs, and taking leave of my Friends, we departed for Orleans, where we took a Boat to go to Nantes along the Li. We ought not in course to have been more than three days in accomplish∣ing this Journey; however, it took us up seven or eight entirely, besides running of great risques, and exposing our selves to many dangers. We had the Wind all along full in our Teeth, and so strong a Gale, that the Waves of this River did near equal the tossings of the Sea: To this inconveniency was added that of the Banks being over∣flow'd, so that we seldom was sensible whether we were in, or off the Chanel. We could only discern some straggling branches above Water, so that we some∣times fell foul upon the Trunks of Trees where Birds do build their Nests. However, at length we arriv'd at Nantes, and after having rested there for
the space of ten days, we took Horse for Brest. What we saw of Brettagny as we rode along, afforded no very pleasant Idea, had we not already been otherways inform'd, that it was a Province rich and fertile in some places, since the whole Journey gave us no other prospect but of a Sandy Road, which occasion'd very tedious Travelling. Having reach'd Brest the 4th of Februa∣ry, we believ'd we should Sail in few days; but the Vessel was not yet in a condition, she being but indifferently fitted out, and very defective in her Rigging. We were to wait till she was new Masted, and put in a capacity to bear Weather, and to Fight too if there were occasion. Two Months was spent in refitting this Ship, which was call'd the St. Catharine; she was of 400 Tun burthen, and carried 40 Guns: She was built at Flushing, and design'd for a quick Sailor, and Com∣manded by Captain Monsegur, by the Or∣der of the Members of this Company. The Port of Brest, where she then was, is by much the best Harbour we have in the Ocean; the largest Vessels Ride there in safety, and lye as it were in a Chamber sheltred from all manner of prejudice from
the blustring Winds, for which reason it has receiv'd that Name; they can go out to Sea as well at low Water as at high Tide, since the Ships there always ride a∣float: Its Entrance is as narrow as the Mouth of a River, fortified of each side with two good Half-Moons, and on the Right has a stately Castle of Antick Build∣ing to defend the Passage. This Haven shoots up in a Spiral Line; it is a large half League in length, and about 200 Pa∣ces over, situated between two Hills: All which Advantages are the pure effects of Nature. I saw in this Port the finest and largest Ships in the whole World; amongst the rest, the Admiral call'd the Royal Sun, she is not so richly Gilt as the Royal Lewis of Thoulon, but she is better Built, of a greater length, and a more nimble Sailor. She carries a Hundred and Twenty Pieces of Cannon, and fortified with three Decks; her State-Room is Magnificent, curiously Gilt and Beautified; her Plat∣form was design'd by Monsieur Le Brun, she has about 15 more Apartments, but much less; however they are very conve∣nient and handsom.
Besides this Vessel, there were more than fifty other Ships, of 90, of 80, 70, 60, 50 Guns each, without taking notice of those of lower Rates. Next to the Royal Sun, the finest are, The Queen, the Crown, the Glorious, the Brave, the Good, the Thundring, the Lightning, the Rock, and the Diamond, &c. The prospect of those vast Machines, like so many floating Palaces, appears delightfully astonishing; nor can they be view'd without exciting a Veneration of the Puissance of their Re∣nowned Master. Our Vessel being Rigg'd and Fitted, it fell down into the Road on the 20th of March: Five of the King's Ships, well appointed, went out at the same time, four of which was to join the Fleet of Thoulon, in the Expedition against the Algiers, and the other was to Convoy some Ships belonging to the East-India Com∣pany. Wednesday the 9th of April 1682. I em∣bark'd with four more of the Family that were to go along with us, Monsieur Dan∣court staying yet at Brest. In the mean while, these Gentlemen and I made a Match of Shooting, imagining it was as easie to come on Board again as it was to
go off. The Director's Cook was brought aboard about some business, in a little Skiff Row'd by two Young Lads of about eleven or twelve Years each. The opportunity seem'd lucky for us, and we, without considering how we should get back again, took his Boat, and went almost two Leagues off near to Ca∣maret; the eager desire of our Sport, made us Land at the first place we came to, slighting the danger of climbing the Rocks that hung shelving over the Sea, from which I was near falling two or three se∣veral times. After all our pains, we had not the good Fortune to meet with any substan∣tial Game, but were oblig'd to take up with killing a few Larks, which at length stood us in more stead than we imagin'd. We left our unlucky Sport, and set to a better, refreshing our selves with some good Wine and cold Provisions we had with us. When we had consum'd what Stock we had, we went aboard our small Skiff, and had scarce got off to Sea, when a violent Storm arose, which soon put me to my Devotions, imagining that we should un∣avoidably perish in a moment. One of
our Companions being excessively tir'd, fell fast asleep at his first getting into the Boat, but being at length disturb'd with our frequent shricks, when we were got near half way to our Vessel, he, though not wholly awake, began to perceive the danger, and cry'd out that we should cer∣tainly be lost, if we did not return ashore with what speed was possible. This Opinion seem'd to us very pro∣bable, since the strength of our Young Water-men was very inconsiderable, tho' they shew'd much greater courage than any of us, telling us, That the Boat would only over-turn, and that there was no danger of its sinking to the bottom. I suppose they imagin'd that all of us could Swim; but indeed they were mistaken, for I very well knew my own Ability. Sometimes I entertain'd my thoughts with the difficulty of escaping amongst Waves that were so large and violent, which I concluded would infallibly dash us in pieces against the Rocks. We readily embrac'd the Advice of our Comrade, and set all hands to Work to Row back to shore, and with much labour we gain'd the Land, to wait there till the Storm was abated.
Whilst each of us was relishing a small Tranquillity, we heard the report of a Cannon, and at the same time saw the Top-sail loos'd, which is the ordinary Sig∣nal for Sailing. There were some Lighters at hand, but we could by no means find the Masters that own'd them to carry us on Board. Thus we saw our Ship under Sail, Sa∣luting the Admiral with seven Guns, the Wind full a Stern, all the Sails out, with∣out hopes of regaining her. I look'd up∣on my self to be in a miserable taking, without Cloaths, without Instruments, and expos'd to the Extremities of Fortune. We follow'd the sight of our Vessel, tearing our Throats, and firing our Fuzees, but to no purpose, she in a little time dis∣appear'd. One of our Comrades not be∣ing so good of Foot as the rest, took the way to Camaret, believing he should find us there; for our parts we were looking after him; so we spent the best part of the Night seeking each other. Thousands of Unfortunate Accidents befel us, one stuck in a Bog, the other fell into a Ditch, and each call'd out upon the other for assistance, and Cursing our Sport was the common Dialect of us all.
Hunger came in the Rear of our other Misfortunes. We at length took into a small Hedge-Tavern, where, by good luck, every thing was answerable to the small Stock we had to spend. We met with nothing there but a Crust of very brown Bread, a Scrap of Holland-Cheese, and Straw Beds; the small Stock of Money we had was expended for dis∣charging our Supper and Lodging; and for our Breakfast, we deferr'd it to a more favourable opportunity. Whilst we were upon the hunt for our straggling Companion, Coasting the Sea, we discover'd some Masts, which we at first took for Trees that grew upon the Banks of the River, not daring to flatter our selves that we should ever regain the sight of a Vessel, which we at that time imagin'd to be far distant from us; but drawing nearer, we perceiv'd that she was not gone, and that she lay at Anchor in the Road of Camaret, three Leagues from Brest. You may easily imagine our Joy, there was nothing now to be done but to find our lost Comrade, and so go on Board. We endeavour'd to make Signs to the Peo∣ple in the Ship that they might know us,
and send off their Shalop, but we were no more successful in this than in our former Enterprises. Whilst we were contriving all manner of ways to get out of this Scrape, we perceiv'd a small Bark, which hir'd her self to carry off to any Vessels at Sea. I can't tell how it came to pass that our stray'd Comrade should be there; but so it was, he was the first that knew us. We made signs to him, he understood us, and order'd the Bark to come near us; but though the shore was almost unaccessible, upon the account of the Rocks, yet we were oblig'd to get aboard in spight of all their threatning Precipices. At length we got in, and after many Congratulations of being once again met together, we settled our selves to repose: But it seems it was not yet time to take our ease, for the Waves rose so high, that they wash'd over the Boat from Head to Stern; so that we were all throughly Sous'd. This, together with the Cold that it oc∣casion'd, and the danger of being over∣set, which our Seamen seem'd to dread, renew'd our Miseries, till at last, after these unlucky Adventures, we arriv'd safe aboard.
We laugh'd at leisure at all these Acci∣dents, and set immediately to remedy our present Hunger: We lay sometime longer in the Road to wait for Monsieur Dancourt, who staid at Brest. He arriv'd Sunday the 12th of April 1682. about Noon, and we immediately made ready to Sail. About three Leagues off at Sea, we met with the Ship call'd the Burning; she Rode at Anchor waiting for the Tide to carry her into the Bay of Brest, she carried to Guns, and came from Haver to  aboard Monsieur de Preuilly the Lieutenant General, and was afterwards to Sail with him for the Coast of Algier. We saluted her after the accustom'd manner, with seven Guns, Trumpets Sounding, and crying three times, Vie le Roy. She return'd as many, contrary to the General practice of the King's Ships, who always give two less. It ap∣pear'd that it was out of Complaisance to the Intendant, who was an intimate Friend of Monsieur Dancourts, and then aboard her. Having return'd our thanks with three Guns, we continued our Course, the Wind being at North East, having doubled the Cape to the West, making West South
West, from whence we took our Point to Steer, at 48 degrees 20 Minutes of the Northern Latitude, and 11 degrees of Longitude. But since I am not very ex∣port in the business of Pilotage, I shall not for the future make any such particular re∣cites, unless they be absolutely necessary. Tuesday, the 21th of April, we made two Vessels direct East of us; by their endeavours to get the Wind of us, we indg'd them to be Pirates. We put our selves in a posture of Defence, which no doubt prevented their coming upon us, they guessing by our Countenance that they could expect from us nothing but dry Blows. Sunday, the 26th in the Morning, we were in 32 Degrees and as many Minutes of the Northern Latitude, and in 4 De∣grees 13 Minutes of Longitude, when we made the Cape Cautin, the Coasts of Bar∣bary, and the Kingdom of Morocco, being but six Leagues from Land. Had the Night continued we had certainly perish'd, since we took our Course for the West of Madera, which was above 140 Leagues from thence. Wednesday, the 29th, we made the Island of Ancerott, one of the Seven Canaries,
which we left about 10 Leagues to the South-East; here we were for some time becalm'd, and suffer'd the scorching of excessive heats. Thursday, the 30th of April, we were got in 28 Degrees and 30 Minutes Nor∣thern Latitude, taking, according to the Custom of our Nation, the first Meridian from the Island of Fer, having then the Grand Canary 10 Leagues from us to the North-East. We went off a Fowling near a League into the Island, where we staid till Night. We could not come to an An∣chor for want of a Wind, and for the darkness of the Night which came on, which made us stand off to the East, and continue till three hours after Midnight opposite to Land. Friday, by break of day, we veer'd to the Westward, taking our Course to the Great Canary: About half an hour after Nine we came to an Anchor in 24 Fathom Water, and brought up a gray and red Sand mix'd with Coral; the Town which lay South South-West, is a League and half from the Road, and is defended by a Castie, though very mean and despicable. When they perceiv'd us from off the Castle, they hoisted the Flag of Spain,
which we Saluted with five Guns; but they made no return, which I believe was occasion'd by want of Powder. Anchorage is extream good in this place, so that they don't draw too near the Town, whose approach is render'd dan∣gerous by Rocks that lye conceal'd under Water. It is Guarded by a Castle situated upon a Hill, from the Insults it might suf∣fer by any Vessels that might undertake to Attack it. 'Tis Inhabited by Twelve Thousand flout Islanders, who are capable of making a very good Defence. Our Ship Anchor'd before the Town in 18 Fa∣thom Water. Its Precincts are near a League in com∣pass, most of the Houses well built, but low, having not above two Stories, they are all flat Roord, so that no Ridge ap∣pears, and one would be apt to take them for Houses so far burnt down. In the day time, scarce any Body appears in the Streets. Though the Bishop, the Governor, and the Men of Quality, make their Residence at Teneriff, yet the See Episcopal, the Tribunal of the Inquisition, and the So∣veraign Council, which is, as it were, the Parliament of the seven Islands, are always
kept in this Capital. There is here four Religious Foundations, one belonging to the Dominicans, one to the Franciscons; the two other are the Bernardins and the Recollects. These Islands, who heretofore were call'd the Fortunate, had that Title not without good Reason, if we consider ei∣ther the Goodness and Purity of the Air, or the Fertility of the Soil. They abound in Bread-Corn, Barley, Honey, Beef, Mutton, Fowl; in short, with all Ne∣cessaries for good and plentiful Living. They afford so large a Store of Malmsy Sack, that France, Spain, England, Holland, and other places, are from thence furnish'd every Year. The felicity that these Islands are capa∣ble of bestowing above any others, in what respects commodious Living, gave, some time since, occasion to the Pagans belief. That these were the Elizian Fields, destin'd for the Habitation of the Souls of the Blessed, after their separation from the Body. Their Water is not proportionably good with the rest of their Commodities, but they have a way to remedy it, by pour∣ing it into Vessels made in the shape of
Mortars, of a Stone very Porose, through which being strain'd, it becomes fresh and purified, and consequently very wholsom. Their Harvest is commonly in March, sometimes in April, and in several places they are double in each Year: The Soil is so Redundant, that I have seen a Cheriy Tree Slip produce Fruit in 6 Weeks time after it had been Grafted. Flowers thrive there without requiring any manner of Industry; and Oranges, and Citrons, are in a surprising Plenty. Grand Canary, as well as Teneriff, and the Palme, did continue some time in Idola∣try after the Conquest of the Spaniards made in 1460. Ancerott, Fort-Avanture, Gomere and Fer, did first espouse Christianity, and at length the other three follow'd their example. The Spaniards desiring absolute∣ly to reduce this Country to their Obe∣dience, sent great store of the Inhabitants Slaves into Spain; those that remain'd amongst them became Civiliz'd, and liv'd after the manner of their Conquerors These People, especially those of Grand Canary, are extream Lovers of Strangers. Monsieur Dancourt was very Honourably receiv'd by the Governor of the Island, at whose House he was entertain'd at Dinner,
being conducted by Monsieur Remond Consul of our Nation, who was Born at Liege, and is a very honest Courteous Gentleman. He Regal'd us very Nobly, and let us want for neither Liquor nor Fruit; I staid two entire days with him, where I receiv'd all the Civilities imagi∣nable. I was four times at the Convent of Bernardins, the Providore having given me that permission at the Instance of the La∣dy Abbess. There were here some French Ladies, amongst the rest one from Paris, who did me the kind Service of being my Interpreter. As there were some amongst them that were Infirm, they omitted not the opportunity of Advising with me, and of giving me great Respect and Attention A Physician being at hand, made seve∣ral of them make the best of the opportu∣nity, and many of them complain'd that had no real occasion, hoping thereby to gain the greater liberty, tho' otherwise they were no how indispos'd. I soon discover'd, that the greatest part of them had no other Distemper, but of that of be∣ing Lock'd up from the rest of the World, and therefore I could furnish them with no Effectual Cure. However, to appear a
Person something considerable, and of Universal Experience, I order'd them some Specifick Medicines, such as was most proper for Chimetical Distempers. These good Religious Ladies were not wanting in their Caresses, and took care to load me with Biskets, dry and wet Sweet-meats, Lemonade, and Sack; to∣gether with all manner of Fruit, which they had serv'd up upon Plates, and Porcelain Salvers, garnish'd with Roses, Pinks, Orange-Flowers, Jessimin, and Tuberoses, with variety of Nosegays. I also made them some small Presents, which were receiv'd with great Respect and Civility. When I left these good Ladies, and re∣turn'd to the Consul's, there were more People that waited, to take me along with them to Visit the Sick. Particularly, I went to a certain Lawyer's esteem'd worth Five hundred thousand Crowns, whose Wife had long labour'd with the Suffocation of the Womb, which was caus'd by some Obstructions: The Doctors of the Place dealt with her as a Peripneumony, by which chiefly I discover'd their Igno∣rance.
Their general distrust of them, makes the Inhabitants very fond of any French Chirurgeons. The Lawyer us'd his utmost endeavours to perswade me to take up my Abode in the Grand Canary, offering me his House, and his Table, and great Ad∣vantages besides. I had no mind to forfeit the promise I made to Monsieur Dancourt, so that I made my returns of Acknow∣ledgments for the obliging offers of the Spaniard, and prescrib'd what Remedies I thought most proper for his Lady, and what might be best met withal in the Island; where, indeed, Medicines are very scarce. He offer'd me a Recompence in Money, which, out of Honour for our Nation, I wholly refus'd. I had design'd to have visited him again in a day or two, since he had begg'd that favour of the Consul, adding, that he would find out some other way of gratifying me, since I refus'd his first offer; but I had not time, the Boat being come to fetch me on Board the Sa∣turday Evening. I do assure you, I was almost Enchant∣ed with the Sweetness of that Country; so that I could scarce leave it without re∣gret. Should I ever quit France, it should
be to fix my Habitation in the Grand Ca∣nary, though I hope I shall never be ob∣lig'd wholly to leave my own Country, which I must own is very dear to me. Before I have done with this Island, I must not forget to acquaint you, that it is about 30 Leagues in Compass, and of a Form very near Round. Saturday, the 2d of May, in the Eve∣ning, the Wind being North North East, we made ready about Three a Clock in the Morning; we took our Course in the sight of the Pique, a high Mountain in the Island of Teneriff, and made forwards to Ride in the Road of St. Cruce. Our Pilot observ'd in this place, that the Compass varied to the North East 3 Degrees, and 30 Minutes. Sunday, the 3d, being full North of the Grand Canary, having a gentle Breeze at North North East, we lay off Westward from the Cape all Night. Monday, the 4th, in the Morning, we arriv'd at Teneriff, the Richest of all the Canaries, being in sight of St. Cruce, a small Town of the same Island, upon its Eastern Point. We might there have Anchor'd in 25, or 30 Fathom Water; in the mean while we
never drop'd our Anchor, but our Ship lay by all the time, expecting the return of our Shalop, which we sent ashore. Though the Governor of St. Cruce suf∣fer'd those that were in the Boat to come ashore, yet he sent to acquaint the Go∣vernor-General, who had his Residence at Laguna, 3 Leagues from the Sea-side, that there were some French who desir'd to come on Shore to take in some Provisions, which they stood in need of: Whose An∣swer was, That he should detain them if they did it. Perhaps he fear'd that we had some Infection on Board, should we have come from the Levant, a place very subject to Contagion. To what remains when I speak of the Pique, I must acquaint you by the by, that it is one of the highest Mountains in the World. 'Tis said that it may be seen 40 Leagues off at Sea; as for us, we md it not above 12 or 15, by reason of the Duskiness of the Evening, which made it appear to us like a Pointed Cloud; 'tis continually cover'd with Snow, which nei∣ther falls off, nor does it ever Freeze. As for Teneriff, it is reputed to lye the highest of any Island in the Ocean, and the best Peopled for its bigness, containing
about 15000 Inhabitants: She produces that Excellent Malmsey Sack, which, with∣out Contest, is esteem'd the best in the World. This Liquor was not known in this Island, till after the Spaniards had made themselves Masters of it, since they were the first that transplanted some Vine-Stocks from Candy; though, at this day, the Wine is justly allow'd a preference to that from whence it owes its Original, and a much larger quantity of it is here pro∣duc'd than in Candy it self. All the seven Islands of the Canaries lye almost in a direct Line from East to West, they are very Mountainous, well Peopled, and extraordinary Fertil; the least of which is 60 Miles in Compass. I had formerly heard Discourse of a Mi∣raculous Tree in the Island of Fer, whose Leaves were long and narrow, always green, which supply'd the Inhabitants with all their Water. I had a mind to inform my self of the Truth of it, I therefore ask'd concerning it, whether so great a Dew fix'd it self on this Plant, that it continu∣ally distill'd a clear and wholsom Water into Basons of Stone set on purpose to re∣ceive it; so that there would be, by this means, a sufficient quantity both for the
Inhabitants and their Cattel, Nature kind∣ly supplying, by this perpetual Miracle, the want of fresh Water, which was not to be met withal throughout the whole Island. The Inhabitants confirm'd me in the Opinion that I had before entertain'd, that it was a meer Fable. There were, however, some that told me, that there was such a sort of Trees, but that they never furnish'd such prodigious quantity of Water which was spoke of. Tuesday, the 5th, we continued our Course to the South, being in 27 Degrees 40 Minutes Northern Latitude, and in 360 Degrees Eastern Longitude. About Six a Clock in the Evening, being full South off the Grand Canary, we kept East North East for about 7 Leagues. Wednesday, the 6th, it blew so strong an Easterly Wind, that the Tackling of the Top-Sail, and the Main-Yard, broke in pieces, and the Main-Mast buckled so much, that it was in danger of breaking. This Wind ceas'd in a quarter of an hour, afterwards, and the Vessel began to be Steady and Trim. Thursday, the 7th, at Noon, being in 20 Degrees Northern Latitude, and in 28 Minutes Easter. Longitude, we cut the Tropick of Cancer.
It was not forgot in this place, to keep up the Ceremony that is us'd by all Sailors, they call it the Baptism; 'tis put in practice upon all those who never yet pass'd the Tropick. See here the whole Description of it. They set a great Tub of Water at the foot of the Main-Mast, with a Stick laid a-cross it; Then those, that have been Initiated in former Voyages, having Grim∣c'd their Faces with Smut, walk in Pro∣cession a-round the Deck, one carrying a drawn Cut-lash, another a Frying-Pan, and the rest several of the Kitchen Uten∣sils. The Pilot, to distinguish himself, turns his Coat, and Displays some tatter'd Rag instead of a pair of Colours. The Pro∣cession being finish'd, which is always per∣form'd in great State, with Trumpets Sounding, and Drums Beating, they pro∣ceed to Baptizing of the Ship, flinging se∣veral Peals of Water about the Deck, till the Captain gives the Ship's Crew some Drink-Money. They go then, first, to the most consi∣derable of the Ship, whom they make to sit, one after the other, upon the Stick I already mention'd: The Mob gets about. him, presenting a Bason to receive his Baptismal Offering, holding the Cymeter
a cross his Neck: Then the Pilot brings his Book of Charts, and makes the Patient put his Hand upon the Tropick Line, and Swear to observe this Ceremony, in like manner, at any time for the future, to those that were fresh Travellers. At length they mark him with a black s upon the Forehead, and fling a little Water up∣on his Head, which follow'd by a Present flung into the Bason, they dismiss him; tho', if it be a Person of Common Rank, they draw the Stick from under him, Sousing him into the Tub, flinging Buckets of Water upon him, and thumping him, at a good Rate, with the Stick he sat up∣on. There is a necessity of undergoing this Ceremony, nor is an Admiral himself exempted, though they use him in a more Civil manner than ordinary. Friday, the 8th, we drew near the Coast of Barbary, being at Mid-day in 21 De∣grees 47 Minutes Northern Latitude, the Wind blowing a fresh Gale at North North East, we were satisfied that it was impossible to reach Cape-Blanc within Day∣light, being 4 Leagues off from Land, ha∣ving 28 Fathom Water, with a Sandy bot∣tom; we kept our bent East South East, and on Saturday the 9th, about Eight a
Clock in the Morning, we found our selves but a League from shore. We Coasted along to Cape-Blanc, and Anchor'd there in 14 fathom Water to the North-West, being about a League from the Point of the Cape; which is, accord∣ing to our Account, in 20 Degrees 30 Mi∣nutes Northern Latitude, and 359 Degrees 10 Minutes Western Longitude. When the Portuguese discover'd this Cape, about the Year 1454. they gave it the Name of Cape-Blanc, by reason of its bar∣ren white Sand, insomuch that nothing of Green appears in view. It lies almost as flat as the Sea; on which Account 'tis call'd the Sea of Sand. From Cape-Cantin to this place, which is 300 Leagues, nothing is to be seen but a Flat of Sand, by the Ancients call'd, The Desart of Lybia, and by the Arabians Zaara. It's not Inhabited, save only with Wild Beasts, such as Lions, Tygers, Ounces, Leo∣pards, and other like sort of Creatures. These Desarts are bounded on the North by Mount Atlas, and to the South by the Country of the Negers; they are of that extent from East to West, that they can't be cross'd on Horseback under the space of 50 days. Over these Sands, the Caravans
pass from Fez to Tombut, Melly, Borneo, and other Kingdoms of the Negers. When any Storm arises in these Desarts, the Sands overwhelm both the Passengers and their Camels, often smothering them to Death; at other times, filling up the standing Pits of Water, so that they perish by Thirst. The Caravans, for want of any beaten Track, are oblig'd to make use of the Compass as tho' they were at Sea. At the Point of Cape-Blanc, there is form'd a certain Gulf which takes its Name from the Island which it makes, and is call'd Arguin. This Gulf shoots up more than 15 Leagues within Land, by which the prospect of it is lost having once pass'd the Point. The Portuguese had formerly a Fort in this Island, where they Establish'd a Com∣merce with the Azoaghes, Arabs, or Moors, who Traffick'd with them for Gold, Gum-Arabick, Ostridges Plumes, which are there in great Plenty, by reason of the abundance of those Birds. 'Tis said-of this Animal, that they are so far destitute of Memory, that they forget where they lay their Eggs, and that they brood over the first they chance to meet withal. I much doubted the Truth of the Report,
that one of these Eggs were sufficient to satisfie the Appetite of eight Men of good Stomach. To the rest, they bring these Merchandises from Hoden, which is four days Journey into the Main Land, and is the place where the Caravans arrive from Tombut, Gualata, and other Inland places of Lybia, and the Country of the Negers. These People are Disciples of the Pre∣cepts of Mahomet, they never continue long settled in a place, but wander in the Desarts from one part to another, accord∣ing as they meet with Pasturage for their Horses, Camels, Cattel, Sheep, and Goats, by whose Milk they are nourished. They are divided into Tribes or Lineages, they own no King or Superior by any legal Right, though he that has the greatest Stock is voluntarily obey'd as their Cap∣tain or Conductor. Their Traffick with the Negers consists in Horses and Camels; they receive for a Horse, 6, 8, or 10 Slaves, but for a Ca∣mel only one or two, may be sometimes three. The Fort of Arguin was taken by the Hollanders from the Portuguese, and taken from them again during the War in 1672. by Monsieur Ducas, a Captain of the Roy∣al
Affrican Company. He had but 120 Men in this Expedition, of which he lost but three. The Supine Negligence of the Dutch Governor, contributed much to this easie Conquest; for there had been nothing more practicable than to have prevented it. Our Artillery consisted but of 6 small Pieces, the largest being only an 8 Poun∣der; we had no manner of shelter, and above all, we were in great want of Wa∣ter, it being impossible to Drink of a stink∣ing Spring, which was the only Water our Men could come to in the whole Island. This Fort was reserv'd to the French by the Peace of Nimeguen, with all the other Places that our Company had then in Possession. Notwithstanding which ac∣cord, the Hollanders do every year Traffick thither with some of their Vessels, which is a manifest breach of Articles. The Captain of our Ship went ashore with 30 Men, in hopes of finding there the Vessel call'd the Town of Hamborough, but she was already gone off. They met with only one Vessel upon the Dock, which was not quite finish'd, they set her on fire, with another small Boat which had on Board some Moors, and a few Hollan∣ders, who quitted her, and betook them∣selves
to Swimming. They found her la∣den with Tortoises, which prov'd a good Booty for our Ships Crew, they at that time wanting Provisions: They are very large upon this Coast, and their number in abundance, one alone being able to sa∣tiate 30 Men; their flesh very much re∣sembles that of Veal, and relishes full as well; their Shells are at least 15 Foot in Circumference. Cape-Blanc abounds in Fish, as Guiltheads, Pargues, Vielles, Sea-Dogs, and many other whose Names I am not acquainted withal. Our Seamen took great quantities with Angling, and feasted themselves highly du∣ring 8 Days as we Coasted along the shore, till we reach'd the Mouth of the River Senegal. There are some Habita∣tions of the Moors, separated from the rest, upon this Coast, who, through the Baren∣ness of the Soil, are forc'd to live altoge∣ther upon the Fish. Saturday, the 7th, we continued our Course for Goree, and pass'd in sight of the River Senegal; of which I shall Discourse hereafter. Tuesday, the 19th, we made Cape-Verd, being in 14 Degrees and 45 Minutes Northern Latitude.
This Cape was so call'd by the Portu∣guese, who discover'd it the same Year as that of Cape-Blanc They Nam'd it Cape-Verd, because you are immediately pre∣sented with the Prospect of great Groves of Trees, many of which hold Green all the Year: It lyes high, and affords a most ravishing Prospect. Above the Woods there appear two round Hills, to which they have given the Name of the Mammells, since their situation do, in some measure, resemble a Pair of Breasts. This Cape juts out a great way into the Ocean, and is esteem'd the largest in the whole Ocean next to that of Bonne Esperance. Its situation is wrong plac'd in our Charts, where we find it in 14 Degrees exact, though in reality it be 14 Degrees and a half. After having doubled the first Point, for there is two, you discover a small Island which is not Inhabited; 'tis call'd the Island of Birds, of which, at all times, are seen great Flocks, it lying wholly open to view. When this Island is pass'd, the other Point must be doubled ere you can make Goree, which lyes behind the Cape, almost opposite to the Mammells. The Coast en∣clines towards the North West, and makes
a Bow, where the best Water is to be met withal that is in all these Parts, which is a great refreshment to the Voyagers. Being arriv'd at Goree, Wednesday the 20th of May, 1682. and Anchor'd in the Road, we Saluted the Fort with 7 Guns; they answer'd the Salute, Gun for Gun, the first with Shot, out of respect to Mon∣sieur Dancourt. When he went off in his Boat, we Saluted him with 5 Guns; all the Ships that were in the Road did the like, and when he Landed the Fort gave him seven. After having shew'd his Letters from the Company, which constituted him Di∣rector, he enter'd into the Management of his Employ. He found the Affairs in a miserable Condition, by the ill Conduct of two Persons, who both pretended to the Soveraign Command: The one was a Frenchman, and Commandant for the Company at Goree; the other was their Agent-General all along the Coasts. But as these things are not to my purpose, I shall say nothing farther of these Concerns. The Island of Goree was so Nam'd by the Hollanders, because it resembles an Island in Zealand of the same Appellation; 'tis about the fourth part of a League in Cir∣cuit,
and extends it self length-ways from North to South, being something more than a League distance from the Continent. It has, to the South, a steep Rock wash'd by the Sea, and is wholly encompass'd with Rocks, having but one narrow passage by which any Vessels can come to. As the Portuguese were the first that made any considerable Voyages along this Sea, these Parts were first by them discover'd, as well as the remainder of Affrica in the Ocean, and Atlantick Sea; and falling un∣der the Power of the Dutch, they Built a Fort on the weakest side of the Hill for the Defence of the Island, and another sorry Fort at the Hill foot. The Count D'Estrees, Vice-Admiral of France, made himself Master of this Fort in November 1678. it being Surrendred to him by the Governour, without so much as putting himself in a posture of Defence; and he not being able to spare Force for Manning them, he Demolish'd both the one and the other. The Members of the Company, who are in present possession of this Island, have a little repair'd the Lower Fort, having built a small Maga∣zine, and a very indifferent Wall rais'd out of the Ruins of the Old Fort, which are
only capable to prevent the Insults from their Neighbouring Negers. Monsieur Dancourt immediately em∣ploy'd himself in facilitating the Com∣merce, and in visiting the Ware-Houses along the Coasts, giving necessary Orders to all the Officers that were therein In∣trusted; at length he Establish'd a good Correspondence with the King of the Ne∣gers, and with their Principal Chiefs. Upon this Account he travers'd the Country near 24 Leagues a-cross, from the Mouth of Senegal to that of Gamby, which are the two main Currants by which the River Niger disimbogues it self into the Sea. I accompanied him in all these Journeys along the Coasts, wherein I made it my business to inform my self concerning these Countries, of the Reli∣gion, Manners, and Customs, of the Affri∣cans of Cape-Verd. We began our Journey the 6th of Decem∣ber 1682. for Senegal, whether we could have no passage by Sea, by reason of a strong Northernly Wind. In the mean time, the State of Affairs requiring the presence of Monsieur Dancourt, upon the Death of the Governor who came thither but some days before, he resolv'd to go
by Land, and to send the Renown, a Vessel Commanded by Captain Oyere, to carry the Merchandises, and to bring back the Goods for which he should make Ex∣changes. It were an easie matter to come from Senegal to Goree, but not to go thither. This Vessel having had a fair Wind, was a Month a making her Passage, which would be no more than 40 Leagues in a direct Course, but full 500 the way she was oblig'd to take. During this time, we began to imagine that she must be lost, when at length we see her come into the Road. Our Journey by Land was not so long, but much more tiresom, since the Road does not furnish Travellers with the least Necessaries. The Guides themselves are in want; and throughout the whole Village of Rafis, which is but 3 Leagues distant from hence, we could meet only with one Horse for Monsieur Dancourt, and six Asses, two of which we Loaded with Provisions. Mine, I must confess, had a very brisk Countenance, she winc'd and play'd the Devil for the first two Leagues, afterwards she would scarce move a foot. Our Negers were weary of beating her,
and, indeed, I was oblig'd to dismount, but she being of no large size, I got on and oft without much trouble, having no occasion for Stirrups. When I lighted upon a piece of bad way, and my Beast began to stick with me, it was but setting my feet to the ground, and she would be perswaded to move from under me, and leave me fairly to get out my self; finding her self without her Burden, she would kick and run after her Companions with a deal of vigour; which I perceiving, I made bold once more to bestride her. But, in short, we were deceiv'd in each other; she fairly stood still, expecting me to get off as before, and with all the Stripes I was able to give, I could only make her move a Foot-pace, as gravely as the Portuguese himself to whom she belong'd. Her Back was so sharp, that she inflicted the same pain as the Wooden-Horse. In short, without any fault of my own, was I thus rack'd during the whole six days of our Journey. Though it were in the Month of De∣cember, yet the heat was insufferable; which added much to my grievances, we continuing our march from Sun set to Sun∣rising, making only a small Halt at Noon,
where, under the shade of Trees, we took some refreshment out of the Provisions we brought along with us. At Night we Lodg'd in a small Village, but we found neither Victuals for our selves, nor Mill for our Carriers, which is the ordinary Food of the Negers, who often, for want of Corn, live entirely upon Roots. Our Landlords entertain'd us after the best manner they were able, but their ex∣tream Poverty made even that most insup∣portable. Their Houses are made of Straw, even that which belongs to the King him∣self. There are some places, where they are made more Commodious than in others. These worthy Structures are about four paces Diameter; their Covering is round, in the shape of a Dome; the up∣per part whereof is Straw, and the under Palm Leaves, the whole very prettily work'd: The Dome is supported with five or six forked Staves: The Wall is ei∣ther with Straw or Palm-Leaves curiously interwoven. They have neither Doors nor Windows to their Houses, save only a Hole much resembling the Mouth of an Oven; so that whoever goes in or out, must do it upon all four. Though the Heat must
needs be excessive in such a streightned place, yet they cannot content themselves without a fire, which must of necessity make an intolerable Smoak, which to them is very agreeable, they taking a particu∣lar delight in Smoak. The Floor of the House is Sand, having Trenches digg'd in them half Leg deep. Some of their Houses have their En∣trance so very small, that I admir'd how they could possibly creep in and out. And I remember a Gentleman, of something a larger size than my self, having lain in one of these lovely Palaces, endeavouring to creep out like a Serpent, having half out he very fairly stuck by the middle. In vain I endeavour'd to help him, and not daring to cut the Wall, I was oblig'd to call help to drag the Spark out. Their Beds are still more incommo∣dious than their Houses; they are made with a parcel of Sticks as thick as a Man's Wrist, plac'd two Fingers breadth asunder in the Nature of a Hurdle; the great knotty Sticks thus Platted, seem made on purpose to break a Man's Back. Their Beds, as well as their Houses, are support∣ed with forked Sticks: They lye down upon them without any more to do,
though those of the better sort of Quality have a Mat, which serves instead of a Quilt. By this that I have already said, 'tis easie to conclude, that though their Coun∣try can't afford its Inhabitants any great Felicities, by reason of its Sterility, yet their Laziness does much contribute to their Miseries. But to return to our Journey, which this digression has interrupted: After six days Travelling, we were got to a Village call'd Bieure, at the Mouth of the River Senegal. We found it to be the Custom of the Country, for their Women only to meddle in the business of Traffick, their Men not concerning themselves at all; so that out of pretext of bringing down their Merchandise, the Women come to divert themselves amongst our Seamen, who often are very ready to oblige them. We left our Equipage here, and Mon∣sieur Dancourt sent to the Residence, that they might send him a Bark to carry us the remaining 5 Leagues, to the Island St. Louis, which is made by Senegal; where we happily arriv'd on the 13th of December, two hours after Midnight. This Island is situated in the middle of
the River, 5 Leagues above its Mouth, and is about a League in Circumference: The Company have there a Store-House, a Commandant and Commissioners; 'tis thither where the Negers bring their Skins, Ivory, Slaves, and sometimes Amber-Gris; for our Gum-Arabick, it comes from the Moors, as I have already men∣tion'd. We give in Exchange, to these Negers, Linnen, Cotton, Copper, Tin, Aqua. Vitae, and some Glass-baubles. The Ad∣vantages that accrues by this sort of Traf∣fick, is 8 Hundred for the Hundred: The Skins, the Ivory, and the Gum, are brought into France; for the Slaves, they are sent to the French Plantations in Ame∣rica, to be employ'd in the Sugar Works. Those of the better sort are purchas'd sop eight Francs each, and are re-sold for above a Hundred Crowns. You'll ofte have a good substantial Slave for four o five Quarts of Aqua-Vitae. Thus their Prie is small, but the Charges of Transportin amounts to something considerable. The River of Senegal is a Branch  Niger, separating it self about 600 League above its Entrance: This River diffuses i self in the Kingdom of Cantorsi, and from
thence spreads into several Branches; the principal of which are Gamby and Ri∣organde. Senegal sepanates the Azonghes, Moors or Tawnies, from the real Blacks; so that on one side of the River are the Moors of a Tawny Complexion, and the other is Inhabited by People that are perfectly Black. The former are Wanderers, still Encamping, and making no longer stay in a place than they are furnish'd with good Pasturage; whereas the others, to wit, the Negers, are Sedentry, and asso∣ciate themselves in Villages. Those have no. Superiors but what they voluntarily choose, but these are subjected to Kings, who Despotically Tyrannize over them, and render them meer Slaves and Vassals. The Moors are small, Mea∣ger, and of an uncouth Mien, but have a Genius that's free and refin'd. On the contrary, the Negers are large, fat, and well proportion'd, but very Silly, and of shallow Conceptions. The Country In∣habited by the Moors is a Barren Sand, destice of Greens; and that of the Nigers fertile in Pasturage, Mill, and ever Greens, though they produce no Fruit for Suste∣nance.
It is from these Moors that we have our Gum-Arabick; they gather it in the Desarts of the interior Lybia. It sticks to the Trees that discharge it, as that of Cherry and Plum-Trees in France: They expose it to Sale a Month or six Weeks before the Inundation of Niger. We give them in Exchange blue Cloth, blue Linnen, and some small quantities of Iron; they bring it 5 or 600 Leagues by Land; some have half a Quintal, some more, and others less. They Ride wholly Naked upon their Camels, Horses, or Beeves, which they make use of for car∣rying, their Merchandises. Those of the greatest Rank amongst them, have a kind of Mantle made of Furr'd Skins, which very much resemble the Hoods of our Chanters; others have only a sorry piece of Leather to cover their Nudities. They make use of little other Nourishment but Milk, with some Gum dissolv'd therein. They are accustom'd to feed in Gangs when they come down to Traffick; and sometimes they buy a Beef expresly to devour him, but must themselves out his Throat, otherwise they will not eat of him; and there are those amongst, who are set a part for that piece of Service
Though they have good store of Cattle, yet they rarely eat any, save only when they have some one that is ready to expire, either by some Distemper, or by Age. Those that Negotiate with them have an intolerable deal of trouble, since they al∣ways meet with either Cheating or Insult from their hands; but since the Com∣merce is drove on the Bank of the River, they cannot so easily Cheat, for the Goods are immediately put on Board as they are Measur'd from them. This Commerce is perform'd in the Months of May and June, 30 Leagues above our Residence. When all is finish'd, they begin to Rattle you with a thousand opprobrious Reproaches; and if they can Trepan any French, or other White Man, they certain∣ly kill him in Revenge of some Quarrel, though of 20 Years standing. No longer than two Months since, they had taken a Seaman that knew the Language, who was sent by a Captain of the Company to Arguin, and they demanded no less than 50 Slaves in Exchange of him. Never was Nation more Roguish and Perfidious: They are very Cunning; and can make use of Fire Arms, but dare not stand a Shot; so that three White Men
did once prevent more than four hundred from seizing of a Bark, with which these Infidels came to Traffick; the Musket-shot which they were ply'd withal, did utterly Disarm them of their Courage, and baulk their Treachery. It was known afterwards, that the most part of them were Moors from the Skirts of Mount-Atlas, who came to Depose Cheiratick, one of the most puissant Negers Princes of that Country; of whom I shall speak more hereafter. I had forgot to mention that they retire into the Up∣lands, as soon as the Niger begins to over∣flow. The Kingdom of Senegal is the first Land belonging to the Negers: It has been for∣merly very considerable, at present it is of small Note; though they have a very brave King, yet, for want of Force, this Prince is become Tributary to another. His Dominion extends it self along the River for the space of 40 Leagues, with∣out reckoning some petty Signiories about its Mouth, and about 10 or 12 Leagues into Land; all which are his Tributaries. This King is call'd Brac, which is an Appellation of Dignity; however Absolute he is, yet is he so Poor and Miserable, bib
that often he has not Mill for his own Support. He is so great a Lover of Horses, that for the generality he contents him∣self with a Pipe of Tobacco, and a small quantity of Aqua-Vitae, and spares his Mill to give his Horses. Sometimes he makes Incursions upon the most unprovided of his Neighbours, without the least pretext, and so drives off their Cattel, in which their Riches consist; nay, often makes a parcel of Slaves, whom he sells for Aqua-Vitae. When his Stock of Strong-Water di∣minishes, he Looks up the remaining quan∣tity in a small Chest, and gives the Key to one of his Favourites, whom he dis∣patches, perhaps, 30 Leagues from thence, to tell some foolish Story to his Weinn. This he does, that he may not have pow∣er to Drink during his absence with the Key, by which means his small Store is preserv'd. If he has no opportunity of exercising his Tyranny upon his Neighbours, he does not fall of giving his own Subjec a taste of it, by over running his own Coun∣try, staying two days in one, Village, three in another, where he exacts an En∣tertainment for himself and all his Court;
which is compos'd of 200 of those that are most exquisite in Roguery, Rascals that have refin'd themselves by the Com∣merce with the Whites, of whom they are sure to retain their worst qualities. After they have ruin'd the Town, they take oc∣casion to carry off some Slaves, upon the least pretence of injury imagnable. And if the Prince be Perfidious, his Subjects don't come an Inch behind him, for they will lay hold on all opportuni∣ties to sell each other, without the least regard either to the degrees of Sanguini∣ty; so that a Father will sell his Sons, and a Son his Parents, as it best happens. They will pretend to employ those whom they have a mind to sell, in helping them with their Goods to our Residence, and when they have them there, they deliver them to whoever will purchase them, if they un∣derstand not the Language. I will insert here an Adventure that hap∣pen'd some time since, which will verify what I have been saying. One of these Wretches had form'd a design of selling his Son, he perceiving it dissembled the thing, and understanding the French Tongue, whilst his Father was gone some∣where aside he went to our Store-House,
and told, That he had a Jolly Slave to dispose of; and, in short, the Price was agreed on, and the bargain concluded, he sold and deliver'd him. This Slave was his own Father, who seeing them go to put Irons on his Feet, he began to be in a passion, and cry'd out, He was his Father; he deny'd it, and the Bargain stood good. This Crime did not go long unpunish'd, for the Son going home again with his Merchandise, met with a powerful Seig∣niour, who fairly stripp'd him of what he had, made him a Slave, and sold him at our Residence. After the Kingdom of Brac, you meet with that of Cheyratick; which is as much as to say, the most potent of the Empire. Of this latter depends more than ten little Kings, and other mean Soveraigns: His Empire extends it self upon two branches of the River Senegal, and contains full 300 Leagues of Land. These Countries pro∣duce Dates, Mill, and plentiful Pastures for feeding great store of Cattel. These People are call'd Foules; they are not quite black, neither so white as the Moors, but are betwixt both. They are far more Civiliz'd than the rest of the Negers, and entertain Strangers
very civilly. It has very often happen'd, when any of our Seamen have been ill treated by their Captains, they have taken Refuge at the Court of Cheyratick, where they have been kindly receiv'd, admitted to his Table, and have partaken of all the satisfaction and diversions that the place was capable of affording. He, for the most part, feeds upon Mill, Beef, and Dates, and never Drinks ei∣ther Wine or Aqua-Vitae, observing the Precepts of Mahomet more Religiously than the other Negers; he can take the Field with 50000 men, but for want of Provi∣sions he cannot long subsist them. Ascending from the Estates of Cheyra∣tick, you meet with the Countries of Far∣gots and Engusland, 300 Leagues from our Residence; we also manage a Traffick with them. They differ not in the least from the Foules. Since it is impossible to get any higher, my knowledge of those Countries reaches no farther; nor do I know a tittle of any thing beyond. After the River Senegal has winded it slf about Cantercy, and several other large Islands, it empties it self into the Sea, by two several Passages, in 15 Degrees 32 Mi∣nutes Northern Latitude. Betwixt the Sea
and this River there lies a Flat, or Bed of Sand, of about a Cannon-shot over; this resistance forces it to continue its Course for 6 Leagues before it can discharge it self into the Sea, though their surface lies of an equal level, but when it has forc'd it self two several Passages, it disembogues it self by two Mouths into the Sea, of about two Leagues distant from each other, between which is found an Island. In each of these Chanels there arises several Sand-Banks, which the River washes down with it, and are cast up back again by the Sea, and are left in dangerous ridges very incommodious for the Shipping for want of open Chanels; the continual agitation of the Sea, meeting a resistance by the Banks, render the Waves of a terri∣ble largeness, whose force do often split the Vessels against the shore; and then there is no manner of help for the Sea∣men, for should they endeavour to save themselves by Swimming, they would be immediately devour'd by the Requiems. These Passages are only dangerous at Low-Water, and not at the over-flowing of the Niger. What is singular in these Inundations, is that they almost, every time the Waters
rise, force themselves new Passages through the Sands to get into the Sea. About 20 Years past, it made its entrance right against the Island which is Inhabited by the French, which oblig'd them to remove a little higher; which Passage is now clos'd, and others made a-new, which are still so interchangeably fill'd, that there, however, remains but two at one time. Several Nations of Europe have Traffick'd formerly in this River, at present they are only French that use that Trade. Perhaps, having often mention'd the Inundation of Niger, it may be requir'd that I should give an Account how, and at what time it increases, without pre∣tending to give any Physical Reasons for its so doing; if by the Relation of the circumstances such a knowledge may be forwarded, I will do my best to recount the Particulars, such as I found them. The Heats are very excessive under the Torrid Zone for want of Rains, which are here very rare, and never out of the Months of July, August, and September. On the South-side of the Equinoctial the Rains begin earlier, and especially falls in abundance at this Season; they are ac∣company'd with furious Winds, and fol∣low'd
by so great a Calm, and such soul tring Heats, that 'tis very troublesome to breath. After the interval of two or three hours the Tempest recommences, and holds thus successively during the three Months; this occasions violent Distempers, Fevers, Cholera-Morbus, Ulcers upon the Legs, frequent Convulsions, follow'd by Death or the Palsie. The Reasons of the Inundation of the Nile are sufficiently known, nor have I any occasion to repeat them; this of the Niger is, no doubt, produc'd by the same Prin∣cipals. I believe that the true cause pro∣ceeds from the Sun's repassing the Line of Cancer, which in France makes our Sum∣mer Solstice; and here the Winter draws together a great Mass of Vapours, which are afterwards discuss'd into great and continued Rains, which, consequently, cause the overflowing. These Rains begin in Aethiopia in April, and continue May and June, but here they begin the 15th of July; they hold en∣creasing for the space of 40 days, and are as long in their decrease. This Inunda∣tion, which enriches the Soil, is not gene∣ral, but only on the Country that borders upon the River. When you are once up,
the Course of the River is no longer per∣ceiv'd, since its Chanel has not depth enough to contain these Waters, nor pow∣er to convey them streight into the Sea; so that they fill up all the Vallies, and lay the whole Country in a level. It's dangerous Sailing during this Flood, especially on the River Senegal, when the Chanel cannot be known; for upon the decrease of the Water the Bark may be left either upon some eminence, or in some hollow, of which it would be im∣possible to get her clear. It is about 15 Years ago since an Acci∣dent happen'd, which will confirm what I. have said. The Gentlemen of the Com∣pany having a mind to take the benefit of the Flood, sent some Barks to discover the Inhabitants about the place, and where the Branches of the Niger separate; they en∣deavouring to Sail from the River of Senegal to that of Gamby, of whose entrance the English are Masters; and by a Fort which they there maintain, they hinder any Com∣merce by others into that River. And since our People could no how make any Discoveries that way, but at the time of the high Waters, by whose assistance they might Sail over Rocks, which at other
times stood on dry ground. They sen 30 Men in these Barks, who went up nea 300 Leagues from our Residence, but they underwent such Fatigues, that but five o them return'd. Having one time lost the Chanel, their Bark, amongst other Mis∣fortunes stuck fast amongst the Trees; by good Luck they were not far off the Chanel, so that by force and main strength they got her once more afloat. When Monsieur Dancourt had dispatch'd his business in these Quarters, in what re∣lated to the advantage of the Company, finding the Barbarre, or the Mouth of the River, in good condition to be pass'd, there being a gentle Easterly Wind, he accomplish'd it in a Bark appointed for that purpose; she carry'd us Aboard the Ship call'd the Ronown, who waited for us in the Road, on which we Embark'd to save a troublesome Journey by Land. We weigh'd Anchor the 10th of Janua∣ry 1683, and Sail'd for Goree; we Coast∣ed along the shore, which being adorn'd with Trees of a continual Green, afforded us a most engaging Prospect. When he had visited all the Coasts, and given his necessary Orders, we return'd the lame way, which took us up eight
hole days. I have here set down what Remarks I was capable of making during my small continuance there. The People that Inhabit the Coasts from the Mouth of Senegal to that of Gamby, are divided into three sorts, The Geloffes, the Sereres, and the Barbecins; they are go∣vern'd by several little Kinglings, each Ab∣solute in his own Territories: He of largest Bounds is King Amel, Sovereign of the Geloffes. The Name Amel is not pecu∣liar to this Prince, but it is a Name of Dig∣nity. Since all their Governments do very much resembe each other, as well in re∣spect of the People as the Country, I shall content my self with this Example, to make you sensible of the others. The Geloffes Inhabit beyond the Mouth of Senegal as you go South, till you come within 6 or 7 Leagues of Cape-Verd, which contains, from North to South, 40 Leagues of the Maritime Coasts, and from East to West 100 by Land. The Country of the Sereres, have for their King him whom we call Portugady, by reason of a Town that belongs to him, and bears this Name; Jain is his Name of Dignity. It contains 10 or 12 Leagues along the Coast, and extends it self almost an hundred by Land.
The Kingdom of Barbecins, otherwise Jouall, (for the same reason as I have al∣ledg'd of Sereres) is govern'd by King whose Name I cannot call to mind; he has no larger Territories than the former, with whom he often wages War. Besides these three People, there are a sort of Portuguese; they are so call'd, since they descended from them who first In∣habited these Coasts after their first Disco∣very. The Negresses, whom they espous'd, brought forth these kind of Mule men, from whom there comes a Race still more swarthy. They may also be Fugitives from Cape-Verd, or from Cacheau, another Co∣lony of that Nation, upon one of the Branches of the River Gamby, distant three days Journey. As they have follow'd the Religion of their Ancient Masters, they are partly Jews, partly Catholicks; they carry a great pair of Beads about their Necks; there are none of any greater Rank than others; they are great Cheats, and very Malicious, having all the Vices of the Portuguese, and not one of their good Qualities. All these parts in general are Sandy and Barren; the Heat is more violent in the Month of January, than it is in July or
August in France. It Rains in the same manner, as I have already said, when  spoke of Senegal. The Country is well Peopled, and is very Woody. They begin at the end of June to Cultivate their Land, and Sow their Seed; some small while after the Rains have ceas'd. Their Harvest falls our in September; so that in three Months time they prepare their Land Sow and Gather in. This makes the Richness of the Soil apparent, which, notwithstanding its Ste∣rility, and their Natural Laziness, produces them great store of Grain; I mean their Mill. Their way of labouring their Earth is odd and pleasant: They get four or five together in the Field, which they call Cou∣gan; or Courgar, and so with a little round Iron Shovel, something larger than ones Hand, set in a Stale of Wood, they break up the Earth, which they fling be∣fore them, not entring the Swerd of the Ground above three or four singers breadth, each having a Pipe constantly in his Mouth. If they Work one hour, they'l besure to Chat two for it. When the Ground is so order'd, they Sow it as they Sow Pease in France, and never take care to lay
by any Store. They are for the most part so Lazy, that they don't gather half enough to serve them, living in the mean time upon a black Root, which is dry'd till it afford no manner of savour; and upon another call'd Gernotte, whose taste is some∣thing like that of a Wall-nut. If by chance their Harvest miss, and they are left destitute of a Crop, they even dye of Hunger. It is not five Years since the like mis∣fortune happen'd to them, being seduc'd by the promises of a Marabon, which is the name of their Priests: He was of the Azoaghes, or Arabs, of which I have al∣ready spoken. Under pretence of Reli∣gion, he possess'd himself of all the Coun∣try betwixt Cheyratick to Sereres, telling them, That he was inspir'd by Heaven to revenge the Tyranny of their Kings. He promis'd Miraculous Forces to prove his Vocation; and, above all, to make their Land bring forth a plentiful and vo∣luntary Harvest, without giving them any trouble of bestowing their Labour. This Promise suiting well with their idle temper, tickled their Imaginations at a strange rate; so that almost all of them, especially those of the Kingdom of Damel,
espous'd the Cause of this Impostor. Their King was Depos'd, and all their Neigh∣bours Pillag'd in this Revolt; they liv'd in daily expectation of this Miracle, and waited two Years looking for their Mill, but to no purpose. At length they began to Eat one another for want of Sustenance, and afterwards were oblig'd to surrender themselves Slaves. Process of time con∣vinc'd them of their folly and madness; so they drove away their Tyrant, and re∣stor'd Damel to his Estate. At present they will allow no more Marabous in their Coun∣try, but make Slaves of all they can lay their hands on. Besides their Mill, they have black and white Beans, very like our French Beans, and Melons full of an insipid Juice. Of this sort of Grain, they make that which they call Couscouse in Arabs and Laguere in their Language, which is their ordinary sort of Food. The Fruit which we call Bananes, and in the Canaries Adam's Ap∣ples, are very plentiful amongst them. They feed Cattle and Goats; and those amongst them which have the largest Stock, are of the greatest Repute. Their Beefs are no larger than a Calf of eight or nine Months old in France, which I sup∣pose
is occasion'd by their great Droughts; for all along the Banks of the River Sene∣gal, which affords good Pasturage, they are as large as in Europe. There are great store of Palm-Trees, of which I observ'd three several sorts: The one resembles the Date-Tree, the other like them we have in France; the third is a sort of Latanier. As for that which bears the Coco, there is none of that kind here. By Incisions which the Negers make in these Palm-Trees, a Liquor is Distill'd of a Pearl colour, which they call Palm-Wine, 'tis sweet and palatable to be made use of the first day, it entoxicates, and loses its gust, every day growing sowrer than other; the older it is, the more it affects the Head. Each Tree may produce three Pints of Li∣quor; it is generally made use of for the Regaling of Strangers, nor is it ever want∣ing amongst the Persons of Condition. This same Tree produces a sort of small Coco's, from which they draw the Punick Oil; which smells like Violets, is of a Saffron colour, and tastes like Olives; it makes part of the Composition of the Musselin-Oil of Nicolas Alexandrin. Some Customs from these Trees are due to Alzair, or the Lord of the Village.
As the Palm-Trees are high and without Branches, and that the Incision must be made in two or three places below the Tuft of Boughs, which is the Beauty of this Tree, they climb up after this man∣ner: They have a round Hoop made of Bark, which they can tye and untye as they please, by which they mount; they seem as if they sat within it, and push their Feet against the Tree, sustain'd by the Rind which goes about their Thighs, and holds them as firm as though they sat upon the Ground. Thus they Inch up till they get to the top, where they make their Incisions, and fix too their Calabasses to catch the distilling Liquor. You can't look upon them so high, upheld by so small a matter, without being sensible of some dread and terror. All along the Coasts they have an infi∣nite number of Animals, of which I shan't pretend to give a particular Description, since I am not well-skill'd in the Science of the Naturalists; I shall only mention them that I know, of which many may be seen in Europe, by the Care and Curiosity of several Princes that have occasion'd their Transporting: But seeing them there in their Natural fierceness, before they are
any ways tam'd, what I have to say con∣cerning them may, perhaps, give you some more particular Ideas. The places where, for the most part, these wild Creatures are seen, are Ponds and Ditches which the Rain has fill'd up; Evenings and Mornings they come thither by Droves, as well as others that be less Savage: There are then to be seen Ele∣phants, Lions, Tygers, Leopards, Ounces, Wolves, Tyger-Cats, such as produce Civet, Foxes, Wild Goats, &c. What they observe of an Elephant, is, That she is never to be attack'd where there is room enough for her quick and free turning; for when she is at liberty, she will certainly overturn the Men with her Trunk, and trample them to Death. I do not know the time when the Female brings forth her Young, what I know, is, That she often has three at a time, and feeds them with Herbs and Leaves, which she puts in their Mouths with her Trunk. They often come by Night into the Villa∣ges, not at all concerning themselves tho' they be frequented places; and instead of turning out of the way, when they meet with any of the Negers Houses, they keep streight forwards, and overturn them in
their Walk as tho' they were but Nut∣shells. The Lyon is very curious and cunning in seizing his Prey, not leaping directly upon it, but taking a compass, ramping upon the Ground, and when he finds him∣self within compass, he darts forth and flings himself upon it. They are easily tam'd when Young, we having had of them as gentle and as fawning as a Dog. The Tyger is more fierce than the Lyon, his length and heighth is near the same with a Greyhounds, and will indifferently fall upon either Man or Beast. The Ne∣gers kill many of them with their Zagayes, and their Arrows, that they may get their Skins; whatever Wound they have receiv'd, yet they keep upon the Defence during they have any life left, and scarce ever fail of killing some before they fall. The Leopard is cruel and nimble; how∣ever, they do not care for attacking Men, unless they meet them in a place so nar∣row that they cannot be avoided; but then he flings himself upon them, tearing their Faces with their Claws, pulling off as much flesh as they can grasp, and thus killing them. They are Mortal Enemies to the Dogs, and devour them where-ever they meet them.
They say the Ounce is still more fierce than a Tyger, of which I believe they are a Species, or, at least, what we call Panthers; their Skin is more beautiful than the Tygers, though they be spotted alike. The Tyger-Cat is also so call'd, by reason of his black and white spots; they are shap'd like our Cats, but four times as large; naturally voracious, and eats Mon∣kies, Rats, and other sort of Animals. The Wolfe differs in no respect from ours, but that they are something larger, and more cruel. The Cat, which produces the Civet, has the Head and Muzzel of a Fox; it is large and spotted like the other, and very wild. One may get Civet from them every two days; which is a sort of Muscosite, or thick Sweat, which is under their Breech, with∣in a concavity which contains their Testi∣cles. I never saw any Rhinoceros, tho' there be some here. There are several sort of Apes and Monkies, as the Guenons with long Tails, and Magots which have none at all; I saw none of these latter. For the former there are store every where, of which there are three kinds; two of which are of a small Composure, and do but
little mischef. Of these lesser sort, the call some of them the Bewailers, by reaso of a Cry like unto small Children. Of the other sort, there are some  large as the Magots; they have not onl Hands and Feet, but have something ver near Mankind in their Gesture. The N∣gers are fully convinc'd that these Ape can speak if they please, but that they do not lest they should be oblig'd to Work Though we know that these Creatures are good for nothing but to bite and tear, y they often meet with a great deal of kind∣ness at our hands. It is, I believe, on th account that the Negers of Senegal w bring Rats in Cages, as though we wer fond of all sorts of Beasts; and they'l te you, that those are more Brave and C∣rious than the Monkies, and that therefo we ought to love them more. It is not to be imagin'd what Havo these Creatures make, when the Mill an the Corn is ripe, on which they fee They will get 40 or 50 of them together and so go to Cougan; one of them is plac Sentinel upon some high Tree near th Field, whil'r the rest are busie at the Harvest. Whenever he perceives any bo∣dy a coming, he will Cry like a Ma∣thing;
the others of the Gang taking hint at the Signal, get off with their Booty with all the speed imaginable, leaping from Tree to Tree with a prodigious agility. And the Females, who carry their Young along with them, will, notwithstanding, leap the Trees to a Miracle, as tho' they were not at all incumbred. They eat here great store of Venison. Wild Boars are very plentiful, but have not the same relish as ours, and their flesh is as white as that of a young Pig. Wild Goats, Kids and Hares, are in great store. I did not see any of their Stags, which are headed as well as in France, only their Horns are like those of the Capricorns in the Mountains of Switzerland, saving that they are streight. There is to be seen here several Species of Birds unknown in Europe, abundance of which live altogether upon Fish; particu∣larly, they have one they call the Great Gosier, they are twice as big as a Swan, having a Beak a full Cubit in length, and a Craw of Skin under their Throat in the ashion of a bag, they swallow Fish entire∣y whole, tho' as large as a good middling Carp. Cormorants and Vultures are the ame as in Europe: Of these latter sort
there are some as large as Eagles, which will devour small Children whenever they can catch them a stragling. I saw some Birds of so changeable and so curious a Plumage, that it's impossible for me to give you a just Description: Their Nightingals do not warble so sweet∣ly as in Europe. I have already mention'd the Ostridges, of which some are of an excessive large∣ness; those of them that are Flyers are delicious Food, and their several parts have a distinct relish; they are as large as  Swan, and their Plumes are grey and black. The Wild Geese are very good and pleasant Food: Their Teal, above all the other Fowl, have a most incomparable relish; and those of them that are grey upon the River Senegal, do much surpa the rest in goodness. The Partridges there do Pearch upon Trees like other Birds; as also do their Hens, which the Portuguese call Pintade These Hens are speckled grey, and black having a small red Wattel on each sid their Ears; they are of a larger size that ours, and I believe them to be a kind  Partridges.
The Parrots there are of two kinds, the one are small, and wholly Green; the other are larger, with grey Heads, their Bellies yellow, their Wings green, and their Backs a mixture of grey and yellow. These never talk, but the small ones have a clear and sweet Voice, and will learn whatever is taught them. Of all those different Birds, I know none that are so curiously Industrious, as a certain small Bird that makes its Nest upon the Palm-Trees, after a most curious way of Architecture, and by a wonderful In∣stinct, secures it from the Serpents that often creep up the Trees. They build them on the extream Point of the smallest Branches, to which they fasten a Rush or Sraw, the strongest that they are able to carry, of about a Foot and a half in length; and to the end which hangs down∣wards in the Air, do they strangely affix their Nests, leaving a small hole for their entrance on one side near the top. This resembles a Ball hung up by a Thread and since the Branch to which it is affix'd is too small to bear any offensive Creature, they there produce their Young in secu∣rity.
The Sea is extraordinary full of Fish along the Coasts, where all sorts may be met withal: Those of Prey have large and long Teeth, of a double or triple range. Those that are commonly Eat there, are Parques, Guiltheads, Vieills, Tun∣nys, Mullets, Rucaes of the shape of a Salmon, Negres, Soles, Smelts, and in abundance of Sprats; by which the Sea is sometimes cover'd. The Requiem is a Sea-Monster, of the shape of a Sea-Dog, but as long as three of them; from four to eight Foot in length. She brings forth her Young ones alive, and has a Matrix like a Bitch, her other parts like a Fish; it is the most rapacious sort whatever, eating all sort of Animals that they can catch; insomuch, that it is dan∣gerous going into the Water to Bath, or to fall into the Sea, where-ever they are, for the best Swimmer in the World will not be able to escape them. The Marsouin, or Sea-Hog, is the same bigness as the Requiem, and very good Food; these will offer no injury to Man∣kind. There is Bacon made of them, but of an ill savour; their Sides and Intrails are the same as in a Swine, excepting that they have two several Stomachs, one at the ex∣tremity
of the Oosophage, the other ad∣joining to its side, and near as large as the former. To this is a small passage as big as the Pipe of a Quill, by which the com∣munication from the one to the other is perform'd: They are full of little Cells, very like the Cells of a Honey-Comb. The Duodenum, I very well remember, has its rise from the latter. I had not an oppor∣tunity to make a just search, our Seamen had so mangled it. The Whales are prodigious in size, both as to length and thickness; so that they of∣ten seem to exceed a Vessel of 26 Tun burthen: However, they never overturn a Ship, nor so much as a little Bark or Shallop, which care of theirs must be rather attributed to the thinness and tenderness of their skin than any good intentions, they not being able to strike against any thing that is hard, unless when they are wounded, then the Fishermen in their Boats must keep off at their peril. The Blower very near resembles a Whale, but of a much lesser size; they fling up Water as the Whale, but only by one single passage, which is above their Muzzel, whereas the others have two.
I do not know the Name of a certain Fish, from whose Upper-Jaw a Bone shoots out the length of four Foot, having sharp pricks a cross all along each side, rang'd in equal distances, and very sharp; which Weapon they often make use of. This Fish we call the Sword Fish, they are de∣clar'd Enemies to the Whale, and often En∣counter them with advantage, wounding the Whales at that Rate, that they force them. selves ashore, and bleed to Death. There are a sort which the Seamen call Sptons, which have a large Bone situated in the same place as the so mer, with thi difference alone, that 'tis smooth and very sharp. I believe 'tis the same we call the Naruval. This Bone resembles the Fabu∣lous Horn of the Unicorn. This Fish i capable of piercing a Vessel, and making her leak Water; if it does not happen that endeavouring to get clear they brea this Bone, and then it serves for a Peg to mend the hole it made. The Sucker, so call'd for fixing them selves to any Vessels by their Mouths, an sucking, they are of the bigness of a Sole when they fasten upon the Rudder the retard the Ship, but not stop it as is fal reported of the Remoras.
Amphions Creatures are not frequently met withal upon these Coasts; nor do you often meet with the Crocodile, the Sea-Harse, or the Sea Calf, the Lamantin, and the Tortoise, unless it be at the Mouths of Senegal and Gamby. There are in Marshes and Pools small Crocodiles of about 5 Foot in length, where∣of some are venomous, and others not They are in the Nature of Serpents, and frequent those places that have most plenty of Pismires. These little Creatures build themselves a kind of Forts by degrees, car∣rying little Morsels of Earth till they en∣crease the Hillock to 12 or 15 Foot in compass, being hollow underneath like an Oven, and so rang'd, that you wou'd be∣lieve them at a distance to be a Village. There are in the River Gamby Crocodiles of above 20 Foot in length, and propor∣tionably in thickness; insomuch, that they will swallow a Kid whole. They are very dangerous Creatures, having their Tails full as long as the rest of their Body; their Skin is so hard that a Zgaye cannot pierce it; some of them will Eat nothing but Fish, others will venture upon a Man. When they Watch for their Prey, they hide themselves in some frequented Rivers, and
being near to any that go Wash themselves, or if they are Rowing in a Canoe, or if a Bullock comes thither, they will catch them with their Tails, and so devour them; they only move their upper Jaw, their un∣der one being immoveable. They do no great mischief out of Water; when the Negers kill them they eat them. They lay their Eggs on Land, covering them with Sand; when they have done, they return either into the Rivers, or the Woods. The Sea-Horse, such as are met withal in the Niger, is of the bigness of an Ass, and of the shape of a Horse; his Skin is hard, and without hair, and lives on Land as well as in Water, which he never leaves, saving when he goes to feed. They make great Havock amongst the Mill and the Rice, since they spoil ten times more than they eat. They will overturn the Canoes of the Negers, but however they do not seize on the Men: They have two large Teeth which is made use of as Ivory. The Sea-Ox, which comes and feeds on Land, is as large as a Calf of 6 Months old. There are more Lamantins in the River of Senegal than in that of Gamby; they are as large as the Marsouin, and have the
same sort of Flesh and Bacon; when they are out of the Water, they make use of their Fins instead of Feet. This is all that I know of things of this Nature; I shall now give you an account of the Manners and Genius of the Negers. The Negers are very well shap'd, and very proportionable in their make and size: You shall not see any amongst them either Hunch-back'd or Lame, if it does not befal them by some mischance. They are Stupid, and without Address, even in Matters of the smallest concern: They are swinging Liars, but greater Thieves. They have a dexterity in nothing else but in Ly∣ing, having so good a knack at this bu∣siness, that they will Rob you before your face, without your perceiving any thing of the matter, by scraping away with one of their Feet what they have a mind to take, and then taking it up behind them. When any of the Mountaneers, for so they call them that come off from Land, come to Negotiate with us, there is no manner of Cheats but the Negers will put upon them; for under pretext of helping them to carry their Merchandise, and to be serviceable to them in the nature of Interpreters, they will fairly keep half of
the value of what they receive from us, as though they had a real interest in the Goods. The terror of those Punishments which their Kings inflict on those who Rob on Nights, and the many Persons taken in the Fact, cannot remedy this Vice that is so Natural to them; notwithstanding the Chastisement in this case is sufficiently rigo∣rous, for on this account they are to be∣come Slaves to those whom they have Robb'd. Whoever is oblig'd to make use of Negers for Interpreters, is miserably expos'd to their Rogueries, they scarce ever giving a true account of what is spoke, always finding out some evasion that is quite con∣trary; and by that means often render our Bargains litigious. Their Manners are altogether insup∣portable, especially when they believe themselves to be serviceable in any respect. Their Drunkenness is to an extream excess, being continually gorg'd with Aqua Vitae; their Palm Wine is not plentiful enough to be always at hand. Their Drunkenness is accompanied with a total deprivation of Reason, and a furious Brutality.
They are not sensible of what Nature is Restitution, nor have they the least tincture of Civility. Their▪ ignorance is so notorious, that they scarce can com∣prehend that two and two makes four; nor have they any knowledge of their Age, nor of the days of the Week, for which they want Names to distinguish. Their Maraboux, who have sometimes a small tincture of the Arabs, writing their Griz Griz in that Language, I shall take to explain these terms hereafter. These People have but one good Qua∣lity, they are very Hospitable; nor do they ever suffer a Stranger of their Nation to go from them, without entertaining them with Eating and Drinking, and do∣ing their best to detain them for several days. And as they set their Aqua Vitae in great esteem, they therefore conceal it from their Guests, since they would be asham'd not to give it them should it be set in view. They recompence them∣selves of their Hospitality towards the Mountaneers, by cheating them of the Aqua Vitae which they have in exchange for their Merchandise, never allowing them so much as a half.
They are all extreamly Poor, their whole Stock depending on a few Cattle, the most Rich not having above 40 or 50, 2 or 3 Horses, with, perhaps, as many Slaves; 'tis very rare that they have any Pie∣ces of Gold to the value of 11 or 12 Pistoles. Though they have no Wit, or any Talent of a Genius, yet they are excessive Lovers of Praises and Adulation; so that there are a sort of People call'd Guiriotz, whose business it is to perform this piece of Service. These Guiriotz carry a sort of Drums near four or five Feet in length, made of a hollow Trunk of a Tree, which they Beat either with their Hands, or with small Sticks. There are also Moresque Drums, resembling Baskets, cross'd over with little Cords, which they finger with one Hand whilst they stike with the other. I observ'd that they made use of another sort of Instrument, sufficiently Harmonious did they know how to touch it; it gives a sound like a Harp. It consists of a row of several Strings of several sizes, suspend∣ed to the touch like the Wires of a Spinet. I saw another of their Musical Instru∣ments, which would be proper for the Chamber of a Sick Person. 'Tis a kind of Lute made of a piece of hollow Wood,
cover'd with Leather, with two or three Strings of Hair, and adorn'd with Iron Plates and Rings like a Tambour de Bsque. These Guiriots Tune these several In∣struments to their Voice, which is very harsh; and thus they Sing Panegyricks of their Men of the best account. The ge∣neral Topicks are, that they are great Lords, Rich, and as Puissant as the White Men, who are great Slaves of a King; and, in a word, an infinite number of such foolish expressions. These Persons are Transported with their Elogies, and largely recompence these Guiriots, who Sing their Praises. They make their Acknowledgments at so great a rate, that I have seen them strip themselves to reward these false and fulsom Flatteries. When these Varlets miss of their expected Fees they fall a railing, and publish in the Villages as many base things as they can rip together against them, contradicting whatever they had said good of them; which is look'd upon to be the grandest Affront imaginable. 'Tis esteem'd a very great Honour when the King's Guiriot Sings any ones Praises, and he never fails of a good Re∣ward, they sometimes giving 2 or 3 Bullocks, and often the best part of their Goods.
These Guiriots do not omit the Singing the same stuff to us, crying, That we are Great, and Rich Lords of the Sea; but they scarce find it worth their while amongst us, since we are not such sense∣less Boobies as the Negers. The Habits of the Blacks are very plain. The poor People have nothing but a piece of Linnen, or Cotton, of about half a Foot breadth, to cover their Nakedness; 'tis fasten'd to a Cord, which serves them for a Girdle, and they let the Cloth hang down before and behind them, which they look upon as a great Ornament. The Gentlemen, and Men of Quality, are something better Equip'd. They have a Cotton Frock made in the shape of a Franciscan's Gown, with long and large Sleeves; they are not Plaited at the Neck, for they only have a slit to put through their Heads like a European Smock; they have them of all Colours, some have blue, yellow, brown, &c. Since these Jackets reach but half way down their Thighs, they have Breeches of the same Stuff, that reach from the Girdle place below the Knees. These Trowses are so large, that they take up five Ells of Cloth; they resemble Wo∣mens
Petticoats-Sew'd together at the bottom, leaving only 2 places to put the Legs through; the largest are the most fashionable. They wear upon their Heads a sort of Bonnets, streight at the entrance, but large at the bottom, something like the Hood of the Jacbins. The Common People go with their Feet Naked, but the People of Quality have Sandals made of a piece of Leather cut into the Shape of a Shooe Sole, fasten'd at the top of the Foot with Thongs, alter the manner of the Sandals of the Ancients. Their Hair, tho' short, yet is tress'd up very prettily, and adorn'd with Gris-gris, Silver, Leather, Coral, Copper, &c. They wear at their Ears Rings of Tin, Silver, and Copper. Those that are Born of a Race of Slaves are not allow'd to wear their Hair. The Maids and the Women go Naked from the Girdle upwards, unless the Cold obliges them to fling over some Covering; the other part of their Body they Cloath with a Paign, which is a piece of Linnen or Cotton strip'd after their fashion, about the bigness of a Towel, which reaches to the half Leg. Their Hair is also deck'd with Coral, and other little Baubles; their Head-Dress makes a Crest upon the Head half a Foot high, the higher they esteem the handsomer.
The Girls and the Boys go Naked till Eleven or Twelve Years old. Men and Women adorn their Legs and Arms with Coral, Bracelets of Silver, Gold, Tin, and Copper, according as they abound in Wealth. Cotton, with which these People Cloath themselves, would be produc'd amongst them in abundance would they bestow labour to Cultivate it; but they content themselves with what they have a Necessi∣ty, and very often want even that. The Women Spin the Cotton, and the Men make the Cloth; nor has their Pieces above five Fingers in breadth, for want of ne∣cessary Employments for the making broader, otherways they would make as good Weavers as in France. They are forc'd to join ten or twelve Pieces toge∣ther to make a small breadth. Mill is the ordinary sustenance of the Western Negers; the Women that pre∣pare it make thereof Sanglet or Couscouse, which are their terms that signify two man∣ner of Victuals. They begin at break of day to make their Sanglet, for it requires full six hours for the preparing it. Two or three go about this Work, then taking all the Mill
they are to make use of at this time, they Pound it in deep Mortars made of Wood, having not the practice of any Mills: When the Mill has lost its Husk; they win∣now it with Fans made of Leaves of Palms to cleanse it; afterwards they Boil it in Milk, or with Butter, or Meat Broth, or with dry'd Fish, or with Water. The Couscouse, which is their best Victu∣als, is also Mill well beaten and clean Sifted. When 'tis well cleansed, a little of it is put in a Bowl, and sprinkled a little Water upon the Meal. After 'tis well turn'd by Hand, some more Water is put in, and then 'tis to be well Moulded again; then 'tis to be made up in little Balls. They are then to be dry'd; when they are well dry'd; they are set in a Pot full of holes, upon another Pot where Meat has been Boil'd season'd with Selpiment and Palm-Oyl, when any is to be had. This Ragou is well enough when 'tis rightly prepar'd, and the Sand well Dress'd out; which is seldom done. When they go to War, they take along with them a little Bag a Foot long, and the thickness of a Man's Arm, full of Couscouse ready Boil'd. Since the Women have this Handy-work for their daily Em∣ploy,
they are not a little busied. Should the Women of France take such constant pains for their Husbands, I fear the Men would lead but sorry Lives. For their Beeverage, they have Palm-Wine, and Water out of some stinking Ditch, or from a worse place; they make use of Milk when they can get it. As Ambition is a Passion unknown to these People, they give themselves no trouble of Building Towns, Castles, or Houses of Pleasure; but however, they have neither Industry nor Materials. They Inhabit only in Villages, in Houses as I have already describ'd. There are several made according to their Quality or Sufficiency; those that are nearest the Palm-Trees are the handsomest, though they be also with∣out either Doors or Windows. The House of a great Lord will be compos'd of, per∣haps, 30 Pavillions, which they call Com∣bettes; sometimes of 40 or 50. A Poor Man will have but two or three, and the King above a Hundred, but cover'd with Straw as the others. Those of Persons of Quality are en∣compass'd with Pallisades of either Straw or Thorns propt up with Stakes: These Combettes communicate one to the other by
ways laid out in the form of Labyrinths; within the Precincts of the House are very sine Trees according to the Capacity of the Owner, though they be scatter'd, and without any regularity, as the place has by Nature produc'd them. The Building of the Palace of King Damel surpasses all the rest in Magnifi∣cence. Before you come to the Gate of the Pallisades, which makes the first En∣closure, there is a spacious open Field, where his Horses are Manag'd, tho' there be not above ten or twelve of them in all. Without, by the sides of those Pallisades, are the Grand Seigniors Cabbins: You go in from this place into the Palace by a large Avenue; this place is adorn'd with several Trees which we call Collbassiers, be∣cause their Fruit resembles a Calbass. Persons that are Employ'd the nearest about the King, have their Cabbins by the side of this Avenue; and their nearness, or distance, from the Combett-Royal, di∣stinguishes their Ranks. Each of their Cabbins are also encompass'd with Palli∣sades; you must turn and wind very much before you can come to the King, few Peope dare go into his Appartment.
All the Women have their Lodgings se∣parately, and each of them have five or six Slaves to serve them. The King may Lye with which he pleases, without crea∣ting a jealousie in any of them. He has always one whom he loves better than the rest, and when ever he is weary of her, he dispatches her into some Village with her Slaves, and appoints her Land for her Maintenance. To her succeeds another, of 30 which he keeps; the one half of them are sent away into the Country. The Negers, from this place to Gamby, observe the Law of Mahomet; but in the Territories towards Siera Liona, and to∣wards the Coast of Gold, have for the most part no Religion at all, or, at least, they Worship what they first meet withal in the Morning. Formerly they were Idola∣ters, worshipping the Devil, to whom they Sacrific'd Bullocks; and though they fed upon Cattel, yet they were Believers of the Metempsucosis. There are some who will not have the Lizards, which run about their Huts, kill'd, upon any account whatever; for, say they, 'tis the Soul of either their Fa∣ther or Mother that comes to make the Folgar with them, which is to say a Mer∣riment.
They receiv'd their Mahometan Religion from the Azoaghes or Arabs, of whom I have already told you. It is but very pittifully observ'd by the vulgar sort, who are only lightly tainted with it. The sub∣stantial are more devour, for they general∣ly have a Moorish Maraboux that belongs to them, which are cunning Rogues, and have a strong Influence upon them. They make their Sala, or Prayers, three times a day, in the Morning towards Sun rising, towards Noon, and in the Evening; some in the Afternoon: The meaner sort of Peo∣ple say them not at all, or at least but very seldom, nor do not trouble themselves in the Building of Mosques. The King and the Grandees have Mosques cover'd with Straw like their other Houses They there keep standing a considerable time, looking against the side towards the Sun rising; then they advance two Paces, muttering some Words betwixt their Teeth, then they lay themselves flat upon their Faces, then rising they place themselves upon their Knees, making a Circle round about them upon the Earth, and about their Heads two or three several times. Afterwards they kiss the Earth by several erks putting Sand upon their Faces with both
Hands, repeating the same Ceremonies for the space of half an hour. One demands of God Almighty that he may have no Enemy, but such as he has Power to defeat; that God would do him no Injury. Another begs, that he may have handsom Women, and great store of Mill, &c. During their Prayers no Accident whatever is capable of Inter∣rupting them, even though they saw their own Houses in flames. They believe Predestination, and when∣ever they fall into disgrace, they charge the Cause upon God Almighty; so that if one Neger be killed by another, they say that God killed him. However they lay hold on the Murtherer and sell him. They are so Superstitious that they ima∣gine, that having certain Spells, they can∣not be so much as touched by any Beasts that approach them, since that will either destroy them, or procure them some mis∣chance. They have a sort of Character which they call Gris-gris; these are little Billets of the Arabian Character, interlaced with Negromantick Figures, which are sold them by the Maraboux. One serves to pre∣vent their being Wounded, to help their
swimming, to procure them good success in their Fishing; others for procuring them great store of Women and Children; to hinder their being taken Captive; and in General; for all purposes that either Suits with their Fears or Wishes. They have so great an assurance in these Characters, that some of them by their Protection will not scruple standing the shot of an Arrow. 'Tis true, that they are arm'd wholly over with this Magical Cuirase, not one single part of their Body being destitute thereof, so that they could scarce be hurt with a Zagay. Their Grand Seignior more particularly have their Vests and their Bonners wholly covered there∣with, often loading themselves at that rate, that they are oblig'd to be set on Horseback. They also affix them to their Horses to render them more sprightly, and to pre∣vent their being wounded. These Gris-gris are wrap'd up in Linnen very hard, folded and glew'd, and cover'd over with a red Leather handsomly fitted up some of them are no larger than your Thumb, worked up and Pointed in form of a Diamond, of which they make Brace∣lets, into which the Marabouxs do often enclose nothing at all; as I have experi∣enced
by some that our Slaves wore. Before and behind them, at their Back and Stomach, they have them very large as big as a Book in Quarto, and the thick∣ness of your two Thumbs; they make them in the shape of a Horses Arse, of a Stag Horn, or of a Wild Bull, cover'd with red Cloth. Two of this latter sort they affix to their Bonnets, and in this Equipage they appear very frightful; this secures them in their Combats which they have one with another, but not all against our Musket-shot; so that they are accustom'd to say, that there is no Gris-gris that is Pou proof, which is the Name they give our Fire-Arms. The Maraboux ruin them by the pur∣chase of this Gris-gris, for they make some which they sell for three Slaves, others for four or five Bullocks, according to the stock of Vertue or Force which they attri∣bute to it. The Opinion the Negers enter∣tain for their Gris-gris, has impos'd upon the Ignorant of the French, so that they have believd to have met with frequent Sorceries amongst these People. There is a certain time when these pretended Sor∣cerers make a thousand Grimaces, Singing or Crying, when, as they say, the Devil beats them.
When they believe that this happens, if it be a Woman they Dress her in the Garb of a Man, and put a Zagay into her Hand, and walk about Singing with a very mournful and deploring Voice, being per∣swaded that by this means they shall chase away the Devil with this Ceremony. I have often observ'd, that these pretended Witchcrafts have been absolute Cheats, for when we take Cudgels and belabour well the Person so possess'd, this Exorcism is of so great force, that the Devil never returns more. During their Ramadan, which is the Ma∣hometan's Lent, and which continues all the Moon of September, they perform the Ce∣remony of Circumcision; they stay till the Children be ten or twelve years of Age. 'Tis a Maraboux that cuts the Prepuce, which must be eaten by the Person Circumcis'd, who by no means is to complain of any Pain that he suffers; nay, they often laugh when they are Seer'd with a Hot Iron for the stanching of the Blood. So long as the Ramadan lasts, they make their Folgar in the Night, for during the day time they do not so much as eat a single Morsel, nor Drink, nay, not so much as Smoak; some of them dare not Spit. As
soon as the Sun is Set, they make a horri noise with their Drums, and eat and drink till the day begins to return. Though by the Laws of the Alcoran they are not allow'd above four Wives, never∣theless they keep as many as they can main∣tain. As soon as they meet with a Lass that pleases them, they demand her of her Fa∣ther; if he consents to it, they agree of a Price, their Quality or their Beauty makes them insist on high Terms. The Dowry consists of Bullocks, which redound to the benefit of the Father; which Dowry ne∣ver exceeds five Bullocks. This Bargain being made, they Lie together without any farther Ceremony. If they warrant her a Virgin, which is a Commodity very scarce in that Country, they lay a white Cloth upon the Bridal Bed, which if it become Bloody, confirms their Opinion of her be∣ing a Maid. Afterwards they walk about the Village, carrying this Cloth in Procession, being accompany'd with several of the Cuiriotz. who Sing the Praises of the fair Lady, and their Wedding Joys If on the contrary she does not prove what she was engag' to be, the Father is oblig'd to take back his Daughter if the Husband requires it, and
restore the Bullocks again; though this seldom happens, for the Girl is taken un∣der strict Examination before the matter is concluded, nor is the demand made but upon sure grounds. And if she be restor'd, she is not at all slighted upon that account, for though she cannot be a Wife but to one, she may be a Concubine to another; and by this the Father has always fresh Markets to make. When, in long run, the Hus∣band is tir'd with his Wife, he drives her away, and may quit her with the loss of what he gave in Purchase; and she her self may take fair leave of her Husband, by restoring to him the Bullocks again. When the King has a mind to gratify a Favourite, he Presents him with one of his Women; but this Gentleman cannot upon any terms put her away, though the Prince can retake her whenever he pleases. The Funerals of the Negroes are per∣formed with great State and Ceremony. A Marabou washes the Body of the Decea∣sed and shrouds it up with the best Linnen he had during his Life: All the Relations and the Neighbours come to make their Lamentations, asking the Corps several ridiculous Questions. One asks it, if he did not live at case with them, what Damage
he had ever done him, if he were not Rich enough to his desires, if he had a sufficient store of handsom Women, and other like Fopperies. Seeing he can get nothing in answer, he withdraws, and makes room for another, who says as much: In the mean time the Guiriats do not fail of sing∣ing his Encomium. And since it is the Custom to make Folgar for all those that come to accompany the Dead; some Bullocks are killed for that purpose; Slaves are sold to purchase Aqua vitae, with which they comfort themselves. When the Assistants are well feasted, they inter the Body in the same Cabin where he died, taking off the Dome or Covering. At length, whisst the Corps is yet above Ground, the Mourners redouble their Yel∣lings; and four People hold a Cloth four square, hiding it that it may not be seen. Then comes the Marabou and whispers some Words in the Ear of the deceas'd, and covers it with the Pall, and afterwards the Dome is again put on, to which they affix some Cloth, either black, red, or any oher colour suitable to their Fancies. Af∣terwards they erect a Stake, on which  hang the Bow, Quiver, and Zagay  Defunct. They set by him a Pot
of Couscouse, and another of Water, which is his Provisions for a twelve Month, since they imagin he can eat though he be dead. In some places they encompass the Ca∣bin with Thorns, or a great Trench, to secure the Body from Ravenous Beasts, which however sometimes do get to it. After this is over, the Mourners con∣tinue in their Grimaces for the space of eight days following. When 'tis a Boy that is dead, the Wo∣men and the Girls sing these Funeral Elo∣gies, and the Boys run with all the force imaginable one against the other, with naked Cimeters in their hands, rushing together in the Encounter, clashing each others Cimeters; upon these occasions they play a hundred foolish Pranks, which would be tiresome to relate. The Negers have few Artisans amongst them, the most common are Smiths, Wea∣vers and Potters: The first make Knives, Iron for their Slaves, Rings of Gold, Sil∣, Copper or Iron; trimings for their Kves and Sebors, and coverings for their Grigri. They make the Chapes of their Scabbards of what Metal they please, and the handles of their Sabers. They have no Farriers, since they do not shoo their Hor∣ses
When they are at work at the Forge, they get two or three together under the shade of some Tree, sitting upon their Breeches with Pipes in their Mouths: they make so little a fire, that you can scarce boign Egg at it, which they blow with Bellows made of two Skins, from thence pressing forth the Wind, which resembles the squeezing of a Bladder. Their Anvil is something like the Stone with which a Mower whets his Sythe, the striking upon which drives it into the Ground, so that after every two or three strokes; they must pull it out again, which takes up the best share of their time. Their Weavers have but little Employ, for, as I have already mentioned, they make use of very few Clouths. The Potters make but one for of Pots, which serve for Kettles, and they make also Pipes of which the bole is only of Earth, the steal being a small stick made hollow, and so fix'd to the earthen Head. In General, all these Handy Crass Men are intolerably Lazy, and spend more than half their time in pratling about Trifles. They are but little concern'd when their Provisions grow short; for upon this occa∣sion they make bold to go Gossip amongst their Neighbours.
The matter of Huswifery, except what belongs to eating, gives their Women but little trouble. For the moveables of the greatest Seignor, amounts to no more than to a few earthen Pots, some wooden Uten∣sils, and Calabasses clove in two in the mid∣dle, serve for Cups. Their Children, thô very small give them but little trouble; for they leave them naked upon the Sand, where they crawl about the whole day: Those which cannot walk themselves, they carry upon their backs, with their legs to their sides, bringing their feet before them, and tying them off with a Cloath, which they fix about them. Whatever work they do, they keep those Bantlings at their backs, even when they beat their Millet, from whence comes that their Bellies are always large, and their Noses flat; for their Mothers in slooping and rising again by jerks, bruise their Noses against their Backs; and so these Children for avoiding the blows, which however they still meet withal, draw themselves back, and set out their Bellies, which makes them large. I believe this to be the sole Reason that the Negers are flat Nos'd and big Bellied. I do not find it true, that they have the greatest esteem
for Noses that are the most flat, or for Lips that are the largest. They have the same consideration for the matter of Beauty as we have, they love a fine Eye, a little Mouth, handsom Lips, and a Nose proportionable, excepting their black colour. There are Negresses as well made as any of our European Ladies, they have a better Genius than the Men, and are extreamly smooth. The Caresses of White Men please them wonderfully; but in the mean while, these Dames being very Mercenary, they will not grant their favours for nothing. The Men take it for an Honour to have the Frenchmen Lye with their Wives, Sisters, or Daughters, they very frequently making the first offers. It is not the same amongst themselves, for should this at any time happen, they would certainly Revenge the Fact with either their Sabre or their Knife; however, their Gallantry is not limited to their Con∣cubines, whose falseness they will not suf∣fer willingly. The Women have always Pipes in their Mouths; they are very brisk and Galliard, and love Dancing in the Evenings, espe∣cially when the Moon changes. They
Dance in a Ring, clapping their Hands, and not budging from their place, except those in the middle, Singing what next comes in their thoughts, without having any regard either to Rhyme or Sense. Their latter, in Dancing, hold one Hand upon their Heads, the other upon their Back sides, thrusting out their Bodies for∣wards, beating their Feet against the Earth. Their Postures are very Lascivious and Infamous, especially when a Boy Dan∣ces with them; a Calbasse, or a Kettle, serves for Musick, for they are great Lo∣vers of noise. The Men Exercise themselves in Wreff∣ling, and approach each other in very ridi∣culous Postures, holding up their Finger, Fist, or Foot. On these occasions they always have one that plays the part of a Guiriot, rattling upon the bottom of a Kettle, or upon a Drum, to excite their Courage; as they are Naked, they have much ado to fling each other upon the Ground. When one is down, the Guiriot Sings and extols the Valour of the Conque∣ror, and exhorts the rest to play their Parts against the Champion, better than he that engag'd last. They give each other very rude Jolts, and fall very heavy.
Most of those that live near the Rivers are Fishermen, and breed their Children to that Trade whilst they are very young. They make use of Canoes, which are small Boats made of the Trunk of a Tree hollow'd for that purpose, all of a piece, the largest of which may contain 10 or 12 Men, being 30 Foot in length, and not above two and a half broad. These Ca∣noes go with both Oars and Sails, and they often over-set when the Wind is high and the Water rough, tho' they do not much matter it, being all excellent Swimmers, and never sink to the bottom. They turn it right again with their shoulders, and get in as unconcerned as if nothing had befel them, and so Row away as swift as an Ar∣row from a Bow, the nimblest of our Shalops not being able to reach them. When they go a Fishing, generally two of them go into the Canoe, and take a com∣pass near 6 Leagues into the Sea. Their Fishing is for the most part by Angling, but as there are great Fish, which will not bite at the Hook, they strike them with Harping Irons something like broad Arrows, which are fix'd to sharp Sticks of the length of a Half-Pike, and fasten'd to e, with which they draw back the
Cramping-Iron after they have Darted it. They dry their small Fish, such as Sprats, and slit the large ones such as Green-Fish; since they do not Salt them, they are al∣most ever putrified before they are dry. 'Tis then when they approve of them as the most Dainty, not at all esteeming them whilst they continue fresh and sweet. They sell these Fish to them who live farthest off the Sea, and would thence make a prodi∣gious profit, would they give themselves the trouble to carry it to the Villages; for the Inhabitants are as much too Lazy to come and fetch them, as the other are for carrying them thither, and by their unac∣countable Idleness it becomes at length spoild and good for nothing. Besides the Commerce they have with us, they keep particular Markets amongst themselves, but of so little consequence, that I have been amaz'd to see them come 6 or 7 Leagues to bring thither a small par∣cel of Cotton, a little Linnen, some sorry Pulse, as Beans and Fitches, little Wooden Dishes, and Palm Mats.: Another time I saw a Man that had come 6 Leagues to bring a Bar of Iron of half a Foot in length.
Notwithstanding sometimes very pre∣cious Merchandises may be here met with∣al; for example, Rings of Gold, Beads for Necklaces, call'd by them Dougaret, of the same Metal, but these are so few, that in the whole Market there is not to the value of five Pistoles. Formerly they us'd to make Exchanges in all their Markets, but since their Commerce with the Europeans they make use of Rassade, and small Baw∣bels of Glass, and little Bars of Iron. What they bring of greatest consequence to these Markets, which are held at the ends of Villages, are Elephants Teeth, Bullocks Hides, and some Slaves; all which they brought to fell at Goree, for which the Members of the Company give Iron, Strong Waters, Rassade, Indian Linnen and Coral, by which they reap an unaccoun∣table Advantage. Their Government is Monarchical and Hereditary, though they are not the King's Children which succeed, but his Nephews, the Sons of his Sisters. This Custom, which however fantastical it seems, has this for its Ground and Foun∣dation: That it is not certain whether the Children brought him forth be really his own, but it is incontestable that the Sons of
his Sister are hers, and consequently more certainly of Royal Blood than his own. When the Prince makes his Accession to the Sovereignty, every body comes to Congratulate the Felicity he has obtain'd above the rest of his Brethren, for general∣ly they being many, the Empire becomes always Contested, and falls to him that has the greatest Force, or the best Success. None can approach the King without a great deal of trouble and circumspection, and very few are admitted the Priviledge to see the innermost Recesses of his Palace. When a great Lord, even though he be one of his Relations, has procur'd an Audience, he puts off his Frock at the entrance of the Court, being quite Naked from the Girdle upwards. When he draws near the place where the King is, he falls upon the Ground on both Knees. Then he bows down his Head, and with both Hands he often besprinkles Sand upon his Head and Face, afterwards rising up, re∣peating the same Ceremony still as he ad∣vances from one distance to another, till he has reach'd within two Paces of the King. When he is arriv'd so near as that; he keeps his Ground, and discloses the Mo∣tives which he had to demand an Audi∣ence,
having finish'd his Compliment, which is made kneeling, he arises without daring to cast the glance upon the King, resting his Hands upon his Knees, and from time to time flings. Sand upon his Forehead. The Prince very slighting of his Sub∣jects, seems not to regard what was said to him, diverting himself some other ways; however, he does not omit at the end of the Harangue to answer his Demand with an extream affected Gravity, and after∣wards the Supplicant intermingles himself with the rest of the Courtiers that are pay∣ing their Attendance. I believe there are no Princes in the whole Universe more Rever'd and more Absolute than these Neger Kings; which Deference is an effect of their severity; for upon the least transgression of any of their Subjects, at which the King is dis∣pleas'd, an Order is immediately issued out for taking off their Heads, all their Goods are Consiscated, and all their Fa∣mily made Slaves. The ordinary People are less miserable than the Grandees, being only Subject to Captivity on the like occa∣sions.
The Azeaghes, the Maraboux, and the French, have a much greater freedom than the Negers, and we the greatest of any, When the Europeans accost him they make their Reverence, and he reaches out his Hand to be put upon theirs. When this is done, he either sits or lies according to the Custom of the Negers, upon a Bed deck'd with a Quilt cover'd with red Lea∣ther, having a Pipe in his Mouth. He then makes them sit down by him, and asks what they have brought along with them. Whereas we never have any of these Audience but when we are to interceed for some favour, or to make Complaints of his Officers, and of Insults made upon some White Men, we never come empty hand∣ed; our Presents consist, for the most part in 10 or 12 Pots of Strong-Water, a little parcel of Sugar, some Birds Heads, 5 or 6 Ells of Linnen, and some pieces of Coral When an Envoy has any thing about him which pleases the King, as a Coat, Stockins, Shooes, Sword, or Hat, he re∣quires to make Tryal of them, I and ys them on, one after another: This he did, soon after we arriv'd, to an Envoy of
Monsieur Dancourt, and took from him a Brocade Wastcoat, his Stockins, Hat and Shooes, so that he had return'd to us stripp'd Naked, had not he, by good Chance, ta∣ken another Suit with him of a lesser value than the other. As long as the Brandy Bottle lasts the Prince is Drunk; thus you must expect no Answer till it be all off. When he grows Sober he gives his Audience of Congee, presenting him with two or three Slaves, which he sends to have taken up in the first Villages. Unhappy are they, who at that time fall into the hands of his Guards, for they stay to make no Choice, the first at hand serves the present turn. Whatever care is taken for carrying Provisions, when you become a Sollicitor to this Court, yet whilst you are there you are ready to Dye with Hunger, since the King requires your Stock, and for his share does always eat the best half. He gives you in Recompence a quarter of a Camel, which is very course Food, a little Couscouse, and some Palm-Wine. During my stay in this Country, a very pleasant passege happen'd, which will sufficiently discover what powerful effects Presents have upon these Princes, and
what small regard they have either to Justice or Equity. Two Petty Tributary Kings to Damel had a Contest about the Succession to a sorry sort of Sovereignty; they were Unkle and Nephew; that is, Son of the Deceased King, and they main∣tain'd their Pretensions by divers Argu∣ments too long, and too frivolous to be here inserted. They propos'd to terminate their difference either by Force, or by the King's final Judgment. This Prince ha∣ving interdicted all other means, they were oblig'd to refer themselves to his Decision. The day being appointed in which Judgment was to be given, the two diffe∣rent Parties assembled themselves in the great space before the Palace, accompa∣nied with very numerous Attendance, who form'd two Battalions distant from each other about 30 Paces; they were all Arm'd with Darts, Arrows, Zagayes, Javelins, and Moresque Knives. The King follow'd with 600 men Accoutred with their Gris∣gris, appear'd mounted upon a fine Barba∣ry Horse, and so plac'd himself betwixt the two Rivals. Though they all spoke the same Lan∣guage, yet they made use of Interpreters,
who repeated to the King what they had heard. The Son of the Deceas'd King finish'd his Harangue in demonstrating; That since God had before given those Dominions, which were in Dispute, to his Father, they must of necessity belong to him as his Right; and that thus he hop'd from His Majesty the Confirmation of the Title, which could not be Disputed with∣out palpable Injustice. The King having hearken'd to him very attentively, told him, with an Air full of Gravity, God gave it you, and after him I give it you again. Such a peremptory Answer soon dis∣pers'd the Unkles Party, who fairly retir'd by himself. The Guiriots, with their In∣struments and their Drums, Celebrated the Praises of the Victorious, saying to him, You Merit this Dignity far beyond the other, and the King has done you nothing but Justice: You are by much the finer Man, more Rich, more Potent, and more Valiant, &c. Whilst this wretched Prince Dream'd of nothing but enjoying his Happiness, he was wholly surpriz'd the day following to see himself stripp'd of this Authority, with which he was but newly Invested; for his Unkle not missing the opportu∣nity,
made the King so acceptable a Pre∣sent, that it defac'd the remembrance of those he had before receiv'd from the Nephew; so that he, in the Morning, dispossess'd him that he had Enthron'd in the Evening, and Install'd the other in his place. This Reverse of Fortune soon chang'd the Notes of the Guiriots, and they began to Extol him they had before De∣cry'd. Such is the Perfidy of the Prince, and the Instability of his Subjects. To return to what concerns the King more particularly, I shall tell you, That when he takes the Field, he has no occasion for Vivandiers, for he is provided for by the Women of the Villages which he passes with all his Train. They serve him up sometimes 50 Wooden Platters full of Couscouse, season'd after several ways, he reserves which suits best with his Palate and gives the rest to his People, who are fre∣quently as hungry after the Repast as be∣fore. They all eat very nastily, lying along upon the Ground, taking it up with a full hand, making no use of either Napkins or Plates. No body eats with the King but the Grand Marabou, or one of the Lords that is most Accomplish'd; often he eats alone.
He will by no means suffer the Thoubabes (for thus he calls us) to see him at his Meals. I believe he conceals himself from us, because that he imagines that our Re∣past are more decent and better than his own; and that he is asham'd of his Po∣verty. Amongst the meaner sort of Peo∣ple, all of the same Family eat together; their first Mess is Couscouse, when that is clear'd they fall Aboard the Flesh, which they tear in pieces with their Fingers, ma∣king no use of Knives; after they have gnaw'd it, they put it again into the Plat∣ter for the next. They use only their Right Hand during the Meals, which they always have both at Noon and Night; the Left Hand they reserve to Work withal, and on that Account they esteem it an in∣decency to eat with it. The King has under him several Mini∣sters of State, who assist him in the Go∣vernment, and in the Exercise of Justice Condy, who is a Tributary Sovereign, is after the manner of our Constable, and has the General Command of his Troops. The Grand Geraff is the Chief Justice throughout all the Territories of King Da∣mel; he goes his Circuits from time to time, to hear the Complaints of all People;
he generally does Justice out of hand, and punishes a Thief with Slavery; for seldom are any People of a private Condition in∣flicted with the punishment of Death. The Kings Alzair Exercises the same Employ as the Geraff, but his Power is more limited. He has under him Alkatys or Alkairs of Grand Villages, that are as particular Lords. When a Neger is accus'd of a Crime, of which he cannot be easily Convicted, he is oblig'd to lick a red hot Iron three seve∣ral times; if it burns him he is reputed Guilty, if not, he and his Accuser leave the Court, and the Process falls without Costs. The Kings of the Negers go to War up∣on very small pretexts. When any such happens, the Condy assembles all the great Lords, and the rest of the Subjects, of which he composes his Cavalry, and his In∣santry. They seldom have a body of above twelve or fifteen hundred men; so that heir War is but a sort of a Skirmish. In all the Kingdom of Damel, they can scarce Muster up together two hundred Horse. The Men of Quality in the Army, espe∣cially the Cavalry, are Loaded with their Gris-gris, as I have already remark'd. I
believe, should they be once dismounted, they would no the able to march four paces on foot. The Cavalry are armed with Zagayes, which is a sort of a Dart, long and large, with three or four Spears, bigger than those of Arrows, and have several small Jags, that tears open the Wound when they draw it forth. They can cast these Javelins and Zagayes a great way, and go very rarely without them. Besides these they have a Cimeter, and a Moresque Knife of a Cubit in length, and the breadth of two thumbs. They guard the blows with a round Buckler, made of very thick Leather; though they are thus en∣cumbred, yet they have still their Hands and Arms at liberty, and they can attack very smartly. The Foot are arm'd with a Simeter, a Javelin, a Quiver stock'd with Fifty or Sixty empoison'd Arrows, whose Wounds are always mortal, if they are not imme∣diately seer'd with a hot Iron. The Teeth of the Arrows produce ano∣ther miserable Effect, for they can't be taken out but by another hole which must be made by the Arrow it self.
Their Bow is made of a Reed, very like that which we call a Bamboo; what they make use of for the String, is ano∣ther sort of Wood very curiously fitted up. They are so dextrous in shooting out of Bows, that they will hit a mark of the compass of a Crown above Fifty Paces. They march without any order of Discipline, even in the Enemy's Country. The Guiriotz excite them to Combat by the sound of their Instruments. As soon as they are within Shot, the Infantry discharge their Arrows, and the Cavalry cast their Javelins. This Dis∣charge is follow'd with Blows of the Za∣gays. They space their Enemies as much as possible, that they may make the more Slaves; the Persons of Quality them∣selves are not exempted. As they are naked, and very dextrous, their. Wars are very Bloody. They are very hardy and had rather lose their Lives, than be guilty of the least Cowardice. The de∣spight that is shew'd to a, Coward, a∣mongst them, and the fear of losing their Liberty, does very much augment their Bravery. This first Shock being over, they be∣gin a fresh often for two or three days
together; afterwards they send Marabou of each side to treat of Peace. When they have agreed of the Conditions, they swear upon the Alcoran and by Mahomet, though they know very little of either one or the other. The Prisoners of ei∣ther side have no Benefit of the Peace, continuing Slaves as though the War were to be Eternal. See here in short how Affairs stand in this Country. Whatever I can meet withal farther, before my return into Eu∣rope, I shall take a just and faithful Ac∣count thereof, that I may discharge my s of what my Friends have enjoyn'd m which was to communicate to them my Oervations. My little Knowledge  Writing, and my uncouth Stile, will soon discover my small Ability of transmitting to them these Relations. All that can  pleaded on my behalf, is, that I shall no impose upon them, and that I shall give preference to Truth before the Reputa∣tion of distinguishing my self by a recital more stuffed with Singularities, than those of others. The End of the First Voyage of the Sieur le Maire.
The Bookseller's Advice to the Reader. A Particular Person that is very knowing, having travelled the Coasts of Africa, and seen the Author of this Voy∣age at his Residence at Goree, remitted to me these following Re∣lations. I thought my self ob∣lig'd to publish them, and affix them to this, and to acquaint you they are not the Remarks of the Sieur le Maire.
Relations of the Islands and ad∣jacent Places of the Rivers of Bresalme, Gambie, Zame∣nee, St. Domingo, Geve, and others, &c. THE Kingdom of the Barbes∣sines, who are almost all Neger Mahometans, is very small, ha∣ving not above six or seven Leagues upon the Coast: 'Tis joyned to that of the Joloffes, beginning at a Village called Joualle, situated upon the Sea-Coasts, inhabited by some Mulatters and Portuguese. There is another small Vil∣lage which they call Coringue, which is nearer to Cape-Verd, and is dependant of Joualle, 'tis there they drive the greatest Commerce. In going up about seven or eight Leagues we meet with the River Bresaline, whose
Mouth is very large, filled with sand Beds, which prevents the Entrance of Conves, Shalops, or little Barques, nor do they drive any great Traffick here, this King∣dom affording no manner of Varieties. However the Portuguefe do here paronase both Salt and Victuals. Upon the same Coast, two Leagues higher, is the River Gambie, which has two Passages for Vessels, the one to the North, and the other to the South, where Ships of Five Hundred Tun may easily enter. You must first sound the Passage with a Shalop, for fear of striking upon the Sands; having entred, you meet with∣al towards the North the Kingdom of Bar∣ra, whose King lives a quarter of a League from Sea. The People and Inhabitants are called Mandingues, for the most part Ma∣hometans. The Island Chiens, to which you may go dry Foot at low Sea, is right over against it in the River. The French did formerly inhabit it, but they had their Throats cut by the Negers, afterwards it was not inha∣bited, being of no Consequence. The Flouppes Negers, of which I shall speak anon, are just in the Entrance upon the South Point.
Six Leagues farther up the River to the North, is the Village call'd Albroda, where the French had formerly a Warehouse, The English have one at a Village call'd Zeelfray, which is a League higher on the same Shoar. They have also a Regular Fort in the Island over against it, which is not above half a quarter of a League about, built up∣on a Crusty and Gravelly Rock. This Fort has above Fifty Pieces of Cannon mounted, which are of no great use for want of Men to Manage them; they are forc'd to fetch all their Water and their Wood from the main Land. These are they who have the best share of all the Trade that is made up this great Ri∣ver, which chiefly consists in Neger Slaves, Ivory and Wax. It is Navigable above Two hundred Leagues.
A Description of the River Za∣menee. THE River Zamenee is Inhabited by many sort of Negers, those at its Mouth towards the North call themselves Floupes, People extreamly Savage, with whom no Nation have any Commerce. They are all Pagans, having every one his God according to his particular Inclinati∣ons; one worships a Bullocks Horn, another a Beast or a Tree, to whom they Sacrifice according to their manner. Their Dress is like those of Cape-Verd, and the Inhabitants of the River Gambie, which consists in a piece of Cotton Cloath, striped according to the Custom of the Country, which barely covers their Pri∣vities. They have no Succession of Kings, the most absolute and most powerful amongst them Commands. They Cultivate their Land in pretty good Order, which they sow with Millet and Rice. Their Riches consist in Bul∣ks, Cows and Goats, of which many
have great quantities. They possess from the River Gambie about 6 Leagues into the Land. Their Villages are well Peopled, distant from each other about a quarter of a League. The Negers, or Flouppes, that Inhabit the Mouth of the River towards the South, are Barbarous, and very Cruel; when they can catch any white Men, they give them no manner of Quarter, and they say they eat them. These are in Possession all along the Coasts to the Village nam'd Boulol, which is at the Entrance of the River St. Do∣mingue. This Coast is much better Peo∣pled than that of Gambie. The Villages are distant from each other near two Leagues, and from the Sea about a quarter of a League. About seven or eight Leagues farther, the Tide makes a little Brook, which goes up to the Town of Jam, where several Portuguese make several quantities of Wax, which they sell and traffick by Land at Gambie and at Cacheaux. The adjacent Countries are inhabited by Negers which are called Bagnons. These have a King who lives about 12 or 13 Leagues off Sea.
Description of the River of St. Domingue. THE River of St. Domingue is situated from East to West; it winds above Two hundred Leagues in length; 'tis also inhabited by different sorts of Negers, and by the Portuguese, who have there several Towns. At its Entrance to the North, there is a Fort belonging to the Portuguese, guarded with four Pieces of Cannon, and com∣manded by a Serjeant and four Soldiers. Four Leagues upwards on the same Shoar near the Village of Boulot, is the lit∣tle River Linguin, which loses it self nine or ten Leagues within Land. They are the Negers Bagnons that possess it, and cul∣tivate the Lands. They are all Idolaters, and worship Forests or great Woods, and in them many Thieves, whom they stand in great dread of. The Village of Quongain is directly at its Entrance, where abundance of Portuguese and Gourmets inhabit, who make there great store of Wax.
The River Bougind is on the same Coast, about three Leagues beyond where the Tide comes, which disperses it self twelve or fifteen Leagues within Land, inhabited by the same sort of People, who as I have told you, traffick altogether with Wax. 'Tis the ordinary passage to go from Ca∣choar to Jam. At the Entrance of the River St. Do∣mingue, on the South, is a large Wood, which they call Matteformose: 'Tis a Vil∣lage inhabited by the Flouppes, more fami∣liar than those I before mentioned, with whom they traffick for Slaves and Victuals; above all they have great store of Rice. Going up the River about two Leagues, you meet with a small River which is not Navigable, which separates the Flouppes from the Papels. The Papels are also Heathen Negers, all Idolaters as the former. They have a King who dwells about five or six Leagues from them. When any Considerable Person dies, they Sacrifice Bullocks, Cows, Kids, and Capons to their Gods, who are for the most part one or more Trees, or a Bullocks Horn, or such like things. In the same district, about four Leagues higher, you meet with the Town called
Cacheau, in possession of the Portuguese, who have there three Forts, the chief of which may have about ten or twelve Pieces of Cannon, and the other two, a∣bout two or three each. A Captain-Major has the Government, who depends upon the Governor of the Islands of Cap-Verd. They are every year Recruited with thir∣ty or forty Portuguese Soldiers, who are generally banished Criminals, they supply∣ing the Places of those who die for want of good Nourishment, by Necessity, or by an over addicting themselves to Women. 'Tis for them a sort of Exile, which how∣ever is somewhat supportable They may have in the Town two or three hundred Inhabitants; the generality of them are Mulaters, the rest are their Wives and Concubines. There is in the Town a Receiver of the King's Customs, from the Ships that come to Traffick there, who pay ten per Cent. both coming in and going out, together with a Writer, who holds the Place of both Notary and Sheriff. 'Tis the Go∣vernor that renders Justice. There is also a Parochial Church, a Curat, and a Visi∣tator, who is in the nature of Vicar in France, who always makes Visitations on
behalf of the Bishop of Saint James. There is also a Convent of Capuchins, where there are seldom more than three or four Religious. The Inhabitants of the Town have little Boats and Barks, with which they Negoti∣ate upon the River Nounne Pougues Serlianne, and in the Island of Bezagotts, where they have great Commerce of Wax, Slaves, and some small Parcels of Ivory. The Portuguese have yet another Town higher up the River, distant from Cacheau about a Hundred and Fifty Leagues, which is called Farim, which is encompassed with Pallasadoes; the Inhabitants are not so numerous as in Cacheau: Those of the best repute in Cacheau have also Houses there, where their Gourmets make their Cloath and Wax. There is also a Curat, a Captain Major, who is depending of Cacheau. The Negers who inhabit the the Lands adjacent are called Mandingues. All the Villages that are from Cacheau to Farim, are inhabited by the Gourmets of the Portuguese, who gather Cotton, &c. Leaving the River Saint Domingue, go∣ing Southwards you meet with several Islands. The first is called Three Islands, which effectively has that Figure, posses∣sed
by the Gourmets, or Negers, who have loos'd themselves from the slavery of the Portuguese, most of them, thô they are Baptiz'd, have renounc'd the Catholick Faith. They Cultivate this Island, which produces good store of Cotton, of which they make their Cloath. They have Ca∣noes to serve them in their Traffick with the Negers of the Continent. The place which they pass is called the Bot; they have a particular care in suffering any Boat to approach their Island. Over against it is the Island of Bussi▪ in possession of the Papels, who have a King not very absolute. It is so low Water, that it may be pass'd by being only wet to the middle Leg. It is difficult to Negotiate with them without being known, for their strange mistrust makes them suppose that there is no sincerity. I know that several English and Dutch, have been there Massacred, for endea∣vouring to have Commerce with them. They have great Store of Provisions, as Cattle, Poultry, Wax, Mill and Feasants, but of a very indifferent relish. Their Island is about ten Leagues in Circuit, and has two Ports, the one to the
East, which is called Old Port, the other to the South-East, which is called the Port of the White Stones. Right over against it, is the Village of Cazelut, and many small Islands which are not inhabited. Very near it you find the Island of Bisseaux a∣bout two Leagues distant. A Vessel of three hundred Tun may pass betwixt them both, so that the Chanel is well known. It is forty Leagues in Compass; the Papel Negers which inhabit it are altogether Heathens There are in this Island nine Kings, of which one is superior to the other Eight, which properly are no more than Governors of Provinces. When any of the Kings die, they take care to strangle more than thirty Persons, above all the young Girls and the Slaves that have been the most faithful to the De∣ceased, whom they bury along with them. They put with him into his Tomb all his Riches, as his Gold, Silver, Amber Gris, Stuffs, &c. When they chuse another 'tis after this manner, they are only the Geagres that make Pretensions. which are, as I may say, the Dukes and Peers of France. They assemble together in a Ring, in the middle of which is the Tomb of the
deceased King, made of Reeds and very light Wood, which is sustain'd in the Air by several Negers, which they toss up into the Air, and on whom ever it falls, they chuse him for King in the Place of the Deceased. They often Sacrifice to their Gods, Bul∣locks, Capons and Kids. There are several Ports in this Island, the chief of which is called Part Bisseaux, Ships of Sixty Guns can there ride at An∣chor with ease. The King's Palace is distant from thence only half a League there is one Parish, and a Convent of Capuchins, several of the Portuguese are married to the Negresses of the Country. There are several of those Heathens Sons who have received Baptism, and embrace the Catholick Faith. The King has his Guards, his Army, and several Women kind of all Ages. He has about Fifty Ca∣noes of War, which hold about thirty Men; for their Weapons, they have only a Ci∣meter hanging at their Arms, and are cloath'd with only the Skin of a Kid, which hangs down behind, and is fastned up before betwixt the Legs to hide their Nudities. They go to War against the
Biaffores, who inhabited the Continent, twice or thrice each Year. The Portuguese did formerly build a Fort of eight Pieces of Cannon, to hinder Strangers from trading thither, but the Negers would not suffer it. They always were sticklers for the Freedom of their Country, which occasions a welcom to all manner of Strangers, that come to Traf∣fick in their Ports, who may Negotiate in the Island with all imaginable Security, without dreading any Insult. When you arrive at their Port, you have not liberty to set foot on Shore, till their King has kill'd a Bullock, and sacrificed; when he has finished, you have liberty to disem∣bark. Over against the Port is an Island call'd Sortiere, full of Trees, where the Negers make their grand Sacrifices every year, in which the King himself assists. Vessels Anchor there very safely.
A Description of the River Geve. THE River Geve winds about seventy Leagues into the Continent, lying North-East, South-West. All the Villages of each side, distant about a League from Sea, are inhabited with the Biaffares. At the Entrance of the River towards the North, is the Village call'd Gouffode, di∣stant one League from the Port. There it is where Bullocks and Poultry is to be sold, and they also Traffick for some Slaves and Ivory. Upon the same River, five Leagues more upwards, is the Town of Geve, the greatest part of which is possess'd by the Portuguese and by the Gourmetts, which is encompassed with Palisadoes. They have one Parochial Church, one Curat, and one Captain, who has the Command, and is dependant on the Go∣vernor of Cacheau. The adjacent Places are possess'd by the Negers Biaffares. Most of the Portuguese have Barks in the Port, by which they Trade to Serlienne. Cocters is a Fruit which both in shape and taste resembles the Marons of India; there are
both white and red, of which they have great trading amongst them, especially in the Countries of the Biaffares and Man∣dingues: They also send their Barks to the Negers upon the River Nounne for Morsil and Indigo in leaf, with which they colour their Cloaths. The Barks can get no higher than the River Gowe. As for their Canoes, they go up several little Rivers of small Note: You meet with several Islands about the Port, especially that of Boulam, well stock'd with Trees; 'tis about six Leagues in Cir∣cuit; it is just at the Entrance of the River Riogrando, and is not at all inhabited. The other Islands are of so small a Consequence, that I do not think it worth while to re∣cite them. I will not speak of Cap-Verd, nor of the Canaries, nor of Senegal, since the Sieur le Maire, by the Care of Mr. Dan∣court, has said more than I am capable of saying. FINIS.
Plays Sold by T. Chapman. SOphonisba. By Mr. Lee. Theodosius. By Mr. Lee. Oedipus. By Mr. Dryden and Mr. Loe. Country-Wife. By Mr. Crown. Abdelazer. By Mrs. Behn. Ibrahim. By Mr. Settle. Heir of Morocco. By Mr. Settle. Pastor Fido. By Mr. Settle. Mr. Dryden's Plays, in Three Volumes, or Single. Mr. Ottway's Plays, Bound or Single. Mr. Lee's Plays, Bound or Single. Mr. Shadwell's Plays, Bound or Single. With Plays of all sorts.
Books Printed for T. Chapman. Caesar's Commentaries. By Edmonds. with Additions. Plutarch's Morals. Kettlewell on the Sacrament. Fire of the Altar. By Dr. Horneck.
