W3516A R229744 99895372 152781
EARLY DEVOTION. Father I have Sin∣ned He yt Humbleth himselfe shall be exalted Luke 14: Remember thy Creatr in ye day of thy Youth. Printed for Ra Simpson Book-seller.
AN Earnest Admonition to ALL, But especially to Young Persons: To turn to GOD by Speedy Repentance and Reformation. Being the Substance of SIX SERMONS, Deliver'd in the Chappel at Popler. To which is added, An Account of the Rise and Progress of the Religious Societies of Young Men; and of the Societies for Re∣formation, lately erected in the Cities of LONDON and WESTMINSTER, with a Copy of their Orders, vindi¦cated from the common Objections. AND Sundry Directions relating to the Reli¦gious Conferences of these Societies; with Devotions suited to them; and Prayers for the use of Private Families, and for Seamen. By Josiah Woodward, Minister of Popler. Prlnted for the Author, and sold by Ra Simpson, at the Harp in St. Paul▪s Churchyard, 1697.
TO THE Religious Societies of Youngmen In and about the CITIES of London & Westminster, Particularly to that at POPLER. IT is in Hope, My dear Brethen, of making some Addition to your Pious Fraternities, (and thereby to the invisible Church of God) that I have (at your Re∣quest) published this compassionate Call to sinful Prodigals; who, by leaving the House and Government of their Heaven∣ly Father, have parted with all true Ho∣nour, Peace and Happiness; and can ne∣ver return to these, but by their effectual
Return to their God and their Duty Which gives us such an undeniable Reason for the Necessity of the Conversion of  Sinner in order to his Happiness, that none who will seriously consider it, ca withstand the convincing Power of it. For, who can once think, That men ma fight against God, and come off with Victo∣ry and Triumph? Or, that such as love nothing so much as Sin and Pollution can inherit the undefiled Kingdom  our Lord Jesus Christ? Or, that such who serve the Devil, and bear his likenes upon Earth, will be as happy as the Rege¦nerate Children of God in the othe World? The least Application of mi will shew us the impossibility of these thing and consequently, that all wicked Peop must speedily repent and amend their Live or perish for ever. But yet indeed, It is a very sad Truth of which we have too many gross Exam¦ples; That habituated Sinners may at la arrive at such a desperate Pitch of Insen¦sibleness, as to be blind to all the Convic¦tive Methods of the Gospel, and dead t
all the mighty Persuasives of it. I have therefore chiefly directed this E∣vangelical Call to Young Persons, who are not yet so fatally inured to sin; hope∣ing that their Ears are not thus judicially closed against the proclaimed Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. And truly as to this, It is matter of abundant Praise to God, that he hath opened the Ears and Hearts of many of You to receive divine Instruction; and this, to such effectual Purpose, that it is enough to affect a very dull Soul to behold the Vigor and Stedfastness of your Zeal for God, and your humble and holy De∣portment in his Sight. What suitable Praise can we offer to God (the Giver of all Good) when we behold Youth punishing Lust, and giving Examples of Piety to Age? Delighting in the Praises of God, as their chief Joy; and celebrating the Exercises of our Holy Re∣ligion with such Relish and Delight, as gives a seasonable Demonstration to this Epicurean Age, That there are vaster Pleasures to be reapt from the blessed
Entertainments of Religion, than fro all the possible indulgence of sensual Van¦ties. I would therefore intreat all Young Pe¦ple (who are naturally Lovers of Plea¦sure) to make this Experiment, namely To frequent your Societies, and joy their hearts with a suitable warmth t yours, in the Worship, Love and Prai¦ses of God for a competent time. An then let them tell us, whether one day in the House (and with the House-hold o God) be not better than a thousand in the Tents of Wickedness? An whether any Company be really so desire¦able as that which tends to advance o spiritual and everlasting Happiness? In this they will have an inconceivabl advantage over such who engage them selves in wicked Company. For, thes meet to their mutual Condemnation, and to the confusion of each others Faces; to fewel each others Lusts a while, and t be Firebrands to each others Consciences for ever. And therefore, except they are perfectly hardened, they who meet toge∣er
for sinful Ends must needs leave ch others Company with sorrowful earts; wishing they never had seen  met each other; regretting the Guilt with hich they have loaded each others onsciences; fore-seeing with horrour e light of that Day which will discover l the Works of Darkness; in which e Partners in sin must appear together  all their Nastiness before the Judg∣ent Seat of Christ to give an Account r what they have joyntly done in e Flesh. But pious Society begins and ends ite otherwise. Such meet to advance e Glory of God, and the Grace and eace of each others Souls. And there∣re they part (as I have sometime seen ) with joyful Reflections on what they ve been transacting together; and itle a blessed Hope of meeting each other ith Joy before God, and of being for ver with him. Enlivened by this Hope, your Zeal ay well take wing, and soar to a very fty Eminency. But then lest it should
evaporate, or (like an Enthusia Phantom) become unsteady and move travagantly: You happily take care your excellent Rules, to poize your Z by a ponderous Humility, and the ste Love of Unity and Order. For make a truely Christian Reformati without a Sect; and whilst you hate  separate from sin, you love and pitty  Sinner: And whilst your affections  in the greatest warmh, you keep to th Form of Doctrine and Devotion which you have been educated; and your utmost to revive the primitive P¦ty and Power of the Christian Religi in the most antient Methods. In these and other particulars,  shew a Zeal steered by Knowledge  ballanced by Humility; which is a g Argument that it is a Fruit of the Spi of God; and is the best Ground I  where find, to hope that God will not le us utterly. Only be exceeding care to walk worthy of this your special P¦fession of Religion; always remembri of what concernment all religious Acti
e, wherein God is the Object, Consci∣ce the Register, and Eternity the Con∣uence. It may be expected from You, that ye uld do more than others. And, O! y it ever be seen, that you are to others emplary in all Humility, Purity and tegrity of Heart and Life. Then will you lay a good Foundation  Stability and Increase in your Holy rposes; and you will engage the Pray∣ of all the Lovers of God and Religion  your behalf. And may it please the od of all Grace to enliven and advance ur Orthodox Zeal for his Glory to ch a conspicuous Brightness, as may eatly glorifie his Name on Earth, d retrieve the Honour of our Holy eligion, and increase the numbers of e true Worshippers of God; till at st, all these lesser Luminaries of the hurch below shall be united in that  and Constellation of the Church a∣ove; where Holiness will never be vied, reproached, or molested; and ill never need to be excited, cherish∣ed
or advanced by humane Assista For, there it will be the very Nat Bliss, and Glory of perfected So o love, serve, and praise God. Into this blessed Society of t First-born, may it please God (in  time) to introduce every one of Y and every one that bears the Name  Christ, in particular. Your Affectionate Assistan in the things of our Common Salvatio J. W.
An earnest Admonition to Young PERSONS: From LƲKE vx. xviii. will Arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him; Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. THESE are the Prodi∣gal's serious Thoughts and Purposes, when he came to himself. And at we may consider them the tter, let us look back a little on
the Follies and Extravagances  his past Life: in which these Ci¦cumstances tend to our Edifica¦on. IN the first place, He was in th prime of his Youth; that bloo¦ing season of humane life fro which the after fruits may ve much be guest at. We read in t twelfth verse, That the young  Son said to his Father; Father, gi me the Portion of goods that fall to me. He would feign be his o man now; free from the Restrai and Councils of his Father's ¦vernment. And thus the wild a wilful Youth, led by his yout lusts and vanity, ran on to the ¦ry brink of Ruine. 1st. Ob. WE may here observe, Th the time of youth is a very dang¦ous & critical Season; & needs  most of any to be kept strictly
der good Tutorage, and to have the benefit of good Examples. In youth, many lusts and passions are strong, and the Judgement and Understanding is weak: and there∣fore it greatly needs to be guided by wise and experienced Gover∣nours. 'Tis a great error in Edu∣cation (and I fear it has proved fatal to many) to think, that when young people arrive to the age of 15 or 16 years, they are then fit to be left to their own Conduct, and need little over sight. Quite otherwise, now is the most dange∣rous season of all their life. One opportunity of committing such gross sin as they are now capable of, may undo them for ever. THIS is the time in which the Tempers and Manners of people are to be formed aright; and are the most easie to take those im∣pressions,
which are the most ¦ficult to be altered in their adva¦ced Age. They are now setti out for Heaven or for Hell, a which way so ever they take, the youthful warmth and spirit is li to carry them on fiercely in  And therefore happy are they w fall into good hands, and so enj a sober and pious Education, they have grace and wisdom make a good use of it; the wa of which had like to have rui the vain youth in the Text. He h a very good Father, and was ¦der a very pious government, b he grew weary of it, and wo have his own will: And therefo he resolves to stay no longer, whe he could not do what he pleased and to this end, He took his jo¦ney into a far Country, Verse  that is, To a place remote fro
is Father's Inspection, where he ould have none to check or urb him in his Revelling and Riot. We may here note further: 2d. Obs. That if a young Person ven to any vice or lust, once gets to such a place where no body proves or checks him for his Sin, is a thousand to one but he is un∣ne. It was a part of the con∣ssion of a young man lately exe∣ated at Tyburn for Robbery; own to many of us (for he li∣ed sometime in our Neighbour∣ood), that he had lived in seve∣l sober Families, but he left them, ecause he could not there follow s Lusts. And when once he got ose from these restraints, how on did he come to ruine? CONSIDER this, You that e Parents; and be careful to pro∣de pious places for your Chil∣dren,
when you send them o into the World. Places in which it shall be difficult for them to com at the vices to which youth i prone: And where they may hav religious instruction, and good e Examples, and may happily escap the pollutions of a loose and pre¦fligate age. AND this is more especially  be regarded in the solemn (an almost indissolvable) contract  Marriage: where the intimacy an affection that is due, will make i almost natural to imitate either th good or evil manners of the de Associate, who is to be lookt o as the other part of ones self. The indeed the evil dispositions of th One are more like to prevail ove the better Temper of the Other than the contrary, through the ten∣dency of our depraved Nature
to that which is ill. As, if a dead ody be chained to a living; the ead will sooner kill the living, han the living quicken the dead. Which serves to shew the unhap∣y state of such who have any tinc∣ure of Religion, when they are natcht to a Person of a contrary umour and practise. 'Tis the fast∣ing of the living to the dead, which should make every one very cautious and circumspect n that great Affair of humane Life: in which, to be rash and unadvised, is to run hoodwinkt upon a Precipice, and to make Court to Misery and Sorrow. THESE Cautions are at this time the more seasonable and im∣portant, considering the dismal de∣baucheries that abound both in Youth and Age. AND therefore, Let me ad∣vise,
yea require, you that a Young, to be advised and directe by your Parents and sober Friend Your Parents have had the Expe¦rience of many years before yo had any Being; and they hav brought you up with great Pain Cost, Care, and Sorrow; expect¦ting to reap comfort from you a last: And they cannot want good will to advise their own Offspring to that which they think most fo their advantage. Wherefore re¦member the Council of Divin Wisdom by the mouth of Solomon Prov. 1. 8. My Son, hear the In¦struction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. HAD the Prodigal taken this course, he had done well. For▪ the first wrong step which he took, was, when he departed from his Father: hereby depriving himself
of the advantages of his Fathers ber admonitions and example, nd forfeiting the blessing of God xprest in the first Commandment ith Promise. Take heed, Young People, that you leave not sober nd serious Society for the contra∣y: If you habituate your selves o ill Company, you run on the mouth of a Cannon. The Lepro∣y of Sin is often spread by Famili∣r Conversation. And such as con∣verse with people that are sick of the Plague, will be in danger of dying of the same distemper. WELL, The Prodigal will be gone from the Government of his pious Father; and now, what will become of him? Truely, 'tis easie to guess, what a young Hot-Pate, left to his own will, will betake himself to. He first falls into ill Company, and then to Drinking
and Riotous living. And this adding new flames to the natural Heat of youthful blood, in the next place; he keeps Company with Harlots. And thus he falls into a deep and narrow Pit, as Solomon calls it, Pro. 23. 27. out of which few escape. IT was a very unhappy Cir∣cumstance of this Prodigal's con∣dition, that he had an Estate gi∣ven him by his Father, Verse 12. He divided unto them his Living. This young Man had not for cer∣tain been so lewd, if he had not been so plentifully provided with means to accommodate his Lusts. So that we may here make a third Note: 3d. Obs. THAT a plentiful Estate in the Possession of a Wild Youth, does most directly tend to his destruction. 'Tis like a Sword in the hand of a mad Man, with which
he will very probably do himself a mischeif. There is not a more dangerous and deplorable condi∣tion upon Earth, than for a Person that is eagerly bent towards any vice, to have favourable Circum∣stances to accomplish it without any Check of Conscience, or Re∣buke of providence. He seems to be abandoned of God to his own Will, and given up to his affect∣ed Vices: and he has no kind Rub or Cross in his way to stop his Ca∣reer in the ways of Death. IN this Respect the Prodigal's wealth was his Snare: But we may be sure, his Prodigality will soon make him poor enough. And, in∣deed, the next news we have of him, is, That he had spent All, and was surrounded with Famine and Distress: And that he had beta∣ken himself to one of the most ab¦ject
employments in the World, even th feeding of Swine, and yet could not by this get Bread to pu into his mouth, no nor so much as a belly-full of Husks on which th Swine did eat. We may therefore note further; 4th. Obs. THAT beastly lust will soon bring men to extream misery in both worlds. Solomon Observation has been fully verist∣ed by many miserable Examples; namely, that by means of a whorish Woman a Man is brought to a Mor∣sel of Bread, Pro. 6. 26. It brings many a plentiful Estate to a poor starving Fragment; and reduces many a Family of Note to such ex∣tream penury, that they are cloath∣ed with Rags. THUS it was with our Prodi∣gal Youth, his case was miserably alered since he left his Father's
House. He is now sorely hunger-itten, and almost starved for want oth of Food and Rayment: He as a severe Fast after his former Surfeits, and has now many Marks of the Lashes of his own Folly be∣fore his Eyes; and this does him more Good than all his Prosperity had done: For, now he begins to consider what Plenty he once en∣joy'd under his Father's Roof. He remembers that his Father's duti∣ful Servants fared better than his wild Son; and having hope, that his Father would yet shew him some Favour upon his Return and Submission to him, he takes up the Resolution of the Text, I will arise and go to my Father: As if it were said, I will arise out of this nasty and needy Condition, into which my Extravagancy has brought me. I am resolved to
throw my self in a Penitent a Humble manner at my Father feet: And I will say unto him Father, I have sinned against He¦ven and before Thee; I am a gre Sinner against God and Man.  have been a very undutiful Chil to my heavenly and earthly F∣ther, and am not worthy to b lookt on as a Child by either o them. I am a vile unthankfu Wretch, a Swine rather than a Man, a Rebel rather than a Son. THIS was the Purport of his humble Confession; and thus hum∣bling himself, he was Exalted: For his Father's Eye was upon him so soon as ever he looked home-ward, and the Son's heart relenting, the Father's bowels are melted within him. And whereas the Son comes onward drooping, the Father runs chearfully, and even pre∣vents
the Language of Words in is Son's mouth, reading his Re∣entance in his very Looks: Where∣pon, he falls on his Neck and kisses Him, giving him Assurance of his Welcome, by the most Affectio∣ate and Rapturous Embraces. And upon this we may make a fifth Remark: Namely, 5th. Obs. THAT God, thro' his mediating Son, accepts even those into his Mercy and Favour, who are by outward Misery brought to an effectual Return to him. The Prodigal's outward Want and Penury awakens his Consci∣ence, (through sanctifying Grace) and excites spiritual Sorrow, which brings him to a sincere Con∣version to God; and so he ob∣tains Favour in his Sight. FOR we must consider this Parable, as a lively Representation
of a Sinners Apostacy from God and the Vows of his Baptism, to a vain and wicked Life. Licen¦tious Minds think themselve crampt and confined by the Com∣mandments of God; and tha they are kept with severity from those things which are agreeabl to their sensual Appetites: An therefore they tread down those Fences of Religion which shoul keep them within the Bounds o true Happiness, forsaking God th only Fountain of Bliss. And the being misled by sinful Lusts an the invisible Enemy of Souls▪ they wander about in the curse of a thousand Follies and Extra¦vagancies, till they are surroun∣ded with Misery and Perplexity: Yet, if then they are awaken'd by their Afflictions and Distress, and effectually turn to God in time,
he will have mercy upon them, nd there will be Joy in Heaven at heir Conversion. And for as much as we find no good thing done by the Prodigal, efore he came to his holy Reso∣ution exprest in the words of the Text, Let us make one Remark ore: To wit, 6th. Obs. THAT we have one of us made one true Step in Religion, till we are come to a revailing Resolution for God and nd his Kingdom, in opposition o all the allurements of Sin and this present World. When once man's wicked and stubborn Will is chan∣ged by the Grace of God, the Man s converted, and begins a new course of Life: Then it is that we ruely set our Face towards Hea∣ven, which we before either for∣got or despised; and then we can
no longer rest on those Beds of slo and sensuality, on which we  drowsily snoared before: but w arise, and go to our Father. NOW, this should put us on th most serious and frequent Con¦deration of those Motives, whic are proposed to us in the Gospe to incline our Wills to embrac the Government and Grace  our Lord Jesus Christ; such a The infinite Danger and Deme of Sin, The abundant Mercies  God, The Grace and Merits  our Lord Jesus Christ, The Spir¦tual Assistances of the Holy Ghost and. The eternal Rewards and Pu¦nishments of the world to come▪ And in order to make these Mo¦tives effectual, we must pray t God for that new Heart which h hath promised, Ezek. 36. 26, 27▪ We must beg, with David, That
God would incline our Hearts to s Testimonies, and not suffer our ffections to run after Covetous∣ess or any other Lust, Psa. 119. 6. AND whereas this Parable is  put, that of the two Sons which e Father had, onely one was a rodigal, the other very Dutiful: Yea, and the Prodigal at last be∣ame reformed. Let us here in he last place make a mournful Re∣ark, concerning the multitudes of obstinate Sinners in these times: To wit, 7th. Obs. THAT it is matter of great Sorrow, and what pre∣sages ill to us, That so few pro∣phane Persons come to the pious Resolution of the Text. Alas! we have many Prodigals, but few Penitents. It is a sad Thought, and unanswerable to right Reason,
(to which all men are Pretenders that the greatest part of the world yea, (which is most our shame the most of those which are calle Christians lye contented in th Prodigal state of a dissolute & pro¦phane life. How many are there wh know no other Pleasure or Tro¦ble, but what affects their externa Senses! and like our Prodigal, they spend their time in feeding of Swin (their beastly Lusts;) themselve being in truth, the more abomina¦ble Swine of the two. They have no mind to the things of God; yea, they have a perverse Dislike to his holy Nature and Government, and are Enemies to that which is Good THEY have a most Gracious and Blessed King to their Father, and might inherit a Glorious and Eternal Kingdom, would they but
arise by a real Conversion, and go enitently to God, and serve Him ruly for the future: But they oath the very thoughts of this, nd do all they can to discredit e∣ery thing that borders on Religi∣n; and in effect, reverse the words of the Text; and say, I will lie own again in my sinful Polluti∣ons, and will not betake my self o the ways of Holiness and eter∣al Life. O poor degenerate Children of Men! How are ye faln from your primitive Excellency! Is this the Creature that was made after the Image of God? Can such as were made to enjoy an infinite All-pure ountain of Goodness, be conten∣ed with a broken Cistern of pud∣dle water? Can the Reason of Man (as corrupt as it is) once ima∣gine that it is better wallowing in
the mire with Swine, than c¦versing with Angels; yea, w God himself? In this wretch choice, Men are more to be proached than Devils. Infer Spirits are faln from their Glori Station, but have no Helper to  up again: But the kind Father faln Men, stretches forth his H all the Day long to them, to inv and assist them to come unto H that they may have Life; but  Men will not Arise and Go to th Father. SURELY, if the Holy Ang above, may be supposed to be intently concern'd for the Salva¦on of men, as those faln Ang beneath, are for their Destructio With what Indignation must th needs consider the sinful Follies of the Children of Disobedie Those Blessed Angels at once p¦ceive
the happiness of serving God, nd the poison of those vices which icked Men Idolize: And the race of God tends to bring Men  this true savour of things, by hich, when the Lovers of Sin ome once to be enlightened and urified, they then awake as one ut of a deluding Dream; they ondemn & renounce their Follies, nd arise and go to their Father. Let us here then Consider three hings in the words before us: 1. THE Prodigal's Resolu∣tion—I will Arise, and Go to my Father. 2. HIS Humiliation—And will say unto him; Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before Thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. 3. THE Considerations which led him to this penitent Conver∣sion: Which were,
1. THE Misery and Wretch¦ness of his Condition, whilst wandered (after his own vain ¦sires and Imaginations) at dista from his Father's House, be rest his Father's wise Conduct, and de¦tute of his Blessing. 2. THE Necessity of changi his course of Life. He saw, th was nothing but Scarcity, Mise and Death, in the ways that he h foolishly betaken himself to; a therefore he resolves to Arise  Go to his Father: Considering f¦ther, 3. THE Bowels and Mercy his Father. He perceives his Co¦dition to be wretched, but  Hopes that it is not desperate.  confided, that his Father, who w once so very kind and indulge to him, would be so again, wh he should approve himself as d¦l
to him as he was before: And  succeeded accordingly. O! That our Good God, the Fa∣er of us all by Creation, would ecome our Father also by Regene∣tion! That he would (for his be∣otten Son's sake) give us such nfeigned Repentance for past Sin, nd such ingenuous Resolutions of uty for the future, that we may  repeat the words of the Text in serious and affected Manner this y: Especially such of us as have therto been Strangers to the Pow∣ of God's Grace, and to that in∣rd Purity of Heart, which is ential to our Divine Religion. It  time for such who have hitherto alkt loosely, without the awful ar of God, and without a just re to Please and Honour him in  their ways; to look about them rth with, and to begin to Work
out their Salvation with Fear  Trembling: Even before the G God rises out of the Seat of a ¦ther, to ascend the Tribunal  Judge. LET us now (even from  very instant) come to a pere¦tory Point, from which we res by the Grace of God, nev part: Namely, that we wil heartily and steadily for Reli for the pure Life and Hope  Christian, in opposition to all  Lusts and Allurements of a C Life. We are sure that this  sent Life is drawing to an  And that this is our seeds-time an eternal Harvest of Bliss or ¦guish. And that Such as sow t Flesh, will of the Flesh reap Co∣tion, that is, Destruction: And  Such as sow to the Spirit, will  Spirit reap eternal Life, Gal.
'Tis time therefore to stop our Course in sin, and to considet whi∣her it is carrying us: And since we annot bear even the Thoughts of welling with Everlasting Burnings; e must seriously set our Selves  do our utmost to avoid them: We must betake our Selves (not eignedly or faintly, but) in good arnest, and with all the Vgour hat humane Nature, assisted by he Grace of God, is able to act  the Ways of God prescribed in he Gospel: Let us therefore begin ith the Prodigal in the Text; amely, I. IN his efficatious Resolution  repent, and reform, and return  God.—I will Arise, I will Go  my Father. I will no longer lye reaming of Happiness in nasty usts, and in a deluding World, hich will one Day perish and
come to naught. No, I will ¦stantly Arise out of my presum¦tuous Dreams, and this car state; and will go right humb to my heavenly Father; and ¦ling down upon my bended Kne before his Mercy-Seat, I will fro the bottom of my Heart be w my corrupt Nature and si Life, and will beg his Grace  Spirit, to serve him truely all  Days of my future Life; trust in the Mercy of his Covenant a Promises thro' my Saviour Je Christ; hoping that (through Mediation and Merits) mercy w yet be vouchsafed to me a vile P¦fligate, who am not worthy  be called a Creature of God, m less his Child. THUS, when an enlighte Mind sees the Baseness, the F and the Danger of Sin, it soon
ies the sad News of this ill State o the Will and Affections: And he Will of Man having a natural Abhorrency of apparent Evil, it oon takes the Alarm, and begins o set up Resolutions of new and etter Courses. For so it is said f the Prodigal, that when he came o himself, or to have a right Judg∣ent of his sad Condition, he forth∣ith resolv'd to Arise and Go to his Father. The same Spirit of Sancti∣cation, who gave convincing ight to his Understanding, did lso incline his Will to follow the Dictates of the enlightened Mind, nd impowr'd him to act accor∣ingly: So that he effectually resol∣ed for God, and actually turned o him, so soon as he really came o his right Mind. SIRS, who ever there is among You, that is carried away with
any sinful Lust or Passion, and li in any way of Prophaneness a Irreligion; I hear mind you o Truth, which perhaps you will  believe now, but I am sure y will loudly confess it sooner or l¦ter: Namely, That whilst you th live in sin, you are not in your rig Mind. As the Idolatrous Jews a said by the Prophet to be mad up their Idols, Jer. 50. 38. for as muc as their Sin clouded their Reaso to that degree, that they praye to a senseless Log or Stone th was more shiftless than themselve So the vitious Person is mad up his Lusts, and sees not the Shame Vexation, and Misery, which ne¦cessarily attends him in that unhap¦py Course of life. As Solomo Youth confesses at the last (after long insensibleness, through the de∣ceitfulness of Sin) Pro. 23. la
They have stricken me, shalt thou y, and I was not sick: They have aten me, and I felt it not. Even  mad Men wound themselves, d are insensible of the Hurt they  to their own Flesh. KNOW therefore, All ye Lo∣ers of Sin, that this your inordi∣te Affection to it, is perfect Ha∣ed to your own Souls. Your hirst after forbidden Objects is  thirst after Poyson: And when er ye indulge it, ye act as madly  he that crams his mouth with rning Coales, or that poureth reams of scalding Brimstone own his Throat. 'Tis a perfect hrensy to indulge unsober Lusts.  this, Men dig their own Graves  this World, and their own Hell  the other. By sinning against od, we resist our own Happiness; e lose the Prospect of future Glo∣ry;
we court Shame; we tre the Paths of Death; and prepa Fewel for the eternal Flames. Come then to sober Though my Brother, in due time pull  that gross Veil wherewith Sat blinds thine Eyes: Look upwar towards thy Father's House, a consider the happiness for whi thou wast made, and is yet te¦dred to thee. And if this awa thee not, Look down into the d Cells of damned despairing Sou Hear, how they lament their se destroying folly in contemni the grace of our Lord Jesus Chri and their selling their Birth rig for a few carnal morsells. O ¦ware my Brother, that thou fall not into that place of Torm thro' Unbelief and incorrigiblen 'Tis cheaper Learning by the  Examples of others Misery, th
our own. Wherefore take up in ime, and resolve (by the Grace of God) to live a new Life. You ee, how properly our publick Ser∣ice begins with the Prodigals Reso¦ution in the Text; I will Arise and Go to my Father, &c. BUT it may be said, That it would seem presumptuous to speak after the manner of the Text. What erson, that has any sense of his own Corruptions, can with any modesty say, I will leave this Sin, r perform this duty? I am resolved to become Religious, or to cease to be Vitious. I Answer: That rash and pre∣sumptuous Resolutions of Refer∣mation will never hold long; and therefore we must always have re∣spect to the Grace and Blessing of the Holy Ghost, in all our spiritual Re∣solutions and Undertakings. And
the gracious promises of this Divi Assistant must never abate our e¦deavours, but always quicken a excite them. For so the case  stated by the Holy Spirit himse Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your ow Salvation with Fear and Tremblin And to stop all Objections of o own Disability to do this, it is a¦ded; For it is God who worketh in  both to will, and to do, of his go Pleasure. So that, since God plea¦eth to assist our Wills in their Dete¦minations for Holiness, we ma and ought to Resolve for it: An since he pleases to give Grace  Accomplish those Resolutions i Newness of Life, we must strive an Labor to the Uttermost to effect it Confiding in the promised Suc¦cours of preventing, assisting, an renewing Grace. Our good God through his Son will hear th
Prayers of such as seek to him in ncerity. It is a very disparaging ct of Unbelief to Question that hich He hath promised Six times ogether, Math. 7. 7, 8. Ask, nd it shall be given You; Seek, and e shall find; Knock, and it shall be pen'd unto You: For, every one that sketh receiveth; And he that seeketh ndeth; And to him that knocketh, t shall be open'd. He hath also romised, that he will pour out his oly Spirit (that is, freely and plen∣ifully give spiritual Assistance) to uch as set themselves to do his will, Prov. 1. 23. Turn You at y Reproof: behold, I will pour out y Spirit unto You, Yea, he will grant this, as willingly and as com∣passionately as ever any Father or Mother in the world gave a piece of bread to their own Child who cry'd upon them for hunger. For
so runs that condescending Promi of of our Lord, Luke 11. 11, 1 13. If a Son shall ask bread of a of You that is a Father, will he gi him a stone? Or, If he ask a Fi will he for a Fish give him a Serpent Or if he shall ask an Egg, will he off him a Scorpion? If ye then being ev know how to give good Gifts unto yo Children, how much more shall yo Heavenly Father give the Holy Sp¦rit to them that ask him? Here  even an Appeal to humane Natu it self, (as depraved as it is) wh¦ther the bowels of Parents will n painfully yearn over a poor hung Child that crys to them for Brea And the Inference is strong an undeniable; Namely, That the i¦finite Mercies of God are inco¦ceivably greater than the scan compassions of corrupt men. L us therefore arise and be doing, a
the Lord will be with the good, Chron. 22. 16. The diligent will be ccour'd when the slothful will be rsaken. AND here, we must also take otice, That pious Resolutions in e general, will not do our busi∣ess; But we must consider the articular ways and means, where∣y we offend God; and make par∣cular efforts against each of them. e may not think to break the bun∣le of our Corruptions all at once, ut must take the Branches apart, nd break them twig by twig, till he whole be destroyed. For, tho' here be a deadly wound given to he whole Body of Sin, in the de∣ermining act of Conversion; yet his blow must be followed by hear∣y strokes of Mortification, and Self-denyal; and the lively exercises of Faith and Prayer. Sanctification
is a progressive work; and we  required to abound in it more a more, 1 Thes. 4. 1. For we mu never think that we have d working, till the Devil has do tempting, and till the world a the Flesh have done warring agai the Spirit. NOW, The Prodigal's Resol¦tion before us consisted of t Parts. 1. HE Resolves to leave  old Wanderings and Misdeme¦nours, and the Ways that led  them. 2. HE Resolves to turn  God, and to observe his Comman¦ments. I. HE Resolves to leave his o Wanderings and Misdeameanour and the ways that led to them. will Arise, says he, from these pe¦niscious Vanities: I have slept
them too long already. The Sun advanced, my time is far spent, d I have not yet set forth in the ays of Life. I have trifled and ayed away the Morning o my ge. I have wasted my Youth, d Stength, and Wealth, in lewd ouses and loose Company. Oh! will Arise out of this hateful and retched sort of Life. 'Tis a Mer∣ that I am yet on this side e Grave: That God has shewn e my Sin, before I am dam∣d for it. Alas! how sottishly ve I lived! in what vain dreams ve I wasted my time! but now, ce God has gratiously a wakened e, I will Arise. I will not lay own my Head to sleep again on at bed of carnal Presumption, hich the Devil makes as soft as e can for deluded Souls. Should take one Nap more thereon, it
may be just with God that I ne awake but in a Bed of unquenc¦ble Flames, from which Di (who scarce ever before lookt H¦ven wards) lifted up his Eyes behold the Happiness he had l Wherefore, by the help of G I will certainly, I will speedily, will effectually arise from this st of Sin, and seek the Face of  God. HERE he must be understood leave three Things: 1. His form sinful Company; 2. His form Lusts; 3. His former way of L 1. He Resolves to leave his ¦mer sinful Company: That is, to any Partnership with them their Vanity and Debaucher For so the Holy Ghost advi Eph. 5. 11. And have no Fell¦ship with the unfruitful Works Darkness; but rather reprove th
Christan must not be the Fellow ill Society, but the Physitian of it. We must break Fellowship ith these, or we cannot walk ith God. Can they that walk wards Heaven, keep Company d Pace with them that walk to∣ards Hell? Or, Can they that ould get to the Top of a Hill, yn Company with them that n downwards, and will tumble own all they can with them to the bottom? I speak not of civil Conversation, or of Intercourse by way of Trade d Commerce, but of our cho∣n and delightful Company. As  which the Holy Psalmist says, epart from me ye Evil-Doers, for will keep the Commandment of my od, Psa. 119. 115. 'Tis the same esolution with this in the Text:  will no more comply with your
Humours, ye seed of Evil-Do¦nor be any further a Partaker your Sins. Cease your ennar Invitations, and forbear your ¦sed Assignations; I am not the m I was, and will no more do a have done. And therefore I da not put my self into such Comp¦ny, wherein I must sacrifice  Peace of my Conscience, and  Favour of my God. WE never find, That the P¦digal went back to his Harlots a profligate Companions, after his R¦turn to his Father's House. N he keeps wisely to the Society his Father's House-hold, wh good Examples tended to confi his holy Resolutions, and refo¦med Conversation. Sober and R¦ligious Company is like a Guard Holy Angels about any Person,  keep him in God's ways; The
must first get out of such Compa∣ before they can be very viti∣. It is the Remark of the in∣'d wise Man, Pro. 13. 20. That that walketh with wise Men shall wise, but a Companion of Fools ll be destroyed. The wise Man e, is the good and vertuous man, o will be apt to instill good In∣ctions into the Person he con∣ses with, and to communicate ething of his own warmth in ritual things to others, through e Grace of God, who hath pro∣sed to make it effectual, where s on both sides piously underta∣. What a divine Blessing then good and holy Company! How  we duely value it! Since the od Companion is often like God's gel to Lot, sent to lead us by the nd out of a State, upon which e flaming wrath of God is descen∣ng.
I therefore take this opport¦ty, to recommend to you all; more especially to such as Young, that excellent Method Religious Society; which has late years been happily set on  by some of our Divines, and m happily increases by the bless of God. Their Method is so H so humble, so full of Charity  primitive Purity; and is ca on (as far I can perceive) w such Life and Savour of H things; and is so opposite to  Scarlet Sins of the times, Tha hope it is seed sown by Almig God for a blessed Reformation,  a most happy Prelude to it. ¦ther it all ye can, ye that h any Zeal for God, or Love of  holy Religion; Despise it not a Blessing is in it. IT is the avowed Purpose
these Societies, to do all they do to e Glory of God, and to think so wly of themselves, that the Re∣oaches of the scornful World can arcely set them lower than y their Rules) they place them∣ves. And in Subordination to e Glory of the Great God, they nd their utmost Strength to re∣ve languishing Religion: and to duce the Honour of it by the ictest holiness of Life, and to nfirm this by frequent and fer∣nt Prayer, and by the most so∣mn and affectionate Celebration  the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup∣r, which they also reduce to the rimitive Frequency, as the due ove of God our Saviour must eeds do. They are full of Alms∣eeds, and of holy Discourse; and ually encourage each other ayly to Meekness, Humility, and
Contempt of the world, those ¦tiquated Graces which have  been despised by a crooked  haughty Generation, tho' they indeed the Ornament of our R¦gion, and of great Price in  sight of God. It is they say on the greatest Delights and Div¦sions they have, to sing Psal which they always perform w the strictest Reverence of S and Body: And before they ther pray to God, or praise Name, they use to read so affecting Preface, to excite at o the highest Veneration of the i¦nite Majesty of God, and the l¦liest Humiliation before him. WHAT I speak is from  own Observation, and upon  strictest Judgment I can make their real Bent and Design: which, though some of them
probably be unsincere (since one of ur Saviours chosen Twelve prov'd Traytor, & some of the very An∣els above kept not their first Stati∣n:) Yet as to the Temper and Be∣aviour of many of them; I think  am so far from giving them any dvantage by what is said; That  am sensible, I have not done hem right. For the Life, the igor and Affections of real Pie∣y have an intrinsick Beauty and Excellence, which it is not in the Power of Words to represent. AND, notwithstanding the urmises of some; I think it ve∣y manifest, That neither the Church nor the State will have rea∣son to be jealous of these Societies; or their Rules tend directly to support and advance both; And hey are protest Enemies to Schism and Sedition; Tho' at the same
time, they profess themselves ¦vers of all good men, tho, di¦ting from them in Opinions w touch not the Essence of Religi looking on Christian Charity, ¦dour, and Mildness, as com Debts to all that lead a g Life, SHALL I need now to  many words to recommend th holy Purposes to You? Is it no valuable Priviledge to enjoy  Society? And will not the L of God and of your ownsolus,  your Desire of the Propagatio Religion, and the welfare of  Nation, engage you to encour it? Especially since pious Ex¦ples do recommend Religion such a lively and attractive M¦ner, and do so fit it for our Pr¦tice (instilling it by degrees,  that, with Pleasure and Life) T
god Company has much the Advan∣ge even of good Books in refor∣ing a vain Conversation. AND how well-pleasing this is the sight of God: See Mal. 3. 16, 7. Then they that feared the Lord ake often one to an other: And the ord harkened and heard it; and a ok of Remembrance was written be∣e Him, for them that feared the ord, and that thought on his Name. nd they shall be mine, saith the Lord Hosts, in that day when I make up  Jewels, and I will spare them as a n spareth his own Son that serveth m. You see, God hearkens at the oor, and will register every good ord which drops from your Lips. ea, not a serious Thought shall cape his Book of Record. And such all be honour'd by a signalizing ovidence of God in the day in ich He makes up his Jewels.
What day is this? Why, 'tis the Da in which he is departing from an place. Then People take care  their Jewels, to carry them wi them: and it is probable that th expression had Respect to the M¦gremus h mention'd by Joseph The Departure of God from  Jewish state. AH! my Brethren (with tre¦bling I speak it) methinks I  the dawning of this day of G Departure from us, even from All his methods to reclaim us ha been sadly frustrated. We are Ju¦ment-proof; and we have tur Gods gracious dealings into wa¦tonness. What can be done furth for our Tryal by the God of  the Earth? what method of pr¦cedure have we not already frustr¦ted? and after all, How prodig¦ous are our sins! and (to the
of Reason) How hopeless our Re∣ormation! In these dark Cir∣umstances, I advise every parti∣ular Soul to secure his Peace with God, that he may be provi∣ed of a sure Refuge in the day of vil; For it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, Eccl. 8. 12. BE so just therefore to your wn Interests in both worlds, as  take up this first part of the Pro∣igal's Resolution, viz. To leave nsnaring Company: Partake not f their sins, lest ye share in their lagues. As you dread their Pu∣ishment, a void all Partnership in heir Pollutions. (2.) He Resolves to set himself against his former Lusts. He seri∣usly endeavours, thro' the holy pirit, to crucify the Flesh with its effections and Lusts, Gal. 5. 24. niquity shall not dwell with al∣lowance
in his heart. He labou to subdue the Love of Sin, by th prevailing Love of God, and h ways. The Prodigal must now pa under an other Name. He no loves his Father too well to affro him, or to depart from him. A tho' the Love of goodness be not y perfected in him, yet he will tru labour by dayly mortification, a progress in holyness, to carry it  towards perfection. REMEMBER, Christians, that ever you would walk worthy that Holy Name ye bear, You m duely exercise and carry on t spiritual work of mortification You must thro' the spirit mortify t deeds of the flesh (inward and o¦ward) that ye may live, Rom. 8. 1▪ Even that ye may live to the Glor of God on earth, and be meet  inherit his undefiled Kingdom.
must be our labour as long as we ive, to hate Sin more perfectly, nd to love God more entirely. And this is Christian sanctification; he blessed work of the Spirit of God on the degenerate Souls of men; who here sits as a Refiner, continual∣y purging out our Dross, and ma∣king us more pure Vessels of Honour, more and more fit for our Maker's Ʋse. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. And indeed they onely can see him with Delight. As, the glory of the un's brightness is painful and in∣olerable to a sore Eye, tho' no∣hing is more pleasant to the sound Eye than to behold the shining of he Sun: so, to the unsanctify'd Soul, he presence and Praises of God are ot onely undesireable but bur∣hensome; whereas, to the graci∣us Soul God is their exceeding joy,
Psa. 42. 4. His Courts are amia Psal. 84. 1. His Commands delight 1 Jo. 5. 3. And in his presence is ¦ness of joy, and at his right hand  pleasures for ever-more, Psal. 16. LOOK to this inward pur¦cation of your Souls, All ye th would have your Righteousness ¦ceed the superficial Righteousness the Scribes and Pharisees; lest w them and all other fruitless p¦fessors, ye be shut out of the Ki¦dome of Heaven, Math. 5. 20. T fear of falling short at last, and b¦ing found light when weighed the ballance of the last Judgme will make every sincere Christi very careful and circumspect in  things, and even curious in Or¦ring his conversation aright. He wi attend upon every ordinance  God with a zealous concern: H will pray without ceasing; He wi
watch withou sleeping as do others; He will fight against Lust and Passi¦on with hearty blows, and perse∣ere in the same with all long-uffering. He would in every action so approve himself to God, that Christ may say of him in every part of his Life, behold a Nathanael, an Israelite indeed; a Christian with∣out dissimulation; a Professor of Religion without Guile. THUS the Prodigal (and every sincere Convert) looks to the inte∣grity of his heart, in opposition to mpurity, vanity, and every deceit∣ful Lust. (3.) He resolves to quit his for∣mer corrupt Conversation. He will no more revel and riot as he had done. He will beware of wine and wantonness, and all those Paths of Death, in which he had like to have perisht. He will no more walk (as
other Sensualists do) in the Vani of their minds, having their Ʋnd¦standing darkened: being alienat from the Life of God, thro' the ig¦rance that is in them, because of t blindness of their heart: Who (bei hurried by exorbitant Lusts) gi themselves over unto Lasciviousness,  work all Ʋncleanness with Greedine But on the contrary; He puts  as to his former Conversation, the  man, which is corrupt according its deceitful Lusts. And (bei renewed by the Holy Spirit  God) He puts on the new Man, whi after God is created in Righteousne and true Holiness, Eph. 4. 18, 1 &c. He casts off the works of Dar¦ness, and puts on the Armour  Light; and walks honestly as in th Day, not in chambering and wanto¦ness, not in rioting and drunkennes not in strife and envy: But he p
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and makes no more Provision for the Flesh, to fulfil he Lusts thereof, Rom. 13. 12, 13. IN few words: A true Con∣vert is influenced by that power∣ul Principle of Faith working by Love to God and his Holy Will, nd aims at the Glory of God in ll he does, in hope of enjoying he glorious Presence of God for ever. Thus, He who lived like  Swine before, lives like an Angel ow. He has his Conversation in Heaven; his Heart is truly there; and his Soul and Body will soon be here also. HE seems to take possession e∣ven now of the prepared Mansions above, in that his Affections are there already. His hope has cast ts Anchor even within that Veil. And surely he cannot but have Treasure there where his Heart is so much.
THIS, This, my Brethren, that Prize of our High Calling. O Let us press hard after it. He is nothing below worthy of o precious Hours, or the Concern  our immortal Souls. We find  much noisy Discord, and nasty D¦bauchery in this present evil wor that a Dove like Soul cannot  where to set his Foot, or rest it se in entire Peace and Quietude. A indeed, it is not fit that we shou have perfect Rest below, lest  should forget the promised Rest  bove; and be ready to take  Lot on this side Jordan, as part  the Israelites did, being enamou with the Commodiousness of t Place. LET us therefore Arise and  to our Father; in whose House the are many Mansions of perfect Bli Let us make the same Use of
our present Wants and Afflictions, hat the Prodigal did; Namely, to asten our Journey Heaven-wards. We must of necessity part with all things which will separate us from God. And if we now sincerely arise from sinful Pollutions, and o to our Heavenly Father by Faith, Love, and dutiful Observance here elow; He will er'e long call us to come up into his nearer Presence, o see him as he is; and to be with im where he is; yea, to Triumph with Him, and to be happy in Him or Ever. HERE then arises an impor∣ant Question? Namely, How we may get to our Father? and what re the sure Paths which lead to is Presence? I hope you are all willing to go to God; and that ou resolve to live no longer (as Prodigal's) in Filthiness and Super∣fluity
of Naughtiness: but to li (as obedient Children) in stri Love and Duty to your God a Saviour. But perhaps some o whose Understanding is not y clearly enlightened in the ways God, may say as Philip, Jo. 14. Shew us the Father, and it suffice us. Or as Thomas, Verse 5. H can we know the Way? No man ha seen God at any time. Whit then must we direct our Ste that we may go directly and su¦ly to him? I answer. Follow the Prodi in the second Part of his Resol¦on as well as the former, and t will lead You to the favoura Presence of God, as it did him. WE have already considered  things which the Prodigal resolv against: Let us now mind th which he positively resolved, fo Namely,
HE resolved to apply himself to spiritual things, and to use all appointed means to please God. He will no longer be a Contemner of God's Ordinances, nor a Mock∣er of his Servants. But will Wait at the Doors of Wisdom, and ac∣count it the greatest Honour in the world to be a Fellow-Citizen with the Saints, and to be one of the House hold of God. He now prays with earnest Fervour, like a true Son of Jacob: He hears with duti∣ful attention, like one whose heart God hath Opened: And praises God with exalted Affections, like a Fel∣low▪Psalmist of Holy Angels: He di∣ligently searcheth the Holy Scrip∣ture to find every part of his Du∣ty: and when ever he opens these blessed Oracles of God, he says in his Heart, Speak Lord, for thy Ser∣vant heareth. He watches against
his own Corruptions, and th Snares of Satan, and the Entangl¦ments of the world: and he Gir on the whole Armour of God, that  may be able to stand against them and come off a Conqueror. BUT more particularly: T Steps which the Prodigal took i his Return to his Father's Hous (as exprest or imply'd in the Tex were principally these: 1. HE deliberately Conside and weighs the Terms upon whic his Father would accept him, an heartily consents to them. 2. HE deeply Regrets and R¦pents of his past Offences again his Father. 3. HE betakes himself effec¦tually to serve his Father in New¦ness of Life. AND if we abstract thes things from the Allegory of the Pa¦
rable, and consider them in the ractical Doctrine which our bles∣ed Saviour teaches us in them, we hall find in these particulars the umm of the Gospel-Covenant, and y Consequence our direct way o Peace with God. I. FIRST then, The Prodigal eliberately considers and weighs he terms upon which his Father ould receive him into Favour; nd he heartily consents to them. He knew full well, that he must ive an other sort of a life than he ad done, if he meant to be one of is Father's beloved Children; and he fully resolves so to do; relying nd trusting in his Fathers good∣ness to pardon what was past, up∣on his penitent Return to him, and dutiful Behaviour towards him for the future. NOW these are some of the
essential Acts of a vigorous and ¦fectual Faith. For, when the S¦ner comes (thro' the Grace of G to such an efficatious Sense of  Sinfulness, Misery, and Cursedne of his Condition, and to such an ¦fecting belief of the Suitablene Sufficiency, and Willingness of  Lord Jesus Christ to supply all  Wants, and of his being ordai by God the Father to these ble purposes for the Sanctification a eternal Salvation of Sinners; a when he considers that all that  saved by Christ must be enligh¦ned, renewed, and governed, by  Gospel through the Holy Spir and upon the serious Considerati of all this, consents sincerely  the whole of it, and will adve¦ture all upon this bottom; T is that dedicating, covenantin and transforming Faith which
Title to the Promises of the Gospel. nd by such Acts as these the Soul akes it's first true steps to leave a te of Sin and Wrath; and to ob∣in the Mercy and Favour of God. ith is the Mother-Grace, the ring of those noble Actions hich abound in the regenerate rvants of God, who by this sub∣e the World, crucifie the Flesh, nquish the Legions of the invi∣le Powers of Darkness, and do ch mighty things as are recor∣ed in the Eleventh Chapter of e Epistle to the Hebrews; which  a little Chronicle of the Wonders ne by a Mighty Faith. WHEN this Principle had owerfully influenced the Prodi∣ls Heart, as well as convin'd his dgment, with what Ease, yea, ith what Joy did he break the hains of Youthful Lusts and
Customary Sins. Faith working Love makes a new Creature.  with one Look he beholds the ¦luding Devil leading him into  Dungeon of eternal Misery;  with an other, he beholds the ¦ther of Mercies kindly calling to  and opening his Arms to rec him. With one Thought he ¦ders the needy and nasty condi into which his Sin had cast h and with an other, he confid the Happyness of the meanest i Father's House. And now he co (thro' the grace of God) to  determining Point, even to reso for Heaven; for Heaven, I say opposition to all the ways and ¦tertainments of Sin. And he upon II. HE deeply regrets and ¦feignedly repents of his past Off¦ces against his good Father. Ev¦gelical
Faith produces an ingenuous elting of the Heart for sinning a∣ainst infinite Goodness and Love; ith an Aversion as well as Fear to ffend again, let the bribe to it be ever so great; and this is true Re∣entance. METHINKS I see, with what a ejected and ashamed countenance e Prodigal returns home: With hat sorrow of heart does he con∣der his undutiful carriage towards s good Father, and those hateful travagances which he had run to since he left him. Let us con∣der his confession, and we shall ave an affecting Account of his rrow. 1. He acknowledges his Sin.—Father, I have sinned. 2. He aggravates it in all its eightning Circumstances. Against Heaven and before thee, or, in thy ght
3. He is sensible of the desert his Sin. I am no more worthy to called thy Son: Make me as one of hired servants. The meanest pl in thy House, is better than all Advancements of ungodlyness. First, HE acknowledges and ¦ments his Sin from his very he His words are very mournful  melting: Father, I have sinned.  sin, my sin troubles me sorely sticks me to the very heart to th how indulgent my good Father  been to me, and what a stubb and untractable wretch I have b towards him. I have been as a Be before him. So that he hangs do his ashamed face, and smites up his guilty Breast, saying, God be m¦ciful to me a sinner. O! When once the sinner co to this; when he sees his o wretchedness, desolation, and d¦r
by reason of his sin, and groans rth his inutterable sense of its eight; there is then a happy al∣ation begun, and he is in the di∣ct way to spiritual peace and e∣nal Rest. For, the promise of di∣ne Rest is made by our Saviour to ch as are weary and heavy laden, th. 11. 28. And we shall one y bless God with rapturous joy t ever he made us Sorrowful after s godly sort; For, this works re∣tance never to be repented of; a, ever to be rejoyced in. Secondly, He aggravates his Sin, all its heightening Circumstan∣. Alas! I have sinned against eaven and before Thee. (1.) He is sorry for the impie∣ of his sin against God: As if he d said, Ah! I am full of Sorrow d Confusion, for my great and ny Sins against my Good God,
the God of my Life, the God my Vows, the God of my Mer and the God of my Salvation.  that ever I should be such a wret to blaspheme the Great God w the breath which he gave me:  abuse his Wine and good Creatu in revelling and drunkeness: make the Members which he g me, the Members of a Harlot; ¦verting the very end, for wh God my Creator made me;  honouring his Name, thwar his Will, and despising his Jus and Mercy. This is the first  cheifest Aggravation of Sin, wh chiefly affects the Conscience. T Sin is lamented, as Sin; as co¦mitted against Heaven. The ¦brew word  (Heavens) is ¦mongst the Jews an usual Name God, as Dan. 4. 26. where it w told Nebuchadnezzar, that his Ki¦
should be sure unto him, after t he knew that the HEAVENS  Rule. And so in the new Testa∣nt, Mat. 21. 25. The Baptism John, whence was it! Of Heaven,  of Men? So that the Penitent ncipally laments his Sin, as Sin; it was committed against the thority, Goodness, and Perfecti∣s of God. (2.) A true Penitent will also ent, and to his power recom∣ce any injury that he has done men. He will confess his Fault, eech Forgiveness, and make ail ssible Restitution to any Person om he has wronged. So the odigal; Father, I have wickedly ended and grieved You: I have ned before thee; My wicked e has fetch many a tear from ur Eyes, and many a sigh from ur Heart. I wasted your Goods,
I left your Company, I dis∣garded your Advice: For which, I solemnly arraign and co¦demn my self before you this da and will no more do so wickedly Thirdly, He was sensible of Desert of his Sin.—And am more worthy to be called thy  Here is more imply'd, than is ¦ken: For it implies the shame, L and Rejection opposite to Son-sh As if he had said, I have deser to be disowned and discarded you, my good Father; as I ha also deserved to have my Na blotted out of the Book of Li to be abandoned by the God Mercy, and to be for ever  up in the Dungeon of Darkn with Unbelievers and Obstin Enemies of God. Thus will a Penitent aggrav his Sin in the day of his Humilia
: which is a true step to obtain ercy, for he that humbleth him∣f shall be exalted, Luk. 14. 11.  thou dealest sharply with thy self, says Tertullian) God will deal ildly with thee. But if thou excu∣t thy self when thou art Guilty, d will accuse thee. And there∣re another of the Fathers advi∣ Sinners to Load themselves th self-accusations as the ready y to alleviate the Burthen of , Ambros. These lowly Princi∣es made those Holy Men of old, walk humbly with their God, e∣n to a degree of Humility which azed the Age they lived in, as uch as it reproaches this. WE may also further take notice ncerning the Prodigals humili∣on and solemn Address to his Fa∣er, that he framed it in his Mind fore he came to utter it with his
Lips in his Father's presence.  first said within himself, I will to my Father, and say thus and th and then he went and spake acc¦dingly. This may mind us to  meditate, before we pray to  Great God: as the Wise-Man ¦vises, Eccles. 5. 2. Be not rash  thy mouth, and let not thine hear hasty to utter any thing before  Remember the infinite distance ¦twixt the Almighty Eternal  and a poor, finite, polluted C¦ture. He is in Heaven, and tho on Earth, therefore let thy word few. 'Tis ill trifling and toying w such a tremendous thing as Pra to the Lord of Heaven and Ea for things of eternal moment true Convert will pray seriou and sensibly too; in the spirit,  with understanding also. And crown all, in the last place:
3. HE betakes himself in good earnest to serve his Father in New∣ness of Life. We never read that the Prodigal played the Runnagate again after his Restoration to his Father's Favour, but he continued soberly in his Father's Family, and observed the pious Orders of his House. Thus a real Convert will firmly and supremely love that God whom before he dishonoured, and embrace those Laws, which before he despised, and venerate that Piety which before he blas∣phemed; desiring by patient Con∣tinuance in well-doing to inherit the Promises. THUS have we in our Medi∣tations accompanied the Penitent Prodigal in all the steps of his Re∣turn to God. And that we may in Heart and Deed imitate his Re∣pentance and Reformation, I come
now to recommend to you th three principal Motives which i¦clined him to it. And truely th will appear very forcible to eve sensible mind; Namely, 1. THE deplorableness his present Condition. 2. THE necessity of an a¦teration of it. 3. THE likelihood of h succeeding in it, upon his earne Endeavours. I. IN the first place, He co¦sidered the deplorableness of h present Condition. He was nast as the very Swine he kept, an much more hungry and empt than they. The Hogs had a Ma¦ster that would provide for them but he had no friend near him none that would bestow the Cha∣rity of a few Husks upon the poo perishing man. He had brough
himself to the most abject, sordid, nd comfortless Condition upon Earth; and to continue in these Circumstances was the way to pe∣ish inevitably. O Sirs! This is yours and my Case, if we are departed from the iving God thro' our evil heart of Unbelief. The Swines wallowing n the mire is a Scripture-Emblem of the Sinners spiritual pollution. And the Famine and Nakedness which befel the Prodigal in his wild amble, foreshews the Misery and Wretchedness to which a carnal Life leads men. For if they live fter the Flesh they must die; they die to all spiritual good now, and herefore will be separated from ll felicitating Good for ever. AH! what nasty work is every Worker of iniquity engaged in? To what brutal Lusts and Passions
is he enslaved! What an ill Mast does he serve! What a pitiful, d generate, and unreasonable Li does he live! and Ah! What wretched and desperate death do he die? and above all, what dreadful, painful, unpitied Ete¦nity must he undergo? O Sinner, I beseech thee even b the Mercies of God which the despisest, that thou wouldst  thy immortal Sous that right,  to stop thy furious Course in s and consider wisely what swee¦ness there is in a Life of Faith a Holiness! What blessedness in ob¦dience to the King of Heaven What Joy there is in peace wit God! What Honour in Communio with the Lord of the whole world What Satisfaction, Hope, and Di¦vinity there is in a pious Life! an what Blessedness and Glory ther
at the end of it. And withal, nsider how near we are to an ernity of Bliss or Torment, and w unalterable our Condition ill be in the other World, when ce it is entered upon. He that ath the Power of thinking, let m think on these things. HOW long shall it be ere we ome to the determining Resoluti∣n for eternal Happiness? We can∣ot endure the thoughts of dwell∣g with everlasting Burnings: We cannot deny but we have immor∣al Souls, which must quickly re∣eive an irrevocable Sentence from he mouth of God, according to he manner of our life here. And we daily see our selves decaying and drawing on towards the invi∣sible state; and yet how late is it ere most of us set our selves seri∣ously to do the will of God, and
many thousands never come at  to this point. Ah! Why will a wise Person live (says one) so  no wise Person dares die? Why  we do that with delight, whi tends to bitter Sorrow? Why  we not lay out our time a strength chiefly in the Conce of the eternal Life to come? Si this World is but our Passage, w do our Affections stick here? Ho can we live in quiet, when t prospect of a future state is  cloudy? Or, how can we wit Reason and Self-Love do suc things now, as will be our Conf¦sion and Torment in the Etern State? TO what purpose have we li¦ved all those years which God ha given us, if we have not yet ef∣fectually considered, for what pur∣pose God sent us into the world
and in what our happiness consists? it wisdom for us to be always roviding for a world in which we ust stay so little a while; and ake no provision for a world hich has no end? Have we yet o hope in Christ? No saving in erest in him? No Communion ith God? No Fellowship of the pirit? No Sense of God's Love? This is indeed a very dark and ismal state, the Shades of eternal eath are in it; I pray you hasten ut of it. No person can make oo much hast where his Life is in mminent Danger. And to quick∣n you to this, Consider the Pro∣igal's second Motive; Namely, II. THE absolute necessity of changing his Condition. And this could be no otherwise done (he was sure) but by untreading the steps of his Prodigal Life. And
therefore, he goes back to his ¦ther with speed; for he saw th if he continued at this distan from him, he should perish by h¦ger and nakedness and the want  all things. Tho' some sins lo fair and alluring to a carnal Ey especially when varnisht by the ¦lusions of the Devil, yet there nothing in it but Darkness, De¦sion, and Destruction. Like th Apples of Sodom which some ha made mention of, which are  (they say) to the Eye, but ha nothing but dust within them. T Prodigal found this true by sad E¦perience; and methinks we sho never forget his Cry, Verse  I perish with Hunger. My so is starved for want of the t meat which nourisheth to eter Life. MY Brethren, Our Father
House is the Church of God: His Family is the Congregation of the faithful: His Son's Body and Blood received by faith are the true viands which nourish to everlasting Life. If we are destitute of these, we are infinitely miserable. For, if so, God is our Enemy; His word is our Condemnation; His Son will pronounce sentence against us; and it will be but a little while, and we shall be cut off from our outward Christian Privileges ike unprofitable Branches, and be cast into the Lake which burneth with Fire and Brimstone for ever. IS this a condition fit to belived n? Can we content our selves in the neighbourhood of such Curses, nd under the burthen of such Guilt? Pray, tell me; is it not worth our while to labour earnestly for so short a time as this life lasts,
to shun the eternal Doom and Tor∣ments of Devils? Has the Prince o this world so perfectly blinded you Eyes, that you are not scared at the approaches of Death and the Judg¦ment to come, tho' you perceiv that your peace is not made wit God, and that you are not par¦kers of that inward holiness with out which none can see His face wi comfort? MEN, Women, Children, co¦sider I pray you in time; that if  are not regenerated by the holy sp¦rit of God, and do not become s¦cerely holy in all manner of conve¦sation: If we dare indulge any c¦nal appetite, or neglect God's O¦dinances, or live in the contem of any part of God's will: T Curses of God's book belong to  in both worlds, and we ma (for ought any body can assure
o the contrary) make our Bed in Hell before the light of the next ay shines upon us. SINCE there is therefore such bsolute necessity of becoming sin∣ere Converts to God in time: Let one of us settle again on the Lees f a carnal state, but let us in time arise and go to our Father, for he is gracious and merciful and ready to forgive. This leads us to consider the third motive which inclined the Prodigal to return, viz. III. THE Likelyhood of his suc∣ceeding in it, upon his sincere En∣deavours. He confided in the good∣ness of his Father, and trusted that he would not reject but cherish these first kindlings of Love to∣wards him. He considered, with what tenderness his Father had brought him up; and with what unwillingness he parted with him;
and with what bounty he gave hi a Portion of his Goods. And he co¦cludes (with reason) that his bo¦els were not perfectly hardened ¦gainst him yet: or however th tho' he might justly loath hi when a Prodigal, yet that he wou love him when a Penitent. And  proved according to his expecta¦on, yea much better than he co have hoped. For, so soon as ev his Father could get sight of hi and beheld that his Son's face w towards him, even whilst he w yet at distance, his Father ran  meet him. The good old Man seem to forget his Years, he ran like  nimble youth, (such Spirits had h Joy infused): And tho' he foun his Son all in raggs, besmeare with dung, and stinking with th stench of Swine; yet the Father' Love digests all these loathsom
circumstances, and before the Son ould confess his fault, the Father alls on his neck and vouchsafes to mbrace that lump of filth and eggary. His Father reads his Son's epentance in his looks, and this lessed Grace blots out a multitude f sins. The Father does not so uch as upbraid him with what he ad been, for Joy of what he now was. For he lookt upon him as aised from the very dead. His sins ad been so enormous, and he had o long abandoned himself to them, hat his Father had despaired of his Conversion, and gave him over for ost. But he now beholds his Son become another Man, and now the best Cloaths and the best Chear in the House are called for, to entertain im: And all the neighbourhood ings with the Musick and Mirth of the House; and the burthen of
their Joyful Songs was this, M Son was dead and is alive again,  was lost and is found. MY Brethren, this is the tru Character of Gods mercy to retur¦ing sinners; drawn to the life i this Parable by the Son of hi Bosom, who could best set for his love to us. Let this then incli us all to return to God with spee and sincerity: and what ever o sins have been, let them not ove¦whelm us into despair, tho' the must humble us to Repentance. LET me here leave this R with you, which I pray you to ¦member and practise, when  Lips shall be closed and will be & more able to give you instruction Namely, That you do not suffer yo sins, how horrid so ever, to drive y from God, but to him. For when t Devil has brought you into t
Snare of sin, his next Plea is, That ou can never get out of it: That ou can't have the face to go to od, or to seek his mercy in this ious condition into which Sin as brought you: And if he can evail with the Sinner to sit still in s Sin and never look out for a medy, he has his End. But be∣are, I beseech you, of this wile of e Devil; And say with the Pro∣gal, I will arise, and ask pardon  my Father: he has laid help upon e that is mighty to save, Isa. 63. 1. d thro' him he will abundantly rdon, Isa. 55. 7. The Lord Je∣s Christ is able to save to the ut∣rmost those that come to God by m, Heb. 7. 21. And will in no se cast out such as come unto him, . 6. 37. EƲSEBIƲS has recorded a me∣orable passage of St. John the E∣vangelist
concerning a Young M of a great capacity and a promis Countenance; in order to wh Education this Holy Apostle h given a particular charge to  Bishop of the place where  young Man lived. But notwith¦standing all the care that was tak he proved a very dissolute and w Man; and after the practise many sorts of wickedness, desp¦ring of the mercy of God, he  came the Captain of a band of R¦bers, wholly bent to Rapin, Mut and Cruelty. Of which when  John was informed, he rode to  place where he used to rob, a being taken by some of them, ¦sired to be carryed to their Capta But no sooner did this great Robb behold the awful face of St. John,  he was stricken with shame, a fled way. Upon which, the go
Apostle ran after him, crying, My , my Son! why flyest thou from thy ther, unarmed, and old? O my , tender my case; be not affraid; re is yet hope of Salvation for thee. ill undertake for thee, with Christ. ill die for thee, if need be, as Christ ed for us, I will hazzard my Soul for ine. Trust to me, Christ sent me. he Robber hearing this, first stood l, casting his Eyes on the Earth: d then fell into a trembling, and  last wept so bitterly that he emed to baptize himself in his n Tears. And here the humi∣tion of the Thief and the embra∣s of the Apostle, seemed to be other Prodigal returning to his ther, and received with Joy. r he was hereby brought to Re∣ntance and Newness of Life. useb. lib. 3. ap. 20. LET us then be assured from
the abundant Promises of G and the Examples of his mercy Sinners, (of which, his forb¦rance towards every one of us i near instance to convince us) t God will shew mercy to the w of Sinners that have hearts repent, and forsake their S Come now and let us reason togeth saith the Lord, Isa. 1. 18. Th your Sins were as Scarlet, they  be as Wool; tho' they were as Cr¦son, they shall be as white as S The change of your Heart a Life by the Grace of God  make a blessed Alteration in y present State and future Expec¦tions. TRUELY, Sirs! there is day so beneficial, so happy, blessed to us, as that of our  feigned Conversion to God.  then the face of our Heavenly
er is turned towards us, His ms are encircled about us, and s Bosom opened to us. Then we ay look up towards Heaven with mfort, and think of Eternity th Delight: We may meet Death th an unshaken peace; and lay  our Bodies (as we put off our  Cloaths) in hope of receiving em in a better frame in the Re∣rection. THUS have we considered the odigal's Resolution of returning his Father; with his Humilia∣ before him; and the Motives ich excited him to both. Let now more particularly apply all s to our selves. 1st. Ʋse. AND here the first e that we are concerned to ke, will be to bring our selves  an impartial Self-Examinaiion in the presence of God; whe∣ther
we are in the Prodigal-Es of distance and disaffection to G or in a penitent and conver one? How stands the case  us? Are we of the invisible Ch of God, or of the Synagogu Satan? All we like Sheep have  astray, every one in his own  says the Prophet, Isa. 53. 6.  are we risen from the Follies  Wanderings of our vain Con¦sation, or are we not? THIS is a point which dese our most speedy and most se Consideration: What! Know not your own selves, says the ¦postle, How that Jesus Christ i you, except ye be Reprobates? 2  13. 5. If this work of sin Conversion of the heart be not effected, what a mockery is our profession of Religion!  how unsavoury are all our P¦s
and other vain Performances  the nostrils of God! The whole urport of the first Chapter of saiah, is to chide and rebuke the ifling and unsincere Medlers with eligion. To what purpose do ey take Gods Book into their and, or his Covenant into their outh, who hate to be reformed? SINCE it is therefore a matter f such Consequence; Let us (with∣ut any manner of Misrepresenta∣on) bring our selves directly and mpartially to this one Question; amely, Quest. HAVE we affectionate∣y and unfeignedly made, And do e (to our utmost Power through Grace) faithfully keep, the Vows f the Christian Covenant? Have e such an abiding sense of the nfinite evil of Sin, and the im∣ense Excellency of God and his
ways, that we have solemnly a resolutely devoted our selves  God thro' his Son Jesus Christ, ¦cording to the terms of the C¦venant of Grace? And is ¦bent of our Heart, and the Course our life indeed agreeable to the holy purpose? Do you serve G or Mammon? Do you live a the Flesh or after the Spirit?  Faith or by Sense? Do you rese¦ble the Prince of Light, or  Prince of Darkness? And to whi of these are you subject? Who  your heart, and whom do y serve? What Interest do you  with in the choices and course your Life? either that of God Jesus Christ, or the interests of the World, and the will of the Fle and the Devil? Does your Desi and Resolution to please God, ¦verbear all contrary Desires an
clinations? And is the Favour f God, the chief happiness you purpose to your self? And in Or∣der to this, is the Holy Gospel your hosen Rule of Life? SINCE many Questions are t to puzzle weak Minds and rupulous Consciences, I have re chosen to referr you to one ve∣y plain one, which is the foundati∣n of the Christian Religion and e Christian Hope. I pray you, ove your selves by it without eceit, the delusion will be your wn, if you deal otherwise. AND if you find your Case ood, and your Heart and ways uely Christian: be sure to offer  God (thro, the Blessed Media∣r) the Praises due to his Name n this Account. O happy You!  you can appeal to God in the ords of the elder Son, Verse 29,
Lo! These many years have I ser thee, neither transgressed I at  time thy Commandment? Not b known and wilful Transgressi or by no such Sin, not truely ¦pented of. If so, the Father's ¦swer to those words may be ap¦ed to you, Verse 31. Son, thou  ever with me, and all that I  is thine. We have a promise full as this, Rev. 21. 7. He th ¦vercometh shall inherit all thi and I will be his God, and he shal my Son. This is blessed bey expression; an Inheritance wh exceeds all Estimation. BUT if on the contrary, Y Self-Examination shews you y wanderings from God, and y distance from his gracious p¦sence. I then beseech you w all the earnestness I am able speak, yea, I charge you in
Name of God that you hasten your return to him; for why? O! why? will you die in your Sin, and pe∣rish for ever? DO you indeed consider your mortality and immortality? Have you ever thorowly considered, how dreadful it is to die in a Pro∣digal State? at a wide distance from your Father's House? And under his heavy displeasure? Without hope of Heaven, or any further mercy from the sole Fountain of it? With Terrors without, and Agonies within? With an Al∣mighty Enemy above, and immor∣tal Enemies beneath? Crusht by a multitude of intolerable sufferings, without any manner of support, or hope of mitigation? SURELY the merry contented Sinner never yet thought so far as this: He is so dazzled by the pre∣sent
Gaity of Sin, and so hood∣winkt by the Prince of darkness that he discerns not the dark cloud which gather about him, and th horrible Tempest which is falling upon him. But there is one Tex of Scripture, which one would think should awaken and unde¦ceive every Sinner, that is not per¦fectly dead to all that is spiritu It is that tremendous Question p to sinful men by the Holy Gho Rom. 9. 22. What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and make his pow∣er known, endured with much long suffering the Vessels of wrath fitte for Destruction? O dreadful! Th righteous God will give an Exam¦ple of his Almighty Power in the Punishment of the damned. It shal be seen by Angels and Men, how miserable the Omnipotent God i able to make condemned men
Who knows the Power of his Anger? says the Psalmist, Psal. 90. 11. It exceeds comprehension, yet must be endured by guilty persons to all Eternity. As the man is, such is his strength. Judg. 8. 21. A Giant can give a more smarting and a more deadly Blow than a Child. O then, who can bear the weight of Almighty Power put forth to the utmost in direful Vengeance? and that for ever? O dismal Sufferings! Which no Revolutions of Ages, or Millions of Years can so much as lessen! For still those miserable Souls are no nearer to an end of their sufferings than at the begin∣ning of them. TELL me, all ye that live un∣righteously, unsoberly, and un∣godly! Are ye willing to die thus? Can ye dwell with everlasting bur∣nings? Can your Hand be strong, or
can your Heart endure, in that D in which the God of Judgment sha deal with you after your deservings▪ I know, ye cannot. O then! Take better Courses in time, that ye may come to a more blessed end. AND yet, lest I should not have sufficiently rouzed the Le∣thargick Sinner; and because  know, that such as see their natural Face in a Glass, and are terrified with it for the time, are apt to go away and forget what manner of me they are, and how near and terri∣ble their dangers are; and because the invisible Enemies of goodness will be busy in their endeavours to steal away the Seed sown; I make this request to every Captive of Sin and Satan, that they would retire, and give the following Questions serious Considerati∣on: by which I desire you to ex∣ostulate
and reason the Case with our own Souls, 1st. Quest. LOVEST thou the God of thy Mercies and Bliss so ttle, as to part with his Favour or such trifles as Sin affords? For  little Drink which thou needest ot, and which can only please hee whilst it is runing down thy Throat? Or, for a few moments of filthiness, like Esau, who for one carnal Morsel sold his Birth-right? Or, for a few Sums of Money, which thou must leave quickly, or they thee; and which bring dis∣quiet to thy mind, and cannot pro∣fit thee in the day of wrath? Or, for a few ill words, which bring neither Profit nor Pleasure here, yet pull down infinite Torments in the eternal State? What a reproach is it to a reasonable Creature to act so madly and disingenuously?
2d. Quest. IS the Authority  the Great God so contemptib that his Command will not st thee? Do you despise the Gove¦nour of the World, who is able  destroy both the Soul and Body ete¦nally? 3d. Quest. CAN any thing be Secret to God? or will the hidde sins of men be long secret to th world? Does not God fill all plac with his Presence? Does not hi knowledge enter where the Ligh cannot? And has he not appointe a day, when every secret Sin sha be laid open? 4. Quest. HAS not any Sou greater Peace in the mortificatio of inordinate Lusts and Passions, than in their rage and fury? Is there not greater Sweetness, Ho¦nour, and Hope, in the Liberty of those whom the Spirit of God
frees from the Tyranny of Sin; han in the Slavery, Toiles, and exations of such as are the Slaves f beastly Appetites and Passions? 5th. Quest. DOES not Christi∣n Self-denial produce great in∣ward Comfort? And does not the Conquest of a Temptation bring s the Joy and Glory of a Noble Triumph? And does not spiritual Joy vastly exceed carnal Mirth? 6th. Quest. HAS not sinful In∣dulgence sad twitches of Consci∣ence, a painful regret of mind, and dismal fore-boadings of an after-reckoning? Threatning them, as (they say) Caesars Ghost did Brutus, to meat them hereafter to their Terror. 7th. Quest. IS it a light matter to contradict the End or which we were made, and to pervert our faculties, and abuse the mercies of
God? Will a just God bear thi long? 8th. Quest. IS it not Self-enmi¦ty to despise the Lord Jesus Christ the gratious Saviour of men? An to trample on his blood, greive hi Spirit, and neglect that great Sal¦vation which he has purchased so dear a rate? 9th. Quest. WHAT if th shouldst be forsaken of God, and g¦ven up to the blindness, hardne and perverseness of thine own Co¦ruption? Would not your C then be as wretched even as th of Devils themselves? 10th. Quest. HOW many Mer¦cies of God are past! How many present! And what offers are mad of an Eternity of mercy to come▪ And shall all these lose their end▪ Will not these Rivers of oyl mel and soften your hard heart?
11th. Quest. HOW if you should be taken out of this world this day, by some violent distemper, or some nseen Accident? How could you ppear before God? Or render an Account of all the passages of your Life? Or bear the doom of the ast Sentence! 12th. Quest. DID you ever look ack on any Sin committed, and not with it undone? Does not Sor¦ow succeed the shameful Acts of wickedness, as soon as ever the Vio∣ence and Rashness of it is over? And why then, will you again ake work for Sorrow and Re∣entance? 13th. Quest. IS it not the greatest Honour that man can have, to con∣erse with God? The greatest sa∣isfaction, to have Peace with im? And the greatest happiness, o be his Favourite?
14th. Quest. Is not our depart from God the Cause of our So¦rows, and the very Essence of o Misery? Would not Hell it self lo its Name if the gratious presen of God where there? And up the whole: 15th. Quest. HAVE we any ¦terest or Concern upon Earth great and important; as to rep of our sins, and return to our G and to glorifie his Name upon E and do the work he has given  do? CONSIDER these things ¦ly and shew your selves men.  as Reason and Self-preservat (influenced by Faith) will d you in this Case. Grudge not pray you) to spend a little time secure a glorious Eternity. AND let me here subjoyn  Saviours words, (tho' spoken
n other Account) what thon dost, do quickly. The shortness and un∣certainty of our mortal Life will not bear the Lingerings and Loi∣terings of a tedious Suspense. Ma∣ny a Soul has been snatcht away into its eternal Condition, whilst it has been entertaining it self with uncertain Thoughts of preparing for it. INDEED nothing frustrates the Design of Religion more, than the putting off the Holy Purposes of it from day to day: Because this administers something of Rest to a deluded Soul, and at the same time prepares a Net for its De∣struction. And Alas! How ma∣ny thousands have perished in this fatal Snare! Tis very probable, that of the many Millions now in Hell, there are but few but had in their Life time, some thoughts of
repenting hereafter. But when God says, Now is the accepted time▪ Now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor 6. 2. It is a very absurd and hate∣ful Presumption for a poor depen¦dent Mortal to say, Not Now, b hereafter. By mens delays, the harden their hearts; they ma the Bonds of customary sins strong∣er; they provoke God to give them up to their Lusts and Delu∣sions; and tho' they will every day need more Grace than othe in order to their Repentance, ye they are less and less likely to ob∣tain it. So that in effect, by per∣swading people to delay their Re∣pentance, the Devil secures hi Game better than he could by bringing them at once to resolve against Salvation; Because this is so horrible a thing that no Consci∣ence can be supposed to bear it
long: Whereas the other way of rocrastination very often prevails n men to their latter end. BESIDES; Consider, my Bro∣her! If it could be as you vainly roject; that you could spend the ost of your time in Sin, and yet e saved at last. Would you not e ashamed to appear before the nfinite Majesty of your Creator, when you reflect on what you ave done; and see how much you ave done for the Devil, and how ittle for God? WHAT! Shall your old Age nly be at Gods Service? Will you offer dry Bones upon his Altar? An honest Heathen would Blush at his. Does it not shame thee (says Seneca) to squander away the active nd useful part of thy time in vice, nd onely to reserve those last hours f thy life for Sobriety and Vertue,
which thou knowest not how to emplo otherwise? And again. Ah! Ho late is it to begin to live, when on life is ending. Sen. de Brev. Vit And we have it from a better Pe that the Blind and Feeble Cattl (the Emblems of old Age) Offere in Sacrifice to God would not be ¦cepted, Mal. 1. 8. That is, whe they had a Male in their Flock, ( more strong and more perfect Ser∣vice in their Possession) as all suc as are young now have, over wh will be in their capacity when the are old. SO then for as much as th Youngman in this Parable has bee the Subject of my Discourse all  long, I now turn my concludin Exhortation to Young Persons in  particular manner. YE that are now in the Flow¦er of your Age, and the mornin
f your time; Consider, I pray your e Misery which attended the he misled Youth in the Text: nd be careful that you do not isspend the golden days of your ife. O! What a vile shame is it, r any Young men and Women  Sacrifice their First-fruits to the evil! To pollute some of their irst-breath by prophane Lan∣uage! And to dedicate the prime f their Strength and Time to Lust, nd Wine, and Prophaneness! I eseech you, do not thus foolishly nd perversely. This will onely e the sowing of Thistles and Bram∣es in the spring, which will not omfort but torment you and tear our Breasts in your reduced years. or, if you should be so unwary nd unhappy, as to begin your ears in polluting Follies; it will me to this, namely, that you
must either walk back, and und what you have done amiss wi Shame and Sorrow, (if God giv you such grace) o go on he lesly to eternal Horrour and D¦struction. LET me therefore advise you set out aright, that you may f your Course with Joy. Do not  much as desire to taste the poi¦nous baits of youthful lusts. ' madness to eat that which will  your death if you do not vomi up again. IF therefore the Sottish W bibber, or the nasty Creature w is above others called Ʋncleane the person who by Cozenage a Robbery gets unjust Gaines, say  thee; Come with us, Partake of  Mirth and Jollity. As thou fea God, consent thou not. Be not a p¦taker of their Dainties, lest thou
r for them when the reckoning rought in. If you laugh with them , you will howl with them here∣er. AND beware, Young People, t you think not within your ur selsve, that you have so much e before you, that you may Sin w and repent hereafter. Lest ath come suddainly, and finding u in Sin, you be doomed eternal,  to that place of toment, where  repentance will be in vain. 'Tis initely best not to taste of Sin at ; for one Sin does but open a p for a greater, till the con∣ence be laid waste, and then 'tis  Thousand to one but the Soul is  for ever. Let me therefore in∣at you, to accustom your selves  sober Thoughts and divine Medi∣ions in your Youth. Begin this ble Exercise betimes, by which
methinks, a good and wise  seemes to excell the sottish and thinking part of Mankind,  than these exceed the more sag¦ous part of Bruits. AND that I may give y proper Subject for your early ¦ditations; I think, you'l scarce  a Consideration which more  to your advantage, than to t deeply and frequently, of the B¦fits of an Early Conversion: S of which I will briefly him You. I. YOUTH is the proper  appointed by God for it. This see to be taught in Type under Mosaick Law, by which they  required to offer up Lambs,  Calves, young Pidgeons, and the  Fruits of all. And is expresly ¦quired, Eccl. 12. 1. Reme Now thy Creator in the days of
Yoth. 'Tis indeed the proper time  it, because we are made wholly  God, and ought to enter upon  work in God's Vineyard so n as ever we are able to do any ng there. If otherwise, how can  present our selves amongst the bourers in the evening to receive ges? Or how can it indeed be,  the Nature of things? Can he pect a plentiful Harvest who glects the proper Seeds-time? Or, n he come timely to the end of a ng journey, who loiters long in e morning? Solomon lamenteth, t Man knoweth not his time, Eccl.  12. And if you trifle away the den Season of Youth, you will e reason to take up the same mentation at the last. II. CONSIDER, if in your outh you set your self to the work Religion, it will the more surely
be accomplisht. Now, time is ¦fore you: Your Heart is com¦ratively tender; Your actual  are fewer; Your faculties m ; Your mind less prejudic Your God more near you; and  promise of your finding fa with him very positive,  8. 17. Such as seek me early  find me. III. THE more early your ¦version is, the greater will y growth in Grace be. To what ab¦sed eminency in Grace will t advance, who have been inpro their Talents ever since they  capable of acting with Rea They will be able to run with  Horsemen, and be some of the  most in the Christian Race. IV. HEREBY your inward  will be the more firmly establis You will shun those doubts ab
he Love of God, and the safty of our case, thro' which many go rooping and with a sad heart. V. YOU will be the greater Or∣ament to Religion: It will be seen n you, that the Grace of God is ble to subdue the violence of outhfull Lusts: To do which Philosophy has confest its weak∣ess; and therfore Aristotle affirms that Young Men are not proper hearers of the Rules of Philosophy. But the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ made young John a steddy Disciple, and young Timothy a grave Bishop. t is recorded to the Honour of Mnason to this day, that he was an old Disciple, Act. 21. 16. And St. Paul speaking of Andronicus and Junia his Kinsman; gives them an honourable Preference (even the Right hand of Fellowship) as those that were in Christ before, Rom.
16. 7. God will surely honour th who thus honour Him, by an ea preferring of his Service before  the glittering Temptations p¦posed to their Senses by the Wor Flesh, and Devil. VI. YOU will hereby beco a greater Help to others; a m eminent Example to them, a m sufficient Councellor and Comfor of them; and a more powerful ¦tercessor for them VII. YOU will have grea Hope and Comfort in your Dea Which indeed you will find wo all thee pains you have undergo All the weary steps which you ha taken in your Christian race w be forgotten, when once you co to finish it with Joy. THERE may be some extra¦dinary Instances which seem  contradict this: But in the ord¦nary
procedure of things, a strong Faith will have strong Consolation. VIII. THIS is the way to greater lory in Heaven. You'll shine like ars of the first Magnitude. The oung Diciple St. John was the Di∣iple whom Jesus loved, and lay in his Bosom, Jo. 21. 20. O admirable! To what Peace, nd Glory, and Honour, and Bliss, o the commands of God lead us. t may well be sayd, Blessed are hey who do his Commandements, Rev. 22. 14. They have even ow some fore-tastes of the Fruit of he Tree of Life. They are now be∣oved of God; Members of the Lord Jesus Christ comforted by the holy Spirit; guarded by Holy Angels;  part of God's Family, yea his dear Children, and the Heirs of his King∣dom. Such is the Happyness, (shall  say?) or rather the Glory of the
faithful servants of God. Aspi unto this advancement, all ye th have any sense of Honour! Wh can too soon make sure of th which cannot be duely value when enjoyed; nor ever recovere when lost? O that every obstinate Sinne (who is the real Prodigal in th Text) would effectually con¦sider this. Count up the cost of yo Sins, O ye unthinking Souls!  there be any possibility in Arithm¦tick to sum up the least part of  Consider what you lose by yo distance from God; and your bein destitute of the Hope which is set b¦fore you. Will your few momen of sensual pleasure, and your fe ¦pence of unlawful Gains, (whic is all you can pretend to get by S make amends for the infinit Loss  of Heaven, and the eternal suffe¦rance
of Hell? If not: why tarriest thou in such a state of Loss and Danger? Why do you not instantly arise, and humble your self before God; and inquire with all the concern you are able, what you must do to be saved? O my Brother! Every hour that you deferr effectual amendment, you run such a Risque as is enough to amaze you, when ever you seri∣ously state your own case. For, there is but the rotten Plank of this frail Life, betwixt you and ever∣lasting Toment. WHEREFORE be advised, Young Men and Women, to go forth early to your Labours in God's Vineyard, and then your work will advance with your time, and your improvements will be so con∣spicuous, that you will be like Pillars in the Church of God. Your
steddy course in the ways of G will glorify your Creator; Redeeme and Sanctifyer; and will adorn yo Profession; and honour yo Name; and comfort your heart and eternize your Happyness. AND whilst vitious and pro¦gate Youths afflict their Friend defile their Consciences, beelo their understandings, wound the Souls, bring temporal Judgmen upon their Countrey, and etern Plagues upon themselves: Yo will rest quiet from the fear of E in both worlds; being sensibly in¦terested in the favour of God, an in his promises relating to the Li that now is, and that which is to come O! how can any of us then re∣fuse to live with such Honour a our holy Religion directs, in orde to die in such Peace and Bliss as i doth promise?
TO conclude therefore, Let us ll seriously set our selves to turn nto the Lord by a penitent and re∣enerating Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us arise and go to our Father, whilst He yet looks whether we will return to our duty or not; and is desirous of an oppor∣tunity to shew us mercy. And if we thus turn to him, and walk in his wayes; we shall certainly find the kind Embraces of our Heavenly Father now; and be commended of him before two Worlds of Men, and Millions of Angels in the last day; and from thenceforth par∣take of the Bliss and Glory of his Kingdom for Ever. WHICH I pray God vouchsafe to us all, for the sake of his ever∣blessed Son, our only Mediator and Redeemer. AMEN.
A Particular Account OF THE RISE & PROGRESS OF THOSE Religious Societies of Youngmen Which have of late been Erected in the CITIES of London & Westminster▪ With a Specimen of their ORDERS. Giving also A Faithful Relation of the Success∣ful Endeavours of Reformation, which have of late been made by these and other Societies meeting together Weekly for that End. WITH Brief Answers to some Objections which have been made against them. Printed in the Year 1696.
To the Citizens of London and Wenster, among whom these Religious Societies are of late Erected: and to whom this Ac∣count of them is hereby particu∣laly addressed, and the Encou∣ragement of them earnestly recom∣mended. SIRS, I Conceive it very proper for me, and of the greatest Concern∣ment to you, to lay particular∣ly before your Eyes those hope∣ful Means of Reformation, which GOD hath lately pleased, in Infinite Mercy, to raise up amongst you. I know, I need not tell you, That you are Denizons of a City, which for its commodious Scituation, Trade, Richs, and Plenty of all necessary
Accommodations, is inferiour to few and for its Evangelical Enjoyments Liberty, and Laws, is happy above all the Cities in the World. But I must in Conscience mind yo That all these great Enjoyments a in manifest Danger of being lost b those horrid Enormities, which have for some Years past abounded in thi great City: for indeed, they are gross, scandalous, and crying; eve to the Reproach of the Government  your City, and to the great Dishon of the Christian Religion. And there∣fore, I beseech you, even by your Hope of Mercy in both Worlds, that ye would effectually set your selves to p up those Pestiferous Roots, which wi produce nothing but Gall and Bitter∣ness to Tou and Yours, in this Life, and that to come. And I entreat you, with all possi∣ble Earnestness, that you would not
trifle nor deliberate long, in a Case of such absolute necessity; but set to it with as much Earnestness and Assi∣duity, as you would to quench the Flames which you saw kindled upon your Houses (of which you above thers have had awakening Instances) or, as you would remove Persons in∣fected with the Plague from among you: A dismal Case too, which you have reason to remember. And I am sure, the least measure of Christian Faith will assure you, that these are but some of the smallest Instances of the Vengeance of an Angry God. It nearly concerns us of this Nation to take notice, That God does, at this day, try us both in a way of Mercy and Judgment at once. We have no small part of the Evil of War up∣on us; and yet the most dismal Effects of it are at a happy distance from us. We are, at the same time, destitute
of Treasure, and yet in a Wealthy Condition. And we have had very considerable Advantages and Disad∣vantages in our Encounters with the Common Enemy; so that Almight God seems at this day to have dra forth the Sword of his Justice again us with one Hand, ready to give the last strokes of his deserved Indignati∣on: whilst, at the same time, his other Hand is all the day long merciful∣ly stretched out to a disobedient and gain saying People. And in∣deed, both the Providences of GOD and the Sins of Men, seem to be ad¦vanced to a full Crisis, either for ou Reformation or Destruction. An London is many ways loudly war to reform, that it be not ruin'd. HOW can you then, in Reason, i Policy, and in Self-love, (as well  in Conscience, and in the Faith an Fear of God) delay to take away th
Causes of God's Wrath? How long shall those worse than Midianitish Women be a Plague and Reproach to your City? How long shall they be tolerated to spread their Nets in the very Streets, yea, before the Sun; and to bring their Rottenness into the very Bones of so many Persons and Families? How long shall the Disor∣ders of Publick Houses go unpunish'd, whereby many a young Man (that might have done good Service to his Country many ways) is utterly ema∣sculated, and becomes feeble as Old-Age, and trembles like a poor ener∣vate Paralitick? IS it not absolutely necessary to our Prosperity (as well as Salvation) that the Holy Name and Day of the Lord be sanctified, which have been so dreadfully polluted and prophaned among us? And that every Family which would be thought desirous of
God's Blessing, should daily seek it by solomn Prayer? And that they seri∣ously set up Religious Houshold-Go∣vernment within their Walls, as they would not be of the number of those who disown all Relation to God, and Dependance on Him? Will you be discourag'd from this because some distracted People will call it Fanaticism, and give it sun∣dry ill Names, which the Enemy of all Goodness puts into their Mouths? Will you be mock'd out of Religion, and the Worship of God, and the Promises of His Favour and Kingdom, by such Unreasonable Revilings? Or rather will not every one that knows the Duty and Reward of a Christian, re∣joice and glory in trampling down such puny Enemies of their Salvation? YEA; Let no Man's Heart fail him, tho' he sees some Sons of Anak appearing as Champions, in the Cause
of these Ʋncircumcis'd Enemies of God. You may, in the following Pages, behold Young Striplings going forth ith a generous Courage against these blaspheming Goliahs, who defie God and his People: And, praised be God, we have some Honourable Magi∣strates, who go forth as Leaders in this Divine Cause; and we hope they will at last smite overgrown Vice in its impudent Forehead, and cut off the Head of it by the Sword of Ju∣stice; since they go forth against it in the Name of the Lord. AND, O! what a brave and bles∣sed sight is it, in these degenerate and debauch'd Times, to behold young Men (not led by ill Women to the correcti∣on of the Stocks) but leading them to a just Correction! And to observe them taking greater Pleasure in sing∣ing of Psalms, than others can pos∣sibly take in their prophane and ob∣scene
Songs; and, in short, better pleased in the punishment of Wicked¦ness, than the poor abandon'd Wretc is in the commission of it! AND in this happy and blesse Work you have in your City some of al¦most all Ranks and Qualities of Me effectually, tho secretly, engaged thro' the late Mercy of God to us, viz Members of the Honourable House of Commons, Justices of the Peace and Gentlemen, together with Citi∣zens of all Ranks, Officers of diver Qualities, and private Persons of a sorts: So that you may have Society to joyn your self to, suitable to your re¦spective Quality and Condition, he  what it will: And therefore ever Inhabitant of this great City has  this day a most valuable Opportunity of doing great Service to God and his Country, of what quality or capacity soever he be.
AND shall I now need to ask you hat you resolve to do in this matter? , which side you will take in this trife, betwixt the Kingdom of God, nd that of the Devil? Dare you be f the number of those who revile, iscourage, and oppose these Persons  the prosecution of scandalous Sins, hich are our worst Enemies, and so∣est Plagues? Yea, can you be cool nd unconcern'd in this important Affair? I must tell you, That there can be o Neuters in this War betwixt the Prince of Light and that of Darkness. t is the known Rule of our Lord and aster, That he that is not for him, s against him: and, That he that athereth not with him, scattereth broad. So that your neglecting to ppose the growth of Sin, according o your Place, is a manifest cherishing
of it, in God's Account, and conse¦quently an Enmity to Him. And i you are against GOD, He will b against you: and if so, nothing i the World can befriend you. THERE is a natural tendency in Vice to ruine any Person, Fa¦mily, City, or Nation, that har∣bours it. It engenders Sloth, Va∣riance, Profuseness, Pride, Falshood, Violence, and a Neglect and Betray∣ing of the Publick Good. It du the Ʋnderstanding, takes away the Sense of Honour, Dispirits Man∣hood; cuts the Nerves of Diligence and destroys the true Principles of Commerce and just Dealing. And by these means it directly tends to undermine and overthrow the Pro∣sperity of any City, or Publick Body.
BƲT Ruine will pursue Vice the e swiftly and surely, because it is 'd on by the just Vengeance of ighty GOD, the righteous Go∣nour of the World; of whose eful Judgments upon other Ci∣s abroad, you have been suffici∣tly inform'd of late, if you have gotten the former Strokes of it  your selves. You bear from irna, Jamaica, Malta, Sicily,  other places, that many great  famous Cities have been shat∣'d, and swallow'd up by dread∣ Earthquakes: whereas the same OD (though mightily provoked  us) was pleas'd only to shake d jogg us in a very gentle man∣r by the same Expression of His ispleasure.
O Sirs! take the gentle War¦ing, and improve the Merciful ¦prieve; lest His Vengeance swall us up also, when He next arise to shake terribly the Earth. T is, in Duty, laid before you, by Your Affectionate Monitor, J. W.
A Particular Account OF THE ISE & PROGRESS Of those Religious Societies, &c. I Do not here undertake to give an Account of all the Pious Fellowship of Youth, which hath been amongst us in time st, (which, we may hope, has een the Practice of serious Young en in all Ages, and among all the o various Denominations of Chri∣stians;)
but to give a short Nar¦tive of the Original of those ¦gulated Societies, which are no (thro' the Grace of God) cons¦cuous among us for many go Works; and which (if duly e¦courag'd) may very much cont¦bute towards the Support, Hono and Advancement of these Th Kingdoms, in Church and Sta and yet are but too little know to very many among us. NOW, as far as I am able  trace their first Rise, it was th introduc'd by the Gracious Pro¦dence of God. IT is now about Twenty yea ago, that several young Mn  the Church of England, in the Citi of London and Westminster, we about the same time touch'd wi a very affecting sense of their Si and began to apply themselves,
a very serious manner, to Religious houghts and Purposes. As to their manner of Life be∣ore this, I am inform'd, That tho' ome of them had been guilty of great Lewdness, and yet became very affectionate Servants of God afterwards, (even to an eminency, n the Judgment of some, who with Wonder consider'd their happy Change) yet the greater part of hem were such as had enjoy'd a ober Education, and had not sha∣ed in the scandalous and heigh∣en'd Enormities of these later days, otherwise than by their having een too insensible of the Disho∣our done to God by them. But hey now began to look on their wn and others Sins, in another anner. I was, about that time, made pri∣y to the Spiritual Sorrows of one
of them: who with floods of Tea lamented, that he had not till the had any affecting Apprehensions  the Glorious Majesty and Perfectio of God, nor of His Infinite Love Men in his Son Jesus Christ: A that he had not before felt any  Convictions of the Immense Ev of every Offence against God, the it be but (said he) in the wilf Neglect or Misperformance of an Duty to Him. But now he  and groan'd under all this, in ve sharp and pungent Convictio▪ And withal perceiving the unive¦sal Corruption of Humane Natur and the deplorable Crookedne and Deceit of Man's Heart; a with what a world of Temptatio we are encompass'd, being with besieg'd by many invisible Legio of Infernal Spirits. When he co¦sider'd all this, his Soul was eve
oured out within him, and he was n danger of being overwhelmed with excessive Sortow. THE Case was very much the me with several young Men at he same time, (as he then told me) ome of which had been greatly empted by the Devil (that Mur∣herer from the beginning) to lay iolent Hands on themselves; which was also (he confess'd) his wn Temptation; and that so ur∣ent and incessant, that Sleep de∣arted from his Eyes, as well as Rest rom his Soul. IN this mournful Season, these disconsolate convicted Persons of∣en resorted to their Ministers for Spiritual Advice and Succour; be∣aking themselves in good earnest o the ways of real Piety, and eter∣al Peace. And it many times fell ut, (as the same person inform'd
me) that several of them met to∣gether, at the House of their Spiri∣tual Physician, seeking Cure for their wounded Spirits; and so con∣tracted a little Acquaintance by those Providential Interviews. FOR, alas! (as he suggested) there needed little other Language but that of their Looks to discover their inward Sorrows to each other (especially when they came p∣par'd to open them to their Mi¦ster) and they needed no other ¦guments to incline them to p each other's Case, but to consid their own; there being a Propens∣ty in Nature to succour those wh groan under the like Miseries wi our selves. So that by these an the like means they soon contracte a very intimate acquaintance. THE Benefit of Dr. Horneck' Awakening Sermons, and the M¦ning
Lectures on the Lord's Day in Cornhill, preach'd by Mr. Smithies, (chiefly design'd for the instruction of Youth) having occasion'd much of this happy Work upon the Spi∣rits of these Young men; they did more particularly apply themselves to these Divines for Direction, who had been Instruments in the Hand of God for their conviction. AND upon their frequent Ap∣lication to these and other Mini∣ers, it was advised, That since heir Troubles arose from the same Spiritual Cause, and that their In∣clinations and Resolutions centerd n the same Purpose of a holy Life; they should meet together once  week, and apply themselves to good Discourse, and things wherein they might edifie one another. And for the better regulation of their Meetings, several Rules and Orders
were prescrib'd them, being such as seem'd most proper to effect the End propos'd. UPON this, they met toge¦ther, and kept to their Rules; an at every meeting (as it was a¦vis'd) they consider'd the Wan of the Poor; which in time a∣mounted to such considerable Sums, that thereby many poor Fa∣milies have been reliev'd, so poor People set into a way. Trade suitable to their Capacitie sundry Prisoners set at Libert some poor Scholars furthered i their Subsistence at the Ʋniversity, several Orphans maintain'd, with many other good Works. BUT they were not presently brought to those pious Exercises, Orders, and Things of publick Be∣nefit; to which they are now, by the Grace of God, advanced. As
no Creature is born in its full Per∣fection, so the improvement of these Societies grew up by degrees, by conferring one with another, nd by their enlarg'd Desires of doing Good, as Occasions and Ad∣vice were offer'd them. So that I cannot but recommend Christian Society with the greatest earnest∣ness, to all sorts of Men. It must needs be as useful to Magistrates nd Ministers, in carrying on their duous work of regulating and re∣forming Mens Manners, as daily Experience shews it to be to Ar∣tists and Tradesmen, who joyn to∣gether in Companies and Societies, and find their Arts and Interests advanc'd by a multitude of Heads and Hands. So that we may very properly pronounce Solomon's Wo to him that is alone.
THESE Young-men soon found the Benefit of their Conferences one with another, by which (as some of them have told me with Joy) they better discover'd their own Corruptions, the Devil's Tem∣ptations, and how to countermine his Subtile Devices; as to which each person communicated his Ex∣periences to the rest. IT seemed proper, for the bet∣ter management of their Comm Stock for Charitable Uses, to chuse two Stewards, as the Ma∣nagers of their Charity. And the two first Stewards that I find (after diligent search) were in the Year 1678. whose Names I have by me, with a recorded Succession of them to the beginning of the Reign of King James II. at which time the face of the Reformed Re∣ligion being clouded, and all private
Meetings suspected, some of these young persons, not having dig'd deep enough to have a firm Root in Religion, began to shrink and give back, (like the Seed in our Saviour's Parable, which had no deepness of arth) being afraid of the Jealou∣sie of the State against them, espe∣cially when they saw the bloody and merciless Executions in City and Country, with which that Reign began, which dy'd it of such a crimson colour, as render'd it frightful to many, particularly to these young Proselytes, inso∣much that some of them forsook their wonted Assemblies, and get∣ting loose from their strict Rules and good Society, they grew cool in Religious Concerns, and alas! some of them grew loose and ex∣travagant.
Times of Danger are indeed Times of Tryal, and many times of Falling; as it prov'd to the first Followers of our Blessed Saviour, who kept close to their Master whilst he was at liberty, but when they saw him apprehended, and in the hands of powerful Enemies, they all forsook him, and fled. But, thro' the Grace of God, there was not such a total tergi∣versation among these Disciples of our Lord; but, on the contrary, some of them being encourag'd by others, who till then had not been of this Society, being also griev'd at Heart to see some of their Bre∣thren turn their Backs in the day of Battel; and being animated with holy Zeal against the growing In∣terests of Popery, (which then ap∣pear'd not only open, but in Ar∣mour; being promoted by the ut∣most
Power and most earnest Zeal of the Prince then reigning): Be∣ing (I say) greatly moved on all these accounts, they took up a more vigorous Resolution than ever, to do what in them lay to∣wards the maintaining and encrea∣sing the Purity and Power of Reli∣gion in themselves and others. And seeing that the Popish Mass was then publickly celebrated not on∣ly at the Royal Chappel, but in o∣ther publick places, they set up (at their own expence) publick Prayers every Evening at Eight of the Clock, at St. Clement Danes, which never wanted a full and af∣fectionate Congregation. And not long after they set up an Evening Monthly Lecture in the same Church, to confirm Communi∣cants in the holy Purposes and Vows which they made at the
Lord's Table: And by this publick Lecture (which was greatly fre∣quented) many were confirmed both in the Profession and Pra∣ctice of the true Principles of Pri∣mitive Religion; for they were preached by the most eminent Di∣vines about the City from whose Lips and Pens Popery, receiv'd such Wounds, as all her Art will never be able to cure. IT was the Design of these young Men, from the first framing of their Societies, to conceal thei Names from publick Knowledge, lest it should seem to be a Device to catch the Applauses of Men; which is but a very poor matter, an aerial Blast, of little importance if you obtain it, and of which you can have no hold; and they look'd upon it with a just Disdain, in com∣parison with those exceeding great
and precious Promises which the Unchangeable God hath set be∣fore men. But they had now a particular Reason for concealing their Names from all but their Ministers and a few Friends; for the Eyes of Papists then in Power were intent upon them, who (to∣gether with those their Under∣setters, whom Gain and the Pro∣mises of Court-favour had brought over to their Party) pry'd narrow∣ly into all they did: So that they law, that they had great Reason as well as the Primitive Christians, to make use of the Wisdom of the Serpent, whilst they as carefully retain'd the Innocence of the Dove; especially being in the near Neigh∣bourhood of the Court, which was then fill'd with foreign and dome∣stick Zealots for Popery, or with crouching false Friends to Prote∣stancy.
IN this Juncture, upon Advice, they chang'd the Name of Society for that of Club; and instead o meeting at a Friend's House, who might be endanger'd by it, they adjourn'd to some publick House or other, where they could have a Room to themselves, and under the Pretext of spending a Shilling or two, they confer'd seriously toge∣ther in the same religious manne as formerly; by which honest A∣tifice they carried on their go Design without interruption, eve to the end of that unhappy Reign. THIS their Constancy, Piety, and good Service to the Publick, made them much esteem'd at the beginning of the Reign of K. Wil∣liam and Q. Mary, those celebrated Instruments of God's Providence, for the restoring our Religion and Liberty, when the publick Enjoy∣ments
of both were just expiring. o that now their Religious Exer∣ises and Purposes grew more pub∣lick and famous; which gave oc∣casion to some mistaken or ill∣ffected People to accuse these So∣ieties to the Bishop, as things lead∣ing to Schism, Spiritual Pride, and many other ill Consequences. This made their Names more publick tn ever they thought or desir'd to have them; for now they were lig'd to appear and justifie their undertaking; which they did in a very humble and solid Apology, which they presented to the Bishop. And their Vindication appear'd so Reasonable and Satisfactory; their Assemblies so Regular and Subor∣dinate to the Publick Worship, and their Designs so truly Christian and in offensive, (all which was attest∣ed by several eminent Divines on
their behalf) that his Lordship de∣clared himself satisfied with it. FOR indeed, any one that peru∣ses the Vindication of their Socie∣ties, which they drew up, upon this and another like occasion, (the Copies of which several of them keep by them) will find, that they have given such meek and full An∣swers to every Objection, that they have render'd it very difficult for any Lover of Piety, or any one that knows and desires the Interests of the Reformation, to make any rea∣sonable Objection against their Or∣ders or Design. As to that which is fear'd by some sober and good People, name∣ly, that it may degenerate in time to a Sect, and introduce Division; be it consider'd, that as this would indeed be a very detestable thing, so they have most industriously
fenced themselves against it, by their Monthly Communion; their use of many of the publick Prayers constantly in their Assemblies; their setting up publick Prayers in many Churches in the City, and frequenting them in great bodies, where they appear the most devout rt of the Congregation; and their utter disclaiming of all Schism and Faction; and finally, their hum¦ble deference to their Ministers, (without whose Approbation no Rule, Prayer, nor Practice is al∣low'd among them). I say, all these Considerations together give any sober Person all the Satisfacti∣on that he can reasonably demand, that there is no manner of Ground for such a Jealousie: For indeed, they find such improvement in all Christian Duty, and such Satisfacti∣on in their Consciences, in observing
the Constitutions of the Church of England, that it is remark'd by some that have made a full Enqui∣ry into the matter, that they could never yet find more than one In∣stance of any person of these Socie∣ties that hath faln from the publick Communion to any Sect or Separa∣tion. AND as to that other dark and dismal Case of some of them, who after an appearance of Zeal for this pious Ʋndertaking, and a tem∣porary Partnership in it, have fa off to Vanity and Vice: It is like the cutting off a Member to th rest of the Body; they consider it with piercing Grief, Affliction and Indignation, tho' it be no new thing in every Profession of Reli∣gion to have some false Brethren The first Planters of Christianity had reason to sigh over the Apo∣stacy
of a Judas, a Nicholas, a De∣as, whom the Love of this present orld had ensnared. And I men∣on this, that every one that ma∣eth profession of Religion, and inketh that he standeth, may take ed lest he fall. And that they ay dig deep, and lay a firm Foun∣ation in Faith, Lowliness of Mind, d sound Knowledge of the great hings of our Salvation; and that ey be very strict in Christian atchfulness, and in Mortification the Desires of Sin, and the in∣rd Workings of Corruption,  to their Life's end. TO fall from a high Profession of ligion, will prove a very crush∣g and dreadful Fall. And there∣e let every Christian look well the Sincerity of his own Heart, at his Spiritual Knowledge and ly Vows may not encrease the
number of his Stripes at last, fo want of walking suitably thereto and of persevering therein. MANY of these Ʋnhappy Revol¦ters from their former strictnes of Life, are now not able to bea the Reproofs of their perseverin Brethren; they shun their Com¦pany, they know not how to con¦verse with them, and are asham' to look them in the Face. An sometimes they pray them to di¦sturb them no more by their Ad¦monitions, since they apprehe all the Danger they threaten the with to be very true, and fore their desperate End sometimes wi a Terror not to be express'd. An their Design seems to be, to div those Melancholy Thoughts as lo as they can, with all the Sensu Merriment they can invent. S true is that Observation, That R¦ligion
can torment those whom it can∣ot reclaim. O! how much greater Comfort  there in the Conscientious Practise an in the Prophane Contempt of eligion, even in the course of this ortal Life! But who can express e infinite difference betwixt them  the Hour of Death, the Day of udgment, the state of the Resur∣ction, and the unchangable Eter∣y to come? TO shun this fatal Danger of ostatizing from God, and rever∣g their Vows made to Him; it e Practice of all these Socie∣ to partake of the Holy Supper ur Lord as frequently as they ay, thereby to devote themselves esh to their good Master, and to nfirm their Purposes of perpetual rvice to Him, and as a Means of ceiving Spiritual Strength from m so to do.
AND in order to their more ad¦vised Preparation for so solemn  Work, there is in some one Churc or more of this City a Sermo preached every Lord's Day in th Evening (by the procurement o some of these Societies) on the im¦portant Subject of due Preparatio for the Lord's Table, and a meet de¦portment after it; by which grea Good has been done, and a de sense of Religion wrought in man persons. AND by this their Care to ac¦quit their Consciences, as to this last Command of our dying Lord many of them have (by the Grac of God) attained to that excelle primitive Temper of frequent com¦municating without growing for∣mal; not lessening due Reverenc by the frequency, nor extinguish∣ing
the proper Exercises of Love to od, Thankfulness and Spiritual y at this Divine Sacrifice of raise, (as some unhappily do) by xcessive and unseasonable Terror nd Dread. THERE is such Love amongst ose of them that have faln un∣ my Observation, that scarce  natural Brothers are so vigo∣sly affectionate. I have often eld their meeting and parting braces with admiration; and ose who are newly admitted are on contracted into the same Fel∣wship of Christian Brotherhood. IT is requir'd of such as desire joyn themselves to them, That ey give the Society a solemn Ac∣unt of their Sense of Spiritual hings, with the real Motives hich lead them to this Underta∣ing, and what they seriously pur∣pose
as to their Future Life. Th is many times done in Writing  and I have perus'd some of thei Papers, and have found them pen' in such an honest, affectionate an undisguis'd stile, with such pio and sensible Expressions, and in s modest and humble a manner, th they would mightily affect a pious person to read them,  move him to break forth in ¦thetick Praises to God, who h given such Grace to young M in so degenerate an Age. AS for the Reproaches which  People cast on these Societies, it  what good Things and Perso have ever met with from the ¦ginning, and must be expected  the end of the World. The Sco and Grudges of such People again any thing, demonstrate that the is Good in it; and indeed the
Commendations may be look'd up∣ as an effectual Defamation. UPON such Occasions of Slan∣ers and Evil-speaking against them have heard them exhorting and commending to each other the e Christian Armour of Humility, ience, and a Resemblance of our essed Saviour's Silence under Re∣ngs, admiring that divine Com∣nd of his, of returning Blessing  Cursing, and of endeavouring to come Evil with Good, minding e another not to make any men∣ of their being of such or such ciety, but to make their Holy es to testifie, that they are real istians. AND thus by exhorting and en∣raging one another to Christian y, the Piety of many of them  appear'd very eminent and emplary; insomuch, that it is
evident, even to demonstration that their Zeal hath in many pla¦ces given new Life to the celebra¦tion of the Lord's Supper, publi Prayer, Singing of Psalms, and Chri¦stian Conference, Duties which w in many places almost disused,  perform'd in a cool and languishin manner. THIS is (as far as human  can see) the real and only De of these Societies, who seem  one Heart to attempt, by the  pious and peaceable methods  put a stop to our overflowing ∣kedness, remove our Plagues,  to dispose us into a meetness for t Blessings and gracious Presence  God; by whose Blessing they ha of late years so encreas'd among us, that there are now 25 distin Bodies of them, within the comp of the Bills of Mortality. And b¦sides,
those that have been some time erected in the University of Cambridge, and in the City of loucester, &c. there are others ewly formed in Shadwell, Green∣ith, and even as far as Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland; where, from three or four persons, with which they began, they are now increas'd to nine or ten Societies, containing about Three hundred ersons. And they find such En∣ouragement there from the pious chbishop, and from several Di∣es, and other considerable Per∣s, that they have been a means of reviving a great Sense of Reli∣ion in many of the Inhabitants of hat City, and have begun a very opeful Reformation of Manners mong them; the Archbishop ha∣ing signed his Approbation of eir Orders, which are copied
from those in London: And indeed all these good Effects were occa∣sion'd by the Examples of the Lon∣don Societies, and by the removing of some few of the London Asso∣ciates to Dublin. This minds me to add, that out of these Religious Societies in Lon∣don, there have been two Associate Bodies formed, who have made it their Endeavour to inform against Vice and Prophaneness, in order to suppress the publick Insolence of it, meeting weekly to carry it on, according to the legal and pruden∣tial Rules which some worthy Gen∣tlemen, learned in the Law, drew up for them; in which they have spent a great deal of Time and Labour, and have suffer'd many Reproaches for their Diligence in this good and necessary Work; yea, they have often run the ha∣zard
of their Lives in it, which they underwent with Christian Courage, being greatly supported (under God) by divers of our Bi∣shops and London Divines, who told them, That if any of them suf∣fer'd in so divine a Work, they would very much resemble the Martyrs and Confessors of Christ, and receive the Reward of it in the other World. And in this re∣spect, the Right Reverend Bishop of cester, and those worthy Di∣nes, Dr. Horneck, Dr. Jekyl, and Mr. Edward Stephens, have most eminently signaliz'd their Zeal for their Great Master and His Work. AND here, I conceive, it may e conducive to the Publick Good  make another eminent Society own to the World, which is of e erected in this our capital City, which consists of many considerable
Gentlemen and chief Citizens, who frequently meet to superintend, direct, and pursue this glorious Work of Reformation, consulting the best and most advisable me∣thods to carry it on, spending a great deal of time weekly, and sometimes daily, in it, and furthe∣ring it by very large and honou∣rable Contributions; by whose means several Thousands of Drun∣kards, Swearers, and Prophaners of the Lord's Day have been brought to just Punishment: And they have by various methods excited all the Cities, Corporations, and Market-Towns in this Kingdom to do the like. AND to the great and just Ho∣nour of many worthy Justices of the Peace in and about this City, be it mention'd, That a very con∣siderable number of them have
agreed to meet weekly, to pro∣mote and facilitate this excellent Design. AND here I may not with Ju∣stice omit to mention a very active and successful Society for Reforma∣tion, consisting of about Sixty per∣sons, most of them House-keepers in and about the Tower Hamblets, to whom several persons in vari∣ous parts of the City are joyn'd, with several Church-wardens, Consta∣bles, and other Officers. And tho' this Society is compos'd of persons who differ one from the other in some lesser Circumstances of Reli∣gion, yet they act as one Man against Debauchery and Prophane∣ness: And they have put downe se∣veral open Markets which were kept on the Lord's Day, and have suppressed some hundreds of Hou∣ses of ill Fame, and have brought
the Frequenters of them to due Shame and Punishment. And by the means of this Society alone, about 2000 lewd Persons have suffered the penalties of the Laws suitable to their Crimes. And their Proceedings herein have been so prudently and legally managed, that they have for some time past received great Countenance in the several Courts of Judicature; and Encouragement from the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of this City, who have honourably contributed towards the necessary great Expence of so vast an Under∣taking. AND indeed, all these Societies before-mentioned, with some o∣thers in the different parts of the City (which I shall not particu∣larly insist upon) have by the blessing of Almighty God so hap∣pily
prevailed, that the open op∣position to Reformation is greatly abated, the general Odium and the threatning Dangers of informing against Vice and Prophaness much lessened, and the blessed Work of Reformation set into such an ex∣cellent and successful Method, that the outward part of it would soon be effected, would but some few in every Street or Parish who are of Place and Power, pull their Hands out of their Bosoms to en∣gage in this honourable and ne∣cessary Work; or would others, who are of Ability, but contri∣bute as it becomes them, towards the Expence of it. For, the ap∣prehending of lewd People, and the Prosecution of them in the course of our Law is very charge∣able; in so much, that more than seven hundred Pounds have been ex∣pended
in this work by one of these Societies alone, within the space of the last three years: As it may be proved by their Book of Accounts, to any one that desires it for any good End. AND that none may be discou∣raged on the account of the gene∣ral Overflowing of Vice, and the dispropotionable fewness of Hands engaged to put a stop to it, It is fit that it be known, that the chief part of this Opposition to Publick Immorality has been occa∣sioned by the meeting of 4 or 5 private Persons together, who duely considering and bewailing the Height and Extent of the Sins of this Nation, came to a Resolu∣tion of doing their utmost to op∣pose it, in the due course of our Laws. An Attempt, which me∣thinks, seemed as Generous and
Heroick, as that of Jonathan and his Armour-Bearer, who being in∣spirited by God, resolved to at∣tack a whole Army of Philistines encampt on a vast Hill: But the Lord of Hosts who led them on in this noble Enterprize, did success∣fully carry them thorow it, to the utter Discomfiture of those numerous Enemies of God: And since we may without Rashness conclude, that this Effort against publick Sins has the same Original with that of Jonathan, we hope it may at last attain the same End, ho' this Attempt against nume∣rous and heightened Enormities has as great Disadvantages as that, in humane Estimate. O! what a Field of Honour lies here, before all Persons among us! In which Magistrates and Ministers are more especially concerned to
be Leaders, who are by their Offi∣ces designed to direct the Consci∣ences, and regulate the Conversati∣ons of Men. I beseech the Al∣mighty and All-good God to inspi∣rit and determine them effectually to this Work, to which he loudly calls them, a work absolutely ne∣cessary not only to our Prosperity but Subsistence; and for want of which we are almost undone. AND in truth, the Glory of Almighty God, and the Support of our Church and State, are so manifestly concerned herein; that I cannot see how the Ministers of Justice or of Divine Service will be able to answer the unchristian Neglect of it, before the Lord Je∣sus Christ (the Judge of All) be∣fore whose Judgement-Seat we must all appear, and that very speedily.
Where two Armies are engaged in a bloody and uncertain Battle, how will those Regiments answer it to their Prince, who stood by, and idly lookt on, without striking one hearty stroke in his Cause, to whom they vowed a military Faithfulness to their Death? But above the rest, how will the Offi∣cers of those dastardly Troops, an∣swer it to their Sovereign, who dreaded a little Danger and Hard∣ship in his Service, more than his Royal Displeasure? AH Sirs! If we are now back∣ward to contribute our utmost En∣deavours in our several Stations to∣wards the suppressing those impu∣dent and scandalous Vices, where∣by our God and his holy Religion are so outragiously blasphemed: If we prefer carnal Ease, the Fa∣vour of men, or any worldly In∣terest,
before the Honour of our God and the propagation of Reli∣gion: What insupportable Shame, Horror and Regret will at last seize us, and for ever torment us! And therefore I again beseech the Holy Spirit to excite and fix in us all (even in Magistrates, Mi∣nisters, and all Ranks of People) a vi∣gorous and effectual Zeal for his holy Name and Will; and a just Concern for the languishing Re∣pute of the Christian Name, and of the Reformed Religion. AND as for all those various Degrees of men who have already set their Hands to this excellent Work, may they never slacken their Hands or pull them back. Let me entreat them to act in it with a Zeal, Constancy and Purity of In∣tention, suitable to so divine an Employment as that they engage
in, to so great and good a Master s they serve, and to that infinite Reward which they may expect. Be not such Enemies to your selves, s to be weary of well-doing, since n a short time you will reap, if you aint not. O Christians! Look unto Je∣us, who not only underwent the Contradiction of Sinners, but endu∣ed the Cross, and despised the me, for the Glory which was et before him. Remember, That s a Curse is threatned to such as  the Work of the Lord negligently, So a Crown is prepared for those ho are faithful unto Death. THE Time of our Warfare is ut short, and the difficulty of it ill be much sweetened by the romised Comforter, and the Re∣ard of well-doing will be of in∣nite Value and eternal Duration.
And as no work in the World wi be more commended of our su¦preme Judge at last, than this  Reformation; since he himself sit as a Refiners Fire and as Fulle Soap, to purifie and cleanse his Peo¦ple from their sins; and since h wlll e're long consume that Re¦probate Silver, which is not effe¦ctually refined by those means o Purification which he hath ordai¦ned: On all these accounts, I say we have no Concern upon Ear so great, as to acquit our selve well in this our spiritual Calling not being slothful, but diligent Fe¦lowers of them, who thro' Faith an Patience inherit the Promises. AND here I cannot but cal upon our dissenting Brethren als to joyn their Hands and Heart with us in casting out those Public Sins which threaten and endange
s all; and in furthering a Publick d General Reformation of Manners, hich is here endeavoured, and  put into a judicious Method  order to success. And let me treat them, even by the Bowels f our common Lord and Saviour, hat they studiously endeavour to pose their Young Ones to fol∣w after things which make for ce, Ʋnity and Order, (the Desire  which seems deeply imprest on  Spirits of our Societies of Young∣) that the Church of God may joy more peaceable and flourish∣g Days in the next Age, than has in this. THE making of our Peace with od by effectual Reformation, and  Ʋnion among our selves by mu∣al Charity and Condescention; e the happiest works that any erson can apply himself to on
Earth. The satisfaction and peace¦able Fruits of it here would be ex∣ceeding great, and the Reward of it hereafter inexpressible. NOW these Societies afore-men∣tioned, seem in a great measure fit∣ted to carry on both these great De∣signs: If at least there be any hope of such inestimable Blessings, left to such a profligate People as we are: For they have been instru∣mental, to bring several Quakers and Enthusiastic People to Baptism▪ and to a sober mind: And of the Conversion of many prophane Persons, and of bringing others to legal Punishment, who appeared otherwise incorrigible. AND many of our Ministers have found by Experience (as they have assured me) that the planting of one of these Societie in their Parish, has been a mean
o enlarging their Congregations od Communions to a very great increase; and not only so, but of troducing a more devout De∣ortment in all Publick Ordinances. o that it is greatly to be wisht, at every parochial Minister ould endeavour to erect a Socie∣ of this Nature in his Parish, hich he might do, if he could  find 2 or 3 Young-men or use-keepers in it, of pious Incli∣tions and a sober Life, (and if ch a number as this cannot be nd in any place, it is worse than ) and we may begin a So∣y with these (as many of those hich are now numerous, began  first) till more be added to em by the Grace of God. A thing this Nature heartily undertaken  the Glory of God, and atten∣d with Prayer, Diligence and
Patience, could hardly misca And a good Minister would f his work happily furthered  such a Pious Nursery of Yout and the poor Neighbour-hood n a little comforted by their Cha¦ty: Yea, the very money whi is by the Law forfeited to t poor, by Swearing, Drunkene and prophaning the Lord's da would be a seasonable Relief  the poor in these hard times;  by these Penalties, 55 Pound w raised in one Parish of this Ci lately in the space of one Year. BEFORE I conclude, it may expected that I give some Descri¦tion of the weekly Conferences, a joynt Devotions of our Religio Societies: But I shall not need  insist on this, since the Method  both is hereunto annexed, par for their Use, and partly to p¦vent
Misrepresentation by false Re∣orts: So that, I shall only add, hat as they use very affecting refaces before they pray to God,  praise his great and holy Name, o raise and fix their inward Devo∣on; so they always use a very everend outward Deportment in he worship of God, that their Bo∣y may not seem to mock or dis∣pprove of that which their Soul  doing. Which is surely agree∣ble to all Sober Reason, and Sound eligion. Our Creator, Redeemer d Sanctifier, ought to be owned,  shiped and glorified with those odies (as well as those Souls,) hich his Almighty Power, Wis∣m and Goodness, hath created, deemed, doth sanctifie, and will orifie. So that, in Prayer, they ll kneel, according to the directi∣ of the Spirit of God, Psa. 95. 6.
And according to our Blessed Sav¦ours Example: Luk. 22. 41.  kneeled down, and prayed. And i singing of Psalms, or any other s¦lemn Doxology, they stand up which is surely the fittest Postu for this exalted part of God's Wo¦ship. And if I may speak my ow Experiences, I think, we shall fin our Souls greatly raised by our b¦dily Reverence. Tho' it be sti allowed, That the spiritual Reve¦rence of the Soul is vastly th chiefest, and that in all bodil Weakness, and other necessary Im¦pediments, God will have Mer and not Sacrifice. MANY of them meet tog¦ther at each others Houses, also  the Evening of many Feasts of th Church and Holy-Days; whe they discourse seriously on th Subject-Matter of the Day. B
which they find themselves much formed in many essential parts  the Christian Religion. THESE their holy Purposes, ve for a considerable time been erished & improved by some of r pious Bishops, who have often eacht to them on these Occasi∣s: And in particular, one of m has for many years allowed m the use of his Church, and an present at the Sermons which ey procured, and has also writ∣n a most excellent Vindication  these beginnings of Reformation, d another of them who, gives a ost illustrious Instance of his Care  cultivating Youth, by training  Young Schollars for the Ministry, t only at his own Expence, but  his personal Instruction of them, th published to the World the eat Delight with which our late
Pious Queen received the Accou of this hopeful Method of refor¦ming of Youth by these Societies and with what Concern she often inquired after it. His words ar these, She did hearken carefully after every thing that seemed to give some Hope, that the next Generat should be better than the present, with a particular Attention: She heard of a Spirit of Devotion and Piety that was spreading it self ∣mong the Youth of this great City with a true satisfaction: She enqui∣red often and much about it, an was glad to hear it went on and pre∣vailed; which was her hearty Wi and daily Prayers. Essay pag. 118. THERE are also several wor∣thy Gentlemen, who encourage and assist these Societies, (particularly in their Endeavour to suppress the publick Vices,) with their Coun∣s
and Examples; and by their ses and Power: But alas! The mber of these sober and pious ntlemen is confessedly small, if pared with the vast numbers thers, to whom the very Name Reformation is harsh and disa∣eable. But since there is evi∣tly so much Goodness in these ieties, as to give us Hope that  are of God; we have thence a  ground to hope, that they not come to nought. N this Hope I have often been ouraged, when I have obser∣ ith what Delight and Indu∣ they prosecute their holy Pur∣es. I have known some of them o have been at their own Li∣y) come out of the midst of City (after their Shops have  shut) three or four miles to  outmost parts of the Suburbs,
to give Instruction and Encourag¦ment to a new-planted Socie Returning again a considera time after night in all the Inco∣veniencies of the darkness and un¦certain weather, with the chea¦ing Thought of having been we imployed. I must also further note, to  Praise and Glory of Almighty  by what remarkable Provide it hath pleased him to further th divine Work. For, the Conver¦ons of some of those Young-me who have been very instrume in this Affair, have been very wo¦derful. ONE of them had such an ¦fecting Dream of the Day of Ju¦ment, that he forthwith became  very zealous Servant of God; a was so sensible of the importand of securing Peace with God an
edeeming time; that for several ears together, he spent the great∣ part of the night in Prayer and ous Exercises; as his Chamber-llow informs me. He also beg∣d leave of his Master to retire  little while to his Devotions at oon, and to have Liberty to par∣ke of the benefit of some publick mons and Prayers, promising to e him satisfaction for it, when  came out of his Time: Which cordingly he did, tho' it does  speak the Piety or Charity of  Master, who required it of him. N other of them (tho in per∣ct health) could not rest in his  for several nights together, hich at last brought him upon  knees to ask it of God, with me Sorrow for his Sins, (for he d lived a very ill Life) and he and such Ease to his mind there∣, that it presently conduced to
his bodily Rest; which led him to the further exercise of it, espe∣cially befere he went to bed. And then taking some Delight in th Duty, he frequented the Evening Prayers set up at eight of the cloc by these Societies; where he ob∣served the affectionate Devotions of these associated Young-men; and after Prayers, made his Condition known to some of them, who mightily assisted him in the Way of God, and he is ever since redu∣ced (thro' divine Grace) to a ve∣ry good Life. AN other of them was told by an idle prating Woman, that  was perswaded, he would not liv long; which she grounded upon a most impertinent Observation not worthy to be mentioned. Bu this jesting Talk awakened him  good earnest to prepare to die:  powerful is a trivial means in th
hands of the All Mighty God. Where∣upon, he spent the greatest part of the following night in Prayer, with rnest Vows and Tears: And he has lived a very devout and ex∣emplary Life ever since, which is a∣bout nine Years. MANY others, have in my hearing, praised God that ever they were acquainted with these christi∣an Associates: And have owned, that their knowledge of God, and conversion to him were occasioned thereby; yea, I never yet met with one member of any of these Soci∣ies, who did not greatly praise God for the benefit they reap from him. AND since the time, that the sefulness of these Societies has been visible to the world; Their Zeal hath provoked some of their dissenting Bretheren to joyn with them occasionally, and to set up
the like among themselves. And who knows, but that this Essential Ʋnion of theirs in the Love of God and goodness, may at last draw them to center in the same Communion; and so bring a most inestimable Blessing to this bleeding Church and State: Than which no Blessing upon Earth can be imagined greater. For, it would mightily strengthen the languishing interest of Pretestancy; and envigorate the the Power of our Holy Religion; and be the best and surest founda∣tion of a vigorous and general Re∣formation. And this, in a time when both Union and Reformation are almost despair'd of. And if once the Holy Spirit of God vouch∣safes us these his heavenly Fruits of Ʋnity and Purity, England will indeed be the Glory of all Nations. IN fine, we have here many Hundreds of young, sober, and
active men, freely and solemnly engaging themselves to live strictly as it▪ becometh our Holy Religion (the Honour of which is at this day deplorably sunk) and humbly offering their utmost service to our Magistrates and Ministers, in rder to suppress the publick Practice of those scandalous and in¦solent Sins which endanger both our Church and State. And there seems to be a zealous and generous Spirit in them animating them to this noble Enterprize: And they are put into an excellent method to carry it on in all the parts of the City, of which they have already given sufficient proof. And truly, if these meanes of Reformation be not accepted, it will be difficult to find out any other that is so like to effect it, or to better the next Genera∣tion, in which all our Hope of Pro∣sperity
on Earth seems to lie. So then, if it shall please Persons in Place and Power to improve this Talent layd before them, by strengthening those Hands which are heartily stretcht forth against Prophaness, but need their assistance to effect it▪ What eminent service may be doe for God and these Kingdoms in this Season? But if this design be mokt and brow-beaten (as many things proposed for the publick Good, and this in particular hath been) and if some vain people give it a Nick▪ Name, and term it an imprudent or unseasonable zeal, or the like, and then the rest decry and discourage it, or at least are ashamed to own it, or appear for it. I am perswaded▪ That notwithstanding the common▪ Cry of Peace, Peace; It will be hard o assign good Proof, that we are not near to Desolation.
Specimen of the Orders of the Societies before men∣tioned; with the Reason of their being here made Pub∣lick: And a brief Vindica∣tion of their Design drawn by some of the Members of those Societies. I. THAT the sole Design of 1. Pet. 1. 15. this Society being to pro∣te real Holiness of Heart and life: It is absolutely necessary Josh. 24. 15. that the Persons who enter in∣ it, do seriously resolve to ap∣ply themselves in good earnest to all means proper to make 2 Tim 3. 15. them wise unto Salvation. II. THAT in Order to their being of one Heart and one Mind Rom. 15▪ 6, 5.
in this Design, every Member of this Society shall own and ma∣nifest Pbi. 2. 2 himself to be of the Church of England, and frequent 1 Pet. 2 13. the Liturg, and other publick Holy-exercises of the same. And that they be careful withal to Eph. 4. 2. Rom. 12. 18. express due Christian Charity, Candor and Moderation, towards all such Dissenters as are of good Conversation. III. THAT the Members of this Society shall meet together one Evening in the week at a conve∣nient place, in order to en∣courage 1 Thes 5. 14. Rom. 14. 19. each other in practical Holiness, by discoursing on spi∣ritual Subjects, & reading God's Holy Word; and to pray to Al∣mighty God, and praise his Name Psal. 34▪ 3. together. AND to this Assembly any serious Person may be admitted, upon Request.
IV THAT at such Meetings, there be no hot Disputes about controversial Points, State Af∣fairs, or the Concerns of Trade Rom. 15. 6. and worldly things. But that the whole bent of the Discourse be to glorifie God, and edifie one Eph. 4. 16.  other in Love. V. THAT it be left to every Persons Discretion to contribute t every weekly Meeting, what  thinks fit towards a Publick-Stock 1 Cor 16. 2. for pious and charitable ses: And the money thus col∣lected shall be kept by the two wards of the Society (who shall be chosen by Majority of voices once a year or oftener) to be disposed of, by the con∣sent of the Major-part of the Society, for the uses above∣mentioned. And the said Stew∣ards shall keep a faithful Reg∣ster of what is thus collected and
distributed; to be perused by any Member of the Society, a his Request. VI. THAT any respective Mem∣ber may recommend any Object of Charity to the Stewards, who shall (with the consent of th rest) give out of the commo Stock, according as the occasion requires. And in a case of ex∣traordinary necessity, every par∣ticular Person shall be desired to contribute further, as they shall think fi. VII. THAT every one that ab∣sents himself four Meetings to∣gether (without giving a satis∣factory account to the Stewards) shall be lookt upon as disaffected to the Society. VIII. THAT none shall be ad∣mitted into this Society, with∣out giving due notice thereof
the Stewards, who shall ac∣aint the whole Society there∣with. And after due Enquiry to their Religious Purposes, nd Manner of Life: The Stew∣ards may admit them to sub∣cribe their Names, if the Ma∣-part of the Society allows  it; and not otherwise. And h the like Joynt-Consent, y may exclude any Member oved guilty of any Misbeha∣our after due Admonition, nless he gives sufficient Testi∣mony of his Repentance and mendment, before the whole utty IX. IT is hereby recommended  every Person concerned in his Society, to consider the ma∣ inconveniencies, (and many mes sins) which attend Ale-House-Games, Ga. 5. 13. and wholly de ine them. And to shun all necessary Resort to such Hou∣ses,
and Taverns; and wholly 1 The. 5. 22. to avoid lewd Play-Houses. X THAT the respective Mem∣bers of this Society, shall hearti∣ly endeavour, thro' God's Grace; 1. TO be just in all their 1 Thes 4. 6. Dealings, even to an exempla∣ry Strictness. 2. TO pray many times e∣very 1 Thes 5. 17. day: Remembring our co∣tinual dependence upon God▪ both for spiritual and tempora things. 3. TO partake of the Lords Supper at least once a month, if 1 Cor. 11. 26. Luke 22. 19. not prevented by a reasonable Impediment. 4. TO practise the profound∣est Meekness and Humility. Mat. 11. 29. Mat 7. 1. 5. TO watch against censu∣ring others. 6 TO accustom themselves Psa. 139. 23. to Holy Thoughts in all places. 7. TO be heipful one to an 1 Cor. 12. 25. other. 8 TO exercise Tenderness, Tit 3. 2. Patience, and Compassion to∣wards all Men. 9 TO make serious Reflecti∣ns on 1 Cor. 10. 11. themselves when they ad the Holy Bible, or other good Books, and when they hear Sermons. 10 TO shun all fore-seen 1 Thes. 5. 22▪ casions of Evil: As evil Com∣any, known temptations, &c. 11. TO think often on the Luke 16. 25. fferent Estates of the glorified d the Damned in the unchange∣e Eternity, to which we are stening. 12. TO examine themselves very night, what Good or Evil 2 Cor 13. 5. they have done in the day past. 13. TO keep a private Fast Mat 6. 16. ace a month (especially near eir approach to the Lords Ta∣e) if at their own disposal; or Luke 5. 35.  fast from some Meals when they may conveniently. 14. TO mortifie the Flesh Gal. 5. 19. 24. with its Affections and Lusts. 15. TO advance in heaven∣ly-mindedness, and in all Grace. 1 Pet. 3. 8. 16. TO shun spiritual Pride and the Effects of it, as Railing, Anger, Peevishness and Impa∣tience of Contradiction, and the like. 17. TO pray for the whole Society in their private Prayers. Jam. 5. 16. 18. TO read pious Books▪ often for their Edification, but Jo. 5. 39. especially the Holy Bible: And herein particularly, Mat. 5, 6, 7. Chap. Lu 15, 16, Chap. Rom. 12, 13, Chap. Eph. 5, 6, Chap. 1 The. 5. Chap. Rev. 1, 2, 3, 21, 22, Chapters. And in the old Testament. Lev. 2. Chap. Deut 28. Cha. Isa. 53. Chap. Ezek. 36. Chap. 19. TO be continually mind∣ful of the great Obligation of his special Profession of Religion; nd to walk so circumspectly, hat none may be offended or scouraged from this by what ey see in them; nor occasion en to any to speak reproach∣ly of it. 20. TO shun all manner of ectation and Moroseness; and  of a civil and obliging De∣tment to all Men. XI. THAT they often consi∣, (with an awfull dread of Mala 3. 16. 's wrath) the sad Height to ich the Sins of Many are anced in this our Nation;  the bleeding Divisions reof in Church and State. And Judg. 5. 15. t every Member be ready to , what upon consulting with h other shall be thought ad∣able, Det. 13. 8. towards the punish∣ent of publick Prophaneness, ac∣ding Lv. 24. 11. to the good Laws of  Land; required to be put in
Execution by the King's and the late Queen's special order. XII. THAT each Member shall encourage the Catechizing of Deut. 6. 7. Josh. 24. 5. young and ignorant People in their respective Families, ac∣cording to their stations and Abilities: And shall observe all▪ manner of Religious Family-Duties. XIII. THAT the Major-Part of the Society shall have Power to▪ make a new Order to bind the whole, when need requires: If it be approved by a pious and learned Minister of the Church of England, nominated by the whole Society. XIV. THAT these Orders shall be read over at east four times in the Year by one of the Stew∣ards; And that with such de∣liberation, that each Member
ay have time to examine him∣lf by them, or to speak his nd in any thing relating to em. XV. LASTLY, That every ember of this Society shall ter mature deliberation and  Trial) subscribe his Name hese Orders: to express his obation of them, and his lution to endeavour to live o them. In order to which, all constantly keep a Copy hem by him. The End of the Orders
The Reason of this Publication  the Orders and Design of these So¦cieties. HAVING found by dis¦course with several Per¦sons (who have greatly rejoyce to hear of any Publick Good set o Foot) that they never before hear of these Societies; I could not bu wonder that a thing of this Nature could so long remain secret. THEY have been erected i our Capital City above Eighteen Years: They procure Sermons by way of preparation for the Lord Supper, or to engage a suitable Holiness of Life after it, every Lord's Day about five in the Eve∣ning, in many of the larges Churches in the City. Their Charit is extended to deserving Objects i all the Parts of the City and Suburb
nd by their Procurement Publick ayers are dayly made in several uches at such Hours as they can ost conveniently be present at m. And by the means of their at Zeal, & giving Informations, a ltitude of such as have no fear of  before their Eys, have been pu∣'d for their Prophaneness and anchery. SO that, it is to be admired, that r good Deeds and Designs could so long unknown to so many. truly, this does very much re∣mend their Christian Modesty. emonstrates that they do not af∣ to publish either their Alms or votion, after the vaunting man∣ of the Pharisees, with which our ssed Saviour was so highly offen∣; but that they desire to manage eir holy Purposes in the most ble Silence and contrived Se∣cy.
I conceived therefore, that might probably conduce to the ¦largement of these useful Societi and to engage the Prayers of go People in their behalf, to give fo Publick Account of their Constitu¦on, Design, and Orders; all whi have been approved by divers Em¦nent Divines; and among them,  our late excellent Primate Arch▪ Tillotson, who after he had examin their Orders, and the trifling Obje¦tions that were made against the by some Persons, declared it as h Opinion publickly, and upon sev¦ral occasions, That these Societi were a Support to our Church: an surely they will not be ashamed  appear in Publick, wheresoever th Christian Religion does. AND tho'there be some litt variations in th Orders of some  these Societies from others; Yet th
bstance of them is generally one d the same. In which, I beseech  Holy Spirit to establish every lengaged therein, and to incline ers to be followers of them in that h is Good. THAT we have absolute need formation from the Highest to owest; and that it highly con∣ us to set about it with speed; Truths so manifest, that I need stand to prove them to any on of serious & sober thought. such must of necessity conclude h me, That unless it be effected dily, we are undone. ND I think it will as little be stioned by sober Men, but that e Societies do very directly d towards that desired Effect. ever, since some Objections e been made against them, we now take them into Conside∣on.
The chief Objections which a been made against these Societi Considered and Answered by some their Members. I. WHEREAS it has be Objected, That there is danger  Schism and Dissention by their we¦ly meeting, and conferring togeth about Religious matters. THEY Answer. 1. That th cannot conceive where this dang▪lies. Since no Persons do mo professedly own the Holy Doctrin and Constitution of the Church England, than themselves, desiri always to be found in their Pra¦tice agreeable thereunto: An that none do more sincerely rev¦rence and esteem the Publick M¦nistry, nor more constantly and ¦verently attend upon the Publi
dinances: In the great Esteem of hich (in Subordination to the lory of God, and their own and hers Salvation) they have at eir own Expence set up daily blick Prayers in many Churches, fter due leave obtained;) and we procured (thro' the Assist∣re of several pious Divines) e benefit of weekly Communi∣s in many Churches, which ey frequent in great numbers. 2. THAT some of their Mem∣s had by their Examples influ∣ced several Dissenters to come  Church, and been a means of inging several Anabaptists and uakers to Baptism. That they d also been instrumental of pre∣ving from Popery several un∣ady and wavering People, in e late Rage of  Plague: and f reducing many licentious Per∣sons
to Holiness of Life. 3. THAT as all controvers Points are forbiden by their Order to be medled with in their Con¦ferences, (because they onely de¦signed to promote practical holy¦ness by their assembling together so in their reading of those prac¦tical portions of Holy Scripture t which their Orders direct them they have recourse to Dr Ham∣mond's Exposition, or some othe Author recommended by their Mi∣nisters. 4. THAT it had in Fact been verifyed for these 20. Years past that but one Member of these Soci∣eties had (to the best of their know∣ledge) left the Communion of the Church of England for any other Of which Singular defection som special Reasons ay be given. LASTLY. That leaving Mat∣ers
of Fact, they did Appeal to the Sentiments of all good People; whether their reading of the Word of God with the most orthodox Ex∣positors; their Praying and singing Psalms together; with their Exhor∣ing, Reproving, and encouraging one another in their Spiritual War∣are, have any tendency in Reason  in the Nature of things to make chismaticks? Or rather, whe∣ther any Church of Christ will not most certainly be the more establi∣shed and advanced by the consci∣ntious and general Practice of such Holy Exercises? II. WHEREAS others have ob∣ected, that ill and designing Men ay get into these Societies (as Po∣ish Emissaries have into some others) nd quite pervert their Design, how good soever in the first insti∣ution) to the prejudice of the Church.
THEY Answer, 1. That thei Orders forbid the admittance  any Person into their Societies (a Members) who is not known t some of the Rest, and who does no frequent the Publick Ordinances i that way of Ministration which i by Law established. Which is  caution they use to prevent diffe¦rences and disorder, and effectuall excludes such as are mentioned by the Objector. 2. THAT they are so man¦festly studious to comply with th Rules of the Church of England,  to yeild a just Obedience to those tha are set over them in the Lord: Tha they have been many times censu¦red as guilty of rigid severity, an uncharitableness towards Dissentin Protestants: Which they must lik¦wise account an injurious trea¦ment: For as much as they ende¦vour
to shun all extremes: Being desirous to practise Christian Sub∣ectian without prejudice to Christi∣n Charity. III. TO those who Object, that by their reproving and admonish∣ng those they converse with; & by their visiting the sick, and some∣times praying with them; they do nvade and intrude upon the Mini∣ter's Office. THEY Reply, 1. That since they are commanded of God, in ny wise to reprove their Brother, nd not to suffer Sin upon him: And o exhort one another dayly, lest any be ardened by the deceitfulness of Sin. They humbly conceive, that their Christian Admonitions and Re∣proofs can by no good Person be censured as an intrusion upon the Ministerial Function. 2. THAT since the Duty of
visiting the Sick, and administring to them, is one of the great things which will be enquired into by their Lord and Saviour at the last Judgment: And since all People are commanded to Pray one for another: They cannot account it an invasion upon the Minister's Office; if a such time as the Minister cannot be present, they use an approved Form of Prayer suitable to the condition of the Sick-Person (which they humbly conceive any Christian Friend may and ought upon Re∣quest, to do for an other, who by sickness is disabled from doing i himself) And in any ase or manner but this, they do not practise it. IV. TO such as suggest, that there is Danger of Spiritual Pride in these Societies, by their making a particular and special Profession
of Religion, and being thought ore holy than others. 2. THAT they cannot think it warrantable to omit any part of Christian Duty for fear of Spiritual Pride, or seeming holyer then others: Since then, for the same reason they ight omit the whole. 3. THAT it is indeed a due ence of their own and others In∣rmities which induces them to nite into Societies (since two are ronger than one, many than few,) nowing that the difficulties are ve∣y many and very great which they ust encounter in their Passage owards Eternal Life: And that uch is the Degeneracy even of Christians in these latter days, That thro' the Prophaneness of some, nd the Luke-warmness and Coward∣ise of others; they should but eldom meet with such Conversa∣tion
as is highly expedient for the keeping up a due Warmth and Life in Spiritual things: Were it not for those frequent Conferences and pius Exercises which are (with good effect) set up by these Societies. V. Whereas it is Objected; That since a Church of Christ s a Society of Christian People; and that these Societies are erected in a reformed Church: That this is  Society with∣in a Society, and a refining upon a reformed Church. TO this they humbly Reply: 1. That they have not yet learnt, that the reading of God's Word and conferring on the practical Points of Religion, in order to a more holy Conversation; hath at any time by good men been thought prejudicial to the Church of Christ. On the contrary, Our best Divines recommend these
things both from the Pulpit and the Press, as the best expedients to support and adorn our Reformed Church, and render it worthy of that venerable Name. 2. THAT they do not well un∣derstand what the Objector means by refining upon our reformed Church. If it be meant; that they pretend to reform her Doctrine or quarrel with her Government: They ut∣terly disclaim any such Practice. But if it be meant, that they de∣sire to refine and reform themselves and others, so as to come nearer to her Purity of Doctrine in their Practice, than some others do, who shelter their prophane Lives under the pretence of her Holy Commu∣nion: They own this, and must ad∣here to it; not doubting but they shall have the Prayers of all good People, that they may so do.
UPON the whole matter there∣fore, they conclude: That since their Societies are neither against the Word of God, nor the Laws of Man; but manifestly conducive to Gods Glory, the Salvation of Men, and the publick Interest of our Church and Nation: And since they have proved very beneficial to the Souls of the Members, and are agreeable to the primitive Practice of the best Christians, and tend so directly to revive some∣thing of their primitive Purity, and Zeal for Religion; together with their Charity, and good works: They humbly crave, That these Societies may be encouraged by their Governours in Church and State, suitably to the Spiritual and National Benefits which may be reapt from them.
Directions for Religious Conference, with PRAYERS for the use of Religious So∣cieties, and upon other Occa∣sions. I Premise, that it may be very ex∣pedient, and what would much promote the pous Design of these Societies: That an Orthodx and ious Minister should be chosen by each Society, as the Director and Visiter of it. Who may frequently be present at their Assemblies, to preserve Order, excite Zeal, and resolve Doubts. THIS would obviate many ob∣jections concerning them; and would greatly benefit, countenance, and re∣commend such Assemblies. THIS Director may be chosen every year (when the Stewards are) by Majority of Votes (no manner of
Sallary or Reward being to be allowed on this account) and when he is pre∣sent, it will be his proper place to pray with the Society. THE Members of the Society are often to mind one another, to be very punctual to their Hour of Meeting: And to wave lesser Occasions that tend to divert them from coming to it. And when a competent Number of them are met; One of the Stewards, (if the Director be absent) or any other Per∣son desired, may begin the Conference thus: All standing up. MY Bretheren, we are commanded of God, that our Communica∣tion be such as tends to the Eph. 4. 29. edifying of one another; and such as ministers Grace to the Hearers. And we find the Spirit of God commen∣ding the Education of Timothy, That from a Child he had known 2 Tim. 3. 15. the Holy Scriptures, which were able to make him wise unto salvation, thro' Faih, which is in Jesus Christ. Let s therefore endeavour at this time to
edifie one another in the things of God, with the greatest Humility of Mind, and the tenderest bowels of Christian Charity. For indeed, Where∣withal can a Youngman cleanse Psal. 119. 9. his way, but by taking heed there∣to according to the Word of God? And that it may please God to instruct our minds therein at this time, and to di∣rect our Hearts and Lives thereby: Let us now put up our Prayers to God, (who is the Giver of all Grace, and the Author of all Good) to accomplish this holy work in every one of us, by his Holy Spirit, for the sake of Jesus Christ his Son, Our Saviour. Then the Steward may devoutly repeat these three Collects: All kneeling. Prevent us, O Lord, in all our Doings with thy most gracious Favour, and fur∣ther us with thy continual Help; that in all our Works begun, continued, and ended in thee; we may Glorify thine Holy Name, and finally by thy mercy
obtain everlasting Life, thro' Jesus Christ Our Lord. [All. Amen.] O Most Blessed Lord! who hast caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our Learning: Grant, that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them; that by Patience and Comfort of thy Holy Word we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed Hope of everlasting Life, which thou hast given us in thy Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. O God! for as much as without Thee, we are not able to please thee; Mercifully grant, that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our Hearts, thro' Jesus Christ our Lord▪ Amen. Then all rising, and seating themselves in their Places, the Steward may read one of the Chapters set down in the tenth Order; resting so long at the end of every Verse, that any one
may have an Opportunity to make any serious Remark upon it. Or some part of an approved Exposition on the Ho∣ly Scripture, or on the Catechism, may be read. And in order to a more advised Conference upon the most im∣portant Duties of our holy Religion; the Steward (in the absence of the Director) may, at the close of every Weekly Assembly, propose one of the following Subjects, to be discoursed upon at their next Conference, viz. 1. The Duty of Self-examination required, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2. THE Duty of Self-abasement, and Self-renouncing required, Mark 8, 34. 3. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, Mark 16. 16. 4. Evangelical Repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 10. 5. Effectual Conversion to God, Act. 26. 18. 6. Trust in God, 1 Tim. 6. 17. 7. Mortification, Rom 8. 13. Gal. 5. 24.
8. Humility Eph. 3. 2. 9. Christian Hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 10. Christian Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 1, &  Including the Love of God, Ma 12. 30. And the Love of Men, Verse 31. 11. Alm-deeds Matt. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4▪ 12. Contentment, Phil. 4. 11. 13. Just dealing, 1 Thes. 4. 6. 14. Government of the tongue, Mat▪ 12. 36, 37. 15. Prayer & Praise, 1 Tim. 2. 1▪ 16. Chastity, Mat. 5. 27, 28. 17. Temperance, 1 Cor. 9. 25. 18. Patience, 1 Pet. 2. 20. 21. &c. Meekness, Tit. 3. 2. 19. The publick Worship of God, Psalm 42. 2, 4. 20. Heavenly-mindedness, Col. 3. 1, 2. And Contempt of the World, Gal. 6. 14. 21. Of Christian Prudence, Matt. 10. 16. 22. Family-Duties, Josh. 24. 15. Or, Religious House-hold Go∣vernment, Acts 10. 2.
23. Subjection to Magistrates, Titus . 1. 24. Peace-Making, Matt. 5. 9. 25. Of Reproof, Lev. 19. 17. 26. Sanctifying the Lords Day, Num. 5. 32. &c. 27. Growing in Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. 28. Improvement of Opportunities of Doing and Receiving Good, Acts 0. 38. 29. Duty of Parents, and Children, owards each other, Eph. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. 30. Of the Husband and Wife, Eph. 5. 22, to the end. 31. Of Masters and Servants, Eph. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 32. Of People to their Pastors, Heb. 13. 17. 33. Of preparing for, and watch∣ing in the Performance of all Religious Exercises, Heb. 12. 28, 29. 34. The Duty of Chistians to Ene∣mies, Rom. 12. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 35. Of endeavouring the Conversion and Salvation of others, 1 Tim. 2. 3, 4. 36. The Sense of Gods Omnipre∣sence, Psalm 139.
37. Of reading the Holy Scriptures, Deut. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Tim. 3. 16. 38. Of Meditation, 1 Tim. 4. 15. 39. Of Circumspection, or Watch∣fulness, Matt. 24. 42, 43. &c. 40. Of Perseverance, Rev. 2. 10. Jude, Verse 24. THESE are Duties of the great∣est Importance, and are all suited to the Rules of these Societies. And I have kept to the number 40, that I might assign one distinct Subject of discourse for every weekly Conference in the year, reserving the Discourse of 12 of them to be spent upon the Sub∣ject of the Lords Supper, which every Member is obliged by the Orders of the Society to receive (where he may with conveniency) twelve times in the ear. THUS every person knowing for a whole week before, what will be the Subject of the Discourse at the next Conference; may the better prepare for it by suitable Reading, Meditation and Prayer.
AND thus the cheifest parts of ristian Duty will be considered and ne thorow every year, to the great crease of Knowledge and Practice. Note, THAT every Person is cheif∣ to bend his discourse to further the ctice of every Duty, and to pro∣te Holiness of Life. AND it will be expedient, That  Person speak above 3 or 4 Senten∣, without a convenient Pause, to e room to others to speak their nd. And in case of Silence, he may eed, but with the same Caution. AND at the time of Conference, ne of the Stewards (in the absence of  Director) may propose the following estions, for the sake of Method, and t every ones discourse may be the re directly practical, viz. When e Duty to be spoken to, is named: he Steward may say, I. Qust. Wherein consists the Na∣e of this Duty. II. Quest. What Directions do you opose in order to make the Practice f it more sure and more easy?
III. What Discouragement do any o you find in the Practice of it? IV. What Motives may encourag our Practice of this Duty, and ou Perseverance in it? IF the time permits, such Motive as these may be toucht upon, viz. 1. The Authority of God command∣ing. 2. The Goodness of God, promising both to assist and reward the Diligent 3. The Terribleness of Gods Threat¦nings and the Examples of his Wrath sometimes seen upon Earth; and the dreadfulness of the everlasting Veng¦ance of an Allmighty God in the fierceness of his Wrath in the other world. 4. The Excellency of the Duty it self. 5. The Examples of Good Men, who have gone before us in the Ways of God. 6. The Blessed Rest and Peace of a good Conscience; and the previous Hell of a bad one. These general Heads may be the Method of discourse upon any Duty a the weekly Conference.
The Conference being ended: One of the Stewards may read some of the ollowing Sentences and the Admoniti∣on; to raise up and engage every Soul  Faith and Fervency in Prayer. Sentences. GOD is greatly to be fear∣d in Psal. 89. 7. the Assemblies of his Saints, nd to be had in Reverence by ll that are about him. GOD is a righteous Judge, Psal. 7. 12, rong and patient, and God is ovoked every day. GOD will bring every work Eccl. 12. 14. nto Judgement; with every ecret thing, whether it be good, r whether it be evil. HE that hideth his Sins shall Pro. 28. 13. ot prosper: But he that confes∣eth and forsaketh them, shall have mercy. IF any man sinneth, we have 1 Jo. 2. 1, 2. an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and
he is the propitiation for o Sins. O Come, let us worship, and Psalm 95. 6. fall down, and kneel before th Lord our Maker. The Admonition before Prayer, to be read by the Steward (in the Directors Absence) if the time will permit. MY Brethren, since our graci∣ous God has promised to be present where two or three are ga∣thered Mat. 18. 20. together in his Name: Let us duely consider what an aw∣ful thing it is to draw nigh un-God; even to him, who is able Luke 12. 5. to save or destroy us for ever: To him, who sees our very Hearts and secret Thoughts, and who hath struck some Persons dead in the place, when they sought Lev, 10. 2 2 Sa. 6. 7. Nu. 16. 35. 1 Sam. 6. 19. him not in the due order. As Na∣dab and Abihu, Ʋzzah, Corah, and many others. BUT we have a perfect and
cceptable High Priest, the Lord Heb. 7. 26. esus Christ, who will perfect nd present our Petitions to his ather, and our Father, if we de∣outly Jo, 20. 17. and sincerely serve him. nd thro' this new and living Heb. 10. 19. ay we may approach to the hrone of Grace with an hum∣e Boldness. Wherefore let  gird up the Loins of our lind, and rouze up our drow∣ Affections, and watch over Ja. 1. 6. r deceitful Hearts. Let us ay in Faith, and in Charity; ith Fervency and Humility; 1 Ti. 2. 8. onsidering that our present and uture Happiness depends upon our prevailing in Prayer. Let s therefore beseech God to as∣st us in this great Duty with Rom. 8. 26. is Holy Spirit, and thereby to elp our Infirmities; and that e would graciously accept our nworthy Persons and Perfor∣mances through his Son JE∣SƲS CHRIST, whom he ath ordained to be an High Heb. 7. 25.
Priest for ever, to make Intercession for u Amen. Let us pray. Then all devoutly kneeling, they m joyn in this Confession of Sin. ALLMIGHTY God! Fathe of our Lord Jesus Christ; Make of all things; Judge of all Men: W acknowledge and bewail Our manifol Sins and Wickedness; which we fro time to time, Most Greivously hav commited, in Thought, Word & Deed Against thy Divine Majesty: Provokin most justly thy Wrath and Indignatio against us. We do earnestly desire t Repent; and to be heartily Sorry so these Our Misdoings. The Remem¦brance of them is Greivous to us, th Burden of them is intolerable. Hav Mercy upon us, Have Mercy upon us Most Mercifull Father! For thy So Our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgiv us all that is past. And grant that we may ever hereafter, serve and please thee in newness of Life: To the
onor and Glory of thy Name, thro' esus Christ our Lord. Amen. OƲR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy King∣m come: Thy Will be done on Earth it is in Heaven: Give us this day  dayly Bread: And forgive us our respasses as we forgive them that trepass gainst us: And lead us not into Tempta∣n; But deliver us from Evil: For, ne is the Kingdom, The Power, and e Glory, for Ever & Ever. Amen. Then the Steward alone may say, ALLMIGHTY & everlasting God, who hatest nothing that thou hast made; and doth forgive the Sins of all them that are penitent: Vouchsafe to treate & make in us new and contrite Hearts, that we duely lamenting our Sins, and acknowledging our Wretched∣ness, may obtain of thee, the God of all Mercy, perfect remisson and forgive∣ness, thro' Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Here may follow, the Collect for the d And such other Collects in the Co¦mon Prayer as may be suitable. Then all rising. Stew. Glory be to the Father, & All. As it was in the, &c. Stew. Praise ye the Lord. All. The Lord's Name be praised. Then the Steward may read the follow¦ing Admonition to the Praise of Go before the singing of a Psalm,  time will permit. LET us consider, my Bre¦thren; what cause we have t Psa. 100. 3. praise God. He is the Autho of our Being; The Fountain o our Mercies: The God of ou Life and of our Salvation. O Praise the infinite Goodness o God, who made us little lowe Psa. 8. 5. than the Angels in the State o our Creation; yea, who hath shewn to us faln men, more Com¦passion
then to the faln Angels; for they are reserved in everlast∣ing Chains of Darkness, to the Jude. 6. Judgement of the great Day; whilst we have the offers of e∣ernal Redemption. And it pleases God to fit men dayly or his nearer presence in the 2 Cor. 5. 5. work of Sanctification, whilst Devils are wholly given up to eir malitious perverseness. LET us consider, That Man as made by God to be the outh of the dumb Creatures  the Praises of their Creator: an is to be the High Priest of Psa. 104. e lower Creation to offer up a ine Service for the whole Con∣egation of Sublunary Beings. LET us remember, That Psa. 57. 8. an's Tongue is his Glory, a very onderful and peculiar Gift of od to men. Let us say there∣re with the Holy Psalmist, I Psa. 109. 30. ll greatly praise the Lord with y mouth; yea, I will praise him ong the Multitude.
LET us observe, with what▪ cheerfulness the very Birds tun their pleasant Notes to the Praise of their Maker, after their Capacity. They have no Store-House nor Barn, and know not Matt. 6. 26. where they shall find the next mouthful of meat; yet how pleasant are they! And how void of mummurs or ullenness. FINALLY, Let us consider that by praising God now, we▪ learn how to praise God in Heaven. This will be the Work and Happiness of that State of Rev 19. 1. Glory. Let us therefore joyn our sincere Praises in the Church below to those more perfect Ha∣lelujahs of the Saints above. It is said, Rev. 14. 3. That none could▪ learn their Song, but those that were redeemed from the Earth: From which we may note, that true Holiness is that which will it us for the Songs of Heaven. LET us therefore now strai up our Affections to the highest▪
itch; and so sing the Praises of God  Heart and Spirit, Psa. 148. 2. that Angels and Saints may joyn with us now, nd we with them for evermore. Amen. Then a Psalm may be sung; all stand∣ing up in this exalted part of divine Worship. Then may they repeat the Apostles Creed. Believe in God the Father Allmigh∣ty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: nd in Jesus Christ, his onely Son our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy host: Born of the Virgin Mary: Suf∣red under Pontius Pilate, was Crucii∣d, dead and buried: He descended in∣o Hell: The third day he arose again from the dead: He ascended into Hea∣en, and sitteth on the right Hand of God the Father Allmighty: From thence he shall come to judge the quick nd the dead. I Believe in the Holy Ghost; The
Holy Catholick Church: The Comm¦nion of Saints, The forgiveness of Sin The Resurrection of the Body, and th Lie everlasting. Amen. All. Lord, we believe; help thou c Ʋnbelief. Then all kneeling. After the Colle r Trinity Sunday; the Stewar may proceed in Prayer for the Socie¦ty, which may also be used in a pri¦vate Family. O Most Holy and Blessed God! Th Creator, Governor and Judge o all: Who hatest Falshood and Hypo¦crisy, and wilt not accept the Praye of feigned Lips: But hast promised to shew Mercy to such as turn unto the by true Faith and Repentance. Vouch∣safe we pray thee to create in us clea and upright Hearts, thro' an unfeign∣ed Faith in thy Son our Saviour. To us indeed belongeth Shame and Con¦fusion of Face: We are not worthy to lift up our eyes or voice towards Hea¦ven▪ Our Natures are depraved, an
ur Ways have been perverse before hee. O! Let not thy wrath arise a∣gainst us lest we be consumed in a mo∣ent: But let thy merciful Bowels earn over us; and vouchsafe to puri∣ and pardon us thro' thine all-suffici∣nt Grace and Mercy in our Lord Jesus Christ. Since it hath pleased thee to of∣er him up as a Sacrifice for Sinners, ouchsafe we beseech thee to cleanse s from all Iniquity thro' his Blood. We believe that he is able to save to he uttermost those that come to the  him, and we do earnestly desire to mbrace him as our Prince and Saviour; O! Give us Repentance and Remissi∣n of sin thro' his Name. All we like heep have gone astray, every one in is own way: Good Lord, reduce us nto thy Fold thro' this great Shepherd of Souls; and be pleased to lay o him he Iniquity of us all. AND as we have much to be forgi∣en, be pleased to incline our hearts o love thee much who forgivest Iniqui∣y, Transgression and Sin. Give us hat Faith which worketh by Love, and
such Love as will constrain us to ha regard to all thy Commandemen And make us to look carefully to a ur ways, that we may never again  any thing whereby thy Holy Name ma be blasphemed, or thine Authority d¦pised. GIVE us the deepest Humility without which we can never be accep∣ted of thee our ininitely condescending God. Make us continually to tread in th Steps of our blessed Lord and Saviou being of a meek and quiet Spirit, al∣ways influenced by the highest Love o thee our God, and by the most chari∣table Dispositions towards all men. VOUCHSAFE to indue us with the saving Knowledge of Spiritual things▪ that we may receive all thy Truths, in the love of them, in all Patience, Pu∣rity, Justice, Temperance, Godliness and Brotherly-kindness; that we may adorn our Holy Profession, and resem∣ble the divine Goodness of thee our Heavenly Father. AND since we are not only weak and frail, but corrupt and sinful:
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us by the power of thine Holy Spirit, that we all not from our avowed Stedfastness n all Christian Duty. Preserve us from all the Sin and Vanity to which our Age, Condition, and Nature is prone, and to which the Devil and this World may at any time tempt us. Glorifie, Good God, thy Strength in our weakness, thy grace in our pollution, & thy Mercy in our Salvation. May our holy Religion be grounded and settled in our Hearts; that out of the good Treasure of a gracious Heart, our Speech may be savoury, and our Con∣versation exemplary; and that we may be fruitful in all good works even to our old Age, and to our last day. FIT us we pray thee for every state of Life into which thy Providence shall cast us, prosper our lawful Underta∣kings, preserve us Night and Day; and prepare us for a hopeful Death, and a blessed Eternity. BE pleased, we beseech thee, to bless all those Societies, who in truth apply their Hearts to thy Service and Glory:
We pray thee be pleased to strength∣en, stablish and settle both them and us in thy Faith, Fear, and Love. LET nothing in this world dis∣courage us from the pursuit of those holy purposes, which thy Spirit has at any time put into our Hearts and Minds. But make us all faithful to thee our avowed God, and our de∣sired Portion, even unto death; that we at last (with thy whole Church) may be partakers, of that eternal Life and perfect Bliss, which thou hast promised, thro' Jesus Christ thy only begotten Son, our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen. A General Intercession. ALLMIGHTY God, whose Kingdom and Power is universal; Vouch∣safe we pray thee to defend and pros∣per thy whole Church; and so dispose the Heart of thy Servant King William, that he may ever seek thy Honour and Glory. And grant to his whole Coun∣cil,
and to all in Authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently minister Justice to the suppressing of those Vices which reign amongst us, and to the reviving of true Religion and Concord. And grant that all our Bishops and Inferior Pastors may be effectually illuminated by the Know∣ledge of thy Word, that by their Holy Lives and Sound Doctrine they may convert many to Righteousness. AND to all the People of these three Nations be pleased to give thine Heavenly Grace, that they may live in thy Faith and Fear, in Obedience to Authority, and in godly Love towards each other. FINALLY, we commend to thy fatherly Goodness all those that are afflicted in Mind, Body or Estate, e∣specially such as suffer for Righteousness fake. O Lord relieve them according to their several necessities, give them patience under their Sufferings, and a happy Issue out of all their Afflictions; All which we beg in the Name and Me∣diation of Jesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.
A Thanks-giving. O Most merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness, we humbly praise thy Name for all thy mercies vouchsafed to us. We praise thee, that thou madest us reasonable Creatures; That we were born in a Christian Land; and that we were early brought into thy gracious Cove∣nant. We bless thee for all the Ad∣vantages of our Education; for all the Benefits of good Examples, and of sea∣sonable Counsel and Reproof. For all the Comfort we have had in any Relation, Friend or Enjoyment, and for the comfortable Use of all thy good Creatures. WE praise thee for all the Benefits of Affliction; for thy merciful Sup∣port in Trouble; and thy gracious De∣liverances from any Evil. WE bless thy Name for our present Health, for our necessary food, for our peaceable habitations, and for
that measure of outward things which thy Bounty hath dispensed to us. BUT above all, we bless and praise thy Name now, (and desire to magnifie thy Name for ever) for our Redemp∣tion by the Blood of thy beloved Son; and that thou hast ordained means of eternal Life thro' him. WE praise thee for thy Covenant of Life and Peace; for thy Word and Sacraments; for the Operations of thine holy Spirit, and for any Evidence or hope of thy Favour towards us who are less than the least of thy mercies. WE bless thee, Good God, for thy Patience towards us, or thy Calls to us, and for thy great Pity and Compassion to such unworthy Creatures. SET home, we beseech thee, a due and constant Sense of these and all thy Mercies upon all our hearts, and make us to live to the Praise of thee (the God of our Mercies) all our days; thro' Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, & the Holy Ghost, be all Bles∣sing, Honour, Glory and Power ascrib'd by Angels and Men for evermore. Amen.
Then all standing up, The following Exhortation to Humility may be read. MY Brethren, since the Great God doth often assure us in his Holy Word; That he will re∣sist Ja. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. the Proud, but give Grace to the Humble. Let us consider; that our Undertakings, tho' never so good, will fail and come to nought, except we be truly and Luk. 14. 11. deeply humble. Indeed it can not be otherwise, because the proud Person quits his Reliance on God, to rest in himself, which is to exchange a Rock for a Reed. ALAS! what are we, poor empty Nothings! yea, what is Gen. 32. 10. worse, condemned perishing Sinners? We have perhaps Un∣derstanding now, but God can soon turn it into Madness. We Dan. 4. 32. may have some Attainments in Grace, but spiritual Pride will
wither all, and soon reduce us to a very profligate and wretch∣ed Isa. 66. 2. state: Such as we have seen others tumble into, who have begun in the Spirit, and ended in the Flesh. What have we 1 Cor. 4. 7. that we have not received? And which, he that gave it, may not as soon take away? WE that are young in years, 1 Tim. 3. 6. and younger in Grace; are in danger of Self-conceit, and of being puffed up; which is a Quick Sand in which thousands have been swallowed up and pe∣risht. It is not in vain, that the Apostle requires; That Pro. 16. 18. Young-men be exhorted to be sober-minded, Tit. 2. 6. which he else-where explains, when he says; Let no man think of him∣self Isa. 14. 12, 13. more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, Rom. 12. 3. BY pride the Angels fell 1 Tim. 3. 6. from Heaven: And if ever we climb up to those blessed Seats
from which they are faln, it must be by the gracious steps of Humility and Lowliness of Mind. Wherefore let him that Luk. 18. 14. thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. Let us walk humbly 1 Co. 10. 12. with our God, and with all men; and ever have lowly Thoughts of our vile selves, and of our Rom. 11. 20. poor Attainments, and of our defective Performances. And with St. Paul, (who was in no∣thing 2 Cor. 12. 11. behind the very chiefest A∣postles) let us always say, I am Nothing. Let us therefore now sing to the Praise of God, to whom alone Praise is due. Here sing a Psalm: After which the Steward may say. IT is very meet and right, and our bounden Duty, that we should at all times, and in all Places, give thanks unto thee, O most blessed and bounti∣ful God, in whose hands our breath is,
and from whom cometh our Salvation. All. Therefore with Angels and Arch▪ Angels, and with all the Com∣pany of Heaven, we laud and magni∣fie thy glorious Name, evermore prais∣ing thee, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts! Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory: Glory be to thee O Lord most High. Amen. Stew. May the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen. At the Request of some under my Ministry, the following Prayers are added. And let it be noted, That the fore∣going Forms of Prayer and Praise may be properly used in Private Fa∣milies. And the prefaces to both may be usefully read in Families now and then, to excite zealous Affections, and an awful dread of God in our ap∣proaches to him. And to the end, That the dayly Worship of God may be set and kept
up in every Family. Let it never be forgotten, that the Spirit of God has denounced a most dreadful Curse upon all prayerless Families. Jer. 10. 25. Four out thy Fury upon the Hea∣then that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name. And, as I have often in my Ser∣mons, so I here again solemnly charge those that own my Ministry, even in the Presence, and by the Au∣thority of the Allmighty God, that they pull not this denounced Curse upon themselves and Families. And I again mind them to read the word of God daily, and to Catechize their Children and Servants in a serious and effectual Manner: And that they Remember the Lords Day to keep it Ho∣ly; even the whole day, and that they suffer not their Children or Ser∣vants to pollute any part of it, or tri∣fle it away by unnecessary worldly business or vain discourse, or diversi∣on. These things are necessary to your Peace with God, and your dying in Hope.
A Prayer for a Family in the Morning. O Most Holy and Blessed God! who fillest all places with thy Presence, and art a searcher of all Hearts: With hee is Terrible Majesty to confound hine Enemies, but infinite Mercy to uc∣or the humble & contrite Soul; we pray hee meet us not at this time in thy just engeance as a consuming Fire; but e pleased to accept us gratiously thro' hy Mercy in our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Hope. WE have indeed lived too long as without God in the World: We have wickedly followed our own corrupt Desires and Devices: And have not uely owned thy Sovereignty and Do∣inion over us. We have broken our ows, and stifled our Consciences, and xceedingly defiled our selves, and of∣ended thee, setting at nought the Pro∣ises and Threatnings of thy Book, &
hating to be reformed. Lord, we la∣ment our Impenitency, and Unbelief, and all the sinful fruits of our lthy & ungodly Hearts, Lips, and Lives. And we earnestly beseech thee, that thou wouldest not give us up to our own filthyness, and folly, and hardness of Heart: But that thou wouldest grati∣ously reduce us into thy Fold & Favour, by the Power of thine Holy Spirit, and to accept and pardon us thro' the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ. AND, O Lord, vouchsafe to cleanse and sanctify us in Soul and Body: And make us to glorify thy Name on Earth, and to do the work thou hast given us to do. Be pleased to subdue our Cor∣ruptions, and to mortify every inor∣dinate Affection and unruly Passion: And make us entirely resigned to thy Will, and subservient to thy Praise, now and Ever. KEEP us, we beseech thee, from the Snares of worldly Pleasures and En∣joyments, and make us to set our Hearts on things above: And bring all the Powers of our Souls and Bodys in∣to
a willing subjection to thy Rule and Government. And save us from all car∣nal Ignorance and Unbelief, and from all Ungodliness, and Sinful indulgence of the Flesh. VOUCHSAFE, Good God, to pity our weakness and imperfection: And to succour us in all our Temptations: And to support us in all our Sorrows & Afflictions: And grant us a happy end of all our Sorrows at last in thine eter∣nal Kingdom. MAKE us ever mindful of the End for which we were made; and the chief work we have to do; and the uncertainty of this present Life; and affect us duly by the forethought of that unchangable Eternity to which we are hastening. AND let thy Faith and Fear ever dwell in our hearts; that it may be our continual Exercise to keep our Con∣sciences void of Offence both towards thee, our God, and towards all Men. SUFFER us not to spend the Day of our Salvation idely and unprofitably: But make us to work out our Salvation
with Fear and Trembling, thro' thy grace and spirit: And make us to stand always upon our Watch; prepared for our Master's Call: That whenso∣ever thou shall put an end to this mortal Life, it may be the beginning of a Bles∣sed Immortality. VOUCHSAFE, O Lord, to Bless all our Governours in Church and State; and grant that they may be thy Ministers to us for Good: And that we may never be guilty of any sinful dis∣obedience towards them. And give to all the people of this Nation thy grace to live in Unity and Godly Love, and to further each others present and eternal wellfare. BE pleased to bless all our Relati∣ons and Friends; and multiply thy mer∣cies upon them in the Blessings of this and of the other World. And vouch∣safe to succor all that lye under any Sorrow or Affliction, and be near unto them in all they call upon thee for. MANIFEST thine especial Love and Favour, we pray thee, to this Fami∣ly: Vouchsafe to provide for us, and
defend us by thy good providence. Preserve us from all Evil thro'out this day; prosper us in our lawful Affairs; let no variance nor ill-will prevail a∣mongst us, but keep us in Peace and Christian Love to our lifes end. FINALLY, We praise thy great and glorious Name for all thy mercies towards us. For the Rest and Safety of the last Night; for the renewed comforts of this present day, and all the good Providences of our past Life. MORE especially, for the means of grace, the motions of thy spirit, and for thy great patience & long-suffering suffering towards us. But above all, for the Merits and Mediation of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who ever liveth to make Intercession for us; for whose sake we beseech thee to hear us, accept us, and pardon us; together with these our unworthy Prayes, in whose most holy Nameand Words we further pray: OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done in Earth as it is
in Heaven: Give us this day our dayly Bread: And forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that Trespass against us: And lead us not into Temptation, but Deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. A Prayer for a Family in the Evening. O Eternal God! Infinite in all Per∣fection, and worthy of all Praise! who wilt be glorified in or upon every Creature which thou hast made: It is meet, that with Fear and Trembling we consider thy holy and righteous Attributes, and our own polluted Na∣tures and sinful Lives. O Lord! we have sinfully forgotten thee our Creator in the days of our Youth; and vainly mis-spent our pre∣tious time in Sin and Folly. Alas! with what diligence have we serv'd the Flesh, and the Devil, and this present World! and how little have we minded the Concerns of our Salvation and eternal
Life! We have not glorified thee the God that madest us, and in whose hands our Breath is: But have lived as if we had been made onely for this world, and to please our selves. O! how justly mayest thou Snatch away our Breath from us, since we have so much abused it in idle and ngodly speeches; and call us speedi∣ly into an other World, since we have so persumptuously built our Hopes of Happiness in this! And should this be thy Pleasure and our ortion; O Lord, how could we ap∣ear before thee in the Guilt of Thousands of unpardoned Sins! or how ould we endure to dwell with ever∣asting Burnings! BUT with thee, O Blessed God, there is Infinite Mercy and plenteous Redemption. Thou so lovedst the world as to give thine onely begot∣en Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have ever∣asting Life. Lord, we desire to be∣ieve on him, help us we pray thee against our Unbelief. Enable us to
submit all the Powers of our Soul to him in his saving Offices, and grant that we may so believe on him, that we may obtain Eternal Life thro' his Name. BE pleased to take away all impuri∣ty and hypocrisie, all insensibleness and perversness from us: And make us thy willing and obedient Servants for ever. We know, that without Holiness, none can enter into thy Kingdom: O Lord, make us Holy thro' the effectual Rege∣neration and Sanctification of thine Ho∣ly Spirit: That we may love thee with all our Heart and Soul; and serve thee with all our Might and Strength. And may delight to do thy Will, and to de∣ny our selves for thy sake. AND since we have too long neg∣lected that great Salvation which was purchased for us by the Blood of thy Son: A waken us, we pray thee, to im∣prove the remaining space of our Days with all possible care, giving all diligence to make our calling and Election sure. ENABLE us to break loose from the Snares of this present World, and from all the sinful entanglements of the
Flesh, and from the seducements of wick∣ed and dissolute men: That we may run with speed that Race which thou hast set before us, and may persevere in it to the Death, that we may in the end attain everlasting Life. TO this end, make us habitually mindful of the shortness and uncertain∣ty of this mortal Life, & the unprofita∣bleness of all Earthly things in the hour of Death, and in the other World. And make us now to choose thy Favour as our chiefest Good, thy Son as our Prince and Saviour, and thy Kingdom as our Portion. And when our Souls shall be summoned to leave this earthly Ta∣bernacle, vouchsafe, Good God, to re∣ceive us into those everlasting Mansions which our Blessed Saviour has Prepared for those that love Him. FOR whose sake, we Pray thee, Bless these three Nations with Plenty, Peace, and Safety, and with the Increase of all that's good. And send Peace and Truth amongst all Nations. BE pleased to bless and direct all that are set in Authority over us; And gran that they may Govern us, and we o∣bey
them, in the Fear of thee our God. Vouchsae to succour all that are objects of Misery, whether they labour under spiritual or temporal afflictions: And be pleased to administer to them as their Necessities of Soul or Body require. BE gratious to all our Relations and Friends, preserve them from all Evil, & bind up their Souls in the bundle of Life. BE more particularly gratious, we pray thee, to this Family, and to every particular person in it. Be pleased to dwell with us, and rule over us. Preserve us in Peace and Safety; and let thy Spi∣rit rule in every one of our Hearts, that we may faithfully discharge our respe∣ctive Duties one to another, and may live in Christian Union and Peace. Vouchsafe, O thou that never slumber∣est nor sleepest! to grant us thy Pro∣tection this Night: Give thine Holy Angels charge concerning us: Preserve us from danger by Fire, and Tempest; and from the violence of unreasonable men: And suffer no Evil to befall any of us, nor any Plague to come nigh our dwellings. AND for as much as we know not
whether we shall see the light of another day, be pleased, Good God, now to seal to every Soul of us the Pardon of all our Sins thro' the Blood of the New Testa∣ment: That when we come to lie down upon our Death▪Beds, we may rest in hope of a blessed Resurrection. FINALLY, we lad and magnify thine Holy Name, O Lord, for thy good∣ness in our Creation, and dayly Perser∣vation: For our Health, Ease, Peace, Friends, Food, Rayment, Deliverances, & all the comforts of this present Life: And for all the means of attaining ever∣lasting Happiness: For the price which our Ld. Jesus Christ has paid for our Re∣demption, for thy blessed Gospel, thine Holy Ordinances, and all the Motions of thy Good Spirit: Humbly imploring thy Grace, that we may so live to thy Praise here on Earth, that we may at last be joyn'd with Glorified Saints & Holy Angels, to Praise thy Name for ever. All which we humbly beg for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour, in whose prevailing Name, and compre∣hensive Words, we conclude our un∣worthy Prayers. Our Father, &c.
A Prayer for a Person at Sea. O INVISIBLE and Omnipre∣sent God! the Allmighty Crea∣tor and absolute Governor of the whole World! Thou holdest the Winds in thy fist, and givest Laws to the Sea which it cannot pass. My whole de∣pendence is on thee, from whom com∣eth my present safety, and my eternal Salvation. I humbly beseech thee, for the sake of Jesus Christ thy Son, that thy Grace and Mercy may be with me all my days. I have indeed dishonoured thy Name, despised thy Government, and broken thy Laws; I have often in∣dlged my sinfull Lusts and wrath∣ful Passions, contrary to my Vows and Covenant made with thee, and thy word revealed to us. BUT O Lord, for Christ's sake, (who is our Passover, slain for the Salvation of Sinners) be merciful un∣to me, and pardon my Sins. Let not thy wrath cut me off in my pollution, as I have deserved; but let thy Mercy abound towards me for Ever.
AND vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me by thy Grace from the Sins to which I am daily exposed by temptation, and my own sinful Heart. And let thy good Providence preserve me from the dan∣gers wherewith I am encompassed. WE behold, O Lord, thy Wonders in the deep: Wonders of thy Good∣ness, as well as of thy Wisdom and Power: O Lord, give me Grace to ad∣mire and praise thine infinite Perfecti∣ons; and grant that my Lips may ne∣ver blaspheme thy Great and Glorious Name, nor ever curse Men who are made after thine Image and likeness. OUR times, O Lord, are in thie hand; how soon mightest thou make this Sea a Common Grave to us all? If but a Plank burst, or give way, or a Rock, or a Heap of Sand lie in our way, how oon shall we be swallowed up in the Deep, and be wated into our end∣less and unchangeable Estate? BUT thy good Providence is a sure Defence: I pray thee, vouchsafe it to me, and to all that Sail with me, in order to our continual direction and defence. And vouchsafe to carry us in safety to
the place of our Habitation, and to pre∣serve all our Relations and Friends in their several Dwellings, that we may behold each others Faces again with Comfort. AND fit us all for that Place of Rest and Peace which thou hast promised to thy faithful Servants, and give us thy Grace to make us meet for that eternal Inheritance amongst thy Saints, thro' Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour, in whose Holy Name and Words we fur∣ther pray. Our Father, &c. In a Storm. O LORD our God! the Father of Mercies, the God of all Power and Might! Who commandest the Winds and the Seas, and they obey thee. We, O Lord, thy dependent Creatures, do send up our Cry unto thee in our Distress. O! let the voice of our Prayers, and not the Cry of our Sins come before thee: Hear, we pray thee, the Intercession of thy Son for Sinners, and for his sake send us Relief. THERE is no Power in the whole
Creation to help us. Lord, Save us or we perish. Manifest, we pray thee, the greatness of thy Power in our Succour and Comfort, in the dark and deep Calamity wherewith we are distressed. The Winds and Waters know their Maker's Voice: And tho' they are now in their Rage, yet if thine Almighty Voice speaks the word, they will soon calm and be still. O Lord, be pleas'd to arise for our Help▪ that we may live to speak of thy Mercy, and tell of all thy wondrous Works. AND, we pray thee, give us Grace that we may never forget nor abuse thy Mercy: But incline and enable us to live Holy, Righteous, & sober Lives, to the Praise of thee, our God, thro' Jesus Christ our onely Mediator and Advocate. Amen, Amen. A Thanksgiving after a Storm. O LORD! Thou art the God of our Mercies, and the God of our Praise. I humbly present unto thee, O thou Preserver of Men! all possible Praise and Thankfulness for thy merci∣ful
nd seasonable appearance for us in our late Distress. We said, We are cut off from the living, and all our earthly Hopes are wither'd away; but thy good Providence appear'd for us, and the Hand of our God brought us Delive∣rance from the Jaws of Death. Good Lord, enable us to comply with the end of thy Patience and Bounty towards us, and make thy present Mercy to us an in∣violable Band of future Obedience to thee, and an Earnest of thine everlasting Mercy to us, thro' Jesus Christ, our Blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Thanksgiving when safely Arriv'd at any Port. O INFINITELY Great and Good God! by whose good Pro∣vidence I am brought in safety to my desir'd Haven! I humbly ascribe the whole of my Preservation and Success to thy Conduct and Blessing. It is not in the Power of Man to preserve him∣self, or to prosper his best Endeavours: but it is by thy Goodness that we live, and in which we hope. O Lord! give
me thy Grace, that as I live by thee, I may live to thee, and may never more dishonour thy Name, or abuse thy Mer∣cy; but may live such a Life of Praise to thee on Earth, as may be an introdu∣ction to that state of perfect Bliss and Glory above, where Holy Angels and Saints extol and praise thy Glorious Name for ever, thro' Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Prayer for a Young Person. MOST Glorious and Blessed God! The Life of our Life, and the God of our Salvation! I look up unto thee, the Fountain of Goodness, (thro' the Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou hast ordained to be our Mediator) with hum∣ble Thankfulness for all the Mercies of this present Life, and for any Hope of everlasting Happiness. IT is of thy great goodness, that I was born in a Christian Land: And of thine infinite Mercy, that I was early brought into thy Covenant; thy Cove∣nant of Life and Peace, thro' the blood of the New Testament.
O my God! I desire to embrace the Engagements, as well as to enjoy the Blessings, of this thy gracious Cove∣nant: Earnestly imploring thy Grace, that I may live suitably to my holy profession. That so I may never, ne∣ver dishonour thine Holy Name; nor in any Thought, Word or Deed deny the Lord that bought me. SEND thine holy Spirit, I be∣seech thee, into my Soul: Vouchsafe to regenerate and make me born anew of the Holy Ghost: Baptize me, O Lord, with that divine Fire which may at once consume my sinful Lusts, and enlame my soul with divine Love. LORD make me to know thee, & Jesus Christ whom thou ast sent; Pre∣pare my Soul to receive him sincerely in all his saving Offices; And make him effectually to me a Prince and a Saviour to give me Repentance and forgiveness of Sin. Thro' Him, O Lord, forgive my natural Corruption, and heal my leaperous Soul. And for his sake, for∣give all my actual Sins; all the trans∣gressions of my Youth; my sins after Vows, contrary to Knowledge, and a∣gainst
thine infinite Goodness. O Lord! for the sake of my Crucified Saviour, e merciful to my Unrighteousness, and remember my ini∣quity no more. And that I may no more commit the same or other Offences. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me by thy Grace from every sinful way, and lead me in the way everasting. Preserve me from the Pollutions of youthful Lusts; and harden me against the Solicitations and evil Examples of impudent and daring Sinners. Be pleased to shew me the vileness of sensual Pleasures, the emptiness of worldly possessions, and the Folly of getting any thing on Earth by the loss of thy Favour. Bless me, O Lord, with an early Conversion, with an unblameable Life, with a hopeful Death, and a blessed Eternity. Give me, Good God, thy Peace which passeth understanding; and so preserve me from the Corruptions of this world, that I may inherit the Glory of thine undefiled Kingdom. And whereas there are Legions of inernal Powers who seek to hinder my enterance into that Rest; O Lord, leave me not to their Ma∣lice, nor my own Frailty; but ever succour me with thine especial Grace and peculiar Provi∣dence; and make me as ready to help, and to forgive others, as to desire help and forgiveness of thee, my God. Make me to lead my Life in thy Fear, and in the sense of thy Favour, and to grow in Grace as I advance in years, ever mindful of my Crea∣tor, my Mortality, and my future Account. That living here to thy Glory, I may for ever
praise thee in thy glorious Kingdom. thro' Je∣sus Christ, who is my Hope; to whom with thee, O Father, and the eternal Spirit, One God, be all Honour and Glory ascribed by An∣gels and Men for evermore. Amen. ADVERTISEMENT. BY the Procurement of these Societies, the following Lectures are constantly preach∣ed at Five in the Evening, on the Lord's Days after mentioned. viz. On every first Lord's Day in the month. at St. Lau∣rence Jewry, St. Clements Danes, St. Michael Woodstreet, St. Olaves Southwark. On the second Lord's Day in the Month, at St. Brides Fleet-street, St. Albans Wood-street, St. Buttolph Aldgate. On the third Lord's Day in the Month, at St. Martins in the Fields; at six in the Morning, St. Giles Cripple-gate. On the last Lord's Day in the Month, at St. Giles Cripple-gate, St. Mary White-chappel, St. John Wapping. Every Lord's Day, at St. Ann's near Alders-gate, at 5 in the Evening; with publick Cate∣chizing.
