B6248A R224280 [ocm]64551012 184404
A TABLE, SETTING FORTH The maner of that great Philosopher the Lord Chancelor Bacons Searching for Mettals by making Addits through the lowest Level of Hills or Mountains, and conveying Aire into the innermost parts of their Center by Pipe and Bellows; as well as by Art to mollifie the hardest Stone, without the tedious way and inestimable Charge of sinking Aery Shafts; and is now intended to be put in practice by his Meniall Servant Thomas Bushell, on Hingston-Downe, according to his Lordships command, and the approbation of that great Mine∣ralist, Sir Francis Godolphine; with the demonstrative Reasons of each particular to the Lords of the Fee, and Proprietors of Hingston-Downe, is as followeth; The Beacon Note that between every double Line is contained 40. Fathom for the close Addit, And at each end 150 Fathom for the open Addit. M. The Mountain O. The old Shafts that have been sunk. S. The Shafts supposed to be sunk, but avoided by the now way of Addit. B. The Pipe and Bellowes woodcut of smith shop North Smiths-shop woodcut of smith shop South Smiths-shop FIrst, the true description of Hingston-downe, lieth in Longitude East and West five Miles, with Millions of Shafts that have been visibly Sunck upon several loads of Mettall, by the Romans, Danes, Saxons, Jews, and Britans, And is in breadth 700 Fatham, at the Basis lying North and South, as well as in depth 200 Fatham from the Becon perpendicular to the Center of that addit now intended. The reason why I undertake a work of this nature, and in these parts, is as followeth; FIrst, the Ambition of gratitude to answer his Highness Heroick trust, reposed in me to discover this Nations Minerall Treasure. Secondly, my obliged fidelity, to my Lord Chancellor Bacon, to practice this his Philosophical invention, for the general good; and in particular to give new birth to the drooping conditions of my fellow Pupills, the poor Miners drowned and deserted works. Thirdly, my Cordial desire to serve these Westerne parts with the benefit of so usefull a president, I having already practised the same in Wales, and found the fruitfull effects thereof. Secondly, the reasons why I begin my Addit or Aqueducts, from Smal-Coome and Hooke-Coome, to meet underneath the Becon at the aforesaid Center, is; FIrst, because these Coomes lying lowest equall with my addits, all the water that shall fall from the superficies being 200 Fatham perpendicular to the levell of my said Addits, may by that meanes be easily conveyed away. Secondly by mine own experience, I found not any of our predecessors to search lower then 40 Fatham. So that I am confidently assured that cutting North and South thorough the aforesaid 700 Fatham, I shall command all the Loads, Rakes, and Veins of Mettal in that Hill, which is conjectured by the multitude of Shafts upon the superficies to run five Miles in length as aforesaid; and how pro∣bable then may it be to reedifie a second Indies out of the drowned and deserted works of our Nation by this example, I shall leave to the rational Judgments of them who are practitioners in those affairs; Especially whither these mine endeavors will not give much hopes to verifie the old proverb in this age of ours, Hingston downe well wrought, is worth London towne dearely bought. For if the riches of those Groves in 40 Fatham sinking hath occasioned the aforesaid proverb, as well as the inundation of water hath caused them to desert from their Mineral profit, it cannot be denied by common sense, or rules of reason, this addit undermining most of the said works 150 Fatham, and then ascending up into their several loads of Metal, to draine the waters in their old Groves, but that it carries the fairest encouragement of probable conjecture to make good the true riches of the old proverb of Hingston downe, in this age of ours. The reason why I use Pipe and Bellows, is, FIrst, to convey Aire into the innermost part of my Addit without the sinking of Airy Shafts, and preventing the vast expence and tediousness of time, which caused our Forefathers being igno∣rant of this invention, to leave such supposed riches of hidden Treasure to us their posterity. The reason why I make my Addit or Aqueducts open 150 Fatham at each end, is, FIrst, to facilitate the dispatch of 300 Fatham of the 700 the first year, by the reason of the multitude of hands that may be set on work, which will not be admitted if close, and likewise it being the shallowest place of the Hill, it will require but the same expence. Secondly, that the close Addit may be but in length 400 Fatham of the 700. and to shorten likewise the drift of the same in point of time, I begin my Addits at each end of my open Trench as Counter∣drifts to meet each other, And so consequently the whole will be dispatched in halfe the time; And therefore you may rest assured that I have so maturely Calculated the waies and means, not onely of this great work at Hingston-down, but also of that of Coom-Martin in Devon, Guinop in Cornwal, and Mondy in Summerset, that I doubt not, but in 4 years to set a period to all expectations, if God per∣it, and I have the honor of your wellwishes. The reason why I make the dimension of my Addit 10 Foot broad, and 10 foot high, keeping my levell equall in my open and close Aqueducts, with the lowest depth of the Coome, is, FIrst, because it drawes the inundation of Water from the whole Hill, and conveying the more plenty of Aire into the lesser Addits, which must follow the loads of Mettall when we cross them in our common shore or principall Addit, as also to prevent those Damps that frequently arise from the sulphurous nature of the earth at that Center. Secondly, for the more convenient passage of Wheel Barrowes each by other in sockets of Timber, to carry the loads of Mettal and Rubbish out of the severall Addits. Thirdly, because I have found by mine own experience in cutting thorough other Mountaines of the like nature, the great inconvenience of little Addits, in respect of the aforesaid reasons, and likewise the prejudice I have received in being careless of losing a foot in the levell, when I met with the several Loads and Veins of Mettall. The reason why I doe not willingly desire any other Partner but Providence, and his Highness patronizing this great enterprise of Hingston-down, Coom Martin in Devon, Guinop in Cornwall, and Mendyp in Somerset, is, FIrst, because I have had already the experience of some Partners, and found the fruits of Providence to assist me more, when they did ever decline the Minerall designe, then when I had complyance with their severall purses, which made me call to mind his Lordships frequent observation, that many partners in the publick acts of Minerall adventures, where greediness of gaine had more rule  their hearts, then to illustrate the Creators glory, became usually the sad Elogie of Misfortune and dis-incouragement to others. Secondly, for that if those two Addits at Hingston-downe prosper according to the Proverb, and the other two at Coom Martin, and Guinop aforesaid, one tenth part must be solely dedicated to pro∣cute the like works in the other 20 Mountaines, marked out by the aforesaid Lord, and that great Mineralist Sir Francis Godolphine, who both subscribed it under their hands, to be the most harmeless gaine and greatest good to a Common-wealth, the choisest study and endeavors of the best bred persons in other Nations, and the most Honourable Imployment this world was capable of. Thirdly, because I have found the faithfulness of such friendship in some friends which heretofore gave me credit, as out of their owne honesty, and noble nature, they have been willing to accept of their present use, and forbeare their principall three years, rather then such a Minerall designe should perish, and I uncapable to prosecute the same for the Publick Good, and honor of the Nation. Lastly, because I conceive all Mines were created for Mans Use and Gods Glory, but in what age to be revealed, or by whom, is onely known to the searcher of all hearts, who can best judge of mine and my designed ends. So that it may be probably hoped that this age of ours which hath had such a strange revolution of Providence, is appointed by the Disposer of all things, to disclose the same to publique Sight, for when I had enlarged by discourse; my Lord Bacons observations to his Highness of the spreading Veines or Loads of Mettall in this Northerne Clymate, I found such a naturall inclination of his Highness wisdome, to further these Conceptions of my Quondam Master, practised by my selfe, as he hath granted me the whole power of his assistance to search for such Minerals; And likewise promised the continuance of his favours, and to make good my Articles, for the ends holden forth. And what person then of an ingenuous spirit that is not impoisoned with envie, will beare unfriendly though to those that search after such subterra∣nean treasure at their owne charge, for the good and honor of their native Country, and which in a manner is presented unto them by the hands of God?
