C3775B R173821 [ocm]61296929 180505
TO THE King's Most Excellent Majesty, Giving Thanks for His ROYAL DECLARATION FOR LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE. NO Monument, tho made of Solid Gold, As high as the proud Pyramids of old; No Marble Statue, reaching to the Skies, Great CAESAR can do more to Eternize Your Memory, and make Your Royal Name Sound in the Trumpet of Immortal Fame, Through all succeeding Ages, than this thing So wisely brought to pass; the World shall ring With loud Applause, and Children yet unborn, Your worth shall strive to set forth and adorn: While with Triumphant Joy they Celebrate The Day, when first You wore the Crown in State. That happy Monarch, in whose Nuptial Bed, The White Rose grew united to the Red, Shall not so famous in our Annals stand, As You for making Peace throughout the Land. And Your Progenitors, which did advance Victorious Ensigns in the Heart of France, Never such Honour, nor such Glory won, As by this Declaration You have done. Mercy in its soft Bosom carries Charms, More Potent to prevail, than war-like Arms; And Kings, like God himself, appear to Shine, When they are Deckt with Clemency Divine. No Thoughts can reach, much less can Words declare, What the sad Miseries of the Nation were; Till like a wise Physitian, You had found This Soveraign Balm, to heal our bleeding Wound. Orpheus they say, in Musick had such Skill, That he could Tame fierce Tygers at his will; The Hound would court the Hare, and Lyons play With tender Lambs, forgetful of their Prey. This Fable is made good by You in part, For cruel Men that have the hardest Heart, If they but listen to your Counsel Sage, 'Twill calm their Spirit, and restrain their Rage. Were I a Poet, whose rich Fancy stood Up to the Chin in the Castallian Flood: Yet my inlarged Soul could not express The thousandth Part of England's Thankfulness. Nor might this Verse of mine presume to show To You, how much both Church and State must owe For such Transcendant Grace, by which You have Raised up many from their very Grave, Which there lay Dead in Law, and Slain before, But now Your Bounty doth to Life restore; You give them Rest and Safety, and have broke, From off their Necks, the Iron-Galling Yoke. Freedom for Conscience will create a Heaven Here upon Earth; there's nothing can be given More Sweet and Precious; this, and this alone, Ev'n in the Hearts of Men, sets up a Throne For Princes there to Reign, and win such Love, As may their strongest Guard and Fortress prove. What tho Self-seeking Men at this Repine, Such as can gladly Feast and swim in Wine, While others swim in Tears, and still would fain By publick Loss, increase their private Gain: Yet all true Friends of Peace must needs rejoyce, And give You Thanks with One consenting Voice. Upon Your Sacred Head, let Heaven pour The choicest Blessings in a fruitful Show'r. Let all Success and Happiness attend Your Glorious Reign, and Crown it to Thomas Cheisman a Nonconformist Minister, living at Ilsley in Berkshire. The End. LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley, in Pater-Noster-Rom. MDCLXXXVIII.
