I322AA R223189 [ocm]80922895 191897
AN ACT FOR Raising the Summ of One hundred and Twenty thou∣sand Pounds, on all Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments IN THIS KINGDOM. royal blazon or coat of arms W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI DƲBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, on the Blind-Key, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCIX.
An ACT for Raising One hundred and Twenty thou∣sand Pounds on all Lands, Tene∣ments and Hereditaments in this KINGDOM. CHAP. III. WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Com∣mons, in Parliament Assembled, having Deép Sense of Your Ma∣jesty's Great Care of our Well∣fare and Preservation, and being desirous to Express the same, by Supplying Your Majesty's Occasions, for Defence of this Your Kingdom, in the most Chearful manner have Vnanimously Resolved to Give and Grant unto Your Majesty, the Rates, Taxes and As∣sessments following, to be Raised and Levied at the Times, and in Manner following. And We pray that it may be Enacted. And be it Enacted by the King's Most Ex∣cellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament As∣sembled and by the Authority of the same,
That His Majesty shall Have and Receive the Rates and Assessments herein-after mentioned, of, and from all Lands, Tenements, and He∣reditaments, and Tiths and Impropriati∣ons whatsoever in this Kingdom, according to the Rates and Proportions, and at the Times, and in the manner following (That is to say) that His Majesty shall and may Have, and Receive out of the same, the Summ of One hundred and Twenty thousand pounds Sterling, in, and by Four equal Payments of Thirty thousand pounds Sterling each Payment, the First of the said Payments to become due on the Twenty fourth day of June, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety and Nine: The Second of the said Payments to become due on the Twen∣ty fifth Day of December, which shall be in the said Year of our Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety and Nine: The Third of the said Payments to become due on the Twenty fourth Day of June, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand Seven hundred: And the Fourth and last of the said Payments to become due on the Twenty fifth Day of De∣cember, which shall be in the said Year of our Lord, One thousand Seven hundred. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Four equal Payments, or Summs of Thirty thousand pounds Sterling, each and each of them shall, and may be Char∣ged on all Provinces, Counties and Cities, of, and in this Kingdom, in such manner and proportions, as the Deficiency of the Years va∣lue was laid on the several Provinces, Coun∣ties and Cities of this Kingdom (that is to say)
That the Province of Leinster shall pay to∣wards each of the said Payments, of Thirty thousand pounds, the Summ of Ten thousand and Fifty pounds Sterling. That the Province of Munster shall pay to∣wards each of the said Payments of Thirty thousand pounds, the Summ of Eight thou∣sand Nine hundred and Foty pounds Sterling. That the Province of Ulst r shall pay to∣wards each of the said Payments of Thirty thousand pounds, the Summ of Seven thou∣sand pounds Sterling. And, That the Province of Conaught shall pay towards each of the said Payments of Thirty thousand pounds, the Summ of Four thou∣sand and Ten pounds Sterling. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Counties and Ci∣ties of the said Province of Leinster, shall pay of the said summ of Ten thousand and Fifty pounds, being the proportion which the sad Province is Charged with, of each of the said Four Payments of Thirty thousand pounds each, the respective summs following. That the County of Dublin shall pay Twelve hundred and Fifty pounds Sterling. The City of Dublin, Twelve hundred and fifty pounds Sterling. The County of Kildare, Eight hundred and sixty pounds Sterling. The County of Catherlagh, Threé hundred and eighty pounds Sterling. The King's County, Four hundred and fifty pounds Sterling. The Queens-County, Five hundred pounds Sterling.
The County of Longford, threé hundred pounds Sterling. The County of Meath, one thousand four hundred and sixty pounds Sterling. The County of West-meath, seven hundred and fifty pounds Sterling. The City and County of the City of Kilken∣ny, one hundred pounds Sterling. The County of Kilkenny, one thousand and ten pounds Sterling. The County of Wexford, seven hundred and fifty pounds Sterling. The County of Wicklow, threé hundred and sixty pounds Sterling. The County of Lowth, five hundred and twenty pounds Sterling. And The County of the Town of Drogheda, one hundred and ten pounds Sterling. And be it likewise Enacted, That the several Counties and Cities of the said Province of Munster, shall pay of the said Summ of Eight thousand Nine hundred and Forty pounds, be∣ing the proportion which the said Province is charged with, of each of the said Four Pay∣ments of Thirty thousand pounds each, the re∣spective Summs following (That is to say) That the County of Limerick shall pay one thousand and ten pounds Sterling. The City of Limerick, two hundred pounds Sterling. The County of Cork, with the City and County of the City of Cork, threé thousand one hundred and eighty pounds Sterling. The County of Waterford, six hundred and sixty pounds Sterling.
The City of Waterford, two hundred pounds Sterling. The County of Clare, Nine hundred and for∣ty pounds Sterl. The County of Kerry, Five hundred and Fif∣ty pounds terling. And, The County of Tipperary (including Holy-Cross) two thousand and two hundred pounds Ster ing. And be it likewise Enacted, that the several Counties and Cities of the said Povince of Uster, shall pay of the said Summ of Seaen thousand pounds, being the Proportion which the said Povince is charged with of each of the said Four Payments of Thiry thousand pounds Sterl. each, the respective Summs fol∣lowing, (that is to say) That the County of Donegall, shall pay One thousand and twenty pounds sterl. The County of Tyrone, Seaven hundred and Eighty pounds Sterl. The County of Fermanagh, Five hundred and thirty pounds Sterl. The County of Cavan, Five hundred and Se∣venty pounds Sterl. The County of Monaghan, Five hundred and Fifty pounds Sterl. The County of Antrim, (including Carrick∣fergus, and the County of the Town of Carrick∣fergus) One thousand One hundred and Eigh∣ty pounds Sterl. The County of Downe, One thousand and Fifty pounds Sterl. The County of Ardmagh, Five hundred and Fifty pounds Sterl. And The County of Londonderry, (including
the City and County of Londonderry, and the Town and Barony of Coleraine) Seaven hun∣dred and Seaventy pounds Sterl. And be it likewise Enacted, That the seve∣ral Counties of the said Province of Conaught, shall pay of the said Summ of Four thousand and Ten pounds, being the Proportion which the said Province is Charged with of each of the said Four Payments of Thirty thousand pounds each, the respective Summs following (that is to say) That the Town and County of the Town of Gallway, shall pay One hundred and Seaventy pounds sterl. The County of Gallway, One thousand two hunded and Sixty pounds sterl. The County of Roscommon, Seaven hundred Eighty five pounds sterl. The County of Sligoe, Six hundred and twen∣ty pounds sterl. The County of Mayo, Eight hundred and Fifteén pounds sterl. And, The County of Leytrim, Threé hundred and Sixty pounds sterl. And for the more easy Applotting and Ascer∣taining how the Proportions of the said several Charges and Payments of the said respective Counties and Cities shall be paid, and how much thereof shall be laid on the several Lands, Te∣nements, Hereditaments, Tyths and Impro∣priations in such Counties or Cities, Be it further Enacted by the Authority afore∣said, That every Barony, Division and Teri∣tory in each County, and each Ward or Parish in each City in this Kingdom, shall bear such Proportion of the said Charge or Tax laid on
the said County or City, as such Barony, Di∣vision, Territory, Ward or Parish is usually Assessed at towards the Publick Charges laid on such County or City, by Presentment of the Grand-Iuries, at the Assizes or Quarter-Ses∣sions held respectively in and for the said Coun∣ties or Cities, and that what such Proportion is, shall be Ascertained by the Major part of the Commissioners appointed by this Act, which shall be present at their first Meéting, pursu∣ant to the Directions aforesaid. And that the said first Meéting of the said Commissioners, respectively in the several Coun∣ties and Cities of this Kingdom, shall be on the First day of March One thousand Six hundred Ninety eight. And for the more Regular Ascertaining the said Proportions, according to the Rule before∣mentioned, Be it likewise Enacted by the Authority afore∣said, That the Persons hereafter Named, shall and may be Commissioners for Ascertaining the said several Proportions payable by and out of the respective Lands, Tenements, Heredita∣ments, and Tyths, and Impropriations in the several Baronies, Territories, Divisions, Wards and Parishes in the respective Counties and Ci∣ties in this Kingdom, (that is to say) For the County of Ardmagh. The High-Sheriff for the time being, Sir Ni∣cholas Atcheson Baronet, Sir Henry Titchburn Baronet, Arthur Brownlow, Marmaduke Cog∣hil, Samuel Dopping, Stephen Ludlow, Edward Reyly, William Richardson, Hamlet Obbin,
Downham Cope, Edward Harrison, John Hamil∣ton, Richard Chappel, William Blacker, Henry Richardson, Walter Dawson, Roger Hall, Henry Hunter, Hans Hamilton, James Maxwel and Richard Whaley Esquires, the Soveraign of Ardmagh for the time being, the Portrive of Charlemount for the time being, the Dean of Ardmagh, Arch-Deacon Charleton, Arch-Dea∣con Jenney, William Delgardno Clerk, Rath Jones, James Manson and Thomas Clarke of Ardress Gentleman, Thomas Clarke of Portadown and John Haltridge Esquires, John Ball, Abraham Ball, Daniel Madden, Robert Lowry, John Hamil∣ton, James Gillaspy, Thomas Bond and James Mc. Keane Gentlemen. For the County of Antrim. Arthur Upton, Popham Conway, Hugh Colvil Esquires, Sir Arthur Langford Baronet, John Chichester, Charles Chichester, Clotworthy Ske∣vington Esquires, Sir Robert Adare, Clotworthy Upton, James Mc. Cartney, Edward Harrson, Hercules Davis, Henry Davis, Charles O Neale, Edmond Stafford, Thomas Dawson, Robert Dalway, John Houston, Hans Hamilton, Francis Stafford, Godfrey Walker, Richard Dobb Iunior, Edmond Ellis, William Shaw of Gonoway, John ô Neale, Henry Mc. Cullagh, William Leslie, Ceorge Mc. Cartney, Benjamin Gallan, Robert Donnel, William Shaw of Bush, John Donaldson Senior, John Donaldson Iunior, Robert Leyes, Edmond Rey∣nolds, George Buttle Esquires, Mayor and She∣riffs of Carickfergus for the time being, Sove∣raign of Belfast for the time being, Captain Edward Brice, George Mc. Cartney of Belfast Merchant, Arthur Mc. Cartney of Belfast Mer∣chant,
William Crawford of Belfast Merchant, Henry Chade of Belfast Merchant, Patrick Ha∣milton of Belfast, Andrew Clements and Samuel Davys Genlemen; Charles Stewart of Bellintog Esquire, Marmduke Newton Gentleman, Cap∣tain Arthur Davys, Captain James Johnston, James Stanneus, Alexander Dallaway Esquires; Benjamin Adare, Roger Bristow, Henry Shaw of Ballygally, William Shaw of Ballygally, Brian Mac Manus, Richard Newton, James Crawford, Robert Crawford, William Maxwell of Portglenon, Francis Shaw, John Peirce of Lisborn Gentlemen: Edward Lindon, Thomas Cornwall, Doctor John Peacock, VVilliam VValkington, Thomas Craw∣ford, William Close, Thomas Smith, Patrick Duffe, David Buttle, Edward Clemence, Brent Spencer, John Charleton, Warham Jemmet, John Lathum Gentlemen: Dean Wilkns, Henry Leslie, John Windar, Richard Dowdall, Dean George Story, James Ecclin Clerk, Dean Enock Reader, William Armor, Andrew Eaton Clerk, James Hartson, Samuel Shannon, Willian Ste∣ward, Peter Jackson, Henry Andrew, Hugh mac Collum, James mac Cullogh, Alexander mac Ca∣ley Gentlemen: William Boyd Clerk, John De∣lap, Neale Buy mac Neal, John Mitchell Gentle∣men: Archibold mac Neale Clerk, John Ful∣lerton Gentleman, Michael Harrison Esquire, Richard Horseman, Francis Courtney Gentlemen. For the County of the Town of Carickfergus. The Mayo and Sheriffs for the time being, Master Henry Davys, Master Edward Lyndon, and Master Samuel Davys, Captain Arthur Davys, Captain John Davys, Andrew Clements, Marmaduke Newton Gentlemen, and Dean George Story
For the County of Catherlaugh. Sir Thomas Butler Baronet, the High-She∣riff for the time being, Sir William Parsons, John Allen, Phillip Savage, Mathew Ford, Went∣worth Harman, Pierce Buttler, William Ponson∣by, John Tench, Benjamin Burton, Thomas Bur∣dett, Edmond Jones, Robert Curtis, Richard Boyle, John Beauchamp, Walter Weldon, Urban Vigors, Richard Wolesley, Nicholas Keymes Iunior, John Bernard, John Brown, Jeffry Paul, William Paul, Esquires; Thomas Bernard, Thomas Bunbury Gentlemen; Thomas Hardy, Christian Borr, Eusebius Beasley, Esquires; Benjamin Neale, James Cox, Thomas Fox and Robert Harris, Clerks; the Honourable Robert Rochfort Esq; Edward Worth, Robert Stopford, James Stopford, Soveraign of Catherlagh for the time being. For the County of Cavan. The Honourable Thomas Coote Esquire, the Honourable Oliver Lambert Esquire, Sir Fran∣cis Hamilton Baronet, Colonel Francis White, Colonel Francis Butler, Sir John Mason Knight, John Warburton, Thomas Ash, Robert Saunders, Samuel Townly, Hans Hamilton, Walter Pollard, Robert Clements, John Coyne, Henry Palmer Senior, Charles Hamson, Arnold Cosby, Daniel French, Thomas Townley, Alexander Saunderson, Joseph Pratt, Robert Casey, Edward Davenport, Dillon Pollard, Thomas Smith, Edward Cosby Esquires; Arthur Cullom, Brockhill Newburgh, Robert Craige, Henry Palmer, James Somervell, Thomas Fleming, John Kempson, Thomas Cole,
William Blashford, Robert Burrose, Henry Gwyl∣lyms, Faustin Cuppage Gentlemen; Enock Rider Dean of Kilmore, Mathew Handcock, Arch-dea∣con of the same; Robert Maxwell, William Hand∣sord, Anthony Iveson Clerks; Samuel Willson, John Price, George Russell, John Robinson, John Jones, William Laughton, Thomas Humes, Lawrence Crow and Patrick Everey Gentlemen. For the County of Clare. Sir Henry Ingoldsby, Sir Donogh ô Brien Baronets, Francis Burton, Francis Gore E∣squires, Neptune Blood Dean of Kilfenoragh, James Hamilton, the Honourable John ô Brian, Samuel Burton, Henry Lee, Thomas Hickman, Edmond Perry, Symon Pordon, David Bindon, Henry Bridgman, George Stamers, Augustine Fitz-Gerald, Henry Hickman, William Smith, James mac Donel, Nicholas VVestby, Thomas Stanton Esquires: John Hawkins, Patrick Fitz-Simons Clerks, Richard Hedges Esquire: VVilliam Brigdall, VVilliam Smith, Henry Lee, John Cusack, John Road, Arthur VVard, Henry Hickman Gentlemen; Peregrin Blood, Thomas Blood Genleman, and Thomas Hawkins Gen∣tleman. For the City and County of the City of Cork. Colonel Toby Purcell, Allan Brodrick His Majesty's Sollicitor-General, Alderman Ro∣bert Rogers, Doctor Walter Neale, Edward Synge Clerk, the Mayor and Sheriffs for the time be∣ing, Thomas Piggot Esquire, Alderman John Newenham, Mathew French Esquire, Alderman
William Ballard, Alderman Soare, Alderman Crofts, Alderman French, Alderman Crone, Alderman Chartres, Simon Dring, Iohn Spread Merchant, Captain William Dunscomb, Warham St. Leger Esquire, Captain Epenetus Cross, Iohn Wallis Esquire, Captain Iohn Traverse, Iohn Raines Esquire, Edward Richardson Esquire, Iohn Wallis Esquire, Abraham Morrice, Robert Blenerhasset Esquire and Harbert Love Gentle∣man. For the County of Cork. The Honourable Henry Boyle, Charles Boyle and Richard Boyle, Sir St. John Brodrick Knight, the Honourable Thomas Brodrick Esquire, the Honourable Allan Brodrick Esquire, Robert Fitz Gerald Esquire, Edward Southwel Esquire, James Waller Esquire, Edward Riggs Esquire, Francis Bernard Esquire, William Jephson Esquire, Lau∣rence Clayton Esquire, Barry Denny Esquire, Francis Brewster Esquire, John Ormsby Esquire, James Barry Esquire, Robert Foulke Esquire, Charles Oliver Esquire, William Brodrick Esquire Percy Freake Esquire, Edward Richardson E∣squire, Bryan Townsend Esquire, Thomas Bee∣cher Esquire, Samuel Maurice Esquire, Robert Pooley Esquire, Sir John Mead, Francis Hodder Esquire, the Honourable Sir Richard Pyne, Sir Richard Cox, William Car Esquire, John Bailey Esquire, Thomas Crooke Esquire, Edward Worth Esquire, Richard Travers Esquire, Richard Hutchins Esquire, Daniel Beamish Gentleman, John Ley Esquire, the Mayor of Youghal for the time being, Captain Thomas Dicks, John Davys Esquire, the Soveraign of Kinsale for
the time being, the Soveraign of Middleton for the time being, the Soveraign of Charle∣vile for the time being, Sir Mathew Dean, Digby Foulke Esquire, John Cooke Alderman of Youghal, Richard Yates, Edward Nicholas Jasper Lucas, Robert Ball and Richard Giles Aldermen of Youghal, Henry Luther Esquire, William Ballard Alderman of Cork, Nicholas Brumby Esquire, Richard Wakeham Esquire, William Wakeham Esquire, Samuel Maynard Esquire, William Sup∣ple Esquire, Peter Bettesworth, William Smyth Gentleman, Thomas Piggot Esquire, John Tra∣verse Esquire, John Bowles Esquire, Michael Gould Gentleman, John Brailsford Gentleman, Arthur St. Leger Esquire, James Graham Gen∣tleman, Thomas Croker Alderman of Youghal, Stephen Moore Esquire, Colonel William Taylor, Richard Gift Gentleman, Emanuel Moore Esquire Henry Tonson Gentleman, Henry Beecher Gen∣tleman, Authony Butler Gentleman, Henry Sandford Esquire, Bartholomew Purdon Esquire, Captain Thomas Purdon, Joseph Stepney Esquire, Michael Parker Esquire, Colonel Theobald Pur∣cel, Arthur Hyde Esquire, Captain Ioseph El∣wel, Ionas Stowel Senior Ionas Stowel Iunior Esquires, Robert Gookin Esquire, Arthur Keife Gentleman, Iohn Montford Gentleman, Thomas Chidley Gentleman, Captain William Stowel, Captain Edward Stowel, Arthur Pomeroy Dean of Cork, Rowland Davis Dean of Ross, William Jephson Dean of Lismore, Master John Rugg Clerk, Master James Spencer, Master John Bulk∣ley, Edward Sayers Clerk, Mathew French E∣squire, Robert Condon Esquire. Thomas Hyde Esquire. Edward Dodsworth Esquire. Henry Rice Esquire. Appollos Morrise Gentleman. Bar∣rachias
Wallis, William Gard Senior, Walter Grocer, Thomas Wallis Esquire, Charles New∣man, George Chinary, James Manser Esquire, John Silver Esquire, Richard Bettsworth Esquire William Thornhill Esquire, George Rogers E∣squire, Francis Smith Senior Esquire, Francis Smith Iunior Esquire, John Watkins, Henry Boreman, Hawes Crosse Esquire, Nicholas Licett Esquire, the Soveraign of Castlemarter for the time being, Augustin Goggin Esquire, Mathew Jacob Esquire, John Gillman, Rich Roffin Clerk, John Morryson, Arthur Bernard Esquire, John Patrickson Clerk, Edward House, Dillon New∣man Esquire, George Oburne Gentleman, John Williams Gentleman, Robert Atkins Gentleman, Robert Constantine Gentleman, Doctor Francis Quaile, David Elliott Clerk, Henry Harrison Clerk, John Mascall Clerk, Francis Foulks E∣squire, John Raines Esquire, Peter Huit Clerk, John Tombs Clerk, Edward Browne Gentleman, Thomas Sweet Gentleman, Richard Price Gen∣tleman, William Kemys Gentleman, Michael Busted Gentleman, Edward Kenny Gentleman, Provost of Bandon for the time being, John Bourne Esquire, Richard Goodman Clerk, John Hungerford Clerk, Robert Echlin Esquire, Ran∣dal Roberts Gentleman, Thomas Lane Gentle∣man, Caleb Coakley Gentleman, John Parsons Gentleman, Nicholas Purdon Gentleman, Mi∣chael Beecher Gentleman, John Chinery Gentle∣man, William Serjeant Gentleman, Daunt Gentleman, For the City of Dublin. The Honourable Robert Rochfort His Maje∣sty's
Attorney-General, and Speaker of the House of Commons, the Lord Mayor, Recor∣der, Aldermen and Sheriffs for the time being, the Honourable Phillip Savage Esquire, Chan∣cellor of the Exchequer, Allan Brodrick Esquire, His Majesty's Sollicitor-General, Stephen Lud∣low Esquire, Colonel John Allen, George War∣burton Esquire, Richard Foster Esquire, John VVarburton Esquire, Anderson Saunders Esquire, Sir Arthur Cole Baronet, Colonel Stephen Stan∣ley, Edward Reily Esquire, William Fownes E∣squire, Sir Richard Levinge, Sir John Mead Knight, Marmaduke Coghill Esquire, Robert Molsworth Esquire, Henry Monke Esquire, Ro∣bert Curtis Esquire, James Tisdall Esquire, Charles Delane Esquire, James Corey, Thomas Pooley Esquire, Edward Richardson Esquire, Colonel John Lovett, Christopher Usher Esquire, John Usher Esquire, Sir Nicholas Atchison Knight, Christopher Borr, Charles Baldwin Esquire, Thomas Tillson, John Smith Esquires, Abel Ram Esquire, Robert Echlin Esquire, Fau∣stin Cupparidge Gentleman, Thomas Twigg Gentleman. Sir Francis Blundell, Sir Henry Ingoldsby, Sir John Coghill, Sir Patrick Dunn, William Connelly Esquire, John Weaver Senior Esquire, Edward Wingfeild Esquire, Charles Meredith Esquire, James Hamilton of Tullymore. Colonel Henry Coningham, Colonel Robert Ech∣lin, Standish Hartstounge Esquire, William Ro∣binson Esquire, Doctor Thomas Mollyneux, Sa∣muel Dopping Esquire, Hercules Davys Esquire, Charles Deering Esquire, Wentworth Harman Esquire, Arthur Meredith Esquire, Elnathan Lumm Esquire, Edward Reynells Esquire, Ser∣jeant William Neave Esquire, Thomas Ash E∣squire,
Thomas Carter Esquire, John Weaver Iunior Esquire, John Redding Esquire, Gideon Delawne Esquire, James Mc. Cartney Esquire, Robert Saunders Esquire, Charles Wallis Esquire, Roger Moore Esquire, Robert Ormsby Esquire, John Ormsby Esquire, Richard Thompson E∣squire, Joshua Dawson Esquire, Daniel Wybrants Esquire, Joseph Budden Esquire, Robert King, Andrew Young Esquires, Master Edward De∣lawne, Master Richard Fleming, Master Ralph Gore, Master John Rotton, Master William Keating, Master Richard Cooke, James Waller Esquire. All such Members of the House of Commons, as have Estates in or are Resident in the City of Dublin, For the County of Dublin. The Honourable Robert Rochfort Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir Ri∣chard Bulkeley, Sir Thomas Domvile, Sir Ar∣thur Cole, Baronets, Sir Walter Plunket, Sir William Domvile, Sir John Coghil Knights, Robert Molesworth, Edward Dean, Henry Mount∣gomery, Richard Foster, John Allen, Joseph Dean Senior, Daniel Reading Senior, William Neave, John Reading, Henry Fernely, John Stepney, Jo∣seph Dean Iunior, Isaac Dobson, Joseph Stepney, Robert Echlin, Bernard Brown, Thomas Stepney, Dixey Coddington, Hugh Rowley, Aghmundition Vesey, Charles Wallis, John Linegar, Joseph Budden, Thomas Carter, Henry Cooley Esquires, Richard Bolton, Henry Scardevile, Stephen Dean, Thomas Rider, John Smith, Charles Baldwin and Christopher Johnson Gentlemen, Robert Curtis, Denny Muschamp, Philip Savage, George Warbur∣ton,
Colonel Crofton, Henry Echlin,  Jackson Clerk, Doctor Patrick Grattan, Doctor Dive Downes, Thomas Keightly, John South, Christo∣pher Carleton, Richard Thompson, John Lovett, Thomas Ash, Edward Swan and John Smith E∣squires, Christian Bor Gentleman, Abel Ram and James Barry Esquires, Doctor Edward Smith Dean of St. Patricks, Marmaduke Coghil, Samuel Dopping, John Price, Iames Grace, Ro∣bert Stopford Esquires, Robert Graydon and Alex∣ander Burrowes Gentlemen: For the County of Donnegal. The High Sheriff of the said County for the time being. Sir William Gore Baronet. Colonel Gustavus Hamilton. Colonel Henry Cunningham. Charles Hamilton. Andrew Knox, Kilner Brasier. John Forward. Iohn Hamilton. Hugh Hamil. Robert King. Francis Folliot. Abraham Creichtown. David Creightown. William Gore. William Connel∣ly. Charles Melvin. Henry Langford. Humphrey May. VVilliam Stewart of Fort-stewart. William Wray. Henry Hart. George Vaughan. Patrick Ha∣milton. Edward Harrison. Ralph Gore. VVilliam Sampson. Henry Brookes. James Nisbet. VVilliam Stewart of Ballylane. Charles Leslie. James Stew∣art. Thomas Knox. John Cowan Esquires, John Trench Dean of Raphoe. Andrew Hamilton Arch-Deacon of Raphoe. Arch-Deacon Isaac Colier. Edward VVhitway.  Cooper. Robert Acheleck Clerks. Captain VVilliam Cunningham. Captain Francis Hamilton. Captain VVilliam Hamilton, the Warden of Lifford for the time being, the Provosts of Donegal, Kille∣begs, Ballyshannon and St. Johnstown for the time
being. Andrew Knox. VVilliam Cairey. Alexan∣der Cuningham of Achen. VVilliam Knox. Robert Mortimer. James Vaughan. Michael Huetson. Robert Spence. Thomas Atkinson, Tristram Swe∣tenham. Charles Colhoone. VVilliam VValker. Alexander Nisbett. John Evans. Robert Baird. Ed∣ward Cairy. John Henderson, Thomas Knox, VVilliam Maxwel, Robert Delap, John Jennings, Andrew Nisbett Iunior, VVilliam Babington, Iohn Nisbett, Henry Mc. Manus, Alexander Cuning∣ham Gentlemen. For the County of the Town of Drogheda. The Mayor, Recorder and Sheriffs for the time being, Charles Lord Moore, Sir Henry Tichborne Baronet, Edward Singleton, Richard Jackson, Thomas Percivall, VVilliam Ellwood, Henry Nichols, Richard Pitts, John Graham, Joseph Tomlinson, VVilliam Newton, James Mead, Henry Ogle and George Hardman Alder∣men: Caleb Gay and John Leigh Esquires. For the County of Downe. Nicholas Bagnall, James Hamilton of Tully∣more, Nicholas Price, Sir Iohn Magill, Mathew Ford Senior, Clotworthy Upton, Mathew Ford Iunior, Sir Iohn Trevor, Iames Sloan, Iohn Hawkins, Henry Hunter, Evan Humphries, Ed∣ward Harrison, Richard Iohnson, Francis Hall and Roger Hall Esquires, the Reverend Iohn Mc. Neale Dean of Downe, Iohn Gibbons, the Re∣verend Doctor Henry Leslie, Vere Ward, the Re∣verend Archibald Mc. Neale, Iames Mc. Cartney, William Shaw of Ganway, Robert Echlin, the Re∣verend
Andrew Mathews Clerk, John Norrice, Charles Campbel, Thomas Smith, Henry Max∣well, Samuel Warring, John Haltridge, Arthur Maxwell, Thomas Knox, the Reverend James Clewlow Clerk, Alexander Stewart, the Reve∣rend Henry Jenney and James Hamilton of Kirk∣dowth Clerks, Robert Hawkins, the Reverend John Cuppaige Clerk, the Honourable Michael Hill, Popham Conway, Hugh Colvill, Francis Anesley, James Hamilton of Bangor, Hans Hamil∣ton, George Fitz-Gerald, Sir Francis Blundel, Fredrick Porter, Patrick Savadge, James Montgo∣mery, William Warring, John Echlin, Gawen Hamilton, William Hamilton, James Baily and Hugh Montgomery Esquires, George Ross, Alex∣ander Stewart, Patrick Hamilton John Montgo∣mery, Francis Allen, John Blackwood, Mathew Stothard, John Saunders, William Neven, Alex∣ander Browne, George Rosse of Cainy, James Smart the elder, James Smart the younger, Ro∣bert Kyle, Thomas Slade, Thomas Stanhopp, Iames Houston and Ioseph Mc. Kitrick Gentlemen. For the County of Fermanagh. Sir William Gore, Sir Gustavus Hume and Iames Caldwell Baronets, Sir Michael Cole Knight, Iames Corry Esquire, Christopher Ir∣wing Doctor of Phisick, Charles Balfoure, Abra∣ham Creighton, Hugh Montgmery of Carow, William Archdale, Edward Davys, Iohn Corry, Henry Tennison, Hugh Montgomery of Derrygon∣nelly, Robert Saunders, William Balfoure, Wil∣liam Wishart, Iames Creightowne, Captain Da∣vid Creightone, David Rynde, Iason Hassard, Gilbert Eccles, Charles Wallis and Captain Francis
Iohnston Esquires, George Hume Clerk, Cap∣tain Iohn Irwin, Doctor George Denis, Iames Aghenleck Gentlemen, the Provost of Inniskil∣lin, Captain Robert Clarke, William Smyth Clerk, Lieutenant Lawrence Crawford, Dudly Tenison and Thomas Leturnel Gentlemen, Cap∣tain William Dobbin, Cornet Lancelot Carleton, Walter Iohnston Gentleman; Lieutenant Iames Iohnston, Major Arthur Noble, Lieutenant Lan∣celot Erwin and Colonel Francis Butler. For the County of Galway. Sir George St. George Knight, John Eyre E∣squire, Sir St. George Baronet, Colonel Richard St. George, Gilbert Ormsby, William Caulfield, Fredrick Trench, Henry Peirce, John Ormsby, John Morgan, John Neyland, Richard Whaley, Robert Mason, Thomas Crosdall, Samuel Eyre, John Lopdell, Edward Eyre and Edward Ormsby of Shrewel Esquires, the High-Sheriff for the time being, Thomas Stanton and Edward Crow Esquires, Stephen Handcock Clerk, Ro∣bert Shaw, John Carter, Oliver Carter, John Tayler, Thomas Cunys, Edward Blackney, Jere∣my Morgan, Jacob Spike, Edward Ormsby of Bellagar, Oliver Bingly. Thomas Crookshank. Wil∣liam Gunter. Richard Warren. John Broughton Iunior. Edward Cornwell. John Kelly. Lodowick Pringle. Francis Muxley. Conn Mitchel. William Davis. Edward VVilson and Theophilus Warren. Gentlemen. Charles Morgan. Walter Taylor. Thomas Smith. Robert Blakeney. George Warbur∣ton. John Seymour and Iames Budd Esquires, Robert Echlin Dean of Tuam. Dean Peirce. Doctor Charles Crow Provost of Tuam, and Edward Price Prebend of Tuam.
For the Town of Galway. Richard St. George Esquire, Robert Ormsby Esquire, Sir George St. George Baronet; Sir George St. George Knight: John Eyre Esquire, James Hamilton of Tullymore, Edward Eyre E∣squire, the Mayor of the said Town for the time being; John Ormsby Esquire, John Gerry Esquire, Thomas Revett, Thomas Smcocks and Thomas Cartwright Aldermen: Robert Shaw Gentleman, Robert Widderington Gentleman, James Ribett Vigre Merchant, Richard Browne Alderman, the Sheriffs for the time being, Marke Lynch Iunior Merchant, Thomas Stanton and John Stanton Esquires. For the County of Kerry. The Sheriff for the time being, Colonel Ed∣ward Denny. William Fitzmorris, Raymond Fitz∣morris Esquires, Major Barry Denny, Colonel John Blenerhassett, William Sandys Esquire, Colonel Samuel Morris, Edward Denny Iunior, Colonel Fredrick Mullins, Rowland Bateman, Tobias Purcel, Andrew Young, Thomas Ponson∣by, John Bateman, Samuel Raymond, John Ble∣nerhassett of Killorglin, Whitehal Browne, James Fitzmorris, David Crosby and Patrick Crosby Esquires, John Sandys and Richard Orpen Gen∣tlemen; Charles Monck Esquire, Samuel Fedwel Gentleman, Henry Petty and James VValler Esquires; Joseph Morris Gentleman, Charles Wican and Edward Herbert Esquires, William Crosby Gentleman, Eusebias Chute Esquire, Henry Par and Thomas Sheircliffe Gentlemen,
Henry Stoughton, Thomas Carter and Francis Burton Esquires, Pierce Power Gentleman. For the County of Kilkenny. Sir Christopher Wandesford Baronet, Sir John Mead, Sir Henry Weymes, Colonel William Ponsonby, Agmondisham Cuffe, Ebenezar Warren Arthur Bush, Henry St. George Senior, Henry St. George Iunior, Richard St. George, Blaney Sandford, Edward Worth, Christopher Hewetson, Edward May, Samuel Booth, Robert Stopford, Balthazar Creamer, Arthur Webb, John Eaton, Joseph Watson, Amias Bush, John Langridge, George Reed, George Baker, William Ponsonby, Thomas Crawford, Colonel Edward Dean, Joseph Deane, Arthur St. George, Thomas Cuffe, Michael Head, Francis Flood Esquires, Edward Briscoe, John Head, Pierce Bryan of Bawenmore, Paul Gore, John Warren, Richard Connel, John Jones, Nathaniel Boyse, Darby Egan, Abel Butler, Charles Gore, James Gager, Jonathan VVhitby, William Feyden, Patrick VValsh, Joseph VVheeler, Thomas Marshel, VVilliam Deyes, John Byshop, Iohn VVheeler, Iohn Barnes, Daniel Marser, VVilliam Hawkins, Ioseph Lodg, and Ioseph Robbins Gen∣tlemen. For the City of Kilkenny. The Mayor and Sheriffs for the time be∣ing, Agmondisham Cuffe Esquire, Sir Christo∣pher Wandesford Baronet, Standish Hartstounge Esquire Recorder, Richard Connel, Ioshua Hel∣sham, Ebenezar Warren, Iohn Pape and Isaac Muckins Esquires, Iosias Haydock, Patrick Con∣nel
and Abraham Butler Aldermen, John Garnet, Thomas Crawford Esquire. John VVaring Alder∣man. Robert Stopford Esquire. Thomas Cooksey and George Burch Aldermen. John Hamilton Gentleman. For the County of Kildare. The Honourable the Speaker of the House of Commons. Sir Francis Blundel, Sir Kil∣dare Burrowes. Sir John Sandys Baronets. George Fitz Gerald. Henry Cooley. James Barry. Richard Nevil. Thomas Medlicot. John Davis. VVilliam Connely. Maurice Keating. Richard Lock Francis VVeymes. Robert Gradon. Paul Davis. Robert Dixon John Allen, Robert Echlin. Wentworth Har∣man. Charles Ryves. Francis Annesly. Maurice Annesley. John Annesley. Robert Annesley. Edward Stratford. Agmondisham Vesey. George Warburton. Garret VVeasley. Richard Meredith Henry VVarren. Charles Rickesey: Henry Cu∣ningham. Thomas Car. Raphael Hunt. Ieffrey Paul. John Aylmer. Iames VVhite. Charles VVallis. VVilliam Brereton: John Aylmer Iu∣nior: Richard VVibrow: VValter White: Francis Spring: Thomas Twigg: Theobald Bourke E∣squires: VVilliam Chavenor Gentleman: Samuel Synge Dean of Kildare: Henry Price Doctor of Divinity. Theophilus Harrison Dean of Knock∣macknoss: Iames Moore: Thomas Hawley: Tho∣mas Theaker: Nicholas Knight: Samuel Price Clerks, and  Meredith Clerk Curate of Naas: Oliver Moore: William Becket Esquires Iohn Prat: George Cooley: Edward Bermingham and Benjamin Fish Gentlemen. George Medlicot William Harborne and William Southerby E∣squires:
Colonel John Lovett: William Winnet Thomas Fisher: Thomas Salt: Alexander Gray∣don: Jonathan Naylor: William Wright: Bar∣tholomew Rigg: Henry Doyle: Benjamin Bennet Edward Ward: William Ward: James mac Ma∣nus: Richard Aylmer Gentlemen: Richard Po∣vey: Lewis Keamish Esquires: Isaac Ward: Ri∣chard Eustace: James Young: Richard Foster Esquire; Thomas Foster: Nicholas Davis: John Wolfe Gentlemen: the several Soveraigns for the time being of the several Corporations of Naas, Kildare, Athy and Harristown: Thomas Ash Esquire: Thomas Fisher and Jonathan Nay∣ler Gentlemen: Thomas Handcastle: Colonel Dean:  Burdett Clerk: Benjamin Burton Esquire. For the Kings-County. Sir Francis Blundell Baronet: Sir William Parsons Baronet: Duke Gifford: John Lovett: Thomas Lestrange: William Sprigg: Thomas Moore: John Wakeley: John Moore; Geoffry Lyons: VVilliam Purefoy: Samuel Rolls: El∣nathan Lum: John Weaver Senior Esquires: John Weaver Iunior: John Baldwin Senior: John Baldwin Iunior: Hector Ʋaughan: Richard Warburton Senior: Richard Warburton Iunior: Henry Westenra: Samuel Mosse: Iames Sterling: Iohn Seymour: Ionathan Darby: Thomas Tilson: Samuel Low: Medhopp Lloyd Esquires: Daniel Tomlinson: William Nelson Clerks: Peter Holmes Gentleman. George Lawder Clerk: Francis Lambert: George Frizel: Phillip wenman: Iames Purefoy Gentlemen; Francis Stoyte Esquire, Ro∣bert Echlin: Alexander Stewart; Oliver Bingly:
Thomas Carter. George Warburton. William Wetherell Esquires. Edward Heaton. Francis Heaton. Philip Moore. William Vaughan Gentle∣men. Edward Baggot Esquire. Francis Clerke Gentleman. Colonel Gustavus Hamilton. Cap∣tain Charles Stewart. Master George Rightson. Albert Nisbett Gentleman. Michael Cahell Clerk. George Homes. Archibald Lawder. Archibald Armstrong. William Armstrong. Charles Le∣strange. John Craddock. Nathaniel Taylor. Oliver Nelson Gentlemen. The Burgomaster of Philip∣stowne for the time being, or his Deputy. Richard Luther. Milo Baggott. John Mc. Cullagh. John Ridgway. John Smith and Nathaniel Smith Gentlemen. For the County of Leytrim. Sir George St. George, Sir Francis Hamilton, Sir William Gore, Sir Robert Gore Baronets, John Reynolds, Theophilus Jones, Gilbert King, Morgan Cuningham, Robert Galbraith, Arthur Coo∣per, Francis Gore, Gilbert Gardiner Esquires, VVilliam Gore, VVilliam Lowder, Thomas Crof∣ton, John French, John Mahon, Edward Reynoll, Ralph Gore, VVilliam Smith, VVilliam Parks, Edward Johnson, VVilliam Parsons, John Peyton, William Ellis, John Crofton Gentlemen: Robert Whitlow Clerk, George Carew Gentleman, Luke Sterling Clerk, William Stack Gentleman, VVilliam Smith Clerk, Robert Craige, Simon Broadstreet Gentlemen: John Druary Provost of Carrick for the time being, the Soveraign of Jame∣stown for the time being.
For the County of Lymerick. Sir Edward Crofton, Sir Thomas Southwell, Sir Standish Hartstounge Baronets: Sir Wil∣liam King Knight, George Evans the younger, Chichester Phillips, Standish Hartstounge the younger, Chidley Coote, Standish Hartstounge the Elder, Charles Oliver, John Ormsby, Ri∣chard Ingoldsby, Lawrence Clayton, Killnor Bra∣zior, Joseph Stepney, William Trenchard, John Piggott, George Evans Senior, Ralph Willson, Benjamin Burton, John Odel, Michael Searle, Henry Widdenham, Richard Stephens, David Willson, Robert Taylor, Thomas Mounsel Wil∣liam Blackney, John Croker, Richard Waller, James Waller, Thomas Tilson, Thomas Holmes, George King, John Parker, Henry Johnson, Hugh Massy, Henry Aylmer, VVilliam Ryves, John Bury. VVilliam Langford, Sampson Cox, Ed∣ward Blenerhassett, Edward Croker, Nicholas VVestby, Joseph Osbourne, George Mansell E∣squires: John Bayly, Thomas Fitz-gerald, John Gabbott, George Rose, Owen Cuthbert, George Denny, James VVeb, Amos Godsell, Hugh Swayne, Alexander Elliott, Richard Pope Gen∣tlemen. For the City of Lymerick. The Mayor and Sheriffs for them being, Sir Joseph Williamson Knight, Sir William King Knight, Richard Ingoldsby Esquire, Robert Blenerhassett Esquire, Recorder: Dean Ezekiel Webb, Ralph Wilson, Edmond Perry Esquires: William Gribble, Robert Smith, George Roch, John
Craven, John Ford, Edward Weight, John Young, Richard Pope, Joseph Cripps and Robert Twiggs Gentlemen. For the County of Longford. Sir Robert Newcomen Baronet, Sir John Edgworth, Sir Walter Plunkett Knights: Am∣brose Angier, Wentworth Harman Esquires, John Kerr Dean of Ardagh, Charles Fox, Anthony Shepard, Thomas Aghmuty, Captain Charles Newcomen, Francis Edgworth, John Percivall, John Aghmooty, Theophilus Jones, Samuel Forth, Freak Sandys, Mathew Wilder, Robert Edgworth, Arthur Aghmooty, William Hyde, William Neave, Francis VVilson, Gilbert Gardner, John Kenne∣dy, Richard Gardiner, Thomas Handcock, Wal∣ter Pollard Esquires: John Wilson Clerk, John Green Clerk, Patrick Fox Gentleman: Benja∣min Spann Clerk, James Corry, John Corry E∣squires: and Michael Boyer and Mathew Young, Patrick Kenny Gentlemen. For the City and County of Londonderry. The Mayors and Recorders of Londonderry and Colerain for the the time being, the Sheriffs of the City and County of Londonderry for the time being; Sir Tristram Beresford, Sir Arthur Langford, Sir Robert Staples Baronets: Wil∣liam Jackson, David Cairnes, Bartholomew Van∣homrigh, Henry Langford and William Connel∣ly Esquires: William Smyth, Gervaise Squire, Alexander Lecky, James Lennox, Henry Long, Henry Ash, Horace Kennedy, Thomas Moncreiffe and Edward Brookes, all Aldermen of the City
of Londonderry: Alexander Skipton: Charles Nor∣man: Thomas Edwards: George Tomkins: John Mogridge: John Harvey and Michael Cuningham Gentlemen: William Cuningham: Thomas Daw∣son: Hugh Rowley: Michael Downing: Arthur Upton and Clotworthy Upton Esquires: Hugh Rainey: Thomas Ash: Adam Downing: William Palmer: Samuel Wright and John Howey Senior Gentlemen: Edward Carey and William Gage Esquires: the Provost of Newtown for the time being: George Carey: George Church: William Bacon: Edward Bacon: Robert Bacon: Robert Dent: George Thornton: Henry Brown Gentle∣men: Hercules Rowley: George Canning and Thomas Church Esquires: Colonel Thomas Blaire: George Canning: Charles Church Iunior Gentlemen: John Hodgson: Dominick Heyland Gentlemen: Coote Ormsby Dean of Derry: Doctor Christophilus Jenny; Richard Griffith Clerk, and Robert Gage Clerk: Tristram Beres∣ford: William Godfrey: Samuel Jackson and Ben∣jamin Gallant Esquires: Arthur Church: John Galt and Edward Barwicke Aldermen of Colerain: Michael Berisford: Arthur Carey: Thomas Spaight and Thomas Lance Gentlemen: Nicholas Ave∣rell: John Tompson Iunior. and John Galt Iu∣nior, Merchants: Richard Linan: James Buoy and John Oliver Gentlemen: Samuel Hill: Edward Hall: Nathaniel Hornby and John Cowan Esquires: Alexander Gordan: VVilliam Mackey: Robert Gamble: Albert Hall: Samuel Erving and Jacob Alexander Merchants: Ro∣bert Mack Neale Esquire, and Gideon Scott Clerk.
For the County of Lowth. Sir Henry Titchborne Baronet, Sir Thomas Fortescue Knight, Thomas Bellingham, James Tisdal, William Fortescue, Brabazon Moore, Bla∣ney Townley, Robert Alway, John Pepper, Edward Singleton, Timothy Armitage, Norman Garstin, Jeremy Smyth, William Barton, John Graham Esquires, John Ruxston, Captain Brent Moore, James See, John Smith, Anthony Bury Gentle∣men, Arthur Brownlow, Henry Tenison, William Brabazon Esquires, William Eccleston Gentle∣man, Doctor Thomas Cox, Mossom Wye, Clerk, the Sheriff for the time being. For the County of Mayo. Sir Henry Bingham Baronet, Sir Arthur Shaen Baronet, William Gore, John Bingham, Owen Vaughan, Robert Miller, Thomas Bell, Ro∣bert Bell, John French, John Mathews, Owen Wynn, George Gore, William Palmer, Thomas Burdett, Francis Palmer, Robert Ormsby of Clogh∣ans, Robert Gardiner, Roger Palmer, Edward Wilson and George Bingham Esquires, John Hill, Mathew Bell, Gilbert Miller, Thomas Cuffe, Francis Bingham, Joseph Lewen, Robert Ormsby of Ballanamoe, John Sheridan, Thomas Browne, William Knox, Edward Crofton and Perkins Vaughan Gentlemen, George Car, Francis Knap, Henry Crofton, James Gordon, James Clarke, Thomas Eccleston, William Pullen, Henry Gonn,  Quatremain, Gideon Johnson and Ed∣ward Nicholson Clerks.
For the County of Meath. The Honourable Robert Rochfort Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons, the Right Honourable the Lord Moore, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Oliver Lambert Esquire, Sir Arthur Langford, Sir Henry Ingoldsby Baro∣nets, Sir Henry Titchburne Knight and Baro∣net, Sir John Dillon Knight, Thomas Bligh Esquire, Sir Charles Feilding Knight, William Napper, Robert Johnson, Arthur Meredith, James Hamilton of Tullymore, Francis Osburne, Tho∣mas Taylor, Charles Meredith, Garret Weisley, James Napper, Doctor Mollyneux, Edward Corker, Edward Forth, Michael Shields, Samuel Bull, Hen∣ry Langford, Robert Stopford, Lancellot Dowdal, Joseph Dean, Charles Lambert, Henry Osburne of Dardistown, Stephen Ludlow, John Warburton and Francis Stoyte Esquires, John Harris Gen∣tleman. Major George Pepper, Symon Pepper, Hugh Mervyn, John Leigh, John Grimes and VVilliam Ellwood Esquires, Nathaniel Ellwood, Anthony Perry Gentlemen, Charles Campbel Esquire, Richard Shinton, Henry Osburne of Knowth, Thomas Garret Gentlemen, Joseph Woodward, William Williams, Samuel Jackson Esquires, Thomas Nicholson Gentleman, Henry Meredith Esquire, Major John Pepper, Henry Coddingan Esquire, Alexander Kent, Joseph Dean Iunior, Gentlemen, Darcy Wentworth, George Wentworth, Nathaniel Bull, John Wade Esquires, Charles Wade of Clonebray Gentleman John Wood senior, John Wood junior, Robert Allway, Faustin Cuppaidge, James Morecroft, Arch-Deacon of Meath, Ioseph Dean Iunior,
Iohn Percival, Samuel Dopping, Thomas Loftus, Ioseph Prat and Benjamin Prat Esquires, Iohn Prat Gentleman, William Connelly, Richard Iones, Isaac Holroid, Iohn Hawkshaw Esquires Por∣trive of Trim for the time being, Soveraign of Kells for the time being, Portrive of Navan for the time being, Duke Iefford Iames Tisdall Ed∣ward Swan Esquire. Alderman James Vanbub∣bart, Captain William Ingoldsby. Doctor Mar∣maduke Coghil, Oliver Moore. Thomas Ash. VVilliam Palmer Esquires. Sir John Coghil Knight. Robert Smith. Robert Molesworth: Hugh Morgan. John Preston of Ardsallagh E∣squire. Richard Barry Gentleman. Richard Wllett Esquire. Samuel Gibbons. Francis Teuk Gentleman. James VVhite of Maglaire. Thomas Carter. James Barry and Richard Ash Esquires Doctor John Bolton. Dean Ryves. John Chett∣wood Clerk. John Keating Esquire. John Preston. Joshua Warren Clerk. Doctor Barton. Colonel Echlin, Doctor Stearne. Benjamin Chettwood Esquire. Edward Lestrange. Master VValler of Allinstowne Gentleman. For the County of Managhan. The Honourable Master Iustice Coote. the High Sheriff for the time being. VVilliam Bar∣ton, Henry Tenison. Robert Echlin. Charles Deering, Hugh Mountgomery. Iames Curry. Iames Moore. Arthur Brownlow. Iames Tisdall, Edward Davyes. Richard Iohnston. Francis Lu∣cas Senior. Francis Lucas Iunior. Bryan Nor∣bury, VVilliam VVishart. Blaney Owens. Henry Richardson, Iohn Curry, Alexander Mountgo∣mery, Richard Pockridge, Gilbert Eccles, Ri∣chard
Leigh, Ioseph Iohnston, Timothy Armitage, Walter Dawson, Thomas Wildman and Thomas Chappel Esquires. Captain Bernard Ward, Captain Iames Butler, Captain Robert Steven∣son, Captain Hans Stevenson, Captain Ioseph Campbel, Iohn Leslie Dean of Dromore, Iohn Smith Arch-Deacon of Clogher, William Smith, Iohn Law. Iohn Forster, Ralph Barlo, Iohn Knox, Andrew Mountgomery, VVilliam Pock∣ridge Clerks, the Provost of Monaghan for the time being, Charles Congrave, Robert Maxwel, Iohn Barlo, Francis Rose, Benjamin Rose, Hen∣ry Evett, Dudley Tenison, Iohn Forster, Iames Staneous, Richard Allen, Richard Fitch, Francis Dobb, William Iohnston. Thomas Iones, Iohn Shewel and Iasper VVills. For the Queens-County. The High Sheriff for the time being, Sir Iohn Mead Knight, Iohn Weaver senior, Iohn VVeaver junior, Robert VVarnford, VValter VVel∣don, Richard VVarburton senior, and St. Leger Gilbert, George VVarburton, Richard VVarburton junior Esquires, Sir Thomas Vesy Baronet. Denny Muschampe, William Harpole, Periam Poole, Dudley Cosby, Richard Hansard, Richard Pryor, Thomas Pigott, William Gray, John Barrington, Stephen Fitz-Gerald, Thomas Carr, John Short, John Spranger, Edward Stubbers, Mr. White Read Clerk, Gilbert Rawson, Ri∣chard Segar, Robert Piggott of Cappard, Oliver Wheeler, Thomas Carter, VVentworth Harman, Robert Saunders, Anderson Saunders, William Brereton Esquires, Doctor Charles Crow, An∣drew Nisbit, Thomas Mosse, Maurice Kenelly
and Richard Hall Clerks, Thomas Starkey, Fran∣cis Newbold senior, Gerald Fitz-Gerald, Abraham May senior, Lancelot Sands, Robert Fin, Hopton Harris and Richard Vicars senior, Gentlemen, the Burgomaster of Maryborough for the time being, the Soveaign of Ballinakill for the time being, the Soveraign of Portarlington for the time being. For the County of Roscommon. Sir Robert King, Sir George St. George, Sir Edward Crofton, Sir Edward Shaen, Sir Ar∣thur Cole Baronets: John King, Henry Sand∣ford, Arthur St. George, Gilbert Ormsby, Wil∣liam Caulfield, William Handcocke Senior, Gil∣bert King, Henry St. George, Andrew Blackburne, John Dogherty, John French, Robert Sands, Edward Madden, John Reynolds, Theophilus Jones, Gilbert Gardner, Henry Dodwell and Daniel Hudson Esquires: Captain Richard St. George, Master Serjeant Neave, Dean Cope Clerk, Captain Toby Molloy, Edward Ormsby Gentleman: George Digby Clerk, Gilbert Don∣nellan, George Crofton Gentlemen: Stephen Handcock Clerk, Bryan Goovin, Thomas Walker, Alexander Erwin, Henry Erwin, Humberston Westby Gentlemen: Edward Nicholson Clerk, Lewis Hawkes, Robert Gouldsmith, Dennis De∣lany, Edward Kelly, Thomas Yeadon and David Cunningham Gentlemen. Jonathan Law Clerk, Patrick French, Francs Waldrum, Bartholomew Mahon and Theophilus Peirce Gentlemen: The Soveraigns of Athlone, Roscommon and Tulsk for the time being, the Burgomaster of Boyle for the time being.
For the County of Sligoe. Sir Robert King, Sir Edward Crofton Baro∣nets: Edward Wingfield, Hugh Morgan, Chid∣ley Coote, John King, Arch-deacon Michael Jones, Percy Gethin, Roger Smith, Arthur Cooper, William Griffith, Mathew Ormsby, Je∣remiah Jones, Henry Yeadon Clerk: Lewis Jones, William Gore, John French, Adam Ormsby: George VVood: VVilliam Orms∣by, Charles Hara, Benjamin Burton Esquires: William Ahouleck Clerk, Kean Hara, Robert Fol∣liott and Thomas Jones Esquires: William Smith, Philip Cox, James Barrett, Stephen Ormsby Gentlemen: Tobias Caulfield Clerk: John Fle∣min, Mathew Fibbs, Mathew Yeadon, John Neylan, William Harlac and James Devett Gen∣tlemen. For the County Palatine of Tipperary. Sir Richard Pyne Knight, Lord chief Iustice of Ireland, Lord Viscount Ikeryne, Sir John Meade Knight; Stephen Moore Esquire; Sir Thomas Osborne Knight;  Standish Hartstounge senior, James Harrison, John Ottoway, Sir Arthur Cole, Thomas Tow∣ler, William Smithwick, Charles Alcock, Richard Moore, Samuel Green, Robert Blenerhassett, Thomas Carter, John Perry, William Arm∣stronge, John Pyke, Symon Broadstreet, John Hunt, John Baily, Robert Stopford, Anthony Chearveley, John Cooke, Oliver Latham, Kings∣mel Pennefather, George Read, John Buckworth, Richard Buckworth, James Dawson, Agmundi∣sham Cuffe, Hecter Vaughan, Thomas Cleare
senior: Richard Whaley: Joseph Floyd: An∣thony Maude: John White of Cappagh: Hum∣phry Minchin: Daniel Gahane: Anthony Carroll: Nicholas Southcoate: Thomas Tillson: Thomas Moore: Richard Waller: Anderson Saunders: Thomas Batty: Joseph Damer: Francis Foulkes: Jonathan Ash and Edward Stratford Esquires: the High Sherff for the time being: Mayor of Cashel fo the time being: Soveraign of Fethard for the time being: Mayor of Clonmell for the time being: Robert Bredin: Patrick Hackett Clerks: John White of Ardfinane: Mathew Bnbury: David Low: William Lane: John Hunt of Glangoole: George Burdett: Charles Langly: William Turvin: John Minchin of Shangarry: Robert Cole: John Minchin of An∣nagh: Phan. Cooke Iunior. Thomas Shephard: Thomas Salmon: Charles Robinson: Peter Cooke Iunior. Thomas Clare Iunior. William Latham: Joseph Judkins: Andrew Roe: John Cooley: Mi∣chael Stanley: Henry Clare: Phillip Carleton: John Carleton: Richard Dennison: Phineas Riall: Richard Newport: John Marshall: John Moore of Sheskin: Robert Boreman: William Minchin: Mathew Jacob: Isaac Hales and Mathew Squibb Gentlemen. Colonel Chidley Coote: Edward Worth: George Evans: Robert Curtis and John Curtis Esquires. John Hall Gentleman Colonel William Smithwick: Kilner Brasier Esquire: Captain Henry Smithwick: Joseph Stepny and Robert Foulkes Esquires. For the County of Tyrone. The High-sheriff of the said County for the time being: Colonel Toby Caulfield: Colonel
John Caulfield: Sir Tristram Berisford: Sir Robert Staple Baronets: Sir Henry Tich∣borne Knight and Baronet: Sir Thomas Packenham Knight: James Hamilton: Henry Mervin: Thomas Knox: John Hamilton: Audly Mervin: Oliver mc. Causland: Richard Iohn∣ston: David Cairnes: David Creighton: Ro∣bert Echlin: Hugh Hamill: Francis VVhite: Iames Moore of Anacley: Archibald Richard∣son: William Barton: Iames Mutray: Patrick Hamilton: William Stewart of Killmoone: Tho∣mas Morris: Iohn Leslie: William Hamilton of Moyagh: William Latham: John Houston: Andrew Stewart of Irey: James Moore of Di∣sertreagh: Francis Nevill: Robert King: George Stewart: Archibald Hamilton: Thomas Ed∣wards: Charles Eccles: John Houston of Ca∣stlestewart Esquires, The Provosts of Stra∣bane and Dungannon for the time being: Arch∣deacon Hamilton: John Simthler Clerks: Ed∣mond Arwaker: John Morris Clerks: David mc. Clenaghan of Strabane: William Maxwell of the same: William Hamilton of Mountalony: James Hamilton of Lisdwen: William Cairnes: Allen Moore: VVilliam Moore: Stewart Blac∣ker, Robert Lowry, Charles Young, John Dowglasse, Thomas Cooper, William Goodlett, John Gamble Merchant  Martin: Iames Stewart of Killemorin, Duley Tenison, Andrew Baily, Francis Hueton, Walter Linsey, Iames Richison, William Moore of Loghmurphy, William Babbington, Robert Edwards, VVinter Fergy and VVilliam Hamilton of Ballefatton, Gentlemen.
For the City of Waterford. The Mayor for the time being. Ahony Suxbury Esquire, Recorder, Richard Christmas Esquire, Sir John Mason Knight, John Dal∣ton Dean of Waterford, John Eccles, Alexander Alcock Clerks. Henry Nichol, Joseph Ivye, John Hallam and John Head Esquires, William Dennis, Francis Barker, Abraham Smith, Benja∣min Bolton, Samuel Frith and John Lap Alder∣men. For the County of VVaterford. The High Sheriff for the time being, the Honourable Henry Boyle Esquire, the Honour∣able Henry Petty Esquire, Sir John Mason Knight, Richard Downing Clerk, Sir John Osborne, Sir Arthur Cole Baronets, Sir Tho∣mas Osborne Knight, Colonel Stephen Stanley, John Dalton Clerk, Dean of Waterford, Arthur St. Leger, Richard Christmas, Henry Nichol, William Bolton, John Otterington, William Dobbin, Edmond Fortescue Aland, Joseph Ivye, Robert Carew, Edward May Iunior, William Bucknor, Iohn Head, Timothy Wall, Iohn Net∣tles: Samuel Maynard, VVilliam Greatracks, Roger Power, VVilliam Congreve, Thomas VVal∣lis, Andrew Bagg, Edward Hibbart, VVilliam Browning, Thomas Croker, Richard Biert, Richard Yeates and Robert Cooke Esquires, Iohn Eccles, Alexander Alcock, Symon Radcliffe Clerk, Beverly Usher, Samuel Frith, Benjamin Bolton, Richard Bagg, Ralph Greene, Charles Bolton, Michael Ca∣rew Gentlemen, Francis Foulke Esquire and Ieremy Coghlan.
For the County of West-Meath. T Honourable Robert Rochfort Esquire, His Majesty's Attorney-General, and Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons, Oliver Lambert Esquire, Sir Francis Blundel Baronet, Sir Thomas Packenham, Sir Richard Levinge, Sir John Rogerson Knights, George Peyton, Wil∣liam Handcock, John Usher, Walter Pollard, Thomas Handcock, Henry Monke, Charles Lam∣bert, James Nugent, Robert Packenham, Thomas Smith, Christopher Nugent, John Wood Iunior, William Jones, Thomas Nugent, Ralph Elrington, John Percival, Lewis Mears senior, Alexander Mur∣ray, Arthur St. George, John Cooke, Lewis Meares junior, Barachias Low, Richard Pilkinton, Esquires, Robert Smith Clerk, William Saun∣derson Esquire, Richard Tigh Gentleman, Ed∣ward Bertles, Hugh Bowen, Charles Fox, Antho∣ny Shepheard, Francis Stoit Esquires, Stephen Handcock Clerk, Samuel Jackson Esquire, Nicho∣las Knight Clerk,  Delgarno Clerk, Edward Wallwein Clerk, Henry St. George, Henry Dowdal, Dillon Pollard, Robert Temple, Patrick Fox Esquires, VVilliam Gamble Gentle∣man, Thomas Daly, Leonard Hatfield Esquires, Arthur Judge senior, Thomas Magan, Oliver Shorne, Edmond Brainthwaite, Charles Smith, Henry Sibbalds, James Pollard, Dominick French, Thomas Smith: William Chapman: John Bos∣wel: Henry Smith: Roger Harrison Gentlemen, Major John Rider: John Lestrange: and Cap∣tain John Crokes.
For the County of Wexford. The Honourable Phillip Savage, Mathew Pord, Daniel Wybrants, John Harvey, Francis Anne∣sley, Thomas Crofford, John Seymour, Ri∣chard Barry, Sir Richard Bulkeley, Sir Nicho∣las Loftus, John Chichester, Abel Ram, Robert Wolesley, Anderson Saunders, John Cliff, Na∣thaniel Boyse, Maurice Annesley, Henry Lof∣tus Esquires, Doctor Robert Elliot, Cadwalla∣der Edwards, Edward Jones, Richard VVent∣worth Esquires, Arch-Deacon Benjamin Neale, Joshua Tench, Thomas Palliser, Thomas Mild∣may, Charles Buggs, Iohn Haugh Clerk, Wil∣liam Hore, John Shapland, Thomas Phillips, Thomas Richards, Master  Donovan, Michael Parsley, Joshua Nun, James Underwood, William Alcock, Master Wlliam Moore, Nicho∣las Kemeys senior, Esquire, Alexander Allen Clerk, Iames Stopford, Iohn Bunbury Iohn White, Edward Rogers, Hugh Warren, Samuel Tench, Revenscroft Gefford, VVilliam Cole, Roger Lindon, William Annesley, Iames White, Iohn Grgan, Henry Archer, Lawrence Davys, Thomas Ivory, the Mayor of Wexford for the time being, the Soveraign of New-Rosse for the time being, the Soveraign of Newburrough alias Gory for the time being, Henry Halton, Iohn Smith, Hygate Boyde, Iohn Boyse, Henry Nap∣per: the Portrive of Eniscorthy for the time being. Richard Donovan, Iervas Clifton, Ni∣cholas Codd Esquires, Walter Bunbury Gentle∣man.
For the County of Wicklow. Sir Richard Bulkely Baronet. Thomas Keight∣ly, William Robinson, Chambre Brabozon, Chri∣stopher Carleton, Christopher Usher, William Usher, Richard Thompson, William Hoye, Hugh Eccles, Denny Muschampe, Gideon Delawne. Edward VVorth: Owen Iones. Humphry Ma∣thews: Peter Cradock: Robert Stratford. Chri∣stopher Colwel. Robert Graydon. Iohn White∣head. VVilliam Neave. Abraham Nixon. VVil∣liam Fownes. Anthony Archer. Iohn Hacket. Thomas Phillips. Titchbourne VVest: Thomas Burrows: Edward Stratford: Charles Rickeseyes Esquires, Talbot Kean: Iohn Edwards: Henry Graydon: VValter Harris and VVilliam Hum∣phrey Gentlemen, and Bernard Browne E∣squire. Which said several Persons, shall Meét at the most Common place of Meéting for their respective Counties and Cities, on the said First day of March One thousand Six hun∣dred Ninety eight; and the said Commission∣ers, or so many of them as shall be present at the said Meéting, or the major part of them, may Sub-divide as well themselves, as other the Commissioners not then present, for the Executing of this Act, into lesser Numbers, so as Threé or more of them shall always be present at each Meéting for any Barony, Di∣vision, Territory, Ward or Parish, to put the said Act into Execution: And that the said Commissioners shall and may meét at the said most Common place of meéting for their re∣spective
Counties and Cities, and the said Sub-divisions of the said Commissioners at such places as they, or the major part of them shall appoint in the respective Sub-divisions, from time to time, and as often as there shall be occasion for the Execution of this Act. And for the more regular Raising and Levying the several Summs charged by this Act: Be it further Enacted by the Authority afore∣said; That the said Commissioners at their said First Meéting, shall Ascertain and Assess the proportions of the said Charge or Tax, pay∣able and levyable out of each and every of the several Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tythes, and Impropriations in the said re∣spective Counties and Cities in this Kingdom; and the said Assessments fairly Written on Parchment, under the Hands and Seals of Three or more of the said Commssioners, shall on or before the First of May One thousand Six hundred Ninety nine, deliver to the Collector of His Majesty's Revenue in the said County or City; and that the respective Collectors of His Majesty's Revenue, shall, and do give publick notice of the days when, and places where, in each Barony in the several Counties of this Kindom, and of the places in the several Cities and Counties of Towns in the said Kingdom, where the respective Taxes payable for, and out of the several Lands, Tenements, Heredita∣ments, Tythes and Impropriations in the said Baronies, Cities and Towns shall be paid, and that such Day shall always be a Day after the several Days on which the said Tax is pay∣able by this Act; and that all and every the Summs so Charged and Assessed by the said
Cmmissioners, as aforesaid, shall be paid to the said respective Collectors of His Majesty's Reve∣nue, at, and on the said Days and Places; which said Collectors shall, and are hereby re∣quired to give Receipts or Acquittances in Writing or Print, for the several Summs so by them Received, immediately on the Receipt of the said several Summs without Feé or other Reward, and that such Receipts or Acquittan∣ces, shall be sufficient Discharges for so much of the said Tax. And be it further Enacted, That in Default of such Payment, at the Days and Places afore∣mentioned, it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said respective Collectors of His Maje∣sty's Revenue, with the Assistance of the Con∣stable of the respective Parish or Parishes, who are-hereby required and commanded to be Aiding and Assisting as often as there shall be occa∣sion to Levy by Distress the several Summs charged and payable out of the several Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tythes and Im∣propriations in this Kingdom, or so much there∣of as shall not be paid at the said Days and Places appointed, and that the said Distress and Distresses so to be taken for the said Tax, shall be Impounded as Distresses for Rent be∣tweén Landlord and Tenant, and not other∣wise, and shall and may be Disposed of, and Sold as is usual in cases of Distress, rendring the Over-plus to the Owner; and that where sufficient Distress cannot otherwise be had, it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said Collectors, in the presence of the Constable of the Parish, by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of Two or more of the said Commioners
of the respective Counties or Cities, to Break open any House or Houses, in the Day time, to Distrain for the said Tax. And be it further Enacted, That no Feé, Reward, or other Gratification whatsoever shall be paid, demanded or given to the said Colle∣ctors, or any other person or persons whatsoe∣ver, for, or on account of Receiving, Collecting or Distraining for the said Tax. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Tenants of all Houses, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tyths and Impropriations in this Kingdom, Rated towards the said Tax, shall pay such Summ or Summs as are, or shall be so Ra∣ted or Charged thereon, and may deduct so much out of the Rent reserved and payable by them to their Landlords, as the proportion of the said Tax payable by their several Land∣lords, mediate and immediate, shall amount unto; and that the said Tenants paying the said Landlords Proportin of the said Tax, shall be a full Discharge to the said Tenants for so much of ther Rent, notwithstanding any Contract or Covenant to the contra∣ry. And for Ascertaining the Proportion of the said Tax, betweén the said Landlords and Tenants, Be it further Enacted, That the Chief Land∣lord or Proprietor of the said several Lands, Tene∣ments, Hereditaments Tyths and Impropriati∣ons, shall be charged with, and pay One full Half or Moyety of the said Tax or Rate, charged on the said respective Lands, Tenements, Here∣ditaments, Tyths and Impropriations: And
that the several Tenements mediate and im∣mediate, according to their respective Interests, do and shall pay the other Half or Moyety thereof▪ and that in the Distribution or Appor∣tioning the said Half or Moyety of the said Tax among the said Tenants mediate and im∣mediate, each mediate Tenant be accounted and pay as a Landlord with regard to his Tenant or Tenants. Provided always, That if the said Moyety or Proportion of the said Rate or Tax so char∣ged on the said Chief Landlord, do exceéd the Moyety of his her or their Clear Rent out of the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tyths or Impropriations, that then such Landlord shall pay only a Moyety of such clear Rent, and the residue, or so much as the said Rate or Tax charged on the said Landlord as aforesaid, shall exceéd the Moyety of his, her or their clear Rent as aforesaid, shall be paid by and charged on the said Tenants mediate and immediate. And be it also Enacted, That all and every person and persons having Mortgages, Rent-charges, Dowers, Ioyntures, Annuities, or other Estates for Lite in, or issuing out of any of the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tyths or Impropriations, whereon no Rent is reserved, shall be Deémed, Charged and Rated as chief Landlord or Proprietor, and allow and pay a proportion of the said Tax according to his, her or their Interest or Be∣nefit out of the said Lands, Tenements, He∣reditaments, Tyths or Impropriations; and that the greater Number of the said Com∣missioners present, not under Threé in each
Barony, Territory, Division, Ward or Parish, shall have full Power to Hear and finally to Determine on the construction of this Act, what part or proportion of the said Tax shall be Paid by or charged on such Mortgages, Tenants in Dower or other Tenants for Life or Incum∣brances aforesaid; and likewise the Appotioning or Dividing the said Moyety of the said Tax, betweén the said several Tenants mediate and immediate, and all other Differences arising upon the Construction, or in the Execution of this Act. Provided always, That none of the said Commissioners shall have a Vote in his own Case, but if any controversie arise, touching the proportion of the said Tax, to be paid by, or charged on him, shall withdaw during the De∣bate of such Controversie, until it be determin∣ed by the rest of the Commissioners then present; and in default thereof, that the said Commissio∣ners then present shall have Power, and are hereb required to Impose such Fine or Fines, not exceeding Twenty pounds Sterling, as to them shall seém meét upon such Commissioners so re∣fusing to withdraw, and to cause the same to be Levyed and Pad as the several Rates and Assessments charged and made pursuant to this Act, are to be Levyed and Paid. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Proprietor or Farmer of any Tyths in this Kingdom, shall neglect, or omit to pay the rate or proportion of the said Tax, charged on the said Tyths, at the time and place before mentioned, that it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said Collectors, as aforesaid, to Distrain and Seize the said
Tyths, and dispose thereof as is usual in case of other Distresses, and in case so much of the said Tyths cannot be found to be Distrained or Seized, as shall be sufficient to answer the said Tax, or charge due thereout, and in case where there shall not be a sufficient Distress upon any of the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, to Answer the said charge or Tax due thereout; that then upon Affidavit made theeof, the said several Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tyths and Impropriations shall, and may by Pocess out of His Majesty's Court of Exche∣quer, be Seized into His Majesty's Hands, as in case of Arrears of Crown-Rent, or Quit-Rent, and there detained until out of the Profits thereof, the said Tax due thereout be paid. Provided always, That no poor Cottier, or poor Day-Labourer shall be charged with, or pay any part of the said Tax, but that the same shall be wholly allowed to him by his immediate Land-lord in his Rent, or be paid by his said Land-lord. And for the careful Writing and Ingrossing the said Rates and Assessments in due time. Be it further Enacted by the Authority afore∣said, That the said Commissioners Clerks who shall respectively perform the same, shall by Warrant under Threé or more of the said Commissioners Hands, have and receive from the said respective Collectors, Two pence in the pound, for all such Summs of Money as shall respectively be Rated, Assessed and Charged in such Assessments pursuant to this Act; which said Collectors are hereby appointed to pay the same accordingly.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Letters Patents granted by His Majesty, or any of His Royal Progeni∣tors, to any person or persons, Cities, Bu∣roughs, or Towns Corporate within this Realm, of any manour of Liberties, Pri∣viledges, or Exemptions from Subsidies, Tolls, Taxes, Assessments, or Aids, shall be constru∣ed or taken to Exempt any person or persons, City, Place, Burough, or Town-Corporate, or any of the Lands, Tenements, Heredita∣ments, Tyths, or Impropriations within the same, from the Burthen and Charge of any Rate or Tax Granted by this Act, but that the same shall Bear and Pay their pro∣portion of all Rates and Assessments by this present Act Imposed, any such Letters Patents, Grants, or Charters, or any Clause of Non-Obstante Matter or Thing therein contained, or any Law, Statute, Custom, or Prescription to the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action, Sute, Plaint, or Information, shall be Commenced or Pro∣secuted against any Person or Persons, for whatsoever he or they shall do in Pursuance, or in Execution of this Act; such Person or Persons so Sued in any Court whatso∣ever, shall, and may Plead the General Is∣sue, Not Guilty, and upon any Issue joyned, may give this Act, and the special Matter in Evidence; And if the Plantiff or Prosecutor shall become Non-Sute, or for∣bear
further Prosecution, or suffer a Discon∣tinuance, or if a Verdict shall pass against him, the said Defendant or Defendants shall Recover his or their treble Costs, for which he and they shall have the like Remedy, as in Case where Costs by Law are given to the De∣fendant. FINIS.
