E1579 R22125 [ocm]12123932 54491
The Humble PETITION OF THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parla∣ment, presented to the Kings Majesty at Oxford, Wherein they declare their hum∣ble Desires concerning the L. Kymbol∣ton, and Mr. Pym. Together with the propositions of peace, agreed on by both houses, and presented to the Kings Majesty, for the removall of these blou∣dy distempers and distractions, and setling the state of the Kingdome. ORdered by the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament, that this Pe∣tition and Propositious be forthwith printed and published. John Brown Cler. parliament. Hen. Elsyng, Cler. parl. D. Com. Decemb. 30. Printed for Richard West, 1642.
The Humble PETITION Of the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT Presented to the Kings most excellent Maiesty at Oxford. May it please your Majesty: WEE the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assem∣bled, having nothing in our thoughts and Desires more precious, and of higher e∣steeme (next to the honour and immediate service of God) then the just and faithfull performance of our duty to your Maiesty,
and this Kingdome; And being very sen∣sible of the great Distractiogs and Di∣stempers of this Kingdom, and the great hazzard and danger which is like to fall upon your Maiesty and your loyall Sub∣iects, if not timely prevented: And after a serious observation of the causes of these misehiefs, do in all Humility and sinceri∣ty present to your Maiesty this our hum∣ble and loyall Message, that out of you princely: wisdome for the establishidg your own Honour and Safety, and gracious ten∣dernesse of the welfare and security of your subiects and Dominions, you will be pleased to grant and accept these our hum¦ble desires and propositions, as the most effectuall means through Gods Blessing, of the removing those Jealousies and Diffe∣rences which have unhappily fallen be∣twixt you and your people, and procuring both your Maiesty and them a happy and constant course of Peace and Ho∣nour.
Here followeth the Propositions of both Hou∣ses which are to be presented to his Maie∣sty at Oxford. I. THat your Maiesty will be pleased to consent that such Reformation bee made of the Church-Government and Li∣turgie, as both Houses of Parliament shall advise. II. That such members of either House of Parl. as have during this present Parl. bin put out of any place and Office, may ey∣ther be restored to that place and▪ Office, or otherwise have satisfaction for the same. III. That your Maiesty will be pleased to rest satisfied with that course that the Lords and Commons have appointed for ordering the Militia, untill the same shall be further setled by a Bill.
IV. That there may be a Cessation of arms for fourteen dayes to agree upon these propositions, and a full answer obtained within that time. V. That your Maj. would passe an Act of Oblivion for all Acts of Hostility, which are past, and that he would consent to an Act for a generall pardon. VI. That His Maj. would be pleased to passe a Bill for the repaying of the Charge of the Kingdom, out of Delinquents estates, and those that stands ill-affected to the Common-wealth. VII. That His Majesty would be pleased to give his Royall consent to such Bills as have already been agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament; amongst which is the Bill for taking away all Innovati∣ons out of the Church, a Bill against scan∣dalous Ministers, a Bill against Pluralities a Bill for the Assembly of the Clergy, for
setling of Church Government, the Bill against Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, &c. VIII. That His Majesty would passe a Bill for the better establishing of the Rights, and priviledges of Parliament, and the li∣berty of the Subject. IX. That Delinquents might be delive∣vered up, or left to receive such punish∣ment as is agreeable to the Lawes of the Land, amongst which are nominated the Lord Digby, Wilmot, and others. X. That His Majesty would passe a Bill for the clearing of the Lord Kimbolton and the 5. Members that were accused of the House of Commons. XI. 5 That all Ministers of State, Judges, and other Officers that have beene recei∣ved since the difference between His Ma∣jesty and the parliament, may bee resto∣red.
And these our humble Desirrs being gran∣ted by your Miesty, wee shall forth with apply our selves to regulate your presen revenue in such sort, as may be best ad∣vantage, and likewise to settle such an or∣dinary and constant encrease of it, as shall be sufficient to support your Royall dig∣nity, in honour and plenty, beyond the proportion of any former Grants of the Subiects of this Kingdome to your Maie∣sties predecessors. ORdred by the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, that this Petitio be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsing Cler. par. Dom. Com.
