E1761 [ocm]12136937 197002
ORDERS, Votes, and Declarations, Agreed upon by the high Court of Parliament, this present Moneth of January: For the peace and safety of the Kingdome, the propaga∣tion of the Gospell, the honour of the King, the Privi∣ledge of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject: And for the protection of such who are faithfull in this service. coat of arms of England, 1642 HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE LONDON, Ian. 27. Printed for T. WRIGHT.
ORDERS AGREED ON BY The High Court of PARLIAMENT, since the first of January last, 1642. 1 THe House of Commons taking into se∣rious consideration the cruelty of the Cavaliers in Hertfordshire, in killing, robbing and plundering divers well affected people, agreed upon a Decla∣ration, to desire all well-affected per∣sons of the County of Hertford, and other Counties adjoyning, to raise all such Forces of horse and Foot as they can make, and march with them to Alisbu∣ry in the County of Buckingham, or to such other places as they shall be directed, to joyne with the Parliaments For∣ces, for defence of themselves, their estates, and the true Protestant Religion, and for suppressing the Forces at Brill. and all their adherents, notorious enemies to the King and Kingdome. 2 The House of Commons agreed upon some alterati∣ons in the Bishops Bill, and other Bills, that His Majesty is desired to give his royall assent unto. 3 There have been some complaints made to the Parlia∣ment
of some abuses committed by those that have seized upon horses for the service of the Parlirment, and at a con∣ference therupon, it was agreed, that none should seize up∣on any Houses under any such pretence, without a Warrant from the close Committe, and that an Entry should be made of the names of such Persons, as for the time being, shall seize upon any Horses for the service aforesaid. 4. The House having been informed that Lambeth-House is full of Prisoners, it was ordered that the Lord Peters his House in Aldersgate-streete, should be made a Prison, and that part of the prisoners which are at Lambetb should be sent thither. 5. The Lords and Commons in Parliament, having re∣nounced the agreement of Newtralty assented lately unto by the County of Cheshire, and declared that it is a thiug ve∣ry prejudiciall and dangerous to the whole Kingdome, that any one County should stand as Newter, and withdraw themselves from the assistance of the rest, a considerable number of Forces are to goe into that County, to disannull that agreement. 6. Whereas His Majesty hath set forth and commanded to be published in the County of Chester, divers printed pa∣pers, in the forme of Proclamations, whereby Sir William Brereton Barronet, a person wel-affected to the publique, is without Processe or Judgement, proclaimed Traytor, who hath lawfully performed his duty in assisting the Parliament and opposing those wicked Councelors, and Cavaliers a∣bout the King, which endeavour the destruction of our Re∣ligion, and desolation of this Land. The Lords and Commons in Parliament doe declare, that the said printed papers in the forme of Proclamations, and the publishing thereof, are against the Lawes of the
Kingdome; and that such persons as have beene, or here∣after shall be proclaimed Traytors by the said printed pa∣pers, or any other of the like nature, shall be protected by the power and Authority of Parliament, from any damage or prejudice to their persons, ot estates, by reason or colour of any such printed paper, or Proclamations heretofore pub∣lished, or shall be hereafter published, or contrived against them, and the said Lords and Commons doe heereby strict∣ly forbid the publishing of any such printed paper, or pro∣clamations, and doe authorize and require all Officers, and other his Majesties good Subjects, to apprehend and bring in safe custody to the Parliament, and to seize their Goods, and profit of their Lands, to be accomptable for the same to both Houses of Parliament, all such persons as have already published, or which shall heareafter publish any such printed papers, or Proclamations, to the end that they may receive due punishment for their offences. 7. The House of Commons agreed upon a Commission for the Earl of Warwicke, to take order for the betrer guard of the Sea, to prevent forreigne invasion, and that himselfe should be desired in person to attend the Navy to that pur∣pose. 8. They agreed upon a Commission for the Lord Willough∣by of Parham to have power to raise Forces in Lincolneshire, to persue and suppresse the Earle of Newcastles Army of papists in Newarke upon Trent, and other parts thereabouts. 9. It was Ordered; that the Cavaliers taken at Chichester, some should be sent to Windsor-Castle, and to other Prisons abroad. 10 The Commons agreed upon an Order, that no ship∣ping going to Newcastle should carry any corn thither, nor
bring any coales from thence, untill such time as the towne shall declare themselves for the King and Parliament, and free themselves from the Earle of Newcastles garrison-soul∣diers; and that if any ships should go contrary to this Or∣der, from the first of February next, their ships and lading shalbe seized upon & disposed by authority of Parliament. 11 The Commons drew up a Bill for clearing the Earle of Manchester, and the other five Members of the House of Commons. 12 It was agreed upon by the Commons that the Colle∣ctors of the Custome-House should be removed from their places for some complaints made against them, for that they disobeyed the Ordinance of Parliament for the receipt of Customes, upon occasion of a late Proclamation in his Majesties name against the same. 13 That others be appointed in their rooms, that no pre∣judice be done to the Commonwealth by the same. 14. That a Declaration be set forth to the Kingdome, to this effect, shewing the present necessity of this Kingdome, caused and dayly multiplied by the traiterous and bloody Counsells and attempts of those pernitious and desperate Counsellors still about the King, and protected by him; while they more and more manifest their implacable enmi∣ty to our Religion, the Parliament, and peace of all his Ma∣jesties good subjects and Dominions, have bin such, and as many as have compelled them to borrow more, and farre greater summes of money upon the publique faith (besides that which they themselves have advanced) for the preser∣vation of Religion, as well as the just and undoubted Privi∣ledge of Parliament, our Lawes and Liberties from most apparent destruction, then at first they intended, and to be longer in repaying the same, which they unanimously re∣solve,
shall be fully repayed back with interrest) then here∣tofore they promised. And albeit they be now preparing sundry Propositions to be humbly and speedily presented to his Majesty for an honourable and firme setling of the pub∣lique peace without more effusion of Christian blood; yet no man can be ignorant of the further necessity of providing more treasure, as well for the support of the Army raised by authority of Parliament untill the King shall vouchsafe gra∣ciously to condescend to our just and necessary requests, as for the full payment of all such summes of moneyes as al∣ready are, or further may be due and arreare for the necessa∣ry provision of Armes, Ammunition and pay of the said Army untill their disbanding and returne home to their se∣verall Countries, that so they may not be occasioned tho∣rough want of pay to plunder, rob or pillage by their way homewards. 15. To the end that an Accomodation might the better be obteyned, the House of Commons agreed that his Ma∣jesty should be desired to enter into a more neare aliance with Protestant Princes abroad, and in particular with the States of the united Provinces in Holland, that so this King∣dome may be better enabled to defend her selfe against the enemies of our Religion, suppresse Popery, and assist the Palts-grave, and the Lady Elizabeth his Majesties Sister. 16. Upon a complaint made against Doctor Bray who is with the King, it was ordered that three Members of the House of Commons should go to S. Martins and sequester his meanes there, and appoint an honest man in his place. 17. The Parliament having received Information that there is much labouring and endeavouring for the bringing in some forraigne forces to infest this Kingdome, they have given order for the rigging and trimming of the Navy, and
victualling of the Ships that they may be ready to put forth to Sea, and to have a speciall care to guard Newcastle, to pre∣vent forraigne aid from comming in thither, which by rea∣son of stormes and tempests which are frequent neer that Harbour, during the Winter season our ships are not able to ride there. 17. An Order was agreed on by the House of Com∣mons for the better guard of the Tower of London, that there should be 200. men appointed by the Committee in London to attend as a constant guard upon the Tower, and to have meanes allowed them for that service, and the said men to be raised out of the new Militia in London. 19. There was information given to the Commons from Portsmouth that they have received information from Dun∣kerke, that there are five Ships prepared in a readinesse to come for England, with Armes and Ammunition to assist the Cavaliers against the Parliament: whereupon it was or∣dered that the same information should be given to the Ad∣mirall, to desire his Vigilancy at Sea to intercept the said Ships. 20. The Parliament having taken into consideration the great prejudice that might accurre, both to his Majestie and his subjects, if the Records of the high Court of Chansery, and othet Courts (which by his Majesties late Proclamati∣on are adjourned to Oxford, where a great part of the trea∣sure of the Kingdome doth consist) should be carried a∣mongst the Cavaliers, they have ordered that the Records shall not be removed to Oxford. 21. After the Commons had spent a great deale of time in finishing the Propositions, (to be sent to his Majesty for an Accommodation of Peace) to make them ready for the Lords having received the other Propositions, agreed upon
before, they added one more, that his Majesty should be desired to passe a Bill for the setling of the Militia, by Land and Sea, and the securing of the Cinque Ports in such man∣ner and in such hands, as shall be agreed upon by both Houses. It is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parlia∣ment; that no Carriers, Waggoners, earts, or waggons, or horses laden with any commodities whatsoever, shall be permitted hereafter to go from hence or elsewhere to Oxford or any part of the Kings Army, with any manner of provi∣sions, without the speciall License and Authority of this House first had and obteined; And if they do presume not∣withstanding to go or carry any thing, that then their per∣sons and goods shall be seized upon, and kept in safe custo∣dy till this House take further order. And Colonell Moore is to take care, that strict command be given to all the Courts of Guard to make stay of them accordingly; And to bring the persons staid, before him, to the intent they may be brought to this House: And that diligent search be made for any Moneys that may be carried or conveyed by any person to Oxford. It is ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parlia∣ment, That if the Agent or Servant to any person that bear Armes against the Parliament, shall presume hereafter to come to Westminster, or reside here about London, That he shall be forthwith apprehended as a spy, and be proceeded against accordingly; and all persons are commanded to doe their endeavour for the discovery of such persons that shall hereafter come to the Parliament House or Westminster, or any parts about London, that they may be apprehended accordingly. FINIS.
