E2146 [ocm]12229296 197520
THE Parliaments Resolution, Concerning the KINGS PROCLAMATION For setting up His Standard. Resolved on by the House of Com∣mons, and by them sent up to the House of Peeres, Aug. 18. 1642. Where after some time spent in debate thereof, they gave their assents thereto, and Ordered that it should be published to the Subjects of England. Jo. Browne Cler. Parl. WITH The apprehending of the Lord Wentworth neere Portsmouth. LIKEWISE Exceeding joyfull Newes from Berkshire, declaring a Fa∣mous Victory obtained by Colonell Hambden against the Earle of Berkeshire and the Lord Lovelace, August 18. who after some Fight, took the said Lords prisoners. Ordered that this be printed and published, Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com. August 22. Printed for J. Horton.
EXCEEDING Joyfull News from both the Honourable Houses of PARLIAMENT. ON Tuesday last there was a joyfull Mes∣sage delivered to the House of Commons it being filled with extraordinary hap∣py tydings, which consisted of these particulars following, (viz.) That information was given unto the Commons House of Parliament, of the
proceedings of Colonell Sands in Kent, which said Colonell brought to London five Waine loads of Armes and Ammu∣nition which he had taken in the Earle of Dorsets house at Sinock in the said County of Kent, with great store of plate and money that he also tooke at the said place, which was laid there with an in∣tent (as it is supposed) to be used against the Parliament, the which Ammunition hath beene a long time gathering toge∣ther, it belonging to divers of the Gen∣try of that County that are ill affected to the Parliament; which tydings being acquainted, the Houses with all speed Ordered that it should be laid in Guild-Hall. It was also certified to both Houses by Letters from that County, that divers Gentlemen being of the Malignant par∣tie, had endeavoured to stirre up dissen∣tion in that County, and strove by all possible meanes to draw the affection of
the people from the Parliament, being much discontented that the Parliament had seized on the Armes and Ammuni∣tion that were found at the Earl of Dor∣sets house at Synock, pretending that the County was much disabled thereby to defend it selfe against any forreigne ene∣my, although the same Gentry at the great Assizes of that County, declared that there was no cause of feare that any forraigne enemy would assault them. Whereupon after some time of De∣bate the Houses ordered and resolved, that two Troops of Horse more should goe into that County, for the safety and security thereof, they having also seri∣ously considered the Resolution of His Majesty for the setting up of his Stan∣dard, after some time spent therein, it was referred to a Committee to consider of, and to make report to the House con∣cerning the same; the said Committee was also appointed to draw up a Decla∣ration
to be published to the Kingdome to declare to the Subjects the legall pro∣ceedings of the Parliament, and the il∣legallity of the said Proclaimation, and the violent prosecution of the Commis∣sion of Array, which they all concluded in one voyce and resolved to doe, and having spent the greatest part of the day therein, but before their rising there was information brought to both Houses, That Colonell Hambden and Colonell Goodwin had taken the Earle of Berke∣shire and Sir Robert Dorman, and one more that was a Gentleman of quality at Wallington in the County of Oxford, which were come thither with an intent to seize upon the Magazine of that part of the County, it being laid in the said said Towne, and that they were also re∣solved to execute the Commission of Array, and had sent out Warrants to Redding and divers other places for the same purpose, but before they could
bring their designes to perfection their passage was stopped; for te  Colonels having intelligence of their in∣tentions, raised a number of men, and marched towards the said persons, where comming to them, they began to stand in opposition against them, but all was in vaine, for Colonell Goodwin and Co∣lonell Hambden strove, obtained the Vi∣ctory, and immediately tooke them pri∣soners and sent them up to the Honou∣rable Court of Parliament, who after some examination they were sent priso∣ners to the Tower; And again the Earle of Berkshire was appointed to attend the House the next day, which he did accor∣dingly, but was again sent to the Tower. The Earle of Holland is also gone into Berkshire for the safety and security of the said County.
Information was this day given to the House by a Gentleman that came from Portsmouth, that there is great possibility in taking the Towne within a short time, and that on Tuesday last at night a Boat was discerned going out of the Towne; whereupon two long Boates lanched forth to meet it, when they came to it, they de∣manded what they had in the said Boat, and it was answered, that there was nothing in it but some goods of House-hold stuffe and old lumber which was a poore mans in the Towne, that had leave given him to goe out of the Towne, but the Souldiers being not so answered, did search the at, and found a brave Cavaleere lying very close betweene two Feather Beds, which they censured to be the Lord Wen. and he was carried neere to those parts to be examined, and to take frther order concerning him. Ordered to be forthwith Printed and pub∣lished. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Par. D. C.
