E2983 [ocm]12790220 200424
ENGLAND'S Imminent Danger, AND ONLY REMEDY Faithfully Considered and Represented By an Impartial Hand. The Lyon hath roared, who will not fear? The Lord hath spoken, who can but Prophesie? Amos 3. 8. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the Sign of the White Lyon next Chancery Lane in Fleet-street. 1671.
Reader THe very reading pro∣phane books is an un∣happiness, but a second perusal, guilt and Ap∣probation: The number of good ones should not discourage, but provoke our writing; He that puts out such, spreadeth nets of Salvation, and adornes the world with none of the worst Furniture. But, time goeth, we turn over leaves, and find our selves no less ignorant, no more advantaged: reading many books hinders the digestion of one, a due search into the only excellent, and other duties absolutely necessary: which occasion'd the composers reducing these memorials into so narrow a compass, as may be re∣view'd in fewer houres than was layd ou in gleaning them, that more may be spent
in doing, and less in knowing what is required in such a day as this. Eter∣nity pulls us by the sleeve, bids us look at the gliding of every sand in the hour∣glass of our lives, upbraids us with mis∣spending the former part in vain, fruitless studies, and calls on us to redeem them by some labours for the good of our selves and others: Thus we wrest the sithe out of the hand of death, and pull the wings from his heels. The publick weal not on∣ly warrants but exacts the most univer∣sall importunate endeavours, suffers none to live in the world, only to fill up the number and tale of it. If the Church of God lie in distress (saith a re∣verend Bishop) and we stretch our selves on beds of Ivory; If she mourn in sackcloth, and we riot in soft raiment; If the wild Boar in the Forrest break in upon her, and we send not our praiers to drive him away; If there be cleaness of teeth in the poor, and our teeth grind
them still; If their bowels be empty of food, and ours still empty of compas∣sion; If the wrath of God be inflamed against his people, and our zeal remain still as frozen, our charity as cold, our affections as benumm'd, our compassions as stupified as ever; If Sion lie in the dust, and we hang not up our harps, nor pray for her peace, we are unnatural members and can expect nothing but the curse of Meroz,Judge. 5. 23 who went not out to help the Lord. How needful E∣pitomes are, is sufficiently evident, if we consider, the shortness of our time, the va∣riety of our duties, the multiplicity of our affairs, the weakness of our memories, the numerousness, the voluminousness of books, and the fastidiousness that is be∣got in us by reading them. He that judges Epitomes, condemns himself, the Epi∣tome of the world. God having the first day diffused the light, through the whole hemisphere, contracted it the fourth, with∣in
the body of the Sun, and the micro∣cosm into man. He hath Epitomized all practical Divinity into ten heads, our Sa∣viour those ten into two, and those two into one; and all that we can pray for, or against into six. If (as is supposed) Aristotle stole that which he had from the most excellent of those that went be∣fore him, and Virgil drew all his richest inventions from Homer, Hesiod, The∣ocritus; and Cicero boldly furnished him∣self with the doctrine of the Stoicks, A∣cademicks Epicures; If Zachariah com∣mit to writing that which Jeremiah had preached, and Obadiah what he had pen'd before; If Saint Mark abb reviate the other Evangelists; and St. Jude, St. Peter, & the New Testament, have many things out of the old, if in our nice inquistivestive age much is transcribed out of former ones: If so many have wished for, and others expected a collect∣ion from our modern authors, and some
endeavoured it; If the spiders web spun out of her own bowels, be not more estee∣med than the honey-comb gathered from diverse flowers: The Publisher may dread no severe sentence on the ensueing extract for borrowing the materials where he found them fitting, but his un∣skilfulness in composing it at first to ac∣comodate a private closet, so being de∣signed but for one (and the lighter pas∣sages inserted to make it take with those, that serious matters only would beat away) 'tis not expected some of it should please all, nor all of it, any, yet may recompense their pains, who resolve not to trifle away some of their odd hours but of their most retired thoughts and se∣verest meditations in perusing it; and will be but so honest to themselves and charitable to the scribe, as to take every thing in a sense will most profit them. It despises not Dominions, nor speaks evil of Dignities; stands for no party but that
where none should be neuters, every one engaged. Complaints are more frequent, more easie than redresses: the making it publick calls for many apologies, but its usefulness to those that otherwise might not meet with, or understand what is writ this way, that want money to pur∣chase, or opportunity to read many books, the too great seasonableness and concern∣ment of it, shall stand for all. While so many enjoy the deserved praise of the first invention of things, it shall suffice me (who am not worthy to wash the feet of the meanest of my Lord's servants) if I but be a remembrancer of what hath been for∣merly met with; without claiming any considerable part of it, or of this epistle as my own but the Errata's (the printers excepted) which also, the equal and pru∣dent reader will be easily able to rectifie or excuse; and find much to benefit, but nothing that may justly offend any, except those for whose use the publishing hereof
was never intended. And if it should but move them also to do it better, I shall think for this, if for nothing else, the tacking∣together (at houres that might have been otherwise lost, or worse spent, or justly gi∣ven to sleep (tis an honest injurie to na∣ture to steal from her some hours of repose) what they may not deem worthy to Read) was not to no purpose. So it afford any advantage to an honest mind, or my na∣tive Country, I shall cheerfully undergo the scorn of the curious and censorious; aspiring to no more height than the comfort of a good conscience, doing good to some, harm to none. My grief is (with an inge∣nious authour) that the event will prove it impertinent, there being not much hope, that a private whisper should be heard by those, who are deaf not only to those who lift up their voice like a trum∣pet, but to the loudest calls of heaven; and have made no other use of the vari∣ous and signal providences we have been
under, then to defeat the design of them. But it is an hour wherein Religion seems near a Miscarriage, and it is enough for me that I have appeared thus far for it, in a day of necessity. My willingness, though unable, to contribute any thing (though never so mean) for rescuing it, claimes your favorable construction of my paines; That you pass by, small Faults, and pardon great ones; the consciousness of my own, makes me remain Incognito.
The general Heads. ENgland call'd upon, by the difference between virtue and vice 1 By the creatures 9 By the scriptures 15 By our civil wars 24 By our peaceable settlement 33 By our forraign wars 36 By the dreadful pestilence 39 By the dismal fire of London 43 And in our Harbour 49 By prodigies and poverty 52 By the parable of a vineyard 58 Our unanswerable demeanour under each of them   Signes of the last judgment and of England's ruine 93 To prevent the last (if the decree be not past) 128 The Nobles, the Magistrates 140 The ministers 156 The masters 159 The prophane 161 Are call'd upon, more especially true Christians 163 To eminency in piety and peaceableness 164 An example of it 184 To regard God's displeasure 197 To spend their main censures upon themselves 205 To purity of heart 209 To an humble dress 213 To temperance and sobriety 216 To a sense of sin and judgment 221 One-ness of heart and endeavour 226
Mourning and weeping 233 Fasting and prayer 244 Its prevalency 257 The great advantage good men are to a nation 266 How unworthily requited 276 Their private devotion exemplifi'd in Their Solemn hu∣miliation for the sins of the nation 281 Particularly, those of our Nobles 283 Magistrates, Ministers 284 Hearers 285 Families 286 Lawyers, Tradesmen 287 Professors 288 Unfruitfulness 289 Sabbath-breaking 291 Covetousness 291 Pride, idleness 292 Surfeiting and drunkenness, uncleanness 293 Swearing 294 Prophaness and blasphemies, blood 295 Insensibleness and impenitency under judgments 296 Their earnest pleading with God, by Arguments drawn, from what we have undergone already 298 From our posterity 301 From the multitude and malice of our enemies 302 From former mercies 304 We are his people 306 For the sake of religion 309 From their wonted prevalency 310 From our own weakness 312 From his own bowels, and good pleasure under which also is comprised the matter of prayer. 316
ERRATA. PAge. 6. line. 30. Read, stain of. p. 21. l. 22. r. decry. p. 26. l. 28. r. furies. p. 40. l. 1. r. above. l. 8. r. some streets p. 43. l. 26. r. Accended. p. 45. l. 6. r. shame. p. 53. l. 2. r. direful. l. 28. r. vye. p. 56. l. 13. r. Robe. p. 63. l. 18. r. the. p. 76. l. 18. r. name. p. 81. l. 13. r. and. p. 82. l. 14. r. it. p. 83. l. 32. r. fat overflow's. p. 105. l. 28. r. nice. p. 112. l. 2. r. silly. p. 117. l. 32. r. his. p. 120. l. 4. r. he. p. 143. l. 7. r. wild. p. 156. l. 22. r. wrangling. p. 158. l. 4. r. ill. p. 166. l. 1. r. avow'd. l. 16. r. were. p. 176. l. 30. r. worse. p. 184. l. 4. r. times. p. 202. l. 30. r. to bring. p. 204. l. 19. r. upon. p. 210. l. 17. r. but. p. 213. l. 7. blot out, the. p. 214. l. 24. r. only. p. 219. l. 24. r. to be. p. 223. l. 3. r. enough. l. 9. r. sins. p. 224. l. 22. r. we declare. p. 227. l. 10. r. virtues. p. 234. l. 4. r. ingredients. l. 25. r. enemies. p. 240. l. 4. r. chimney. p. 245. l. 24. r. his. p. 246. l. 1. r. mutual. p. 250. l. 10. r. strength. p. 253. l. 7. r. pleasure. l. 33. r. awke. p. 254. 1. l. r. shriek. l. 13. r bowels. p. 255. l. 6. r. this. p. 256. l. 1. r. sixscore thousand. p. 258. l. 23. r. subject. p. 259. l. 13. r. press. p. 263. l. 22. after (i) r. can no more be exprest, then what they have that keep Gods precepts, Ps. 119. 56. p. 264. l. 33. r. and. p. 266. l. 27. r. judgment is. l. 30. r. see. p. 267. l. 28. r. and. p. 268. l. 1. r. will. l. 30. r. a pernicious creature, and dangerous, a publick evil to the place he lives in. p. 271. l. 7. r. the lord of hosts. p. 275. l. 8. blot out, that. l. 16. r. low. p. 276. l. 13. r. ad∣ministrations. p. 278. l. 25. r. his. p. 288. l. 14. r. detraction. p. 294. l. 14. r. blessings. p. 316. l. 25. r. cry. Advertisement of a Book. The devout communicant Exemplified on his behavi∣our before, at and after the Sacrament-large, and more practical then any yet extant sold by Tho. Dring in Fleet-street.
ENGLANDS Imminent Danger, And onely REMEDY. England called upon. GOD at sundry times hath called England called up∣on, by the difference between Virtue and Vice. upon us in Divers manners. His Love and Hatred, an Intellectu∣al eye sees imprest on the na∣tive Beauty and loathsome de∣formity, of good and Evil. In∣tegrity hath such a fairness, lustre, and mag∣netick power, as by its own worth allures, and wins upon us, out of meer love, to close with such an Amiable object. Among the worst is a kind of natural Awe and Reverence towards Good men; their Intrin∣sick glory darts such rayes of outward Splendor and Magnificence, as makes them rather en∣vied than hated, feared than disrespected: None neglect, or despise a good name, but he who either despaires of, or resolves against doing
any thing that may deserve it; therefore would by his obliquities deprive goodness and vertue of all just Honour, and Fame in the world. An unjust Judge, if disinterested in the cause, will give a Righteous judgment, he loves a Bribe, but not injustice. Such who care not to blot their names out of the Book of life, would fain write them in the Chronicles of fame; and had rather their very graves be buried than their good works. The prophane affect to be e∣steemed Virtuous, but excuse or lay their faults rather on God, Satan, others, their natural Constitution than their own wills; and like Ir∣regular Patients blame their Physician for those ill accidents they know owing only to their own unruliness. Sin hath many Servants but few Patrons; tis in it self so shamefully disgracefull, that such as lodge it in their hearts, would seem to throw it out of their doors, and lay it at any mans rather than their own; nor ever owne it except under some other name; to play the Devil they personate a Saint, pursue vengeance un∣der pretence of justice, murder, but 'tis for their oath sake, Mat. 14. and that they may kill Christ, worship him. Mat. 2. 8. Satan would have ma∣ny wares unsaleable, did not his Broker profit pander, which puts Vertues visage on Vices race; casts a Samuel's mantle, over the De∣vil's shoulders; Christens Covetousness good∣husbandry; Fraud Ingenuity; Cousenage In∣dustry; Rebaptizes oppression Equity; and so the Soul embraces those Vices (which naked
would be skared at) when found cloathed in the Silver vestment of profit. God hath stampt in the cruellest hearts a Reverend respect to his own Image in his people, as at first an awe of man in the fiercest creatures; so as they that hate, doe yet honour them. Religion is so excellent, that such who out of passion, or interest condemn, their Reason absolve and give it letters of Recommendation: Their hearts Reverence it, while they lift up their hands to suppress it; they assist oppressed vertue in its appeal, in the Court of Equity, Conscience, where its plea is heard, and righteous sentence reversed; while the Criminal is self accused, when none beside controule, many flatter and commend; They inwardly assent to the Justice and Authority of those Divine Rules, which their words and actions most oppugn. There is an early and immediate verdict passed in its behalf, in the esteem and liking, creating an Assent and Veneration, not only when obey∣ed, but from profest despisers, who cannot chuse but think well of that vertue they de∣sert, and the necessity of their affairs compell them to speak ill of. The Judge who gve sentence against our Saviour, at the same mo∣ment washed his hands, and openly profest he found no fault in him. Were our eyes open we should see Charmes enough in Vertue, to procure it self a door without the help of o∣ther external Inducements; A Beauty spark∣ling within its own bosome, rendering it en∣amoring without the assistance of those forreign
aides, that so numerously surround it; and 'tis not only in it self Illustrious, but gilds those that are cloathed with it, 1 Pet. 5. 5 with its re∣flexive bames it shines through the cours∣est sackcloth, and Enamels the garments with so much glory, as adorns all that wear them with a remarkable Beauty and Splen∣dor. Did women know how much Vertue in∣hances Beauty, they would be vertuous, that they might be beautifull; and without corrupting nature by paint, would use no other Red, but that of modesty; no other white but that of Innocence; no other majesty but that of prudence; no other sweet but that of meekness; no other pomp, but that of hu∣mility; for in this Cloathing, they shine with grea∣ter lustre, than in all the well wrought spoiles of Silkworms. The very Heathens distinguishing be∣tween Imaginary and Real Misery, so prefer∣red suffering before doing Injustice, that they affirmed Injustice the worst kind of suffering; and that nothing hurts a man so much as the doing harm; for when one Injures another, the greatest mischief redounds to him who de∣scends to the meanness of doing such things, as deprive him of the priviledge of being (a help∣full creature) like unto his Maker; and renders him so much worse than the worst of beasts (whose nature and property it is to persecute and devour their fellow creatures) as he hath means allowed him of being better. Who among them though never so wicked themselves seriously commended another for his rudeness and debaucheries? Or reckoned his
Lusts among the Titles of his Honour? who ever raised Trophies to his vices? Or thought to perpetuate his memory by the glory of them? Who ever suffered in his Reputation, by being thought to be Really good? Or where was So∣briety, Justice, Charity, thought the marks of Reproach and Infamy? They accounted it a mans glory to be Vertuus, and to be vitious base and mean; to be betrayed into sin, weakness; to contrive it, sordid; to defend it, infamy; to make a mock at it, a mark of the highest folly and Incorrigibleness, and the bare suspicion of vice in a person, was diminution to an esteem that might otherwise have been great in the world. We decline vertue only because 'tis dif∣ficult, the companion of all excellent things; and without which not worthy a Recompence. In the service of impetuous lusts is to be undergone far greater pains; the Trouble of being sober, is far less than that of being debauched and intempe∣rate. The pleasures f sin must needs offend through the opposite endeavours of Flesh & Spirit, & the bitter remembrance that they must end▪ and yield no more than the Picture of Contentment to that in doing which leads to the right hand of God, where are pleasures for ever more. Vice is the green sickness of the Soul, which makes her nauseate all substantial food, and long for nought but Trash; she therefore swallows down sensual pleasures with such a delightful gust and Ho-goo, while all ratio∣nal
Spiritual delights leave their bitter far∣well behind; let drop a pious discourse to such, and you make musick unto deaf Ad∣ders; do but fling out the Bait of an obscene story, and you angle their Souls into their ears: They find more pleasure in a Laseivious Poem; than in the Psalmes of David; the de∣lights of a Jovial Club, more Eligible than those of a Holy Communion; the reason is, their Appetite is wofully depraved, the sto∣mach so surfeited with sensuality that it turns against and instantly vomits up all substantial nourishment; but were it purged from the viciousness wherewith 'tis cloyed and over-loaded, she would loath the Quails, as much as she doth now the Manna; and in the room of her sensual Bouimy, where-with sh's possest, would immediately succeed a Sared hunger, making her twine greedily about every precept, watch at every oppor∣tunity, suck sweetness out of every duty, ex∣tract the very spirits and quintessence of eve∣ry Ordinance. Short fighted Souls look no far∣ther than their senses, grope after Happiness in the Allurements of the flesh, think no Heaven to brave Apparell, or Paradise to that of their mi∣stris's embraces; wil buy revenge at so dear a rate as the price of Blood, and the damnation of their Souls with the Hazard of their lives and for∣tunes; they think the of stain Blood is wiped off when their Sword is sheathed, and the noyse of murdr full'd so soon as they have struck down their enemy: But he tortures himself
that sins unpunished; And did they experience the uninterrupted delights that arise from the Conscience of well doing, They'd find good men do not serve God for nought; but that it is worth their while setting aside another life, meerly to prevent a Hell in this; And that themselves lose the substance by catching at the shadow; seek for peace in wars and fightings, take much pains to gather Grapes from Thorns, and Figs from Thistles; such pleasure from vice as only grw from virtue. Where Grace hath not put a restraint on the Appetite, stoln waters may be sweet, but not pleasant: A man is Happy or miserable, accord∣ing to his mind: Poverty with contentment is no great affliction; Riches with greedy desires, with continual cares are a plague and torment; the frolicks of voluptuous men that seem to pass away their daies in Mirth and Jollity, are but like the pleasures of a Robber on the High∣way, accompanyed with fear and constant fail∣ing of his heart. We see their great estates, their delicious feasts, their full cups and mer∣ry countenances, but not the little Truce they have with misery; what envy, hatred, from their neighbors; what inward Recoylings, Trepidations, and convulsions; what severe smarts, and Cruel lashings; what gnawing gripes in secret; what sad nights after their merry dayes: Their Joyes which make their neighbors envious, are but as the Tormenting Stone, or Gout, stately accomodated, or laid on a Purple bed; those plagues and torments,
which we call peace and happiness. O the melancholly intervalls they must needs suffer, who are fain to stretch themselves on Couches, to invent to themselves Instruments of Mu∣sick, to drink Wine in Boles, to study for new methods of losing time, that by these A∣musements they may put far off the evil day, and be as unmindful of their own, as of the af∣flictions of Joseph: Am. 6. 1. &c. The morning to them, is as the shadow of death, if one know them they are in the terrors of the shadow of death: Job. 24. 17. con∣science they dare not permit to speak, left it should say more than they are willing to hear: It suffers the violence of a prisoner, while it should sustain the place of a Judge; yet while dancing round hand in hand, guilt like the Devil stands in the midst of the Circle, and with its fla∣ming eyes often stares them into horror, and looks them into trembling. There are a great deal more pleasures at the Gate than can lodge within the Rooms, and Chambers of iniquity: In the closest retirement they can find to sin, they are not solitary; and in the same hour of their sumptuous fare, a Hand writing so troubles their thoughts, that their countenances are changed, the Joints of their loins loosed, their knees smite one against another Dan. 5. and marrs their supper without imparing their dainties; changing the scene of their delights into that of their pangs, and their full Boles into a cup of trembling: even in laughter their heart is sor∣rowful, and the end of that mirth, Heaviness. Such as applaud themselves in their privacy to
defile their souls, shall be forc'd in the sight of the Sun to do penance before all the world, men, Angels, and Devils, and find confusion, as sure as late. The sting and shame which accompa∣nies the pleasures of sin, the corners which it seeks, the repentance wherewith 'tis followed, together with its little duration, allow it not worthy to be compared with being innocent and vertuous in the sight of the Sun; debarring from no corporal pleasure that's agreeabe to reason, and our true interest, and astording delights in∣comparably beyond these, which strangers can∣not understand, doth not intermeddle with Prov. 14. 10.. Disobedient men are self-condemned, & at Christ's Bar shall produce Records of their own keep∣ing, writ as with the point of a Diamond, of all their evil deeds from the womb to the grave. They who hate the light to do evil, are scorch∣ed with sparks themselves have kindled, but can∣not extinguish the Candle of the Lord, Pro. 20. 27. nor enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, but are gnawed with that worm which shall never die, where the fire is not quenched; the luscious sweets of sin are so dearly reckoned for, and afford so much biterness in the latter end, that their senses sadly convince them of (which their sensuality kept them from believing) the folly of gaining any thing at the rate of losing their souls. Considerate men, not content to inhabit only, By the creature. but to understand (and so truly enjoy) the crea∣ation, discern a Divine Omniscient, shining through the most despicable object. Such a va∣riety
of curious useful creatures is this world ador∣ned with, as may well astonish an intelligent in∣quisitve Spectator, who traces the Authors ex∣quisite inimitable workmanship; yea amaze and force such as see (not the secret recesses or de∣licate lineaments) but the surface, to adore the God of nature. Some born blind, restored to sight, have been so ravished at the surpassing Spectacle of so many curious objects, that almost every thing they saw transported them with such ad∣miration and delight, as indangered the loss of the eyes of their minds, by thse of their bodies. An ability not only to behold and sustain our lives by them, but to consider, compare, alter, as∣sist, and improve them to various purposes, is a prerogative above other creatures, and so far capable of being advanc't by industry, as makes some men excell others as much as they do beasts. The more attentively they reflect upon those things it brings to their knowledge, the more they find the world to be an immense volume, which can be never enough studied, or throughly read: and the things of consideration which it offers to their understanding, infinitely exceed in number those that are read in the best furnished libraries. To them the earth seems quite another thing, and in every little particle of its matter (by adding artificial organs to their naturall) see almost as great variety of crea∣tures: and in the parts of the most minute, such gildings, embroideries, and curious variety, as o∣thers are able to reckon up in the whole Uni∣verse. And how delicate a hand must be em∣ployed
to contrive into so narrow a compass, the several external, and internal parts requi∣site to make up a little animal, so small that they are all workmanship and not discernible by the unassisted eyes. The numberless kind of birds, beasts, fish, herbs, shrubs, stones, mettals, minerals, and every of which indu'd with all the qualifi∣cations requisite to the perpetuation of their spe∣cies, preservation of their lives, attainment of the respective ends of their creation, the plenti∣ful and easie provision made them; how many nascuntur Artifices, born their own crafts-masters, Physician, Carpenter, apparrell'd, and arm'd by nature upon their first entrance; live and sport themselves in their several elements, bring forth young, and provide for them, build, and know their appointed time, every year keep the same course, and order, yet ignorant of what they do, and work for an end they do not understand; Am. 9. 3 in their course fight against the Atheist, who ra∣ther ignores the being of God, than denies it; and is little lesse a stranger to the mysteries of nature, than to the Author of it; being writ in such legible Characters upon every leaf of na∣tures book, that the denyal of it seems far more stupendious than those great works that demon∣strate it. A studious, diligent perusal of this book of the world discovers to us a lad∣der, whose top reaches to the foot-stool of the Throne of God; the highest link of natures Chain, tied to the the foot of Jupiter's Chair: God who made all things for himself, looses much of his design in setting forth so famous, so finely
drawn, so magnificent, so many waies beautiful, a structure, by those busied only about what serves their own trifling uses; living ignorant of all the rooms of the house, saving that wherein they lurk, minding nothing of the Architecture, proportion of its parts in relation to each other, and to the entire structure; in which is display'd so much workmanship as was never meant for eyes, that wilfuly close themselves, and confront it with the not judging it worthy the specula∣ting; who are more concerned as Citizens of any place than of the world; and live so wholly as Londoners, that they never find the leisure to worship and live as men: that behold so many in∣structive creatures with no more discerning eyes, than those whom nature hath denied the pre∣rogative of Reason, as they deny themselves the use of it; so taken up with trifles, or the works of mens hands, that they pass by those of na∣ture, and admire every Artist, but the only ex∣cellent God, who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of Heaven, Job. 35 11. yet they (guided by a reason transcending ours) in some operations (by instinct, not imitation, fancy supplying the place of reason) surpasse those of the most cun∣ning workmen. Nor can the benefit be any way so much as by promoting our piety. Were we as able to discern the secret workings of na∣ture, as the productions of art, (the Ape of it) managed by Wheels, Engines, Springs, devised by humane wit; and had a perfect insight into the subtilty of their composition, structure of
their parts, various texture of their matter, in∣struments and manners of their regular moti∣ons, singular uses and properties in their several ranks, orders, times, and seasons, exact obedi∣ence, and significant representation of their su∣preme Maker and Governour, the curious and subordinate disposition one creature hath unto another, the exact symmetry and proportion of each part unto the whole; we should find we trample upon many things for which we have cause to kneel, and offer praises to God for his excellent greatness. It may well stop our over bold enquiries to comprehend God, we can't all he hath put in any the least of his creatures. And what we vulgarly call ugly (as a Toad or Ser∣pent) in respect of the Ʋniverse are as regular comly parts as any of the rest, their outward shapes suitable to their inward forms, and those purposes they were intended for, by him who hath not only given man a soul capable of enjoy∣ing himself, but such an Habitation for it here, as by the curiosity of its contrivance, number and usefulness of its parts, might be a perpetual and Domestick Testimony of the wisdom of its maker. And if we compare his munificence in creating so many things (the cryers and He∣ralds of his glory) that never violate the laws of their nature, nor endeavour to disappoint him of his ends, for the necessity and pleasure of rebellious unthankfull man (de∣signed to command this lower world and serve the Creator of it) we must resent an ingenuous shame, and noble disdain, that that creature
should be of all the least grateful, that hath recei∣ved the most benefits, that those whom God hath made little lower than the Angels, should debase their nature below the very lowest rank of crea∣tures, be the only jarring string in this great In∣strument to discompose this divine melody; be∣come the only unprofitable useless part of the creation, and prove the most unruly who alone is priviledged with reason to rule himself, and to refer the creatures that want it, to the Crea∣tors glory: to that end hath he placed us here, as well as to prepare our selves for a better man∣sion. Even those that have not the Law, not on∣ly are a Law unto themselves, Rom. 1. . but have the creation for their Library, Bible and History of the Almighty, already open in all places where they can run and read without a teacher, for, What e're they see, or wheresoe're they go, They must see God, whether they will or no. In smaller creatures He's set forth, as it were in Short-Hand, in great, in Capital letters; in inanimates is a certain kind of dumb Eloquence, there is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard, their line is gone out through all the earth▪ and their words to the end of the world. P 19.  To them the whole world is a Pul∣pit, and all things therein Regii professores, Divi∣nity readers, preachers of the invisible God; & al∣most every particle suggests an use of instruction, reproof, or exhortation. The Mle-hills inhabi∣tant condemnes our improvident forecast; the Llies of the Field, our distrust of Gods Provi∣dence,
&c. No Chymist can make such a rare ex∣tract of the creature as the Christians, they draw medicines for feavers, gouts, &c. He Antidotes against unbelief, &c. Do but aske the beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee; or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee, and the fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. Job. 12. 7. 8. Not only Kings of the earth and all people, but beasts, and all cat∣tel, creeping things and flying fowls, dragons and all deeps, mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all Cedars, fire and hail, snow and va∣por, storm and wind, praise the Lord, and ful∣fill his word: Psal. 148. such as honour not God, in naturalls, are not spull, nor of their number that worship him who liveth for ever, and ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne, saying, thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power, for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Rev. 4. 10 11. By the Scriptures. Addicting ones heart to the knowledge of na∣ture, both invites and recompences our comtempla∣tion; highly gratifies our intelecual faculties, without displeasing any of them, being none of those criminal pleasures which injured and in∣censed consciences very much allay in the fruition, and turn into Torments after; yet must give way to those wherewith the improved opportunities of serving and enjoying God, are capable of bles∣sing the pious soul. As God, so the knowledge of him is infinitely better than of all things he hath
made: And he that hath placed so much delight∣fulness in a knowledge wherein he allows his very enemies to become great proficients (many of whom are so taken up with Astrological con∣templations of Heaven, as they deny themselves time to study in his Book that made it the way of getting thither) hath surely reserved much higher, to sweeten and endear those disclo∣sures of himself, which he vouchsafes to none but such as know and do his will revealed in his Word; in which is such an admirable Harmony and disposition, as manifests it the work of the same wisdome, that so accurately, divinely com∣posed the Book of nature, which leaves all with∣out excuse; but this only able to make us wise to salvation, and affords him that searches for it as for hid treasure, not only light to work∣by, and a comfortable warmth while he is work∣ing, but animates by the hopes it cherisheth in him, that in due season his paines and diligence shall be rewarded. How admirable is infinite wisdome and goodnesse in so tempering his word, as induces the most learned to implore & depend on him for light by leaving amongst many pas∣sages that stoop to our weakness, some that may make us sensible of it, and others in so plain fa∣miliar a way, as the illiterate may see they were not forgotten or overlooked by him, places so obscure, as if it meant purposely to pose, teach us humility if nothing else; and give us an happy opportunity to evince how great a re∣verence we pay Gods word, upon the single score of its being so. We ought to study what we
can't understand: By the welcome Christ disposes us to give his word, he saith, what I say thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter. John 13. 7. Every new degree of Scripture knowledge, is an Instrument to acquire more; and ignorance of those places whose sense we seek for, makes us more perfect in the meaning of all the rest. Re∣ligious Industrious inquirers by experience find, what at a distance deter'd them, was not inten∣ded to frustrate diligence, but to punish their la∣zinesse, who thought not such knowledge worthy studying for; and do now admire what before they could not relish, because they did not understand. What at first through a superficiall cursory perusal, appeared barren, useless, or tautologies, their sedulous searching into, hath discovered such pregnant uses, as they have e∣qually admired the riches of those texts, and their not discerning it sooner: Repeated pints make Hereticks blush to question, and despair to disprove truths attested by more than two or three witnesses; and give Orthodox Believers the satisfaction of having there Anchor tied to a three-fold cord, which is not easily broken. The very words and phrases which clothe the obvious sense, are not only Emphaticll, but often mysterius and highly instructive; affording not only seasonable fruit, but the very leaves are for the healing of the nations. Rev. 22. 2. The strongest Proficients in Scripure-knowledge, have the keenest stomacks to this spiritual food▪ at what a rate did those purchase the Bible, when 'twas capital to be found possessors of it: Valued
we not our bodies above our souls, and inferiour things before God; we should esteem the words of his mouth, more than our necessary food; 'twould hugely indeare his word to us, that the object of our devotion is the author of it. How could our love to him suffer us from frequent en∣tertaining our selves with those Leaves which are at once his writing and picture; represent∣ing, and refreshing us with the vast unmerited Love▪ and unresembling Idea (in the absence of an immediater presence) of our only desi∣rable beloved, that the Deity hath framed for Mortalls to apprehend. Some possessed with this servent flame, placed so much contentment here▪ that no thoughts so sweetly steal away themselves, & time, as those employed in conver∣sing with God on the Horeb of both testaments; the sweetnesse whereof so affecting them, as they could even beg of an Enemy this leave to be happy; not without much unwillingnesse ob∣taining it of their thoughts, to return to sublu∣nary employments; one having tasted was so taken with the lusciousnesse of Christ's doctrine, that before much company could not forbear commending the Tree for the Fruit sake Luke 11. 27. Sure Atheists only omit frequent perusing these profound contrivances, whose wisdom ingages the Attention, & exacts the wonder of Angells, who for all their native abilities, high preroga∣tives and employments desire, yea, bow to prie into; 1 Pet. 1. 12. disdaining, not to think our In∣structions worthy their concern, while we dis∣dain a concern for our own instruction. I ap∣peal
to the judgement of any carnall Reader un∣prejudicated, setting aside the Majesty of the Author, and profitablenesse of the Subject, whe∣ther any History be so pleasant as the sacred or can compare with it for Magnificence, Antiquity of the matter, sweetnesse of compiling, strang variety of memorable Occurrences; Its Scribes supplying each others Omission, according to Gods decrees, and Seasons in dispensing his mysteries to his Church, that in Writers severed by so many Ages, and Regions, a Harmony whose seeming dissonances seem but to mani∣fest the sincerity, and unconspiringnesse of the Author, their mutuall Irradiations, and secret re∣ferences, perswade their Pens were guided by an Omniscient Hand, and were but the severall Secretaries of the same Inditer: where he stoops to our Capacities, is something so awfull, so clearly his, as manifests a Majestick Prerogative above any others. Eloquent Orators unsatisfiedly travel∣ling through all sorts of Humane Volumes, have acquiest only in this Divine one: Be∣ginning perhaps to read it out of Curiosity, or to learn some unknown Language 'twas tran∣slated into, or some such triviall purpose, have found themselves engaged to continue that ex∣ercise out of conscience, having, by the means they elected, their reverence and assent carried away beyond the end they designed, in spite of their indisposition to it, climbing up this Syco∣more-te only to see Jesus have passed thence to be his Proselite and Convert, receiving him joy∣fully into their Hearts, and Houses. Other com∣posures
of Devotion still lose with nice pallats at second reading; Acquaintance here still en∣deares; Familiarity breeds not Contempt but Re∣verence. If we light of the sense, we can't miss of truth, nor be deceived, except we deceive our selves, by presuming we understand it, when indeed we do not: Therefore can't but prize a Book so comprehensive, which understood, makes it safe for us to ignore others as needlesse to Sal∣vation, and which ignored, are insufficient: It containing virtually all Divine Precepts, others scatteringly glean out of Humane Books: and our selves otherwise affected to find the world depreciated by him that enjoyed all the de∣lights and Glories of it; then when we meet with the same from some beggerly Cynick that never tasted those luscious bewitching pleasures, and need no greater Philosophy to despise a World he judges of by the scanty share, the nar∣rownesse of his condition allows him of the joys of it. When God affirms we cant be wise or happy, but by being good, nor avoid the greatest Miseries, but by eschewing Evill, it works on us otherwise than the same in Humane Authors, whose frailties make them obnoxious to mistake, and capable to deceive: Ʋnwise, unthank full they, and as well wrong themselves as the Scripture, who choose to read Gods word rather in any Book than his own; but much more, who make Divertisments their Impediment: To gratifie their Fancy, more than their reason: despise, neglect reading this (the best way to Justfie it self, & disabuse them) than which, scarce any thing
can be more prejudiciall, to a Book that needs to be but heedfully observed, and sufficiently under∣stood to be highly reverenc'd. Their pleasure is so bewitching, so dear to them, that they like no∣thing that would divorce, or divert their per∣suit; whose pride, and lazinesse dare plead Multiplicity of weighty avocations against the one thing necessary: The importantest imployments, are the Study, and Glory of God; and sure they that pretend want of leisure for their neglect of reading the Scripture; must be able to give a rare account of all the portions of their Time, to make that passe for a Misimployment of it, that is laid out towards the purchase of a Happy Eternity. He ever makes an ill Bargain that gets Hell to Boot, who to gain so inconsiderable a possession as the whole world, shall part with his own soul. So earnestly is it injoined, that scarce any can think the neglect of reading it no fault, save those that are guilty of it, because it prophesies no good concerning them. Their vitious scandalous lives make them deny the Scripture, for fear of being obliged for meer shame to live more con∣formable to it. 'Tis the Interest, not the Reason of these guilty Malefactors that makes them find fault with this Statute-Book, that finds so much fault with them. Their Censures and irreligious expressions are as Apologies they judge neces∣sary to palliate their sins, or as Acts of Revenge for their being exposed in all their deformities to the Eye of the World, and of their own con∣sciences in the Bible, and do rather shew what they would have men believe of them, than
what themselves believe of the Scripture; by seeming to slight which they hope to have there vices imputed rather to a Superiority of their Reason over that of others, than a Servitude of their Reason to their passion; when cast upon peruseing it, they do it in so perverse a manner, as if they went to revenge themselves on that unwelcome opportunity: Their Observation is worse than their Neglect; They look into it in∣sidiously, not as Disciples, but as spies, not to weigh the obligingnesse, but to quarrel at the unreasonablenesse, difficulty, impossibility of its Injunctions; not to direct their practice, but to excuse their prevarications: They contrive, not how they may comply with it, but how they may best bend it to comport with them: They rebate its edge, or turn it only against such of their corruptions as they have least kindnesse for: They weigh its Precepts with no other de∣sign but that, of taking the lightest; those to which their constitutions, or other circumstan∣ces carry least repugnance: They come unto it, not as to a Law, but to a Market, cheapen what they best like, and leave the rest for other Cust∣omers, nor will they take faith's word, that, so it is, unlesse Reason will be her Surety, and shew them bow. Profane Wretches stamp their own Image, and Superscription on Gods Coin; Tor∣ture it to confess that which was never in it, and their own wits to pervert the Holy Scrip∣tures expressions to deliver their obscene thoughts; A thing so easie, as almost any man hath the wit to talk at their Profane Rate, that
will but allow himself the sawey boldnesse, and Hellish Liberty to contemn, yea directly and immediately to provoke God, by making him the Subject of their derision, and sport with that word he so solemnly declares his mind by to Mankind, and which shall judge them at the last day. But considering persons will scarce deem him a Wit, that will venter to be damned to be thought one; or admire his plenty who cannot make an Entertainment without furni∣shing out the table with a John Baptist Head; nor please the Fancy, without offending the Con∣science; nor say any thing well, but what is Ill to say: Never using their Wits, but to gratifie their own or others Lusts, nor the Bible except in their Tavern-Songs, only as anchovis, to entice the company to drink the longer, instead of em∣ploying their parts, in working for the Sanct∣uary, by cloathing excellent thoughts, in suita∣ble winning dresses, the way to have their names written, at once in Heaven, and in the immor∣tall leaves of Fame, prostitute them to indite li∣centious irreligious ones, that argue more a de∣pressed soul, than an elevated Fancy: A sin so un∣profitable, as scarce gets them any thing but an ill name amongst good men upon Earth, and a worse place amongst bad men in Hell; by making their Envy and Impiety so malicious and disinterest∣ed, that they will endeavour to do religion harm though it be to do themselves no good, and have no excuse of declining their conscience in com∣plyment to their senses: nor will the highest favour of Applaus, and the being cried
up for a wit, so repair the punishment of pro∣faness, but that its wretched sufferers will find but small satisfaction, in having their name celebrated in other Books, while 'tis blotted out of that of Lif: And can't but think that wisdom the greatest folly, who to tempt praises they seldom hear, provide themselves Torments they shall ever feel; and that that pains and time spent in studying corrupt discourses, was a hewing fewel for Hell flames, where they shall be weep∣ing and gnashing their Teeth, while they that be wise shall shine as the brightnesse of the Fir∣mament, and they that turn many to righteous∣nesse as the Stars for ever and ever Dan. 12. 3. A Treble portion we enjoyed of Gods mer∣cies, By our late Civill Wars. to mankind in generall, to the Christian world in particular; our lines fallen in pleasant places: from our Fathers will in our mother∣tongue, we might take counsell as a man of his friend: To us chiefly have been committed the Oracles of God; but have been exercised with such strange intermingled providences, as is a Theam worthy the best Historian Pen, and choycest Christ∣ian Meditation. We have had such unexpected wonderfull appearances of a Divine Hand, own∣ing, preserving, rescuing Innocency in such e∣minent Exigences, as Experience seals that Pro∣verb infallible, In the mount will the Lord be seen. Such remarkable events of mens vain projects, Gods infinite eye so piercing through all pre∣tences, as Justice hath required no other Accuser than their own Consciences, bringing to light
(notwithstanding all possible care used to the contrary) such private consultations, contrivance and practices as evince, there's nothing hid that shall not be known, but what is done in secret shall be published on the House-top. How sad the condition of these discomposed dilacerated nations, what clancular actings of Satans ma∣chivals (who cared not to set a whole world on fire, meerly to rost their own eggs by, and build themselves monuments of the Churches ruines) how dareing the insolencies and attempts of unstable minds, acted by the various and quoti∣tidian conduct of changeable and domestical In∣terests against our Moses and Aarons, hath been so well known at home and abroad, as hath render∣ed us a shame to our selves and a Ludibrium to the world? The untimely death of Princes, the frequent expirations and vicissitudes of e∣states and Governments, servants set in great dignity, and the rich sitting in low places, per∣sons of mean extraction, leaving their Cottages and dwelling in Kings Palaces, while Soveraignty forced to take up the Lodging of a Crow: Beggars lifted from the Dunghill to the Throne, while Ma∣jesty justled off, and not allowed the Liberty of a Subject: The dolefull earthquakes and con∣cussions in Church and State; the wild pernicious Opinions and horrid practices among us, seemed as if the scene of the ten Tribes was translated into these Nations, and we making hast to be a Loruamah, Hos. 1. 6 surely 'twas through the wrath of the Lord of Host, that our Land was watered with bloud. Eze. 3. 26. And the People as the fewel
of fire, no man sparing his Brother; Isa. 9. 19. when War was proclaimed in our Gates, and our mighty men awakened, and all the men of war drew near and stood up, Joe. 3. 9. when our Cornets were turned into Fifes, our Dances into Mar∣ches, and our Banquets into want of Bread, our Livery-Gowns into Buf-Coats, our Suites of Gold into Glittering Armour; our Beavers into Helmets; and those into a Myter, and Infallibility inspired with the sound of a Trumpet, the pride of the Cupboard and the Fingers Glory into Souldiers Salleries, and the price of Blood, our Walking-Staves into Halberts, our Girdles into Belts, and our Cassoks into Coats of Mail, our Stately struct∣ures into Garrisons, our Dwelling Houses into Prisons, our Temples into Stables, Jakes, Places of Stench, and Filthinesse, the Abomination of De∣solation, standing in the Holy place, and the House of Praier a Den of Theeves: When our Pruning Hooks were beaten into Spears, and our Plow∣shares into Swords, sharpened, not among the Philistines, but at Sion, which always makes it cut the keenest. Woe, and Alas to such sad Encomasticks, when men engaged in Designs not on intuition of their Lawfulnesse, but Profit, and never enquired into the Justice of the quar∣rel but the rate of the pay: when there were such Tigers and Fryars, as would rifle for drams of Silver, into the Bowels of their own Flesh, and either Kill, or Die for a Day's Wages; Hewing down men like Brambles, and butcher∣ing them like Oxen, defaceing Gods Image as if it were but battering down a painted Picture; o∣pening
the Conduits of life to gush forth till the last drop were their mirth; wounds their feats of Activity, bloud their Cordiall, cry∣ing groans their musick, gastly faces their looking-glasses, shivering bones the reliques of their puissance, and dead carcasses the emblems of their glorious Triumphs, when the noise of Drums and Trumpets deafned our ears to the cries and groans of oppressed Sufferers, and Re∣gall Laws must give place to private ones: When sate down to meat we suspected the intrusion of armed, uninvited guests; and our next nights lod∣ging to be in Prison, or out of our Beds, when we were rather Stewards than owners of our e∣states, and had rather the Trouble than Advan∣tage of their Managery, when we strove to supplant, surprize, destroy our nearest Friend, or Kinsman, and our bloud was poured out as dust, and our Flesh as the dung; Ze. 1. 17. and widdows encreased like the Sands of the Sea, Jer. 15. 8. when members of the same body carried themselves as if of a different world. They who once lay in one anothers bosome, could hardly endure to stand in the same seat, or join in the same Fa∣mily Duty; praying with, and for one another before, now one against another: Division of Hearts hindred the building of the new Jeru∣salem; while contending about the Windows, we had almost lost the Foundation of the Church; when pretence of inward Sanctity in some, devoured their outward decency, and was suborn'd to legitimate those practices, the reall solid one forbids and execrates; and God
said to be Honoured, and exalted by those ways whereby men would think themselves affronted & vilified, when faith was made subservient to extinguish love, Charity banished to fetch home truth, and a Coal from the Altar to set the Temple it self on fire: When our slightest pro∣blems were writ in blood; Thousands made na∣ked to keep the surplice off a few mens Backs; pulling down Churches in displea∣sure at the Windows: when our minute dif∣ferences became quarrels, by disputes raised a∣bout a Pin, or Naile of the Temple, shook and endangered the whole Fabrick; and robbed the Church of Fraternall Ʋnity, the surest Cement and Support: The Laws trampled upon, for the preservation of Right, Justice violated for its own security; Oaths broken for the con∣servation of Faith; The People oppressed for their Welfare; The Nation inthrall'd for its Liberty, forced to maintain Tyranny for its freedom. When Christian Religion at once was violated & defamed, not only her Precepts broken, but her self asperst with the filthy consequences of that disobedience brought in, to abett seditious practices: when men could say Grace over the foulest Crimes, and consecrate them to the use of a good cause, when they should have been doing Gods work, were hiding the Ba∣bylonish garment; instead of driving Nails into Gods Temple to en it, were driving a wedge of Gold into their own Cofers: when neither the Command of G, the Authority of Laws, the Love of Peace, the Fear of War, the Sa∣cred
Unction, Royall Crown, nor Scepter it self, could awe the bloudy insolent Sword, secure and defend the Soveraign's Head: when men judged of the Justice by the Successe of their Attempts; and that their cause was ap∣proved of God because prosperous, when our Hands were embrewed in our Neighbours bloud, Ambitious to be unjust Conquerors, and Honour sought in war, which formerly was not to be Crown'd with boasting Triumph: Be thou, Oh Charles (the first) added to our deplorable Trophies, who the Fortune of war caused to be esteemed faulty, and was looked upon as a Crime in thee to be overcome. Our War was (both a Sin and a Judgement) like to swallow up the one, and Victory the other, and the publick still sure to be a loser: War for the Kingdom against the King; for his Autho∣rity against his Person: The Soveraign arraigned before his Subjects: Majesty it self accused of Treason, and barbarously slain (with an Axe whetted at Rome,) that they might se on his Inheritance; let a Curtain there be drawn over our sorrows, a veil over our shame. Then did Royall Majesty descend into the dust, and the Glory, Peace, and Safety of the Nation with him. How then did all Loyall Hearts Throb and Tremble? How did all faces gather black∣nesse, that were not steeled with Rebellion, and Impudence? How did the whole Land sit as a widdow, desolate, and forsaken? So that our very Victories were Tragicall, and our Triumphs mournfull, and the Conquerors with the Conquer∣ed
had cause to sit down in Tears; For the Al∣mighty had called for a Sword against us through all the Land, which cut off the right∣eous with the wicked: The dead bodies of his servants were made bridges over ditches, and gi∣ven as meat unto the Fowls of Heaven, and the Flesh of his Saints unto the beasts of the Earth; their blood shed like water round about the Kingdom, and none to bury them: So that we were become a derision to our neighbouring Nations, a By-word among the Heathens, a terror to our selves; Troubled on every side, without were fightings, within fears, and none had Peace or was secure under his own Roof; but every Heart melted, and all hands were feeble, every spirit fainted, and all knees were as water because of the spoilers rapine: and a man was made an offender for a word, Isah. 29. 21. and a Sword was sharpened to make a sore slaughter, and the Lord pleaded against us with blood, and with Fire, and with Brim∣stone, his fury was upon his face, and a great shaking in our Land: Jer. 1. 12. 3. e. 21. And yet the confu∣sed noise of battels, and warriors, the ratling of wheels, and of praunsing Horses, the jumb∣ling of Charriots, and of the bright Sword, and glittering Spear, the multitude of slain, and the great number of carcasses (So that we stumbled upon corpses, nah. 3. 3. and upon garments rowled in blood) Isa. 9. 5. did not awaken us. As to many might it not be said, we are a talk∣ing, not a repenting People; if our tongues are better, so are not our Hearts, our Bibles,
our Pulpits have taught us little but a Scrip∣ture Language, a Sanctuary Phrase; we repent in Adages, or ordinances only, not by ordering our feet; turn from one opinion to other principles, from one faction to another sect, but who from his evill ways: we swim in o∣ther Seas, but like the Porcupine, the change of water makes us not lose our prickles; shift places but like Serpents, carry our poison with us whereever we creep; turn Proselites, not to God, but two-fold more the Children of wrath. Were ever so many Pulpits despised? so many unregenerating Sermons? unmollify∣ing Lectures? many watch over souls, but how few win them? many Counsellors, but who is a Father? Our Faith is a distraction, our re∣pentance a contagion, a corruption. We talk much of the Gospel, and reformation, but when shall we once be Evangelicall, and the reformed Church? We are gotten, we say, our of Aegypt, but do we not carry Aegypt into Ca∣naan? and make the Land of promise, a Land of provocation? Fled farther from Rome, and gone into Sodom? Left her corruption in Doctrine, but kept those in manners. Oh sad separation, for all the ground we have left be∣hind us, have we left in the Red Sea, or in the Wildernesse, or upon the Bank of Jordan, our evill ways? What reformation to be seen a∣mongst us but beating down Crosses? clashing windows? demolishing a font? new placing a communion Table? plucking off that abomi∣nable Rochet? hewing of May-poles? but hath
this reformation cleansed away sin; are we made more morall than Turks? more pure than Infidells? Is there not as much pride and co∣vetousness, craft and perfidiousnesse, peevish∣nesse and contention, as among Barbarians, and Scythians? And how did that little blood left in others boil up in scum, and rage? we impati∣ently murmured under those burthens, our sins prepared, and other mens laid upon us; and disclaimed Gods relief, by indirect attempts of our own; yet took it very ill, that he left us to the Successes of them, that he prospered not those methods he had interdicted, and made us Triumphant, not only over our enemies, but himself too. We laid boundlesse expect∣ations upon the Justice of our cause, and as if we had extremely obliged God by not bing Traytors, thought he wronged us extremely that he made us not Victors: we seemed to think Loyalty witchcraft; that like a spell it was able to keep us invulnerable, not only against our Enemies, but our selves; and so countercharm all our Crimes, that they should only be active to please not to hurt us. How many had little private Rebellions of their own, even while they opposed the more publick? that owed their zeal to their spleen? and did not so much love those they fought for, as Hate those they fought a∣gainst. The profession of Holinesse their ad∣versaries had put on, more averted these Liber∣tines from them, than all their reall Crimes: Their professing to advance the power of god∣linesse, allarum'd them to contend, not for the
liberty of their Country, but their Lusts; so could with no Justice expect a reputation, or successe from that cause, which they at once Help't to defame and defeat: And the soberer 'tis to be suspected were inspir'd more by the spirit of opposition than of piety, from whom the Liturgy never had so much veneration, as when the Directory was set up against it: A perverse kind of zeal or devotion, kindled only by Antiperistasis (not of that pure flame which descends from Heaven) excited by interdict, and deadned by invitation. He then makes Civill wars to cease, and stil∣leth the tumult of the people Psal. 65. . and returns By our peaceable settlement. our Peace, before we had forsaken our sins; As if he meant to try our Ingenuity that we who had been so much worse than Beasts un∣der those former methods, and no stripes di∣sciplin'd us, might have this advantage to re∣deem our credit, and be drawn with the cords of a man. After the shedding of Royall Blood, to the shame and reproach of Religion and the Nation, and perpetuall infamy of the Actors of it. He disappoints our Anointed's Enemies confident Hopes, of finding him among  Slain, or Prisoners; and delivers Good Men of their afflictive fears for his Jeopardy, and of ever seeing him on his Throne; except he swome to it in the blood of his Subjects; makes rebellious Absolons Executioner, our Lawfull Soveraigns Sanctuary; provides him Safety & Favour in a strange Land. And though the dangerous oppositions of our provocations,
insolent by contending against Gods goodness, made it far more reasonable to look for a Hand upon the wall, writing a visible irrecover∣able sentence of Extirpation, than secretly and powerfully working deliverance behind it: When we had set our selves in a Defiance of his Judgement, he layed as it were an Am∣bush of mercy for us; gave a Victory without a war; and surprised us with Safety by such indiscernable ways, turning again our captivi∣ty, that we were like them that dream Psal. 126. 1. He bowed the Hearts of England even as one man, so that they sent this word to the King, re∣turn thou, and all thy servants, that all the people of the Land may rejoice, and the City may be at quiet; so the King returned, and the Nobles went to meet and conduct the King. 2 Sam. 19. 14. 15. He erects his Thrne in as calm a manner, as was the Temple, without the noyse of Swords, Guns, Axes, and Hammers, when we had been so long da∣shing to pieces one against another, and all things reeling, and breaking into confusion, he composes and orders them as before; E∣very one sitting under his own Vine, and un∣der his own Fig-tree, eating the fruits of his own Labours, and none to make him afraid, nor danger of Sequestration, but from our own Luxury, or of being mocked into his Grave by Shews, and Pagantries of Justice that will but keep in the boundaries of known Laws. But no sooner is the Scepter redeemed from Bond∣age, and restored to its Master, but the whole Nation is made loose; Licentiousnesse
invades the People; And we suffer smiling fu∣ries; Luxury revengeth weapons, and England wips away war with a lazy peace; giddy head∣ed Liberty breaks its Reins, fumes, waxes hot, burnes, and swelling with successe tramples on Ordinances with a profane Heel: in∣fected we are with filthinesse; and a debauch∣ed company of People are inhabitants of a dirty Sty. When he had made Peace with∣in our Borders, and filled us with the finest of the Wheat, Psal. 147. 14. our Late unhappinesse nor pre∣sent favour prevailed with us: for his blessings we rejoiced, but grew rather wanton than thankfull; we entertained the change with a joy too profuse, but not enough religious. We saw that great things were done for us, wherefore we were glad, but did not so much consider that the Lord had done them; Psal. 129. 2, 3. and so were rather affected with the rarity and profitable∣ness, than mercy and kindnesse of the dis∣pensation. Our transports were such as ex∣hausted themselves in their noise. We ex∣pressed our joy in Bone-fires, and it vapoured away in the smoke; there wanted that mixture of Piety, which should have fixed that volatile passion. We noted and surfeited on his blessings, feasted our lusts on his fa∣vours, dishonoured, spurned, kicked against him in the face of all his bounties. The Oil of his mercy made us more nimble, and active in feats of Impiety, and his creatures mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; Isa. 5. 22. our requitall to him for com∣posing
our nationall intestine Broils, were to give Reins to our open Rebellion against Hea∣ven; for restoring our Soveraign to rise up against our God, for removing the Disorders of Church and State to bring them into our Hearts and Lives; we put off not only Piety but Humanity, from the most benigne purposes, extracted nothing but our own mischiefs. We were the poor∣er for his Liberalities, and the worser for his goodnesse. Our sins by being common, made us approve them by being successfull; because God kept silent, we thought he was such a one as our selves Psal. 50. 21. undervalued, or de∣nied a Diety; thinking nothing to be sin, but what hath punishment for its consequent, no fruit in the Garden forbidden, if a flaming Sword secure it not. Having chastised and tried to reduce us by inferior Instruments and Lictors among our selves; making one mans sin the punishment of another, as if he had the same jealousie for his Honour, which Joab had at the siege of Rabah for David; 2 Sam. 12. 28. and feared to be ri∣val'd in the Glory of our Ruine; He takes us into his own Hand; marks us out as he did Pharaoh to be the Trophies of his own pecu∣liar Vengeance; appearing signally against us in all the dreadfull Solemnities of an inraged E∣nemy. Three years he waited seeking the fruit of his providences, and found none; yea grant∣ed one year more, to the intercession of his own goodnesse. To testifie then our ways did not
please him, he makes a Nation at peace with us, become our Enemy. Pro. 16. 7. Where if he de∣livered us from their Fury, and prospered our Forces with remarkable successe, yet prevent∣ed a Totall Victory over them; as if he designed to hold this Rod over us, till we gave some better proofs of our being Humbled, and Refor∣med by it; and that which cost so much Blood and Treasure, must be accounted (as 'tis threat∣ned Lev. 26. a Judgement for our abuse of peace, and incorrigiblenesse under former Judge∣ments: As there's required for war a Lawfull Authority▪ a just Cause, and a right intention; so it must not be out of Hatred, but with a desire to preserve life in the heighth of Bat∣tle. The lives of the vanquished are not whol∣ly at the mercy of the Conqueror, who had need to distinguish well between a Conqueror and a Cut-throat vindicative War, must be mode∣rated, that a man be not a too severe righter of his own injuries; he ought to be satisfied with the Victory, and as much as may be, leave re∣venge to God. The principall Authors ought to be slain, and not the generality which are drawn in to be Parties; yea killing is allow'd, but only against obstinate and desperate Adver∣saries: Conquest must end▪ with the least damage both of the Enemies and inhabitants; for the Community cannot be touched without the Hazard of many Innocents. 'Tis no little mi∣sery to be necessitated by Arms to maintain our own right; for w is the extream act of vin∣dictive Justice; not approveable to God, for
any other than a desperate Remedy. As it is sometimes necessary, so mostly unjust, always evill, and fighting is publick murder, if so con∣stituted that there is a culpable scruple in the close, and any other end be proposed besides Peace. Therefore Noble Dispositions have still shewed their propensions to Peace (though Victors) calling for a cessation of Arms (where∣as necessity wrung it from the overmastered) letting passe no opportunity of making spare of blood, and have deemed it an inhumane cruelty to shed it, where they have not first proffered fair conditions of Amity; the Refu∣sall whereof is justly punished with the Sword of Revenge; or one drop more than that which was necessary out of insolency, and blood∣thirstynesse. Pestilence, and Famine frequently follow this sore Judgement. Ezek. 14. 21. Slaughter is not the only effect of war, It destroyes the lives of many, but blasts the joys and supports of more. The Land is the garden of Eden be∣fore them, and behind them a desolate wilder∣nesse yea, and nothing shall escape them. Joe. 23. Ours was war upon war; Forraign upon civill, not against strangers, but Allys; not with Pagans, Papists, but Protestants; what will the Hea∣thens say? what ever either nation gains, Reli∣ligion is like to be a Loser. It may well break our hearts, that so many are destroyed, whom Christ purchased with his own blood, and the Ocean turned into a Red Sea, by that of Israel. Victory lies not in the cause but in the God that owns it. Many a just Businesse
is crossed, for a punishment to the Agent. Gods people for the accursed thing, may be defeated by the Benjamites Jud. 20. Jos. 7. and fly before the men of Ai. (v) Tis no strange thing to see Is∣rael troubled by an Achan, or the Ark taken captive from off the shoulders of Hpni, and Phineas. If we waged war for reparation of publick wrongs, and its ground not only pol∣licy, but religion, yet while some had rather been destroyed by the Enemy than live to see their Prince have the Honour of saving, and defending them, others strive to disoblige and in∣cense him to whom we appealed, and seemed to enter prohibitions in Heaven against our de∣sired enjoyment of successe. By nourishing our Lusts from whence cometh wars Jam. 4. 1. we fought against our selves, put a Sword into our Enemies Hands, and provoked God to de∣stroy us; as if our notorious fighting against him by our Trespasses, would oblige him to right us, and that when our Host goes forth against our Enemy, we ought to keep to every wicked thing. Deu. 2. 9. And lest this alone should not be physick enough for our maledy, Comes forth a destroying Angell, pouring out off his full viol such a Horrid Infection into our Ayr, as scarce we or our Forefathers ever tasted of. Whilest bu∣sied against men Abroad, God takes us into his own hand at Home, and surprizes us with new feares from himself by the noysome pestilence, which Cut off, from one City, in Less than
nine months about 100000 Inhabitants, and Chased away more from their Habitations; So that we had something of a wilderness, in a City, The streets formerly Throng'd with stran∣gers, now destitute of Neighbours; When few to be met but such, as lookt wan with grief, fear, or sicknesse; when as many dead Carcasses hurryed along the streets ith' night, as living persons walking in the day; Habitations made both Hospitalls and Charnell-houses; where the sick without hope, for want of Help, die without Comfort, Consume without Interr∣ment, or are Carry'd away without Sheet or Coffin save their Cloathes; Thrown by Hun∣dreds into a pit, and not a friend following to shed a Tear at their Funerall, except at a distance crying: pray Bury my Dead, when such noyse of Bells; Complaints for loss of friends; The live∣ing labouring night and day, scarce enough, and new ground must bee purchased to Bury the Dead, Heapes upon Heapes. The mother per∣haps must Carry her Tender Infant to the grave, the Husband the wife of his Bosome, and a near∣est Relation forc't to be both priest and graves∣man; scarce determinable whether the Drops that fell from their faces were the sweat of their Browes, or Tears of their Eyes. The Diseased groaning for Extremity of their paines, and Rejoycing exceedingly if they could find the grave. The sound weeping for the miseries of the sick; longing for deliverance of their Fami∣ly from the Burden of the flesh; some Eating their Bread with Quaking, and drinking with
Trembling and Carefullness, for fear 'twould be their last, whilest others perishing for want of it▪ The sight of this weekes Bill, appearing to many, but as A Repreive till the next; So that they had no Rest, but the Lord gave them a Trembling Heart, and failing of Eyes, and sorrow of mind, and their life did hang in doubt before them, and they feared day and night have∣ing no Assurance of their Life; Deu. 28. 65. 66. How then did the City sit solitary that was full of people; and became as a widdow that was great among the nations; she wept sore in the night, and her tears were on her Cheekes; Among all her lo∣vers she had none to Comfort her, all her friends had dealt treacherously with her, and by leaving her became her Enemy. And yet in our Blackest Bills, God writ but 50 for 100. How came it that our Houses were not all disinhabited, or one wherein not one dead, That our City was not turn'd into a very golgotha, (and our fields into graves,) for the wickedness of them that dwelt therein: For though Death surprised all Conditions, in all places, at all Times, in our streets, at our Labour, in our sleep, at our meat, in our Clossets, alone, in Company, some in the very Act of sin, others dead before they thought themselves sick, dreaming of nothing less than dying, the Bell Touling constantly, carrying some of our Fellow-servants to Gods Bar, yet the mouths of so many graves, the sad Charrecters writ on our neighbours Dores, the sight of so many Carcasses Death lead in Tri∣umph
before our own, did not preach us into Repentance, but even Extinguished Humanity, brought in a kind of Ferity and Barbarousnesse among us, rendering us vilinous to men, and Blasphemous against God; desperate upon the prospect of our danger, or presumptuons on remedies, or Contemplation of our Escape. The very greatness and Commonnesse of our misery, made us so Careless, stupid, sensless, that we could sleep amidst dying groans, dance amongst graves, Revel at Funeralls, drink healths on Coffins, be obscene among the Dead, steal winding sheets out of the very Chambers of death, Eating and drinking, swearing and Rioting, marrying and giving in marriage, while the floud was sweeping nigh all away, and at the very pits brink thought not of death, but lived, as if by that Time all mortals were hurry'd out of the world, and that none were left stand∣ding there that should tast of death. Even in the height of it, we mis't not to be as Luxurious as we were able; and if some of our Lusts were at all less Rageing, t'was only because they were starved into a Little Tameness; the sup∣plies and Conveniences cut off which should maintain our Riot. Those publick Humili∣ations and Intercessions recommended to the Country, as well by the Command of Authority, as the Common distresse, were cast off without the substraction of either of those motives; so unmindfull of the Afflictions of Joseph, that we could not afford one day in a month for a solemne Reflection on them; and sure we are
not less wanting to our selves, than others in such neglects; the office being no less designed for Antidote than Cure, to prevent a Judg∣ment where it is not, as to Remove it where it is; and if we will neither deprecate on our own behalf, nor Intercede on others, we are as Im∣provident, as uncharitable, and may justly ex∣pect the fatall event of both; so that the Rest of the men which were not killed by the plague, Repented not of their murders, nor of their Fornications, nor of their Thefts, nor of the works of their Hands. Rev. 20. 12.. This Judgment being thus forced to raise its Seige; at the Heeles of it marches devouring By the late dismal fire of London. Flames. For ere the destroying Angell had finished his work here, and was Rageing in ma∣ny parts of the nation, as though the Infected Ayre had been too kind and partiall to us, and had only destroy'd the vile and Refuse, and spared the greatest of the people; As though the grave had surfeited with our dead bodyes and was loth to go on in the execution of Gods dis∣pleasure: He Imploy'd a more furious Element which might in a more lively manner represent to us, the kindling and Continueing of his wrath against us which was Attended to a very Exces∣sive Heat, that thus poured out it selfe not only like La. 2. 4. but in fire: In so stupendious a manner desolating the glory of our land, that no Humane fury could have procured or even wish't the like vastation and Ruins; and what neither For∣raign nor Domestick Enemies could in a suc∣cession
of many Ages effect, one blast of the breath of his displeasure who is a Consuming fire, performed in a moment: Those whom the King of Terrors frighted from their Habitati∣ons, had not been long returned full of Re∣solves to Redeem by double Dilligence, their loss of Trades and Time, but a dreadfull fire ceases upon our great Metropolis, defaces the Beauty and splendor of England, wherles into flames that glorious mart of Trade, and covers that Queen of Cities with its ashes, making her both Funerall pile and urne to her self; Con∣suming in 4 days above 13200 of our Houses, the price of many years Labour, more wealth than an ordinary Arithmititian can numerate; with those publick monuments and ornaments, wich had out-lasted the Injuries of many hun∣dred years, in the space of far less hours. The detriment sustained in our Civill interest, nothing but time and Experience can give a full estimate of. Its sad Consequences are unknown, clouded in its owne smoak; yet must needs Cast forth some of her Ruines, desolations, want of Trade, and poverty upon the neighbou Towns and whole nation. A fire which began with that unexpected violence, and spread with that Horror, and Rag'd with that Furie, and Con∣tinued so long with that Irresistable force, esteeming Brick as stubble, stone as straw, and Brass as Rotten wood, that Laugh'd at the shake∣ing of an Engine, and despised all Resistances in its way; that made the streets to Boil like a pot, and the Houses like a pot of oyntment; that
made a path to shine after it; one would have thought it a Type at least of the universal Confla∣gration: so full of Dread and Astonishment, that nothing less than Hell flames can awaken him, who by it is not wrought upon to lye down in his shames, and his Confusion to cover him; because God hath Covered the daughter of Sion with a Cloud, and cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the Beauty of Israel, and Remembred not his foot-stool in the day of his Anger, La. . 1. Laying in Ashes such a City, as I ex∣pected not to see on this side the Heavenly; making our magnificent Temples, not Habitati∣ons for owles, but Ruinous heapes, and specta∣cles of desolation. Had only the scenes of our Luxury and fraud been destroyed, this might have sent us with more fervency to the places of our Devotion; and we might have frequented Gods house the Better for being destitute of our own; but when these also are made parts of the Common heap, when our holy and beautiful houses, where our fathers praised him, are burnt with fire Is. 64. 12▪, 'Tis a sad Testimonial that our very Religion was provoking, that the pageant∣like piety that we deposited in our Churches only to make a shew with on holy-days, served only to defile those holy places, and render them so poluted, as required no slighter purgation than that of fire: Of our comely hospitalls, stately halls and pallaces, nothing remaining, but a strange mass and Labyrinth of naked steeples, useless Chymnies, fragments of Ragged walls, amidst heapes of stones and Rubbish. In stead
of sweet smells a stink; burning for well set houses, ashes for Beauty, a spirit of Heaviness for the garment of praise. Yet while most were only Amaz'd and Terrified, others in stead of letting go, increased their sins under the Judg∣ment; useing it as a Happy opportunity to steal, while the Judg himself before their faces was doing Execution, and were glad of Satan's Commission to carry away their neighbours goods, while the fire of God was falling upon them, Job 1. 16. 17. and entered into the Houses of his people to lay hands on their substance in the day of their calamity. Obad. 13. Their designs of ad∣vantages took all thoughts off their own turn∣ing; imploying them to gather up the Reliques of others Ruines; the spoyles of a common wreck to increase or Repair the breaches of their own fortune; so they esteem'd it not as a Judgment, but kindness of Heaven, to advance their own private interest; and interpreted those loud calls to repentance, invitations to eat, drink, and be merry; because they had more goods layd up for them. And others turned not to him that smote, because they saw an ad∣vantage arising from the blow, for they said in the pride and stoutness of their hearts, the bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewen stone, the Sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars; Is. 9. 9, 10. and not a few, in Requitall to God for their preservation, evil intreated, yea raised themselves on those whom God had cast down; By their mercyless cruelty adding affliction to the afflicted; by
their rigorous exaction of rates for carriages, houses, provision, and withholding contri∣bution from them to whom it was given, be∣yond the laws of reason, equity, conscience, or common humanity: By shutting up their Bowells against those whom God had stript naked, they took away the sheaf from the hungry, and caus∣ed the naked to lye without cloathing, that they had no covering in the cold: so that men groan∣ed from out of the City, and the soul of the needy cryed out, yet they think God layeth it not to their charge. And those compassions which the novelty at first gave us to sufferers in this kind, seems now quite extinct; so uncon∣cern'd are we grown to every thing that touches us not in our individualls, as if we owned no relation to the species of man-kind, though backed also with that closer tye which the spiritual consanguinity hath superadded. Those that escaped, had an equall share in the procuring cause of the Judgment; their great Insensibleness of what others groan under, is not only a dangerous symptome, but a probable means of drawing the like calamity on our selves; when God sees we will suffer nothing by way of consent and sympathy, 'tis but equal we have our part in a more direct and immediate infli∣ction; and feel what we would not compas∣sionate. How few eye the primary efficient, meritorious cause, or mortifie the main incendi∣ary; but throw the desert off themselves, on other persons, or such a party, whom they would punish, if in Gods stead; as if they must
needs displease him, which doth themselves: so tossing the guilt from one another, it remains among us all; none amending himself, while he expects it only from those, for whose sake we say, this evill is come upon us. What in∣dustry so ever hath been used to intitle the negli∣gence or designes of men unto our overthrow; yet sure, never any Judgment had more Legible marks of Gods immediate hand; such as shew he meant to revenge the abuse of his former gen∣tle methods; that those who would not be re∣formed by smaller corrections, might find a Judgment worthy of God. By how much the more there is not an apparent author of so vast a ruine, by so much the more evident is the po∣wer of his Almighty arm. Its rageing firceness, quick dispatch (a parish for every hour) spoiles, destructiveness, duration, time (when few friends at home, and many enemies abroad) day, and place it began, dryness of the season, stand∣ing and increase of the wind, irresistableness even against it, and all other oppositions, un∣expected stop, infatuation of the people, &c. are so many dreadfull remarkable evidences of divine wrath. Quis talia fando temperet àlachrymis. To what purpose do we rail against obscure authours of our destruction, since our sins have spread abroad the flames, and added nourish∣ment to their furious heat? although extrava∣gant suspicion make not many of us guilty, yet
if we confess the truth, all had a hand therein, and we but act against our selves, by complain∣ing of what we deserved. Oh! England, thou long since owed this Burnt sacrifice to Heaven: nor are thy crimes yet expiated; unless by good actions thou cancell former pretermissions, in vain thou hopest incensed anger is appeased. One would have thought our hive being burnt, By the fire in our Harbour. the Bees our Lusts should have been smothered in the smoak; but in stead of that, they fly Hum∣ming about our streets in far more numerous swarms than ever. We stumble at the old stone; burn our fingers in the former Flames; Run in∣to the Pest-bouses where we Catched our first plague sore; fall a stealing when the brand∣ing-Iron newly taken from our Hands: to Forgeries, so soon as Come down from the pillory. Our seeming sorrows of Repentance restrain not future vitiousness; but we defile our selves with disclaimed Impurity; we lick up that we had disgorged; Soyl our skin in the old puddle; with the Dog return to the vomit, and with the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire; we come Canker'd Mettle out of the furnace, and Leprous out of Jordan. This Judgment being defeated; he then Reaches the Rod out of his own hand, into our Enemies. Such an infatuation falling on our Senators, as they neglected those Counsels, obvious to the commonest person. His Provi∣dence as well as our carelesness, lets loose that Belgick Lion upon us, to enter into our very En∣trals,
and burn our strength in our own Harbor; Exposing our Houses to be made our Shambles or Prisons: pulling down those Brazen walls that for more than a hundred year rendred us terrible and impregnable to all nations round about us: which judgment, if mercy to a mi∣racle prevent not, is like to prove but a prologue to a more fatal Tragedy. Thus ready to be straitned in all our Interests; scarce possible for us to flee any way but to himself; Imprisoned in our native Countrey, and Invironed round by Insulting foes, we were minded to surren∣der our lusts (which provoked him to make war upon us) and our selves to him, that we might gain a Title to his Rescue and Delive∣rance. We called our Moseses to Improve their Interest; we let down our Almes Basket of re∣pentance, looked out at our prison grates, and cryed, Lord remember the poor prisoners: He pitty∣ed, and took compassion &c. and as he passed by, dropped in an alms of mercy and delive∣rance. When we stood upon the brink of de∣struction, and ripe for ruine; when vengeance even knocked at our door, and the sword at our breast, he held his hand, offered violence to his own justice, and called upon us, Turn yee, turn yee, why will yee die! He put us once more into the hands of our own counsel; set life and death, Blessing and Cursing before us, yet to chuse and make our own fortune. We cannot have forgotten the fears, losses, mischiefs, o our late war, especially that dread, conster∣nation and shame we were affected with, when
our enemies did distress us in our very gates. But neither did we set our hearts to this also; no sooner was the present smart and sting of that judgment abated, but we began to cast up new Trenches of security; to fortifie our old Lusts with thicker Rampants of a more Reso∣lute impenitency; great Amazement, some Humiliation, but no amendment: we turn in∣to a Temple, into a Closset, into a Counsel Chamber, turn to devise new platforms, but not from our evil ways. We soon forgot the promises made in the day of our distress: our Devotion abated with our fears; and our piety ceased with his Rod: God no sooner held his hand, but we held our tongue: He forbore plague∣ing, and we forbore praying; and greedily a∣gain sucked in the poyson, we had only laid down while we were begging for our lives. We soon grow weary of our own rest, and make war upon our own peace, and become cruel to our own mercies. As if we were so inamored of destruction, when prevented of it from our Enemies abroad, we (by Duells and divisions) seek it from one another, and find or make Enemies at home: As if we thought publick peace intollerable, that when it is cast upon us we are faine to take in private quarrels as our res∣cue from that dull quiet, and court the utmost mischiefs to avoid the oppression of the great∣est happiness. That we might be prepared if attempted by others, we try and exercise the Acts of war (lest we forget them) on our selves. We dread the reproach of vain Impotent men,
yet confidently Incounter the anger of the om∣nipotent God. Thus perversely do we coun∣termine his purposes of kindness, and when he hath secured us, solicitously seek to be de∣livered from our safety; project new dangers, and dare his power with a yet harder Taske, the delivering us from our selves as well as our Enemies. Thus one Rod swallowed up another: And the Lord hath come with fire and with his Chariots like a whirle-wind, to render his An∣ger with fury, and his Rebuke with flames of Fire; for by fire and by the sword hath he pleaded with us, and the slain of the Lord have been many . 1. .. Nor hath he been silent by Extraordinary admonitions, Blzing Stars, and prodigies in nature, the usual Tokens and Com∣minations of his Anger, Trumpets and Instru∣ments of judgment, Portenders, and Antice∣dents of mundane Catastrophes. He with whom it is free to do or forbear, usually thus shakes his Rod before he strikes a nation, threatens to try, and when iniquity abounds, by thse fore-runners makes an out-cry to Alarum us by repentance to meet him; (so will avert the evil or provide it shall not be evil to us) who is marching on in fury after them; and that steps not out of his ordinary road, besides the order of nature, but for special ends and designs. To declare to the world they are insignificant, is to cast a vail upon the face of providence, to put out the eyes of most men living, and o raze the records of all past ages, and our
own experience, who have seen and felt their doubtful effects. (h) And although he hath not hi∣therto , 2. Act. . sent famine amongst us, yet this calls as loud because so deserved though at present not inflicted. He gives us bread, that we may live to see our selves miserable. Yea, there is much of famine in our very plenty; with our store of Corn, so great a nationall po∣verty if not occasioned by, accompanied with it; that he seems to have over-blest us with Abundance, and made us unhappy by his mer∣cies; we want by having much, fulness of bread is our sin and punishment. Thus by all means manifesting himself, he hath not left himself without witness, but us without excuse, who resist all indearments, and by kindnesses will not be courted into Amendment; we even pro∣voke the day of the Lord, and insult over his vengeance, and offend notwithstanding, nay the more for such terrible judgments, as appale and strike us into terror and con∣fusion: No nation was ever more signallized by Gods goodness, or its own perverseness. It being hard to determine, in which of these respects it is most eminent. But we still Af∣fect prodigies, take a kind of wanton joy in defeating his designs; and as if we aspired to use miracles with him, have made our returns as unparralleld as his mercy: and would strive whether he should be first weary of smiting, or we of Sinning. We look up to heaven with as black Brows, and walk the Church with as Crooked feet as before. He that was filthy, is
filthy still. What Adulterer hath yet unclaspt his hands with his curtezan? what drunkard hath drawn his lips from his intemperate cups? what proud person shifted himself from his fantastick garbs? what swearer latcht his tongue, or miser opened his cofer? what man given to appetite hath put a knife to his Throat? or scoffer ceased to blaspheme? such as observe us, cannot conclude we are so modest as to stick at saying the worst we can think, or suppress any thing as too ill to be acted or spoken. And if our noon-day sinners be so unreformed; could we search the blind corners, pry what the ancients do in the dark, and look through the hole of the wall, what strange chambers of imaginary, and creeping things, and fourfooted beasts, might be there discerned F. Z. 8. 7. &c.; how many black-nighted birds appearing upon the walls? but what then is seen by the all-seeing eye? The Times, the face of things turn, there are several variations and changes in humane affairs, but not in humane actings, men are resolved upon their paths, constant in their extravagances; their necks are as Iron: They sweat and ride post in their waies, that an Angel with a naked sword in his hand can scarce make them give a check with the bri∣dle; so degenerate we are, and habituated in vitious courses, that if Enoch again walked with God upon earth, he should scarce draw us to walk after him; was Noah to preach over his old notes, we would mock at him, rather than listen to him; not a man more
would be saved, but leave him to ship himself and family only in the Ark: was Elijab to prophesie to this age, himself might be carried up in a fiery charriot, but leave Ahab and Azuriah to plagues and vengeance: were Christ once more to take flesh on him, he might soo∣ner be led again to be crucified, than crucifie our unmortified lives: The most pervers Jews, obstinate Scribes and Pharisees, were never hard∣lier to be converted than we. Vice goes strut∣ting to and fro our streets in its gaudy bra∣very, while despised virtue hangs her drooping head; as if to make an open shew of the spoils of goodness we lead our lusts in triumph. We ingrosse and set up a Monopoly of vice, and have made this land the Cut-purse Hall of the earth, the stews of the whole world; as if all Miscreants were here met as at a general Randevouz. How have the filthy streams and Channels of all nations round about us, emp∣tyed, and disgorged themselves in this com∣mon-shore of iniquity: we may here behold the old worlds oppression; the fulness of Bread and idleness of Sodom; the pride of Jerusalem; the drunkenness of Holland; the vanity of France; the uncleannesse of Spain; the Iron yoak of Egypt; the furnace of Babylon, &c, The land is covered with filth, and a dunghil lies at each man's door. We are building up to such a prodigious height, the confused Babel of our own sin and guilt, that we seem to threaten heaven it self; as if we meant to make war upon God to invade his territories, to pull him off his
Throne, and prescribe Laws to him for A∣greement; our daring lusts bid battel to all the Artillery of the almighty, meet him in his Lou∣dest thunder, and venter on destruction in its dreadfullest form; we love our sins, even when they threaten us ruine; and serve them assidu∣ously, while they promise no other wages but utter overthrow. Oh! what balm is there in Gilead for this wound? what Jordan to cleanse this le∣procy? what can we presage from execrable cour∣ses but a desperate end? what do our monstrous impieties, but foretell prodigious punishments? that sin will at last rap us in her fatal rope. If nothing but bearing fruit will save this figtree that cumbers the ground, it is in great hazard to be cut down, and this kingdom in the broad way, the high road to destruction. There may be threshing mountains, beating hills as chaff, shattering gates of Brasse, cutting asunder Bars of Iron, giving people as dust to the sword and as driven stubble to the Spear, turning, Cities into a Heap, and Eden into a wilder∣nesse, sweeping away the valiant men, and causing the Carcasses of the dead to fall as the dung, throwing down golden Candlesticks, and bringing a famine both of bread and of the word upon a Nation, that hath been full fed with the ordinances; for there is no refor∣mation to preserve a falling Church, to rescue a perishing Kingdom. We have all reason to ex∣pect God should exert his power as eminently against us, as he hath done for us, unlesse per∣haps that he sees that is not necessary for
our ruine. For indeed let him but stand by, and not interpose his Omnipotence for us, he may trust us to be his Executioners, our vices having a naturall, as well as morall efficacy to destroy us; and▪ we have cause to fear that's the reason of his seeming connivance, that he forbears to strike us, to give us up to those more fatall wounds, we inflict on our selves. 'Tis not our innocency that gives us impunity, but (more than probable) our incorrigiblenesse that God gives us over, with a Why should you be smitten any more? will not prostitute his judgements; but as the basest of Malefactors, leaves us to the basest of Executioners, and let our iniquities become our ruine: the se∣verest purpose God can entertain towards us, and to avert it our most important concern. And oh! that we who have so perversly re∣sisted all the designs of his love, would now try to defeat that of his anger, rob him of those intestine avengers within our own breasts; 1 Pet. 2. 11. which not only provoke, but execute his wrath, and make us more miserable than Hell it self could do without them. 'Tis more than time for us to seek to escape from so for∣midable mischiefs; O let us not contract one minutes delay; let's cast our selves at the feet of our offended God, and beg that he will please to think us worthy his own correct∣ion; that whatsoever we suffer from his hand, we may not (like Herod) be delivered up to the loathsome fortune of being devoured by our own putrification, but may fall into the
hands of God, and not into the hands of men, at least, not of our selves, who are more to be dreaded than all our other enemies. Now will I sing to my well beloved, a song By the pa∣rable of a Vineyard. of my beloved touching his Vineyard; Isa. 5. 1. &c. Mar. 12. 1. &c. [my beloved planted a Vineyard in a very fruitfull Hill] on which his paths dropt fatnesse. To secure it from invasion of Forraign Enemies, [he fenced it] with water. His Providence, and Protection encompassed about, and hem∣ned it in, as a garden enclosed, appointing Salvation for walls and bulwarks. It's invin∣cible strength put despair into the fainting Hearts of Forragin Monarchs, all their rage unable to bring: mischief upon it; [he gathered out the stones thereof] throwing out the Heathen Psal. 4. 2. Idolaters, or whatsoever might prove snares, stumbling blocks to annoy, or hinder its fertill prosperity; delivered it from Hellish cursed conspiracies of trayterous Papists, (men of bloudy principles and practices, oh my soul, enter not thou into their secrets) and plucked it as a fire brand out of the fire. He [planted it with the choycest Vine] richest means, and such excellent ones Psal. 16. 3. as he chose to be a speciall people unto him, above all upon the face of the earth, (o) and out Deu. 7. 6. of his speciall love gave them Kings for their nursing Fathers, and a Queen their nursing-mother. Isa. 49. 23. To spy and see what returns it would make, and for its Beauty and Strength He [built a Tower] erected his worship [in the midst of it, Isa. 6. 27. Mich. 4. 8. giving such frequent, plain,
awakening, vehement, alluring, passionate in∣structons, invitations, pleadings, admonitions, promises, threats, solicitations, expostulations, & warnings by his watchmen, that every one was a∣shamed not to owne Religion, or pretend Ig∣norance of his duty, or despair of his reward, or to want obligations to bring forth much fruit. To distill the spirituall juice of grace which chears God and man, [He hewed out a wine-presse in it] making our plagues won∣derfull, and us a Theatre of his providences, mercies, judgements, and disquieting prodi∣dies. His Heralds having worn and wearied themselves out of Breath, with crying, and dis∣playing the Banner of Peace, he came himself in the fiercenesse of his wrath, with a flaming Sword in one hand, and a Besome of de∣struction in the other; and he put on righte∣ousness as a brest-plate, and a Helmet of Sal∣vation upon his head, the garment of ven∣geance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak Isa. 59. 17: for he called for a domestick E∣nemy to be the Hammer wherewith he might break us, for a Forraign nation to be the ar∣rows of his quiver wherewith he might cleave us, for death to be his syth to mow us down like grass, for the fire to be his glittering Sword wherewith he might terrifie and destroy us, plying us so close with his judgements that the Land it self mourned for her houses and inhabitants Ho. 4. 3. who did not for them∣selves. And after so much cost, pains, and means, I might well [look that it should
bring forth grapes;] for though none expect a Vintage from a wildernesse, yet who plants a Vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? 1 Cor. 9. 7. or sowes wheat and reaps only Tares? the earth gives seed to the sower, the Harvest-man ga∣thereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his armes, the mower filleth his hand, and he that bindeth up sheaves his bosome: Psa. 129. 7. And in the nobler cultures of the mind, men justly expect of their Pupils that their man∣ners attest the discipline they have been under; His expectation from it could not but be very high, there being no place under the Sun whom he hath more signallized as his own immediate care, on whom the Divine Oecono∣my hath more constantly, and even solici∣tously attended in all the variety of seaso∣nable and powerfull applications; but such a strange unhappy propriety there was in the soil, that after all this culture, it produced nothing but [wild grapes;] answered all his care and kindnesse in husbanding it, with an un∣godly prodigeous wickednesse. The plenti∣full Showers, and Sun-beams of his blessing, drew from them the more filthy stenchful lusts, and noysome vapors of their corrupt lives. The sweet dews of Hermon, made the Hill of Sion fruitfull only in unfruitfull works: whe∣ther God strike or stroak, the obstinate grow more rebellious by correcting, and untoward by indulgence; they harden under the shine of his mercies, and hammering of his judge∣ments; any wind will serve his turn that's
sayling to the Land of darknesse. [And now Oh inhabitants of London and men of England] I summon you into the Court of Conscience, and arraign and plead against you, like a wronged plaintiffe at your own Bar. I im∣pannel no Jury, but your own consciences, nor condemn you by any other verdict, but that out of your own mouths: Judge I pray you between me and my vineyard, to evince the equity of my proceedings; I refer the controversie to a∣ny rationall mans decision; I appeal to your own Testimony; be your selves Judges in your own case; tell me what your selves would do, if so served as I have been, or [what could have been done more for my Vineyard that I have not done:] Indeed God can do more n he doth or will do; he is not bound to  he can, and if he did, he could not , but doth all in number weight are, as pleases him, and seems most agr to that infinite eternall wisdom that govend regulates all his Actions. He can o∣verturn the order of nature, enlighten the world without a Sun, and command corn to spring forth of the earth for the use of man, without plowing, sowing, Sun, or showers, with as much ease as he upholds second cau∣ses in an ability to produce those effects; but he ordinarily will nt; the established order of nature, is the orb wherein his power moves. He hath chosen and pitched on this way of governing and maintaining the world by the ministery and Agency of second causes, with∣out
which he seldom works, even miracles to give an allay to meer and pure omnipotency; Exod. 10. 3. Mar. 8. 23. he carries on his work in a way of wis∣dom, tempers his omnipotency according to the nature and necessities of man; puts forth so much of an omnipotent power, as serves to bring about his own ends, and uses it in such a manner & not ordinarily to over-power his creature by irresistable force, nor shew any more of his omnipotency than the condition of man-kind requires. He had done all for it that he could suitable to the Law of Humane nature, wherein he hath established such a li∣berty of will, as is steered by the compasse of reason, managed by the force of morall Argu∣ments and inducements; not hailing in chains of violence, or dragging forceably as slaves, but drawing by the Bands of a man, and cords of Love, he works in such a manner as is fit for reasonable souls, by overpowering our Judgements with such clear convictions of the beauty, excellencie, and necessity of Divine things, as may in a manner sweetly and gent∣ly ravish our wills into the embraces of them; not by any force of coercion, but of perswasion and conviction, and by the same principles in man that the devill did with his first tempta∣tion, self-love, and self-interest, a desire of preferment and bettering our condition. Gen. 3. 5. &c. The grace of God was never intended to super∣sede but encourage mens endeavours; so that if we be not saved we may thank our selves; 'tis not because he doth not vouchsafe us a suf∣ficiency
of grace for that end, but because we abuse the liberty of our wills in hardening our selves against that grace that is tendered to us; boul∣ting and fortifying our Hearts, & making them impregnable against all his assaults. He that shews a man that precipice upon whose brink he stands, that entreats, importunes, nay, bribes him with the greatest rewards, to re∣tire from danger, and chuse safety, hath done all that can be expected from a friend, or cha∣ritable man; and if after all, the wret∣ched person so advised shall cast himself headlong upon ruine, no inquest surely would return his murder in any other form than Fe∣lo-de-se. He had done so much for them as were proper, and abundantly sufficient to have wrought repentance in the most obsti∣nate; but yet successe and efficacy answered not the sufficiency and probability of the means. Now hear O House of England, are not my wayes equall? are not your ways unequall? Ezek. 1. 25. Have not I wooed thee with tears of love? wrestled by my Ambassadors? trained thee up in the school of my providences? sent thee to it with a rod at thy back, a Garland over thy Head; useing there all means to learn thee righteousnesse; trying smiles and frowns, courting with all the Arguments drawn from the topicks of promises, and threatnings, judgements, and mercies; waiting with unwearied patience; all the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a rebellious and gainsaying peo∣ple Rom: 10. 21. And if the day be not long enough,
I have stood till my head hath been filled with Dew, and my Locks with the drops of the night. Can. 5. 2. How many plaisters have been laid upon our sores, yet the Ulcer as bad as e∣ver? How many Ministers Heart-strings have been broken, and sent into their graves with our impenitency, to afflict their dying spirits? We weary God with expectation; the eye of Heaven akes to see this nation humbled. We hear many clocks strike, yet do not believe that the hour is yet come that we should fall to our work. All the Watchmen upon the walls cannot give us warning. All the clouds of Heaven gathered together, cannot water our dry consciences. All the Hammers of the Temple striking in their order, cannot break our stony-Hearts. The whole Colledge of Physicians cannot cure us: Myriads of Preachers, that have been in this Na∣tion have not been able yet to convert us. We come away dry from the purest springs; poor from the richest Mines, unregenerate from the most soul saving Fathers. If the pre∣sence of one Minister contemn'd will make men one day know and feel that there hath been a Prophet among them; Ezek. 2. 5. what a judgement doth this Nation ly under, for vilify∣and nullifying so many seraphicall Sermons. Whole Nineveh turn penitent by one Jonab, and the cry of one days journey, but the zeal of many Teachers, and Gods patience for many years, leave us impenitent. [And now go too, I will tell you what I will do to my vine∣yard]
seeing it hath defeated all my attempts of mercy, vanquished all the stratagems of my love, frustrated all my expectations, [I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, & I will break down the walls thereof, & it shall be troden down,] and destroyed by Hostile inva∣sion; for I will leave off to help, succour, and defend it, and lay it open to the rage, and fury of its enemies; so that all that passe by the way shall pluck it, the Boare out of the wood shall wast it, and the wild beast of the field devour it Ps. 30. 13.: [And I will lay it wast] turning it from a Vineyard into a desart, without any inha∣bitants: [It shall not be pruned, nor digged,] seeing my former husbanding it was but lost labor, and cost cast away, I will hold my Hand; and [there shall come up briers and thorns;] It shall be overgrown with Idola∣try, superstition, errors, abominations, and such noxious weeds. Its very root also shall wither; it shall be no more comforted and refreshed by my Ministers, whose Doctrine used to drop and distill on it as the Dew; for [I will command the Clouds that they raine no more upon it:] Howl for her, take Balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed; we would have healed her, but she is not healed; Forsake her, and let us go every one to his own place, for her judgement reacheth unto Heaven, and is lifted up even unto the skies: Je. 51. 8. . Gods promise of cohabiting and residence is limited to those who own them∣selves his people; therefore, when so many of
us have openly renounced that relation we cannot justly expect the blessing appendant to it, that he should longer reside among those, who so avowedly disclaim him. And though this seem to some no formidable thing; God's withdrawing himself, is but agreeable to their wishes, a kind of quitting the field to them, and so rather matter of complacency than regret; but there's another presence of God that will infallibly succeed this: When he removes that of his grace, 'tis to make way for that of his anger, and we shall know the God of Israel is among us by his plagues; 1 Sam. 5. And like the damned in Hell, discern his pre∣sence only in the punitive effects of it, and read his nearness in our sufferings. And those that have most despised or loathed the soft breathings of his word and spirit, shall find it yet harder to endure the whirlwinds of his wrath, which will snatch from us those secular advantages, for whose pursuit we have neglected the bet∣ter part; Lu. 10. 42. And leave us as little of world∣ly enjoyments, as we desired to have of spi∣rituall. [For the Vineyard of the Lord of Host, is the house of England, and the men of London his pleasant plant. And he looked for judgement, but behold oppression, for righteousnesse, but behold a cry] nothing but fraud, and force; pinching, and biting; supplanting, and circumventing; prosecuting, and persecuting; glossing, and varnishing; suf∣fisticating, and adulterating; lengthning, and spinning out suites and quarrels; dread∣full
decrees in the Court of Consci∣ence, and horrid orders in the Courts of Justice; as if oppression and tyranny were a trade, and the Poets Iron-age, a tipe of ours. O where shall the wronged seek for relief, or the innocent find a bar of Justice? 'twould perplex one to think how many writs are fil'd, records entred, bills preferred, Judgments and executions passed; how many regiments there are of Serjeants, and Bayliffs, how ma∣ny brigades of Attornies, and Counsells in this little Kingdom? were not violence predomi∣nant, what need there be called in so many necessary Agents to restrain it? were not the house ruinous, what need of so many Master∣workmen to repair it? O! when will the whip depart out of the Kingdom? when will the wild beasts teeth fall out of their heads? when will the hammers leave beating? when will the Milstones leave grinding? when will re∣pentance so reduce us to equity, that there need neither Tribunall to rectifie injuries, nor Pulpit to touch consciences for extortion? How can a man desire God to remove Judgements, when he removes Land-marks? or to cast away his rod, when himself chastises with Scorpions? or to have a taste of free mercy, when he eats the bread of others with∣out money? shall he repent with his Bears teeth in his head? or his Lions skin upon his back? 'Tis in vain to sigh for compassion, where the sighs of the poor cry for venge∣ance; or think to pacifie God, till he hath
pacified the world; or to look up to Heaven for pardon, till cured of his blood-shotten eyes, or to strike his hands for mercy, till he hath quit them of violence. 'Tis much men can take their nights rest, for they lay them∣selves down upon clothes layd to pledge; Mic. 2. 8. or joy in their dwellings, for their stones are hewen out of a rough quarrey; their hou∣ses are built by unrighteousnesse, and their chambers by wrong; Je. 22. 13 or that they can walk the streets, the cryes of the oppressed are so shrill against them, that they can eat their meat, when they find so much strange flesh in the Caldron, or comfortably enjoy enjoy their estates, when they know by what an Ahab's evidence they hold the Vineyard; that they can make their wills, when they feel on their death-beds, they are but to give away ill gotten goods for legacies. O how many seek places to suck the veins of the people? buy Offices, to shark upon the Nation? Turn Informers, Promoters, waiters, searchers, not to discover, but to distill; not to punish, but to prey upon errors? so many wild beasts, and ravenous Serpents rang, that one would think this Land were the forrest of Tygers, and dragons: Men enjoying preys with as much inward satisfaction as Birth-rights, and possessing rifles with as quiet a conscience as just earnings. Digging of pits, taking up all with the angle, swallowing people alive as the grave, enjoying fruit without money; breaking the arms of the Fatherless, afflict∣ing. Gods heritage. Aegypts Iron furnace is e∣ven
amongst us. How many roaring Lyons, and Wolves of the evening, devouring with such fury, that they leave not the bones till the morrow? Some with Felix griping for bribes; others with Naash require mens right eyes to condescend to a peace; some with Jezabell's Judges pronouncing sentence of death upon a framed information; others running gree∣dily after the error of Balam for reward: Should men demand according to Gods Law Ex. 21. 24. hand for hand, what a dismembred Nation would there be? how many houses and e∣states are built with crying stones? Cement∣ed with bloudy morter? Grounselled with damages? Roofed with detriments? Plai∣stered with the brains of widdows? Hung with the skins of Orphans? that keep a shambles of butchers meat, & have their caldrons boyl∣ing with the limbs and quarters of the poor, chopt in pieces with their cleavers? people generally will scarce take notice of their cru∣elty, or feel their rough hands, much lesse take away the crimes, or turn from the vio∣lence of their hands: Instead of emptying their houses of preys, cleansing their estates from injustice, and casting away their ill∣gotten goods over their neighbours thresholds, they will finger more, snatch at the rest, and make a perfect rifle of the remainder. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish peo∣ple and unwise? Is not he thy Father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established thee, and divided thee thine
inheritance? Remember the daies of old, con∣cerning the years of many generations: Ask thy elders, and they shall tell thee what de∣liverances he hath wrought for thee; and how he kept thee as the apple of his eye; and was thy rock and mighty deliverer, when the Sea overwhelmed thy enemies; Heaven even bowed down unto thee, and under its pro∣tection thou wentest as under a canopy of State; He made thee to ride on the high pla∣ces of the earth, that thou mightest eat the en∣crease of the field; the fat of lambs, and of the kidneys of wheat, and of a land flow∣ing with milk and honey; and thou didst eat the pure blood of the grape. Deu. 32. 6. &c. Psa. 78. 53. But thou forsookst God that made thee, and lightly e∣steemedst the rock of thy salvation. Oh un∣kind people! were it a nation I had not been acquainted with, had it been an enemy, I could have born the affronts you put upon me, but, what you my familiar? what thou my son? is this thy kindnesse to thy friend? hast thou no bowels to spurn against, but his that yearns in compassion; no breasts to shoot at but his that burns in affection towards thee? Art thou resolved to make God to serve with thy sins? His providence to be a purvey∣er to thy Lusts? a Chamber-maid to thy pride? a Cupbearer to thy intemperance? a Groom to thy luxurious desires? and divine patience to Lacque it, to run still at thy heeles? to be a sinning stock, a pack horse for impenitent soules: loading, and forcing
him to cry out, Ah! I will ease me of mine adver∣saries? will you extract the rankest poyson from the most soveraign cordiall? and kindle hell out of a sparke of heaven? will you nurse the brats of your lusts, at the breasts of divine bounty? while he is smiling upon you, spit in his face? and be sticking daggers in his heart, while opened to let you in? do you spend the time of your reprieve, in plotting treason against your soveraign, in forging weapons against him, who stands beckoning to you at the gate of his promises? why throw you the plaster the physician offers, in his face? and fling out of the armes of mercy? scorning, trampling her invitations under foot, that sets out, pursues, and overtakes you, spreads all her treasures at your feet, and on her knees intreates you to return and live? do you nauseate your present state? and desire a change? are you satiated with comforts? and sick of happiness? do you loath mannah, and grow weary of your welfare? have you dwelt so long in Canaan, that you know not the worth of a land of promise? do you all you can to grieve providence? and to exasperate a blessing God, to make gaps in your own hedge? to pluck down the sticks of your own nest? to drive him away from watching over you? and force him that hath thus long dwelt among you, to turn his back upon you, and to leave your coast with distast and displeasure? and invite in, the de∣stroyer? Is this the way to preserve blessings, or to wast them? and to compel those mercies to forsake you, that you would be glad with
wringing hands, to recall and regain? wretches, I might have shut you up in the dungeon of de∣speration, with the silly heathens groaping in darkness, without the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto me, but by him, nei∣ther is their salvation in any other Joh. 14. 6. Act. 4. 12. 1 Tim. 2. 5.: How be it I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; so famous that you might well question whether you had Angells, or men to preach unto you, and more truly say, than the people of Lystra, that God was come down unto you in the likeness of men: Here one speaks like an orator, there another like a Logician; Here one by rhetorick endeavours to charme and perswade, there another, by rea∣son to convince; here one shewes an Almighty arme to save, there another his hand to reveng; here one comes with teares and terrours, there another with tokens of love and kindness; here one offers an arke to such as de∣sire salvation, there another raines down floods of curses upon refusers of it: These lights spend their own oyle to light you to Heaven; and like silk-wormes spin out their own bowels to cloath you with the garment of Righteousness; and loe they are unto you, but as a very lovely song, of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument; for you hear my words, but you will not do them: You were still talking against them by the walls, and in the dores of the Houses; and spake one to another saying, come I pray you and hear, what will this Babler say? you were readier to lay a snare
for him that reproveth in the gate Is. 29. 21 than to doubt of any snare coming upon your selves. Princes write such crimes, as contempt and abuse of their ambassadours, in the blood of the guilty, unless where an arm of power is wanting to weild the sword of justice, because it reflects on him that sends them Lu. 10.; Jerusalem ston'd the prophets so long, till she had not one stone left upon another; they mocked the messengers of God, and misused his prophets, till there was no remedy; and when this cometh to pass, (lo it will come) then shall you know that a pro∣phet hath been among you Ex. 33. 30, &c.: wherefore my fu∣ry and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the Towns of England, and in the streets of London, and they are wasted and desolate as at this day: for I sent among you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt; your young men have I slain with the sword; I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and you were as fire∣brands pluckt out the burning, yet have you not returned unto me saith the Lord; Am. 4. 10 11. you make a mock at Heaven, and slight, and con∣temn that power that strikes you, by continu∣ing in sin under Judgment; and put the great∣est affront and indignity upon God, and all his attributes: carring his Judgments in triumph, and hauling them at the chariot-wheels of your Impe∣nitency; you proclaim to all the world, you have conquered the Lord of Host, defeated his power, vanquish't his vengeance, stood out the seige and shock of his omnipotent fury, daring Hea∣ven
to do its worst upon you, and charge thorow whole squadrons and troops of divine threat∣nings and Judgments; telling him you are re∣solved to shelter his enemy, to interpose your own breasts as shields between his sword and your lusts, and to make your houses and hearts their sanctuary and refuge, manger all his re∣venges? O desperate soules! do you provoke the Lord to Jealousie? are you stronger than he? do you fling down the gantlet to omnipotency? and challenge him into the field, that can easily vindicate himself in your confusion? against whom no rebellion can be longer prospe∣rous than he willingly permits? Come sinner, gird up now thy Loynes like a man, for I will demand of thee in Gods name, and answer thou me Job. 38. 3: Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds? or hast thou an arm as long as Gods? art thou able to wrest the sword out of his hands? and make infinite vengeance fly before thee? canst thou stand the shock of his fury, and bandy back his thunder-bolts? and incounter the vio∣lent torrent of his indignation? O prodigious folly! to contend with one that can look thee into attomes, beckon thee into ruine, wink thee into nothing, point thee into destruction, and kill thee with a single frown. Tis your sins have made havock of the church and state. The security and Licentiousness of your prosperous dayes, made the first breach in your walls; and now your impenitency, profaness, incorrigible∣ness, cry, down with them, down with them even to the ground. Will you be so cruel to your selves,
as by your persevering Impieties to smite and destroy those feeble and faint remaines of your former Felicities? and not only curse, but de∣stroy your common mother and native country, to abet and maintain those troops that defie and invade them? O! why should you not at last re∣call your exil'd piety, and assume a holy and becomeing indignation against those your cruel and implacable enemies? Know you not that England is destroy'd? Are not your estates wasted? your splendor ecclipsed? your families broken and scattered? your dignities trampled on? And is it not time to dismiss the author of all, your sins? which are also not your slaves, but task-masters, that set you to the most servile, vilest drudgery; and are so far from bringing you in profit, Ro. 6. 21. that the only account, you can bring in of your harvest, is but the inventory of your miseries? many houses and temples they have layd wast and demollisht, but you have no structures of theirs to shew, but a Babell of confu∣sion. Would you yet fain feel the weight of an Almighty arm? and force him to pour forth Judgment without mercy? may it not suffice to have sinn'd away your plenty? and so many thousand soules, and such a city into their graves? no sooner is one plague removed, but do you lay hands upon Heaven, by the mighty cart-ropes of your iniquities, to pull another down on your own head? Must you yet stir up a consuming fire? have you not drunk deep enough already? do you long to see the bowl going round again? and to kindle the oyl
of mercy, and the heat of wronged love into everlasting flames? Are you resolved to try what Omnipotency can bring upon you, how far di∣vine vengeance will pursue you, how low it is to the bottome of misery? what! call you for more plagues, and direfull curses? do you cry out for the sharpe scourge to sting your backs? and the cup of astonishment to be thrust to your lips? that the line of confusion might be drawn over all your cities? and the stones of emptiness might be found in your streets? that you might be made as Admah, and set as Zeboim? that head and tail branch and rush might be cut off in one day? that there might be none but wild beasts in stead of living men to inhabit them? a pos∣session for the bittern, screech-owle, Zijms, and Sijns? that you might be smitt till none re∣main? that your land might be blotted out from under Heaven? that not a Town, pallace, or ruin of a porch, might be seen? but breeding of salt∣pits, nettles, and a perpetual desolation? that your city might be made a heap, a burying place, a dunghill, a shambles? that the day of our slaughter and dispersions might be accomplished? Ah sinners! are these your bloody designes, and endeavours? the Kingdom might stand long e∣nough, if you weaken not its foundations: If it fall, we know whose hands to charg for pulling it down; not the hands of justioe, but of your own Transgressions: 'tis they that plot treachery, and combine to work your ruine; that open your gates; that call in Judgments to slaughter on the right hand and on the left; yea so inrage
them, that they will not leave wasting, till made you utterly desolate. O England, thou hast destroy'd thy self; methinks I see you bring∣ing pick-axes to dig down your own walls, springing mines to blow up your own houses, kindling sparkes that will set all in a flame, bar∣ring up your Havens, unrigging your ships, building block-houses against your selves: There∣fore now, thus saith the Lord, wherefore commit you this great evill against your soules, to cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling out of England, to leave you none to re∣main; in that you provoke me to wrath with the works of your hands; that you might cut your selves off, & that you might be a curse, & a re∣proach among all the nations of the earth Je. 44. 7. . And yet, as if he only spake big words, & all his threat∣nings were but meer bravado's of Heaven; you slight & contemn both his golden scepter, and his Iron rod: you laugh at the shakeing of his spear, & account his darts as stubble; you mock at fear, & at the alarum of war cry, ha, ha Job, 9. 25.. What, will you not turn to that great Soveraign, who hath invited you by more than six score thou∣sand warnings, which cannot discern between pity and forgiveness, and also much forbearance? were ever people so prodigiously besotted, as to think God will see himself thus infinitely pro∣voked? out-brav'd and defeated by a handfull of dust and confronted by a skin-full of worms∣meat? As I live saith the Lord, I have no plea∣sure in the death of a sinner, much less of a people; Wherefore turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye? 12: 18. 31 & 33. 11 Can you tell why or wherefore?
what people ever perrished being innocent, or where were a righteous nation cut off? or who hath harden'd himself against him and prosper∣ed? But go ye now unto my place which is in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the iniquity of my people Israel Je. 7. 12.. When Pharaohs throne confronted Hea∣ven, saying, who is the Lord? God cloaths him with darkness, to convince him of his blindness; turns his waters into bloud, to mind him of his oppression; pours in armies of vermin to mock his numbers, death to destroy them; and when he still drives on furiously in his sins, takes of the chariot wheels, and stops both them and him together. Belshazar while securely carouzing between the cup and the lip is surpriz'd with a hand on the wall, that shook him and his King∣dome into a convulsion. Nebuchadnezzar while boasting of the Babell he had built, by the greatness of his power, and for the Honour of his majesty, is forc't to lay down that and his humanity together, sent to graze in the field amongst beasts, and condemned for derogating from the power of Heaven, to have too much of its influence; To speak of more the time would fail; and will you dance upon the brink of ruine? and rock your selves asleep in the cradle of security, while the hasty tide of divine ven∣geance is flowing towards you? Ask Athens, Spar∣ta, Babylon, Nineveh, Carthage, Sodom, Gomorah, Jerico, Corinth, Galathia, Philippi, Ephesus, Smyrna, Nice, Laodicea, Antioch, Constantino∣ple, Tyre. Yea all the Eastern and African
Churches (who have no other defence, but pa∣per walls, to keep their memories, and are set up, as night-lights to warn all, of those rocks and Quick-sands that ruined and destroyed them) whether sin doth not ring your funeral knell in their ruines; you may find enough treasure there, if well imploy'd, to redeem you out of present hazard, and future miseries. Oh the tender mercy's of our God! should he take our first refusall, and write every breach of his law in the bloud of his subjects; should we bear no more from him upon our refusing his first call; and go away when we thrust him away, who then could be saved? but he pittys our weak∣ness, over looks our infirmities, provides for our necessities, incourages our frail endeavours, accepts of our sincerity, and remembers we are but dust. He doth not examine by scourg∣ing Act. 22. 24., nor (as Zedekiah did Micaiah) strike, and speak after. He lyes not at ketch to tra∣pan us into ruin; nor suddenly stirrs up all his wrath; or immediately hurries from sentence to execution; he tries, many hours Belshazzar, Da. 5. 30. and the Rich fool Luk. 12. 20. forty; days the men of Nine∣veh: three years the fruitless figtree; forty years Jerusalem, and the people of Israel; a hundred and twenty the old world; four hundred the Amorites: And though we can pluck down 20 houses in less time than we can build one, God was but 6 days in making the world, and yet seven in destroying one city; longer in razeing the walls of Jerico, than in raising the fabrick of hea∣ven and earth. He stoops to court the sinner to
his own happiness; rifles the creation for argu∣ments; and wrestles with him only that he would accept a blessing; gives us good exam∣ples, burning and shining lights; that he may thereby discover our deformity, and kindle our devotion; overthrows them on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, that being dead, may yet speak in its Ruines; mingles others blood with their sacrifices, that by a coal from their Altar, we may purge away our iniquities, or copy out our ruine; gives us the fatnesse of the earth, that we may purchase the dew of Heaven; the upper and nether springs to quench our thirst, to mind us of the Foun∣tain of living water; sends Nineveh a Prea∣cher to forewarn them of their destruction, furnished not only with arguments from their condition, but an experiment of his own, able to convince them, both by the venge∣ance he denounced, and the punishment he had suffered: forbore the old world all the while the arke was preparing, which had they well considered the design of it, though it saved but eight, might have preserv'd them all. He hangs out articles of agreement, before his black ensigns of death: warnes, and whets his sword Is. 26. 21., before he smite; and lays the axe at the root of the tree, ere he take it into his hand, to hew down, and cast into the fire. Even the last day's tempest, is conspicuous in the black cloud of the threatning. If he use martiall Law, and hasten on to final execution, he steps out of the common road of justice; when he executes that,
is said to come out of his place, Is. 26. 21., puts him∣self out of his usual posture, and forsakes his cen∣ter as't were, when he rises out of his mercy seat, to punish the inhabitants of the earth. His mercy is over all his works, he prefers it, and gives it a place above them; and exercises it, though with some present disadvantage to his glory; the world suspects his being, the saints quarrel with his justice, and question his love ps. 7.: When Jonah had done his errand, free-grace seemingly made him a lyer Jo. 4. 2.. Judgements are the reserve, which he will not have fall on, till mercy is defeated, as all other means prove un∣successful, to revenge the quarrel of his abused darling attribute. He admonishes chides, ex∣postulates, threatens. How many pauses doth he make, ere he take the rod in hand, and send us to his house of correction, and then, how lea∣surely doth he lift it up; he will not lash, not lay it on, if shaking it over us will amend and bring us on our knees: nor punish till there be no remedy. How many warning-peices doth he shoot against us, ere he shoot oft his murder ing-peice? Justice goes a foot's pace gen. 18. 21.; mercy hath wings ps. 57. 1.; he waits that he may be gra∣cious: instead of bringing in an extinguisher, he lights up a candle ps. 18. 28.. In encountering a rebellious people, he sends forth smaller partys of Judgments, to prevent a more solemn ruin; if they be vanquisht, he rallies into battle array a whole army of Judgments to root out and destroy Lev. 25. He would fain have us reform, not at so dear a rate; chops, prunes, lops, before he lay the axe to the root of the tree: Lighter
Evills are sent before, that if they dispatch their errand, their whole army yet behind, may be disbanded or turned another way. Would words work us to his will, hee'd spare his blowes; would launcing heal the wound, hee'd not chop of the head. He threatens, that he may not punish; afflicts, that he may not destroy; and when determin'd to cut off a people, he knows not how to sign the warrant for execution, while mercy stands up pleading their cause. It fetches tears from his eyes, to give way to justice, before he shed the bloud of his enemies Ho. 11. 8. Lu. 19. 41.: He doth but shake the candlestick, to settle it; his hand trem∣bles, when he must remove; and when he sees we will not be ordered, he breakes out into a deep sigh, with an, O that my people would have hearkned unto me, and Israel walked in my wayes, &c. Ps. 81. 13 &c.. No nation is the root that bears mercy, but 'tis that bears up all humane con∣ditions, which hangs like a ball in the air, sup∣ported by infinite kindness. It is the great mi∣racle we are preserved, not that we are in distresse, being so apt to danger that we are cru∣shed before the moth, so worthless, that we pe∣rish by multitudes, without any regarding it; so guilty, that all creatures in heaven and earth give their applause to divine Judgments upon us; which are unwilling to proceed, till the stones cry out of the wall, and the beams out of the timber answer it Hab. 2. 11.: till the most insensible things, are ready to joyn with, and even pro∣voke them up. Indeed, 'tis inconsistent with those methods and contrivances he sets on
foot for making us happy, to circumvent his creatures, with ambushes of unwarned judgments; or execute his revenge, by sly unexpected stratagems. He makes not the sword the judge, but first weighs things in the ballance; and ever layes judgment to the line, before he draws the line of confusion. But, though God be long suffering, he doth not tell us how long: Though infinite mercy will not be conquered, nor endless goodness admit of bounds, and mercy rejoyces against judgment Ja. 2. 13.; yet he doth not forget, though he stay long: and the longer he forbears the interest, the greater summ, the principall of his vengeance will amount to. He is Just, as well as gra∣cious: his truth obliges him to make good his threatnings against an unreforming people, and not to alter the word that is gone out of his lips. Sin may cry so loud, as to fetch him down with a vengeance Ge. 18. 20 &c.; and be so importunate, as it seemes to say to the just judg, aveng thee of thine adversary; I will not leave, not let thee go, untill thou hast punisht this people, and quenched the fire of sin, with a shower of bloud. For, so states are dashed in peices like a potters vessell, and kingdomes translated from one people to another. Whosoever harbours sin, is still unfortunate. A land spew's out its polluted inhabitants, when they have filled up the measure of their sins: put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe, come get you down, for the press is full, the fatts over-flow, for their wicked∣ness is great Ge. 15. 16 I. 1. . Jr. 1. 13. . 12. Z. 17. . z. 1. 2. .. Lo, he hath come year after
year, with patience seeking fruit; but found none, yet while the axe of his justice was at cutting down such cumberers of the ground, mercy interposed, Lord let it alone this year also. And when his hand hath been stretched out to strike, his dear children clunge about, ketched hold, and would not let him go; so that he could not sling them off, till weary of repenting. Now after his yearly drawing nearer and nearer, to be∣wail our sin and forwarn our ruine, my heart trembles, lest I behold him in a relenting po∣sture of humane despair, and like one with blub∣bered eyes, smiting his breast, tearing his gar∣ments, standing in funerall weeds, over his languishing, dying patient; with whom no meanes are left unattempted, but now finding her marked with the tokens of stupidity and death, giving her over for lost) to take his finall solemne farwell, expressing his sad Resent∣ment, and compassionate relenting thoughts, weeping out the fatall period of an obstinate, incorrigible, self destroying people, saying, O my people! what have I done unto you, where∣in have I wearied you? what fault can you find with me? testifie against me. Have I been a barren wilderness, or a land of darkness unto you? of dread, or of the shadow of death? what iniquity have you found in me, that you are gone far from me? How often would I have gathered thy children as a hen gathers, her brood under her wings, and you would not . 1. 34. O [if thou] that art the wonder of the world, the holy and honourable nation, the
delight of Heaven, the desire of the whole earth [even thou] that hast on thee such peculiar obligations, for whom I have had so much kindness, to whom I have sent so many Mes∣sengers, for whose sake I have rebuked so ma∣ny people, of whom I have taken so much care, to whom I have preached so may I sermons, among whom I have wrought so ma∣ny wonders, from whom I have received so many affronts and injuries, with whom I have been at so much cost and paines, and so long gone about doing thee good, teaching thee by my word, loading thee with my benefits; (at least in this thy day) and happy season, while the treaty of peace, and offers of mercy are yet on foot, while the silver trumpets of Heaven and watch-men of Israel, rack and stretch their voices with ruefull elogies, so passionate, as might wring a stream of tears, from an heart of Iron. Even after thy so rudely treating my former messengers, killing so many prophets, openly, scornfully rejecting me their Lord, I yet made a pause, stood still, knockt, called, looked back; thought I, well, I'le stay a little longer, peradventure this sleeping church may yet awake: O that there were such a heart in them, that it might be well with them; O that they would yet take up the controversie; that I might put up my sword into the scabbard, and my arrowes into my quiver; run ye to and fro through the streets of London, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad paths of England if you can find a man  5. 1. that taketh hold of my
strength, that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. Will none plead for a reprieve? Will none interpose for pardon? Will none mediate for reconciliation? O my bo∣wells, my bowells, must I lose my dear son? Must I leave off my pleasant child; what shall I do unto thee? Which way shall I heal thee? How shall I part with thee? What more can I do for thee? Is all in vain I have done to thee? will nothing prevail with thee? must I now quite destroy thee? O London! what shall I do unto thee? O England! what shall I do unto thee? how shall I give thee up London? how shall I deliver thee England? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned with∣in me, my Bowels are kindled together. O if at length thou [hadst known the things that belong unto thy peace] and wisely impro∣ved the advantages, that might have setled thee on lasting foundations! But it's too late [now they are hid from thine eyes] The glasse of divine patience is run out. Thy roc∣ky heart hath barred up the door of mercy; Ordinances, Providences, let her alone, to sleep on now. Though heaven thunder above, hell flame beneath, Judgments roar round about, they shall but Lull her into a sensless slumber, till destruction wake her; for the day shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a Luk. 1. 14. &c. Trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in, on every side; and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children with∣in
thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another [Because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation] (r) Thou misim∣provedst thy day of Grace and space of repen∣tance. O Repentance! Thou joy of Angels, thou glory of man, thou Crown of nations, thou Clarifier of hearts, thou refiner of lives, thou great Almoner of the world, thou nurse of orphans, thou patron of all goodness. O Repentance! that art able to transnature, and translate a people, to purifie them in life, and pacifie them in death, and justifie them at the Throne; that canst unlock the gates of hea∣ven, put the triumphant palm in the hand, & set the Crown of immortal glory upon the head; that saved 8 persons in the flood, A fa∣mily at the destruction of Sodom, a mighty na∣tion at the slaughter in Egypt, a great City, when after a thousand years Triumphant state, she had but 40. days respite to repent or be destroyed; Nineveb had fallen, if thou hadst not supported it, and perished, if thou hadst not protected it; 'Tis thou that wert her cure and covert, her shadow and shelter, her but∣tress and buckler, her brest-plate and head-peice, her shield and custos, her target and propi∣tiatory; 'Tis thou that taughtest her the art & mystery how to prevent an eminent danger, to preserve her self at an exigence; that she stood still upon her old basis, when her grounsel was sliding and Cracking in peices; That her fa∣brick remained firme, when the whole struc∣ture was dropping down, and not one stone
ready to be left upon another. O Repentance! how hast thou saved a flourishing City? kept every pillar unshaken, every limb unshivered, ratified their liberties, confirmed their immu∣nities, renewed their charter, continued them proprietaries in all their fees, Lords of all their Royalties, secured their authority and Juris∣diction, opulency and Affluency, Clsitude & sublimity, power and pomp, principality and preheminence, procerage and peerage, crown and crown-land: 'Tis thou that heldst the crown upon the Kings head, preservedst the No∣bles in their court Equipage, the Merchants in their splendid traffique; pallaces, and banquet∣ting houses, statues and sepulchers, Exche∣quers and wardropes, Coverts and arsenals, magazens and records, Laws and lives, by thee were safe; not a tree blasted, not a stone cast down, not an Image defaced, not a crea∣ture destroyed, not the least dammage or de∣triment sustained; vengeance took not from them a shoo-latchet. O Repentance! how may we honor thy succouring bowels? and kiss thy securing hand? O great is thy potency, yea, a kind of omnipotency is bestowed upon thee, to rescue a people from greatest flatteries; O repentance! In the crowd of our scuffles and contentions, whither art thou escaped? A midst our could entertainment into what quarter art thou stolen? which way art thou gone? to what region art thou fled? in what unknown country dost thou reside? tell us, that we may go and seek thee. O all haile Repentance!
Turn in unto us, be thou visible in this na∣tion, that art able to repair the mischiefs, recall the vital spirits, reunite the scattered limbs of this mangled body, and in thee such an omnipotency as to effect a resurrection; weep so long over its ashes, till that moysture hath rendered them prolifical, and thou see it spring out of its urn; prepare us such a mercy-seat for God to appear upon within our walls. Let us be Ninevites, till thou canst make us the new Jerusalem; open our Ears to listen to our pro∣phets, that we may not have the Thunder of a confounding God; lend us faith, that we may believe God, that trembling at his threatnings, we may not feel the Terrors of a perishing decree executed; cloath us in sack-cloth, that we may not be stript of our gorgeous ray∣ment, sprinkle us with ashes, that the smell of fire may no more be felt within our walls; Enjoyn us to fast, that we may ere long be set down again at our spread tables; make us cry mightily, that no other cry may be heard in the City, but those of devotion; turn us from our evil ways, and from the violence of our hands, that they may not expose us to all manner of evils and the violence of Incensed justice; that thou mayest be as Exemplary as our crimes are Exorbitant. Whither can we go, O miserable people, but unto God? when we are in sickness, whither can we fly, but unto the fountain of health? when in want, whither but unto that treasury of fulness? when hu∣mane strength fails, whither can we go, but to
omnipotency? when humane wisedome is baf∣fled, whither can we go, but to omnisciency? God sometimes is out of sight, but never out of hearing: our sins may drive him away so far, that we may not be able to see him, yet they can never drive him so far (though in the belly of Hell, wrapt within the horred womb of despair Jon. 2. 2. but he will still be able to hear us. Gather your selves together, O nation not desired; before the decree bring forth, be∣fore the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come upon you Zeph. 2. 2.. O, I beg of you by all that's dear and preci∣ous to you, for your own sake, for your dear Relations sake, for your native countrys sake, by all the hopes you have of future happiness return; else, whatsoever is set on foot for your preservation, God will blast and curse it; and his vengeance pursue you wherever you go, why will you expose your selves to the fury of a conquering foe? why will you necessitate your little ones to wish, you and they had never been born? and your posterity to curse you when layd in the dust, for leaving them only the guilt of your sins, and intayling up∣on them nothing but misery? if you neglect to be holy, you are base Traitors to your King and Coun∣trey; you sell your souls, wives, children and nation to satisfie your lusts; you betray those brave persons lives, that venture them to pre∣serve yours. Stay not for a publick reformation, but every one endeavor to reconcile himself
and the nation to God: one wise man may save a City Eccles. 9. 15.. By this may you lay a foun∣dation for the future happiness of a sinking people, and those yet unborn, bless you. Come then my brethren, while our superiors are con∣sulting our welfare, let us back their endea∣vours with our prayers; now wrath is approach∣ing, and heaven marching out against us, now Judgment is at the threshold, and vengeance at the door, drawing the latch, ready to come in, now the neck of our native countrey seems to lie upon the block, and the fury of heaven to be lifting up its Axe, ready to strike some more fatal blow than ever we have yet felt; let us betake our selves to our closet de∣votion, let us beseige and environ the throne of Grace with our sighs and groans for mercy, and never cease ringing out a loud peale of Cryes and moanes in Gods ear, till he pitty, compassionate, and deliver us; those prayers that make the longest voyage, will at length make the richest return; Therefore, though God delay us, yet pray, though he deny us, yet pray; who can tell, but that we may wrest the falling thunderbolt out of Gods hand, & pull the axe out of the arm of Almighty ven∣geance, and yet prevail for a Reprieve for our native country. There is no way to conquer heaven, and to put vengeance upon a retreat, but to fight upon our bended knees with tears in our eyes: Who knows, but that he whose Bowels our sins have shut, may have his bow∣els opened by our means and supplications,
and his outstretched arm Imbrace us; That God, who hath been our Enemy, may at last be made our friend, and then, no matter who is our Enemy. Can we conquer him by our pray∣ers, he will conquer them by his power. If but our ways please the Lord, he will discover or disappoint their plots, scatter them like dust before a while-wind, and confound or make them to be at peace with us: such a change in us works another in him; turns all his frowns into smiles; his fury against us, into Zeal for us; the thunder of his threatnings, into the sounding of his Bowels; his compassions and Repentings will be kindled in him, in stead of kindling the fire of his Jealousie. And then, after the Dresser of the vineyard hath pulled up our pales and fences, and flung down our walls round about, and laid us wast, and torn us up; he will at length return, dresse, prune, and cut us into fine knots and borders; and this poor kingdome, now floating like a little spot in the midst of a sea of misery, become a fortified Island, incompassed found with gol∣den streams of blessings, and in our laps de∣scending showrs of mercy. So, me thinks I see his compassionate eye, looking upon this Re∣newed face; fire from heaven falling upon this acceptable sacrifice; tears quenching all Indignation, reformation (as Rahahs thread hung out of the window) keeping the house in safety; judgment drawing back; the des∣troying Angel called off; the arrows taken off the string; the viol of wrath set by: So
long as we are peccant, God cannot but par∣don sin, so soon as penitent, he cannot pu∣nish Repentance; shall not I spare Nineveh? Signs of the last Judgment, &c. THis know that in the last daies perillous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthank∣full, unholy, without naturall affections, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God: False Christs, and false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many; and soul-deluding seducers shall lead captive and draw many Disciples after them; and shall shew great signs and wonders to seduce; insomuch, that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect; and because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. And you shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars; Nation shall rise up against nation, and Kingdome against Kingdom; and great earthquakes shall be in divers places. And there shall be famines and pestilences on earth; and fearfull sights, and great signs shall there be from Heaven. But before all these (be∣ginnings of sorrow) they shall lay there hands on you, and persecute you; you shall be beat∣en, and brought before Rulers, and Kings for my sake; and they shall deliver you up to be afflicted; and you shall be betrayed both by
Parents and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends: And some of you shall they cause to be put to death; the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son: and children shall rise up against their Pa∣rents, and shall cause them to be put to death: and you shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Men shall not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables; when it shall be a per∣illous thing to lay down the symptomes of per∣illous times; and Micaiah seem as one that mocketh Gen. 19. 14.; and be rudely interrupted and smitten on the cheek for prophesying the truth 2 King 22. 24.; when resolute prophets shall stand upon precipices, unable to keep their ground, if they discharge their consciences; when venerable true religion shall grow out of credit, and disguised upstart errors and prophanesse, wait∣ed on by insolent attendants, shall be all in fashion and favour, when Dagon shall be brought into the Temple, and set above the Ark, and Jeroboams calves have more wor∣shippers than the God of Israel. When the Vultures shall drive the Doves from their hou∣ses, and the Wolves contend with the Sheep for the Fold; and the Prince of darknesse, Captains of his Train-bands, shall captivate by stratagem many of Christs Subjects, who in their Baptism received presse-money, to fight under his Banner to their lives end. When
those that should be healers of their nation, shall wound it by their transgressions. When there is poyson in the plaister, and the Phy∣sician himself hath the plague upon him. When the proud Philistine shall defie the ar∣my of the Israelites, the Host of the living God, and Saul with his men of war stand by and look on. When Piety shall be hist from the Court, and iniquity abound in the Camp. When thieves and robbers shall be as quietly permitted in stealing and robbing, as faith∣full shepherds in watching their flock, and painfull labourers in working in the vineyard. When plague-sore-men shall have freedom to walk the streets, and our enemies liberty to impoyson our springs. When the beasts of the field shall defile the waters of the Sanctuary, and filthy swine trample down the green pa∣sture, wherein the Shepherds of Israel are wont to feed their flocks. When those shall be admitted as stewards of Divine mysteries, who put poyson into the meat of the Kings children, and impudently challenge the Chur∣ches dowry, meerly for violating her chastity, or falsly accusing her to be an Harlot. When avarice shall put on the Canonicall habit, and twist it self not only with the practices▪ but doctrines of the Church. When Articles of re∣ligion shall be esteemed by their profitable∣nesse, and Ecclesiasticks dispute as Lay-men for money, unanimous in nothing so much as a joint-reference to profit. When men shall cast dirt into the Galleries and Chariots of the
great King, and disgrace the Throne of his Glory, and foot-stool of his anointed; vilifie the Lords Tabernacle; spit in the face of the beauties of holinesse, and cast stones at the windows of the Sanctuary, by which the Son of righteousnesse sheds forth his beams of light upon the children of Sion. When all degrees of men shall have corrupted their ways, the bounds of sin even removed, and the world groaning under a second deluge of profanesse. When iniquity walks hand in hand, & to be a reall Saint, the object of hatred. When men shall carry it towards professors of religion, as if they were their profest enemies, and to be a friend to God, shall be esteemed to be an e∣nemy to Caesar. When the oppressors hand shall be full of spoil, the extortioners of ra∣pine; and Christs little flock surrounded with troops of wolves, and a land-floud of abo∣mination, shall look round about and none to deliver them. When the Harlot shall be bol∣der than the inncent, and most professors luke∣warm, key-cold in the cause of Christ. When inodesty must go for want of breeding, and ho∣nesty for want of wit. When men shall dissolve themselves into sensuall delights, eating, and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage; as in the daies when Noah entered into the ark, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. And there shall be great tri∣bulations, and distresses, and afflictions, such as were not from the beginning of the creation. And immediately after the tribulation of
those dayes, there shall be signes in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Starrs; the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from Hea∣ven, & upon the Earth distress of nations and perplexities; the Sea and the waves roaring, mens hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth; for the powers that are in Hea∣ven shall be shaken; and then shall appear the signs of the son of man in Heaven: and the tribes of the earth shall mourn; and shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with Power, and great Glory; and he shall send his Angells with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds; and the Gospell must first be preacht in all the world, for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the End come. The maturity of our sins, the face of our distempers, and tokens of Gods displeasure, so far threaten us in this nation, that 'tis to be feared he's even weary of repenting, and after so many despised methods, and bills of in∣ditement, will refuse to pass us by any more. Instead of forsaking or diminishing, we have encreased the first heap, and put out our sins to usury, to reap our punishment with encrease. How are we swelled with pride, blackened with malice, pined with envy, fretted with animosities, vexed with whisper∣ings, mad with jealousies, puffed up with ambition, overflown with drunkennesse, de∣luded
with profanesse, polluted with adulte∣ries, inflamed with fornication, infamous by perjuries, stigmatized with oaths and execra∣tions? we not only neglect and deny God, but reproach and villifie him by dayly as∣saults with our bold and insolent blasphemies, making him the mark all our wild passions are shot at; we presently question his provi∣dence or goodness, if we want any thing for our use or delight; Accuse or disclaim against him as impotent or illiberal. He stands ob∣noxious to all the displacencies we receive from men, nay from inanimate creatures: his sacred name must be profaned, if they vex or disquiet us: we account our fiercost reviling of men faint and Insignificant, if not inspired with the most dreadful horrid oaths. If a die or card run amiss, our profane, vile resent∣ments are presently vented on him, as if he was the cheat that rookt us of our mony, because he secures us not from those losses to which we wantonly expose our selves, not on∣ly our eager warmer passions, but our plea∣santer moods do thus invade us, and we blaspheme by way of advertisement: Every impertment story or insipid jest, or incredi∣ble narration must be attested and recommend∣ed by an oath; That Hellish piece of oratory so over-spreds their language, that it's become the most Remarkable part of it: What pro∣phane Atheistical discourses about God and religion? what bold and insolent abuses of his word in publick houses? How are our ears
in the streets grated and pierc't with horrid Oaths and imprecations? enough though guil∣ty of no other crime, to sink a nation: Yea, how many solemn deliberate perjuries suborn Gods venerable dreadful name to be the En∣gine of our fraud and malice: And as if we thought he would for-swear as well as we, we bring him to countenance those crimes he hath vowed to punish. Thus do we with a prodigious impiety, contaminate even divinity it self, make it the sink of all our puddles to run into, and prostitute that name which is great wonderful and holy, to all the unholy purpo∣ses, our passion, interest, or fancies can sug∣gest. What licenciousness Licensed in play∣houses, where wantonness is more effectually Taught than Decry'd in the pulpit, and Scurri∣lity prefer'd before what is sacred; while perso∣nated religion is laught at on the stage, it lo∣ses its due fear and Reverence in our lives. Be∣sides the vanity, frothiness of mind, disfitting for religious duties plays naturally produce, and precious time mispent, in seeing and talking of them; what real good is learnt there, I ap∣peal to the lives and consciences of those that plead for, and haunt them. O sinful Allure∣ments, when wicked Actors have learned thee by counterseiting, or learned to counterfeit by custom, virtue in the mean time glides away, and the applause of spectators bring what is nought into Imitation. From hence Cupid sharpens his pierceing arrows, and the Devil erects so many Brothel-houses, where unlanful
gain is spent, and punished with poverty: our courage is overcome with Wheredom: nor is youth brought up in Martial discipline, under such kind of Tyranny. Ensigns and Trum∣pets (men of war) grow cowardly, and luxu∣ry effeminates our swords; from whence our enemies without wonder Triumph over us, an easie prey to every foe; nor have our vic∣tories deserved praise: O once renowned nati∣os, in whom now, the very vitalls languish and decay, and hath utterly lost its pristine vigour and activity. To how brutish an im∣pudence is uncleannesse grown? we need not trace men into their privacies and recesses, themselves willingly proclaim their guilt, and dread nothing so much, as the opinion of be∣ing Innocent; not to have a paramour, is as much as not to be a Courtier. He who hath the greatest interest to debauch, is accounted the bravest man: And those who in other cases are most tender of their own honour, labour to prostitute it here, and then glory in their shame. By immodest obscene talk, breath infection on their hearers; disperse and scatter their own impure fires, to the inflaming o∣thers; and make no other use of their Eyes than of a burning-glasse meerly to set their unclean hearts on fire. Yea, so out-dated a vir∣tue is modesty become now, that the sex to which it was once accounted the greatest or∣nament, have put it off; look on it as a piece of Rusticity and country-breeding. That free and confident behaviour in use is, not only
apt to invite assaults, but takes off all that ex∣tenuation of crime, which was wont to be al∣lowed that sex, upon the supposition of their being seduced; and this pulling down the fence, is too often an indication they are willing to lie common: Decency is little regarded; and Ir∣reparable time insensibly passes away, while the head is adorning, the hair curling into lascivious wrethes, and a youthful countenance disguised with patches: much cost and pains in attires to court the eye; the naked breasts and lascivious dresses, more plausible kind of pandors, Trapans and snares for the wanton behoulder; by Ambiguous habits adding fuel to unlawful flames. A confidence in wit in∣cites them to scoffing, and indecency; They despise the company of their own sex, and are desirous to traffique away their own re∣putation. Clownishness is aymed to be shunned by stuperous actions; and whatsoever is of force to prevail for the staying of a Mistres, is lookt upon, as that which will abandon Modesty; Yea Marriage, the remedy God hath Assigned, with many serves only to exasperate the disease, and advance simple fornication to Adultery, and superadd perjury to uncleannesse. Those sacred Bands are broken like Sampsons withs, upon every assault of the Philistins; and the very thoughts of being confined, makes men more apt to range; their only quarrel to their wives is, that they are their own. 'Tis not their need but fancy they must provide for, and gratifie two sins at once, their vanity, as
well as their Lust; their complacency in under∣mining the Husband, as great as that of en∣joying the wife. Conjugal honour is violated; and Hymen conceals forbidden love, which is by consent cast underfoot; and those solemn covenants, but cloaks to cover adulterous ac∣tions: Nor is it enough to be Evil by Imita∣tion, but exemplary in that which exceeds the sin of Sodom and whoredome of Gomorah. Re∣pine not O England, but esteem the anger favourable, which goodness hitherto hath o∣verpoysed, and put a Restraint to thy desert; since those exceed thee in punishment, whom thou outviest in sin. Ah! sinful nation, steep∣ed in iniquity: into which the deadly serpent hath set at liberty his hellish furies; on which the bottomlesse pit breaths with a poysonous breath, infecting the very entrals with mor∣tall fumes. 'Tis well, if among all other pro∣jects for promoting of holy church, this be not one, to debauch our gentry, the better to dis∣pose them for imbracing that Religion which can afford them indulgence at so cheap a rate. The whole species of Real friendship seems to be extinguished, since the ficititious took place; and is become only a confederacy in sin, a combination and league against what they account the common enemy, God and ver∣tue. 'Tis a rarity, almost a prodigie, to find (even among those that professe the greatest dearnesse) any that hath the courage to give, or humility to receive an Admonition. But in stead of the wounds of a friend, give the kis∣ses
of an enemy prov. 27. 6. such mutual soothings in ill, as render it inveterate and incurable; nay, not only nourish those vices they find already planted, but sow new seeds; communicate their personal ones to each other: as if the community of friendship obliged them mutu∣ally to diffuse their poyson; and he that hath arrived to the more elevated mysterious part of wickedness, would lose much of the gust, if he should not get some confident, to whom at once to boast and propagate his proficiency. So reproachful is Sobriety with them, as even those that value it, dare not own it; but are driven to preserve it by shifts and Artifices, or chuse to Abandon it rather than Hazard the scandal: So base, that they are ashamed both of piety and humanity, and had rather cease to be men, than appear to be Christians. They think it enough to damn themselves with their friends, and all their combinations are transmuted into that of sin; which they not only commit themselves, but laugh at the scrupilsty of those that dare not, or do it with a blushing countenance, and a trem∣bling Conscience, as the reproach of the school of wickedness; because not yet attained to those heights of impiety they Glory in, who have sub∣dued their conscience much easier than others do their sins, which they boast of and defend with as much greediness as they commit, unto whom no sin is so unpardonable as the thinking there is any at all; The utmost they will allow in the description of sin, is, that it is a thing that
some live by declaiming against, and others can∣not live without the practice of; That clap a fools coat on all that are not of vices train & retinue; As if no Art were proper for gentlemen, but to swagger, wanton, and rant it in the mode, and none fit for their company, but such as can talk profanely, with a Boone-grace, and swear in the newest fashion. As if he that will poc∣ket up a wrong, and take a Lye any other way than upon the point of his sword, were a dastard, and deserved not the honour of any noble society; to be hooted at as a most un∣pardonable Coward, that will not die for his Mistress, sooner than for his God, and Coun∣try. And as if all the Snakes that hang in En∣vie's perrewig were twisted about their ran∣karous souls, Holiness can no sooner appear in sight, but they craul up into their tongue, thrust forth their heads at their mouth, and fall a hissing at, and stinging of it, as it pas∣ses by. How are we ready to be born down by that spiteful enemy of all virtue and good∣nesse; the Impudence of such, who 'tis hard to say, whether they shew it more in com∣mitting sin, or defending it; of so bad man∣ners, that scarce any thing can be Imagined worse, unless the wit they use to excuse them with; that take the measure of mens perfec∣tions downward, and the nearer the approach to Beasts, the more they think themselves to Act like men. O unfortunate times! where∣in wickednesse is so incouraged, approved, connived at, that 'tis a wonder we doe not
Establish it by Law, and make some Act of Parliament to continue it in fashion for ever: when, he that speaks against sin, becomes more odious than he that acts it, and he that re∣proves, must expect the unjust retaliation of being reproved for his pains; and a man may with lesse peril of Scorn appear in the most superannuated dress, than own the qua∣lities of meekness, poverty, sobriety, &c. Vir∣tue bears the blame of vices faults, and ice the credit of virtues goodness; Drunkeness is accounted good fellowship; Swearing and curs∣ing, a gentile dialect, or extravagant speech∣es; Covetousness, frugality and thriftiness; Pride is but decency; Fornication, an harmless plea∣sore; Adultery, but a frolick; Flattery, civil deportment; Cheating and cosening, inge∣nuity; Jesting with scripture, is wit; Oppressi∣on is exacting no more than ones due; Filthy talk, is but honest mirth; Atheisme, but rala∣ry; Killing a man in a Duel, is gallantry; and Revenge, but a point of honour; Close-hand∣ednesse, good-husbandry. He passes for a con∣sidering-man, that desputes principles; and is thought most to own his rn, that least owns his faith. Nothing mo us, but what courts our senses; and what is t grosse e∣nough to be seen, we think too wise to be considered. A serious man is accounted an Humorist. He that dares reprove for sin, is a peevish fellow. He that complies not with o∣thers in vice, is conceited: and he that cares not for vain and idle discourse, is an Ill-bred
Clown, fitter to live among Hermits, than in∣genious men. He that cannot away with the Hellish Rhetorick of damming and sinking, is a precisian; and he that mourns for sin a melancholly person. Forgiving injuries, is a principle of cowardice, that Emasculates the world, gratifies Enemies, and loses the sa∣tisfaction of Revenge. Patience in adversity, is Stupidity. Humility, a symptom of a lead∣en spirit. To love our enemies, a piece of spa∣nil e-fawning: To turn the check not only to hazard, but invite new injuries, by own∣ing them as benefits. Temperance, is branded for ill nature and dulness of humour. Chastity, unnaturalness. Zeal, passion. Modesty, a fool∣ish Bashfulness. Strictness in religion, is no∣thing but Hypocrisy. To be meek is to be servile, a temper fit only for the abject. Pay∣ing blessings for curses, kindnesses and good turns for hatred, a Ridiculous patience, that exposes to the insolencies of many, the scorn and derision of all men, and they will be no such fools for Christs sake. Selfdenial is a vow∣ed open madness, to part with real pleasures for an empty name, or profit, for that bank∣rout thing, called conscience. Charity is arrai∣ned of robbery, and stigmatized as a thing that picks the purse, and rifles coffers. The christian precepts of meekness, long-sufferance, and forgiving injuries are despised as rudi∣ments of cowardice and pusillanimity. Men tear off the Signatures of honour God himself hath imprest, villifie those he hath dignified Prov. 18. 32. & 19. 11.;
cansel his patents by whom Kings reign; and mark them out, as the objects of scorn, to whom God gives so glorious atestimony. Good∣ness is of so old a date, and constant to one habit, that it agrees not with our Athenians, while nothing is so A-la-mode as vice, drest in several shapes, and appears new, though it be as old as the Devil; and gains not only strength but impudence: We are become witnesses a∣gainst our selves; of declaring our sin as So∣dom Isa. 3. 9. and have forced God to attest against us in a manner as conspicuous: We seem to be advanced beyond a common degree of Hosti∣lity with God; subjoyn malice to licentious∣ness, and project not more to please our selves, than displease him. We profess a contempt, not only of his commands, but of himself; and seek no lesse to dethrone him, than to abrogate those. By our infamous Crimes we do open violence to heaven; make it a kind of per∣sonal quarrel, and dare (as it were) the divine vengeance to vindicate it self. As if we would tempt the proof of a diety in our own destruction; and our onely design were to be famous for our wickedness. Armed with des∣pight and contempt we summon heaven and earth to take notice of us, as if he would not or durst not punish us. When the Lord of host is fearfully and continually provoked; not only robbed, but mocked; used contume∣liously, as well as unjustly, 'tis high time for him to arm himself with vengeance, and come forth to cut off a rebellious people: Grosse sins
commonly, openly committed, are as so ma∣ny cords to pluck down judgment; yet men set themselves as it were on purpose to pro∣voke his anger; joyn with their deliberate sins, a visible contempt, scorn, and defi∣ance of Gods commands; They sin with a high hand; and not only break the law, God and nature have laid upon them, but do it to shew the bravery of their spirits; to let the world see what stout and gallant persons they be; to demonstrate what courage they have; that they are the men that dare storm the gates of Hell, and valiantly, violently rush on their own damnation: So unwilling are the gallant spi∣rits of our days to go to Hell in the old way, that it cannot consist with the greatness of of their spirits to be wicked at those low rates their silly Ancestors were. In all they do, they would be taken notice of; appear above the vulgar, and proclaim to all men, that they are none of those Melancholy, weak brain'd, mean-spirited persons, who are so awed with the apprehension of a diety, that they dare not sin freely. They pay so little of reve∣rence due to God, that at last they turn their impiety into argument; and infer him not to be, whom thy treat so unlike one; and they will not thank his charity, that will not hope better of them. To them Davids Atheist is a modest puny, and deserves the epithite of a fool that would not own, what would now a-days so certainly denominate him a Witt, and master of reason: Though at first prompted by their
interest to take up the tennet, as a buckler against the unwelcome invasions, and checks of conscience; for the more plausible enjoy∣ment of their lusts: but when they find their necessity made a virtue, and themselves struck into the repute of a wit by all but those that have none; they doubt not but their fame will increase with their irreligion; so make themselves its avowed champions; seek to win it proselites; not only use, but love it; and appear so zealous for it, as if they made it their religion to have none. How many such reverse kind of Evan∣gelists, who with as great design unteach Divi∣nity as the first propugners taught it? Satan now may leave his toylesome labour of com∣passing the earth, men do his business for him. Are there not new arts and schooles of sin day∣ly invented and erected, where the art of sin is delivered by Rule, and men taught how they may wisely damne themselves, most effectually provoke God, and curse themselves into his displeasure? To put their own damnation in their prayers; instead of imploring Gods grace, beg of him to damn body and soul for ever? How many endeavour to put profaness into rhe∣torick? and to teach blasphemy to speak with eloquence? That know no other breeding, but to sin with impudence; or braverie, but to be brave against God; and to charge upon their own ruine? That have so conquered those pre∣judices they had conceived of virtue and vice, sin and shame, that they dare in the open Sun commit those sins, Cowards run into the dark
for. So superlatively, prodigiously wicked, that former times brought forth but Puny's to our Anakims in wickedness; notorious fighters against God, professors of vice in the Devill's Academy; improving their ingenuity to search out diligently new ways of iniquity ps. 64. 6., and to devise oathes that shall be Al-a-mode, unknown to the less studyed sinners, and bunglers in wick∣edness. As if a consultation had been had with the French, Italian, and all the out-landish devills, to advise us of all their several modes of vice; we are so good at following, that we are more compleat than our pattern. How dreadfull, that in a nation professing christianity, among a people, whose genius inclines them to civility and religion; that have the greatest advantages of behaviour and education, and who are to give Laws of civility to the rest of the nations, there should be found so many, who deride religi∣on, make sport with their own profaness, and so light of nothing as being damn'd, a thing not to be regarded whether they be eternally happy or miserable; and never think of it, but when they call upon God to damne them; for fear he should not do it time enough for them. But t'will be no comfort to them in another world, that they were accounted wits for de∣riding those miseries they then feel and smart under the severity of; nor mitigation of their flames, that they go laughing into them; nor will they endure them the better, because they would not believe them. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the
daughters of the Philistines and of the uncircum∣cised rejoyce and triumph. Isa. 1. 20. The enemies of our peace have no greater incouragment against us, than to see and find us at open wars with God. Their sins (say they) will provoke him, when he is provoked, he will desert them, and when they are deserted by him, then shall we prevail against them. Our hearts full of im∣piety, is vented in atheistical drollings at what∣soever is sacred; Religion made the sport of entertainments, the common subject of playes and comedies. O! is there nothing to trifle with but God and his service? Is wit grown so Schismaticall and sacrilegious, that it can please it self with nothing but holy ground? and find nothing to carouse in but the vessells of the temple? are profanesse and wit grown such inseparable companions, that none shall be al∣low'd to pretend to the one, but such as dare be highly guilty of the other? that scoff at past promises, as antiquated stories, tales that never had accomplishment; and endeavour to impose upon the secure world, a disesteem of all the threats of God, as the troublesom dreames of some melancholy hungry Priest, who divines for a reward, and whose trade is to inveigh against sin: deeming them causeless curses that never come; and the passionate rants of weaker persons, who would terrifie where they cannot perswade, and frighten whom they cannot force: Decrying it as the greatest folly and most un∣manly submission to yield them any considera∣tion; a project of imposing upon credulous
soules, and of gaining reall advantages to the managers, while they feed the City proselites with imaginary ones. That temperance, chastity, mortification &c. were but the creations of melancholy reclusiv'es, who would enviously impose those bands upon others, wherewith they had foolishly fettered themselves. That God is more indulgent to mens appetites, which they may satisfie here as they please, without those future dangers preachers fright them with; which thoughts suggest to them a more than vulgar wisdom, not to be shaken as fooles, with words and a mistaken courage, which is but obsti∣nacy; nor to be hector'd out of their carnall sa∣tisfactions. That God is not extream to mark what is done amiss. To all declarations of future Judgment, they oppose his goodness and mercy, that so gracious a God cannot ap∣point eternall torments for the temporall trans∣gressions of finite creatures; thus, as if he could not be just without being cruel, they baffle his veracity with his clemency, and make his long-suffering to wear out the sense of his justice. Scof∣fers, walking after their own lusts, saying, where is the promise of his coming, &c. 2. Pet. 3. 3 such willfull ignorance makes these unfaithfull stew∣ards argue from their Lord's delaying to come, that either he will not call them to account, or that they may have leasure enough to beat their fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunken; and thereby povoke the hand of God to take away his mercies, by their sacrificing them to their idol lusts, while Christ in his poor mem∣bers
goes hungry and naked. Their tongues set on fire of hell, shoot their poisoned arrowes of oathes and blasphemies at the face of God; such as the deeply damn'd in the bottomlesse pit, could never be guilty of worse: as if they'd curse away all his blessings from the land of their na∣tivity, and press the divine vengeance to set on fire the whole course of nature. O what rivers, what ocean of teares are competent to bewail such unutterable evils? These are such sad, such direfull transmutations, as excite not so much wonder, as griefe and lamentation? shall I not visit for these things saith the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this Je. 5. 3.? when such monsters appear, they presage a storm in the state. When the blasphe∣mies of the prophane, sensuality of the volup∣tuous, and mockeries of the hypocrite, send day∣ly challenges to heaven, we cannot but look it should at last overcome its long suffering, awa∣ken God to vindicate the honour of his name, and not suffer it any longer to be thus prostitu∣ted and polluted; nor sit still unconcern'd when so many indignities are continually offered him. Such exasperating crimes we cannot expect should be wholly respited to another world; but in all probability awaken his fury, and pull down present judgments. Such nationall im∣pieties are sad indications and fatall symptomes, that we have nigh fill'd up the measure of our iniquities, and are ripened for the woes de∣nounc'd against those, who call evill good, and good evill Isa. 5. 20.: That his justice will multiply our miseries, to a proportion with our sins, which
are also increased by our unprofitableness under foregoing corrections, & so many methods to make us serious if any thing would. Had we slighted God and religion, under the abundance of peace and plenty, and saw no severities of Gods justice upon such as made a mock at sin; it might well have interrupted our peace, and destroy'd that plenty, which made us out of the greatness of our pride and wantoness to kick against Hea∣ven. But to do it in despight of all Gods judg∣ments; to laugh in his face when his rod is upon our backs; when neither pestilence, nor fire can make us more afraid of him, when we dance among naked swords; defie and reproach Hea∣ven in midst of a citys ruin's, and over the graves of those whom the arrows of the Almighty have heaped together; what can be thought of us, but that nothing will make us serious but eternall misery? The proper effect of religion is safety and security: the work of righteousnesse shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever Isa. 32. 17.; when a nation is deprived of these Bles∣sings, 'tis a sign, it is defective in the means of them; and we may judg of the degree of the sin, by that of the punishment: that 'tis no ordinary defect in religion, that hath expo∣sed us to so many sore judgments following so close, one upon another, not to be pararell'd by any History or example; such unusuall pro∣vocations, as former times have not been guil∣ty of. Other ages have been carelesse in du∣ties of religion towards God, and of Justice
and charity towards one another, but still there was a reverence payd to the very profession of religion; and those who had little of the truth in the power of it, thought it an honour to pretend to it. But was there ever any time, when the very form of religion was out of fa∣shion? when men arrived to that impudence, as to dispute against the very being of God, and future state of rewards and punishments? and made it their businesse to bring the very profession of religion into contempt? when every frothy wretch who hath not seriousness enough to consider, wisdom nor grace enough to distinguish, shall be set up for a wit by his scoffing at virtue? And if this be our case, what can any (who believes a Diety, concern'd for humane affairs) expect to be the fruit of our irreligion and unrighteousnesse? but that the jealous God should in some extraordinary man∣ner, be revenged on such a sinfull people: nor is there any thing more equall, than that those who would bring religion into contempt, should suffer under it themselves. Injuries done to the truth, and Gospell, are sad forebodes of ruin. The ministery of Christ dishonoured was a just preparation, and justification of that so severe stroke Jerusalems destruction. The Gospell honoured, is as a wall of fire for defence, and breaks outward upon the enemies of a nation; when despised it burns inward. It is a Pillar of fire, and a cloud of protection, when observed; but disregarded, it is a cloud trou∣bled with a thunderbolt, rowling up and down, and at last flashing out in lightening to de∣stroy.
Nothing delivers the history of any time so fair to posterity, as an honourable en∣tertainment of a pure and unmixed religion, giving it the utmost freedom to shine as the Sun, to communicate it self as the air; and to run like the fountains without any interrup∣tion. The Gospel of Christ, is the common hap∣pinesse and necessity of the world, from no nation, of which, where ever it had place, hath it used to remove, but it carried the honour, and peace residing there, with it: as the glry together with the ark, departed from Israel, leaving it as naked of present happinesse, as of the hopes of eternall. The horror of a∣ny punishment inflicted by God, argues the offence proportionably hainous; his ways are equall, and his Judgments never exceed, but are beneath the transgression. Therefore he so severely punishes our not amending after Judg∣ments, because impenitency is a most horrid provocation; being a contempt and despite of all his gracious and glorious attributes; for we having both tasted sin, and felt punish∣ment, yet think the former worthy the hazard of the latter, and that one is a cheap purchase for the other; reproach and affront infinite wisdom, of having not sufficiently pro∣vided for the attainment of his end, by in∣venting the consequence between sin and pu∣nishment; that men might be advised not to dote upon sin, which draws after it such an in∣separable throng of miseries, assuring the more sensual part, that there are just and solid
comforts in obedience, and that to disobey shall be neither safe, nor pleasant. Yea, we thereby rudely scorn the Divine kindnesse by which we are saved from a totall excision, and re∣ject the Court-ship to a more endeared love; our being not shut up in the pit, where there is no remembrance of him, argues he reserves us for his service and embraces. We slight and un∣dervalue his power, and brave his omnipo∣tency, and affront him to his face, after escaping one stroke; which argues this vile e∣steem of God, as if he had wasted all his thun∣derbolts, emptyed his quiver, and broke his Sword in the first encounter. When hardly come off from one overthrow, we challenge him to another, renewing the controversie by repeating our sins; we must be concluded to think he cannot triumph as gloriously in the Vallies as on the Hills, nor have strength e∣nough for a fresh Victory 1 King 20. 23. 24., else we should certainly hear his first rod; (who can punish yet seven times more) and be ashamed that our Father hath spit in our face, and not wea∣ry him till he smite us with greater and other sorts of punishments, with an utter disinheri∣tance, and our land be no more in remem∣brance, except in the stories of its sin and ru∣ine. As if our space of repentance were given us to revenge our selves upon him, and to make him rue the wounds he hath given us; how do many of us dip our tongues as 'twere in our bloud, and spit it in his glorious face? O how doth this debauched age anticipate the
miseries of the place of torment by continue∣ing in sin under affliction? Moab settled upon her Lees, is at ease indeed, but not when emptyed from vessel to vessel. Did Sodom and Gomorrah so provoke God, while the fire and brimstone was showering on their heads, passe over the Isles of Chittim and see, and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently; ask ye now among the Heathens, and see if there be such a thing: can the most savage Pagans pararell the crimes we glory in? that have been a people of wrath, and seem to have been born, to be as fewell for Judgement, and summoned upon the stage of the world, to come and behold what desolations God can bring upon a land, for the wickednesse of them that dwell there∣in. For those plagues and miseries which were wont to be divided among severall ages, and to fall singly and in certain periods of time, have all befallen us at once, and come upon us with the speed of hasty messengers, one treading upon the heels of another; so that we have had scarce time to survey the wasts and spoiles one hath made, ere another came to call for our tears and wonder. Let us sit down upon our ruines, and recount them if we can: for Re. 6. 2. &c. he that sate on the White∣horse hath shot at us, and the Red Horse hath marched furiously before, all bloud with the effects of Civill war, & the Pale Horse hath followed with death upon his back, and the grave at his heels, and after them those out of whose mouth issued fire and smoak and brim∣stone,
with the innumerable series of their miseries, and sad consequences, bringing so much poverty and desolation on the whole Kingdom. Every stroke at the magazene of life is much more dangerous, than heavier downfalls upon lesse noble parts, and speak severest intentions of that displeasure that cut us so deep in that one neck. The three late Judgments making up to the very head and top of the Nation, where they fixed them∣selves as if they had that commission to fight neither with small nor great but the Metropolis, which also descended upon the whole; the Issue of all, we have just cause to fear, if it be not our speedy amendment, will be our ruine. For we are not amended, though we are alrea∣dy punished not to correction only but to a terror and example, for he hath called Heaven and Earth to witnesse; the world rings with the sound of our ruines. He hath cited all nations to judge between him and us, and hath pleaded against us in his Judgements, and discovered our nakednesse; putting us to an o∣pen shame; for all the world knows, the Judge thereof will not deal unrighteously; & our sins therefore were very grievous, and the cry of them waxen great, because he hath so destroyed us. For, where Judgments are en∣graven on the Reverse, Iniquities are inscribed: there needs no more to declare the guilt of Sodom, than to tell the travellers as they went a long, there once was a City, where is now a pitchy lake; and when the Marriners shall sayl by our shores, and say, how is the joyons
City become a desolation? they will soon subjoin how was the Faithfull City become a harlot, and unrighteousnesse lodged in her? And that now there remains nothing, but that it should pu∣nish us to excision and vengeance (though he only knows how soon, and by what ways,) our selves may guesse by our sins and terrors, that it is not far off. When judgments tread on the heels of one another, and hang to∣gether in so long a line, when God speaks once and twice, when he is not quiet with us but importunes and solicits to a sense, and we regard it not, he intends something great and considerable. For, he doth not fight as one that beateth the air; but having entered in∣to particulars, at last sums up all, in a perfect effect, and lesser Judgements are but the begin∣nings of sorrow. When our Physician purges, and the distemper continues, the bloud still cor∣rupt after frequent Plebetmie, and impurity still swims up after all evacuations, 'tis deadly; for it argues the whole masse is corrupted, and no∣thing to be purged, but what is it self; God is weary of striking impenitents in order to a cure, and they must do as those in whom nature hath no resistane to make against the prevailing distemper; the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint, and those powers perished that should be ayded by medicine: The principes of recovery, that are as the handles by which God apprehends the soul, are lost, by geat obduration in sin, and men die like beasts under those strokes, of which
they understand no more than that they op∣presse them. Things continue to contest (when they are in it) till one of them desert its own mode, and station; this cannot fall on Almighty Justice, a broken melted heart run∣ning out of its fomer shape, ceases the con∣troversie between God and man, but an hard∣ned Pharaoh, holds Judgements play, till they accomplish their own. God will not be guil∣ty of vain acts, nor punish for our reforma∣tion, and then remove those punishments be∣fore we reform, except he abandon us the care of his providence, and reserve his dis∣pleasure for our finall destruction; what shall we say? when we can play with the effects of his anger and the fiercenesse of it will not melt us; incapable of impression under all his strokes, and sleep under the noise of present and approaching Judgement, that infinite wisdom can scarce invent such as will awaken us, when by a people professing true religion and godli∣nesse those sins are dayly multiplyed, that pro∣voke him, so that he is weary of correcting us and of his own repentings. If some branches of the great tree of a Kingdom be barren, or bear evil fruit, he may in mercy prune it with some smaller Judgement, to make it bring forth good fruit; but when he is tired out in waiting for fruit, and both body and boughs be corrupted and rotten, He'll destroy it root and branch, and not suffer it longer to cum∣ber the ground. When false fires appear, and the fire of the Altar goes out, sure God is
departing from his Temple. When the lo∣custs and Caterpillars swarm in the field, and the Frogs croak in every corner of the house, the Judgment of God is already upon the land. When the Idolatrous nations join in confe∣deracy, and the Canaanites are combined a∣gainst the Israelites, and the Israelites are divided among themselves; when the hand of Moses falls in prayer, and Amalek prevails in battel, we must needs expect it should go ill with Israel. When the Preachers mouths are stopt, and Players opened; when a nation is sick of a spirituall pluresy, and surfeit upon the bread of life; when God sees his mercies ly∣ing under the table, 'tis just with him to call to the enemy to take away. When wicked∣nesse shoves it self on, settles and grows to a head, and the age we live in, seems the drain and sink of the sins and evills of former times, it argues our iniquities grow full, which have been some ages in filling, and we hasting to de∣struction. Of such a generation shall be re∣quired all the bloud that was shed from right∣eous Abell, to Zacharias. When the Lord of the whole earth hath fenced a land about, for a Vineyard to himself, and hath done so much to it, that no more can be done, yet for grapes brings forth wild grapes, let himself (as true in his threats as that he is) tell you what he will do to this Vineyard Isa, 5. 5. .. When men are not separated from their drosse, not softned by the fire of affliction, what may we expect, but that he should turn the whole
Kingdom into a furnace of Judgment, and heat it seven times hotter, till he hath utterly con∣fumed us. When the field is overgrown with thorns, and a whole land is sown with vice, the Harvest time must be a day of destruction; even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickednesse, reap the same Job. 4. 8.. The much to be feared, many ways threat∣ened, every way deserved ruinous condition of England; while some presage from Signs in the Heavens, unusuall apparitions, and great mutations in that course and order God hath appointed in nature, others expect from for∣mer predictions of persons endowed (as sup∣posed) with a prophetick spirit, But we have a more sure word of Prophecy. I am no Pro∣phet, nor the Son of a Prophet, but I will stand upon my watch, and set my self upon the Tower, and will watch to see what the Lord will say unto me, and the Lord answered me and said Ha. . 12.; Go and tell this people, hear ye indeed but understand not, and see indeed but perceive not; make the heart of this peo∣ple fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed: Then said I, Lord how long? and he answered, untill the City be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly deso∣late, and the Lord have removed man far a∣way, and there be a great forsaking in the
midst of the land Is. 6. 9. &c.; ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes, in the land of Aegypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land. The great temptati∣ons which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great miracles; yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day Deu. 29. 2, &c.: The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire, the founder melteth in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away: reprobate Sil∣ver shall men call them, because the Lord hath rejected them Jer. 6. 29, 30.. Thou hast stricken them but they have not grieved, thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correcti∣on, they have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to return; wherefore a ly∣on out of the forrest shall slay them Je. 5. 3, &c.: Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your Heart; for consider how great things he hath done for you, but if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye, and your King 1 Sam. 12. 21, 25. Isaiah 1.. Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation; therefore have I poured out my indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath Ez. 22. 24, 31.. For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts; therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel, head and tail, branch and rush in one day Is. 9. 13, 1. Zep. 3. 1, &c.. Thou hast forsaken me, thou art gone back∣ward, therefore will I stretch out mine hand
against thee, I am weary with repenting Je. 15. 6. Am. 4. 11, 12.. She hath wearied her self with lies, and her scum went not forth out of her, her scum shall be in the fire. In thy filthinesse is lewd∣nesse, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthinesse any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee Ez. 24. 12, 13.. Read Lev. 26. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our ad∣monition, upon whom the ends of the world are come 1 Cor. 10. 11. Jud. 7.. Whatsoever were written afore∣time, were written for our learning Rom. 15. 4.: God is the same & our sins are more hainous than theirs in former ages. He deservedly suffers, that falls by stumbling at the same stone, at which he da∣shed who went before him. More exactnesse in walking and working become us who have more light to guide us. The sins of a Church, as the fruit (that hangs in the Sun) of a well ordered garden, ripen faster than those of a wildernesse Am. 3. 2.. We may expect the same Judgments threatned, where such sins reign: Even the generall denunciations of the wrath of God against all ungodlinesse, and unrighte∣ousnesse of men, who hold the truth in un∣righteousnesse; attested unto by so many severall instances of such as have fallen under this wrath, leave every man to conclude Gods an∣ger against his own particular sins, as cer∣tainly as if a Prophet had been sent on pur∣pose unto him; for, as 'tis not the appearance of a Prophet, nor his particular application,
that makes the threatnings of God effectuall, because all were not prevailed upon to repent, to whom the Prophets addrest themselves, so neither, more certain; for no one particular Prophet can possibly have so many evidences of his being sent from God, as there are of the whole Scripture, of Christ himself, and all the Prophets, who spake by his Spirit. Thus many, prudently comparing the word of God, with his usuall providences, and applying them to the times and lives of men, have been able to fore-see and declare those future e∣vents, which have as certainly come to passe as if a present inspiration had inabled them to prophesie. Generall denunciations, may by prudent observation be fixed to particular times and persons: 'Tis as possible for us to know the Signs of the times, the approaching of Judge∣ment, as what weather the face of the Sky will wear the next day Mat. 16. 8. Lu. 12. 56.. For there are some previous circumstances in the states of affairs, in the conversations of men, (as their generall debaucheries, impudence, obstinacy in sin, not∣withstanding Gods word, and rod, &c.) in which the approaches of common distresses are as conspicuous, as a following storm or tempest is in the gathering together of the blackest clouds. When Amaziah was so strangely infatuated, as to forsake the God who had given him a wonderfull victory, and to worship those of his defeated enemies, which could not deliver their own people out of his hand, and was so obstinate in his folly, as to terrifie the reproving Prophet, he con∣cludes
from thence his approaching destruct∣ion, for he forbore and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my coun∣sell 2 Chron. 25. 14, 15, 16.: Judgments may intermit and suspend themselves, though they intend their own re∣trieve; as a snare is taken up, that hath taken nothing, that it may be more conveniently placed, and at a better time. And if we can neither deny those severall sad appearances of Judgment, nor say that God inflicts any with a design, or not out of infinite counsell, nor plead our own reformation, how can we but expect the succession of Judgment, till there be some evident determination of things by them, which yet may be concealed in a pre∣sent truce. As the great complaints of the hu∣mane nature against it self, argue it all in a lapse, so the generall out-cries of the severall parties of a nation against one another, and all against the whole, concerning the ineffica∣cy of Judgments, are strong arguments we are unreformed. And if we appeal to the prog∣nosticks of the most sober breasts upon the pre∣sent scheme of our condition, would they not be very trembling? seeing besides the uncer∣tainty what a day may bring forth, we look more like a people reprieved than restored, and setled. The great symptomes of danger, are those our sin discover upon us, and they, not softned or mitigated with those things that may stay off the blow, so much as from our own days. If one sinner destroys much good, and
we see them with their sins by multitudes, thronging into the broad light, while in publick appearance, we have very little of the preservations against Judgments, or the usuall reasons of their suspensions; how can we but fear, the clouds should return after the rain; till we are punished to seven times more, and Judgment cease in destruction; when God shall begin, and also make such an end, that affliction shall not rise up the second time. Englands only Remedy. YEt because there are better hopes, though retired into clossets, and secret corners, we may not despair a preservation from utter ru∣ine; through that mystery of providence to be observed in the government of the world; whereby God, without desolating states, to∣tally redeems their converts with the righteous∣ness and judgment he executes, purges away their dross and Tinn by the spirit of burning, exciting the fire to a just intention to such an end, purifies them seven times, in the se∣ven fold punishment, and then reinstates them in glory, and over that glory creates a defence: A lengthening of our tranquility, is only a speedy breaking off our transgressions Dan. 4. 27., by a personal publick reformation: God may de∣liver us from one judgment to reserve us for another, but no striking off the score, till the
Creditor is satisfied; nor keeping off judg∣ment, but by driving away sin. There's ne∣ver any sword drawn on earth, till first drawn in heaven; nor sheathing it, till God be pa∣cified, by our laying down the arms of our rebellion that are taken up against him; nor appeasing his wrath, but by withdrawing the fewell of the fire of his indignation. If the flag of defiance be taken in, he presently li∣stens to an accommodation: And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not. Jon. 3▪ 10 God cannot turn off suitors, nor despise suppliants; nor professe enmity, when men have taken away the ground of discord: He cannot digrace men with their errors, nor put them to the blush▪ where they are ashamed of their iniquities Ez. 43. 10: Nor march out with his Trained bands, when they prepare to meet him Am. 4. 12.; at what time I shall speak concerning a na∣tion, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy: If that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them Je. 18. 7. Will God insult upon the prostrate? and set his face against them, that seek it? will he wring the sin-offering out of the sacrificers hand? and kill them at the sides of his own Altar? will he try m∣ries with them that submit? or y them gasping for life, who are already half dead in spiritual anguish? will he lay his Axe at the
root of the fruitful Tree? and make a wast upon the ground, that brings forth herbs meet for the Dresser? God resiprocates with true penitents; if they turn, he doth. He bathes a sword in heaven against contemners; and wa∣ters a nation with bloud, where live his pro∣fessed enemies: But he cannot fight with sighs and tears, bended knees, wringing hands, pacifying lips. There's nothing left for the Hammer of judgment to bruise or break, if the heart of stone be turned into a heart of flesh. God hath no Rods, but for the disobe∣dient; nor Blood-axe, but for Malefactors. If repentance have shaven us, there's no other sharp Razer to come upon the head. God cannot strike where the penitent hath given the first blow. The very standing up in the gap, fences out all judgments. Had England been soaked in tears, it had not wallowed in blood; nor felt the violence of avenging justice, if forsaken the violence of their hands. London had not been so crouded into the grave, if we had known the plague of our own hearts; nor lyen in ashes, if it had been cloathed in sackcloth. Repentance discharges from deserved Judgment. God hath no sword for the yield∣ing, but obstinate: He can fight with his Ene∣mies, not with those that sue for peace: Reconci¦liation would redress all sad accidents. O that there were such an heart in us, that it may be well with us. Magistrates, maintain and vindicate the venera∣tion The nobles the Magi∣strates called upon. of religion; the whole design of which is no∣thing
else but to procure the private and publick hap∣piness of man-kind, and restrain them from whatsoever would make them guilty and mise∣rable to themselves; unpeaceable, and trouble∣some to the world. 'Twill requite all the kind∣ness you can do it, by the advantages and blessings it drawes down upon civil government, from him, who is ingaged to honour those that honour him, but delivers to infamy and contempt those that lightly regard him. Righteousness esta∣blisheth, exalteth a nation Pr. 14. 34.; whose mighty success and prosperity hath been a reward given by God for their eminent justice, sobriety, &c. Is. 32. 17.. The Roman empire was strong as Iron, while their virtues remained firm, but upon dis∣solution of their manners, mixed with miry clay, and the feet upon which that empire stood, to be broken. Publick bodies and communities of men as such can only be rewarded and punished here. The general and crying sins of a nation, unless prevented by a general repentance, though they may stay till their iniquities are full, never escape publick judgment, for the present vindication of the divine majesty and Laws, and to give some check to the overflowing of wickedness. The greater and more numerous offendors are, the more his justice is concern'd to vindicate the affront; when a whole nation combins against him, when hand joyns in hand, they shall not go unpunished. He turns a fruitfull land into barreness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein Ps. 107. 3.; take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall be esta∣blished
in righteousness Pr. 2. 5.. The wisest ma∣gistrates have ever thought themselves concern∣ed to cherrish religion, without which govern∣ment wants its firmest foundation, it being the greatest and constant obligation upon conscience, to all civil and morall duties. Such are not to be tempted from their obedience, by any worldly consideration, knowing, he that re∣sisteth authority, resisteth the ordinance of God, and shall receive to themselves damnation Ro. 13. 2: while subjection for fear of the magistrates power; will cease, when men can rebel with safety and to advantage. He that is conscious to him∣self of so great an injustice, as the neglect of his duty to God, cannot rationally be fidelious to any other parts of righteousness; or religious∣ly revere one commandment, who despise the other nine. 'Tis not probable those should have any great sense of duty to their King, that have none to their maker; or be subject for conscience∣sake, who have none. 'Tis religion plants in men those qualities that dispose to peace and amity, fills men with a spirit of kindness and universall charity; secures every man's interest, by doing as we would be done by; and exter∣pates pride, covetousness, injustice, hatred, revenge, cruelty, peremptoriness in a mans own opinion, peevishness, uncompliance of hu∣mour in things lawful and indifferent, all those passions and vices which render men unsociable and burdensome to one another. It heales mens natures, sweetens their spirits, corrects and mortifies those lusts and passions that make
the world so tumultuous & disorderly, trouble∣some and tempestuous, which were religion con∣formed to, would be a more lovely desireable qui∣et habitation: But for those small remainders of virtue left scattered in it, humane society would soon disband and run into confusion; the Earth would grow mild, and become a great forrest, and men turn beasts o prey towards one ano∣ther. Chastity, temperance, Industry, in their own nature tend to health and plenty; truth and fidelity in our dealings, create love; confi∣dence and good will among men, the greatest bands of peace: While wickedness naturally produces publick mischiefs; intemperance and lust breeds infirmities and diseases, which being propagated spoil the strain of a nation: Idleness and Luxury bring forth poverty, this tempts men to injustice, that causes enmities and animosities, & those strife, confusion, and every evil work Ja. 4. 1.. One would think then, virtue should find it self a seat, where ever humane societies are, and religion be owned and encouraged in the world, untill men cease to be governed by reason. Come then ye Heroes of our nation, see after the observa∣tion of our Sabbaths; upon this God often hung the glory or desolation of the Princes and people of Judah (though an extern rite of religion, because it carry'd so much of the reverence of divine worship, & acknowledgments of God) & still suspends the greatness or depression of na∣tions, to whom the notices of himself and Jesus Christ are given, upon their subjection to those sacred principles, and the Instituti∣ons
wherein they are concerned: our Christi∣an Sabbath being slipt out of the shell of a Jewish ceremony, into the spirituality of the Lords day, and the morality of a rest, for the publick and private Exercises of Religi∣on, our obligations to it still continue with those advantages wherein it was made for man: all contemptful disenclosures or unwor∣thy prostitutions of it, must needs therefore Im∣ply, not only a great senslesness of God and his glory, whom we would dispute into the narrowest room, but too much of an Irreve∣rence of him, if not a defiance to him. Make your sword a shaddow to the innocent, a ter∣rour to evil doers; root out the common e∣ormities of our age, with utmost industry. Burn the Golden Calf in the fire, grind it to Powder; strew it upon the water; abolish all the memorials of those things, which have been occasional to the sins and sufferings of the times. Arise ye generous spirits, and divert destruction from your habitations, one famous city is reduced to ashes, up and be doing, to drive away threatning flames from the rest: Like offences will bring on them the same Judgment, unless deserved punishment be in∣flicted on wicked conspirators, and justice bring into light the authors of our slaughter. Those laws will be dreaded and obeyed, when put in execution, which are disregarded for want of it. The hainous offences which have provoked God to anger, by exemplary punish∣ment may be speedily amended, the frowns
of heaven diverted, an incensed diety appea∣sed, before he again burst forth and there be no remedy. By the most prudent and effec∣tual means endeavour the curbing those bold and insolent defiers of heaven, who take a pride in being Monsters, and are come to that degree of impudency, as to boast themseves in the follies and deformities of humane na∣ture. Those frequent profane scoffings at pie∣ty among us, are but as so many blasts of ma∣levolent vapors, to nip and destroy the prac∣tice of it, among those, whose greener reso∣lutions set them not above their malignant influence. Nothing can be matter of greater wonder, than that among a grave and sober people (none more generally indispos'd to, and can worse brook it, seriousness and zeal in re∣ligion being almost the natural temper of the English) profaneness should be permitted to gain so much ground, and the most excellent and reasonable religion, made the scorn of fools, and prophaned by the unhallowed mouths of any who will venter to be damned to be accounted witty: A thing never suffe∣red in any nation; whatsoever was their reli∣gion, the reputation of it was alwayes preser∣ved sacred. God himself would not suffer the Jews to speak evil of other Gods, though they were to destroy all those who tempted them to the worship of them; The Heathens would not suffer their Gods to be reviled, which yet were no Gods; and shall it among observers of the true God, be allowed by any
man, to make a mock of the maker of heaven and earth; and to breath out blasphemies a∣gainst, him who gives us life and breath and all thing? That religion should be made the object of their rallery, who make it not their care and business to search into it, yet throw out their bitter scoffs and profane jests against it, doth not become the gravity of a nation professing wisdom to permit, much less the sobriety of a people professing Christianity. Those whose first approaches to goodness were mercinary and out of compliance to others, may, by coming within view of it, discern it so Amiable, that they may after love it for it self. 'Tis scarce Imaginable, the vulgar (considering their rude Ignorance) should im∣brace it upon the strength of speculation, there∣fore must be allured by the bait of secular in∣vitation. What weight soever they, that advance not higher than the meer form of Godliness, may add to their own doom, yet is it less mischeivous to the world than the contrary extream; Hypocrisie being a sin that cannot well set up for proselites, because it never owns it self of a distinct party from true piety; it shews some reverence to religion, and so far owns its worth and Excellency, as to acknowledg, it deserves to be counterfeited. The example of a fained Christian may teach others to sur∣mount their coppy, and be that in sincerity, which he is but in appearance; whereas pro∣fanesse pretends to no such possibility, breaths nothing but contagion, and like a Pest infects
communities: It openly declares against religi∣on, and endeavours to make a party to drive it out of the world. O Be Hericall not Dastards in doing Justice. Stand in the gate of the camp, and do execution upon the master offendors▪ Put your hands with all earnestnesse to manacle & ham-string those mighty men in outragious wickednesse, who are engaged in a continuall and open Theomacy, as if they would pro∣ceed in affronting God, till earth were turned into Hell. Timerous, cowardly Magistrates, are Slaves to their Superiors, Sycophants to their equalls, Tyrants to their inferiors; like a Hare in a Lyons Seat, the frown or check of a great one, frights him from his conscience. Publick miseries are taken as reproaches of those who are in power to prevent publick sins; give some reverence to religion, punishing severely our atheisticall profane scoffers, that deride, scorn, cast reproach upon righteousnesse which establishes a nation, as the worst sort of se∣ditious persons, open rebells against the God of Heaven, unprofitable noxious burdens, enemies to the publick peace and safety of a nation, & pernicious to Civill Government. The most plausible offender is secretly seditious, and stirs up quarrels in Heaven: There's no such Traitor to any state, as the wilfully wicked; notwithstanding all their pretences to publick worship, they contribute more to our publick calamities, than the plots and oppositions of our open enemies. Connivance, or neglect makes personall sins publick, and brings their
guilt on the nation, but is taken off when pu∣nished 1 King 2. 1. by doing that which Gods ven∣geance is coming to do. None are so good friends to the state as couragous, impartiall Magistrates, nor procure so much credit to Government, as their strict execution on great and noble offendors. Those whom their crimes have debased, deserve no favour in their punishment. God makes difference of sins, none of persons. Some crimes are rest∣less suitors, and will not leave clamouring for Judgment, till its mouth be stopt with re∣venge. Favour to the offendor, is cruelty to the Favourer; patronizing evill, instead of a∣venging it; not only command, consent, coun∣tenance, but very permission Feoffts publick persons in those sins they might and will not prevent; and in Gods account stand guilty of all those crimes they have received power to restrain, or punish, but do not exercise it; malum qui cum potest, non prohibet, facit. How many sober, seeming religious Magistrates, shall be indited, and condemned at Gods Tri∣bunall, as the greatest swearers, drunkards, sabbath-breakers in the land: both enmity and safe-guard is from God; 'tis the surest policy to conciliate, and have peace with him. Sin only ruines Kingdoms. Goodnesse hath been ever a stronger guard than valour. Na∣ture swells out of its place to prevent a vacu∣ity. When the seats of dignity are empty, that is, not filled with good Government, who is not ready to presse into them? when
the Prophets chairs are unfurnished by persons of graver investiture, naked Sauls croud into them. Now the foundations of religion are shaken, and profanesse with a bold assault like a fatall flood threatens to overturn us, where are ye the sons of the Highest? ye depu∣ties of Moses, ye Magistrates put in power, not only to lament our sins, but to take away the cause of our Lamentations. In vain you enquire into other causes of our great decay of trade, while you neglect the grand one, the decay of piety. In vain you go to free us from other grievances, unlesse you pull down the grand one of all, Sin: It's not conspiraces abroad, but our scandalous lives; reform that, and you re∣form all; and till you do that, you do nothing: consult good laws, and see them executed. In vain we make peace with Forraign e∣nemies, so long as we nourish these Regicides, and murderers in our own bosomes. May it then be the happinesse of our times and na∣tion, to be rescued from the further pursuites of Divine displeasure by your mediation for re∣formation, by an efficacious interposall against licentiousnesse of practice, which grows speedi∣ly to an height, when those whose honour and gravity forbids them to stoop to those meanesses of vice which others fall down to, have not yet that zeal against it; but either draw too nigh the circus or Ring of the disor∣ders, or entertain the actors of them with fa∣miliarity, which gives a boldnesse to wicked∣nesse,
that soon espies its own advantages, and grows insolent upon them, ready not only to rise with violence against common oppositi∣on, but to dismount authority it self, which hath no greater security than its own virtue enstamped upon those under it. Be not over much wicked, hath a larger place upon states than persons; for besides that Justice makes more hast to punish a com∣bination in evill, the fury of contrary passions and lusts is so outragious, that they violate all things in their mtuuall encounters, and the in∣undation grows so strong through the meet∣ing of so great a body of evill, that the de∣structive force runs into suddain confusions, and is more impatient of those abatements a single wickednesse must admit, and so more leisurely brings forth death. There are few in∣stances of any who have been the notorious de∣bauches of their time, but have been exemplary for the fate attending them, except prevented by a sudden return to a sober mind; but not any of an extreamly corrupted age, but unhap∣pinesse, if not ruine hath rode along with it. Do not recede from the interests of your cal∣ling, nor do vulgar things to lessen your re∣putation; but prenoble your priority with hone∣rable actions: Let your lives▪ be as sacred as your laws, that men may prize these, and not dare to violate those; that if wicked men will not love religion, yet they may pull in their heads, and not dare to despise it: If their hearts will not renounce their lusts, let it not
be safe to act them but in disguise and dark∣nesse, not in the face of the Sun. Consult the honour of your station; let the births of your actions be answerable to the dignity of your callings; do not pejorate your degree; nor rip the fur off of your cap of maintain∣ance. Those that would command the hearts of men must shew them God in their faces; so irradiate their Thrones by being like him, that men may gaze with adoration, and obey with reverence. How can they blush at those vices they observe placed with thee in the chair of Dignity: Guilt quells the courage of the bold, ties the tongue of the eloquent, & makes great∣nesse it self sneak and lurk, and behave it self poorly. They that sit in Thrones of Judg∣ment, should be able to scatter away evill with their eye, by their very presence, to look and strike an awe in offendors. If they dart no∣thing but malignant influences, who are plac't as Stars in our Firmament, no wonder if an universall Pest ensue. 'Tis they have brought vice into countenance, advanc't it to this re∣pute, made it the mode and fashion of the times; that people dread the singularity of being innocent. What can be more perswa∣sive to the vulgar to embrace virtue, than to see it made the election of those, wey suppose have most Judgment to discern  va∣lue; so fall not on it blind-fold, and who have all the contrary pleasures of sin within their reach, nay, prostrate at their feet sueing for entertainment; so are not cast on it by impo∣tence?
And what a temptation to them to run to all excesse of riot, when they see their superiors have beaten the path before them, immerst in the most bruitish sensuality? which of them will endure to be sober, when drunk∣ennesse shall be accounted so dignifying a qua∣lity, that it makes a Peasant company for a Lord? When Gentlemen are Atheisticall, Clowns will think themselves very modestly wicked, if they be but profane. And when they hear their betters discharge loud vollies of oathes, they will soon find they are as well qualified for that part of greatnesse as the best, their tongues are as much their own Psa. 12. 4; and will be glad that by such an easie employ∣ment, they can be Gentlemen so good cheap. The body follows the head, their vices commend and countenance it. Miserable that people, whose Rulers instead of making up the breach∣es, inlarge them; instead of punishing, plead for vice; by their scandalous viciousnesse, dis∣countenance not, but animate, and encourage it. When a distillation of evill falls from the Head upon the lungs of any state, there must needs follow a deadly consumption. The So∣veraign sometimes is smitten in his Subjects; nei∣ther is it otherwise than just, that the arraign∣ment of many malefactors run in the stile of wrong done to Kings Crown and dignity. Emi∣nency of virtue, (in meanest persons, com∣mands an awfull respect) casts a lustre upon your very places; and by a strong reflection, doubles the beams of Majesty; while impiety
strangely lessens greatnesse, secretly and unavoid∣ably derives some weaknesse upon authority it self. When perswasions of reformation find freest entertainment with those that have most power to promote it, and Princes are not only Philosophers but Divines, publishing repentance and amendment of life by those soveraign docu∣ments; the face of their authority and example shining upon holiness; how orderly doth this reformation descend from the superior regions, without that tumult and suspicion of design, that usually accompanies popular attempts therein; and the greatest honour; for such being nearer God, the originall of all, we accept from them recommendations of goodness as acts of bounty, with thankfulness; but not without disdain and regret from them below us. How hard is it for they that wear soft rayment, and are in Kings courts, to see Heaven through the palace casements. The rich man's wealth is his strong city Pr. 12. 1. There lies hid a kind of sorcerie in the throne: The robe is a kind of inchanted vesture. How many have lost their sight, with glaring too much on the glittering heap, and their senses by drinking too deep out of the intoxi∣cated cup of abundance: so infatuated with their chariots of glory, as if they should out run all miseries: because they have such greatness to trust to, distrust not to be happy against all accidents. The throne and Robe, have kept them from be∣ing array'd in the pure and white linnen, and sitting in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. The crested worlding cannot endure a check, but con∣ceives
himself superior to all Reproofs. God drawes few servants from Mammons thresholds; not many noble are called 1 Cor. 1. 26.. Rich merchants who are bartering for so many Jewells, seldome purchase the pearl of price; or seek for dura∣ble riches, that lay up Gold as the dust. Great ones are seldome good leaders: They who should appear in the front, come in the rear: they that should be exemplary, think themselves exempted. He that hath great adventures to put in his ship, sailes last. The Devills prison is fill'd chiefly with persons of high birth and fortunes: he hath in fetters honorable slaves; his captives go in scarlet, wear golden chaines ride in coaches, lye upon Beds of Ivorie. These lofty pines are most barren. How many had been humbled to the Earth, but that their gran∣deur would not suffer them to come on their knees. But, the cry from heaven ought to be as shrill in their ears, as of the most despicable. Greatness must stoop and listen, as well as penu∣ry and indigency. O now God denounces de∣struction, Trample on pomp, slight splendor, be as active to quiver up Gods arrowes, and to sheath▪ up his sword, as he that grinds at the mill, or crouches for a peice of silver in the streets; for word came to the King of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered himself with sack∣cloth, and sat in ashes Jon. 3. 6.: Forgetting all dig∣nitie and grandeur, he not onely moves with the rest, but rises up with the first: He sits, not like a King, but a Minor, one under authority, or
an head-servant (at best) among the rest of the attendants, and bowes before his master. The Cedars should have their Judgment-fraies, shiver and break at the voice of the Lord. Gods lightning strikes upon the highest mountaines. There is no preservative against divine wrath, no antidote against Caesar. Have great men no soul nor Superior? What is a throne of state, to him that hath Heaven for his? Or a scarlet robe to him that is cloathed with jealousie as with a garment? Is an embroidered nightcap, a head-peice, or a velvet jacquet, a brest∣plate against his blowes? Can a golden scepter fright away judgment? Or all the jewells of the crown redeem from vengeance? Shall the munition of rocks be a safe defence? Shalt thou reign because thou dwellest in Cedar? God takes Kings by the collar, and hurles them under his feet; he smites the great ones with breaches, and makes the house of Ivory to perish. Those crownes that now sit light on their heads, shall ere long lye heavy on their consciences, that think it beneath them to ownreligion, any further than 'tis subservient to their civill interest; set up the Kingdom of Christ no faster than they can rear their own, and had rather themselves should reign in a corner, than their master rule in the whole world. When Emperors and Kings shall be brought, not in chaines of gold about their necks, but in fetters of Iron about their heels. When the peeres and powers, and potentates of the Earth, shall hold down their heads and hold up their hands, and cry
guilty. When most of all the mighty, and all the almost Almighty, that have disrobed Christ of his title, and rob'd him of his honour, shall be lead up and down this court, to be gaz'd on, and hooted at by all the saints, as prisoners of Law and prizes of Justice. Ps 149. 6. &c. 1 Cor. 6. 2. The mini∣sters called upon.. Watchmen, cry aloud, spare not, lift up your voice like a trumpet, shew your people their sins. Is. 58. 1. Mistake not your commission which is not that of an Herauld, to make a party, or proclame war among men, but of an Ambassador, to reconcile them by holyness to God. One soul gained to piety, will more promote your account than many thousands sccured to a sect. Be devoted to get God, not your selves proselites; to correct exorbi∣tant crimes in others, not to propagate your own nice and subtile disquisitions. O how woun∣ding a spectacle! to find those Christ hath made fishers of men, entertaining themselves like children with picking up shells and pebles on the shore, nay angling about them too; no wonder if they make the disciples complaint, we have toyled all night, and have taken no∣thing. Luk. 5. 5. That were designed for the high∣est atcheivements, the puling down Satans Kingdome, yet devote themselves to ignoble contests▪ and account their conquests, not from the number of soules won to God, but of oppo∣sers worsted in an argument: fear not faces, nor spare offences; but with all authority rebuke and warn them night and day; by passionate, powerfull arguments compell them to come in,
lest their bloud be required at your hands Ez. 3. 18.. How many consume in the flame of their own vitious courses, because none pull them out of the fire, nor convert them from the Error of their wayes? sin would never flourish with such a green top, were wicked men hewen by the pro∣phets Ho. 6. 5., and smitten with the rod of Gods mouth Is. 11. 4.. But alas, the priest puts honey into the sacrifice, and saves the soul alive that should dye. Ez. 13. 19 He limbs all his pictures, as may best please the eye; and dishes out his sipits ac∣cording to the pallat of the age; so, conscience is not awakened, but cast into a sleep, because the noise of their sins doth not tingle in their eares, and soules go fettered to hell, because their chaines are not shaken about their heeles. O bear them on your breasts at continual sacrifices. Weep before the porch and the altar. And do not unhallow the consecration of the Lord upon your foreheads. Live not, as if you thought to go to heaven some other way than that you teach the people. Though your uncleaness pollute not the offering, for its virtue is not from the agent, but institution; and therefre to abhor it, is to make holy things guilty of our profaness, to contemn heavenly dainties, because admini∣stred by a Raven; to fa ut with God, because we find cause of offence from men, and to des∣pise him, because he is offended: 'Tis no mira∣cle to see a man raised to life by a dead prophet: yet by drowning your sermons in pots and im∣purities, makes so many atheists, and men nauseate what comes out of your nasty filthy
fingers; and fortifies profane wretches. He that with never such piercing arguments dehorts from that sin hmself commits at next opportu∣nity, may be supposed to have no reall opinion of it, but rather so passionate a love, that he is Jealous any but himself should have its im∣braces; and so, will not avert, but excite o∣thers appetite to tast of that, they see is thought so desirable as to be monopolized. How ill doth your rubie colours sute your white cloathing; your noses dy'd with grapes, and your faces with their clusters, carbuncles: how sad, to hear belches proceeding from yesterdays wine mixed with what is sacred, your tongues heard in the tavern, which ought to be in the pulpit? that gravity which holy precepts require is de∣spised or disaffected; levity of speech detracts from the weight of words; so are had in odium and undergo the contempt of the world: publick worship is abandoned, ancient customes disre∣garded, and reverence due to the whole clergy fades away; their words being contradicted by an unanswerable life: and whilest one prefers his teacher for conformable manners, the com∣mon sort dislike such kind of discrimination. How can you expect to be believed by others, whoe actions so confute your words, that 'tis plain you do not believe your selves; or be re∣garded by those that hear you; that have nothing in your manners (whose calling is so holy) diffe∣rent from others: but are religious in, and other men out of the pulpit: as if the house of God were a theater only to act in, and you
are, what men ought to be in your lives. You are debtors both to the wise and unwise Ro. 1. 14.. God will not brook the defilement of the Priest-hood Num. 12. 1. Nene. 13. 29.. Woe to the Idoll Zec. 11. 17. wicked Shepherd Is. 5 6. 10.. A Prophets punishment there shall be, as well as a Prophets reward, to him, who knew every thing but how to keep himself happy. Governours, see you & your house serve the Lord The Ma∣sters cal∣led upon. Jos. 14. 15., who hath committed them to your charge; and unto whom for them you must give an ac∣count. Every Master hath so much of the pro∣phet, that he is set as a Watchman Eze. 3. 17. over his Family; and ought as jealously to observe the approach of any vice towards it, as a Centi∣tinel doth that of an enemy. They with theirs are common servants to the one great Master of the world & the subordination of the one to the other, is but the wise oeconomy of their Lord, who hath constituted the one as stewards, or Supervisors to regulate the rest: To neglect this charge, is a piece of inormous unfaithfulnesse: To avoid which guilt, have a sedulous care over, and make strict inspection into the manners of those intrusted to you, and accordingly apply in∣structions, admonitions, reproofs or incourage∣ments. Avow such a love to piety and detestation of vice, that your servants may see, there is but one way of approving themselves both to their earthly and heavenly Master. Let not your actions give your edicts the lye. In vain you advise against your own practice. Conscience of your own crimes choakes the accuser. With
what face or heart can you punish your own sins in anothers person? We make our selves ridiculous, to leave our own house on fire, to go quench our neighbours; and rebuke those sins abroad, we tolerate at home. Every notori∣ous vice, is destructive against the spirit of Go∣vernment, and debases the man to an evenesse with common persons. Lead the way in an holy life, so may you challenge to be fol∣lowed. Innocency gives an artificiall and ad∣vantagious authority over our brethren, and casts a more dreadfull, awefull, dazling lustre than any other accomplishment. The foyls and scandals of a publick governing man, de∣stroys the efficacy of that authority that is just and naturall. You authorize the evill you com∣mit, bis peccat, qui exemplo peccat: for you teach evill by doing it, and do evill by teaching it. Superiors are their families Looking-glasse, by whose President most dresse themselves. Corrupt Patrons shall find an unanswerable Inditement for the foul copies that have been taken from them: By conniving at vice you nourish it, and by sparing it, commit it. What is not by you punished in others, is made pu∣nishable in you. He that favours present evils, entailes them on his posterity. O! how hap∣py are many Children whose Progenitors are in Heaven, being left an Inheritor of Bles∣sings together with their estates; while wick∣ed Ancestors lose the thanks of a rich Patri∣mony by the curse that attends it. In vain we look for good from those children we have
neglected; or grieve for those miscarriages in elder ages, our care might have prevented be∣times. The way to make a good Kingdom is to have a godly family, a nursery of piety, and to walk in it with a perfect heart Ps. 101. 2.. He not only obliges the common wealth, but is as 'twere a Patriot to Heaven it self: provides it with inhabitants, and helps to se∣cure it from that emptinesse and depopula∣tion, wherewith the generall wickednesse of men seem to threaten it. You that hate the name of Christians be The Pro∣phane cal∣led upon. Royallists; though you value not your soules, be Loyall to your King; put your selves into such a posture, as with the reason of men you can affirm, will be most advantagious to the good of your Soveraign. 'Tis not your Damme's your Sinkme's will do it; thes are the secret Fire∣balls that have blown up our prosperity; the cursed incendiaries, that have set Heaven a∣gainst us, and alarum'd Almighty vengeance thus far to pursue us. Fancy not from his great longanimity that you have vapoured God (as you are used to do men) into a tameness: mistake not impudence, or desperation for cou∣rage; frantickly defie not that omnipotence which you cannot resist. You dare to humour or win a fantastick Mistris, venter upon the wrath of your maker; your neck to the Halter and your souls to the Devill, for the wall or a wrie word: such true sons of valour, as even in cold bloud, and upon sober deliberation,
damn your selves for fear of being abused, or called coward, for passing by an injury; you will draw at the least affront, and 'tis present death for a man, to throw a ly or a glasse of li∣quor in your face; and is it nothing you do daily the same to God, by giving him the ly, and pouring down your superfluous glasses? Are you so tender of your honour as rather to violate the laws of the great God, than the least Punctilio of it? and will he be carelesse of his? Do you dread the reproach of vain impotent men, & confidently encounter the anger of the omni∣potent God? O stop in your careir: do not so madly affect a full Pararell with Sodom and Gomorrah, as to force him to destroy that rem∣nant; which alone distinguishes our case Is. 1. 9.. You durst, to gratifie a lust one hour, hazard lying eternally in fire unquenchable, and when your credit lyes at stake, rather lose your life than that, though you go with reputation to Hell. Yet brave souls have publick spirits; having now an opportunity, shew your selves true Lovers of your King, and Country; be not instrumentall to ruine them; hold your hands from pulling down vengeance as it were with Cart-ropes, though it be but untill this calamity be over-past. Seeing vice is so common, use it as you do your fashions, and leave it off (if for no better reason) for its being vulgar. Drink for your own health, and pray for the Kings. For thou shalt then be one of those honourable Nobles that build the wast places,
that raise up the foundation of many gene∣rations; and thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in Is. 8. . &c.. True Christians Duty. PIety and morality are the interest and peace of every single person; and, to be his care in his retired administration over himself: next; of fa∣milies, and the oeconomy therein, the most likely, kindly, and compendious way for re∣formation: lastly, of great communities and the rulers over them, to whom is committed the custody of these two tables. When these are obliterated, or exaucterated by sin, God publishes them afresh from the dreadfull mount, and engraven with his own finger in Judg∣ments, that they may still be preserved in full force; he promulgates them with that Trum∣pet with which they were at first given; the sound of which having encreased louder and louder to this nation, should awaken us to re∣ceive them with a new Devotion, that we die not. And having invited the Magistrate, the Minister, the Master, the Hctor, shall we now draw in the Lawyer, to sollicite the highest Court for relief? Shall we summon in the whole Colledge of Physicians, to prepare an Elixir out of their suppled eyes, rent hearts, extracted consciences to preserve at this exi∣gence?
Shall we call upon the Trades men to set up an exchange of prayers and tears, to negotiate and strike up a bargain and agree∣ment between Heaven and us? shall we send to our particular Counties to congregate together, or to send their faithfull substitute and proxy, their convertion, to associate for us with their humiliation and reformation? But because the most proper cure is that which is personall; and knowing both the malady, True chris∣tians call'd upon. medicine, and how to prepare our antidote; what need we trouble others, when we are able if we will, Christians, to do the work our selves, and to be our own Physician. And O, that we would unanimously unite our en∣deavours to keep off Judgment, and to bring in fashion, solid and substantiall christianity. Come then my brethren, live up to the Essential and fundamentall Laws of religion; for so is the will of God, that with well doing you put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; haveing a good conscience, that whereas they speak evill of you, as of evill doers, they may be ashamed, that falsly accuse your good conversation in Christ 1 Pet. 2. 15. &. 3. 16.. Translate your creed into practice. By an exemplary reverence, redress the scandall of your former prophaness. Confute not your holy profession, which while strangers contemplate, they will be apt with some confidence to con∣clude Christendom to be the Goshen of the world, not only for its light, but immunity from those locusts and caterpillars, swarmes of mean and sordid vices, which cover and devour the rest of the
Earth. But what tearms of wonder or grief can be sufficient enough to express or bewail so strange, and perverse degeneration; that Christen∣dome should be as much Heathen as America; that the Light of the world should thus darken it; the salt of the Earth be the means of putrifying and corrupting it; that those who were by God drawn out from the heathen world, should so outvie the Gentiles crimes, as if they had forsaken them on∣ly because they were too innocent. So universall a depravation is there among us, that we have scarce any thing left to distinguish us from the most barbarous people, but our better name and worser vices. We ridiculously contend for the title of the best Christians, but such acts deno∣nominate us none at all; and make that sacred name serve only to upbraid the contrariety of our practice. That which was once the index to point out all morall and divine virtues, now marks out that part of the world where least of them reside. Yet, while we damn heathens for their morall virtues, we are so stupid, as to hope our selves to be saved by their worst vices. True practick virtue, which once made such victorious salleys on the heathen world, is now baffled in its own quarters, beaten from its works, and driven to seek shelter in obscure corners; immures it self in some private breasts, and like an exil'd Prince, makes only shift to live, when it should reign. 'Tis one of Satan's subtillest stratagems, to fill Christ's camp thus, with his souldiers; by whose intestine treachery, he hath been more triumphant than by all his open as∣saults
and arrow'd Hostilities. 'Tis too evident how much Christianity loses, by the miscarriages and contests of its professors, which while they pretend to guard, do indeed invade her under her own colours. Christian religion hath allways had the hap to suffer, what was once the fate of the great Authour of it, crucifixion between two thieves: Irreligion on one hand, & contention on the other; & while they two have been spitting their venome in her face, her professors have been behind her with thornes, and nailes, and spears; and the injury she hath received from her pro∣fessed enemies, have been far exceeded by those of her own house. As long as the lives of Christi∣ans where the transcripts of their doctrin, they rendered it venerable to all; and gave a presump∣tion, there was some thing more than humane in it, that could work such signall effects, and so transform men, as to make the adulterer chast, the drunkard temperate, the covetous li∣berall, the contentious peaceable. So long as Christianity waged war only with forraign enemies, she never missed to be victorious; for while she was persecuted, she was victorious; they were enamoured on her when besmeared with bloud, courted her in the flames, bow'd to her on the Gibbit. It hath always been invulnera∣ble against all darts, but what have been taken out of her own quiver, and could never have sunk to such a despicableness by any endeavours, but our own: of which the primitive times were pregnant testimonies: where all the most weighty cruelties, and bloudy persecution
never made any breach in her, but she stood firm for all those batteries; and like an arch'd building, became more strong and compact by all that weight that was design'd to crush her. But, the vices of professors undermine her very foundation; and as much exceed the destru∣ctiveness of the most hostile assaults; as intestine treachery is more ruinous and fatall, than forraign violence. This sacred gourd, throve and flourished so long as watered with its mar∣tyrs bloud; in absence of which, the Devill pre∣par'd those two wormes, contention and pro∣phaness, that hath smote the root of it, and made its branches to fade and wither. The persecution of Christians being ended, the martyrdome of Christianity began when, they had done suffering for the faith, the faith began to suffer by them: and it hath lost much of its fame and repute in the world, ever since its face hath been soiled with the debauchery, and its garments torn with the divisions of its profes∣sors, expos'd to ruine and contempt. Ah me; what a slaughter of soules hath been in this Age? Whilst the wandring and only flock of Christ is divided into parties, the devouring wolfe lyes ready to destroy the scattered fold: this runs away, because the pipe playes an accustomed tune, because it must feed with a bended knee, because the shepherd wears a linnen garment, & differs the innocent fleeces with a scandalous brand; and that brings his Lambs to the foun∣tain, and they wantonly wash (drown) themselves: one prefers this, another that, a
third neither, and the greater part none at all; but had rather have a freedome in the field, rages against folds, and leapes over them; untill driven about with errors, drops into the Roman fold; so, what he foolishly feared, is hurried head-long into, by seeking to avoid. The wild-fire of passion, hath nigh consumed brotherly love; that fire is almost out, and scarce a spark of it appeares. Many live as if they had been born on the moun∣taines of Bether and baptis'd in the water of Meri∣bah. Were mens reprobates, Gods reprobates, all the world would be damned. So, while he that is without heares each Sect thunder out damnation against each other, he cannot but be startled at the danger of adhering to the wrong; and though that may a while excite his diligence, to discover the right; yet when he comes to that inquisition, he meets with so many pole∣mick intricacies to intangle him, that after ma∣ny turnes from one side to another, hee'l be apt to think, the onely clew to extricate himself out of this Labyrinth of many religions, is to a∣bandon all. Nor can any take a more malicious and effectuall course to disgrace, reproach, and do Christianity the greatest dispite and mis∣chief than to profess it, and live contrary: It more discourages others from embracing than the highest charecter we can give of, can perswade them to it: And while we would gain them to become Christians, by telling them of our holy precepts and hopes, of an undefiled state, what a Holy God we serve, what a perfect pattern we imitate, what
a holy spirit guides, directs, strengthens, assists us. Their wicked lives who professe themselves Christians (and so to have supernaturall prin∣ciples, to be Sanctified, washed, regenerate, born of God,) loudly proclaim; that either 'tis our religion to sin, or that Christianity is a barren, unfruitfull, weak, powerlesse, ineffectuall thing, or we our selves secretly believe it to be a ly, that without holinesse we may see God; and Heaven, if there be any such place, is an inheritance among the unsanctified; that God is pleased with any thing, and glad of any company; so we cannot reasonably expect they should believe us, when they see we dis∣believe our selves. A Jew, or Turk is not so great an enemy to the Crosse of Christ, as a sen∣suall, earthly Christian Phi. 3. 18. &c.. 'Tis really on many accounts better such should abandon their profession, than to keep on a Vizard which should be for no other purpose, but to scare other men from religion. The wicked lives of Christians at this day, is one of the greatest obstacles of the Jews, Heathens, and progress of the Gospell, representing it in the world to so great disadvantage, that prejudiced per∣sons mischief their own souls by others ex∣amples. Yet why will they fall and break their necks, because others stumble and break their shins? Doth Christian religion any way countenance, patronize, or rather severely con∣demn the sinfull practices of its professors? Is any Doctrine so holy Ps. 19. 8. Mat. 5. 48.? Are all that pro∣fesse it, loose and carelesse? Must the inno∣cent
be condemned for the guilty? Do not many in temporall concerns act against their own belief, and though the prodigall knows his estate is ruining, yet will on, through his impetuous lusts, for want of due consideration? If you stay for a religion, which none that professe live contary to, you must set up your ladder, and go to Heaven by your self. But 'tis not our Printed Apologies for Christianity, but our visible, unblameable lives, is the only way to remove the fatall stumbling-block, and to make it look with so amiable a counte∣nance as to invite others to it. This would carry so much Majesty, as to command reve∣rence from the greatest enemies, and seeig our good works, to glorifie our Father which is in Heaven. But while we professe largely, and live at large, we make the prophane, athe∣isticall, imbitter their spirits against it, inducing them to conclude all professors hypocrites, and religion a meer design and mockery, deceit and cosenage; so keeps them from that, thus made to stink in their nostrils, scorning and abhorring it as a basenesse below them, thus to juggle and dissemble with the world; and to say, there's so much difference between that religion in your bibles and conversations, that either you are not evangelicall, or this is not Gospell. I tremble to think, God grant this day of blasphemy, be not laid to our charge. That which was designed to perfect and fill up the law, hath by the strange pra∣vitie of those that live as if they profest Chri∣stianity,
meerly in spite, to defame it, at once obliterating both law and law-giver, out of mens minds. Feigned piety is the mother of prophanesse, and atheism; hence religion it self comes to be questioned and what is true, doubt∣ed to be so. And because the outward Ha∣bit displeases some, the very face of religion begins to be detested, flouted at, and put to an undeserved blush; and fears the whole world will be censured for hypocrisie; so hugs it self in its retired life and hermitage. The wits of our age give many a gird, fling many squib at it, for the disorderly actions of Christi∣ans; they have procured Christ many a taunt, and flout, put many a mock-robe upon him, many a Reed and Scepter into his hand, set many a Crown of thorns upon his head, calling him Lord, but revile and spit upon him. Thus is Christ wounded in the house of his friends, and hath more reproaches cast on him by those that professe his name, than by the loud∣est blasphemies of those that oppose it. There are men so irrationall, and unjust, that take notice of the better morals of Turks and in∣fidels, not in reproach of our selves but our religion (than which none makes so much provision for a holy life Tit. . 11. 12.. And because we have so many Lepers, think Abanah, and Par∣phar better than all the waters of Israel. Our very Religion partakes of the infamy of our lives is thought rather a mistery of iniquity than of god∣linesse; for when those that have not oppor∣tunity to examine our faith, see the enormous∣nesse
of our works, what should hinder them from measuring the master, by the disciple; it being scarce imaginable, that any one Sect of men, should so universally run counter to all the rules of their profession; for let a∣ny sober heathen, look upon Christendom, as it is at this day, weltering in the bloud, not of martyrdom, but war, and is it possible for him to think it owns a Gospell of peace, or that those who perpetually do those outrages, they are unwilling to suffer, professe obedience to the Royall law, of, Love thy neighbour as thy self? Can he see the violences, and oppressions, the frauds and underminings, the busie scrambling for Crowns, and for little parcels of the earth, believe, we account our selves strangers and Pilgrims in it, and have laid up our treasure in Heaven? Can he observe the strange and almost universall distortion of speech, where∣by it hath lost its native propriey of being interpreter of the mind, and under intelligible words so far exhibits the Babell of confusion, that no man understands anothers meaning, and can he imagine we have any such precept as lye not one to another, or penalty upon the infringer, as exclusion from the new Jerusalem? Shall he hear our God mentioned more fre∣quently and earnestly in our imprecations, than our prayers, and every part of our crucified Sa∣viour recrucified in our horrid oaths, and not think that his second executioners bear him as little reverence as his first; or that he hath given no such command, as Swear not at all?
When he descernes self-preservation bowed to as the supreme law, can he ever dream of another so inconsistent obligation, as that of taking up the Crosse; or that suffering for righteousness sake, is one of our greatest felicities, when he sees, us run so affrighted from it, that, nocrime, perjury, rebellion, murder, is block enough in our way to stop our flight, when he sees how much of our businesse, is, first to excite, and then to cloy the flesh, to spur it on to riots, even beyond its own propensions, that the whole year is but one mad Carnivall, and we are voluptuous, not so much upon desire of appetite, as by way of exploit and bravery; can he possibly guesse our institution directs us to beat down the body, and interdicts us all ri∣oting, and drunkennesse, chambering, and wan∣tonnesse, and all provisions for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof? Certainly when he sees a set of men, that have inhanc't the common humane pravity he will be apt to inser, their principles have taught them the improvement; and up∣on that supposal, he wanted not temptation to his option, that said, Let my soul be with the Philosophers. So hath Christianity been infi∣nitely more opprest by those that fought for it, than that were in arms against it; breeding aversion and abhorrence of that religion, whose admirers are full of bloud, rapine, &c. nor do such attempts gain any thing to the cause, but the infamy of those, used to promote it. And now it amidst all our importunate pretences to piety, there be indeed any such thing among
us, me thinks it should give us some relenting, make us sadly consider to what a deplorable condition we have brought that very Religion on which we professe to hang all our hopes, our happinesse. And oh that our importunate strifes might be superseded, and our number∣lesse mortall enmities, moulded into the one noble emulation, who shall fastest unravell his own mischiefs, and promote that peace he hath hitherto disturbed. That while many of our combatants, in spite of daily repeat∣ed calls to peace, still pursue their hostility, we may shew more zeal to the obeying our Ge∣nerall, than annoying our enemy; and may fight, not against single adversaries, but war it self, and contend against nothing but con∣tentions. The atchievements of calm and so∣ber counsells are infinitely preferrable before those of strength and power; especially here, where if we fight, we wound our bre∣thren, but if we unite, we destroy our ene∣my, bafle, and circumvent Satans Master-stra∣tagem; not only worst, but out wit him. Oh if possible retrieve the decays of Christianity, and repair the injuries you have done it, by bringing its precepts into your conversati∣ons, and avoiding the doing any thing that may arm or provoke others tongues against your profession, to which your personall faults will be imputed. To what a dismall, forlorn state have we brought that, which was de∣signed to bring us to bliss, far exceeding the barbarity of the brutish Sodomites; they would
have violated the messengers of their ruine, but we those of our safety; and have not only neglected, but vilified and reproached the em∣bassie sent us from Heaven, & instead of embra∣cing that purity, and peace, it recommends to us, have done our part to make it forgotten that ever it was sent upon an, such errand. And indeed, so it is like to be, f some Heroick piety revive not its memory, and teach us to record it, not so much in our books as lives: there only it will be universally legible, and appear to be, what it is in its own nature, the power of God unto Salvation. A Christian pre∣tends not to have a better wit, a more pierce∣ing Judgment, but a better rule, more power∣full arguments and incentives to be more holy, chast, temperate, just, more master of his pas∣sions, more meek, kind, gentle, obliging, cha∣ritable, loving, mild, of a sweeter, peaceable temper, than others. Then will the world believe Christianity powerfull indeed, when they beholds its victories written in the blood of our lusts, and our vices led in triumph, as the Trophies of its conquest; when they see our actions stamped with its sacred im∣pressions, and can read its Precepts in its Pro∣fessors practices. O save your selves from this untoward generation Act. 2. 40.. Come out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and that you receive not of her plagues; for her sins have reached unto Heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities Rev. 18. 4, 5.. Do you not know, that the Saints shall judge the
world? How much more ought your lives to condemn it Heb. 11. 7. O! let not them whom you must one day Judge, justly Judge you now. O! why will you by an ill example 2 Sam. 17. 14. Mat. 18. 7.. shed the bloud of their souls for whom Christ shed his own, and be cruel to them, who have found Christ so kind to you? Shall those brought up in Scarlet, that wear Christs Livery (like the Courtiers of Heaven) in their conver∣sation embrace the stinking dunghill of this worlds pleasure and profit. Jerusalem is a lighting with candles to search Hearts; now God is coming to purge his Gold, to prune his Vine; Professors look within you, and look about you. How can you who sin against so much light, resolution engagement encouragement,) a∣bide the day of his coming? & stand when the Sun of righteousnesse appears; for he is like a Re∣finers fire, and like fullers sope Mal. 3. 2.. Ah Lord! what blushing will there be ere long? when thou shalt wash off the paint of our profession (which will not endure the water, or Sun) and thy olowers wear their hearts in their faces? When they that have not the power, and life, shall wish they had not the form, and vizard of godlinesse, and cease to appear to be; what they really are not? 'Tis much more eligible to be an honest Heathen, or Devout Idolater, than a prophane Christian. How many see themselves more than Infidells? and that the Charter of Christianity hath served them for no other purpose, but to reprove them in the e∣ternity of their pains for the exorbitance of
their infamy. Hell is pav'd with hypocrites skulls, they fall deepest into misery, from the greatest advantages, and opportunities of be∣ing happy, have their portion with hipocrites and unbelievers Mat. 24. 1.. There is one that ac∣cuses you, even Jesus in whom you trust. We sin at a greater, but not so cheap a rate as our forefathers: Our crimes are of a deeper dye, attended with sadder, blacker aggrava∣tions, and capable of more Judgment. Re∣member Capernaum's Doom, and tremble. Weep not for heathens, weep for your selves; it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of Judg∣ment than for thee. Thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that Judgest, for wherein thou Judgest another, thou condem∣nest thy self; and thinkest thou this O man, that Judgest them which do such things, and dost the same, that thou shalt escape the Judg∣ment of God Rom. 2. 3.. The Evangelicall Covenant allows no other priviledge to the sins of the most knowing Professors, but a preheminence in punishment, the being beaten with many stripes. The Son of righteousnesse, so long shining on the insincere, serves only to involve them, in that most dreadfull condemnation, which awaits those who love darknesse more than light. But what can we expect, but that Christian re∣ligion, crumbled into so many minute fractions, should like dust be scattered, and irrecoverably dissipated. That while she is surrounded with
Assassines from all quaters, every one whereof with a wanton cruelty are ambitious to inflict new wounds, but that her present languishing should end in death. To preserve that sacred manuscript of Heaven, the Gospell, from being lost, or taken away, the way is to transcribe, and copy it out in your lives. That formida∣ble Judgment of removing the candlestick (us'd by Christ as the most awakening menace, Rev. 2. 5. is yet inhanced by doing it with our own hands. When men are come to that insensate obdurati∣on, that they court their plagues, become their own lictors, & make their extrinsick punishment their choice, they are certainly too secure of that ruine they call for. And may we not fear it may prove Generall, and involve us all? That while so many cry out to be delivered from their Christianity, as their load and pressure; and so few express their dissent to that demand, God may in Judgment grant it, hearken to those that cry loudest, rescue his Gospell from our prophane and impious violations, and give it to others that may bring forth the fruit thereof. The fawning professions of the demure hypocrite, accelerate, and not avert this fate: He that makes the Golden scepter in Christ's hand, a Rod of Iron in his own; That thinks his Saint-ship Li∣censes him to all the severe censures, & the seve∣rer (because more effective) oppressions of others, is certainly to be lookt on, not only as a Rebel, but Ʋsurer, and of all others, the highest pro∣voker. He that tramples under foot the son of God, doth not so much violate him, as he that
pretends to erect him a throne upon bloud and rapine, perjury and sacriledge: nor, he that accounts the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, so much prophanes him, as he that uses it as a varnish to paint over his foulest lusts. There is no concord between Christ and Belial. And can we think he will be patient to be made subservient to his enemy, or suffer his Ark to be set for the support, which should be the confusion of Dagon? Will he, that so severely upbraides the Hypocrisie of the Jews, that stole, murdered, and committed adultery, and sware falsly, yet came and stood before him in his house Je. 7. 9.? con∣nive at it in Christians? Was it intollerable pro∣phanation in them, to account his house a den of robbers, and shall we be permitted to make it so? They are sent to Shilo to learn their own destiny, and sure, we are as like to find ours there too: to be deprived of those advantages we have so unworthily abus'd. We cannot but expect, that when he sees his light serve only to aid us the more subtily to contrive our deeds of darkness, he should with draw it, smite us with blindness like the Sodomites, whom he finds in such impure pursuites. By our nonconformity to it, we abjure the soveraignity of Christ, and really say, we will not have him to rule over us. And being thus deposed of his regall and dere∣ctive power, we have reason to believe, he will dispise a meer titular Empire, not suffer the scep∣ter of his Word to remain as an empty ceremony, among those, who pay it no reall obedience? To be again cloathed with purple, crown'd and sa∣luted
King, to advance, the triumph of his scorn and crucifiction? Be not deceived, God will not be mocked; nor always stand holding the candle to us, while we do the devil's drud∣gery. If we make no other use of the waters of life, but to bath and paddle in, we may ex∣pect to see them dry'd up, or turned into some other channell; and the Sun of righteousnesse no longer to shine upon those who only baske themselves in its raies, grow Ethiops from its neighbourhood, and will not work by its light. A Judgment so black and dismall, that our liberty, peace and plenty go with our means of salvation. When with our guilt, we have Ex∣orci the Gospel from among us, and dispossest our selves of it; it will not depart without horri∣ble rendings, tearings, tortoring; nor give over strugling in its passage, till left us dying and weltering in our own bloud. O then! for the Gospell, the nation, your own, and posterities sake, be prevailed with, to a speedy reformation of your lives. Seriously ponder the excellency of that holy vocation to which you are called, and whether you have walked worthy of it Ep. 4. 1.. Diligently sift out the fallacies and delusions of Satan and your own hearts, as the particulars, so the causes of your miscarriages; not for ac∣quaintance with those malefactors, but for their punishment, and our security. Be ingaged in an earnest prosecution of those delinquents you have impeacht, and in as earnest endeavours to repair the mischiefs they have wrought, make no delay to rescue your selves from their trea∣cheries.
Manfully break those withes and cords which are too weak to hold any that will but in earnest remember he is a Nazarite, a person consecrated to God. Resolutely resist the insidu∣ous carresses of those Dalilab's, which would deliver, not your selves only, but the Ark to the Philistines. Nor be content with your own sin∣gle escape, but propagate the deliverance to as many as you can. Blazon and stigmatize those impostors; to conceal them is a combine∣ing with them. Warn and caution others against those jugling artifices, by which your selves were intrapped; make your own escape a sca-mark for securing the course of other pas∣sengers; when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. A piece of this fraternal charity, we all owe to every particular soul, to whom we have opportunity to dispence it; and the on∣ly way to take off that scandall we have broughr upon religion; which will no more be removed by a few single, private reformations, than it was contracted by their irregularities. There must be combinations, and publick confederacies in virtue, to ballance and counterpoise those of vice, or she will never recover that pristine honour which she acquired, by the Generall piety of her professors; when there was such an abhor∣rence of all that was ill, that a vitious person was look'd on as a kind of monster or prodigy, and like a putrified member cut off, as being not on∣ly dangerous but noisom to the body. But alas, the Church is now made up of such, as she then would have cast out: And, 'tis as remarkable to
find a good Christian, as there, a bad. Every thing is estimated, not according to its rare and casuall, but frequent usuall operations. Christianity hath lost as much in its repute, as it appears to have done in its efficacies: nor will there be any way of repairing i, till we be Ge∣nerally rendred as malleable to its impressions, that our lives may attest its force and energy. To suppress the operations of our religion, is indeed to extinguish it. And O that men would Generally lay to Heart, the sin and infamy of be∣ing promoters of publick ruine! and quench that fire with their tears, their sins have kind∣led. That the fastings and prayers, the sighs and groans of the primitive Christians, may sup∣plant the prophane Luxuries, the carnall jollities of the modern. That sackcloth and ashes may become the universal mode, the only fashion∣able dress among us. But the less there is of this Generall reformation, the more Jealously ought every single person to look on himself, lest he be one that obstruct it, by staying till it be a fashion, but neglect to contribute his part, to the making it so. O why should we not all emulously contend who should first put off that ugly vizard we have put upon our religion, and restore it to its native form? men are willing to discourage themselves from the attempt; and with an unseasonable modesty reflect, what a nothing one man is to so many millions: When alas, all that vast empire Vice hath got in the world, is founded in the pravitie of single per∣sons, and would certainly be ruined by their
reformation. He who considers himself but as One, should not suffer himself to grow into lesse, to fall from that Unite to a Cypher, by permitting sloath or cowardice to enfeeble, and emasculate him; but recollect his spirits, actu∣ate all his strength, and therefore be sure to do his utmost, because that utmost is but little. What wonders are industry and resolution able to effect; and a single courage exerted, hath of∣ten without Romance overcome Giantly diffi∣culties. 'Tis a prejudice is cast upon virtue, by the pusillanimity of those that like but dare not abet her: when most commit all impieties daring∣ly and openly, and those few that mourn for it, do it but in secret; the example of the one is contagious, but the other hath no means to defuse it self. Would Christians stoutly own Duty, and not follow Christ afar off, they might yet hope to make a party, and gather ground in the world. And how noble an attempt were this, thus to conquer Satan in his highest Tri∣umph, and recover a lost field? Methinks those who have any warmth of piety glowing within them; may easily thus improve it into a flame, by being, not only devout to God, but zealous toward men: endeavouring by all prudent means to recover them out of the snares of the Devill; among which are none more intangling than the creditablenesse and repute of customary vices. Set your selves especi∣ally against that overgrown covering and Ornament, those locks wherein its great, its Sampson strength lyes; and strive to render it as
contemned, as it is base. To which purpose is nothing so apt, as the exalting its compe∣titor, affecting virtue out of the Dungeon, that darknesse, and obscurity wherein it hath long lain forgotten, and by making it illustriously visible in your own practices, put it into the pos∣sibility of attracting others, there only it ap∣pears in its true splendor: They are but dead co∣lours the sublimest speculations can put on it: He that will draw it to the life, must imprint it upon his own. And thus every pious person may, nay, ought to The true Christian∣in evill be a Noah, a Preacher of righteousnesse; and if it be his fortune to have as imperswasible an auditory, if he cannot avert the deluge, it will be yet the providing himself an Ark; the delivering, yea, advancing his own soul, if he cannot benefit other mens: Nay, this be∣ing a Noah may qualifie him to be a Moses, give him such an interest with Heaven, that he may be fit to stand in the gap, to be an intercessor and mediator for a provoking people. He so mourns for the sins of others, that he will hardly be taken off, while others mourn not for their own. Hath learnt to deny his pri∣vate interest for the publick good; Moses would not cease praying for Israel, to be made great upon their ruines. He abhors the basenesse of serving himself on the evill of the times; by seeking a private gain, by that which will turn to the publick losse, and of fearing to adven∣ture a private losse, for that which may turn
to the publick gain. His zeal i mixed with love and meeknesse, to melt, not consume his ene∣my; apter to pour out his own bloud a Sacri∣fice for truth, than that of gainsayers; far from those that think to propagate religion by arms not only lawfull but meritorious; and in order to planting it in a nation, mellow the soyl with the bloud of the inhabitants. The common errablenesse of mankind urges in him commiser∣ation to the Seduced, to look gently upon o∣thers, (on an involuntary error, rather as the disease, than crime of the person), as to reflect impartially upon himself. He considers how possible it is, that even while we condemn others, we may indeed be in the wrong, and then, all the invectives we make at their sup∣posed errors, fall back with a rebounded force upon our own reall ones Gal. 6. 1.. Those univer∣sall truths to which all parties assent, are the clearest, for their evidence, and most impor∣tant for their consequence; so should be a more inforcing motive to unite, than the more sin∣gular opinions (perhaps fancies) of some men can be to discord, would men as nicely observe the principles of agreement between discenting parties; and with as much art and care, seek to dilate and spread them, why might not they, as much overwhelm our differences, as they have been overwhelmed by them. Hy∣pocrites are more zealous and earnest for a Ce∣remony, than for the Sabbath; reverence the Creed, but make no conscience of the Commandements. But a true Christian contests more for the
weightier things of religion; than for the lesser, and is charitably affected to the favourable cen∣sures of all usages that are meerly indifferent. Prudence often requires as much compliance with our weak brethren as is allowed by inno∣cence. In what he cannot comply with the depraved customes of those among whom, with∣out disobeying him for whom, he lives; or do∣ing what would derogate from the dignity of a person related to such a Master, whose servant he is, he will lesse consider what may be thought of him by a multitude, than what account he is to render to him, who hath forbid him to follow a multitude to do evill. And as he knows his reward will be much lesse than he reckons upon, if it were a thing to be received on earth, not in Heaven; so how strange and unfashionable soever his conformity to his own Soveraign may appear, he chooses rather to displease him, than God, and acts as both see∣ing and being seen of him that is invisible. If sin present himself as his Protector from a temporall calamity, reason tells him the profer is insidious; It exposes him to that which is infinitely more, than what it pretends to save him from, in respect both of guilt and punish∣ment: what a cheat is it to keep me out of the Dungeon, and send me to the bottomlesse pit? To save me from a temporall fire, and there∣by mark me out as fewel for eternall flames? To take me out of their hands who can kill the body, to put me into his, who can destroy both soul and body in Hell? 'Tis folly to wallow
in the mire, though it were safe, much lesse when it is full of Asps, and Vipers, which will infallibly sting me to death. He eyes both the uglinesse of sin, and the affrightfull, dismall blaze of those unquenchable flames it kindles. He refrains his tongue from evill, seeks peace and pursues promoting good will among men, healing differences, abating animosities, pre∣ferring the publick quiet, before his own pri∣vate ends; Censures not, reviles, nor mur∣murs against others, for that helps not to bet∣ter any condition, but rather encreases the evill and discontent of it; especially if directed a∣gainst our Governours; men in private stations can't understand the temptations and difficul∣ties great persons contest with, therefore no fit Judges of their actions; By maligning them, we weaken their hands, and undermine that power, whereby order is to be preserved, & introduces confusion, the worst kind of evills any times are capable of: One tongue set on fire of Hell, may set on fire the whole course of nature Jam. 3. 6. the frame and compages of hu∣mane Societies, and dissolve those bonds, where∣by men are to be united in an orderly associ∣ation: Even those most prone to discontent, could not with safety sleep or wake, did not the wing of Government hover over them: Were the King a Nero, St. Paul would charge us not to resist, and would charge resistance with damnation Rom. 13. 2.. The peoples sin may cause God to infatuate their Princes Counsel, or leave him to commit such crimes, for which he may
punish the nation, and he not deserve to go∣vern, but they not deserve a better Governour Is. 3. 1. &c.. He redeems the time because the days are evill; the fire of his zeal is kindled by an Antiperistasis, and burns hottest in coldest sea∣sons; as Spring water warmest in frosty wea∣ther. He takes Antidotes in an infectious air, in common contagion, beware lest ye being also led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastnesse 2 Pet. 3. 17.. Follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, not for his fleece, but for his bloud, when so few go after him, so many stand still, and most go backward; A∣postates are the Devills windfalls, death blows them into Hell. In the darkest night the Fir∣mament of his soul is deck't and bespangled in greatest lustre, and then most carefull to hang out his light, to stir up, and live in the exercise of his most excellent graces, especially those that stand in opposition to the reigning usages of the age; that he may diminish the darknesse of an evill generation, he shines as a light in it Ph. 2. 15.; is patient among offensive neighbours, chast among lascivious, sober a∣mong Epicures, religious in Sodom, upright when the whole earth is corrupted: their worldlinesse quickens his Heavenlinesse, their Atheism his belief in God, their lukewarmness his circumspect zeal and strictnesse Jos. 24. 15.; Is as active for God, as others are for the world; as truly content with his condition as others are covetous and oppressive, as faithful as others are false; as pious as others are prophane; as
much excells in Christian moderation, Humi∣lity, as others in cruelty, censoriousnesse, pride. His life is an illustrious Testimony for Christ and his cause against a wicked world. He fears not the reputation of singularity, but had ra∣ther go himself alone to Heaven, than to Hell in a crowd of Company. In an Epidemick di∣sease, every one looks out for Antidotes for his own peculiar, and doth not acquiesce in that silly confidence, he shall do as well as others: Can numbers outface Damnation? Do men hope that by going in troops to Hell, They shall master the native inhabitants, sub∣due those Legions of tormentors, and become Conquerors instead of sufferers? He appears in defence of Gods word and ways, with more courage, resolution, and boldnesse, than others in opposing or pleading against them. 'Tis the wisest, safest course to take the strong∣est side; greater is he that is with us, than they that are with them: When Gods cause and glory suffers, he that is not for God is against him, and he that gathers not with him, scatters abroad; so, by fearing a lesser danger, falls into a great∣er; to save his cloaths, breaks his neck. He is not ashamed of his profession, and dare be religious when it exposes to danger, when no∣thing is so hard and chargeable to keep as a good conscience; and he that departs from e∣vill, makes himself a prey, and is accounted mad for his pains. His truly generous spirit, not only surmounts the difficulties that attend him, but is raised by them; and turns them in∣to
steps to glory. That boysterous breath the prophane send forth to deride and cross this skilfull Pilot in his intended voyage, by the right composing of his fails, he makes that his great∣est furtherance and advantage, which was in∣tended for his ruine. He can with any name, and with any wind go to Heaven, a harbour where he is sure to meet with his name written in the book of life. He cannot think that any debase∣ment of his spirit, which carries him out upon so High and Noble atchievements, but an hap∣piness to go into Heaven, though through a red Sea, and a rude wildernesse: Whilest o∣thers (alas) feed so greedily upon the Quails, that they never say grace, but in a murmuring that they have not more and better cheer; he feeds more upon his hopes, than his enjoyments, & blesses his God for both. He converts the peoples froth into Pearl; and will not buy their good word, with the losse of his Lords, well done good and faithfull servant. He sticks close to Christ when it is disgracefull or death to wear his colluors, and rejoices he is counted wor∣thy to suffer shame for his name Act. 5. 41.. What the Church loses in the number of formall Professors, is abundantly made up in the vigo∣rous graces of reall Saints. He will let go all his earthly preferment, rather than lose his conscience, accounting the enjoyment of what he principally loves, enough to recom∣pense him for all he hath been constrained to part with in pursueing it: That servant is worthy to faint, that holds it not a sufficient encourage∣ment
to see the evident proofs of his Masters favour. Let Michal revile his dancing before the Ark, his patience stops all mouths and pur∣chases Crowns. If no cause to blush for Hea∣ven, why should we for grace? What shall we be adasht at, serving the only potentate, and originall of all excellencies? Shamefac'tness is for them, in whose coat of arms they may well put in the Devils cloven-foot; virtue is a thou∣sand escutcheons. He abhors the basenesse of being bafled out of a truth or virtue: A good cause divests sufferings (in what dresse soever they appear) of their dreadfull shape; pulls off the ugly vizard; and shews us a beauty that lay there concealed; wise men may be argued out of a religion they own, none but fools and mad men will be drol'd out of it; sooner laugh'd out of their estate, than out of their hopes of eternall happinesse. He prizes his Masters honour more than his own interest: having fixed his end, he takes his way as he finds it; all weather is fair to a willing mind. 'Tis indifferent to him whether he be consumed by Martyrdom, or religious employment, or what manner of death he shall die: If he prize any thing in the world, as his own, 'tis that he hath some∣thing to esteem as nothing for Christ. Desire of gain or glory, fear of disgrace or danger, in∣duces not him to pernicious practices; a man can never be undone by the greatest losse he can sustain, for preserving an interest in Gods love and favour. He is rich and happy, whose por∣tion is God, and inheritance Heaven, how
great soever his sufferings and losses, while o∣thers with their greatest worldly gain or glory are poor and miserable. And yet, here, where the prize is so rich, the tearms so easie, the ac∣quest so certain, the detriment of refusing it so inestimable, how many insignificant combatants are there in the Christian camp that only lend their name to fill up the muster-roule, but never dream of going upon service? If we fight not manfully under our Saviours banner against sin, the world, and the Devill, 'tis not materiall what profession we make; we are the same desertors whether we stay in our own camp, or run over to the enemies, throw away our arms, or not use them, renounce our Christian faith, or not improve it. Sloath is as mischievous in war as treachery or cowardise And, he that keeps his sword in the sheath, is as formidable an enemy, as he that brings none into the field. Christianity is our badge or cognizance of the cause and generall we fight for; to engage us to all the obedience, fidelity and constancy of Resolute souldiers. They that please not themselves with the empty title, but penetrate the full purport and significancie of their Christianity, will find themselves assaulted by such force of reason, that they must be either very ill Logicians, or very good Christians: &, they that look on the eternall things that are not seen, will through those opticks exactly dis∣cern the vanity and inconsiderableness of all that is visible, and temporary; and so (while others un∣worthily desert that cause they find chargeable to
maintain, and chuse the way of the wicked, whose prosperity they envy) will be equally unmoved with the terrors or allurements of the world, and neither frighted nor flattered off their duty. He would not be saved alone, but is still provoking and winning over others to a love of the truth. When 'tis customary to speak more of persons, than things; and reckoned a peice of ingenuity to raise or improve a story, to wound the fame of an enemy, or play with the reputation of a friend: when blasphemous hypo∣crites words are stout against God, then they that feared the Lord spake oftenone to another Mal. 3. 16 by way of counsell & encouragment in the wayes of God; that the sincerity and eminency of their piety, may be sufficient to overwhelm the contrary perversness. He hath as many chaines to oblige men to his maker, as he hath given him means of well doing. He perfumes every place with his presence, and 'tis hard for any to come from him, no whitt holyer than he went. While others are drawing in partners of their Damnation, he is pulling them out of the fire: even permission in those things we might reme∣dy, makes us no less actors than consent; some kill as much by looking on, as others by smiting: whosoever gives the blow, the murder may be ours: 'tis all one, to hold the sack, and to fill it: we are guilty of all the evill we might have hindered. Foolish Christians, in stead of vindi∣cating the truth, think it forsooth, discretion and moderation, with a complying silence, and perhaps a smile to boot, tacitly to approve and strike in with the scoffer, and so go sharer both
in the mirth, and guilt of his prophane jests. He stu∣diously contrives how he may promote his ac∣quaintances advantage, not only outward and secular but inward and spirituall; useing all friendly stratagems to recommend and endear vertue to him: He makes his kindness the ve∣hicle wherein the more gratefully to administer whatsoever is most wholsome, even reproofs when they appear so; and yet, by taking his own turn in being the patient, evinces 'tis no assuming humour that creates him a Physician. He feeles such an unutterrable complacency in rescueing any man by seasonable advice from a course of sin, that he finds he is kind to himself as well as the other; and hath no temptation to think himself unprofitably imploy'd, though that were to be his only reward. He becomes a Saviour without a cross; and payes but a little breath for that, which exhausted the bloud of his own. He that by a strict and exemplary con∣versation sets himself up a Land-mark, to direct men in this turbulent, and dangerous sea, though his light goes forth to others, the warmth and cherishing heat of it remaines in his own breast. What cheerful exulting re∣flections, may he make upon himself, that can make good Saint Paul's protestation, I am pure from the bloud of all men Act. 20. 26.: That he hath not by any scandalous example insnared any soul; but by illustrious acts of virtue, so adorn'd his Christian profession, as to draw in proselites to the obedience of Christ: That hath made it his business to stand in the gap, not only by his
intercessions with God against the plagues, but by his endeavours with men against the sins of the na∣tion; and by a steady opposeing himself against the inundation of prophaness and licentious∣ness, hath invited others to give some stop to those impure torrents. He that aspires to no more than a private innocence, is only on the defensive part, stands upon his guard against Satan: but he that aimes at publick reformations, maintains an invasive war against him, and so more shakes his kingdome: The reducing any sinner is the dispossessing him of so much of his usurpt ter∣ritory, and weakens his empire in the world. But alas, while we should awaken others, we sleep our selves: While we should give cordialls, to uphold others, we faint, we fall our selves. Christian, hath Christ cast his cloak of Love over thee, and said unto thee Live, and wilt thou not pitty those that lye dead in their bloud? O were the neglect and abuse of religion lookt on as a commoninjury, which every one is concern'd to vindicate; were there such a combination in order to the nations happiness; would every Governour seriously mind his charge, every man his brother, every Christian his particular duty, how much might it contribute to the general good? How soon are the foul streets of a great City made clean, by every mans sweeping his own dore. Evill men make evill times, they are made good by every mans mending one: No such way of being a publick benefactor, as care∣full endeavours to make the times we live in, better for us. For the Kingdom's welfare, it lyes upon
each particular person, to put out, and faithfully improve his little stock to the publick banke, doing some extraordinary worship to God, with a carefull circumspection against whatsoever hath any tendency to augment the sins and sufferings of the times. If the foot be pinched, the back bends, the head bowes down, the eye looks, the hand stirs, the tongue calls for aid, the whole man is in pain, & labours for redress: being mem∣bers of the same body, we pray for our selves in praying for others: Then may we rest satisfied, when conscience tells us we have neglected no meanes for redressing our miseries; but may look for amendment or patience by the personal perfor∣mance of our duty: we shall procure to our selves at least the great benefit that would accrue to the nation, by a Generall reformation: either the affliction shall be kept or taken off thee, or laid on in so much mercy, that thy self shall bless God for it; whereas the contrary may cost thy tem¦porall or eternal ruine. And though the distributi∣on of rewards and punishments properly belong to those in authority, yet there is one sort of them in the power of private persons i. e. Honour and contempt; every man being obliged to honour them that fear the Lord, and to cast contempt upon those, that would cast contempt upon re∣ligon; which if well apply'd, might prove of great efficacy: Were prophane persons used as the lepers under the Law, would men nauseate their company, and avoid all kind of conversa∣tion with them, as vile infectious mischievous persons, this might be one good meanes to work
in them some kind of shame and modesty, when they shall see themselves despised and abandon'd by all sober men. And now, why should not every one be am∣bitious To regard Gods dis∣pleasure. by all means to make one in this so pious a confederacy? and resolve most studiously to endeavour the composing our discords, and supporting piety: in which he may borrow something of instruction even from his own guilt, and copy out his former industry to this better purpose. But among us are so many hu∣morous and vitious; such a complicated disease of bad opinions, and such a cachexie of evill lives, some half sighted architects, who magni∣fie our virtues, but can neither see errors, nor foresee dangers; other Earthly hearts, hid a∣mong the stuff 1 Sa. 1. 22., so busied about their worldly designes, as they have no leasure to mind, or propension to be intent upon this solemne sub∣ject: and notwithstanding the common safety or ship wrack, that we must sink or swim toge∣ther, yet in this storm, most passengers abandon or disregard the ship of Church and state, to save themselves in the cockboat of their own fortunes Ac. 2. 30. that we despair to find the generallity appre∣hensive of disease or cure. 'Tis a singular work, and must be ingaged by fingular agents, such as are truely religious, that have the Sins of the nation smarting in their hearts, and the safety of it Ecchoing in their eares; that have the most conscience to cure sin, and the most re∣morse to reconcile an offended God: whose
hearts are knit to the nation, and whose tongues soliciting for it: That weep over our sins, and would even sacrifice themselves in expiatory du∣ties to prevent Judgment. O Christians, God takes special notice how we behave our selves, and comport with his dispensations of mercy or Judgment. He expects when extraordinary in his providences, that we be so in seeking him. Because they regard not the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up Ps. 28. 5.. Trees of righteousness, of Gods own planting, bring forth their fruit in their season Ps. 1. 3.; They carry sutable spirits under his various actings; and shift their sailes according to the several winds, whether North or South that blowes upon their garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth. When the Lord comes out of his place to punish the in∣habitants of the Earth for their iniquities Is. 2. 21., 'Tis not manners for his servants to sit still; they must arise and prepare to meet him Am. 4. 12. 'Tis our grand, important duty, when Judgments are felt or feared, to be sensible of and sorrowful under them: when he was come nigh, he beheld the city and wept over it Lu. 19. 41.. When he Eclipses and over-clouds the day, he expects we put on our mourning garments; and be upon our knees (in the lowest resentment) when he lifts up his hand to strike, as a sutable posture to keep off the storm of his wrath now gathering against us. 'Tis high time to betake our selves to our def∣fensive armes, when the Lord of hoasts is mar∣ching against us: And because I will do thus un∣to
thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel Am. 4. 12.. He smartly, severely resents that most provoking sin, a stupid insensiblenesse & security under Judg∣ment, as being a slighting and contemning of his power, and a dishonourable reflection upon his wise management of humane affairs; as if the methods of his providence were not worth taking notice of; that the ship drove at random, and things came by hap hazard; Wo unto them that are at ease in Sion Am. 6. 1.; drowned in sense, & now lye sleeping, unconcerned, at the signs of Gods wrath. The very Romans severely punished one, that shewed himself out at a window, with a Garland on his head in the time of war, when it went ill with the common wealth. Whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in the same day, he shall be cut off from among his people: for it is a day of attonement, to make an attonement for you, before the Lord your God Lev. . 28. 29.. Shall the Lyon roar, and shall not the beasts of the Forrest tremble? Fear ye not me? saith the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence Is. 5. 22.? What not dread such a God as I am? Will not my greatnesse nor displeasure make you quake and stand in aw? Are ye so sottish, as not to be startled at the voice of the Lord that sha∣keth the wildernesse Ps. 29. 8.? Will not the ap∣prehension of my approach enforce you to stir? Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob Ps. 114. 7.: Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed Is. 26. 11.. O! who shall not fear thee O Lord, and worship be∣fore
thee? For thy Judgments are made mani∣fest Rev. 15. 4.. Tremble ye women that are at ease, be troubled ye carelesse ones; strip ye, make ye bare, gird Sack-cloth upon your loins Is. 32. 11.. Sigh ye Sons of men with the breaking of your Loins, and with bitterness cry and howl and smite upon your thigh Ez. 21. 5. 1.; be afflicted and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness; humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, that he may lift us up Ja. 4. 9. 20.: Others sins unmour∣ned for, become ours. O wo unto our hard∣ned jolly Professors! O shall not your hearts be broken, for and from sin, that hath incensed God against the land of your nativity? Can you retire from the world, and seriously con∣sider the prints of his displeasure, and remain impenitent? Is it nothing to you that God hath these many years been withdrawing from his Sanctuary in England? That your Mini∣sters after all their labours, have had miscar∣rying wombs and dry breasts? That so seldom any are under the pangs of the new birth? and so few added to the Church that shall be sa∣ved? That God calls aside so many of his Am∣bassadours? That there is such a spirit of division in the Land? That he hath been so long con∣tending with us by the Sword, by Pestilence, and by Fire? The joy of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning; the Crown is fallen from our head; wo unto us that we have sinned; For this are our hearts faint, for these things are our eyes dim La. 5. 15. &c.. How un∣reasonable
are earthly prosecutions in this day of wrath? Thus saith the Lord, behold that which I have built, I will break down, and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, e∣ven this whole land; and seekest thou great things for thy self? seek them not; for behold I will bring evill upon all flesh Je. 45. ▪; Is this a time to walk with out-stretched necks, and wanton eyes? to be vain and frothy, careless and stupid, carnall and immersed in the world? to receive money and garments, and Olive-yards, and Vineyards, and sheep, and Oxen, and Men∣servants, and Maid-servants? The sins there∣fore of the nation, shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever 2 King 5. 26. 27.. If the foundation be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Why, fast and pray, for the Lord is in his Holy Temple, the Lords Throne is in Heaven Ps. 11. . 4.. O! would every one that contributed to the ac∣cending, be as industrious to the appeasing Gods wrath, would all that have brought their Fire-brands, bring also their Tears to quench it; as there would be no dry eyes in the nation at present, so might it prevent as great a gene∣rality of weeping ones for the future. But who (unlesse awakened by his personall con∣cernes) seems at all to startle at the noise of publick ruine? What sign of remorse? What vanity, nay what vice have we substracted up∣on the sense of Gods anger? What nicety in Cloaths or Diet have we cut off, in sympathy with the nakednesse and Hunger of our afflict∣ed brethren? Does not the unreasonable jollity
of too many among us, look as if we triumph∣ed in their miseries, found musick in the dis∣cordant sounds of their groans and our own laughter? Emulating that infamous barba∣rity of Nero, who played while Rome burnt. 'Tis a kind of impious Solycism, to revell under the menace of Judgment. Thus saith the Lord, a Sword is sharpened, and also furbished; it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is fur∣bished, that it may glitter; should we then make merry Ez. 21. 9, 10.? With how much more in∣dignation must he resent our perverse contu∣melious behaviour; against whom he hath not only prepared but used his Sword; and are not only under the threats, but actuall execution of his vengeance? This is interpretatively to prompt him to yet sharper inflictions, by shewing him that these have not edge enough to penetrate us. And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to bald∣ness, and to girding with Sack-cloth; and be∣hold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen, and kil∣ling sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die; and it was revealed in mine ear by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord of Hosts Is. 22. 12. 13.. Every one hath brought a Faggot to encrease the common flame, therefore ought his Bucket to quench it; but so few do, with how much more vigour and resolution should they bestir
themselves. England, for many generations hath had in a succession a number of pretious ones, who by a keeping close with God, un∣spotted from the times, were the Atlas's of their severall ages, and found favour of God, to beg the life of this nation, when ready to be turned off: when wrath rushing in at the breach its sins (as ordinances) had battered down in the fence and wall of safety that was round about it, have stept in, stood before him, and stopt his entrance Ps. 106. 23. 30.. Unhappy will the day of your birth be called, if you now com∣ing in their room, should by degenerating from the power of godliness, and earnest endeavours cut the bank, which was their chief care to keep up, and let in an over-flowing desolating Judg∣ment. Unworthy that Heir of his Birth and Patrimony, who prodigally looses that estate, which, by the care and providence of his An∣cestors, was, through many descents, at last transmitted to him, but together with the honour of the Family, thus unhappily ends in him. Lu∣ther foreseeing a black cloud of Judgment hang∣ing over Germany, told his friends he would do his best to keep it from falling in his days, yea, he believed it should not; but when I am gone (saith he) let them that come after me look to it. God uses rather to spare the offendour, than strike the intercessor; and now seems doubt∣full whether to destroy for many wicked, or save for the sake of a few righteous. And O Christian! hast thou not often said, this nation must suffer, and that the end of all will be dis∣mall?
And dost thou not fear it? Or fear it, & not stand up to save it? O! that thou hadst but as much prevention, us thou hast Judgment, or as much conscience, as thou hast a presaging spi∣rit. That thou wert but as true a Saint, as thou wouldest seem to be a Prophet. Can you foretell, but remedy nothing? And foresee pe∣rills, yet put to the venter whether you escape or be ensnared in them? Do you dread char∣ging plagues and disregard challenging sins? Do your ears glow, yet suspect no bad news? Do you seem to see nothing but Rods, Razors, Yokes, and Fetters, yet so blind that you can∣not see the violating of God's laws? Doth e∣very mechanick talk of the danger of times, and not you cry out of those execrable things which are ready to make the land an execra∣tion? Can you dread vengeance with impeni∣tency? And reflect your ruine with stony Hearts? Feel malignant humours rising with∣out taking a purge? And fear sinking, with∣out pumping out the water? You are then ra∣ther inquisitors of dangers, than interpreters of them. Your eyes are open, your ears listening, and your hearts asleep. You are fearfull yet re∣gardless. Your own predictions, nor con∣victions, will make you look inward. You are appaled at Gods Judgments, yet sirt them away, as if the angry and arming God would never smite. You see him displeased without striving to pacify him; and take notice of the sadness of the times, and receive the bruit of impending miseries, and dispose not your selves
to prevent it. God, you say, threatens; but do you believe him? He moves from his seat, do you arise from yours? He puts on Justice like a Cloak, do you cast away your Robes? He is ready to rend your garments from your backs, do you put on Sackcloth? He is blowing up his coales to burn against Jacob, do you sit in a∣shes? He's calling in variety of Judgments to plague, do you call in Citizens and others to pacify? He's resolved upon dismall things, do you do memorable ones? He frowns, do you weep? He is setting your sins in order before you, do you confess them? He is righting himself for injuries, do you make reparation? He is upon the point of confounding mightily, do you cry mightily? His feet is turning into the visiting way, do you turn every one from his evill way? His hand is laying hold on Judgment, do you purge your selves from the violence of your Hands? O! come ye true mourners in Sion. In the consciences of your own wants and infir∣mities, To spend their main censures upon them∣selves. spend your main censures upon your selves. Effectually work your hearts to a sound Humi∣liation for your own sins, which contribute to our publick stock of miseries. Though every one is not bound to say, he hath deserved those Judgments above all others; yet he must, that his sin hath deserved any Judgment, that can befall him: and that what every man is liable to, God may in Justice pick out whom he please, to make him an example of it. Every inha∣bitant
is strictly and impartially to examine himself, and reflect upon the plague of his own heart, what 'tis in him particularly God aims at. How he hath contributed towards kindling his anger; and accordingly, speedily to apply him∣self to him: doing his utmost to make an a∣tonement. Hide nothing from him; from the publick guilt who can say his heart is clean? In thy skirt is found the bloud of the nation; yet thou saist because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me: behold I will plead with thee, because thou saist I have not sinned Je. 2. 34. 35.. How many can find out the filth of the whole nation, rather than the dunghill at their own doors? And reckon up all the vices of the times, rather than their personal? They can consider their proper rights, but not their proper sins. This clapsed book hath not been opened, to view every leaf; nor this depth of i∣niquity searcht to the bottom this many years. They had rather teacb the world repentance than practice it: And cleanse the age, than purge themselves. To bring forth the prisoners in chains, & accuse them at the bar, they leave this to the last Tribunall. We arraign only other mens sins, and leave our own out of the Inditement. We charge our mortall wounds and ruines up∣on immediate weapons and instruments; not con∣sidering they were wielded and whetted by the more generall impieties, from whence they bor∣rowed their destructive power. To transfer the guilt here, is but the artifice of slaying Ʋ∣riah with the Sword of the children of Am∣mon;
which acquits not David from being his murderer. Here lies the carcase of a poor bleeding nation; which of us can say, our hands have not shed this bloud, neither hath our eyes seen it Deu. 1. 7.? Instead of accusing others as A∣postates to truth, condemn your selves as enemies to peace. Our lusts though they are confessedly the Butefieus among us, have by I know not what fascination so endeared themselves, that we retain them in spite of all their appendent mischiefs; cherish and foster them under the covert of religion. The lesse capable you are of washing your hands in innocency, the greater neeed to wash them in penitency. The office of the avenger of bloud devolves on you; drag out the criminals which have taken Sanctuary in your own breasts, as in a City of refuge, saying, is here all? & hew them in pieces before the Lord. While others gaze upon, and cry out against the infirmities of others in the market-place, weep over your own in your closet; spend not time in examining the lamps of others, while you neglect to get oil into your own vessels. Exclaim not against the sins of Governours, and Courtiers, Templers, divided parties &c: make them matter of Humiliation, not of Dis∣course; and recoil upon your selves, saying what have I done? How have I provoked God as Principal or Accessory? O! run speedily unto him with tears; away into thy closet, fall down amazed, fill thy spirit with horrour, possesse the sins of thy youth as if just now committed; track the abominations of thy life; hide nothing
from him: chew the cud till they break thy heart, and become a burthen too heavy for thee to bear Ps. 38. 4.. That he may forgive the iniquity of thy sins (q); confesse them frequently, fully, freely, p Ps. 32. 5. with all their aggravations, contrition, indig∣nation, resolutions through Christ of reforma∣tion: what have I to do any more with Idols? and give the Lord no rest, till he hath blotted them out of his remembrance. Let the sight of thy hardnesse (which makes thee fear thou shalt but sin, by their enumeration, or a formall dull confession) drive thee the oftener to the Throne of grace, and there lie before the Lord, till he break the Rock, that the water gush out. Ne∣ver greater cause to tremble, not at Gods Judg∣ments only, but the Hellish impieties that swarm in our own hearts. How is it possible to stand under so much guilt, without shrieks, cryes, & lamentations? How can we eat or drink, sleep or laugh under the weight of that, which drew tears of water and bloud from our dear Re∣deemer? How can we continue our claim to him, call God Father, Christ Redeemer, the Spirit our Sanctifier, and not be pricked at the heart, for the injuries we and others do him? What ever filthinesse was ever found in men or Kingdoms may be found upon our skirts. O! hang up your harps, refuse to be comforted, lie prostrate, let your hearts be as the leaves of the tree shaken with the whirlwind; tremble O my soul under thy manifold provocation; O! let sorrow enter into thy very Inwards; Let the insupportable pressure of sin, sink thy very
soul: mourn as the tender mother for her On∣ly Son; be in bitternesse, so as thou canst not re∣lish those things thou hast hitherto followed with so much eagernesse; let the loathsomeness of thy sins be ever before thee as thy standing dish; separate some extraordinary times to humble thy self by fasting and prayer, that God would give thee repentance for thy own and others sins; fall down at his foot more solemn∣ly than ever; weep till you can weep no more: And then keep conscience tender; let not your affections die; keep this fire alive, by bring∣ing new fewell to it. Labour exquisitely to af∣flict your souls that you should be so little ser∣viceable, so foolish, so vile, and commit so great, so odious abominations under Christ's Livery. And let them cut and afflict thy soul exceedingly from morning to evening, and from evening to morning. Let not the motions of a lazy spirit cause thee to desist, till God be pacified to thee. Be pure in heart; sincere conformity to this To purity of heart. one precept of Christ, facilitates and ascertaines obedience to all the rest: were the first sparks of ill quenched, 'tis impossible they should ever break forth into a flame; How shall he kill, that dares not be angry? Actually commit adultery, that did not first transgress in his de∣sire? Be perjur'd, that feares an oath? Or defraud, that permits not himself to covet? Di∣vine interposition alone, can possibly secure us; and indeed, the suite for it amounts to no less,
than that he will force upon us the blessing, we resist, do us good, against our wills, and not suffer us to acquire those miseries we so eagerly pursue; which is so bold a request, that they had need be more then ordinary favorites, that shall prefer it: Those hands must be very pure that are lift up in such an intercession: and all that undertake it, qualifie themselves for it, by purging out the leaven of malice, strife, hypo∣crisie, and all filthiness of flesh and spirit; and project for the purity, as for the peace of the cbruch; else, 'tis a mockery to pretend such jealous tenderness for her; to deprecate the ruine of Chri∣stianity, by the contagions and blasphemies of o∣ther men, when our selves contrive it by some o∣ther vice of our own; This is not to desire it shoud live, that none but we should kill it. O search out your own spots, and leave not a stain to be an eye-sore to Heaven. Set apart certain seasons for strict and solemn repentance; weep out all your contamination; pray away all your pol∣lutions; purge away all your defilements; scrape the walls infected with the leprosie; hate the garment spotted by the flesh; mortifie your members which are upon the earth; hate all appear∣ance of evill: live as if you conversed with an∣gels, and did but tread below to cleanse your selves before you put on the white robe: O come out of the fining-pot, without any dross; out of the Lath, without any stain: bring forth the stoln goods, now the thief is sought for: open the castle gates, now God comes to summon the rebell saying, I am the man; Rake the Channels,
sweep the hid corners, lay open and unravell the secrets of your hearts and lives; disburthen your consciences; let no corruption lie ranckled or festered within; let it run out of the mouth of the wound; sensibly tell out all your disor∣dered affections, refractory desires, irregular motions, deviating treads, excursions, exorbi∣tances, aberrations and defections in Gods ear. Abimilech had like to have destroyed his whole Family Gen. 20. 7.: Dauid, all his people 2 Sam. 24. 17.: Jo∣nah, those in the ship Jon. 1. 12.. 'Tis a dangerous thing to be a stranger to, or hide the iniquity in our own bosome. O! make your work a a peculiarity of devotion, Sanctifie your selves with some solemne resolution; enter into a vow not to desert the nation with your repentance and prayers, till a discharge be brought from Heaven, and the nation settled in a condition to be spared. Express your gratitude by pitying and endeavouring to presrve alive your nurse, your mother, now upon her sick couch and bed of languishing. Cease not to visit her, till there be some signs of her recovery, open her inward disease, and apply that spirituall reme∣dy, which will certainly, and can only work her proper cure. To endear your selves to our only Physician, make way by more exact com∣pliances and observance of him. Children when they have a great suite to promote, are double diligent to insinuate themselves into their fa∣ther's affections. Prudent Hester by degrees sweetens, ingratiates, steals her self into the Kings favour. 'Tis this whisperer, sin, that sepa∣rates
chief friends, makes God stand aloof off from his people and their prayers. You leave your Vows as well as your Prayers with God; as you expect he should answer the one, so doth he that you should pay the other; break thy pro∣mise with God, and thou discharges him with thy own hand of any mercy he owes thee. Think not to bind him, and leave thy self free. He that's the best man towards God, is the best Magistrate to his Prince and Country. The blind man as blind as he was, could see this for a certain truth, that God heareth not sinners. Kings pardon not murderers at the intercession of thieves. He that would work effectually to∣wards a great deliverance, can be confident of his successe, but in the same degree in which his person is gracious. The exemplary piety, zealous and holy prayers of a righteous man, shall save the City and destroy the fortunes of an enemies army; when God sees it good it should be so, for he never denies him any thing, but what is no blessing; and when 'tis otherwise, his prayer is most heard, when 'tis most denied. Strive to be still better, as there is more need and use of you. 'Tis a great thing for a man to be so gracious with God, as to prevail for him∣self, and others. We must not expect such great effects, as to cancell a decree of Heaven gone out against a people, to recover a dying nation, to prevail against an enemy, to blow a∣way clouds of guilt that hangs over our heads, ready to dissolve into showers of vengeance with a good wish. When going upon this noble
design you have undertaken, eye nothing but your duty: be full fraught with Ninevb's qua∣lifications; see what a great measure of remorse and reformation is expedient to redresse our pre∣sent calamities, and avert that finall devastati∣on sin hath so long, so loudly called for. You have more to think of, than the frivilous, su∣perfluous cavills, or mundane concerns. Apply your selves to the right work: fall to down right Christianity; be religious to purpose; serve God in good earnest; single out him for your Lea∣der, to stand in the front of this holy order; let him be the best man who can be most virtuous and zealous in this religious work. And by how much more familiar you are with God, so much more are you to improve your interest for the relief of the distressed nation. They must be Master workmen that can repair the de∣cays of a City grown crasie with sin; ('tis as hard to preserve, as build it;) that can under∣prop and keep a tottering Kingdom from an eminent casuality and downfall. Be you ne∣ver so well prepared, yet you have a task which requires almost Angelicall purity and perfection to discharge. Have an humble dresse. Attire your selves in To an humble dress. your Judgment suites, your visitation Rags, not gorgeous apparrel, Beyond that decency, and moderate expence, agreeable to your se∣verall ranks and qualities. O! what gaity of ap∣parrel? Richnesse of furniture? Splendour of Equipage? Which hath no propriety to any o∣ther
sense but that of seeing, and is lost if it be not look'd on. Among equalls is not only an emulation of pomp and bravery, but those of the most distant qualities; there seeming now no other measure, than the utmost extent of their money or credit, to the ruine of many, who want necessary clothing, only to maintain the superfluity of theirs. We pursue this folly with so great expence of care, time, and mo∣ney, as if our bodies had been designed only for our cloths; and to be fine and happy were the same thing: never thinking of Dives, who, instead of Silk and Fine Linnen, has the purple flames for his unchangeable clothing. Our ex∣cesses have besides their proper guilt, that of in∣justice superadded; our superfluities being more the poors right than ours, assigned to them by God the grand propriator; and when their cry shall be joined to those of our riots, they will certainly be too clamourous to let vengeance sleep any longer. O! how many naked backs might half that cost cloath, which is lavished to put one in a fools coat, or to hang about them such bables as may serve to set out the street, or others to stare at? O now (if ever) cut of luxuri∣ances, strip your selves of vanities: when the peo∣ple heard evill tidings they mourned, & no man put on his Ornaments Ex. 33. 4.. What true peni∣tent was ever busie with the Mercers Shop? minded fashions, or the perfumer? God calls to weeping and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with Sackcloth Is. 22. 1.. 'Tis a time this, to rent and not sow Ec. 3. 7.; admits of no
tersing, sprucing, flaunting garbs. The Ninevites repent in penitentiall apparel, they cast away the robe, and cover themselves with Sackcloth; (this prevailed more with God, than that Quod non poterat Diadema, id Saccus obtinet:) and do we in curious dresses, changeable sutes, inlaid with vanity, chequer wrought with pride? If con∣verts, very spruce ones; If penitents, gay, gaudy ones; If suppliants, very trim, gallant ones; If old fashioned Protestants, but new fashioned repentants; fitter for a dance, than dejection; for Jovisance, than repentance; for the stage or tiring room of vanity, than the house of mourn∣ing. Already are too many splendid blades, poping-gys, phantastick comedians, glister∣ing, loose-fangled professors, that will not loose an Ornament, but renew levity; fitter to curse a nation, than to be instrumentall for a pacifi∣cation; to irritate a patient God, than to as∣swage an offended; to fright a Country, than to support it. O! our patch'd faces are enough to make us monsters in Gods eyes: our long tails, to sweep all blessings out of the Kingdom: our powdered hair to fetch Gods rasor to shave our besmeared locks. We have brought all nations into our Wardrobe, to act upon the garment stage. 'Tis a wonder that the flying roll of curses, hath not already lighted upon this exo∣tick Island; That this Theater of vanity is not burnt down with fire, and brimstone from Hea∣ven: That Gog and Magog is not called in, to pluck of our antick habiiments, to fley of those
skins, which have clad themselves in such pro∣digious bravery, disguisements, and imbellish∣ments. Refrain from delicacies; eat not the bread of To Tem∣perance and Sobri∣ety. men Ex. 24. 17. To capacitate you to promote piety and charity, abate, abstain from things lawful. Approve your selves the servants of God, in watching, in fasting 2 Cor. 6. 5. As if you had eaten away your right to the creature, and drunk a∣way your Life-plea. 'Tis much, that a wound∣ed conscience can have an eager appetite; or watry eyes look out for full spread tables; feeding without fear of Gods wrath, ready to break forth upon us. Penitents must not hunger af∣ter the Creature, while soliciting the Creator; or come to thcir appetite, while the stomach is full of the sense of sin, and divine wrath; nor sit down in the banquetting house, while pre∣venting a shipwrack, and averting judgment. Do your work, earn your bread, ere you eat it. You have a diet, a cup; humiliation bread, the pennance goblet, feed upon, drink of that: when preserving of life, mind not nourishing of nature; when flying from destruction, be not in∣tent upon belly chear. Can the mariner gorge himself when the tempest is coming? Or the souldier, when the enemy looks him in the face? Can the penitent be at his repast, when vengeance blows her trumpet? Eat not now but abstain; nor feed but fast; 'tis a day of atonement Nu. 31. 50, not of pampering; of aflicting our selves L. 16. 29., not of satisfying the flesh; of rolling our selves in the
dust Mic. 1. 1, not of stretching our selves upon couches, eating the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the stall Am. 6. 4.. Our daily bread is not to be thought on, when begging pardon for our daily Trespasses. We must not belch in Gods face; nor have the crums sticking between our teeth, when petitioning for life. Hollow cheekes, sunk eyes, gnawing bowels, macerated sides, fainting spirits, high preparatory fasts, gets admittance to God, rather then swoln faces, soaking gullets, swilling paunches, reaking sto∣macks, eyes starting out with fatness; as if we would have God to seal our pardon in the Larder-Nineveh seeks not to appease Gods anger by sitting down by her flesh-pots, eating bread, drinking wine to the full, wallowing in her vo∣mit: the dread of Gods judgments, shut all their pantries, locked up all their cellars: the whole City sits like an anchorite; no pleasant food comes into their mouths: To free them∣selves from stripes, they chasten themselves be∣fore the Lord; to procure mercy, they pro∣claim a fast; half kill themselves with a strict forberance from necessary sustenance. But ra∣ther then punish the flesh too much by absti∣nence, we will hazard our selves upon all the Judgments of heaven. Cookery is become a very mysterious trade; the kitchin hath almost as many intricacies, as the schools, Our meat is not apportioned to our hunger, but our tasts: the stomack is made meerly passive in matter of eating; and serves only to receive the loades
we charge it with; whilst its election and choices are forestall'd by the plat or fancy; nor allow'd so much as a negative voice to refuse, what for kind or quantity is destructive to it. With studied mixtures, we force our relucting ap∣petites; and with all the spells of epicurism, con∣jure them up, that we may have the pleasure of laying them again. So unworthily treacherous to nature, that while we pretend to releive, we oppress, giving her beyond both her need and sufferance. Our very pride mingles with our gluttony; every thing is insipid, that is not cost∣ly; and 'tis thought an ignoble peasant-like thing, to eat a plain meal; and no Gentleman, whose single ordinary costs not as much, as would be a fair exhibition for some whole families. By examining our blls of fare, one would think, the dogs-appetite, were our Epidemical disease, if they did not consider, we have eyes to be fed as well as bellies. Lust is increased by art and much charg; whence France hath learnt fruga∣lity, to fill their tables rather with dishes, then meat. How many, whose Almanacks consist all of red letters, nothing but festivals; their inter∣valls and pauses in their debauches, for study to find out whets and juleps, to provoke, satis∣fie, inhance and satiate their boundless appetites. That allow themselves no longer intermissions then may just qualifie them for a new excess; and recover their wits, to put them in a capaci∣ty of losing them agai. O England beware, if thou art not conquered by armes, thou lie not overcome with cups! Our Land is seised
with the Vertigo of an epidemical drunkenness, and seems ready to reel into its own ruines. How many great families are become such perfect Academies of licentiousness▪ not of piety & vertue) that the most innocent puny will there, in a short time, become proficient? Their houses may well pass for enchanted castles; no man scarce, that comes into them, being able to guide him∣self out. They keep as't 'were solemne justs and turnaments of debauchery to challenge all comers, and variety of champions to deal with combatants of all ranks; as if they affected to out-bid the tyranny of the Turk, in sending an halter to his vassalls, & making them their own ex∣ecutioners; or thought it a disparagement to their quality, to go to hell, without an honoura∣ble Retinue. So great a malice do we bear to our reason, that, to opress it, wee are content to expose our darling, and do violence to our very sence. Our hospitality relieves not stran∣gers, but burthens them; cures their wants, by the worse exchange of a surfet. How great a shew soever this may have of liberality, he is not be to thought to have drunk Grais, that hath paid his reason for his shot. 'Tis impossible Bestiality should be so universally agreeable to man kind, that all should pursue it out of appe∣tite and liking; though it hath too many vo∣luntiers, yet tis this press that engages many to make up its number. Men strive for the ma∣stery in sinning; as i some excellency in it; and to be able to drink down others, goes for a manly faculty: Hence fury and anger is produced, and
the heart waxes hot with base flames. Drink∣ing of healths, the test of mens Loyalty & respects, to those great ones to whom the beginner shall consecrate his bole; as if a disorderliness (no beast will be guilty of) must shew good manners; and no man could be a good subject to his King, which dare not rebell against his God: those that dare, are valiant men indeed, but will, when it comes to trial, do little more for their Prince, than they do for their maker. Our whole Land seems to be nothing but a Huge stye, or victualling house. We out-science all the Artists in voluptu∣ousness and Luxury for Charger-principles. One would think man lives by bread alone, for he is alwayes feeding; or by liquor, for he is more for that, than for the cup of consolation. Did we diet our selves, we might be healthful, and fit for action. We are so sull fed, that our pursey spirits are adapted for nothing that is sacred. So much for the manger, so full of provender, that we even melt in our grease, when we should ride post to stop a Judgment. We are tyed by the teeth, to hinder us from religious exercises. Our tables are our snares, to inthrall us to mi∣sery. Epicures, slow bellies, Gormondizers, are dull agents in a Churches pacification. How many in this Dizzy-Island, drink as if tunnels in their mouths? To be strong to drink wine is become a kind of Chivalry. Men wage battle at their full boles, as in a pitched field; come soaked with wine into the senate house; and in a Drunken humor, consult about the safety of the Kingdome, but cannot become sober to pre∣serve
it; nor shut up their mouths, to fence out a Judgment; nor loose a meales-meat, to obtain a blessing: but will eat and drink away the fear of Gods vengeance, though they die with meat in their mouths. Slaves of the palate mind not Church, nor state, but their own delicious fare. They face off Gods anger, with nourishing their hearts as in a day of slaughter; and will jeopard the loss of priviledges and ordinances, rather then forbear from their belly-chear, or eat ashes like bread. Good diet runs more in their minds, than sad accidents to themselves, or their dearest friends; and they will not rise from a banquet to save a Kingdome, but sell it for a mess of pottage. Be truly apprehensive of Judgments past, pre∣sent, A sense of sin and Judgment. imminent, and the perill wherein we stand. Sorrowfully take notice of the raging Pesti∣lence, devouring Fire, mutual effusion of so much Christian bloud, with the wofull disast∣ers, and inexpressible miseries inevitablely at∣tending them. Nor ought any Judgment make so deep impression as spiritual; God's repay∣ing our unfruitfulness and actuall rebellions, with a senseless obdurateness, deadness of spi∣rit, spiritual divisions &c. There's nothing more ominous, than a fat heart, a spirit of slumber, an obstinate inflexible mind, for then we seek to outface God himself, and to put his Prophets out of countenance. O go circuit through your own consciences, and then walk the streets from one end of the nation to
the other: observe the face and fate of it: Take notice of its maladies and ulcers: Consider what prognosticating symptomes there are of an e∣migration and examination: Ah feel her weak pulse; touch her cold lips, behold her griftly cheeks; mark her bad crasis and sad crisis; look upon the present dangers and disasters: appre∣hend what a flag of Defiance is hung out upon earth, and what a Sword is bathed in Heaven. Can such sins, and the nations safety; such impeni∣tency and the nations impunity, stand long to∣gether? Fear you not some other plagues? Some general massacre? Some coal blown with the great breath of the Almighty, that may sparkle and kindle, and burn us to Cinders, that not a wall or a pillar may be left to testi∣fie the remembrance of a nation? Behold they whose Judgment was not to drink of the cup, have assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished Je. 49. 12.? Is there more sins: and shall there be less Justice? May not the vial of red wine, be reserved for the lips of this nation? Hath she been so often at her wits-end, and may not her brains at last be cra∣sie, with an inevitable, and inextricable Judg∣ment? Vengeance deferred, is not recalled; a forbearing God may double his dismaying and confounding stroakes. The twigs are gather∣ing to make the sharper rod; the rasor whet∣ting, to shave with the keener edge. O be not blind under so many grievances; deaf, under so many warnings; asleep, under so many Judg∣ments.
Believe not your Politicians, if they say, your nation is in no danger; believe not your Pulpits, if they preach you up to be pure against God's examining Justice; believe not your own consciences, if they perswade you, that you are prepared sufficiently against all ac∣cidents. Think that you have read Scripture with rechless eyes, if you have not found out curses against such sin: That you have fre∣quented Sanctuaries like fruitless hearers, if they have not taught you repentance for such sins: That you have searched your consciences with partiality, if such trespasses do not drive you into passions: That you were never terrified with your own exigences, if it do not terrifie you to see a nation at such a disaster. Consider in what a talking age you live; how religion is little more than argument, profession and dis∣course; how many are wit-founded with hu∣mours, and stare upon themselves as if Heaven must look upon them with enamoured eyes; how hard to get people to confess they are guil∣ty, or that God should visit a place for their im∣pieties. Most dally with Sanctuaries, trifle with Sermons, and make conscience but a meer Sexton to unlock the great Doores, to sweep the Church, to ring the Bells, open the Pews, that a company of Formalities may take their seats. When the Lord roars mightily from on high Je. 25. 30., shall we be deaf below? and not see the whipping Pillar st up, when he smites the earth with the rod of his mouth Is. 11. 4.? When the Heavens write out our Judgments in capi∣tal
letters, shall not we read our own fatal condition? When the grievous vision is declared Is. 21. 2., shall we turn it into a panick fear? and rub off all frights or presages of misery when he hews us by his Prophets Ho. 6. 5.? Shall we not stand in awe of the Ax, but dream rather of Jollity than Judgment, put off the evill day when it approa∣ches, and dance upon the threshold when ven∣geance knocks at the gate? Shall we expell all dread? And stand in awe of no peril, though smoke and fire predict otherwise? In the great∣est tempest drunk, intoxicated against all dan∣gers? And not put on our armour, when the Triumpet sounds away to the march? Do we receive all warnings sitting? our repentance all lies in our ears. Attend to the cry, but not rise from our seats? nor change our posture, gesture, garb, nor countenance? The great God can't make us abate of the Clarissimo: We will lose nothing of the Prince shew our selves penitent; hear much, but moved with no∣thing: Let God declare what he will, we will declare no astonishment: Our proud hearts can't shrink up: Our stiff Limbs can't arise: Repentance or vengeance can scarce make us vail a hat, or leave a chair empty, or move from a degree, or fly out of a Porch or Belcony, Shop or Counting-house, as people terrified with the sense of sin, and danger. We must keep state and our wonted garb in our most religious work; & act the Prince even in repentance it self: we shew neither fear nor express en∣deavour; but sit till misery must cast us down
grovelling, or Judgment strike us down dead. Never was the Judge nigher to come, and ne∣ver less preparations for his coming. Christi∣stians have you not closets to mourn in? Or rather, do you not want hearts to mourn with∣all? How can Christ wipe tears from your eyes, if you never weep for his absence? Or come to answer your prayers, if you never pray for his coming? We are as stupid as if we had never seen any change, nor ever should: And sit still in a mindless security, notwithstanding the great and various turnings of the wheel of Divine providence, which calls aloud to mind that great work God is doing in the world, and to meet him by repentance, lest he suddain∣ly overturn and crush us in his wrath. Sure so great calamities never made so little impression on the hearts even of good men; as if God had given all over to a spirit of slumber. We put far from us the evil day, and are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. What a black and dreadfull cloud hangs over Christ's little flock, threatening no less than utter overthrow; at least speaking a loud alarum to the sleeping Bride, to call upon and awaken her head, her husband, he that keepeth Israel, that neither slumbers, nor sleeps? Yet how little is the Church of Christ in every place affected with this Imminent stroke, ready to light on all? while some grieve more for private losses, than publick abomi∣nations which provoke God to destroy us; others instead of being upon the guard, are helping to make the breach wider at which the
enemy may enter: Most quiet and at rest, sing∣ing a Requiem to themselves. This deadness, and deep security, when all things speak an approaching storm, as it evidences a great Judgment and spiritual Plague from God up∣on our spirits; so presages no less than remedi∣less ruine. What a dreadfull night of confusion and astonishment must be at hand, when such blackness without, deadness and security with∣in, and the only means to prevent destructi∣on seems to be laid aside, or at a stand? Be knit together in an entire affection. Readily One-ness of heart & endeavour. shew all mutual respects of Christian obser∣vance to each other on all occasions. Let not only your particular safety, but of the whole army of Saints be in your eye and care, to raise or keep them from falls. That Souldier which can see an enemy in fight with his bre∣thren, and not help them, makes it more easie for the enemy to slay himself at last: God would not keep him that cared not to keep his brother. Christians are the greatest losers these breaking times, who have lost so much of their love and charity. He is no true Israelite that is not ready to lift up the weary hands of Gods servants. Be kindly, charitably minded to, & lovingly con∣verse with your friends and neighbours, which are not yet so sensible of the just cause of their Humiliation; zealously excite them with your selves to be passionately affected with our sad state. Propagate, make a whole City propense to repentance: Let your believing God, beget
faith in others: Your standing up from your seats, excite others to rise; Your empty bowels provoke others to fast; your stript backs clothe others in Sack-cloth; your squalid demeanour set others upon the ash-heap; your moist eyes set others on weeping; your confessing lips stir those tongues that have been silent these many years; your making reparation for errors cause others to deface their memory of foul facts with opposite vertue; your mighty cries fill the land with ecchoes of Devotion; your turning from your evil ways change the steps of others from exorbitances; your purging your hands from violence procure oppression to ake in the joints of other mens fingers. Be exact in your street, as well as closet work. A defective as∣sistance is next to absolute carelesness. Every one should send in his supply, where all are in∣terested. A common danger calls for an u∣nanimous prevention. All the children of Is∣rael, and all the people went up, and came un∣to the house of God, and wept and sate there before the Lord and fasted, and offered burnt∣offerings and peace-offerings before the Lord Jud. 20. 26.. Thus be knit together as one man Jud. 20. 11.; call upon▪ and serve the Lord with one consent Zep. 3. 9.. So did Esther and her maidens; Mordecay and and all the Jews Est. 4. 10. &c.. Ezra, Nehemiah and all the peple gathered together as one man Ez. 8. &c. Ne. 8. 1. The Nneviles even from the greatest of them to the least Jon. 3. 5.. But we think the generality may be spared; so long as some are serious. A small company will suffice to do the Church
work, and preserve the land. If our own Ba∣bel must be raised, the whole earth can meet to build it. To worship our own calves the people can be gathered from Dan to Beersheba. When we fly about our own projects, the whole flock is upon the wing. The whole Kennel is raised, and on the full cry when we hunt our own game. There is a conspiracy, but it is in evil. We associate to exalt our own design: But to pacify God by mutual Cove∣nant, or turn by solemn league, here we are ill affected, and clear malignants. There are epidemical diseases, and reigning defections, but no such universal perfections, or conspi∣racy in that which is good. There are King∣dom's sins and scars, but not national graces and lustres; no, here we are in our several clas∣ses; divided into parts and partitions: There is a tumult in our humiliation; we repent by piece-meal and as it were in a distraction. We have several breasts and motions, orbs, and constellations. If one side of Gideon's fleece be wet, the other is dry. If there be light in Go∣shen, darkness is over all the land besides. Ra∣chel is fair, Leah bleer-eyed. If David dance before the Ark, Michal mocks. If some are sen∣sible, others are past feeling. If some lie grovel∣ling upon the ground, others stand upon their tiptoes. Our Church looks a squint; the land is splay-footed. Collateral winds, mutinous Souldiers, blowing against, turning our weap∣ons upon one another. O how sad in such a day, that when some are upon their knees, o∣thers
should be walking after their pleasures? When some are seeking God, others should be seeking their booties? when some are shedding of tears, others should be singing of catches? When some are fasting, others should be jun∣keting? some prostrating themselves to regain favour, others prosecuting their unregenerate desire? Some appeasing, others incensing. Some quenching the flame, others blowing up the coals? Some seeking to sheath the Sword, others drawing it further out of the Scabbard, and whetting the edge of it? Nay, our Devo∣tions are but designs for our own Society, not for the publick safety. We pray for strength∣ening our party, rather than restoring the King∣dom, and wrestle against one another, rather than with God for the peace of Jerusalem. We would fetch in Judgments rather than prevent them; and have fire brought down from Hea∣ven to consume our enemies, but we seek not to destroy his in our own bosomes. O what un∣clean beasts are there offered up for Sacrifice! What strange fire doth often burn upon the Al∣tar! We rather execrate, than pray; curse than cry. Our petitions smell of brimstone; they seem to be brands that come out of Tophet: Bullets, rather than bills; imprecations than prayers. Instead of just petitions, we insert our own distempered passions. We invent cri∣minal things that God is not offended at; a∣bout these exercise our zeal, rather than those sins, that sink states and convert Kingdoms. With the noise of our imaginary crimes, we stop that
of our personal, detestable, execrable sins. We endeavour to fetch over Heaven with a circum∣vention. We cry cunningly, artificially, by parts, and halves, but we can't speak out our proper sins, nor lance the wound to the bot∣tom, when we are begging balsome from Hea∣ven. We are the greatest impostures in our devotions: There is a craft in our prayers; we dissemble in our petitions, as well as in our practices, and in our prayers have the art of conveyance to slip in other mens sins, rather than our own. We make our selves so much work about others faith, that we are sel∣dom at leisure to regulate our own practice; and so have no way of stating our accounts with God, but by ballancing the excess of the one, against the defects of the other. 'Tis not seeing men have no religion, but one different from our own, that awakes our indignation. How many who are at odds upon a religious, can unite upon a vitious account; That mu∣tually denounce damnation to each other, with full accord combine in those practices which ascertain it to them both; as if they so much feared to have their prediction, that they would be each others, convoy to the land of darkness. Those that will not by no means meet at the Church, know not when to part at the Tavern; that will not jointly partake of the cup of the Lord, are yet very sociable at the cup of Devils and excessive debauches, which are a most accept∣able drink-offering to the infernal spirits. Ma∣ny, whose distant opinions fasten upon one a∣nother
the brand of Antichristianism, like Gog and Magog join against the holy City. We justle one another out of the narrow path that leads to life, but can hand in hand run our carrier in the broad way of destruction. We measure our religion, not so much by the op∣position it makes to our lusts, as to those whom we first make, and then call our enemies. We make it a part of our religion, to tear and mangle Christ's body, when heathen souldiers that crucifi'd him, thought his coat too good to be parted. O how can we expect our sacri∣fices should be accepted, till salted with love? and know no difference between party and par∣ty, but owne all as fellow-members, that are partakers of the influence of the head. The fa∣ther will not agree to answer the prayers of his Children that disagree: he will answer the re∣quests of one Child for, but not against another: first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift Mat. ▪ 23. 24.. To expect that God should answer our divided prayers, is to put a jeer on Omnipotency, & to charge the Almighty with inconsistency: It puts an absurdity on God in making him to please men; nay, an impossibility, to please all men. The divisions of our prayers, may cause some to suspect that God is divided to whom we pray, and in time occasion the world to believe there is no God at all, for God is but one, and not divided. He must frustrate (in specie) many prayers of some Christians, as he will be true to the principles of his own glo∣ry: How can he grant all our petitions, and be
God? We attempt unlawful means, to force the lord out of his way; and all, that man might not be proved false to his own Interest and be cried up and down for a Lyar. How many, with Jonah, pray backwards? who rather then he would be accounted a false prophet, cared not so much for the salvation of Nineveh, as for his own reputation. Every one that rides in a fiery Chariot, is not an Elias. How can this nation be secure, if we conceal one capital sin? One hainous crime unsuppres'd▪ may break out with a Generall destruction. O that this nation could but speak out, lament and deplore the grand and horrid guilts of the times, without reserva∣tion or partiality. That all our crimes with∣out diminution, retrusion, substraction, could be bewailed with one national yell. O that our teares might cement those breaches which our dissents made, and our separations widen. That there were an harmony in pious intentions: that what one builds, another might not pluck down; what one layes a foundation for, ano∣ther might not undermine. O when shall we agree indistinctively to procure a General par∣don? To make a dominion adress to Heaven to be acquitted and accepted? O when shall we be free of the Canaanite and Perizite? And have the Neuters, Libertines, Hypocrites, out of the Land? That the whole nation might ac∣cord together in a paciin service: that there might be an united dejection: that the whole Kingdome might offer as it were the same pro∣pitiatory sacrifice: that every heart and spirit
might have the same penitential impressions and expressions; that we might leave counterfeiting, falsifying, tergiversating: that we might pour out Hearts like water before the face of the Lord Lam. 2. 19.. That our sins might be drained forth to the last drop: that we might agree in conscience, in longings, as we do in country, in language; and in repentance, as we do in relati∣ons. O how powerful is a holy combination in devotion? Where the hazard is publick, 'tis time there be a publick union to eschew the per∣ril, that the whole nation put all their stock to∣gether to purchase a general pardon: that An∣gels may rejoice at our conversion, and God him∣self may look out at his Court-gate, and say, behold another Nineveh, this is the nation of penitentiall converts, I will spare it. Deeply take to heart; rouze up your spirits to a lively Mourning and weep∣ing. piercing sense of and sorrow for our sins, & Gods displeasure. Make an impartial account of, night and day lay open and bewail the crimes and miseries of the times; representing them in their hainous nature. O! our errors, heresies, divi∣sions, apostacies, contradictions, bitterness, malice, animosities, injustice, oppresion, per∣fidiousness, false-hood, covenant-breaking, hy∣pocrisie, neglect and contempt of Gods word and servants, prophanation of Sabbaths, pol∣lution of ordinances, abuse of mercies, stupidi∣ty, incorrigibleness under Judgments, pride, luxury, lasciviousness, bloody practices, dread∣ful oaths, horrid blasphemies, damnable here∣sies, impieties, and a deluge of prophaness dis∣gorged
from the mouth of hell among us, to the high dishonour of God, and shame of the blessed Gospel, require a Catholicon and com∣position of all penitentiall Judgments to purge these noxious humours out of this diseased bo∣dy. O what tears, what ejaculations can be bitter, or loud enough for us who are to lament, not partiall and imperfect repairs, but totall ruines, and vastations? That see the materi∣als of our Sion now reduced to dust and rub∣bish, who once saw it happily compacted, built together as a City at unity in it self. Bid a solemn adieu to all entertainments of joy and pleasure; make a strict inquisition; have a heart∣aking discussion. Consider what hath been done in the quaffing room, the bed of dal∣liance, the banqueting house, the counsel chamber, the Treasury, the Tribunal, the Par∣lour, the Shop, and the Street: Ransack all back roomes; search all blind corners; leave not a sin undiscovered, which conscience may ake under, and repentance can mortifie. O! for all the cries of our sins, and the calls of the Temple, the stings of guilt, and gripes of conscience, the scandal of our enemy, and the scourge of Hea∣ven, for the pattern at Bochim, the president at Mizpeh, for the example of Nineveh: Blush, and bleed, sigh and sob, wring and wail, help at an exigence; repent when there's nothing but repentance lett for an Antidote; repent truly, lest your repentance prove a scandal and curse; repent throughly, lest an unmortified sin frustrate the vertue of your humiliation; repent timely,
lest not knowing the time of your visitation, the blessing you wish for, be hid from your eyes. O! the nation looks pale, fetch blood in∣to her cheekes by your pity; It shakes, let your hearts prop her up with your pititions; Is sick unto death, cure her with your convertion: your buildings are loose upon the foundation, groundsell them by mortification: your goods are ready to be sacrificed to vengeance, bring forth your sin-offering, before the sparkes have taken fire. Sigh in the temple that you do not sob in the streets. Groan in your closets, that you do not roar in the fields. Wash your Cities in teares, that they be not drenched in blood. Be zealous, to free you from flames; penitent, to prevent ruine; serious solemn converts, fervent petitioners, for so great a Benefit▪ Wear sackcloth, lest you go naked: fast, lest you starve: sit upon the Ash-heap, lest you be brought to an Ash-heap: creep upon your knees, lest you creep into corners: shut up your selves in your closets, lest you be shut into dungeons: fly to Heaven, lest you fly out of the land: con∣fess your sins, lest justice read the bill to your faces: condemn your selves, lest you be senten∣ced without reprieve. Look on your errors with passions: be humbled with conflicts: repent with agonies: appease with fire: reconcile with ropes: weep with torrents: pray with shriekes: cleanse with nitre, attend at the court of au∣dience: lay it out at Gods judgment seat: wash in Jordan, till the Leprosie be departed: wrestle with the Angel, till obtained the blessing.
Leave not one grievance in Heaven to prosecute you; not one injurie on Earth to accurse you. B perfectly renew'd, that you may be perfectly secur'd. 'Tis a great people, and how many sins are there to be expiated? What a great trespass∣offering must there be made for it? What great penitents must there be to preserve it? What great affections, care and pity ought we to use for it? O wail and howl, go stript and naked, making a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls Mic. 1. 8.. Roll your selves in the dust, lest your wound be incurable. Let there be a great mourning in England, as the mourning of Hada∣drimmon in the valley of Megiddon; every fami∣ly a part, and every person a part Zec. 12. 12.. Lift up your voices and weep untill you have no more power to weep 1 Sa. . . Let the priests Re. 1. 6. and ministers of the Lord weep between the porch and the altar Joe. 2. 17.. Rent your clothes; go up to the house of the Lord cover'd with sackcloth; spread your case before him, and lift up your prayers for the remnant that are left 2 Kin. 19 1. &c.. When Nehemiah Neh. 1. 4. & . 2. heard of the peoples great aflicti∣on, he sat down and wept and mourned certain dayes, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven; and aflicted himself with such vehe∣mency, that his Prince he waited on, observed the anguish o his spirit which looked out of his eyes, and left a mark of sorrow upon his very countenance. He prefer'd Jerusalem before his cheif joy; and felt the cords of the Chruch's afliction through a bed of doun on which him∣self lay, Oh Compunction! whither art thou
fled? O contrition! where shall we find thee? Broken hearts! where shall we feel you? Trick∣ling eyes! where shall we see you? Penitent petitioners! where shall we hear you? O! where is the Kingdom's scout? The Citie's re∣membrancer? The nations sollicitor? Where are the Christian bosomes and bowels, groanes and cries? O, that we could purifie by water; that repentance had not lost her Laver; that our hearts were not made gross; that we were nor turned into pure adamant; that we were not brass and iron! But there's a sad indication of it; here are sins enough to bring down a tempest, to make every trespasser an Heraclitus and the whole Church a Nobe; Alas Alas, might be the tone of the streets, a national wailing might be heard from one end of it to another. But our Hearts seem to have their old fore-skins; they have not yet smarted under the cir∣cumcising-knife. A great drought seemes to be among us; our land is turned into powder, and dust; for the cloud is not rent under us: The unclean spirit here walks in dry places; in∣deed, he hath taken away our terrours and our teares too; the water courses of repentance are stopped. O where is that Key of Elah, that should unlock those clouds? Where is that Moses's rod, which should fetch water out of those rocks? We should weep abundantly, but our hearts are not so soft as to distill or melt into sorrow. Our eares do not tingle; our eye-lids are not sore; we do not seek after the Lord la∣menting, we do not bow down heavily: the
cry of Jerusalem doth not go up; we look upon our guilts without remorse; we feel our errors with indolency; our sins can strike no teares out of our eyes; we are sinfull but not weeping Nineveh: how few can prove, themselves con∣verts, by their penitent eyes? Or bruised un∣der our sins, by their broken hearts? We have many rivers in this nation, and yet we are a dry island: many crying inhabitants, but few weep∣ing penitents. The flame may here rage, for we have no water: the top of Carmel may wither, for the springs are dryed up. We are bruised in the temple, yet little moisture is drawn from us: the minister often turnes the cock, but the pipes are empty; no water runs forth. Jonah cry's passionatly, yet cannot raise up the mour∣ners to sigh with the breaking of their loines, that judgment might not break the bones of this nation; to take up a wailing to prevent a Kingdome from crying it self dead. The whole nation may perish for want of mourners. The songs of the temple may be turned into howlings, for there is none to wail for the abo∣minations of the times. We are asleep in Da∣lilah's lap when the Philistins are upon us: at ease in Sion, when the gates of it are ready to la∣ment. We have braines and armes, service and sedulity enough for other things; but here we have neither pregnancy nor prowess. We would preserve a nation, only by looking on it, or talking of it, or putting up a formall motion for it. We walk our streets, and discern no breaches in them: we gaze upon our walls, and
behold not their sides cracking. We are blind in seeing our sins, and stupid in feeling their judg∣ments: as if we cared not to have this pile of wonder pulled down, this bright Diadem shivered in pieces. All nations admire it, and we only slight and neglect it. This nation walls∣in rechless inhabitants; feeds unthankfull guests; holds out her breasts to unnatural children, that are neither affectionate for her welfare, nor compassionate over her ruine. Yet forty dayes and Nineveh shall be destroyed; let it be destroyed, for we do not keep it from sinking. Were there here such a Jonah, there would not be such Ninevites. What do we at the cry? How are we frighted at the threatening? It is a great people, but what great insensibleness indolency, indevotion? We think to support a great Kingdome without laying both shoul∣ders to it; or calling forth the two master∣workmen, body & soul, to do their utmost for her preservation. We go in the beaten road; & sail in the ordinary current; we fight with the old du∣geon dagger, and build after the old fashion. We have nothing but customary wonts, and com∣mon usages; we do not exceed, nor transcend. There is no Praestancy to be discerned. The flood of repentance▪ comes not in with a spring tide. Our repentance begins and ends, without any e∣gregious thing in it, to draw the observing eye of the world to look upon us with admiration, or set the whole world in a gaze at the behold∣ing us. No adorning stamps, no beautifying prints are to be seen here. We desire to have
every thing else about us choice, neat, and splendid: were repentance our garment, how should it be embroidered? Were it our picture, how should it be limned? Were it our China piece, how should it be ingraven? were it our palfrey, how should it be trapped? Were it our linnen, our house, how should it be washed, rubbed, and adorned? Only our repentance is abject, despicable and sordid. How doth our art most fail us in that, which should most ho∣nour us, and eternally bless us? Can we own it? Or wil God accept of it? Or is he not ready to condemn it for our sin? And to judge us as well for a hypocritical conversion, as for an irreligious conversation? O superficiall pa∣cification! Is this enough to mitigate an aveng∣ing God? To unsnare, to extricate a great people? Will not Judgment denounced, quicken you to sincerity? May you not be surpriz'd in your offering to God a counterfeit devotion? Will you dissemble to the last? And jeopard the ru∣ine of a whole nation, in your outside cleansing? How far can you imagine you are off from the collision of Justice? Every corner of your King∣dome seems to tremble under the voice of a threatening God: Vengeance is awakened with the noise of your sins: The Heavens are of∣fnded with you: The earth seems to rise up in tumult against you: Most defie you, few pity you: Many consult sad things concerning you, and would fain be stretching out their hands to shake and shiver you. You have enemies with∣in your walls, and your own consciences: How can you oppose such irresistable forces? Policy
may invent many expedients for security, but the preservative is only that of repentance, to prevent a general overthrow, to wash away with tears, what we have deserved from a pro∣voked God. O shall we ever see a general con∣version? nothing but that will attone the Al∣mighty. All by-contrivements, are but sinister drifs and bents. O when will men leave their seats of honour, and apply themselves to Sack∣cloth, and ashes, mighty cries, and turnings from their evil ways, and from the violence of their hands? Among us are some penitents, but how few Ninevites? Are there any alive to God? But how many dead carcases do we walk among? O that we were drawing out to the life Repenting Nineveb in orient colours! That instead of buildings and bulwarks, stately houses, and hoards of treasure, and heaps of amunition, there were but repentance! that in∣stead of our raptures and priviledges, revela∣tions, and curious languages, there were but repentance! that our congregations were so purified, and our Churches so Sanctified, that they might afford such Professors, such Saints, as might be able to bless a Church and save a nation by repentance! But 'tis to be feared that this is but a nation of desires, and that every stone in this City may sooner be altered, and new laid, than mens minds and consciences. In what a forwardness is this great work? Nay, is not the first stone for the generality yet to be laid? Men have not learn'd Nineveh's initiating, much less her compleating graces: We are not yet
come to her dejections, trepidations, percus∣sions, astonishments, paroxisms of conflicts, gravitoned accents of prayer. We nourish the flesh, catch at the world, follow modes, tem∣porize with changes, and leave perils and Judgments to the chance and venter. Happen what will, we have not so much as a wrinkled brow, or a trembling brest. Mirth is now as unsuitable, as Silver Lace on a mourning Suite. A true penitent should be the troubled crea∣ture of his age. He is brought to the Altar, and would even make a Sacrifice of himself. He seems to have no more life left in him, but to vent out his own anxiety. The sight of sin daunts, yea exanimates him. The Sun seems not to shine upon the day of his Humiliation; nothing to be discern'd but a cloudy sky, a black Eclipse, dark mists, tempest, and thunder: It pierces, pinches, grinds the heart, soakes the eye: contrition is full of collisions and convulsions, rough waves, and rushing sourges, sparkling, scalding bosome shrillings, and eye droppings. He is a strange penitent, that doth not change countenance, that hath not every heart-string aking. It would astonish one that among so many celestiall shews, there should be so little Heaven, that the Devil should be lurking a∣mong so many Angelical reformers. There is some appearance of religion, but what repentance? or if repentance is it that of Nineveh? Angels tongues but the hearts of beasts. The earth ne∣ver saw greater provocations to overthrow us, but is there so great propitiations in us to have
us spared? In what a dangerous deplorable state are we? Full of stupendious sins, yet full of stupid impenitency: A professing people, yet how far from evangelical purity: A corrupt but far from a contrite nation. Was there ever more need to lie in Sack-cloth, than now? this City hath lain in ashes: To shed tears, Than when we have lost so much bloud? O! how may our walls shake, and every heart be daunt∣ed, expecting some unexemplified Judgment for our enormous crimes? Will God be alwaies dared with challenging trespasses? Or mocked with formalities? Will the noise of gospelling tongues, and sound of Sermon-bells, be able to pacifie an incensed God? Or a few super∣ficial specious pretences, satisfie the strict ex∣amination? 'Tis not our prowess, nor profes∣sion, our formidable chivalry, nor formal re∣ligion but repentance onely, that will privi∣ledge, protect, and shelter us. He may seise upon us in our streets, where we are defying him in our full strength. Or take us at the Church where we are deluding him (perhaps) with our Temple cheats. He may send a flood in midst of our quaffings and dalliances; or fire from Heaven, when the Sun shines bright in our streets. A great cry may be heard at mid-night, when we are not suspecting the slaughter of the first born. The avenger of bloud, may pur∣sue and pluck us out of the City of refuge: yea, God may slay us, while we are laying hold of the horns of the Altar. He may demolish all our fortresses, and our places of oblation be made
a Sacrifice to the justice of a provoked God; for that our hearts are as fat as brawn, as hard as the nether mil-stone, at ease in Sion, settled upon our lees, and frozen in our dregs: our eyes are blind, our eares uncircumcised, our consciences seared with an hot Iron: we answer not crimes, with cryes; nor provocations, with vexations; we will perish in our steely and flinty condition. Shall the childrens bread be cast unto dogs? Shall God feed the secure, with the dainties of the perplexed? There are no plasters, but for smarting wounds: no wine, but for the sorrow∣full: no breast of consolation, but for the cry∣ing children; nor garments of beauty, but for the spirit of heaviness. God lights up his can∣dle to none, but those that sit in darkness: nor casts out his anchor to any, but where sensible the ship cracks, and is ready to sink. He lifts up only the hand that hangs down, and strengthens only the weak knees; he holds only the aking head, and wipes only the bloubered cheekes; he binds up only the broken heart, and sheds consolation in their breasts, which recount their sins in bitterness of soul. Pa∣radice is promised only to the penitent thief. The distressed Publican only, departs out of the temple justified. And the Golden Thau is set only upon the foreheads of the mourners of Jeru∣salem. I summon, adjure, and beseech you bethren, by all the worth your names are imbellished Fasting and prayer. with; by all the sincerity you seem to have
reserved out of the defection and distraction of the times; by all the love you pretend to our Chruch and state: if you have any remnant of grace, any reverence, or regard to God and his command, Ps. 122. 6. any sense of sin, any dread of a confounding majesty, any charity for an un∣done nation, if any gratitude for your hitherto health and safety, or desire of future comfort, by considering how you sat down and wept when you rememberd Sion Ps. 137. , and that your unmindful uncompassionateness hath not occa∣sion'd our miseries; if any fellow-feeling as members of the same body; or care to imploy the gifts of the spirit, according to the mind and intent of the Donor 1 Cor. 12 7., or when the Lord shall arise and have mercy on Sion, you would be call'd to pertake of her comfort, Rejoyce ye with Jerusalem and be glad with her, all ye that mourn for her Is. 66. 10.: Even for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the spirit, that you strive together with me in the prayers to God for this Church and people Ro. 15. 30.. That it would please him at the last to look upon us with a favourable countenance, and cease from heavy displeasure. The spirit of prayer is a publick treasure, though laid up in some few hands, distinguished from the vulgar, not by empty names and aie ti∣tles, but real donatives; distributed to them by God as so many distinct advantages, and ∣ties, towards the bringing him in his expected harvest of honour and glory: nor can he pray or be heard for himself, that is no mans friend but his own; no prayer without faith, no faith
without charity, no charity without mutua intercession. God forbid that I should sin a∣gainst the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you 1 Sam. 12 23.: for I am bound to do it alwaies for you; I thank God, that without ceasing, I have remem∣brance of you in my prayers night & day 2 Th. 1. 3. 1 Th. 1. 2. 2 Tim. 1. 3.. If I forget thee, O London, Let my right hand forget her cunning: if I do not remember thee O England, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy Ps. 137. 5. 6.. Save Lord, or we perish. O that all who are concern'd in the grant of that petition, would qualifie themselves to present it, vigorously undertake this pious work! that God who hears not sinners, may yet hear them. O let no Moses's hand ever wax heavy, but be alwaies lifted up in a devout importunity: tran∣scribe that holy oratory, he so often effectually used; plead to God his own cause, what wilt thou do to thy great name? And when there's nothing in us can pretend to any thing but ven∣geance, ransack his bosome, rifle his own bow∣els for arguments of compassion; repeat to him his own titles Ex. 34: 6. 7., and by those sollicit, yea conjure him to pity. O! cry passionatly, im∣portunatly, mightily; give your selves unto prayer Ps. 109. 4.; never hold your peace day nor night ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not si∣lence, and give him no rest, till he establish Eng∣land, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth Is. 62. 6. 7.. Let your prayers be doubled and tri∣pled, arise higher & higher as the flouds of waters are increased. Being in an agony, he prayed more
earnestly; and his sweat was as it were great drops of bloud falling down to the ground Luk. 22. 44., who in the dayes of his flesh offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and teares unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared He. 5. 7.. O how great an ardency is requir'd to this intercession? What strong cries must they be, that shall drown so loud a clamour of impieties? How doth it reproach the slightness of our sleepy heartless addreses? Can we think to bind the Almightie's hands with withs and strawes? To arrest his vengeance with such faint and feeble assaults? When nature and danger suggest to heathen Nineveh, not onely to cry, but to cry mightily unto God; shall the super-addition of our religion damp ours into a whisper, a soft unaudible sound? No small tempest hath long lain upon us; neither Sun nor Stars in many dayes and yeares appearing Act 17. 20.. Nothing but black and dismal portents of a finall wreck, to a poor weather-beaten Church and people: Is it not time to learn so much of instruction from the waves that toss us, as to make our prayers keep pace with them, in swift uninterrupted successions, in loud and not to be resisted vio∣lence? A storm will teach the prophane mari∣ner to pray in earnest. And though the sky how ever black with clouds, carry no thunder in it; though the impetuous winds that blow from every quarter, should not break out in tempest, and bring ship-wrack to us; yet the wicked are likethe troubled Sea that cannot rest:
We have within us a principle of ruine, which can operate, though nothing from without ex∣cite it. A tempest is not alwaies necessary to sink a ship, one treacherous leak may do it in the greatest calm; and what security can there be to our torn vessel, whose rents, our continual divisions, and prodigious crimes, still keep o∣pen and widen? O Christian! canst thou sit still in such a season? Is the Church and King∣dom priviledges and liberties nothing? which beg and crie unto thee, if thou canst do any thing come and help us? If thou hast no sense of the deso∣lations of England, no pity to see Sion lie in the dust; but still cherishest those im∣pieties which brought her thither, even they at least will avenge her quarrel, bring thee those miseries, the sense whereof shall be impossible for thee to avoid, or extinguish. Think not with thy self that thou shalt escape more than all the people; for if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, and be silent, when so much need of prayer for a perishing nation, then shall there enlargment and deliverance a∣rise to the Saints from another place; God will bring about his purposes of mercy some other way without thee, but thy self can expect no∣thing but destruction, thou and thy fathers house, thou and thy family shall smart for it, be destroyed: And who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom, reserved for such a time s this t. . 13, 14.? that this Island England should be delivered by the pureness of thy hands J. 22. 30.? that thou maist have the honour to be the Sa∣viour
of thy Country? God seeks at such a time as this, for a man among you that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before him for the land, that he should not destroy it Je. 5. 1. Ez. 22. 30. 31.. Perhaps thou (or none) art the man, and if he find not thee, he will pour out his indigna∣tion upon us, and consume us with the fire of his wrath. It may be there wants of the num∣ber that should prevail with God; who knows what one more may do as to the turning of the scale? And art thou fast asleep in thy own cabin on the side of the ship, which is ready to be bro∣ken in this mighty tempest? For ought I know, for thy sake this evil is come upon us; carest thou not that we perish? Yea thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God Job. 15. 4.. The A∣thenians inquiring at the Oracle of Apllo, why their plagues continued so long, were answered, they must double their Sacrifices: nothing more dangerous than a plodding formality, we may as well betray Christ with a tear as Judas did with a kiss, Lachrymae mentiri doctae. May he not send us to flames below, that only mock him in ashes here? God so delights in the prayers of the upright, that when their devotion is slack and cold, he sometimes brings publick Judgments on a nation, on purpose to alarum, rouze, a∣waken, and kindle their droe spirits, that he may oftener hear the melody o their voice by earnest importunate prayer, which is sweet, and see their countenance, which is comly, which when effected, they have done their errand, and accomplish'd their end. What meanest thou
O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us that we perish not Jon. 1. 4. &c.. For the Lords sake, lend a hand to a sinking nation, double your devotion; be much, be mighty in prayer; put coals to the incense Lev. 16. 13., bring your censer, and step in, that the wrath of the great God may be appeased. O weep and make supplication Ho. 12. 4.: Stir up your selves to take hold of God Is 4. .: Wrestle with him in his own strenhtg: Resolve not to let him go untill he bless us. O stand up in our defence: open the right Arcenal: bring forth your right artillery: make use of your proper weapons: appear in your compleat armour on the right hand and on the left: quit your selves like men in fighting this battle. The stout hearts, and bright armour I call for, are suppli∣cating hands, the compleat armour of righte∣ousness, the Captains and Souldiers are Inter∣cessors, and Advocates: not field but Temple amunition; not camp but closet ordnance. And O! that I could gather these companies together, summon in all the trained bands; see them all stand in battle array; their hearts edged with repentance; their tongues sharpened with de∣votion: that the ranks of converts would dis∣charge and pierc the air with these darts, a∣waken heaven with this gun-shot, and even conquer God with this artillery, and make the spear drop out of his hand, pluck down his standard, unhaness the Lord of Hosts, draw him to a treaty, and get him sign to Articles of peace. There is not any better countermine to
all our outrages acted upon earth, than by ma∣king them reverberate in our cries and prayers. O with a holy importunate impudence besiege and lie at the Throne of grace, till you she Heaven the Throne of God under him▪ & God in it, that Heaven may suffer violence, and the violent take it by force. Overcome him to be appeased. Go up to him with a trembling heart, as not knowing whether the place and people be not past reconciliation; peradventure I shall make an attonement for your sins. Rather than not come away with the pardon in your hand, offer to be slain at his foot to save so many alive, to be sacrificed your selves, to re∣deem such a goodly place from an exigence: yea, to have your names and persons razed out of the land of the living, rather than the land of England should be expunged; yet now if thou wilt forgive their sins, it not, blot me I pray thee out of the book thou hast written. Religious inhabitants! you now see what a great task you are to undertake, that you had need lay to your whole strength, to bring forth a right, a happy people. If you fail in this work, the nation is past remedy. Either plead earnest∣ly or the cause is lost; administer the best physick or the patient dyes. God is ready to shoot and fight, to bring up his front and main battle a∣gainst us, but where is reformation to latch ar∣rows? To break in pieces speares? To meet the vanquishers in their march? and to carry an army of Judgments out of a nation? Go then, gather your selves together, all that are present in
the land: see how many true Ninevites are among you: let them stand apart: look to your qualifi∣cations: examine the compleatness of your num∣ber; the perfection of your gifts and graces: con∣sider, and correct; cry and cleanse; weep and reforme. As ever you would seem to have rifled your own hearts; to have dissected your own consciences; to have sent the intelli∣gencer into the land; to have heard the cries of your abominations at Gods jugment seat; to have seen the armies that are raised on Earth to assault it: O set the the whole Kingdome before you: think upon it with dismayed, perplexed hearts: look upon it with weeping eyes: glow towards it with inflamed zeal: let your vigi∣lancy be quick-sighted; your dread dismaying; your solicitousness anxious; your dejection abased; your meditation vehement; your re∣formation twice vigorous; your contrition grinding. Turn aside to bemoan apparent pe∣rils: fall upon your knees, to mitigate deserved vengeance: make an experiment of your own contrition: ry, how you can humble your selves, to keep your country from curse and confusion: cut off your own fore-skins, and doe your best to circumcise others: rent your own hearts, and make a wound in your brethrens, till the bloud come. O Bring forth all the water in your heads to extinguish wrath: kindle all the fire in your lips, to put a heat into congealed pity: stretch ou all the manacles in your hands to chain such an adversary. Fast, as if you de∣deserved not to eat bread, till your Kingdome
be in safety. Weep, as if you had not teares e∣nough in your eyes to lament the aflicted state of your nation. Pray, as if you would not rise up from your knees, till you have procured peace for it in Heaven. Reform, as if you would not leave a guilt behind to curse it. O! fly from all honour: condemn all honours: be strangers for a time to your own chaires▪ kitchings, ward∣robes, cellars, porches, galleries, cattle. Con∣verse rather with ashes than thrones; sackcloth, than tissues; biting hunger, than sumptuous banquets; bitter cries, than musicall instru∣ments. O think not of the world, think upon Judgment: mind not preferment, mind attone∣ment: look not upon the splendor of the King∣dom, look upon the horror of it: eye not your guardians, eye your enemy. Carry the threaten∣ings of Gods law in your eares, and the peril of your country in your breasts. Let your hearts ake, and your lips quiver. So long as people are settled upon their les, think that there is some emptying of the vessell at hand: when you are laid in your beds, suppose, that a punishing God may awaken you: when you are at your feasts, that vengeance may bring in the voider: when your are selling your wares, that your lst burgains are even making: when your are telling over your thousands, that you are but pursing up for a new receiver: when you are looking out at your doors, that you are ready to be pluckt over your thresh∣hold: when you are coming from your temple, that their doors are nigh locking up. Expect e∣very hour when your bells should ring Awake:
when a skrcek Trumpet should be blown in the streets: when you may inquire for a Gate to sigh at, and find none, or seek for a Pillar to shed tears at, and not one left standing: when nothing shall be heard among you, but tumults and distractions, wailings, and cryings▪ Alas▪ Alas! Would you hun this? can you prevent it? Then you must not only remember the nation in your morning and evening devotion; but consider how low you must stop; what abjects you must turn; what meditations you must use; what castigations you must endure; what strange backs and bellies, loathings and lamentings, debtings and debsings; cleans∣ings o consciences and estates▪ reformings and translatings; separated daies of solemn prayer; all the decrees of violence and ear∣nest addresses; fasting and prayer; almes and prayer; act of repentance and prayer; prayer alone, and together with united hearts there must be, e're the breach be repaired. You must be all vigour and vehemency, dejection and devotion, solicitousness and sorrow, con∣flict and conversion, satisfaction and sacrifice, prostration and propitiation, reconciliatio-and reformation, soul and solemnity in so im∣portant a work. O the must be strong phy¦sick taken, to recover such a patient: a potent friend employed to get such a condemned male∣factor reprieved: Princly persons to anticipate or repell vengeance lifting up her hand to strike: great fasting n mourning, weeping and wail∣ing; many lying in Sackcloth and ashes, for
reversing the bloody decree (x). O they must  Ist.  be Prime Penitents which are engaged in this peerless duty: they must sit upon Nineveh's Ash∣heap; mcrate themselves with Nineveh's Fast; drench our streets with Nineveh's tears; they must have Nineveh's plaister to heal their fster∣ing wound; Nineveh's solicitor, to procure peace in this Court; they must polish their Diamond with Nineveh's Fire, to make it give the true lustre; they must write out their repentance in Nineve's capital letters, to have it legible in Gods eye. And O that you stood upon equal number, that you were but the third, the twen∣tieth, the fifith, the hundreth part of the na∣tion; that there were but a common Hall of you; that you did but equal the number of your Of∣ficers and watches; that your sorrowfull accents might pierce the skies; that the skrks of the mourners might awaken Heaven; that there were but enough to take the frowns out of Gods forehead; the menaces out of Gods cheeks; to reard Gods f, to bind his hands; to put audience into his ears; compassion into his bowels; reconciliation into his breast, pity into his eyes, pardon into his lips; to keep his Trum∣pet from our gates, and his Troopers out of our streets! If there be a number among you which hath Nineveh's art, they may have Nineveh's success; they may bury all fears in the ash-heap, and shift off all miseries into the Sack∣cloth; fast away all perils; and pray away all Judgments. God would pity, would you but soften the bowels of his compassion; he would
spare, would you but prepare for mercy; God will not turn upon us with fury, if these turn from their evil waies; nor stretch out his aveng∣ing hand, if these forsake the violence of theirs. Who can tell if God will repent and turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not. These penitents may send word to Heaven, that God may forbear smiting, for they have smit∣ten themselves with repentance. They may conveigh news to all their enemies upon earth, that they may stay at home, for repent∣ance hath reared them up walis higher than the clouds, which no sealing ladders can reach; and mounted ordnaces for them upon their Towers and Fortresses, which shoot assailants to death further than the spires of their stee∣ples can be seen; yea, dispatch away messengers to all plagues and Judgments, that they are not to come nigh to our Kingdom, for repentance hath gotten a warrant of remove to carry and conveigh them out of the land. Do you thus re∣pent and plead, and you are as safe as Nineveh: God will be your pleader, and against all your adversaries ▪were it Jonah himself) multiply rea∣sons for your preservation. He will draw pity towards you from the most flinty heart. How∣ever his own breast will flow with compassion; you shall be pretious in his eyes; he will forget nothing that may be an incentive for sparing: Should not I spare Nineveh, that great City, wherein are more than six millions of persons, which can't discern between the right hand & the left, and also much attle.
But we rather express our Judgment than our The pre∣valency f repentance & prayer. Resentment, and make it more our discourse, than our concerne, as to the frequency and ar∣dency of our humiliations and intercessions. Our own private interests have been much apter to excite our devotions. Our Resentments have not been proportionable for that which is much bet∣ter than our selves. Our Imminent present dan∣gers haue not as much awakened our fervour, gi∣ven as sharp & piercing an accent to our prayers. We fall short of what we should, and might do towards our rescue. We look for favours without asking, and mighty comforts without mighty cries. We shake not the tree that the fruit might fall: We unlock not the treasury that we might carry home handfulls of Bounty. God enclines to an amiable countenance, but there is none to intreat his face: he offers em∣braces but there's none to spread out hands to Heaven: he is ready to redress misery but there's none to pour out a complaint. He would preserve us as happy creatures, but there's none to speak good for the people. There is an Altar but the Sa∣crifice doth not flame upon it. There are gold∣en censors, but the odors do not steam out of them. God listens, and none cries: He sits in his Court of audience, but none make addres∣ses to him. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it Ps. 81. 10., but we would have it filled without opening If thou wouldst seek unto God be∣times, and make thy supplication to the Al∣mighty: If thou wert pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness to prosper Job. .
But we would have God to awaken, without calling him up; and the habitation to prosper without building it up with devotion. We have sapless services: our lips and Gods ear are at a great distance. We would have mercy, but we do not set our faces unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplication, with fasting, & sackcloth, and ashes Da. 9. .: we perish by silence: zeal seems to be at the last gasp, and giving up the Ghost, for there is nobreathing out of the cry a. 3. 6. There are no such gusts come out of our lips, as formerly, which were wont to shake the roofes of temples. We rather live by our poli∣cies, our brames, than by our petitions, our tongues: we project, contrive, const, conse∣derate mightily, but we do not cry mightily. We have houses without noise, Churches without orisons, closets without lamentations, weep∣ings, and waing. Wsh for pearls, with∣out this dr would break open the castle, with∣out setting th p to the gate of it. We have much r and indigency, but little ferven∣cy. We scarce consider the project of our re∣quests, our petitions might be taken up for tryes: we are not intent, but deviating and ssant in our prayers. Very drowsi devoti∣ons come from , most of our petitions are in Gods account but wast paper, and at the last day shall never be seen hung on the file in Heaven. The intercession of our Lord Jesus is a confer of gold, and can we desire him to offer up our drowsie prayers for incense? Or expect, they should speed, that are neither worded by the scripture, indited by the spirit, nor subscribed
by a bleeding heart. Our prayers upbraid our spi∣rits, when we beg codly for those things, for which we ought to die. We are more rechless than the most indevout: our prayers shew what an oitant, and orplent people we are; for, we must carry all at the  charge, or we lay down our weapons: we do not rally our forces, and renew the fight. O! what light skirmishes do we use? How do we retreat up∣on the first Justs? We do not hold up our hands till they be weary with Mses; nor with Jcb, wrestle till we obtain the blessing. We may be sent away with a repulse, for we pierce but faintly; and smitten dead with curses, for we avert judgments in a very languishing manner. O that devotion were but articulate! that re∣pentance could but open her lips! and the peni∣tent draw up all his desires in this short Enthy∣mm! what wonders might he work? God repented that he made man, and resolv'd to de∣stroy him from the face of the Earth, yet when Noah built an altar, and prayd to him, he smelt a savour of rest and said, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake Ge. 8. 20. 21. He was once so displeased with his people, that he said flatly, I will deliver you no more▪ yet when they ask∣ed a deliverer of him, his soul was grieved for their misery and gave them Jphthah Jud. 10. 13 & .. Prayer is the pnitent's bom▪ his chief antidote, his principal engine▪ the belt musick in God ear. It hath been the prop, protection, promotion of the saints in all extremities. When nothing could relieve, prayer hath comforted, when
nothing could assist, prayer hath supplyed. O how hath prayer calmed the tempest of a trou∣bled mind? Put songs into the mourners lips? acquitted the guilty? justified the sinner? set the face whereby the soul might look right upon God? carryed it with boldness to the throne of grace? sent up sweet odours into God's nostrils? How many have filed of the fetters of their sins, escaped out of the keepers hands, shut up the mouth of hell, stood spotless among the pure and bright spirits, stilled the noise of thunder at God's judgment seat, unlocked all the chests in God's treasury, frighted devils, exhilarated an∣gels, cancelled bonds, cast inditements out of the court, compremis'd differences, reconcil'd mortal adversaries, cured phrensies, eased con∣flicts, filled the breasts of disconsolate souls with extasies, fetched pensions out of Gods exche∣quer, drawn the signet off his right hand to seal Church grants to the faithfull, by the benefit of prayer? When cities of refuge, the hornes of the Altar were never so secure. And what shall I more say, for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Deborah, and of Barac, and of Sampson, and of Jephtha, and of Hannah, and of Esther, and of Abraham, and of Jacob, and of Lot, and of Moses, and of Jo∣shuah, and of David, and of Solomon, and of Hezekiah, and of Job, and of Samuel, and of Jehoshaphat, and of the Prophets, and Apostles, who through faith and prayer subdued Kingdoms Ios. 12. 1.; wrought righteousness 2 Ch. 7. 11; obtained pro∣mises Heb. 11.; stopped the mouths of lions Iu. 14. 6. 1 Sa. 17. 35;
quenched the violence of fire Da. 3. 17. 25.; escaped the edge of the sword; out of weakness were made strong 2 K. 20. 7.; waxed valiant in fight 1 Sa. 17. 32. 45 &c.; turned to flight the armies of the aliens 1 Sa. 7. 9. &c. 2 Ch. 14. 11 12. Ex 17. 11. 2 K. 17. 14. &c.; prevented Ex. 33. 11 &c. Ge. 19. 21 and removed Judgments Ex. 8 9. 2. 4. 25.▪; opened the womb 1 S. 1. 1 &c, the grave Io. 11. 4 &c, the prison Ac. 12. 5 &cs, and Heaven it self Ia. 5. 17. 18.; divided 2 Kin. 2. 14., and healed the waters Ex. 15. 25; stayed Jos. 10. 12 14., and turned back the Sun Is. 38. 8.; fetched down fire from Heaven 1 Kin. 18. 36., and water out of the rock Ex. 17. 4. 6.; infatuated 2 . 15. 31.▪ wound∣ed 2 Kin. 6. 18., destroy'd their enemies 2 Kin. 2. 22. 24., and turned their wrath and fury into love and amity Ge. 32. 9. &c.; unlocked such secrets as past the skill of the de∣vil himself Da. 2. 1. &c.; obtained wisdome 1 Kin. 3. 9 Ja. 1. 5., pardon u. 18. 13., and Heaven Lu. 23. 42. 43.; cast out Ac. 16. 16 &c., and van∣quished the Devil 1 C. 12. .; removed diseases Ac. 3. 6. 7.; prolonged life Is. 38. .; raised the dead 1 Kin. 17. 20.; de∣livered from the belly of Hell Jon. 3. 2., and was translated into Heaven Heb. 11. 5.. When God is re∣solv'd on a nations ruine, he shuts out their peti∣tions, denies their ambassadour audience, and will not suffer his favorite prayer to speak with him: usually carries things so in his providence, that the prayers of his ser so loth is he to go against them) shall be ng: either removes his Lts into the mount, leaving not any conside∣rable number to stand in the gap▪ soe that no man (comparatively) stirreth up himself to take hold of God: or so withdrawes the breathings of his spirit in their hearts, that they are fallen into a stupour, benummedness and deep sleep, when the
ship is in greatest danger. He loves prayer for the sake of the advocate, who can do miracles, yet the nation may not be worthy to receive the blessing Ez. 14. 14. He often makes their intercession the condition of his mercy to others e. 20. 17. 18. Ex. 8. 9. in. 13. 6 Joh. . Jam. 5. 1.. Their wanted mercy may be stopped, while thy prayer goes not to Heaven for i. One saint may obtain that by prayer for us, which sometimes we can∣not by our own. Job. 42. 8.  4. 16. . 1 Col. . 3. . 1. 7. . 8. 2 Ch 18. 3. Act. 8. 4. . 14. 1. & 1. . 2 &. 26. . 1 &c. D. 3. 7.  Ps. 10. 17  Ps. 66. 0  Jam. 5. 16. Is. 65. .. Therefore not only good men in any great strait call in their help, to give a lift with them at this duty (s), but the wicked have solicited their prayers and company (t); as trusting to prosper better for their pre∣sence, and to find mercy for their sake more than their own. And when God intends to deliver a people, he drawes up their hearts to seek him (v), as the means to effect it (w). There∣fore, when he stirs us up to ask any thing, 'tis a good sign he intends to grant it: when he pre∣pares our hearts to pray, he will cause his ear to hear (x). When he doth not turn away our pray∣er, he will not turn away his mercy from us (y). Prayer rightly manag'd, was never deny'd (z) it shall rather work miracles, than return empty. The suit that's faithfully asked is already granted in Heaven. The spirit which searcheth the deep things of God 1 Cor. 2. 10. helps our infirmities, He must deny himself in denying those holy desires himself puts into our hearts. He saith not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain Is. 45. 19.. Never any came to his door that went away without an almes: as the word which goeth out his mouth, so that which goeth unto him, shall not return
void but prosper in the thing whereto it is sent Is. 55. 11.. He cannot deny us what our advocate hath purchased by his merit: whatsoever you shall ask the father in my name he will give it you Joh. 16 23.: such must prevail as have propriety in him: I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me Mich. . 7. Ps. 6. 8. 9.. One branch of the Covenant is to hear our prayers. He hath sealed and subscri∣bed several promises as so many blanks, giving us leave to write on them any desire we please Ps. 145. 18. Je. 3. 3. Mat. 21. 22. Jo. 16. 24. 1 Jo. 5. 14.. What flocking would there be to an earthly Prince that would grant any petition? I am the Lord their God and will hear them Zac. 1. 6.. If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my father which is in Hea∣ven Mat. 18. 19.. Ask me of things to come, concern∣ing my sons; and concerning the work of my hands, command ye me Is. 45. 11.. How much more prevalent is their importunity, than that of children with their indulgent Father Mat. 7. 11.? These Heavenly favourites have gained more for themselves and others gratis by a petition to their Prince at Court, in a morning, than many trades-men that work hard all their lives. There's a singular efficacy, potency, preva∣lency, I had almost said omnipotency in prayer. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much: How much the Apostle tells us not, that's left to God's grace and our own ex∣perience; but he adds an instance to confirm
the truth of the proposition, Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are (prayers ef∣ficacy is not from our worthiness, but Christ's intercession, God's prescribing the use of it, and his promise to it) and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain▪ and it rained not &c. Ja. 5. 16. 17. 18.. Did Christians truly know the Power they have in Heaven and earth▪ nothing could discourage or stand against them. No wonder faith over∣comes the world 1 Jo. 5. 4., if it overcome its maker, and he be outwrestled, and overpowred by it Gen. 32. 26. 28. Is. 45. 11. Mat. 15. ., that making a present closure and drawing near between God and the soul. When their prayers bring not down the express er∣rand for others, God is carefull his people should not have the least suspicion, that the denial proceeds from any disrespec̄i he hath to their persons or prayers. He sometimes therefore gives the thing desired, only changes the Sub∣ject; or grants to themselves what he denies them for others: what he denies Abraham for Ishmael, he makes up abundantly in Isaac: Da∣vid's prayer for his enemies, returned into his own bosome Ps. 35. 13.. One generation sows prayers for the Church, and another reaps the mercy prayed for. O the Bounty of our God, who proposes a mercy, and encourages us to seek it; commands us to pray, assists us in it, promises audience, and vouchafes a gracious acceptance; teaches us how, what to say, then gives us a Boon; prepares mercy, disposes our hearts to pray, then causes his ear to hear. He prevents them with his blessing; doth for them before
abundantly above what they can ask or think: Is. 65. 20. Ps. 21. 3. 4. so liberal to them that he exceeds their mo∣desty in asking and checks them for it; open thy mouth wide and I will fill it Ps. 81. 10.. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name, ask and ye shall receive that your joy may be full Jo. 16. 24.. He commonly gives them their prayers with an overplus; not only what, but much more than they have faith or face to request. Abraham begs Ishmael's life, God grants him that, and con∣firms his covenant with Isaac for a numerous posterity Ge. 17. 18. 19.. Isaac prays for a child, God gives him two at once Ge. 25. 21. 22.. Jacob desires but God's pass, under the Protection of which he might go and return safely, with enough food and rai∣ment to keep him alive; God sends him home with two bands, who went out a poor fuga∣tive, having little besides his pilgrims staff Ge. 28. 20. & 32. 10.. Hannah asks a son, God gives her that with three sons and two daughters 1 Sam. 1. 11. 20. & 2. 21.. Hezekiah begs recovery from sickness, God gives him that with addition of fifteen years Is. 38. 2. &c.. Solmn asks wsdom, God gives him riches and honour 1 King 3. 8. &c.. He not only cures the sick of the palsie, but secures him a pardon Mat. 9. .. And commends the (enturion for his faith, besides healing his servant Lu. 7. 9, 10.. The Prodigal desires but to be as a hired servant, the father readily bestows on him the affection and priviledge of a son Luke 15.. The woman of Canaan begs a crumb (so much as we throw to dogs) Christ gives her a childs por∣tion; yea, puts the key of his treasury into her own hand, and bids her serve her self, be it
unto thee even as thou wilt Mat. 15. 26.. The King asked life of thee and thou gavest it him, even length of daies for ever and ever Ps. 21. 4.. Christ gives his brethren not only as much food as they can carry▪ but their money in their sacks, and also his cup in Benjamin's. His Familiars procure answers, when stran∣gers The great advantage good men are to a nation. stand out, yea even of Domesticks some are more entire: He that lay in Jesus's bosome could receive that intelligence which was kept from the rest J. 13. 3 &c.. The better men, the greater good: such as have great faith, obtain what they will Mat. 15. 28.. They have often met God as Abigail did David, and moved him to put up his Sword. If any thing in the world can perswade him to preserve a nation, 'tis their prayers. If Moses will do according to the word of the Lord, He will do according to the word of Moses Ex. 8. 13.. If you have faith as a grain of Mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain remove hence to yonder place, and it shall re∣move, and nothing shall be impossible to you Mat. 17. 20. & 21. .. 'Tis a very extraordinary case, when such Favourites as Noah, Job and Daniel, cannot de∣liver a nation, but only their own souls Je. 15. 1. Ez. 14. 14. So that when he's resolved to punish a people, and Judgment's inevitable, he is fain to bid such not to pray Je. 14. 11.; as if this was the only hinderance could be made, and he could deny nothing to them he loves, nor execute his fierce wrath, unless they let him alone 32. . 10. Deu. 9. 13. 14.. He could not destroy Sodom while Lot was in it; not vin∣dicate
himself of his enemies, till taken care of his friend Ge. 19. 12. 22.. He hath as it were obliged his Power to their faith: By their prayers the al∣mighty (with reverence) is bound to the peace, when he hath a quarrel with his people. They can overcome him, not only when he's well pleased, when any child may deal with him, but when he thunders from Heaven, cleaves the rocks, when Sea and Land quakes and trembles, and his wrath burns like fire so that no man can come nigh him Ex. 19. He then seems to indent with them, offers them composition, if they will hold their peace, and say nothing; he hires them to be silent Ex. 32. 10.; and entreats them to let him alone, but they will not let him go with∣out a blessing Ge. 32. 24. &c., for as Princes they have power with God and with men, and have pre∣vailed even against a command Ex. 32. 10. &c.: May not we much more, who have no such prohibition, but are bid to pray and promised to speed Chron. 7. 13. 14.? When the wheels of providence stand still as it were, prayer oyles, and puts them in motion. The effusion of the spirit of supplication, is the first happy token, presage and intimation of ap∣proaching mercy 1 Chron. 17. 23., for it gives God the glory of his Mercy, Pity, Power, Soveraignty, and universal providence over us and all things; obtains from him such a frame-disposition in the hearts of others, as may qualifie them for deliverance; carries him along with the means, that are proper for it, without whom second causes are of no value, but he can make any person a Physician, any means a medicine, where
himself still joyn in the cure. He knows he shall have a revenue of unfeigned thanks and praise for what comes in the way of prayer (t): And Ps. . 1. 'tis the way, this, to direct the eyes and hearts of all to the first cause that sends and removes Judgments; to make all that see how open hand∣ed he is to his suppliants, turn beggars at his door Ps. 2. 5. 6. & 65. 2. Dan. 6. 26. 7.; yea for the honour of his servants; that the wicked may see what esteem he hath for their prayers, who are the Favourites of Heaven and Pillars of the earth; and how much behold∣ing they are to them for their safety and securi∣ty; when all wordly wisdome, policy, and con∣trivances can prevail nothing, for the prayers of a few poor contemptible inconsiderable per∣sons to work deliverance, what an honour doth God hereby cast upon them? How little is their love to their Country, or that beholden to them, who to preserve it, think it not worth their care, pains, or a serious desire? Meer burthens and Caterpillers of the earth; that have mouths to consume our comforts, not to beg or bless God for them: but that they are good for nothing, is not the worst of them; 'tis a small thing that we want the help of their prayers (their so∣lemnest devotions are an abomination to God) in comparison of the mischief they do us, whose lives a a continuall imprecation of all manner of plagues upon themselves and place of their abode. A wicked man is a wicked creature, and dangerous; a publick evil to the state. He de∣serves ill of those he never lived to see; that he ruines and damns himself, is the least part of his
wickedness: By the guilt or infection of his sin, (which is alwaies hurtful to the sinner, often to posterity) he commonly draws vengeance on thousands: 'tis they are the troublers of Israel 1 King 18. 18. 1. 2. 7. Flabella Diabli; & Flagella Dei; as studying, en∣deavouring, acting, meriting, and procuring mischief; blowing the coals of contention a∣mong men, and of Gods wrath, till set the Kingdom on a flame. By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted, but is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked Pr. 11. 11.. Scornfull men bring a City into a snare, but wise men turn a∣way wrath Pr. 29. 8.. Tis no small advantage and hap∣piness to have interest in God's Favourites; we receive from them true favours though insensibly: next to being good, 'tis best being with those that are so: If we be not bettered by their ex∣ample, we are blest by their protection and company. If God smite many for one sinner, he will spare them for a good man. A hypocrite was saved for Noah's sake, but not one righte∣ous swept away for company. God must either separate the righteous from the wicked, or de∣stroy the righteous with the wicked, or spare the wicked for the sake of the righteous. It fares well with others for their sake: Laban for Jacob Ge. 30. 27.: Pharaoh's Court and Kingdom for Joseph Ge. 39. & 0. &c.: Two families for Noah Ge. 17.: A City for Lot Ge. 19. 16. 21.: The King must see how he's engaged to a Sojourner for himself and his Ge. 0. 17. &c.. Saints are the honestest debtors we can deal with: They will pay us in our own coin: Those that shew them any kindness, are sure to have God
for their paymaster; for 'tis their way to turn over their dbts to God, and engage him to dis∣charge their scores  Tim. 1. 1.. The service of our love to God's children, are never thankless: When we are dead & rotten, they shall live, & procure blessings to those that never knew, nor heard perhaps of then Progenitors. I we sow good, succession shall reap it, and we shall be happy in making them so. God loves to remember his ancient mercies. To be faithful with God, is the way to oblige a world, even those who are unborn, and to entail blessings on succeeding generations. Such mighty charms are there in piety, that even a dead Abraham's bail is taken for a whole Kingdom, when ready to be laid up in the chains of a perpetual captivity. God is said to remember his Covenant with Abraham. Ten would have saved two Cities. Isael a bles∣sing in the land of Assyria Is. 19. 21.. There's a time coming when the greatest shall know their worth and excellency, and cleave unto them: It shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you for we have heard that God is with you Zac. 8. 3.. 'Tis they are the munition and strength of a Kingdom King 2. 12. & 3. 14. & .; for they seek safety where 'tis to be found 2 Chron. 20. 12.; they have the greatest courage 1 Sa. 17. 32., the surest promise Ge. 12. 23. Le. 26. 73. Ps. 125. 1. 2. and supplies 2 King 6. 17., for God is with them 1 Sa. 17. 4. Is 8. 10., and except he keep the City the states-men counsel, the souldiers fight, the watchman waketh but in vain Ps. 71. 21.. Never any strove with God, and
prevailed, except by Jacob's way of wrestling. Such are fenced with divine favour, though destitute of all humane succour, while none more naked than their enemies, though clad in ar∣mour. What's there adversaries Sword and Spear, to going out against them in the name of Hosts 1 Sa. 17. 45.. David was ser with his handfull in the cave than Saul in the camp, with his guard and army. Security is, where there is true Piety, though no Souldiers, or though the Souldiers drew not a Sword Ge. 31. 25.. The strength of a nation lies not so much in having prudent Counsellers, or mighty armies, as store of such as are the faithful o the land Ps. 101. 7.. Their cries mount beyond the Stars, pass through guards without resistance, open the gates of Heaven without a Turn-key, get audience when none else can be admitted, press into Gods privy chamber, shake his Throne, bind his hands: They command above, and reign in Heaven; God yields infinitely, if they cry mightily. They have the best weapons, and fight by faith more than others with all their forces: Their silent prayers are more piercing and prevalent, than the most roaring ordnances; their zeal is able to consume Captains and their tie; their righte∣ousness to rebate the edge of the sharpest Sword of their enemies. One supplictory shft, is better than a quiver of arrows; a single Saint, than an army of Giants: He can do more by an ejaculation, than others by their Spears; and by entreating the face of God, than others by ga∣thering of parties; by looking upwards, than
others by plotting beneath, which the land of Judah found true, in the daies of their godly Kings and Prophets. Abraham with his hous∣shold-servants rescues five captive Kings, from four that were conquerors Ge. 14. 14.. How low did he beat the market for Sodom, brought it down to ten righteous. The push of Moses's prayer, did more than all the pikes of Israel: and one Elisha than three armies 2 King 6. 17.. Poor Josiah when he came to the Crown found the Kingdom tumb∣bling a pace to ruine, yet because his heart was set for God, He took his bail for that wretched people, when they were even under an arest from the Almighty, and almost at the prison door. And their safety was as it were bound up in his life, for soon after his death all went to wrack among them. Rehoboam's walking in the way of David made his Kingdom strong three years, & might longer, if he had not by sinning pulled it down on himself & people; for his unhappiness is dated fom the very time of his departing from God 2 Chron. 11 16 17. & 12. 1. &c:. 'Tis state interest to countenance and en∣courage pure religion, and those that practice it: no forts on the frontiers, or standing armies within are so sure a defence from forregin invasion, and inbred commotions. Their fervent prayers and holy lives do more for us, than our enemies combined powers and po∣licies can against us. Indeed they only have true publick spirits. The principal effect of religion upon the soul is, to withdraw us from the love of carnal self (which contracts mens cares and designes to themselves as the center) and what∣soever
makes for its gratification; and implants in us a pure and fervent love for the blessed God as the pattern and authour of all perfection, and our only satisfying portion, whom to know and love, imitate and obey, is the great riches and honour, good men are ambitious of. Their happiness is placed in that which affords no monopoly, or matter of contention. Hence natu∣rally flow those qualifications which exalt their possessours to unconfined, enlarged spirits imitating their heavenly Father whose bounty and providence is unlimited and universal): longing and labouring to have others possest of the same felicity they have tasted of, and is not diminished by communication. Their pleasure increases with their participators, and to do o∣thers good is one part of their happiness. Their knowledge, love, and comformity of their na∣ture to God, necessarily enclines to love his image: those that bear it liveliest, he cleaves to with greatest dearness: is fill'd with designes for, and delight in their good; and becomes a lover of all man kind, as on them remaines some∣thing of God (which calls for our regard) and is sincerely, affectionately desirous they may attain that dignity and happiness their na∣ture is capable of. They take to heart the state of the whole world: how compassionatly do they think of the sad condition of poor Heathens that live under the tyranny of the devil; stran∣gers to God and Christ? How do they long and pray for the Gospel among them? How deeply affected with the Churches miseries in
any part of the earth? That groane under the effects of ignorance, idolatry, and cruelty? How heartily do they sympathize with those in bondage to Turk or Pope? How affectio∣natly do they bewail the divisions, disorders, decayes of religion here among its professors? These are matter of their daily lamentation; with teares, and groanes they represent them before the God of mercy. How much more the miseries and distempers of the land f their Nati∣vity, being ever before their eyes, must needs make the deeper impression on their hearts? The sins of all men are their grief, but their righteous soules are especially vexed with their unlawful deeds among whom they dwell 2. P. 2. 8. They have great heaviness and continual sorrow of heart, and are pleading instantly for re∣dressing sin and suffering; and more desirous of their prosperity, than their own ▪ 9. 2. . 2.. Even for the afflictions that come on their neighbors and country mn they sympathize & are greatly sensible: much more they lay to heart their sins, which they know to be so provoking to God, so fatal to the sinner, and the destruction it me∣rits . O what a burthen is it, to their spirits▪ to see a nation ver-run with a∣thesm, inlity, errour, and prophaness, fel∣low▪crurs endud with reason and pro∣ling religion, living in hatred and strife, op∣pressing, ing▪ destroying one another? How in would they such miscarriages were remo∣ved, and truth and peace, charity, and Godli∣ness brought in their stead. Others good, is
their great pleasure; the conversion of one sin∣ner, is matter of joy to them, as to the angels in Heaven; much more, when the gospel ob∣taines a free course and happy success, the word of the Lord prospers in the hands of his servants, and righteousness flourishes in the holy, peacea∣ble, blameless lives of professors. Yea, so large hearted are that they, as they are solictous, not only for the present, but succeeding ages; that the same priviledges and blessings  discend and be kept among them. Happy  nation, which abounds with men of this  lent spirit. They'r much mistaken, who  chief and only strength to consist in mony, policy of States-men, valour of cmmanders; and look on good men, in law places, as a contemp∣tible useless sort of persons: they discern not the secret mighty influence they have upon those very affairs, whereof they think themselves sole masters and disposers, and how little good they could do without their concurrance. Had they beheld Elijah walking with his mantle, they'd have scarce thought he deserved that high title the man of God puts upon him, my Father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horse-men thereof 2 Kin. 2. 12.▪. True Christians, are the best, profitablest subjects, having serious, hearty, constant desires and abilities of doing good, laid out and improved in diligent endeavours. What though they never studyed politicks, and have too much simplicity to apprehend the deep reasons and intrigues of state, so unfit to be made privy∣counsellers to their own, or ambassadours to a
forreign Prince; yet they know what most Achi∣tophel's little think of, that sin is the most dan∣gerous underminer of the Kingdomes safety; that they mightily strive against, and all the fatal effects of it. Their prayers go daily on Embassy in behalf of the land, to the soveraign majesty of all the world, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, who orders and over-rules all afaires; that he would counsel, direct, and prosper them. The simplest of them, if call'd to the counsel board, would advice to make Gods glory the end, and his word the rule of all administration, which if put in practice, would be found more advantagious, than all Machivilian subtilties. What though some of them are so weak, that they cannot weild a sword; so poor, that they cannot send souldiers of their own cost? The very lifting up of Moses's feeble hand, did more to discomfit Amalek, than the strength and weapons of the whole ar∣my; and when the little city was so straitly besieged by a great King, one poor man deli∣vers it Ee. 9. 15. &c. How un∣worthily requited.. How unthankfully doth the world repay this kind∣ness? They scorn, contemn, maligne those, to whom they owe their happiness. They can nei∣ther abide, nor be safe without them They look on them as their great burthen, who are the only bail God takes when their nation is under his arrest, and rail on those who are a wall unto them night and day. They cannot afford them so much as a good word, who are very good to them, and they are not hurt, neither
miss they any thing as long as they are conver∣sant with them Sa. 25. 15, 16.. Though they know what one word (Aha!) cost, yet had they rather have the blood of a Saint, than half a Kingdom, Mar. 6. 23. 25. and would pay a great fine (ten thousand Talents) to have them destroyed Est. 3. 9.. The righteous is an abomination to the wicked; 'tis a Sect every where spoken against. Cain will kill Abel to the end of the world. The supports are the troublers of Israel 1 King 18. 17.. Away with these pestilent fellows, it is not fit, not for the King's, profit, that they should live Est. 3. 8. Ac. 16. 20. & 24. 5. &c.. With what wonder and care do we look upon and pre∣serve other things, with what contempt and disdain do we in extremity overlook these? How weary of injuring other things, with what violence do we push at these? Is there a more dying groan among you, than the neglect of these? a shriller yell, than the passionate cries of these oppressed ones? There is Royal blood running in their vains; 'tis dangerous medling with them, and no better than spilling Christ's bloud, is that of his members; his heart is exceedingly taken with them, and set upon them, they are his Jewels Mal. 3. 17. and the nation's; its lustre and excellency, it shines only while they are present. Stately fabricks are but dim and dead ensigns to that beauty and adorn of their in∣nocent lives. Prophaness shames and annoyes a City more than all its sinks and dunghils; and far worse than breaches in our walls, build∣ings half levelled, and our monuments defa∣ced But these leave no stench but a blessing
behind, and perfume every place where they set their foot. All good things are promised, and primarily intended them; the earth is given to the meek, and Heaven to the poor in spirit; for the wicked what is there own, but hell Ac. 1. 25.? The Sun shines on the barren ground for the sake of the fruitful the tares are preserved; and watered because of the good seed Mat. 13. 30.. Why then do you strip your rooms of your hang∣ings? Trample upon your treasure? Abase and vilifie your stock? Why so malicious and cruel, not to them only, but your nation, and betray and hasten its ruine more than abuse them, who can only resist assaults and purchase redem∣ption? Against whom do you shoot your veno∣med arrows? Why will ye run the hazard of damning your souls, rather than not fling a dagger at the apple of Gods eye Zac. 2. 8.? How dare you profess the name of Christ, and hate his nature in the Saints? Call him your head yet rend and tear his body? Your Soveraign, yet psecute his faithfullest subjects? Beat and destroy them as wrapt up in the bare skins of precise fanaticks &c? Bow at the name of Je∣sus, while you pierce him in the members? Many good works have they done for you, for which of them do you persecute and stone them . 1. .? Shall evill be recompensed for good? and a pit digged for them, who stand before God to speak good for you, and to turn away his wrath from you Jo. 18 2.? Shall they die who have wrought so great salvation in England 1 Sa. 14. .? Why must these worthy champions that
step into this sinking cave to uphold it with their shoulders, find that to be their Sepulchre, which they supposed should have been their shelter? what frenzie possesses you, to pull away the props, to drain the city of its guards, to destroy the forts and bulwarks of defence when an enemy comes to besiege it? What do men mean to cut down the boughs on which they stand? To hasten their own destruction? Are they weary of their safety? Do they ask to be shaved of their strength? Little do they think that while they injure them, they do the greatest injury to them∣selves. They are every moment beholden to them; and owe their freedom and reprieve from hell and ruine, next to God's patience, to their prayers. Such as endeavour to destroy their persons and hinder their prayers, do (whatso∣ever they intend or pretend) what in them lies, to ruine us by pulling down the Pillars that upholds Church and State. To stop, corrupt, or trouble those fountains which are a common benefit to serve a whole Town, is a wrong to all that have thence their water. Take hed of provoking against you their prayers, especially God's Prophets; if their silence had been a sad omen, what are their imprecations? The grie∣ving of Moses and Elias's spirits, cost Israel dear. Zechariah's prayer at shedding his bloud, the Lord look upon it and requite it! brought on them the miseries of Babylon, and was not fully avenged till their utter ruine 2 Chron. 24. 21. &c.. Were it not that he re∣gards the presence of his servants that sojourn with us, he would not with any gracious aspect,
look towards us, nor see us, 2 Kin. 3. 14.. The loss of a good man, chiefly a good minister, especially, in bad times, is a just ground of deep sorrow 1 Sa. 25. 1 La. 1. 19. Ze. 11. 2.; woe is me, for the good man is perished out of Earth Mic. 7. 1. 2.; help Lord for the Godly man ceaseth, for the faith∣full fail from among the children of men Ps. 12. 1.: we may well mourn when they are taken away; our glory is departing: there is like to ensue some great evil, on the absence of so great a good 1 Sa. . 19 Is. 57. 1.. They are such a blossing where they live, that they seldome fall, but the earth shakes under them. When God chambers his children in the grave, us commonly a prognostick of an ap∣proaching storm Is. 26. 20. 21.. 'Tis they that con∣tinue happiness to a nation, and carry it along with them. When the corn is housed, the beast; are turned into the field, and that into an high way, when the hedg is troden down or re∣moved. When the building of the Church is fi∣nished, this Scaffold shall be taken down; and the Theatre of the world, when they have done acting. God will fire the house about our eares, when compleated the number and removal of his Jewels. The pharises were troubled with christ: they thought him a thorn in their side, and that they should never be well, till he was gone J. 8. 32. &c, upon which Christ tells them, yet a little while am I with you, and I go unto him that sent me: they needed not to be so hasty, so earnest to get him gone, poor soules, they should want him too soon; and should seek him, but should not find him (though they would gladly); for in their
ensuing calamity, they should miss of their pro∣mised Messiah. Still the world stands for their sake, for whom t'was preserv'd; else fire should consume that, which could not be cleansed by water. Were it not for a very small remnant, we should long since have been as So∣dom, and like unto Gomorrah Is. 1. 9.. Their presence and prayers, will procure mercy, if there be any place for it Ez. 14. 14. Solemn humiliation for our nations sins. ANd now my soul what remaines but that thou enter into thy closet; shut the door a∣bout thee; set thy self as in his presence who seeth in secret; beg his assistance; with all so∣lemn strictness, faithfulness and brokenness of spirit, rip open and ransack, deeply enquire in∣to and review the vileness of thy heart and life: so will appear thy own hypocrisie in crying out against such parties or persons, such abuses, or corruptions in Church and state, as the cause of misery, and not smiting upon thy own thigh, saying, what have I done or omitted? repre∣sent thy sins with all their heightening circum∣stances and aggravations, till so sensible of the hainous nature of the least sin, that thou canst not conceive any suffering suited to its demerit, but wrath eternal; and apprehendest not only thy contributing to our present calamities that so many lye under in part for thy sins, but that if
the rest of the nation had been like thee, 'twould sure ere this have been utterly desolate. And hav∣ing judged and condemned, loathed and abhor'd thy self, and repented in dust and ashes; and sued out thy pardon; that thine iniquities may not help to fill up the measure of England, s: im∣prove thy utmost interest in God for it, mourn∣ing for the sins, and interceding for the safety of it. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise within me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war, destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is spoiled Jo. 4. 19. 2.; the remnant that are left of the plague are in great affliction and reproach; the walls of the city are broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire Ne. 1. 3. 4. I will set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth and ashes I will fall upon my knees, and spread out my hands, and weep and mourn, and pray unto the Lord my God, and make my confession and say D. 9. 3. 4., O my God! I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God; for our iniquities are encreased over our head, and our trespasses are grown up unto the Heavens since the dayes of our fathers have we been in a great trespass, unto this day; and for our iniquities, have we, our Kings and our priests been delivered unto the swod, to the plague, and to fire, and to a spoil, and to con∣fusion
of face as it is this day Ezr. 9. 6. 7.. We have reason to fear our end is come before Universa∣lity of sin. thee, and that thou wilt destroy us with the land, for all sorts of men have corrupted their wayes Ge. 6. 12. 13.. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and steal∣ing, and committing adultery we break out, and blood toucheth blood Ho. 4. 2.. Pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness is in us, neither do we strengthen the hands of the poor: we are haughty and commit abominations before thee: neither hath Sodom or Samaria committed half of our sins; but we have multiplyed our a∣bominations more than they; and have justified our sister nations in all our abominations which we have done Ez. 16. 4 &c. Ah! sinfull nation, a people la∣den with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupt. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint: from the sole of the foot, even unto the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrifying sores; Is. 1. 4. 5. 6. we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags: and we all do fade as a leaf, and our inquities like the wind have taken us away: and there are none that call upon thy name, that stirr up them selves to take hold of thee; though thou hast hid thy face from us, and consumed us because of our iniquities Is. 64. 67. Sins of no∣bles. Our nobles are rebellious, and companions of evil doers Is. 1. 33.. They bid defiance to thee, notwithstanding all sacred solemn promises,
bonds and obligations to obedience Ie. 5. 5.: yea, they put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near; they stretch themselves upon their couches, and spend their time in mirth and vanity, but they are not grieved for the afliction of Joseph Am. 6. 3 &c.; therefore mayest thou abhor our excellencies, and hate our palaces, and re∣move our banquets, and deliver up our land, with all that is therein. Our Magistrates bear the sword in vain: they Magi∣strates sins. are not terrors to evil doers, nor encouragers of those that do well Ro. 13. 4.. All manner of wick∣edness reignes without restraint, and with con∣nivance. National impieties are not punished by those who are for that purpose intrusted with power and authority. None calls for judgment, nor standeth up and executes it, that our plagues may be staied Ps. 106. 3., but are themselves guilty of God provoking abominations. The wicked walk on every side, for the vilest of men are ex∣alted Ps. 12. 8.. Therefore mayst thou take the sword into thy own hand, & bring upon us our own ini∣quities, cut us off in our own wickedness; be∣cause none riseth up for thee against the evil do∣ers nor standeth up for thee against the workers of iniquity Ps. 9. 16. 23.. Mine heart within me is broken, all my bones Ministers sin. shake because of our Teachers: How many of them vitious, bruitish, commit uncleanness, fill themselves with strong drink, prophane thy holy things, put no difference between the
clean and unclean, walk in lies, look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quar∣ter? They have not gone up into the gap, nei∣ther made up the hedge for us. Greedy, igno∣rant, idle, sons of Belial, that know not the Lord; their sins are very great before thee, for they cause the people to nauseate and abhor the offering of the Lord, therefore maist thou fay, they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered 1 Sam. 2. 17. Is. 56. 10. &c. Je. 10. 21. & 23. 9. &c. Ez. 13. 5. Hearers sins.. The Kingdom of God may be taken from us and given to a nation bringing forth the fruit thereof, for our itching ears, slighting, loathing, prejudices, contempts, scoffings as to thy Word and Ministers. What rovings, lightness, vain discoursings, prophaness, in the place and time of thy worship? neglect of, careless, perfunct∣ory, drowsie, irreverent, unbelieving, untract∣able addresses to and attendance on thee? with stiff necks, uncircumcised hearts, resisting the Holy Ghost, not examining, remembring, pon∣dering over, talking of, practicing what we hear? despising thee, by despising them thou hast sent? not prizing, praying, praising thee for them? unhumbled for the want o them, niggardly to them, not esteeming them for their work's sake? So that the daies may come that thou maist send a famine of the word; and we may wan∣der from Sea to Sea, and from the North even un∣to the East, and run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it Am. 8. 11, 12..
O what failings in our several relations? [Su∣periors Families sins.], not modest, sober, diligent, upright, wise, exemplary in their carriage; not doing so much good as the advantage of their abili∣ties and places require; but abusing them to scorn, pride, oppression &c. [Inferiors], not humble, dutiful, thankful, submitting for con∣science sake; but disdaining, flattering, irrever∣encing their Superiors. How many come toge∣ther upon base ends? How few marry only in the Lord? or live together as one flesh? whose only strife is, how they may please thee and each other? What neglects, jarrs, contentions, bla∣zoning of infirmities, occasions of trouble, jea∣lousie, disaffection in families? [Husbands], not behaving themselves as the head, to govern instruct, cherish their wives; but churlish, fret∣ful, humorsome, imperious, not rejoicing in the wife of their youth, nor loving them as Christ the Church. [Wives], irreverent, un∣quiet, unchast, forsaking the guide of their youth, and fogetting the Covenant of their God Pr. 2. 17.. despising their Husbands in their hearts 1 Chron. 15. 29., not helpers but hinderers of their good, not subject in every thing as the Church to Christ, Ep. 5. 22. &c. nor adorn themselves as the holy women in old time 1 Pet. 3. 1. &c.. [Parents], humoring, cock∣ering, indulgent to their children in vice; not educating instructing, chastising, praying, pro∣viding for them as they ought. [Children], not loving, reverencing, submitting, thankfull; but disobedient, stot, rebellious, unnatural, setting light by Father and Mother Deu. 27. .. [Ma∣sters],
not careful in directing, governing, pu∣nishing, redressing disorders, examining, confer∣ing with, encouraging, rewarding those over whom God hath made them overseers. [Ser∣vants], scornful, sawcie, refractory, answer∣ing again, disparaging, slothful, improvident, defrauding, unfaithful, eye-servants, not obedi∣ent with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ. How few walk with gravity, circumspection, and a perfect heart in midst of their house; but by lightness, vanity, and unseemly carriage make themselves vile, and breed in others contempt of thy ordinance? that labour to bring up in thy fear, those com∣mitted to their charge? that resolve and endea∣uour they and their house will serve the Lord? We have cause to fear thou wilt pour out thy fury upon us amongst whom are so many that know thee not, and families that call not up∣on thy name. In the law, O the neglects and evasions! the Lawyers, Trades∣mens sins. fraudulent tricks and delaies! the partiality and injustice! the cruelty and oppression! the lovers of bribes, and followers after rewards! Judgment is turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock Am. 6. 12.. In our deal∣ings, O the lyings, and deceiving! the unlawful, unmerciful advantages, and over-reaching! the unfaithfulness and dishonesty! the sophistications, adulterations, wicked protestations! we do not as we would be done by; but go beyond and de∣fraud our brother. In our Shops are treasures
of wickedness, and the scant measure, the wick∣ed ballance, and the bag of deceit, unrighte∣ousness lodges in our land, that was full of Judgment; our silver is become dross, and our wine mixed with water. Therefore maist thou smite thy hand at our dishonest gain, and make us desolate, because of our sins. Yea, amongst those that profess thy name, how Profes∣sors sins. few depart from iniquity? O what pride, la∣sciviousness, unfaithfulness, variance, anger, peevishness, passion, emulation, wrath, envy, hatred, malice, animosities, divisions, mutual upbraidings, slanderings, tale-bearings, defa∣mings, distraction, railing, evil surmisings, perverse disputings, frothy, vain, corrupt com∣munications, despising Dominions, speaking e∣vil of dignities, not of the things that make for peace, and things wherewith one may edifie a∣nother, formality, luke-warmness, hypocrisie, compliance with the sins of the times! How few are crucified to the world? that seek it with a holy indifferency, and reserve their zeal, and hottest endeavours for thee? O where are the humble, meek, patient, self denying, sym∣pathizing, submissive, Heavenly followers of our gracious, tender hearted, compassionate Lord? That consider one another, to provoke one another unto love, and to good works? That sufficiently reprove, mourn for, assist a∣gainst sin? With insensible spirits we complain of the hardness of others, that we are therefore unfit for mercy, not considering, were not our
hearts hard, others might not be so; could we bewail their hard-heartedness before thee with broken hearts our selves, who knows, but thou might mollifie theirs, and prepare them for de∣liverance? How few put on, as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, kindness, charity, giving, forgiving, forbearing one another? We have a form of godliness, but deny the power of it. We bring unto thee vain oblations; and offer the blind and the lame, and the sick for Sacrifice. We fast and pray, hear and receive, but do we do it unto thee? How many take up religion meerly to get gain? and pretend thy glory, to accomplish their base designs, by reason of which the way of truth is evil spoken of? We have left our first love, and lost our former fer∣vour, strictness, and courage in thy service. Wo unto us that thus provoke thee to depart from us; to spue us out of thy mouth, and to remove thy candlestick out of its place; for through us, the name of God is blasphemed a∣mong the Gentiles. O how much ignorance, error, infidelity, a∣theism, Unfruitful∣ness. prophaness in a land of light? We have line upon line, Precept upon Precept, thy word in season and out of season; but we shut our eyes, deafen our ears, mock and abuse thy Ambassa∣dors, loath our spiritual Manna, cast thy law behind our backs, and hate to be reformed; neglect and abuse thy ordinances, blaspheme that holy name whereby we are called, scanda∣lize our profession, and make it as eminent for
vice as it hath been and should be for vertue. We call our selves Christians, and commit such enormous crimes, as are not once named among the heathens. We so little retain the power, that we cast off the very form of Godliness; de∣nying the Lord that bought us; and not only think, but say there is no God. So that thy wrath may arise against thy people, till there be no remedy 2 Ch. 36. 14 &c., and we reap nothing of our Christianity but the guilt of our apostacy, and that fiery indignation which awaites those that love darkness rather than light, trample under foot the son of God, do despite unto the spirit of grace, and account the bloud of the covenant whereby we are sanctified an unholy thing: for the Earth which drinketh in the rain that com∣eth oft upon it, and bringeth forth thornes and briers, in stead of herbs meet for him, by whom it is dressed, is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned Heb. 6. 7. 8.. We may justly fear thou wilt depopulate our Sabbath-breaking. land, that it may enjoy its sabbaths, for our spend∣ing thine in sloath and drowsiness, vanity, tedious dressings, idling in our doors, streets, fields, sports, recreations, tavernes and ale-houses, bearing of burthens, following our callings, vain dscourses, tedious longings, saying, what a weariness is it? when will the sabbath be over, that we may buy and sell and get gain? In stead of turning away our foot from the sabbath, from doing our own pleasure on thy holy day, calling it a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable,
and honouring thee, not doing our own wayes, nor finding our own pleasure, nor speaking our own words; but wholly employing and im∣proving it according to the nature, use and ends of it. So that for our not hearkening unto thee to hallow thy Sabbaths thou mayst kindle a fire in our gates which shall devour our palaces, and shall not be quenched Is. 58. Je. 17. 27. Covetous∣ness.. For the iniquity of our covetousness was thou wroth and smote us Is. 57. 17.; yet O how few whose conversation is without it, and are content with such things as they have Heb. 13. 5.? From the least of us even unto the greatest, every one is given un∣to it. O! what continual cares, carping and scraping, eager thirstings, studious consultati∣ons, earnest prosecutions, unwearied uninter∣rupted paines after the world? enlarging our desires like hell and the grave, never saying it is enough? worshiping, and serving the creature, more than the Creator, God blessed for ever? What griping, rigour and oppression? What extortion and unlawful usury? What hard heartedness, shutting up our bowels of compassion, not strengthening the hands of the needy E. 16. 49., grinding the faces of the poor, making advantage of their necessities, exposing them to nakedness, in stead of cloathing them? The hire of the labourers, and the pay of poor tradesmen, which are of us kept back by fraud, crieth, and the cryes of them which have earned, are entred into the eares of the Lord of sabbath; so that we may weep and howl for our miseries that shall come upon us Ja. 5. 1. 4..
If pride goeth before destruction and an haugh∣ty Pride. spirit before a fall Pr. 16. 18, ours testifie to our face, therefore we shall fall in our iniquities Ho. 5. 5.. O the vain, swelling minds, the lofty eyes, the haughty gallants, the pride of heart, hair and apparel, the painted, spotted, phantastick ladies, walking and mincing as they go, with stretched out necks, wanton lookes, and making a tin∣kling with their feet Is. 3. 16 &c.! The tender and deli∣cate women among us, which will not adven∣ture to set the sole of their foot upon the ground for their delicateness and tenderness De 28. 56.! There∣fore mayst thou marre the pride of England, and the great pride of London Ie. 13. 9.; and it may come to pass, that in stead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and in stead of a girdle, a rent; and in stead of well set hair, baldness; and in stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning in stead of beauty; and that our men shall fall by the sword, and our mighty in the war, and our gates shall lament and mourn, and we being desolate sit upon the ground Is. 3. 16 &c Idleness.. Abundance of idleness is in us, as to our gene∣ral & particular calling. Our land is full of tatlers, idle dames, busie bodies, lasie droanes, that la∣bour not with their hands, eat the bread of idle∣ness, worse than infidels, that provide not for their own house. How much precious time and parts are devoured in the bed, at the glass, board, unnecessary, unlawful recreations, vain corrupt communications? Inventing ways to misspend
time, taking pains to be rich, and to damn our soules; but how little in working out our salva∣tion with fear and trembling, and giving all diligence to make our calling and election sure? So that thou mayst justly cloath the whole nati∣on with rags Pr. 23. 21, and take us away as thou seest good Ez. 16. 49. 50.. Wo unto us for our surfeiting, drunkenness, and Surfeiting and drunke¦enness. fulness of bread. Among us are multitudes of wine-bibbers, and riotous eaters, that live deli∣ciously, feeding themselves without fear, that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; that gives his neighbour drink, and makes him drunken also; whose God is their belly, who glory in their shame. O the niceness, and daintiness! the rioting and excessive feasting! the chambering and wanton∣ness! the staggering and vomiting! the abuse, and sacrificing of thy creatures to our lusts! making provision for the flesh! living in pleasure and worse than bruitish intemperance! nou∣rishing our hearts as in a day of slaughter! The cup of thy right hand may be turned unto us, and shameful spuing on our glory Ha. 2. 13. 16.. O the vain attires and carriages, the wanton Unclean∣ness. eyes, the speculative uncleanness, the secret pol∣lutions, the obscene, filthy speeches, the toy∣ing dalliances, the lustful burnings and heart adultery, the actual uncleanness, which thou art every day witness to, who art of purer eyes than to behold the least iniquity! Our land is polluted
with adulteries, fornication, horrid abominati∣ons; we assemble in the harlots houses; every one neigheth after his neighbours wife. We turn the sanctuary into a stews, and defile the temple of the holy ghost by our lascivious filthi∣ness. So that thou mayst justly abhor and for∣sake us, who have given our selves over to work all uncleanness with greediness; and condemn us with an utter overthrow, making us an ex∣ample to those that afterwards should live un∣godly. Because of oaths the land mournes. 'Tis a wonder of thy patience, that we have not Swearing. cursed away all our blessing, and pray'd down vengeance upon our own head: that so many tongues set on fire of hell have not set the whole nation in a flame. O! how is thy great and dreadful name which we should tremble at in mentioning, and command our spirits into awe and reverence, taken in vain, and used to witness a lie, or fill up our common dis∣courses? What a hellish noise is heard in our streets and publick houses? What volleys of dreadful, prodigious oaths and blasphemies are daily by persons of all ages and degrees, shot in the face of the great Majesty of Heaven and Earth? Whetting our tongue like a sharp sword, we have not fear'd to wound the name of God, when injured by men. We toss to and fro, tear and rend, the life, bloud and wounds of our dear and precious Saviour. Thou mayst well grow jealous for thy great name, and arise and vindi∣cate
thy glory, from the contemptuous affronts of such insolent rebels, that dare thee to thy face, and force thee to give a convincing evi∣dence of thy power and being, for the sins of our mouths, for our hideous execrations, perjuries, and prophane words of our lips, and for all our hard speeches that we have spoken against thee, and consume us in thy wrath that we may not be. O! how is thy sacred word played and jested Prophane∣ness and blaspemies. with, made light and prophaned by unhallow∣ed wretches, that set their mouths against the Heavens, and religion it self suffered to be the object of our scoffs and rallery, in a nation pro∣fessing it? We are ashamed of thee, of thy word and our glory; the name of a Saint or God∣ly man is ridiculous, laughed at and reproach∣ed: the honour of being religious failes, he that departs from evil makes himself a prey, Is. 59. 15. & is accounted mad. O how are the sacred pages themselves, made a theame of wanton drollery; and thy name, being, and honour prostituted to the licentious, irreligious wits of our age: that make a scorn of, and trample upon, all that is sacred and serious. Thou mayst justly bring upon us swift destruction for our mockers, dis∣spisers, revilers of those that are good, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, denying, yea blaspeming the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. The voice of blood cries unto thee for venge∣ance Blood.
Ge. 4. 10.. How many murthers are commited among us, out of hatred, revenge, distress of the world, instigation of the devil? Yea we sacri∣fice one another's lives to our lusts, passions, and pride: So that thou mayst speedily make inqui∣sition for bloud, and give us it to drink. We are an obstinate, impudent, stiffnecked, impenitent▪ people: we blush not, nor are a∣shamed Insensible∣ness and impeniten¦cy under judgments. when we commit abomination Je. 8. 12.▪. The shew of our countenance doth witness a∣gainst us: we declare our sin as Sodom, we hide it not Is. 3. 9.. We have been at ease from our youth, setled upon our lees, though emptyed from vessel to vessel Je. 48. 9.; and live secure in the guilt of those sins which hath made thee become our enemy. We have grown worse and worse under all the means of making us better. Thou hast given us fruitful, peaceable seasons, fill∣ing our hearts with food and gladness, the earth yielding its increase, we eat our bread to the full, and dwelt in our land safe∣ly, and none to make us afraid; but we have waxed fat and kicked, abased and were un∣thankful for thy mercies; have forsook and lightly esteemed the God of our salvation, victo∣ries, and mighty deliverances; and knew not that thou gave us corn and wine, and oil, and multiplyed our silver and our gold, which we prepared for our lusts. Thou hast hewed us by the prophets, and slaine us by the words of thy mouth, and our Judgments are as the light that goeth forth Ho. 6. 7.▪: thou hast made our plagues won∣derful; stricken us with the pestilence, but we
have not grieved, consumed us by the Sword, and in our estates, but we have not received correction; overthrown some of us, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and we are as fire-brands pluck'd out of the burning, yet have we not returned unto thee Am. 4. 10. 11.: we have made our faces harder than a rock, we have refused to return Je. 5. 3., and will not see now thy hand is lifted up, nor be serious though thou seems to be naming us Ichabod & our glory departing 1 Sa. 4. 21.. Strangers have devoured our strength; yea gray hairs are here & there upon us, and we know it not; the pride of England testi∣fies to our face and we do not return unto thee, nor seek thee for all this Ho. 7. 9, 10.. O where are our weeping Ezras, Jeremiahs, Davids &c. Such an universal slumber, and general stupidity hath seised on us, that there is none duly laies to heart the sins, distractions and dangers of the times; or mournes for those abominations, whereby thou art provoked to destroy the land: no man repenteth him of his wickedness saying, what have I done? Or constantly, earnestly seeks thee, now thy wrath is ready to fall upon us: eve∣ry one minds his own concerns, and not the pub∣lick, or thy providential dispensations: mirth and jollity, and wine are in our feasts; but we re∣gard not the works of the Lord, nor consider the operations of his hands, therefore maist thou destroy us and not build us up Ps. 28. 5. Is. 5. 12..
Argumentative Supplication. BUt now O Lord, thou art our Father, we From what we have un∣dergone al∣ready. are the clay, and thou our Potter; and we all are the work of thy hand Is. 64. 8.; the effect of thy power and goodness. Remember we be∣seech thee, that thou hast made us as the clay, and wilt thou bring us into dust again Jeb. 10. 9.? And dash us to pieces as a thing of naught? Wilt thou destroy what thou hast made? And de∣face the glory of thy creative power? Thou being our founder, knowest our frailty, remem∣ber that we are but flesh, a buble, a blast that passes away and cometh not again; and wilt thou not pity our weak estate? Wilt thou chase the dust? or pursue a leaf driven with the wind? O Let not the God of Heaven alwaies strive and contend with worms lately crept forth out of nothing, what glory in the victory? Lord, though thou punish our wickedness, yet preserve thy own workmanship; thou that hast created the object, create also the act of deli∣verance; let us live because thou gavest us life; that the praises of our creation may be joined with those of our redemption. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever; behold see we beseech thee, we are all thy people. Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desola∣tion our Holy and our beautiful houses where our fathers praised thee are burnt with fire, and all
our pleasant things are laid wast: wilt thou re∣frain thy self, for these things O Lord? Wilt thou hold thy peace and afflict us very sore Is. 64. 9.? May it not suffice the Divine justice to have brought upon us the miseries we have un∣dergone already? Is our slain, and our rui∣nous heaps, our poverty, our civil broils and confusions, nothing to our tender-hearted God? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like un∣to our sorrow, which is done unto us, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted us in the day of his fierce anger La. 12. 1.. And will our God still con∣tinue his heavy hand upon us? And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds and for our great transgressions, be angry with us till thou hast consumed us, so that there be no remnant nor escape Ezra 9.  14.? Shouldest thou punish us in propor∣tion to our iniquities, thou might never leave till thou hadst utterly destroyed us. But may not the Judgments we have felt already, shew thy Justice and hatred of sin, and by thy grace ef∣fect our return unto thee? And is it not ac∣ceptable to thee to accomplish it by milder means? O when wilt thou say, it is enough? and restrain the hand of vengeance from further prosecuting us? O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us, for we are desolate and afflicted. The troubles of our hearts are enlar∣ged, O bring thou us out of our distresses, look upon our carcases, and our ashes, our affliction and our pain, and forgive all our sins Ps. 24. 1. &c.. Make us glad according to the daies wherein thou hast afflicted us, and the years wherein
we have seen evil. Ps. 9. 15. O remember not against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low Ps. 79. 8.. Though our sins should hold all good things from us, and we obstinately resist the means of our happiness, thou canst otherwise secure thy own glory, and raise it even out of our ruines: But thou delightest not in the death of a sinner, much less of a people, but rather, and art very desirous, commandest, & intreatest, they return and live? Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our daies as of old La. 5. 21.. Hast thou utterly rejected En∣gland? Hath thy soul loathed thy Church there? O give us not up to our own waies, for so we shall but dishonour and displease thee, till we have destroyed our selves. And alas what profit is there in our death? Wherein can destruction bring thee praise? What Trophies of honour canst thou raise out of the overthrow of a handful of dust? Will a red field of bloud make thy Escutcheon the more illustrious? Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? Shall the dead arise and praise thee? Shall thy loving kind∣ness be declared in the grave? Or thy faithful∣ness in destruction? Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness Ps. 88. 10. &c.? O glorifie thy self in working in us what thou requirest of us, in order to obtaining thy favour; so shall our re∣formation advance thy glory, as well as secure our happiness, and we shall praise thee, both by our obedience, and for our security; as the
fruit of thy unlimited bounty. What can be more to thy praise, than that we may be unani∣mously devoted to thy service? Whilest our chiefest aime is, that thou wouldest advance and establish thy own glory among us, and about that glory set a defence; we the more confi∣dently beg it of thee, that thou wouldst do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion, make her a praise in the land, and build up the walls of Jerusalem, repair the sad decays of religion, rouze us out of our stupidity and lukewarm∣ness, asswage and drive back our deluge of prophaness, and so order all events as may be most for the interest of religion, to which the Holy God hath so tender a regard, and to have it rooted out of a nation, is just matter of sadness to thy upright ones. We plead not our own cause only, but our po∣steritie's; From our Poster. 15. who, if we be destroyed, or have the Gospel put out, will, we fear, be left in the night of sin and ignorance, and involved in our ruine. And how can we but deprecate so sad an infe∣licity to them, and so much dishonour to thee, as to have our land overrun with barbarism, su∣perstition, impiety, and this propagated from one generation to another would produce? Thy honour being so much concerned, may we not, with hopes of being heard, pray thee so far to continue thy favour to us and ours, that we may conveigh to them that Gospel we have received from our forefathers, pure and uncor∣rupted, that there may never fail to be a holy
seed, a succession of sincere Christians, who may be the substance of these nations, when we are dead and gone. We beseech thee therefore prevent those calamities, which may either de∣populate our land, or may be of so dangerous and extensive an influence, as to threaten to succeeding ages, that they should be wicked and idolatrous here, and miserable for ever. But graciously preserve us, and secure to us and ours the priviledges of thy Gospel; so we thy people and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks for ever, we will shew forth thy praise to all generations (l). Ps. 79. 13. Consider our enemies for they are many, and they hate us with cruel hatred: O keep us and Fom the multitude and malice o our ene∣mies. del ver us, let us not be ashamed, for we put our trust in thee Ps. 25. 19.. How long wilt thou forget us, O Lord, for ever? How long wilt thou hide thy face from us? How long shall we take counsel in our souls, having sorrow in our hearts daily? How long shall our enemies tri∣umph over us? Consider and hear us O Lord, our God, lighten our eyes lest we sleep the sleep of death; lest our enemies say we have pre∣vailed against them; and those that trouble us rejoice when we are moved Ps. 1. 1. &c.. Will not the adversaries of thy Church and people be em∣boldened to blaspheme their God, and reproach them? be more hardened, encouraged, and strengthened in their opposition by their success? and interpret it for a justification of their cause? and look on power in their hand, as an obliga∣tion laid on them, utterly to destroy all that
gainsay them; as if zealously serving thee, while butchering thy servants? And will not pro∣phane persons, from permission of such events, deny thy providence and being; and say 'tis in vain to serve, depend upon, and have re∣course unto thee, seeing they are not preserved or rescued that do? O let not any that have an ill will at our Sion, have cause to say, ah! so would we have it. Help us, O God of our sal∣vation, for the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy name sake; wherefore should the Heathen say, where is their God? their reformation, their power and purity of religion, the glorious providen∣ces and promises they boast of? What are they the better for their prayers and fastings? O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? Why doth thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture? How long shall the adversary re∣proach? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thine hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bo∣some. Remember thy congregation which thou hast purchased of old, the rod of thine in∣heritance, which thou hast redeemed, this mount Sion wherein thou hast dwelt, O de∣liver not the soul of thy turtle dove unto the multitude of the wicked; forget not the con∣gregation of thy poor for ever. Have respect unto the Covenant: O let not the oppressed return ashamed; let the poor and needy praise thy name Ps. 74. 1. &c.. Consider the quality of those, and impiety of their designs who seek our ruine:
Enemies, not so much to us as thy self and Gs∣pel, so far as it opposes their interest: Arise O Lord, plead thy own cause, be jealous for thy glory, fight against those that fight against us and thee; is not our quarrel thine? and thy interest ours also? And wilt thou give up thy darling to the dogs? thy only ones to the Ly∣ons? Or shall any harden themselves against thee and prosper? O deliver us from such whose tender mercies are cruel; who willingly will know no bounds in afflicting us, but our fi∣nal subversion; when thou art but a little dis∣pleased, will help forward the affliction Zec. 1. 15.: rather let us fall into the hands of God, than of men, do thou correct us, but with Judg∣ment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring us to nothing Je. o. 24.. Let our former mercies move thee to bestow From for∣mer mer∣cies. those we want: from our experience of thy readiness to help, we hope thou wilt not be less gracious now; nor deny that assistance so oft afforded us. Wil God now abandon those who have so long been the charge of his pro∣vidence, to the lusts and fury of unreasonable men? Shall they turn the work of infinite wisdom, into a Babel of confusion? And scat∣ter those whom God hath gathered together? After so many wonders of mercie that have been shown among us and for us, shall we be∣come the scorn and derision of all nations? Wilt thou cast off those thou hast raised up? Take so much pains, to no purpose? And demolish
what might stand as a lasting monument of thy bounty? Is thy goodness abated, that thou wilt not, or thy hand shortened, that thou canst not save? Is not thy readiness and power to do good, and thou the same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever? Thy mercy, O God, is unwearied in stretching out it self for the defence of thy servants: the treasures of thy goodness are bot∣tomless and inexhaustible; thy servants have found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magni∣fied thy mercy which thou hast shewed unto us, in saving us, and we cannot escape without thy caring for us Ge. 19. 19.. O thou that hast done so much for us, and so often come in to our as∣sistance, when all creature helps have failed, forsake us not in this exigence, let not all thy care and cost be lost. O perfect that which con∣cerneth us: thy mercy O Lord, endureth for e∣ver; forsake not the works of thine own hands Ps. 138. 8.. Thou hast wrought great deliverances for us; shall we now die for want of it? And thy servants whom thou hast delivered from the Lyon and the Bear, fall into the hands of the un∣circumcised Philistines? Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord! Awake as in the an∣cient daies, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Art thou not it which hath dryed the Sea, the waters of the greatest deep, that hath made the depths of the Sea, a way for the ransomed to pass over Is. 51. 9. 10.? Thou art he that took us out of the womb of destruction; thou didst make us hope, when we were upon the
brink of ruine; we were cast upon thee from the womb, thou art our God from our mother's belly, hide not thy face from us; put not thy servants away in anger; thou hast been our help, leave us not, neither forsake us, O God of our salvation Ps. 27 9.. Give ear, O Shepheard of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, thou that dwellest be∣tween We are his people the Cherubims, shine forth before England Scotland and Ireland, stir up thy strength & come and save us. Thou feedest us with the bread of tears, and givest us tears to drink in great mea∣sure. Thou makest us a strife unto our neigh∣bors; and our enemies laugh among themselves. Turn us again, O God of Hosts, and cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved. Thou hast brought a Vine out of Aegypt; thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it, thou prepardst room before it, and didst cause it to take deep root, and it filled the land. The hills were co∣vered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were like the goodly Cedars. She sent out her boughs unto the Sea, and her branches unto the fver. Why hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by the way▪ do pluck her? The boar out of the wood doth wast it; and the wild beast out of the field doth devour it. Return we beseech thee, O Lord of Hosts, look down from Heaven and be∣hold and visit this Vine, and the Vineyard which thy right hand hath planted, & the branch that thou madest strong for thy self. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the
Son of man whom thou madest strong for thy self Ps. 80.. Save us or we perish, O thou Preser∣ver of men; since that is thy property let it be thy pleasure: Imprint this thy name in so fair a Cha∣racter, that all the inhabitants of the land may read and rejoice. With thee 'tis as easie to save as destroy; to raise us to mercy, as drown us in misery. O shew forth thy power in attendance on thy goodness; and because God is our Pre∣server, let England be Preserved; since we call thee our Protector, let us be called thy Protected; since the Lord is our Saviour, let us be the Saved of the Lord; since to believe this, is our duty, let it be our safety also. Let not thy providence be blas∣phemed, by being disowned among the Heathen; who will conclude because God could not pre∣serve this nation where his worship hath been chiefly owned, therefore he destroyed it (x). Let not Protestant religion be discouraged, in 1 Num. 14. 15, 16. that the Prfessors of it are destroyed; though but Professers, preserve them for the profession sake. May we not represent before thee, the present state and condition of the world? How few enjoy, and fewer embrace the Gospel? And where hath it been more powerfully, suc∣cesfully dispensed than here? And will the Lord make his poor Kingdome the Butt to level his arrows at? and chuse us from among the rest, a people called by his name, to pour upon us the hottest of his fury? Must Judgment thus begin at the house of God? When there are so few obey the Gospel? Will the Lord root up so many professing Christians
when the number is so great of the heathens that know thee not, and of the families that call not upon thy name? Shall such a doleful wound be given to thy Church, which is already sunk into so low, and weak an estate? Will not the maligners of our peace and Gospel, to have their wills of us, endanger the ruine of other Church∣es also, when their friends are so much lessened and disabled, and their enemies strengthened? And is not this thy own cause and quarrel? & thy glory enfolded in thy Churches welfare & successes, against all that seek to destroy it? Is not the relation & dearness, between Christ & his members the same now, as it was, when to one that with violence pierced him, he cried out, why persecutest thou me? Is not our God struck at by the blows that are given to his Church? And whilest the enraged instruments of Satan, are en∣deavouring not to leave him a people upon earth, doth not this speak them much more desirous there should be no God in Heaven? Thou O Lord art our Father, Redeemer, thy name is from ever∣lasting, O Lord, why hast thou made us to erre from thy waies, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake, the Tribes of thy inheritance. The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while; our adversaries have troden down thy Sanctuary. We are thine, thou never barest rule over them, they were not called by thy name Is. 63. 16. &c.. O the hope of Israel, the Saviour thereof in time of trouble; why shouldst thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a way-faring man, that turneth
aside to tarry for a night? Why shouldest thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name, leave us not Ie. 1. 8. 9. For the Lord will not forsake his people, for his great name's sake, because it ha pleased the Lord to make us his people 1 Sa. 12. 2.. Were we not in an ill case when thou began to do us good, and to lend us thy gospel? Hast thou not written thy name in fairer characters upon us, than on any other nation? Upon whom the Envy of Papists, and Hopes of the Protestants, are especially set? Art not thou then concern∣ed in our welfare? Thou knewest not onely what we have done, but what we would do; as it hindered thee not from beginning a good work, let it not from perfecting it. O glorifie thy name in our preservation, by For the sake of religion. giving the inhabitants, especially the professors of our nation, opportunity and ability of re∣deeming the honour of religion, so lamentably impair'd and forfeited by great pretenders to it. Let there be yet such a generation among us, of those that may abound in holiness, humility, charity, self-denyal, undissembled zeal for thy glory, as by their exemplary, unblameable be∣haviour may adorn the gospel, and wipe of all those foul blots, which hath been cast upon their profession, by the malice and ignorance of those who devise faults or aggravate them, or con∣demn the generation of the just for the miscar∣riages of professors. Let not religion go down a∣mong
us, in such a cloud, as their unsuitable behaviour hath brought upon it: but let such sincere lovers, and practicers of it, be raised up, and continued, as may effectually vindicate it, silence and shame its accusers; and make some reparations o the dishonour done to thy name, even by such as boast a zeal for the Lord of Host. Suffer dust and ashes humbly to speak un∣to From their wonted prevalency thee from the number of the truly Godly yet among us. Wilt thou destroy the righteous with the wicked Ge. 18. 23? Notwithstanding the general corruption of our wayes, have we not multitudes that wickedly depart not from thee, but are stedast in thy fear? In what nation hast thou a greater number, of holy, humble, sincere people, that go not after the service of their lusts, nor bow the knee to Baal, but daily to the father of mercies, in earnest supplications for thy favour, and are sincerely consecrated to thee? and shall not the voice of their prayers, prevail over the noise and provocations of our crying sins? And their fruitfulness prevent rooting up this thy garden, thy vineyard? Shall not they live before thee, who desire their lives for no other end, but to serve and please thee? Who are still contriveing, which way they may most advance thy honour? We trust, there are many Tens in our city, many Fifties in our coun∣try, many Thousands in our Israel, and wilt thou not spare the place for their sake Ge. 18. 2? How  ill can thy faithful industrious servants be spar∣ed
out of the world? O let not such judgments overflow us, as should sweep them away, and make them incapable of doing thee here any further service. 'Tis the living, the living shall praise thee; O let them live and they will bless thee, O let not the Sun go down at noon, nor the evening surprize thy labourers, while so much work is before them. Make it appear e∣ven to their malicious contemners, how con∣trary thy judgment is theirs; how pretious they are in thy sight; and how themselves are beholden to them, while they undervalue and hate them; how much they contribute to the Kingdome's safety, while accounted the troublers of it. Thou hast said, at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a Kingdome, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from the evil, I will re∣pent of the evil that I thought to do unto them Je. 18. 7. 8▪. And that, if I shut up heaven that their be no rain, or i I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I end pestilence among my peo∣ple: if my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked wayes; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin and heal their land ▪2 Ch. 7. 1 14.. And thou hast been prevailed with for mercy and deliverance by a few, yea, a single person for the whole: why then, O our God, hast thou forsaken us? Why art thou so far from helping us, and from the words of our roaring? We cry in the day time, bu
thou hearest not, and in the night season, and are not silent: but thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel: Our fathers trusted in thee and were not confounded; they cried unto thee and were delivered Ps. 22. 1 &c.: And art thou not the same? And is not thine eye still upon the righteous, and thine ear open to their cry? Hast thou not as great an esteem, & art as willing to shew favour for them as ever? Sayest thou to the seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain? O Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayers of thy people Ps. 80. 4. wherewith thou wast wont to be delighted and conquered? Shall those made according to thy will be of no efficacie? Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble, thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear Ps. 10. 17. O let us, to whom thou hast gi∣ven no prohibition, but leave, and inclination to come unto thee, experience thee a God hear∣ing prayers. O let thine eyes be open, and thine cares attent unto the prayers that are made in this land 2 Ch. , 15. O turn our prayers into praises for mercy; now we call upon thee in the day of trouble, deliver us that we may glorifie thee. So will we not go back from thee; quicken us, and we will call upon thy name Ps. 80. 18. We would plead with thee from our own From our own weak∣ness. weakness; and so that glory thou maist get to thy self in delivering and establishing us, which will appear to be the Lords doing and it will be mar∣vellous in our eyes. It is a time for God to work, when men are utterly at a loss, and can
only lament, not amend the sadness of their con∣dition. When there is none else in Heaven or earth to help, thou art wont to lift up thy self, & to bring salvation by thy own outstretched arm Is. 33. ▪ 10.. Thou art not willing to share thy glory with another; or to contribute any thing to men's idolizing their own strength, riches, multitudes: Thou chusest to perform thy mighty works, when least danger of ascribing them to any but thy self. We find thee complaining of too many Ju. 7. 2., but never of too few, lest they vaunt themselves against thee, saying, their own hand hath saved them. Our extremity, is thy opportunity; when thy people are ready to be overwhelmed Mar. 4. 37.; when thou seest their pow∣er is gone, and there is none shut up or left Deu. 32, 39., when they say our bones are dryed, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our part Ez. 37. 11.; now will I arise saith the Lord: thou wilt be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble Ps. 9. 9.. O how often art thou seen in the mount, between the knife and the throat, the hand lifted up, and the blow Ge. 12. 10.? Permitt∣ing thy people to be reduced to such streights, as to their plainest sense, omnipotency can only rescue them; for discovery of thy own readi∣ness and ability to save, and to exercise and en∣gage their faith, patience, love, thankfulness, and confidence for the future. And from such sig∣nal evidences of Divine assistance, most sensibly we make our acknowledgments, that if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then they had swallow∣ed
us up quick Ps. 12. . 2, 3.. The many great disadvant∣ages we lie under will tend to advance the praise, and discover the power of our unerring Physi∣cian, and mighty deliverer, who makes the most hopeless disease, the triumph of his art, and to whom no difficulties are insuperable. Why may we not then turn our very discouragements into matter of confidence; and make the grounds of our fear, motives to our hope, by using them as so ma∣ny arguments in our petitioning for relief from Omnipotency. We are overrun with such fatal distempers, and so far from being able to heal our selves, that we can scarce discern which way it is possible; and had we not a God to relie on, should judge our selves quite past all hope of help or healing: O then that it might please the most High to undertake our establishment & cure when we seem to be cast off and given up for lost; how exceedingly will the dangerousness of the disease and untoward∣liness of the patient, discover and commend the compassion and skill of our great Physician? How would all the difficulties, and seeming im∣possibilities in humbling, reforming, uniting such an obstinate, wicked divided people as we, contribute to the great praises of him that ac∣complishes it; who purposes and none can disap∣point, works, and none can hinder him? We are poured out lke water; all our bones are out of joint; our hearts are like wax, melted in the midst of our bowels, our strength is dryed up, & thou hast brought us unto the dust of death; we lie open and obnoxious to the malice, subtilty, have
power and plots of our enemies, are ignorant of their conspiracies, & have little strength to resist. O our God, wilt thou not judge them; for we have no might of our own, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee 2 Chron. 20. 12.. O be not thou far from us, for trouble is near, for there is none to help, O thou our strength, hast thou to help us Ps. 22. 11. 19.. Attend unto our cry, for we are brought low; deliver us from our adver∣saries, for they are stronger than we. Bring our souls out of prison, that we may praise thy name Ps. 142. 6. 7.. Save us according to thy mercy, that they may know that this is thy hand, that thou Lord hast done it (z). And that all the Kingdoms x Ps. 109. 26 27. of the earth may know, that thou art the Lord God, even thou only 2 King. 19. 19.. 'Tis to thee the All-knowing & Almighty God we betake our selves; O make known thy wisdom and power, where the creatureis of so little use, in frustrating and defeating all preparations and devices against us. Help O Lord, or we perish: we are impotent, but thou art Omnipotent; our insufficiency, calls to thy Allsufficiency: If thou wilt, thou canst defend and deliver us: It is nothing with thee to help, whe∣ther with many, or with them that have no pow∣er; against, or without means: with thee all things are possible; thou that shakest the powers of Heaven, canst shake the powers of the earth; thou that broughtest light out of darkness, and order out of confusion, canst create deliverance out of destruction it self. Thou that puttest a hook into the nostrils of the Leviathan, and a bridle upon the Sea, saying, hitherto shalt thou
go, and no further; canst restrain the rage of man, and bring back from the brink of ruine. Thou that found out a way to save a world canst also, to save this small remnant of it. Our coun∣sels are confounded and our wits at an end; we see after all our consultations, we have taken the wisest way to ruine our selves: Lord we ap∣peal from the wisdom of man to thine; we beg thy counsel which never fails; thou canst not be overreached by counsel, undermin'd with trea∣son, nor surprized by stratagem; but canst take the wise in their own craftiness, and counterplot the policies of all the Sages of the earth. We know not how to get out of this Labyrinth, but all our intricacies are to thee an open path: teach then our Senators wisdom, find thou out a way to save us, and we shall then be wise and saved: be present with, and president among and over them, let nothing that concernes our peace be hid from their eyes. But if thou wilt not save us by others, save us by thy self: let thy wisdome a∣lone work out our deliverance; leading us in the open plaines of safety, by what wayes seem best to thee: Then will we admire thy wisdome; & out O the depth of the riches both of the wis∣dome & knowledge of God, how unsearchableare his judgments, and his ways past finding out. Ro. 11. 3.. 'Tis of the Lord's mercy that we are not con∣sumed, From hi own bow∣els & good pleasure. and because his compassions fail not. If thou shouldest lay judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, make us as mise∣rable as we have made our selves sinfull, and give us over to all those desolations the present
circumstances of things (especially the continu∣ance of our hainous crimes) threaten us with; thou might make thy arrowes drunk with our blood, thy anger and jealosie to smoake against us, and lay upon us all the curses that are writ in thy book, and blot out our name from under heaven. But we have heard the King of Israel is a merciful King: cruelty lodges not in thy bo∣some; thou delights not to bath thy sword in the blood of thy subjects; thou art not pleased in acting tragedies in the world, nor in the tor∣ture and ruine of thy poor creatures. The Lord will not cast off for ever, but though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies; for he doth not aflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men La. . 31, 2.. O we appeal to the tender bowels of our God; since mercy is thy name in which thou gloryest, let it be the work in which thou re∣joycest; and now we beseech thee, let the pow∣er of our Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken, saying, the Lord is long suffering and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. Pardon we beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven them even until now Nu 14. 17. &c.. We deserve no mercy, but mer∣cy is shew'd for mercy sake; and thou hast mer∣cy, because thou wilt have mercy, and thy mer∣cy is over all thy works. Is not our God a God of bowels? That hath a sense of the miseries of his people, a great and ready compassion for them? And will he then be hardned against
his poor people? Will it consist with his father∣ly bowels, to behold us plunged into such dole∣ful straits and perplexities? Will the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be favourable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Do his pro∣mises fail for ever more? Hath God forgotten to be gracious? Hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies Ps. 77. 7. 8? Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies towards us? Are they restrained? Is. 63. 15. 16. Remember, O Lord thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses; for they have been ever of old Ps. 2. 9.. O! pity the desolations, and com∣passionate the ruins of poor England, that hath been the garden of the world; the beauty of Christendom; the defence of many nations, and terrour of all; is become despicable as the dust, and trampled on by those, who have owned her very shadow for a sufficient shelter: let thy bow∣els yearn over her to see her in the dust. Return O Lord, deliver our souls, O save us for thy mercy sake Ps. . 4.. Disappoint our feares and dis∣mall apprehensions: O spare thy people, whom thou hast created after thy own image, and re∣deemed with thy most precious blood, and let not thine heritage be brought to confasion. Nor desire we mercy, only in reference to outward safety, but inward sanctity: we would be sav∣ed from sin, as well as from misery; and made holy, as well as happy. Now herein will the glory of thy mercy appear, if thou save our bo∣dies, our estates, our friends, so as withall, to
save our soules: hereby will mercy be found in the embraces of justice, and so, both joyntly bearing up the diadem of thy glory: justice ad∣vanced in the full satisfaction taken from our surety; and mercy exalted, in converting us to him, and saving us by him. Now, if only thy justice be glorified in our destruction, rather glo∣rifie thy mercy joyntly with it, in our salvation: If mercy must not rejoyce over justice, yet at least let mercy rejoyce together with it: if both can be glorious in England's preservation, let not only one be glorious in England's perdition. When we have said all, we acknowledge we have nothing to say for our selves, & that no∣thing we can say, can in the least prove us de∣deserving the mercy we need and sue for; we therefore the more earnestly recommend our selves to thy free grace, and the more singly de∣pend upon thy goodness, which will be the more manifested and magnified, the less we have to plead on our own behalf, the greater will thy compassions appear, who yet affords us gracious audience: Since then, our chief, indeed our on∣ly, discouragement is our wickedness and unwor∣thiness, our abuse of mercies and unfruitfulness under them, our continued senselesness & hainous miscarriages under thy judgments, we thus far plead even our indesert itself, as it will contribute the more to the glory of that grace, which shall hear and help such worthless sinners as we. For thy name sake, O Lord, pardon our iniquities, for they are great. If it be an exaltation of mer∣cy,
to shew it self in misery, much more to mag∣nifie it against sin, that calls for wrath, but mi∣sery naturally for mercy; when so marvailously display'd, as when thou sayest to people that are in their blood, and pollution live Ez. 16. 6.? O give us to possess this land, not for our righteousness, for we are a stiffnecked people, but for the wicked¦ness of those that would drive us out; and for thy glory sake, for vindication of thy honour, which is otherwise subject to be trampled on. O work for thy name, that it should not be pollu∣ted before those among whom we were, in whose sight thou made thy self known unto us, in bringing us out of worse than Egyptian darkness Ez. 20. 8. 9. 14. 22.. And what shall we say, when we turn our backs before our enemy? and what wilt thou do unto thy great name? Thou hast seemed to be at a strait between thine anger and thine ho∣nour De. 32. 6. 27.; do it not for our sake, be we ashamed and confounded for our own wayes Ez. 36. 22. 32., but for thy own sake, for thy free mercy's sake (which hath prevailed with thee for all the great and good things thou hast done for the sons of men) without any other argument than what thou fetchest from thy own bowels. Remember thy word unto thy servants upon which thou hast caused us to hope Ps. 119. 49.. For my names sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I re∣frain for thee, that I cut thee not off. For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it, for how should my name be polluted, and I will not give my glory unto another Is. 48. . 11.. Who is a God like thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and
passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retaineth not his anger for ever because he delighteth in mercy. He will turn a∣gain, he will subdue our iniquities: and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the dayes of old Mich. 7. 18. &c.. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee, thou art righteous in all the evil thou hast brought upon us; but to the Lord our God belongs mercy and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against him, O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, we beseech thee let thine anger and thy fury be turned a∣way from us, because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, we are become a re∣proach to all that are about us. Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayers of thy servants, & cause thy face to shine upon us, for the Lord's sake. O our God, encline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold our desolations, and the people that are called by thy name; for we do not pre∣sent our supplications before thee for our righte∣ousness, but for thy great mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive; O Lord hearken and do; defer not for thy own sake, O our God, for thy City and thy people are called by thy name Da. 9. 8.. Thou hast done great things for those, who have deserved exceeding ill Ezr. 5. & 9. Is. 57. 16. &c., and made many gra∣cious promises, notwithstanding their manyfold transgressions; and not waited for their repen∣tance
before thou conferred the intended bene∣fits; but by preventing them with these, hast drawn them unto it, that then (when thou hast dispensed on them those temporal and spiritual blessings) they should remember their own e∣vil waies, and their doings which have not been good, and loath themselves in their own sight, for their iniquities, and for their abominations Ezr. 20. 23. 24. & 6. 2. &c.. Whence didst thou all those great acts for thy people (and first began even our reformation) but from thy mercy which endureth for ever Ps. 136.? What if England be not Israel, the God of England, is the God of Israel, unchangeable, and hath shewn in his word, promises, precepts, examples, what he will do to his Church, in all ages; and what∣soever things were written aforetime, concern∣ing his dealings with his people were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures▪ might have hope Ro. 15. 4.. Hast thou not shewn mercy to a vile wretched people? O set the same free love on work, on our behalf; seeing it is in thy power to reform us by mercies as well as corrections, and hast de∣clared thou wilt proceed this way in Gospel times Ezr. 36. Ho. 3. 5.. When didst thou, who art rich in mercy, for thy great love wherewith thou loved us, call the Gentiles to be thy Church, but when we were the wild olive, dogs, sinners, dead in tres∣passes & sins? by grace we are saved Ep. 2. 45.: & upon the same argument wilt thou call the Jews who have polluted thy name in every place. After thy va∣rious methods, they rebelled against thee, yet being full of compassion, thou forgave their i∣niquities,
& destroyed them not Ps. 78. 37. 38.. And though thou art not under any obligation to do thus for this or that particular people, yet neither art thou restrained, and therefore we are not out of all hope, but that it may please thee to take this method with us, who may justly expect to be swal∣lowed up in utter destruction, in that hitherto we are so obstinate, unreclaimed, unaffected with all thy dealings: yet it is in thy power, it may be thy pleasure to work upon, and reform us, by thy signal restoration of mercy to us, when we have no merit to challenge, and less reason to expect it. O since it is the glory of thy Soveraignty and Prerogative Royal, to pardon offences, let ours be pardoned, let the sin of England be blotted out, that the name of England be not blotted out. Our sins undermine our safety, that we may be saved, let thy Soveraignty tri∣triumph over them. Our sins are great, but greater is he that pardons. 'Tis the glory of a man to pass by an offence, much more thine, whose prerogative principally it concerns Ex. 34. 67., and art unbounded in acts of grace. Lord glorifie thy Prerogative; shew thy self to be God, by for∣giving our great offences, and to be above Sove∣raign and Subject, by forgiving both. Let it ap∣pear that thou art God, and there is none like un∣to thee, by pardoning those sins and remitting those punishments, that none else can. We are in∣gulphed in misery, because we are deluged in sin; all our misfortunes proceed from misdemeaners; take away our guilt, and our griefes will follow: let England be pardoned, and then we doubt not
but it will be preserved. And do not only for∣give, but reform us; let all that have received power, & authority from thee, improve it for his interest to whom all power in Heaven and earth is given. Awaken our Magistrates to greater vigilancy in searching out, suppressing, punish∣ing impiety: against licentiousness of Judgment and practice; let holiness have, not only a tole∣ration, but an authority among us, make our Of∣ficers peace, and our Exactors righteousness, that we may be an eternal excellency, and the joy of many generations Is. 60. 15.. Let us search and try our waies, and turn unto thee our God; as uni∣versally and industriously combine to propitiate, as we have to provoke thee. Make us a Ho∣ly people zealous of good works. Let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish thou the just. Give thy people one heart and one way. Let every one that names the name of the Lord live as becomes the Gos∣pel, depart from all iniquity; weep day and night, and give thee no rest untill thou have mercy on us. Thou that turnest the rock into a standing water and the flint into a fountain of water Ps. 114. 8., strike upon these that are before thee. O Father of mercies, pity us who know not how to pity our selves. Though we have cast of all bowels, let us find them all concentred in thy self; heal our wounds, and which of all others is the most desperate, our unwillingness to be heal∣ed: let the spirit of peace overshadow us; and impress on us the dove-like qualities of meekness and gentleness. Rescue our religion from our pro∣phanation;
not by taking it from us, but by con∣forming us to it. Do for us not only above what we can ask or think, but beyond what we would wish or chuse; and suffer us not to acquire the miseries we so eagerly pursue. Let us be happy in that relation, of having the Lord for our God: save thy people, bless thine inheritance; feed them also, and list them up for ever Ps. 28. 9.. O canst thou see thy Sion a shipwracking, and not lend thy hand? Can the Shepherd be content to see the wolves worry his tender flock? The Father love to behold his children hate one another? Dearest Lord is not thy glory dearer to thee, than to thy spouse? Shall she be solicitous, and wilt not thou seem so to provide against thy disho∣nour? Is the Crown of Christ glistering enough on his head in the eyes of all the world? Hath our Jesus the full procurement of his blood? Hast thou left thy compassions, as well as the infirmi∣ties of thy body behind thee on earth? Is our Joseph in Heaven where there is provision e∣nough, and shall thy brethren starve for want of crumbs of comfort from thy table? Are thine affections altered with thy condition? Dost thou in thy glory trample under foot thy children, whom thou accounted as the apple of thine eye in the daies of thy sufferings? Shall we give over praying for opening the blind eye, and softening the hard heart? Shall we fall a∣sleep and urge thee no more? Shall we pull our hands from thy plough, and our necks from thy yoke? Will the Lord dispense with our luke∣warmnese, and wink at our apostacy? Is it not
thy burthen to see thy spirit so grieved? To see such noisome weeds and errors to grow in thy garden, which thou so much regardest? And so much backsliding after so much profession of re∣formation? Hath not the Lord said his moun∣tain shall be established in the top of all the moun∣tains Is. 2. 2. Mich. 4. 1.? And that Jerusalem shall be made the joy of many generations? Is not this thy own hand and seal? How long stay thy Cha∣riot wheels? Is the Lord angry at the prayers of his people, and not at the blasphemies of his enemies? Art thou offended because we pray for Sion, and wilt thou not if we forbear? Have we already the first fruits and shall we never have the harvest? Will the Lord comfort us mourning, enliven us dying, or raise us when bu∣ried and in our graves? O Lord, though thou dishonourest thy people, yet wilt thou disgrace the Throne of thy glory? Will not the adver∣sary say, surely if God in love had thus begun to build, he would have gone on to finish? Though we are trampled under foot, must thy Christ also? If his body hath deserved to sit on dunghills, & lie in fetters of Iron, our head hath merited to sit on a Throne, & to have the liberty of his spirit in the world. Though our prayers are rejected, yet wilt thou not fulfil thine own promise? Thou hast a Prerogative to save and destroy, but art thou not bound in Covenant to set up thy Son? And if thou make not hast for his glory, will not the world be ready to say the Lord is gone back of his word? Is it only free grace and mer∣cy, and not also justice and righteousness for our
God to justifie condemned sinners, & to sanctifie prophane conversations, & to carry on the build∣ing of the new Jerusalem to its desired perfection Doth the Lord seem to cast us off, to see whe∣ther we wil indeed cast him off? Or hide him∣self, to see if we will earnestly seek after him? Because his smiles have not caused us to love him, will he now frown on us, to make us to fear him? Are the golden daies of his spiritual presence gone, and not to come, as we hoped they were? That we should rather put mourning on our backs, than take harps in our hands? Be∣cause England hath been perfidious and perjuri∣ous to God, will God now break his covenant of faithfulness with England? Shall the un∣faithfulness of man, make God unfaithful? Did the Lord of old wait to be gracious, and will he now wait till we are gracious? Was the Lord wont to be found of those that sought him not, and will he not be now found of those that seek him? Wilt thou not pardon our hypocrisie, pride, passions, and prophaness till we repent, and is not that, thy gift? Shall disconsolate Sion never be ransomed from her spiritual sla∣veries, and distractions, till worthy? Is not the price of her redemption already paid? and will the Lord seem to require the debt again? Lord, are we so far gone from thine house, like prodigals, that either we want an heart to return or an hope, if we return, that our father will ac∣cept of us? Art not thou the God of peace? Is not thy son, the son of peace? Thy spirit, the spirit of peace? Thy Gospel, the gospel of peace? And shall not thy children, be children of peace?
Is Christ in one of his followers, against Christ in another? Is Christ divided? Blessed father, how shall the world know we are thy children, if we have not thy Image? Thy servants, if we wear not thy Livery? Will the world be con∣vinced by our divisions, that thou art love? Thy people see not so much prophaness in the world, as the world sees passions among thy people. We censure and condemn them for not agreeing with thy people, whilest they see thy people a∣gree not amongst themselves. Ah Lord! if cha∣rity be the onely badge of thy disciples, how few hast thou in the world? Is this a time to pull down, and not at all to build up? To cast a∣way stones and to divide, and not to gather stones to raise thy temple? Art thou resolv'd no more stories shall be built in Sion, till one stone be not left on another in Babylon? Are the grounds of our feares, not only from thy secret or open enemies, but also from the vain conver∣sations of the professours of thy name? Will the Lord consume their gold & silver, as well astthe other's hay & stubble? O how hath one form of thy people been trampling & triumphing over ano∣ther? O how many Sins dowe make, that thou hast not? How many articles do our passions put into our Creed, which thou never enjoynd to be believ'd for salvation? How have we been tithing mint, a∣nise, & cummin, neglecting the salvation of soules, & weighty matters of the Lord? O, when will the candle of the Almighty, shine on the heads of thy people as of old? When shall the name of thy son be poured out as a precious Ointment, that the virgins again may love thee? Lord,
let us be thy patients though thou woundest us: under thy rod, rather then we should be out of thy covenant; rather then we should sleep to death, sound thy trumpet, beat thine alarm; rather then we should not have thy presence, let us go into a furnace; thy Son, let us have a storm; rather then we should not be thy Children, whip us; thy servants, beat us; thy spouse, chide us; thy friends, frown on us. O sound a retreat to our disor∣ders; let all thy Saints engage their prayers and endea∣vours against the common enemy; that Sion may be ter∣rible as an army with banners; that the brats of Babylon may come and worship before her feet, and know that thou hast loved her. If the building of Sion may not go forward in this age, Lord, let it not go backward; if we may not build thy spiritual temple, let us at least lay up stuff for the building it in the next generation. O, how sad is it, that those who have been brought up in scarlet, should embrace dunghills? And that England that was the Terrour of the Lord, to the nations round a∣bout us, should so much be a scorn unto them, and a terrour one to another? O make up our breaches, com∣pose our differences, heal our disorders, unite our hearts to thee and one another: Restore, continue our forfeited mercies, prevent and remove our deserved judgments, be no more a consuming fire among us, but a wall of fire round about us to secure us and destroy our enemies; de∣light to bless us, and to watch over us, and to do us good: let us begin the reparation of our ruines, in the reformation of all our lives. Sanctifie the various dispen∣sations of thy providence towards us. Turn us unto thee by a speedy and an unfeigned repentance. O let the power of thy arm who art the Lord of Host, and the power of thy spirit, who art the God of all grace, now
appear and be exercised for and upon us: let thy power deliver us from the dangers wherewith we are surround∣ed; and thy grace so sanctifie this deliverance, that it may work those blessed effects among us, which no former dispensations have done, even to humble and re∣form us. Let thy mercies overcome the desert and cry of our hainous sins, and be now manifested towards us for thine own name sake; and let the manifestation of these undeserved mercies, overcome our stubborn hearts; that we may be ashamed, and loath our selves when we remember our own evil wayes; that ever we should be so basely disingenuous to rebel against a God of such pa∣tience and compassion, who notwithstanding all our unworthiness and provocations of his glorious majesty, yet in our low estate, hath pityed, and seasonably reliev∣ed us. Wherefore, give glory to thy own name, O God, we beseech thee, give glory to thy own name, in redeeming Israel, England, out of all its troubles, and from its iniquities; that hereby we may be not only engaged, but enabled to serve and glorifie thee, as thy redeemed ones for ever. FINIS.
