W2371 816.m.17[16] R205698 99883387 188559
His Majesties Most Gracious LETTER TO THE Parliament of SCOTLAND. With the Speech of the Marquis of Tweeddale, His Majesties High Commissioner: And the Speech of the Earl of Annandale, Lord President of the Parliament. Published by Authority. His Majesties most Gracious Letter to the Parliament of Scotland. WILLIAM R. My Lords and Gentlemen, THE Continuation of the War still hinders Us from Pursuing Our Resolu∣tion of being amongst you in Person; And so Obliges Us to Call you toge∣ther once more in Our Absence. Therefore We have appointed Our Right Trusty and Right In∣tirely Beloved Cousin and Counsellor, John Mar∣quiss of Tweeddale, to be Our Commissioner, and to Represent Our Person and Authority amongst you. The Proofs he hath given of his Capacity and Experience in Business, as well as of his Fide∣lity and Zeal, by his many and long Services to the Crown and Nation, and particularly to Us, since We made him Our Chancellor, will Render Him very Acceptable to you. We Desire you to give him Intire Trust and Credit; for We have fully Instructed Him with Our Mind. He has Powers to pass all such Laws for the Good of that Our Antient Kingdom, as have been proposed to Us at this Time. He is to Ask nothing of you in Our Name, but that which the Interest of the Countrey makes necessary to be Done; And there∣fore We need not Mention to you, that the Sub∣sidies for Paying the Forces are now Expired, and that your Peace and Safety Requires the Renewing of them during the War. You will be also Sen∣sible, that there is a Necessity to have the Coast and Trade secured from Privateers. We are glad of any Appearances of a Disposition to Mo∣deration and Union, about Church-Matters; We Hope you will Encourage it, and Promote it, by removing the Subjects of Differences as much as you can. We are not unmindful of your Letter to Us in the close of the last Session. The known Interrup∣tions We have had in Business this Winter, have been a great Hinderance to Us, but We are re¦solved to Do whatsoever may be for the security of the Government, and the Satisfaction of Our good Subjects. We Recommend to you Calmnes and Unanimity in your Proceedings; and Doubt not, but that you'll Act sutably to the Confidence We have put in you, in Calling you again in Our Absence: And that as you have done upon other Occasions so you will upon this, Give Us such Signal Testimonies of your Duty and affection, as will convince all Men of the perfect Union and Understanding, that is betwixt Us and that Our Ancient Kingdom. Given at Our Court at Ken∣signton, the 17th Day of April, 1695. And of Our Reign the Seventh Year. By His Majesties Command, Directed thus, J. Johnstoun. To the Lords Temporal, and the Com∣missioners of Shires and Burghs, Assembled in Parliament of Our Antient Kingdom of Scotland. The Speech of John Marquis of Tweeddale, His Majesties High Commissioner to the Parliament of Scotland; on Thursday the ninth of May, 1695. My Lords and Gentlemen, THE great Confidence the King hath in your Affection and Faithfulness to his Go∣vernment, and the Trust he reposes in you, doth evidently appear in His calling you so frequently together, during his own necessary Absence be∣yond Sea, as well as His tender Care and Concern for your Safety and Welfare, in minding every thing which may contribute thereto. Particularly as to the Concerns of the Church, that all Differences about Church-Matters, and amongst Church-Men may be composed; it being His Majesties Purpose to maintain Presbyterean-Go∣vernment in the Church of Scotland. And that the Peace and Security of the King∣dom against Foreign Invasion and Intestine Com∣motion be provided for, by renewing the former or granting other Supplies for maintaining the Land Forces, and providing and entertaining a compe∣tent Naval Force for the Defense of the Coast, and securing of Trade. And if you find it will tend to the Advance∣ment of Trade, that an Act be passed for the En∣couragement of such as shall Acquire and Establish a Plantation in Africa or America, or any other part of the World, where Plantations may be lawfully acquired; His Majesty is willing to De∣clare, That He will grant to the Subjects of this Kingdom, in Favours of those Plantations, such Rights and Priviledges as he doth grant in like Cases to the Subjects of His other Dominions. And that the Judicatories Higher and Subal∣tern be so Regulated in their Proceedings, as Ju∣stice may be Administred with the greatest Dis∣patch, and least Charge to the People.
These things have taken up some part of His Majesties Time and Thoughts these Months past, that I have had the Honour to wait upon Him, and have been frequently Discoursed by Him, and then put in the Method of Instructions, and Di∣rections for my Behaviour on the Station he hath Honoured me with. So that I can say without Flattery, there is no∣thing that can Contribute to promote the Honour and Jnterest, the Safety and Security of this His Antient Kingdom, which His Majesty will not concur with you to provide for, and hath not Impowered me to Consent to. It remains then, My Lords and Gentlemen, for you to take these weighty Affairs under Conside∣ration, and to Consult of the best Ways and Means to enable His Majesty to perfect so good Designs. By granting Him Supplies for maintaining the present Land-Forces. And for providing and Entertaining a Compe∣tent Naval-force, for the Defence of the Coast, and Securing of Trade: In Order to which, His Majesty hath granted a Commission of Admiralty for Managing the Affairs thereof. Not omitting to take Care for the other unavoi∣dable Contingencies of the Government, wherein the Civil List comes short. Your Dispatch of these Great Affairs with Chearfullness and Alacrity, will perfect a good Understanding, and perpetuat a Confidence be∣twixt the King and you. The Speech of William Earl of Annandale, Lord President of the Parliament of Scotland, on Thursday the Ninth of May, 1695. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Am very sensible it is a great and undeserved Honour, that I have His Majesties Commands to preside in this Session of Parliament; for I know well my insufficiency and unfitness, to Dis∣charge so important a Trust, but Duty calls, and I must obey. I do therefore rely upon His Majesties Good∣ness, who I know, has those Allowances to give, which the accidental Failings and Escapes of His Servants may require; And I am convinced, that the same Zeal and Forwardness which has former∣ly appeared in all the Proceedings of this Parlia∣ment, for His Majesties true Interest, the Support and Honour of His Government, will yet show it self amongst Us; and it is You I hope, will make this Station easie to me. Here lies my great Encouragement and Confi∣dence, that my Defects and Wants shall be cove∣red and supplied, by a cheerful and ready Com∣plyance from this Honourable and Great Meeting, with all His Majesties so just and reasonable De∣mands. And now, My Lords and Gentlemen, it may be expected that I should enlarge upon every Parti∣cular, which His Majesty by His Gracious Letter, and his Grace My Lord Commissioner in his Speech, has recommended to you, whereby you may see His Majesty asks not for himself, He on∣ly prevents Our necessary Cares, for it is Our own safety and security that requires the dispatch of all of them; but his Grace has so fully and di∣stinctly spoke upon all the several Heads, and they do so effectually speak and recommend themselves, that I am perswaded, there remains a Conviction upon Us all; and I shall but touch some few of them. The first makes way for it self, a Supply for sub∣sisting of the Forces which are now on foot, or what more may be judged necessary for preserving and securing the Peace and Quiet of this Kingdom. For let Us consider, His Majesty engaged in For∣reign Wars against the Enemies of our Religion and Liberties, and that we bear no share of the Expense. Or if we reflect on His exposing His Sacred Per∣son (I may say too liberally) to all the Dangers and Accidents of War, upon whose Safety depends, God knows, not only Our happiness, but the hap∣piness of Europe, we must all as good Protestants, and good Countrey-Men, esteem it Our Honour and Credit, as well as Our Interest, to give now cheerfully, what the Honour and Security of His Majesties Government calls for. And since We are Happy and Easie under it, let Us use our outmost Endeavours that this Inestima∣ble Blessing may not only be continued with Us, but handed down to Our Posterity. I Think I need scarce Mind you, how much the Honour of the Nation, and Our Trade has suffe∣red, by the Want of some Ships of War, for the Guard of Our Coasts, and Convoys; This is not only our Loss in general, but I believe many who hear Me, may be now Sensibly Touched with their own particular Losses; so that I need not Use Ar∣guments to Enforce this, nor can I Doubt your Forwardness to Provide against It in time coming; and it is no small Encouragement that Our King proposes only those Things to Us, which are Our own Advantage to Grant. I shall but shortly take Notice of the Fresh As∣surances We have of His Majesties Gracious and Firm Resolutions to Maintain the Presbyterian-Go∣vernment of this Church, as now by Law Established; And I Hope the Moderation and Calmness that shall at this Time Appear in all Our Proceedings in Church Matters, will Satisfie the World that this is the Government most Agreeable to the Temper and Inclination of this People, and most Sutable for the Interest and Support of Our King, the Civil Government, and Peace of this Kingdom. I Fear to Spend too much of your Time, and am sensible, You cannot Bestow it worse; but I Hope You'l Allow me to Wish, there may be Unanimi∣ty bnd Cmness in all Our Proceedings, and that We Abstain from all Heas and Animosities, laying aside Privat Ends and Designs, that so We may with all Expedition Finish the Work We have before Us; and thus We shall not only raise Our Reputation Abroad, but Satisfie His Majestie, We Deserve the Trust, He hath Reposed in Us, when He himself is out of Britain. And can there be a greater Inducement, or a stronger Argument to Encourage Us, then that We have a King; who is not only careful to Govern Us by Our standing Law, but as We may see, has now Instructed His Grace, My Lord Commissioner, that such New Laws may be Made, and Old Ones so Rectified; as may be Judged most for the Inte∣rest, Safety, and Ease of His Subjects. There is yet One Thing, which I shall but Name, that does justly Challenge a more than ordinarie Zeal and Fervour in our Duty at this Time, and it is the Sad and Irreparable Loss We have Sustained of the Best of Queens, I insist not upon it, for it were to Renew Your Grief, and I shall only Wish (My Lords and Gentlemen) We may All of Us make this Use of it, that as now the Whole Soveraign∣ty is Lodged in His Majesty, it may appear by Our Actings, that We have Doubled our For∣wardness and Endeavours to serve Him, which is the only way now left Us, to Show Our Just Sense of this inexpressible Loss, and to make it in some Measure, more Supportable by His Majesty. And as We Ought to Give Him all the Assu∣rances Imaginable, that We will Effectually Main∣tain and Support His Interest and Government, against All His Enemies; So when We put a Just Value upon so great a Blessing, it may be a pre∣vailing Mean with GOD to Continue Him long and Prosperously with Us. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson; And Reprinted by Edward Jones in the avy. 1695.
