R492 [ocn]767840346 212292
REASONS for Incouraging the Throwing of Silk in this Kingdom, and Discouraging the Im∣portation of Foreign Thrown Silk hither, especially Over-Land. First, FOrasmuch as the Throwing of Silk Imploys many Thou∣sands of Poor, the greatest numbers of which are, The Wives, Widows, and Children of Seamen. Secondly, For that it occasions the Consumption of the greatest quantities of our Woollen Manufacture, in which many Thousand of Poor are Imployed, That Silk being alwayes brought Raw that comes from Turky, (whither our Cloth is sent) and is of no use unthrown. Thirdly, if Foreign Thrown Silk be incouraged to be Impor∣ted (especially over Land) in all probability it will be the Ruine of the Throwing Trade, (as has been experienced:) And also of all those that depend thereon, as was evident by the Out-Cries of Multitudes all over the City, when it was suffer'd, even to the Doors of the Honourable House of Commons before the late Act past for discouraging of it. Fourthly, For that it will of necessity greatly hinder the Exporta∣tion of Cloth, or bring it to a very Low Price, as it did before the late Act past, to the Dammage of the Nation in general, as well as the Impoverishment of those Imployed in the Manufacturing thereof. Fifthly, If it be objected that nothing is desired but what we do not Throw, and that if the Weavers have it not as cheap here, as it is had in Holland and France, they shall suffer greatly; and the Lustring and Alamode Manufacture be in danger of being lost, Foreign Wove Silk being Imported hither cheaper than they can bring it to Market. To which is Answered, † That there is considerable Quantities on the way by Sea coming hither. * And that there is no Silk, but in a little time, there is reason to be∣lieve may be Thrown here. † If any be suffered to be brought Over-Land, so much may be brought under the Umbrage and Denomination thereof, and so Cheap, that the Weavers may have little, or no occasion for Turky Silk Thrown, Counterfeit Italian Silk (which will serve for almost all purposes) being so like what they desire, that it is rather bought upon Reputation, than Judgment, and consequently will come in, if the other does. * All which considered as it was by King, Lords, and Commons be∣fore the Late Act past for Disincouraging the Importation of Foreign Thrown Silk into this Kingdom Over-Land; It is again humbly left to their Wisdom, Whether it be more reasonable that the Late Act should remain in Force, and that a Branch of the Weaving-Trade should suffer, and the Alamode and Lustring Manufacture, which is but of Yesterday, should be Discourag'd, or the Throwing-Trade be Ruin'd, and all that depend thereon Begger'd, The Consumption of our Woollen Manufacture Impeded, and all that depend thereon Impoverished.
The Weavers Reply. First, THese Persons are imployed in Throwing of Turky and China Silks, such as were (before the late Act) Throwed in Holland and imported hither, to the dammage of the English Throwers, But the present Bill in Parlia∣ment provides against the Importation of such Silks. The Numbers of Persons imployed by the Throwers, are very inconsiderable, if compared with those imployed by the Weavers, in Manufacturing of fine Italian Thrown Silk, who also have Wives and Children to be maintained by them. Secondly, Much greater quantities of Turky Silk would be consumed, or used in Woven Silks, had we fine Italian Thrown Silk, in like manner as our Neighbours beyond the Seas: For that Turky Silk is of little Use without fine Italian Silk to mix with it, The Trade to Italy may be truly said to take off as much Manu∣factur'd Wool, as the Turky Trade, besides many other Commodities of the growth of this Nation. Thirdly, Fine Italian and Sicilian Silks are desired to be Imported over Land, which the English Throwers cannot Throw, and all the Noise and Interest that is made against the Importation thereof, is because it will abate the extravagant Price of Turky Silk, which is advanced from 17 s. to 21 s. per l. and unless the Weavers are releived, it is said the same will be at 25 s. per l. These Outcries (however immodestly owned) were on account of a Bill to in∣joyn the wear of Woollen several Months in the Year. Fourthly, The Consumption or Use of Turky Silk is an Incouragement to the Exportation of Cloth; and when Turky Silk was at a Reasonable Price, the same was Customarily Exported to Holland, Flanders, Hamburgh and France; and greater Quantities were then also worked up by the English Weavers, to the great Incouragement of the Exportation of Cloth; but now (by Reason of the great Price of Turky Silk) there is none Exported: Which is a great detriment to the Woollen Manufacture. † Merchants of known Integrity do say that but one English Ship (called the Princess) is expected with Messina Silk until about September, 1693. or the re∣turn of the Convoy now going to Turky, which Ship is in great danger, and occa∣sions the extraordinary Insurance of 40 Guineas per Cent. And but one English Ship of Ten (that came from the several Ports of Italy, Sicily and Naples) hath escaped the French. * The Throwers cannot Throw such Fine Italian Thrown Silks as are desired to be Imported over Land, For that such Silks must necessarily be Wound by a Water-Engine; the setting up whereof they have Industriously opposed, and their Journeymen (however Incouraged) have threatned to pull down the Houses of such who were willing to Erect such Engines. † That fine Italian and Dutch Thrown Silks are as easily distinguished as Flax and Hemp, and the Officers at the Custom-House of London (where Thrown Silks are only brought) do daily distinguish Goods, less distinguishable than such Thrown Silks. * That there will be as much Money paid to the Poor for Manufacturing of Alamodes and Lustrings (if duely Incouraged, and though but of Yesterday) as the whole Trade of Throwers do pay for Winding and Throwing of Silk, but no Comparison can be made with the several other Branches of the Weaving Trade. All which Considered, and that the Extravagant Price (not the Consumption of Turky Silk) is Projected, It's prayed that all Private Interest, as Ingrossing of Silk, or advancing the Price thereof may be discouraged, by permitting Fine Italian and Sicilian Thrown Silks to be imported over Land by Holland, Ham∣burgh, &c. only during the present War with France, or until such time as the Throwers can provide and Throw the same Silks. Which will procure a greater Consumption of the Woollen Manufacture, and prevent the Ruin of the Silk Weaving Trade.
