10455 99850775 16001
A mery Dia∣logue, declaringe the proper∣tyes of shrowde shrewes, and ho∣nest wyues, not onelie verie pleasaunte, but also not a lytle profitable: made by ye famous clerke D. Erasmus Roteroda∣mus. Translated in to Englyshe. ¶Anno. M.CCCCC. IVII.
EUlalia. God spede, & a thou¦sand mine old acqueintāce. xantippa. xan. As many a∣gayn, my dere hert. Eulali. me seme is ye ar waxē much faire now of late. Eula. Saye you so? gyue you me a mocke at the first dash. xan. Nay veryly but I take you so. Eula. Hap∣pely mi new gown maketh me to loke fayrer then I sholde doe. xan. Sothe you saye, I haue not sene a mynioner this many dayes, I reken it Englishe cloth. Eu. It is english stuff and dyed in Uenis. xan. It is softer then sylke what an oriente purpel colore here is who gaue you so rich a gift. Eu. How shoulde honeste women come by their gere? but by their husbandes. xā. Hap¦py arte thou that hathe suche an hus∣band, but I wolde to god for his pas∣syon, that I had maryed an husband of clowts, when I had maried col my good mā. Eula. Why say, ye so. I pray you, are you at oddes now. xā. I shal neuer be at one wt him ye se how beg∣gerly
I go. I haue not an hole smock to put on my backe, and he is wel con¦tente with all: I praye god I neuer come in heuen & I be not ashamed of∣times to shewe my head, when I se o∣ther wiues how ner and trim they go that ar matched with farre porer mē then he is. Eula. The apparell of ho∣nest wiues is not in the aray of the bo¦dy, nor in the tirementes of their head as saynte Peter the apostle teacheth vs (and that I learned a late at a ser∣mon) but in good lyuynge and honest conuersacion and in the ornamentes of the soule, the cōmon buenes ar pain¦ted vp, to please manye mennes eies we ar trīme ynough yf we please our husbands only. xan. But yet my good man so euyll wylling to bestow ought vpon his wyfe, maketh good chere, and lassheth out the dowrye that hee hadde with mee no small pot of wine. Eulaly, Were vpon? xantipha, wher∣on hym lyke the beste, at the tauerne, at the stewes, and at the dyce. Eulalia
Peace saye not so. xan. Wel yet thus it is, then when he cōmeth home to me at midnight, longe watched for, he ly∣eth rowyng lyke a sloyne all the leue longe nyght, yea and now and thē he all bespeweth his bed, and worse then I will say at this tyme, Eulali. Peace thou dyshonesteth thy self, when thou doest dishonesteth thy husbād. xantip. The deuyl take me bodye and bones but I had leuer lye by a sow with pig∣ges, then with suche a bedfelowe. Eu∣lali. Doest thou not then take him vp, wel fauoredly for stūbling. xantip. As he deserueth I spare no tonge. Eulali¦a. what doth he thē. xantip. At the first breake he toke me vp vengealy, tru∣sting that he shoulde haue shakē me of and put me to scilence with his crabid wordes. Eula Came neuer your hote wordes vnto hādstrokes. xantip. On a tyme we fel so farre at wordes yt we wer almost by y• eares togither. Eula what say you womā? xan. He toke vp a staffe wandryng at me, as the deuill
had bene on hym ready to laye me on the bones. Eula. Were thou not redye to ron in at the bch hole. xanti. Nay mary I warrant the. I gat me a thre foted stole in hand, & he had but ones layd his littell finger on me, he shulde not haue founde me lame. I woulde haue holden his nose to the grindstōe Eulalia. A newe found shelde, ye wan¦ted but youre dystaffe to haue made you a speare. xantip. And he shoulde not greatlye a laughed at his parte. Eulali. Ah my frynde. xantyppa. that way is neither good nor godli, xantip¦pa what is neither good nor godly. yf he wyll not vse me, as hys wyfe: I wil not take him for my husbande. Eula∣lya. But Paule sayeth that wyues shoulde bee boner and buxume vnto their husbandes with all humylytye, and Peter also bryngethe vs an ex∣ample of Sara, that called her hus∣bande Abrahame, Lorde. xantippa. I know that as well as you thē ye same paule say that men shoulde loue theyr
wyues, as Christ loued his spouse the churche let him do his duete I wil do myne. Eula. But for all that, when the matter is so farre that the one muste forber the other it is reason that the woman giue place vnto the man, xan. Is he meete to be called my husbāde that maketh me his vnderlynge and his dryel? Eula. But tel me dame xā¦tip. Would he neuer offre the stripes after that xātip. Not a stripe, and ther in he was the wyser man for & he had he should haue repented euery vayne in hys harte Eulali. But thou offered him foule wordes plentie, xantip. And will do. Eula. What doth he ye meane seasō. xantip. What doth he sometyme he cowcheth an hogeshed, somtime he doth nothing but stande and laughe at me, other whyle takethe hys Lute wheron is scarslie three strynges lay∣enge on that as fast as he may dryue because he would not here me. Eula. Doeth that greue thee? xantippa. To beyonde home, manie a tyme I haue
much a do to hold my handes. Eula. Neighbour. xantip. Wylt thou gyue me leaue to be playn with the. xantip∣pa. Good leaue haue you. Eula. Be as bolde on me agayne our olde acquayn¦taunce and amite, euen frō our chyld∣hode, would it should be so. xantippa. Trueth you saie, there was neuer wo¦man kinde that I fauoured more Ela¦ly Whatsoeuer thy husbād be, marke well this, chaunge thou canst not, In the olde lawe, where the deuill hadde cast aboone betwene the man and the wife, at the worste waye they myght be deuorsed, but now that remedie is past, euē till death depart you he must nedes be thy husbande, and thou hys wyfe, xan. Il mote they thryue & thei that taken away that liberty from vs Eulalia. Beware what thou sayest, it was christes act. Xā. I can euil beleue that Eula. It is none otherwyse, now it is beste that eyther of you one be∣yng with an other, ye laboure to liue at reste and peace. xantyppa. Why?
can I forgeue him a new. Eu. It lieth great parte in the womē, for the orde¦ringe of theyr husbandes. xan. Lea∣dest thou a mery life with thine. Eula Now all is well. xan. Ergo ther was somwhat to do at your fyrste metyng Eula. Neuer no greate busynes, but yet as it, happeneth now and than be¦twene man & womā, there was foule cloudes a loft, that might haue made a storme but that they were ouer blo∣wen with good humanitie and wyse handlynge. Euery man hath hys ma∣ner and euery mā hath his seueral ap¦tite or mynde, and thinkes hys owne way best, & yf we list not to lie there li∣ueth no mā without faulte, which yf a¦nie were elles, ywis in wedlocke they ought to know and not vtterly hated xan, you say well. Eulalya. It happe∣neth many times that loue dayes bre¦keth betwene man and wife, before ye one be perfitly knowē vnto the other beware of that in any wise, for when malie is ones begon, loue is but ba∣rely
redressed agayne, namelye, yf the mater grow furthe vnto bytter chec∣kes, & shamfull raylinges such things as are fastened with glew, yf a manne wyll all to shake them strayght waye whyle the glew is warme, they soone fal in peces, but after ye glewe is ones dried vp they cleue togither fo fast as anie thing, wherfore at the beginning a meanes must be made, that loue mai encrease and be made sure betwene ye man & the wife, & that is best brought aboute by gentilnesse and fayre condy¦cions, for the loue that beautie onelie causeth, is in a maner but a cherifaire Xan. But I praye you hartelye tell me, by what pollycy ye brought your good man to folow your daunce. Eu∣la. I wyll tell you on this condicyon, that ye will folowe me. xan. I can. Eu¦la, It is as easy as water yf ye cā find in your hart to do it, nor yet no good time past for he is a yong mā, and you ar but a girle of age, and I trowe it is not a yere ful sins ye wer maried. Xā.
All thys is true Eulalia. I wyll shew you then. But you must kepe it secret xantip. with a ryght good wyl. Eula. This was my chyefe care, to kepe me alwayes in my housbandes fauoure, that there shulde nothyng angre him I obserued his appetite and pleasure I marked the tymes bothe whan he woulde be pleased and when he wold be all by shrwed, as they tameth the Elephantes and Lyons or suche bea∣stes that can not be wonne by strēgth xantyppa. Suche a beaste haue I at home. Eula. Thei that goth vnto the Elephantes weare no white garmen¦tes, nor they that tame wylde bulles, weare no blasynge reedes, for experi∣ence teacheth, that suche beastes bee madde with those colours, like as the Tygers by the sounde of tumbrels be made so wode, that thei plucke theym self in peces. Also thei yt breake horses haue their termes and theyr soundes theyr hadlynges, and other knackes to breake their wyldnes, wyth all.
Howe much more then is it oure due¦tyes that ye wyues to vse suche craf∣tes toward our husbandes with whō all our lyfe tyme wil we, nyl we is one house, and one bed. xantip. Furthwith your tale. Eula, whē I had ones mar¦ked there thynges. I applied my selfe vnto hym, well ware not to displease hym. xantip. How could thou do that. Eulalya. Fyrste in the ouerseynge my householde, which is the very charge and cure of wyues, I wayted euer, not onely gyuynge hede that nothing shoulde be forgotten or vndoone, but that althynges shoulde as he woulde haue it, wer it euer so small a trifle. xā wherin. Eulalia. As thus. Yf mi good man had a fantasye to this thynge, or to that thyng, or if he would haue his meate dressed on this fashion, or that fasshion. xan. But howe couldest thou fasshyon thye selfe after hys wyll and mynde, that eyther woulde not be at home or elles be as fresshe as a saulte heryng. Elali. Abyde a while. I come
not at that yet, yf my husband wer ve¦ry sad at anye tyme, no time to speake to him. I laughed not nor tryfled him as many a woman doth but I looked rufully and heauyly, for as a glasse (if it be a true stone) representeth euer ye physnamy of hym that oketh in it, so lykewyse it becommeth a wedded wo¦man alway to agre vnto the appetite of her husbande, that she be not mery whē he murneth nor dysposed to play whē he is sad. And if that at any time he be waiward shrewshaken, either I pacyfye hym with faire wordes, or I let hym alone, vntyll the wynde be o∣uerblowen gyuing him neuer a word at al, vntyl the time come that I may eyther excuse my faute, or tell hym of hys. In lykewyse when he commeth home wel whitled, I gyue hym gen∣tyll and fayre woordes, so with fayre entreatynge I gette hym to bed. xan∣typpa, O carefull state of wyues, whē they muste be gladde and fayne to fol∣lowe their husbandes mindes, be thei
eluyshe dronken, or doyng what mys∣chiefe they liste. Eula. As whoe saieth this gentill dealynge serueth not for bothe partyes, for they spyte of theyr berdes muste suffre many thynges in our demeanor, yet a time ther is, whē in a weighty matter it is laufull that the wyfe tell the good mā his faute, if that it be matter of substaunce, for at lyght trifles, it is best to play byll vn∣der wynge. xantyp. what time is that Eula. when he is ydle, neither angry, pensife, nor ouersen, then betwixt you two secretly he must be told his faute gētly, or rather intreated, that in this thynge or that he play the better hus∣bande, to loke better to his good na∣me and fame and to his helth and this tellyng must be myxt with mery con∣ceites and pleasaunt wordes many ti¦mes I make a meane to tel my tale af¦ter this fashyon, that he shall promise me, hee shal take no displeasure wyth my thynge, that I a foolyshe woman shall breake vnto hym, that pertay∣neth
eyther to hys helthe worshyppe or welth. When I haue sayde that I woulde, I chop cleane from that com∣munication and falle into some other pastime, for this is all oure fautes, neyghbour Xantippa, that whē we be¦gyn ones to chat our tounges neuer lie. Xantip. So men say Eulalia. Thus was I well ware on, that I ne¦uer tell my husbād his fautes before companie, nor I neuer caried any cō∣playnte furthe a dores: the mendes is soner made whē none knoweth it but two, and there were anie suche faute that myght not be wel borne nor amē¦ded by ye wyues tellige, it is more lau∣dable that the wife make complaynte vnto the Parentes and kynsfolke of her husband, then vnto her own, and so to moderate her complaynte that she seme not to hate hym but hys vice nor let her play all the blabbe, that in some poynt vnutered, he may know & loue his wiues curteysy. Xantip. She had nede be aswel lerned womā, that
should do all this. Eu. Mary through suche demeanoure, we shall sterre our husbādes vnto lyke gentylnesse. Xan: There be some that cannot be amen∣ded with all the gentyll handlynge in the worlde. Eula: In faith I thyncke nay, but case there be, marke this wel the good man must be for borne, howe soeuer the game goeth, then is it bet∣ter to haue him alwayes at one point or ells more kinde and louing throw oure gentill handlinge, then to haue him worse and worse throwe our cur∣sednesse, what wyll you say and I tell you of husbādes that hath won theyr wiues by suche curtesie, howe muche more are we boūde to vse the same to¦warde our husbandes. Xantip. Than shall you tell of one farre unlyke vnto thyne husband. Eula. I am aquented with a certayne gentelman well ler∣ned and a veri honest man, he maried a yonge wyfe, a mayden of .xvii. yeare olde brede and brought vp of a chylde in the countre vnder her fathers and
mother wing (as gentilmen delite to dwel in the countre) to hunt & hawke This yong gētilman would haue one that were vnbrokē, because he might the soner breake her after hys owne mind, he begā to entre her in learning syngynge, and playinge, and by lytle and lytle to vse here to repete suche thynges as she harde at sermons, and to instruct her with other things that myght haue doone her more good in time to come. This gere, because it was straūge vnto this young womā which at home was brought vp in all ydelnesse, and with the light commu∣nication of her Fathers seruauntes, and other pastimes, begā to waxe gre¦uouse & paynfull, vnto her. She with drew her good mynde and dylygence and whē her husband called vpon her she put y• finger in the eye, and wepte and many times she would fal downe on the grounde, beatynge her head a∣geynst the floure, as one that woulde be out of thys worlde. When there
was no healpe for this gere, the good man as though he hadde bene wel as∣ked his wyfe yf she woulde ryde into the countre with him a sporting vnto her fathers house, so that she graun∣ted anone. When they were cōmē thy¦ther, the gentilman left his wyfe with her mother & her sisters he wēt furth an huntynge with his father in lawe, there betwene theym two, he shewed al together, how that he hadde hoped to haue had a louynge companion to lead his lyfe withall, now he hath one that is alwaies blubberynge and py∣ninge her selfe awaye withoute anye remedie, he prayeth him to lay to hys hande in amendinge his doughters fautes her father answered yt he had ones giuen hym his doughter, and yf that she woulde not be rewled by wor¦des (a goddes name take Stafforde lawe) she was his owne. Then the gē¦tylman sayd agayne, I knowe that I may do but I had leuer haue her amē¦ded eyther by youre good counsell or
commaundement, then to come vnto that extreme waies, her father promi¦sed that he woulde fynde a remedye. After a dai or two, he espied time and place whē be might be alone with his doughter. Then he loked soureli vpō his doughter, as though he had bene horne woode with her, he began to re¦herse how foule a beaste she was, how he feared many tymes that she neuer haue bestowed her. And yet sayde he muche a doe, vnto my great coste and charg, I haue gottē the one that mou¦ghte lye by any Ladyes syde, and she were a quene and yet thou not persei¦uynge what I haue done for the nor knowynge that thou hast suche a man whiche but of his goodnes myghte thyncke thee to euill to be stoye in his kytchen, thou contrariest al his mind to make a short tale he spake so sharpe¦ly to her, that she feared that he wold haue beaten her. It is a man of a sub∣tyll and wylye wytte, whyche wyth∣out a vysade is readye to playe anye
maner of parte. Thē this yonge wife what for feare, and for trouthe of the matter, cleane stryken oute of counte¦naunce, fell downe at her fathers fete desyryng hym that he wolde forgette and forgiue her all that was past and euer after she woulde doe her duetye Her father forgaue her, and promised that she shoulde finde him a kynd and a louynge father, yf so be that she per∣fourmed her promyse. xantippa. How dyd she afterwarde? Eulalya, whē she was departed frō her father she came backe into a chaumber, and there by chaunce found her husband alone she fel on her knees to hym and said. Mā in tymes paste, I neyther knewe you nor my selfe, from this daye froward ye shall se me cleane chaunged, onelye pardon that is past, with that her hus¦bande toke her in his armes & kyssed her sayinge she should lacke nothyng yf she woulde holde her in that mind. xantip. Why did she cōtinue so. Eula∣lya. Euen tyll her endynge daye, nor
there was none so vyle a thynge but that she woulde laye handes on it re∣dely with all her herte, if her husband wolde let her, so great loue was be gō and assured betwene them and many a daye after, shee thanked god y• euer she met with such a mā. For yf she had not she sayd she had ben cleane caste a waye. xan. We haue as greate plentie of suche housbandes, as of white cro∣wes. Eulalya. Now, but for werieng you? I coulde tell you a thynge that chaunsed a late in this same citye. xan¦typpa. I haue litell to doe, and I lyke your communicacyon very well. Eu∣lalia. There was a certaine gentilmā he as suche sort of men do, vsed much huntyng in the cuntre, where he hap∣pened on a younge damoysell, a very pore womās child on whō he doted a man well stryken in age, and for her sake he lay oftē out of his owne house his excuse was hūtīg. This mās wife an exceding honest womā, halfe deale suspecte the mater, tried out her hus∣bandes
falshed, on a tyme whē he had taken his iourney fourth of the town vnto some other waies, she wente vn¦to that poore cotage and boulted out all the hoole matter, where he laye on nights, wheron he drāke, what thyng thei had to welcō him withall. There was neither one thyng nor other, but bare walles. This good womā retur¦ned home, and sone after came againe brynginge wt her a good soft bed, and al therto belongyng and certain plate besydes that she gaue them moneye, chargynge them that if the Gentilmā came agayne, they shold entreate him better not beyng knowē al this while that she was his wyfe, but fayued her to be her sister. Not long after her hus¦band stale thether againe, he sawe the howse otherwyse decked, and better fare then he was wounte to haue. He asked, frome whence commeth al this goodly gere? They sayde that an ho∣neste matrone, a kynsewoman of hys hadde broughte it thyther and com∣maunded
them that he should be well cherished when so euer he came, by and by his hart gaue him that it was hys wiues dede, whan he came home he demaūded of her yf she hadde bene there or nay, she sayd yea. Then he as∣ked her for what purpose she sente all that housholde stuffe thyther. Man (said she) ye haue bē tenderly brought vp I perceiued that ye were but cors∣lie handled there, me thought that it was my part, seing it was your wyll and pleasure to be there ye shoulde be better loked to. Xantippa. She was one of goddes fooles. I woulde rather for a bed haue layd vnder him a bundel of nettels: or a burden of thi¦stels. Eula. But here the end her hus∣bande perceyuyng the honeste of her great pacience neuer after laye from her, but made good cheare at home with his owne. I am sure ye knowe Gilberte the holāder. xan. Uery well. Eu. He (as it is not vnknowē maried an old wife in his florishīg youth. Xā.
aduēture he maried the good and not the woman. Eulalia. There sayde ye well, setting lytell stoore by hys olde wife, hunted a callette, with whom he kept much companie abrode, he dined or supped litell at home. What woul∣dest thou haue sayd to ye gere. Xantip. What woulde I a said? I wolde haue flowē to the hores toppe and I wolde haue crowned myne husbande at hys oute goinge to her with a pysbowle, that he so ēbawlmed might haue gon vnto his souerayne ladie. Eula. But how much wiselier dyd this woman? she desyred that yonge woman home vnto her, and made her good chere, so by that meanes she brought home al∣so her husband without ani witchraft or sorserie, and yf that at anye season he supped abrode with her she would sende vnto them some good dayntie morsel, and byd him make good chere Xantippa. I had leuer be slayne then I woulde be bawde vnto myne owne husbande. Eulalia. Yea, but consyder
all thynges well, was not that muche better, then she shoulde be her shre∣wyshnesse, haue putte her husbandes minde cleane of from her, and so haue ledde all her life in trouble and heuy∣nesse. Xantippa. I graunte you well, that it was better so but I coulde not abyde it. Eulalya. I wyll tell you a prety story more, and so make an ende One of oure neyghboures, a well dis∣posed and a goddes man, but that he is some what testie, on a day pomeld his wife well and thriftely aboute the pate and so good a woman as euer was borne, she picked her into a inner parler, and there weepynge and sob∣bynge, eased her heuye harte, anone after, by chaunce her husbande came into the same place, and founde hys wyfe wepyng. What sitest thou heare sayth he seighing & sobbīg like a child Thē she like a wise woman sayde. Is it not more honesty for me to lamente my dolours here in a secret place, thē to make wondering and on oute crye
in the strete, as other womē do. At so wysely and womanly a saing his hart melted, promysynge her faythfullye and truelie that he woulde neuer laye stroke on her afterwarde, nor neuer did. Xantippa. No more wil mine god thanke my selfe. Eulalya. But then ye are alwaies one at a nother, agreinge lyke dogges and cattes. Xan. What wouldest thou that I should do? Eu. Fyrst & formest, whatsoeuer thy hus∣bande doeth sayde thou nothinge, for his harte must be wonne by lytell and litel by fayre meanes, gentilnesse and forbearing, at the last thou shalte ey∣ther wynne him or at the leaste waie thou shalt leade a better life thē thou doest now. Xantippa. He his beyonde goddes forbode, he wil neuer amende Eulalia. Eye saye not so, there is no beest so wild but by fayre handling be tamed, neuer mistrust man thē. Assay a moneth or two, blame me and thou findest not that my counsell dooeth ease. There be some fautes wyth you
thoughe thou se them, be wyse of this especyall that thou neuer gyue hym foule wordes in the chambre, or inbed but be sure that all thynges there bee full of pastyme and pleasure. For yf that place which is ordeined to make amēdes for all fautes and so to renew loue, be polluted, eyther with strife or grugynges, then fayre wel al hope of loue daies, or atonementes, yet there be some beastes so wayward and mis∣cheuous, that when theyr husbandes hath them in their armes a bed, they scholde & chyde making ye same plesur their lewd condicions (that expelseth all displeasures oute of their husban∣des mynde vnpleasaunt and lytell set bi corrupting the medecine that shuld haue cured al deadly greifes, & odible offēces. xantip. That is no newes to me. Eula. Though the woman shulde be well ware and wyse that she shulde neuer be disobedient vnto her husbād yet she ought to be most circūspect yt at
that at meting she shew her selfe redy and pleasaunt vnto him. xantyppa. Yea vnto a man, holde well withall but I am combred with a beast. Eula. No more of those wordes, most com¦monly our husbādes ar euyll through our owne faute, but to returne againe vnto our taile they that ar sene in the olde fables of Poetes sai that Uenus whome they make chiefe lady of wed¦locke (hath a girdle made by the han∣dy worke of Uulcan her Lorde, and in that is thrust al that enforceth loue and with that she girdeth her whan so euer she lyeth wyth her housbande xantippa. A tale of a ubbe. Eulalya. A tayle it is, but herkē what the taile meaneth. xantippa. Tell me. Eulalia That techeth vs that the wyfe ought to dyspose her selfe all that she maye that lieng by her husbād she shew him al the plesure that she cā. Wherby the honest loue of matrimony may reuiue and be renewed, & that there with be clene dispatched al grudges & malice
xant. But how shall we come by thys gyrdle? Eula. We nede neyther wyt∣chraft nor enchauntment, ther is non of them al, so sure as honest condiciōs accompayned with good feloshyp. xan I can not fauoure suche an husbande as myne is. Eula, It is moste thy pro¦fyt that he be no longer suche. If thou couldest by thy Circes craft chaunge thin husband into an hogge, or a bore wouldest thou do it? xantip. God kno¦weth. Eu. Art thou in dout? haddest thou leauer marye an hogge than a mā. xantip. Mary I had leauer haue a manne. Eulalia. wel, what and thou couldest by sorcery make him of a drō¦karde a soober man, of a vnthrifte a good housbande of an ydell losell a to∣warde body, woldest thou not doe it? xantip. yes, hardely, woulde I doe it. But where shoulde I learne the cun∣nyng? Eula. For soth that cōning hast thou in the if thou wouldest vtter it, thyn must he be, mauger thy head, the towarde y• makest him, the better it is
for the, thou lokest on nothing but on his leude cōdicions, and thei make the half mad, thou wouldest amende hym and thou puttest hym farther oute of frame, loke rather on his good condi∣cions, and so shalt thou make him bet∣ter. It is to late cal agayne yesterdaie before thou were maryed vnto hym. It was tyme to cōsyder what his fau¦tes were for a woman shold not only take her husbande by the eyes but by the eares. Now it is more tyme to re¦dresse fautes thē to fynd fautes. xanti. What woman euer toke her gusband by the eares. Eulali. She taketh her husbande by the eyes that loketh on nothyng, but on the beautye and pul∣critude of the body. She taketh him by the eares, that harkeneth diligētly what the common voice sayth by him xantip. Thy counsaile is good, but it commeth a day after the faire. Eula. Yet it commeth time ynough to brin¦ge thyne husbande to a greate furthe¦raunce to that shall bee yf God sende
you anie frute togither. xantippa. We are spede alredy of that. Eulaly. How longe ago. Xantip. A good whyle ago Eulalia. How many monethes old is it. Xantip. It lacketh lytle of .vii. Eula What a tale is this, ye reken the mo∣nethes by nightes and dayes double. xantippa. Not so. Eula. It can not be none otherwyse, yf ye reken from the mariage day. xantippa. yea, but what thē, I spake with him before we were maried. Eulalia. Be children gotten by speakinge. xantip. It befell so that he mette me alone and begon to ticke at me, and tickled me vnder the arme holes and sydes to make me laugh. I might not awaie with ticklynge, but fell downe backewarde vpon a bedde and he a lofte, neuer leuinge kyssynge on me, what he did els I can not saye, but by sayncte Marie within a while after my bely be ganne to swell. Eula. Go now and disprayse thyne husbāde whiche yf he gette children by playe, what wyll he do whē he goeth to it in
good ernest. xantippa, I fere me I am payed agayin. Eula. Good locke God hath sent a fruitfull grounde, a good tylmā. xantip. In that thing he might haue lesse laboure and more thanke. Eula. Few wyues finde at theyr hus∣bandes in that behalf but were ye thē sure togither. xanti. yea that we were Eula. The offence is the lesse. Is it a man chylde. xantip. yea. Eula. He shal make you at one so that ye wil bow & forbere. What saieth other mē by thin husband, they that be his cōpanions, they delite with him abrode xā. They say that he is meruelous gentyl, redy to do euery man pleasure, liberal and sure to his frende. Eula. And that put¦teth me in good cōfort that he wyll be ruled after our counsayll. xantip. But I fynde him not so. Eula. Order thy selfe to him as I haue tolde thee, and cal me no more true sayer but a lier, if he be not so good vnto the as to anie creature liuinge Agayne cōsidre this he is yet but a childe, I thinke he pas∣sethe
not .xxiiij. the blacke oxe neuer trode on hys fote, nowe it is but loste laboure to recken vpon anye deuorse. xantippa. Yet manye a tyme and ofte I haue troubled my braynes with al Eulalia. As for that fantasye whenso¦euer it commeth into your mynd first of all counte how naked a thynge wo¦man is, deuorsed from man. It is the hyghest dignitie that longethe to the wyfe to obsequyous vnto her spouse. So hath nature ordeined so god hath apoynted, that the woman shoulde be ruled al by the man loke onely vppon this whiche is trouth, thine husbande he is, other canste thou none haue. A∣gaine forgette not that swete babe be gotten of both your bodies what thin¦keste thou to do with that, wilte thou take it awaye with thee? Thou shate berene thyne husband his ryght wylt thou leue it with hym? thou shalt spoi¦le thy self of thy chefeste Iewell thou haste. Beside all this tell mee trueth hast thou none euyll wyllers. Besyde
all thys tell me trueth, hast thou none euyll wyllers. xan. I haue a stepdame I warrant you, and myne husbandes mother euen such another. Eula. Do they hate the so deadly. xantip. They woulde se me hanged. Eula. Thē for∣get not thē what greater plesure coul¦dest thou shew them then to se the de¦uorsed from thine husband and to led a wydowes lyfe. Yea and worse thē a wydow, for wydowes be at their choi¦se. xantippa. I holde well with youre coūsell, but I can not awaye wyth the paynes, Eulalia. yet recken what pai∣nes ye toke or ye colde teache your pa¦ret to speake. xantippa. Exceadynge much. Eu. And thinke you much to la¦bour a lytel in reforming your husbād with whō you may liue merely all the dayes of your lyfe? What busines doe mē put thē self to be wel & easly horsed & shal we think our selues to good to take paines that we mai haue our hus¦bādes gētil & curteise vnto vs. xantip What shal I do. Eu. I haue told you
al redy, se that al thing be clene & trim at home, that no sluttysh or vnclenlye syghtes dryue hym oute a dores. Be your selfe alwayes redy at a becke, be rynge continuall in minde what reue¦rēce the wife oweth vnto her husbād. Be neyther in your dūpes, nor alway¦es on your mery pinnes go nether to homely nor to nycely. Let your meat be cleane dressed, you know your hus∣bādes diet. What he loueth best that dresse. Moreouer shewe your selfe lo∣uinge and fayre spokē vnto thē where he loueth, call them now and thē vn∣to your table. At meate, se that al thin¦ges be well fauored, and make good chere, And whē that he is toppe heuy playing on his lute, sytte thou by and singe to him so shalte thou make hym keepe home, and lessen hys expences This shall he thynke at length, in fay∣the I am a fonde felowe that maketh suche chere with a strumpet abroode with greate lossee bothe of substance and name, seyng that I haue a wyfe
at home bothe muche fayrer, and one that loueth me ten times better, with whome I may be both clenlyer recei∣ued and dayntelier cherisshed. xantip. Beleuest thou that it will take and I put it into a profe. Eulali. Looke on me. I warrante it or ought longe I wyll in hande with thyne husbande, & I will tell hym his parte. xantippa. ye marie that is well sayde. But be wyse that he espie not our caste, he would plaie his fages, all the house should be to lytle for hym. Eulalia. Take no thoughte. I shall so conuey my mat∣ters, that he shall dysclose all toge∣ther hym selfe, what busynesse is be∣twene you, that done I wyll handell him pretelie as I thinke beste, and I truste to make him a new man for the and when I se my time I wyl make a lie for thee, how louinge thou hast spo¦ken of him. xantippa. Chryst spede vs and bringe our pupose well aboute. Eulalia. He will not fayle the so thou do thy good wyll
THere was a man that maried a woman whiche hadde great ri∣ches and beawtye. Howe bee it she hadde suche an impedyment of na¦ture that she was domme and coulde not speake, whiche thynge made him ryghte pensyfe, and sayd, wherfore v∣pon a daye as he walked alone ryght heuye in hearte thynkynge vpon his wyfe. There came one to hym and as¦ked him what was the cause of his he¦uynesse whiche answered that it was onely bycause his wife was borne dō¦me. To whome this other said I shal shewe the soone a remedy and a medi¦cyne (therfore that is thus) go tak an aspen leafe and lay it vnder her tōge this night shee beinge a steape, and I warrant the that shee shall speake on the morowe whiche man beyng glad of thys medycyne prepared therfore and gathered aspen leaues, wherfore he layd thre of them vnder her tonge whan shee was a sleape. And on the
morow when he him selfe awaked he desyrous to know how hys medicine wrought being in bed with her, he de∣maunded of her how she did, and sodē¦ly she answered and sayd, I beshrewe thy harte for waking me so early, and so by the vertue of that medycyne she was restored to her speche. But in cō¦clusion her spech encresed day by day and she was so curst of cōdycyon that euery daie she brauled and chyd with her husbande, so muche at the laste he was more vexed, and had much more trouble and disease wyth her shrewed wordes then he hadde before whē she was dumme, wherfore as he walked another time alone he happened to mete agayne with the same personne that taught hym the sayde medycine and sayde to hym thys wyse. Syr ye taught me a medicin but late to make my domme wyfe to speake, byddynge me lay an Aspen leafe vnder her toūg when she sleapte, and I layde three Aspen leaues there. Wherfore nowe
she speaketh. But yet she speaketh soo much & so shrewdlye that I am more werier of her now, then I was when she was dōme: Wherfore I praie you teache me a medycine to modyfye her that she speake not so muche. This o∣ther answered and sayd thus. Sir I am a deuyl of hel but I am one of thē that haue least power there. Al be yet I haue power to make a womā to spe¦ke, but and yf a woman begin ones to speake, I nor al the deuyls in hel that haue the mooste power be not able to make a woman to be styll, nor to cause her to leue her speakyng. ¶The end of this pleasant dialogue declaryng the seueral properties of ye two contrary disposers of the wyues aforesayde. ¶Imprynted at London in Paules churche yearde, at the sygne of the Sunne, by Antony Kytson.
