1294 99849609 14767
An Expo¦stulation or com∣playnte agaynste the blasphemyes of a franticke papyst of Hamshyre. Cōpiled by Iohan Bale. Mathew .xxiii Wvo be vnto you Scribes and Pharises, Hypocrites, that shut vp the kingdom of heauē before men. For neyther go ye in youre selues, neyther suffer you anye other to enter. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septēnium.
¶To the ryght hygh and myghtie Prynce, Iohā Duke of Northumberlande, Lorde greate Maistre of the Kinges most honourable housholde, and Lorde presydent of his Maiestyes most honourable preuye Counsell, hys most humble and faythfull ser¦uaunt Iohan Bale wysheth the fauour of god, encrease of ho¦nour, longe lyfe, and pros∣perouse helthe both of soule and bodye. COnsyderyng in your noble grace (moste Honourable Duke) the same mightie feruent, & reli¦giouse zele in Gods cause,Zele. whych I a∣fore tyme by readynge the scriptures haue dylygent∣ly marked in Moyses the seruaunt of God, I haue vrgently bene moued vn∣dre God and our kynge to seke your ear¦nest ayde for the same. The rage at thys presēt is horryble and fearce, whych the
stought sturdy satellytes of Antichrist in dyuerse partes of ye realme, chefely with∣in Hamshire.Hamshire, do blustre abroade in their mad furyes to blemyshe the Euāgelycal veryte of the Lorde now reuelated. An intollerable grefe it is to their vncircum¦cysed hartes, to beholde the glytterynge toyes of superstycyouse ydolatry and hi¦pocritycall papystrye remoued frō thys earthe of Englande, by the kynges wur∣thie maiestie and hys most honourable counsell,Relygyon. and Gods true relygyon again restored. That oure sayde seconde & most valeaūt Iosias, hath thus pourged hys Iuda (hys Englande I meane) frō the abhomynable buggeryes and ydolatries of the great Baal Peor of Rome, earnest¦ly sekynge for the true God of Dauid hys forefather,ii. Paaral. xxxiiii. to the most lyuely exam∣ple of all other prynces, their vngraty∣ouse and noughtie eyes are not a lyttle offended. That hys ymages, rellyckes, roodes, torches, candels, copes, ashes, palmes, waxe, water, oyle, creame, and holy bread, that hys bulles, bedes, belles,Toyes. bablinges, masses, purgatory, processi∣ons, confessyons, exorcysmes, hallow∣ynges, shauynges, gresynges, sensyngs, slauerynges, slumberynges, and a great sort of Popysh toyes more, are bānyshed hens, in conscyence they are dysquyeted. Not all vnlyke to the grosse wytted
Gergesytes, they wolde gladly ye Christ were sumwhat further of.Mat. viii. Yea, they ear∣nestly wyshe, that he wolde peaceably de¦parte from their coastes, least he went a∣bout it, to drowne their swyne for euer, whome they all contrarye to gods ordy∣naunce, haue so frankely in al beastly∣nesse maynteyned. They can not awaye with the precyouse lyght of Christes holi Gospell, their eyes are so sore.Ihon. iii. Neyther maye they broke it, to knowe their salua¦tyon alone to be reposed in Christ Iesu,Colloss. iii. so blynde are their folyshe hartes. Ney∣ther maye they abyde it, that God is on∣ly to be worshypped in sprete and veryte, so superstycyously minded are they.Ihon. iiii. But darkenesse they iudge lyght, & the lyght very darkenesse. That is swete,Esay. v. they thynke sower, & that is good they deme euyll. Suche are now a dayes ye peruerse and frowarde iudgementes of men vn∣godly. The most christen reformacyon of thys churche of Englande,Mockers. whych is to other natyons a most wurthie spectacle, so they very turkyshely deryde & mocke. At the dayly suppressyons of their blas∣phemouse and beastly papystryes,Nume. xxi they create, they frowne, they grynde their tethe, and for anger wexe wode. With ye carnall Israelytes they hate & abhorre the celestyall Manna of Christes Gos∣pell,i. Iohn. ii. because it neyther nurrysheth the
lust of the fleshe, neyther fedeth the con∣cupyscence of the eyes, nor yet maintey∣neth the pryde of thys lyfe.Nume. xi. To the grea∣sy fatt pottes of Egipte, wold they glad¦ly returne agayne, and become subiectes vnder the great Romish Pharao, so that they myght be fedde with his olde styn∣kynge cucumbers, melons, lekes, ony∣ons, and garlyke, whych are hys vnpro∣fytable tradycyons. Malycyously and rebellyously do thei now resyst the manyfest truthe of Gods wurde,Rebelles. and wyll by no maner of meanes consent therunto, although their owne conscyences both accuseth and condem∣neth them for it. And all is bicause they wyll heare of no repentaunce, neyther yet agre to amendemēt of their most wic¦ked liues.Papystes, They bragge they boast, they dreme, thei dote, thei fume they face, thei grunte they grudge, they iangle they iest they mocke they mowe, they scoffe they scorne, they ruffle they rage, wyth dag∣gerand with fyste, and all to stoppe the swete blastes of the scriptures,Apo. vii. least they shulde clearly blowe awaye their old Ro¦mysh sorceryes, as duste from the face of thys earthe. Neyther is it any great wō¦dre vnto vs,Psalme▪ i. to beholde these terryble tur¦moylynges of the deuils furyouse mem∣bers, for those Romysh Pharisees leuen▪Luke. xii. consyderynge he is that roarynge Lyon
whych busyly seketh whome he maye de¦uoure.i. Peter. v. Genesi. iii. Iob. ii. Exody. vii. Psa. lxxvii He fraudolētly deceiued our first mother Eue Greuously he afflycted the pacyent mā Iob. He made Pharaos sor¦cerers to withstande both Moyses & Aa∣ron. Dauid ryght sore complayneth of vexatyons by wicked angels. Who was a more cruell aduersary to Iesus Iose∣dech in reparynge the temple,Zach. iii. than was Sathan? And though he preuayled not in hys .iii. temptatyons agaynst Christ our redemer,Math. iiii. yet procured he hys owne dysciple Iudas trayterouslye to betraye hym,Ihon. xviii the clergye of the Iewes malycy∣ously to accuse hym, and the Romish ma¦gistrates most wrongefully to condēpne hym. Saynt Paule geueth vs good war∣nynge,ii. Cor. xi. that Sathan to deceyue vs, can transforme hym selfe into the Angel of lyght. and telleth vs also, that we must alwayes haue sumwhat a do with ye mi∣nysters of darkenesse.Ephesi. vi. In the prymatyue churche,Idolles▪ when the wurshyppynge of Idolles ones ceased, at the prechynges of the Apostles and o¦ther vertuouse fathers. The prestes whi¦che had lyued by those Idolatryes, pro∣uoked both the prynces and commō peo∣ple to persecute them to deathe,Priestes. making them to beleue, that it was neuer a mery worlde sens they were suffered to preach This hath both Eusebins in Ecclesiasti¦ca
historia, and also Tertulianus in Apo¦logetico. Thus haue the wholsō wyndes of heauenly doctryne, bene alwayes dis∣turbed,Apoca. vii. letted and stopped, & theyr lyue∣ly vapours oppressed. First by Sathan ye deuyll, then by the Iewysh and Popysh clergye, then by superstycyouse monkes and sophystycall scole doctours, & nowe last of all by vnlearned loyterers and des¦perate ruffyanes, as he of whom I haue written thys treatise folowynge,Braban. is one. Of thys latter sort, are some become far¦mers of benefyces, some blynde brokers in ye lawe, some scribes, some pharysees, some flatterers for fauer, some lyngerers for lucre, some cloynars for aduauntage menpleasers, and make shyftes. These gyue the preachers most vncōly reportes to deface their godly preachynges,aplers. and most odyble names, to brynge them in cō¦tempte of the people. Their croked coun¦sels, persuasyons, illusyons, prouocacy∣ons, and promyses of ayde in wythstan∣dynge the mynysters, are suche, for a wel¦thie lyuynge in ydelnesse, that the truth of the Lorde can take no place▪ These are as were Elymas the sorcerer, Hyme∣neus,Actes. xiii. i. Timo. i. ii. Timo. ii. ii▪ Tim. iiii Philetus, and Alexander the cop∣per smythe, enemyes of all truthe, with∣standers of all ryghtousnesse, and chyl∣dren of ye deuyl. Men of corrupt myndes resysters of the veryte, and lewde as cō∣cernynge
faythe ii. Tim. iii. And al these are set a wurke by the popes late masmō¦gers, by olde pylgrymage goers,Styngers. by craf∣ty Cathedralystes, mynster men, and col¦lygeners, lokinge yet for a daye of mayn¦tenaunce in their olde sorceryes. And as for our partes, we are not so ig¦noraunt of the rules of Christes relygy∣on, but we knowe that hys flocke of true beleuers,Beleuers. hath had alwaies their wolues Math x. their blasphemers, persecuters, and slaunderers, that they myght bryng fourth godly frutes in pacyēt sufferaūce For loke what the threshynge flaile dothLuke. viii. to the corne (S. Gregory saith) the fyery fornace to the golde,Gregorye. and the polishinge fyle to the yron, the same doth aduersyte to the ryghtouse man, for it maketh hym perfyght. Wicked persons are in all pla∣ces to be tollerate of priuate men (I say not maye) because there canne be no A∣bel,Abel. vnles he be vexed of some maliciouse Cain. We ought therfor of congruēce ve¦ry paciently to suffre them, but yet not in all pointes to holde our peace. We are not bounde altogyther to beare them in their mischefes No,Christ. Christe neuer ded so neither yet the Prophetes afore him, nor his Apostles after him. But wyth sto∣macke (as occasiō gaue it) they inueihed against them, and mightely reproued thē If any man hurte the witnesses of God
(S. Iohan saith)Iohan. he must be kylled. Apo. xi. Either must he be consumed of the rite that cometh out of their mouthes,Esay. xi Heb. iiii▪ or els by the .ii. edged swerd of the sprete, which both are the wurde of God. For in their handes haue they swerdes (saith Dauid) that are sharpe on both sides. Psa. Cxlix. manfully to stande vp, for faythe, for truthe, for religion, for obedience to kin∣ges, for iust beleuers, and for the glory of the liuinge God,Sharpe against the manifest e∣nemies of all godlinesse. And with ye dou¦ble sharpenesse of those swerdes, shall they eyther conuert them or dampne thē. Care not (saith. S. Paule) for the hate of your aduersaries, for vnto them is it a to¦ken of perdicion, and to you a most mani¦fest signe of saluacion. Phi. i. Doubt thē not (saith Esaye) neither feare them at all,Christ. but prayse the Lord of hostes, let him be your feare & drede, for he is the stone yt they stomble at, and the rocke that they fall vpon. Esa. viii. for no confusion can come vpon them that put their full trust in God. Dan. iii. Now is there nothynge els behynd (most honourable Duke) but that your excellent grace vndre god and our kingeId ducem, set to your fauourable hāde, with the rest of his most honourable counsell. If Ab∣bas Ioachim, Nicolas Lyra, Iohā Tyl¦neye, and other of our latter expositours
hath taken great Constantine the Em∣prour,Constanti∣nus. for that other angell in. S. Iohās reuelacion, which ascended from the ri∣synge of the sunne for that age. Apoca. vii. Sebastianus Meyer and Conradus Pellicanus not all dyssentynge from the same, because he had than brought the christen churche to a quyetnesse, all foren tyrannies suppressed. What shall let me to thinke as much of our present Constā¦tine, kinge Edward the .vi. for our time?Edwarde vi. Kynge. consyderynge that the hande of God is not yet abbreuiated? Esa. lix. He cōmeth as wele from the rysinge of the sunne, as he ded. He hathe as wele hys autoryte of God, and is now a christen Magistrate. as he was than. So wele is he kynge of thys realme, and a Brytayn borne,A Kyng. as he was. As wele is he gyuen to good letters and careth for the christen relygyon, as he ded.Godly. As wele hath he set Christes gos¦pell at lyberte, from the daunger of ty∣rauntes, and by proclamacion commaū∣ded it frely to be preached, as he ded So wele hath he made a generall desturctiō of supersticiouse Idolles and other ab∣hominations, as ded he. As Constanty∣nes face in all hys coynes of Golde and syluer was erected towardes heauen, by report of Eusebius in vit a Constantini,Libro. ii▪ so is the vysage of hys harte eleuated vn to God in all hys daylye studies & prince¦lye
procedynges, if the good frutes maye shewe what the tree is. Than maye oure most vertuouse and godly king Edward the .vi.Angell. for thys age so wele resemble that good angel of God, as mighte our great Constantyne for that age. Consyderynge therfor (ryght wurthie and excellēt Duke) that he hath by that hygh offyce,Apoca. vii. the seale of the lyuynge god and is declared a prynce of power by hys lyuely wurde. Roma .xiii. to make all his subiectes the true seruauntes of God by the Gospell, lete the malyciouse rable of Antichristes ruffyanes, by your myghtie admynystracyon vnder hym be forbyd∣den any more to noye. Apo. vii.Restraynt. Lete thē be restrayned from doynge suche vyolēce rauyne, and excesse, as they haue done now of late to Christes mynysters in Hā¦shire. Lete them be inhybyted of dagger drawynge, and of fyste lyftynge in the o¦pen stretes, whan no man hath ones offē¦ded thē. Lete them leaue their pullynges by the bearde and bosom in the presence of people,Violence. starynge like wylde oxen, whā no euyl at all is ment to thē. Lete thē no longer bragge afore the iustyces in the o¦pen sessyons, of castinge their gloue and of wagynge battayle, vncorrected, whan nothynge is eyther done,agynge. sayde, or yet thought agaynst thē. Lete them be wele stayed from ragynge and raylynge, oblo¦cutynge
and slaunderynge, withoute cause reasonable, for vpholdyng the wic¦ked tradycyons of Antichrist. Permyt them no longer to counsell in corners,Councell. to haue wycked persuasyons, and to drawe people after them. Lete them from hens¦fourth be charged vnder payne of sore po¦nyshment, not lycēcyously to do all their lewde lykynges, as they haue done her∣tofore, lyke men that are lawles.Desyre▪ We de¦syre not the euyll of thys frowarde sort, but their good. We couete not their losse but their winning, not their vtter destruc¦cion, as they do ours, but their spedye a∣mendement, if such angels of reprobacy¦on as they are maye amende, whych I scarsely beleue. Chefely our request is,Request▪ to lyue in peace by them as in Esaye is pro¦mysed, that the Lambe shuld dwell with the Wolf, the Gote lye by the Leopard, the Cowe fede with the Beare,Peace. the Bul∣locke company with the Lion, the Child playe with the Serpent, and yet none of them shulde hurte the other. Esa. xi. Hys angelicall voice hath bene hearde al ready by most earnest proclamacyons,A voyce. ouerall hys domynyons of Englande, Wales, and Irelande, as was the loude voyce of great Constantyne ouer Aegipt Grece, Persye, Asye, and Italy, by most straight commaundementes, that Christ shulde be wurshypped, hys holy Gospell
preached, the mynysters therof both pro∣uyded for and honoured, and all Idoll worshyppynges to be vtterly abolyshed. Lete it now therfor be obeyed of all sub∣iectes without contradyctyon,Obediēce, no wylde wytted ruffyane permytted from hens fourth so stubbernely to withstande it. Commaunde thys gentyll west winde to haue styll hys plesaunt passage & frinde∣ly fre course without anye restraynt orApoca. vii. cruell impedymente of those angels of darkenesse, that the earth, sea, and trees maye wholsomly be refreshed therwith. Gracyously suffre (as ye haue done hi∣therto) all sortes of people to haue know¦ledge df the Gospell.Verytye Lete the veryte of God, so sounde in the eares of all men, that they may be marked with the sprete of Christe, and neuer denye hym for a∣ny vexacyon. Thys poore Expostulacy∣on, am I your poore oratour, so muche the boldar to dedycate to your hyghnesse that I haue alwayes knowne the same a moste myghtye,Experiēce. zelouse, and ardente supporter, maynteyner, and defender of Goddes lyuely wurde. Ryghte humbly besechynge your excellente grace, to ac∣cepte the small gyfte thereof, as the sim∣ple presente of that poore seruaunte of yours, whyche hathe alwayes borne bothe you and all yours a most faythful harte. The eternall father of our Lorde
Iesus Christe, whose inuyncyble veriteVerytye your grace hathe hytherto most feruent¦ly fauoured, vouchsafe prosperously to preserue the same, with my ladyes grace your most faythfull spouse, and all your vertuouse and godly chyl¦dren, in contynuall helthe and increase of honour, to the glorye of hys holy name. Amen. iii. Reg. xl. If Israel (sayth the Lord) shall hold vp∣on other goddes, and worship them. I wyl cast hym out of my syght, and he shall be a Prouerbe, and a fable amonge the nacions And they that passe by shall maruel therof, and shall hysse at hym.
¶An Expostulation or complaint agaynst the blasphe∣myes of a frantyke papist of Hamshire. Compiled by Iohan Bale. DAniel the mā of desyres, & Iohan Boa∣uerges or the sonne of thō∣dre, bryngeth me to remem¦braunce of a mouth that vttered blas∣phemyes.A mouthe. Thys mouthe (sayth Daniel) spake presūp¦tuouse thynges. And hys horne (whych is ye power that maynteyneth hym) made bat∣tayle agaynst the sayntes, yea, and gote the vyctory of them, tyll suche time as they had the kyngedome in possessyon. Dan. vii. To the Beast (sayth .S. Iohan)Dani. vii. was gyuen a mouthe, that spake great thynges and blas∣phemyes. And he opened that mouthe in blasphemye agaynst God to blaspheme his name, and hys tabernacle, and thē yt dwell in heauen. And power was gyuen hym to make warre with the sayntes, and to ouer∣come them. Apoca. xiii.Apo. xiii. Not only is thys to
be verifyed vpon the Romysh Antichrist & hys synneful synagoge of spiritual calcars but also vpon suche pratlynge papystes as are hys dayly maynteyners. For cōsequēt∣ly it foloweth in the same reuelacyon of.Apoca, xvi. S Iohan. And I sawe (sayth he) thre vncleane spretes, lyke frogges come out of ye mouthe of the dragon, and out of the mouthe of the beast, and out of the mouthe of the false pro¦phete, and they are spretes of deuels. Apo.A Papyst. xvi. Lo sir, the false prophete, whych is the wycked papyst, is so wele touched here, as is eyther the Beast or the Dragon. Now to thys frantyck papyst thā, whych on the .xxix. daye of Decembre last past,Conuen∣ticles. in the house of a gentylman of hys affynyte within Hamshire, beynge in the full heate of hys frenesye, brast out into thys vnreue∣rent, blasphemouse▪ and cōteptuouse talke of the Kinges Maiestie and of hys mooste godly procedynges.Blasphemy Alas poore chyld (sayd he) vnknowne is it to hym, what actes are made now a dayes. But whan he cometh ones of age, he wyll se an other rule, and hange vp an hondred of suche heretyke knaues. Meanynge the preachers of our tyme, and their maynteyners by lyke. For at the same season he had most spyghtfully rayled of one of thē, beynge absent,A rayler▪ whych
neuer in hys lyfe ded hym dysple asure, ne¦ther in dede nor in wurd, that he was able to burden hym wyth. The fyrst part of this blasphemouse clause toucheth the kynges hyghnes, the second hys honourable Coū∣sell, & the thyrd,Marke i. the true ministers of Gods wurde. By the fyrst is Gods name blasphe¦med, by the second is his tabernacle yll spo¦ken of, and by the thyrd are they that dwell in heauen contempned. But thys pernycy∣ouse poyson haue thys wycked papyst suc∣ked out of the vngraciouse pappes of hys mother the synnefull synagoge of Rome, whose deuylyshe nature hathe it alwayes bene, to despyse those kinges yt are not her mainteyners, to cōdēpne those magistrates yt wyll not become her slaues,Cōdicions & to kill those preachers that impugne her Idolatryes. Concernyng the fyrst. In that thys fran¦tycke papyst wyth poluted mouthe,A Chylde. repor∣teth the kinges maiestie to be a poore Child, he blasphemeth the name of God. For ther is no power (S. Paule saythe) but it is of God. And who so euer abuseth the power, abuseth the ordinaunce of God to hys dāp∣nacion, Rom. xiii.Take hede Beare no wicked hart to thy kyng (sayth Salomon) neyther reporte any euyl of the gouernours in thy malycy∣ouse anger. For if thou do, the birdes of the
ayre wyll discouer thy wickednes, Eccls. x Double is the blasphemye of this furiouse papyst against the kynges highnes, in that he hath disdainously called him both poore and a Childe, in contempt of his most chri∣sten procedynges. Poore is as much to say as contēptuouse,Poore. abiect, wretched, forsaken myserable, or of such byrth as is nothynge estemed. And so is it taken in diuers places of the scriptures, whych all are farre vnse∣myng the maiestie of a kynge.A kyng. And wele is it knowen to all the world, that neyther na∣ture for her parte, nor yet fortune for her part, hath so left hym, hys hyghnes beynge the naturall sonne of so noble a kyng as his father was. Neyther is he destitute, but on euerye syde most habundauntlye repleny∣shed with the most graciouse giftes of god,Learned. specially wyth all kindes of good learning far aboue all hys progenytours, kynges of thys imperiall regyon. Childishnes in a kyng, is reproued by ye mouth of God, & giuen many times of him to ye people as a cursse,Esay. iii. plage, or scourge for their vnfaithful nes. I shal giue you childrē (saith the Lord) to be your princes, & babes shal haue rule ouer you. Esa. iii. That is, ye shal haue for your disobediēce in neglectīg my lawes & cōmaundemētes, mē to your
gouernours, that are dyssolute, rashe, wan¦ton, and carelesse, yea men vnexpert and vn¦exercysed in pryncely affayres,Vnwyse. and men whych wyll not regarde your cōmē welthe but folow their owne lustes. Wo be to such a land (sayth Salomon) as hath so chyldysh rulers, and whose princes are early at their bankettes. Eccls. x, These be those rulars whose lyues are wanton, actes lycencyouse and iudgementes babyshe, wherby theyr commen welthes in the end,Ruyne, are brought to confusyon. Yea, S. Hierome sayth, yt these are suche worldly gouernours, as neglec∣tynge Gods holy preceptes, do set vp the vayne tradycyons of men synnefull. And though all these chyldysh wayes be detesta¦ble in a kynge yet is not the chyldehode of youthe in him to be reproued. For so might kynge Iosias haue bene reproued,Iosias. whych began to reigne in the .viii. yeare of hys age iiii, Regum, xxii. and kynge Dauid discom¦mended,Dauid. for being the yongest of his brethrē i. Reg, xvii, whose prayses are neuertheles habundaunt in the scriptures,Ioas. Ioas beyng but .vii. yeares old was a kyng also, and for the tyme of his youth pleased God, what though in hys age he ded otherwyse.ii. Par. xxiii In England here, kyng Hēry the, vi, was but .viii. yeares old, king Hēry the third, ix,
yeares olde, and kynge Edwarde the third scarse, xv. yeares of age,iii. Kynges when they were crowned kynges, yet was there neuer chro¦nycle writer, nor yet honest, faythfull, and o¦bedient subiect, that euer called them poore chyldren. But with reuerence and honour, euen from the first daye of their reignes, toke them alwayes for whole and persyght kynges, lyke as the sacred Bible holdeth of the afore named kinges,Iosias. Ioas & godly Iosi¦as, in the .vii. and .viii, yeares of their ages, iiii, Re. xi, et. ii. Pa. xxxiiii. What shuld this franctyck papyst here meane than, so blas∣phemously to report our most noble & wur∣thie kinge Edwarde ye .vi. in the, xv. yeare of hys age, and, v, yeare of his reigne, wtout al honour and reuerēce, but that he hath done on ye vnshamefast face of hys whorysh mo¦ther,Babylon, the monstruouse madame of Rome whych is full of the names of basphemye, Apo. xvii. Hym hath our eternal God most graciously gyuē vnto vs in the latter age of his noble father, not without euydent mira¦cle, and wyll preserue hym, no doubt, to his owne glorye and welthe of thys realme, in spyght of all hys popysh enemyes, if we be not vnthākefull.Educacion. Hys wurthie educaciō in li¦berall letters & godly vertues, & hys natu∣rall aptenesse in retaynyug the same, plēte∣ously
declareth him to be no pore child, but a manifest Salomō in princely wisdō. Hys sober admonicions, & open exāples of godli¦nes, at this day sheweth him, mindfully to prefer yt welth of his cōmēs, as wele gostly as bodyly,Relygyon, aboue all forē▪ matters. Marke what his maiestie hath done already in reli¦giō, in abolishing the most shameful idola∣tries of Antichrist, besides his other actes for publyque affayres, & ye shal find at this day, no christen prynce lyke to hym. Now foloweth the secōd part of the blas¦phemouse sētēce of this frātick papist, whi∣che is,Blasphemy yt the actes put fourth now a dayes, are vnknown to the kyng, & yt he wyl chāge them whan he cometh of age. Thys not on¦ly toucheth ye kinges wurthie maiestie, whi¦che is gods hygh minister, in iudginge him chyldysh, mutable, & inconstaūt, but also it pearceth hys most honorable coūsel, which are vnder him,Ioseph. as was Ioseph in Aegipt, ye staies of his people. Ecc .xlix. as cōsentinge to ye same, So is Gods tabernacle by him blasphemed. For if yt tabernacle of God be wt meane men, as, S, Iohā sayth, it is. Apo, xxi. Moch more with the coūcel of a christē king, which is gods high magestrate, & thei his assistētes. They yt despise yt rulers (saith the Apostle Iude) & speake euil of thē which are in autoryte,Rulers. shal suffre yt vengaūce of e∣ternall
fyre. Whan Michael yt archangell stroue agaynst the deuyll,Sathan. & disputed about the body of Moyses, he durst geue no ray∣ling sētence, but sayd. The Lord rebuke the, But such (as is here this pratlynge papyst) speake euyll of those thynges whych they knowe not. And what thynges they knowe naturally, as beastes which are wtout reasō they corrupt in thē selues. Wo be vnto thē, for they haue folowed ye way of Cain,Cain. & are vtterly giuē to ye errour of Balaā for lucres sake, and shal perish in the treason of Core.Iude .i, If Christ be in the middes, whē .ii. or, iii. pryuate men be collected in his name, as he saith, he is, Mat. xviii. much more amōge ye faithful coūsel of so vertuouse & Christen a king,Councell. Who cā thā deny them to be the taber¦nacle of God? specially whā they wyth all endeuer possyble, haue sought and yet daily seketh, clerly to bānysh out of thys christen realme, the manyfolde abhomynacyons of Antichrist, or idolatryes without nombre. Which he by his smoky locustes,Locustes, ye mōkes and shauen prestes, hathe craftely planted here, contynually from tyme to tyme, euer sens the dayes of that wycked Emproure Phocas.Phocas, Who can denye them (I saye yet ones agayne) to be yt seyd tabernacle or cho¦sen māsyon of God, eyther that cōgregaciō amonge whome he dwelleth by promesse.
Luke, x, et. Ioan. xiiii, Whan they so ear∣nestly labour, to place here in Englād, the true relygyō agayne, aud to set vp hys true worshippinges, as in the primatiue church of the faythfull Bryttayues,Brytans. fyrste planted by them ihat were hyther sente by Christes Apostles,Asia. aud fashyoned after the perfight rules of the .vii. churches in Asia, the filthy corrupcions of those Romysh Idolatours, in the power of hys wurde taken from vs. If God doothe not dwell wyth them, that thus dayly seketh hys glory, wyth whome doth he dwell? Than hath thys arrogaunt papyst wyth poluted mouthe,Blasphemy blasphemed the tabernacle of God, iu reportyng them, nowe to make actes wythoute the kynges knowledge, concernyng relygyon, or els at thys day to buylde that hereafter they wyl breake. And thys that enemy hathe done to brynge them in hate of the commen people, as though not regardynge hys Maiestye, they now went about not to establysh thē, but deceyue them in the same.A Beast, Suche is the mad frenesy of so brutysh a beast. But vnworthy are suche reprobate ves∣sels of so godly Magistrates. Of thys are we certayne & sure,The Coun¦cell. so many as haue Gods knowledge, roare those ragynge raylers what them lusteth to the contrarye, wyth
lyes after theyr leude lykynges, that had it not bene in the feare of God & theyr kinges true obedyence agaynst the wycked Anti∣christ, they coulde neuer haue propounded so godly lawes. And hauyng God present∣ly assistent vnto thē, as all they haue which seketh hys only glory,Gods ho∣nour. they can not be so far to hys heauenly wyll contrariouse, as their vyle report is, in the quarel of that horrible monster. No, they are no suche wauerynge reedes, as for a Christen commen welthe, are thys yeare of one mynde, and the nexte yeare wyll be of an other. No truly, it stan∣deth not so wyth the vnchaungeable wys∣dome of Christes sprete,Constaun wherin they haue earnestly wrought, for tyme of the prospe∣rouse raygne of our present Iosias. Theyr foūdaciō haue they set vpō so sure a rocke, euen vpon Gods wurd, that neither winde nor water, stormy tempest, nor wether, can ouerthrowe it, Math. vii,Strong. Neyther shall the great gates of hell, nor yet the stronge po∣wer of Sathan, euer preuayle agaynste it. Math, xvi, Neyther yet the deuyls vnholy vycar at Rome, wyth all hys curssynges & cuniurynges, calkynges and coblynges, brawlynges and bablinges, massinges and mutterynges, Images and Idolles, par∣dons and purgatory, with the deuil and all
of hys other sorceryes,Sorceries, whych these grace∣les papistes cōtynually gapeth for yet ones agayne, as the hongry hownde for the car∣reine, & the ful fed sowe for her puddel. But as Baldad the Suhyte sayd vnto pacyent Iob. The hypocrites hope shall come to nought, Hys confydence shall be destroyed for he trusteth in a spyders webbe.Baldad. Iob. viii The sober abydynge of the ryghtouse (saith Salomou) shal turn him to much gladnes, but ye hope of yt vngodly shal perysh. pro, x. The thirde or last part of that most wyc∣ked sentence, whych thys malygnaunt pa∣pyst with blasphemouse mouthe hath vtte∣red,Blasphemi is thys, that when the kynge cometh to age, he will hang vp an hūdred of such here tyke knaues, meanynge the true preachers of our tyme. As wele in reproche of men godly, obseruynge the Gospell, as in con∣tempt of ye true ministers of Gods wurd,Poyson. haue thys furyouse enemye & sonne of Beli aloute vometed that poyson, whyche hathe longe tyme lyen boylynge in hys papysty∣call stomack. Neyther hath he abashed in ye heate of that frenesye and forgetfulnesse of reason, to abuse the christen modestie of our godly and innocent kynge, in iudgyng him acompanyon herafter, with the most cruel tyrauntes of the worlde, Antiochus, He∣rode,
Caiphas, Nero,Tirauntes Domycyane, Tra∣iane, & hys bloudthurstie father of Rome, whych in their wycked tymes, malycyous∣ly murthered vp the true witnesses of God And thus are they whych dwell in heauen, most spightfully of this brutish babler blas¦phemed, as is towched in the texte of .S. Iohan.A babler. Apoca. xiii. In manye places of the holy scripture, is the congregatyon of the faythfull called heauen, or the kyngedome of heauen, chefely in the prophecyes and ye parables of Christe, for so muche as God is inuysybly the inhabytour, ouersear,Heauen. and gouernour therof, Math. xiii. et. xxv. Who then can denye the true preachers, whych are the dystributers of Gods mysteryes, to be dwellers in the same. Saynt Paul is not all behind, in boasting him self to be one of them, which also was a preacher, Our cōuersaciō (sayth he) wher so euer we remain,A preacher is in heauē, frō whens we loke for ye sauyour. Phil. iii, If ye be rysen a¦gayne with Christe, seke the thinges whych are aboue, wher he sytteth on ye right hād of god, Set your affectyō on thynges yt are in heauē, & not on tryfles whych are here on ye earthe. Col, iii. These are they, which in the houshold of god,what he is are ye profitable buylders the fyshers of men, the feaders of the flock,
the salte of the earth, the light of the world, the clowdes full of moysture, the starres, lanternes, and candelstyckes, yt stewardes, searchers, and releuers, the kepers of the vyneyearde, planters, tyllers, sowers, and repers of the Lordes haruest,Helpers. yea the hel∣pers of Christe, & vpholders of his church. All these names & offyces do the holy ghost giue them, and a great sort more in the scrip¦tures, reportynge them also wurthie of dou¦ble honour, whan they labour in the wurde i. Timoth .v. In sprete and veryte teach thei our heauenly father to be wurshipped.Shadows. Ioh iiii. and not in the beggerlye shaddowes of mennes tradycyons. They haue the holye angels for their fellowe seruauntes and bre¦threue, for hauynge the noble testimonye of Iesu in their mouthes. Apoc. xix. These are no heretyke knaues than, neyther yet wur∣thie to be hanged, as thys Popysh scisma¦tyck do both iudge them and wishe them,A Papyst. in the hastie sprete of his whote stomacked mo¦ther. So hath he them blasphemed yt dwelle in heauen, whych is the cōgregaciō of god. If they were hanged for teachynge the truthe of God and impugnyng falfe rely∣gyon,Hangynge they shulde haue the same rewarde for wele doynge that their maistre Iesus Christe had afore them, For he for that ve∣rytees
sake, was most spyghtfully, shame∣fully, and contemptuously hanged vp be∣twyn, ii, theues, in the cōmen place of their executyons, as though he had bene a greate malefactour, so whote was the malyce of the holye clergie than against him, Diuerse of hys Apostles for maynteynyuge his doc¦tryne,Apostles come to the same hygh promocyon of hangynge, specyally Peter, Andrew, Bar∣tylmew, Philyp, and Simon, as the histo∣ryanes of them hath written, because they shulde seme no better then was Christ their maister. Amonge their disciples the nombre so excedeth of them that were hanged for ye testimony of Iesu, that it wold axe to much tyme to rehearce them.Disciples. And this vyle kinde of hangynge, was no dishonoure to them. How shulde it now then become a dysho∣nour to these, in the same iust quarel? As the cause made that contēptuouse death in thē gloryouse, so shulde it also do now in these men, in the syght of the Lorde & his electes, Psal. Cxv, But thys syghte is not gyuen to suche reprobate vessels,Syght. as is thys furiouse papist, whose malice hath vtterli made him blynd. Sap. ii. Yea, so frantyckly and beast¦ly blyude, that he shameth not to attrybute vnto our most godly and vertuouse kynge, that kynde of tyranny, whych is of al other
the most wycked & blasphemouse. But far other is the gentyll nature of our religiouse Iosias▪Iosias, whych hath already ouerthrowne the hyll aulters, brokē in peces the Idolles, destroyed the relygyouse buggery, restored the boke of the Lorde, set vp hys true wur∣shppyynges, and kept suche a passouer to yt Lorde as neuer was afore, iiii. Reg. xxiii, et ii.Apoynted. Paral, xxxiiii. Of God is he appoynted to turne ye people agayne, & to take away al the abhominaciōs of the vngodly. Ec. xlix. Breuely to conclude the matter. These iii. blasphemyes, whych thys malycyouse papyst in one wycked sentence here vttered are those .iii.iii. Spretes vnclene spretes, ye like frogges came out of the monthe of ye false Prophet, Apoca, xvi. And they are not all vnlyke to the wylde fyre, smoke, & brymstone, whych the terryble horses, or fat pampered vp lo∣custes of Antichrist emeed, Apo. ix, for fearce,Locustes. noyfull, and stynkynge are they, yea furyouse, erronyouse, and full of infamye, accordynge to the sygnifycatyons of wylde fyre, smoke, and brymstone. Not only hath it spronge of the doctryne of deuyls, so blas¦phemously to abuse the maiestie and power of a kinge,Abuse, the estate of his honourable coū¦sell, and the godly offyce of hys preachers, in iudgynge them chyldyshe, inconstaunte,
and heretycall, but also it hath rysen of er∣rour in the hipocresie of yt Romysh Bishop Whan the iust man Simeon both beheld & wurshypped the maiestie of Gods sonne in ye little babe Iesu,Simeon. he called not him a poore chylde, but the sauer of the worlde, ye syght of the gētyles, & the glory of Israel, Luc, ii, A faythfull true subiect wyll reuerētly res∣pect in a kyng, not what he is of nature,A kyng. but rather what he is of gods election and ordi∣naūce. Rom, xiii, Neyther is he for his ten∣dre youthe to be contēpned, hauynge gods knowledge, as he hath in wōdrefull habun¦daūce. Christ Iesus gaue thākes to his hea¦uenly father, bicause he had hydden godly wysdome from the wyse and prudent, & ge∣uen it vnto babes.Wysdome Math. xi. whan Prophe∣cye (saythe Salomon) is in the lyppes of a kynge, hys mouthe shall not go wronge in iudgemente. Prouer. xvi. ¶He is proued a Papist. THat it may apere to ye reader, yt thys maliciouse fellowe is not here called a papyst wythoute iust cause, I wyl declare what a Papyst is, and by what frutes he is chefe∣lye knowne.A Papyst. A Papyst is he that in lyfe and doctryne maynteyneth the Romyshe Popes dyuelish tradycyōs, contempnynge
the pure testamente and Gospell of Iesus Christe. As we saye in the vnyuersyte, that he is a Platonyst, Ciceronyst, Scotyst, or Thomyst, that defendeth the doctryne of Plato,Doctrine. Cicero, Scotus, or Thomas against them that holdeth not the same. Thys fran∣tyck fellowe is of the same kynde of doyng Ergo he is a wycked and an obstynate pa∣pyst. Wycked, for so muche as he dishonou¦reth god, and obstynate, because he dysobey¦eth hys kynge.Frutes. The Minor, whych is the seconde part of thys argument, is proued true by hys cursed frutes. For a false Pro∣phete, or popysh hypocryte whether ye wyl is alwayes knowne by hys wycked frutes Christe sayth. Math, vii, et Luce. vi. In, ii. specyall poyntes shall ye knowe a ranke pa¦pyst, whych he hath firste of hys father the great Antichrist of Rome, and than of hys mother hys malignaunt synagoge. For the naturall chylde foloweth father & mother. And these are they breuely, as afore is tou∣ched,ii. Pointes He blasphemeth God, and contemp∣neth the christen magistrates. Of thys are euydent examples, in the Chronicles of our christen nacyons, yea, innumerable, specy∣ally of thys realme of Englande. Daniel ones prophecyed of that vnshā∣fast faced vsurper,The Pope that he arrogantly shuld
stande vp agaynst the Prynce of Prynces, (whych is God in his Christe) and yet in ye ende shulde be destroyed wythoute hande, Dan, viii, Saint Paule calleth hym Gods great aduersary, the wycked one, the man of synne, and the sonne of perdycyon, repor¦tynge of hym, that he shulde exalte hys fyl∣thie seate here iu earthe aboue god, and hys dongyshe decrees aboue Gods set ordy∣naunce, to the vtter dampnacyon of thou∣sandes, for not beleuynge the truth, ii. Thes ii. Saynt Iohan in hys reuelatyon,Thess. ii. calleth the churche of that aduersarye, great Baby¦lon the mother of all whoredome and abho∣mynacyons done vpon the earthe, yea such a fylthie whore, as hath both subdued to her obedyence the kynges of the earthe, and al∣so made them dronke with the wyne of her fornycacyon,Apo, xvii. Apo, xvii. If yefynde in thys frantyck fellowe, these naturall condicyōs, naturally planted, what els cā ye iudge him but a naturall chylde of that father and mo¦ther, and so an obstynate papyst? The pro∣pyrtie whych he hath of that vnhappye fa∣ther and mother, is to blaspheme God, and in that he hath shewed hymselfe plenteouse First by a chaplayne whych popyshly my∣nystred in hys hyred benefyce.Thre kna∣ueryes. Secōdly by conueyaunce of certen ymages in hope of a
change; And thirdlye in iudgyng it a fowle heresye to write any thynge in reproche of the Byshopp of Rome. Concernynge the first, Vpon the, xx, day of September last past, I was (as he wele knoweth) at seruyce there,A Prieste. to beholde the workemanly conueyaunce of hym and that popysh chaplayn of his, and to know what wholsome frutes I shulde fynde after that tyme, of their .ii. plantinges. Such an other ape of Antichriste as that prest was, neuer sawe. I afore in my lyfe, for he coulde not reade a Psalme, neyther yet speake Eng∣lyshe, beynge an allyen, an Armoricall or frenche Britayne.Cōuaiaūce And to excuse hys most beastly ignoraunce, his own self was cōpel led, I being ther presēt, to slauer out ye .ii. les¦sōs of ye Byble, with no small stutting & stā¦beryng, turnyng his arse to the people after the old popysh maner, to helpe forward the kynges most godly procedynges. More a∣pysh toyes & gawdysh feates,Feates. could neuer a dysarde in England haue plaied (I think) than that apysh prest shewed there at the cō¦munyon. He turned and tossed, lurked and lowted, snored and smirted, gaped and gas¦ped, kneled and knocked, loked and lycked, with both his thombes at hys eares & other tryckes more, that he made me, xx, tymes to
remembre wylle Somer,Wyl Som¦mer. Yet of them both, that prest semed yt more foole a great deale And to amende the matter, he had than a new shauen crowne, which I rebuked him for, By thys I proue hys maistre,iii, vertues a mocker of God, a deceyuer of the people, and a con¦tempner of the kynges iust procedynges. Concernyng the second, which is ye craf∣tie conueyaunce of certen ymages in hope of a change.Images. In that poynt hath he also no∣table folowed both father and mother, to be proued a naturall papyst. For God hath he blasphemed in sekynge to vphold ydolatry, and the kynge hath he contempned in so de¦rydyng hys most godly ordynaunce. The kynge hath commaunded, and that by acte of hys parlement, that all yma es shulde,An Acte not only be remoued out of the churches of Englande and Irelande, but also that they shulde be defaced, mangled, and vtterly de destroyed for theyr abhomynacyons. How is thys wurthie commauudement obeyed, whan they are so subtylly conuayed, and so craftely retayned aloft in the belfreye or ste¦ple, and neyther deformed nor yet altered? Parauenture he wyll saye, that he was ne¦uer of counsell in that propre poynt of con∣ueyaunce.Suttle foxe Wherin he doth lye most falsely For who is more of counsell in a noughtie
matter, thā he that knoweth it, and yet wyn¦keth at the doynge therof? The abolyshyng of ydolles, is a churche matter, and chefely perteyneth to religyon. If it had touched ei∣ther offeringes or tithes, I doubt it not, but he woulde haue stande fourth for the chefe head of the parryshe, and no man so hardie to haue medled afore him therin.Chefehead Why was he not then of counsell in thys reckenynge. He remayned as maistre and heade of that churche, by the space of more thā, ii. yeares after. Wolde not hys syght serue hym to se so fowle a blot, in so long tyme space? Well sir, whan thys matter came ones to a tryall afore the iustyces at wynchestre sessyons, a man that had bene dead more thā, ii, yeares afore, was able to discharge him of that hor¦rible contempt of Gods wurd,Cōueiaūce and hys kin¦ges procedinges. So workemanly doth one hounde of yt race lycke an other in this age. Concerninge the thirde, that it is a great heresie,Heresy. to write ought in reporche of the Bi¦shopp of Rome, In the weke afore Christ∣mas last past, as he chaūced to be in ye house of the forseyd gentylmau af hys owne affy∣nyte, where he myght alwayes be bolde to do hys lewde feates, hys accustomed frene¦sie came sodenly vpon him. In yt heat wher¦of, he most shamefully reuyled a seruaūt of
that house calling hym heretyke aud knaue, because he had begonne to studie a parte in suche a Comedie,A Comedy as myghtely rebuked the abhomynacyons and fowle fylthie occupi∣enges of the Bishopp of Rome, Moreouer he requyred hym, in hys own stought name to do a lewde massage, whych was to call the compiler of that Comedie, both heretike and knaue, concludynge that it was a boke of most perniciouse heresie, That boke was imprynted about .vi. yeares a go, and hath bene abroad euer sens,Abroade. to be both seane and iudged of men, what it cōtayneth. And thys is the name therof. A Comedie concerning. iii. lawes, of nature, Moyses, & Christ. etc, Therin is it largely declared, how yt faythe lesse Antichrist of Rome with his clergye, hath bene a blemysher, darkener, confoun∣der, and poysener,Lawes. of all wholsom lawes. And that wyth ydolatricall Sodometrie he hath defyled nature, by ambytyouse Aua∣rice he hath made Gods commaundemēts of non effecte, and with hypocrytycall doc∣tryne peruerted Christes moste holye Gos∣pell. Thys is wele knowne to al men. How commeth than an heresye, thus to report or wryte? By lyke this fonde fellaw, hath lear¦ned of Lanfrancus and fryre Walden,Lālfrācus. Walden, that he is only an heretyke, whych in doctryne
dyssenteth from the synagoge of Rome,Guido, Or els of fryre Guido in hys boke De heresi∣bus, that he is a most perniciouse heretyke, whych sayth, that the Romysh pope is not heade of the christen churche, neyther maye make lawes for the christyanyte, But he ne¦uer yet marked the wurdes of Athanasius,athanasius that they are the most wycked sorte of here∣tykes, whyche persecuteth Christes true seruauntes. Other argumentes are there els, to proue thys wycked fellawe, a natural child of that father & mother, & so a most spyght∣full Papyst. In the tyme that stought Ste∣uen Gardyner was Byshopp of Wynches¦tre,Steuen. Gardiner. and made hauocke of Christes poore stocke, no mā was so madde as thys madde fellawe, to searche and to seke, to accuse, to reuyle to shame, and to brynge menne in daunger of deathe, for their Christen be∣leues sake.A Sawle. No where was anye sessyons wythin Hamshire, but he was alwayes there agaynst them, conducted by yt prestes, pratynge and scoldynge, stuttinge and stam berynge, with frothe yssuynge out on both sydes of hys mouthe for anger. The super∣sticyouse Nonnes of Wynchestre,Nonnes. dysobey¦enge both the Byshopp and hys chauncel∣ler
concernynge their apparell, and vtterly contempning the preachinges that are now had their daily resortes to him, and became as flickering culuers about hys house. The preachers of Gods wurde there, were no∣thynge els wyth hym, as he fat on the ale bē¦ches, but heretykes & knaues, vagaboūdes, traiters, apostataes, & runnegates,A bloud▪ wt bloud and soule, that he wold laye hys dagger on their faces. No mā knoweth this to be more true then I do, vpon whome he not only be¦stowed these vncomelye names, and that a great sort of tymes, but also in yt opē streate at Wynchestre, cōming sodenly out of an house of purpose vpon me,A Ruffyan he sette hys one hande vpon my Bearde and bosome, and hys other hande sometyme on hys Dagger and sometyme bent it ouer my heade, as thoughe he wolde haue buffetted me on the face, wyth suche madde exclamacions as I neuer hearde of man of Bedlem, besydes the vnreasonable spoyle that he had made afore that of my house,A spoyle, Yet neuer in my life ded I offende hym, to my knowledge, ney∣ther in my dede nor my wurde. Not thus yet satled in all thys ragynge furye,A beast. he procured the clarke of my parrish of bishops Stoke a man yt knoweth not his
A. B. C. & .ii. more as vnlearned and popish as he was, to indyghte me at Wynchestre sessions, for not hallowing the funte at the baptyme of a Childe, wyth candel lyghte, salt, oyle, creame, and waxe droppinges, as in the popysh tyme, notwythstandyng the kynges inhybycion concernynge all suche papystycall beggeryes. He caused them to report there, to the rediculouseRydiculus wondermēt of all men learned, that I should haue sayd than, that the wurd of God was hallowed ynough alredy, But that Gods wurd at a∣ny tyme should be prophane and nede hal∣lowyng, or els that it hath bene hallowed, it is their blasphemouse and beastly opyni∣on, and not myne.Foolysh, I thynke a more folysh & vnlearned a sentence, was neuer vttered of any man. Se how depely the Lord hath per¦mytted these papystes to spew fourth their owne rydyculouse shame. Yet was it not so doltish and brutish, but it toke place there, and was wele allowed. They that could do nothynge in matters of truthe for the kyng at the sessyons afore,Sessions. coulde in the popes se¦crete quarell at that sessions, for falshehode fynde me wurthy an indightment, & wurk∣manly made it out. And it wanted no circū¦staunce that myght be deuysed to aggrauat the matter. For there was I called an ob∣stynate
persone, a sedycyouse fellowe, a tro¦bler of thys whole realme, a prophaner of of the sacramentes,Slaunders a deprauer of the kyn∣ges boke, a slaunderer of hys procedinges, an abhominable example gyuer, & a contēp¦ner of the kynge and hys crowne. Al the pa¦pystes of England, had neuer at that bench so muche layed agaynst thē, And all for pre¦termyttynge yt one poynte of olde papistrie If thys conueyaunceCōuaiaūce be not sūwhat wurth I report me. Well, he hath made his boast, that for doynge of suche feates, he can lacke no lyuyng. Twētie prestes within Hāshire, (he saithe) wyll rather giue me vp their per∣sonages and profyghtes, vpon a small pen¦syon, than I shulde be without a dwellinge house. And he yt shall seke hym at thys day shall fynde him tabernacled in one of their personages,Found out what though he hath protested by othe, that he wyll be no longer a papyst. Thus haue I set out thys frantyck pa∣pystA Papyst. in hys owne lyuely colours, agreynge to hys most maliciouse frutes, to make him knowne to others, and to cause hys other companyons to be a shamed of hys lewde lunitick waies. If he be not a papist, which with poluted mouth, in defence of papistrie blasphemeth the kynges Maiestie, his ho∣nourable counsell, & the preachers of gods
wurd, signified by Gods name, Gods ta∣bernacle, and thē that dwell in heauē, who is a wicked papist? If he be not a false pro∣phet, that euometeth such .iii. filthy frogges at ones, as this busy babler hath done here in one blasphemouse sētence, who is a false prophet? If he be not a malignaunt mēbre of Antichrist, that so malicyously and mad∣lye defendeth hys noughtye quarell, wyth pratlynges and scoldynges, stuttynges and stamberynges,Antichrist. supportynge supersticiouse Noōnes and other Idolaters in theyr open Idolatries, conteptuouslye reuylynge the preachers wyth dagger in hande or fyst on theyr faces, besides indightmentes, I wold fayne knowe who were a member of Anti∣chist? Thau shall it be no slaundre to thys frātyck fellow, to be called a papyst, a false prophete, and a malycyouse lymme of An∣tichrist,iii. Persōs but a most manifest truth, conside∣ryng he hath played al those franticke par∣tes at tymes so stoutlye. None other is the tree that bryngeth sowre crabbes, than a crabbe tree, neyther yet the yll manne that wurketh wyckednesse, but a wycked fel∣lawe. The eternall God chaunge the hate∣full hartes of suche papystycall enemyes,God graūt as thys is one, and send them more gentyll myndes in obeying hys heauenlye truthe,
that they may at the latter becom of so hea∣dye and malycyouse Saules, moste gentyll and pacient Paules, to the glorye of his most holye name, Amen. ☞Thus endeth the Expostulacion or complaynt against the blasphe∣myes of a franticke pa∣pist of Hāshyre, Compiled by Iohā Bale Finis.
¶The .xxiii. Psalme of Da¦uid. called: Dixit insipiens. FOoles that true fayth yet neuer hod, Sayth in theyr hartes, ther is no God Fylthie they are, in theyr practyse. Of them not one, is godly wyse. From heauen the Lord on man dyd looke, To knowe what wayes, he vndertooke▪ All they were vayne, and weut astraye, Not one he found, in the ryght waye. In hart and tunge, haue they deceyte, Their lips throw forth, a poisened baite their minds ar mad, their mouthes ar wod And swyft they be, in sheddyng blood, So blynde they are, no truth they knowe, No feare of God, in them wyll growe, How can that cruell sort be good? Of gods dere flock, which suck yt blood On hym ryghtly, shall they not call, Dispayre wyll so, theyr hartes appall, At all tymes God, is wyth the iust, Because they put, in hym theyr trust, Who shall therfore, from Syon geue, That helth which hāgeth, in our beleue Whan God shal take from hys the sma Than wyl Iacob, reioyce in hart. Prayse to God.
¶The .Cxxx. Psalme of Dauid, called. De profundis. To God thus faithfull Dauid songe, Hys depe and dayly cates amonge. FRom faith of soule and hartes reioyce, I call to the, Lorde heare my voyce. Thyne eares (good Lord) enclyned be, Vnto the poore complaynt of me. If thou shuldest waye our wyckednesse, Who can abyde thy ryghtousuesse? Bicause I fynde all helpe in the, I doubte no fearce extremyte. In my Lorde God is al my trust, To walke as hys wurde hath dyscust, The churche for her contynuaunce. Hopeth in the Lordes good gouernaūce. For in the Lorde great mercye is, And full redemptyon after thys, He wyll redeme all Israel, From deuyll and death, frō synne & hell. ¶Prayse to God.
Imprynted at London by Ihon Daye, dwellyng ouer Aldersgate beneth Saynte Martyns, and are to be soulde at the shope by the litle Condite in Chepesyde.
