1356.7 99847907 12971
THE TRAGICALL HIS∣torye of Romeus and Iuliet, writ∣ten first in Italian by Bandell, and nowe in Englishe by Ar. Br. In aedibus Richardi Tottelli. Cum Priuilegio.
To the Reader. THe God of all glorye created vniuersallye all creatures, to sette forth his prayse, both those whiche we es∣teme profitable in vse and pleasure, and also those, whiche we accompte noysome, and lothsome. But principally he hath appointed man, the chiefest instrument of his honour, not onely, for ministryng matter thereof in man himselfe: but aswell in gatheryng out of other, the occasions of publishing Gods goodnes, wisdome, & power. And in like sort, euerye dooyng of man hath by Goddes dyspensacion some thynge, whereby God may, and ought to be ho∣nored. So the good doyrges of the good, & the euill actes of the wicked, the hap∣py successe of the blessed, and the wo∣full procedinges of the miserable, doe in diuers sorte sound one prayse of God. And as eche flower yeldeth hony to the
bee: so euery exaumple ministreth good lessons, to the well disposed mynde. The glorious triumphe of the continent man vpon the lustes of wanton fleshe, incou∣rageth men to honest restraynt of wyld affections the shamefull and wretched endes of such, as haue yelded their liber∣tie thrall to fowle desires, teache men to witholde them selues from the hedlong fall of loose dishonestie. So, to lyke ef∣fect, by sundry meanes, the good mans exaumple byddeth men to be good, and the euill mans mischefe; warneth men not to be euyll. To this good ende, serue all ill endes, of yll begynnynges. And to this ende (good Reader) is this tragicall matter written, to describe vnto thee a coople of vnfortunate louers, thral∣ling themselues to vnhonest desire, neg∣lecting the authoritie and aduise of pa∣rents and frendes, conferring their prin∣cipall counsels with dronken gossyppes, and superstitious friers (the naturally
fitte instrumentes of vnchastitie) at∣temptyng all aduentures of peryll, for thattaynyng of their wished lust, vsyng auriculer confession (the kay of whore∣dome, and treason) for furtheraunce of theyr purpose, abusyng the honorable name of lawefull mariage, to cloke the shame of stolne contractes, finallye, by all meanes of vnhonest lyfe, hastyng to most vnhappye deathe. This president (good Reader) shalbe to thee, as the sla∣ues of Lacedemon, oppressed with ex∣cesse of drinke, deformed and altered from likenes of men, both in mynde, and vse of body, were to the free borne chil∣dren, so shewed to them by their pa∣rentes, to thintent to rayse in them an hatefull lothyng of so filthy beastlynes. Hereunto if you applye it, ye shall de∣liuer my dooing from offence, and profit your selues. Though I saw the same ar∣gument lately set foorth on stage with more commendation, then I can looke
The Argument. LOue hath inflamed twayne by sodayn sight. And both do graunt the thing that both desyre. They wed in shrift by counsell of a frier. Yong Romeus clymes fayre Iuliets bower by night. Three monthes he doth enioy his cheefe delight. By Tybalts rage, prouoked vnto yre, He payeth death to Tybalt for his hyre. A banisht man he scapes by secret flight. New mariage is offred to his wyfe. She drinkes a drinke that seemes to  her breath. They bury her, that sleping yet hath lyfe. Her husband hearte the tydinges of her death. He drinkes his bane. And she with Romeus knyfe, When she awakes, her selfe (alas) she sleath.
¶ Romeus and Iuliet. THere is beyonde the Alps, a towne of auncient same, Whose bright renoune yet shineth cleare, Verona men it name. Bylt in an happy time, bylt on a fertile soyle: Maynteined by the heauenly fates, and by the townish toyle. The fruitfull hilles aboue, the pleasant vales belowe, The siluer streame with chanell depe, that through the towne doth flow: The store of springes that serue for vse, and eke for ease: And other moe commodities which profite may and please. Eke many certaine signes of thinges betyde of olde, To fyll the houngry eyes of those that curiously beholde: Doe make this towne to be preferde aboue the rest Of Lumbard townes, or at the least compared with the best. In which while Escalus, as prince alone dyd raigne, To reache rewarde vnto the good, to pay the lewde with payne. Alas (I rewe to thinke) an heauy happe befell: Which Boccace skant (not my rude tong) were able forth to tell. Within my trembling hande, my penne doth shake for feare: And on my colde amased head, vpright doth stand my heare.
But sith she doth commaunde, whose hest I must obaye, In moorning verse, a wofull chaunce to tell I will assaye. Helpe learned Pallas, helpe, ye muses with your arte, Helpe all ye damned feendes to tell, of ioyes retournd to smart. Helpe eke ye sisters three, my skillesse penne tindyte: For you it causd which I (alas) vnable am to wryte. There were two auncient stockes, which Fortune high dyd place Aboue the rest, indewd with welth, and nobler of their race. Loued of the common sort, loued of the Prince alike: And like vnhappy were they both, when Fortune list to strike. Whose prayse with equall blast, fame in her trumpet blew: The one was cliped Capelet, and thother Montagew. A wonted vse it is, that men of likely sorte (I wot not by what furye forsd) enuye eche others porte. So these, whose egall state bred enuye pale of hew, And then of grudging enuyes roote, blacke hate and rancor grewe. As of a little sparke, oft ryseth mighty fyre, So of a kyndled sparke of grudge, in flames flashe out theyr yre.
And then theyr deadly foode, first hatchd of trifling stryfe: Did bathe in bloud of smarting woundes, it reued breth and lyfe. No legend lye I tell, scarce yet theyr eyes be drye: That did behold the grisly sight, with wet and weping eye. But when the prudent prince, who there the scepter helde So great a new disorder in his common weale behelde: By ientyl meane he sought, their choler to asswage: And by perswasion to appease, their blameful furious rage. But both his woords and tyme, the prince hath spent in vayne: So rooted was the inward hate, he lost his buysy payne. When frendly sage aduise, ne ientyll woords auayle: By thondring threats, and princely powre their courage gan he quale. In hope that when he had the wasting flame supprest, In time he should quyte quench the sparks that boornd within their brest. Now whilst these kyndreds do remayne in this estate, And eche with outward frendly shew dooth hyde his inward hate: One Romeus, who was of race a Montague, Vpon whose tender chyn, as yet, no manlyke beard there grewe.
Whose beauty and whose shape so farre the rest did stayne: That from the cheefe of Veron youth he greatest fame dyd gayne. Hath founde a mayte so fayre (he found so foule his happe) Whose beauty, shape, and comely grace, did so his heart entrappe, That from his owne affayres, his thought she did remoue: Onely he sought to honor her, to serue her, and to loue. To her he writeth oft, oft messengers are sent: At length (in hope of better spede) himselfe the louer went: Present to pleade for grace, which absent was not founde: And to discouer to her eye his new receaued wounde. But she that from her youth was fostred euermore With vertues foode, and taught in schole of wisdomes skilfull lore: By aunswere did cutte of thaffections of his loue, That he no more occasion had so vayne a sute to moue. So sterne she was of chere, (for all the payne he tooke) That in reward of toyle, she would not geue a frendly looke. And yet how much she did with constant mind retyre: So much the more his feruent minde was prickt fourth by desyre.
But when he many monthes, hopelesse of his recure, Had serued her, who forced not what paynes he did endure: At length he thought to leaue Verona, and to proue, If chaunge of place might chaunge awaye his ill bestowed loue. And speaking to himselfe, thus gan he make his mone: What booteth me to loue and serue a fell vnthankfull one, Sith that my humble ute and labour so wede in vayne, Can reape none other fruite at all but scorne and proude disdayne: What way she seekes to goe, the same I seeke to runne: But she the path wherin I treade, with spedy flight doth shunne. I can not liue, except that nere to her I be: She is ay best content when she is farthest of from me. Wherfore henceforth I will farre from her take my flight: Perhaps mine eye once banished by absence from her sight: This fyre of myne, that by her pleasant eyne is fed: Shall little and little weare away, and quite at last be ded. But whilest he did decree this purpose still to kepe: A contrary repugnant thought sanke in his brest so depe:
That doutefull is he now, which of the twayne is best: In sighs, in teares, in plainte, in care, in sorow and vnrest. He moues the daye, he wakes the long and wery night, So deepe hath loue with pearcing hand, ygraud her bewty bright. Within his brest, and hath so mastred quite his hart: That he of force must yeld as thrall, no way is left to start. He can not staye his steppe, but forth still must he ronne, He languisheth and melts awaye, as snow against the sonne. His kyndred and alyes, do wonder what he ayles, And eche of them in frendly wise, his heauy hap bewayles. But one emong the rest, the trustiest of his feeres. Farre more then he with counsel fild, and ryper of his yeeres. Gan sharply him rebuke, suche loue to him he bare: That he was felow of his smart, and partner of his care. What meanst thou Romeus (quoth he) what doting rage Dooth make thee thus consume away, the best parte of thine age, In seking her that scornes, and hydes her from thy sight: Not forsing all thy great expence, ne yet thy honor bright.
Thy teares, thy wretched lyfe, ne thine vnspotted truth: Which are of force (I weene) to moue the hardest hart to ruthe. Now for our frendships sake, and for thy health I pray: That thou hencefoorth become thyne owne, O geue no more away. Vnto a thankeles wight, thy precious free estate: In that thou louest such a one, thou seemst thy selfe to hate. For she doth loue els where, (and then thy time is lorne) Or els (what booteth thee to sue) loues court she hath forsworne. Both yong thou art of yeres, and high in Fortunes grace: What man is better shapd then thou? who hath a swetter face? By painfull studies meane, great learning hast thou wonne: Thy parentes haue none other heyre, thou art theyr onely sonne. What greater griefe (trowst thou?) what wofull dedly smart Should so be able to distraine thy seely fathers hart? As in his age to see thee plonged deepe in vyce: When greatest hope he hath to heare thy vertues fame arise. What shall thy kinsmen thinke, thou cause of all theyr ruthe? Thy dedly foes do laugh to skorne thy yll employed youth.
Wherfore my counsell is, that thou henceforth beginne To knowe and flye the errour which to long thou liuedst in. Remoue the veale of loue, that keepes thine eyes so blynde: That thou ne canst the ready path of thy forefathers fynde. But if vnto thy will so much in thrall thou art: Yet in some other place bestowe thy witles wandring hart. Choose out some worthy dame, her honor thou and serue, Who will geue eare to thy complaint and pitty ere thou sterue. But sow no more thy paynes in such a barrayne soyle: As yeldes in haruest time no crop in recompence of toyle. Ere long the townishe dames together will resort: Some one of bewty, fauour, shape, and of so louely porte: With so fast fixed eye, perhaps thou mayst beholde: That thou shalt quite forget thy loue, and passions past of olde. The yong mans lystning eare receiude the holesome sounde, And reasons truth yplanted so, within his head had grounde: That now with healthy coole ytempred is the heate: And piecemeale weares away the greefe that erst his heart dyd freate.
To his approued frend, a solemne othe he plight: At euery feast ykept by day, and banquet made by night: At pardons in the churche, at games in open streate: And euery where he would resort where Ladies wont to meete. Eke should his sauage heart lyke all indifferently: For he would view and iudge them all with vnallured eye. How happy had he been. had he not been forsworne: But twyse as happy had he been had he been neuer borne. For ere the Moone could thryse her wasted hornes renew, False Fortune cast for him poore wretch, a myschiefe newe to brewe. The wery winter nightes restore the Christmas games: And now the season doth inuite to banquet townish dames. And fyrst in Capels house, the chiefe of all the kyn: Sparth for no cost, the wonted vse of banquets to begyn. No Lady fayre or fowle, was in Verona towne: No knight or gentleman of high or lowe renowne: But Capilet himselfe hath byd vnto his feast: Or by his name in paper sent, appoynted as a geast.
Yong damsels thether flocke, of bachelers a rowte: Not so much for the banquets sake, as bewties to searche out. But not a Montagew would enter at his gate: For as you heard, the Capilets, and they were at debate. Saue Romeus, and he. in maske with hidden face: The supper done, with other fiue dyd prease into the place. When they had maskd a whyle, with dames in courtly wise: All dyd vnmaske, the rest dyd shew them to theyr ladies eyes. But bashfull Romeus, with shamefast face forsooke The open prease, and him withdrew into the chambers nooke. But brighter then the sunne, the waxen torches shone: That mauger what he could, he was espyd of euery one. But of the women cheefe, theyr gasing eyes that threwe To woonder at his sightly shape and bewties spotles hewe. With which the heauens him had and nature so bedect: That Ladies thought the fayrest dames were fowle in his respect. And in theyr head beside, an other woonder rose, How he durst put himselfe in throng among so many foes.
Of courage stoute they thought his cumming to procede: And women loue an hardy hart as I in stories rede. The Capilets disdayne the presence of theyr foe: Yet they suppresse theyr yrred yre, the cause I do not knowe. Perhaps toffend theyr gestes the courteous knights are loth, Perhaps they stay from sharpe reuenge, dreadyng the Princes wroth. Perhaps for that they shamd to exercise theyr rage: Within their house, gainst one alone and him of tender age. They vse no taunting talke, ne harme him by theyr deede: They neyther say, what makst thou here, ne yet they say God speede. So that he freely might the Ladies view at ease: And they also behelding him, their chaunge of fansies please. Which nature had him taught to doe with such a grace, That there was none but ioyed at his being there in place. With vpright beame he wayd the bewty of eche dame, And iudgd who best, and who next her, was wrought in natures frame. At length he saw a mayd, right fayre of perfect shape: Which Theseus, or Paris would haue chosen to their rape.
Whom erst he neuer sawe, of all she pleasde him most: Within himselfe he said to her, thou iustly mayst thee boste. Of perfit shapes renoune, and Beauties sounding prayse: Whose like ne hath, ne shalbe seene, ne liueth in our dayes. And whilest he fixd on her his part all perced eye, His former loue, for which of ate he ready was to dye. Is nowe as quite forgotte, as it had neuer been: The prouerbe saith vnminded oft are they that are vnseene. And as out of a planke a nayle a nayle doth driue: So nouell loue out of the minde the auncient loued doth riue. This sodain kindled fyre in time is wox so great: That onely death, and both theyr blouds might quench the fiery heate. When Romeus saw himselfe in this new tempest tost: Where both was hope of pleasant port, and daunger to be lost: He doubtefull, skasely knew what countenance to keepe In Lethies floud his wonted flames were quenchd and drenched deepe. Yea he forgets himselfe, ne is the wretch so bolde To aske her name, that without force hath him in bondage folde.
Ne how tunloose his bondes doth the poore foole deuise, But onely seeketh by her sight to feede his houngry eyes. Through them he swalloweth downe loues sweete empoysonde baite, How encly are the warees wrapt by those that lye in wayte? is the poyson spred throughout his bones and vaines: That in a while (alas the while) it hasteth deadly paines. Whilst Iuliet (for so this gentle damsell hight) From syde to syde on euery one dyd cast about her sight: At last her floing eyes were ancored fast on him, Who for her sake dyd banishe health and fredome from eche limme. He in her sight did seeme to passe the rest as farre As Phoebus shining beames do passe the brightnes of a starre. In wayte laye warlike loue with golden bowe and shaft, And to his eare with steady hand the bowstring vp he raft. Till now she had escapde his sharpe inflaming darte: Till now he listed not assaulte her yong and tender hart. His whetted arrow loosde, so touchd her to the quicke: That through the eye it strake the hart, and there the hedde did sticke.
It booted not to striue, for why, she wanted strength: The weaker aye vnto the strong of force must yeld at length. The pomps now of the feast her heart gyns to despyse: And onely ioyeth when her eyen meete with her louers eyes. When theyr new smitten heartes had fed on louing gleames: Whilst passing too and fro▪ theyr eyes ymingled were theyr beames▪ Eche of these louers gan by others lookes to knowe: That frendship in their brest had roote, and both would haue it grow. When thus in both theyr harts had Cupide made his breache: And eche of them had sought the meane to end the warre by speache. Dame Fortune did assent theyr purpose to aduaunce: With torche in hand a comly knight did fetch her foorth to daunce. She quit her selfe so well, and with so trim a grace: That she the cheefe prayse wan that night from all Verona race. The whilst our Romeus, a place had warely wonne: Nye to the seate where she must sit, the daunce once beyng donne. Fayre Iuliet tourned to, her chayre with pleasant cheere: And glad she was her Romeus approched was so neere.
At thone side of her chayre▪ her louer Romeo: And on the other side there sat one cald Mercutio. A courtier that eche where was highly had in pryce: For he was coorteous of his speche, and pleasant of deuise. Euen as a Lyon would emong the lambes be bolde: Such was emong the bashfull maydes, Mercutio to beholde. With frendly gripe he ceasd fayre Iuliets snowith hand: A gyft he had that nature gaue him in his swathing band. That frosen mountayne yse was neuer halfe so cold As were his handes, though nere so neer the fire he dyd them holde. As soone as had the knight the vyrgins right hand raught: Within his trembling hand her left hath louing Romeus caught. For he wist well himselfe for her abode most payne: And well he wist she loued him best, vnles she list to fayne. Then she with tender hand his tender palme hath prest: What ioy trow you was graffed so in Romeus clouen brest? The soodain sweete delight hath stopped quite his tong: Ne can he claime of her his right, ne craue redresse of wrong.
But she espyd straight waye by chaunging o his hewe From pale to red, from red to pale, and so from pale anewe: That vehment loue was cause, why so his tong dyd stay: And so much more she longde to heare what loue could teache him saye. When she had longed long, and he long held his peace, And her desire of hearing him, by sylence dyd encrease. At last with trembling voyce and shamefast chere, the mayde Vnto her Romeus tournde her selfe, and thus to him she sayde. O blessed be the time of thy arriuall here: But ere she could speake forth the rest, to her loue drewe so nere: And so within her mouth, her tong he glewed fast, That no one woord could scape her more, then what already past. In great contented ease the yong man straight is rapt, What chaunce ({quod} he) vnware to me O lady myne is hapt? That geues you worthy cause, my cumming here to blisse: Fayre Iuliet was come agayne vnto her selfe by this. Fyrst ruthfully she lookd, then sayd with smylyng cheere: Meruayle no whit my heartes delight, my onely knight and fere.
Mercutious ysy hande had all to frosen myne And of thy goodnes thou agayne hast warmed it with thine. Whereto with stayed brow, gau Romeus to replye If so the gods haue graunted me, suche fauour from the skye, That by my being here, some seruice I haue donne That pleaseth you I am as glad, as I a realme had wonne, O wel bestowed tyme. that hath the happy hyre, Which I woulde wysh if I might haue, my wished harts desire. For I of God woulde craue, as pryse of paynes forpast. To serue, obey and honor you, so long as lyfe shall last. As proofe shall teache you playne, if that you like to trye His faltles truth, that nill for ought, vnto his lady lye. But if my tooched hand, haue warmed yours some dele Assure your self the heat is colde, which in your hand you fele. Compard to suche quick sparks and glowing furious gleade As from your bewties pleasaunt yne, loue caused to proceade. Which haue so set on fyre, eche feling parte of myne. That lo, my mynde doeth melt awaye: my vtwerd parts doe pyne.
And but you helpe all whole, to ashes shall I toorne: Wherfore (alas) haue ruth on him, whom you do force to boorne. Euen with his ended tale, the torches daunce had ende, And Iuliet of force must part from her new chosen frend. His hand she clasped hard, and all her partes did shake: When lay sureles with whispring voyce thus did she aunswer make. You are no more your owne (deare frend) then I am yours (My honor saued) prest tobay your will, while life endures▪ Lo here the lucky lot that sild true louers finde: Eche takes away the others hart, and leaues the owne behinde. A happy life is loue if God graunt from aboue, That hart with hart by euen waight doo make exchaunge of loue. But Romeus gone from her, his heart for care is colde: He hath forgot to aske her name that hath his hart in holde. With forged careles cheere, of one he seekes to knowe, Both how she hight, and whence she camme, that him enchaunted so. So hath he learnd her name, and knowth she is no geast. Her father was a Capilet, and master of the feast.
Thus hath his foe in choyse to geue him lyfe or death: That scarsely can his wofull brest keepe in the liuely breath. Wherfore with piteous plaint feerce Fortune doth he blame: That in his ruth and wretched plight doth seeke her laughing game. And he reproueth loue, cheefe cause of his vnrest: Who ease and freedome hath exilde out of his youthfull brest. Twyse hath he made him serue, hopeles of his rewarde: Of both the ylles to choose the lesse, I weene the choyse were harde▪ Fyrst to a ruthlesse one he made him sue for grace: And now with spurre he forceth him to ronne an endles race. Amyd these stormy seas one ancor doth him holde, He serueth not a cruell one, as he had done of olde. And therfore is content, and chooseth still to serue: Though hap should sweare that guerdonles the wretched wight should sterue. The lot of Tantalus is Romeus lyke to thine For want of foode amid his foode, the myser styll doth pine. As carefull was the mayde what way were best deuise To learne his name, that intertaind her in so gentle wise.
Of whome her hart receiued so deepe, so wyde a wounde, An auncient dame she calde to her, and in her eare gan rounde. This olde dame in her youth, had nurst her with her mylke, With slender nedle taught her sow, and how to spin with silke, What twayne are those (quoth she) which prease vnto the doore, Whose pages in theyr hand doe beare, two toorches light before. And then as eche of them had of his houshold name, So she him namde yet once agayne the yong and wyly dame. And tell me who is he with vysor in his hand That yender doth in masking weede besyde the window stand. His name is Romeus (sayd she) a Montegewe. Whose fathers pryde first styrd the strife which both your housholdes rewe. The woord of Montegew, her ioyes did ouerthrow, And straight in steade of happy hope, dyspayre began to growe. What hap haue I quoth she, to loue my fathers foe? What, am I wery of my wele? what, doe I wishe my woe? But though her grieuous paynes distraind her tender hart, Yet with an outward shewe of ioye she cloked inward smart.
And of the courtlyke dames her leaue so courtly tooke, That none dyd gesse the sodain change by changing of her looke. Then at her mothers hest to chamber sheher hyde So well she faynde, mother ne nurce. the hidden harme descride. But when she should haue slept as wont she was, in bed, Not halfe a winke of quiet slepe could harber in her hed▪ For loe, an hugy heape of dyuers thoughtes arise That rest haue banisht from her hart, and slumber from her eyes. And now from side to side she tosseth and she turnes, And now for feare she sheuereth, and now for loue she burnes. And now she lykes her choyse, and now her choyse she blames, And now eche houre within her head, a thousand fansies frames Sometime in mynde to stop, amyd her course begonne Sometime she vowes what so betyde, that tempted race to ronne. Thus dangers dred and loue, within the mayden fought, The fight was feerce continuyng long by their contrary thought. In tourning mase of loue she wandreth too and fro, Then standeth doutfull what to doe, last ouerprest with woe.
How so her fansies cease, her teares dyd neuer blyn, With heauy cheere and wringed hands, thus doth her plaint begyn. Ah sily foole quoth she) ycought in soottill snare: Ah wretched wench bewrapt in woe, an caytife clad with care. Whence come these wandring thoughtes to thy vnconstant brest? By straying thus from raysons lore, that reue thy wonted rest. What if his suttell brayne, to fayne haue taught his tong? And so the snake that lurkes in grasse, thy tender hart hath stong? What if with frendly speache the traytor lye in wayte? As oft the poysond hooke is hid, wrapt in the pleasant bayte? Oft vnder cloke of truth, hath falshood serued her lust: And toornd theyr honor into shame, that did so slightly trust. What, was not Dido so, a crouned Queene: defamd? And eke for such an heynous cryme, haue men not Theseus blamd? A thousand stories more, to teache me to beware: In Boccace, and in Ouids bookes too playnely written are. Perhaps the great reuenge he cannot woorke by strength: By suttel sleight (my honor staynde) he hopes to worke at length.
So shall I seeke to finde my fathers foe his game: So I befylde, report shall take her trompe of blacke defame. Whence she with puffed cheeke shall blowe a blast so shrill Of my disprayse, that with the noyse Verona shall she stil. Then I a laughing stocke through all the towne becomme: Shall hide my selfe, but not my shame, within an hollowe toombe. Straight vnderneth her foote, she treadeth in the dust Her troublesom thought as wholy vaine, ybred of fond distrust. No no by God aboue, I wot it well quoth shee, Although I rashely spake before, in no wise can it bee. That where such perfet shape, with pleasant bewty restes: There crooked craft and trayson blacke, should be appoynted gestes. Sage writers say, the thoughts are dwelling in the eyne: Then sure I am as Cupid raignes that Romeus is myne. The tong the messenger, eke call they of the mynd: So that I see he loueth me, shall I then be vnkynd? His faces rosy hew, I saw full oft to seeke: And straight againe it flashed foorth, and spred in eyther cheeke.
His fyred heauenly yne, that through me quite did perce His thoughts vnto my hart, my thought they semed to rehearce. What ment his foltring tunge, in telling of his tale: The trembling of his ioynts and eke his cooller waxen pale? And whilst I take with him, hym self he hath exylde, Out of him self (as seemed me) ne was I sure begylde. Those arguments of loue, craft wrate not in his face But natures hande when all deceyte▪ was banishd out of place What other certain signes seke I of his good wil? These doo suffise, and stedfast I will loue and serue him still. Till Attropos shall cut, my fatall thread of lyfe, So that he mynde to make of me his lawfull wedded wyfe. For so perchaunce this new aliance may procure Vnto our houses suche a peace as euer shall endure Oh how we can perswade, our self to what we like And how we can diswade our mynd, if ought our mynd misyke. Weake arguments are stronge, our fansies streyght to frame, To pleasing things, and eke to shonne, if we mislike the same.
The mayde had scarsely yet ended the wery warre, Kept in her heart by striuing thoughtes when euery shining starre Had payd his borowed light, and Phebus spred in skies His golden rayes, which seemd to say: now time it is to rise. And Romeus had by this forsaken his wery bed: Where restles he a thousand thoughts had forged in his hed. And while with lingring step by Iuliets house he past: And vpward to her windowes high his gredy eyes did cast: His loue that looked for him, there gan he straight espie, With pleasant cheere eche greeted is, she followeth with her eye His parting steppes, and he oft looketh backe againe: But not so oft as he desyres, warely he doth refraine. What life were lyke to loue, if dred of ieopardy, Ysowred not the sweete, if loue were free from ielosy. But she more sure within, vnseene of any wight, When so he comes, lookes after him, till he be out of sight. In often passing so, his busy eyes he threw, That euery pane and tooting hole the wily louer knew.
In happy houre he doth a garden plot espye: From which except he warely walke, men may his loue descrye. For lo, it fronted full, vpon her leaning place: Where she is woont to shew her heart by cheerefull frendly face. And lest the arbors might theyr secret loue bewraye: He doth keepe backe his forward foote from passing there by daye. But when on earth the night her mantel blacke hath spred: Well armd he walketh foorth alone, ne dreadfull foes doth dred. Whom maketh loue not bold, naye whom makes he not blynde? He reueth daungers dread oft times out of the loues minde. By night he passeth here, a weeke or two in vayne: And for the missing of his marke. his griefe hath him nye slaine. And Iuliet that now both lacke her hearts releefe: Her Romeus pleasant eyen (I meene) is almost dead for greefe. Eche day she chaungeth howres, (for louers keepe an howre) When they are sure to see theyr loue in passing by their howre. Impacient of her woe, she hapt to leane one night Within her window, and anon the Moone did shine so bright.
That she espyde her loue, her hart reuiued, sprang, And now for ioy she clappes her handes, which erst for woe she wrang. Eke Romeus when he sawe his long desired sight: His moorning cloke of mone cast of, hath clad him with delight. Yet dare I say, of both, that she reioyced more: His care was great, hers twise as great, was all the tyme before: For whilst she knew not why he dyd himselfe absent: Ay douting both his health and lyfe, his death she dyd lament. For loue is fearefull oft, where is no cause of feare: And what loue feares, that loue laments, as though it chaunced weare. Of greater cause alway is greater woorke ybred: While he nought douteth of her helth, she dreads lest he be ded. When onely absence is the cause of Romeus smart: By happy hope of sight agayne he feedes his faynting hart. What woonder then if he were wrapt in lesse annoye? What maruell if by sodain sight she fed of greater ioye? His smaller greefe or ioy, no smaller loue doo proue: He for she passed him in both, did she him passe in loue.
But eche of them alike dyd burne in equall flame: The welbelouing knight, and eke the welbeloued dame. How whilst with bitter teares her eyes as fountaynes ronne: With whispering voyce ybroke with sobs, thus is her tale begonne. Oh Romeus (of your lyfe) too lauas sure yon are: That in this place, and at thys tyme to hasard it you dare. What if your dedly foes my kynsmen, saw you here? Lyke Lyons wylde, your tender partes asonder would they teare. In ruth and in disdayne, I weary of my lyfe: With cruell hand my moorning hart would perce with bloudy knyfe. For you myne owne once dead, what ioy should I haue heare? And eke my honor staynde which I then lyfe doe holde more deare. Fayre lady myne dame Iuliet my lyfe (quod he) Euen from my byrth committed was to fatall sisters three. They may in spyte of foes, draw foorth my liuely threed: And they also, who so sayth nay, a sonder may it shreed. But who to reaue my lyfe, his rage and force would bende: Perhaps should trye vnto his payne how I it could defende.
Ne yet I loue it so, but alwayes for your sake, A sacrifice to death I would my wounded corps betake. If my mishappe were such, that here before your sight, I should restore agayne to death, of lyfe my borowde light: This one thing and no more my parting sprite would rewe: That part he should, before that you by certaine triall knew The loue I owe to you, the thrall I languish in: And how I dread to loose the gayne which I doe hope to win. And how I wishe for lyfe, not for my propre ease: But that in it, you might I loue, you honor, serue and please. Tyll dedly pangs the sprite out of the corps shall send: And therupon he sware an othe, and so his tale had ende. Now loue and pitty boyle, in Iuliets ruthfull brest, In windowe on her leaning arme, her weary hed doth rest. Her bosome bathd in teares, to witnes inward payne: With dreary chere to Romeus, thus aunswerd she agayne. Ah my deere Romeus, keepe in these woordes (quod she) For lo, the thought of such mischaunce, already maketh me
For pitty and for dred, welnigh to yelde vp breath: In euen ballance paysed are my life and eke my death. For so my hart is knitte, yea, made one selfe with yours: That sure there is no greefe so small, by which your mynde endures. But as you suffer payne, so I doe beare in part: (Although it lessens not your greefe) the halfe of all your smart. But these thinges ouerpast, if of your health and myne You haue respect, or pitty ought my teary weping eyen: In few vnfained woords, your hidden mynd vnfolde, That as I see your pleasant face, your heart I may beholde. For if you doe intende my honor to defile: In error shall you wander still as you haue done this whyle, But if your thought be chaste, and haue on vertue ground, If wedlocke be the ende and marke which your desire hath found: Obedience set aside, vnto my parentes dewe: The quarell eke that long agoe betwene our housholdes grewe: Both me and myne I will all whole to you betake: And following you where so you goe, my fathers house forsake.
But if by wanton loue, and by vnlawfull sute. You thinke in ripest yeres to plucke my maydenhods dainty frute: You are begylde, and now your Iuliet you be seekes To cease your sute, and suffer her to liue emong her likes. Then Romeus, whose thought was free from fowle desyre: And to the top of vertues haight, did worthely aspyre: Was fild with greater ioy then can my pen expresse: Or till they haue enioyd the like the hearers hart can gesse. And then with ioyned hands heaud vp into the skies: He thankes the Gods, and from the heauens for vengeance downe he cries. If he haue other thought, but as his lady spake: And then his looke he toornd to her, and thus did aunswer make. Since Lady that you like to honor me so much, As to accept me for your spouse, I yeld my selfe for such. In true witnes wherof, because I must depart, Till that my deede do proue my woord, I leaue in pawne my hart. To morow eke betimes. before the sunne arise: To fryer Lawrence will I wende, to learne his sage aduise.
He is my gostly syre, and oft he hath me taught What I should doe in things of wayght, when I his ayde haue sought. And at this selfe same houre, I plyte you here my fayth: I wil be here (if you thinke good) to tell you what he sayth. She was contented well, els fauour found he none, That night at lady Iuliets hand, saue pleasant woordes alone. This barefoote fryer gyrt, with cord his grayish weede, For he of Frauncis order was, a fryer as I reede, Not as the most was he, a grosse vnlearned foole: But doctor of diuinitie proceded he in schoole. The secretes eke he knew, in natures woorkes that loorke: By magiks arte most men supposd that he could wonders woorke. Ne doth it ill beseeme deuines those skils to know: If on no harmefull deede they do such skilfulnes bestow. For iustly of no arte can men condemne the vse: But right and reasons lore crye out agaynst the lewd abuse. The bounty of the fryer and wisdom hath so wonne The townes folks herts, that welnigh all to fryer Lawrence tonne.
To shriue them selfe the olde, the yong, the great and small: Of all he is beloued well, and honord much of all. And for he did the rest in wisdome farre exceede: The prince by him (his counsell craude) was holpe at time of neede. Betwixt the Capilets and him great frendship grew: A secret and assured frend vnto the Montegue. Loued of this yong man more then any other gest, The frier eke of Verone youth, aye liked Romeus best. For whom he euer hath in time of his distres: (As erst you heard) by skilfull lore, found out his harmes redresse. To him is Romeus gonne, ne stayth he till the morowe: To him he paynteth all his case, his passed ioy and sorow. How he hath her espyde with other dames in daunce, And how that first to talke with her, himselfe he did aduaunce. Their talke and change of lookes he gan to him declare: And how so fast by fayth and troth they both ycoupled are. That neither hope of lyfe, nor dreed of cruel death, Shall make him false his fayth to her while lyfe shall lend him breath.
And then with weping eyes he prayes his gostly syre To further and accomplish all theyr honest hartes desire. A thousand doutes and moe in thold mans hed arose: A thousand daungers like to come, the olde man doth disclose. And from the spousall rites he readeth him refrayne: Perhaps he shalbe bet aduisde within a weeke or twayne. Aduise is banishd quite from those that followe loue, Except aduise to what they like theyr bending mynde do moue. As well the father might haue counseld him to stay That from a mountaines top thrown downe, is falling halfe the way: As warne his frend to stop, amyd his race begonne, Whom Cupid with his smarting whip enforceth foorth to ronne. Part wonne by earnest sute, the fryer doth graunt at last: And part, because he thinkes the stormes so lately ouerpast, Of both the housholdes wrath: this mariage might apease, So that they should not rage agayne, but quite for euer cease. The respite of a day, he asketh to deuyse: What way were best vnknowne to ende so great an enterprise.
The wounded man that now doth dedly paines endure: Scarce pacient tarieth whilst his leeche doth make the salue to cure. So Romeus hardly graunts a short day and a night, Yet nedes he must, els must he want his onely hearts delight. You see that Romeus no time or payne doth spare: Thinke that the whilst fayre Iuliet is not deuoyde of care. Yong Romeus powreth foorth his hap and his mishap, Into the friers brest, but where shall Iuliet vnwrap The secretes of her hart? to whom shall she vnfolde, Her hidden burning loue, and eke her thought and cares so colde. The nurce of whom I spake within her chaumber laye: Vpon the mayde she wayteth still, to her she doth bewray Her new receiued wound, and then her ayde doth craue: In her she saith it lyes to spill, in her her life to saue. Not easely she made the froward nurce to bowe: But wonne at length, with promest hyre she made a solemne vowe. To do what she commaundes, as handmayd of her hest: Her mistres secrets hide she will, within her couert brest.
To Romeus she goes of him she doth desyre, To know the meane of mariage by councell of the fryre. On Saterday quod he, if Iuliet come to shrift, She shalbe shriued and maried, how lyke you noorse this drist? Now by my truth (quod she) gods blessing haue your hart: For yet in all my life I haue not heard of such a part. Lord how you yong men can such crafty wiles deuise, If that you loue the daughter well to bleare the mothers eyes. An easy thing it is, with cloke of holines, To mocke the sely mother that suspecteth nothing lesse But that it pleased you to tell me of the case. For all my many yeres perhaps, I should haue found it scarse. Now for the rest let me and Iuliet alone: To get her leaue, some feate excuse I will deuise anone. For that her golden lockes by sloth haue been vnkempt: Or for vnwares some wanton dreame the youthfull damsell drempt, Or for in thoughts of loue her ydel time she spent: Or otherwise within her hart deserued to be shent.
I know her mother will in no case say her nay: I warrant you she shall not fayle to come on Saterday. And then she sweares to him, the mother loues her well: And how she gaue her sucke in youth she leaueth not to tell. A prety babe (quod she) it was when it was yong: Lord how it could full pretely haue prated with it tong. A thousand times and more I said her on my lappe, And clapt her on the buttocke soft and kist where I did clappe. And gladder then was I of such a kisse forsooth: Then I had been to haue a kisse of some olde lechers mouth. And thus of Iuliets youth began this prating noorse, And of her present state to make a tedious long discoorse. For though he pleasure tooke in hearing of his loue: The message aunswer seemed him to be of more behoue. But when these Beldams sit at ease vpon theyr tayle: The day and eke the candle light before theyr talke shall fayle. And part they say is true, and part they do deuise: Yet boldly do they that of both when no man checkes theyr lyes.
Then he .vi. crownes of gold out of his pocket drew: And gaue them her, a slight reward (quod he) and so adiew. In seuen yeres twise tolde she had not bowd so lowe, Her crooked knees, as now they bowe, she sweares she will bestowe. Her crafty wit, her time, and all her busy payne, To helpe him to his hoped blisse, and cowring downe agayne: She takes her leaue, and home she hyes with spedy pace: The chaumber doore she shuts, and then she saith with smyling face. Good newes for thee my gyrle, good tidinges I thee bring: Leaue of thy woonted song of care and now of pleasure sing. For thou mayst hold thy selfe the happiest vnder sonne: That in so little while, so well so worthy a knight hast wonne. The best yshapde is he, and hath the fayrest face, Of all this towne, and there is none hath halfe so good a grace. So gentle of his speche, and of his counsell wise: And still with many prayses more she heaued him to the skies. Tell me els what (quod she) this euermore I thought: But of our mariage say at once, what aunswer haue you brought?
Nay soft quoth she, I feare, your hurt by sodain ioye: I list not play quoth Iuliet, although thou list to toye. How glad trow you was she, when she had heard her say: No farther of then Saterday, differred was the day. Againe the auncient nurce doth speake of Romeus, And then (said she) he spake to me, and then I spake him thus. Nothing was done or said, that she hath left vntolde, Saue onely one, that she forgot the taking of the golde. There is no losse quod she, (sweete wench) to losse of time: Ne in thine age shalt thou repent so much of any crime. For when I call to mynde, my former passed youth: One thing there is which most of all doth cause my endles ruth. At sixtene yeres I first did choose my louing feere: And I was fully ripe before, (I dare well say) a yere. The pleasure that I lost. that yere so ouerpast: A thousand times I haue be wept, and shall while lyfe doth last. In fayth it were a shame, yea sinne it were ywisse, When thou mayst liue in happy ioy to set light by thy blisse.
She that this mornyng could her mistres mynde disswade, Is now becomme an Dratresse, her lady to perswade. If any man be here whom loue hath clad with care: To him I speake, if thou wilt spede, thy purse thou must not spare. Two sortes of men there are, seeld welcome in at doore: The welthy sparing nigard, and the sutor that is poore. For glittring gold is woont by kynd to mooue the hart: And often times a slight rewarde doth cause a more desart. Ywritten haue I red, I wot not in what booke: There is no better way to fishe, then with a golden hooke. Of Romeus these two, doe sitte and chat a while, And to them selfe they laugh, how they the mother shall begyle. A feate excuse they finde, but sure I know it not: And leaue for her to goe to shrift on Saterday she got. So well this Iuliet, this wyly wench dyd know Her mothers angry houres, and eke the true bent of her bowe. The Saterday betimes in sober weede yelad, She tooke her leaue, and forth she went with visage graue and sad.
With her the nurce is sent as brydle of her lust: With her the mother sendes a mayde, almost of equall trust. Betwixt her teeth the bytte, the Ienet now hath cought: So warely eke the vyrgin walkes her mayde perceiueth nought. She gaseth not in churche, on yong men of the towne: Ne wandreth she from place to place, but straight she kneleth downe Vpon an alters step, where she deuoutly prayes: And there vpon her tender knees the wery lady stayes: Whilst she doth send her mayde the certain truth to know, If fryer Lawrence laysure had, to heare her shrift, or no. Out of his shriuing place he commes with pleasant cheere: The shamefast mayde with bashfull brow to himward draweth neere. Some great offence ({quod} he) you haue committed late: Perhaps you haue displeasd your frend, by geuing him a mate. Then turning to the nurce, and to the other mayde: Goe heare a masse or two quod be, which straight way shalbe sayde. For her confession heard, I will vnto you twayne The charge that I receiud of you, restore to you agayne.
What, was not Iuliet trow you right well apayde? That for this trusty fryre hath chaungde her yong mistrusting mayde? I dare well say there is in all Verona none: But Romeus, with whom she would so gladly be alone. Thus to the fryers cell, they both foorth walked bin: He shuts the doore as soone as he and Iuliet were in. But Romeus her frend was entred in before: And there had wayted for his loue, two howers large and more. Eche minute seemde an howre, and euery howre a day: Twixt hope he liued and despayre, of cumming or of stay. Now wauering hope and feare, are quite fled out of sight. For what he hopde he hath at hande his pleasant cheefe delight. And ioyfull Iuliet is healde of all her smart: For now the rest of all her parts, haue found her straying hart. Both theyr confessions first the fryer hath heard them make: And then to her with lowder voyce thus fryer Lawrence spake. Fayre lady Iuliet my gostly doughter deere: As farre as I of Romeus learne who by you standeth here:
Twixt you it is agreed that you shalbe his wyfe: And he your spouse in steady truth till death shall end your life. Are you both fully bent to kepe this great behest? And both the louers said it was theyr onely harts request. When he did see theyr myndes in linkes of loue so fast: When in the prayse of wedlocks state somme skilfull talke was past. When he had told at length the wife what was her due: His duety eke by gostly talke the youthfull husband knew. How that the wife in loue must honor and obay: What loue and honor he doth owe, and dette that he must pay. The woords pronounced were which holy church of olde Appointed hath for mariage: and she a ring of golde Receiued of Romeus: and then they both arose. To whom the frier then said, perchaunce a part you will disclose Betwixt your selfe alone the bottome of your hart: Say on at once, for time it is that hence you should depart. Then Romeus said to her, (both loth to part so soone:) Fayre lady send to me agayne your nurce this after noone.
Of corde I will bespeake, a ladder by that time: By which, this night, while other sleepe, I will your window clime. Then will we talke of loue, and of our olde dispayres: And then with longer laysure had, dispose our great affaires. These said, they kisse, and then part to theyr fathers house: The ioyfull bryde vnto her home, to his eke goth the spouse. Contented both, and yet both vncontented still: Till night and Venus child, geue leaue the wedding to fulfill. The painfull souldiour sore ybet with wery warre: The merchant eke that nedefull things doth dred to fetch from farre: The plowman that for doute of feerce inuading foes, Rather to sit in ydle ease then sowe his tilt hath chose: Reioyce to heare proclaymd the tydinges of the peace: Not pleasurd with the sound so much: but when the warres do cease. Then ceased are the harmes which cruell warre bringes foorth. The merchant then may boldly fetch, his wares of precious woorth. Dredelesse the husband man doth till his fertile feeld: For welth her mate, not for her selfe, is peace so precious held.
So louers liue in care, in dread, and in vnrest: And dedly warre by striuing thoughts they kepe within their brest. But wedlocke is the peace wherby is freedome wonne, To do a thousand pleasant thinges that should not els be donne. The newes of ended warre these two haue hard with ioy: But now they long the fruite of peace with pleasure to enioy. In stormy wind and waue, in daunger to be lost: Thy stearles ship (O Romeus) hath been long while betost. The seas are now appeasd, and thou by happy starre Art comme in sight of quiet hauen: and now the wrackfull barre Is hid with swelling tyde, boldly thou mayst resort Vnto thy wedded ladies bed, thy long desyred port. God graunt no follies mist so dymme thy inward sight, That thou do misse the chanell, that doth leade to thy delight. God graunt no daungers rocke ylurking in the darke Before thou win the happy port wracke thy sea beaten barke. A seruant Romeus had, of woord and deede so iust: That with his life (if nede requierd) his master would him trust,
His faithfulnes had oft our Romeus proued of olde And therfore all that yet was done vnto his man he tolde. Who straight as he was charged, a corden ladder lookes: To which he hath made fast two strong and crooked yron hookes. The bryde to send the nurce at twylight fayleth not: To whom the bridegroome yeuen hath. the ladder that he got. And then to watch for him appointeth her an howre: For whether Fortune smyle on him, or if she list to lowre, He will not misse to comme to his appoynted place, Where wont he was to take by stelth the view of Iuliets face. How long these louers thought the lasting of the day, Let other iudge that woonted are lyke passions to assay. For my part, I do gesse eche howre seemes twenty yere: So that I deeme if they might haue (as of Alcume we heare) The sunne bond to theyr will, if they the heauens might gyde: Black shade of night and doubled darke should straight all oner hyde. Thappointed howre is comme, he clad in riche araye, Walkes toward his desyred home, good Fortune gyde his way.
Approching nere the place from whence his hart had lffe: So light he wor, he lept the wall, and there he spyde his wife. Who in the windowe watcht the cumming of her lorde: Where she so surely had made fast the ladder made of corde: That daungerles her spouse the chaumber window climes, Where he ere then had wisht himselfe aboue ten thousand times. The windowes close are shut, els looke they for no gest, To light the waxen quariers, the auncient nurce is prest, Which Iuliet had before prepared to be light, That she at pleasure might beholde her husbandes bewty bright. A Carchef white as snowe, ware Iuliet on her hed, Such as she wonted was to weare, attyre meete for the bed. As soone as she him spyde, about his necke she clong: And by her long and slender armes a great while there she hong. A thousand times she kist, and him vnkist agayne: Ne could she speake a woord to him though would she nere so fayne. And like betwixt his armes to faynt his lady is: She fettes a sigh, and clappeth close her closed mouth to his.
And ready then to sownde she looked ruthfully: That loe, it made him both at once to liue and eke to dye. These piteous painfull panges were haply ouerpast: And she vnto her selfe agayne retorned home at last. Then through her troubled brest, euen from the farthest part, An hollow sigh, a messenger she sendeth from her hart. O Romeus quoth she, in whome all vertues shyne: Welcome thou art into this place where from these eyes of myne, Such teary streames dyd flowe, that I suppose welny The source of all my bitter teares is altogether drye. Absence so pynde my heart, which on thy presence fed: And of thy safetie and thy health so much I stood in dred. But now what is decreed by fatall desteny: I force it not, let Fortune do and death their woorst to me. Full recompensd am I for all my passed harmes, In that the Gods haue graunted me to claspe thee in myne armes. The christall teares began to stand in Romeus eyes, When he vnto his ladies woordes gan aunswere in this wise.
Though cruell Fortune be so much my dedly foe: That I ne can by liuely proofe cause thee (fayre dame) to knowe How much I am by loue enthralled vnto thee: Ne yet what mighty powre thou hast by thy desert on me. Ne tormentes that for thee I did ere this endure: Yet of thus much (ne will I fayne) I may thee well assure. The least of many paynes which of thy absence sprong: More paynefully then death it selfe my tender hart hath wroong. Ere this one death had reft a thousand deathes away: But lyfe prolonged was by hope, of this desired day. Which so iust tribute payes of all my passed mone: That I as well contented am, as if my selfe alone Did from the Occean reigne vnto the sea of Inde: Wherfore now let vs wipe away old cares out of our mynde. For as the wretched state is now redrest at last, So is it skill behinde our backe the cursed care to cast. Since Fortune of her grace hath place and time assinde Where we with pleasure may content our vncontented minde.
In Lethes hyde we deepe all greefe and all annoy, Whilst we do bath in blisse, and fill our hungry harts with ioye. And for the time to comme, let be our busy care: So wisely to direct our loue as no wight els be ware. Lest enmous foes by force despoyle our new delight, And vs throwe backe from happy state to more vnhappy plight. Fayre Iuliet began to aunswere what he sayde: But foorth in hast the olde nurce stept, and so her aunswere stayde. Who takes not time (quoth she) when time well offred is, An other time shall seeke for time, and yet of time shall misse. And when occasion serues, who so doth let it slippe, Is woorthy sure (if I might iudge) of lashes with a whippe. Wherfore, if eche of you hath harmde the other so, And eche of you hath been the cause of others wayled woe, Loe here a fielde, (she shewd a fieeldbed ready dight) Where you may, if you list, in armes, reuenge your selfe by fight. Wherto these louers both gan easely assent, And to the place of mylde reuenge with pleasant cheere they went.
Where they were left alone, the nurce is gone to rest: How can this be? they restles lye, ne yet they feele vnrest. I graunt that I enuie the blisse they liued in: Oh that I might haue found the like. I wish it for no sin. But that I might as well with pen their ioyes depaynt, As here to fore I haue displayd their secret hidden playnt. Of shyuering care and bred, I haue felt many a fit, But Fortune such delight as theyrs dyd neuer graunt me yet. By proofe no certain truth can I vnhappy write: But what I gesse by likelihod, that dare I to endite. The blyndfyld goddesse that with frowning face doth fraye, And from theyr seate the mighty kinges throwes downe with hedlong sway▪ Begynneth now to turne, to these her smyling face, Nedes must they tast of great delight, so much in Fortunes grace. If Cupid, God of loue, be God of pleasant sport, I thinck O Romeus Mars himselfe enuies thy happy sort. Ne Venus iustly might, (as I suppose) repent, If in thy stead (O Iuliet) this pleasant time she spent.
This passe they foorth the night in sport, in ioly game: The hastines of Phoebus steeds in great despyte they blame. And now the virgins fort hath warlike Romeus got, In which as yet no breache was made by force of canon shot. And now in ease he doth possesse the hoped place: How glad was he, speake you that may your louers parts embrace? The mariage thus made vp, and both the parties pleasd: The nigh approche of dayes retoorne these seely foles diseasd. And for they might no while in pleasure passe theyr time, Ne leysure had they much to blame the hasty mornings crime: With frendly kisse in armes of her his leaue he takes, And euery othe night to come, a solemne othe he makes. By one selfe meane, and eke to come at one selfe howre: And so he doth till Fortune list to sawse his sweete with sowre. But who is he that can his present state assure? And say vnto himself, thy ioyes shall yet a day endure. So wauering Fortunes whele her chaunges be so straunge. And euery wight ythralled is by sate vnto her chaunge.
Who raignes so ouer all, that eche man hath his part: (Although not aye perchaunce alike) of pleasure and of smart. For after many ioyes, some feele but little payne: And from that little greefe they toorne to happy ioy againe. But other somme there are, that liuing long in woe, At length they be in quiet ease, but long abide not so. Whose greefe is much increast by myrth that went before: Because the sodayne chaunge of thinges doth make it seeme the more. Of this vnlucky sorte our Romeus is one For all his hap turnes to mishap, and all his myrth to mone. And ioyfull Iuliet an other leafe must toorne: As wont she was (her ioyes bereft) she must begin to moorne. The summer of their blisse, doth last a month or twayne: But winters blast with spedy foote doth bring the fall agayne. Whom glorious fortune erst had heaued to the skies: By enuious fortune ouerthrowne on earth now groueling lyes. She payd theyr former greefe with pleasures doubled gayne: But now for pleasures vsery ten folde redoubleth payne.
The prince could neuer cause those housholds so agree, But that some sparcles of their wrath, as yet remaining bee. Which lye this whi eraakd vp, in ashes pale and ded, Till tyme do serue that they agayne in wasting flame may spred. At holiest times men say most heynous crimes are donne, The morowe after Easter day the mischiefe new begonne. A band of Capilets did meete (my hart it rewes) Within the walles by Pursers gate, a band of Montagewes. The Capilets as cheefe, a yong man haue chose out: Best exercisd in feates of armes, and noblest of the rowte. Our Iuliets vnkles sonne that cliped was Tibalt: He was of body tall and strong, and of his courage halt. They neede no trumpet sounde to byd them geue the charge, So lowde he cryde with ftrayned voyce and mouth out stretched large. Now, now, (quod he) my frends, our selfe so let vs wreake, That of this dayes reuenge, and vs, our childrens heyres may speake. Now once for all let vs their swelling pride asswage, Let none of them escape aliue, then he with furious rage
And they with him gaue charge, vpon they present foes, And then forthwith a skyrmishe great vpon this fray arose. For loe, the Montagewes thought shame away to flye, And rather then to liue with shame, with prayse did choose to dye. The woordes that Tybalt vsd to styrre his folke to yre, Haue in the brestes of Montegewes kindled a furious fyre. With Lyons hartes they fight, warely themselfe defende: To wound his foe, his present wit and force eche one doth bend. This furious fray is long, on eche side stoutly fought, That whether part had got the woorst full doutfull were the thought. The noyse hereof anon, throughout the towne doth flye: And partes are taken on euery side. both kinreds thether hye. Here one doth gaspe for breth, his frend bestrideth him, And he hath lost a hand, and he another maymed him. His leg is cutte whilst he strikes at an other full: And whō he would haue thrust quite through hath cleft his cracked skull. Theyr valiant harts forbode theyr foote to geue the grounde, With vnappauled cheere they tooke full deepe and doutfull wounde.
Thus foote by foote long while, and shield to shield set fast: One foe doth make another faynt but makes him not agast. And whilst this noyse is ryfe in euery townes mans eare, Eke walking with his frendes, the noyse doth wofull Romeus heare. With spedy foote he ronnes vnto the fray apace: With him those fewe that were with him he leadeth to the place. They pittie much to see the slaughter made so greate: That wetshod they might stand in blood on eyther side the streate. Part frendes (sayd he) part frendes, helpe frendes to part the fray: And to the rest, enough (he cryes) now time it is to staye. Gods farther wrath you styrre, beside the hurt you feele: And with this new vprore confounde all this our common wele. But they so busy are in fight so egar and feerce, That through theyr eares his sage aduise no leysure had to pearce. Then lept he in the throng, to part, and barre the blowes, As well of those that were his frendes: as of his dedly foes. As soone as Tybalt had our Romeus espyde: He threw a thrust at him that would haue past from side to side.
But Romeus euer went (douting his foes) well armde: So that the swerd (kept out by mayle) hath nothing Romeus harmde. Thou doest me wrong (quoth he) for I but part the fraye, Not dread, but other waighty cause my hasty hand doth stay. Thou art the cheefe of thine, the noblest eke thou art: Wherfore leaue of thy malice now, and helpe these folke to parte. Many are hurt, some slayne, and some are like to dye. No, coward traytor boy ({quod} he) straight way I mynd to trye Whether thy sugred talke, and tong so smootely fylde: Against the force of this my swerd shall serue thee for a shylde. And then at Romeus hed, a blow he strake so hard, That might haue cloue him to the brayne but for his cunning ward. It was but lent to him that could repay agayne: And geue him death for interest, a well forborne gayne. Right as a forest bore, that lodged in the thicke, Pinched with dog, or els with speare ypricked to the quicke: His bristles stiffe vpright vpon his backe doth set, And in his fomy mouth, his sharp and crooked tuskes doth whet.
Or as a Lyon wylde that rampeth in his rage, His whelpes bereft, whose fury can no weaker beast asswage. Such seemed Romeus, in euery others sight: When he him shope, of wrong receaude tauenge himselfe by fight. Euen as two thunderboltes, throwne downe out of the skye, That through the ayre the massy earth and seas haue power to flye: So met these two, and while they chaunge a blowe or twayne, Our Romeus thrust him through the throte and so is Tybalt slayne. Loe here the ende of those that styrre a dedly stryfe: Who thyrsteth after others death, himselfe hath lost his life. The Capilets are quaylde, by Tybalts ouerthrowe: The courage of the Mountagewes, by Romeus sight doth growe, The townes men waren strong, the prince doth send his force: The fray hath end, the Capilets do bring the brethles corce, Before the prince: and craue, that cruell dedly payne May be the guerdon of his falt, that hath their kinsman slaine. The Montagewes do pleade, theyr Romeus voyde of falt: The lookers on do say, the fight begonne was by Tybalt.
The prince doth pawse, and then geues sentence in a while, That Romeus, for sleying him should gone into exyle. His foes would haue him hangde, or sterue in prison strong: His frendes do think (but dare not say) that Romeus hath wrong. Both housholds straight are charged on payne of losing lyfe: Theyr bloudy weapons layd aside, to cease the styrred stryfe. This common plage is spred, through all the towne anon: From side to syde the towne is fild with murmour and with mone. For Tybalts hasty death, bewayled was of somme, Both for his skill in frates of armes, and for in time to comme: He should (had this not chaunced) been riche, and of great powre: To helpe his frendes, and serue the state, which hope within an howre Was wasted quite, and he thus yelding vp his breath, More then he holpe the towne in lyfe, hath harmde it by his death. And other somme bewayle, (but ladies most of all) The lookeles lot by Fortunes gylt, that is so late befall, (Without his falt,) vnto the seely Romeus, For whilst that he from natife land shall liue exyled thus.
From heauenly bewties light, and his welshaped parts: The sight of which, was wont (faire dames) to glad your youthfull harts. Shall you be banishd quite: and tyll he do retoorne What hope haue you to ioy? what hope to cease to moorne? This Romeus was borne so much in heauens grace Of Fortune, and of nature so beloued, that in his face (Beside the heauenly bew∣ty glistring ay so bright: And seemely grace, that wontes so to glad the seers sight.) A certain charme was graued by natures secret arte: That vertue had to draw to it, the loue of many a hart. So euery one doth wish, to beare a part of payne: That he released of exyle, might straight retorne agayne. But how doth moorne emong the moorners Iuliet? How doth she bathe her brest in teares? what depe sighes doth she fet? How doth she tear her heare? her weede how doth she rent? How fares the louer hearing of her louers banishment? How wayles she Libalts death, whom she had loued so well? Her hearty greefe and piteous plaint, cunning I want to tell
For deluing depely now in depth of depe dispayre: With wretched sorowes cruell sound she fils the empty ayre. And to the lowest hell, downe falles her heauy crye, And vp vnto the heauens haight her piteous plaint doth flye. The waters and the woods, of sighes and sobs resounde: And from the hard resounding rockes her sorowes do rebounde. Eke from her teary eyne, downe rayned many a showre: That in the garden where she walkd might water herbe and flowre. But when at length she saw her selfe outraged so: Vnto her chaumber straight she hide there ouercharged with wo. Vpon her stately bed, her painfull parts she threw: And in so wondrous wise began her sorowes to renewe: That sure no hart so hard, (but it of flint had byn:) But would haue rude the pitious plaint that she did languishe in. Then rapt out of her selfe, whilst she on euery side Did cast her restles eye, at length the windowe she espide, Through which she had with ioy seene Romeus many a time: Which oft the ventrous knight was wont For Iuliets sake to clyme.
She cryde O cursed windowe, a curst be euery pane, Through which (alas) to one I raught the cause of life and bane. If by thy meane I haue some slight delight receaued, Or els such fading pleasure as by Fortune straight was reaued: Hast thou not made me pay a tribute rigorous? Of heaped greefe, and lasting care: and sorowes dolorous? That these my tender partes, which nedefull strength do lacke, To beare so great vnweldy lode? vpon so weake a backe: Opprest with waight of cares and with these sorowes rife: At length must open wide to death, the gates of lothed lyfe. That so my wery sprite, may somme where els vnlode His dedly lode, and free from thrall may seeke els where abrode: For pleasant quiet ease, and for assured rest, Which I as yet could neuer finde, but for my more vnrest. O Romeus, when first we both acquainted were, When to thy paynted promises I lent my listning eare: Which to the brinkes you fild with many a solemne othe, And I them iudgde empty of gyle, and fraughted full of troth:
I thought you rather would continue our good will, And seeke tappease our fathers strife which daily groweth still. I little wend you would haue sought occasion how By such an heynous act to breake the peace, and eke your vowe Wherby your bright renoune, all whole yelipsed is, And I vnhappy husbandles, of cumfort robde, and blisse. But if you did so much the blood of Capels thyrst, Why haue you often spared mine? myne might haue quencht it first. Since that so many times, and in so secret place (Where you were wont with vele of loue to hyde your hatreds face.) My doutfull lyfe hath hapt by fatall dome to stand, In mercy of your cruell hart, and of your bloudy hand. What? seemd the conquest which you got of me, so small? What? seemd it not enough that I poore wretch, was made your thrall? But that you must increase it with that kinsmans blood, Which for his woorth and loue to me most in my fauour stood? Well, goe hencefoorth els where, and seeke another whyle, Some other as vnhappy as I, by flattry to begyle.
And where I comme, see that you shonne to shew your face: For your excuse within my hart shall finde no resting place. And I that now too late my former fault repent: Will so the rest of wery life with many teares lament: That soone my ioyceles corps, shall yeld vp banishd breath, And where on earth it restles liued, in earth seeke rest by death. These sayde, her tender hart, by payne oppressed sore: Restraynd her teares, and forced her tong to keepe her talke in store. And then as still she was, as if in sownd she lay: And then agayne, wroth with her selfe, with feble voyce gan say. Ah cruell murthering tong, murthrer of others fame: How durst thou once attempt to tooch the honor of his name? Whose dedly foes doe yelde him dewe and earned prayse: For though his fredome be bereft, his honor not decayes. Why blamst thou Romeus for sleying of Tybalt, Since he is gyltles guite of all, and Tybalt beares the falt? Whether shall he (alas) poore banishd man now flye? What place of succor shall he seeke beneth the starry skye?
Synce she pursueth him, and him defames by wrong: That in distres should be his fort, and onely rampier strong. Receiue the recompence, O Romeus of thy wife: Who for she was vnkind her selfe, doth offer vp her lyfe. In flames of yre, in sighes, in sorow and in ruth: So to reuenge the crime she did commit against thy truth. These said, she could no more, her senses all gan fayle: And dedly panges began straight way her tender hart assayle. Her limmes she stretched forth, she drew no more her breath, Who had been there, might well haue seene the signes of present death. The nurce that knew no cause, why she absented her, Did doute lest that some sodain greefe too much tormented her. Eche where but where she was the carefull Beldam sought, Last, of the chamber where she lay, she haply her bethought. Where she with piteous eye, her nurce childe did beholde: Her limmes stretched out, her vtward parts as any marble colde. The nurce supposde that she had payde to death her det: And then as she had lost her wittes, she cryed to Iuliet.
Ah my dere hart (quoth she) how greeueth me thy death? Alas what cause hast thou thus soone, to yelde vp liuing breath? But while she handled her, and chafed euery part, She knew there was some sparke of life by beating of her hart. So that a thousand times she cald vpon her name, There is no way to helpe a traunce, but she hath tryde the same. She openeth wide her mouth, she stoppeth close her nose, She bendeth downe her brest, she wringes her fingers and her toes. And on her bosome colde, she layeth clothes hot, A warmed and a holesome iuyce she powreth downe her throte. At length doth Iuliet, heaue fayntly vp her eyes, And then she stretcheth forth her arme, and then her nurce she spyes. But when she was awakde, from her vnkindly traunce: Why dost thou trouble me (quoth she) what draue thee (with mischaunce) To come to see my sprite, forsake my brethles corce? Goe hence, and let me dye, if thou haue on my smart remorse. For who would see her frend to liue in dedly payne? Alas, I see my greefe begoone, for euer will remayne.
Or who would seeke to liue, all pleasure being past? My myrth is donne, my moorning mone for ay is like to last. Wherfore since that there is none other remedy, Comme gentle death, and ryue my hart, at once, and let my dye. The nurce with tricling teares, to witnes inward smart, With helow sigh fetchd from the depth, of her appauled hart. Thus spake to Iuliet, yelad with eugly care. Good lady myne, I do not know what makes you thus to fare. Ne yet the cause of your vnmeasurde heauines. But of this one I you assure, for care and sorowes stresse, This hower large and more, I thought (so god me saue) That my dead corps should wayte on yours, to your vntimely graue. Alas my tender nurce, and trusty frend (quoth she) Art thou so blinde, that with thine eye, thou canst not easely see The lawfull cause I haue, to sorow and to moorne, Since those the which I hyld most deere I haue at once forlorne? Her nurce then aunswerd thus. Me thinkes it sits you yll, To fall in these extremities that may you gyltles spill.
For when the stormes of care, and troubles do aryse, Then is the time for men to know, the foolish from the wise. You are accounted wise, a foole am I your nurce: But I see not how in like case I could be haue me wurse. Tibalt your frend is ded, what weene you by your teares, To call him backe againe? thinke you that he your crying heares? You shall perceue the falt, (if it be iustly tryde) Of his so sodayn death, was in his rashnes and his pryde. Would you that Romeus, him selfe had wronged so, To suffer himselfe causeles to be outraged of his foe? To whom in no respect, he ought a place to geue? Let it suffise to thee fayre dame, that Romeus doth liue. And that there is good hope that he within a while, With greater glory shalbe calde home from his hard exile. How wel yborne he is, thy selfe I know canst tell: By kindred strong, and well alyed, of all beloued well. With patience arme thy selfe, for though that Fortunes cryme Without your falt, to both your greefes depart you for a time.
I dare say for amendes of all your present payne She will restore your owne to you, within a month or twayne. With such contented ease, as neuer erst you had: Wherfore reioyce a while in hope, and be ne more so sad. And that I may discharge your hart of heauy care: A certaine way I haue found out, my paynes ne will I spare. To learne his present state, and what in time to comme He mindes to doe, which knowne by me, you shall know all and somme. But that I dread the whilst your sorowes will you quell, Straight would I hye where he doth lurke to frier Lawrence cell. But if you gyn eftsones (as erst you did) to moorre Wherto goe I, you will be ded before I thence retoorne. So I shall spend in wast, my time, and busy payne, So vnto you (your life once lost) good aunswere commes in vayne. So shall I ridde my selfe with this sharpe pointed knife: So shall you cause your parents derre wax wery of theyr life. So shall your Romeus, (despysing liuely breath,) With hasty foote (before his tyme) ronne to vntimely death.
Where if you can a while, by reason, rage suppresse, I hope at my retorne to bring the salue of your distresse. Now choose to haue me here a partner of your payne, Or promosse me, to feede on hope, till I retorne agayne. Her mistres sendes her forth, and makes a graue behest, With reasons rayne to rule the thoughts that rage within her brest. When hugy beapes of harmes, are heapd before her eyes, Then vanish they by hope of scape, and thus the lady lyes, Twixt well assured trust. and doutfull lewd dispayre, Now blacke and ougly be her thoughts: now seeme they white and fayre. As oft in summer tide, blacke cloudes do dimme the sonne, And straight againe in clearest skye his restles steedes do ronne, So Iuliets wandring mynd yclowded is with woe, And by and by her hasty thought the woes doth ouergoe. But now is time to tell whilst she was tossed thus What windes did driue or hauen did hold her louer, louer Romeus When he had slayne his foe, that gan this dedly strife, And saw the furious fray had ende, by ending Tybalts life:
He fled the sharpe reuenge of those that yet did liue, And douting much what penall doome the troubled prince myght gyue, He sought some where vnseene, to lurke a little space, And trusty Lawrence secret cell, he thought the surest place. In doutfull happe ay best, a trusty frend is tride, The frendly fryer in this distresse, doth graunt his frend to hyde. A secret place he hath, well seeled round about, The mouth of which, so close is shut, that none may finde it out. Both roome there is to walke, and place to sitte and rest, Beside, a bed to sleape vpon, full soft and trimly drest. The flowre is planked so with mattes, it is so warme. That neither wind, nor smoky damps haue powre him ought to harme. Where he was wont in youth, his fayre frendes to bestowe, There now he hydeth Romeus whilst forth he goeth to knowe Both what is sayd and donne, and what appoynted payne, Is published by trumpets sound. then home he hyes agayne. By this, vnto his cell, the nurce with spedy pace: Was coe the nerest way: she sought, no ydel resting place.
The fryer sent home the newes of Romeus certain helth: And promesse made (what so befell) he should that night by stelth Comme to his wonted place that they in nedefull wise Of theyr affayres in time to comme, might thorowly deuyse. Those ioyfull newes, the nurce brought home with mery ioy: And now our Iuliet ioyes, to thinke, she shall her loue enioye. The fryer shuts fast his doore, and then to him beneth. That waytes to heare the doutefull newes of lyfe orels of death: Thy hap quoth he, is good, daunger of death is none: But thou shalt liue, and doe full well, in spite of spitefull fone. This onely payne for thee was erst proclaymde aloude, A banishd man, thou mayst thee not within Verona shroude. These heauy tydinges heard, his golden lockes he tare: And like a frantike man hath torne the garmentes that he ware. And as the smitten deere, in brakes is waltring found: So waltreth he, and with his brest doth beate the troden grounde. He riseth eft, and strikes his head against the wals, He falleth downe againe, and lowde for hasty death be cals.
Come spedy death (quoth he) the readiest leache in loue, Since nought can els beneth the sunne the ground of griefe remoue. Of lothsome life breake downe the hated staggering stayes, Destroy, destroy at once the lyfe that faintly yet decayes. But you (fayre dame) in whome dame nature dyd deuise,: With cunning hand to woorke, that might seeme wondrous in our eyes: For you I pray the Gods, your pleasures to increase, And all mishap, with this my death, for euermore to cease. And mighty Ioue with speede, of iustice bring them lowe, Whose lofty pryde (without our gylt) our blisse doth ouerblowe. And Cupide graunt to those theyr spedy wrongs redresse, That shall bewayle my cruell death, and pity her distresse. Therewith, a cloude of sighes, he breathd into the skies: And two great streames of bitter teares, ran from his swollen eyes. These thinges, the auncient fryre, with sorow saw, and heard, Of such begynning eke, the ende, the wise man greatly feard. But loe, he was so weake, by reason of his age, That he ne could by force, represse the rigour of his rage.
His wise and frendly woordes, he speaketh to the ayre: For Romeus so vexed is, with care and with dispayre, That no aduise can perce, his close forstopped eares: So now the fryer doth take his part, in shedding ruthfull teares. With colour pale, and wan, with armes full hard yfold, With wofull cheere, his wayling frend, he standeth to beholde. And then, our Romeus. with tender handes ywrong: With voyce, with plaint made horce, wt sobs, and with a foltring tong. Renewd with nouel mone the dolours of his hart, His outward dreery cheere bewrayde, his store of inward smart. Fyrst, nature did he blame, the author of his lyfe, In which his ioyes had been so scant, and sorowes aye so ryfe: The time and place of byrth, he fiersly did reproue, He cryed out (with open mouth) against the starres aboue: The tall sisters three, he said, had done hun wrong, The threed that should not haue been sponne they had drawne foorth too long. He wished that he had before this time been borne, Or that as soone as he wan light, his life he had forlorne.
His nurce he cursed, and the hand that gaue him pappe, The midwife eke with tender grype that held him in her lappe: And then did he complaine, on Venus cruel sonne Who led him first vnto the rockes, which he should warely shonne. By meane wherof he lost, both lyfe and libertie, And dyed a hundred times a day, and yet could neuer dye. Loues troubles lasten long, the ioyes he geues are short: He forceth not a louers payne, theyr ernest is his sport. A thousand thinges and more, I here let passe to write, Which vnto loue this wofull man, dyd speake in great despite. On Fortune eke he raylde, he calde her deafe, and blynde, Vinconstant, fond, deceitfull rashe, vnruthfull, and vnkynd. And to him self he layd a great part of the falt: For that he slewe, and was not slayne, in fighting with Tibalt. He blamed all the world, and all he did defye But Iuliet, for whom he liued, for whom eke would he dye. When after raging fits, appeased was his rage, And when his passions (powred forth) gan partly to asswage.
So wisely did the fryre, vnto his tale replye, That he straight cared for his life, that erst had care to dye. Art thou quoth he a man? Thy shape saith so thou art: Thy crying and thy weping eyes, denote a womans hart. For manly reason is quite from of thy mynd outchased, And in her stead affections lewd, and fansies highly placed. So that, I stoode in doute this howre (at the least) If thou a man, or woman wert, or els a brutish beast. A wise man in the midst of troubles and distres, Still standes not wayling present harme, but seeks his harmes redres, As when the winter flawes, with dredfull noyse arise, And heaue the fomy swelling waues vp to the starry skies, So that the broosed barke in cruell seas betost, Dispayreth of the happy hauen in daunger to be lost. The pylate bold at helme, cryes, mates strike now your sayle: And tornes her stemme into the waues, that strongly her assayle. Then driuen hard vpon the bare and wrackfull shore, In greater daunger to be wract, then he had been before.
He seeth his ship full right against the rocke to ronne, But yet he dooth what lyeth in hun the perilous rocke to shonne. Sometimes the beaten boate, by cunning gouernment, The ancors lost, the cables broke, and all the tackle spent. The roder smitten of, and ouer boord the mast, Doth win the long desyred porte, the stormy daunger past. But if the master dread, and ouerprest with woe, Begin to wring his handes, and lets the gyding rodder goe The ship rents on the rocke, or sinketh in the deepe, And eke the coward drenched is, So: if thou still be weepe And seke not how to helpe the chaunges that do chaunce, Thy cause of sorow shall increase, thou cause of thy mischaunce. Other account thee wise, prooue not thy selfe a foole, Now put in practise lessons learnd, of old in wisdomes schoole, The wise man saith, beware thou double not thy payne: For one perhaps thou mayst abyde, but hardly suffer twayne. As well we ought to seeke thinges hurtfull to decrease, As to endeuor helping thinges by study to increase.
The prayse of trew fredom, in wisdomes bondage lyes He winneth blame whose deedes be fonde, although his woords be wise. Sickenes the bodies gayle, greefe, gayle is of the mynd, If thou canst scape from heauy greefe, true fredome shalt thou finde. Fortune can fill nothing, so full of hearty greefe, But in the same a constant mynd, Finds solace and releefe, Vertue is alwayes thrall, to troubles and annoye, But wisdome in aduersitie, findes cause of quiet ioye. And they most wretched are, that know no wretchednes: And afther great extremity, mishaps ay waxen lesse. Like as there is no weale, but wastes away somtime, So euery kind of wayled woe, will weare away in time. If thou wilt master quite, the troubles that the spill, Endeuor first by reasons help, to master witles will. A sondry medson hath, eche sondry faynt disease, But pacience, a common salue, to euery wound geues ease. The world is alway full of chaunces and of chaunge, Wherfore the chaunge of chaunce must not seeme to a wise man straunge.
For tickel Fortune doth, in chaunging but her kind: But all her chaunges cannot chaunge, a steady constant minde. Though wauering Fortune toorne from thee her smyling face, And sorow seeke to set him selfe, in banishd pleasures place, Yet may thy marred state, be mended in a while, And she eftsones that frowneth now, with pleasant cheere shall smyle. For as her happy state, no long whyle standeth sure, Euen so the heauy plight she brings, not alwayes doth endure. What nede so many woordes, to thee that art so wyse? Thou better canst aduise thy selfe, then I can thee aduyse. Wisdome I see is vayne, if thus in time of neede, A wise mans wit vnpractised, doth stand him in no steede. I know thou hast some cause, of sorow and of care: But well I wot thou hast no cause thus frantikly to fare. Affections foggy mist, thy febled sight doth blynde, But if that reasons beames agayne, might shine into thy mynde: If thou wouldst view thy state with an indifferent eye, I thinke thou wouldst condemne thy plaint, thy sighing and thy crye.
With valiant hand thou madest thy foe yeld vp his breth, Thou hast escapd his swerd, and eke the lawes that threatten death. By thy escape, thy frendes, are fraughted full of ioy, And by his death thy deadly foes are laden with annoy Wilt thou with trusty frendes, of pleasure take some part? Or els to please thy hatefull foes, be partner of theyr smart? Why cryest thou out on loue, why doest thou blame thy fate? Why dost thou so crye after death? thy life why dost thou hate? Dost thou repent the choyce. that thou so late didst choose? Loue is thy Lord, thou oughtest obay, and not thy prince accuse. For thou hast found (thou knowst) great fauour in his sight: He graunted thee at thy request, thy onely hartes delight: So that the Gods enuyde the blisse thou liuedst in, To geue to such vnthankefull men, is folly and a sin. He thinkes I heare thee say the cruell banishment, Is onely cause of thy vnrest, onely thou dost lament, That from thy natife land, and frendes thou must depart, Enforsd to flye from her that hath the keping of thy hart.
And so opprest with waight of smart that thou dost feele, Thou dost complaine of Cupides brand, and Fortunes turning wheele. Vnto a valiant hart, there is no banishment, All countreys are his natiue soyle beneath the firmament. As to the fishe, the sea: as to the fowle, the ayre: So is like pleasant to the wise, eche place of his repayre. Though froward Fortune chase thee hence into exyle: With doubled honor shall she call thee home within a whyle. Admyt thou shouldst abyde abrode a yere or twayne: Should so short absence cause so long, and eke so greeuous payne? Though thou ne mayst thy frendes, here in Verona see, They are not banishd Mantua, where safely thou mast be. Thether they may resort, though thou resort not hether, And there in suretie may you talke, of your affayres together. Yea, but this whyle (alas) thy Iuliet must thou misse, The onely piller of thy helth, and ancor of thy blisse. Thy hart thou leauest with her, when thou dost hence depart: And in thy brest inclosed bearst, her tender frendly hart.
But if thou rew so much, to leaue the rest behinde, With thought of passed ioyes, content thy vncontented mynde. So shall the mone decrease, wherwith thy mynd doth melt, Compared to the heauenly ioyes which thou hast often felt. He is too nyse a weakeling, that shrinketh at a showre, And he vnworthy of the sweete, that tasteth not the sowre. Call now againe to mynde, thy first consuming flame, How didst thou vainely burne in loue of an vnlouing dame. Hadst thou not welnigh wept, quite out thy swelling eyne: Did not thy parts fordoon with payne, languishe away and pyne? Those greefes and others like, were happly ouerpast: And thou in haight of Fortunes wheele, well placed at the last: From whence thou art now falne, that raysed vp agayne, With greater ioy a greater while in pleasure mayst thou raygne. Compare the present while, with times ypast before, And thinke that Fortune hath for thee, great pleasure yet in store. The whilst, this little wrong, receiue thou paciently, And what of force must nedes be done, that doe thou willingly.
Foly it is to feare that thou canst not auoyde And madnes to desire it much, that can not be enioyde. To geue to Fortune place, not ay deserueth blame: But skill it is, according to the times, thy selfe to frame. Whilst to this skilfull lore; he lent his listning eares: His sighes are stopt, and stopped are the conduits of his teares. As blackest cloudes are chaced, by winters nimble winde: So haue his reasons chaced care, out of his carefull mynde. As of a morning fowle, ensues an euening fayre: So banisht hope returneth home, to banish his despayre. Now is affections veale, remoued from his eyes. He seeth the path that he must walke, and reson makes him wise. For very shame, the blood doth flashe in both his cheekes: He thankes the father for his lore, and farther ayde he seekes. He sayth that skilles youth, for counsell is vnfitte, And anger oft with hastines are ioind to want of witte. But sound aduise aboundes in heddes with horishe heares: For wisdom is by practise wonne, and perfect made by yeares.
But aye from this time forth, his ready bending will: Shalbe in awe, and gouerned, by fryer Lawrence skill. The gouernor is nowe, right carefull of his charge: To whom he doth wisely discoorse, of his affaires at large. He telles him how he shall, depart the towne vnknowne, Both mindfull of his frendes safetie, and carefull of his owne. How he shall gyde him selfe, how he shall seeke to winne, The frendship of the better sort, how warely to crepe in The fauour of the Mantuan prince: and how he may Appease the wrath of Escalus: and wipe the fault away. The choller of his foes, by gentle meanes tasswage: Or els by force and practises, to bridle quite theyr rage. And last he chargeth him, at his appointed howre, To goe with manly mery cheere, vnto his ladies bowre. And there with hole some woordes, to salue her sorowes smart: And to reuiue, (if nede require, her faint and dying hart. The old mans woords haue fild with ioy, our Romeus brest: And eke the olde wiues talke, hath set our Iuliets hart at rest.
Whereto may I compare, (O louers) this your day? Like dayes the painefull mariners, are woonted to assay. For beat with tempest great, when they at length, espye Some little beame of Phoebus light, that perceth through the skie, To cleare the shadowde earth, by clearenes of his face: They hope that dreadles, they shall ronne the remnant of their race. Yea, they assure them selfe: and quite behynd theyr backe, They cast all doute, and thanke the Gods for scraping of the wracke. But straight the boysterous windes, with greater fury blowe, And ouer boord the broken mast. the stormy blastes doe throwe. The heauens large, are clad with cloudes, as darke as hell: And twise as hye, the striuing waues begin to roare, and swell. With greater daungers dred, the men are vexed more: In greater perill of their lyfe, then they had been before. The golden sonne, was gonne to lodge him in the west: The full moone eke in yonder South, had sent most men to rest: When restles Romeus, and restles Iuliet, In woonted sort, by woonted meane, in Iuliets chaumber met.
And from the windowes top, downe had he leaped scarce, When she with armes outstretched wide, so hard did him embrace, That welnigh had the sprite (not forced by dedly force) Flowne vnto death, before the time abandoning the corce. Thus muet stoode they both, the eight part of an howre And both would speake, but neither had of speaking any powre. But on his brest her hed doth ioylesse Iuliet lay, And on her slender necke, his chyn doth ruthfull Romeus stay. Their scalding sighes ascende, and by their cheekes dowue fall, Their trickling teares, as christall cleare, but bitterer farre then gall. Then he to end the greefe, which both they liued in, Did kysse his loue, and wisely thus hys tale he dyd begin. My Iuliet, my loue, my onely hope and care: To you I purpose not as now, with length of woords declare, The diuersenes, and eke the accidents so straunge, Of frayle vnconstant Fortune, that delyteth still in chaunge. Who in a moment heaues her frendes vp to the height, Of her swift turning slippery wheele, then fleetes her frendship straight,
O wondrous chaunge, euen with the twinkling of an eye, Whom erst her selfe had rashly set, in pleasant place so hye? The same in great despyte, downe hedlong doth she throwe: And while she treades and spurneth at the lofty state laid lowe, More sorow doth she shape within an howers space, Then pleasure in an hundred yeres: so geyson is her grace. The proofe wherof in me (alas) too plaine apperes, Whom tenderly my carefull frendes haue fostered with my feers, In prosperous high degree: mayntayned so by fate, That (as your selfe did see) my foes enuyde my noble state. One thing there was, I did aboue the rest desire, To which, as to the soueraigne good, by hope I would aspyre: Thol by our mariage meane, we might within a while, (To woorke our perfect happines) our parentes reconsile. That safely so we might (not stopt by sturdy strife) Vnto the boundes that God hath set, gyde forth our pleasant lyfe. But now (alacke) too soone my blisse is ouerblowne, And vpside downe my purpose and my enterprise are throwne,
And driuen from my frendes, of straungers must I craue, (O graunt it God) from daungers dread, that I may suertie haue. For loe, henceforth I must, wander in landes vnknowne: (So hard I finde the princes doome,) exyled from mine owne. Which thing I haue thought good, to set before your eyes: And to exhort you, now to proue your selfe a woman wise. That paciently, you beare my absent long abod. For, what aboue by fatall doomes decreed is that God, And more then this, to say it seemed he was bent, But Iuliet, in dedly greefe, with brackish teares besprent, Brake of his tale begonne, and whilst his speche he stayde, These selfe same wordes, or like to these, with dreery chere she sayde. Why Romeus, can it be, thou hast so hard a hart? So farre remoued from ruth? so farre from thinking on my smart? To leaue me thus alone? (thou cause of my distresse) Beseged with so great a campe, of mortall wretchednesse, That euery hower now, and moment in a day, A thousand times, death bragges, as he would reaue my life away.
Yet such is my mishap, (O cruell destenye) That still I liue, and wish for death, but yet can neuer dye. So that iust cause I haue, to thinke (as seemeth me) That froward Fortune did of late, with cruell death agree To lengthen lothed life, to pleasure in my payne, And tryumph in my harme, as in the greatest hoped gayne. And thou the instrument of Fortunes cruell will, Without whose ayde she can no way, her tyrans lust fulfill: Art not a whit ashamde, (as farre as I can see) To cast me of, when thou hast culd the better part of me. Wherby (alas) to soone, I seely wretch do proue, That all the auncient sacred lawes, of frendship and of loue, Are quelde and quenched quite. since he on whom alway, My cheefe hope, and my steady trust, was wonted still to stay, For whom I am becomme, vnto my selfe a foe: Disdayneth me his stedfast frend, and scornes my frendship so. Nay Romeus, nay, thou mayst of two thinges choose the one: Either to see thy castaway as soone as thou art gone,
Hedlong to throw her selfe downe from the windowes haight, And so to breake her siender necke, with all the bodies waight. Or suffer her to be companion of thy payne, Where so thou goe (Fortune thee gyde) till thou retoorne agayne. So wholy into thine, transformed is my hart, That euen as oft as I do thinke that thou and I shall part: So oft (me thinkes) my life withdrawes it selfe awaye, Which I retayne, to no end els, but to the end I may In spite of all thy foes, thy present partes enioye, And in distres to beare with thee, the halfe of thine annoye. Wherfore in humble sort (Romeus) I make request, If euer tender pity yet, were lodgde in gentle brest, O let it now haue place, to rest within thy hart, Receaue me as thy seruant, and the fellow of thy smart. Thy absence is my death, thy sight shall geue me life. But if perhaps thou stand in dred, to leade me as a wyfe, Art thou all counsellesse, canst thou no shift deuise? What letteth, but in other weede I may my selfe disguyse.
What, shall I he the first? hath none done so ere this? To scape the bondage of theyr frendes? thy selfe can aunswer yes. Or dost thou stand in doute, that I thy wife ne can, By seruice pleasure thee as much, as may thy hyred man? Or is my loyalte of both accompted lesse? Perhaps thou fearst lest I for gayne, forsake thee in distresse. What,hath my bewty now, no powre at all on you? Whose brightnes, force, and praise somtime, vp to the skyes you blew? My teares, my frendship, and my pleasures donne of olde: Shall they be quite forgote in dede? when Romeus dyd behold The wildnes of her looke, her cooler pale and ded, The woorst of all that might betyde to her, he gan to dred. And once agayne he dyd in armes his Iuliet take: And kist her with a louing kysse, And thus to her he spake. Ah Iuliet (quoth he) the mistres of my hart, For whom (euen now) thy seruant doth abyde in dedly smart, Euen for the happy dayes which thou desyrest to see, And for the feruent frendships sake that thou dost owe to me:
At once these fansies vayne, out of thy mynd roote out, Except perhaps vnto thy blame, thou fondly go about To hasten forth my death, and to thine owne to ronne: Which Natures law, and wisdoms lore teache euery wight to shonne. For, but thou chaunge thy mynde, (I do foretell the ende) Thou shalt vndoo thy selfe for ay, and me thy trusty frende. For why, thy absence knowne, thy father wilbe wroth, And in his rage, so narowly he will pursue vs both: That we shall trye in vayne, to scape away by flight, And vainely seeke a loorking place, to hyde vs from his sight. Then we found out, and caught, quite voyde of strong defence Shall cruelly be punished, for thy departure hence. I, as a rauishor, thou, as a careles childe, I, as a man who doth defile, thou, as a mayde defilde. Thinking to leade in ease, a long contented life, Shall short our dayes by shamefull death. but (if my louing wife) Thou banish from thy mynde, two foes that counsell hath: (That wont to hinder sound aduise) rashe hastines, and wrath:
If thou be bend to bay the lore of reasons skill, And wisely by her princely powre suppresse rebelling will: If thou our safetie seeke, more then thine owne delight, Since suerty standes in parting, and thy pleasures growe of sight: For heare the cause of ioy, and suffer for a while, So shall I safely liue abrode, and safe torne from exile. So shall no slaunders blot, thy spotles life destayne, So shall thy kinsmen be vnstyrd, and I exempt from payne. And thinke thou not that aye, the cause of care shall last, These stormy broyles shall ouerblow, much like a winters blast. For Fortune chaungeth more, then fickel fantasie, In nothing Fortune constant is, saue in vnconstancie. Her hasty ronning wheele, is of a restles coorse, That turnes the clymers hedlong downe, from better to the woorse. And those that are beneth, she heaueth vp agayne, So we shall rise to pleasures mount, out of the pit of payne. Ere fowre monthes ouerpasse, such order will I take, And by my letters, and my frendes, such meanes I mynd to make,
That of my wandring race, ended shalbe the royle, And I cald home with honor great, vnto my natiue soyle. But if I be condemd to wander still in thrall, I will returne to you (mine owne) befall what may befall. And then by strength of frendes, and with a mighty hand, From Verone will I cary thee, into a forein lande. Not in mans weede disguisd, or as one scarcely knowne, But as my wife and onely feere, in garment of thyne owne. Wherfore represse at once, the passions of thy hart, And where there is no cause of greefe, cause hope to heale thy smart. For of this one thing thou mayst well assured bee: That nothing els but onely death shall sunder me from thee. The reasons that he made, did seeme of so great waight, And had with her such force: that she to him gan aunswer straight. Deere syr, nought els wish I, but to obay your will: But sure where so you go, your hart with me shall tary still, As signe and certaine pledge, tyll here I shall you see: Of all the powre that ouer you your selfe did graunt to me.
And in hip stead take myne, the gage of my good will: One promesse craue I at your hand, that graunt me to fulfill. Fayle not to let me haue at fryer Lawrence hand, The tydinges of your health, and how your doutfull case shall stand. And all the wery while that you shall spend abrode: Cause me from time to time to knowe the place of your abode. His eyes did gushe out teares, a sigh brake from his brest, When he did graunt, and with an othe did vowe to kepe the hest. Thus these two louers passe away the wery night, In payne and plaint, not (as they wont) in pleasure and delight. But now (somewhat too soone) in farthest East arose Fayre Lucifer, the golden starre, that Lady Venus chose. Whose course appoynted is, with spedy race to ronne, A messenger of dawning daye, and of the rysing sonne. Then freshe Aurora, with her paie and siluer glade Did clear the skyes, and from the earth, had chased ougly shade. When thou ne lookest wide, ne closely dost thou winke, When Phoebus from our hemysphere, in westerne waue doth sinke.
What cooller then the heauens do shew vnto thine eyes: The same, (or like) saw Romeus in farthest Esterne skyes. As yet, he saw no day: ne could he call it night, With equall force, decreasing darke, fought with increasing light. Then Romeus in armes his lady gan to folde, With frendly kisse and ruthfully she gan her knight beholde. With solemne othe they both▪ theyr sorowfull leaue do take, They sweare no stormy troubles shall theyr steady frendship shake. Then carefull Romeus, agayne to cell retoornes, And in her chamber secretly our ioyles Iuliet moornes. Now hugycloudes of care, of sorow and of dread, The clearnes of their gladsome harts hath wholy ouerspread. When golden crested Phoebus bosteth him in skye, And vnder earth, to scape reuenge, his dedly foe doth flye: Then hath these louers day an ende, their night begonne, For eche of them to other is, as to the world, the sunne. The dawning they shall see, ne sommer any more, But blackfaced night with winter rough, (ah) beaten ouer sore.
The wery watch discharged, did hye them home to slepe, The warders, and the skowtes were chargd▪ theyr place and coorse to keepe. And Verone gates a wyde, the porters had set open, When Romeus had of his affayres with frier Lawrence spoken: Warely he walked forth, vnknowne of frend or foe: Clad like a merchant venterer, from top euen to the toe. He spurd apace and came withouten stop or stay, To Mantua gates, where lighted downe, he sent his man away. With woords of comfort, to his olde afflicted fyre: And straight in mynd to soiorne there, a lodgeing doth he hyre. And with the nobler sort he doth himselfe acquaint, And of his open wrong receaued, the Duke doth heare his plaint. He practiseth by frendes, for pardon of yle, The whilst, he seeketh euery way, his sorowes to begyle. But who forgets the cole that burneth in his brest? Alas his cares, denye his hart, the sweete desyred rest. No time findes he of myrth, he findes no place of ioye, But euery thing occasion geues, of sorow and annoye.
For when in toorning skyes, the heauens lampes are light, And from the other hemysphere, fayre Phoebus chaceth night, When euery man and beast, hath rest from painfull toyle, Then in the brest of Romeus, his passions gyn to boyle. Then doth he wet with teares, the cowche wheron he lyes, And then his sighes the chamber fill, and out aloude he cryes Against the restles starres, in rolling skyes that raunge, Against the fatall sisters three, and Fortune full of chaunge. Eche night a thousand times he calleth for the day, He thinketh Titans restles stedes, of restines do stay. Or that at length they haue some aying place found out, Or (gyded yll) haue lost theyr way and wandred farre about. Whyle thus in ydel thoughts, the wery time he spendeth, The night hath end, but not with night▪ the plaint of night be endeth. Is he accompanied, is he in place alone? In cumpany he wayles his harme, a part be maketh mone. For if his feeres reioyce, what cause hath he to ioy, That wanteth still his cheefe delight, while they theyr loues enioy▪
But if with heauy cheere, they shewe their inward greefe, He wayleth most his wretchednes, that is of wretches cheefe. When he doth heare abrode, the praise of ladies blowne. Within his thought he scorneth them and doth preferre his owne. When pleasant songes he beares When others do reioyce The melody of Musike doth styrre vp his mourning voyce. But if in secret place he walke some where alone, The place it selfe, and secretnes redoubleth all his mone. Then speakes he to the beastes to fethered fowles, and trees, Vnto the earth, the cloudes, and to what so beside he sees. To them he shewth his smart, as though they reason had, Eche thing may cause his heauines▪ but nought may make him glad. And (wery of the day) agayne he calleth night, The sunne he curseth, and the howre, when fyrst his eyes saw light. And as the night, and day, their course do enterchaunge: So doth our Romeus nightly cares, for cares of day exchaunge. In absence of her knight, the lady no way could Kepe trewe betwene her greefes and her, though nere so fayne she would.
And though with greater payne she cloked sorowes smart: Yet did her paled face disclose the passions of her hart. Her sighing euery howre, her weping euery where, Her recheles heede of meate, of slepe, and wearing of her geare: The carefull mother markes. then of her health afrayde, Because the greefes increased still. thus to her child she sayde. Deere daughter, if you shoulde long languishe in this sort, I stand in doute that ouer soone your sorowes▪ will make short Your louing fathers life, and myne, that loue you more Then our owne propre breth, and life. Brydel hence forth therfore Your greefe, and payne your selfe on ioy your thought to set, For time it is that now you should our Tybalts death forget. Of whom, since God hath claymd the lyfe, that was but lent, He is in blisse, ne is there cause why you should thus lament▪ You can not call him backe with teares, and shrikinges shrill: It is a falt thus still to grudge at Gods appoynted will. The seely soule had now no longer powre to fayne, Ne longer could she hyde her harme: but aunswerd thus agayne.
With heauy broken sighes, with visage pale and ded Madame, the last of Tybalts teares, a great while since I shed. Whose spring hath been ere this so laded out by me, That empty quite, and moystureles, I gesse it now to be. So that my payned hart by canduites of the eyne, No more henceforth (as wont it was) shall gush forth dropping bryne. The wofull mother knew not, what her daughter ment, And loth to vexe her childe by woordes, her peace she warely hent. But when from howre to howre, from morow to the morow, Still more and more she saw increast her daughters wonted sorow. All meanes she sought of her, and howshold folke, to know The certaine roote, whereon her greefe, and booteles mone doth growe. But lo, she hath in vayne, her time, and labor lore, Wherfore without all measure, is her hart tormented sore. And sith her selfe could not fynd out the cause of care: She thought it good to tell the syre, how yll his childe did fare. And when she saw her time, thus to her feere she sayde: Syr, if you marke our daughter well, the countenance of the mayde,
And how she fareth, since that Tybalt vnto death, (Before his time, forst by his foe) dyd yeld his liuing breath. Her face shall seeme so chaunged, her doynges eke so straunge, That you will greatly wonder at, so great and sodain chaunge. Not onely she forbeares, her meate, her drinke, and sleepe, But now she tendeth nothing els but to lament and weepe. No greater ioy hath she, nothing contentes her hart So much, as in her chaumber, close to shut her selfe apart. Where she doth so torment her poore afflicted mynde, That much in daunger standes her lyfe, except somme helpe we fynde. But (out alas) I see not how it may be founde: Vnlesse that fyrst, we might fynd, whence her sorowes thus abounde. For though with busy care, I haue employde my wit, And vsed all the wayes I knew, to learne the truth of it: Neither extremitie, ne gentle meanes could boote. She hydeth close within her brest, her secret sorowes roote. This was my fyrst conceite, that all her ruth arose Out of her coofin Tybalts death, late slayne of dedly foes.
But now my hart doth hold a new repugnant thought, Some greater thing, not Tybalts death this chaunge in her hath wrought. Her selfe assured me, that many dayes a goe, She shed the last of Tybalts teares, which woord amald me so, That I then could not gesse what thing els might her greene, But now at length I haue bethought me. And I doe beleue The onely crop and roote of all my daughters payne, Is grudgeing enuies faynt disease, perhaps she doth disdayne To see in wedlocke yoke the most part of her feeres, Whilst onely she vnmaried, doth lose so many yeres. And more perchaunce she thinkes you mynd to kepe her so, Wherfore dispayring doth she weare her selfe away with woe. Therfore (deere syr) in time, take on your daughter ruth, For why, a brickel thing is glasse, and frayle is frayllesse youth. Ioyne her at once to somme, in linke of mariage, That may be meete for our degree, and much about her age. So shall you banish care out of your daughters brest: So we her parentes in our age, shall liue in quiet rest.
Wherto gan easely her husband to agree, And to the mothers skilfull talke, thus straight way aunswerd he. Oft haue I thought (deere wife) of all these thinges ere this, But euermore my mynd me gaue, it should not be amisse, By farther leysure had, a husband to prouyde, Scarce saw she yet full .xvi. yeres: too yong to be a bryde. But since her state doth stande on termes so perilous, And that a mayden daughter is a treasour daungerous: With so great speede I will endeuour to procure A husband for our daughter yong, her sickenes faynt to cure. That you shall rest content, (so warely will I choose) And she recouer soone enough the time she seemes to loose. The whilst, seeke you to learne, if she in any part, Already hath (vnware to vs) fixed her frendly hart. Lest we haue more respect to honor and to welth, Then to our doughters quiet life, and to her happy helth. Whom I do hold as deere, as thapple of myne eye, And rather with in poore estate, and daughterles to dye:
Then leaue my goodes and her ythrald to such a one, Whose chorlish dealing (I once dead) should be her cause of mone. This pleasant aunswere heard, the lady partes agayne. And Capilet the maydens sire, within a day or twayne, Conferreth with his frendes, for mariage of his daughter, And many gentlemen there were, with busy care that sought her. Both for the mayden was well shaped, yong, and fayre, As also well brought vp, and wise, her fathers onely heyre. Emong the rest was one inflamde with her desire, Who, County Paris cliped was, an Earle he had to syre. Of all the futers, him the father liketh best, And easely vnto the Earle he maketh his behest. Both of his owne good will, and of his frendly ayde, To win his wife vnto his will, and to perswade the mayde. The wife did ioy to heare the ioyfull husband say, How happy hap, how meete a match, he had found out that day. He did she seeke to hyde her ioyes within her hart, But straight she hyeth to Iuliet, to her she telles apart,
What happy talke (by meane of her) was past no rather Betwene the woing Paris, and her carefull louing father. The person of the man, the fewters of his face, His youthfull yeres, his fayrenes, and his port and semely grace. With curious wordes she payntes before her daughters eyes, And then with store of vertues prayse, she heaues him to the skyes. She vauntes his race, and gyftes, that Fortune did him geue: Wherby (she saith) both she and hers, in great delight shall liue. When Iuliet conceiued her parentes whole entent, Wherto, both loue, and reasons right, forbod her to assent: Within her selfe she thought, rather then be forsworne, With horses wilde, her tender partes a sonder should be torne. Not now with bashfull brow (in wonted wise) she spake, But with vnwonted boldnes, straight into these woordes she brake. Madame, I maruell much, that you so lauasse are, Of me your childe, (your iewel once, your onely ioy and care.) As thus to yelde me vp, at pleasure of another, Before you know if I doe like, or els mislike my louer.
Doo what you list, but yet of this assure you still, If you do as you say you will, I yelde not there vntill. For had I choyse of twayne, farre rather would I choose, My part of all your goodes, and eke my breath and lyfe to lose: Then graunt that he possesse of me the smallest part. First, weary of my painefull life, my cares shall kill my hart. Els will I perce my brest, with sharpe and bloody knife, And you my mother shall becomme the murdresse of my life: In geuing me to him, whom I ne can ne may, Ne ought to loue. Wherfore on knees, deere mother I you pray To let me liue henceforth, as I haue liued tofore: Ceasse all your troubles for my sake, and care for me no more. But suffer Fortune feerce, to worke on me her will, In her it lyeth to doe me boote, in her it lyeth to spill. For whilst you for the best, desyre to place me so, You hast a way my lingring death, and double all my woe. So deepe this aunswere made the sorowes downe to sinke, Into the mothers brest: that she ne knoweth what to thinke.
Of these her daughters woords. but all appalde she standes, And vp vnto the heauens she throwes her wondring head and handes. And nigh besyde her selfe her husband hath she sought, She telles him all, she doth forget ne yet she hydeth ought. The testy old man wroth, disdainfull without measure, Sendes forth his folke in haste for her. and byds them take no leysure. Ne on her teares or plaint, at all to haue remorse, But (if they can not with her will,) to bring the mayde perforce. The message heard, they part, to fetch that they must fet: And willingly with them walkes forth obedient Iuliet. Arriued in the place, when she her father saw, Of whom (as much as duety would) the daughter stoode in awe. The seruantes sent away, (the mother thought it meete) The wofull daughter all be wept, fell groueling at his feete. Which she doth washe with teares as she thus groueling lyes: So fast and eke so plenteously distill they from her eyes. When she to call for grace her mouth doth think to open, Must she is: for sighes and sobs her fearefull talke haue broken.
The syre, whose swelling worth her teares could not asswage, With fiery eyen, and skarlet cheekes, thus spake her in his rage. Whilst ruthfully stood by the maydens mother mylde, Listen (quoth he) vnthankfull and thou disobedient childe. Hast thou so soone let slip out of thy mynde the woord, That thou so often times hast heard rehearsed at my boord? How much the Romayne youth of parentes stood in awe, And eke what powre vpon theyr seede the fathers had by lawe? Whom they not onely might pledge, alienate, and sell, (When so they stoode in neede) but more if children did rebell, The parentes had the power, of lyfe and sodayn death. What if those goodmen should agayne receaue the liuyng breth? In how straight bondes would they thy stubberne body bynde: What weapons would they seeke for thee? what tormentes would they fynde? To chasten (if they saw) the lewdnes of thy lyfe, Thy great vnthankfulnes to me, and shamefull sturdy strife? Such care thy mother had, so deere then wert to me, That I with long and earnest ute, prouided haue for thee.
One of the greatest lordes, that wonnes about this towne, And for his many vertues sake, a man of great renowne. Of whom, both thou and I, vnworthy are too much, So riche ere long he shalbe left, his fathers welth is such. Such is the noblenes, and honor of the race, From whence his father came, and yet thou playest in this case, The dainty foole, and stubberne gyrle, for want of skill, Thou dost refuse thy offred weale, and disobay my will. Euen by his strength I sweare, that fyrst did geue me lyfe And gaue me in my youth the strength to get thee on my wyfe. On lesse by wensday next, thou bende as I am bent, And at our castle cald free towne, thou freely doe assent To Counte Paris sute, and promise to agree To whatsoeuer then shall passe, twixt him, my wife, and me. Not onely will I geue all that I haue away, From thee, to those that shall me loue, me honor, and obay: But also too so close, and to so hard a gayle, I shall thee wed for all thy life, that sure thou shalt not fayle.
A thousand times a day to wishe for sodayn death: And curse the day, and howre when first thy lunges did geue thee breath. Aduise thee well, and say that thou art warned now, And thinke not that I speake in sport, or mynd to breake my vowe. For were it not that I to Counte Paris gaue My fayth, which I must kepe vnfalst, my honor so to saue: Ere thou goe hence, my selfe would see thee chastned so, That thou shouldst once for all be taught, thy duetie how to knowe And what reuenge of olde, the angry syres did finde Against theyr children that rebeld, and shewd them selfe vnkinde. These sayd, the olde man straight. is gone in hast a way. Ne for his daughters imswere▪ would the testy father stay. And after him, his wife doth follow out of doore, And there they leaue theyr chidden chylde. kneeling vpon the floore. Then she that oft had seene the fury of her syre, Dreading what might come of his rage, nould farther styrre his yre. Vnto her chamber she withdrew her selfe aparte, Where she was wonted to vnlode, the sorowes of her hart.
There did she not so much busy her eyes in sleping, As ouerprest with restles thoughts in piteous booteles weping. The fast falling of teares make not her teares decrease, Ne by the powring forth of plaint, the cause of plaint doth cease. So that to thend the mone and sorow may decaye, The best is that she seeke some meane to take the cause away. Her wery bed betime the wofull wight forsakes, And to sainct Frauncis church to masse her way deuoutly takes. The fryer forth is calde, she prayes him heare her shrift: Deuocion is in so yong yeres, a rare and precious gyft. When in her tender knees the dainty lady kneeles, In minde to powre forth all the greefe, that inwardly she feeles. With sighes and salted teares her shryuing doth beginne, Forshe of heaped sorowes hath to speake, and not of sinne. Her voyce with piteous plaint was made already horce, And hasty sobs, when she would speake, brake of her woordes parforce. But as she may peece meale, she powreth in his lappe, The mariage newes, a mischief newe, prepared by mishappe.
Her parentes promisse erst to Counte Paris past, Her fathers threats she telleth him, and thus concludes at last. Once was I wedded well, ne will I wed agayne, For since I know I may not be the wedded wyfe of twayne, For I am bound to haue one God, ene fayth, one make, My purpose is as soone as I shall hence my iorney take With these two handes which ioynde vnto the heauens I stretch, The hasty death which I desire vnto my selfe to reache. This day (O Romeus) this day thy wofull wife Will  the end of all her eares by ending carefull lyfe. So my departed sprite shall witnes to the skye, And eke my blood vnto the earth beare record how that I Haue kept my fayth vnbroke, stedfast vnto my frende, When this her heauy tale was tolde her vowe eke at an ende, Her gasing here and there, her feerce and staring looke, Did witnes that some lewd attempt, her hart had vndertooke. Whereat, the fryer affonde, and gaftfully afrayde, Lest she by dede perfourme her woord, thus much to her he sayde.
Ah lady Iuliet, what nede the wordes you spake▪ I pray you graunt me one request for blessed Maries sake. Measure somewhat your greefe, holde here a while your peace, Whilst I bethinke me of your case, your plaint and sorowes cease. Such comfort will I geue you ere you part from hence, And for thassaltes of Fortunes pre prepare so sure defence, So holesome salue will I for your afflictions finde, That you shall hence depart agayne with well contented mynde. His wordes haue chased straight out of her hart despayre, Her blacke and ougly dredfull thoughts by hope are waxen fayre. So fryer Lawrence now hath left her there alone, And he out of the church in hast is to his chaumber gone. Where sundry thoughtes within his carefull head arise, The old mans foresight diuers doutes hath set before his eyes. His conscience one while condems it for a sinne, To let her take Paris to spouse, since he himselfe had byn The chefest cause, that she vnknowne to father or mother, Not fiue monthes past in that selfe place was wedded to another.
An other while an hugy heape of daungers dred, His restles thought hath heaped vp, within his troubled hed. Euen of it selfe that tempt he iudgeth pertious, The execucion eke he demes so much more daungerous, That to a womans grace he must himselfe commit, That yong is, simple, and vnware, for waighty affaires vnfit. For if the fayle in ought the matter published, Both she and Romeus were vndonne, himselfe eke punished, When too and fro in mynde he dyuers thoughts had cast, With tender pity and with ruth his hart was wonne at last. He thought he rather would in hasard set his fame, Then suffer such adultery resoluing on the same, Out of his closet straight, he tooke a litele glasse, And then with double hast retornde where wofull Iuliet was. Whom he hath found welnigh in traunce, scarce drawing breath, Attending still to heare the newes of lyfe or els of death. Of whom he did enquire of the appointed day. On wensday next (quod Iuliet) so doth my father say:
I must geue my consent but (as I do remember) The solemne day of mariage is, the tenth day of September. Deere daughter quoth the fryer of good chere see thou be, For loe, sainct Frauncis of his grace hath shewde a way to me, By which I may both thee, and Romeus together, Out of the bondage which you feare assured deliuer. Euen from the holy font thy husband haue I knowne, And since he grew in yeres, haue kept his counsels as myne owne. For from his youth he would vnfold to me his hart, And often haue I cured him, of anguish, and of smart. I know that by desert his frendship I haue wonne, And I him holde as dere, as if he were my propre sonne. Wherfore my frendly hart, can not abyde that he Should wrongfully in ought be harmde, if that it lay in me, To right or to reuenge the wrong by my aduise, Or timely to preuent the same in any other wise. And sith thou art his wife, thee am I bound to loue, For Romeus frindships sake, and seeke thy anguishe to remoue.
And dreadfull torments which thy hart besegen rounde, Wherfore my daughter geue good care, vnto my counsels sounde. Forget not what I say, ne tell it any wight, Not to the nurce thou trustest so, as Romeus is thy knight. For on this threed doth hang thy death and eke thy lyfe, My fame, or shame, his weale or woe, that chose thee to his wyfe. Thou art not ignorant (because of such renowne As euery where is spred of me, but chefely in this towne.) That in my youthfull dayes abrode I trauayled Through euery land found out by men, by men inhabited, So twenty yeres from home, in landes vnknowne, a gest, I neuer gaue my weary limmes long time of quiet rest. But in the desert woodes, to beaste? of cruell kinde, Or on the seas to drenching waues, at pleasure of the winde. I haue committed them to ruth of rouers hand, And to a thousand daungers more by water and by lande, But not in vayne (my childe) hath all my wandring byn, Beside the great contentednes my sprete abydeth in.
That by the pleasant thought of passed thinges doth grow One priuate frute more haue I pluchd which thou shalt shortly know: What force the stones, the plants, and metals haue to woorke, And diuers other things that in the bowels of earth do loorke, With care I haue sought out with payne I did them proue, With them eke can I helpe my selfe, at times of my behoue, (Although the science be against the lawes of men) When sodain daunger forceth me, but yet most cheefly when The worke to doe is least displeasing vnto God, Not helping to do any sinne that wrekefull Ioue forbode. For since in lyfe no hope of long abode I haue, But now am comme vnto the drinke of my appointed graue, And that my death drawes nere, whose stripe I may not shonne, But shalbe calde to make account of all that I haue donne, Now ought I from hence forth more depely print in mynde The iudgement of the lord, then when youthes folly made me blynde, When loue and fond desyre were boyling in my brest, Whence hope and dred by striuing thoughts had banished frendly rest,
Knowe therfore (daughter) that with other gyftes which I Haue well attained to by grace and fauour of the skye, Long since I did finde out, and yet the way I knowe Of certain rootes and sauory herbes to make a kinde of dowe, Which baked hard, and bet into a powder fine, And dronke with conduite water, or with any kynd of wine, It doth in halfe an howre astonne the taker so, And mastreth all his sences, that he feeleth weale nor woe, And so it burieth vp the sprite and liuing breath, That euen the skilfull leche would say, that he is slayne by death. One vertue more it hath, as meruelous as this, The taker by receiuing it, at all not greeued is. But painlesse as a man, that thinketh nought at all, Into a swete and quiet slepe immediately doth fall, From which (according to the quantitie he taketh, Longer or shorter is the time before the sleper waketh. And thence (theffect once wrought) agayne it doth restore Him that receaued vnto the state, wherin he was before.
Wherfore, marke well the ende, of this my tale begonne, And therby learne what is by thee hereafter to be donne. Cast of from thee at once, the weede of womannish dread, With manly courage arme thy selfe, from heele vnto the head. For onely on the feare or boldnes of thy brest, The happy happe, or yll mishappe of thy affayre doth rest. Receiue this vyoll small, and keepe it as thine eye, And on thy mariage day before the sunne doe cleare the skye, Fill it with water full, vp to the very brim. Then drinke it of, and thou shalt feele, throughout eche vayne and lim: A pleasant slumber slide, and quite dispred at length, On all thy partes, from euery part reue all thy kindly strength. Withouten mouing thus thy dle parts shall rest, No pulse shall goe, ne hart once beate within thy hollow brest. But thou shalt lye as she that dyeth in a traunce, Thy kinsmen, and thy trusty frendes shall wayle the sodain chaunce: Thy corps then will they bring to graue in this church yarde, Where thy forefathers long agoe a costly tombe preparde.
Both for himselfe, and eke for those that should come after, Both deepe it is, and long and large, where thou shalt rest my daughter, Till I to Mantua sende for Romeus thy knight. Out of the tombe, both he and I will take thee forth that night. And when out of thy slepe thou shalt awake agayne, Then mayst thou goe with him from hence, and healed of thy payne. In Mantua lead with him vnknowne a pleasant life, And yet perhaps in time to comme, when case shall all the strife, And that the peace is made twixt Romeus and his foes, My selfe may finde so fit a time these secretes to dysclose, Both to my prayse, and to thy tender parentes ioy, That daungerles without reproche thou shalt thy loue enioy. When of his skilfull tale, the fryer had made an ende, To which our Iuliet so well her eare and wits dyd bend, That she hath heard it all, and hath forgotten nought, Her fainting hart was comforted, with hope and pleasant thought. And then to him she said, doubte not but that I will With stoute and vnappauled hart, your happy hest fulfill.
Yea, if I wist it were a venemous dedly drinke: Rather would I that through my throte the certaine bane should sinke, Then I (not drinking it) into his handes should fall, That hath no part of me as yet, ne ought to haue at all. Much more I ought with bold and with a willing hert, To greatest daunger yelde my selfe and to the dedly smart, To comme to him, on whome my life doth wholy stay, That is my onely hartes delight, and so he shalbe aye. Then goe quoth he (my childe) I pray that God on hye, Direct thy foote, and by thy hand vpon the way thee gye: God graunt he so confirme in thee thy present will, That no inconstant toy thee let, thy promesse to fulfill. A thousand thankes and more, our Iuliet gaue the fryer, And homeward to her fathers house ioyfull she doth retyre. And as with stately gate she passed through the streete, She saw her mother in the doore, that with her there would meete. In mynd to aske if she her purpose yet did holde, In mynd also a part twixt them, her duety to haue tolde:
Wherfore with pleasant face, and with vnwonted chere, As soone as she was vnto her approched sumwhat nere, Before the mother spake, thus did she fyrst begin, Madame, at sainct Frauncis churche haue I this morning byn, Where I did make abode, alonger while (percase) Then dewty would, yet haue I not been absent from this place, So long a while, whithout a great and iust cause why, This frute haue I receaued there, my hart erst lyke to dye, Is now reuiued agayne, and my afflicted brest Released from affliction, restored is to rest. For lo, my tronbled gost (alas too sore diseasde,) By gostly counsell and aduise, hath fryer Lawrence easde, To whome I did at large discourse my former lyfe, And in confession did I tell of all our passed strife. Of Counte Paris sute, and how my lord my syre, By my vngrate and stubborne stryft, I styrred vnto yre. But lo, the holy fryer hath by his gostly lore, Made me another woman now, then I had been before,
By strength of argumentes he charged so my mynde, That (though I sought) no sure defence my serching thought could finde. So forced I was at length to yelde vp witles will, And promist to be orderd by the friers praysed skill, Wherfore, albeit I had rashely long before, The bed and rytes of mariage, for many yeres forswore, Yet mother now behold, your daughter at your will, Ready (if you commaunde her ought) your pleasure to fulfill. Wherfore in humble wise. dere madam I you pray To goe vnto my lord and syre, withouten long delay, Of him fyrst pardon craue of faultes already past, And shew him (if it pleaseth you) his child is now at last Obedient to his iust and to his skilfull hest. And that I will (god lending life) on wensday next be prest▪ To wayte on him and you, vnto thappoynted place, Where I will in your hearing and before my fathers face, Vnto the Counte geue my fayth and whole assent, To take him for my lord and spouse. thus fully am I bent.
And that out of your mynde I may remoue all doute, Vnto my closet fare I now, to searche and to choose out The brauest garmentes and the richest iewels there, Which (better him to please) I mynd on wensday next to weare. For if I did excell the famous Gretian rape, Yet might attyre helpe to amende my bewty and my shape. The simple mother was, rapt in to great delight, Not halfe a word could she bring forth, but in this ioyfull plight, With nimble foote she ran and with vnwonted pace, Vnto her pensiue husband, and to him with pleasant face She tolde what she had heard, and prayseth much the fryer. And ioyfull teares ranne downe the cheekes of this gray berded fyer. With handes and eyes heaued vp, he thankes God in his hart, And then he sayth, this is not (wife) the friers first desart. Oft hath he shewde to vs, great frendship heretofore, By helping vs at nedefull times, with wisdomes pretious lore: In all our common weale, scarce one is to be founde, But is for somme good torne vnto this holy father bounde.
Oh that the thyrd part of my goods (I doe not fayne) But twenty of his passed yeres might purchase him agayne So much in recompence of frendship would I geue, So much (in faith) his extreme age my frendly hart doth greue. These said, the glad old man, from home, goeth straight abrode, And to the stately palace hyeth, where Paris made abode. Whom he desyres to be on wensday next his geast, At Freetowne, where he myndes to make for him a costly feast. But loe, the Earle saith such feasting were but lost, And counsels him till mariage time to spare so great a cost. For then he knoweth well the charges wilbe great, The whilst his hart desyreth still her sight, and not his meate. He craues of Capilet, that he may straight go see Fayre Iuliet, wher to he doth right willingly agree. The mother warnde before, her daughter doth prepare, She warneth and she chargeth her that in no wyse she spare Her curteous speche, her pleasant lookes, and commely grace, But liberally to geue them forth when Paris commes in place.
Which she as cunningly could set forth to the shewe, As cunning craftesmen to the sale do set theie wares on rew: That ere the County did out of her sight depart, So secretly vnwares to him, she stale away his hart, That of his lyfe and death the wyly wench hath powre, And now his longing hart thinkes long for theyr appoynted howre. And with importune sute, the parentes doth he pray, The wedlocke knot to knit soone vp, and hast the mariage day. The woer hath past forth the first day in this sort, And many other more then this, in pleasure and disport, At length the wished time of long hoped delight, (As Paris thought) drew nere, but nere approched heauy plight: Against the bridall day the parentes did prepare, Such rich attyre, such furniture, such store of dainty fare, That they which did behold the same the night before, Did thinke and say, a man could scarcely wishe for any more. Nothing did seeme to deere, the deerest thinges were bought, And (as the written story saith) in dede there wanted nought.
That longd to his degree and honor of his stocke, But Iuliet the whilst her thoughts within her brest did locke. Euen from the trusty nurce, whose secretries was tryde, The secret counsell of her hart the nurce childe seekes to hide. For sith to mocke her dame she dyd not sticke to lye, She thought no sinne with shew of truth, to bleare her nurces eye. In chamber-secretly the tale she gan renew, That at the doore she tolde her dame as though it had been trew. The flattring nurce did prayse the fryer for his skill, And said that she had done right well by wit to order will. She setteth foorth at large the fathers furious rage, And eke she prayseth much to her, the second mariage. And County Paris now she praiseth ten times more, By wrong, then she her selfe by right, had Romeus praysde before. Paris shall dwell there still, Romeus shall not retourne, What shall it boote her life, to languish still and mourne. The pleasures past before, she must account as gayne, But if he doe reforne, what then? for one she shall haue twayne.
The one shall vse her as his lawfull wedded wyse, In wanton loue, with equall ioy the other leade his lyfe: And best shall she be sped of any townish dame, Of husband and of paramour, to fynde her chaunge of game. These wordes and like, the nurce did speake, in hope to please, But greatly did those wicked wordes the ladies mynde disease: But ay she hid her wrath, and seemed well content, When dayly dyd the naughty nurce new argumentes inuent: But when the bryde perceued her howre opproched nere, She sought (the best she could) to fayne, and tempted so her cheere, That by her outward looke, no liuing wight could gesse Her inward woe, and yet a new renewde is her distresse. Vnto her chaumber doth the pensiue wight repayre. And in her hand a percher light the nurce beares vp the stayre, In Iuliets chamber was her wonted vse to lye, Wherfore her mistres dreading that she should her work descrye As sone as she began her pallet to vnfold, Thinking to lye that night, where she was wont to lye of olde:
Doth gently pray her seeke, her lodgeing some where els. And lest the crafty should suspect, a ready reason telles. Derefrend (quoth she) you knowe, to morow is the day, Of new contract, wherfore this night, my purpose is to pray, Vnto the heauenly myndes, that dwell aboue the skyes, And order all the course of thinges, as they can best deuyse, That they so smyle vpon the doynges of To morow, That all the remnant of my lyfe, may be exempt from sorow: Wherfore I pray you leaue me here alone this night, But see that you to morow comme before the dawning light, For you must coorle my heare, and set on my attyre, And eastly the louing nurse, dyd yelde to her desire. For she within he hed dyd cast before no doute, She little knew the close attempt, her nurce childe went about. The nurce departed once, the chamber doore shut close, Assured that no liuing wight, her doing myght disclose, She powred forth into the vyole of the fryer, Water out of a siluer ewer, that on the boord stoode by her,
The slepy mixture made, fayre Iuliet doth it hyde, Vnder her bolster soft, and so vnto her bed she hyed: Where diuers nouel thoughts arise within her hed, And she is so inuironed about with deadly dred, That what before she had resolued vndoutedly, That same she calleth into doute, and lying doutfully, Whilst honest loue did striue with dred of dedly payne, With handes ywrong, and weping eyes, thus gan she to complaine. What, is there any one beneth the heauens hye, So much vnfortunate as I, so much past hope as I? What, am not I my selfe of all that yet were borne, The depest drenched in dispayre, and most in Fortunes skorne? For loe the world for me, hath nothing els to finde, Beside mishap and wretchednes, and anguish of the mynde, Since that the cruel cause of my vnhappines, Hath put me to this sodaine plonge, and brought to such distres, As (to the end I may my name and conscience saue,) I must deuowre the mixed drinke, that by me here I haue.
Whose woorking and whose force as yet I doe not know, And of this piteous plaint began another doute to growe. What doe I knowe (quoth she) if that this powder shall Sooner or later then it should or els not woorke at all? And then my craft descride, as open as the day, The peoples tale and laughing stocke, shall I remayne for aye. And what know I (quoth she) if serpentes odious, And other beastes and wormes that are of nature venemous, That wonted are to lurke, in darke caues vnder grounde, And commonly as I haue heard in dead mens tombes are found, Shall harme me yea or nay, where I shall lye as ded, Or how shall I that alway haue in so freshe ayre been bred Endure the lothsome stinke of such an heaped store Of carkases, not yet consumde and bones that long before Intombed were, where I my sleping place shall haue, Where all my auncesters doe rest, my kindreds common graue. Shall not the fryer and my Romeus when they come, Fynd me (if I awake before) ystified in the tombe?
And whtlst she in these thoughtes doth dwell somwhat to long, The force of her ymagining, anon dyd ware so strong, That she surmysde she saw out of the hollow vaulte, (A griefly thing to looke vpon,) the carkas of Tybalt, Right in the selfe same sort, that she few dayes before Had seene him in his blood embrewde, to death eke wounded sore. And then, when she agayne within her selfe had wayde, That quicke she should be buried there, and by his side be layde All comfortles, for she shall liuing feere haue none But many a rotten carkas, and full many a naked bone: Her dainty tender partes gan sheuer all for dred, Her golden heares did stand vpright, vpon her chillish hed. Then pressed with the feare that she there liued in, A sweat as colde as mountaine yse, pearst through her tender skin, That with the moysture hath wet euery part of hers, And more besides, she vainely thinkes, whilst vainely thus she feares, A thousand bodies dead haue compast her about, And lest they will dismember her, she greatly standes in dout,
But when she felt her strength began to weare away, By little and little, and in her hart her feare increased ay: Dreading that weakenes might or foolish cowardise Hinder the execution of the purposde enterprise, As she had frantike been, in hast the glasse she cought, And vp she dranke the mixture quite. withouten farther thought. Then on her brest she crost her armes long and small, And so her senses fayling her, into a traunce did fall. And when that Phoebus bright heaued vp his seemely hed, And from the East in open skies his glistring rayes dispred The nurce vnshut the doore, for she the key did keepe, And douting she had slept to long, she thought to breake her slepe: Fyrst, softly dyd she call, then lowder thus did crye, Lady, you slepe to long, (the Earle) will rayse you by and by. But wele away, in vayne vnto the deafe she calles, She thinkes to speake to Iuliet, but speaketh to the walles. If all the dredfull noyse, that might on earth be found, Or on the roaring seas, or if the dredfull thunders sound,
Had blowne into her eares, I thinke they could not make, The sleping wight before the time by any meanes awake: So were the sprites of lyfe shut vp, and senses thrald, Wherwith the seely carefull nurce, was wondrously apalde. She thought to daw her now as she had donne of olde, But loe, she found her parts were stiffe. and more then marble colde, Neither at mouth nor nose, found she recourse of breth, Two certaine argumentes were these, of her vntimely death. Wherfore as one distraught, she to her mother ranne, With scratched face, and heare betorne, but no woord speake she can. At last (with much a doe) dead (quoth she) is my childe, Now out alas (the mother cryde) and as a Tyger wilde, Whose whelpes whilst she is gonne out of her denne to pray, The hunter gredy of his game, doth kill or cary away: So, rageing forth she ranne, vnto her Iuliets bed, And there she found her derling, and her onely comfort ded. Then shriked she out as lowde, as serue her would her breth, And then (that pity was to heare) thus cryde she out on death.
Ah cruell death (quoth she) that thus against all right Hast ended my felicitie, and robde my hartes delight, Do now thy worst to me, once wreake thy wrath for all. Euen in despite I crye to thee thy vengeance let thou fall. Wherto stay I (alas,) since Iuliet is gone? Wherto liue I since she is dead, except to wayle and mone? Alacke dere chyld, my teares for thee shal neuer cease, Euen as my dayes of life increase, so shall my plaint increase. Such store of sorow shall afflict my tender hart, That dedly panges when they assayle shall not augment my smart. Then gan she so to sobbe, it seemde her hart would brast, And while she crieth thus, behold the father at the last, The County Paris, and of gentilmen a route, And ladies of Verona towne, and country round about, Both kindreds and alies, thet her a pace haue preast, For by theyr presence there they sought to honor so the feast, But when the heauy newes the hydden geastes did heare, So much they mournd, that who had seene theyr countnance and theyr cheere,
Might easely haue indgde, by that that they had seene, That day the day of wrath, and eke of pity haue beene. But more then all the rest the fathers hart was so Smit with the heauy newes, and so shut vp with sodain woe, That he ne had the powre his daughter to bewepe, Ne yet to speake, but long is forsd, his teares and plaint to kepe. In all the hast he hath for skilfull leaches sent, And hearyng of her passed life, they iudge with one assent, The cause of this her death was inward care and thought, And then with double force againe the doubled sorowes wrought. If euer there hath been a lamentable day, A day ruthfull, vnfortunate, and fatall, then I say, The same was it in which, through Veron towne was spred, The wofull newes how Iuliet was sterued in her bed. For so she was bemonde, both of the yong and olde, That it might seeme to him that would the commen plaint behold, That all the commen welth did stand in ieopardy, So vniuerfall was the plaint, so piteous was the crye.
For lo, beside her shape, and natiue bewties hewe, With which, like as she grew in age, her vertues prayses grewe. She was also so wise, so lowly, and so mydle: That euen from the hory head, vnto the witles childe, She wan the hartes of all, so that there was not one, Ne great ne small, but dyd that day her wretched state bemone. Whilst Iuliet slept, and whilst the other wepen thus: Our fryer Lawrence hath by this, sent one to Romeus. A frier of his house, there neuer was a better, He trusted him euen as himselfe, to whom he gaue a letter: In which, he written had, of euery thing at length, That past twixt Iuliet and him, and of the powders strength. The next night after that, he willeth him to comme To helpe to take his Iuliet out of the hollow toombe. For by that time, the drinke he saith will cease to woorke, And for one night his wife and he within his cell shall loorke. Then shall he cary her to Mantua away, (Till sickell Fortune fauour him) disguisde in mans aray.
Thys letter closde he sendes to Romeus by his brother: He chargeth him that in no case he geue it any other. Apace our frier Iohn to Mantua him hyes, And for because in Italy it is a wonted gyse, That friers in the towne should seeldome walke alone, But of theyr couent ay should be accompanide with one: Of his profession straight a house he fyndeth out. In mynde to take some frier with him, to walke the towne about. But entred once, he might not issue out agayne, For that a brother of the house, a day before or twayne. Dyed of the plague (a sickenes which they greatly feare and hate) So were the brethren charged to kepe within theyr couent gate, Bard of theyr felowship, that in the towne do wonne, The towne folke eke commaunded are, the fryers house to shonne: Tyll they that had the care of health, theyr fredome should renew, Wherof, as you shall shortly heare, a mischeefe great there grewe. The fryer by this restraint, beset with dred and sorow, Not knowing what the letters held, differd vntill the morowe:
And then he thought in tyme to send to Romeus, But whilst at Mantua where he was, these dooinges framed thus, The towne of Iuliets byrth was wholy busied, About her obsequies, to see theyr darlyng buried. Now is the parentes myrth quite chaunged into mone, And now to sorow is retornde the ioy of euery one. And now the wedding weedes for mourning weedes they chaunge, And Hymene into a Dyrge, alas it seemeth straunge. In steade of mariage gloues, now funerall gloues they haue, And whom they should see maried, they follow to the graue. The feast that should haue been of pleasure and of ioy, Hath euery dish, and cup, fild full of sorow and annoye. Now throughout Italy this commen vse they haue, That all the best of euery stocke are earthed in one graue. For euery houshold, if it be of any fame, Doth bylde a tombe, or digge a vault that beares the housholdes name. Wherein (if any of that kindred hap to dye) They are bestowde, els in the same no other corps may lye.
The Capilets, her corps in such a one dyd lay, Where Tybalt slayne of Romeus, was layde the other, day: An other vse there is, that whosoeuer dyes, Borne to their church with open face, vpon the beere he lyes In wonted weede attyrde, not wrapt in winding sheete, So, as by chaunce he walked abrode, our Romeus man dyd meete His maisters wyse, the sight with sorow straight dyd wounde His honest hart, with teares he sawe her lodged vnder ground. And for he had been sent to Verone for a spye, The doynges of the Capilets by wisdome to descrye, And for he knew her death dyd tooch his maister most, (Alas) too soone, with heauy newes he byed away in post: And in his house he found his maister Romeus, Where he besprent with many feares, began to speake him thus. Syr, vnto you of late is chaunced so great a harme, That sure except with constancy you seeke your selfe to arme, I feare that strayght you will brethe out your latter breath, And I most wretched wight shalbe thoccasion of your death.
Know syr that yesterday my lady and your wyfe, I wot not by what sodain grefe, hath made exchaunge of life: And for because on earth, she found nought but vnrest, In heauen hath she sought to fynde a place of quiet rest. And with these weping eyes my selfe haue seene her layde Within the tombe of Capilets, and here withall he stayde, This sodayne message sounde sent forth with sighes and teares, Our Romeus receaued too soone with open listening eares, And therby hath sonke in such sorow in his hart, That loe, his sprite annoyed sore with torment and with smart, Was like to breake out of his prison house perforce, And that he might flye after hers, would leaue the massy corce. But earnest loue that will not fayle him till hie ende, This fond and sodain fantasy into his head dyd sende: That if nere vnto her he offred vp his breath, That then an hundred thousand parts more glorious were his death, Eke should his painfull hart a great deale more be eased, And more also (he vainely thought) his lady better pleased.
Wherfore, when he his face hath washt with water cleene, Lest that the staynes of dryed teares, might on his cheekes be seene, And so his sorow should of euery one be spyde, Which he with all his care dyd seeke from euery one to hyde: Straight wery of the house, he walketh forth abrode, His seruant at the maisters hest in chamber styll abode: And then fro streate to streate, he wandreth vp and downe, To see if he in any place may fynde in all the towne, A salue meete for his sore, an oyle fitte for his wounde, And seeking long (alac too soone) the thing he sought, he founde. An Apothecary sate vnbusied at his doore, Whom by his heauy countenaunce he gessed to be poore, And in his shop he saw his boxes were but fewe, And in his window (of his wares) there was so small a shew, Wherfore our Romeus assuredly hath thought, What by no frendship could be got, with money should be bought. For nedy lacke is lyke the poore man to compell, To sell that which the cities lawe forbiddeth him to sell.
Then by the hand he drew the nedy man apart, And with the sight of glitrring gold inflamed hath his hart, Take fiftie crownes of gold (quoth he) I geue them thee▪ So that before I part from hence thou straight deliuer me, Somme poyson strong, that may in lesse then halfe an howre, Kill him whose wretched hap shalbe the potion to deuowre. The wretch by couetise is wonne, and doth assent, To sell the thing, whose sale ere long▪ too late he doth repent. In hast he poyson sought, and closely he it bounde, And then began with whispering voyce thus in his eare to rounde, Fayre syr (quoth he) be sure, this is the speeding gere, And more there is then you shall nede, for halfe of that is there, Will serue, I vndertake, in lesse then half an howre, To kill the strongest man aliue, such is the poysons power, Then Romeus somwhat easd of one part of his care, Within his bosome putteth vp his dere vnthrifty ware. Retorning home agayne, he sent his man away, To Verone towne, and chargeth him, that he without delay,
Prouyde both instruments, to open wyde the toombe, And lightes to shew him Iuliet, and stay (till he shall comme.) Nere to the place whereas his louing wyfe doth rest, And chargeth him not to bewray the dolours of his brest. Peter, these heard, his leaue both of his maister take, Betyme he commes to towne, such hast the paynfull man did make. And then with busy care he seeketh to fulfill, But doth dysclose vnto no wight his wofull maisters will. Would God he had herein broken his maisters hest, Would God that to the fryer he had dysclosed all hys brest. But Romeus, the whyle, with many a dedly thought, Prouoked much, hath caused ynke and paper to be brought, And in few lynes he dyd of all his loue dyscoorse, How by the fryers helpe, and by the knowledge of the noorse, The wedlocke knot was knyt, and by what meane that night And many moe he dyd enioy, his happy hartes delight. Where he the poyson bought, and how his lyfe should ende, And so his wailefull tragedy the wretched man hath pend.
The letters close and seald, directed to his syre: He locketh in his purse, and then, a post hors doth he hyre. When he approched nere, he waxely lighted downe, And euen with the shade of night, he entred Verone towne, Where he hath found his man wayting when he should comme, With lanterne and with instruments, to open Iuliets toomme. Helpe Peter, helpe quod he, helpe to remoue the stone, And straight when I am gone fro thee my Iuliet to bemone: See that thou get thee hence, and on the payne of death, I charge thee that thou comme not nere, whyle I abyde beneath, Ne seeke thou not to let thy masters enterprise, Which he hath fully purposed to doe in any wise. Take there a letter, which as soone as he shall ryse, Present it in the morning to my louing fathers eyes. Which vnto him perhaps farre pleasanter shall seeme, Then eyther I do mynd to say, or thy grose head can deeme. Now Peter that knew not, the purpose of his hart, Obediently a little way withdrew himselfe apart,
And then our Romeus, (the vault stone set vpright) Descended downe, and in his hand, he bare the candle light. And then with piteous eye, the body of his wyfe, He gan beholde, who surely was the organ of his lyfe. For whom vnhappy now he is, but erst was blyst: He watred her with teares, and then an hundred times her kyst. And in his folded armes, full straightly he her plight, But no way could his greedy eyes be filled with her sight, His fearfull handes he layd vpon her stomacke colde, And them on diuers parts besyde, the wofull wight did hold. But when he could not fynd the signes of lyfe he sought, Out of his cursed box he drewe the poyson that he bought. Wherof, he gredely deuowrde the greater part, And then he cryde with dedly sigh, fetcht from his mourning hart: Oh Iuliet, of whom the world vnwoorthy was, From which, for worldes vnworthines thy worthy gost dyd passe: What death more pleasant could my hart wish to abyde, Then that which here it suffreth now, so nere thy frendly syde.
Or els so glorious tombe, how could my youth haue craued. As in one selfe same vaulte with thee haply to be ingraued? What Epitaph more worth, or halfe so excellent, To consecrate my memorye, could any man inuente As this, our mutuell, and our piteous sacrifice Of lyfe, set light for loue, but while he talketh in this wise, And thought as yet a while his dolors to enforce, His tender hart began to faynt, prest with the venoms force: Which little and little gan to ouercomme hys hart, And whilst his busy eyne he threwe about to euery part: He saw hard by the corce of sleping Iuliet, Bold Tybalts carkas dead, which was not all consumed yet, To whom (as hauing life) in this sort speaketh he, Ah cosin dere Tybalt, whereso thy restles sprite now be, With stretched handes to thee for mercy now I crye, For that before thy kindly howre I forced thee to dye. But if with quenched lyfe, not quenched be thine yre. But with reuengeing lust as yet thy hart be set on fyre:
What more amendes, or cruell wreke desyrest thou? To see on me, then this which here is shewd forth to thee now? Who reft by force of armes from thee thy liuing breath, The same with his owne hand (thou seest) doth poyson himselfe to death. And for he caused thee in tombe too soone to lye, Too soone also, yonger then thou himselfe he layeth by. These said, when he gan feele, the poysons force preuayle, And little and little mastred lyfe, for aye beganne to fayle, Kneeling vpon his knees, he said with voyce full lowe, Lord Christ that so to raunsome me rescendedst long agoe, Out of thy fathers bosome, and in the virgins wombe, Didst put on fleshe, Oh let my plaint out of this hollow toombe, Perce through the ayre, and graunt my sute may fauour finde. Take pity on my sinnefull and my poore afflicted mynde. For well enough I know, this body is but clay, Nought but a masse of sinne, to frayle, and subiect to decay. Then pressed with extreme greefe, he threw with so great force, His ouerpressed parts vpon his ladies wayled corps:
That now his wekened hart, weakened with tormentes past, Vnable to abyde this pang, the sharpest and the last: Remayned quite depriued, of sense and kindly strength, And so the long imprisond soule, hath freedome wonne at length. Ah cruell death, too soone, too soone was this deuorce, Twixt youthfull Romeus heauenly sprite, and his fayre earthy corse. The fryer that knew what time the powder had been taken, Knew eke the very instant, when the sleper should awaken. But wondring that he could no kind of aunswer heare, Of letters, which to Romeus his fellow fryer did beare: Out of sainct Frauncis church hymselfe alone dyd fare, And for the opening of the tombe, meete instrumentes he bare: Approching nigh the place, and seeing there the lyght, Great horror felt he in his hart, by straunge and sodaine sight, Tyll Peter (Romeus man) his coward hart made bolde, When of his masters being there, the certain newes he tolde: There hath he been (quoth he) this halfe howre at the least, And in this time I dare well say his plaint hath still increast.
Then both they entred in, where they (alas) dyd fynde, The bretheles corps of Romeus, forsaken of the mynde. Where they haue made such mone, as they may best conceue, That haue with perfect frendship loued, whose frend, feeres death dyd reue. But whilst with piteous playnt, they Romeus fate be wepe, An howre too late fayre Iuliet awaked out of slepe. And much amasde to see in tombe so great a light, She wist not if she saw a dreame, or sprite that walkd by night. But cumming to her selfe, she knew them, and said thus, What fryer Lawrence, is it you? where is my Romeus? And then the auncient frier, that greatly stoode in feare, Lest if they lingred ouer long, they should be taken theare, In few plaine woordes, the whole that was betyde he tolde, And with his fingar shewd his corps out stretched, stiffe, and colde, And then perswaded her with pacience to abyde This sodain great mischaunce, and sayth that he will soone prouyde In somme religious house for her a quiet place, Where she may spend the rest of lyfe, and where in time percase
She may with wisdomes meane, measure her mourning brest, And vnto her tormented soule call backe exiled rest. But loe, as soone as she had cast her ruthfull eye On Romeus face, that pale and wan, fast by her side dyd lye, Straight way she dyd vnstop the conduites of her teares, And out they gushe, with cruell hand she tare her golden heares. But when she neither could her swelling sorows wage, Ne yet her tender hart abyde her sickenes furious rage: Falne on his corps, she lay long panting on his face, And then with all her force and strength, the ded corps dyd embrace, As though with sighes, with sobs, with force and busy payne, She would him rayse, and hun restore from death to lyfe agayne: A thousand times she kist his month as cold as stone, And it vnkist agayne as oft, then gan she thus to mone. Ah pleasant prop of all my thoughtes, ah onely ground Of all the sweete delightes, that yet in all my lyfe I found. Did such assured trust within thy hart repose: That in this place, and at this time, this churchyarde thou hast chose?
Betwixt the armes of me, thy perfect louing make? And thus by meanes of me to ende thy lyfe, and for my sake? Euen in the flowring of thy youth, when vnto thee, Thy lyfe most deare (as to the most) and pleasant ought to be: How could this tender corps withstand the cruell fight Of furious death, that wonts to fray the steutest with his sight: How could thy dainty youth agree with willing hart, In this so fowle infected place (to dwell) where now thou art. Where spitefull Fortune hath appaynted thee to be, The dainty foode of greedy woormes, vnworthy sure of thee. Alas, alas, alas, what neded now a new, My wonted sorowes doubled twise agayne thus to renewe? Which both the tyme, and eke my pacient long abode, Should now at length haue quenched quite, and vnder foote haue trode. Ah wretch, and caytiue that I am, euen when I thought To find my painefull passions salue: I myst the thing I sought, And to my mortall harme, the fatall knyfe I grounde, That gaue to me so deepe, so wyde, so cruell dedly wounde.
Ah thou most fortunate, and most vnhappy tombe, For thou shalt beare from age to age, witnes in time to comme, Of the most perfect leage, betwixt a payre of louers, That were the most vnfortunate, and fortunate of others: Receaue the latter sigh, receaue the latter pang, Of the most cruell of cruell slaues, that wrath and death ay wrang. And when our Iuliet would continue still her mone, The fryer and the seruant fied and left her there alone. For they a sodayne noyse, fast by the place did heare, And lest they might be taken there, greatly they stoode in feare. When Iuliet saw her selfe left in the vaulte alone, That freely she might worke her will, for let or stay was none: Then once for all, she tooke the cause of all her harmes, The body dead of Romeus, and claspd it in her armes, Then she with earnest kisse, sufficiently did proue, That more then by the feare of death, she was attaint by loue. And then past deadly feare, for lyfe ne had she care, With hasty hand she did draw out, the dagger that he ware.
O welcome death (quoth she) end of vnhappines, That also art beginning of assured happines: Feare not to darte me nowe, thy stripe no longer stay, Prolong no longer now my lyfe, I hate this long delaye. For straight my parting sprite, out of this carkas fled, At ease shall finde my Romeus sprite, emong so many ded. And thou my louing lord, Romeus my trusty feer, If knowledge yet doe rest in thee, if thou these woordes dost heer: Receue thou her whom thou didst loue so lawfully, That causd (alas) thy violent death although vnwillingly. And therfore willingly offers to thee her gost, To thend that no wight els but thou, might haue iust cause to boste Thinioying of my loue, which ay I haue reserued, Free from the rest, bound vnto thee, that hast it well deserued. That so our parted sprites, from light that we see here, In place of endlesse light and blisse, may euer liue yfere. These said, her ruthlesse hand through gyrt her valiant hart. Ah Ladies helpe with teares to wayle, the ladies dedly smart.
She grones she stretcheth out her simmes, she shuttes her eyes, And from her corps the sprite doth fiye. what should I say: she dyes. The watchemen of the towne, the whilst are passed by, And through the grates the candel light within the tombe they spye: Wherby they did suppose, inchaunters to be comme, That with prepared instrumentes had opend wide the tombe, In purpose to abuse the bodies of the ded, Which by theyr science ayde abusde do stand them oft in sted. Theyr curious harts desire, the trueth herof to know, Then they by certaine steppes descend, where they do fynd below In clasped armes ywrapt the husband and the wyfe, In whom as yet they seemd to see somme certaine markes of lyfe. But when more curiously with leysure they did vew, The certainty of both theyr deathes, assuredly they knew. Then here and there so long with carefull ere they sought, That at the length hidden they found the murthrers, so they thought. In dongeon depe that night they lodgde them vnder grounde, The next day do they tell the prince the mischefe that they found.
The newes was by and by throughout the towne dyspred Both of the takyng of the fryer, and of the two found ded. Thether might you haue seene whole housholdes forth to ronne. For to the tombe where they did heare this wonder straunge was donne, The great, the small, the riche, the poore, the yong, the olde, With hasly pace do ronne to see, but rew when they behelde. And that the murtherers to all men might be knowne, Like as the murders brute abrode through all the towne was blowne. The prince did straight ordaine, the corses that wer founde Should be set forth vpon a stage, hye raysed from the grounde, Right in the selfe same fourme, (shewde forth to all mens sight) That in the hollow valt they had been found that other night. And eke that Romeus man, and fryer Lawrence should Be openly examined, for els the people would Haue murmured, or faynd there were some wayghty cause, Why openly they were not calde, and so conuict by lawes. The holy fryer now, and reuerent by his age, In great reproche set to the shew vpon the open stage.
(A thing that ill beseemde, a man of siluer heares) His beard as whyte as mylke he bathes, with great fast falling teares. Whom straight the dredfull Iudge commaundeth to declare Both how this murther hath been donne, aud who the murthrers are. For that he nere the tombe was found at howres vnfitte, And had with him those yron tooles, for such a purpose fitte: The frier was of liuely sprite, and free of speche, The Iudges woordes appald him not, ne were his wittes to seeche. But with aduised heed, a while fyrst did he stay, And then with bold assured voyce, aloude thus gan he say. My lordes, there is not one emong you, set togyther, So that (affection set aside) by wisdome he consider My former passed lyfe, and this my extreme age, And eke this heauy sight, the wreke, of frantike Fortunes rage, But that amased much, doth wonder at this chaunge, So great, so sodainly befalne, vnlooked for, and straunge. For I, that in the space of .lx. yeres and tenne, Since first I did begin to soone to leade my lyfe with men,
And with the worldes vaine thinges my selfe I did acquaint, Was neuer yet, in open place at any time attaynt With any cryme, in waight, as heauy as a rushe, Ne is there any stander by, can make me gylty blushe, (Although before the face of God, & doe confesse, My selfe to be the sinfulst wretch of all this mighty presse.) When readiest I am, and likeliest to make My great accompt, which no man els for me shall vndertake: When wormes, the earth, and death doe cyte me euery howre, Tappeare before the iudgement seate of euerlasting powre, And falling ripe I steppe vpon my graues brinke: Euen then am I most wretched wight (as eche of you doth thinke.) Through my most haynous deede, with hedlong sway throwne downe, In greatest daunger of my lyfe, and domage of renowne. The spring, whence in your head, this new conceite doth ryse, And in your hart increaseth still your vayne and wrong surmise: May be the hugenes of these teares of myne (percase,) That so aboundantly downe fall, by eyther syde my face.
As though the memory in scriptures were not kept, That Christ our sauiour himselfe for ruth and pittie wept. And more whoso will reade, ywritten shall he fynde, That teares are as true messengers of mans vngyltie mynde, Orels (a liker proofe) that I am in the cryme, You say these present yrone are, and the suspected tyme. As though all howres alike had not been made aboue, Did Christ not say the day had twelue? whereby he sought to prone, That no respect of howres, ought iustly to be had, But at all times men haue the choyce of dooing good or bad. Euen as the sprite of God, the hartes of men doth guyde, Or as it leaueth them to stray from Vertues path asyde. As for the yrons that were taken in my hand, As now I deeme, I neede not seeke, to make ye vnderstande, To what vse yron first was made, when it began: How of it selfe it helpeth not, ne yet can helpe a man. The thing that hurteth, is the malice of his will, That such indifferent thinges is wont to vse and order yll.
Thus much I thought to say, to cause you so to know, That neither these my piteous teares, though nere so fast they flowe. Ne yet these yron tooles, nor the suspected time, Can iustly prout the murther donne, or damne me of the cryme, No one of these hath powre, ne power haue all the three, To make me other then I am, how so I seeme to be. But sure my conscience (if so my gylt deserue) For an appeacher, witnesse, and a hangman eke should serue. For through mine age, whose heares, of long time since were hore, And credyt greate that I was in, with you in time to fore, And eke the soiorne short that I on earth must make, That euery day and howre do loke my iourney hence to take, My conscience inwardly, should more torment me thrise, Then all the outward deadly payne that all you could deuyse. But (God I prayse) I feele no worme that gnaweth me, And from remorses pricking sting, I ioy that I am free. I meane as touching this, wherwith you troubled are, Wherwith you should be troubled still if I my speche should spare.
But to the end I may set all your hartes at rest, And plucke out all the scrupuls that are rooted in your brest: Which might perhappes henceforth increasing more and more Within your conscience also, increase your curelesse sore: I sweare by yonder heauens, whither I hope to clym, And for a witnes of my woordes, my hart attesteth him, Whose mighty hand doth welde them in their vyolent sway, And on the rolling stormy seas the heauy earth doth stay: That I will make a short and eke a true dyscourse Of this most wofull Tragedy, and shew both thend and sourse Of theyr vnhappy death, which you perchaunce no lesse Will wonder at, then they (alas) poore louers in distresse, Tormented much in mynd not forcing liuely breath, With strong and patient hart dyd yelde themselfe to cruell death. Such was the mutuall loue, wherin the burned both: And of their promyst frendshippes fayth, so stedy was the troth. And then the auncient frier began to make dyscourse, Euen from the first of Romeus, and Iuliets amours.
How first by sodayn sight, the one the other chose, And twirt them selfe dyd knitte the knotte▪ which onely death might lose. And how within a while, with hotter loue opprest, Vnder confessions cloke, to him, them selfe they haue adrest. And how with solemne othes they haue protested both, That they in hart are maried by promise and by othe. And that except he graunt the rytes of church to geue, They shalbe forst by earnest loue, in sinnefull state to liue. Which thing when he had wayde, and when he vnderstoode, That the agreement twixt them twaynt was lawfull honest, good, And all thinges peysed well, it seemed meete to bee, For lyke they were of noblenesse, age, riches, and degree: Hoping that so at length, ended myght be the stryfe, Of Montagewes and Capelets, that led in hate theyr lyfe. Thinking to woorke a woorke well pleasing in Gods sight, In secret shrift he wedded them, and they the selfe same night Made vp the mariage in house of Capelet, As well doth know (if she be askt,) the nurce of Iuliet.
He told how Romeus fled, for reuing Tybalts lyfe, And how the whilst, Paris the Earle was offred to hys wyfe. And how the lady dyd, so great a wrong dysdayne, And how to shrift vnto his church she came to him agayne: And how she fell flat downe before his feete aground, And how she sware her hand, and blody knife should wound Her harmeles hart, except, that he some meane dyd fynde To dysappoynt the Earles attempt, and spotles saue her mynde. Wherfore he doth conclude, (although that long before) By thought of death, and age, he had refusde for euermore. The hidden artes which he delighted in, in youth, Yet wonne by her importunenes, and by his inward ruth, And fearing lest she would her cruell vowe dyscharge, His closed conscience he had opened and set at large. And rather did he choose to suffer for one tyme, His soule to be spotted somdeale with small and easy cryme, Then that the lady should, (wery of liuyng breath) Murther her selfe, and daunger much her seely soule by death.
Wherfore, his auncient artes agayne he putres in vre, A certayne powder gaue he her made her slepe so sure, That they her held for dead, and how that frier Iohn With letters sent to Romeus, to Mantua is gone, Of whom he knoweth not as yet, what is becomme, And how that dead he found his frend within her kindreds tombe. He thinkes with poyson strong, for care the yong man sterued, Supposing Iuliet dead, and how, that Iuliet hath carued With Romeus dagger drawne her hart and yelded breath, Desyrous to accompany her louer after death. And how they could not saue her, so they were afeard, And hidde them selfe, dreding the noyse of watchmen that they heard. And for the proofe of thys his tale, he doth desyer The Iudge, to send forthwith to ntus for the fryer, To learne his cause of stay, and eke to reade his letter, And more beside, to thend that they might iudge his cause the better, He prayeth them depose the nurce of Iuliet, And Romeus man, whom at vnwares besyde the tombe he met.
Then Peter not so much as erst he was, dysmayd, My lordes (quoth he) too true is all, that fryer Laurence sayd. And when my maister went into my mystres graue, This letter that I offer you, vnto me then he gaue. Which he himselfe dyd write as I do vnderstand, And charged me to offer them vnto his fathers hand. The opened packet doth conteyne in it the same, That erst the skilfull frier said, and eke the wretches name That had at his request, the dedly poyson sold, The price of it, and why he bought, his letters playne haue tolde. The case vnfolded so, and open now it lyes, That they could wish no better proofe▪ saue seeing it with theyr eyes. So orderly all thinges were tolde and tryed out, That in the prease there was not one▪ that stoode at all in doute. The wyser sort to councell called by Escalus, Haue geuen aduyse, and Escalus sagely decreeth thus. The nurse of Iuliet, is banisht in her age, Because that from the parentes she dyd hyde the mariage.
Which might haue wrought much good, hau it in time been knowne, Where now by her concealing it, a mischeefe great is growne. And Peter, for he dyd obey his masters hest, In woonted freedome had good leaue to leade his lyfe in rest. Thapothecary, high is hanged by the throte, And for the paynes he tooke with him, the hangman had his cote. But now what shall betyde of this gray bearded syre? Of fryer Lawrence thus araynde, that good barefooted fryre. Because that many times he woorthely did serue The commen welth, and in his lyfe was neuer found to swerue: He was discharged quyte, and no marke of defame, Did seeme to blot, or touch at all, the honor of his name. But of him selfe he went into an Hermitage, Two myles from Veron towne, where he in prayers past forth his age. Tyll that from earth to heauen, his heauenly sprite dyd flye, Fyue yeres he liued an Hermite, and an Hermite dyd he dye. The stranngenes of the chaunce, when tryed was the truth The Montagewes and Capelets hath moued so to ruth,
That with their emptyed teares, theyr choler and theyr rage, Was emptied quite, and they whose wrath no wisdom could asswage, Nor threatning of the prince, ne mynd of murthers donne: At length (so mighty Ioue it would) by pitye they are wonne. And lest that length of time might from our myndes remoue, The memory of so perfect, sound, and so approued loue. The bodies dead remoued from vaulte where they did dye, In stately tombe, on pillers great, of marble rayse they hye. On euery syde aboue, were set and eke beneath, Great store of cunning Epitaphes, in honor of theyr death. And euen at this day the tombe is to be seene. So that among the monumentes that in Verona been, There is no monument more worthy of the sight: Then is the tombe of Iuliet, and Romeus her knight. ¶ Imprinted at London in Flete strete within Temble barre, at the signe of the hand and starre, by Richard Tottill the .xix. day of Nouember. An. do. 1562. (∴)
