13901 23813613 26871
King Edward the 2. surnamed Carnaruen was crouned att Westminster at the 22. yere of his age the 24. of febru: 1308. he Raigned 19 yere. 6 monethes was desed the 25 of Iarius 1326. he was slayne in the Castle of barkley in the 43 yere of his age.
THE HISTORIE OF EDWARD THE SECOND. Surnamed CARNARVAN, one of our English KINGS. Together with the Fatall down-fall of his two vnfortunate Favorites GAVESTON and SPENCER. Now Published by the Author thereof, according to the true Originall Copie, and purged from those foule Errors and Cor∣ruptions, wherewith that spurious and surreptitious Peece, which lately came forth vnder the same Tytle, was too much defiled, and deformed. With the Addition of some other Observations both of vse and Ornament. By F. H. Knight. LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F. for L. Chapman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the vpper end of Chancery-Lane. 1629.
TO HIS VERY LOVING Brother, Mr. RICHARD HVBERT, the Author of this historicall Poëme F. H. Knight, wisheth all Health and Happinesse. WORTHY SIR: I Know that noble Na∣tures desire more to doe good, then to hear of the good, they doe; and therefore,
without all farther Complement, you shall giue me leaue, Onely to say thus much: That (if GOD and Nature had not) yet your many kind and Con∣stant fauours to mee, and all mine haue made mee truely your owne: which, (as I glad∣ly acknowledge) so I would haue the World take notice, That I am both sensible of them, and thankefull for them: And now (Sir) being already deepe in your debt, I must still runne farther vpon your score, by committing to your Care and
custodie this Innocent Child not of my Body, but of my Braine. It is surely of full Age, for It was conceiued and borne in Queene Elizabeths time, but grew to more maturitie in King IAMES's; and therefore, (as wee vse to say) It should be now able to shift for It selfe: But I that gaue It life, finding the weaknesse thereof, was ful∣ly resolved to keepe It still at home vnder mine owne wing, and not to let It see the Sunne, when loe, (after Twenty yeares concealement) when I thought
the vnfortunate Babe (like to It's Father) euen dead to the World, I saw the false and vncomely Picture of my poore Child (taken by a most vnskil∣full hand) offered to the pub∣licke sight and censure of euery judicious Eye: and (though that could not) yet truely I did blush for It, to see It, so nakedly, so vnworthily, so mangled and so maymed thrust into the world, that I scarce knew It, and was a∣sham'd to owne It: And therefore (good Brother) to
vindicate both It and my Selfe from those grosse and sence∣lesse Errours, wherewith that false Bastard was too foulie de∣formed; I haue now sent It a∣broad to seeke It's fortunes, in It's own true shape, and habite: desiring your Selfe, and euery vnderstanding Reader (for I know It is not for the vse of e∣uery Ordinarie Eye) to loke vpon that former Peece, with scorne and Contempt, and once againe to take a resurvay of It, as now It Appeares in It's owne true feature and po∣sture:
It may bee you shall find somewhat in It, both to informe the Vnderstanding and to rectifie the Affections, and if in any of the Passages thereof, It shall seeme eyther too light, and remisse or too bold, and free, eyther, too open and tart, or too sparing and reseru'd; That you must impute, eyther to the matter, that I handle, or the parties, that I personate, which must of necessitie be drawne according to the true Life, both in colours and pro∣portion, or else, the Worke will
bee of very little vse, and of lesse Grace and Ornament, eyther to my Selfe or others: And so humbly desiring the Almighty to blesse You both in Soule, Bo∣dy and Estate; I rest, not your Servant according to the new and fine, but false Phrase of the Time, but in honest old English, your loving Brother, and true Friend for euer: FRAN: HVBERT.
THE AVTHORS PREFACE. (∴) 1 REbellious thoughts why doe you tumult so? And strie to breake from forth my troubled brest? t not enough that I my selfe doe know The mouing Causes of mine owne vnrest? s't not enough to know my selfe distrest? O no: Surcharged hearts must needs complaine, "Some ease it is (though small) to tell our paine. 2 Yet weyward thoughts retire vnto your home, nto my heart (your proper home) retire. There rest in your vnrest, till Death oth come, And Death will come, call'd by conceal'd desire, "For Coales rak'd vp glow more then open Fire, And deepest streames doe run with smoothest speed, And silent griefes are the true griefes Indeed.
3 But if my heart bee so Inr'd to groaning, Or if my tongue must bee the voyce of Sorrow, Or that my Pen bee still Injoyn'd to moaning, Because my night of Care hath neuer morrow, Yet of my griefe thus much at least I'le borrow. That for a time, I may surcease mine owne. And tune my Muse to tell anothers moane. 4 Anothers moane to tell my Muse is tun'd, (If any tune can bee in jaring Griefe) And I a King for subject haue assum'd, An English King: Wh whilst he li'd, was chi In Honours height, yet dyed without reliefe; So true is that, which SOLON once did say; No man is Happie, till his dying day. F. H.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF EDVVARD the Second. 5 IT is thy sad disaster which I sing Carnarvan EDVVARD: Second of that name, Thy Minions pride, thy States ill-managing, Thy Peeres revolt, the sequell of the same, Thy Life, thy Death I sing, thy Sin, thy shame; And how thou wert depriued of thy Crowne. In highest fortunes, cast by Fortune downe. 6 Did I say Fortune? Nay, by Folly rather, By vnrespect vnto the rules of State. For let a Prince assure himselfe to gather As he hath planted: eyther Loue, or Hate. Contempt, or Dutie: not the workes of Fate, Much lsse of Fortune, but of due respects To Causes, which must needs produce effects.
7 As if a Prince doe draw his plat-forme right, And then with courage builds vpon the same. His ends proues happie: But by ouersight Hee that is weake, wholly subuerts the frame Of his owne building, and doth Idly blame Fortune, the seruant to deseruing merit, But the Commander of the aject spirit. 8 In which discourse, if I shall hap to touch Those faults, wch in our time are frequent growne Let not the gall'd offender winch, or grudge. For I intend a priuate wrong to none, Onely I would haue those same errours knowne By which the State did then to ruine runne, That (warn'd by theirs) Our Age like sins migh shunne▪ 9 Nor doe I meane, to bound my selfe so much, As onely for to tye mee to those Times, The causes, courses, consequents I'le touch Of later Ages, and of their designes, And if detrctions breath doth blast my Lines, Bee it for me, I haue for my defence The priuie-Coat of harmlesse Innocence. 10 And thou * great King that now do'st weild our StateIACOBVS, 1 Building on that, which former times did square O let it not be thought to derogate From thy perfections; (admirably rare) If I some errours of these Times declare. "Since neuer State was so precisely good, "But faults haue scap'd, which could not be with stood
11 For men are not like God, compleat, divine, "Whom neither passions moue, nor errors blind, "Who is not limited with any time, "Nor tyde to meanes, nor into place confin'd; "But free in all, no counter checke doth find "To contradict the least part of his will, "But worketh all in all, and nothing Ill. 12 "Whereas our humaine actions all are mixt, "Men liue in motion, so doe theyr designes; "Nothing is simply good, or firmely fix'd. "All haue defects: Nature it selfe declines, "Darknes oft clouds the clearest Sun that shines. "Our purest streames are not without their mud "And we mistake, what oft we take for good? 13 Besides, Kings needs must see with others Eyes, From whence mistakings cānot choose but spring, And when the offence from Error doth arise, Why should men cast the Enuie on the King? And not on those, that mis-informe the thing? "It is the gall most banes the Kingly throne, "That of his faults the least part is his owne. 14 For hee him-selfe is blamelesse oft (God knowes) Except it bee, because hee doth not know The noted Scandals, that arise from those On whom, hee doth his fauours most bestow Which they abusing, discontents may grow Against the Prince, though not deseruing them, "So apt wee are eu'n Goodnes to condemne.
15 Nor must we with a blacking Coale streight brand A Prince, or State, because of some defect, Who can be free from Sulley (if so scan'd)? But that same Prince or State deserues respect, Whose actions doe in generall affect. And ayme at good: for in particulers "None can be so compleat, but often erres. 16 And much they are deceiu'd, that thinke to find A State, without some blemish, or a staine. Conceit may cast Ideas in the mind. And forge strange formes, in th'inuentiue braine. But States consist of men, and men retaine One natiue badge, which vnto all doth cleaue, That is, to be deceiu'd: and to deceiue. 17 It is the sole Prerogatiue of Heau'n Not to be tainted with the smallest error, But that Immunitie was neuer giu'n To Earth; wise Soloman be thou the mirrour Where all may see their frailties euen with terror. Thou mouing in perfections higest Spheare Fell from thy orbe: who hath not cause to feare? 18 The Warlike Trumpet sounding to the fight Commands the hearing more then doth the Reed. Each eye is fixed on the Eagles flight, When little Wrens deserue not any heed. The greatest men shall haue the greatest meed. Marke who so list, and they shall find it try'd "That all mens eares to Princes tongus are ty'd.
19 Then let the world attend King Edwards words (The second Edwards) matter fit for moane, Whose smiles gaue life, whose frownes did wound like swords Whilst he did sit vpō ye Kingly throne. Nor minded now, nor moan'd by any One. "So time (we see) cuts down with fatall blow "As wel proud oakes, as humble shrubs below. 20 Imagine with your selues, you see him come From forth the deep darke Cauernes of the earth, Starued, and pin'd, Nothing but skin and bone In Princely plentie suffering want and dearth, As naked as an Infant at his birth. "So pinching need doth pluck what Pride did plant. And wastfull Ryot is repay'd with want. 21 And thus pore Prince (begins his tragick plaint, Am I the same that was first Edwards Sonne? By Nature borne to liue without restraint. Were there for me so many Trophies wonne? By Long-shanks, and such great atchiuements done? I am the same; and he so great did leaue me, As none (I thought) of Greatnes could bereaue me. 22 But now I find by proofe, that One there is (And well it is, that there is such an One) Who is not hood winckt vnto our amisse, And he can pull vs from our Kingly Throne, For all our Guards, our Forts, our walles of one. Know King how great-soeuer that thou be, The King of Kings still ruleth ouer thee.
23 Thou do'st command on Earth, well, be it so, That Earth which thou cōmand'st, his foot-stoole is. Thy power but reacheth things that are below, Heau'n, Earth; and Hell are subiect vnto his. Th' Infernall Agents, and the spirits of blisse His Seruants are, to execute his will, "What wants nor might, nor means to punish Ill. 24 I know, that Nature (apt to ouer-weene) May easily straine a Prince his thoughts to high. I know it is, and euermore hath beene A common course, to flatter Maiestie. "Greatnesse is apt to sinne in surcudrie, (Yet thogh) like Hils we ouer-look low grounds All vertuous Kings doe know they haue their bounds▪ 25 And therefore, though we haue Prerogatiues, Yet there are certaine limits to the same. Which keepes not Kings from being Superlatiue To sway (as Gods-Lieue-tenants) this faire frame And those Aspirers merit death and shame, That doe repine against those supreame powers Whom God hath made his vnderlings, not ours▪ 26 Yet grant their State free from coerciue force, That giues not lawlesse libertie in all, Kings must obserue a just and rightfull course, God is their King, by whom they stand or fall. Who all their acts to strickt acccount will call, Besides, their Oath, their vertue, their Renown Are Diamantine chaines to tye a Crowne.
27 And such as are not mou'd with these respects, But make their power to serue their will in all, Leaue them to God, who ruine, sand erects, Sets vp a Dauid, and puls downe a Saul. Hee prospers: Houses rise: he frownes: they fall, 'Tis not discents, nor fortune, force, nor fate, But God supports, and God supplants a State. 28 Nine Kings had raigned since the Conquest here, Whom I succeeded in a rightfull line, My Father (all domesticke tumults clere) Did warre, and win in fruitfull Palestine. This Northerne Sunne eu'n to the East did shine. The French were fearfull hearing but his name, French, Scots, and Turkes aeternized his fame 29 No Realme but did resound first Edwards praise. No praise was euer wonne with more deserts, And no deserts (though great) could counterpoise Much lesse out-balance his Heroyicke Parts, Mars taught him Armes, the Muses taught him Arts, Whereby so great he grew, that might there bee A Ioue on Earth, that earthly Ioue was he. 30 A King may leaue his name vnto his Sonne, But to his Sonne, no King can leaue his nature. In outward forme and shape they may seeme one. Hi posture, speech, his Countenance and feature. May make the Son be thoght the selfsame creature. 'Tis true, in face Sonnes may be like their Sires But faces like haue oft vnlike desires.
31 For why, our Bodies made of humaine seed Resemble them, whose matter was our making, Yea so farre forth as often times we read Of many griefes hereditarie, taking First roote from Parents loines: and not forsaking Their Issues issue, vntill many Ages, To wofull masters most vnwelcome Pages. 32 But mindes not cast in any mortall mould, Infus'd from Heau'n, not tyed vnto succession. Are freely left, (for so the Maker would) Vnto his wise all-gouerning discretion, Like softned wax, apt to receiue impression. But when the forme is once imprinted In "'Tis hardly lost, what Nature first did win. 33 'Tis somewhat to bee borne of vertuous seed, An honest bellie beares a hopefull Sonne. And yet (we see) goods Parents often breed A wild and wicked Issue, which doe run Most impious courses, till their liues be done. As was the Sire, the Sonne himselfe will fashion Is probable: but yet no demonstration. 34 That vertuous Romane great Germanicus One of the peerelesse worthies of that State, Begets Caligula, a Prince most vicious, Most bloudie, furious, and vnfortunate. How much Domitian did degenerate From his braue Sire, warlike Vespatian. Is not vnknowne to euery knowing man.
35 The same is truly instanced in mee, For I was farre vnlike my worthy Sire. A sower Crab, from sweetest Apple-tree, A Cloudie smoake from Sun-bright shining fire. And that small good that Nature did inspire, By soothing tongues too soone was turn'd to Ill, So smallest rost vntimely fruit doth kill. 36 For when men did perceiue my youthfull Itch. To vaine delight, and saw my mind affected Vnto the flight, where pleasure made the pitch. How all my noble studies were neglected, My youth with ease, my ease with Lust infected. Streight some sow'd pillowes vnderneath my sin, And prais'd that most, I most delighted in. 37 Vpon the earth where is that happie ground Wherein such answering Ecchoes are not heard? But most of all such pleasing voyces sound About Kings Courts, there find they best reward, And that's the chiefest end, that they regard, But that poore Prince which such flies blow vpō. Shall scarcely know his owne Complexion. 38 Blest are those times (saith an * Historian)Tacitus. The grauest, wisest, worthiest of that kind, Wherein 'tis lawfull for an honest man, Freely to thinke, to speake, to write his mind. And you great earthly Gods shall euer find More truly louing hearts, in such free tongues. Then in th'impostum'd breath of flatt'ring lungs.
39 Amongst the rest one Peirce of Gaueston (Pleasing in speech, and gracefull in behauiour, One, that Indeed was second vnto none In winding in himselfe to great mens fauour, That by their hazards he might be the Sauer) When he did spye the marke whereat I ment Streight gaue the meanes to giue my bow more bent, 40 VVe liu'd together eu'n from prime of yeares, VVhereby our joynt affections were combin'd. The mutuall consort of our infant Pheeres Doth keepe a long possession of the mind▪ And many deepe Impressions leaues behind. VVouldst thou haue Loue to last beyond the tomb. Thē let it take beginning at the wombe. 41 So hunts the Hound, and so the Hauke doth flye. As at the first entrance they are made, and man'd, And so those springing humours seldome dye. That in our first conceit Ingraued stand, Though childish loue seeme to be built on sand, Yet euery one eu'n in himselfe may proue He likes it still, what he at first did loue. 42 Princes, that doe intend your Heires such good As shall enable them for to succeed, And no way to disparage their high blood, O let it be your most respectiue heed, To sow their tender yeeres with vertues seed. For so the well, or ill-manured field As it is till'd doth Corne or Cocle yeeld.
43 Inure their youth vnto their Peeres conuerse, From whence, some seeds of liking first will grow, VVhich eu'n the Soule it selfe in time will peirce And proue a constant zeale: from whence will flow All dutious offices, that men may shew. And then, Designes of Princes happiest proue VVhen their great Peeres do serue, because they loue 44 Besides, there is a secret trust repos'd, In those, whom long assurance hath combin'd, And when we know, how humors are dispos'd, VVe frame our councels fitter to the mind. "Vnsounded Natures sharpest judgements blind "And those we entertaine with diffidence Of whom we haue but small experience. 45 So that to win a trust, to plant a Loue, To gaine a settled Seruice of the Peeres, It is the safest way, that Kings can proue, To glew them close eu'n in their Infant yeeres, And here my Fathers Error much appeares, VVho did ingrift me into Gaueston, By so vniting both our youths in one. 46 Hee was in face a Cupid, or more faire. A Mercurie in speech, or else as much. In actiue vigor hee was Mars his heire, In wit Ioue. bred Minerua was not such. But (O) these guifts will not abide the touch, Except with Inward vertues of the mind. Both beautie, speech, strength, wit are all refin'd.
47 But why should Nature set so faire a Glosse Vpon a mind, which sinne did so deforme? Why should shee gild, and polish such base drosse? As if she did the Soules perfection scorne, And onely would Impietie adorne. Or else seduce those mindes from judging right, Who doe conforme their censures to their sight. 48 But oft we see a sweet and mild aspect, A comely presence, winning vpon all. A face that seemes all vertue to affect Doth hide a heart of stone, a mind of gall, A crabbed will, a Soule to sinne most thrall. And therefore he in Iudgment shootes awry That takes his leuell onely from his Eye. 49 Because, the glorious inside of the mind Hath no dependance on the outward forme, In which, if erring Nature proue vnkind, And disproportions doe the shape deforme Shee commonly endeauours to reforme The bodies error, with the mindes supply, So richest Iemmes in Earths base entrailes lye. 50 "The face is false, the looke is but a lyer, "The habite and the heart doe much discent. "For good pretences cloake a bad desire. "Faire complements varnish a foule entent, "Who doth relye on them may chance repent. Which was my Case, and caus'd my ouerthrow; For I did prize the substance by the shew.
51 If one may vse that word without controule, If euer any* Metempsicosis was.Sardanapa∣lus. I thinke the last* AsyriansA transmi∣gration of the soule frō one body to another. On of Pythago∣ras his dreames. Monarchs soule By due descent to Gaueston did passe. For he a right Sardanapalus was: Drown'd in delights (if one may tearme them so) That hatch in lust, and breath their last in woe. 52 This highest Scholler in the Schoole of Sinne, This Centaure, halfe a man, and halfe a Best, This pleasing Syren so my soule did win, That he was deere to mee aboue the rest Looke what he said, was Gospell at the lest. Looke what he did, I made my President. So soone we learne, what wee too late repent. 53 This Angell-Diu'll thus shrined in my heart, This Dragon hauing got the golden fruit, My very Soule to him I did impart, Nor was I euer deafe vnto his suit. Hee acted all, I was a silent mute. My being seem'd to be in him alone Plantaginet was turn'd to Gaueston. 54 And hauing seiz'd me thus into his hands (For feare belike least he should bee diseased) Hee thought to tye me still in streighter bands By praising that, wherwith my sense was pleased; Affirming, that our liues were to be eased Of many cumbers, which the curious wise Had layd on men, the more to tyrannize.
55 For what are Lawes, but seruile obseruations Of this, or that, what pleas'd the Makers mind? The selfe-conceited-sowen Imaginations Of working braines, which did in freedome find Our humaine state, wch they forsooth would bind To what they lik't, what lik't not, was forbidden, So Horse and Mule, with bitt and spur are ridden. 56 Which well inuented scar-Crowes, though they serue For md-borne men, to keepe them in some awe. Yet Princes are not borne, so to obserue The strict precisenesse of th' incombring Law. Which their high state to base cōtempt doth draw. Kings made those lawes, & Ks. may break thē now That pleas'd them then, & this now pleaseth you. 57 No, no (sweet Prince) saith he, There is no law Can bind a King, but onely his desire. And that full well Th' Assyrians Monarcks saw, Who had before them borne consuming Fire. (Embleme of Regall power) which all admire But none must touch, for feare of following harms For Fire we know consumes, as well as wormes. 58 The Spiders web holds fast the silly Fly. The Hornet breakes It, like a mighty Lord, That* King of KingsAlexander magnus. when he could not vntye The Gordian knot duides it with his Sword. That Act of his fit matter doth afford For President: were I, as thou shalt bee. No Law at all, should giue a law to mee.
59 Except it were the golden law of Nature, Sweet Nature, (sweetest Mother of vs all) Who hath infus'd thus much into each Creature To loue the Honey, and to loath the Gall▪ To serue delight, not to be Sorrow's thrall; For pleasure doth with Nature so agree, As Bees with hiue, as Honey with the Bee. 60 For in the Prologue of our Infant play. Eu'n in our Cradle, wee doe cry, and yell For Nurses breast: why so? For food (you'l say) 'Tis true: and food (say I) doth please vs well, As Hunger seemes to bee a second Hell. So that (in truth,) The motiue of our Cry, Is to bee fed, and to bee pleas'd thereby. 61 As in our Prologue, so in our next Act (I meane in Childish yeares) who doth not see That euery thought of ours, and word, and fact Doe ayme at Sport, at Pastime, and at glee? Which daily cares, and nightly studies bee. Witnes the checks, the Rods, the blowes we take The many blowes, and all for Pleasures sake. 62 But when our Youth doth step vpon the Stage, (The sweetest part, that any man can play) Then pleasing Loue, & hope (loues pleasing page) And Courage (hops Attendant night, and day) And fortune seldome saying Courage Nay With full-sayl'd course doth carry vs amaine, To seek the Coast, where ful content doth raigne.
63 Not staying here, still Nature drawes vs on To new delights, but of a diuers kind, For middle Age to Armes will needs be gone. With honours sweets to feed his hungry mind, And what is Honour but a pleasing wind? Remember what, the famous * Graecian sayes,Themisocles▪ The sweetest Musicke is a Mans owne praise. 64 Next elder-Age, and Siluer-seeming hayres By Nature run full chase still after pleasure. For (O) the solace of the waning yeeres! To view their Rudducks, & their heaps of treasur To weigh, and tell their gold at euery leasure How great it is; speake they, that rather choo Gold should loose them: then they their gold would loos 65 The Epilogue of all our former time More hunts for joy then any of the rest. Decrepit Age doth pray before the prime, VVith weeping eyes, and knocks vpon his Bre And giues his Almes, to them that are distrest, And what's his end? that he might Heau'n obtai "And what is Heau'n, but pleasure void of pain▪ 66 And as the mind hath motions to affect, So haue we meanes to satisfie the mind. "Our little world is made with much respect, Our Mother Nature hath bin wise and kind; By whom, we haue apt Organons assign'd To execute, what so our thoughts intend, "And all our thoughts ayme at some pleasing
67 Is not the Head the store-house of conceit Plotting the meanes, to compasse our delight? Our Eyes Attendants, that doe daily waite Vpon such objects, as may please the sight? Witnesse the cherry-cheeke, & brow milk-white. Witnesse no other witnesse, but my wish, How sight, and Soule, both likes, and longs for this. 68 What mind, what man, what man of any mind That is not touch'd, & mou'd with Musicks sound? Whose deepe Impressions worke in bruitish kind, As Dolphynes, Else Arion had bin drown'd. The saluage beasts, that would not Orpheus wound The sencelesse stones, whō Phoebus harp did moue Doe witnesse all, how all doe Musicke loue. 69 The bubling murmur of a sliding Spring That seemes to runne with sweet, yet ullen mind. By which the winged Quiers in Consort sing VVith faire-fac't Eunuches (the defects of kind) VVhose Notes are answer'd by a soft still wind. Some dear lou'd Dame, bearing her part wth kisses Who would not thinke that place a heau'n of blisses? 70 As head, and eares, and Eyes; So are our hands lesh-hookes to draw, and gather all vnto vs That with our pleasure, or our profit stands, Thrusting aside, what euer may vndoe-vs For which Imployments are allotted to vs Two hands, two feet, The Agents of our wills. To follow rest, and flye from restlesse Ills.
71 "So likewise, in the structure of this frame "What is not made with admirable Art? So likewise in the guidance of the same, What is deny'd vs, that may please the heart? Most sencelesse man (what man so e're thou art) That in the very fulnesse of such store, By wilfull wants wilt make thy selfe most poore. 72 In heate of Summer, when the burning Sunne Doth crust the Earth, are there not shadie bowers Are there not Riuers, that doe mildly runne? And now, and then some cooling dewie showers To keepe the beautie of the blooming flowers? Wherwith our mother Earth (so fairely drest) Seemes, to Invite her sonnes to pleasures feast. 73 I will not speake of euery dayes delight They are so various, full of Ratities. But are there not sweet pleasures for the night? Maskes, Revels, Banquets, mirthfull Comedies, Night-Sunnes, (kind Natures dearest Prodigies) Which worke in men with powerfull Influence As hauing their first life, best motion thence. 74 O glorious Peeces, (the best guifts of Heau'n) Fairer thē those faire lights, that make Earth fair Why were you vnto wretched mortals giu'n But to bee Cordials 'gainst heart-eating Care, B' Imparting vnto vs your beauties rare? You are the Starres, which when the Sun is se Both heate, and light, and life in vs beget.
75 Hath then the Mouer of this glorious round So wisely fitted euery thing to pleasure, And seemes hee not his Order to confound That to delight doth limit sparing measure? And makes him-selfe vnworthy of such treasure? Is't euer like, He would haue made things thus But that they should bee fully vs'd by vs? 76 And that I may not runne about the field But keepe my selfe in Compasse of the Ring. I will omit the rich, and fruitfull yeeld Of pleasure, pointing onely at the Spring, The taste whereof, such perfect joy doth bring. As I doe thinke, no other Heau'n there Is, Heau'n pardon me; If I doe thinke amisse. 77 That is (sweet Ned) the Paradise of Loue, The joy of Life, and life of our conceit, The heau'nly Fire, infused from aboue, On which the Muses, and the Graces wayt; The Bodies health, Harts hope, and Natures bayt, The quintissence, of pure essentiall sweet. The point, where all the lines of Pleasures meet. 78 Sweet loue, that hast sweet beauty for thine obiect Kind loue, that knits in One two seuerall hearts. Great loue, to whom the greatest King is subiect; Pure loue, that sublimates our Earthly parts, And makes them ayerie by Ingenious Arts. O let my Ned, my Prince, my Ioue possesse The joyes, I would, but cannot well expresse.
79 And thou (deare Ned) experience but the pleasure Try what it is to Loue, and bee requited, And I will pawne my life, (my greatest treasure) With one sweet night, thou wilt be so delighted, That thou wilt wish, ye world were still benighted; Then say (sweet Prince) when thou the same dost proue▪ No heau'n but joy: Nor any joy but loue. 80 O see the fruits of an Ill-gouern'd wit, VVhen the sharpe Edge thereof, is turn'd awry. VVhen the best graces make men apt, and fit To blazon, and to tricke Impietie: To lay faire Colours on foule Sinne, whereby Th' Abused sence, (deluded with false shewes) On a most loathsome witch Inamo'd growes. 81 Wee need no Tutors, to bee taught to sinne, Wee sucke that lsson from our mothers brest. Nature is easily drawne, to trade therein, For that's the trafficke that doth please vs best, Sinne is a bold, a most intruding guest; And will not bee kept out, doe what wee can There's such an vnion betwixt Sinne, and Man. 82 What need Inuitement? why should Art bee vs'd To draw that on, which wee too much desire? VVhy should our ablest Graces bee abus'd To powre more oyle vpon a flaming Fire? But mounting Spirits that faine would soare vp higher Regard not what they doe, nor what they say, So they to their owne ends may make their way▪
83 And then indeed, they are most dangerous When they are arm'd with Learning, wit, and skil. Wholesome Ingredients proue most mischieuous Being apply'd, onely to strengthen Ill; For then they worke too much vpon the will. And that full well such damned Doctors know, Which makes them vse their Art & cunning so. 84 It is a certaine truth: The best of all Beeing Corrupted, turnes vnto the worst. And so, those hellish Spirits, before theyr fall Most blessed (chang'd from what they were at first) Are now most vile, and wretched, most accurst. Looke, what degree of Goodnes, things retaine Whilst they are good, being Ill, they so remaine. 85 But to proceed; By these, and like discourses (Whereat thy mayden muse may blush for shame) This Gaveston imbark'd mee in such Courses As caus'd my Fathers griefe, mine owne defame. Whilst I went on, not sensible of shame, Nor of my Fathers griefe, not heau'ns just doome Nor any future danger, that might Come. 86 O see, how soone our sweetest buds are blasted, How soone our fairest colours loose their flourish, How easily are the Seeds of vertue wasted? And noysome weeds of vice how much we nourish Which do ye Soule of her chief wealth impouerish. Youth (apt to stray) is easily led awry, VVe fall by Nature, what need Flatterie?
87 And yet, it hath too much, to worke vpon▪ The vnexperience of our younger yeares, The heat of bloud, the furie of affection, Vngrounded hopes, and vaine surmized feares. The courses entertain'd by like compeeres. Our selfeconceit, our Parents watchfull Eye. Nay, eu'n desert, make all for flatterie. 88 And soone it will the least aduantage find, Whereby it may creepe into mens conceit. Obseruing first, to what they are inclin'd. Which once perceiu'd, It fits the humour streight, Still keeping fashion, but still wanting weight. In complements most seemingly precise, And that's th' abused maske to blind weake eyes. 89 But like, s those diseases faster grow, Whose mouing causes our Complexions eed. So farre more dangerous is this priuate foe That doth attire himselfe in friendships weed, Then he that shewes his hate by open deed. For Armes, or Lawes, or Friends may fence the one The other God himselfe must shield, or none. 90 So Simon did the Troian State confound, So guilded Tombes are full of rotten Earth, So Crocodiles although they weepe, they wound, So Panthers circumuent with their sweet breath, So Syrens though they sing, their tunes are death. And yet, as fish bite most at hony-baytes Eu'n so are men most caught with sweet deceites.
91 Therefore be pleas'd to heare a plaine discourse. Suspect the tongue, that's still tun'd to the eare. Faire truth is not for nakednesse the worse But falshood many Ornaments must weare. Least all her foule deformities appeare. Which Art can flourish ouer, fit for Court, Whilst simple truth to deserts doth resort. 92 And this is that vast Sea of miserie In which, the greatest Monarks most are drown'd, That they are seldome free from flatterie. Pretences being colourably found, To sooth that humour, that doth most abound. And so the Prince runs on from ill, to worse. But still perswaded best of his bad course. 93 VVhereby the danger on himselfe doth fall. The gaine vnto the Fauorie accrewes. For wronged Subjects, being grieu'd withall. Forgetting duty, impiously pursues Meanes o reuenge: whence danger oft insues. Meane while the man, that fed the humour so Falls off perhaps, and sapes the comming blow. 94 Therefore let Kings prefer them, that are plaine. And make those great, that doe not greatnes feare. Such serue their Lords for loue, and not for gaine. The'are Iewels of the heart, not of the eare. They will discouer dangers, that are neare. VVhen oyled tongues will still make all secure, "And carelesse greatnesse euer stands vnsure.
95 But why should I giue rules, when I kept none? Why should I teach, and neuer could obey? Onely for this: where I was ouerthrowne Others may Looke, least they bee cast away. And they that make this vse, thrice happie they. Because, by others wracks themselues may reade. How to preuent theyr owne mishaps with heed. 96 Sooth'd thus in sinne, all goodnesse was forgotten, My Fathers words of no esteeme were growne. And I that scarce seem'd ripe, was straight found rotten. Like fruit that is frō tree vntimely blown. But that tooke root, which Gaveston had sowen. And sprouted so, that It did seed at last: So worthlesse weeds (we see) do grow too fast. 97 For at the first, I was asham'd of Sinne, But sinne did say, my greatest sinne was shame. Then by degrees I did delight therein; And from Delight, I did desire the same. And my Desires so prosperously did frame. That now the chiefest Quere, was this One. Whether were worse my Selfe, or Gaveston. 98 It is a certaine truth: Men doe not touch The highest point of wickednesse at first. "Habites or good, or bad, proue to bee such "By often vse, Sinne thriues as It is nurst. And therefore, kill this Cocatrice (accurst) Whil'st 'tis an Egge; for if It hatch, and grow, It will at last proue a commanding Foe.
99 This did my aged Father well perceiue, And with sad teares (the Messengers of moane) He did bwayle himselfe, that he should leaue His Crowne to me, and me to (Gaueston) I in my sonne (saith he) am ouerthrowne. My blisse my bane; my peace procures my strife. First Edward dyes, in Second Edwards life. 100 To bee a Father was my onely Ioy And now my griefe it is, to bee a Father: Why should my solace turne to mine annoy? Why planted I Harts-ease, and Rue must gather? As I did sow, I should haue reaped rather. My hopefull haruest proues but baleful weeds, And for the bloud I gaue, my heart now bleeds. 101 For (Oh) how neere a touch doth Nature giue? How searching are the sufferings of our blood? How much the Fathers soule doth joy, or grieue, When he doth see his Issues bad, or good, Is hard of any to bee vnderstood Except by such, whose feeling bowels find, What deepe Impressions do proceed from kind. 102 Wise was the Prince, who playing with his Son, And teaching him to ride vpon a Reed. To whom a great Ambassador did come, And seem'd to blush at his so childish deed. Doe not (quoth he) to censure it proceed. I onely craue a respite of thy doome. Till thou thy selfe art Father of a Sonne.
103 Inferring, that there is a secret loue, Which vntouch'd hearts can hardly comprehend. Would God, the same reciprocall might proue▪ Oh that kind Nature did sometimes ascend. Parents too oft in Indulgence offend But Sonnes more oft in duty proue defectiue. These weyward times are grown so vnrespectiue. 104 Nature so wrought, that Cressas Sonne cry'd out, Who from his birth before had not spoke word. When he did see a Souldier goe about, To kill the King his Father, with a sword. Could Nature then such Presidents afford? Was she so powerfull then, now weakned so. That Sonnes themselues, do work their Fathers woe? 105 Or was he not my Sonne? did brutish lust So fire the affections of my deerest Queene That sh vnto my bed should proue vniust? And by some other, not my selfe should teeme? O farre bee't from my soule, so to misdeeme. Sweet flower of Castile, sacred was thy vow, If euer wife were true, that wie wert thou. 106 O Elianor, thou wert too good a piece, Once to admit the smallest shew touch, Take all the chastest Dames of Rome, or Greece, VVhereof fore-going Ages speake so much, They can but say at best, That they were such As I knew thee to bee: and perhaps too. Time more then Truth permits them so to doe.
107 Ill gouern'd Ned, although my soule doth hate Thy vitious Errors, as the Stigian floud, Which will proue dangerous to thy selfe, & State, Yet Nature workes so much vpon my blood, As that I cannot choose, but wish thy good. If euer thou in Himens bands be ty'd. Such as thy Mother was, such be thy Bride. 108 And in that onely wish Included is The chiefest, choysest good, that thou can'st find. Summa Totalis of all earthly blisse Is such a wise, as is both wise, and kind. Chast, sober, silent, faire in face, and mind. And such was she: when therfore thou dost erre, 'Tis from thy selfe alone, and not from her. 109 But foolish man why doe I blame my Sonne? Whose yet vnknowing yeeres by Ill adice Being led away: A dangerous course doth run. For Youths hot bloud forgets old Ages yee▪ And while his hand is in, doth throw the dice At all that pleasure sets: and thinks to gaine▪ If with the Bye he can discharge the maine. 110 Sweet Ned, I blame not thee, but Gaueston. For he it is that sitteth at the helme And steeres thy course, with his wind thou art blowne Nor will he leaue, till he doth ouerwhelme In deepest gulfe, thy selfe, and all this Realme, For stirring spirits doe troubled streames desire. And then thriue best, when all is set on fire.
111 Obserue with all those States that doe decline, How apt they alwayes are for Innouation. How much they doe 'gainst publike good repine, And hopefully expect an Alteration. That whil'st things are vnsetled▪ out of fashion. They may close vp the wounds they had before, And by that meanes their priuate wants restore. 112 Therefore let those that haue a grounded State. And may liue well, joyne close in any wise Against all such, as seeke to Innouate, If not in duty, yet in sound aduice To keepe such downe, as hope perhaps to rise Vpon their ruines, whose reuenewes may Cut short their liues, sure proue the spoilers pray. 113 And with these linke such Spirits as faine would rise, But are by former great. Ones still supprest, And such doe dangerous Stratagems deuise, Nor will their Eager hopes affor'd them rest. But mount they must, who-euer be deprest. And little doe they force the States confusion. So thereby they to greatnes make Intrusion. 114 And to this End, they are obsequious still, They sooth, they fawne, they seeme officious. They fit themselues to their great mouers will. Bee't good, or bad, just, or Iniurious. They serue eu'n turnes base, and luxurious But I'le prouide a wholesom Mithredate So to preuent the poysons of the State.
115 And firmely settled in this resolution, By strict command was Gaueston exil'd. begg'd of him to stop the Execution. But then my Father shak'd his head, and smil'd, O Ned (saith he) how much art thou beguil'd To foster that which will thy downe-fall be, And warme the Snake, that will inuenom thee. 116 wish'd my selfe an Eccho at that word, That I might boldly then haue answered: Thee For neuer was there sharpest-edged sword That wounded more, thē that same wounded me. But goe he must, such was the King decree. And when he went, then dy'd my bloud-lesse heart, So doth the Body from the soule depart. 117 The former times haue held it policie That some offendors should abjure the Land, But 'tis indeed an idle vanitie. And with no rules of regiment can stand, For if the matter be with Iudgement scann'd It will appeare to men considerate That Abiuration hurts both Prince and State. 118 I doe not meane of men, that are not mist, (For who respects the hummings of a Gnat) Such atomy may wander where they list, Their muddie paes can neither frame the plat, Nor feeble hands worke danger to the State, Lt men of Note be mark'd; and wary heed Be had of them, that may disturbance breed.
119 And 'tis not safe, to banish such an-One As may find meanes to worke his owne returne. So * Bolenbroke stept into * RichardsRich. 2. throne. Hen▪ And hee had leisure, afterwards to mourne His foolish fault: Such med'cines may adjourne The present paine a while: But makes the sore To ake more felly, then It did before. 120 Mild drugs may stirre the humours that abound, But will not quite expell the growing Ill; The Root and Body both remaining sound Although the tree be lopt, It thriues It still. And when thou hast the Axe, to vse at will Strike at the Root; and fell it to the ground, Rather then pare the boughes & branches round 121 For 'tis lost labour, to begin with them. They needs must wither, if the other dye. And doe not feare, though vulgar breath condemn Thy Cariage in such courses, whose weake Eye "Lookes at the present only: And thereby Values the rest: "Doe thou make good thy end "The common sort will euer be thy friend. 122 Wise Long-shankes, yet in this thou wert not wise▪ If thou hadst tooke the head of Gaveston, Those subsequent disasters that did rise From him, had bin preuented euery-one: Thy Sonne had not bin shouldred from his throne▪ Thy people slaine, nor Realme to ruine brought But so God workes, till all his will be wrought.
123 "And the whole List of Nature serues his will, "Our selues are Instruments vnto his ends. "Our most reserued drifts hee vseth still. "To worke those purposes, which hee Intends; "Though our deuices ayme at other ends. "He is the Master wheele, and makes vs strike No otherwise, then hee himselfe doth like. 124 My Gaveston thus driu'n into exile, My selfe Committed like a Captiue thrall; (For so my Father kept mee short a while) With bitter Curses I did banne them all, I dranke my Teares, and fed vpon my Gall. I chaf'd, and storm'd, yet could I not preuaile. "Needs must: will be, faine would: doth often faile. 125 Then were my Colours turn'd to mournfull blacke And I put on the Liuerie of Care. Like to the hopelesse Sea-man in a wracke That sees the greedy waes deuour his share; No otherwise, did thoughtfull Edward fare. When sad remembrance in my soule did plant His lot, my losse; His woe, my pleasures want. 126 The chiefest Cordiall of my grieued Soule, The one, and only Period of my paine. Was this: That Death (admitting no Controule) Would end my Fathers wrath, his Life, his Raigne And then (thought I) Ned will haue Pierce again. When Englands Crowne shall make a Ioue of me Then Gaveston my Ganimed shall bee.
127 As I did hope, so had my hopes successe. For shortly after dy'd my noble Sire. Whil'st he prepar'd the Scos for to suppresse. Low now (quoth I) I haue my hearts desire. Long-shankes is dead: His water, Ayre, and fire Are turn'd to Earth: and earthy might he bee, That on the Earth did keepe a Crown from me▪ 128 Yet in that sad dismayfull houre of dying, No griefe did him more feelingly possesse, Then that his vicious Sonne all vertue flying Should ruine that, by ryot, and excesse. Which he had built with so great carefulnesse. And therefore, for to weane me from such Sins. These well tun'd Notes this dying Swan begins. 129 My Sonne (quoth he) (for in that name of zeale My words may proue of more effectuall power) Why should'st thou so with thy sicke Father deale? As to torment him in his parting houre. Whose life hath had his portion full of sower. And yet to make my measure fuller still, My Sonne doth daily adde vnto my ill, 130 I know what 'tis eu'n some-times by extreames To keepe the Crowne vpright vpon the head. I know the troubled sleeps and fearefull dreames▪ That houer still about a Princely bed. "The worme of greatnesse (Iealousie) is bred. "Out of it selfe; yet this I know withall, Our powerfull sway doth sweeten all our gall.
131 But for thy selfe, and for my heart-breake griefe That out of thy sin-ship-wrack'd youth doth grow No Circumstance yeelds colour of reliefe. The cause excuselesse, Limitlesse the woe That doth from thy full Sea of follies flow. For foulest faults proceed from powerfull Ill. And Subiects sort themselues to Princes still: 132 Thou do'st not onely by thy vicious liuing Bereaue thy Soule of blisse, which vertue wins. But also, by the ill-example giuing Thou do'st incite weake mindes vnto like sinnes. "For certainely, the Subiect euer swims Iust with the streame: so growing like to thee. A generall Deluge of all sinne will bee. 133 Much better had It bin: Thou hadst not bin, Then that thy being should so ruine all. O wherefore was thy birth-day euer seene? If by thy life, The State It selfe doth fall. To those foule sins, which wrath from Heau'n doe call. By whose just doome such states confounded are By forreine fury, or domesticke warre. 134 For when the seed of sin to ripenesse growes Then Iustice with a sythe doth mow It downe This, this It is, that Kingdomes ouerthrowes. Layes wast the fields, vnpeoples euery Towne. Or if not so, disorders yet the Crowne. VVhich, though It proue no generall desolation Yet many mischiefes grow by Innouation.
135 When my heau'n-seeking soule shall leaue her Inn, And this my flesh clos'd in a house of Clay. Then will my shame suruiue me in thy sinne. And babes vnborne, will ban my birth, and say; His wretched life, gaue life to our decay. And had no other ill by him bin done. He sinn'd too much, in getting such a Sonne. 136 Did I for this endure the dust and Sunne? Dislodge at mid-night, March in mid-dayes heate? Were Turkish, French, VVelch, Scottish Trophees wō Was all my care imploy'd, to make thee great, That sinne might dispossesse thee of thy Seat? O then, I see that greatnesse soone is gone, VVhen God drawes not the plot, man builds vpon. 137 And my devining Solue doth sadl see Thy Ruine in thy ryot: Ah my Ned VVhen I am gone, a King then shalt thou be, But if thou still be with thy passions led, Thou wilt not keepe the Crowne vpon thy head. My Soule now parting from her earthly Cage Fore-tels thee so in her Propheticke rage. 138 And those predictions seldome vse to faile VVhich she vnfolds in her last extasie. Shee's ready now to quit her fleshly jayle And now she tels thee with free libertie Thy Raigne, thy life will end in miserie, If still thou keep'st the wayes, thou now art in. And dost not leaue thy mind, and meanes to sin.
139 VVell Son I feele my faultering tongue doth faile, Therefore this short Abridgement I doe make. Feare God, Loue goodnesse, let the right preaile. Shun sodaine courses, Parasites forsake. Disfauour not thy Peeres, their Councels take In thy designes: Reuoke not Gaueston, For he will proue the Canker of thy Throne. 140 Pursue those Scottish warres I haue in hand. And for because my Soule did make a vow Vnto my God: to serue in Holy-Land. From which, This sicknesse Interdicts me now, Though death disable me, yet doe it thou. Embowell me, and thither beare my heart, That in that worthy worke I may haue part. 141 And you my Lords (speaking vnto his Peeres) Whose wealth, and greatnes I haue much Increas'd Bee Fathers to my Sonnes vntored yeeres. Loue him for me, though Long-shanks be deceas'd. Let Gauestons exile be not releas'd. Lest his repeale occasion ciuill strife And so first Edward ends both speech, and life. 142 Thus death, that Herald that eu'n Kings doth sum∣mon, The Pursiuan, that doth attatch proud Peeres. The Cittie-Sergeant, whose arrest is Common, The errant-Bayliffe, that one Processe beares, And no place bounds, but serues it in all shires. The generall Surueyor of each-one Did bring my Father to his longest home.
143 Whose obsequies, and Ceremonies done. Thē I was crown'd: me thought the Sun did dance. And that faire Thames with siluer streams did run. Me thought, the Stars did all applaud the chance, That did my State vnto a Crowne aduance. Smile Starres, dance Sunne, and Riuer run with mirth, Carnaruan Edward is a God on Earth. 144 But all the Starres to blazing Comets turn'd, Whose sad vprise presag'd my dreatie fate. The Riuers seem'd, as if they wept, and Mourn'd. The Sun did neuer shine vpon my state. Starres, streames, and Sun, saw me vnfortunate. Disastrous man, so borne to suffer wracke, As is the Aethiop to be alwayes blacke. 145 Obserue the man, whom fates haue slau'd to griefe See how the wretch, that's destin'd Fortunes foe Will be a rub, to turne away reliefe Eu'n from himselfe, and worke his owne-wrought woe. Harme after him: he after harme shall goe. (Fore-spoken man) he's neuer but succeslesse, Himselfe his hurt, and yet his hurt redreslesse. 146 Nay eu'n those very meanes which he shall vse In good discretion to preuent the clap Shalbe returned vnto his abuse. And serue for pullies of his owne mishap. So though he see, he shall not shun the trap. And if his ruine were not ripe before, His owne designes shall hasten It the more.
147 The King of *ALEXAN∣DER Epiro Epire, fearing death at home. Fore-warn'd thereof by former Prophesie. To Italie forthwith must needs be gone. So to preuent his fate by policie. But Still hee's followed by his destinie. In Italie he findes an Acharon, The fatall flood, from which he would be gone. 148 Fourth Henrie was by some blind Bard fore-told, That he should neuer dye, till he had seene Ierusalem: fourth Henry will be old. Ierusalem for him shall be vnseene. No, he shall see it, when he least doth weene. He sownes at prayers, and by religious men Is streight conuey'd vnto Ierusalem. 149 (So was the Chamber cal'd, where he was lay'd) And shortly after dy'd the noble King. "In vaine man striues: the heau'ns will be obay'd. "We may fore-know, but not preuent a thing. "Our selues will neuer cease vntill we bring "Our Fates to full effect: and what we doe "Shall be but lines, to leade vs thereunto. 150 For first, I doe those Counsellors remoue That in my Fathers time had borne most sway. Whereby I did disarme me of their Loue, To practices, and discontents made way. Expose my selfe to Enuy: open lay To disaduantage, wanting their aduice, Whom long experience had made deeply wise.
151 Besides, I did the publike State some wrong. So to cast off those grounded Polititians. Who knew to gouerne, by commanding long. Had seene, and well obseru'd mens dispositions. And so could tell, when, where, how Impositions Were to be rais'd: how to auoyd offence. How to gaine men, & ends with faire pretence. 152 Who likewise knew, how other Kingdomes stood, The concordances of each neighbouring state How Realmes best correspond for eythers good. How to make Leagues, how to negotiate. When to breake off, when to Incorporate. How farre Remotes, and neere-Confiners too. Are to be weigh'd, as they haue meanes to doe. 153 'Tis not the practice of a day, or twaine. 'Tis not the Schoole, or Sophisters debate. 'Tis not the froth of euery working braine. 'Tis not the start into a neighbouring State. That works men fit to beare a Kingdomes weight. When men are fully made, imploy them then, "For 'tis an Art of Arts to gouern men. 154 Therefore I lay It for a certaine ground, Which new-made Princes must not violate (Except they will the Common-wealth confound Not to discard those men, that know the State. Whose long experience doth ingenerate A true, and readie Method to command. Both for the Princes good, and for the Land.
155 What got the youthfull Sonne of Soloman By his neglect of that Sage-sound aduice VVhich from his Fathers Councellors did come? Did It not turne vnto his prejudice? Did not ten Tribes fall from him in a trice? VVhich neuer could be glew'd againe in one After that rupture and disunion, 156 Besides this fault, scarce settled in my State: I streight recall'd exiled Gaueston. Who by my many fauours grew so great, That I did seeme for him, to liue alone. I Alexander: He Hephestion. O no, I wrong them to vsurpe their names, Our loues were like, but farre vnlike our fames. 157 Here I did violate my Fathers will, And all respect of dutie did despise. "To wrong the dead, is Sacraligious Ill, A clog which on the Conscience euer lyes. And at the latest gaspe for vengeance cryes. VVhat fears, how many doubts lurk close wthin That restlesse soule, that's guiltie of this Sinne? 158 VVhen all his joynts are rack'd with dying paine. VVith cold dead sweat all couer'd ouer quite. What thorny thoughts will thē distract his brain? How shall he dare t' approach his fathers sight? VVhose dying words he liuing set so light. He'l feare his friends, suspect his wife, and Son, And sighing thinke: They'l doe as I haue done.
159 It is too Common, to betray the trust That is in friends by Testators repos'd. But marke Gods Iudgements, how seuere, how just. How to the Nature of the Sinne dispos'd, Eu'n I my selfe was by my Sonne depos'd. I that infring'd my dying Fathers best, Was in my life, by my owne Sonne distrest. 160 Me, that did wrong a Sire, a Sonne did wrong. I that did shew my selfe degenerate As I had sowen, so did I reape er'e-long, Such sinne It is▪ our Faith to violate. O deepest doome, of all fore-seeing fate How wisely are thy fearefull Iudgements fitted. To punish sinne, as Sinne was first Committed. 161 The Gyants heap't vp hills, to climbe the Sky, I honours heap'd, that Gaueston might climbe, They did contend with Ioue, and fell thereby. He with my Peeres, and perish'd in his prime. They thriu'd at first, but fell in after time. His Prologue sweet, but sad was his last Act. So fairest glasse (men say) is soonest crackt. 162 These were the honours, that he did attaine, The Earle of Cornewall, and the Lord of Man, Chiefe Secretarie, Lord great Chamberlaine. And for his wife he Glosters sister wan▪ Aspiring men, see how great Monarchs Can. Aduance their states, whom they do daine to fa∣uor. "Who serues y• King, doth seldom lose his labor.
163 Though Poets fictions seeme to sauour much Of Idle Errour, yet they haue their sence. King Midas turn'd to Gold all hee did touch. The Morall this: The fauour of a Prince His gracious touch may gild without offence The greatest wants: and make him for to soare A loftie Pitch, that flagg'd the wing before. 164 Not all the painfull passages one spends In serious Contemplation of deepe Arts, Nor any-one Imployment so commends The Agent (though a man of rarest parts) As when the Prince but One sweet smile Imparts One Looke of Loue, One Eye-glance of delight Hath power to change darke Clouds, to Sunnes most bright. 165 The Eyes of Kings, are more then simply Eyes They are the Starres that doe predominate Th' affayres of men, and in theyr Influence lyes The good, or bad of euery-ones estate. They are the Primum Mobile of Fate. They whirle about our Fortunes as they list. And as they fauour, men are Curst, or Blist. 166 A Kings smooth brow, Is the true dwelling place Of Honour, wealth, dependancie, respect. And in his frowning fore-head Liues disgrace, Death, Exile, want, a generall neglect, A world of wrongs let that poore wretch expect. Bee it: All Riuers to the Sea must runne. And euery Light receiue light from the Sunne.
167 Let them bee great, whom Kings resolue to grace, It is a Priuiledge, that is theyr owne. To rayse such as they please to wealth, or place, Is truely proper to the Kingly throne And hath not bin deny'd to any-One. Lewes th' eleuenth did say hee spent his Raigne, In making, and in marring men againe. 168 Some by the Schoole, some by ye Lawes do mount, Some by the Sword, and some by Nauigation. All streames haue heads, though not the selfe-same fount; Shall onely Kings admit a Limitation How high, for what desert, or of what Nation They shall advance? It were a wretched thing On that Condition to become a King. 169 To make new Creatures, Is the Princes due, And without murmur let him haue his owne. The danger onely Is to him that's new, For Enuie euer waytes on such an-One Both from those men, that are not so well growne, And from great houses too, who streight wil feare Lest such new Stars should thrust them frō they Spheare 170 And those which once haue got the highest staire Will keep them downe, that mount with too much hast▪ 'Tis best (say some) to rise but soft and faire. If thou wilt gaine thy journies end at last, Tyre not thy meanes by posting ouer-fast. Stirre like a Dyall, vnperceiu'd to moue: So shalt thou gather strength, and purchase loue▪
171 And therefore, they that found a Familie, Must gather wealth, liue vnder theyr estates, Make great pretences of Humilitie. Ally them-selues with grac'd Confederates, Serue Great mens turnes, so to avoyd theyr hates. For Cerberus with Hony-sops was pleas'd, And Malice must with Mildnes bee appeas'd. 172 Then let It bee his worke, that next succeeds To rayse him-selfe vnto a farther height, By home-Imployments, or by forreine deeds. Or by vnlading some of that rich fraight Of wealth, wch he had stor'd: And that wil streight Bring Honour to his house: That golden key To all designes opens a ready way. 173 Nor shall ee find such eager Opposition, Time hauing worne out all his Fathers foes. Or else perhaps altred theyr dispositions By Guifts, by Matches, by Obsequious showes, Or else perchance for feare of future blowes. And so some few discents from heyre to heyre The newnesse of the House will varnish faire. 174 Where sodaine Greatnes ruin'd Gaveston, Whom I too much preferr'd before my Peeres, Who did possesse mee more then any One, From whence; grew many jealousies and feares Close discontents, which at first appeares Of little moment, worthlesse of respect, But prou'd such skarres, as wee did least expect.
175 It is the praise and blessing of the Sunne To make his heate, and light both generall; Princes are Sunnes, and both must freely runne An open Course, and not bee seuerall Vnto some few, but common vnto all. The poorest he that breathes, this Song may sing Wee all haue Interest in the Ayre and King. 176 And this too much did speake my heady passion, Who like pure water should haue had no tast, This Error did my gouernment disfashion That Gaveston vnworthily was grac'd. And made too great a monster, huge, and vast; Who in this growth being vnproportionall, Became offensiue to himselfe, and all. 177 The Court, which in my Fathers life-time seem'd A Senate-house of siluer-headed Sages. Might now a pompous Theater bee deem'd Pester'd with Panders, Players, and with Pages. Of my ensuing fall, too true presages. And yet in shew, It seemed fairer farre, So Comets glister more then any Starre. 178 But (O) the quiet of that happie Land. Where aged Nestors beare ye chiefest sway. Where strength of mind, more rules then force of hand▪ Where Old men bid, and Young men do obey, Where Ages winter guideth youths sweet May. But when the foot, or hand Commands the head, The Body then is many wayes misled.
179 Let siluer hayre, and long-experienc'd Age Bee sole directors of each enterprize. Let youth bee as an Actor on the Stage, To execute, what stayder-heads deuise; For Youth is Actiue, Age discreet, and wise. Youth is more daring, but precipitate. Age more Iudicious, and considerate. 180 Yet should not Statists bee too-aged men, Because, by too much time theyr spirits decay; They Earthy grow, and Melancloly then Heauie, and dull (theyr Edge being worne away) Weyward, and teachy, wrangling all the day; Full of moositie, and which is worse, Extreamly giu'n to gripe, and fill the purse. 181 Besides, wee see, some men are ripe betimes, Like Summer fruit, soone pleasing to the tast. And if those Spirits in whom such vertue shines May bee with Greatnes, and Imployments grac'd They Come to full maturitie at last, Men of exceeding worth, when they are growne. Both for their Countries good, & for their owne. 182 But to my Selfe: Who did neglect my Peeres, And only did divote my selfe to pleasure. Lou'd I? Why Loue it selfe loues youthfull yeres. Spent I? Why Kings should not be laues to trea∣sure. Heard I not Subiects suits? I had no leisure. Did I neglect my Peeres conuerse? What then? Ioue is not ty'd, to sort him-selfe with men.
183 When they did say that Scottish Bruce did burne My Northerne borders, and did wast the same. Then sighing I to Gaveston would turne, And say (sweet Pierce) my selfe feels fancies flame. I saw, I loue, I dye for such a Dame. Cupid (I feare) to mee a Bruce will proue, My Holds by him, my heart is fir'd by Loue. 184 With these, and many more fantasticke toyes I shifted-off my Councell, when they came. I had not time enough to spend in joyes, Why should I spare one minute from the same. Let them that list, by warres goe out for fame I force it not, giue mee those pleasing warres; Where blowes are giu'n, but such as cause no scarres. 185 But when the field, is to a field bed turn'd. When Eyes like sharpest Lances pierce, yet please. Whē amorous Harts with equall flames are burn'd. When Foes lye downe, our furie to appease, And lips on lips redouble blowes of ease. When braue assaults are not by Death controll'd, In such a band who would not bee inroll'd. 186 The Roman Monster Heliogabilus. And Persian Xerxes neuer fortunate; Might well bee thought to liue againe in vs, Wee priz'd our Pleasures at so high a Rate. Such was our sad, and still-succeslesse Fate. In Peace, our Faults procured our decayes, In Warre, our Fortunes made vs Run-awayes.
187 The lucke-lesse Battels fought, whil'st I did Raigne With Robert Bruce, that noble English-Scot. Sad Monuments vnto the world remaine, "That vicious Life with Monarchs thriueth not; "For Sin and shame are ty'd with Gordions knot: "And those Designes, do proue succeslesse quite, "That are Contriu'd by men drown'd in delight. 188 Marke but the Maps of all Antiquitie. True Registers, vnfalsify'd Records, The voyce of Time (which we call Historie) And 'twill be found, that euery Age affords Plentie of proofe to fortifie my words. Each place, each time do pregnant witnes beare, Who Riot most, to Ruine are most neare. 189 When Sinne did ouer flow, the Deluge Came. Th' Assirians then did loose theyr Monarchy When theyr last * King did liue most out of frameSARDANA∣PALVS. And was o're-whelm'd with Sensualitie. The Persians then did wracke theyr Empirie. When wealth, & Lust, and ease did most abound Which also did the Roman State confound. 190 The Danes did first set footing in this Land, Because Lord Buerus wife was rauish'd here. The Saxon forces got the vpper-hand, When Vortiger held Hengists * Daughter deare.ROVVEN. And still our Realme to ruine hath bin neare When ripened Sin hath gathered strongest head. So stalled Steeres are to the shambles led.
191 Thus Edward sayd: And this our Age hath seen Like Instance, of a neere-confining State, Neuer was France more deadly sicke of sinne. Neuer was Goodnes growne more out of date. Neuer did Princes more preposterate Their priuate liues, and publicke regiment. And as they Liu'd so dy'd Impenitent. 192 Neuer Religion seru'd for more pretences. Neuer were Nobles more ambitious. Neuer like Inundation of offenccs. Neuer were Church-men lesse religious. Neuer were Commons more seditious. Such plotting, Counterplotting policies, Such massacres, such barbarous Cruelties. 193 Such Impious Courses, such Impunitie Neuer was seene, lesse blushing, and more shame▪ Neuer had Sinne so great Immunitie. Neuer was euer all so out of frame As in those wretched times: Till the fierce flame▪ Of Ciuill furie, and the forreigne foe Did make poore France the stage of tragick wo 194 And without doubt, had not that * Man of men:HENRY, 4. the Great. The mightie Atlas of that falling State Bin rays'd by God, to giue new life, eu'n then That famous Kingdome of so ancient date By home ambition, and by forreigne hate Had breath'd her last, being Sin-sick vnto deat And much a doe there was, to giue her breath.
195 But that great Spirit was a blest instrument To giue new strength vnto much weakned France. That Heau'n-blest Country neuer shall repent That shee did Henry Burbon so aduance. For next to God, It was his happie chance By matchlesse vertue to reuiue againe That sinking State which Sin had almost slaine. 196 "For still the eye of wrath doth ouer-looke "The wicked actions of obdurate men, "The Court of heau'n doth keep a titeling book, "VVherein are entred all our sinnes, and when "The score is full, let's looke for payment then. And O, what Prince what Cōmonwealth can stand When God doth scourge it with a rigorous hand. 197 And let vs make this vse of their neere-wracke, "Forbeare to sinne, for feare of punishment. "God is not senselesse, though he seeme to flacke. "He giues vs day, in hope we will repent; "But vse growes more, the longer debts are lent▪ And God forbeares, and winkes at our abuse "That we might haue lesse colour of excuse. 198 I could not choose, when I had yoak't my teame, But make this furrow to inrich my field. I now returne to my Intended Theame. And Edward wishes, that his Raigne might yield Fit Presidents for Princes, how to weild. That weightie Prouince, which they do sustain. And thus continues his discourse againe.
199 VVhen my chiefe Peeres did see, how things mis∣chance And those mischances did Impute to Sinne. My Sinne to him, whom I had so aduanced, To banish him againe, they then begin, And made my selfe to haue a hand therein▪ Their force, my feare compell'd me thereunto, "'Tis hard, when Princes are inforc'd to doe. 200 It is the chiefest good, of Kingly Raigne That it is free, from base compelling feare. And 'tis againe the Kingdomes chiefest bane Not to admit wise Councll to the Eare. Away with Awe: hold admonition deare, "Feares figure ne're should meet with Kingly Eyes, "But on the Backes o flying Enemies. 201 But the faire louely picture of Aduice Should still be placed in the Princes sight. Thrice happie Kings that are both stout, and wise, You scorne Controule, but set not Councell light Not feare, but vertue makes you to doe right. Y'are, Kings indeed: and may securely rest Whilst feares are lod'gd within a weaker brest 202 Te Solum vercor: Is a Princely word Speaking to him, that Is Lord Paramount And supreame Princes so should beare the sword As but to him, they need giue no account. Which they shall do, If (as they do Surmount In greatnes (so in goodnes they excell, 'Tis certaine: Hee rules all, that governs well.
203 And none doth so, but the selfe-governor That his owne priuate passions can Command. Which make a slaue, eu'n of an Emperor, If once they grow, to get the vpper hand. And soone deepe searching Spirits will vnderstand And find a Prince that's weake: and ride him so, That he must pace, as they will haue him goe. 204 Whereof my selfe may be a President Who was so ouer-aw'd by my great Peeres That Gaveston was doom'd to banishment, And now my Soule (full fraught with griefes, and feares Was in her motions restlesse (like the Spheares But not so fix'd) Now go he shold: now shold not. So woman like I would: and streight I would not. 205 Yet e're he went, (as goe he must, and did) Deare Prince (saith he) wherein haue I misdon? That I am banish'd thus? Doth Edward bid, His poore (yet but his owne poore Pierce) to shun His gracious sight? must I from England run? He bids: I must: Farewell: yet thinke of me. Though bodie goes, yet stayes my Soule with thee. 206 What were these words, but each to me a wound? Whereat my very life-bloud gashed out. I would haue spoke: but words with tears drown'd Whilst giddy passion hurl'd my braines about. Confusedly I spake: O do not doubt: Those cursed Peeres: It is not long of me Though Body staies, yet goes my Soule wth thee.
207 Mourne not (sweet Prince) saith he: O doe not mourne. Let neuer teares disgrace those gracefull eyes: Is not enough, that I am thus forlorne? Must woes from me, (as clouds from Sea) arise? My deare, deare Liege, let it at least suffice, That still you haue the better part of me My Body they command, my Soule is free. 208 Cease, cease my Pierce, thy tongue doth wound my heart. I grieue to see: because I see thy griefe. Farewell: and yet me thinks we should not part. And yet we must: VVell: this be thy reliefe: Thou bear'st a fild of gold: A King in chiefe. Thou shalt be Irelands Gouernour for me. VVould'st thou might stay, or I might goe with thee. 209 At Parting, thus with wanton griefe we play'd. He went to Sea, and I to Sorrow went; And yet, my heate of lust was not allay'd. My treasure that to Ireland was sent. And there by Gaveston in triumphes spent. VVho now seem'd greater, then he was before, So vines being cut, increase, and thriue the more. 210 And heere my Peeres did in true Iudgment faile. So to remoue, not take him quite away. VVho once returning, needs must seeke to quaile The aduerse part: that labour'd his decay, Dead Dogs can neither barke, nor bite (men say) But angred Curres more fiercely still returne, And wronged mind with greater fury burne.
211 Better It is, still to dissemble hate Then first to enter into discontent, And leaue him great, whom thou did'st wrong of late VVho hauing meanes, and sharp'ned in Intent May easily worke some dangerous euent. Either strike not, or (else besure) strike so. That thou thy selfe need feare no after blow. 212 Besides, they did the more exasperate, By opposition, my inraged ire; And as for Gaveston, (whom they did hate) They did inflame me with a greater fire. His absence setting edge on my desire. "For Princes kept from what they doe affect, "Doe hurry to their ends without respect. 213 VVhat euer stops the Current of a Streame Is swept away with furious violence. "Force is effectlesse 'gainst a strong extreame, But if one will with labor, and expence Diuert the course, and turne the Channell thence. 'Tis possible, that he in time peuailes, For Art doth compasse, when resistance failes. 214 Philosophers doe hold, (and truely too) That lightning oft, (the sheath vntouch'd (y• blade Consumes: The reason why it doth so doe Is, by the one ther's small resistance made, Being full of Pores: Th' other hard to Inuade Doth set it selfe against that heau'nly shot VVhich quite consumes, because it pierceth not.
215 I cannot fit the awfull wrath of Kings More properly, then to this wondrous fire Which once inflam'd, consumes resisting things, Breakes vp the bounds, that limit their desire, And by depressing downe, still mounteth higher. "Whereas strong passion borne with patience, "Spends on It selfe, and dyes without offence. 216 My Peeres soone saw, which way the Hare did run, And therefore gaue consent to his repeale. Not Caesar (when Pharsalia field he won) Did triumph more then I, when they did Seale And did subscribe the ruine of our weale. Then all was well, whil'st all did well agree, But All prou'd Ill for all, and worst for mee. 217 For Gaveston after he did returne Of all my former fauors once possest, His full-sayl'd Fortunes held my Peeres in scorne, Nor could he any equall well digest, Though I was King in shew, in him did rest The Kingly power: all was at his Command, And nothing done, that did not passe his hand. 218 Such over-swelling greatnesse was the Cause That made my Peeres report: His cursed Dam To bee a Witch: And (that by force of Lawes, Shee suffring for't) was burned for the same And that her Sonne like practises did frame Vpon my selfe: and by such hellish Art Had skrew'd him selfe so farre into my heart.
219 It is too true, my dotage was extreame. And I did prize him at so high a Rate, That he, my Crowne, my life weigh'd at a beame, Aboue them both, I him did estimate. Which was indeed my follie, and his fate. But that the same was wrought by Magick Spell. Is such a Tale, as old wiues vse to tell. 220 Witch-craft may worke vpon the Body much, But there's no fascination of the mind. The Soule is free from any Mgicke touch. Nor can inchanting charmes or loose, or bind The powers and aculties thereto assign'd, Spirits may suggest, they may perswade to ill, But all their power cannot compell the will. 221 It is the sole Prerogatiue of Heau'n, 'Tis Gods peculiar, to command the heart. That damn'd Imposter had his power giu'n From the most high, e're he with all his Art Could worke on him, in whom he had most part. Seduced Ahab falls by his perswasion. But It is God, that first graunts the Commission. 222 The Prince of Darkenesse may corrupt the braine, And so worke strongly vpon th' Imagination, Which being abused, oft becomes most vaine In the conceiting a strange transmutation, Of It's owne selfe, into some wolvish fashion. Which is no other▪ (As our Doctors say) Then the disease call'd Lycantropia.
223 Hee may, (and doth oft times) delude the sight, By offring strange Phantasmaes to our Eyes. And then the Iudgement is peruerted quite; When 'tis seduc'd by such erronious Spies, As brings vs no Intelligence, but lyes. A thousand like deuises hee hath got To make vs thinke hee doth, what he doth not. 224 Besides, when any Errour is committed, Whereby wee may Incurre or losse, or shame. That wee our selues thereof may be acquitted, Wee are too ready to transferre the blame Vpon some Witch: That made vs doe the same. It is the vulgar Plea, that weake-ones vse, I was bewitch'd: I could nor will: nor chuse. 225 But my affection was not caus'd by Art The witch that wrought on mee, was in my brest. My Gaveston wholly possest my heart And that did make him swell aboue the rest, But 'tis not safe so high to build ones nest: For bubbles fullest blowne doe soonest breake, And Trees are euer at the top most weake. 226 Content doth seat It selfe in lowly dales Out of the dint of winds, and stormy showers. There sit, & sing melodious Nightingales, There run fresh cooling streams, there grow sweet flowers There heat and cold are fenc'd by shady bowers. And there is wealth at will: But this we know, The grasse is short, that on the hill doth grow.
227 O Gaveston! why do'st thou then aspire To bee so Great, when greatnesse stands on yee. If thou should'st slip, as now thy place is higher So will thy fall bee greater: In a trice Hee's downe that stands on Pinacles: Bee wise, Stand low, stand sure: But (oh) I speak in vaine "For men will mount, though sure to stoope a∣gaine. 228 How Gaveston (the third time banished) Did liue in Dutch-land, where hee found no rest. How hee return'd, How I as famished Did feed on him, as on some dainty feast. How ill my Peeres his presence did disgest, I doe but touch at: Now my Muse vnfold How till his fall hee bare him proud, and bold. 229 Suppose him spleenfull, melancholie, sad. And mee in my affections passionate. Thinke him reuengefull, thinke mee doting-mad; Thinke, how I lou'd, and thinke, how he did hate; And thinke him then, thus to expostulate. Grieu'd with precedent, fear'd wth future wrong Thus did this Syren tune his balefull song. 230 O King (no King) but shadow of a King; Nay, doe not frowne, but heare mee what I say, I speake in Zeale, (though harshly I doe sing) Thou op'st a gap vnto thine owne decay By suffring thy proud Peeres to beare such sway. For look how much ye shadowes length doth grow So much the Sunne declines, and goes more low.
231 Thy waxing is their waine: Thy Ebbe, their tide. When they are strongest, thou art weake and faint. Turne euery stone, to quell their growing pride. It fits not Kings to brooke the least restraint. Disgrace, Exile, close Durance, or Attaint For seeming Crimes, to bring them into hate These are the meanes to reassure thy State. 232 Now thou art King in shew, but not Indeed, Those pettie Pawnes do check, and mate thee too. All is reverst, that is by Thee decreed, They doe injoyne Thee what thou hast to doe, And what they will, thou art Compell'd vnto. But though thy pleasure bend another way Yet things must passe, as they are pleas'd to sway. 233 They haue Allyes, to strengthen theyr dissignes. They backe themselues with strong Conferates. Theyr seeming Zeale the vulgar vndermines, The wiser sort for feare insinuates; And so they gaine assurance of all States. Some by the glosse of faire deportment, and Some by a hard and ouer-awing hand. 234 Besides, they raise men, that are popular, And by their meanes the Peoples hearts they steale Them-selues seeme just, theyr courses regular, They make pretences (for the Common-weale) Of Reformation, of religious Zeale. And by these Colours which they doe pretend They bring theyr complots to successefull end.
235 But more then this: The wealth of all thy Land Is in theyr hand, or else at theyr dispose, Whereby they haue an absolute Command Of many Liues, which are maintayn'd by those Great bounties, which frō their abundance flowes. For they must needs remaine at their deuotion, That haue from them their being, & their motion. 236 These are the close Consumptions of thy State, VVhich by these Antidotes thou must restore. Bee seru'd by such, as thou hast rays'd of late, Aduance new Creatures, of no note before; And such will still depend on thee therefore. For wanting means, except thou grace them still They must remaine obliged to thy will. 237 Let them bee stirring Spirits of ayre and fire, Apt both to make, and to maintaine a Faction. Ambitious, Actiue, hungry to aspire. Not fool'd with feare, but bold for any action, True to theyr ends, but false in faith and paction; And such being grac'd and fauour'd by the time, VVill in despite of spightfull enuie Climbe. 234 VVhose grouth, thy Peeres will malice, and detest, And seeke to stop: Which they not brooking well Will nourish mutuall hatred in theyr brest; And rankerous Enuie in theyr soules will swell. From whence reuenge, and greedy thrist to quell The aduerse partie: Cannot but proceed. And so Confusion to them all Indeed.
239 Meane while, thou vnderhand must feed the flame And secretly, giue heart to eyther side. And which is weakest, leane thou to the same, Whereby thou shalt Confound the aduerse pride. And if thy doubling, chance to bee espy'd, Make it an open quarrell, and bee sure To rid them first, that may most harme procure. 240 This lesson was by Tarquine well exprest, When with his wand he did behead those flowers, That any way did ouer-grow the rest. As who should say: Bee jealous of great Powers, And Cut them downe, whose growth neare equals ours. For that same Throne is but a slipp'ry Seat, That suffers any to bee ouer-Great. 241 Make penall Lawes, to Cut off their retainers. Wrest from their hands all publick great cōmand. Grace them in shew, but not to make them gainers Keepe them aloofe, let them not vnderstand The Passages of State, at any hand. Doe not Commit thy forces to theyr trust, Least hauing minds, th'aue meanes to be vnjust. 242 Where e're they liue, (though they be far remou'd) Yet, let them bee survay'd with carefull Eye. Such as are neare to them, and dearely lou'd, To whom their Inward thoughts most open lye; VVinne them by guifts, and by close pollicie, To serue thy turne, with true Intelligence Of any thing, that may procure offence.
243 Gaine to thy selfe by all meanes (if thou can) His bosome friend, the Consort of his life. So did Sejanus (that deepe knowing man) Obtaine the Loue of Livia, Drusus wife, (VVith whom he liu'd in jealousie and strife) And by that course found meanes to make away His Opposite, who labour'd his decay. 244 If they doe sue, doe not thou favour then, Let all advancements bee deriu'd from thee. So shalt thou weane from them, the hearts of men, And they will onely thy dependants bee. For there men serue, where they preferment see. Lastly, what Stratagem thou dost Intend, Let shewes of vertue colour still thy end. 245 These are the baites, to fish for wisest Peeres, The yonglings may be caught with easier meanes. Let Syren pleasure loue theyr youthfull yeeres, Let Lust, expence, and riotous extreames, (To which their youth by course of Nature leanes) Let followers, change of beauties, pompous pride Infect their minds, and wrack their states beside. 246 Yet, If thou see a likely growing Plant (great) VVhose spreading branches may in time grow Lodge him at home, let him Imployment want, And vselesse wither in his Natiue seate; For Ease and rest will Chill his actiue heate, And lull'd in pleasures of a safe delight, Relinquish mounting thoughts of honour quite.
247 But if his Temper soare so high a Pitch, As that his working vertue must haue vent. Ingage him in some Action, by the which Hs haruest may bee Death, or Discontent. Yet make a shew to grace his hardiment, With highest honours, and so thrust him on To such Attempts, as death still waytes vpon. 248 Which (if hee misse, as Heau'n may blesse him so) Yet will the managing of such designes Afford fit matter for his ouerthrow: If prosperous fortune any wayes declines. For Commonly the vulgar sort repines Against all Actions, that doe want successe, And in theyr humours weigh the Agents lesse. 249 And so they lye more open to their wracke When they haue once Incurr'd a Common hate. And then some faire occasion cannot lacke Eyther by Death to cancell their liues date, Or at the least, to weaken so their state; As that the Prince need feare no future harme, That may proceed from theyr vnjoynted arme. 250 And hauing cleer'd thy selfe of such: Yet then (That thou must keepe thy Maiestie and State) Thou needs must entertaine some Noble men. But froathy bubbles full of Idle prate, Who study fashions, know their place (scarce that) All whose sweet worth is fetch'd from dead mens Tombes, And they them-selues lesse worthy then theyr Groomes.
251 Let them discourse of Kindred, and Allies, My Vncle Earle, my Cosi Duke, or so. Who liuing did this, or that enterprize. And tell how his great Grandsires horse did goe, When hee in France encountred with his Foe. Graco these (sweet Pr:) These thy Court-Cōmet bee And pray for thē: They'l neuer prey on thee. 252 Thus must thy twigges be lim'd, thy nets display'd To catch these birds, that soare vp to the Sunne. And when these wise foundations once are layd, 'Tis almost ended, what is well begun. Then art thou King Indeed: Then hast thou won Vnto thy selfe, an absolute estate. Till when, The Lyon liues but in the Grate. 253 Thus did this hellish Are cast the ball Or Discontent, betwixt mee, and my Peeres. Whose wicked Councels (flowing from the gall) Fill'd them with furie, mee with needlesse feares, And set vs altogether by the Eares; Whilst eyther side (neglecting Common good) Sought onely how to spill each others blood. 254 Ill Councels seeme most faire at the first shew And promise much, but in theyr managing, Many vnthought of difficulties grow. And in theyr end (which crowneth euery thing) They proue vnprosperous, and doe ruine bring. They haue an eae birth, Dangers attend Their progresse: And in wretchednes they end.
255 It is a wise mans part; soundly to weigh The Councels giu'n: And to obserue with-all The giuers priuate ends: because they may In their aduice vpon some passage fall, That may perhaps proue prejudiciall Vnto th' Aduice: They (their owne true friends) Ayming at nothing, but their priuate ends. 256 VVhich in this Councell giu'n by Gaveston VVas obvious for euery Eye to see. VVho in his spleenfull heart still thought vpon His owne reuenge, and so aduised mee To that, which with his ends did best agree. VVhich drew my Peeres to Arms, who vow'd e't long His head should answere for his cursed tongue. 256 I wish'd the trees were turn'd to armed troopes, And all the bowes were Pikes, their hearts to wound▪ All other birds the Princely Eagle stoops, The Lyon Roares: The Beasts shake at the sound, VVhy should not I their daring pride Confound? That saw cily vsurpe vpon my right, But Lyons are no Lyons wanting might. 258 My Peeres did strike, whilst that the steele was ho And Still came on to seize vpon their prey. VVhat should we doe, Complaine? It booted not. Goe leauie men? Our men did disobey. Sue for a Truce? They would not grant a day. Submit our selues, and so some pitty craue, Mee hurt they would not, him they would not saue
259 That Prince Indeed is to be held most wise That by his vertues doth his State secure. But hee's not so, that meanes to tyrannize And doth not secke by forces to assure His owne designes: for let him be most sure; A Prince that's weake, and yet doth gouerne ill, Is subiect to a thousand dangers still. 260 O Sacred Vertue, what a powerfull guard Art thou? What a strong Power of defence? All hearts are won to reuerence and regard Thy awfull worth: Thou neyther giu'st offence, Nor takest It: Men are not without sence, But they both see, and tast, and loue, and nourish, That Reall good, by which themselues do flou∣rish. 261 What vnderstanding Soule, that doth not know, And knowing loue, and louing will not spend The dearest bloud, that in his veines doth flow, To guard, and giue vnto that Prince, whose end To publike more then priuate good doth bend? Hee shall be euer able to command At will, his Subiects purse, his heart, his hand. 262 Flight was our best defence, and flye we did. So silly Doues before proud Falcons flye. Till Gaveston in Scarborow. Castle hid My Peeres surpriz'd: Whom War wicks Earle Sir Guy Beuchamp beheaded:The death of GAVE∣STON. So my Pierce did dye. A gloomie night conclude his faire morne And Fortunes darling ended Fortunes scorne.
263 O what is honour but an exhalation? A fierie meteor soone extinct and gone, A breath of People, and the Tongues relation, That streight is ended when the voyce is done, A morning dew, dry'd vp with miidday Sun. A ceasing sweet, like Danaes golden showre. That both began, and ended in an houre. 264 There breeds a little Beast, by Nilus Streames, VVhich being borne, when Phebus first doth rise, Growes Old, when he reflects his hottest beames, And when at night to VVesterne Seas he hies, Then life begins to faile, and streight It dyes. Borne, old, and dead, and all but in a day Such honour Is, so soone it weares away. 264 How much more happie is that sweet estate That neither creepes too low: nor soares too high? VVhich yields no matter to contempt, or hate. VVhich others not disdaine, nor yet enuie, VVhich neyther dos, nor takes an injurie. But liuing to it selfe in sweet Content, Is neither abiect, nor yet insolent. 266 He liues indeed, and spends his course of time In truest pleasure, that this life can yield. He hath set houres, to pray at Eu'n, and Prime Hee walkes abroad into his quiet field And studies, how his home affaires to wield. His Soule, and Body make one Common-wealth. His Councels Care, to keepe them both in health.
267 Hee feares no poysons in his meates and drinkes, Hee needs no guard, to watch about his bed. No teacher vndermines him, what he thinkes, No dangerous projects hammer in his head, Hee sits and sees how things are managed. And by obseruing, what hath earst beene done. He levels oft, how future things will run. 268 If he would liue with Kings, and mightie men, Hee doth converse with them in Historie. If he would know the Heau'nly motions, Then Hee takes his Globe, he reades Astronomie, His Mapps, and Chartes doe teach Cosmography. And whil'st in his safe Cell he studying stands, In one short houre, he sayles both Sea & Lands. 269 And tyr'd (perhaps) with the discouerie Of forreigne things, He comes more nearer home, Hee lookes into himselfe with carefull Eye, That little world, (that is indeed his owne) Hee trauailes-In, which being truely knowne, Affords enough, for wonder and delight, When he hath learn'd, to know himselfe aright. 270 How farre remou'd from this true Happinesse Are those high Climbers, that grow over-great? They alwayes eate the Bread of Carefulnesse, And sad suspition vshers in their meat. They sleepe on Thornes: (If any sleepe they get) Being troubled, both to deale, and to discard. Vngarded they doe feare, and feare their Guard.
271 O greatnes! though thou seem'st faire gilded. ouer Yet Inwardly, thou art but wretchednes. So haue I knowne, a Costlie habit couer A Body full of Soares, and filthinesse. Thy very marrow is but rottennesse. An Alpe to Clime, An yee to stand vpon, A very Hell of Hell's, if had, and gone. 272 The Earle of Cornewall (causer of the Warre) Thus being dead, they laid their weapons downe. Protesting all, They would not goe so farre As to be thought disloyall to the Crowne, But they did seeke the Realmes, and my Renowne. Which was eclips'd in him, whom they had slain, But Englands Spheare would now grow faire a∣gaine. 273 But still dark Clouds did shadow Englands Sphere, And bitter stormes, on gloomie Clouds dependant. Vnfortunate, and fatall euery yeere, Whil'st haples Edward was chief Lord ascendant. Malignant Starres on me were still attendant, Though at my birth Ioue smil'd with sweet aspect Yet froward Saturne did my life direct. 274 For though distasted Gaveston was dead, Yet Edward liu'd, and liu'd to farther Ill, For still I was by my affections led, I will'd no Law: yet vs'd no Law but will, My Peeres disgrac'd, my people grieued still. The Spencers, hey succeeded Gaveston. Ill chang'd to worse: and worst: two Ills for one
275 These Spencers (now the Subject of my Song) Discended of a Race of great esteeme. The elder Hugh (the Father) liued long A man of worth, and happie dayes had seene. Till his ambitious Sonne did over-weene. Whose greatnesse caus'd the Father to aspire, And at the last did wracke both Sonne, and Sire. 276 O what hast thou (Old man) to doe with Court? Thy Bookes, and Beads had better beene for thee. Liue still retyr'd, and doe not now resort To stormie tempest, Age doth Ill agree With great Concourses, and vulgar mutinee. It rather craues Immunitie, and rest, And peacefull ease, with tumults not distrest. 277 Whose joynts being rack't, and tortur'd with the Gout Can scarce endure the stirring of a straw Who being vnweildie, must be borne about. Whose golden Ewre is crack't with many a flaw, Who hath no grinders left in either jaw. Whose strong men bow, whose keepers shake & tremble, Whose meager lookes, pale death doth most re∣semble. 278 But this Ambition is a boyling Ill. Honour doth make dead Cinders glow againe. What aged One so great, but by his will Would faine grow greater? Age doth still retaine Two Humours: Hope of Life: Desire of Gaine. And this was that, wch made Old Spencer clime. When he was past the Autumne of his time.
279 The younger Hugh (the Sonne of this old man) Was of an actiue Spirit, and able braine, Who with the Barrons at the first began To side himselfe: They fauouring him againe For Gaveston made him Lord Chamberlaine. That he in place so neare about the King. Might giue them notice still of euery thing. 280 Thinking, (because he was by them preferr'd) He still would cleaue to them in their designes. But (vnjudiciall men) herein they er'd. A swelling Spirit hates him, by whom he climes; As Iuie kils the tree whereon It twines. So rising men, when they are mounted high. Spurne at the means, that first they mounted by. 281 Because, they thinke such fauours challenge still, An equall correspondencie of Loue. Which tyes them, to be plyant to their will. And as the lower Spheares by those aboue Are whirl'd about, so they by them must moue. And doe what they insultingly obtrude. Or else be censur'd for Ingratitude. 282 And such well mettled men cannot disgest To be obsequious to anothers mind, Their haughtie Spirits will not let them rest, Till those precedent bands which did them bind. By open opposition are vntwin'd. And such a publike rupture doth restore Their libertie, which was lngag'd before.
283 And greatnesse holds it needfull policie. To rid his hands of them, that did it raise. By entring into open Enmitie, And so to cut them off without delayes. These were, and are the Courses of our dayes; Who list obserue both old, and moderne times Shall find I write no fables, though some Rimes. 284 I will not touch particulars at all, I play the ball, let others marke the chase. The Spencers doe my wandring muse recall. Who being neare the King in chiefest place, Did heape vp much, and that in little space. For all things had from them their passage then, Who turn'd to gold all matters, and all men. 285 The chiefest Peeres were vnderhand kept downe, The Minions of the King got euery place. Though Edward had, yet Spencers rul'd the Crown. And being both made Earles in highest grace, Did heape vp much, and that in little space. They wrong'd, they car'd not whō: such was their lust "And sodaine greatnes growes too soone vniust 286 Especially, If (like a mole) it workes Only in Earth, how greedy's such a Man? How slyly he in close advantage lurkes To compasse a whole Country, if he can. Still griping all, that Comes within his span. What wealth, wit, friends, force can doe, good, or Ill, Shall, must be practis'd for to please his will.
287 The Princes fauours doe for Pulleys serue To draw on men to be at his command. Eu'n Seats of Iudgement shall from Iustice swerue, If they may bring a Title to his hand. And if some Reverend Fathers shall with-stand. Then weed them out: They will not serue a turn, Such men are fit for Marryres: Let them burne. 288 His Agents must bee of another mould, Sharpe-sighted into other mens estate. Plyant to doe what their great Master would, Close, cunning to dissemble loue, or hate, VVell-spoken, powerfull to Insinuate. Seemingly honest, out wardly precise. By which they may their close complots disguise. 289 These are the Pipes of lead, that doe Conuey Those practices, that from their head doe spring. And so, these seconds come to beare great sway, Are legg'd and crouch'd vnto, for feare they sting These buy, and build, and beg: and raise & wring Farmer, Esquire, Knight, and Baron too, And Prince, and all with whom they haue to do. 290 And this Indeed was the most dangerous Rocke VVhereon I split, and so at last did drowne. This was my Error: This the stumbling blocke At which I fell, and cast my Fortunes downe, This lost my peoples hearts, (and that the Crown) My Minions rapine, and vniust oppression, And my too much Indulgent Indiscretion.
291 My Peeres were male-content, being vnrespected. My Souldiers mutinous for want of Pay. My Court with all Licentiousnesse infected. My People poore, with Taxes par'd away, And apt for Innouation euery day: All out of joynt, deiected, and dismay'd. Onely the Spencers, and their Consort sway'd. 292 I sold, they bought, I wasted, they did thriue. They had abundance, I was Indigent. Their's was the honey, mine the ransack'd hiue, Which made them grow bold, tart, and insolent, And thereby caus'd a Common discontent. Of all whose Crimes, I did Incurre the blame, Because my heate gaue life vnto the same. 293 Princes attend (for I doe speake in Zeale) 'Tis not enough, that you your selues bee just. But you must Looke into the Common-weale; And see that those whom you doe put in trust, Doe gouerne by the Law, not by their Lust. "For hee indeed the wrong doth perpetrate, "That may redrese, yet doth It tollerate. 294 And so you make their wickednesse your owne By suffring them to sinne without Controule. But let not Widowes teares bedew your Throne. Nor poore mens sighes sent from a grieued Soule. Nor Orphans prayers (wch heau'n doth still enroll) Nor common curses caus'd by publick grieuance, Draw Iudgements down on you, for their mischieuance.
295 Kings must vse some: And may chuse of the best, But let them still remember, what men are, Let not all Lawes bee lock'd vp in one brest. Let not ones onely Censure make or marre; For men haue passions, which oft strain them farre. "The most sees least: few best: But none sees all, "Who hath not, doth: who doth not, yet may fall. 296 I doe not barke against Authoritie, My heart did neuer lodge vnreuerend thought. Heau'n knowes, how I adore just Soueraigntie, How oft my soule wth vpheau'd hands haue sought Vnto that God, whose precious bloud vs bought. For our right vertuous * King,IACOB. I. This peacefull State And all those powers, he doth subordinate. 297 Long before this, how often haue I pray'd Vnto th' Almighties supreame Maiestie. And in a faithfull Zeale deuoutly said; When lou'd ELIZA (of blest memorie) Shall pay the debt of all mortalitie. And leaue her Crowne vpon this Earth, To bee Translated to a Crowne in Heau'n with thee. 298 Doe not againe a Conquering William bring, Nor an intruding Stephen, to steere our helme. Let neither power, nor practise make a King That hath not lawfull Title to the Realme, Least Ciuill broyles (so caus'd) should ouerwhelm The fortify'd foundations of our Land Which thou hast layd by thine ELIZAES hand.
299 And if one beame of thy resplendent light Most faire, all gladding Sunne chance to discend Vpon this short Abridgement, which I write. Let no conceit thy Sacred selfe offend; For It was chiefly molded to this end, To shew, how much our selues obliged stand, For that firme Peere, that now doth blesse our Land. 300 Which by Collation of those gloomie dayes Appeare more full of Comfort, and Content. But I goe on: Muse, keepe the beaten wayes, Whilst Spencers rul'd with Common discontent. Eu'n God him-selfe inflicted Punishment; Vpon the Prince, the People, and the Land, Which felt the weight of his afflicting hand. 302 The King him-selfe was full of diffidence, And sought to strengthen his Partialitie. The Lords (not brooking Spencers Insolence) Did league themselues with strong formalitie. The best were guiltie of Neutralitie. The vulgar sort were tyded vp, and downe. As fortune pleas'd to fauour, or to frowne. 302 The Earth her selfe (as sorrowing for her Sonnes, Or weary of their foule misgouernment) Grew out of heart, and barren so becomes. Not yeelding men, sufficient to bee spent, But seem'd to droope away with languishment. So may wee see, how God vnfructifies, A fruitfull Land, for mens Impieties.
303 The louring heau'ns do seem to drop down teares As if they wept, to wash the sinfull Earth, Infectious fogges, and gloomie cloudes appeares; Wch choke the growth of all things in their birth, Heau'n, Earth, and All conspir'd to make a dearth. O see, when God takes Armes against his Land, Hee can enroll all Creatures in a band. 304 Great was the want, of that vnhappie time, The Earth not yeelding her accustom'd-store, And that which was, whilst greedy men purloyne And hoord It vp: They make the Famine more, Grinding thereby the faces of the poore. As if Gods heauie hand were too too light, Vnlesse eu'n Man should study mans despight. 305 Such men are Traytors eu'n to Natures law, And doe conspire against the Common good. They wring the bread out of the poore mans jaw, By keeping vp the Corne, whilst they want food But without doubt, God will require theyr blood. Their guiltlesse blood, which from the earth shall cry And begge revenge for such Impietie. 306 If but one sparke of Grace in them did dwell. Did they respect humaine Societie, Had they a hope of Heau'n, or feare of Hell; Or any little sence of Pietie, Did they in heart conceiue a Dietie, And that most Iust, most wise, most powerfull too, They would forbeare, what God forbids to doe.
307 But neither feare of God, nor Loue of men, Nor just Compassion of a Publicke ill Can worke vpon their steely hearts: And then "Coeciue meanes best fits a stubborne will, Else they'l bee hard'ned in their malice still. For often times (we see) where Nature fayles Law Interposes, and indeed preuailes. 308 The auncient Roman state in It's chiefe Pride, When It was gouern'd with most sound advice: Had Leges Frument arias, to prouide That Corne should not grow to too high a Price, And sure It was a course both Iust and wise, When men grow monstrous, eu'n against their kind, Wee must like Monsters them inclose and bind. 309 But now I must not bee misunder stood, I doe not passe a heauie Censure heere, Vpon such men, as for the generall good Store vp the plentie of a fruitfull Yeere. And keepe it safe, till more cause doth appeare, To vent the same: And when such cause shall be, As they were frugall, so they must bee free. 310 Religious Ioseph in the Aegyptian Land Stor'd vp much graine, and at an easie Rate, He had his warrant sign'd with Gods owne hand. Both for the publicke good of the whole State (To which hee did that graine Communicate) And to relieue his Fathers familie, In those ensuing yeeres of Scarcitie.
311 And so wee may (and must) after like fashion When there is great abundance to come-In. Prouide both for the wants of our owne Nation, And to helpe those that our Confiners bin "Frugall prouision neuer was a Sinne. It is a just, and honest Policie So to prouide against necessitie. 312 But in a time of Dearth, when there is want▪ Then for a man to hoord, and hide his graine, With an Intent, to make the same more scant; And so to rayse the price for his owne gaine, Is such a Sinne, as were I to ordaine A Law against It, for the Common good, I should (with Drac) write that Law in blood. 313 But (O) what times are these wherein wee liue? In which, wee neither can Indure the Sore Nor yet the Salue; The Causes why we grieue, Nor yet the means, which should our states restore. Once Pharoes Kine (which were but leane & pore) Deuour'd the fat: Those times are altred cleane For now we see, The fat deuoures the leane. 314 But whilst, Impatient hunger did constraine The vulgar sort, to eate vnhealthy food, A great Mortalitie began to raigne, Spilling too much (but most Ploebeian) blood. And after Dearth came Death with angry mood. Loe wretched man, how woes still come in grosse And after One succeeds a second Crosse.
315 When God seuerely scourgerh any Land Hee seconds Plagues with plagues, and woes with woes. Hee taketh his three-stringed whip in hand Of Dearth, of death, of home, or forreine Foes, And from these three all desolation growes. What true Content, what rest to man remaines, When ills by Ounces: Good scarce comes by Graines. 316 And to increase the current of my Care, A slauish Groome (Iohn Poydras was his name) Borne in the West; At Exceter, did dare To bruit abroad, that he form Long-shankes came, And I a Changling was suppos'd the same That hee in truth was, Edwards lawfull Sonne, And by a Nurse this treacherie was done. 317 But afterward, (of his vntruth conuicted) Hee did confesse that hee was mou'd to that By those blacke Artes, that God hath Interdicted, And by a Spirit, in likenesse of a Cat, Who did assure him, by this damned plat. Hee should vnto the Soueraigntie attaine. But a poore Rope seru'd to preuent his Raigne. 318 Heere, giue me leaue a little while to dwell Vpon the Nature of this accident, First I obserue: The Diuels cannot fore-tell Before things Come, what will bee theyr euent; If that the same bee properly Contingent. That is, That may bee, and not bee as-well. And such no Deuill, no Spirit can fore-tell.
319 All future things, that haue, or may be told, Are in themselues, or by their causes knowne. Things in themselues God onely can vnfold, And yet sometimes hee doth Impart his owne And proper knowledge, of such things to Come Vnto such Agents, as hee please t'inspire With some small sparkles of his heau'nly fire. 320 Such were the holy Prophets in their dayes Who Onely by th' Infusion of his Grace, Fore-told strange things, such likewise did he raise At seuerall times, eu'n from the Gentill Race, And in that Ranck some doe the Sybils place. Who by the glimmering of his glorious Light, Of things to come, did oft diuine aright. 321 Those things that by theyr causes are conceiu'd Doe eyther follow of necessitie, (Therefore in them eu'n men are not deceiu'd) Or grounded else on probabilitie, Or they doe hit by meere contingencie. The first, the Diu'ls most certainly conceiue, Guesse at the second, In the last deceiue. 322 And yet because of long Experience, And by their wondrous knowledge in all the Arts And for no Earthly substance dims their sence And by their speedy motion, which Imparts A present knowledge, from remotest parts. I grant they fully comprehend those things, Which vnto vs great admiration brings.
323 But when in truth, The things are so Conceal'd, As neither causes nor effects appeare, Then those occurrents are by them reueal'd In such a sort, as double sence may beare, Alwayes ambiguous, cloudie, never cleare. And such were those same Oracles of Old, That were by Phoebus, or by Hamon told. 324 I will be no retayler of such wares, For they are cheape, and common vnto all. But I obserue, what comes to such mens shares. I note the fearefull Iudgements, that doe fall Vpon such Artists, as doe vse to call. Which both the ancient Annals doe record, And moderne stories of our times afford. 325 Some burnt with fire, as Zoroastes was, And some the Earth did swallow vp aliue. As Amphiraus, when that he did passe To Thebes: Some their owne Spirits did depriue Of breath, and so Pope Benedict did thriue, The ninth of that same name, whose vitall line The Diu'll himselfe by strangling did vntwine. 326 Nicephorus, and so Abdias tells, How Simon Magus flying in the Ayre, By Magicke Art, and by inchanting spels, Fell downe, and brake his boanes at Peters prayer, And so he dy'd in horror and dispaire. O God! how farre thy hand is stretched out, To poure down vengeance on this damned Rout.
327 But to returne, from whence I did digresse, Besides this Common confluence of ill, Those warres I vndertooke, God did not blesse, But euermore they were successelesse still; Because I fail'd both in advice and skill. Which being manag'd without due respect, How could their ends, but sort to such effect. 328 Most true It is: A Power of fearefull Harts, That by a Princely Lyon is but led, Shall in the field exploit more glorious parts, Then Armed Lyons with  Hart, their head; Besides, Warres thrue as they are managed. And in the streame of Action, sound advice, Preuailes as much, as doth bold enterprize. 329 A Ship well mann'd, well victual'd, tackled well Without a skilfull Pilote steere the same, Doth in that warry world in danger dwell, Looke what the Pilote is to that huge frame, To armed Troopes the chieferaine is the same. Who wanting either Courage, or fore-sight, Ruines himselfe, and all his armie quite. 330 In managing of Ciuill home designes, If any Councell, be not wisely fitted, There yet remaines some sparke in after times To execute, what was before omitted, Or to correct, what was before committed. But in the field, when Armies joyne in shocke One onely Error brings all to the blocke.
331 And hence (as I conceiue) It doth proceed, That excellent Commanders are so rare. Because they must be very wise Indeed, To take the least advantages that are, And very valiant to attempt, and dare. And (O) how seldome meet in one these twaine; A Lyons heart, joyn'd with a Foxes braine. 332 Troy onely stories forth one Hectors fame. One Alexander Name of (Great) did merit. One Hanibal from Carthage onely Came. And but one Pyrrus Epire did Inherit, So sparing are the Heau'ns of such a spirit. That no one Climate hath produced many And many one hath searce beene blest with any. 333 The Theban State no greatnesse did attaine But onely in Epaminundas time. Who being dead: That did grow weake againe, He was the Sunne, that lightned all that Clime, His setting was their fall: His rise their Prime. Before Inglorious, after of no name, Such powerfull vertue from that Chieftaine came. 334 Therefore in truth, I doe not Iumpe with those Who thinke the Prince for Conduct in the field, Should both himselfe, and common wealth repose Vpon some-Chiestain, whil'st himselfe doth wield The home-affaires: which more assurance yield. In shew I grant: but weigning euery thing. Such seeming safeties certaine dangers bring.
335 For if Ambition seize vpon the Soule (As 'tis a passion apt to entertaine. And once possest, no just respects Controule) I would aduise the Prince that then doth raigne To doubt th' euent: 'Tis worser to complaine, Then be complayn'd of: & who doth not know How many Kings haue beene vncrowned so. 336 This was y• Rock, that wrackt great Meruees Line▪ And brought the Crowne of France to Martells Race; For Childericke was forced to resigne To Pepin (Martells Sonne) his Princely place. And so like-wise Hugh Capit did displace The Line of Pepin, and advanc't his owne, Because in warre his worth was greater growne. 337 A Subject may in shape a Prince excell▪ A Subject may more then his Soveraigne know Eyther in Artes, or in discoursing well. Hee may be stronger to vnhorse his foe, And yet no danger to the Scepter so, But if in Armes the Subject growes too great, The Prince may chance be set besides his Seat. 338 Therefore let Princes labour to attaine The Art of warre, by all the meanes they can; Because, It doth inable him to raigne, And makes him greater, then a priuate man. That often hath the Supreame Title wanne Of sole Commander: which who doth possesse Is scarce a Prince: and yet but somewhat lesse.
339 To haue such troopes of Souldiers at command, To haue such store of wealth, which men affect, To haue such potent meanes by Sea or Land, To execute what e're they would effect, To be obseru'd with duty and respect; By forreigne States, and home dependencie, Are shadowes at the least of Soveraigntie. 340 And he that oft hath tasted that delight, Wherwith such powerfull greatnes doth bewitch, Is hardly brought, to humble so his Spirit, As not to thinke himselfe aboue the pitch Of Common men: More eager is the Itch To mount the top, of One, that's vp halfe way, Then his, that still at lowest step doth stay. 341 Therefore the Prince, whose forces, and whose Armes By other, then himselfe Commanded bin, Must (for prevention of ambitious harmes) Haue many Chiefetaines to Imploy therein, So shall no One be able for to win So strong a partie, but another may Serue for a Helpe: to be crost in his way. 342 But is there then, No Cement for to joyne The Prince, and pow'rfull Peere so close, so fast, That th' one shall not suspect, nor th' other clime? Or is the state of things so strangely plac'd That men cannot be good with greatnesse grac'd? Must Princes feare the noblest vertues still? Or must a Subject vse such vertues Ill?
343 O no, such mindes a glosse of vertue beare, But no essentiall part of her partake, "A Kingly Nature cannot nourish feare, "And vertuous soules Loue good for goodnesse sake, "And onely that their Actions ayme doe make. Where such as borrow vertues for a time, Are dangerous men, and very apt to clime. 344 Especially, If their designements bend To Compasse that, which we dependance call, If all their actions leuell at this end, T'endeare themselues vnto the Generall, They will bee easily drawne to throw at all, When they haue got the dice into their hand, By hauing often Conduct, and Command. 345 The Antidote for Princes to preserue Their States vndanger'd from such poysonous plattes Is onely Iustice: which who doth obserue In all designes, to men of all estates, And is not swaid with Feares, Hopes, Loues, or Hates. Or any passion, but goes eu'nly on That Prince is wise, and doth secure his Throne. 346 Let all the Politickes that breath this day Racke their conceits, vntill they break their braine. They never shall inuent a better way Whereby a Prince may with assurance raigne, Then to be truely just: and to retaine An eu'n proportion Arithmaticall, Which giueth equall Iustice vnto all.
347 This is the Mother both of Loue, and Feare, This doth ingender dutie, and desire. This doth the Prince from all suspition cleare, Because it doth Cut-off the meanes to aspire, This distributes to all deserued Hire, Whereby the Subject hauing his just due, Doth rest Contented, and Contented, true. 348 And you great Starres, whose powerfull Influence May worke so much, be not Irregular: Moe fairely in your Orbes without offence, Bee Nobles truely, and not Titular; But stay my Muse, how apt art thou to erre. From thy first path, returne, and make it plaine; That Armes are safest for a Soveraigne. 349 Not onely ro preuent aspyring harmes Would I haue Kings Commanders of their owne. But chiefly I would haue them practise Armes, That their great spirits might be the better shown, And haue more vent to make their vertues known. For greatnes doth much in opinions rest, And that's maintain'd by being in action best. 350 Besides, 'tis certaine, all men wish to serue Rather in the Kings eye, then by his Eare Nothing inflames the Soule, more to deserue, More quickens honour, more expelleth feare, Then when the Prince in presence doth appeare. To checke the Coward, & with praise, and merit To grace the Actions of a gallant Spirit.
351 This of all Causes, that I can Conceiue Made Alexander Monarch of the East. It is a mightie motiue, not to leaue Theyr Soueraigne Prince in danger, or distrest, Ill thriue they heere on Earth (in heau'n vnblest) That thinke not so: And grant (O dearest Lord) That men, and Angels to my prayers accord. 352 Wise was that State, and very well advis'd Whose forces being often put to flight, Still finding bad successe, at length devis'd To bring theyr Infant Prince into the fight, Eu'n in his Cradle, that his very sight Might giue them better heart; which prou'd most true, For they did fight, and fighting did subdue. 353 Besides, those vnder-Officers that are Imploy'd, according to each seuerall place, Will with more Faith, and more respectiue Care Intend their Charge before the Princes face, So to auoyd both danger, and disgrace. And then the Common Souldier serueth best, When hee's respected most, and fleeced least. 354 And (though I know Examples doe not proue) Yet is the state of things not so Confounded. But that those selfe-same motiues still may moue, On which their resolutions then were grounded. Therfore since Nor-man William first was Crow∣ned, Who list suruey our Kings, cānot but yield Their states thriu'd best, who most did keep y• field
355 Yet, if the Prince by Age disabled bee, Or otherwise, by any like defect; Or if the Sex with Armes doth not agree, Then let them make fit choyse, with much respect Of men of greatest vertues, to direct Their martiall forces, and the more they traine In such Designes, The safer is their Raigne. 356 Because that Prince with more assurance liues That doth rely on many, then on One. For nothing sooner apt occasion giues To swelling Spirits, for to worke vpon, Then if they often haue Command alone. Especially, If men doe hold them such, As without them, The State cannot doe much. 357 Besides, it causeth Enuie on all parts, Many malignant humours will bee bred; If that the Prince all powerfulnesse Imparts Solely to One, which eu'nly quartered Sets many Spirits on worke: Who all are fed At least with hopes, which else perhaps might fall To practice, If one hand ingrossed all. 358 Nor would I haue the Prince to nourish feares Or jealousies, of such as well deserue. But let them make, and keepe great spirits theirs, And let their fauours, and their bounties serue As chaines to bind them, that they may not swerue From loyall Dutie: Stronger is that Tye, Then Cunning practice, or sterne Crueltie.
359 And since, they must haue Agents of their will For Execution of their enterprizes, Or bee themselues Ingag'd in action still. Let nor vngrounded feares, and false surmises Vnapt theyr meanes, and crosse their own deuises. "For who suspects, when no cause doth appeare, "Doth giue a cause to that, which he doth feare. 360 So Commodus, and Bassia so (Two Princes of a most mistrustfull braine) Did spinne the thrid of their owne ouerthrow By diffidence, which they did entertaine Of theyr own Creatures, by whō they were slaine Onely to saue themselues: Whilst causlesse feare Did make them guiltie, which before were cleare. 361 Where liues the man, that may in peace possesse The happie blessings of a priuate state? Yet prostitutes him-selfe to wretchednesse, To Care of mind, to bodies Toyle, to hate Of Enuie, to the violence of Fate, To teachy times; To dangers imminent, If vertue findes no grace, but discontent. 362 Therefore let Princes weigh their Seruants merits, And grace them most, that haue deserued best, So shall respected vertue raise new spirits. And euery noble heart, and gentle brest Will boile with Zeale, which will not let them rest Till they haue rob'd of blood each seuerall veyne, To doe due seruice to theyr Soueraigne.
363 But if the Prince too much distrustfull bee, Sad, sowre, and of a melancholy mind, Hard of accesse, close-handed, nothing free, To best deseruers euer most vnkind. Let such an One assure himselfe to find False hearts, and feeble hands, but certaine hate If any danger threatens his estate. 364 Besides, the foule defacing of his glory, And the remembance of his liuing shame, Which will recorded bee in euery storie, And euery Annall will report the same, And taxe with hatefull tyrannie his Name. And why should Kings bee so Ill-gouerned That their blacke deeds should liue, when they dead? 365 A Thousand yeares, and more are gone, and past, Since that Iustinian did the Empire sway And yet his foule dishonour still doth last; And will doe still, whilst there is night, and day. Because hee did vnworthily repay Thy Seruices (good BELLISARIVS) To whom hee was vnjustly Tyrannous. 366 What though hee did plucke forth those Eyes of thine? (The chearfull Lamps y• lightned those dark dayes) Yet thy great Acts (maugre his malice) shine As bright,Da obulu Bellisario vator, que Inuidia, no culpa cacit, form suaepetition and glorious as the Sunnie rayes, And Time both sees, and speakes thy lasting praise. What though hee made thee * beg from doore to doore? Thou shalt be rich in honor, he but poore.
367 Besides, God doth Ingratitude detest▪ But loues kind offices from man to man; For sweetnes, goodnes, priuate States are blest. And much more Kings: Because, indeed they can Do much more good: They measure not by th' span But by the Ell: And as their meanes are more, With abler winges so must they higher sore. 368 And (O deare God, the fountaine of all good) How much oblged are these times to thee? For our most blessed * Prince,IACOB. I. of greatest blood; And yet of greater vertue; Happie wee, Yea ten times happie, that haue liu'd to see So many rare perfections joyn'd in One. And that same-One to sit vpon our Throne. 369 I doe not purpose to perume my Rimes With the false ash of seruile Flatterie, I rather  too bold with these our Times. But I appeale to Gods All-seeing Eye (To which our closest drifts doe open lye) How my true Pen writes from my feeling heart, When I (Great King) out shadow what thou art. 370 And (O) how blest, how deare the heau'ns do loue That happie State, where vertuous Princes sway? O sweet Experience, now by thee wee proue, Wee taste, wee touch that blessing euery day, And graunt (All-guiding God) that long we may Long in him-selfe, and so long in his Race, Till Time vnto Eternitie giue place.
371 But whither hath my Zeale, my Soules desire With feruent passion led my Pen astray? To my first subiect now I will retire, And bring my Muse into the beaten way, And ing of thy disaster, and decay; O fatall Edward, whose Ill-gouern'd Crowne Both ruin'd others, and thy selfe cast downe. 372 But yet of all the multiplicitie Of seuerall Ills, that doe vnhappie life; There was no greater Infelicitie Then was the false-hood of his faultie Wife, "That bosome wound, that deadly-poyson'd knife "That stabs the Soule, and neuer finds reliefe; "But kils with outward shame, & inward griefe. 373 O what a Chaos of Confused ill Is in the Compasse of this Sinne Contain'd? First, violation of GODS Sacred will. Next Parents, Brothers, Sisters are defam'd, The Common-wealth by Bastardy is stayn'd. Inheritances wrongfully possest. The Husband scorn'd, 6 Wife loath'd, 7 And babes vnblest. 374 The festrous Sore growes to a dangerous head, Now Mortimer begins to play his prise. A brauer spirit Nature neuer bred, Of goodly presence, to attract the Eyes, Of sweet Discourse, wherein great Influence lyes Of high resolue, and of a noble heart, No want of Nature, and all Ayde of Art.
375 This was the Paris, which my Hellen wonne, And this Promethius stole my heau'nly fire. This was the Eagle, ayring in the Sunne, "Hee's more then man, that can restraine desire, Especially, being wag'd by such a hire. A Queene, and young, and faire, he's halfe a Ioue "Whom honour, youth, & beautie cannot moue. 376 And (though there bee no just excuse for sinne). Yet ISABELL, This will I say for thee. "'Tis hardly kept, what many striue to winne, "The finest Cloath doth soonest staine (we see) Perhaps thou took'st thy President from mee. 'Twas like for like: though in thee wrong It were Yet was It right and just for mee to beare. 377 Besides, Hee did imploy all potent meanes To vndermine the bulwarke of her brest, And (O) that Sexe too much by Nature leanes To Change of loues: What need it bee opprest, With winning Art? But men will doe their best To scale the Fort: And till the same be wonne, "It is vndone, desir'd: Repented done. 378 And after many sweet intising baytes, When hee had something diu'd into her heart, Hee then fit opportunitie awaytes, To act the last, and best of all his part, Wherein hee was to shew his Master Art. Which hauing got: Thus hee begins the field, To conquer her, that of her selfe did yeeld.
379 Faire Queene (qd. He) may I behold thy beautie? Why not, (quoth she) The Sunne is seene of all. And shall I speake, respecting still my duty? Why not (qd. she?) Ioue heares the Captiue thrall? Shall not disdaine on my endeauours fall? Feare not (qd. she) great minds take all in worth, Not Pearle, but Flint sends sparkes of fire forth. 380 Then beautious Queene, my words shall vent my woe, I loue: how sweet were that same sound frō thee? For once (qd. she) I am pleas'd to play the Eccho, I loue: It is no perfect point (quoth he) The sentence wants, except your Grace addes: Me You said not so, I made but repitition, To greatest summes (faire Queene) needs no addition. 381 Why then (qd. shee) what is't that I should adde? Adde fancie to affection gracious Queene, Let not desire in tawny weeds bee clad, No suite becomes sweet Loue, so well as greene, Adde Loue to loue, Loue will more louely seeme. Beleeue me (sweet) stolne fruit contenteth most, Then spare not that, which being spar'd is lost. 382 Ah Mortimer, Thou know'st (qd. she) I may not. Madame (qd. he) I know you may, but will not. What if I will? Why then sweet Queen delay not. Edward will know: why say he doth, It skils not: Fame wil defame: fame wel may hurt, but kils not. Danger may grow: That will indeere delight, So darkest grounds make white to shew more white.
383 Thou wilt be false: then Sun leese thou thy light, Why being Eclips'd, thou know'st it oft doth so. Let water burne: I know thou hitt'st It right, From Englands Bathes such boyling waters flow, Bee Constant Moone, when I vnconstant grow, That fitteth well: Shee changing: You vntrue: Nay you the Moone, and I the man in you. 384 I'le cry: Doe Madam, Shed some teares for joy. You wrong me much, yet wrong'd you will not tell▪ I pray thee leaue: 'Tis but an Idle Toy: 'Tis true: and Toyes please Ladies passing well? I cannot yield: No, women must but spell Men put together: That's my part to play: I'le cry: I'le kisse, and so begin the fray. 385 You will: Nay then I must, because you will, Women are weak (poore soules) and dare not fight Who-euer rises, we goe downward still, And yet fond men will say, that we are light, Well, 'tis our Fortunes, and the destines spight. I am Content, because I cannot chuse, 'Tis best to take, what bootes not to refuse. 386 Thus Mortimer did steale this fleece of gold, That storie (so apply'd) doth Ill agree: Shee rather was Medea, fierce, and bold, And gaue away that golden fleece: 'Twas shee That let another griffe vpon my Tree The fruit of sin, and shame; whence did proceed, Matter, that made me both to blush, and bleed.
387 O woman! Thou art euer in extreames, Eyther an Aetna or a Caucasus: Or burning, like the Dog-starres fierie gleames, Or like North windes too bleake, and boysterous. Eyther too mirthfull, or too mischieuous. Yet of the twaine (since needs thou wilt be such) Thy fire is better, then thy frost by much. 388 Thy ouer-louing may proue Iealousie And that's an amorous sicknesse, a kind paine, But hatred Is the Dame of Crueltie, And at the very Life-bloud still doth Ayme. But leauing this: Goe to thy Loomes againe Vnwearied Muse: till thou hast wou'n at will The wofull storie of poore Edwards Ill. 389 'Tis not the Ayre, whereby we liue, and breath, 'Tis not the Earth, the Mother of vs all, Nor Starres aboue, nor is it Hell beneath, Nor yet those Spirits which we our Demons call, Nor chance, which seemes to sway things casuall. That are the sole-efficients of our Euils We, to our selues, are eyther Gods, or Deuils▪ 390 But I was still the latter of the twaine, My selfe-wrought woe beares witnes of the same. And you great Lords, y• liu'd, whil'st I did raigne And were consumed with the furious flame Of my enraged wrath, I will not blame Your wayward Pride, nor yet my wiues vntruth. My seed was Sin, my Crop was shame, and ruth.
391 And when did euer that accursed field Beare other haruest, then such thriflesse weed? Can poyson'd fountaines wholsome waters yield? Or doe not wormes out of corruption breed? Mischiefe the Dm pregnant with sinfull seed. Brings forth her daughter Miserie at last, And they are alwayes glew'd together fast. 392 There can be no divorce betweene these twaine, They mix, or rather they incorporate. Like to the Poles of Heau'n it doth remaine Constant and fix'd: Sinne is vnfortunate, Still drawing Iudgements downe, on each estate. Wch somtimes are defer'd, not following streight, But what time looseth, is repay'd with weight. 393 How many houses haue bin rais'd by Sinne, And flourish'd faire, for one, or two discents. But still the third vnprosperous hath bin, And God hath crost them, with some strange euents Whereof these times yield many presidents. But stay my Muse, If thou wilt shun offence Thou must not meddle with the present Tence. 394 Speake of the Spencers mightie in their dayes, Let Edward be the Subject of thy Pen. Who did his Minions to such greatnesse rayse That the whole State was by them manag'd then, As men with Counters, So doe Kings with men, Sometimes they stand for halfe-pence, and anon What was but so, becomes a Million.
395 But when my Peeres did see, how I was bent To make base waxen wings to mount the skye, Whil'st their faire Plumes were pluck't wch vile cō∣tempt. And they deprest with scorne and Injury. To late-left Armes they got them by and by. They moved warre, the Spencers to remoue, Hate armed them, and I was arm'd by Loue. 396 They leuied men, I likewise men did leuie. Both raised all the Forces wee could make: A Tyrants hand (they say) was too too heauie. A traytors head (I said) became a stake. They vow'd redresse, I vow'd revenge to take. We met, and meeting fought, & fighting found, No hurt more grieues, then doth a selfe-wrought wound. 397 O English Peeres! relinquish Impious Armes, Build not your weightiest actions vpon sand. 'Tis not the Colour of pretended harmes, Nor seeming zeale vnto your Natiue Land. Nor reformation (though you beare in hand The people so) of some abuse of Lawes That can make lawfull your vnlawfull Cause. 398 These are▪ (and euer haue bin) those smooth Oyles With which foule treason seekes to paint her face: That she might seeme faire, pleasing, full of smiles, So to win loue, and gaine the peoples grace, Who silly Gudgions euer bite apace. Vntill the fatall hooke be swallowed downe▪ Where-with Ambition Angles for a Crowne.
399 Who euer practis'd against Prince, or State But alwayes did pretend the Common good? Thereby to draw into contempt, or hate. The course of governement, as then it stood. This hath beene still the marrow, life, and blood Of such Attempts: But here the rule stands fast, "What's thought-on first, Is executed last. 400 For when that once their priuate turne is seru'd, The care of Common-wealth Is layd aside, That did but wht the knife, with wch they caru'd For their owne good: That vizor did but hide Some Secret ends, not fit to be discry'd Vntill accomplish'd: which once brought to passe The Common State stands as before it was. 401 And for to angle men, Crimes must be made Against the Prince: I if he be without touch, So that no just exceptions can be had. Then must the Imputation rest on such Who being neare the Prince▪ are vsed much. For this is certaine: "They that stand on high, "Are fairest markes for foulest obloquie. 402 But though the Arrow seemeth at them aym'd, Yet through their sides it wounds the Princes brest Whose reputation cannot be but stain'd By their reproach, whom they doe fauour best. And they that kill the birds, would spoile the nest. But what's intended, must be closely wrought, And that pretended, which was neuer thought.
403 Why should vaine man still daube his actions thus With outward whit-lime, that are pitch'd within, "Eu'n wicked Kings must be Indur'd by vs. "What e're the cause be, Treason is a sinne, "Rebellious Armes cannot true honour win. "The sword is not the Subjects: His defence "In all extreames: Is Prayer, and Patience. 404 Therefore deare spirits, dye not your silver Armes Into a Sanguine, with your Mothers bloud. Let not vnciuill hands cause ciuill harmes; For priuate griefe, confound not publike good, "Not all the water in the Ocean flood "Can wash the Sin from you, and your Allyes, "For Treason liues, although the Traitor dyes. 405 Sweet Trent! How were thy Christall-waters stain'd With English-bloud, that was at Burton shed. Let Burrow-bridge a Golgotha bee nam'd, A field of death, wherein lay buried So many people, and all Natiues bred. 'Gainst forreigne foes, had those liues bin Im∣ploy'd; We had not grieu'd, though they had nobly dy'd. 406 At last, the doubtfull victorie prou'd mine, The Barons lost the day, and lost their liues. Their heads went-off, whose hearts did so repine Against their Prince, "For treason seldom thriues, "That great all-seeing God, whose knowledge diues "Into the deepest secrets of the Soule, "Vnjust attempts in Iustice doth Controule.
407 Great * Lancaster,Tho. Planta∣ginet Earle of Lancaster. then whom. No greater Earle This greatest Isle of Europe had before, Good Lancaster: in goodnes such a Pearle, That him the vulgar sort did long adore, Had then his head strucke off, and many more Eu'n of the greatest, felt the selfe-same stroake, "So lightning spares the shrub▪ & rends ye Oake. 408 And here be pleas'd, to make this obseruation, The Popular, and ouer-powerfull Peere. That doth Command too much in any Nation Breeds in his Prince, both Iealousie and feare, Is enuy'd eu'n of those of his owne Spheare. Vntunes the vulgar: tumults the whole State, And to himselfe proues most vnfortunate. 409 That make-king * WarwickeRichard  Earle of Warwicke.  hauing th' English Crown Pinn'd on his sleue, to place where he thoght best, Who set vp * Princes, and did pull them downe. How did he toyle the Land with his vnrest? How did his sword rip vp his Mothers brest? Whose greatnesse, and his popularitie Wrought both his owne, and others Tragedie. 410 O that we could not Instance in our dayes, Then some of match-lesse vertues had not so By popular dependancie, and praise Bin drawne to fatall courses, full of woe, Which caus'd their owne, and others ouerthrow. But wishes come too late, when things are done, And men are borne to that, they cannot shu.
411 "Yet prudent men a present vse may make "Of errors past: And they are truely wise, "That doe from others their Instructions take "Not from themselues: It is too deare a price "So to buy wit: Bee rul'd by my aduice. "Learne to be wise, yet not at thine owne cost, "But shun those waies where thou seest others lost. 412 The sword was sharp, and wounded euery where, Many great men of noble qualitie, In seuerall places were beheaded here, For being Actors in that treacherie, Which alwayes proues a mournefull Tragedie. And though I know, The sword is due to such, Yet should a Prince forbeare to strike too much. 413 For often Executions in a State Especially of men of fashion First stirre vp pittie, then dislike, then hate, Then close complaint, then combination Then followes practise for some Alteration▪ And that Indaungers all, if not withstood: And though vnprosperous yet It spils much bloud. 414 And that same Throne, that's often wet wth bood Is very slipp'rie, apt to catch a fall. Yielding no howers rest, no pleasures good, Sleeping on Thornes, and feeding vpon gall. Still thinking, and still thinking Ill of all. Haed with restlesse feares, whilst day doth last And then at night, with fearefull dreames agast,
415 Our Stories doe report third Richard so, And without doubt, Hee did too much let bloud, Alwayes mistrustfull, both of friend, and foe. Ready to strike them, that but neere him stood, Fearefull to all, such was his furious moode. And fearing all, as one that knew too well How many soules did wish his soule in hell. 416 O that a Prince might see a Tyrants mind, What Monsters, what Chimeraes therein are. What horrours in his Soule, hee still doth find, How much him-selfe is with himselfe at warre, Euer diuided, full of thoughtfull Care. What Pistols, Ponyards, Poysons he conceites, And thinks each one for his destruction waites. 417 Besides, It is indeed no Policie (Except it bee in a meere Turkish state) To make the Crowne a Common Butcherie, To gouerne all by feare, which breedeth hate In noble mindes, and doth exasperate A free-borne People: Where the Turkish race Feare best Cōmands, being seruile, poore, & base. 418 Princes rewards should fall like gentle Raine, Which comming softly, doth the longer last, That theyr sweet relish might still fresh remaine. Their Executions should bee done in hast, Like sodaine furious stormes, that soone are past. Because, when once the violence Is done, Th' offence thereof might bee forgot and gone.
420 One limbe of that great body, that did band It selfe against mee, in their factious frayes Was Mortimer: Who yet vpon Command Came In before the fight, and I streight-wayes Sent to the Tower, to spend his wearie dayes In wretched bands: restrayn'd from libertie, But walles of stone keepe not out Destinie. 421 Which eyther finds, or makes it selfe away. For Mortimer, thus sent vnto the Tower To free himselfe doth labour night, and day, And by a sleepie Potion, which had power To make men slumber, till a certaine hower. Hee found the meanes (his Keepers so made fast, To make escape: and got to France at last. 422 This was not done without my Queenes consent, Whose head, and hand were working in the same. Little thought I, That, that way the Hare went, But Sir Stephen Segraue * onely I did blame.Constable of the Tower. Wretched mankind, how bold wee are, to frame Hopes to our selues: How blind to see our ill, That least we feare, what most doth hurt vs still. 423 Doe but Conceiue, how much we straine at Gnats And swallow Camels downe without respect. How hood-winck'd are we to discerne those plats That hurt vs most, how ready to suspect Our friends for foes, how apt wee are t' effect Our owne disaster: Mortimer goes free, And others dye, that lesse had wronged mee.
423 Obserue the weaknesse of Mortalitie, It sees but little, and It can doe lesse. Yet, I allow not of fatalitie, Except that word bee vsed to expresse That all Commanding Power, that doth suppresse, Support, set vp, pull downe, doth all in all, Eu'n in those Actions, that seeme casuall. 424 Now did I thinke my selfe, my State as sure As if great Atlas did vphold the same. The drosse being purg'd, my gold must needs bee pure, The smoake once gone, my fire must brightly flame Their Eyes were out, ye mark'd, & marr'd my game. They had no hearts to dare, nor tongus to preach, Nor hands to fight, nor busie heads to reach. 425 But heartlesse, haplesse, yea and headlesse too Are those disturbers of our awfull Raigne. Who would prescribe their Prince, what he should doe, And when, and where, and why, & whom refraine Like , whom their Tutors doe restraine. "To play with Edg tooles Is a dangerous thing, "And 'tis no May game to Controule a King. 426 Thus in a Calme, I fear'd no storme at all, But yet too soone a sodaine Cloud did rise. From whence such store of wintry stormes did fall As for my shrowd, no shelter might suffice, Vntill pale Death had clos'd my tearefull Eyes. O bring with you, who-euer reads my fall, Sad thoughts, wet Eyes, and wailing words with∣all.
427 And thus It was: I sent my Queene to France, And after her, The Prince my Sonne I sent, To treate a Peace; but see the fatall chance. They brought home War, although for Peace they went. Th' Ambitious woman, she was fully bent To haue sole rule, and meant to put me downe. So Ninus once did loose both life and Crowne. 428 There is more mercy in the Tygers claw, Lesse venome in the Scorpions sting doth lye, More pitie in the hungry Lyons paw, Lesse danger in the Basiliske his Eye. Hiaena, that doth call the goers by, The Panthers breath, and Crocodiles false teares Haue truer hearts, then faithlesse women beares. 429 Let loosers speake, for they will not bee let, I lost my Crowne, my Life I also lost, My glorious rising had a gloomie set. My Wife the Sea, wherein my barke was tost, The rocke, wherein I suffred shipwracke most. Shee Clitemnestra: Agamemnon I, Whom false Aegistus foully caus'd to dye. 430 His part my Riuall Mortimer did play Whom ISABELL my Queene so well did loue, That still in France shee meant with him to stay As One that would the selfe same fortunes proue, And moue, no otherwise then hee did moue. Mean while, The Cuckoe hatch'd in Edwards nest And in my Boate his Oare was liked best.
431 They that inioy, and joy in their owne Loues, Whose vertuous soules no secret sinnes doe staine. Who neuer did vnlawfull pleasures proue, But truly louing are so lou'd againe. Thrice happie they, more true Contentment gaine Then those that haue the change & choise of many And vsing all, are neuer lou'd of any. 432 For streames diuided runne a shallower Course Then they, that only in one Channell runne. A mind vnchast, doth euer like them worse That are obtayn'd, then those that are vnwonne. Because, It thinkes some pleasure is to Come Which yet, it hath not found; and neuer ill Did seeme so sweet, but something wanted still. 433 For how can Sinne afford a full delight When 'tis indeed a meere priuation? As well may darknes bee the Cause of light, And Heau'n to Hell bee turn'd by transformation, As Wickednes yeeld perfect Contentation. "The vertuous Pleasures are Compleat & sound, "And lawfull is at last delightfull found. 434 But Lust is deafe, and hath no Eare to heare The cunning Charmer, charme he nere so well. VVhich did too much in Isabell appeare. VVho did resolue with Mortimer to dwell And both of them did labour to expell, Mee from my Kingdome: and to please the time They made my Sonne the colour of their Crime.
435 And heere obserue, the foule effects of Lust, What Treasons, Murders, outrage from It springs, How both to God, and man it is vnjust. How it defiles all States, Confounds all things And at the last, to vtter ruine brings. How much more pure is that most holy fire, Which God doth blesse, & men themselues desire. 436 I neuer heard of any hee or shee Although themselues were lewd, and vicious That euer wish'd theyr Off-spring for to bee Like to themselues: but good and vertuous. There's some thing in the Soule, that worketh vs T' affect the good wee had at our Creation, VVhereof (being lost) wee wish a restauration. 437 As Mortimer, and Isabell my Queene Practis'd in France, so heere they had their factions Of Earles and Barons: Men of great esteeme, Both wise, and stout to manage any actions. And the poore Cōmons (grinded with Exactions) To Innouation were not easily led, And nothing wanted, but an able head. 438 But hee that was chiefe workman of the frame, VVhich drew the plot at home for all the rest, VVho afterwards did build vpon the same A Bishop was: Yet Church-men should be best, But oftentimes Sinne lurkes within the brest▪ VVhen sacred Titles, and religious names, Are but the Couers of vncomely shames.
439 'Twas * Tarlton,ADAM DE ORLETON or TARL∣TON, Bshp of Hereford. whose great spleen, and working braine, Was the Producter of this Monster first. Who for some priuate wrong hee did sustaine. An inward hate, and bosome treason nurst Against his Prince: Which afterwards did burst Into those open flames, from whence did grow As hatefull Ills, as euer Age did show. 440 May then Religion bee a Cloake for Sinne? Can holiest Functions serue but for pretences? Are Church-men Saints without, & Diu'ls within▪ Dare men make God a colour for offences? Knowing with what fierce wrath he recompences▪ Eu'n simple Sinners, that scarce know his will, Then much more those, whose knowledge serues for ill▪ 441 Most reuerend Priesthood, how art thou prophan' How comes thy glorious Lustre so obscure, That eu'n thy very Title is defam'd? The Cause is plaine: Profesors are impure, Their liues doe hurt, more then their tongues doe cure▪ For Lay-men thinke all lawfull that they doe, And with that thought, are easily drawn thereto 442 And so there growes a Confluence of all Sinne. For Sheepe will wander, If the Shepheard stray. Smal Boats must drown, If great ships cānot swi▪ If Doctors faile, what shall poore Pupils say? God helpe the blind, If cleare Eyes misse the way▪ Though Sinne doth euer draw with it, a Curse; Yet doth the Author, make the sinne the worse.
443 But to my selfe: I doubted what to doe. (For weightie Causes challenge heedfull care) I fear'd the French, I fear'd my Subiects too, I wanted Crownes, the Sinnewes of the warre. Those that I had, I thought not good to spr. But freely sent them to the King of France, For feare hee should his Sisters part aduance. 444 Whereby from thence shee had no Ayde at all. O what a pleasing Orator is Gold? How well hee speakes, that tels a golden tale? And yet, It loues not to bee heard but told; Although It sweetly sounds to young, and old. Orpheus did make ye stones strange wonders doe, But this can moue both stones, and Orpheus too. 445 Philip Macedon did besiege a Hold, Which some did tell him, was not to bee wonne. Hee answers: If an Asse laden with Gold Can come vnto 't; The worke is to bee done. Such is the heate, and lustre of this Sunne That It doth melt the hearts, and blind the Eyes Both of the brainlesse vulgar, and the wise. 446 Which when my Queene, and Mortimer perceiu'd They leauing France, to Henault went for Ayd. And there with honour, they were well receiu'd, Forces prepar'd, and Ensignes were display'd, And Ships were rigg'd, and nothing was delay'd That might aduance their Enterprize begun, So deepest Seas with smoothest silence runne.
447 They tooke the Sea,By Narwich in Essex. and landed at the last At * Orwell Hau'n, a deadly Gulph to me And thither their Confederates did hast, Both Lords, and Commons seemed to agree; As winds, & waues Consent, whē wrackes shalbe. All turn'd their faces to the rising Sun, Because my date was done, and I vndone. 448 But when the voyce of Eagle-winged fame Did spread abroad the cause of their repaire. And seemed still to justifie the same By due succession of my Sonne and heire, My hope to feare: My feare turn'd to dispaire. And my dispaire on these two grounds was laid, My Peeres were false, my Partizans dismaid. 449 Then did I flye from London, where I lay, Because they seemed partially affected, And in my flight did often weepe, and say, To what hard haps art thou (poore Prince) subje∣cted? What gloomie Stars haue thus thy State infected? That they should hate, who ought to loue thee rather, A haplesse King, a Husband, & a father. 450 Most mightie Monarkes haue bin oft distrest, Whō yet their wiues haue lou'd with tender Care, And many in their matches curst, are blest Yet in their Issue: But my case is rare, In all of them my fortunes fatall are. They hurt me most, that should protect me rather A haplesse King, A husband, and a father.
451 Some say, that Kings are Gods vpon the Earth▪ And Mariage quasi Merri-age some surmise. God giue vs joy (they say) at Childrens birth. What God am I whom traytrous men despise? And Marr-age from my Mariage doth arise. There reape I Care, where most Content doth ga∣ther, A haplesse King, a Husband, and a Father. 452 As thus I fled, My Queene pursues amayne, So runnes the Hare for life, the Hound for Prey. Few followed me: But thousands were her trayne, So Flyes swarme thickest in a Sun-shine day. At last at Oxford, did shee make some stay With all her Troupes: and did deliberate What Course to take with me, and with ye State▪ 453 There did her Tutor Tarlton thinke it fit Of their chiefe drift remonstrance for to make. Who being of good Discourse and pregnant wit? To broach the matter, first did vndertake. He Preach'd: His Text was this, My head doth Ake, Whereon dilating, hee did seeme to proue That Subiects might an Aking head remoue. 454 And in that Compasse hee included mee. And so Concluded, I should bee Depos'd. A dangerous, and detested Heresie, By some infernall fury first Compos'd In Hell: Where long the monster lay inclos'd. Till Impious Spirits, swolne with insolence To curbe all Christian Princes brought it thence.
455 Why should such Diuellish Principles be broach'd, By them, that seeme to bring Gods Embassie? Why should the Pulpit bee so much reproach'd As to bee made a place to tell a lye? To serue a Turne, to sooth Impietie. But they that onely theyr owne Ends affect, Nor God, nor man, nor Heau'n, nor Hell respect. 456 No worthy mind will charge mee to disclose With Cursed Cham my Fathers secret shame. If my free Muse doe somewhat touch at those Of holy Church, whose Actions full of blame Haue soyl'd themselues (not function) wth defame, Nor is 't a wonder, though those blinded times, Did hatch both monstrous men, and monstrous Crimes. 457 William whose Sword did seate him in this throne Brought with him Odo Bishop of Bayon. Whose Pride, whose lust, whose Irreligion, Whose Symonie to buy the Sea of Rome Incenst his Brother to just wrath: By whom Th' aspiring Priest in Prison was restrain'd, And not releas'd, as long as William raign'd. 458 And had that head-strong man bin still held in, (Rufus) thy raigne had bin more easie farre. For hauing head, hee labour'd still to win All discontented Spirits, (who euer are Apt to take fire) vnto a Ciuill warre. And the Corrupted humours drawne to a head, In Prince and State great Inflamations bred.
459 When second Henry wore the Diademe How did Ambitious Becket toyle the State? Who made the Pope to Interdict the Realme? Who with the French King did Confederate? Who vnder-hand nurst man and wiues debate? VVho drew the Son to Armes against the Sire? 'Twas Becket, that most kindled all this fire. 460 What bitter stormes had almost wrack'd the state By Clergie practise whilst King Iohn did Raigne? Sixe yeeres the Realme stood Excommunicate, And vnder Interdiction did remaine. People and Peeres drawne from their Soueraigne. Lewes of France brought in to weare y• Crowne, If by his forces Iohn were shouldred downe. 461 Who almost sinking with so rough a blast, Finding him-selfe vnable to withstand. To saue his Crowne, was forced at the last, For to resigne vnto the Pope this Land, And by a Rent to farme it at his hand. Then all was well: The Clergie turne was seru'd, Lewes was Curst, and Iohn had well deseru'd. 462 Doe Kingdomes then serue but for Tennis-balles For holy Church to racket vp and downe? Must Scepters bee dispos'd by Bishops Palles? Or shall a Prince make forfeit of his Crowne If a proud Prelate chance to fret and frowne? If they can Carie it so, I like their wit; But sure I am: 'Tis not by holy writ.
463 When Straw his base rebellious troupes did gather And drew the Commons to a dangerous head. One Ball a Priest, or one of Baals Priests rather, By those seditious Libels, which hee spred. By foolish doating Rimes hee much misled The vulgar sort, and made their madnesse more, Which of It selfe did rage too fast before. 464 When* Lancaster King * RichardHENRY, 4. did depose His chiefe Assistant Thomas Arundell,RICH. 2. Primate of England did absolue all those That joyn'd in that soule Action, to expell, Their lawfull King, and did in substance tell The very Tale, that Tarlton first had told. So oft this Realme by them was bought, and sold 465 Whilst Humphrey Duke of Glouster rul'd the Stat (Henry the Sixt then being vnder Age) What bloodie Tumults, what Intestine hate Were heere vntimely rais'd by * Benforts rageBishop of Winchester. Which was so fell, that nothing could asswage His rank'rous spleene, nor would he stint y• strif Till by close practise Glouster lost his life. 466 Richard the 3. that did vsurpe the Crowne, And swom through blood to get the Kingly plac Had hee not Shaw a Clearke of great Renowne? (Before that time high in the peoples grace) Who at Pauls-Croe did Bastard Edwards race. Defam'd the dead, forg'd, wrested, sooth'd vp Ventur'd his Soule, a yrants Loue to win.
467 But stay, I handle with too hard  touch The Churches wounds, that now are fairly heal'd. Then were the hoodwinkt times: then were they such In those dark dayes, now is ye truth reueal'd, And now those former Errours are repeal'd. And now the Sunne illumines all our Clime Most Learned Fathers answer you the time. 468 Bee (as you should bee) Lampes to giue vs light, And shining Starres to grace our firmament, Though you doe teach, and wee beleeue aright, Yet mindes vnsetled sooner will bee bent, When they shall see your words, and workes con∣sent. And therefore let your liues your faith expresse, And proue by practise, what you doe professe. 469 Nor speake I this, to taxe this present Age Eyther of Ignorance, or Indeuotion, Let enuy swell and burst with It's owne rage, Yet my free Soule shall truely vent her notion Those Reuered men, that now attaine promotion Are for the most part such, as doe excell As well in Learning, as in liuing well. 470 Whil'st Mortimer, my Queene, and Tarlton play'd Their pageant thus: The Current went so swift, That I thought fit, vntill the fury stay'd, In some close-priuate place a while to shift, And (for the land seem'd Crosse vnto my drift) I did resolue, by Sea to seeke some Clime) Where I might harbour, till some happier time.
471 And so I left the Land, and tooke the Seas. But Sea and Land conspir'd vnto my taking, For neither plaints, nor prayers could appease the winds, & waues, wch far'd, as they were making Sharp war betwixt themselues: whilst I stood qua∣king For feare least I the subiect of their strife, Should end their warre, by ending of my life. 472 And yet, thrice happie had poore Edward bin, If Death had ended then his weary dayes. For cast on Shoare in Wales: I liu'd vnseene In path-lesse woods, and vnfrequented wayes With those few friends, whom whilome I did raise Balduck, Reading, young Spencer, and no more. Who in my fall, their ruine did deplore. 473 Of all the swarmes, that followed Kingly Raigne, Of all the friends that faw'nd on awfull pride, Loe, onely this poore Remnant did remaine, Whose ortunes glew'd to mine, made thē t' abide, A true-loue knot, with sad affliction ty'd. For wretched men Compssionate each other, And kind Compassion is affections mother. 474 O see, what quick-sans Honour treads vpon? How Icie is the way, that Greatnes goes? A mighty Monarch late Attended-on With supple hammes, smooth browes, submissiue showes, For many followers, now hath many foes. For awing friends, from falling fortunes runne As Persians vs'd to Curse the setting Sunne.
475 When Ioue had made the chiefe of all his Creatures VVhich wee call Man: (A litle world indeed) The Gods did praise his well proportion'd features Each in their functions seruing others need. But prying Momus taking better heed Obseru'd at last one Errour in his Art; Because hee made no windowes in mans heart. 476 O that the glorious Architect of man Had made transparent Glasses in his brest, VVhat place should bee for Politicians then? How should dissembling grow in such request? And machiauillian Athiesme prosper best. But temporising is the way to Clime, There is no musicke without keeping time. 477 I shall not doe amisse, If now I sing Those heauie Anthemes our sad Consort made, VVhilst they did warble to their wretched King, (As wee did Sorrowing sit in silent shade) The Sodaine downfall, Reeling Greatnesse had▪ Balduck(quoth I) ou of Philosophie, Distill some medicine for our Miserie. 478 Deare Prince (quoth he) whom late our Eyes be∣held In greatest Glory, that the world could see. VVhilst thou with awfull Maiestie did'st weild The publike State, let It no wonder bee, If some few Starres proue opposite to thee. Since in their fauour none so firmely stood, But they haue giu'n them griefe, as well as good.
479 Doe but obserue the Fauorite of Chance. Her chiefest Minion, highest in her Grace, Philips great * Sonne,ALEXAN∣DER. whom she did so aduance. Who did subdue the East in little space. Vnto whose Armes th' Amazed world gaue place. Whose Actions are the subiect of all Stories, Hee poys'ned dyes amidst a world of glories. 480 I list not wade in telling tragicke Tales Sufficeth this: All greatnesse is vnsure. "Stormes rage more fiercely on the hils, thē dales. "Shrubs better then high Cedars windes indure. "Those Colours soonest staine, that are most pure. "O let him graspe the Clouds and span the sky. "That can assure himselfe felicitie. 481 In all, that this same massie world doth hold There is a certaine mixture to bee found Eyther of dry, or moyst, or hot, or cold. Of which, If any One too much abound The body so affected proues vnsound. But being kept in just proportion They doe maintaine a healthfull vnion. 482 So fares It in our fortunes, and our State, Nothing is simply sweet, or simply sower. Our weale is mixt with woe, our loue with hate, Our hope with feare, & weaknes wth our power, "Bright Moones breed mists, y• Sunshine morne a shower. And as there is an Autumne, & a Spring. So change by course is seene in euery thing.
483 The wind that's now at South, will change to Nore, The greenest grasse will turne to withered Hay, The Seas both bbe and flow at euery shore. The Moone doth wax and waine, yet not decay, Day drawes on night, & night drawes on the day. Our selues once babes, now men, now old, streight none, Doe plainely proue a change in euery-one. 484 Wise Politicians, and deepe-sighted Sages That haue discourst of Common-wealths with Care, Both of our time, and of precedent Ages, Obserue in them a birth, when first they are, A growth, which oft extendeth very farre. A sate, wherein they stand, and change withall, And then at last, A finall fatall fall. 485 Rome had her being first from Romulus, Her growth, from Consuls, that were annuall▪ Her State most flourish'd in Octaius. Many Conuersions, Three most principall, From Kings to Consuls, Last Emperiall. And (O) who sees not she is ruined, And in her ruines now lyes buried? 486 The greatest, and best grounded Monarchie Hath had a Period, and an overthrow. "There is no Constant perpetuitie "The streame of things is carried to and fro, "And doth in euer-running Channels goe. If then great Empires are to changes bending What weaker States are warranted frō ending?
487 Ruines of Kingdomes, and their fatall harmes From one of these same causes doe arise. From Ciuill furie, or from forreigne Armes Or from some plague doom'd frō the angry skyes, Or worne by wasting time dissolued dyes. For as the fruit once ripe falls from the Tree. So Common-wealths by Age subuerted bee. 488 If these be Rockes that shipwracke Monarchies, Are priuate States exempted from the same? Where liues the man hath such Immunities? 'Tis hard to scape vnscorch'd in Common flame, Or parts to stand, when ruin'd is the frame. Those publike harmes that Empires doe decay In priuate states doe beare a greater sway. 489 Fiue hundred yeeres some that are curious wise, Would haue the Period of a publike State. And they appoint for priuate families Some Six, or Seu'n discents the vtmost date, I dare not so precisely Calculate. But without doubt there is a fixed Time, In wch all States haue both their Eu'n & Prime. 490 Let these be motiues (O dejected greatOne) To calme the Tempest of thy stormie Care, And though I must confesse it well may fret-one, Thy past and present fortunes to compare; Yet, since in all things changes common are. Thinke Ebb'd estates may flow, & think withal, What happ's to One, to every-one may fall.
491 Thus Balducke ceas'd, and Reading thus begun (But first his eyes dew'd downe a weeping raine) O thou (once glorious now Eclipsed) Sun Now thou art clouded, yet maist cleare againe, With Courage therfore hopefull thoughts retaine. For oft those winds y• draw the Clouds together, By their disperse occasions fairer weather. 492 But I intend no Comment on this Text, Nor will I harrow that which he did sow; What I apply to thy sad Soule perplext With those dismayes that from thy Fortunes flow, Out of th' assured grounds of truth doth grow▪ Then make good vse thereof, and learne thereby This Soueraigne Salue for thy sad melodie 493 All things, that boundlesse thought can once con∣ceiue, Sacred, prophane, of Elements compos'd, Vnbodied Spirits, or what else doth receiue A being: when, or where, or how dispos'd, Within one Triple Circle are inclos'd. Being Eternall, or perpetuall, Or else indeed but meerely Temporall. 494 That is Eternall, which did not begin Nor euer ends: and onely God is so, "Who hath for euer, and from euer bin, "VVhō no place circumscribes, nor times forego "Nor limits bound, nor thoughts can fully know. "VVhom we so much the more ought to admire "How much the lesse to knowledge we aspire.
495 That is perpetuall, which in time began, But neuer any time shall end againe. Such are the Angels, such the Soule of man, Such are those Spirits, that liue in restlesse paine Rebellions Spirits, against their Soveraigne. All these were form'd, as pleas'd the makers wil, Once to begin, but to continue still. 496 Lastly, those things are counted Temporall, Which hath beginnings, and shall haue their ends, And in that ranke, the world it selfe shall fall. So honour, riches, strength, Allyes and friends, All which by Nature to corruption bends. And in this sence, 'Tis true Philosophie, "What doth begin, shall end most certainely. 497 And therefore make not things so weake & vaine To be thy God, as if they were Eternall, Nay, doe not prize them, as an equall gaine Vnto thy Soule, which Is perpetuall, But hold them, as they are but Temporall And since their Nature is, to cease to bee, Thinke, they obserue but their due course with thee. 498 The spacious world Is Fortunes Tennis-Court, Men are the Balles, which with her Racket (Time) She toses too and fro, for his disport, Some times aboue, some times beneath the line, Now bounding, streight strucke dead, but yet in fine, All goe into the hazard, that's the graue, And they once gone, she other balles must haue▪
499 Now we are those, with whom she playes her set, And she doth ply vs with hard stroakes amaine, Yet thereby may we this advantage get▪ Not to depend on her, that is so vaine Whose faour, soone is wonne, soone lost againe. Then let vs not fix our affections here, But let our hopes moue in a higher Spheare. 500 So silenc'st he: and then spake Spencer so, To my discourse (deare Prince) vouchsafe thine Eares, And since we all doe share alike in woe, Let me haue leaue, to tune my voice like theirs. "Vnited forces greater vertue beares, And all of vs leuell our Aymes at this, To make thee thinke the world, but as It is. 501 Which (O) that our experience prou'd not true, Would we did sit vpon the quiet strand, And thence behold the wracke like to ensue, And pittie others, we secure on Land; But now our states in doubtfull hazard stand Succeeding Ages in our fall may read, "How all things hang but by a slender thread. 502 Such in the sad-condition of each state Annexed to It, by Eternall doome, Which is enrolled in the booke of Fate, From whence, our least occurrents here doe come That happen from the Cradle, to the Tombe. For though our fortunes seeme but Casuall, The finger of the highest is in all.
503 And 'tis a worke of his All-guiding will, Whose boundles knowledge sees what is the best, In our whole life to mingle good with Ill, Contents with crosses, quiet with vnrest, Least we should hold the world in such request. That for the same, we should abandon Heau'n And sowre our selues, with too much earthly Leau'n. 504 For who sees not, how much the world bewitches? Who feeles not, how the flesh is apt to yield? Especially, made insolent with riches, How hard It is Prosperitie to weild? How proudly fighteth Sinne with such a shield? When lustfull ease, hot wines, and stirring fare Are Satans baites, to draw vs to his snare. 505 We may eu'n of our selues an instance make, When did we entertaine such thoughts as these? Oh, when did we this Theame for Subiect take? When sinne begot with greatnes, nurst with ease, Confirm'd with vse, did seeke all meanes to please. The present humour, that did most delight, And fram'd our minds according to our might. 506 But now afflicting sorrow doth assaile vs, We tune our Consort to another key; We change our minds, because our means doe faile vs. And those lewd motiues being remou'd away Which did induce vs so to run astray. We now recall our wandring thoughts againe, And from our troubles take our truest Ayme.
507 O sad afliction, though thou seem'st severe, Yet often-times thou draw'st vs vnto God, "Who strikes, for to instruct, & Clouds, to cleare. "So doth the tender father vse the rod "So bitterest hearbes in medicines ot are sod. Of easie Reynes who doth no reck'ning make, Must needs be ridden with a rougher brake. 508 We were too full of rust, and sinfull soyle, VVhich like a Canker eates into the Soule, Our gracious God is pleas'd to vse this file To take that rust off, that did make vs foule, And since his Actions are without Controule. Let's meet his blessed will without submission, For he knowes best, what's best for our conditiō. 509 If thus thou dost account, thou reck'nest eu'n, And thou shalt sum thy Sorrowes with delight. "God strikes on earth, that he may stroake in heau'n, "He giues a Talent, whē he takes a mite. And least thy Soule should liue in endlesse night, He sends his Herauld onely to this end, That thou maist be his follower: He thy friend. 510 He ceas'd: I said: Spencer I find It true, Eu'n from my selfe I can th proofe deriue, "Calamitie doth fashion vs anew, "Remorcefull griefe, into the Soule doth diue "And sorrow makes repētant thoughts to thriue. "But full-fed men, and fortunes soaring high, "Care neither how to liue, nor how to dye.
511 I must confesse the truth: The time hath bin Whil'st my sweet-canded Fortune lasted still, I neuer thought on things, that were vnseene, I onely was obsequious to my will, My sense my God: whose lusts I did fulfill. And my deluded Soule did place it's good, Onely in that, that pleas'd my wanton blood. 512 How often did I plot Impietie? And fashion It, vpon my sinfull bed, Still hunting after resh varietie. Longing to act, what was in fancie bred, How much were all occasions welcommed? By which, I might adde heate vnto my fire, And still new formes, were fram'd by new desire. 413 And that, I might doe Ill without Controule, Without all checke, or touch of Conscience, How often did I say vnto my Soule? Injoy a present good: Be rul'd by sence; Not by opinion, or conceit, from whence Some curious braines haue forg'd strange Nouel∣ties, But be thou wise, and follow realties. 514 But Spencer, now I find, I was a foole, And like Ixion did a cloud Imbrace. Calamtie hath set mee to a Schoole Where (though I feele more griefe) I find more grace. And now I see, how wretched was my case, Whil'st being bewitch'd with false felicitie, I thought Religion but meere policie.
515 But now my Soule groanes with the weight of sin, And I lye prostrate at my Makers feet. I doe confesse, how sottish I haue bin, How my distast hath taken sower for sweet, I find a God, whose Iudgements now I meet. Damn'd Atheist, thou that say'st, There is no God Thou wilt confesse one, whē thou feel'st his rod. 516 Let Pharoh liue at rest, and he will wage VVar against heau'n: and aske who Is the Lord. Nay more, and more, the Tyrant still will rage, Till God draw forth his sharpe auenging sword, Till his just plagues no breathing time afford. Then▪ I haue sinn'd, Pray for me, Let them goe. And then, who God Is, Pharoh learnes to know. 517 So doth the Sharpest bryer heare sweetest Rose, And bittrest Poions purge the body best▪ How woundrously doth God his workes dispose That eu'n by Crosses he can make vs blest? And hatch our chiefest joy in sorrowes nest, Then let vs not repine against his doome, But weaue our web, as he hath warp'd our loome. 518 And Reading, of the world thou read'st aright. It is indeed, but meerely temporall, And those deare pleasures, wherein men delight, Friends, honours, riches, all are Casuall, And as they haue their honny, so their gall. There's nothing certaine in the world but this, "That euery worldly thing vncertaine Is.
519 Whom Rosie Phoebus rising in the East Hath seene aloft in glory and renowne, Before he tooke his lodging in the West, Hath often seene as low dejected downe▪ That man, that in the morning wore the Crown▪ Had not er'e night, nor Crown nor head to weare, So full of frailties are our fortunes here. 520 These were our parlies as we sate alone, These tearefull Tributes duely were defraid, Now did we walke, and weepe, now sit, & groane Till faithlesse Welch me (friendles wretch) betrays Vnto their hands, who streight, waies me conueys To Knnelworth, where I imprison'd lay, And neuer after saw one happy day. 521 The proofe whereof we doe not onely see, But by a selfe experience we doe feele, Others to vs haue taught, others shall bee Inform'd by vs? how that part of the wheele That's now aloft, doth streight wayes downward reele▪ And never rests at any certaine stay, But vp and downe weares out a wearie way. 522 The Spencers both the Father, and the Sonne Discended of an ancient worthy race, By whose directions all designes were done, And nothing past with-out their speciall grace, They were so great in power, so high in place. Both dy'd such wretched deaths, as men may say▪ A gloomie night shut vp a glorious day.
523 To vse the French-mans phrase, vnder an Oake They both of them at seuerall times did dye, Their Bodies quartered by the Hangmans stroake▪ Their Heads cut off, were placed very high; As Spectacles, for euery enuious Eye. Which done, sayes form of Law by lawlesse will, Though they deseru'd It, was vnjust and Ill. 524 The Sonne (Glosters proud Earle) so great before, Had a white Paper fix'd vpon his head. Wherein (both to disgrace and grieue him more) In * Capitall letters were CaractredQuid glorivis potens i moliti ud Those words, that in one of the Psalmes are read; For so the two and fiftieth doth begin, Thou Mightie Man, why do'st thou boast i Sinne? 525 Vnhappie Lord, It was enough to dye, It was too much, to dye with sorne and shame. "Men should not trample vpon miserie, "Since euery Mothers Sonne may share the same, I know he was in many things too blame. Proud, griping, cruell, Well: Say what you can, Yet giue me leaue to say: Hee was a man. 526 I write not Idly, doe not read mee so; I pray obserue, vpon what slipperie way, "Greatnes, (that is too great) doth euer goe "How apt It is to catch a fall, and they "That so doe slip, how readily they may "Breake their own necks: without especiall grace, "They fall not soft, that fall from an high place.
527 Besides, who will obserue the Course of things From Conquering Williams Raige, til this our age, Shall find, how those great Fauorites of Kings Haue by themselues bin brought to tragicke stage Or prou'd vnprosperous by the vulgar rage Or weeded vp by him that next succeeds, Such dangerous humours swelling greatnesse breeds. 528 Thou shalt not need, to trauaile very farre To fetch in matter, to informe thy mind▪ Of which, our Stories true relaters are, Studie but them, Thou shalt not faile to find Particuler Examples, in each kind▪ I am, but as an Index to a Booke To point thee too 't: Turne thou the leaues and looke. 529 Aske Wolsey, Aske Lord Cromwell, Both will say That Princes Minions doe but hold at will. That, fauours neuer were Free holds, but they Are soone transferr'd from one t' another still; That, as the wind doth change▪ So must the Mill. Bee turn'd about, and euery-one doth know, "Winds doe not alwayes in one quarter blow. 530 Empson, and Dudley flourish'd very faire, And mightie were, during seuenth Henries raigne; But he being dead, his next succeeding Heire Did cut them downe, and they did fall againe. They had their waxing, and they had their wane. And for the vulgar rage, who doth not know, How many mightie men haue perish'd so.
531 I was my selfe depos'd by Parliament From Princely rule, as one not fit to raigne Both Peeres, and people, all did giue consent, That I vnking'd in durance should remaine, And sent their Agents to me, to explaine That if I would not to my Sonne resigne, They'd chuse a Prince out of some other Line. 532 O Englands Peeres, weigh what you take in hand, Looke but with Iudgement, into your designe, That wch you now attempt, will wracke the Land The wounds whereof, will bleed in after-time, And Babes vnborne, will Curse your hatefull crime. For what so doth peruert the course of things Wrath, Enuie, death, and desolation brings. 533 There is a lawfull, and a certaine right, Which alwayes must be kept Inuiolate. And being infring'd by practise, or by might▪ Drawes fearfull Iudgements downe vpon a State. Then you, or yours will wish (although too late) That I had kept my rightfull Int'rest still, And you had not bin Agents in this Ill. 534 When your owne children shall each other wound And with accursed hands gore eythers brest; When Ciuill furie shall your state confound, Then will you say; His Ghost is not at rest His, whom vnjustly we haue dispossest. The second Ewards: for whose Sacrifice Your Nphews then shall pay a bloudie price.
535 Neuer (O neuer) was the rightfull Course Of this our Crowne peruerted, or supprest. But still the same hath bin the fatall source Of many mischiefes, and of much vnrest. And as the Land hath bin therewith opprest So the vsurpers neuer kept it long In any quiet, what they got with wrong. 536 William who with his sword did get the Crowne, Winning by Conquest, what he kept with Care (The true & lawfull heire being shouldred down) Like a wood-Lyon (His owne word) did fare Against the English, whom he did not spare Or young, or old, that were of worth, and place. And for the rest, He yoak'd with bondage base. 537 And as he toyl'd the Land, with his vnrest, So tasted hee his share of miserie. Robert rebels: a Byrd of his owne nest, The Normans breake forth into mutinie, T' opressed English hatch conspiracie. Alwayes in Forreigne broyles▪ or Ciuill strife, And so wastes forth a wretched wearie life. 538 Nay Death, the Period-maker of all moane Eu'n against Nature, followes him with spight, The mightie Prince of thousands waited-on Being dead, Is left alone forsaken quite, No Sonne, no friend, to doe him his last right. None, that vouchsaf'd to giue him buriall, But vnregarded lay, despis'd of all.
539 Nay more, The ground where he should be Inter'd Anselme Fitz-Arthur(his dead bones to spight) Claim'd as his owne, (A thing not euer heard) And for the Prince (there dead) by lawlesse might Had worm'd him out of that, which was his right. On Gods behalfe, He did forbid them all Within his Earth, to giue him buriall. 540 Nor would he cease the challenge he had made, Nor yet, durst they interre his Corpes therein, Vntill a summe of mony was defray'd With which, they pay'd a ransome for his sinne So much a doe had this great Prince to winne That which none doth the poorest wretch deny. A bed of peace, where his dead bones might lye. 541 Nor was the streame of miserie thus stay'd, The date of our Affliction lasted still. There is not yet, sufficient ransome pay'd, The Ill-got Scepter, must be sway'd as Ill, Rufus succeeds, and still more bloud doth pill. Still hauocks more, and still doth Tyrannize, Vntill by sodaine violence, he dyes▪ 542 Nor did the Crowne stand well on any head, Till * Ben. Clarke got the Scepter in his hand,HENRY, 1. Who to the Saxon Maude being married. Some beames of cōfort cheer'd the drooping Land, And then our State in peacefull tearmes did stand. Till Henry dy'd: and Steephen vnjustly got▪ The Crowne, and set new troubles here on foot.
543 Then burst there forth, an all consuming flame, The Empresse Made sought to require her right. Steephen had the Crowne, and he would keepe the same; Vntill She could recouer It by fight. Then followed all the hostile Acts of spight. Sword, fire, Rapes, murders, leaguers, wast and wrack. And nothing of extreamest Ills did lacke. 544 So hath vnjust Succession scourg'd this Realme At length Steephen dyes, after a wretched Raigne Then Second Henry weares the Diadem, In whom, the rightfull Title did remaine, And then our state did happy fortunes gaine. Then did our strength encrease, our bounds ex∣tend; And many nations to our yoake did bend. 545 And Richard his braue Sonne did next succeed In a just Course, and all things prosper'd well. In Sria hee did many a worthy deed, The Easterne world of his exploits can tell, And many thousand miscreants sent to Hell, By his vnconquered Armes: haue prou'd long since That Cure-De Lyon was a peerlesse Prince. 546 He dead, young Arthur should haue had ye Crown, The Sonne of Ieffrey, who was Henries Sonne Had not King Iohn his Vnckle put him downe, Who being hauld on by Ambition Diuerts the Course of true succession▪ Makes himselfe King vsurpes the Princes name, And murthers Arthur, to secure the same.
547 And now (O now) begins our Tragedie, VVhere Death and horrour onely Actors are. Iohn gouernes (as hee got) preposterously And doth both with his Peeres, and Clergie jarre. Then Ianus sets wideope the gates of warre. And then the Land with blood was ouerflowne, And none could safely call his owne, his owne. 548 Then were the Cities sack'd, the fields lay'd wast, The Virgins forc'd, the Marriage bed defil'd. Then were the auncient Monuments defac'd. The Portes vntraffick'd landed vp, and spoyl'd. Eu'n God himselfe seem'd hence to bee exil'd. The land was Curs'd, all Sacred rights were bard And Six yeeres space, no publike prayers were heard. 549 Then did the King lease forth the Realme to Rome. Then did the Peeres to France betray the Crowne. O heau'ns great King, how fearefull is thy doome? How many mighty Plagues canst thou powre downe Vpon a Nation, If thou please to frowne. Arthur, It was the wrong done thee of late, That made just Heau'n so to afflict our State. 550 But yet, might not his death that did the deed, Bee a Peace-offring to redeeme the Sinne? Why should the Land of ye one wound still bleed? Or wherefore dy'd not his offence with him? Was not the measure heap'd-vp to the brim Both of the Ills hee suffred, and had done, But that the guilt must prosecute the Sonne?
551 O no: Although third Henry was the man In whom, The lawfull Title was Inuested (For Arthur dead, the right was then in Iohn And Iohn decea'sd, the same in Henry rested) Yet, that the world should see, ow God detested Such wrongfull meanes, Acts so vniustly done, The Fathers whip is made to lash the Sonne. 552 For still did Ciuill furie wound the state During the time of Henries pupillage, And still the Peeres swolne with Intestie hate Against theyr harmelesse Prince, being vnder age Cōbine themselues wth France: & whē that rage Was spent, the Barons-warre brake forth againe, So full of troubles was third Henries raigne. 553 Hee dead, my Father Long-shankes then did raigne, And in due Course succeeded next his Sire; Then all afflictions did begin to waine, And England did to peace and wealth aspire. Nor did the streame of blisse flow euer higher: Then when first Edward managed the State, Prudent in Peace, and in warres fortunate. 554 That Noble Prince to mee my birth did giue, Whom I succeeded in a rightfull line. You all haue sworne Allegiance whilst I liue, And will you now inforce mee to resigne? Will you againe with wicked hands vnt wine That Sacred chayne, whereon depends our good, And drowne this Iland once againe in blood?
555 O, If you doe disorder thus the Crowne, And turne the lawfull course another way. If you vnjustly wring from mee mine owne, You spinne a Thred, to worke our owne decay And my propheticke Soule doth truely say The time will come, when this vniust designe; Will plague your selues, your sonnes, and mine owne line. 556 For from my Stocke two branches shall arise From whom shall grow such great dis-union, As many thousand liues shall not suffice To re-unite them both againe in One, England shall wast more deare blood of her owne, Against her selfe, then would suffice t' obtaine All France, and conquer Germany, and Spaine. 557 Thou wert too true a Prophet fatall King, And thy Presages were too ominous. From thee, and from thy worthy Sonne did spring Those Families, that so afflicted vs; For Yorke and Lancaster litigious For the Crowne-right, did make the Sword their plea, And so white Albion grew to be a red-Sea. 558 But when that men are bent to doe amisse, Then all perswasions are but spent in vaine. The Parliament was resolute in this That I their King no longer should remaine. Whereto If I oppos'd my selfe: 'Twas vaine. They were resolu'd: And my peruersnes might Make them perhaps to doe my Son lesse right.
559 Which when I heard, thinke how my soule did war Within It selfe, which way I should incline. Deare was my Sonne, my selfe was dearer farre, By my Eclipse must I procure his shine? Cannot hee raigne, vnlesse I now resigne? My Father dy'd e're I could get the Crowne. I liue: And yet my Sonne must put me downe. 560 My Sonne? (Alas poore Prince) It is not hee, For many Wolues maske in that Lambes attire. Proud Mortimer,'Tis thou vncrownest mee. Luxurious Queene, This is thy foule desire, And moodie Tarleton(bellowes of this fire) 'Tis you that are the marrow of this sinne My Sonne doth serue, but for the outward skin. 561 You are the wheeles that make this Clock to strike My fatall hower; The last of all my good, For this is not the height of your dislike. "Death is the fruit, when Treason is the bud, "Such practices doe alwayes end in blood. "Whē others stumble, Kings fall headlong down "There is no meane betwixt a Graue & Crown▪ 562 "For this is certaine: Sinne doth alwayes find "Within It selfe sufficient cause of feare. "'Tis dangerous, to trust a guiltie mind. "The Creditor remou'd, the debt's thought cleare "Men hate whō they haue wrong'd, & hating feare "And fearing will not cease, till they haue prou'd "All meanes, by which the cause may be remou'd.
563 Therefore, would I might leade a priuate life In some sequestred place, which none might see. Where I may seeke, to reconcile the strife That Sinne hath made, betwixt my God, and mee. For if the ransome of my Crowne might free My life from slaughter, little would I grieue, "There's none so wretched but desires to liue. 564 And yet why should I loose or life or Crowne? Are liues, or Crownes so light and easie losses? 'Tis vaine to aske, why fortune list to frowne, Or to dispute the causes of our Crosses▪ When Ships at Sea, stormes winds and billowes tosses It boots not ask, why winds and stormes should rise, "All ruling heau'n respects not humaine whyes? 565 Cato would know a reason of the Gods Why Pompey should by Caesar vanquish'd bee? Whose cause was better (as he thought) by oddes. Cato, thou seest Euents, thou canst not see Their causes: They are kept reseru'd from thee, In Gods close Cabinet, being safely layd; And hee must not bee question'd, but obey'd. 566 The stately Steed that champs the steely bit, And proudly seemes to menace friend and foe, Doth fling, and foame, and boundeth oft, and yet Poore beast perforce hee is inforc'd to goe. Eu'n so far'd I: and since It must bee so, As good the same should seeme to come from me, 'Twas best to will, what gainst my will would be.
567 And so I made a solemne resignation Of all my right and Title to my Sonne, And there withall an earnest Protestation (Which was with sighes, & weeping teares begun) How much I grieu'd, that I had so misdone, As to procure thereby my Peoples hate, And so bee thought vnworthy of the State. 568 Which since I was, I willingly would giue Vnto my Sonne my throne of Maiestie; Desiring them, to giue mee leaue to Liue, And not too much tread on my miserie: For I had once their Faith, and fealtie. Which, though I now discharg'd, & set them free, Though not obey, yet should they pitie mee. 569 The Crowne had often made my head to Ake, And I pray'd God, my Sonne felt not the same. Whom they should not lesse value for my sake, Since by his vertue hee might salue my shame. And well I hop'd, my President would tame All youthfull humours, which are easily led Vnto those courses which Confusion bred. 570 And here, (though griefe my sences did o'rewhelm And I did swone, e're formes could finished bee) Yet * Thomàs Trussell Knight for all the RealmeSpeaker of the Parlia∣ment. Did then renounce Allegiance vnto mee And of all Faith and Seruice set men free. My Steward brake his staffe: my State before Was now discharg'd, and I was King no more.
571 Marke what pretences wrong can make of right, How loath men seeme 'gainst Iustice o offend. O Sacred vertue! Thou art full of might, When eu'n thy foes thy Title will pretend, As if thy onely shadow could amend All Impious Acts: But now 'tis growne an vse Thou must bee made a Bawd vnto abuse. 572 Well, well wise Politickes! With formall shewes Your lawlesse Actions you haue gilded ouer. And now the streame in a smooth channell goes. My resignation now doth fairely Couer Your foule Abuse: But Time will truth discouer. That's current now, that will not alwayes goe, "Formes serue for men: God Is not serued so▪ 573 Your hands can not wipe off the holy-Oyle Which hee hath layd on Kingly Maiestie. Nor your deuices wash away the soyle From your owne Soules of wilfull Periurie To God: To mee of Infidelitie. Vse all your Art, you neuer can get free From that just Oath▪ you gaue to God, and mee. 574 When I had thus departed from my Crowne, I did bewayle the wayning of my State. Poore Prince (sayd I) how low art thou cast down From that high Heau'n, wch thou inioy'dst of late? Thou hast no prospect, but an Iron-grate. Thy costly Hangings, ragged walles of stone, And all thy solace, solitarie moane.
575 Now of a Cushion thou must make a Crowne, And play the mock-king with it on thy head. And on the Earth (thy chaire of State) sit downe, And why not so? Since thou art Earthly bred. But for a Scepter how wilt thou bee sped? Why, take a brand, and shake it in thy hand, And now, thou art a King of high Command. 576 All guiding Heau'n what change doe I indure? Once wealth at will: But wealthy now in want. Then men my pleasure, now my paine procure. Then sumptuous houses, now one Chamber scant. Then thoughts of rest, now restlesse thought doth plant The sad remembrance of my wretched fate, What now I am, and what I was of late. 577 Mee thinkes, the Birds vpbraid me in their songs And earely sing my shame in euery place. Me thinks, the waters murmure forth my wrongs, And in their course discourse of my disgrace. Me thinkes, the Sunne doth blush to see my face. The whistling winds (me thinks) do witnes this, "No griefe so great, as to haue liu'd in blisse. 578 When I complaine to Eccho of head-aking, Shee sounds a King: And yet no King am I. In silent night, when I my rest am taking, I dreame of Kings, yet I vnking'd doth lye. And till sweet sleepe seales-vp my weary Eye. I cannot fixe my thought on any thing, Bu tels mee straight; that once I was a King.
579 That once I was, (aye me) that now I am not, And now I am not, would I had bin neuer. Lesse feeles he want, that yet to plenty came not. "To haue bin happie: Is vnhappy euer, But to forget my selfe I will endeauour. One of the Soules perfections, Memorie Is vnto me a Cause of miserie. 580 Restlesse remembrance, how dost thou torment The feeling Soule, with a sad apprehension Of former pleasure, present discontent? Of many wrongs in Act, more in Intention And they without all compasse of preuention. "It is some Comfort (though a wretched one) "To know, Our sorrows are at their high-noone. 581 "But to feele miserie in a high degree, (And sure, I am not sencelesse of my smart) "Yet still to feare, that It will worser be, "Is a most eating Corr'siue to the heart. But (O) my thoughts why doe you beare a part In these sad dumpes: This plain-song only sing, I was not borne, nor shall I dye a King. 582 So when the tempest of my stormie passion (Wch at the first, wrought strongly on my sence) Was somewhat calm'd, then I in better fashion Began to sift the mouing Causes, whence My great disasters did at first Commence. And after such a serious scrutinie, I found, That Sinne had caus'd my miserie.
583 I did forget my duty to my God, My Subjects they neglected theirs to mee. It was high time for him to vse the rod, And lash me mee foundly: When that he did see How milder med'cines could not worke on me, "When the still growing Gangreane hazards life, "The skilfull Surgeon needs must vse the knife. 584 I writ awry, and God hath rul'd me thus With his blacke-lead, to make my lines more streight, "It is a Iustice sweet and gracious, "To make a daring Sinner feele the weight "Of his owne sinnes; and so vnload the freight Wherewith the burd'ned Soule, did sinke before "The more we feele, humbled we are the more. 585 And God is gracious, when by punishments Hee makes the Sinner see his woefull case Who vpon sight and sence thereof repents; Humbling himselfe before th' Almighties face, And that makes way vnto ensuing grace: For then doth CHSIST that good Samaritan Powre Wine and Oyle into the wounded Man. 586 When the sear'd Soule (that feeles no smart at all, But is by pleasure nusled in its Ill) Doth still remaine a poore Captiued Thrall To Sinne, and Satan: Who commands him still Both in his vnderstanding, and his will. Till at the last comes death, and rings his knell; Who liuing feares not, dying findeth Hell.
587 This I know true, by selfe-experience; For being thus mur'd vp in miserie. I then began to haue a feeling sence Of mine owne Sinnes: which blinded libertie Kpt from my sight: Or did so qualifie, That I did hold my selfe in best estate, When my condition was most desperate. 588 But seeing now my danger: I began To cast about, how to preuent the Ill. I found, there was nor helpe nor hope, in man; For they that wrong'd me now, would wrong me still, And they had able means to work their will. At last I found a Supreame Dietie, Who could or mend, or end my miserie. 589 O then my Soule, aduance thy thoughts to heau'n. If there be hope of helpe, there it doth rest, And onely by that hand it must be giu'n That festred sore, that matters in thy brest? That worme with-in thee, will not let thee rest. Till thy Repentance, makes thy peace with God And thou canst blesse his hand, and kisse his Rod. 590 Heau'n-seeking Soule, (whoeuer that thou bee) Let me acquaint thee with one meditation. Which was like Ajax's buckler vnto me A seu'n-fold shield, temp'red in such a fashion As did abate the Edge of all temptation. And this It was: As I sate musing long, My hart grew hot, and I spake with my tongue.
591 Number the Moates, that in the Sun-beames fly. Number the Sand, vpon the beachy shore. Number the sparkling Diamonds of the sky. But number not my sins: for they are more, Yet joyne in one, Moates, Sands, Starres, Sins, All oure. Nay, be they many more, then all these are, The mercies of my God are more by farre. 592 And mine he is: and all those mercies mine, Not by deseruing worth, that is in me; But by that Int'rest, which is truely thine (O blessed IESVS) and transferr'd from thee To mee most sinfull wretch: So mine they bee. So God is mine: And this I fully know, Because my blessed IESVS makes him so. 593 But how comes IESVS to be thine? By faith, Which Apprehends him, and applyes him too. That may be false: O no: The Spirit saith (The Sacred Spirit) That all which he did doe Whil'st he did liue, And all he suffer'd too By his free Grace doth vnto me pertaine, Nay, Is made truely mine: And ther's my claime. 594 Thy Claime is grounded on a weake foundation, What if that Spirit doth informe a Lye. Then wher's thy strange presumptiō of Saluation? O no: It is Gods Spirit certainly. And hee's a God of truth, and veritie. How know'st thou this? Because his motions tend To make me good and happie at my end.
595 Because he makes me see my owne demerit, And what is lustly due to me by right, And then hee Comes, and like a blessed Spirit Presents my gracious Sauiour to my sight, Makes me lay hold on Christ, with all my might. And tender him vnto the God of heau'n To cleare my score, & make our reck'nings eu'n. 596 In these good thoughts, I spent my best of Time, My Cosin * Leicester well respecting me,Henry Earle of Lecester kept him at Kenelworth. Which to my foes did seeme a heinous Crime. Who after Consultation did agree, Some lesse Indulgent should my keepers bee. And * Gurney,Tho. Gurney Iob. Maltre∣vers, Knights. and, * Maltrevers chosen were, To rid me of my life, them of their feare. 597 They that haue Eares to heare of my extreames, And feeling hearts, to comprehend my woes. And yet haue Eyes as dry as Sunny beames, Whence no moyst Teares (poore Pitties tribute) flowes. Within such minds whole mines of marble growes Flint-hearted men that pitie not my moane, Some Gorgons head, hath turn'd your hearts to stone. 598 And what haue I to doe with stonie hearts? With men of marble, what haue I to doe? I take no pleasure in Pigmalions Arts, I would not worke on stone, or marble wooe Hee lou'd his stony-maide, and had her too. She was transform'd at his incessant moane, So were my foes, but chang'd from men to stone.
599 And would to God, I had beene chang'd like thē, Then without sence, I should haue borne my pain. "And senceless haplesse are halfe-happie men, "who feele no grief, what need they much cōplain, But I was touch'd, being strucke in euery veine. That my extreames, to their desires might bring The fatall Period, whence their feares did spring. 600 And first, They hurried me from place to place, might haue Intelligence of me. clothed me with garments vile and base, my selfe, that I vnknowne might bee, And least, I should the chearefull day-light see. I still remou'd, when Sol his course had run, My day was night, & Moone-shine was my Sun. 601 I did lament, that woes to words might yield, And said: Faire Cynthia with whose brightsome shine This sable-night doth beate a siluer shield. Yet thou art gracious to these griefes of mine. That wth thy light do'st cheare my weeping Eyne. Thou borrowest light, to lend the same to me, I lighten those, that my Eclipsers bee. 602 The glorious Sunne (thy Brother) lends thee light, My Sonne makes me obscure, vnlike to thee. Eniions loue, thou did'st with loue require, My loue distresseth, and disdaineth me; Yet both too like in often changing bee. O no, for thou being wan'd, dost wax againe, But still her loue continues in the wayne.
603 Some doe ascribe the Oceans ebbs and flowes Vnto thy Influence, working in the same. I wot not that, but this poore Edward knowes, Men ebbe and flow, as Fortune list to frame; Whose smiles, or frownes doe make or marre our game. Then since we all must stoope vnto her lure, When shee is false, how may our states be sure. 604 But cease (faire Phoebe) cease thy beautious shine, Spend not thy rayes on such a wretch, as I; 'Gainst whō the very Heau'ns themselues repine, Whose presence, All good-boading stars doe flye, Then giue me leaue, that I obscure may dye. And suffer me, vnsought, vnseene to goe; "Some ease It is, not to be knowne in woe. 605 And that, the humid vapours of the night Might be of force, to make weake nature faile They made me ride cold, and bare-headed quite To whom both hats & heads were wont to vaile, Whil'st I with prosperous wind at will did sayle. But now, I was reproach'd with hatefull Crimes, O Times, O Men; O Change of men, and Times. 606 Thinke not, that I was Marble, not to haue A sence of Ill, after a feeling fashion, Which made me sometimes for to fret, and raue, Sometimes to weepe▪ and humbly beg compassion, As I was sway'd by variable passion. Remembring what I was, some storms did passe, And streight a calme, remembring what I was.
607 Traytors (quoth I) Why doe you vse me thus? Know you not me? Forget you whom I am? Was not great Long-shanks Father vnto vs? I Kingly Edward, Second of that name? Why kneele you not? Oft haue you done the same. Why shold you not? since you are sworn to do It, And by our birth-right wee are borne vnto It. 608 From forth the Loines of many Kings came I, This head hath beene Impaled with a Crowne, And will you now a simple Hat deny? I'le be reueng'd: They doe not feare my frowne, Too well, too well they know, my Sun is down. My day is done, Now doth my night begin; And Owles, not Eagles vse to flye therein. 609 I haue bin Grac'd, let me be gracious now, I haue Commanded, Let me now request. Your sometime. King hath humble knees to bow, And weeping Eyes to craue some little rest; Mans heart is flesh: He hath no flintie brest. One * Aristomines had a hayrie heartlinius. But you are stones: else would you rue my smart. 610 And that I might be wretched euery way, That euery sence might haue his proper paine. The Byrd, to whom Promethius was a prey. The waking Serpent, that doth rest restraine, Hunger I meane, did gnaw on me amaine Hunger, which often forc'd me eate such food, As weak'ned Nature, and corrupted blood.
611 I that Lucullus-like, was seru'd at will, With whatsoeuer Sea, or Land affords, Would now be glad of Crumes, to feed my fill, Such want doth often follow wastfull boards, Better the frugall fare of Rootes, and gourdes, Which keepes the Soule and body both in health, And God doth blesse wth great encrease of wealth. 612 Camelions feede vpon the peircing Ayre, O that kind Nature, had but made mee such, The Salamander doth It's strength repaire Amid'st the fire, when It the flame doth touch, Against whose happie state I did not grudge, But onely wish'd my selfe, to haue like meanes For hunger is th' Extreamest of Extreames, 613 I thought sometimes, to Eate my very flesh, My brawn-lesse armes would do some little good, But still my stomacke loathed such a messe, And would not serue mee to digest my blood. My teeth should rather teare the stones for food, I'de soften them with teares, & ceaslesse moanes, But stones were hard, and men more hard then stones, 614 And for to make me fret my selfe to death, They crost, and thwarted me in euery thing, Sweete-sugred words like to the Panthers breath, You pleasing Tongues, whose Chimes so sweetly ring▪ Where are you now? why sooth you not your King Yea, so you will: But that is not my Case And flatterers tune not to the meane, or base,
615 How deadly Is the venome of faire toungs? Whose Nectar-tearms do seeme more smooth then oyle And all the breath, that commeth from their lungs Is sweet in shew, but full of gall, and guile. Beleeue me, There's more danger in their smile Then in their frowne: for seene is soone detected. "But they hurt most, that are the least suspected. 616 O why are Princes like to brazen Pots Which being great, are lifted by the Eares? Little see they, their reaches, and their plots, Whose tongus are tun'd to sooth them many yeres Till turnes are seru'd: & then It streight appeares. That Hony gone, the Combes are soone rejected, And wanting meanes, the man is lesse respected. 617 May it please your Highnes: was my wonted stile: Whose pleasure now is lesse esteem'd then mine: Did I looke Cloudy? Who durst seeme to smile? Or was I pleasant? Who durst then repine? Spake I? Apolloes words were lesse diuine. What e're I did, Applause grac'd every thing. And this the cause: Because, I was a King. 618 But now the Spring-time of my Blisse is done, Those Nightingales that did so sweetly sing In this my winter, all are fled, and gone Nay turn'd to Serpents, that both hisse and sting. So Bels to Marriage-Feasts, and Burials ring. A King: No King: Hap, and mishap doth bring, And none so haplesse, as a King, no King.
619 And that my words might vnrespected be, And neither they, nor I regarded ought. They gaue it out, my senses failed me, And I was mad, and helpelesly distraught, 'Tis true, I haue beene mad, and dearely bought My madnes: I was mad, when I did blot My Soule with Sinne: When I my God forgot. 620 But now my sences are restor'd againe, And I begin to see, how mad I was; To put my trust, in things that are so vaine, To change my heau'nly gold, for earthly glasse, To dote on shadowes, letting substance passe, And now my God hath purg'd that Lunacie. With bitter Potions of Calamitie. 621 And (O) this sicknesse is too generall, The world doth groane vnder this mad disease, This franticke humour doth distract vs all, We onely seeke the present sence to please, And whil'st we liue, so we may float at ease. We quite forget the place, where we must Land, The Throne of Iudgment, where we al must stand. 622 Why should mankind, be so extreamely mad, As for the short fruition of base pleasure, (Which often Is repented, when 'tis had) To loose a soule, more worth then Worlds of trea∣sure? This is Indeed a madnes aboue measure. Thus once I rau'd, and therefore now I rue, Thus raue you now, and therefore so shall you.
623 And least my Torments should but seeme to cease Or breath a while, They would not let moe rest, Of quiet sleepe (The harbinger of peace The Common Inne both vnto man and beast) My weary Eyes could neuer bee possest, My head waxt light, yet heauie was my heart; Two Contraries, One Cause, but no desert. 624 I that had once so many Princly bowers, And in the same, so many beds of state, With sweete Perfumes, and beautious Paramouts And melodie, such as at Plutoes gate Once Orpheus play'd, and all most delicate To charme the sences, and bewitch the Soule, Must now not sleepe one hower with-out Con∣troule. 625 O Iustice! what a Tallie do'st thou keepe Of all our sinnes, and how thou pay'st them right? "Though God doth winke, yet doth he neuer sleep "The Eye of heau'n sees in the darkest night. My wast of Time in sleep (then thought but light) Was chalked vp, and now hee payes the score With want of that, which I abus'd before. 626 Fond men (quoth I) you haue in all bin cruell, But yet in this, you are too much vnwise, If to my Torments you would adde more fewell, You should permit some slumber to mine Eyes, That being wak'd, fresh sorrow might arise, Nor can I last, my strength with watching spent, "For bowes grow weak, that neuer stand vnbēt
627 Besides, Continuall thinking of my woe So duls my sences, that I feele It lesse, "As Paths grow plaine, whereon we alwayes goe "So Hearts grow hard, that neuer find redresse, And you will make mee sencelesse by excesse. I know, you hate mee, shew your hate therfore, And let mee slumber, for to vex mee more. 628 And that my greife might worke on mee the more By apprehension of my present fall, And sad remembrance of my state before. They wreath'd a Crowne of Hay: & therewithall They Crowned me: and King eft-soones did call. Phurp, Phurp, (say they) God saue this jolly King O saue me God! whom Div'ls to death would bring. 629 And thou meek Lamb, that by thy precious blood Hast made Atonement twixt my God, and mee, (Which was more Soueraigne for a sinners good Then sweetest mirrhe, or purest balme could bee) In my weake steppes I somewhat follow thee. The Spunge, the Speare, the Crosse, y• Crowne of Thorne Thy ensignes are, and may not else bee borne. 630 Thy head was Crown'd with Thorn, mine but wth Hay. Thou knew'st no sin, my sinnes the sands exceed. Well may I follow, when thou lead'st the way, And (O) that I might follow thee Indeed Then of the Tree of Life, my soule should feed. My soule that hath no other hope but this, Who will be thine, Thou alwayes wilt bee his.
631 Sweet Sauiour Christ, these are the hopes I haue, Though they afflict me, yet my Soule is thine. A Tyrant cannot reach beyond the graue These fierie tryals make me brighter shine Thou wilt relieue me, when thou see'st thy time Or I shall end: 6 Or they at last will cease. Thou wilt giue patience till thou giu'st release, 632 And that I might eu'n of my selfe be hated, They shau'd off all my beard in my disgrace. The Instrument a Razor blunt, rebated. And from a muddy ditch, neere to that place They fetch'd cold filthy water for my face. To whom I said, that eu'n in their despight, I would haue warme: My teares should doe that right. 633 These drops of brine, yt poure down frō mine eyes, Mine eyes, cast vp to heau'ns high glorious frame, That from, whence God all earthly deeds descryes. That God, that guerdons sin with death & shame. Shall witnesse, yea, and will reuenge the same. That you haue bin most cruell to your King, Whose death, his Doome: His doome your deaths will bring. 634 Vnmanly men, Temember what I was, And thinke withall, what you your selues may be, I was a King: A powerfull King I was: You see my tall, and can your selues be free? But you haue friends, why, you were friends to me And yet, you see how much your loue is chang'd; So others loues from you may bee estrang'd.
635 But you are young, and full of able strength, And am not I? What bootes my strength or youth, Both now seem firme, but both shall faile at length, "Old Age cold Ache: and both sad griefe pursu'th, But you are wise, the more should be your ruth Of mine estate, whose wracke may teach you this That balefull chance may clowd your greatest blisse. 636 You are not, No, you are not Beasts by birth, Nor yet am I made of a seneclesse stone. We all are fram'd, and all shall turne to Earth, You should haue feeling Soules, for I haue one. Then see me at least, relenting to my moane. I Pittie craue, and crauing let me haue It, Because one day your selues may need to craue It. 637 But these sad motiues could not worke at all In their hard steelie hearts the least remorse. They rather added wormewood to my gall, And exercise of Ills did make them worse. So violent streames hold an their wonted course. And being flesh'd in Crueltie before, Vse made the habite perfect more and more. 638 And least one torment should be left vntry'd, They shut me in a valt, and layd by mee Dead Carkasses of men, who lately dy'd, That their foule stincke my fatall bane might bee, These were the Objects that mine eyes did see. These smels I felt, with these I did conuerse, And vnto these, These plaints I did rehearse.
639 O happie Soules, whose bodies here I see (For you haue play'd your parts, and are at rest) Yet somewayes haplesse, you may seeme to bee That wich your bodies I am thus distrest. Perhaps you grieue (If that you know at least) That by your means, your King is thus tormented. Grieue not (deare soules) for I am well cōtented. 640 'Tis not your bodies (sencelesse as they are) That doe inflict these Torments on your King, But the fierce Agents of proud Mortimer, Frō them my plagues proceed as from their spring, And (O) just Heau'n! Let them their tribute bring Backe to the Ocean, whence they first did flow, And in their passage, still more greater grow. 641 But what poore soules haue you deseru'd so ill? That being dead, you must want buriall. Nothing but this: I must my fates fulfill, And still be plagu'd with woes vnnaturall, My wretchednesse must still transcend in all. The liuing, and the dead must doe me spight, And you (alas) for me must want your right. 642 But you are happy, free from sence of wrong; Here are your bodies, but your soules are well. Death, doe not thou forbeare thy stroake too long, That with these happie soules my soule may dwel. And soule be glad to goe: Here is thy Hell. And eu'n in this, th'art happie, that 'tis here, O better so, Then it should be else-where.
643 What seest thou now, but Objects of disgrace? What do'st thou heare, but scornes, and words of spight, What do'st thou touch, that Is not vile and base? What do'st thou smell, but stench both day and night? What do'st thou tast, that may procure delight? Thy sight, thy hearing, touching, tast and smell All cry for Heau'n, for here is now thy Hell. 644 This darke-some Vault, the house of Acharon, These wicked men like Fiends doe torture me. This miseries sinke resembles Phlegeton, My acted Sinnes like fearefull furies bee, And he that would a whole Infernall see. Let him obserue the plagues, that I endure, And hee shall find them Hells true portraiture. 645 The Earth it selfe, is wearie of my paine, And like a tender Mother moanes for mee, From me thou cam'st, returne to me againe, Within my wombe I'le keepe the safe (quoth she) And from these vile abuses set thee free. Never shall these fell Tyrants wrong thee more, Hee that payes death, dischargeth euery score. 646 These bodyes that thou seest thy Brothers were, Subject to many wants, and thousand woes, They now are clear'd from Care, and free'd from feare, And from the pressures of Insulting foes, And now, they liue in joy, and sweet repose, Thy selfe can'st witnesse, that they feele no woe, And as they rest, eu'n thou shalt rest thee so.
647 Their eyes, that whil'st they liu'd oft Tyded teares Thou seest, how sweetly they Injoy their rest, Those harsh vnpleasing sounds that wrong'd their Eares, Are turn'd to Angels tunes among the blest. Their Soules that were wth pensiue thoghts possest, Now in their Makers bosome without end, Injoy that peace, whereto thy Soule doth bend. 648 And thou hast need of peace (poore wretched Soule) If euer any Soule had need of Peace. God being in Armes against thee doth enroule All Nature in his list, which doth not cease To fight against thee, and doth still Increase Thy wretchednesse, forbeare rebellious dust, To warre with him, who is most great and just, 649 O would to God, that I had dy'd ere this, Then had my sinnes bin fewe then they are. Then had my Soule long since repos'd in blisse, That now Is wandring still in wayes of Care, "Lifes griefe exceeds lifes good with-out Cōpare. Each day doth bring a fresh supply to Sorrow, Most wretched now, yet shalbe more to morrow. 650 My carefull mother might haue helped mee When I lay sprawling in her tender wombe. If she had made her burd'ned Bellie bee My fruit-lesse birth-bed, and my fatall Tombe, Sure had she knowne her Sonnes accursed doome. She never would haue wrong'd her selfe so much, To beare a wretch, saue whom was never such.
651 My tender Nurse is guilty of these paines, Shee might haue put some poyson in my pap, Or let me fall, and so dash'd out my braines, When she full oft did dance me on her lap, A thousand wayes had freed me from mishap. But he whom Heau'n ordaines to liue distrest, Death will delay to set that wretch at rest. 652 For Death's the wearie Pilgrims rest and joy, This world of woes a hard and flintie way, Our birth the path, that leades to our annoy Our friends are fellowpassengers to day And gone to morrow, Honour Is a stay That eyther stops, or leades vs else amisse▪ Pleasures are Theeues, that Intercept our blisse. 653 And in the passage, as the way doth lye Wee meet with seuerall Innes, wherein we rest Some at the Crowne are lodg'd, and so was I: Some at the Castle: So am I distrest; Some at the Horne, That married folkes doe feast. Though men haue divers Innes, yet all men haue One home, to which they go, & that's the graue. 564 Yet whil'st we trauaile Fortune like the weather, Doth alter faire or foule, so doth our way If faire, then Friends like foules do flocke together, If foule, Each man doth shift a severall way Onely our vertues, or our vices stay "And goe with vs, whose endlesse memorie, Doth make vs liue, or dye Eternally.
655 This Is the freight, that men cannot vnload No, not by death▪ Therefore Mortalitie Worke for thy selfe, whil'st here thou hast abode For on the present hath dependancie Eyther thy endlesse blisse or miserie. And death's the Convoy to conduct vs home Come death to me, that I to rest may Come. 656 Perhaps thou fearst me, being great and hye, "O death! Man were a thing Intollerable "Were he not mortall: But eu'n Kings must dye. "No priuiledge doth against death Inable, Both fat and leane are dishes for his Table. The diff'rence this: The poore-one hath his graue, The great-one, hee his Monument must haue. 657 "Our fates may be concein'd, but not Controul'd, "Before our dated time we cannot dye, "Our dayes are numbred, and our minutes told "Both life and death are destin'd from on high. And when that God, that rules the Imperiall skye Shall find It fit, then thou shalt goe in peace, Meane while with patience looke for thy release. 658 Thus vnto Care I pay'd his due: Complaint, And joynd withall my tributarie teares, Such my laments (for griefe finds no restraint) As they at last, did come vnto their Eares, That by the Castle past, which caus'd such feares In their selfe-guilty soules, that vs'd me so, As they resolu'd by death to end my woe.
659 To which effect came Letters from the Court, Written by Tarleton, at the Queenes command, In such a cloudie, and ambiguous sort, That diuers wayes, one might them vnderstand By pointing them; That if they should be scann'd, Hee and his Letters might be free from blame, And they Delinquents, that abus'd the same. 660 The words were these: * (Kill EdwardEdward um occidere noli∣t timere b∣num est. doe not feare 'Tis good) which being Comma'd diuersly As pleas'd the Reader, double sence may beare. O Art! Thou art the Earths chiefe treasurie But being Imploy'd to practise villanie, What monstrous births from thy faire wombe do spring, So Grmmar here is made to kill a King. 661 Which to effect, They first remoued mee From forth the place, where I before did lye, And made a shew, as if they seem'd to bee Compassionated, for my miserie. And would hereafter graunt Immunitie From such vnworthy vsage: So we see, The Sunne shines hot, before the shower wil bee. 662 But being ouer-watch'd, and wearied too, Nature was much desirous of some rest, Which gaue them opportunitie to doe What they desir'd, for being with sleepe opprest They clap great massie Beds vpon my brest. And with their weight, so kept me down withall, That breath I could not, much lesse Cry, or Call.
663 And then into my Fundament they thrust A little horne, as I did groueling lye, And (that my violent death might shun mistrust) Through that same horne, a red hot Spit, whereby They made my guts and bowels for to fry. And so Continu'd, till at last they found, That I was dead, yet seem'd to haue no wound. 664 And here I pitch the Pillars of my paine, Now, Ne plus vltra, shall my Poesie bee, And thou which hast describ'd my tragicke raigne, Let this at least giue some content to thee, That from disastrous fortunes none are free. Now take thy web out of the Loomes againe; And tell the world, that all the world Is vaine. THE AVTHORS Noli peccare. 1 FOrbeare to Sinne:Deus vi∣det. God hath thee still in sight, Nothing is hid from his all seeing Eye. Though thou putt'st on the Sables of the night, Thou canst not cloud thy selfe from him thereby; All time, all place, all Ends, and all thy meanes He better sees, then thou the Suns bright beames.
2 Forbeare to Sinne: The AngelsAngel tristātur. grieue for thee When by thy Sinne thou grieu'st thy louing Lord. Those noble natures our Attendants bee, To whom both day and night they doe afford Theyr dearest seruice: O vnkind too much To cause their griefe, whose loue to thee is such. 3 Forbeare to Sinne:Diabolus accusat. For eu'n that damned Fiend That mou'd thee first, and sooth'd thee in thy Sin. When hee hath once attayn'd his cursed End, And made thee Act his ill, will straight begin To aggrauate thy guilt: Hee'l vrge thy shame Against thy selfe, that vrg'd thee to the same. 4 Forbeare to Sinne:Conscien∣tiaterret. For out of Sinne doth breed A biting worme, that gnawes the Sinner still. Deuouring wolfe, that on thy selfe doest feed, Blacke Register, that do'st record our Ill. And makes the Soule the booke, where thou dost write Sad thoughts by day, and fearefull dreames by night. 5 Forbeare to Sinne:Mors mi∣natur. Death standeth at the Doore, Ready to Enter on thy house of Earth. One day being spent, The lesser is thy store Of time to come: Man dyes from his first birth. Who euer writes, or speakes of any-One, Still ends his tale with Mortuus est, Hee's gone.
6 Forbeare to Sinne:dicium instat. There is a day of Doome, There are Records, where thy sinnes are Inrol'd, There is a just and fearefull Iudge, from whom Lyes no appeale: Who cannot bee control'd Whom teares-almes, prayers may here to mercy moue But thē there is no place for peace or loue. 7 Forbeare to Sinne:nferni crciant. Because there is a Hell, Where cease-lesse, ease-lesse, Endlesse torments be, Where Diu'ls, & all the damned Soules doe dwell, Whom Millions of yeares shall neuer free. Where to remaine, Is grieuous past Conceit, And whence, not any hope to make retreat. Therefore (to End as I did first begin) Let these respects make thee forbeare to Sin. —Quorum si singula, duram Flectere non possunt, possunt tamen Omnia, Mentem. FRAN. HVBERT Miles. Timens Deum, non habet quod timeat vlterius. FINIS.
