17372 99847366 12399
Markhams farwell to HVSBANDRY OR, The inriching of all sorts of Barren and Ster∣rill Grounds in our Kingdome, to be as fruitfull in all manner of Graine, Pulse, and Grasse as the best Grounds whatsoeuer: Together with the anoyances, and preseruation of all Graine and Seede, from one yeare to many yeares. As also a Husbandly Computation of Men and Cattels dayly Labours, their Expences, Charges, and vttermost Profits. Attained by Trauell and Experience, being a Worke neuer before handled by any Author: AND Published for the good of the whole Kingdome. LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop neere Fleete-Streete Conduit. 1620.
TO THE RIGHT WOR∣shipfull and his most worthy friend Mr. BONHAM NORTON Esquire. Worthy Sir: KNowledge which is the diuine mother of certaine Goodnesse, neuer came vnwelcome to a knowing Iudgement; no more I hope Shall this my La∣bour to your worthy Selfe, since doubtlesse you shall finde in it many things New, somethings necessary, and nothing which th not in it some particular touch of profit: It is a worke your former incouragements to my other labours did create in me; and the wants you worthi∣ly found, I hope shall bring you supplies both wholesome and becomming. The experience I assuer your Goodnesse, was the expence of a bitter and tedious Winter, but the contentme (in gaining my wish) made it more pleasant then all the three other Seasons. What euer it be, it comes to you full of loue, full of seruice: And since I know Vertue measureth all things by its owne goodnesse; it is enoughto me, that I know you are that Vertue. In you is power to iudge; in you is Authoritie to exercise Mercy, lth them both flye from your Goodnesse, with that mildnesse, that in them my hopes may be Crowned, and my Selfe rest euer at your serice. GERVASE MARKHAM.
To the Reader. DId not the beginning of the worke it selfe sufficiently pleade an excuse for euery part of the Worke; I should (Gentle Reeder) trouble thee with a tedious tale of the man∣ner, matter, and cause of this Building; and therein begge that chaitable Almes, which the hone∣stie of thine owne Nature will giue me without any trou∣blesome acclamation: Let it suffice, I haue written no more then I haue seene, nor added a benefit which I haue not knowne liberally bestowed vpon the industrious; of which, if you will be a pertaker, follow their Imitation, and to good labours adde a good life, and there is no feare of a Blessing: if any man be costiue or hard of beliefe. I know not how to purge him, except it be with the bitter ayres of those barren places where these Ster∣rill Grounds are; on which, if he liue and haue no foode but his owne labour, doubtlesse he will not only beleee, but loue and admire what is written for a generall profit; and to that I leaue those: The rest that are of more equall indifferencie, to the Blessings and Increase which shall come by worthy knowledge and experience. Fare∣well. G. M.
The Table and generall Contents of the whole Booke. CHAP. I. THe nature of Grounds in gene∣rall Page 1 The Authors preamble ibid: The profit of the Worke 4 A satisfaction for the truth of the Work 6 The nature of barren Grounds. ibid: CHAP. II. The Ordering, Tilling, and Dressing of all barren Clayes; simple or compound 9 The first Inriching of barren Grounds ibid The manner of Plowing 10 The hacking of grounds ibid: The Sanding of grounds 11 The Lyming of grounds 12 The Meanuring of grounds ibid: The times for all labours 13 The second plowing 14 The second hacking ibid: The first Harrowing ibid: Of Sowing the Seede ibid: The second Harrowing 15 Falts in the Earth ibid: The Clotting of grounds 16 Another manner of Clotting 17 An Obiection and Answere 20 The ordering of Earthes where Sand wanteth 21 Sowing of Salt ibid: The excellency of Salt ibid: Of Steeping Seede in Brine. 22 CHAP. III. Of the ordering tillying and dressing of all rough barren clay as simple or com∣pound, being ouer-runne with Gorse, Brome, &c. 24 The destroying of Weedes 26 Burning of Baite ibid: The breaking of the burnt Earth 27 The causes of vnfruitfulnesse ibid: An excellent Meanure ibid: The Plowing 28 Of diuers Meanures ibid: Mixture of Meanures ibid: Of Weeding 29 The time for Weeding 30 The gathering of Stones. 31 CHAP. IIII. Of the Ordering, Tylling, nd Dressing of barren Clayes that are ouer-runne with Whinnes 32 What Whinnes are ibid: Paring of grounds 33 Making of Baites ibid: Breaking of Baites 34 Plowing 35 Harrowing, Weeding, and the profits. 37 CHAP. V. Of Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing all barren Clayes which are ouer-runne with Ling and Heath 38
Destroying of Heath 39 Another burning of Baite 40 Of Weeding. 42 CHAP. VI. Of the Ordering, Trimming, and Dres∣sing of all barren Sands, bearing no thing but moie Grasse 44 Of Plowing 46 Of Marling 47.53 What Marle is ibid: Of kalke, and the vse 49 The Profit. 51 CHAP. VII. Of the Plowing, Tilling, and Dressing of all barren Sands, that are ouer∣run with Braken, Ferne or Heath 52 Of Sanding and Liming 54 Of Plowing and Sowing ibid: Labours after Sowing 55 Of Weeding. 56 CHAP. VIII. The Flowing, Tisting and Ordering of all barren Sands laden with Twitch and wilde Bryar 57 The destroying of Twitch and Bryar ib: Of Meanures 58 Of Harrowing and other labours 59 Of Weeding. 60 CHAP. IX. The Plowing, Tilling, and Ordering of Sands laden with morish stinking grasse 61 Grounds for Fish-ponds 62 The Draining of Wet grounds 64 The Harrowing 67 The Weeding. 66 CHAP. X. How to inrich and make the most bar∣re soyle to beare excellent good Pa∣sture or Meadow 69 Two waies to inrich Earthes ibid: Of watering Grounds 71 The belpes in watering 72 When and how to Water ibid: The best season for Watering. 73 CHAP. XI. The iiching barren Grounds, for Hemp or Flaxe 75 Black Clay for Hemp 76 The Weeding 78 The making ill Earth beare Hemp ib: The Weeding. 79 CHAP. XII. The manner of Stacking all kinde of Graine with least losse. 80 CHAP. XIII. The diseases and impersections which happen to all manner of Graine 84 Crowes or Birds, and the cuer 85 Pigeons and the cuer 87 To saue Corne ready to reape 88 Of Dors and the cuer 90 Of Pismiers and the cuer 91 Of field Rats and Mice ibid: Of wormes and the cuer 92 Of Rye not to be wet ibid: Of snailes ibid: Of Grashoppers 94 Of Moales and the cuer 95 Offences from the influences of Hea∣uen 96 Of Smuttinesse or Mildew, and the cuer. 97 Of Hale, and the cuer ibid:
Of Lightning, and the cuer ibid: Of Frosts 99 Of Mysts and Fogges, and the cuer 100 Of Blastings, and the cuer ibid: Corne reapt wet, and the cuer 102 Of Washt Corne 104 To know washt corne. 105 CHAP. XIIII. How to keepe all manner of Graine thrasht or unthrasht the longest time and how to preserue it, &c. 106 The needfull vse of preseruing corne. ib: The keeping corne in the eare or chaffe, 108 Keeping corne drest 109 Of Garners ibid: Of Hutches, and their vses 110 To preserue wheate 111 To preserue Rye 117 To preserue Beanes 118 To preserue Pease or Fetches 120 To preserue Lentils or Lupins 123 To preserue Oates 125 To preserue Oat-meale 126 To preserue any Meale ibid: The preseruing of all small Seedes. 128 CHAP. XV. How to keepe Grayne either for tran∣sportation, &c. 129 The vse of Grayne. 130 Of Pulsse. ibid: Of Rice and the vse ibid: Of Wheate and the vse 132 Of Oat meale and the vse 133 Of Barley and the vse 135 Of Bucke and the vse ibid: Of Pulsse and the vse ibid: Of French Beane 136 Of the Kydney Beane ibid: Of Common field Beanes ibid: Of Pease and their vse 137 Seuerall sorts of Pease ibid: To transport Graine ibid: CHAP. XVI. A generall computation of Men and cattels Labours, &c. 140 Of Plowing, Sowing, and Mowing 141 Of Reaping and gathering Graine 142 Of Ditching, Hedging, Plashing 143 Of Deluing and Thrashing 144 The particular expence of a day 145 The particular Labour of cattell 147 CHAP. XVII. The applying of Husbandry, to the seue∣rall Countries 148 The carters Office 150 Of cattell for the Draught 152 The Seuerall Labours, of the seuerall Moneths 153
MARKHAMS FAREWELL TO HVSBANDRIE. CHAP. I. The nature of Grounds in generall: But particularly of the barren and Sterryll Earth. CErtainely in this vnthankfull and vn∣inst The Au∣thors Pre∣amble. Age, where greatnesse and Gar∣ments onely make vp the vertuous, there is nothing of lesse esteeme then the painefull labours of those pens, whose watch and indostrie haue only kept an vnwearied pace, with the be∣nesit and general good of their Countries; no, though the despisers thereof eate no bread but the foode of their writings, so vngratefull is man to his best Teachers, and so vnhappy they that in this kinde become the worlds Tutors. Why, me thinkes those squint-eied vneuen accusations: those fooles bolts shot backward from the true
marke; and those manifold mouth-torturing impu∣tations, which a world of wise (in their owne conceits) will thunder against me for this Labour; doeas it were, euen now stand before me face to face, and braue me: Why, me thinkes I heare one foole (who hath bet∣ter fortune then wit) say; writes he of Husbandry and is no husband; nay, I will not beleeue his rules till I see his example: poore sot, how Clarke like he he speakes, as if no man had famously written of any thing to which he had not beene bound Prentise seauen yeares by condition; I would haue him looke vpon Ly∣bault and Steuens, two of the most famous Physitians that euer liued in Fraunce; men, that in mine owne con∣science neuer knew what belonged to the handling of a Plow, or euer lifted Mattock aboue their shoulders, for they were meerely Schollers, and better knew how to gather Plants then set them; yet in this Art of Husban∣dry, who hath euer writ more famously, or more truly and exactly, Fraunce flourishing more by their Theorie, then by the practise of all the pessants of that Kingdome. So also Seres, an excellent Scholler, an excellent Hystori∣an, a man that the State could not spare into the Coun∣trie, yet who reades his Agriculture, shall finde such deepe knowledge and rich rules for Husbandry, that the King∣dome will euer acknowledge him for a famous Bene∣factor. So likewise Vinet, a man of the same nature, the same nurture, and the same excellence. And to looke downe into our owne Countrie, was not Fitzharbert and Goouge, gentlemen of good birth and education, farre from any seruile or meane offices; yet in this Art of Husbandry, who hath written with greater praise or allowance. Master Tuffer was meerely all Vniuersitie, and outwardly profest only in Musique, yet shall his
books of Husbandry liue as long as there is life in any booke of that nature. What shall I doe speaking of Virgil, who although his fame and profession was only Posie, yet shall his bookes of Husbandry be as famous ouer all the World as in Italie. Now for my selfe, although a piece of my life was Schollar, a piece Souldiour, and all Horseman; yet did I for nine yeares apply my selfe to the Plow, followed it with earnest∣nesse, and my nature being euermorefull of inquisition, I could not indure to haue any thing hidde, that practise, argument, or discourse could reueale vnto me; nay, so farre forth (I must accuse mine owne ambition) that I could not for beare any trauell, any expence, to finde out the truth of any doubt I haue in Husbandry heard rela∣ted, neither could euer any mans words take vp my minde, till I did by proofe finde that action and discourse went euen hand in hand together: whence it comes that I haue beene more darringly audatious to publish my labours, then otherwise my nature or good manners would haue giuen me leaue. There be some will say, what can I write more then I haue written, are not my two bookes of the English Hus∣bandman extant; and if they containe not all my know∣dge, sure I wrong the World, or the opinions of ma∣y of my Readers. To this I answere, who knowes not that Industrie is a mother whose wombe can neuer be discharged of her whole burthen, hourely bringing forth new things, drawing euery Art and Occupation to that height of excellency, that the knowledge of our forefathers compared with the times now present, is but meere ignorance; and shall we then be confined to our first rules, not daring to shew the better, because we
hae published the good: It were a tyrrannie not suf∣ferable, and a way to murther all the perfection in Art. For mne owne part, this I must both conseffe and I∣stifie in mine owne Workes, that for thosetwo parts of the English Husbandman, they are tracts, as casie and cer∣taine for the ordering of our English grounds, as any that haue bne published of that nature within our Kingdome, and doe as truly shew the manner of orde∣ring of all sors of grounds (in which is any good or reasonable fertilitie) as either labour or profit can wish or bring forth. But this part of which I intend now The profit of this Worke. to treat, bath a higher aime, and shootes much more neere to the marke of commoditie: For the former sheweth how to make the fruitfull more fruitfull; this, how to make the Barren most plentifull: euery good ground will of it selfe bring forth (for Nature was euer a hater of Idlenesse) But the Barren and Sterrill Earth, to make it full of increase and plentie, is Gratum opus Agricolis, and such a generall benefit to all good men, that the concealement can be no lesse an offence then theft, robbing a mans Country of that treasure (by negligence) which no other industry, in him, can after restore. I haue formerly written, how by Art to keepe good Grounds good, and to strengthen the weake: But now I shew how to make ill Grounds excellent, and to conuert that which is Barren and vnfruitfull, to become rich in store and plentie: whence shall ensue to all men, these particular profits following: First, plenty of Corne and Pulse, because all grounds being made able and apt for Tillage, the Kingdome may afford to sowe for one Bushell that is now, hereafter fiue hundred, so mightie great are the vnfruitfull and vntilled wastes of Heathes, Downes, Mores, and such like, which at this day lye
vntilled and vnoccupied: and to this abundance of Corne, will redound an equall, or greater abundance of Grasse and Pasture; for besides that, those men and Masters of many grounds, may conuert all their best and most fruitfull Earth to Pasture and Medow, and only keepe the Barren for tillage: yet also this barren earth after it hath done bearing of Corne, which will be in fiue or sixe yeares, shall for as many yeares more, beare as good Medow or Pasture either for breeding or fee∣ding as can any way be reasonably required, and then being newly made againe, shall newly begin and flou∣rish in his first Profit, as shall be at large shewed and set forth hereafter; as I haue seene with mine owne eies, to my no small pleasure and amazement, not in one, butin diuers and sundry most vntruitfull and hard Countries. Secondly, whereas through the most parts of this Kingdome, there is euery yeare a third or fourth part of all Corne grounds lost in the fallow or tylthe fields, one field of three, or one of foure, continually lying at rest; now by the vse of the Husbandry following, you shall neuer keepe any fallow field at all, but haue all your ground to beare you con∣tinually either Corne or Grasse in good aboun∣dance. Lastly, whereas in all the generall best parts of this Nation, you cannot haue any Graine of price, as Wheat, Barley, Rye, and such like, vnder two, three, foure, fiue, and some sixe times plowing; now you shall not plow aboue twice at the most for the tenderest and richest graine that is to be reaped, whereby there shall be much paines eased in the Husbandman, great trauell saued from the Cattell, and a much larger
limitation of time giuen for other neceary houshold and forraine businesses. Now some may heere aske me what true and vp∣right A satisfa∣ction for the truth and good∣nesse of the Worke. right testimonie I can giue of this my assertion, or what inducements to draw men to a beliefe of my relation: though I could referre such disputers to practise, and the experience which shall arise from such practise; yet to giue them better satisfaction, if they please to ride or walke into the North parts of Deuonshire, in∣to the Barren or Mountainous parts of South Wales, or North Wales, or into that wildernesse of Bogges, and Barrennesse, I meane that colde vast Country of Exmore, where is nothing but vnseasonablenesse, and they shall euen there finde where the ground is industri∣ously made and refined, as good plenty of Corne and Grasse, as in the fruitfullest vales in our In-land and warmer Countries. Truly for mine owne part, I dare boldly auow that which mine eies haue beheld; for I haue seene on oneside of the hedge nothing but mosse for grasse, furres, gosse, whynnes and all other tokens of Sterrill barrainnesse; and on the other side as good Corne and Grasse, and in as great plenty as in any fruit∣full Country whatsoeuer, and all this brought forth but with a little cost and some labour. To proceede then to the full effect of my purpose Nature of Barren Grounds. without more preambulation or satisfaction to the cu∣rious, for to the honestly vertuous are all mine indeuours directed: you shall vnderstand that it is meete that euety Husbandman be skilfull in that true knowledge of the natures of Grounds, as which is fruitfull, which not: of which, in my first Bookes I haue written suffi∣ciently; nor doe I in this Booke intend to write any tit∣tle that is in them contained; for as I loue not Totolo∣gie
so I deadly hate to wrong my friend: Grounds then as I haue formerly written in my first Bookes, being simple or compounded; as simple Clayes, or simple Sands; or compounded of Clayes, Sands, or Grauels together, may be all good, and all fit to bring forth in∣crease, or all euill and barren, and vnfit for profit; for euery Earth, whether it be simple or compounded, whether of it selfe or of double mixture, doth partici∣pate wholly with the Clime wherein it lyeth, and as that is more hot or more cold, more moist or more drye; so is the Earth euer more or lesse fruitfull: yet for the better vnderstanding of the plaine Country-man, you shall know that both the fruitfull and vnfruitfull Ground hauetheir seuerall faces and charracters, where∣by they be as well knowne as by the Clime or situa∣tion of the Continent; for that ground which though it beare not any extraordinary abundance of grasse, yet will loade it selfe with strong and lusty weedes, as Hemblocke, Docks, Mallowes, Nettles, Ketlocks, and such like, is vndoubtedly a most rich and fruitfull ground for any graine whatsoeuer: also, that ground which beareth Reede, Rushes, Clouer, Daysie, and such like, is eer fruitfull in Grasse and Herbadge; so that smal cost and lesse labour in such grounds will euer make good the profit of the Husbandman: But with these rich grounds at this time I haue nothing to doe. To come downe then to the barren & vnwholesome Knowledge of barren Grounds. Grounds, you shall vnderstand that they are to be known three seuerall waies; first, by the Clyme and Continent wherein they lye; next, by their constitution and condi∣tion; and lastly, by outward faces and charracters. By the Clyme and Continent, as when the ground lies farre remote from the Sunne, or when it lyes Moun∣tainous
and high, stony and rocky, or so neere vnto the skirts and borders of the Sea, that the continuall Fogges, Stormes, Myfts and ill vapours arising from thence, doe poyson and starue the Earth; all which are most apparent ignes of Barrennesse. By the Con∣stitution and Condition, as when the ground is either too extreamely cold and moist; or else to violently hot and dry; either of which, produceth much hardnesse to bring forth, and sheweth the Earth so lying, to be good for little or no profit. By the outward Faces and Charracters, as when you see (insted of Grasse which should be greene, flowrie, and thicke growing) a pale thinne mossie substance couer the Earth, as most com∣monly is vpon all high Planes, Heathes, Downes, and such like: or when you see the ground couered with Heath, Lynge, Broome, Braken, Gorsse, or such like; they be most apparent signes of infinite great Barrennesse, as may be seene in many Mores, For∣rests, and other wilde and wooddy places. And of these vnfertill places, you shall vnderstand that it is the Clay ground, which for the most part brings forth the Mosse, the Broome, the Gorsse, and such like: the Sand, which bringeth forth Brakes, Lynge, Heath; and the mix Earth, which vtters Whynnes, Bryars, and a world of such like vnnaturall and bastard∣ly issues. Thus hauing a true knowledge of the Nature and Condition of your ground, you shall then proceede to the ordering, eareing, and dressing of the same, whereby it may not only be purged and clensed from those falts which hindred the increase thereof, but also so much bettered and refined, that the best ground may not boast of more ample increase, nor your more
fruitfull placed Neighbours exceede you in any thing, more then in a little ease. CHAP. II. Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all sorts of plaine Barren Clayes, whether they be simple or com∣pounded. THou whom it hath pleased God to place vpon a barren and hard soyle, whose bread must euermore be grounded with sweat and labour, that mayest nobly and victoriously boast the conquest of the Earth, ha∣uing conquered Nature by altering Nature, and yet made Nature better then shee was before; thou, I say, that takest this honest delight in goodnesse, hearken vn∣to these following Precepts. Assoone, as thou haft well pondered and conside∣the The first inriching of barren Grounds. nature of thy ground, and dost finde that it is alto∣gether barren and vnfruitfull, the Clyme and condi∣tion not suffering it to bring forth any thing of worth or profit, and that thou haft well weighed what manner of Earth it is; as that namely it is either a simple Clay, or a Clay so mixt with other earths, that yet notwith∣standing, the Clay is still most predominant, thou shalt then select or chuse out of this earth so much as to thy selfe shall seeme conuenient, it being answerable to the strength of thy Teame, and the abilitie of thy purse and labour to compasse; and this Earth so chosen out, thou shalt about the beginning of May, in a faire season, breake vp with a strong Plow, such as is generally vsed in all strong Clay grounds, the Share being rather long then broad, and the Colture rather somewhat ben∣ding
them straight and euen, according as the nature of the ground shall requier, which euery simple plow∣man will soone finde out in turning vp two or three fur∣rowes; for according to the cutting of the earth, so must the Husband man fashion the temper of his Plow. Now for the maner of plowing this bad and barren The man∣ner of plowing. earth, if the ground lye free from water (which com∣monly all euill barren earths doe) you shall then throw down your furrowes flat, and betwixt euery furrow you shall leaue a balke of earth halfe as broad as the furrow, and so goe ouer and plow your whole earth vp, with∣out making any difference or distinction of lands: but if you feare any annoyance of water, then you shall lay your furro was more high, neere and close together, di∣uiding the ground into feuerall lands, and propor∣tioning euery land to lye the highest in the midst, so that the water may haue a descent or passage on either side. Now so soone as you haue thus plowed vp your Hacking of Ground: land, and turned all the swarth inward vnto the earth, you shall then take hacks of yron well steeled and rea∣sonable sharpe, such a competent number, as or your purse of power can compasse, or the greatnesse your ground requireth; for you shall vnderstand that one good hacker, being a lusty labourer, will at good ease hacke and cut more then halfe an Aker of ground in a day; and with these hacks, you shall hew and cut to pieces, all the earth formerly plowed vp, furrow, by furrow, and not the furrowes onely, but also each seue∣rall balke that was left betweene, and any other greene swarth whatsoeuer the Plow bad escaped, and it shall be cut into as small pieces as conueniently you can, for thereby is your mould made much more mellow and
plentifull, and your seede at such time as it is to be cast into the earth, a great deale the better and safer, couered, and much more sooner made to sprout and bring forth increase. Now for the shape and fashion of these Hacks, you shall behold it in this figure. When you haue thus hackt all your ground, and broke in peices all hard crust and toughnesse of the swarth; you shail then immediatly, with all the conuenient speed you can (because time is very pretious in these labours) if you Sanding of Ground. be neere vnto any part of the Sea-Coast, or to any other Creeke or Riuer where the salt water th a continuali recourse, and thence fetch (either on Horse backe, or in Cart, or other Tumbrell, such as the nature of the Coun∣trie or your owne ease can afford) great store of the salt Sand, and with it couer your ground which hath beene formerly plowed and hackt, allowing to euery A of ground, three score or, fourescore full bushels of Sand, which is a very good and competent proportion; and this Sand thus layed, shall be very well spread and mixed amongst the other hackt and broken earth. And heerein is to be noted, that not any other sand but the salt and is good or auaileable for this purpose, because it is the brine and saltnesse of the same which breedeth this fertillitie and fruitfulnesse in the earth, choaking the growth of all
weedes and bad things which would sprout from the Earth, and giuing strength, vigour, and comfort to all kinde of Graine or Pulse, or any fruit of better na∣ture. When you haue thus sanded your earth, you shall Lyming of Ground. then, if you haue any Limestone about your Grounds, (as barren earths are seldome without) or if you haue any quarries of stone (which are seldome vnaccompa∣nied with Lymestone) gather such Lymestone together, and make a Kylne in the most conuenientest place you haue, as well for the carriage of the Lime, as for the ga∣thering together of the Stone, and bauing burnt your Lyme, the manner whereof is so generally well knowne through the whole Kingdome, that in this place it nee∣deth little or no repetition; you shall then on euery aker so formerly plowed, hackt, and sanded, bestow at least forty, or else fiftie bushels of Lyme, spreading and mixing it exceedingly well with the other sand and earth; and heerein is to be noted, that the stronger and sharper the Lime is, the better the earth will be made thereby, and the greater increase and profit will issue from the same; neither shall you neede to respect the colour and complexion of the Lime, as whether it be purely white (as that which is made from chalke) or gray (as that which is made from the smal Lymestone) or else blackish browne (as that which is made from the great stone and maine Quarrie) since it is the strength and good∣nesse of the Lyme, not the beautie and colour which brings forth the profits. Now, when you haue thus lymed your ground, you Meanuring of ground. shall then take off the best meanure you haue, as Oxe, Cow, or Horse dung, straw rotted either by the lyttering of Beasts, or by casting vpon the High-waies; the mud
of Lakes, Ponds or Ditches; the soyle of yong Cattell made in the Winter time by feeding at stand Heakes, or any such like kinde of Ordure; and this meanure or compasse, you shall carry forth either on Horsebacke, or in Carts or Tumbrels (according as the Countrie will afford) and you shall lay it and spread it vpon your ground so formerly plowed, hackt, sanded, and lymed, in very plentifull manner, so farre forth as your proui∣sion will extend: for it is to be vnderstood, that barren and hard earths can neuer be ouerladen with good mea∣nure or compasse, since it is only the want of warmth and fatnesse which meanure breedeth, that causeth all manner of vnfruitfulnesse. After you haue thus meanured all your ground, it is Times for all labours. to be supposed that the season of the yeare will be well shot on, for the labour of sanding will take little lesse then two Months, your ground being of any indifferent great quantitie, except you haue the assistance and helpe of many of your friends, which is a curtesie that euery Husbandman may imbrace, but not trust vnto; for I would not wish any man that hath not Tenants to com∣mand, to presume on other friends, lest they fayle him, and so his worke lye halfe done, halfe vndone, which is a great Charracter of negligence and improuidence: but let euery one proportion their labours according to their owne strengths, and the number of their ordinary families. The lyming of your ground, will take at least halfe so much time as the sanding; and the meanuring rather more then lesse then the lyming; so that by any reasonable computatiō of time, beginning to Plow your ground at the beginning of May, ere it be hackt, sanded, lymed, and meanured, Michaelmas will be come, which is the last of September: for I allow the Month of May
to plowing and backing, Iune and Iuly, for sanding; August, for lyming; and September, for meanuring. So then to proceede on with your Labour, at Michal∣mas, or from that time to the end of October, you shall Second plowing. begin to Plow ouer that ground againc which formerly you had plowed, hackt, sanded, lymed and manured; and at this later plowing, you shall plow the ground somewhat deeper then you did before; and taking a good stitch (as they call it in Husbandry) you shall be sure to raise vp the quick earth which had not beene stirred vp with the Plow before, making your furrowes greater and deeper then formerly they were, and laying them closer and rounder together then they were be∣fore; and in this ardor or later earing, you shall be carefull to Plow your ground as cleane as you can, with∣out balkes or other escapes in Husbandrie, and as you thus plow your ground, you shall haue certaine Hackers, Second Hacking. with their hacks to follow the Plow, and to cut the Earth and furrowes into very small pieces, as was formerly shewed in the hacking and cutting of the first Ardor: then so soone as your ground is thus plowed & hackt `you shal take a paire or two of very strong & good yron Harrows, First Har∣rowing. and with them you shail goe ouer your ground, tearing that which was formerly plowed and hackt into more smaller pieces then before, and raising vp the mould in much greater abundance then was formerly seene: which work once finished, you shall then take your Seed, which Of fowing the Seede would be the finest, cleanest, and best Wheate you can prouide, and after the manner of good Husban∣dry, you shall sowe it on the ground very plentiful∣ly, not staruing the ground for want or Seede (which were a tyranous penury) nor yet choking it with too much (which were as lauish a foolery) but
giuing it the falt due, leaue it to the earth and Gods blessing. Now so soone as you haue thus sowen your Seede, The second Harrow∣ing. forth with you shall take all the Harrowes againe, har∣rowing the Seede into the earth, and couering it close and well with all care and diligence; and in this latter harrowing, you shall haue great respect to breake euery clot as much as you can, and so stir vp and make as much mould as you can, and the finer such mould is made, the better it is, so it couerdecpe and close; for you shall vn∣derstand, that all these kinde of barren Clayes, are natu∣rally tough, cold, and binding, whereby they stifle and choke any thing that growes within them; for the na∣turall Falts in the earth. toughnesse of the earth will not giue any thing leaue to sprout, or if it doe sprout, the binding nature thereof, so fetters and locks it within the mould, that it cannot issue our, or if it doe (with extreame strugling) rise through the pores of the same, yet doth the colde presently starue the roote and make the stemme vtter∣ly vnable to bring forth fruit, or any profit at all, so that except the toughnes be conuerted to a gentle loosenesse and easie diuiding of it selfe, the coldnesse vnto warmth, and the hard binding vnto a soft libertie, there can be small hope of commoditie which this manner of dressing the earth bring to passe for the mixture of the sand, takes away the toughnesse; the Lime brings heate, and the meanure comfort and li∣bettie: as for the hacking and cutting the earth, that is to make all the rost simbolize and mixe together: for as if any Physitian, Apothecarie, or Dispensatory, if he make a medicine, and cast his ingredians con∣fusedly one vpon another, without care of mix∣ture, melting, or dissolution, shall finde but a corrupt,
disorderly, and ill compounded receit'; so he that dres∣seth and meanureth his ground, and doth not by hack∣ing plowing, or some other husbandly course, mixe the earth and the compasse perfectly well together, shall sel∣dome finde profit from his seede, or finde any man of wit desirous to become his imitator. Now I must con∣fesse, that some easie grounds of light and temperate nature, will mixe very well and sufficiently by the helpe of the Plough onley; but this barren hard earth of which I now write, must only be broken by this vio∣lent and extreme labour, or else there will neither be mould, earth, nor any other couerture for the seede, but only foule, great, and disorderly clots and lumps, through which the graine can neuer passe, and that which lyeth vncouered will be made a prey to foule and other ver∣mine which will howerly destroy it. After you haue sowen and harrowed the ground, you Ofclotting grounds. shall then see if there remaine any clots or hard lumps of earth vnbroken, which the teeth of the Harrowes are not able to teare in pieces (as it is very likely you shall perceiue many) for these hard barren earthes which are ploughed vp in their greene swarthes, are nothing neere so easily broken and brought to mould, as are the mellow soft earths which haue beene formerly plough∣ed many times before, because the hard and intricate rootes of the Grasse, Mosse, and other quick substances growing vpon the same, doth binde and hold the mould so close and fast together, besides the naturall strength and hardnesse of the earth, that without much industri∣ous and painefull labour, it is impossible to bring it to that finenesse of mould which Art and good Husban∣dry requireth; therefore, as soone as you behold those clots and lumps to lye vndisseuered and vnbroken, you
shall forthwith take good strong clotting beetles, or mauls made of hard and very sound wood, according to this proportion of figure. And with these maules or clotting beetles, you shall breake all the hard clots and lumps of earth in pieces, euen to so small dust, as possibly you can; because you are to presuppose, that these clots thus hard, tough, and vnwilling to be with any easie meanes digested into mould, are either not at all, or else very insussiciently mixed with the Sand, Lyme, and other meanures; and therefore you must the rather breake them, that thereby they may mixe, and giue easie passage to the graine, and not like heauy poyses and dead lumps lye and presse downe the Seede so that it cannot sprout. But if it so fall out that partly by the hardnesse of An other manner of clottting. the ill earth, partly through the season and drynesse of the yeare, that these clots and lumpes of earth will either not be broken at all, or at least so insufficiently that the mould will not bee any thing neere so fine as you would haue it; you shall then hauing done your best indeuour, let your ground rest till there haue fallen a good ground shower or two of raine, which may wet the clots through and through; and then the
next faire blast, you shall take your clotting beetles, but not those which you tooke before in the dry season, but some much lighter, broader and flatter, being made of thick Ashe boards more then a foote square, and aboue two inches in thicknesse, according to this figure. And with these flat mauls and beetles, you shall break all the vnbroken clots and lumps of earth which shall trouble or annoy your ground, making your Lands as plaine and smooth as is possible, so that the graine may haue easie passage forth; which labour as soone as you haue finished, you shall then referre the in∣crease and prosperitie thereof vnto the mercies of God, who no doubt will giue his blessings according to thy labour and thankfulnesse. As touching the trimming and weeding of this Corne, after it is sprung a foote aboue the earth, or there abouts, you shall vnderstand, that these hard barren grounds are very seldome troubled with weedes; for weedes, especially great, strong, and offensiue weedes are the issues of rich and fertile soyles; yet, if through the trimming and making of this earth (which is not commonly seene) you doe perceiue any sore of thy∣stles, or other grosser weedes to spring vp, you shall
then in the Month of May, with hookes, nippers, and such like tooles, cut them away orpull them vp by the rootes, which indeede is the better manner of weeding. Now heere is to be vnderstood, that your ground be∣ing thus dressed and trimmed as is before shewed, you Seuerall seedes se∣uerall yeares. may very well for the first two yeares sowe Wheate or Rye vpon it, but Wheate is the greater profit and more certaine seede; the third yearebestowing but your fold of Sheep vpon it, that is meanuring it with your Sheep, (for it is to be intended, that in these barren earths sheep are the greatest stocke of which the Husband man can boast) you may very well sowe it with barley, and haue a fruitfull and plentifull crop thereon: the next three yeares, you may sowe it with Oates; and the senenth yeare you may sowe it with small white Gar∣den Pease or Beanes, according as you shall finde the strength and goodnesse of the ground (for Beanes desire somewhat a richr soile then the Pease) then for three or foure yeares following the seuen, you may let it lye at rest for Grasse, and doubtlesse it will yeeld you ei∣ther as good Pasture, or as good Medow as you can reasonably (according as the necessitie of your occasi∣ons) shall require. And then after the expeence of this time, it shall be good that you dresse and order your ground againe in such sort as was formerly de∣clared; and thus you may euery yeare dresse one or other piece of ground, till you haue gone ouer all your ground, or at least as much as you shall thinke ex∣pedient; and without faile, he that is Master of the most fruitfullest and richest soyle, shall not boast of any greater increase then you shall, only your charge may be a little more, and so shall be also your commoditi,
which shall make an amends for your charge; as for your toyles, yours shall be much the lesse, by a iust computation; for though you haue many labours, yet they are but Somer labours, and neither hurt your owne body, nor your Cattell: whereas the Master of the rich soyle is in continuall worke both Winter and Somer, labouring twice so much to confound the superflu∣ous growth of weedes as you doe to beget the increase of Corne; and whereas he must euer keepe a third or fourth part of his Corne-ground without fruit, you shall not keepe any which shall not yeeld you a sufficient com∣moditie. Now me thinkes I heare, in this place, to be obiected Obiection. vnto me, that whereas I doe prescribe the sanding of these barren Earths with the salt Sea-sand, and no other (as it is true, for all other fresh sand is vnauaile∣able) what if the ground doe lye so farre within the Land, that there is no salt sand within many score of miles of it, how then shall I make good my barren earth; sure to fetch sand so farre, will neuer equall the cost, or it may be this experience hath no further li∣mits then to such hard and barren earths as lye alongst the Sea coast only. To this I answere, that al-be this salt Sea sand be of Answere. infinite good and necessary vse, inriching grounds won∣derfully much, yet is not this experience of bettering of barren soiles, so strictly feltered or bound thereunto, but that without any vse of the same, you may make your earth as fruitfull in Corne or Grasse, as hath beene alrea∣dy formerly declared. Therefore if your ground lye much within the Land, and farre from the Sea, so that this commoditie of sand
is not by any possible meanes to be gotten, then you Ordering Earth where sands wan∣teth. shall (hauing first lookt into the nature of your ground, and finding it to be by all charracters and faces a cold, barren, stiffe, dry Clay, yeelding nothing but a short mossie grasse, without any other burthen at all as is seene vpon most Plaines, and Downes of this Kingdome) first, plow it and hack it as was before shewed in the former part of this Chapter, then in stead of sanding it, you shall lime it as beforesaid, or rather a little more plentifully, then you shall meanure it, after (at seede time) you shall plow it and hack it againe, then harrow it as before said; then to euery aker of ground, you shall take two bushels of very dry bay salt, and in such manner as you sowe Sowing of Salt. your Wheate, you shall sowe this salt vpon the ground, then immediatly after the sowing of the salt, you shall sowe your Wheate, which Wheate would be thus pre∣pared before you sowe it; the day before you are to sowe your graine, you shall take Bay salt and water, and mix∣ing them together make a brine so strong that it wil beare an egge, then put the Wheate you are to sowe into that brine, and let it steepe therein till the next day then draine it as cleane as may be from the brine, and so sowe it, har∣row it, clot it, and weede it, as was before declared, and no doubt but you shall finde a meruellous great increase thereby: for this I can assure you, both from a most The excel lencie of salt. certaine knowledge, and a most worthy relation, that a Gentleman buying some store of seede Wheate, and in∣forst to bring it home by Sea, by some casual means some of the sack at the vnlading, fell into the Sea, and were much drencht in the salt water, whereat the Gentle∣man being grieued (as doubting some hurt to come to the Seede) yet inforst of necessitie to make vse
thereof caused all the Wheate which was so wet to be sowen by it selfe in a parucular place, and vpon the worst ground which he had, (as much dispairing in the increase thereof) and it is most infallibly true, that of that wet Seede, he receiued at least fiue-fold more profit then of any other, and from thence it came, that this experiment of Bryne and the sowing of salt hath taken place; from which the painfull hus∣band-man hath found such infinite increase to arise, that the vse thereof will neuer be layed downe in this Kingdome, neither is the thing in it selfe, without good and strong probabilitie of much increase and strength for the bettering of all manner of earable grounds; for there is nothing which killeth weedes, quicks, and o∣ther offences of the ground so much as saltnesse: for what makes your Pigeons dung and your Pullens dung to be better for earable grounds then any other dung or meanure whatsoeuer, but by reason of the saltnesse thereof, by which saltnesse also, you may iudge the strength and heate thereof, insomuch that the propper taste of fier, or any hot thing is euer salt; also we say in Phylosiphie, that blood which carryeth the vitall heate and warmth of the body, is in taste salt, and so a nourisher, maintainer, and increaser of all the strength and vigor of the inward faculties; where∣as Fleame, Chollar, and Melancholly, which are the hurts and confounders of the vitall spirits; the first, is in taste sweete; the second bitter; and the last, of an earthy and dry taste, full of much loathsome∣nesse. Now againe you shall vnderstand, that as you thus wet Of ∣ping Seede in brine. or steep your Wheate seede, so you may also steepe any
other seede, as Barley, Oates, Beanes, Pease, Lupins, Fetches, and such like; of which, your Beanes, Pease, and Lupins, you may steepe more then any of the rest, and your Oates the least. As touching Rye, it shall be good not to steepe it at all, for it is a great ene∣my to all manner of wet and moistnre, insomuch, that the curious Husband-man will forbeare to sowe it in any great shower of raine, bearing in his minde this ancient addage or saying, that Rye will drownd in the Hopper: as on the contrary part, Wheate would be sowen so moist that it might ftick to the Hopper; yet notwithstanding, when you doe sowe Rye in any of these In-land and cold barren Country, where sand is not to be gotten, you shall not by any meanes omit the sowing of your salt before, for it is nothing neere so moyst as it is warme and comfortable. And thus much touching the ordering, plowing, and sowing of all barren, cold, and moyst Clayes, whether they be mixt or vnmixt, which are plaine and vnfruitfull, as bearing no other burthen then short mossie grasse, without any other hard and boystrous sub∣stances.
CHAP. III. Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all rough Bar∣ren Clayes, whether simple or compound, being la∣den and ouerrunne with Gorse Broome, and such like. NExtvnto these plaine barren earths, which by rea∣son of their heights and eleuations, are subiect in the Winter time to all manner of cold, frosts, ftormes, tempests, blasts, and windes which are the perfit binde∣rers of all increase and growth; and in the Somer time to all hot scorchings, scaldings, and fierie reflections of the Sunne, which on the contrary part, burneth and withe∣reth away, that little seeming increase which appeareth aboue the earth. I will place that barren Clay, whe∣ther it be mixt ovnmixt, which lying not so high, and subiect vnto those hurts and offences, seemeth to be a little more fruitfull, yet either by the extreme cold moisture thereof, or the stony hardnesse and o∣ther malignant qualities, is no lesse barren then that of which I haue formerly written, which indede is that barren and vilde soile, which will neither beare Corne nor Grasse, but is only ouer-runne and quite couered ouer with great, thicke, and tall bushes of Gorse or Furres, which is a most sharpe, woody and grosse weede; so full of pricks, that neither Horse, Beast, Sheepe nor Goates dare thrust their noses to the ground to gather vp that little poore grasse which groweth thereon: Andal-be these Gorse, or Furres, are one way a little commodity to the needfull Husband-man, in
being a reasonable good fewell, either for Baking, Brewing, or diuers other sudden and necessary vses; yet, in as much as the profit being compared with the great quantitie of earth which they couer and de∣stroy, and which with good husbandry might be brought to great fruitfulnesse, is indeede no profit at all; it shall not be amisse for euery good Husband-man that is pestered and ouer-laden with such ground, to seeke by way of good husbandry how to reduce and bring it to that perfection and excellencie which may bec best for his one particular commoditie, and the gene∣rall good of the kingdome wherein he liueth. Then is there another kinde of soyle which is no∣thing at all differing from this, but is euery way as barren and sterryll, which is that ground which is ouer runne with Broome (which is as noysome a weede as the former) and though it haue not such sharpe prickles as the other, whereby to hinder the grazing of Cattell; yet doth it grow so close and thick together, and is na∣turally so poysonous and offensiue to grasse, that you shall seldome see any grow where this Broome prospe∣reth, besides the bittrrnesse thereof is so vnpleasant and distastefull to all kinde of Cattell, that not any will euer crop or bite vpon the same, only it is of some necessary vse for the poore Husbandman, in respect that it serueth him both for fuell, for thatching and the couering of his houses (being for that purpose, of all, the longest lasting) and also for the making of Beesomes for clen∣sing of the house and Barnes, or else for sale and com∣modity in the Market; all which profits (as before I said) being compared with the losse of the ground and the goodnesse that might be reaped from the same, are indeede truly no profits but hinderances.
Therefore I would wish euery man that is Master of such grounds, whether they be ouerrunne with Gorse, Furres, Broome, or any such kinde of grose, woody, or substantiall weede: first, to cut vp the iweede (of what Destroy∣ing of weedes. sort so euer it be) whether Gorse, Furres, or Broome) as close and neere vnto the ground as you can possibly, and then making them vp into sheafes or bigge Faggots, carry them home and stack them vp very dry, so as no raine may enter or peirce into them, for the smallest wet will rot and consume them to dirt and filthinesse; which done, you shall make Labourers with hacks, picks, and such like tooles to stub vp ail the rootes which you left in the ground, euen to the very bottome of the same; and these rootes you shall be very carefull to haue stubbed vp exceeding cleane, by no meanes lea∣uing (so neere as you'can) any part or parcell of the rootes behinde you; then these rootes thus stubbed vp, you shall diligently gather together into little heaps as bigge as moale-hils, and place them vpon the ground a pretie distance one from another, and so let them lye till the Sunne and Winde haue dryed them (for it is to be intended, that this labour must begin about the latter end of Aprill and beginning of May. Then so soone as you finde these rootes are thorow∣ly urning of Bavte. dryed, you shall pile them handsomely together, laying them a little hollow one from another, and then with a hack cut vp some of the same earth, and therewithall couer all the rootes quite ouer, only lea∣uing a venthole at the top and on one side, and so let the hils rest two or three daies till the earth be a little partcht and dried, then take fier and some other light drie fuell which is apteft to blaze, and with the same kindle euery hill, not leauing them till you see them
perfectly on fier, which done, let them burne both day and night, till the substance being wholly consumed, the fier goe out of it one selfe, and this in some Countries is called the Burning of Baite. Now assoone as the fier hath beene extinguished for Breaking of the burnt earth two or three daies, you shall then come, and with sho∣uels and beetles (to breake the hard burnt earth in pieces) you shall spread al the ashes clean ouer the ground; which done, you shall with a very strong Plow teare vp the earth into great and deepe furrowes, and deuide into Lands as you shall thinke meete and conuenient, laying them higher or flatter as you shall haue occasion, and as the ground lyeth more or lesse within the danger of wa∣ter, whether it be the ouerflowing of some neere neigh∣bouring Brooks or Riuers, or else other standing water occasioned by raine and extraordinary showers, which must be carefully lookt vnto, because all ouerflowes Causes of of vnfruit∣fulnesse. and inundation of water, is a mightie destroyer and con∣sumer of graine: but these barren grounds of which I now write, are very seldome opprest with water; for most commonly they lye so high, that the continuall drienesse thereof, is a strong occasion of the much vn∣fruitfulnesse. After you haue thus burnt your baite and plowed vp your ground, you shall then with your hacks hack it into small pieces, in such manner as was declared in the former Chapter; then you shall (if the Sea be any thing neere you) sand it with salt sand (as beforesaid) then lime it and after, meanure it either with Oxe dung, Horse dung, rotten Straw, mudde of Ponds and Ditches, the spyteling of House-floores, or sweepings of Channels and Streeres, or such like, or An excel∣lent mea∣nure.. for want of all these in case you dwell neere vnto the Sea-coast (where mean for the most part is in grea∣test
scarcitie, and the hardest to be come by) you shall gather from the bottome of the Rocks (where the seydge of the Sea continually beateth) a certaine blacke weede, whica they call Hemp weede, hauing great broad leaues, and growing in great abundance, in thick tufts, and hang∣ing together like Pease-straw; and with these weeds, you shal couer your Lands all ouer of a prety good thicknesse Of Plow∣ing. and then forth with you shall plow it againe somewhat deeper, and with somewhat greater furrowes then be∣fore, raising vp the new quick earth to intermingle and mixe with those meanures and helpes which you had formerly prepared and laid vpon the ground; then shall you againe hack it and harrow it, then shall you take Pigeons dung, or Pullens dung (that is any kind Of diuers meanures. of land foule whatsoeuer, but by no meanes any wa∣ter foule) or Pigeons dung and Pullens dung mixt to∣gether, and allowing to euery aker two or three bushels thereof, which is the true quantitie of seede proportio∣ned for the same, and this dung being broken and masht into small peices, you shall put into your Sydlop or Hop∣per, and in the same manner as you sowe your Corne, you shall sowe this dung vpon the ground, and then immediatly after it, you shall sowe your Wheate ei∣ther steept in brine or salt Sea-water, or vnsteept, as you shall thinke good, but in case you can neither get salt sand nor Sea-Rocke weedes, then you shall by no meanes omit the steeping of your Seede; neither shall you faile before you sowe your seede, to mixe with your Pigeons and Pullens dung, a full equall part of Miture of mnures. Bay salt well dryed and broken, and so sowen with the dung vpon the land, and then the seede after it; which done, you shall Harrow it againe, clotit, sleight it, and smoth it, in such sort as was formerly declared
in the former Chapter, for these labours haue no alte∣rations, but must in all points be done as was before set downe. Now touching the weeding of this earth; after the Of wee∣ding. Corne beginneth to grow aboue the ground, there is no feare to be had either of Thistles, Tares, Cockles, Dar∣nell Docks, and such like strong weedes, which indeed are the issues of good groundsill ordered and handled: But the weeds which you shall most feare in this place, is yong Gorse, or Furs, or else yong Broome, which are ve∣ry apt to grow from the leaft part or parcell of roots that shall be left behind; nay, the very nature of those bar∣ren earths is such, that of the one accord it will bring forth those weedes, the cold sharpnesse of the ayre mix∣ing with the fterrility and roughnesse of the earth, being the cause that it will giue life to no other bet∣ter plants; therefore so soone as you shall behold any of them to appeare aboue the earth, though they be not halfe a singer high, you shall presently, with all diligence, pull them vp by the rootes and cast them away, or lay them in heapes that they may be afterwards burnt, and the ashes sprinkled vpon the ground, and heerein is to be obserued, that the yonger and the sooner that you doe pull vp these weedes, the better it is and the easilier they will come from the earth, and the sooner be destroyed: for all those mix∣tures where with already you haue beene taught to mixe your earth, are in themselues such naturall enemies to all these kinde of barren weedes, that should you omit the manuall labour of destroying them (which no good husband willingly will do) yet in time the earth of it selfe, and the often plowing of the same would leaue no such
offence of weedes or other growths which might hin∣der the Corne. Now touching the best time when to pull away these Time for weeding. weedes, though generally it must be done assoone as they doe appeare aboue the ground; yet it shall not bee amisse for you to deferre the worke till after a shower of raine, and thenimmediatly after the ground is wet (and so by that meanes more apt and wil∣ling to open and forsake the rootes fastened within it) you shall with all diligence pull them out of the ground and destroy them: neither shall you pull them out of the ground with your hands onely; for the Gorse haue exceeding sharpe pricks, so that with your naked hands you are not able to touch them, and to arme your hands, against them, with ftrong thicke gloues, would be too boistrous and combersome, so that sometimes you might either misse the weedes, and pull vp the Corne; or else pull vp the Corne and weeds both together; therefore to preuent all these casu∣alties or hinderances, you shall take a paire of long small woodden Nyppers, made after the forme of this figure. And with these you shall pull the weedes out of the ground and cast them into the furrowes by the sides of the Lands, till your daies worke be finished, and
then with a rake you shall rake them together, and so lay them in heapes, to dry and wither, in more con∣uenient places, that when time shall serue, you may burne thm and vse them, as was before declared. Laftly, you shall haue great respect that if this ground Gathering of stones. be very much troubled with loose stones, as Flynt, pible, and such like, that then you very carefully get them gathered from the ground, both before and after you haue plowed it, and to lay them on heapes in other vacant places, where they may serue for pa∣uings, and such like purposes when time requireth: but if the ground be ouerrunne with great or else small limestones, as for the most part these barren grounds are; then shall you with all care gather them vp and lay them in great heapes in some corner of your field where you may make a conuenient lime-Kilne, and so there burne these stone thus gathered, which will be both an infinite profit, and an infinite case to the rest of your labours. And thus much touching the Ordering, plowing and sowing of all manner of rough barren Clayes, whether simple or compound, being laden and ouerrunne with Gorsse, Broome, and such like.
CHAP. IIII. Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all rough bar∣ren Clayes, whether simple or compound, that are ouer∣runne with Whinnes, and such like. NExtvnto this barren Clay which is ouerrunnewith Furres, Broome and such like, I will place that barren and vnfertill carth, being also a Clay, wether sim∣ple or compound, which is ouerrunne onely with Whinnes, as indeede bearing little or no other burthen, or if it doe beare any other burthen, as some little short, moffie grasse, yet is that grasse so couered ouer with these sharpe Whinnes, that not any beast dare put his nose to the ground, or bire vpon the same; and indeed, this kind of earth is not any whit at all lesse barren then those of which I haue already written: but rather more, in that the malignant qualities thereof are not so soone cor∣rected, nor yet the vertues so soone restored. To speake then first what these Whinnes are, you shall What Whinnes are: vnderstand that they be a certaine kinde of rough dry weedes which growe bushie and thick together, very short and close vnto theground, being of a darke browne collour, and of crooked growth, thick and confused, and full of knots, and those knots armed with hard, long, sharpe pricks, like thornes or bryars, they haue little browne leaues which shadow the pricks, and doe winde their branch so one into another, that they can hardly be seperated, yet is their growth at any time little more then a handfull aboue the earth, only they spread ex∣ceedingly, and will runne and couer ouer a whole field, choaking vp all sorts of good plants whatsoeuer, and
turning the best grasse that is to mosse, and filthinesse; Paring of Grounds. wherefore if at any time you be Master of any such naughtie and barren ground, and would haue it redu∣ced vnto goodnesse and fertillitie, you shall first take a fine thinne paring-shouell made of the best yron and well steeled and hardned round about the edges, accor∣ding to the forme of this figure following: And with this paring-shouell, you shall first pare vp all Making of Baites. the vpper swarth of the ground, about two inches or an inch and a halfe thick at the least, and euery paring would be some three foote in length at the least, and so broad as the shouell will conueniently giue it leaue, and; this swarth thus pared vp, you shall first turne the whinny or grasse side downeward, and the earth side vp∣ward, and so let it lye two or three daies in the Sunne to dry (for this worke is intended to begin in the month of May) and when that side is well dryed you shall turne the other side, and dry it also; then when all the swarth is dryed, you shall gather fixe or seuen pieces together, and turning the whinny or grasse side inward and the earth side outward, you shall make round, hol∣low little hils thereof much what according to the fashi∣on of this figure following:
And the inward hollownes like vnto the hollownes of an Ouen, butmuch lesse in compasse, which done, you shall fill the hollownesse with dry chips, or else small sticks, or Furres and straw mixed together, which you shall put in at the vent-hole which shall be left on one side of the hill, and then kindling it with fier, you shall burne all that swarth in such sort as you burnt the roots of your Furres and Broome before; for this is also called a burning of Baite, as well as the former; for it is a most principall nurrisher of the earth, and a very sudden destroyer of all malignant weedes whatso∣euer. After the burning of your hils, as soon as the fier Breaking of Baites. is vtterly quenched and gone out, and no heate at all left in the hils, you shall then with clotting beetles beate them all downeto dust, and then with shouels you shall spread the ashes quite ouer all the ground, as was before declared in the former Chapter: and heerein is to be no∣ted,
that you must place these hils as thick and close to∣gether as by any meanes possibly you can, making your hils so much the lesse and lower, that they may stand thicker and neerer together, and so couer more ground, and thereby the heate and strength of the fier to disperse it selfe ouer all that peice of ground; for the fier bur∣ning vpon the ground, doth as much good for the inrich∣ing of the earth and destroying of the weedes, as the ashes doth which are spread vpon the same. Now after your Baite is in this manner burned and Plowing. spread, you shall then (as was before shewed) plow vp your ground in good large furrowes, then hack it very small, sand it, limeit, and meanure it; and of all mea∣nures, there is not any better for this ground then Oxe dung and ashes well mixt together; of which ashes, those of Beane-straw, Pease-straw, or any other straw, are best; those of Wood or Ferne next, those of Charcoale next, & those of Seacoale or pitcoale are the worst of all; Swines dung is not much amisse for this ground; for though it be a great breeder of weedes and thystles in good or fer∣tile grounds, yet in this cold hard and barren earth it worketh no such effect, but is a great comforter and warme moistner of the same. After you haue thus made your ground; as soone as wheate seede-time cometh, which is the latter end of September and beginning of October, you shall then with great care plow ouer your ground againe, and take great respect that you turne vp your furrowes much deeper then before, and that for two especiall causes; the first, that the new earth may the better mixe with the old earth and those helpes which are added thereunto; and secondly, that yow may be surer to teare vp the rootes of all the Whinnes from the very
bottome of the earth, not suffring any part of them to remaine behinde, and for this purpose it shall not be a∣misse to haue an idle Boy or two to follow your Plow, and to gather away all the rootes that shall be torne vp or any way else left bare aboue ground, which rootes shall be layd on heapes in conuenient places, and then after burnt, and the ashes thereofspread vpon the ground, which will be a very great comfort vnto the seede, being a speedy helpe vnto the sprouting thereof, and a very warme comforter of the roote after the stemme is spind∣led aboue ground, for in these cold barren earthes, no∣thing doth so much spoile and flay the Corne, as the dead coldnesse which lyeth at the roote thereof; for in many of these vnfertill places, you shall see Corne at the first sowing (whilest there is a little strength in the ground) sprout in great abundance, promising much hope of the profit; but when it should spindle and come to much better perfection, that poore strength be∣ing spent and consumed, and the cold and drinesse of the soile, hauing as it were ourcome all matter of comfort then presently you shall sec the blade of the Corne turne yellow, the stemme or stalke to wither, and ei∣ther put forth no eare at all, or else a very poore lit∣tle empty one, being laden with nothing but a most dry chaffie huske without substance: But to come a∣gaine to our purpose, after you haue thus plowed vp your ground the second time, you shall then hack it againe, and harrow it, as was declared in the other former Chapters; then you shall take your seede-wheate which hath beene steept either in brine or Sea water, and to enery bushell of that seede, you shall adde a bushell of Bay salt and mixe them very well together in your Hopper or Sydlop, and so sowe them toge∣ther
vpon the ground, obseruing to double your casts so ost, that you may not faile to cast that true quanti∣tie of seede into the earth which otherwise you would haue done if so be there had beene no mixture at all, for to doe otherwise were to deceiue the ground, and a handfull of seede so saued, would be the losse of a peck in the time of Haruest; therefore haue great re∣spect that your ground haue his due, for it is no more cost though it be a little labour. When your seede is sowen, you shall harrow it a∣gaine Harrow∣ing. the second time, clot it, smooth it, and sleight it, as was before declared in the former Chapters. As touching the weeding of this ground, it is the leaft Weeding. labour of all other, for the earth being so corrected as is before shewed, it will naturally of it selfe put forth no weedes, especially if you remember to plow it deepe, and be sure to teare vp and gather away all the quick rootes, otherwise if that labour be any thing neglected, then will it put forth both Whinnes and great store of other rough weedes, which as soone as you shall perceiue to appeare, you shall presently with your wood∣den Nyppers pull them vp by the rootes, as was at large declared in the fore-going Chapter. Now for the generall profit of this ground thus Profits. made and prepared, it is the same that the two former are, that is to say, it will beare you good and suffici∣ent Wheate, in plentifull abundance for the space of two or three years, then Barley a yeare after; then Oates three yeares together after the Barley; and Pease or Beanes a yeare after the Oates; then lastly, very good Meadow or Pasture, for the space of three or foure yeares after, and then you shall begin and dresse it againe, as was formerly declared, and thus much touching the
ordering, plowing, and sowing of all rough barren Clayes, whether simple or compound, being laden and ouer-rune with Whinnes, and such like. CHAP. V. Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all barren Clayes, whether simple or else compound, which are ouer-runne with Lynge, or Heath. There followeth now successiuely, another sort of barren Earth, which indeede is much more sterryll and barren then any of the other formerly written vp∣on, because they, out of their owne natures, doe beare a certaine kinde of grasse or foode which will relieue ordinary, hard, store-Cattel, whether it be sheepe, goats, or yong beasts. But this earth of which I am now to intreate, beareth no grasse at all, but only a vilde, filthie, black-browne weede, which we call Lynge or Heath, the tender tops whereof Cattell and wilde Deere will sometimes crop, yet it is to them but little reliefe, and only maintaineth life and no more. Now al-be some may obiect vnto me, that this kinde of soyle is euer a sandy soile and no Clay, as may be seene in most Chas∣ses, Forrests, and Downes: yet I answere, that al-be it hold so in generall; yet there are diuers Clayes, es∣pecially in mountainous Countries, that are pestered with these kinde of weedes, as may be seene in the North and North-West parts of Deuonshire, in some parts of Cornewall, and in many parts both of North and South Wales; and these Clay grounds which are thus offen∣ded with these weedes of Lyng or Heath, are much more barren and vnfruitfull then the sands, because of
their much more coldnesse; yet those Clayes which are mixed with either blacke sand, dun sande, or yellow sand, and ouerrunne thus with Heath or Lynge, are the most barren of all: to make any further discription of this Heath or Lyng, being a thing so notoriously knowne ouer all this Kingdome, I hold it meerely needlesse, only to say it is a rough browne weedo, shooting out abundance of stalkes from one roote, with little darke leaues, and flowers on the toppe, of a pale reddish colour, much inclyning vnto Peach colour at the first, but being full blowne, they are then a little more whitish. You therefore that haue any such ground, and desier Destroy∣ing of heath. to bring it to fruitfulnesse and the bearing of good Corne and grasse in a reasonable abundance; you shall first with sythes or sharpe hookes (but old sythes are the bet∣ter) cut downe all the Heath, or Lynge which grow∣eth vpon the earth, you intend to conuert to goodnesse so neere the ground as possibly you can; then when it is cut downe (which would euer be at the beginning of the Month of May) you shall let it lye vpon the ground, daily tossing and turning it till it become very dry, then spreading it all ouer the ground, and mixing or couering it with dry straw of any kinde whatsoeuer you shall presently set it on fier in so many seuerall corners of the field, that all the seuerall fiers in the end may meete in one point, and not leaue any part of the mowen Heath or Lyng vnburnt, or any part of the ground vnscortched; after this is done and the ground cooled, you shall with your flat clotting beetles beate the ashes hard into the ground, then you shall take a strong plow, with a broad-winged share, and an euen colture, and you shall plow vp all this ground thus
burnt, in very large and deepe furrowes, by no meanes picking out any of the quicke rootes which shall re∣maine in the furrowes so turned vp, but letting them rest in the earth still, then with your hacks and the help of your yron paring-shouell, you shall cut vp the fur∣rowes, formerly turned vp, into short pieces of three foote or three foote and a halfe long, and some lesse, as occasion shall serue; then with these pieces, you shall build little hollow hils, such as in the former Chapter you made of the vpper swarth of the ground only; and then filling the hollownesse with dry heath and dry straw mixt together, you shall set euery hill on fier, Another Burning of Baite. and so burne the very substance of the earth into ashes, which will soone be done by reason of the infinite number of rootes and small strings which lie mixt in the earth, and the drynesse thereof occasioned by the former burning: And this is another kind of burning of Baite much different from all the former, and yet to as great end and profit as any whatsoeuer, and these hils must as the former be placed one as neere ano∣ther as is possible, so as they may spread and couer ouer the greatest part of the ground, and leauiug no more then a good reasonable path to passe betweene hill and hill. Now as soone as you haue thus burned all your Baite, and that your hils are cold, you shall then as was before shewed in the former Chapters with Be∣tels and Shouels breake downe the hils and spread the earth and ashes ouer all the ground; which done, you shall sand it (if the situation of the ground be answe∣rable thereunto) and lime it in such sort as was shewed in the second Chapter; then when it is lymed, and the lime equally spread, not more in one place then in an∣other,
you shall then meanure it with the best mea∣nure you can prouide, of which there is none better or more propper for this ground then mans ordure, and the rubbish, sweepings, parings and spytlings of houses mixt together, or for want of this (because it may not be in so great plenty as other meanures) you may take either old Oxe dung, or Horse dung, or for want of them, the old rotten and mouldy staddels or bot∣tomes of Corne-stacks, or reedes; especially Pease∣stacks, or Beane-stacks, prouided that it be thorowly rotten, for the lesse rotten it is, the worse it is: Also the scowrings of common Sewers, and especially those through which much of mans vrine doth passe, is a most wonderfull and beneficiail meanure for these grounds, so are also the scowings of sinkes and chan∣nels which come from Kitchins and Wash-houses, where great store of Brine and salt broth is shed, and other greasy, fat and putrified substances, as also abun∣dance of sope suddes, and buck-ashes, and other sope and lye washings, then which there is no better mea∣nure that can be vsed for these kinde of grounds. After your ground is thus perfectly made and mea∣nured, and that Wheat-seede time doth draw on, which (as before was shewed) is euer at the latter end of Sep∣tember, you shall then plow vp your ground againe in that manner as was shewed for the former earths; to wit, much deeper then before: for you are to vnder∣stand, that this ground being drest as is before declared, there will remaine nothing of the furrowes which were first plowed vp but the ass, which being couered with sand, lime, and meanure, the earth will lye plaine and leuell, so that of necessitie you must raise vp new furrowes of new earth, which being done, you shall
then with your hacks, cut all the new earth into very small pieces; mixing them well with the other mould made of sand, lyme, meanure and ashes, then as was before said, you shall harrow it to make the mixture so much the better, and the mould so much the finer; and then if it haue beene sanded, you may sowe your Seede-Wheate simply of it selfe, without any doubt of the plentifull increase thereof; but if it haue not beene sanded, then as in the fore going Chapter, you shall not only steepe your Seede in Brine (as be∣fore shewed) but also you shall mixe your Seede with Bay-salt, and so sowe it into the ground; or if at the time of sowing (after it is plowed, hackt and harro∣wed) youbestow or Pigeons dung, or Pullens dung, or sheepes dung vpon the Land, it will be much better, and the Corne will giue a much greater increase. Now as soone as your Land is sowen, you shall then forth∣with harrow it againe and couer the Seede very close, then you shall clot it, smooth it, and sleight it (as was before shewed.) As touching the weeding and cleansing of this earth Of Wee∣ding. after the Corne is sprung vp, you shall vnderstand that there is great care to be had thereunto, for this ground is much subiect vnto weedes, and those of the worst kinde: fot although for the most part it will be free from all manner of soft and tender weedes, as thy stels, cockell, darnell, ketlocks, docks, rape, and such like herball stuffe; yet is it much subiect to twitch Bry∣ars, which grow at both ends, lyng, wilde time, `and such like, any of which as soone as you shall see appeare or peepe aboue the earth, you shall presently with your Nippers pull them vp by the rootes, and not suffer them in any wise to looke a handfull aboue the ground, for if
you doe, their hardnesse is so great, and their rootes so large and fast fixt in the mould, that you can by no meanes pull them away without great losse and hurt to the graine, pulling vp with them all such rootes of Corne, as shall be fixed neere about them, for any o∣ther weake and superfluous things which shall grow from the Land, you may with ordinary weeding hooks cut them away; as for long grasse, whether it be soft or segy, or any other such like stuffe, you shall not stirre it but let it grow, for it keepeth warme the roots of your Corne, and giueth nourishment and increase thereunto: Now for the profit of this soyle thus or∣dered and husbanded it is equall with any of the for∣mer, and will beare Wheate very plentifully for the space of the three first yeares, good Barley; the fourth yeare with the helpe of the sheepe folde (as was before said;) and good Oates the sift, sixt, and seuenth yeares; and very good small Pease the eight yeare (for Beanes this Soyle will very hardly beare at all) and the ninth, tenth, and eleuenth yeare it will beare very good mea∣dow (though not altogether very fine pure grasse, yet very good feeding and wholesome grasse) or so good pasture as a man can reasonably require for any hol∣ding Cattell whatsoeuer; nay; it will also indifferent∣ly well feede, and fat Cattell, though peraduenture it requireth a little longer time then other finer grounds will. And thus much touching the well Ordering, Plowing, and Sowing of all barren Clayes, whether simple or compound, which are ouer-runne with Lyng or Heath.
CHAP. VI. Of the Ordering, Tylling, and Dressing of all plaine, simple barren Sands, bearing nothing but a short mos∣sie grasse. HAuing thus (in as large manner as I hope shall be needfull for any iudiciall or indifferent Reader) written of the Natures, Orderings, Plowings and Dres∣sings of all manner of barren and vnfruitfull Clayes, whether they be simple of them selues, or else com∣pounded with other earthes, as sands, chalkes, grauels, and such like; shewing by those naturall burthens which continually of their own accords, they produce & bring forth (which indeed is the easiest and safest way of knowledge) how to amend and better them and bring them to that perfection of fruitfulnesse, that the best earth shall but in a very small degree exceede them, nay hardly any thing at all, except in the sauing of a little charge and some labour, without which nothing is to be obtained by the Husbandman; neither ought we indeed to expect any thing without our industry, since the Highest hath said him selfe, that we shall eate the sweat of our Labours; neither is this charge or la∣bour thus bestowed on these barren grounds to be grutcht at by any honest minde, since the worst crop of tenne or eleuen, will make good his charge and toile with a reasonable interest; so that I make account, nine or tenne yeares profits come into his Barnes without purchase, for it is to be intended that all these earths formerly spoke of, are not to be drest or to put the Husbandman to any charge more then the first yeare
of tenne or eleuen, for the second yeare he shall assoone as he hath gathered his Wheate off, which will be in August, and finisht other parts of his haruest, he shall presently put his Plow into the same Wheate-ground againe and Plow it vp, hack it, harrow it, sowe it, her∣row it againe, clot it, and weede it, as in the former yeare, and so consequently of all the yeares following, whereby you perceiue that all labours and charges are saued more then once plowing and sowing. This then considered, it necessarily now followeth, that I speake of the bettering and bringing into perfecti∣on of all manner of barren Sand-grounds, being sim∣ple of themselues, without any mixture of other earths, except one and the same kind, as sand with sand, though peraduenture the colours of the sands may alter; as red with white, yellow with blacke, &c. which in as much as the whole substance is sand without any con∣trary mixture, therefore it may well be called simple and not compound: and of these sands, I purpose to intreate, as formerly I did of the Clayes; that is to say, by their outward faces and Charracters, which are those burthens and increases which of their owne prop∣per natures without any help or compulsion they pro∣duce and bring forth into the World. And first of that naughtie cold and barren sand, which lying vpon high, stony & mountainous Rocky places, or else vpon low∣er cold bleak Plaines, subiect to the North and North-East windes and tempests, or bordering vpon the Seas, doth not bring forth any thing but a short mossie grasse which the Sunne makes bitter, and the cold dewes ful∣some & vnsauorie in taste. If any man then be Master of such vnprofitable and vnfruitfull earth, and desire to haue it brought to goodnesse and perfection, he shall
First, at the beginning of the Spring, as about midd Plowing: Aprill or earlyer, with a strong Plow answerable to the soyle, yet somewhat lesse both in timbers and yrons then that wherewith you plow your Clay grounds: you shall Plow so much of that earth vp as you may conueniently compasse to sowe and dresse exactly and perfectly; for to vndertake more, were to make all vn∣profitable, and to cast away much labour and charge without any profit, this ground you shall plow of an indifferent depth, though not so deepe as the Clayes, and you shall lay the furrowes though flat, yet close one one to another, without leauing any balke betweene, but plowing all very cleane; yet not so very cleane and close together, that you may lay the greene swarth to the new plowed or quick earth; but rather turne one swarth against another, so as the furrowes may lye, and no more but touch the edges one of another: This when you haue done, you shall then with your hacks cut and breake all the earth so turned vp in∣to very small peices, and not only the earth so turned vp: but also all other greene swarth which was left vn∣plowed; prouided, that before this labour of hacking, you let the ground lye certaine daies in the furrowes, that one swarth heating and scalding the other, they may both equally rot and grow mellow together, which once perceiued by the blacknesse thereof, you may then at your pleasure hack it and cut it as is before declared. Now some may in this place obiect vnto me, that this Obiection. labour of hacking should be needlesse, in as much as all sand grounds whatsoeuer are out of their owne natures so light, loose, and willing to disseuer, that this toile might very well and to good purpose be saued.
To this I answere, that true it is, most sands in their Answere. owne natures are loose, and light, and willing to disse∣uer into fine mold without any extremity, especially rich and fruitfull sands whose predominant qualitie of warmth giueth nourishment and increase; but these barren and cold sands, in which is a certaine flegmatique toughnesse and most vnwholesome dry∣nesse, are of a cleane contrary nature, and through the stony hardnesse thereof, they are as vnapt to break and disseuer as any Clay whatsoeuer: besides, the swarth being of a tough mossie substance (which euer carryeth a hard strong roote answerable with the cold in which it is ingendred) doth so constant∣ly binde, fetter, and hold the mold together, that it is inpossible for any harrow to breake it in pieces, or to gather from it so much mould as may serue to couer the Corne and giue it roote when it is sowen into the same; and therefore then this worke of hacking, there can be none more necessary, or to the Husband-man can bring more ease or profit. When therefore you haue thus hackt your Land, OfMarling and distributed the mold into many small pieces, you shall then with all expedition marle it; which forasmuch as it is no generall or common practise in euery part of this Kingdome, I will first tell you what Marle is, and then how to finde it, digge it, and vse it for your best behoofe. Marle you shall then vnderstand, is a certaine rich, stiffe What Marle is. & tough Clay of a blewish colour, and full of many red veines like Porphery or Marble, it is of a tough & glewie substance, apt to worke and hold together like waxe, and chiefly when it is any thing moist, but being dryed, it mouldereth and breaketh as small as cynders; and by
these three Carracters, colour, toughnesse, and loose∣nesse, being dryed, you shall neuer faile certainely to know it. Some are of opinion, that this Marle was first found out in Germanie, and there put in practise, and found of most notable vse, calling it by the name of Pytch, or a certaine Clay like pitch: others that we found it out first heere in England, as indeed is most probable, because we haue the greatest store, and make the greatest vse thereof: others, that the first knowledge came out of France, but that is least credible, for nei∣ther is it there in much vse, nor much mentioned in any of the French Authors, especially the antientest or any that writ out of present memory; howsoeuer, most cer∣taine it is, that not any meanure that is in vse with the Husband-man is of more vertue or perfection, especial∣ly for these loose, sandy, barrē earths, neither of so much goodnesse and continuance; for it is hard for any one single and simple meanure to continue aboue three or foure years; yet this Marle is knowne to haue conti∣nued the ground good for the space of a dozen yeares at the least. This Marle is commonly found in the lowest parts of high Countries, neere Lakes and small Brookes, and in the high parts of lowe Countries, vpon the knols of small hils, or within the Clyts of high Mountainous banks, which bound greater Riuers into conclude, you shal seldom finde any of these barren sands, but they are either verdged about with Marle grounds, or if you will bestowe the labour to digge beyond the depth of the sand, you shall not faile to find or Marle or quar∣rie of stone, or both; for in some places Marle lyeth ve∣ry deepe, in other some places within a spades grast of the vpper swarth of the earth: Therefore it shall be
good for you to make proofe of all the most likely parts of your ground to finde out this Marle; and as soone as you haue found it out, you shall with Mattocks and Spades digge it vp and carry it to your land, there laying it in bigge round heapes, and setting them within a yard or two one of ano∣ther; thus when you haue filled ouer all your ground (which would be done with as great speede as might be, for the ancient custome of this Kingdome was, when any man went about to Marle his ground, all his Tenants, Neighbours and friends would come and helpe him to haften on the Worke) you shall then spread all those heapes, and mixing the Clay well with the Sand, you shall lay all smooth and le∣uell together; and heerein is to be obserued, that if the land you thus marle shall lye against the side of any great Hill or Mountaine, whereby there will be much desent in the ground, then you shall (by all meanes lay double as much marle, sand, or other compasse on the toppe of the Hill as on the bottome, because the raine and showers which shall fall will euer wash the fatnesse of the earth downe to the lowest parts thereof; when your ground is thus marled (if you be neere to the Sea-side) you shall then also sand it with salt Sea-sand, in such sort as was for∣merly declared, only you may forbeare to lay altoge∣ther so much vpon this sand ground as you did on the Clay ground, because an halfe part is fully suffici∣ent. If you cannot come by this salt-Sand, then in Of Chalke and thevse. stead thereof, you shall take chalke, if any be to be had neere you, and that you may lay in more plentifull manner then the sand; and albe it is said, that chalke is
a wearer out of the ground, and maketh a rich father yet a poore sonne, in this stile it doth not so hold, for as it fretteth and wasteth away the goodnesse that is in Clay grounds, so it comforteth & much strengtheneth these sand earths, and this chalke you shall lay in the same manner as you did your marle, and in the same manner spread it and leuell it, which done you shall then lime it as was before shewed in the Clay grounds, yet not so abundantly, because also a halfe part will be sufficient; after your lyming, you shall then mea∣nure it with the best meanure that you haue, whether it be dung of Cattell, Horse, Sheepe, Goates, straw, or other rubbish, and that being done and Seede-time drawing on, you shall then plow vp your ground a∣gaine, mixing the new quick earth and the former soyles so well together, that there may be little distin∣guishment betweene them, then you shall hack it a∣gaine, then harrow it, and lastly sowe it with good sound and perfit seed, and of seedes though Wheate will very well grow vpon this earth; yet Rye is the more naturall and certaine in the increase, yet ac∣cording to the strength of the ground, you may vse your discretion, obseruing that if you sowe Wheate, then to steepe it before in brine or salt-Sea-water, as was before described; but if you sowe Rye, then you shall sowe it simply without any helpe, ex∣cept it be Pigeons dung, or Bay-salt simple of it selfe in such manner as hath beene before declared; either sowing the salt with the Corne or before the Corne, as shall seeme best in your owne discre∣tion. After your seede is sowen, you shall then harrow
it againe, clot it, smooth it and steight it as before shewed in the second Chapter, which done (after the Corne is shot aboue the earth) you shall then looke to the weeding of it being somewhat a little too much subiect to certaine particular weedes, as are Hare-bottels, wilde Chesse-bolles, Gypsy flow∣ers and such like, any of which, when you see them spring vp, you shall immediatly cut them away close by the rootes, as for tearing their rootes out of the ground with your Nyppers, it is not much materi∣all, for the cutting of them is sufficient, and they will hardly euer againe grow or doe you hinde∣rance, many other weedes there may grow amongst these which are also to be cut away, but these are the principall and of most note; wherefore as soone as you haue clensed your lands of these and the reft, you shall then referre the further increase of your pro∣fit vnto Gods prouidence, thankfully accepting what∣soeuer he shall send you. Lastly, you shall vnderstand that this ground be∣ing The Profits thus plowed, dreft, and ordered, will without any more dressing, but once plowing and sowing, euery yeare beare you good Wheate or good Rye three yeares together; then good Barley the fourth yeare; good Oates the fift, sixt and seuenth yeare; excellent good Lupins the eight yeare, and very good Meadow or Pasture three or foure yeares after, and then it shall be necessary to dresse it againe in such manner as was before described. And thus much touching the plowing, ordering, and inriching of all these plaine barren sands.
CHAP. VII. Of the plowing, Tylling, Ordering and Inriching of all barren Sands which are laden and ouer-runne with Braken, Ferne, or Heath. NExt vnto this plaine, cold, barren Sand, which beareth no other burthen but a short mossie grasse; I will place that Sand which is laden and ouer runne with Braken, Ferne, or Heath, as being by many degrees more barren then the former, both in respect that it is more loose and lesse substantiall, as also in that it is more dry and harsh, and alto∣gether without nutriment, more then an extroame sterryll coldnesse, as appeareth by the burthen it bringeth forth, which is Braken or Ferne, a hard, rough, tough weede, good for nothing but to burne, or else to lytter store-beasts with for the breeding of meanure, or if you strow it in the High-waies where many Trauellers passe, it will also thereturne to good reasonable compasse. Of this kinde of ground if you be Master, and Of de∣stroying Braken. would reduce it vnto fertilitie and goodnesse, you shall first, whether the Braken be tall and high (as I haue seene some as high as a Man on Horse-back) or short and low (as indeed most commonly these barren earths are, for tall Ferne or Braken hewes some strength in the ground) you shall with Sythes first mowe it downe in the Month of May, then wi∣ther and dryeit vpon the ground, and after spread it
as thinne as you can ouer all the earth you intend to plow; which done, you shall bring your plow and begin to plow the ground after this order: first, you shall turne vp your furrow and lay it flat to the ground, greene-swarth against greene-swarth, then looke how broad your furrow is so turned vp, or the ground it couereth, and st so much ground you shall leaue vnplowed betweene furrow and furrow, so that your land may lye a furrow and a greene balke, a furrow and a greene balke, till you haue gone ouer all the ground, then shal you take a paring-shouell of yron and pare vp the green-swarth of all the balkes between the furrowes, at least two inches thick, and into pieces of two or three foote long, and with these pieces of earth and the drye Ferne which is pared vp with them, you shall make little round hollow Baite hils as in the third and fourth Chapter; and these hils shall be set thick and close ouer all the ground, and so set on fier and burnt; then when the fier is ex∣tinct, and the hils cold, you shall first with your hacks cut in pieces all the furrowes that were for∣merly turned vp, and then breake downe the burnt hils, and mixe the ashes and earth with the other mould very well together; which done, you shall then with all speede marle this earth as sufficiently Of Marle. as possible may be, not scanting it or sparing it of Marle, but bestowing it very plentifully vpon the same; which done, you shall then plow it o∣uer againe, and plowing it excedingly well, not lea∣uing any ground whatsoeuer vntorne vp with the Plow; for you shall vnderstand that the reason of leauing the former balkes, was that at this second
plowing after the Marle was spread vpon the ground, the new, quick, and vnstirred fresh earth might as well be stirred vp to mixe with the Marle, as the o∣ther dead earth and ashes formerly receaued, whereby a fresh comfort should be brought to the ground and an equall mixture without too much drynesse, and this second Ardor or plowing would begin about the latter ende of Iune. After your ground hath beene thus marled, and Sanding and lyming the second time plowed, you shall then sand it with salt Sea-sand, lime it and meanure it as was decla∣red in the foregoing Chapter: and of all meanures for this soile, there is not any so exceeding good as sheepes meanure, which although of the Husband∣man it be esteemed a meanure but of one yeare, yet by experience in this ground it hapneth otherwise, and is as durable, and as long lasting a compasse as any that can be vsed, and besides it is a great de∣stroyer of thystles, to which this ground is very much subiect, because vpon the alteration of the ground the Ferne is also naturally apt to alter vnto Thystell as we daily see. When your ground is thus amply drest and well Plowing and sow∣ing. ordered, and that Seede-time commeth on, you shall then plow it againe in such manner as you did the second time, that is to say, very deepe, cleane, and after the manner of good Husbandry, without any rest balkes or other disorders: then shall you hack it very well, then harrow it, and then sowe it; but by mine aduice, in any case, I would not haue you to bestow any Wheate vpon this soyle (except it be two or three bushels on the best part thereof
for experience sake, or prouision for your houshold) for it is a great enemy vnto Wheate, and more then the marle hath no nourishment in it for the same, because all that commeth from the salt sand, lime and meanure it little enough to take away the naturall sterrilitie of the earth it selfe, and giue it strength to beare Rye, which it will doe very plen∣tifully; and therefore I would wish you for the three first yeares only, to sowe the best Rye you can get into this ground; the fourth yeare to sowe Barley; the sift, sixt and seuenth Oates; and of Oates, the bigge blacke Oate is the best for this ground, ma∣keth the best and kindlyest Oat-malt, and feedeth Horse or Cattell the soundest; as also it is of the hardest constitution, and endureth either cold or drynesse much better then either the white Oate, the cut Oate, or any Oate whatsoeuer; the eight yeare, you shall only sowe Lupyns or Fetches; and three yeares after, you shall let it lye for grasse, and then dresse it againe as before said; for it is to be vn∣derstood, that in all the following yeares (after the first yeare) you shall bestow no labour vpon this ground more then plowing sowing, hacking and har∣rowing at Seede-time only. But to proccede to the orderly labour of this Labours after sow∣ing. ground, after you haue sowen your Rye, you shall then harrow it againe, clot it, smooth it and sleight it as was before shewed in the second Chapter of this Booke. And although a man would imagine that the sandy loosenesse of this soyle would not neede much clotting or sleighting of the Earth, yet by reason of the mixture thereof with the Marle
and meanure, it will so hold and cleaue together, that it will aske good strong labour to loosen it and lay it so hollow and smooth as in right it should be. Touching the Weedes which are most subiect to Weeding. this Soyle, they are Thystles and yong Brakes or Fernes which will grow vp within the Corne, which before they rise so high as the Corne, and euen as it were at the first appearing, you must with your woodden Nyppers pull vp by the rootes, and af∣ter rake vp and lay in some conuenient place where they may wither and rot and so turne to good mea∣nure. And thus much touching the ordering, dres∣sing, plowing, and inriching of all barren Sands which are ouer-runne with Braken, Ferne, or Heath.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Plowing, Tilling, ordering and inriching of all bar∣raine Sands, which are laden and ouer-runne with Twitch, or wilde Bryar. HAuing written fufficiently of this hard & barraine, waste, wilde, sandy ground, which is ouer-run with Braken, Ferne, Heath, & such like: I wil now proceed, and vnto it ioyne another sand which is much more barren, and that is the sand that bringeth forth nothing but wilde Twitch, Bryars, Thorn-bush, and such like vndergrowth of yong misliking wood, which neuer would rise or come to profit, the bitter cold drinesse of the earth wherein it groweth, and the sharpe stormes to which the clime is continually sub∣iect both day and night, blasting it in such manner that nothing appeareth but a starued, withered, and vtter∣ly vnprofitable burthens good for nothing but the fire and that in a very simple sort. Such ground if you be Destroying of Twitch and Bryar. master of, and would reduce it to profit and fruitful∣nesse, you shall first with hookes or axes cut vp the vp∣per growth thereof, that is the bushes, yong trees and such like, then you shall also stubbe vp the rootes, not leauing any part of them behind in the earth, carrying away both home to your house to be imploide either for fewel, or the mending of the hedges, or such like, as you shall haue occasion; this done, you shall take a paire of strong Iron harrowes, and with them you shall harrow ouer all the earth, tearing vp all the Twitch, Bryars, and rough Grasse so by the rootes, that not any
part but the bare earth may be seen, and when your barrowes are cloyed, you shall vulade them in seue∣rall places of the ground, laying all such rubbish of weedes and other stuffe, which the harrowes shall ga∣ther vp in a little round hill, closse vp together that they may sweat, wither and dry; then spreading them abroad and mixing them well with dry straw, burne them all ouer the ground, leauing no part of the weeds or Grasse vnconsumed, then without beating in of the ashes, you shall presently plow the ground all ouer very cleane as may be, laying the furrowes as close as you can one to another, and leauing no earth vntoucht or vntorne vp with the Plow, which done, you shall immediately hacke it into small peeces, and as you hacke it, you shall haue idle Boyes to goe by the Hackers, to gather away all the roots which they shall loosen or breake from the mould, and laying them on heapes in the worst part of the ground, they shall there burne them, and spread the ashes thereon, after your ground is thus harrowed, plowed, and hackt, you shall then mucke it, as was formerly shew∣ed in the sixt Chapter, then shall you sand it, lyme it, and manure it as before said. Now of meanures, which are most proper for this Meanures soyle, you shall vnderstand that either Oxe, or Horse meanure, rotten straw, or the scouring of Yards is very good, prouided that with any of these meanures, or all these meanures, you mix the broad-leaued weeds, and other greene-weeds which grow in Ditches, Brooks, Ponds or Lakes, vnder Willow tree, which with an y∣ron Rake, Drag, or such likeinstrument, you may easily draw vpon the banke, and so carry it to your land, and there mingle it with the other meanures & so let it rot
in the ground, this meanure thus mixed is of all other most excellent for this soile, both by the experience of the Ancients who haue left it vnto memory, as also by daily practise now vsed in sundry parts of this king∣dome, aswell because of the temperat coolenes there∣of, which in a kindly manner asswageth the lime and sand, as also through the moysture which distilling through those warme Soiles doth quicken the colde starued earth, and giueth a wonderfull increase to the seede that shall be throwne into the same. After your ground is thus sufficiently drest with Harrowing and other labours. these soiles and meanures, you shal then plow it againe the second time which would bee after Michaelmas; after the plowing you shall then hack it againe, and be sure to mixe the earth and the meanures very well to∣gether, then you shall breake it in gentle manner with your Harrowes, and then sowe it; which done you shall harrow it againe, but then you shall harrow it much more painefully, and not leaue any clots or hard earth vnbroken that the Harrow can pull in pieces: as touching the seede which is fittest for this earth, it is the same that is spoken of in the next foregoing Chapter: as namely, the best Rye or the best Ma∣sline, which is Rye and Wheate equally mixt toge∣ther, or if there bee two parts Rye, and but one Wheate, the seede will bee so much the more cer∣taine and surer holding, and this seede you may sowe on this ground three yeares together, then Barley, then Oates, and so foorth, as is formerly writ of the grounds forgoing. After your ground is sowne and harrowed, you shall then clotte it, sleight it, and smooth it as you did the other groundes before, and then lastly with your backe Harrowes, that
is with a paire of harrowes, the teeth turned vpward from the ground, and the backe of the harrow next vnto the ground, you shall runne ouer all the ground and gather from the same all the loose Grasse, Twitch, or other weeds that shall any wayes be raised vp, and the same so gathered, you shall lay at the lands end in heapes, either to rot for meanure, or else at the time of the yeere to be burnt for ashes, and sprinkled on the earth the next seed time. Lastly touching the weeding of this soyle, you shall Weeding. vnderstand the weeds which are most incident there∣unto, are all the same you first went about to destroy: as namely, Twich, rough wilde Grasse, and yong woo∣dy vndergrowth, besides Thistles, Hare bottles, and Gipsie flowers; therefore you shall haue a great care at the first appearance or springing vp of the Corne, to see what weeds ariseth with it, (for these weeds are e∣uerfully as hasty as the Corne) and assoone as you see them appeare, both your selfe and your people with your hands shall pull them vp by the roots, and so weed your land as you would weed a garden, or Woad ground. Now if at this first weeding (which will be at the latter Spring, commonly called Michaelmas, or the Winter Spring) you happen to omit & let some weeds passe your hands vnpulled vp (which very well may chance in so great a work) you hal then the Som∣mer Spring next following (seeing them as hie or per∣aduenture hier then the Corne) with your wooden nippers pull them vp by the roots from the ground, and so cast them away: As touching the cutting them vp close by the ground with ordinary weedhookes, I doe in no sort allow it, for these kinde of weeds are so apt to grow, and also so swift in growth, that if you cut
them neuer so close in the Spring, yet they will againe ouermount the Corne before haruest, and by reason of their greatnesse, roughnesse, and much hardnesse choake and slay much Corne that shall grow about them, and therefore by all meanes you shall pull these weeds vp by the roots whilst they are tender, (if possi∣bly you can,) or otherwise in their stronger growth, sith their sufferance breedeth great losse and distructi∣on; And thus much touching the plowing, ordering, dressing and inriching of all barraine sands that are laden and ouer-runne with Twitch, wilde Bryar, or woody vndergrowth. CHAP. IX. Of the Plowing, Tilling, Ordering and Inriching of all bar∣ren Sands which are ouer-runne with mores or morish stinking long Grasse. VNto these fore-going barren Sands, of which I haue already written, I will lastly ioyne this last barren Sand, being of all earthes, whether Clay or Sand the most barrenest, and that is that filthy, blacke, morish Sand which beareth nothing but a stinking, putrified Grasse or Mosse, or Mosse and Grasse mixed together, to which not any Beast or Cattell, how course or hardly bred soeuer, will at any time lay their mouthes: and this kinde of ground also is very much subiect to marrishes and quagmires, of which that which is couered with Mosse, or Grasse, is the worst, and that which is tufted aboue with rushes, the best and soonest reduced vnto goodnesse; in briefe, all
these kinds of grounds generally are extremely moyste and colde, the uperabundance whereof is the occasion of the infinite sterrillity and barren∣nesse of the same. And therefore hee that is master of such vnpro∣fitable Earth, and would haue it brought to some profit or goodnesse, shall first consider the situati∣on of the ground, as whether it lye high or low, for some of these marrish groundes lie low in the Valles, some on the sides of Hilles, and some on the tops of Mountaines, then whether the much moystnesse thereof bee fedde by Riuer, Lake or Spring, whose veines not hauing currant passage through or vpon the earth, spreads soakingly ouer all the face thereof, and so rotting the mould with too much wette, makes it not onely vnpassable, but also vtterly vnprofitable for any good bur∣then. Now if you finde that this marrish Earth lie in Ground for Fish-ponds. the bottome of low vales as it were girdled about with Hilles or higher grounds, so that besides the feeding of certaine Springs, Lakes, or Riuers, eue∣ry shower of raine or falling of water from higher grounds bringeth to these an extraordinary moy∣sture to maintaine the rottennesse, in this case this ground is past cure for grasse or Corne, and would onely bee conuerted and made into a fish-pond for the breeding and feeding of Fish, being a thing no lesse profitable to the Husband-man for keeping his house, and furnishing the market then the best corne-land hee hath; and therefore when hee ma∣keth any such pond hee shall first rayse vp the head thereof in the narrowest part of the ground, and
this head by driuing in of stackes and piles of tough and hard wood as Elme, Oake and such like, and by ramming in of the Earth hard betweene them, and sodding the same so fast that the mould can by no meanes be worne downe or vndermined with the water, hee shall bring to as firme Earth as is possible, and in the midst of this head he shall place a sluce or Flood-gate made of sound and cleane Oake Tim∣ber and plankes, through which at any time to draine the Pond when occasion shall serue, and this done you shall digge the Ponde of such depth as the Earth conueniently will beare, and casting the Earth vpon either side you shall make the bankes as large and strong as the grounde requireth, then if any Spring which did before feed the Earth bee left out of the compasse of the Pond (because it lieth too high to be brought in) then shall you by draw∣ing gutters or draynes from the Spring downe to the Pond, bring all the water of the Springs into the Pond and so continually feed it with fresh and sweet water. Then storing it with Fish of best esteeme as Carpe, Tench, Breame, Pearch and such like, and keeping it from weeds, he and Vermine, there is no doubt of the daily proffit; But if this marrish and low Ground though it lie low and haue many Springs falling vpon it yet it lyeth not so extreame lowe but that there is some Riuer or dry Ditches bordering vppon it, which lie in a little lower diffent, so that except in case of inundation the Riuer and Ditches are free from the moysture of this Ground, but where there is any ouer-slowing of waters there this marrish Grounde must needes be drowned,
in this case this ground can hardly be made for corne, because euery ouerflow putteth the Graine in danger, yet may it be well conuerted to excellent pasture or medow, by finding out the heads of the Springs, and by opening and cleansing them, and then drawing from those cleansed heads, narrow draines or furrows through which the waters may passe to the neighbour ditches, and so be conueied downe to the lower Ri∣uers; leauing all the rest of the ground dry, and suffe∣ring no moistures to passe, but what goeth through these small deepe channels, then as soone as Sommer commeth, and the ground begins to harden, ifyou see any of the water stand in any part of the ground, you shall forth with mend the draine, and helpe the water to passe away, which done (as the ground hardeneth) you shall with hacks and spades lay the swarth smooth and plaine, and as early in the yeere as you can conue∣niently, you shall sow vpon the ground good store of hay seeds, and if also you doe meanure it with the rot∣ten staddels or bottomes of haystacks, it will be much the better, and this staddell you shall not spread very thicke but rather of a reasonable thinnesse, that it may the sooner rot and consume vpon the same. But if this marrish and filthy ground doe not lie so Draining of wet grounds low as these low valleyes, but rather against the tops of hils, you shall then first open the heads of all the Springs you can find, and by seucrall draines or slu∣ces, draw all the water into one draine, and so carry it away into some neighbouring ditch and valley; and these draines you shall make of a good depth as at least two foote, or two foote and a halfe, or more, if need require, and then crosse-wise, euery way ouer∣thwartthe ground, you shall draw more shallow fur∣rowes,
all which shall fall into the former deepe draines, and so make the ground as constant and firme as may be, then hauing an intent to imploy it for Corne, you shall bring your Plow into the ground, being a very strong one, and not much differing in Timber - worke or Irons from that which turneth vppe the clay grounds, and laying before the Plow long wades or roules of the straw ofLupyns, Pease, or else Fetches, (but Lupynsis the best) you shall turne the furrowes of earth with the Plow vpon the waddes, and so couer or bury them in the mould, and thus do vnto euery furrow, or at least vnto most of the furrowes you turne vppe, and so let it lie a little time to rotte, as by the space of a fortnight or three weekes, in which space, if the ground receiue not raine and moysture enough to rotte the strawe thus formerly buried, you shall then by stopping the draynes, and making the Springs ouerflow, gently washe the ground all ouer and no more, and then presently draine it a∣gaine; which done, assoone as the earth is dry, you shall hacke it and breake it into small peeces, then you shall also Sande it, Lyme it and mea∣nureit. Andlastly, you shall marle it, but if no salt sand be to be had, then instead of it, you shall chaulke it, yet of all the rest you shall take the least part of chaulke. This done, about the latter ende of luly you shall plow vp the ground againe with somewhat a better and deeper stytch then you did before, that if a∣ny of the straw be vnrotted or vnconsumed, it may a∣gain be raisd vp with the new moist earth & so made to
waste more speedily, and if at this second carrying you doe see any great hard clots to arise, then with your hacks you shall breake those hard clots in peeces, lay∣ing the land cleane without clots, weeds, or any other anoyance, and so let it rest till October, at which time you shall plow it ouer againe, hacke it, harrow it, and then sow it with the best seed-wheate; for this soile thus drest and meanured, albeit it be of all other the most barren, yet by reason of this mosture which at pleasure may be put to it, or taken from it, and by the mixture of these comfortable soyles and compasses, it is made as good and fruitfull as any earth whatsoeuer, and will beare wheat abundantly the space of three yeeres together; then good barley the fourth yeere with a little helpe of a sheepefold, or sheeps meanure; then Rye the fift yeare, Oates the sixt, the seuenth and eight yeare, small Pease the ninth yeare good medow or pasture three yeares following, and then to be new drest agaiue, as before faid. Now as soone as your seed wheat is sowne, you shal Harrowing. then harrow the ground againe, and be sure to couer the wheate both deepe and closse, as for the clots which shall arise from this soile, it shall not matter whether you break them, or no, for by reason of their moysture, they will be plyant and easie for the wheat∣to passe thorow, so that you shall not care how rough your land lye, so it lye cleane, and the Corne well co∣uered, but for all other seeds, you shall break the clots to dust, and lay the land as smooth as may be. Now for the weeding of this soyle, you will not be much troubled there with, because this ground natu∣rally of it owne accord, putteth forth no weeds, more then these which are ingendred by the new-made
fruitfulnesse thereof, and those weeds for the most part are a kinde of small sedge, or hollow reede; any of which if you see appeare, or with them any other kind of weed, you shali at the first appearance, either pull them vp by the roots with your wooden nippers or else cut them close by the ground with your weed∣hookes. And thus I haue with as much care and diligence, as Weeding. either my knowledge, experience, tradition from the best and skilfullest Teachers, or the obseruations which my udgement could at any time collect from my trauell or other mens labours, faithfully and duly set downe the best, safest and easiest wayes how to bring the most vilde and barrenest grounds in this kingdome, whether they be clayes or sands, mixt or vnmixt, or of what nature soeuer, to as great fertility and fruitfulnesse in the bearing and bringing forth of Corne, as the best and most richest soyle vnder the Sunne can doe, and that (all things considered) with as little cost, and much lesse labour, for to make a short comparison, or computation of the labour and char∣ges which belong to these two soyles, the rich and the barren, you shall vnderstand that the rich soyle is that which beareth Barley most naturally and abundantly as is to be seene in all the fruitfull vales of this King∣dome, as the vale of Beluoyre, the vale of am, the vale of White-Horse, the vale Royall, and Taunton-Deanry, with such like; and all these rich vales to be fallowed in January and February, then Sommer stirred in April and May; then foild in July and August, then Winter rigged in October and Nouember, and lastly fowne in March following; so that here is a full work of a yeare and a quarter betwixt the preparing of the
ground, and the sowing of the seed (as may better ap∣peare by my Booke called, The English Husbandman) and yet I doe, appoint here no time for the leading out of meanure, supposing the earth to be so rich that nee∣deth no meanure at all, yet is the Husbandman in a most continuall toile both Winter and also Sommer, and at continuall charge both with cattell and seruants whereas the barren grounds (of which I haue written of before) is begun to be tilled in May, sanded, marled, limed and meanured in lune, and at such vacant times in July, August and September, as may no way hinder harueft, then is it sowne, clotted and smoothed in Octo∣ber, so that here is but one halfe yeeres worke before the crop be expected, and that but in one yeare of ele∣uen or twelue neither; For after the first yeare it nee∣deth but onely one halfe moneths worke which is plowing and sowing; also the rich earth looseth euery fourth yeares profit, by reason of the lying fallow, and this barren earth, neuer looseth any yeare at all, but al∣wayes brings forth some profit: lastly, for the value and prices of the profits arising from these grounds, I neuer saw in the rich soyles an aker of Corne sold for aboue xlvi. s. viii. d. and I haue seene in the barren grounds an aker of Corne ordinarily fold for v. li. so that I conclude the barren earth euer is worthy of the Husbandmans charge and labour. It resteth now that I speake some thing of the bet∣tering and inriching of all forts of barven Grasse∣grounds, inasmuch as they are for the maintenance of stocke, (without which no Corne or other commo∣dity is to be had) in as great vse and necessity as any Corne ground is, and the rather in as much as there be some barren earths which partly through their cuill
situations, partly through much distance of place, and other naturall defects, can hardly, or very inconueni∣ently be brought to beare Corne; therefore you shall reduce them vnto good medow or pasture, by these helpes and good husbandries following. CHAP. X. How to inrich and make the most barrennest soile to bears excellnt good pasture or medam. MAny will thinke that in the head of this Chapter, I haue taken to large a scope, and haue made so vnbounded a promise that I cannot chufe but either loose my selfe, or leade my Readers infinitely a∣stray in this large wildernesse: Indeed for mine owne part I could haue wisht to haue gathe∣red it much neerer within the compasse of common mens common vnderstandings: But since I saw the fruitfull grounds and gardens, growing about Chats∣worth, in the Peake in Darbye-shire, and since I saw the medowes vpon Exmore, and the rich pastures on the toppes of mountaines in North Deuon-shire, and all made by industry & not nature; I thought my pro∣mise scant enough, and that any painefull man might with his cost and labour easily walke about my mea∣ning. To speake then of the bettering and inriching of Two wayes to inrich earths. these barren earths, and reducing them to good pa∣sture or medow, it is to be vnderstood that there are but two certaine wayes to compasse and effect the same, namely water or meanure.
You are then when you go about this profitable labor First, to consider the situation of the earth, you would conuert to pasture and to sellect for this purpose the best of this worst earth you can finde, and that which lies lowest, or els that which is so discending as that the bottome there of may stretch to the lowest part of the continent, for the lower that such grounds lie, the soo∣ner they are made good and brought vnto profit; Next you shall consider what Burthen or grasse it beares, and whether the grasse be cleane and entyre of it selfe (which is the best and likliest soyle to be made fruitfull) or else mixt with other worser growthes, as Thystles, Heath, Brome or such like, and if it be bur∣thened with any of these naughty weeds, you shall first destroy them by stubbing them vp by the roots and by burning the vpper swarth of the earth with dry straw mixt with the weeds which you shall cut from the same, then it shall be good for certaine nights both before the first and latter Spring to fold your sheepe vpon this ground, and that not in a scant manner but very plentifully, so as the dung of them may couer o∣uer all the earth, and their feet trampling vpon the ground, may not onely beat in the dung, but also beat of all the fwarth from the earth, that where the folde gōeth, there little or no grasse may be perceiued, then whilest the ground is soft, and thus trampled, you shall sow it all ouer with Hay seeds and then with your flat board beetles beat the ground smooth and plaine, which done you shall then strow or thinly couer ouer the ground with the rotten staddels of Haystacks, and the moist bottomes of Hay-barnes, and ouer that you shall spread other strong meanure of which horse∣dung, or Horse-dung and mans ordure mixt together
is the best, or for want of such either the meanure, of Oxen, Kine, or other Beasts; and this meanure also you shall spread very thinne vpon the ground, and so let it lye till the grasse come vp through the same, which grasse you shall by no meanes graze or feed with your cattell, but being come to the perfitnesse of growth, you shall mowe it downe, and although it will be the first yeare, but short and very course, yet it skil∣leth not, for the ensuing yeares, shall in the profit, and bring forth both so good grasse, and such plenty there∣of, as reasonably you can require for this is but the first making of your ground and alteration of the nature thereof, neither shall you thus dresse your ground euery yeare, but once in twenty, or forty yeares, ha∣uing plenty of water to relieue it. When therfore you haue thus the first onely prepared your ground by de∣stroying the barren growth thereof, and by meanu∣ring, sowing and dressing it, you shall then carefully Of watring grounds. search about highest parts of the ground, and the highest parts of all other grounds, any way neighbou∣ting round about it, and somewhat aboue the leuell thereof, to see it you can find any Springs in the same, (as doubtlesse you cannot chuse to doe, except the ground be of more then strange nature,) and the heads of all such Springs as you shall find, you shall by gut∣ters and channels draw into those ditches which shall compasse your medow ground about, obseruing euer to bring the water into that part of the medow-ditch which euer lyeth hyest, and so to let it haue a current passage through the ditches downe to the lower part thereof, and so into some Lake, Brooke, or other Channell, and in this fort you may bring your water amyle or two, Nay I haue seene water brought for
this purpose, three or foure miles, and the gaine there∣of hath quit the charge in very plentifull manner. But if you cannot find any Springs at all, nor can haue the helpe of any Lake, Brooke, Riuer, or other Helpes in the watring. Channell of mouing water, (which is a doubt to curi∣ous, as being cast beyond the moone) you shall then not onely cast ditches about this your medow ground but also about all other grounds which shall lye aboue it, and that in such sort, that they all may haue no pas∣sage but into the vpper part of the medow ditch, so that what raine soeuer shall fall from the skie vpon those earthes, it shall be receiued into those ditches, and by them conueied into the medow ditch; and to augment the stor of this water, you shall also in sun∣dry parts of those vpper grounds which are aboue the medow, in places most conuenient, dig large Ponds or Pits, which both of themselues may breed, and also re∣ceiue all such water as shall fall neare about them, and these Ponds or Pits being filde (as in the Winter time necessarily they must needs be at euery glut of raine) you shall presently by small draynes made for that purpose, let the water out from them into the ditches and so into the medow ditch, and so stopping all the draynes againe, make the Ponds or Pits capable to re∣ceiue more water. When you haue thus made your ground rich with When and how to wa∣ter. water, and that you see it flow (as in the Winter time necessarily it must) in plentifull manner through all your ditches, you shall then twice or thrice in the yeere, or oftner, as you shall thinke meete in the most conuenientest places of the medow ditch, stoppe the same, and make the water to rise aboue his bounds, and to ouerflow and couer your medow ground all ouer,
and if it be a flat leuel ground; if you let the water thus couering it to lie vpon the same the space of 4. or. 5. daies or a week, it shall not be amisse; & then you may water it the seldomer, But if it lie against the side of a hill, so that the water cannot rest vpon the same, then you shall wash it all ouer, leauing no part vnmoystned, & this you shal do the ofner, according as the weather shalfal out, & your water grow more or lesse plentiful. Now for the best season or time of the yeere for The best season for watring. this watering of medowes, you shall vnderstand, that from Alhallontide, which is the beginning of No∣uember (and at which time all after-growth of med∣dowes, are fully eaten, and cattel for the most part are taken vp into the house) vntill the end of April (at which time grasse beginneth to spring and arise from the ground) you may water all your medowes at your pleasure without danger, if you haue water enough at your pleasure, and may spend or spare at your will, yet to doe it in the best perfection, and whereby your ground may receiue the greatest benefit; you shall vn∣derstand that the onely time for watering of your me∣dowes, is immediately after any great Fluxe of raine, falling in the Winter any time before May, when the water is most muddy, foule and troubled, for then it carryeth with it a soyle or compasse which being left vpon the ground, wonderfully inricheth it, and makes it fruitfull beyond expectation, as daily is seen in those hard countreys where almost no grasse growes but by this industry; And here you must obserue, that as you thus water one ground, so you may water many, ha∣uing euer respect to begin with the highest, and so to let the water passe out of one ground into another vntil it come vnto the lowest, which commonly
is euer the most flat and leuell, and there you may let the water remaine so long as you thinke good (as was before shewed) and then let it out into other waste ditches or riuers. And here you shall know that this lowest ground will euer be the most fruitfull, as well because it lyeth the warmest, moystest, and safest from stormes and tempests, as also because what soyle or o∣ther goodnesse this ouerflow of water, or the raine washeth from other grounds, it leaueth vpon this, and so daily increaseth the fertility, from whence you shall gather, that at the first making of these medow grounds you may bestow lesse cost of meanure and o∣ther charges vpon this lowest, flat, leuell ground, then on the higher; and so by that rule also obserue to be∣stow on the highest ground, and the highest part of the highest ground euer the greatest abundance of mea∣nure, and so as you shall descend lower & lower, to lay your meanure thinner and thinner, yet not any part vtterly vnfurnished & voyd of compasse, yet as before I said you are to remember that these medow grounds need not this much vse of meanure (hauing this bene∣fit of water, and the first yeares dressing as was shewed in the beginning of this Chapter) aboue once in twenty yeares; nay it may be not aboue once in a mans life time. And here also is to be considered, that the water which commeth from clay or marle grounds, being thicke, muddy and pudly, is much better and richer then that which commeth from sand, grauell or pib∣ble, and so runneth cleare and smooth, for that rather doth washe away and consume the goodnesse of the ground, then any way adde strength thereunto. And thus much touching the dressing and inri∣ching
of all sorts of barraine medow or pasture grounds. CHAP. XI. Of the inriching and dressing of barraine grounds, for the use of Hempe or Flaxe. HAuing shewed you thus how to better and inrich all sorts of barren grounds of what temper soeuer they be, as whe∣ther they be claies or sands, or whether mixed or vnmixed, and that as well for Corne as for Grasse: It resteth now, that I shew you how to inrich and make any soyle whatsoeuer fit to beare abundance, either of Hempe, or Flaxe, a thing of no meane or small vse in this our Kingdome, as witnesseth the abundance of all manner of cordage daily vsed for ships and other purposes; the infinit store both of course and fine linnen cloth, and a world of other things, without which families can∣not be sustained. You shall then first vnderstand that there are two Grounds ill for Hempe or Flaxe. sorts of grounds which out of their owne natures vt∣terly refuse to beare Hempe or Flaxe; that is the rich stiffe blacke clay, of tough, solyd, and fast mould, whose extreamefertility and fatnesse giueth such a surcharge to the increase of the seed, that either with the ranke∣nesse, it runneth all into Bunne and no Rinde, or else the seed being tender, and the mould sad and heauy, it burieth it so deepe therein, that it can by no meanes get out of the same, but lies choaked and consumed without profit: the other is the most vilde and extream
barren ground, which by reason of the climat wherein it lyes, is so exceeding sterrile and vnfruitfull that it wil neither beare these seeds nor any other good seed; and of these two soyles onely I purpose in this place to intreate, for with such soiles as will naturally and commodiously beare these seeds, I haue nothing to doe in that I haue sufficiently written of them in mine English Husbandman, and English Huswife, which are books onely for good grounds, but this for all such grounds as are vtterly held without cure. To begin then with the stiffe blacke clay, which al∣beit, be very rich for Corne, is most poore for these Blaoke clay for Hempe, &c, seeds, when you would reduce and bring it to beare Hempe or Flaxe, which neare vnto the sea-coaste, is of greater price and commodity then Corne any way can be, especially adioyning vnto any place of fishing, in respect of Nettes and other Engines, which is to be made of the same, and which being daily washed and consumed, must likewise be daily replenished: You must first with astrong plow, fit for the nature of such land, plow vppe so much ground as you intend to sow Hempe or Flaxe vpon, about the middest of May, if the weather be seasonable, and the ground not o hard: if otherwise, you must stay till a shower doe fall, and that the earth be moystened, then shall you hacke it and breake the clottes in small pieces, then with the salt Sea sand, you shall sand it very plentiful∣ly, but if that be not to be gotten, and that you be very well assured of the naturall richaesse of the earth, you shall then sand it with the best red sand you can get or find neare vnto you, and vpon euery aker of ground you thus sand with fresh sand, you shall sow three bu∣shels of Bay-salt, and then plow vp againe the earth,
sand and salt together, which would be done about thelatter end of the yeare, as after Michaelmas and so let the ground rest till seed time; at which time you shall first before you plow it, goe downe to the low rockes on which the sea beats, and from thence with dragges and other Engines, gather those broad leaued blacke weeds, which are called Orewood, and grow in great tufcs and abundance about the shoare, and these weeds you shall bring to your Hemp-land, and couer it all ouer with the same, and then you shall plow it againe, burying the weeds within the earth: And herein is to be obserued, that in any wise you must lay these weeds as wet vpon the land, as when you bring them out of the Sea, prouided still that you adde no other wet vnto them but the salt water, for so they are of all soiles or meanures whatsoeuer, the only best and most fruitfullest, and most especially for these seeds, and breed an increase beyond expectation. When you haue thus plowed ouer the ground you shall then back it againe, then sow it with either Hemp or Flaxe seed, which you please, and after it is so sown, you shall then harrow it (and not before) and you shall be carefull to harrow it into as fine mould as you can, and this mould is likely to runne fine enough, as well by reason of the fertility, as also of the mixture; yet what clottes you cannot breake with your Harrowes, those you shall breake with your clotting beetles, and such like Tooles, then after the first great shower which shall fall after your sowing, you shall runne o∣uer your Land thus sowne with your backe harrowes, that is with a paire of large Harrowes, the wrong side turned vpward, to wit, the teeth turned from the earth, and the backe towards the earth, and if need
be, you shall lay vpon the harrowes some indifferent heauy piece of wood which may keepe the backe of the harrowes closer to the ground, and so goe ouer all the earth, and lay it as smooth and light as is possible, without leauing the smallest clot that may be vnbro∣ken. Now if the ground be sowne with Hempe, you . shall not thinke of weeding it at all, because Hempe is so swift a grower, and such a poyson vnto all weeds, that it ouer-runneth, choaketh, and destroyeth them; but if it be sowne with Flaxe or Lyne, which is a much tenderer seed, and bringeth forth more tender leaues and branches, then you shall watch what weeds you see Spring vp, and in their first growth pluck them vp and cast them away till you behold your Flaxe or Line to be growne aboue the weeds, and then you may let it alone also, for after it hath once gotten height, it will not be ouergrowne with weeds. Now touching the other soile, which through the extreame barrennesse thereof, refuseth to bring forth Making of ill earth beare hempe &c. any good fruit at all; you shall in all points dresse it as you drest your plaine clayes discribed in the second Chapter of this booke, beginning at the same time of the yeare that is then appointed, or (if more necessary occasions hold you) if you begin latter it shall not be amisse, and then at Michaelmas you shall plow it ouer the second time, and meanure it with the sea weeds, and so let it lye at rest vntill March (which is seed-time) and then plow it againe, and meanure it with the sea weeds againe, and after the plowing you shall hacke it, and if in the hacking you find the earth stiffe and tough then you shall harrow it before you sow it, then fow it and harrow it againe, breaking the earth so small and
laying it so smooth as possible you can, vsing the help both of the clotting beetles and all other tooles which may be auaileable for the breaking of the earth, and making the mould as fine as any ashes, then after the first great shower of raine, perceiuing the ground to be well moystned, you shall insteed of the backe har∣rowes (which vpon this earth may be to light) take the great rouler which is discribed in the booke of the English Husbandman, being a great round peece of Tim∣ber of many squares, drawne either by Horse or Oxen but a single Horse is the best, both in respect of much treading the ground, as also for the swift going away or drawing of the same; for the swifter it is drawne, the better it breaketh the ground, and the lighter it leaueth the mould: and with this Rouler you shall run ouer and smooth your ground very well, leauing no clot vnbroken, and so let it rest. As for the weeding of this ground, you shall not re∣spect Weeding. it at all, for naturally it will put vp no weed, the very ground of it selfe being a very great enemy ther∣unto, nor shall you need to dresse this ground in the forme beforesaid, aboue once in eight or ten yeeres; onely euery seed-time when you plow it, (as you shall not need to plow it at any time, but seed-time onely) you shall before the plowing, couer or meanure the land with the sea weed before spoken of, which will giue strength enough to the ground, without any o∣ther assistance. And thus much touching the inriching, plowing, and dressing of all manuer of barren earths, of what nature or quality soeuer, whereon you would sow Hempe or Flaxe.
CHAP. XII. The manner of Stacking of all kinde of Graine or Pulse with greatest safety, and least losse. IN these barren and hard countreyes of which I haue formerly written, all sorts of buildings are exceeding costly and scarse, both in respect of the clime which is commonly most extreame cold mountainous, and much subict to storme and tem∣pest, as also through the great want of Wood and Timber, which in those hard soyles doth hardly or neuer prosper; and therefore in such places building must be both small and deare, so that it will be very hard for the Hnsbandman to haue houseroome for all his Corne, but that of necessity he must be inforced to Stacke much or the most part of his Corne without the dorcs, which albeit it be a thing very vsuall in this Kingdome; yet is it in many places so insufficiently done, that the losse which redounds thereby (partly by the moisture of the ground, which commonly doth rot and spoyle at least a yard thicknesse of the bottome of the Stacke next the ground, and partly through myce, Rats and other vermine, which bree∣ding in the Stacke, doe eate and deuoure a great part thereof; as also through many such like negligent causes) is greater then a good Husband may with his credit be guilty of, or a profitable Husband will by a∣ny meanes suffer to be los so negligently. To shew then the manne how to Stacke or Moow your Corne without the dores, in such sort, as neither
the ground shall rot it, nor these vermines destroy it, nor any other losse come to it by way of ill husbandry, you shall first cause foure pieces of timber, or foure stones to be hewed broad and round at the nether end and somewhat narrower and round at the vpper end like the fashion of a Sugerloafe, or this figure, And these pieces of wood or stone shalbe in length three foot or thereabouts, and in compasse or breadth at the bottome, two foot, or a foot and a halfe, and at the top not aboue one foot, these foure pieces of wood or stone, you shall place in your stack-yard, or o∣ther conuenient place near your thrashing-sloore, and you shal place them four-square, of an equall distance one from another, then you shall cut out foure smooth boords of two inches and a halfe thick at the least, and full three foot square euery way, & these boords you shall lay vpon the heads or narrow tops of these stones or pieces of timber according to this figure.
Then shall you take strong ouer-lyars of wood, and lay them foure-square from one board to another, ac∣cording to this figure. And then vpon those ouer-lyars you shall lay other smaller poles cloffe one by another, and then vpon them you shall Moow or Stacke all your Corne whe∣ther it be Wheate, Barley, Oates, Pease, or any other
kinde of Graine, and be sure if you make your Stacke handsome and vpright, which consisteth in the Art and Workemanship of the Workeman, you shall neuer re∣ceiue losse in your Cornes, for the raising of it thus two or three foot from the ground will preserue it from all moysture or hurt thereof, and the broade boards which couer the foure ground posts will not suffer any Myce orother vermine to ascend or come into the same. Now for the manner oflaying your Corne into the Stacking of Graine. Stack, you shall be sure to turne that part of the sheafe where the eares of the Corne lie euer inward into the Stacke, and the other which is the straw end you shall euer turne outward, and by that meanes you shall bee assured that no flying foule as Pygions, Crowes and such like, can doe you any hurt or annoyance vpon the same; Lastly you shall vnderstand that you may make these stacks either round, square, or long-wise, yet round is the safest, and if you do make them longwise, then you shall set them vpon sixe ground posts or eight, according to the length and proportion you would haue it, and after your Stacke is made, you shall then thatche it very well to keepe out the wet; also if when you doe stacke your wheat, you doe top your Stacke with Oates or other course Graine, it will be so much the better, and the Wheat will lie in greater safety, for no part of a Stacke well made, especially a round stacke will so soone take wet or hurt, as the top thereof. And thus much as touching the Stacking of Corne without dores in greatest safety.
CHAP. XIII. The diseases and imperfections which happen to all manner of Graine. ALbeit the manner of stacking and laying vp of Corne or Grainein the forme be∣fore shewed, may to euery one giue an affurance for the safe and profitable kee∣ping thereof as long as it endureth ther∣in, and abideth in the eare, yetbecause diuers necessi∣ties may compell the Husbandman to thrashe out his Corne, as either for present vse of straw, chaffe, gar∣badge or other commodities needful vnto him (as the season of the yeare shall fall out) I thinke it most neces∣sary in this place to shew how all manner of Graine and Pulse, of what nature soeuer may most safely and profitably be kept from all manner of annoyances, or corruptions whatsoeuer, being a worke of that vtility and goodnesse, that not any belonging to the Hus∣bandman doth exceed it; Nor shall it be sufficient to shew the offences and diseasses of Graine with their cures and healthfull preseruations, whilst it is in the Husbandmans possession, but also whilest it is in the earth, and at the mercy of cold, heat, moystnesse or drynesse, and not onely subiect to the malignant influ∣nces of starres and planets, with the increasing and decreasing of the Moone and her operations. but also of diuers other hurtful vermines, as birds, wormes, pis∣smires, dorres, snailes, moales, and other such like; some whereof consume and deuour the graine ere it sprout, others in sprouting when the kernell is rotten tur∣ned to a sweet substance, and others after it is sprouted by deuouring the first tender leaues before they haue strength to appear aboue the earth, being as itwere but
soft white threds not changd into the strength of green because the aire & Sunne hath not yet lookt vpon it. To begin then with the first enemies of corne or grain Crowes and Birds. after it is throwne into the earth, there is none more noisome then crowes and choughs and other smaller birds, which flocking after the seeds-man, will in a ma∣ner deuour & gather vp the graine as fast as it is sowne, for as according to the old saying, That many hands make ht work so many of their mouthes (being creatures that euer fly in flocks together) and their much nim∣blenes in deuouring, soonerob the earth of her store, and depriue the labouring Husbandman of very much profit, and the graine which these creatures doe most consume, is all manner of white corne, as wheat of all kinds, barley of all kinds, rye & oats, as also hempseed, linseed, rapeseed and such like: Neither are they onely offensiue during this time of sowing, but also after it is sown and couered, digging it with their strong bils out of the earth, and so making the wast greater & greater. The prcuention or cure for this euill, is diuers, as the The cure. affections of people and customes of countreys do in∣struct them, for some (especially the French men) vse when they sow these graines or seeds, first to sprinkle it with the dregs or lees of their bitterest oyles, which when these deuouring foules do tast, they refuse to do any further hurt: Others vse to sow Pigeons dung or lyme with their seed, which sticking vnto the grane, the vnsauorines therof will make the sowle caft vp the graine againe, and leaue to do further hurt; But for as much as these medicines cannot euer be had, nor are cuer wholesome for euery ground, the only best and safest meanes to preuent this euil, is to haue euer some yong boy with bow and arrowes to follow the seeds∣man
and Harrowes, making a great noise and acclama∣tion and shooting his arrowes where he shall see these deuourers light, not ceassing but chassing them from the land, and not suffering them at any time to light vpon the same; and these seruants are called field-kee∣pers or Crow-keepers, being of no lesse vse and profit (for the time) then any other seruant whatsoeuer, nor is it sufficient to haue these field-keepers for the bare time offeed onely whilst the Graine is in sowing, but he shall also maintaine them till such time as you see the Graine appeare aboue the earth, which for Wheat or Rye, because they are Winter seeds, and so longer in sprouting, will aske a full moneth, for all other seeds which are sowne in the Spring or Sommer, a fortnight is full sufficient; and this field-keeper shall not faile to be in the field an houre before Sunne in the morning, and so continue till halfe an howre after Sun-set in the euening; for at the rising and setting of the Sunne, is euer done the greatest mischiefe, for then are all crea∣tures most eager & hungry: and though the indurance may promise much paine and trouble, yet questionles the labour to any free spirit, is both easie and pleasant, and not without much necessary vse, in as much as it makes him expert and cunning in the vse of his Bowe, which howsoeuer musket shot in these dayes seemes to disgrace, yet sure the very nature and quality of our Kingdome, (being so muchplaine champion and vn∣fenced, and our best strengths in our men, not townes) will challenge it as a matter of great worth and conse∣quence. The next great destroyers of Corne vnto these, are Pygeons. your Pygeons, which the wisdome of our nation, hath so well found out that they haue prouided many
wholesome Lawes for the restraint of the great multi∣plicity thereof, for they are not onely great destroyers of Graine when it is going into the ground, but also when it is gathered and Stackt, tearing the thatche and other couerings, and digging such hoales into Stackes and Reeks of Corne, that the losse is most plaine and apparant; Now the Graine to which these Pygeons are most offensiue, albeit they are generally hurtfull to all kind of Corne, yet they are especially most mis∣chieuous vnto all sorts of Pulse, as Beanes, Pease, Fet∣ches, Lentiles, Lupyns, Tare and such like. The cure or preuention against these kind of fowle, The cure. when the Corne is going into the ground, is the same formerly shewed for Crowes or Chouges, without altering any circumstance, onely if instead of the bow and arrow, you doe vse a musket, harquebush, or fowling peece, the report or noise where of is more terrible and fearfull, you shall find the profit thereof a great deale more, and that a shot or two of Powder wil saue more Corne, then a whole weekes hooping and showting; onely you must obserue by all meanes that your field-keeper shoot neither bullet nor haileshot, for so he may turne scaring vnto killing, and that may breed vnkindnesse from, and iniury to your neigh∣bours: Now touching the destruction that they make of Corne after it is stackt vp, by tearing of the thatche, and digging hoales and pits therein, you shall obserue that as your Thatcher thatcheth the same, that forth∣with he throw great store of ashes of any kinde, as ei∣ther of wood or coale, vpon the thatch, orinstead of ashes to sprinkle all the thatch ouer with Lyme, that as the foule (whether it be Pygeon, Crow or any other) teareth vp the straw, the lyme or ashes may sparkle in∣to
their eyes and-nares, and by the noisomnesse thereof make them forbeare their wicked labours, as for those parts of the Stacke which cannot be thatcht, as the sides and ends thereof, vpon them you shall pricke di∣uers scar-crowes, as dead crowes, or dead Pygeons, or the proportion, or shape of a man, made either of thumb-ropes of hay or straw, or else some old cast-a∣way apparell stopt with straw and so with stakes faste∣ned to fundry parts of the stack, there be others which to remedy these euils, make little clap mils of broken trenchers, which blowne and turned about with the winde, doe make such a continuall noyse, that not any birde whatsoeuer dare come neare it. Now to conclude, for the generall offence of these birds or any other whatsoeuer, if you want ability to maintaine a field-keeper, or thinke his labour might be better imploid in other seruices, then the onely way to rid you of the losse and annoyance, which come by these dcuouring birds, is to take long lynes of pack∣thred, and in them to knit diuers feathers, especially white ones, and with little stakes so to fasten them o∣uer the Corne you would saue, that with euery breath of winde the feathers may dance, turne and moue a∣bout, and the nearer that these blinks or strawes come to the ground, when the Corne is new sowne, so much the better it is least the foule finding away to creepe vnderthem, begin not to respect them, so that a hand or two from the ground is sufficient, prouided that the feathers, and scarres haue liberty to play. But if it be to saue Corne in the ripening, that is to say, a little before it be reapt, when the eare begins to To saue Corne rea∣ to reape. harden, or when it lyeth in single sheafe vpon the land for then fowle and birds doe as great mischiefe, as at
any other season, it shall then be fit that you raise these lines or scarres vpon higher stakes, so as they may play as much aboue the toppes of the eares of corne as be∣fore they did aboue the earth: and amongst these scars thus made vpon lines in sundry parts of the field, you shall vpon other stakes place many other bigger scars, as dead crowes, pies, gleades, pigeons, or such like; as also the proportions of man formerly shewed you, or any rags of cloth being black, foule, & vgly like bakers malkins, & than this; there is no saffer way for the de∣fence of grain or corne from these birds; & such like. The next great deuowrers or consumers of graine Of Pismiers are Pismiers or Ants, which although it be but a little creature, yet it is so laborsome, that the graine which they carry away or destroy by eating, amounteth to a great quantitie, and the mischiefe which these little vermins do, is after the corn is couered in the ground, and before it sprout, for they creeping in at the little chinks of the earth, & finding the corne, either drag it out, or eat it; so that it cannot grow, & the grain which they most hurt, is all manner of white corne, especial∣ly your finest and smallest wheat, for the skin or hull is thinnest, and the kirnell whitest & sweetest: also to barley they do much hurt, especially, that which is ful∣lest & best, and likewise to rie, hemp seed, lin seed, and rape seed; as for oats, because it is double hulld, & al∣so your great hole straw wheat & polard wheat which is thick huld, their hurt is not so much to them, & vnto pulse nothing at all, because they are too heauy, too thicke skind, and too bitter in taste. The best cure or preuention for these pismires is to The cure. search your corn fields wel, especially vnder hedges & old trees, and on the tops of moale-hilles, and if you
find any beds or hils of Ants or Pismyres, presently af∣ter Sun-setting with hot scolding water to drownd the beds or hils, or with wet straw and fire to make such a smoake vpon them as may smoother them to death, also if you meanure your Corne lands with a∣shes, lime or salt sand, you shall be well assured it will neuer breed Pismires. Next vnto these your Dores, or great black Clocks Of Do: es. are vehement destroyers of all kind of Corne both white corne and Pulse, whilst it lyeth dry in the earth, and before it sprout, for after it beginneth to rot, they doe no more touch it, and these Dores destroy it in the same manner as the Pysmyres doc by creeping in at the small crauies of the earth, and finding the graine doe as long as it is dry feed thereon, and though they are no hoarders or gatherers together of the graine, keeping it in heapes in dry places as the Pismyres and other vermine doc, yet they are great feeders thereon and that continually, besides they will euer chuse out the fullest and best Corne, and leaue the leaner; wher∣by they doe the Husbandman a double inury, as first to deuoure, and then to deuoure but the best onely. The care or preuention for these Dores or blacke The Care. Clocks, is in seed-time to make great smoakes in your corne-fields, which will presently chase them from thence, for they are the greatest enemies that may be to all manner of smoake; but if that be not sufficient, then immediately before you sow your Corne, you shall very lightly sow your land with sharpe lime, and whensoeuer the Dore shall find the smell or taste therof, presently he wil depart, or if he eat of the grain that toucheth the lyme, it is as present poyson vnto him, and he there dyeth.
After these your field Rats and Myce, are very ve∣hement Of field Rats and Myce. destroyers of all manner of Graine or seeds before they sprout, especially all sorts of wheate, and all sorts of pulse, because for the most part those kinde of graines in many soyles are sowne vnder furrow, and not harrowed, so that the furrowes at first lying, a little hollow, these vermines, getting in betweene the earth and them, will not onely deuoure and eat a great part of the graine, but also gather together great heapes thereof into their nests, as is often seene when at any time their nests are found, some hauing more, some lesse, according to their labours; And albeit in other soyles where the graine is sowne aboue furrow, and so harrowed in and laide much more closse and safe, they cannot doe so much hurt as in the former, yet e∣uen in these they will with their feet digge out the corne in great abundance, and though in lesse measure, yet doe hurt that is vnsufferable; so that to conclude, neither Rye, Barley, Oates, nor any other smaller and more tender seeds are free from their annoyance and destruction. Now the cure and preuention for these fielde Rats and Mice are diuers, according to the opinions of di∣uers authors, and diuers of our best experienst Hus∣bandmen; for some vse in the Dogge dayes, or Cani∣cular dayes when the fieldes are commonly bare, to search out the holes and nests of these Rats and Mice, which are easily knowne, being little round holes in the earth made so round and artificially as if they were made with an Auger, no bigger then the body of the Creature that was to lye in it; and into these holes they vse to put a few Hemblock seeds, of which when the beast tasts it is present death vnto them: Others
vse to sprinkle vpon the land, Hellebere or neesing pou∣der mixt with Barley meale, of which the myce and Rats will greedily feed, and it is deadly bane and pre∣sent death vnto them; Lastly, (and which is the best medicine, if you take a good quantity of ordinary greene glasse beaten to pouder, and as much copporas or vitriall beaten also to pound and mixe them with course honey, till it come to a paste, and then lay it in the holes, and most fuspicious places, and it will nei∣ther leaue Rat nor Mouse about all your fields, but fo∣dainely destroy them. The next great destroyers of Corne and Graine, are Of wormes. wormes, and they destroy it in the sprouting, then when the ground hath rotted it, and the white or mil∣ky substance breaking open the vpper huske, shooteth forth in little white threds at both ends, vpon which whilest it is so moyst and tender the worme feedeth extreamly, & so deuouring vp the substance or sperm, is the cause that the Corne cannot grow or get out of the ground, and these wormes being as it were the maine citizns within the earth are so innumerable that the losse which is bred by them is infinite. Now the cure or preuention for these wormes is di∣uersly The Cure. taken; for some husbandmen vse, but onely to strike into the plow rest, and vnder the lowest edge of the shelbord certaine crooked spikes of yron or great nailes halfe driuen in, and turned backe againe, with which as the plow runs tearing in the ground, & turnes vp the furrow, those pices of yron kil and teare in pie∣ces all such wormes as are either within or vnder the furrowes that the plow castsvp, and this is sure a very good husbandly practise, but not sufficient for the de∣stroying of such a secret hurtfull vermine which is so
innumerable, and lies so much concealed; therefore more curious husbands vse besides this helpe of the plow, to take oxe dung and mixe it with straw, & then to burne it vpon the land, making a great smoke ouer all the land, immediately before you plow it for seed, and it is thought that this will kil all the worms which lie so hie in the earth, as to hurt the Corne; Others vse before they make either the mixture or the smoak to wet the straw in strong lie, and then adding it to the dung, the smoake will be so much the stronger and the worms killed the sooner, or if you Sprinkle strong lie vp on your seed before you sow it, there is not any worm that will touch the graine after; Also if you take hemp and boyle it in water, & with that water sprinkle your seed before you sow it, not any worme will come near to touch it. Yet it is to be obserued in this rule of wet∣ting Of Rye not to be wet. your seed Corne, that by no means you must wet your seed Rye, for it is a graine so warme and tender that it will neither endure cold, wet, nor stiffe ground insomuch that the plowman hath a prouerbe, that Rie wil drownd in the hopper, that is to say, it must neither be sown on wet ground, nor in a wet day, since present shewers are apt to destroy it; lastly, it is thoght that oft plowing of your ground in the wane of the mooneis a very good meanes to destroy wormes, touching that practise which many vse, to gather the wormes from their lands at Sun-rise, & sun-set in bright dewy mor∣nings when the worms coople aboue the earth, I hold it more fit for small gardens then large Corne-fields. The next great destroyers of Corne are Snailes and Of Snailes. they destroy it after it is sprouted, seeding vpon theren∣der white threds and rions which start from the seed & woldrise aboue the earth, being the stem or stalk on
which the eares should grow (were it not deuoured and eaten vp by these Snailes, and such like vermine) as so one as it begins to peepe vp, or as it were but to o∣pen the earth, whereby it is driuen backe and forced to dye in the earth: for these creatures sucking vpon the tender sweetnesse, deprine it both of life and nou∣rishment. The cure and preuention for this euillis to take the The cure. soot of a Chimney, and after your Corne hath been sowne a weeke, or ten dayes, or within two or three dayes after the first shower of raine which shall fall af∣ter the Corne is sowne; you shall sow this soot of the Chimney thinIy ouer the land, and not a Snayle will indure to come thereon: Others vse (especially in France and those more fertill Countres) to take com∣mon Oyle lees, and after the Corne hath beene sowne and is ready to appeare aboue ground, to sprinkle it all ouer the Lands, by which meanes no Snaile or such like creature will indure to come neere the same. The next great destroyer of Corne is accounted Of Grashop pers. the Grashopper, and he also destroyeth it after it is sprouted & appeareth aboue the ground as the Snaile doth, but somewhat more greedily, for he not onely feedeth on the tender white strings, bt vpon the first greene leaues that appeare also; by which meanes the Corne is not able to spring or bring foorth a steme or stalke to beare the eare vpon; or ifit doe put forth any, yet it it is so small, weake and wretched, that the eare growing on the same, is withered and leane, and the graine dry and blasted, and no better then chaffe; nor is there any Corne that scapeth the destruction of the Grashoper, for he generally seedeth
on all: first, on Wheate and Rye, because they are the earliest, then on Barley and Oates, and lastly on Pulse, vppon whose leafe and blossom he feedeth whilst the first is sweet and pleasant or the other greene. Now the cure or preuention for these Creatures The cure. is according to the opinion of some Husband-men to take Wormewood and boyle it well in water, 'till the strength of the Wormwood be gone thereinto, and then with that water in the month of May to sprinckell all your Corne ouer when the Sunne is rising or setting: and not any Grashopper will come neare or anoy the same. Others vse in steed of worm∣wood to boyle Century, and to vse the water there∣of in the same manner as afore said, and findean e∣quall and like proffit in the same, but it is most cer∣taine that any bitter decoction whatsoeuer vsed and applyed as aforesaid will not leaue one Grashopper about your fieldes, for any bitternesse is such an ene∣mie vnto them that they cannot liue where they feele any taste thereof. The last offence of liuing Creatures belonging to Of Moales. Corne or Graine are Moales, which not onely feed vpon it after it is sprouted and spindled by eating vp the roots thereof, and so consequently by killing the whole Corne: but also by their digging and vnder∣mining of the earth, doe not root vp the Corne and destroy it, in most wonderfull manner, for where they make their haunts, or are suffered to digge, there they will destroy almost halfe an acre in a day, neither make they choice, either of ground or Grain, for all grounds and all Graines are alike, if the ground be not too wet, or subiect to inundation or ouerflowes (as for the most
part Corne grounds are not) for aboue all things moales cannot indure wet ground or earth of too moyst quality. Now the best cure or preuention against these crea∣tures The cure. is to find out their trenches and passages which are most plaine and casie to be knowne by the turning vp of the new earth, and digging crosse holes in the same, to watch either the going forth, or the comming backe of the Moale, and when you see her cast to strike her with an yron forke made of many graines, as eight or fixe at the least, and so to kill and destroy them; which still is so generally knowne amongst Husband∣men, that it is become a trade and occupation amongst them, so that it needs no further description, & the ra∣ther in as much as for iii. d. or iiii. d. a score, you may haue any ground cleansed of Moales whatsoeuer; Now there be some others which haue not this art of killing, or catching of Moales, which onely doe take brimstone and wet stinking straw or any thing els that will make a stinking smoake, and putting fire thereto, smoake all the places of their haunts, and by that meanes driue them all cleane away from the Corne lands; many otherpractices they haue, but none so good, certaine and probable as these already decla∣red. Thus far I haue spoken of those offences which pro∣ceed Offences from the in∣fluence of the heauens. from liuing creatures, I will now intreat of these which come and grow from the influence of the hea∣uens, being malignant vapours which striking into the erathdo alter the sweet & pleasant nourishment therof, and change in into bitternesse and rottennesse, where∣by the Corne is either ssaine outright, withered and made leane and vnkindly, or else the kernell turned to
a filthy blacknesse being bitter, dry and dusty like vnto Of smuti∣nesse and mildew smoake, which the Husbandman calleth smuttines or mildewing, and yet this smuttinesse or mildew∣ing commeth another way, as namely by ouer∣rankenesse or to much fatnesse of the earth, and this hapneth most commonly only to wheat, for if black∣nes happen to any other graine, it commeth of bla∣stings or other malice of the starres, for ranknesse of the ground in Barley, Rye or Oates onely makes them lye flat to the ground, the stalke not being able to sup∣port the multiplicity of the eares, and so by that means the grain wanting his true nourishment, growes light, withered, and of no validity; now that this is most ea∣sie to be found out, the ranknes of the growing corne, rising as it were in close bundles together, and the deepe blacknesse of the greene blades will with small trauell shew you. The Cure. This to cure and preuent it shall be good before you sow your Graine, to sow your land lightly ouer with fine chalke for that will abate his ouer-ranknesse. To proceed then to the other imperfections Of haile which doe happen from the skies, I hold haile in the formost ranke, which with his violence beateth downe the Corne flat to the ground, and bruiseth the reede so in pieces that the Corne not able to rise vp a∣gaine, there lyes and rotteth, or else withereth to no∣thing. The cure and preuention of this euill (according The cuee. to the opinion of the French Husbandmen) is to take the white Vine, and to plant it in diuers parts of your Corne-fields, and it will deffend the Graine from this annoyance of haile; or if your soyle be such as the white vine will not grow therein, if then you take
but branches therof, and strike them in diuers parts of your lands, it is thought that no haile will at any time do offence to your corne; Others vse to take an Owle, and to fasten her legs into a post in the midst of your Corne field and her wings extended and spread forth to the vttermost, and so abiding whilst the Corne groweth, no hurt shall come to your Corne by haile. The next mischiefe which commet to corne, is by ning lightning, which is a violent opening or flashing of the ayre, being an erruption of swift fire which dareth out his beames so sharpely, that sometimes it burneth or scorcheth the corne, sometimes breaketh the reede in pieces, and sometimes withereth and slayeth it out∣right. The cure and preuention of this cuill, according The cure. to the opinion of some husbandmen is to take a hedge Toad, and to close it vp fast in an earthen pot, and then digging a hole in the middest of your Corne field there bury the pot with the Toade, and lighte∣ning will neuer damage your corne, there be others which vse to take the feathers of an Aegle, and to hang them vp in the foure corners of your corne-field, or for want of them to hang vp the skinne of a Seale, and either of them will preuent the hurt of lightning; last∣ly, some vse to plant the Lawrell or Bay-tree in their corne-fields, and hold it a certaine preuention from lightning, or where the trees cannot conueniently be gotten, if but some branches thereof be but stucke vp in sundry places, it is thought to preuent all hurt that comes by lightening. Next vnto lightning is the hurt which commeth to Ofthunder. corne by Thunder, being a sharpe and fiery exhalation or meteon closed within the body of cold, moyst
cloud, euery way contrary both in nature and quality to the thing in which it is imprisoned, whereby a most violent contention growing betwixt the fire and the water; at last the fire getting the vpper hand, breakes from his cold bed with such violence and noyse, that many malignant qualities follows it, and it doth much hurt both to graine and all other growing things whatsoeuer. The cure and preuention for those euils which hap∣pen The Cure. by Thunder, is many times to ring loud and great Bels, or now and then to shoot of a Cannon or Culue∣rin shot, or any other great shot whereby the acquain∣tance with these great noyses may make the graine more apt and able to indure the violence and sudden∣nesse of the Thunder whensoeuer it shall happen, for it is the suddennesse of the cracke which breedeth all the imperfection, there be others that in this case vse to gather vp all the stinking and filthy smelling weeds and seeds which can be got, and mixing them with any other filthy matter that stinketh most, to burne them in their corne-fields, and it is a most safe preseruation from any hurt which shall happen by Thunder. The next euill which happeneth to corne or graine Of frosts, is that which commeth by frosts and sharpe nipping colds, which staruing the root, and binding vp all nou∣rishment marketh the corne dry, wither and neuer pro∣sper, and then the violence of the frost, there is no∣thing more bitter to plants and seeds, for euer rasor∣like it cutteth the veines and sinews in pieces, and as sharpe needles pricketh the heart of euery growing thing, for as the fire which is most hot, when it rageth burneth and consumeth all things, so the frost which
is most cold when it continueth, starueth and choa∣keth or stifeleth whatsoeuer it imbraceth. Now the cure or preuention for those euils which doe happen to graine by these great frosts is as some The cure. husbandmen sappose to couer the land ouer when it is sowne with ashes, others spread straw or rotten litter vpon their corne, and not any of them but is sufficient to preent the worst iniury that the frost can doe. The most malignant quality which offendeth graine Mists and fogs. is myst and fog, which being naughty vapours, drawne from the infected parts of the earth, and falling vpon the corne, doe not onely make the graine leprous, but also infecting the better earth alter the kindly nourish∣ment there of, and as it were distilling corruption into the vaines, makes all that depend thereupon most leprous and vnwholesome, and thereby altereth the quality, quite turning sweetnesse into bittenesse, ful∣nesse into emptinesse, and goodnesse into badnesse, to the great losse of the husbandman, and the much dis∣reputation of the ground. Now the cure and preuention of this eiill, ac∣cording The cre. to the opinions of all the best husbandmen, is to take weeds greene, the twigs of brambles and other bruth wood, wet straw or any such like stuffe, and bin∣ding them in great bundles, to pt fire there to, making a great and violent smoake, and then taking the aduan∣tage of the winde, to walke vp and downe the field and smoake it, which is thought a certaine remedy to take away those inconueniences which happen by violence and poison of these mysts and fogs. The last and not least hurt (for indeed it happens of∣test, Osting. and is most dangerous, which als on corn-fields, is that which proceedeth from blasting, or (as some
call it) planet strooke; This blasting is diuersly di∣stinguished, as proceeding from diuers occasions, as sometimes from the euill aspects of the Starres, some∣times from the rotten corruptions of the ayre, some∣times from the contagion and infection of the winds, and sometimes from the cuill habits of dewes, and o∣ther pestifferous serenes which fall vpon the earth; of all or any of which, if a man be desirous to read, let him looke into Plinie, in the first booke of his naturall history, and he shall finde them set downe and de∣cyphered at large, with an abstract of all such Stars and Planets as are most propitious and helpfull to all man∣ner of grain, as it were guarding and defending it from the casuall malladies which doe come from the skie; so that in this place to enter into the large field of so well written a discourse, were much needlesse, and a good mans worke much worse repeated. Touching the cure and preuention of those euils The cure. which happen vnto corne by blasting, they are sundry according to the sundry opinions of husbandmen, yet the best and most approued, are these two onely, of which I meane to write in this place; the first, to take the right or farre horne of an oxe, and mixing it with a good quantity of his dung, adde fire vnto it, so as the horne and dung may make a great smoke or smother, & this do in diuers parts of your corn-field, the opera∣tion or vertue where of, is, that this smoake will purge and dissolue the euill qualities of the ayre and other influences, and reduce them to their proper good∣nesse and vertue: The second, is to take the boughes or branches of the Bay-tree, and to plant them in sun∣dry places of the Corne-field, so as they may stand a pretty distance or space aboue the height of the
standing corne, for it is held a maxime amongst the best husbandmen, that all blastings will fall vpon those boughes and branches, and the corne wil remaine safe and vnstriken or blemished. Now to conclude the diseases and infirmities which Corne reapt wet. happen to corn, whilst it is in the field, there is not any formerly spoken of more dangerous or of vilder qua∣lity then the reaping, mowing or gathering in of corn, wet or too greene, and vnhardened, for such moysture when the corne is either sheaffed vp close together, or stackt or mowed vp, forthwith gathereth heat, and ei∣ther setteth the corne on fire, or else the moysture be∣ing of lesse quantity, and not apt to flame, yet it cor∣rupteth the graine and straw, and breedeth a stinking mouldinesse or rottennesse about it, so that the graine either becomes dung and durt, or at least so stinking and vnsauory that it is good for no vse or purpose as is daily seene where carelesse husbands gather in their graine without respect or gouerment, making the old prouerbe good, that hast euer brings waste. The cure and preuention of this euill, is the well The cure. husbanding and managing of the haruest, as first with a carefull and well iudging eye to looke vpon your corne, and to know by the hanging downeward of the eare (looking as it were backe to the ground) and by the hardnesse of the graine, whether it be rype or no; then to looke into the cleannesse of the corne, as whe∣ther it be full of greenes, as grasse, weeds, and such like or cleane of it selfe without any mixture, if you finde there be many weeds mixt with it, then you may reap it so much the sooner, though the kernell be not so well hardned as you would wish, and aboue all things haue a care neuer to sheare corne in the raine or wet,
no not so much as with the mornings or euenings dew vpon it, but euen in the heat and brightnesse of the day; then hauing reapt your corne so full of grasse and weeds, you shal by no meanes sheafe it, but sprca∣ding it thin in the Sun, let the grasse wyther all that day, which when you perceiu to change color & grow dry, then bind it vp in sheaffes, and let it lye single a day that the winde and Sunne may get into it, and dry the greenes more sufficiently, then lay it in stuckes of sixe and eight sheafes a piece, and turne the cares so inward that the other bigger ends may defend them from all raine, wet or dew that may fall vpon them; then a day or two after lay them in stoucks of twenty or foure and twenty sheaues a piece, and in those stoucks let them take a sweate, then breake them open in a bright Sunne-shine day, and letting the ayre passe thorow them to dry them, forthwith lead the grain home, and house it or stacke in such sortas was shewed in the for∣mer chapter, and be sure the graine thus ordered and dryed can neuer take hurt, but if the season of the yere fall out so extraordinariy euil, & ful of wet, that by no meanes you can get your corne dry home (which al∣though it be seldome seen, yet it is possible to be seen) in this case you must bring it home as well as you can, and hauing your kilne well ordered and bedded, you shall lay as many sheaues thereon, as it can containe, and turning and tossing them ouer a very gentle fire, by slow degrees dry them very perfectly as neare as you can, with no greater a heate then that which the Sunne giueth, and then moow and stacke them vp at your pleasure, for the ayre will sweeten them againe and take all smell of smoake or other annoyance one∣ly obserue not to stacke them vp-whilst the fire or
heat is in them, but when they are cold, and so they will be as sweet as may be. Now it is not amiste that I speake here a word or Of wht Corne. two of washt corne, or the washing of corne; true it is (as before I haue written) that all sorts of wheat whatsoeuer are subiect, or by the rancknes of the ground, blasting or else mildewing to a kind of filthy sooty blacknes, as is already shewed; and this sooty corne is taken two wayes, generally, and paticularly; generally, if the whole land be stricken, and no corne saued but all spoyled, which is called mildewed; or particularly, where but some special eares are strooke, or some speciall part of the grame, as when it is black at both ends, yet full and sound in the midst, and this is called smutcht corne, being disfigured in part, and not in all: this smutcht corne which is stricken here and there, if the blasted eares be not culld out from the other (which to do, is an husbandry exceeding good and very worthy) when it commeth vnder the flasile, the dust of those blacke blasted eares will so de∣file all the rest of the corne, that it will all looke blacke and ill-fauoured, and so become vnseruiceable and vn∣markeable, for the blasted corne is both bitter and vn∣wholesome; In this case you must of force wash this corne, and you must do it in two or three waters, till you see all the blacknes quite gone, which done then draine away your water cleane, and laying the corne on faire window cloathes or couerlids, lay it in the heat of the Sun, and so dry it againe till it be so hard that it will grind; But if the time of the yeare will not serue for the Suns drying it, then you shall dry it on a kelne with a very saft and gentle fire, and then coole it in the ayre to recouer the sweetnes againe, and then
the corne is as seruiceable as any other, onely for seed it will by no meanes serue, both by meanes of the bla∣sting which makes the kernell imperfit at both ends, where it should sprout, as also the too much drying thereof, by which it is so much hardened that the ground hath not strengh to resolue it, therefore it is the offence of euery Husbandman when he chuseth his seed corn, to eschew by all meanes this washt corne as a graine that is lost in the earth, and will by no meanes grow. Therefore that you may know washt corne from all To know washt corne. other corne, and so not be cosoned by any deceit in the ill Husbandman, you shal take it vp into your hand and if the corne looke bright, cleere, and shining, be∣ing all of one entire colour without change or diffe∣rence, then be sure the Corne is vnwasht and perfit. But if you find it look whiter at the ends then in any other part of the Corne, and that the whitenesse is blacke and not shining, so that there is a changeable colour in the Corne, then be assured that the Corne is washt, and then by no meanes apt for seede or in∣crease. Againe, put three or foure graines into your mouth and chaw them, and if then the taste be sweet and plea∣sant, and grinde mellow and gently betweene your teeth, then is the Corne not washt, but if it haue a bit∣terish, or flashy raw taste, and grind hard betweene your teeth, or with much roughnesse, then hath the Corne beene washt and dryed againe, and is not good for seed, also when Corne is more then or∣dinarily moyst, or more then ordinarily dry, both are very ill signes, and shew either imperfit Corne, or imperfit keeping; for the best and good Corne in∣deed
euer holdeth an indifferent temperature betwixt drynes and moysture. And thus much touching the diseases and imper∣fection of all sorts of grain within the field, with their certaine cures and most approued remedies, being a worke hitherto vnwritten, yet worthy of all know∣ledge and vsefulnesse; CHAP. XIIII. How to keepe all manner of Graine, cither thrasht or un∣thrasht with least losse the longest time, and how to prescrue it from all infirmities mities and vermine in the house or garner. SOme may imagine it an vnnecessary Obiection. worke to teach men these extraor∣dinary secrets and skill touching the keeping and preeseruing of corne, in as much as it leaneth so neare vnto hour∣ding and vncharitable keeping vp of graine, which occasioneth dearthes and other scarci∣ties, by which many times the commonwealth is hurt, and the poore almost famished. But they are therein deceiued, for to the cormorant and deuouring myzer whose sinnes are his substance and whose mind is euer laboring on the euils he intēds to practise, though these rules were buryed in the center of the earth, yet could his inuentions produce a thousand others to fit the wickednes of his purpose, nor was it cuer seene that ignorance euer made a wic∣ked man good; but the truth is, that there is nothing The need∣full vse of∣preseruing corne. more needfull and necessary then this knowledge for all sorts of people, as well the poore as rich, for euery
man doth not sowe corne, yet euery man must eat corne, and what thing can be more husbandly & good then for a man to buy his prouision of corne and meale at the best and cheapest time of the yeare, in which no small thing is saued, where the family is of any greatnesse: as thus for example, if a man dwell ei∣ther in the city or other market towne, being a Trades man or other which soweth not any corne, and yet he spendeth weekly in his house, of wheat one bushel, of Rye two bushels, and of malt foure bushels; wheat in October, Nouember and December is worth iii. s. iiii. d. a bushell, Rye worth ii. s. iiii. d. and malt worth ii. s. in the Spring Wheat is worth v. s. Rye worth iiii. s and malt worth iii. s. iiii. d. but in the Sommer, wheat is worth vi. s. and vi. s. viii. d. Rye worth v. s. and malt worth iiii. s: now if a man know how to keep his corn, or meale sweet and sound all the yere, and buy his pro∣uision at the best hand, and at once, there is the price of a quarter of his prouision almost saued in the bar∣gaine. Againe the poore husbandman that is to make the best profit of his graine that he can, is peraduen∣ture in great need for fodder for his cattell, and must of necessity thrash vp his corne to get the straw to feed with: in this case, if he know not how to preserue and keepe his graine wholesome and sweet, he must of force sell it, and it may be at that time markets are full and all corne at very low rate, so that he cannot chuse but be a wonderfull looser, whereas on the contrary part hauing skill and knowledge how to keepe it sweet and without shrinking, he may take his best markets at his best leisure, and so put off his corn to his best aduan∣tage, so that to conclude both to the Farmer and the Grazier, the good towne man, and the village man,
this is an Arte and skill right good and necessary. To proceed then to the keeping and preseruing of Keeping of corne two∣fold. Corne and Graine, it is to be vnderstood that it is to be done two seuerall waies; that is to say, in the eare and out of the eare, in the Stack when it is ioyned with the Strawe and Chaffe, or in the Garner when it is clnfed and dressed. Touching the keeping of Corne in the Eare or Keeping corne in the eare or in chaffe. in the Stacke, there is no better or safer way then that already described in the twelfth Chapter, be∣ing free from all offences whatsoeuer that can come to hurt it. Now, there be others that cut off the eares of their Corne, and then put them into great Chests or Hut∣ches of wood, (such as are very frequent and much in vse in Ireland and other Countries where warre ra∣geth) and so keep it sweet and good many yeares: O∣thers vse to beate it out of the Eare, but not separate it from the Chaffe, and then laying a leare of Strawe more then a foote thicke, to lay a good thicke leare of the thresht Corne, then another leare of Staw, and so a leare of thresht Corne, and thus lay leare vpon leare, till you haue made vp your Stacke, in such proportion as you shall thinke conuenient; and this will keepe all kinde of Corne, or Graine, or other seeds, sound, sweet, and fit for any purpose, at least a dozen yeare, or more as some haue supposed, without either too much drying, whithering, moystening or moulding; and sure this is a very excellent way for the storing vp of much Corne in a very little roome, and may as well be done with Corne as with Srtawe; onely it is not to be done in Barne nor House, because Mice, Rats and other kinde of Vermine will worke much de∣struction
thereupon, but on a Stacke or Houell made and proportioned in such forme as was shewed before in the twelfe Chapter, and so it will stand in safe with∣out alannoyance, as long as it shal please the owner to keepe it; sure I am it will last thus fully twelue yeares, yet some Authors affirme it will last fifty yeares, but that is a space of yeares beyond my tryall. Touching the keeping of Corne after it is thrasht Keeping of corne out of the eare or drest. and drest, it is diuers wayes to be done, as by stoage or place of leare, as garners, hutches, and such like: by la∣bour and industry, as with the shouel, or else by deuice or medicine. For Garners they be made diuers wayes, accor∣ding Of Garners. to the nature of the Country and custome of the people. Some are made with clay and lome troden with haire, straw chopt, and such like: but these are the worst and doe soonest corrupt Corne, for although they are warme, which is a great preseruation to Corne, yet they yeeld dust, and from that dust is bred fleas, mytes, weauels, and other vermine which spoyle Corne, and make it easily rot. Others are made of stone and lyme, but they are subiect against wet weather, to yeeld fourth a moyst dew which corrupteth and rotteth corne. Others are made of bricke and lyme, and they are very good against the weauell and other small ver∣mine, but the lime is sharpe and so consequently very vnwholesome for all manner of Graine. The best Garner then that can be made to keepe all manner of graine in, is made of plaster burnt & brought into mor∣ter, and so raising it vp with the helpe of small stones hidden and placed in the middest of the wall to make
both the inside and the outside of the Garner of smooth plaster, no stone being seen but hidden at least two fingers thicke on each side, and all the bottome also must be made of plaster for no floore keepeth corne so well, of what kind soeuer it be, and these Gar∣ners would be placed as neare as you can to the backs or sides of chimneys, or as neare the ayre of the fire as you can conueniently, for as there is nothing more cold then plaster, yet is it euer so dry and free from moysture, that with no change of the ayre or wea∣ther it relenteth, but keepeth the corne euer in one state of goodnesse, whilst the warme standing thereof is such a comfort in the Winter, and the naturall cool∣nesse of the thing so soueraigne in Sommer that the graine euer abideth in one state without alteration. Now for hutches or great chests, byngs, dry-fats Of hutches. and such like, they are made of old dry and well seaso∣ned oake-bords, plained smooth and close ioyned and glewed together, with couers and lids made also very close whereby little or no ayre can come in; Some of these great byngs or hutches made of dry boards are made open and without couers, but they are not so good for the ayre cooling the vpper part of the corne, and the middle part sweating, breedeth corruption, or mustinesse, which hurteth and spoileth the corne; besides they are somewhat too warme, and thereby make any greene corne apt to corrupt and smell. Touching the vse of Garners and Hutches, they are The vse of Garners and hutches for malt, principally to keepe malt after it is dryed, or Barley which is for the vse of bread or meale; & here is to be noted that the best maner of keeping malt, is to keepe it in the come, that is to say in the dust and other filth which commeth with it from the kilne, as thus, when
first you lay your malt on the kilne to be dryed you know there is at one end a certaine sprout or small trids which growes from the corne, and is called the come, which by the rubbing and drying of the malt falles away and leaues the corne cleane and snugge of it selfe, and when you trim and dresse vp your malt for the mill, is windowed and cleansed away; this you shall preserue and put altogether into your garner or hutch, which will so mellow and ripen your malt, that in the spending thereof a pecke will goe further then a pecke and a halfe kept of a contrary fashion, and al∣though some are perswaded that this come or malt dust, is a great breeder of the worme or weeuell, by reason of the much heate thereof, being indeed of the purest of the hart of the corne; yet it is not so vnlesse some danknesse or moysture do get to the corne, and then it breeds weeuels in infinite abundance, and ther∣fore by all meanes be sure that your garners and hut∣ches do stand exceeding dry, and then there is no feare of the losse of corne, nor shall you need to dresse or window your malt but as you spend it. Lastly, here is to be noted, that although I heare ioyne garners, hutches, chests and byngs together, yet I make them not all of equall goodnes, for the plaster∣garner is absolutely the best of all, the close hutch or chest next, and the open bing last; yet any or all suffi∣cient enough to keepe malt, barley, or small seeds, di∣uers yeares without imperfection. It is written by some of the ancientest Authors that wheat hath been kept in these close hutches or chests sweet, the space of fifty yeres, yet I hold the rule some∣what doubtfull, both because wheat of it selfe lying so close packt together, is apt to heat and sweat, and that
heat commonly turneth to faughtinesse, and the sweat to corruption; but that it may thus be preserued from wormes, weauels, mytes and other vermine, breeding in corne: it is doubtlesse and infallible, there be other husbandmen, which for the preseruation of their corne, take a land Toade and tye it fast by the hinder leg, and hang it before the dore or entrance of the gar∣ner, and by the vertue thereof, suppose that no hurt can come to their corne; tye venome of the best, as it were drawing away all other venome or euill that may come to the corne; many other experiments there are, but none so certaine as these, and therefore these for malt or barley, shall suffice in this place. Now for the preseruation of wheat, which is the To preserue wheat. most principall graine, of greatest vse, and greatest price, and therewithall most tender, and aptest to take hurt: the experiments are diuers as mens fancies and practises haue found out, for some husbandmen hold opinion, especially the French and Spanish, that if you take the lees of common oyle (so it be sweet) and sprinkle it vpon your wheate as it lyes, either in the garner or vpon the floore that it will preserue it from all corruption and annoyance whatsoeuer, not doth it saue wheat only, but all other manner of graine what∣soeuer; nor doth preserue corne alone from mis∣chiefe, but if corne by casualty be tainted or hurt, it doth recouer it againe and brings it to the first sweet∣nesse, and if either wormes or weauels be bred in it, the oyle presently kils them, and makes the corne free from that mischiefe: as for smaller feeds as hemp, lyne and rape, this oyle doth not onely keepe them long and sound, but also feeds & nourishes them, and makes them better, either for the ground, or for vse
either in the mill or in medecine, there be others that vse to take chalke, and beat it to pouder, and then scat∣ter it amongst their wheat, when they put it into the garner, and haue found that thereby their graine hath been wonderfully preserued from all imperfection and surely there is great reason for the same, because the drynesse of the chalke drinketh vp the moisture which sweateth from the graine, and is the first breeder of all putrifaction: also it cooleth and asswa∣geth the immoderate heate which is ingendred in the Corne by reason of the packe and close lying to∣gether. Againe, there be others which vse to lay great store of wormwood amongst their wheat, which like∣wise preserueth it from all anoyances, especially from wormes and weauels, as also from Mice, Rats, and such deuouring vermine; neither will the Corne cor∣rupt or grow faugthty, as long as the wormewood re∣maines amongst it: In Italy the carefull Husbands vse to take a certaine dry earth or clay, called earth of Ol∣nithus or Cernithus, and this earth they beat amongst their wheat, and then put it into the garner or hutch, and it will keepe it sound and sweet diuers yeares to∣gether; then when they haue occasion to vse it, with small reding siues to dresse it from the Corne, and so preserue the dust, which will last and serue you many yeares together, euen almost an age as some haue re∣ported, and is at this day to be seene in many parts of Italy and other places. Againe, I haue for mine owne part seene in the I∣lands of the Axores, which lie lowest from Spain (and it is a great practisealso in Spaine) certaine very great and large caues or pits made vnder the earth, of the fa∣shion of a Spanish earthen Iarre, that is to say,
great and spacious in the midst, and narrow both at the top and bottome, like a brasse pot or great glasse viall, and made as smooth within as may be, & in these caues or pits, they first lay chasse, and then their thrasht wheat filling it vp full to the top, or within a handfull thereof, which they fill againe with chaffe, and then closing the top with a broad stone, they couer it ouer with earth so close and vnperceiueable, that you may walke or trauell ouer it without any suspition; and for mine owne part, I haue my selfe digged vp many of these pits, and found great store of wheate, both in the high wayes, and other most in suspicious places, and surely it is thought, and experience in those places makes it good that in these caues or pits you may keep wheat as long if you please as Plinie speaketh of, which is an hundred or an hundred and twenty yeares with∣out hurt or putrefaction either of heate, moysture, wormes, weauels or any other vermine whatsoeuer which consumeth or deuoureth Corne; yet how I may recommend this experiment to our nation I am vncertaine, because the much moysture of our climat, and the cold rawnesse thereof promisseth a con∣trary effect for the great enemies vnto graine, are vi∣olent cold and moysture, and with vs it is very difficult to make any cauerns vnder the earth but they must bee subiect; vnto both; therefore onely to those which liue in hot sandy countreys high and free from springs or waters, or in dry and rocky grounds, where these mines or hollow places may be hewed out, as in a maine and firme quarry, I recommend the tryall of this practise, with this assurance, that where the ground is fit for this purpose, as in any of your sand grounds or grauelly earthes, as in Norfolke,
Middlesexe, Kent, and many other sandy climats; or in rocky situations as in Nottingham, Bathe, Bristol, and such like, you may keep your wheat, good, sound, firme and free from all annoyances, euen as long as you shall please to keep it, both without putrifaction in it self, or waste made by other deuoring worms & vermin: but if in a more moyst place, as in a clay or other mixt earth which euer is vomiting wet and dewish humours, you are forced to approue this experiment: then you must necessarily lime all your caue or hallow mine within, at least halfe a foot thicke with tyle shred and plaster laid wall-like together, and then the plaster dawbde at least three fingers thicke aboue all, and so you may keepe your corne as safe and as sound as in any hot soile whatsoeuer, but without it your corne will not indure a weeke without rottennesse, faughtinesse, mouldinesse and stinking. To conclude, hauing shewed you all the most approued & best experiments, for the keeping and preferuing of wheat, there is not any bet∣ter, or so good as this last poore silly plaine one, which I will heare deliuer; & that is, first (as neere as you can) reape your wheat at the change of the Moone, for wheat which is so reaped, is sedome or neuer subiect to losse or putrifaction (being gotten dry and in hus∣bandly maner ordred & handled) because that celestial body hath such a power and influence in the growth of corne and seeds, that as she groweth, so they grow, and as she waneth, so they abate and wither, and truely for mine owne part in my poore husbandry, I haue made this obseruation, that I haue reaped corne at the beginning of the wane (to mine eye and iudgement) great, full and bold, (as the Plowman cals it) and with∣in few dayes after when it came to thrashing, I haue
found it most poore, hungry and small Corne, no could giue or find any other reason for the sam but that it was reaped in an ill and most vnseasonable time, for on the contrary part, I haue euer found tha Corne reaped vpon the change, being ripe, full, and e∣uery way fit for the barne (and the weather faire and dry aboue head) it hath neuer altered but kept his first and perfit goodnes, so that I cannot chuse but in this case thinke the obseruation of the Moone, to be a thing of great effect and validity, appointed by God as a secondary meanes for our helpe and profit; when therefore your Corne is thus seasonably and well got, you shall thrash it, window it and dresse it so cleane as you can, then carry it vp into your chambers or lofts appointed for that purpose, and whose floores by all meanes, I would wish to be cast of the best plaster, for boards are too hot, and clay is to apt to breed vermine: On this plaster floore, you shall spread your wheat not aboue a foot dpe at the vttermost, and so let it lie; obseruing once in foure or fiue dayes at the most, with a large wooden shouell, to turne the wheat quite ouer and ouer, and thus doing, you shall be sure to keepe it as sweet, found and good as when it came first into the barne; for neither can the heat, sweat nor coldnesse offend it, the first being cooled and tempered by the opening and dipersing; the second dryed vp by the ayre which hath free recourse into it, and the last com∣forted by the labour and tossing of the shouell, casting it vp and downe from one place to another; and though some curious husbands may obiect that this maner of keeping Corn dryeth it somwhat too much, and thereby disableth it for some particular purposes as for seed, and such like; yet in that they are much mi∣staken;
for this stirring and moouing of graine, is not a drying of it, but rather a great comforter and streng∣thener of it dispersing backe into the Corne, those wholesome vapours which should doe it good (by way of communication and fellowship with the Graine) and expelling those ill humours which swea∣ting out of it would otherwise confound and hurt it, so that in conclusion for the true and long keeping of wheat, sweet, sound and perfit without losse or cor∣ruption, there is no way more safe or easie then this last expressed, being of all other the best, although in shew it appeare sleight and triuiall, as for the most part things of greatest moment in this nature doe; but to the iudiciall Husbandman I referrc it, whose ayme is at the worth and substance not at the words and curious glosse, set foorth in strange ingredi∣ans. Touching the keeping of Rye or Massine, or as To preserue Rye. some call it Munck-corne or Blend-corne, being part Rye, and part Wheate mixed together, that which preserueth Wheat will also preserue it, for they are Graine of like nature, onely the Rye is somewhat hotter and dryer, and therefore will endure somewhat more moysture, yet to speake particularly touching the preseruation of Rye, there is nothing better then the Plaster floore and oft turning; the closse Hutch is also excceding good, so is the Pipe or Dry∣fatte, but being once opened and the ayre entring into the Corne, except it be soone spent, it will soone putrifie, for though in the close keeping it last long, yet when it comes to the ayre, it quick∣ly receiucs tainte. Lastly, for the profite in keeping of Rye, indeede there is nothing better then to
pile it and tread it hard into dry vessels or barrels, wherein Salt hath been much ledged, or other brine or salt matter; prouided alwaies that the vessels be sweet and vntainted, no waies subiect to faughtinesse, or other vnsauory smels, from which there is no pre∣seruation. Concerning the preseruation & keeping of Beanes, To preserue Beanes. which are indeed a more grosse and fatter Graine then any heretofore written of, & out of the fulnees of their substance, more subiect to moysture and those dankish humors which corrupt corne: the carefull Husband∣man obserueth two rules; first, not to thrashe any Beans or Pulsse, more then for necessary vse (as for the Stable or the Mill) before it be midde March, at which time the Graine hauing taken a kindly sweat in the mow, Stack or houel is become so dry, firme and solid, that no floare, wall, or other place of leare, can make it relent or giue againe (except great abuse and too much moist keeping: for it is to be vnderstood, that this sort of Pusse or Graine is of it selfe so exceeding moist and apt to sweat in the moow, that all Husbandmen indeauour by no meanes to house it, or lay it within dores, but seek to make it vp in stacks and houels with∣out doores; not so much that houseroome is wanting, as that the benfit of the Sunne and Aire which pier∣ceth through the same, drieth & ripeneth the corne in such kindly manner, as maketh it as seruiceable as any other: and indeed, the first inuention of Stacks, Ho∣uels, Reeks, and such like, did not spring so much from the want of housing, as from the good & profit which the Husbanman found to acrue to this kind of Graine onely by reason of laying it abroad; for it is certaine, that Beanes & Pease neither grow together, nor ripen
together, but put forth their increase one after ano∣ther; for you shall see vpon one Stake, bloomes, swads, and ripe cods; so likewise in the gathering of Pulse (when it is reaped from the ground) you shall see some dry and withered, some ripe, some halfe ripe, some absolutely greene, and as but new in growing. Now all these must be reapt together, and if you stay them in the field till all be of like drinesse, questi∣onlesse the oldest will shake & shed vpon the ground before the yongest be ripned, and what that losse will redound to, euery husbandman can iudge; so also to howse and moow vp in closse moow, the dry pulse with the greene, surely the greene cannot chuse but inflame and heat the dry, and the dry so heated, giue fire to the greene till both be either rotted or consu∣med: and hence it came, that expert husbandmen de∣uised to lay their pulse for the most part euer without dores in Stacks, Reeks and Houels, that the Sun and wind passing thorow them might bring all the graine to an equall drinesse and hardnesse. Againe, Pulse being of all Graine the coursest and fullest of substance in it selfe, and the Straw euer big and substantiall, and full of broad thicke leaues euer moyst and sappy; it must needs follow that this Graine must euer be most apt to sweat in the moow, and so necessarily craueth the greatest store of ayre, and the longest time in drying; so that to returne to my first purpose, it must needs follow, that no Beanes or Pease can be fully ripe or seasoned in the moow, til it be mid March at the least; for it is an old saying amongst the best husbands, I hat March wind is a salt which seasoneth all Pulse: And if vse or necessity compell men to thrash their Pulse before that time the graine is so imperfect,
that of force it must be kilne dried, or els it is fit nei∣ther for the vse of bread nor prouender. Now herein is to be vnderstood that Pease or Beanes which are kiln dried may be kept sound, sweet and good, either on plaster floores, boarded floores, or earthy floores, the space of many yeares without turning or tossing; nor need you to respect how thick the heape lye, since Beanes after they are once dried on the kilne, or in the Sunne, neuer after will thawe, giue againe or relent, butremaine in their first sound∣nesse. But if you preserue your Beanes for other vses, as to boyle in your pot and feed your seruants withal, as is vsed in Somersetshire, and many other Westerly parts of this Kingdome, then it shall be good for you to take oyle Barrels, oyle Caske that is sweet, and first chalke them all ouer within and without with ashes, and then put your Beanes therein, and close vp the heads, and as it is affirmed by diuers great Authors of Husbandry, it will keepe Beanes sound, sweet, and good, twenty yeares: nay, some giue instances of Beanes which haue bene thus kept and preserued the space of one hundred and twenty yeares; and surely I am perswaded that if Beanes be well and dry got, and thrasht at a seasonable time of the yeare, as in March or Aprill, that then thus kept, they will last the vttermost of a mans pleasure. Now for the keeping and preseruing of Pease or Preseruing of Pease or tches. Fetches, which of all other Graine whatsoeuer, is most subect to rottennesse and imperfection, because out of it owne nature it is apt to breed wormes, wea∣uils and mytes, by reason of the much lushious sweet∣nesse of the kernell of the Graine; you shall in all things obserue the same courses that you do with your
Beanes, both touching their gathering, drying, stacking, and also thrashing, for as they are most aptest to grow together being neare of nature and condition one to the other, so it is fit that vnto them you doe apply one and the selfe-same medicine or re∣medy. And herein is to be noted, that as Pease are of more generall vse hen Beanes, as for horse-prouender, fee∣ding of Swine, Pigeons, Pullen and such like; as also for bread, pottage, to boyle with or without meate, for certainly it is a most wholesome and strong food as may be seene by the people of Deuon-shire, Corn∣wall and Sommerset-shire, to whose great strength of body not any reason can be giuen more pro∣bablie then their much feeding on this graine, and theit acquaintance with much and strong labour, so they ought with more care and circumspection to be preserued from all those anoyances that natu∣rally are apt to hurt them, as wormes, rottennes, mould, mustinesse, and such like. And first there is nothing better for the long and well keeping of Peasse, then the very well dry∣ing of them, either in the Sunne or on the kilne, especially those which you vse for bread, prouen∣der or feeding of Swine, and although some Hus∣bands vse to feed their Swine with vndryed pease, nay many times both vndryed and vndrest, that is to say the pulse or chaffe not taken away, and are of opinion that the Graine so giuen sooner fee∣deth and puffeth vp Swine then the other, yet they are deceiued; for albeit it swel and puffe vp a beast, yet is the flesh and fatte neither so good sound and long lasting, as that which is gotten with dry foode, nor
doth it make a Swine so thirsty, and the Husbandman is euer assured that when his Swine drinks not well, he feeds not well; therefore what Pease you keepe for bread or feeding of Cattle, by all meanes dry them well, and lay them either in Garners or Floores, and they wil last sound and good without breeding worms or weauils, as long time as you please. But those which you keepe for foode at your owne table, as in pottage, or other vses, which must by no means be two much dryed, because then they aske a double time in boy∣ling, and spend a double quantity of fuell in their pre∣paring. Some vse after they be cleane thrasht and drest to lay them in a coole close Garnor, either of Plaster, earth or boards, of which, Plaster is the best; as for any thing that relenteth or yeeldeth moysture, as Lime, stone walles, or such like, it is most hurtful, and immediatly maketh pease mould and rot: also it is good to lay your pease in thicke heapes in you garner, for that will preserue them moyst the longest time, but to spread them thin vpon the floore by which meanes the Sunne, Ayre, and Winde may passe thorow them is not so good, for it drieth them too so are, and taketh from them much of their sweetnesse and goodnesse, which ought most carefully to be preserued. There be others which preserue these tender meat Pease by thrashing them vp, and then letting them lye in their owne pulsse or chaffe, and not dressing them but as they haue occasion to vse them, and questionlesse this is a very good & laudable way, for the pulsse or chaffe doth mainetaine thm sweet & moyst, and yet keepeth them withall so warme and comfortable, that they last much longer then any other way whasoeuer, and in this manner of preseruing Pease is to be noted, that
by all meanes you must let them lie vpon a dry earth floare, so long as they are in the chaffe, rather then on the boards or on plaster, and yet in this case the boards are better then plaster. Lastly, and which indeed is the best experiment of all other, if you intend to keepe Pease any extraordi∣nary long time, you shall take Barrels or dry Caske, wel and strongly bound, and pitch them within excee∣ding well, with the best pitch or bytumen that you can get, and then sprinkle the pitch al ouer with strong vinegar; then take your Pease, being cleane and well drest, and put them into the Barrels, pressing them downe closse and hard, then head vp the Barrels, and let them stand dry and coole, and they will preserue your Pease sonnd, sweet and good for any vse whatso∣euer as long as you please, be it for ten, twenty, or thir∣ty yeares, according to the opinions of ancient Hus∣bandmen and other prouant masters that haue liued and commanded in townes besieged, and townes of Garrison; neither shall any worme, mite or weauell, euer breed in it or offend it, nay if any haue in former time been bred in them, this manner of keeping the Graine, killeth them and destroyeth them for euer. Now there is another sort of Pulse which are called Preseruing of Lentils or Lupins. Lentils or Lupins, which albeit they are not so gene∣rally vsed for the food or sustenance of man, yet they are for horse, swine, and other cattell as much in re∣quest as any Graine whatsoeuer, and indeed doe feed fatter and sooner then other ordinary Pulse, and the flesh so fed is sweeter and pleasanter both to the eye and to the taste, then that which is fed with Beanes or Pease; also they are a Pulse very Physical and good for many; medicines, as may appeare by the workes of
many learned Phisitians; & these the longer they are kept, the better they are, and fuller of profit. To pre∣serue them then in good and sound estate, it is meet to reape them in very faire weather, and to Stacke them vp exceeding dry, & if they be laid in the Barne, or any close house, it is not amisse, for they wil endure houssing better then any other pulse, yet the sooner you beat them out of the straw or thrash them vp, the better it is, for husbandmen suppose there is no grea∣ter hurt to this kind of Graine, then the long keeping it in the straw, for it is of such ranknesse, that the very straw and cods breed in it much putrifaction; and I my selse obserued both in Spaine and in the neighbor Islands, where is great abundance of this kind of graine, that they do no sooner gather it and bring it home, but immediatly they thrash it; nay, some thrash it in the fields vpon the lands where it growes, and so bring it home, then spread it on faire boarded floores in very great heapes, or else lay it vp in close hutches, or bings, such as wheate and other white graine is to be kept in: If you dry this kind of Pulse in the Sun, or vp∣on a kilne, with a very moderate and soft fire, and then lay it vp either in close garner, or close hutch, it will last many yeare sound, good, and without corruption; there be other husbandmen which mixe with this graine when it is thrasht, a halfe part of hot, dry, white sand, or at least couer the whole heape of Pulse with the sand, and do find that it keepes the graine very sound & good many yeres together. But to conclude, if you take strong vinegar, & a good quantity of Lcer∣pitium, and dissolue and mixe them very wel together, and then hauing laid your lentils or lupins together on a faire boarded floore, in large, broad and flat heapes
about two foot, or two foot and a halfe thicke with the vinegar and Lacerpitium sprinkle ouer all the heape and not any change of weather, frosts, wormes or o∣ther vermine shall doe them hurt, but they shall re∣maine sound and good as many yeares as you please to keepe them. There are other husbandmen that in∣stead of this before rehearsed, take only sweet oyle, & sprinkle it all ouer the grain, and find the same vertue and effect, for neither wormes nor other vermine will touch it, nor will the radicall humour thereof at any time waste or decay, but remaine strong, full & found without any kind of diminishing, nor shal you find any abatement of it, shrinking in the measure, but that which was a bushell, this yeare will be also a bushell, the next yeare, and as many yeres after as you please; which is no small profit to the owner: whereas on the contrary part if the graine be either dryed in the Sun, on the kilne, or by the wind, you shal hardly haue of euery such bushel so dried, three pecks and a halfe a∣gain, which is by computation at euery quarter which is eight bushels full one bushell lost, and yet this Pulse thus preferued as before said shall be as good for any vse whatsoeuer fit for such Corne to be imploied in, as any other dried graine whatsoeuer, and yeeld as much euery way, and altogether as good meale, and as good meate, Now touching the preseruing and keeping of Oats Preseruing of Oates. it is to be vnderstood that of all Graine it is least ca∣suall, because of it selfe naturally it breedeth no euill , and is againe preserued and defended with a double huske; whereby neither colde, moisture, heate, nor drinesse is able so soone to pierce and hurt it as other graines which are more thinne clad and
tender, yet because it is of great and necessary vse both for cattell and pullen, and that neither the hus∣band nor houswife can well keepe house without it, you shal know that the best way to preserue it longest, is, after it is thrasht to dry it well either in the Sunne or on the kilne, and then either put it into close Gar∣ner or close case, and it will keepe many yeres sound and sweet. Touching the preseruing of Oate-meale, which is Preseruing of oatmell. the inner kirnell of the Oates, and a graine of most speciall vse in the husbandmaus house, as in his pot∣tage, in his puddings, and in many other meats necessa∣rily vsed for the labouring man. It is an experiment not altogether so curious as any of the rest formerly written of for no oatmeale can be made, but the Oats must be exceedingly well kilne-dried, or els the kirnell wil not part from the hull, and being dried, as is fit that drying is sufficient to keep and preserue the oatmeale diuers yeres: prouided euer that presently after the making of your oatmele, you put it into dry closse cask or dry closse garner (but caske is the better) and so as it may remaine exceeding dry (for any thaw or moi∣sture corrupts it) and as neare as you can let it haue, if it be possible, some ayre of the fire, for the warmer it stands, the better and longer it will last as experience sheweth. For the preseruing or long keeping of any sort of Preseruing of any meal. meale, there is no better way then first to boult and searse him from his bran, for the branne is very apt to corrode and putrifie the meale, and to bring it to a faughtinesse or mustinesse, then into very sweet and cleane dry caske closse and well bound, tread in your meale so hard as you can possible tread it, and then
head it vp closse, and so you may keepe it either by land or water as long as you please, and when you haue any occasion to spend of it, be sure to loosn no more of the meale then you presently vse, for the fa∣ster and closser the meale lyeth together, the longer and sweeter it will last, for it is the gathering in of the aire that onely corrupts it. And here is also to be noted, that you should not presently assoon as your meale is ground, boult it from the bran, but rather let it lye a weeke or fortnight, in the branne in some closse bing or trough, and then af∣ter that time boult or searse it, and you shall find it to afford you in euery bushell, more meale by at least halfe a pecke then if you should boult it presently as∣soone as it comes from the mylne, whence it pro∣ceeds, that the cunning and skilfull Baker will euer haue a week or a fortnights prouision of meale before hand, which lying so long in the branne, paies double interest for the continuance. Now if it fall out so, that either by trade of Mer∣chandise, or other occasion, you buy any meale by way of transsportation which is caskt vp (as much meale is should by the barrell) you shall then presently as soone as you haue bought it (if it be for your owne vse or expence) breake open the heads and empty the meale vpon faire sheets on a cleane floore, and then spreading it abroad, let the Sunne and Aire passe tho∣row it which will dry vp the sweat, and if there be any taint or faughtinesse, take it away, and bring the meale to his first sweetnesse, and then immediatly boult out the course branne, and after as was before declared, tread it hard into freesh and sweet caske: and thus you may keepe your prouision of meale all the yere long;
nay, if need require two or three yeares, for after the first sweat is taken away and kindlie dried, there is no doubt to be made of any that shall follow after. Lastly, touching the preserning and keeping of all Preseruing of all small seeds. maner of small seeds of what nature or quality soeuer they be, whether hempe, line, rape, musterseed, or any other garden-seed whatsoeuer, though truly and pro∣perly they last neuer aboue one yeare, nor are fit for seed or increase after that date expired, yet in as much as they are medicinable after, and a much longer time, therefore you shall vnderstand that the best way to keepe them safe and sound, and the fittest for vse and profit, is first to gather them as soone as you perceiue them to be ripe, and the weather being bright, cleare and dry, then shall you dry or wither them in the shade and not in the Sunne, especially vpon a plaster∣floore, where the light looketh to the South, and be sure that as little Sunne and moisture come to them as you can, for both are maine enemies; which done, bind them vp in bundles without thrashing, and so hang them vp and keepe them in their owne cods, and they will last for all vses, a full yeare, and for some par∣ticular vses two or three yeares; and in this manner you may also preserue all manner of hearbs, weeds, flowers, rootes, and the barkes or rinds of all manner of trees. And thus much touching the preseruation of all manner of Graine, Pulse, or meale, with smaller seeds and other things thereunto appertaining.
CHAP. XV. How to keepe Graine, either for transportation by Sea, or for vse in a towne of Warre or Garrison, from one yeare, to one hundred and twenty. OF the necessity of this knowledge there needs small disputation both in respect of the daily vse therof, & the continuall benefit is found thereby, as also in as much as trauell and long voyages grow with vs in these latter dayes still more and more; our forefathers knew but three parts of the world, we are acquainted with foure, and there is con∣stant promise that surely our children shall inhabit fiue: so excellent are men growne in all the Art of discouerie and Nauigation; neither comes these dis∣coueries vnto vs empty handed or in meane garments, but with infinite bounty, and such wealth, that indu∣stry neuer thinkes himselfe so happy as when he is in the imployment as our frequent trade can witnesse, and our many Plantations, all like most rich flockes bringing their fleeces to our Iland, and clothing it more rich then any neighbour Nation whatsoeuer: then sith our trade is so honourable and gainefull and no way to be continued & preserued but by sea-faring & sea iournes what can be more fit, for any good hus∣band to know, then that which is the strength, sinewes, nourishment and ability of such labor, which indeed is victuall, and of all victuall none so good, sound, sweet, and long lasting, nor so wholesome for mans body, as graine and pulsse, for all (God be thanked)
our land is excellently stored, nay farre exeeding most of the Nations in Christendome, with Beefe, Bacon, Porke, Fish, Butter, Cheese, and many such like, most excellent prouissions, all which are able to indure the sea, yet seeing they are euer falt, and preserued in falt, they doe not onely breed in men the Scuruy, Iaundise Dropsie, and such like; but many other contagious, as Calamtures, hot Feuers, ad other sicknesses procee∣ding from adust and choller, which being well corre∣cted with fresh meates, such as are made of graine and Pulse, for they are all the fresh meates that a man can well or certainly carry to the Sea in a tedious long voyage) they keepe men able and in strength fit for a∣ny imployment. To speake then of the Graines and Pulses which are Thevse of Graine, Pulse at Sea. meetest for the sea, and their seuerall vses. It is to be vnderstood that the best and principallest Graine which is indeede both most sweete, most fresh, most pleasant in taste, and most long lasting, is Ryce, which although it grow not much in our Of Rice, and the vs. kingdome, but that we are beholden to our good neighbours for the trade thereof, yet it is in such plen∣ty, where we fetch it, that we need neither complaine of the scarcity nor the cost, and so much the rather in that a pecke therof will goe further then a bushell of a∣ny other Graine; of this Ryce is made many good and wholesome dishes, some thicke, some thinne, some baked, some boyld, as thus: if you take a quarter of a pound of Ryce, and boyle it in a pottel of water, til it come vnto an indifferent thicknesse, and then put into it a good lumpe of potted or barrelled butter, and s much suger as shall salt-wise season it to an indifferent sweetnesse, it is a dish of meat, meet for an Emperour
at Sea, wholesome, good, and light of disiesture, and will be as much as foure reasonable men can well eate at a meale; for the nature of the Rice is such that it will swell in boyling and grow to that bignesse, that in an instant it will thicken a pottle; some vse the night before they boyle it, to steepe it in so much water as will onely couer the Rice all ouer, and then the next day boyle it in a pottle of water more, and the Rice so steeped will so swell, that all the first water will be drunke vp, and a great deale of lesse boyling will serue to make it ready, and sure then this a man cannot finde a cheaper way to feed men, since one pint of water and the fourth part of a quarter of a pound of Rice (which comes not to aboue a halfe pe∣ny at the dearest reckoning) is a meele sufficient for a mans eating, hauing bisket and drinke proportionably. And this dish of meate being but thus thinne boyled, is called at Sea Lob-lolly, and after salt-feeding is wondrous wholsome and comfortable to any man, whether he be sicke, sound, or diseased, and both aba∣teth infirmities & hastneth the healing of all wounds. There be others that after they haue steeped this rice (as aforesaid) doe then boyle it in like manner, till it be so thick that a spoone may stand vpright in it, and no liquidnesse of the water perceiued, then put a good lumpe of butter into it, and boyle it with it, and stirre it about, and it wil make it come most clean out of the pot in which it is boyled; then season it with suger and a little Cynamon & it wil be a dish of meat, right good and delicate, and meete for any man of what quallity soeuer, that is worth goodnes or preseruing, nor need the quantity exceed the proportion already descri∣bed. Againe, if you haue meale in the Ship, if you
take of this Rice steeped in water, and a little lightly boyled and seasoned with Suger, Cinamon and Gin∣ger, and a good quantity of butter, and then bake it in litle Bastics, you shal find it a most delicat, pleasant, and wholesome meat, and that a penny in it shall goe fur∣ther and giue better contentment then foure peni∣worth of Beese, Bacon, Fish, or any other hard salt meat; yet do not wish any man on Shipboard to make this a continual feeding dish, for it is both too pleasant and too strong, and where cuacuation of some humors are wanting, may breede inconuenience in strong bo∣dies; but rather to vse it once a weeke as a physicall nourisher, or for the comfort of sicke and diseased men, whose stomackes are tane away or else weakned; there may be also made of this Ryce in time of neces∣sitic (being ground to a fine mcale) an excellent good Bread or Ruske, which is pleasanter, sweeter and much longer lasting then any made of Wheate or any other graine, whatsoeuer, besides many other secdes which would in this place shew but too much curiosity to repeate. The next Graine vnto Rice which is of estimation Wheate and the vse. and great seruice at the Sea, is Wheate, of which al∣though there be diuers kinds; yet they are all alike for the sertling of this purpose; onely the large and thick huld Wheat (being well dryed) will last the longest, but the smaller and fine skinde Wheate, yeeldes the purer slowre and makes the better meate. Now of this wheat is to be made diuers dishes of meat, for some doe take it and bruse or beat it in a bagge, till the vpper skinne be beaten off, and then hauing drest and win∣nowed it, boyle it in cleane water till it burst and grow as thick as pap, then take it from the fire and being hot
put it into seuerall dishes of wood or traies, so much in euery dish or tray as may serue foure men, and so let it coole; then giue it to the sicke or sound, as you shall be directed, and it is an excellent wholesom good meat either cold or els hot, and a little butter melted with it or being againe boild in fresh water, and seasoned with salt and a little suger, it makes an excellent grewell, or lob-lolly which is very soueraigne at Sea; also your parcht wheat is a very good food at Sea, and of much request & estimation, being sprinkled with a little salt, and of this foode a little will serue a man at a time, by reason that the much sweetnesse thereof, soone silleth and cloieth the stomack, yet it is wondrous light of di∣gestion & breeds great strength and much good bloud as we dayly finde by experience. The next Graine vnto this which is to be recom∣mend Of Oate∣meale and the vse. to the Sea (and which is indeed not any thing inseriour to either of the other going before, both for strength and lasting) is Otemeale, which by reason of the great drynesse and drying thereof feeles little or no imperfection at the Sea, as being vnapt to sucke or draw in any of the ill or moyst vapours thereof. Of this Oatemeale is made many good, fresh and comfor∣table meats at Sea, as Grewell or loblolly by boyling it in fresh water and seasoning it with salt, and (if you haue it conueuiently) sometimes with suger and a few currants, and a little mace, which is meate of great strength and goodnesse; especially for such as are sick and weake, for it is a great restorer of nature and pur∣ger of the blood; also to stecpe the whole Grotts of Oatmeale a night in water, and then draining them, & putting it vnto a bag boile it til the grotts break, then putting it out of the bag butter it with butter, & it is an
excellent foode; also boyling Oatmeale in fresh wa∣ter with barme, or the dregges and hinder ends of your Beere barrels, makes an excellent good pot∣tage, and is of great vse in all the parts of the West Countrie, especially, where Marryners or Sea-men liue, and are called by the name of drousson pottage. Also of Oatemeale is made that meate which is called in the West, Washbrew, and may be made at the Sea at you pleasure, being a meate of that great account a∣mongst Deuonshire and Cornishmen, that they will allow it no paralell; and for my owne part I haue heard a most famous & well learned Phisition in those parts allow it to be a meate of singular great strength, and goodnesse, and withall so light of disiestion, that a man can very hardly surfeit vpon it at any time; and I am the rather induced to beleeue the same, because I haue obserued and seene many of the laboring men of that Countrey to eate such an vnmeasurable quan∣tity thereof, that in mine eye one mans supper would haue serued a whole family. But you will say, hunger and labour, are such excel∣lent sawces that they will disgest any thing: To that I answere, that I haue seene the best Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of that Countrey, of whom as much curiositie hath attended, as is lyable to the City, nay such as haue had sicknesse their best familiar, yet eate of this with great and sharpe appetite, and when health was most to be feared, then to boast of most soundnes: This washbrew is to looke vpon like Painters cyze, or new made Ielly, being nothing but the very heart of the oatmeale boyled and drayned to that height and thicknesse hauing neither hull nor branne in it but the pure meale and water, and it is to be eaten either with
wine, strong beare, orale, or with fine clarified hony, according to mens stomacks or abilities: Now this the eaters therof affirm, that by no means it must be chaw'd but rather swallowed by the spoonfuls whole because chawing like a pil makes it taste vnpleasantly; There is againe another meat to be made of oatmeale, which is called Gertbrew, and is somewhat more course, and lesse pleasant then wash-brew, hauing both the branne and huls in it, yet is accounted a food of a very good strength, and exceeding wholesome for mans body, and of my knowledge much vsed and much desired of all labouring persons that are acquainted with it, many other foods there are to be made of oatemeale, but these shall be at this time fully sufficient. The next graine to this I account Barley, which may Of Barley and the vse. be euery way vsed like vnto Wheate, either to make Grewell, to be creyed, parcht, or boyled; and of Bar∣ley for this purpyse of food, the best is French Barley, the next is barley byg, or beare barley, and the worst are the spike or battledore barley, and our common English barley. And as Barley or Wheate, so you may vse you Buck Bucke or the vse. and your Indian Silligo, for they are of like nature, on∣ly aske a longer time in their beating, steeping, and boyling, because they are naturally more hard, & more dry, by reason of the heate of the climat in which the best grow; and it is euer to be obserued for a rule, that the dryer you keepe your corne at Sea, the better it is, the sweeter and longer lasting. Now hauing shewed the vse of these lighter graines Of Pulse and first of Beanes, the vse. I will come to Pulse, and shew their vse and benefit at the Sea, or in besieged townes; and of Pulse, I will first speake of Beanes as a principall food, wholesome and
strong, and though not so fine and light of digestion as any of the former, yet exceeding harty and sound & a great breeder of good bloud, they are for the most part to be boyled whole, till such time as they apeare soft and tender, or begin to breake, and then drained from the water, are serued in traies, and well salted and so eaten; a pottell whereof is thought a full proporti∣on for foure men; and of these Beanes there are diuers The French Beane. kinds: as the common garden Beane, or French beane, which is great, broad, and flat, and these are the best to boyle, either with meat, or by themselues, and aske the least labour, because their outer skinne is most ten∣der, and the inward substance most apt to be mollified, and softned: they may also be boiled both when they are yong and greene, and when they are old and dry, and the meat at both times is good and sauory. The next bean to these are the Kidney beane, which The Kydney Beane. is flatter, and lesser, and neerer the proportion of a kid∣ney then the French Beane is, and this is also a garden beane, and whilest it is young & green is to be eaten sal∣let wise after they are boild, both the cod and beane together, and it is certaine a better sallet cannot be ta∣sted; for the cod or huske is euery way as excelent in taste as the beane is; but after they grow olde and dry and that the moisture is gone out of the cod, then it is meete to thrash them, and then boyle them like the French beane, and they are euery way as good meat and as soone boyld and as tender. The next Beane to these are your common and ordi∣nary Common Field beanes thevse. Field beanes, which hauing tough and hard skins aske more boiling then the other beanes, & are some∣what harder in taste, yet a good souud food also: there be many that parche them in the fire and thinke them
then the best meat, because the fire sooner breakes the skin and softneth the kirnell; but they cannot be done so abundantly, and therefore are not so much in vse. After this great sort of Pulse, I will speake of the Of Pease and the vse. smaller sort as Pease and their like: and of Pease there betwo kinds, the garden Pease and the field Pease, and for this vse (albeit both are good) yet the garden Pease are best, for they are soonest boyld, are most ten∣der, and serue for most vse, as for pottage, boiling, parching or spelting; and of these garden Pease, there are diuers kinds; as white Pease, French Pease. hastings rounsiuals and such like; the first being the longest Seueral sorts of garden Pease. lasters, the second the pleasantest in taste, the third the earlyest and tenderest, and the last largest and ful∣lest. The field Pease are onely of two kinds, as the white Pease and the gray Pease, and they seldome make pot∣tage, because they are vnapt to breake, but are onely for boyling and making of leape Pease, or for pat∣ching, yet a good and a strong food also, and as we vse Pease, so in other countreyes they vse Lupins, Lentils, Tares, Fetches, and such like smaller Pulse, but they are neither so good, wholesome nor sauoury in taste, being a kind of Graine more ranke, fulsome and breeding of ill blood and infection within, these cases of Seafare and warrefare ought principally to be eschwed and shunned. Now it resteth after this long digression of these Totransport Graine. seuerall Graines, and their vses with the meates and profits which are made from them, that we come to the safe manner of keeping and preserning them ei∣ther by land or water, for victuall or transportation, so as they may last & indure without ill smel or rottennes.
And first for transportation of Graine by Sea, it is two wayes to be done, as either in great quantities for trade and the victualing of other Nations, or in smaller quantitie for victualling the men in the ship, prepared for a long and tedious voyage. For the transporting of Graine for trade in great quantitics, it is to be intended the voyage is seldome Transpor∣ting graine for trade. long, but from neighbour to neighbour, and therefore commonly they make closse decks in the ships to re∣receiue the Graine, faire and euen boarded, yet if such decks be matted and lined both vnder and on each side it is much the better, and this matting would be strong and thinne; there be some which make the decks one∣ly of mats, and sure it is sweet but not so strong as the board, therefore the best way of transportation is to haue strong boarded decks wel matted, and then sprea∣ding the Corne of a reasonable thicknesse, to couer it with matting againe, and then to lay Corne on it again, and then mats againe, that betweene euery reasonable thicknesse of Graine a mat may lye, the profit where∣of is that when the Corne with his owne heat and the working of the Sea shall begin to sweat; which sweat for want of ayre to dry it vp would turne to putrifacti∣on, then these mats thus lying betweene, will not only exhall and sucke vp the sweat, but also keep the Corne so coole and dry that no imperfection shall come vnto it, and here is to be noted that these mats should rather be made of dry white bents, then of flags and bul-rush, for the bent is a firm, dry, crispe thing, and will not rent or sweat of it selfe, but the flag or bul-rush is a spungy and soft substance which is neuer empty of his owne and others moystures. Now for transporting of Graine for victuall for
the ship which is in much smaller quantity, because it Transpor∣ting graine for victuall. is but for the priuate vse offew within the ship; the on∣ly best and safest way is to take salt fish barrels, or any caske in which any salt fish hath beene piled, as Cod, Herrings, Salmon, Sprats, or any other poudred fish; and whilst the vessels are sweet you shall calke them both within and without with plaster, daubing them all ouer, then into them put your Graine of what kind soeuer it be, and head them vp closse, and then stow them in such conuenient dry place of the ship as you shall thinke fit, and questionlesse, if beliefe may be gi∣uen to the worthiest Authors which haue writ in this kinde, you may thus keepe your Graine sweet, sound, and in full perfection from one yeare to one hundred and twenty yeares, but certainely daily experience shewes vs, that all kinde of graine thus put vp and kept, will remaine sound and sweet, three, foure, and as some say, seuen yeares, for so farre hath lately beene tryed: and what here I speake of Ship-board, the like maybe done in any towne of Warre or Garrison, whether be∣sieged or not besieged, or in any other place where any necessity shall compell; the proofe of this manner of piling or putting vp of graine, serueth as well for Land as Sea. And thus much for the transportation and preser∣uation of Corne and Graine.
CHAP. XVI. A generall computation of men, and Cattels labours; what each may do without hurt daily. TO make an exact or seuere computation of men and cattels labours, so as it might stand for a president not to bee altered, is a thing almost impossible, be∣cause countries alter, customes alter, and people are incertaine: countries alter, so as one may worke more in halfe a day in some then in a whole day in othersome; as where one may plow two akers in the sand, he shall hardly plow one in the clay; customes alter, for in some countreyes they plow but from seuen or eight a clocke in the morning, till two or three in the afternoone; and in other coun∣treyes they plow from before Sunnerise, till Sunne∣set: and people are incertaine, for some are painefull and conscionably industrious, not desiring to eat more then the worke, and others are so full of floath and greedinesse, that in the prime labours as in haruest and seed-time, they spend more time in eating and drink∣ing, then in their worke, for I haue obserued both in those places where I was bred, and in those where I haue liued, that the haruest mans howres of repast haue much runne beyond either his worke or hone∣sty: as thus for example, within the compasse of mine owne knowledge, I haue seene haruest men come into the Farmers house, betweene fiue and sixe a clocke in the morning, and there eat bread and cheese and drink, then goe to the field, and at nine of clocke
haue breakefast, at eleauen the dinner, at one a noo∣ning, at foure a drinking, and at seuen Supper, besides an houres sleepe in the heate of the day for refreshing, now what time is left for labour may easily be iudged, so that to measure true proportions to these vncer∣taineties is a trauell too difficult. But to come to the honest industrious workeman which craues to the so∣rest labour, but resonable repost, as breakfast, dinner, nooning and supper, with drinke at such conuenient times as he is thirsty, according to the violence of his labour and the heate of the day: To these I say may be proportioned a reasonable computation how worke may with least losse or vexation bee com∣passed and gouerned; to speake then generally of all husbandly workes where the countrey is tollerable Plowing and sowing. without any extraordinary difficulty, you shall vnder∣stand that a man may well in stiffe ground, plow an aker, or an aker and a halfe, and in light sand grounds two or three akers with one Teame in a day, and hee may plow and sow in stiffe ground two akers and a halfe each day, and in light ground foure at least with one Teame, and a wayes what he soweth, that he may harrow the same day also. Mowing. A man may well mowe of good and deepe loggy medow, or of rough vneuen medow euery day one a∣ker, mowing cleane and making a smooth board, of well standing, and good smooth medow, an aker and a halfe each day, and of very thinne and short grasse, or vpland medowe two akers at the least euery ay. Also he may mow of Corne as Barley and Oares if it be thicke, loggy and beaten downe to the earth
making faire worke and not cutting of the heads of the eares, and leauing the straw still growing one aker and a halfe in a day, but if it be good, thicke and faire stan∣ding Corne, then he may two akers, or two akers and a halfe in a day, but if the Corne be short and thinne, then he may mowe three, and sometimes foure akers in a day, and not be ouer laboured; Also of Beanes he may mowe as much, and of Pease mixt with Beanes, hauing a hooke to follow him, no lesse; for they are workes in this nature most easie and least troublesome. One man with a binder may well reape an aker of Reaping. Wheat, or Rye in a day, if it be principal good and wel standing, but if laid or beaten downe with weather, then three roode is fully sufficient for a dayes labour; but if it be thinne and vpright standing, then he may reape and bind fiue roods in a day of small Pease, Fet∣ches and such like, a man may wel reape two akers eue∣ry day. Now for as much as it is a custome in diuers coun∣treyes Binding of Barley and Oates. (and truely is exceeding profitable and worthy imitation) to sheafe and bind vp both Barly and Oats as well as Wheate or Rye, and that it both saueth much Corne, and also makes it take a great deale lesse roome, and that this labour is to be done after the mowers, as the other was after the reapers by gathering the Barley or Oats vp with a sickell or hook, as it lyes in the swath and so binding it in sheaues, you shall vnderstand that one man in a day will bind as much as one mower can mowe, and if the men be any thing skilfull in the labor two binders will binde as much as three mowers can mowe. For the gathering or inning of Graine, no man can Gathering in of graine. proportion the number of loads, or quantity of
ground shal daily be brought home, sith the iourneyes are vncertaine, some going a quarter of a mile, some halfe a mile, and some a mile; therefore it is the hus∣bandmans best way, the first day to go with his Teame himselfe, and both to obserue the labour and distance of place, and by that to compute what may be done af∣ter without hurt to his cattell, and where he failes of any hope, there to take a strickt account of the errour, for it is either ignorance or carelesnesse, which brings forth mischances, speaking of husbandry, as ouer∣throwing the Teame, ouer loading the Teame, brea∣king necessary instruments, or not respecting the wayes and passage, any of which may in a day hinder more then halfe the dayes labour. Againe, a man may in a day ditch and quick-set of Ditching. a reasonable ditch foure foot broad, and three foot deep a rod or poll a day, allowing sixeteene foot to the rod, and so of larger measure lesse ground, and of lesse ground larger measure, according to the sufficiency of the fence which you purpose to make. A man also may hedge in a day, if the hedge be good Hedging. and substancial, that is to say, fiue foot high, wel bound, thicke stackt, and closse layed, two rod in a day, and if the worke be lower or thinner then double so much, according to the former proportion. For the plashing of hedges, or making a quicke fence Plashing. if he do it workmanly, and that the quicke growth be high and well growne, and then he lay it thicke, closse, and strongly bound on the top, turning the quicke downeward and inward, to plash a rod a day is as much as any man can well do, but if ye plash it after the West countrey fashion, that is, onely cutting it downe, & laying it a long closse to the ground, seeking
onely thicknesse, and not much guard or comelinesse, then he may well plash aod and a halfe in a day with∣out trouble, and sure in this worke is great care and art to be vsed as well for the preseruation of the quick as the goodnesse of the sence, being a thing of worth and validity to euery husbandman. Againe, a man may delue or dig, as for garden mould Deluing, hempe-yard, Flaxeyard, or for the setting of Corne, or leuelling of vneuen places, one roode in a day, and the ground so digged and delued, he may rake dresse and leuell in the same day also, but if he digge it deepe, and trench it, and meanure it, as is meet; either for garden, orchard, or cornsetting, then to delue half a rood in a day, is a very great proportion, because ordinarily to delue, as to receiue ordinary seeds requires but one spade grafin depth, but extraordinarily to delue, as for inriching and bettering of the ground, and to cleanse it from stones, weeds and other anoyances, will re∣quire two spade graft at the least. Lastly, a man may thrash if the corne be good and Thrashing, cleane, without some extrordinary abuse or pouerty in the graine, inone day foure bushels of Wheat or Rye, fie bushels of Barly or Oats, & fiue bushels of Beanes or Pease, but the Pulse must then be imagined to be exceeding, otherwise a man shal thrash lesse of it, then of any other kind of Graine, for as when it is well loa∣den, it yeeldeth plentifully, so when it is poore and lightly loaden it yeeldeth little or nothing, and yet hath not one stroke lesse of the slaile, nor any labour saued more then belongs to the best Pulse whatsoeuer being euer at least three times turned and foure times beaten ouer. Hauing thus generally runne ouer (in a short com∣putation)
the labours of the husbandman. I will now The parti∣cular ex∣pence of a day. as bricfly as I can, goe ouer the particular dayes la bours of a Farmer or aPlowman, shewing the particu∣lar expence of euery houre in the day, from his first ri∣sing, till his going to bed, as thus for example; we will suppose it to be after Christmas, and about plow day (which is the first letting out of the plow) and at what time men either begin to fallow, or to breake vp Pease earth which is to lye to baite, according to the custom of the countrey; at this time the Plowman shall rise be∣fore foure of the clock in the morning, and after thanks giuen to God for his rest and the successe of his labors, he shall goe into his stable, or beast house, and first he shall fodder his cattell, then cleanse the house, and make the boothes neate and cleane, rubbe downe the cattell, and cleanse their skinnes from all filth, then he shall curry his horses, rubbe them with cloathes and wispes, and make both them and the stable as cleane as may be, then he shall water both his Oxen and Hor∣ses, and housing them againe, giue them more fodder, and to his horse by all meanes prouender, as chaffe and dry Pease or Beanes, or Oat-huls, Pease or Beanes, or cleane Oates, or cleane garbadge (which is the hinder ends of any kinde of Graine but Rye) with the straw chopt small amongst it) according as the ability of the Husbandman is. And whilst they are eating their meat, he shall make ready his collars, hames, treates, halters, 'mullens, and plow-geares, seeing euery thing fit and in his due place, and to these labours I will also allow, full two houres, that is to say, from foure of the clocke, till sixe, then shall he come into breakfast, and to that I allow him halfe an houre, and then another halfe
houre to the gearing and yoaking of his cattell, so that at seuen of the clocke he may set forward to his labour and then he shall plow from seauen of the clocke in the morning, till bet wixt two and three in the afternoone, then he shall vnyoake and bring home his cattell, and hauing rub'd them, drest them, and cleansed-away all durt and filth, he shall fodder them, and giue them meat, then shal the seruants go in to their dinner, which allowed halfe an houre, it will then be towards foure of the clocke, at what time he shall goe to his cattell a∣gaine and rubbing them downe, and cleansing their stalles, giue them more fodder, which done he shall goe into the oarnes, and prouide and make ready fod∣der of all kinds, for the next day, whether it be hay, straw, or blend-fodder, according to the ability of the husbandman; this being done and carryed into the sta∣ble, oxehouse, or other conuenicnt place, he shall then goe water his cattell, and giue them more meat, and to his horse prouender as before shewed: and by this time it will draw past sixe of the clocke, at what time he shall come in to supper, and after supper hee shall either by the fire side, mend shooes both for him∣selfe and the family, or beat and knock hempe, or flaxe, or picke and stampe apples, or crabs for cider or verd∣iuyce, or else grinde malt on the quernes, picke candle∣rushes, or doe some husbandly office within dores till it be full eight a clocke; Then shall he take his lan∣thorne and candle, and goe to his cattell, and hauing cleansed the stailes and planckes, litter them downe, looke that they be safely tyed, and then fodder & giue them meate for all night, then giuing God thankes for benefits receiued that day let him and the whole househould goe to their rest till the next morning.
Now it is to be intended that there may be in the houshold, more seruants then one; and so you will de∣maund of me what the rest of the seruants shall be im∣ployed in before and after the time of plowing; to this I answer, that they may either goe into the barne and thrash, fill or empty the malt fat, load or vnload the kilne or any other good and necessary worke that is a∣bout the yard, and after they come from plowing, some may goe into the barne and thrash, some hedge, ditch, stop gaps in broken fences, dig in the orchard or garden, or any other out work which is needfull to be done, & which about the husbandman is neuer wan∣ting, especially one must haue a care euery night to looke o the mending or sharpning of the plow yrons, and the repairing of the plow and plow geares, if any be out of order, for to deferre them till the morrow, were the losse of a dayes worke, and the worst point of husbandry that might be, besides the example. And thus from this briefe and compendious com∣putation, may a man compute and direct the workes of his family, how great soeuer it be and keepe euery one to his true and distinct labour, without amazement or molestation. Now for the particular labours of cattell, though it Particular labours of cattell. be already inclusiuely spoken of in that which is gone before, where I shew you how much a man may con∣ueniently plow in a day with one Teame or draught of cattell, yet for further satisfaction, you shall vnder∣stand that in your cattell, there are many things to be obserued, as the kind, the number & the soile they labor in, for the kind which are Oxen, buls, or horses, the best for the draught, are Oxen, & the reasons I haue shew∣ed in my former workes, the next are Horses, and the
worst Bulles, because they are most troublesome; the number fit for the plow is eight, sixe, or foure; for the Cart, fiue or foure, and for the Weine neuer vnder sixe, except in loading home of haruest, where loading easily, foure very good oxen are sufficient, for the soile of it be of the toughest and deepest earth, eight beasts can doe no more but fallow, or breake vp Pease earth, no nor sooner surre, if the season grow hard and dry, for soyling; winter rigging, and seed furrow, sixe beasts may dispatch that labour: if the soile be mixt and haffel, then sixe may fallow and sow Pease, and foure doe euery other ordure; but if it be light and easie sand, then foure is enow in euery season; for the quantity of their worke, an oxe plow may not doe so much as a horse plow, because they are not so swift, nor may be driuen out of their pace, being more apt to surfeit then horses be, so that for an oxe plow to do an aker, and a horse plow an aker and a rood, or an aker and a halfe in good ground is worke fully sufficient. And thus much for a briefe and generall computation of men and cattels labours, how they ought to be im∣ployed for the best vse and profit. CHAP. XVII. The applying of has bandry to the seuerall countreys of this Kingdome, where in is shewed the office and duty of the Carter or Plowman IT is to be vnderstood that Husbandry doth vary according to the nature and climats of countries; not one rule obser∣ued in all places, nor all places to be go∣uerned and directed by one rule, but ac∣cording
as the earth, the ayre, the much or little heat, moisture or cold doth increase or diminish, so must the skilful husbandman alter his seasons, labours and in∣struments; for in stiffe clayes, as are all the fruitfull Vales of this kingdome (of which I haue named most part in a Chapter before, as also Huntington-shire, Bedford-shire, Cambridge-shire, and many other of like nature, all manner of errable workes must be be∣gun at early seasons, and betimes in the yeare, and the plowes and instruments must be of large size & strong timbers, and the labour great and painfull; so also in mixt soiles that are good and fruitful, as Norhampton shire, Hartfortshire, most part of Kent, Essex, Barkshire and countries of like nature; all errable toyles would begin at latter seasons, and the plowes and instruments, would be of middle size and indifferent timbers, and the labour somewhat lesse then the other, but the light sandy grounds which haue also a certaine natural fruit∣fulnes in them, as in Norfolke, Suffolke, most part of Lincolneshire, Hampshire, Surry and countries of that nature, all errable toiles would begin at the latest sea∣sons, and the plowes and instruments would be of the smallest and lightest size, and of the least timbers, and the labour of all other is most easie. Lastly, for the barren and vnfruitfull carthes (of which onely I haue written of in this booke) as is De∣uonshire, Cornwall, many parts of Wales, Darbyshire Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkeshire, and many other like or worse then they; the errable toiles would haue certaine set time or sit season of the yeare, but onely ac∣cording to the temperatnes of the yere, which if it hap∣pen early, then you must begin your labors early, but if it fall lower in the yeere, then you must begin your
labours at later seasons, and for your plow and instru∣ments, they must not keepe any certaine proportion, but be framed euer according vnto the ground, the stronger and stiffer ground hauing euer the strong and large plow with instruments of like kinde, and the lighter and more easie earth, a plow and instruments of more easie substance; as for the labour, it must be such and no other then that which hath been already de∣clared in this booke. And hence it comes that the office and duty of eue∣ry The Carters office. skilfull plowman or Carter, is first to looke to the nature of the earth, next to the seasons of the yere, then to the customes and fashions of the place wherein hee liueth: which customes although they be held as se∣cond natures amongst vs, and that the best reasons of the best workemen commonly are, that thus I doe be∣cause thus they doe; yet would I wish no man to binde himselfe more strictly to custom, then the discourse of reason shal be his warrant, and as I would not haue him to preiudicat in his owne opinion, so I would not haue him too great a slaue to other mens traditions, but star∣ding vpon the ground of reason made good by experi∣ence, I would euer haue him profit in his owne iudge∣ment. Now of these matters I haue written sufficient both in this booke, and in my former, and also for the election, ordering, tempering, and making of all sorts of plowes or plow yrons, together with the Teames, dranghts and other aduantages, of which whosoeuer is ignotant, let him looke into the English Husband∣man, and he may be satisfied: Now the further office and duty of the Husbandman, is with great care and diligence to respect in what sort or fashion to plow his ground; for although I haue in the former Chapters
shewed how he shall lay his furrowes, what depth he shall plow them, and how he shalbe able to raise and gaine the greatest store of mould, yet is there also ano∣ther consideration to be had, no lesse profitable to the husbandman, then any of the former, and that is how to lay your lands best for your own profit & ease, as al∣so the ease of your cattel, which shal draw within your draught, as thus for instance: if your erable land shall lie against the srde of any steepe or mountainous high hill (as for the most part all barren earthes do) if then you shall plow such land directly against the hill, beginning below, and so ascending straight vpright and so downe againe, and vp againe; this very labour and toyling a∣gainst the hill wilbreed such a bitter wearisomnesse to the cattell, and such a discouragement, that you shal not be able to compasse one halfe part of your labour; besides, the danger of ouer-heating and surfetting of your beasts, whence will spring many mortal diseases. Therefore when you shal plow any such ground, be sure euer to plow it side-wayes ouerthwart the hil, where your beasts may euer tread on the leuel ground and neuer directly vp and downe, so shal your cattel be better able to endure the draught, and you with much case and comfort be able to compasse and finish your labors, Besides the compasse and meanure which you shall lay vpon the ground shall not be so soone washt away from the top or vpper part of the ground, because the furrowes not lying straight downe in an e∣uen and direct discent, but turned crosse-wise vpward against the hil, it must necessarily hold the soyle with∣in it, and not let it wash away as it were through libe∣rall channels, as I haue oft seene in diuers places where the corne hath been as ranke as might be at the bot∣tome,
and not any growing at the top; only for want of well ordering of the Lands, and knowledge how to prepare, both for a mans owne ease and his cattels. Againe, it is the office & duty of euery good Plow∣man Of cattell for draught. to know what cattle are meetest for his draught; as whether Oxen, or Horse, or both oxen and horse: wherein is be vnderstood that although of all draughts whatsoeuer within this kingdome, there is none so good to plow withall, both in respect of the strength, stabilitie, indurance and fitnes for labour, as the oxen are, in whom there is seldome, or neuer, any losse, be∣cause whensocuer his seruice faileth in the draught, his flesh wil be of good price in the shambles; yet not with∣standing in this case a man must necessarily bind him∣selfe much to the custome of the Countrey, and fa∣shion of his neighbours; for if you shall liue in a place where fuel is scarse, and far to be fetcht as commouly it is in all barren Countries, which for the most part are stony Champaines or cold Mountaines; and your neighbours as wel for the speed of their Iourneis, as for the length keepe Horse draughts: in this case you must also doe the like, or else you shall want their com∣panies in your Iourney, which is both discomfort and disprofit if any mischance or casualty shall happen, or being inforst to driue your Oxen as fast as they doe their Horse, you shal not onely ouerheate, tire, bruise and spoile them; but also make them vtterly vnfit ei∣ther for feeding or labour: and therefore if your e∣state be mean, & that you haue no more but what neces∣sitie requires, then you shal sort your plow or Teeme according to the fashion of your Countrey, and the vse of your neighbours: but if God haue blest you with great blenty, then it shal not be amisse for you to
haue euer an Oxe draught or two to till your Land; and a Horse draught to do all your forraine and abroad businesses; so shall your worke at home euer goe con∣stantly forward, and your outward necessary prouisi∣ons neuer be wanting. Now for the mixture of Oxen and Horse together, it falleth out oftentimes, that the plowman must of force be prouided with cattell of both kind, as if he happen to liue in a mountanous and rocky countrey, where the steepenesse of the hills, and narrownesse of the wayes will suffer neither Cart, Weine, nor Tum∣brell to passe; in this case you shall keepe Oxen for the plow to till the ground with, and Horses to carry pots or hookes: the first to carry foorth your meanure, and the other to bring home your hay and Corne haruest, your fuell and other prouisions which are needfull for your family; as they doe both in Cornewall, and all other mountainous countries, where Carts and weines and such like draughts, haue no possible passage. Againe, it is the office and duty of uery good plowman to know his seuerall labours, for euery se∣uerall moneth through the whole yeare, whereby no day nor houre may bee misspent, but euery time and season imployed according as his nature requireth, as thus for example. In the moneth of Ianuary, the painefull plowman if Ianuary. he liue in fertile and good soyles, as amongst rich, stiffe, simple cleys, he shall first break vp, or plow vp his pease earth, because it must lye to take baite before it be sowne; but if he liue in fruitful wel mixt soyles, then in this moneth he shall begin to fallow the field he will lay to rest the yeare following; but if he liue vpon hard barren earths (of which chiefely I write) then
in this moneth he shall water his Meadowes and Pa∣sture grounds, and he shal draine and make dry his erra∣ble grounds, especially where he intends to sow Pease, Oates, or Barley, the feed-time following. Also he shall stubbe and roote vp all such rough grounds as he intends to sow the yeare following; in this Moneth you shall meanure and trime vp you gar∣den moulds, you shal comfort with meanure, sand, or lime, or all three mixt together, the rootes of all bar∣ren fruit trees: and also you may cut downe all fuch timber as you would not haue chinke or riue, but hold firme and close together, onely there will bee losse in the barke, for the time is something to earely for it to rise. Lastly, you may transplant all sorts of Fruit trees, the weather being open, and the ground cafie: you may reare Calues, remooue Bees, and for your owne health, keepe your body warme, let good diet and wholesome be your Physition, and rather with exer∣cise, then sauce, increase your appetite. In the Moneth of February, either set or sowe all sorts of Beanes, Pease, and other Pulsle, and the stif∣fer February. your ground is, the sooner begin your worke, pre∣pare your Garden mould, and make it cafie and tender, prune and trime all sorts of Fruit trees from mosse, cankers, and all superfluous branches; plasse your hed∣ges, and lay you quicksets closse and entire together, plant Roses, Gooseberies, and any fruit that growes vpon small bushes; graf at the latter ende of this mo∣neth vpon yong and tenderstockes, but by all meanes ouerlade not the stocks: Inauguratin in this moneth, or any other, as soone as the barke will rise, and also set a∣ny slips, branches, or young syens.
Lastly, for your health, take heed of cold, forbeare meats that are slimy and flegmatique, and if need re∣quire, or purge, bathe, or bleed, as art shall direct you. In the moneth of March, make an end of sowing of March. all sorts of smal pulse, and begin to sow Oates, Barley and Rye, which is called March Rye; graft all sorts of fruit trees, and with young plants and syens replenish your nurcery, couer the roots of all trees that are bared and with fat earth lay them close and warme, if any tree grow barren, boare holes in his roote, and driue hard wedges or pins of oake wood therein, and that wil bring fruitfulnesse; transplant al sorts of Som∣mer flowers, and giue new comfort of meanure and earth to al early outlandish flowers, especially to the crowne Emperiall, Tulippos, Hyacynth and Narcissus of all shapes and colours, cut downe vnderwood for fuel or fencing, and looke wel to your cwes, for then is the principall time of yeaning: And lastly, bathe often, bleed but vpon extreamity, purge not without good counsell, and let your dyet be coole and temperate. In the moneth of April finish vp all your barley seed April. and beginne to sowe your hempe and flaxe; sow your garden seeds, and plant all sorts of herbes; finish graf∣ing in the stock, but begin your principal inauguration for then the rinde is most plyant and gentle; open your hiues and giue the Bees free libertie, leaue to succour them with foode, and let them labour for their liuing: Now cut downe all great Oake timber, for now the barke will rise and be in season for the Tanner; Now scowre your ditches, and gather such meanure as you doe make in the streets and high waies into great heaps together, lay your meadowes, fleight your corne grounds, gather away stones, repaire your high waies,
fet Ozyers, and Willowes, and cast vp the bankes and munds of all decayed fences. Lastly for your health, either purge, bathe or bleed, as you shall haue occasion, and vse all wholesomere∣creation, for them moderate exercise in this moneth, there is no better Physicke. In the moneth of May sow Barley vpon all light May. sands and burning grounds, so likewise do your hempe and flaxe, and also al sorts of tender garden seeds as are Cucumbers and Mellons, and all kind of sweet smel ling hearbes and flowers; allow your stiffe clayes, Sommer-stirre your mixt carthes, and foyle al light and loose hot sands. In this moneth begin to prepare all barren earths; for Wheat and Rye, Bourue baite, Stubgorsse or Furres, and root out Broome and Ferne, begin to fould your sheepe, lead forth meanure, and bringhome fuel and fencing, weed your winter corne, follow your common workes, and put al sorts of cat∣tel to grasse, either in pasture or teather; put your mares to the horse, let nothing be wanting to furnish the Dairy: and now put off all your winter-fed fat cat∣tel, for now they are scarcest and dearest, put young steares and dry kine now to feed at fresh grasse, and a∣way with all Pease fed sheepe for the sweetnesse of grasse, mutton wil pul downe their prices, Lastly for your health, vse drinkes that wil coole and purge the blood, and al other such Physical pre∣cepts, as true Arte shall prescribe you; But beware of Mountebankes and olde wiues tales, the latter hath no ground, and the other no truth but apparant co∣senage. In the moneth of Iune, carry sand, marle, lime, June. and meanure of what kinde soeuer to your land; bring
home your coales and other necessary fuel fetcht farre off, sheare early fat sheepe, sow all sorts of tender hearbes, cut ranckelow medowes, make the first re∣turne of your fat cattel, gather early Sommer fruites, distil al sorts of plants and hearbs whatsoeuer. And lastly for your health, vse much exercise thinne dyet and chast thoughts. In the moneth of Iuly, apply your hay-haruest, for Iuly. a day slackt is many pounds lost, chiefly when the wea∣ther is vn constant, sheare all manner of field-sheepe, Sommer-stir rich stiffe grounds, foyle all mixt earthes and latter soyle all loose hot sands, let hearbes you would preserue, now runne to seed, cut of the stalkes of outlandish flowers, and couer the rootes with new earth, so well mixt with meanure as may be, sel all such Lambes as you feed for the Butcher, and still leade forth sand, marle, lime and other meanure, fence vp your Copses, gaze your elder vnderwoods, and bring home all your field-timber. And lastly for your health, abstaine from all Phy∣sicke, bleede not, but vpon violent occasion, and neither meddle with Wine, Women, nor other Wan∣tonnesse. In the moneth of August apply your Corne August. har∣uest, sheare downe your Wheat aud Rye, mowe your Barley and Oats, and make the second returne of your fat Sheepe and Cattel; gather all your Sommer grea∣ter fruit, as Plumes, Apples, and Peares, make your Sommer, or sweet Perry and Cider; fet slips and scy∣ens of all sorts of Gilly-flowres, and other flowres, and transplant them that were set the spring before, and at the ende of this moneth, beginne to winterrigge all fruitfull soyles whatsoeuer; gueld your Lambes,
carry meanure from your doue-coats, and put your Swineto the early or first mast: And lastly for your health, shunne feasts and banquets, let phisicke alone, hate wine, and onely take delight in drinkes that are coole and temperate. In the moneth of September, reape your Pease, September. Beanes, and all other Pulse, making a finall end of your haruest; now bestow vpon your Wheat land, your principall meanure, and now sow your Wheat and Rye, both in rich, and in barren climats; now put your swine to mast of all hands, gather your winter fruit, and make sale of your wooll, and other sommer commodi∣ties; now put off those stocks of bees, you meane to sell or take for your owne vse; close thatche, and dawbde warme, all the suruiuing hyues, and looke that no droanes, mice nor other vermine be in or about them, now thatche your stacks and reekes, thrash your seed Rye and Wheat and make an end with your cart of all forraine iourneyes. Lastly, for your health in this moneth vse Phisicke, but moderately, forbeare fruits that are two pleasant or rotten, and as death shunne ryot and surfet. In the moneth of October, finish vp your Wheat∣seed, October. scower ditches and ponds, plash and lay hedges and quickset, transplant, remoue, or set all manner of fruit trees of what nature or quality soeuer; make your winter cider and perry, spare your priuate pastures and eate vp the corne-fields and commons, and now make an end of winter-ridging, draw furrowes to draine and keep, dry your new sowne Corne, follow hard the ma∣king of your malt, reare all such calues as shall fall, and weane those foales from your draught mares, which the Spring before were foaled; now sell al such sheep
as you wil not winter, giue ouer folding, and seperate Lambes from the Ewes which you purpose to keepe for your owne stocke. Lastly, for your health refuse not any needful phy∣sicke at the hands of the learned Physitian, vse all mo∣derate sports, for any thing now is good which reui∣ueth the spirits. In the moneth of Nouember, you may sow either Nouember. wheat or Rye in exceeding hot soyles, you may then remoue all sorts of fruit trees, and plant great trees, either for shelter or shadow; now cut down all sorts of timber, for plowes, carts, axeltrees, naues, harrowes, and other husbandly offices, make now the last re∣turne of your grasse fed cattel; bring your swine from the maste, and feed them for slaughter, reare what calues soeuer fall, and brake vp all such Hempe and Flaxe as you intend to spinne in the winter season. Lastly, for your health, eatc wholesome and strong meats wel spiced and drest free from rawnesse, drinke swect wines, and for difiestion euer before cheese pre∣ferre good and moderate exercise. In the moneth of December, put your sheepe and December. swine to the Pease reeks, and fat them for the slaughter and market; now kill your small Porks and large Ba∣cons, lop hedges and trees, saw out your timber for building, and lay it to season, and if your land be ex∣ceeding stiffe, and rise vp in an extraordinary furrow, then in this moneth begin to plow vp that ground whereon you meane to sow cleane Beanes onely, now couer you dainty fruit trees al ouer with canuase and hide al your best flowers from frosts and stormes with rotten old horse litter; now draine al your corn-fields and as occasion shal serue, so water and keepe moyst
your medows; now become the Fowler with piece, nets and al maner of engin, for in this moneth no foule is out of season: Now fish, for the Carpe, the Breame, Pyke, Tench, Barbel, Peale and Salmon. And lastly for your health, eate meates that are hot and nourishing; drinke good wine that is neat, sprighty and lusty, keep thy body wel clad, and thy house warme, forsake what socuer is flegmatick, and banish al care from thy heart, for nothing is now more vnwholesome, then a trou∣bled spirit. Many other obseruations belong vnto the office of our skilful Plowman or Farmar; but since they may be imagined too curious, too needlesse, or too tedious, I wil stay my pen with these already rehearsed, and thinke to haue written sufficiently touching the application of grounds and office of the Plowman. FINIS.
