17336 99847281 12310
Cheape and Good HVSBANDRY For the vvell-Ordering of all Beasts, and Fowles, and for the generall Cure of their Diseases. Contayning the Natures, Breeding, Choyse, Vse, Feeding, and Curing of the diseases of all manner of Cattell, as Horse, Oxe, Cow, Sheepe, Goates, Swine, and tame-Conies. Also, approued Rules, for the Cramming, and Fatting, of all sorts of Poultrie, and Fowles, both tame and wilde, &c. And diuers good and well-approued Medicines, for the Cure of all the diseases in Hawkes, of what kinde soeuer. Together, with the Vse and Profit of Bees: the making of Fish∣ponds, and the taking of all sorts of Fish. Gathered together for the generall good and profit of this whole Realme, by exact and assured experience from English practises, both certaine, easie, and cheape: differing from all former and forraine experi∣ments, which eyther agreed not with our Clime, or vvere too hard to come by, or ouer∣costly, to little purpose: all vvhich herein are auoyded. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, dwelling in Fleetstreet, neere the great Conduit. 1614.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND most truely ennobled with all inward and outward vertues, RICHARD SAKVILE, Baron of Buck∣hurst, and Earle of Dorset, &c. ALthough the monstrous shapes of Bookes (Right Honoura∣ble and best ennobled Lord) haue with their disguised and vnprofitable vizard-like fa∣ces halfe scared, euen vertue her selfe from that ancient defence and patro∣nage, which (in former ages) most Nobly she im∣ployed; to preserue them from Enuy, yet so much I know the largenesse of your worthy breast is en∣dewed with wisedome, courage and bountie, that notwithstanding the vanities of our ignorant Writers, you will be pleased out of your Noble
Spirit, fauourably to behold whatsoeuer shall bring a publique good to your Country; at which end I haue onely aymed in this small Booke. In which, hauing runne farre from the way or tract of other Writers in this nature, yet I doubt not but your Honour shall finde my path both more easie, more certaine, and more safe then any; nay by much farre lesse difficult or dangerous to walke in. I must confesse, something in this nature I haue formerly published, as namely of the Horse onely; with whose nature and vse I haue beene exercised and acquainted from my Childe-hood and I hope without boast neede not yeelde to many in this Kingdome. Yet in this worke, I hope, your Lord∣ship, and all other Princely maintainers of that worthy and seruiceable beast, shall finde I haue found out and herein explained a nearer and more easie course for his preseruation and health, then hath hitherto beene found, or practised by any, but my selfe onely. Whatsoeuer it is, in all humblenesse, I offer it as a sacrifice of my loue and seruice to your Honour, and will euer whilst I haue breath to be, be your Honours in all du∣tifull seruice. G. M.
To the Courteous Reader. THere is no Artist o an of Indu∣strie (courteous and gentle Rea∣der) which mixeth Iudgement with his experience, but findeth in the trauell of his labours, bet∣ter and nearer courses to make perfit the beauty of his worke then were at first presented to the eye of his know∣ledge: for the minde being preoccupied and busied with a vertuous search, is euer ready to catch hold of whatsoeuer can adorne or illustrate the excellency of the thing, in which he is imployed; and hence it hap∣peneth that my selfe hauing seriously bestowed many yeeres to finde out the truth of these knowledges of which I haue intreated in this Booke, haue now found out this infallible way of curing all diseases in Cattell, which is by many degrees more certaine, more easie, lesse difficult, and without all manner of cost and ex∣traordinary charges, then euer hath beene published by any home-borne, or forraine practiser. Wherein (friendly Reader) thou shalt finde that my whole drift is to helpe the needfull in his most want and extremi∣tie: for hauing many times in my iourneying seene
poore, and rich mens Cattell fall sodainly sicke; some trauelling by the way, some drawing in the Plough or draught, and some vpon other imployments. I haue also beheld those Cattell or Horse dye ere they could be brought eyther to Smith, or other place, where they might rceiue cure; nay if with much paines they haue beene brought to the place of cure, yet haue I seene Smths so vnprouided of Pothecary simples, that for want of a matter of sixe-pence a beast hath died, worth many Angels. This to preuent, I haue found out these certaine and approued cures; wherein if e∣uery good Horse louer, or Husbandman will but ac∣quaint his knowledge with a few hearbes, and com∣mon weedes, he shall be sure in euery Field, Pasture, Meadow, or Land-furrow, nay almost by euery high∣way side, or blinde ditch, to finde that which shall preserue and keepe his Horse from all sodaine extre∣mities. If thou shalt finde benefit, thinke mine houres not ill wasted; if thou shalt not haue occasion to ap∣proue them, yet giue them thy gentle passage to others, and thinke me as I am Thy friend, G. M.
The Table of the first Booke. Of Beasts. Of the Horse. OF the Horse in generall. Page. 1 Natures of Horse. 2 Choyse of Horses and their shas. 2 Colours of Horses. 3 Horse for a Princes seat. 3 Horses for trauell. 4 Hunting-horses. 4 Runing-horses. 4 Coach-horses. 5 Packe-horses. 5 Cart horses. 5 Of Mares. 5 Orderng Horses for seruice. 6 Horses for a Princes seat. 7 Ordering of trauelling-Horses. 7 Ordering of hunting-Horses. 8 Ordering of running-Horses. 9 Ordering of Coach-Horses. 10
Ordering of the Packe or Cart-Horse. 10 The preseruation of Horses. 10 How to cure all inward sickenesses, &c. 11 Of the Head-ach, Frenzie, or Staggers, 12 Of the sleeping euill. 12 Of the falling euill, planet-strooke, night-Mare, or Pal∣sey. 13 Of the generall crampe or convultion of sinees. 14 Of any colde, or cough, wet or drie, or for any consump∣tion or putrifaction of the Lungs whatsoeuer. 14 Of  running glaunders, or mourning of the Chine. 14 Of hide-bound or consumption of the flesh. 15 Of the brest-paine or any sickenesse of the heart. 15 Of tired horses. 16 Of diseases of the stomacke, as surfaits, loathing of meat or rinke. 16 Of foundring in the bodie. 17 Of the hungrie euill. 17 Of diseases of the Liuer, &c. 18 Of the yeallowes, and diseases of the gall. 18 Of the sickenesse of the spleene. 19 Of the dropsie, or euill habite of the body. 19 Of the hollicke, belly-ake, or belly-bound. 19 Of the laxe or bloody flyxe. 20 Of the falling of the fundament. 20 Of Bots and womes of all sorts. 21 Of paine in the kidnyes, paine-pisse, and stone. 21 Of the strangullion. 21 Of pissing blood. 22 Of the colt-euill, mattring of the yard, falling of the yard,
shedding of the seed. 22 Of the particular diseases in Mares, as barrennesse, con∣sumption, rage of loue, casting Foales, hardnesse to foale, and to make a Mare cast her Foale. 22 Of drinking venome, &c. 23 Of suppossitaries, glisters, and purgations. 24 Of neesig and frictions. 24 Of all the diseases in the eyes, &c. 25 Of the impostume in the care, pole-euill, fistula, swelling after blood-letting, any galde backe, canker, sit-fast, wennes, nauell-gall, &c. 26 Of the Viues. 26 Of the strangle, bile, botch, or impostume. 26 Of the Canker in the nose, or any other part. 27 Of stnching blood in any part. 27 Of the diseases in the mouth, as bloody-rifts, igges, lam∣pas, camerie, inflamation, tongue-hrt, or the barbs. 28 Of paine in the teeth, or loose teeth. 28 Of the cricke in the necke. 28 Of the falling of the crest, maungines in the maine, or shedding of haire. 29 Of paine in the iters. 29 Of swaying the backe, or weakenesse in the backe. 29 Of the tch in the taile, scabbe, maungines, or farcie. 30 Of any halting whatsoeuer, &c. 30 Of foundering in the feete. 31 Of the Splent, curbe, bone-Spauen, or any knobbe, or bony excression or ringbone. 32 Of the Mallader, Sellaner, Paines, Scratches, Miet,
Mules, Crowne-scabbe, &c. 32 Of an vpper attaint, or neather, or any ouer-reaching. 33 Of all the infirmities of, in, or about, the Houes, &c. 33 Of the blood-Spauen, hough bony, or any other vnnaturall swelling. 34 Of windegales. 35 Of enterfairing, shakell-gall, &c. 35 Hurts on the crownet, as quilter-bone, or matong. 35 Of wounds in the foot, grauelling, pricking, figge, retrait, or cloying. 36 To draw out stub or thorne. 36 Of an Aubury or Tetter. 36 Of the cords or string-halt. 37 Of spurgalling, &c. 37 To heale any olde soare or wound. 37 Of sinewes cut. 37 Of eating away dead flesh. 38 Of knots in ioynts. 38 Of venemous wounds, &c. 38 Of Lice or Nits. 38 To defend a Horse from flies. 39 Of bones broke, or out of ioynt. 39 Of drying or skinning soares, when they are almost whole. 39 A most famous receipt, to make a Horse that is leane, and full of inward sickenesse, sound and fat in foureteene dayes. 39 To make a white Starre. 40
Of the Bull, OF the Bull, Cow, Calfe, or Oxe, &c. Page. 41 The  41 Of not mixing and  42 The shape of the Bull. 43 The vse of the Bull. 43 The shape of the  43 The vse of the Cow. 43 Of Calues, and . 44 Obseruations for Calues. 44 Of the Oxe, and  vse. 44 Of the Oxes food for labour. 45 Oxen to feed for the Butcher. 45 To preserue Cattell in health. 46 Of the Feuer in Cattell▪ 46 Of any inward sickenesse. 47 Of the diseases in the head, , 47 Of all the diseases in the eyes of Cattell, &c. 48 Of diseases in the mouth, as  49 Of diseases in the necke, as , closh, &c. 50 Of the pestilence, gargill, or murraine. 50 Of misliking or leannesse. 51 Of diseases in the guts, as Fluxe, . 51 Of pissing Blood. 51 Of dropping nosthrils, or any colde. 52 Of all manner of swellings. 52 Of the worme in the taile.
Of any cough, or shortnesse of breath. 53 Of any Impostume, Bile, or Botch. 53 Of diseases in the sinewes, as weakenesse, stifnesse, or sore∣nesse. 5 Of the generall scabbe, particular scab, . 53 Of the Hide-bound, or drie skinne. 54 Of diseases in the Lungs, as lungrowne, &c. 54 Of the biting with a madde Dogge, Beast. 55 Of the falling downe of the Pallat. 55 Of any paine in the Hoofe, as the foule, &c. 56 Of all kindes of bruisings. 56 Of swallowing Hennes-dung, or any . 56 Of killing Lice or ticks. 57 Of the Dewe-bowle. 57 Of the losse of the cudde. 58 Of the killing of all sorts of wormes. 58 Of vomiting blood. 58 Of the Gout. 59 Of Milting. 59 Of prouoking a Beast to pisse. 59 Of the oueowing of the gall. 59 Of a Beast that is goared. 60 Of a Cow that is wethered. 60 Of drawing out thornes or stubs. 60 Of purging of Cattell. 60 Of being shrew-runne. 61 Of faintnesse. 61 Of breeding Milke in a Cowe. 61 Of bones out of ioynt or broken. 62
Of the rot in Beasts. 63 Of the Pantas. 62 Of all manner of wounds. 63 Of the Sheepe. OF Sheepe, their vse, choyse, shape, and preserua∣tion. 64 Of the staples of wooll. 64 Of the choyse of Sheepe. 65 Of the leare of Sheepe. 65 The shape of Sheepe. 66 When Ewes should bring forth. 67 Ordering of Lambes. 67 Needfull obseruations. 68 The preseruation of Sheepe▪ 68 The signes to know a sound Sheepe and an vnsound. 69 Of sicknesse in Sheepe, as the Feauer, &c. 70 Of the generall scabbe. 70 Of killing Maggots. 71 Of the Red water. 71 Of Lung-sicke, or any cough or cold. 71 Of the worme in the claw, or in any other part. 72 Of wilde-fire. 72 Of the diseases of the Gall, as Choller, Iaundise, &c. 72 Of the tough Fleame, or stoppings. 73 Of bones broke, or out of Ioynt. 73 Of any sicknesse in Lambes. 73 Of the Sturdie, turning uill or More-found. 74
Of all diseases in the eyes in generall. Of water in a Sheepes belly. 7 Of the tagdd or belt Sheepe. 74 Of the poxe in Sheepe. 75 Of the Wood-ull or crampe. 75 Of making an Ewe loue her owne Lambe, or any other Ewes Lambe. 75 Of licking vp poyson. 76 Of Lambes yeaned sicke. 7 Of making an Ewe to be easily deliuered. 76 Of teeth loose. 77 Of increasing Milke. 77 Of the Staggers or leafe sickenesse. 77 Of all sorts of wormes. 78 Of the losse of the Cudde. 78 Of sauing Sheepe from the rot. 78 A fewe precepts for the Shepheard. 79 Of Goates. OF Goates, and their Natures. 81 The shape of Goates. 82 The ordering of Goates. 82 Of any inward sickenesse, as the Pestilence, &c. 83 Of the dropsie. 83 Of stopping the teats. 83 Of Goats that cannot kid. 84 Of the tetter, or drie scabbe. 84 Of guelding Kiddes. 84
Of the itch in Goates. 85 Of the tuell stopping. 85 Of the Staggers. 85 Of Swine. OF all manner of Swine. 87 The nature of Swine. 88 Of the choyse and shape of Swine. 88 Of the vse and profit of Swine. 88 Of the feuer, or any hidden sickenesses in Swine. 90 Of the Murraine, Pestilence, or Catharre. 91 Of the gall in Swine. 91 Of the meazels. 92 Of impostumes in any part. 92 Of vomiting. 92 Of leannesse, mislike, skurfe, or maunginesse. 92 Of the sleeping euill. 93 Of paine in the Milt. 93 Of the vnnaturallnesse in Swine. 94 Of the Laxe or fluxe. 94 Of the lugging of Swine with dogges. 94 Of the poxe in Swine. 95 Of killing Maggots in any part. 95 Of feeding Swine, eyther for Bacon or Larde. 95 Of feeding Swine in Wood Countries. 95 Of feeding Swine in Champaine Countries. 96
Of feeding at the Reee. 96 Of feeding Swine in, or about,  7 Of eeing Hogges for Lrde, . 8 Of Conies OF tame Conies in generall. 99 he nature of the Conie. 99 Of Boxes for tame Conies. 100 Of the choyse of rich Conies. 100 Of the profit of rich Conies. 11 Of the feeding and preseruation of Conies. 101 Of the rot amongst Conies. 103 Of madnesse in Conies. 103 The end of the Table of the first Booke.
The Table of the second Booke. Of Poultrie. OF the Dunghill-Coke, Hee, Chicken, and Cpon. Page. 109 Of the Dunghill-Cocke. 110 Of the choyse, and shape of the Cocke. 110 Of the Henne, her choyse and shape. 111 Of setting Hennes. 112 Of the choyse of Egges. 113 Of Chickens. 114 Of feeding and cramming Chickens. 115 Of preseruing Egges. 115 Of gathering Egges. 115 Of the Capon, and when to carue him. 116 Of the Capon to lead Chickens. 116 Of feeding and cramming Capons. 116 Of the pippe in Poultrie. 117 Of the roupe. 118 Of the fluxe. 118 Of stopping in the belly. 118 Of lice in Poultrie. 118
Of stinging with venemous wormes. 119 Of all sore eyes. 119 Of Hennes which crow. 119 Of Hennes which ate their Egges. 119 Of keeping a Henne from sitting. 120 Of making Hennes lay soone, and oft. 120 Of making Hennes leane. 120 Of the crow-troden. 120 Of the Henne-house, and the situation. 121 Of Geese. OF the Goose in generall. 122 Of the choyse of Geese. 122 Of laying Egges, and sitting. 122 Of ordering of Goslings. 123 Of Greene-Geese, and their fatting. 123 Of Ganders. 123 Of the fatting of elder Geese. 124 Of gathering of Geesefeathers. 124 Of the gargell in Geese. 124 Of Turkeyes. OF Turkeyes in generall. 125 Of the choyse of the Turky Cocke. 125 Of the Turky Henne, and her sitting. 126 Of the feeding of Turkies. 126
Of VVater-Fowle, and others. OF the tame Ducke. Page. 127 Of wilde Duckes, and their ordering. 127 Of Swannes, and their feeding. 128 Of Peacocks and Peahennes. 129 Of the tame Pidgeon, or rough footed. 130 Of nourishing and fatting Harnes, Pets, Glls, and Bitters. 131 Of feeding Partridge, Pheasant, and Quaile. 132 Of Godwits, Knots, gray-Plouers, or Curlews. 133 Of Blackbirds, Thrushes, Felfares, and all sorts of small Birds. 134 Of Hawkes. OF Hawkes in generall, of all kindes. 136 Of Scowrings. 136 Of impostumes in Hawkes. 138 Of soare eyes in Hawkes. 138 Of the pantas. 138 Of casting the gorge. 138 Of all sorts of wormes or Filanders. 139 Of all swellings in Hawkes feet. 139 Of the breaking of a pounce. 139 Of bones broke or ut of ioynt. 140
Of all inward bruisings. 140 Of killing of Lice. 140 Of the Rie. 141 Of the Frounce. 142 Of the Rhewme. 142 Of the formicas. 143 Of the fistula. 143 Of the priuie euill. 144 Of all sorts of wounds. 145 Of the Apoplexie, or falling euill. 145 Of the purging of Hawkes. 146 Of a Hawke that cannot mute. 147 The assuredst signes to know when a Hawke is sicke. 147 Of the Feuer in Hawkes. 148 Of helping a Hawke that cannot digest. 149 Of the Gout in Hawkes. 149 Of the flaunching of blood. 250 Of Bees. OF Bees in generall. 151 Of the nature of Bees. 151 Of the Bee-Hiue. 152 Of the trimming of the Hiue. 153 Of the placing of Hiues. 153 Of the casting of Bees, and ordering the Swarmes. 154
Of selling Hiues. 156 Of the preseruation of weake stocks. 156 An excellent secret concerning Bees. 157 Of Fishing. OF Fishing in generall. 158 Of the making of Fish-ponds. 158 Of the taking of all sorts of Fish, with Nets, or other∣wise. 160 FINIS.
A SHORT TABLE. expounding all the hard words in this Booke. A AVripigmentum or Orpment, is a yellow hard substance to be bought at the Pothecaries. Aristolochia-longa, otherwise called red Mad∣der, is an hearbe growing almost in euery field. Aristolochia-rotunda, is the hearbe called Galingale. Agrimonie or Egrimonie, is an vsuall and knowne hearbe. Ameos or Comin-royall, is an hearbe of some called Bulwort, Bishops-weed, or hearbe-William. Anyse is that hearbe which beares Ani-seeds. Auet, of some called Dill, is an hearbe like Fenell, onely the seeds are broad like Orenge seeds. Agnus Castus, of some called Tutesaine, is an hearbe with reddish leaues, and sinewie like Plantaine. Aegyptiacum, is a reddish vnguent, to be bought at the Pothecaries, and is soueraine for Fistulas.
Assafoetida a stinking strong gumme to be bought at the Pothecaries. Adraces or Adarces is that Salt which is ingendred on the salt marshes by the violence of the Sunnes heat after the tide is gone away. Asterion is an herabe growing amongst stones, as on walles, or such like, it appeareth best by night, it hath yellow flowers like Foxegloues, and the leaues are round and blewish. Aloes is a bitter gumme to the bought at the Pothe∣caries. B BEtin or Beets is an hearbe with long broad leaues indented, and growes in hedge-rowes. Bolarmoniake a red hard earthy substance, to be bought at the Pothecaries, and is of a cold and bin∣ting nature. Broomewort is an hearbe with browne coloured leaues, and beareth a blew flower, and most com∣monly groweth in woods. C CResses are two kindes of water-Cresses, and land∣Cresses: they haue broad smoath leaues, and the first growes in moyst places, the latter in Gardens, or by high-waies. Comin, see Ameos. Carthamus is an hearbe in taste like Saffron, and is called bastard-Saffron, or mocke-Saffron.
Calamint is an ordinary hearbe, and groweth by ditches sides, by high waies, and sometimes in Gar∣dens. Coleander is an hearbe which beareth a round little seede. Chiues are a small round hearbe growing in Gar∣dens, like little young Onions or Scallions not aboue a weeke old. D DIapente asoueraine powder made of fiue equall sim∣ples, as Bay-berries, Iuory, Aristolochia-rotunda, Mirrhe, and Gentiana, and may be bought of the Pothecary. Dettonie is an hearbe called Pepper-wrt, or horse-Radish, and groweth in many open fields. Dragons is an hearbe common in euery Garden. E ELecampana is an hearbe of some called Horse∣helme, and growes almost in euery field, and eue∣ry Garden. Eyebright is an hearbe growing in euery meadow. F FEnnegreeke is an hearbe which hath a long slender trayling stalke, hollow within, and sowne in Gar∣dens, but easiest to be had at the Pothecaries.
Ferne Osmud is an hearbe, of some called Water-Ferne, hath a trianguler stalke, and is like Polipody, and it growes in boggs, and in hollow grounds. G GAlingale, see Aristolochia-. H HOrsemint is an hearbe that growes by waters sides, and is called Water-mint, or Brooke-mint. Horseelme, see Elecampana. Houseleeke is a weede which growes on the toppes of houses that are thacht, and is like vnto a small Hartichoke. Hearbe-Robert hath leaues like hearbe-Bennet, and small flowers of a purple colour, and growes in most common Fields and Gardens. I IVory is the shauings of the Elephants tooth, or the old Harts or Stagges horne, being the smoth white thereof. K KNot-grasse is a long running weede with little round smoth leaues, and the stalke very knotty and rough▪ winding and wreathing one seame into another very confusedly, and groweth for the most part in very moist places.
L LEttice, is a common sallet-hearbe in euery Gar∣den. Lollium is that weede which we call Cockell, and groweth amongst the corne in euery field. Liuerwrt, is a common hearbe in euery Garden. M MAythe, is a weede that growes amongst corne, and is called of some Hogs-Fennell. Mirrhe, is a gumme to be bought at the Pothecaries. Mandragg, is an hearbe which growes in Gardens, and beareth certaine yealow Apples, from whence the Pothecaries draw a soueraine oyle for broken bones. N NEepe, see Calaminte. O ORiganum, is an hearbe called wilde-Marioram, and growes both in open fields, or in low copses. Orifice is the mouth, hole, or open passage, of any wound or vlcer. Opoponax, a drugge, vsuall to be bought at the Po∣thecaries. P PItch of Burgundy is Rossen, and the blacker the better. Plantayne is a flat leafe and sinowie, growing close to the ground, and is called Whay-bred leafe.
Pulioll-royall, is an hearbe that groweth both in fields and gardens, and is best when it flowreth. Patch-grease is that tallow which is gotten from the boyling of Shoemakers shreads. Q QVinquefolio of some called Cinquefoyle is that hearbe which is called Fiue-leaued grasse. R REd-Oakr is a hard red stone which we call Raddle Orell, marking-stone. S SEllondine or Tetterwort is a weede growing in the bottome of hedges, which being broke, a yellow iuyce will drop and runne out of it. Shirwit is an hearbe with many small leaues, and growes most in Gardens. Stubwort is an hearbe which growes in wooddy places, and is called wood-Sorrell. Sanguis Draconis, is an hard red gumme to be bought at the Pothecaries. Stonecrop is a greene weede growing on the tops of walles. Sparma-Caetae is the seed of the Whale, excellent for inward bruies, and to be bought at the Pothecaries. Slarmniake is a drugge vsuall to be bought at the Pothecaries.
T TVssilaginis is that weede which we Treapharmicon a composition mad of three simples, and to be bought at the Pothecaries. Turmericke, is a yealow simple, of strong saur, to be bought at the Pothecaries. V VErdi-greese is a greene fatty gumme drawne from Copper, and is to be bought at the Pothecaries. W VVOodrose or wilde-Eglantine, is that small thin flower which growes vpon Bryars in woods or hedge-rowes. Y YArrow, is an hearbe called the water-, and growes in Lakes or marrish grounds. Thine Geruase Markhame. FINIS. Errt. For, mixing them together till they be paste, read, mixing ther ith Turpentine till they be paste. Page 15. Line .
The diuision of the Titles entreated of in these Bookes following. FIrst, of the Horse his Nature, Diseases, and Cures, from folio 1. to folio 41. 2 Of the Bull, Cow, Calfe, and Oxe, their bree∣ding, feeding, and curing, from 41. to 64. 3 of Sheepe, their choise, vse, shape, infirmi∣ties, preseruation, from fol. 64. to fol. 81. 4 Of Goates, their nature, shape, ordering, and curing, from fol. 81. to fol. 87. 5 Of Swine, their choise, breeding, curing, and feeding, in either Champaine, or VVood-Countries, from fol. 87. to 109. 6 Of Poultrie, their ordering, fatting, cram∣ming, and curing all the diseases to them incident, from fol. 109. to fol. 135. 7 Of Hawkes, generall cures for all their diseases and infirmities, either for short-winged or long-winged Hawkes, from fol. 135. to 151. 8 Of Bees, their ordering, profit and preser∣uation, from fol. 151. to 158. 9 Of Fishing, and making Fish-ponds, from fol. 158. to the end. Published by Authoritie
THE GENERALL CVRE and Ordering of all Beasts and Fowles. Of the Horse. CHAPTER I. Of the Horse in generall, his choyse for euery seuerall vse, his Ordering, Dyet, and best preseration for health, both in trauell or in rest. THe full scope and purpose of this worke, is in few, plaine, and most vndoubted true words,  shew the Cure of all manner of diseases be∣longing to all manner of necessary Cattell, nourished and preserued for the vse of man; making by way of demonstration so easie and plaine a passage to the vnderstanding and accomplishment of the same, that not the simplest which hath priuiledge to be estee∣med no Idiot, nor the poorest,  hee can make two
shillings, but shall both vnderstand how to profit him∣selfe by the Booke, and at the dearest rate purchase all the receipts and Simples declared in the whole vo∣lume. For in sober truth this Booke is fit for euery Gentle-man, Husband-man and good mans pocket, being a memory which a man carrying about him will when it is cald to account, giue a manfull satisfaction, whether it be in the Field, in the Towne, or any other place, where a man is most vtterly vnprouided. And now for as much as the Horse of all creatures is the Noblest,Nature of Horses. strongest, and aptest to doe a man the best and worthiest seruices, both in Peace and War, I thinke it not amisse first to begin with him. There∣fore for his Nature in generall: he is valiant, strong, nimble, and aboue all other Beasts most apt and able to indure the extreamest labours, the moist quallitie of his composition being such, that neither extreame heate doth dry vp his strength, nor the vioence of colde freeze the warme temper of his mouing spirits, but that where there is any temperate gouernment, there he withstandeth all effects of sickenesse, with an vncontroled constancy. He is most gentle and to the man, apt to be taught, and not forget full whn any impression is fixed in his braine. He is watchfull aboue all other Beasts, and will indure his labour with the most emptiest stomacke. He is naturally gien much cleanlinesse, is of an excellent sent▪ and offended with nothing so much as euill auours. Now for the choise of the best Horse,The choise of Horses, and their shapes. it is diuers, according to the vse for which you will imploy him▪ If therefore you would haue a Horse for the Warres▪
you shall chuse him that is of a good tall stature, with a comely leane head, an out-swelling fore-head a large sparkling eye, the white whereof is couered with his eye-browes, and not at all discerned, or if at all, yet the least is best; a small thin eare, short and pricking; if it be long, well carried and euer mouing, it is tollerable, but if dull or hanging, most hatefull; a deepe necke, large crest, broad breast, bending ribbs, broad and straight chine, round and full buttocke, with his huckle bones hid, a taile high and broad set on, neither too thicke nor too thinne, for too much haire shewes sloath & too little too much choler and sloath; a full swelling thigh, a broad, flat, and leane legge; short pasternd, strong ioynted, and hollow houes, of which the long is best, if they be not wierd, and the broad round, the worst. The best colours are Browne-bay, Dapple-gray,Colours of Horses. Roand, bright-Bay, Blacke with a white nare-foote be∣hind, white far-foote before, white rache or white star, Chesse-nut or Sorrell, with any of those markes, or Dunne with a blacke lit: and of these Horses, for the warres the courser of Naples is accounted the best, but the Turke, the Iennet, the Almaine, Frieson, or the largest of our English races, or any bastard of the other races will serue sufficiently. If you will chuse a Horse for a Princes seat,Horse for a Princes seate. any supreame Magistrate, or for any great Ladie of State, or woman of eminence, you shall chuse him that is of the finest shape, the best reyne, who naturally beares his head in the best place, without the help of the mans hand, that is of nimblest and easiest pace, gentle to
get vpon, bold without taking affrights, and most fa∣miliar and quiet in the company of other horses: his colour would euer be milke white, with red fraynes, or without, or else fayre dapple-gray, with white mayne and white tayle. If you will chuse a horse onely for Trauell,Horses for trauell. euer the bet∣ter shape, the better hope, especially looke that his head be leane, eyes swelling outward, his necke will risen, his chine well risen, his ioynts very strong, but aboue all, his pasternes short and straight without bending in his go∣ing, and exceeding hollow and tough Hoes: let him be of temperate nature, neither too furious nor too dull, willing to goe without forcing, and not desirous to runne when there is no occasion. If you will chuse a horse for Hunting,Hunting-horses. let his shapes in generall be strong and well knit together, making e∣quall proportions, for as vnequall shapes shew weaknes, so equall members assure strength and indurance. Your vnequall shapes are a great head to a little necke, a bigge bodie to a thinne buttocke, a large limbe to a little foote, or any of these contraries, or where any member suites not with the whole proportion of the bodie, or with any limbe next adioyning: aboue all let your hunting horse haue a large leane head, wide no∣strils, open chauld, a big wessand, and the winde-pipe straight, loose, well couerd, and not bent in the pride of his reyning: the English horse is of all the best. If you chuse a horse for Running,Running-horses. let him haue all the finest shape that may be, but aboue all things let him be nimble, quicke and fiery, apt to ie with the least motion: long shapes are sufferable, for though they
shew weakenesse, yet they assure sodaine speed. And the best horses for this vse is the Barbary, or his bastard; Ie∣nets are good, but the Turkes are better. If you will chuse a horse for the Coach,Coach-hor∣ses. which is called the swift draught, let his shape be tall, broad and well furnisht, not grosse with much flesh, but with the big∣nesse of his bones; especially looke that he haue a strong necke, a broad breast, a large chine, sound cleane limbs, and tough houes: and for this purpose your large En∣glish Geldings are best, your Flemish Mares next, and your strong ston'd horses tollerable. If you will chuse a horse for portage, that is,Packe-hor∣ses. for the Packe or Hampers, chuse him that is exceeding strong of bodie and limbes, but not tall; with a broad backe, out-ribs, full shoulders, and thicke withers: for if he be thin in that part you shall hardly keepe his backe from galling▪ be sure that he take a long stride with his feete, for their pace being neither trot nor amble, but onely foote pace, he which takes the largest strides goes at the most ease, and rids his ground fastest. Lastly,Cart-horses. if you will chuse a horse for the Cart or Plough, which is the slow draught; chuse him that is of most ordinarie height; for horses in the Cart vnequally sorted neuer draw at eae, but the tall hang vp the low horse. Let them be of good strong proportion, bigge brested, large bodied, and strong lim'd, by nature rather inclinde to craue the whip then to draw more then is needfull. And for this purpose Mares are most profi∣table,Of Mares. for besides the effecting of your worke, they yeerely bring you forth increase: therefore if you fur∣nish your draught with Mares to breed, obserue in
any wise to haue them fayre fore-handed, that is, good head, necke, breast, and shoulders, for the rest it is not so regardfull, onely let her bodie be large; for the big∣ger roome a Foale hath in the dammes belly, the fairer are his members. And aboue all things, obserue, neuer to put your draught beasts to the saddle, for that alters their pace, and hurts them in their labour. Now for the ordering of these seuerall horses,Ordering of horses for seruice. first for the horse for Seruice, during the time of his teach∣ing, which is out of the warres, you shall keepe him high and lustily; his food, much straw and little hay, his pro∣uender cleane drie Oates, or two parts Oates, and one part Beanes or Pease, well dried and hard; the quantitie of a pecke at a watring, yet not giuen all at once, but at seuerall times. In his daies of rest you shall dresse him betwixt fiue and sixe in the Morning, water be∣twixt seauen and eight, and feede from nine till af∣ter eleauen: in the afternoone you shall dresse betwixt three and foure, water betwixt foure and fiue, and giue prouender till sixe, then litter at eight, and giue foode for all night. The night before he is ridden, you shall at nine of the clocke at night take away his hay from him, at foure of the clocke in the morning giue him a handfull or two of Oats, which being eaten, turne him vpon his snaffle, rubbe all his body and legs ouer with dry clothes, then saddle him, and make him fit for his exercise. Soone as he is cal'd for to be ridden, wash his bit in faire water, and put it into his mouth with all other things necessarie, draw vp his girths, and see that no buckles hurt him: then lead him forth, and as soone as he hath beene ridden, all sweating as
he is, lead him into the stable, and  rub him quick∣ly ouer with dry wisps, then take off his saddle, and hauing rubbed him all ouer with dry cloathes, put on his housing-cloath; then set on the saddle againe, and gird it, then leade him forth and walke him vp and downe, in gentle manner, an houre or more, till he be cold: then set him vp, and after two or three houres fasting, turne him to his meate: then in the after-noone, curry, rubbe, and dresse him, then water him, and order him as is afore-said. For ordering of the horse for a Prince,Ordering of Horses for Princes seats or great La∣dies seate, let it be in his time of rest, like vnto the Horse for Seruice, and in his time of labour like the trauelling horse, as shall be shewed instantly; onely be∣cause he is to be more choisly kept, I meane, in the beau∣tifullest manner, his coate lying smooth and shining, and his whole body without any staine or ill-fauourd∣nesse, you shall euer when he hath beene ridden and commeth in much sweting, presently haue him into the stable, and first rub him downe with cleane wisps, then taking off his saddle, with a sword-blade whose edge is rebated, you shall stroake his necke and body cleane ouer, leauing no sweate nor filth that can be gotten out; then clothe him vp & set on the saddle, and walke him forth as afore-said: after, order and diet him as you doe other trauelling horses: dry Oates is his best prouender if he be fat and full, and Oates and Beanes, if he be poore, or subiect to loose his flesh quickely. For your trauelling Horse,Ordering of trauelling Horses. you shall feede him with the finest Hay in the Winter, and the sweetest Grasse in Summer; his prouender would be dry Oates,
Beanes, Pease or Bread, according to his stomacke: in the time of rest, halfe a pecke at a watring is sufficient; in the time of his labour, as much as he will eate with a good stomacke. When you trauaile him, water two houres before you ride, then rubbe, dresse, and lastly feede, then bridle vp, and let him stand a quarter of an houre before you take his backe. Trauaile mode∣rately in the morning, till his winde be rack'd, and his limbes warmed, then after doe as your affaires re∣quire. Be sure at night to water your Horse two miles before you come to your iournyes end; then the war∣mer you bring him to his Inne the better: walke not nor wash not at all, the one doth beget colds, the o∣ther foundering in the feete or body, but set him vp warme, well stopt, and soundly rubbed with cleane lit∣ter: giue no meat whilst the outward parts of your Horse are hot or wet with sweate, as the eare roots, the flanckes, the necke, or vnder his chaps, but being dry, rubbe and feede him according to the goodnesse of his stomacke. Change of foode begetteth a sto∣macke, so doth the washing of the tongue or nostrils with vinegar, wine and salt, or warme vrine. Stop not your horses fore-feete with Cowes-dung, till hee be sufficiently cold, and that the bloud and humours which were dispersed, be setled into their propper pla∣ces. Looke well to his backe, that the saddle hurt not, to the gyrths that they gall not, and to his shooes that they be large, fast, and easie. For the ordering of your Hunting-horse,Ordering of Hunting-Horses. let him in the time of his rest, haue all the quietnes that may be, much litter, much meat, & much dressing: water euer
by him, and leaue him to sleepe as long as he pleaseth. Keepe him to dung rather soft then hard, and looke that it be well coloured and bright, for darkenesse shewes grease, and rednesse inward heating: let exer∣cises and mashes of sweet Mault after, be his vsuall scowrings, and let bread of cleane Beanes, or Beanes and Wheat equally mixt, be his best food, and Beanes and Oates the most ordinarie. For the ordering of your running-horse,Ordering of Running Horses. let him haue no more meate then to suffice Nature, drink, once in oure and twentie houres, and dressing euery day once at Noone onely. Let him haue much moderate exercise, as morning and euening airings, or the fetch∣ing of his water, and know no violence but in his courses onely. Let him stand darke and warme, haue many cloathes and much litter, being wheat straw on∣ly. If he be very fat scoure oft, if of reasonable state scoure seldome, if leane then scoure but with a sweet mash onely. Be sure your horse be emptie before he course, and let his foode be the finest, lightest, and quickest of digestion that may be: the sweats are most wholesome that are giuen abroad, and the cooling most naturall which is before he come into the stable. Keepe his limbes with coole oyntments, and by no meanes let any hot spices come in his bodie, if he grow dry inwardly wash't meate is wholesome. If he grow loose then giue him straw in more abundance. Burning of sweet perfume in the stable is wholesome, and any thing you eyther doe about your horse, or giue vnto your horse the more neate, leanely and sweet that it is the better it nourisheth.
For ordering the Coach-horse,Ordering of Coach-hor∣ses. let him haue good dressing twise a day, Hay and Prouender his belly full, and Litter enough to tumble on, and he cannot chuse but prosper. Let them be walk't and wash't after trauell, for by reason of their many occasions to stand still, they must be inur'd to all hardnes though it be much vnwholesome▪ Their best foode is sweet Hay, and well dried Beanes and Oates, or Beane-bread: looke well to the strength of their shoes▪ and the galling of their harnesse: keepe their legs cleane, especially about the the hinder fetlocks, and when they are in the house, let them stand warmely cloathed. For the ordering of the Pack-horse or the Cart-horse,Ordering of the Packe and Cart-horse. they neede no washing, walking, or houres of fasting, onely dresse them well, looke to their shoes and backs and then ill their bellies, and they will doe their la∣bour. Their best food is sweet Hay, Chaffe and Pease, or Oate-huls and Pease, or chopt Straw and Peae mixt together: once a weeke to giue them warme Grains and Salt is not amisse, for their labour will pre∣uent the breeding of wormes, or such like mischiefes. Now for the generall preseruation of horses health,For the pre∣seruation of all horses. it is good whilst a horse is in youth and strength to let him bloud twise in the yeere, that is, beginning of the Spring, and beginning of the Fall▪ when you may best afford him a weeks rest. After you haue let him bloud, two daies after, giue him a comfortable drench, as two spoonefuls of Diapente, or such like (which is called Horse Methridate) in a quart of strong Ale. Ve oft to perfume his head with Frankensence, and in the heate of Summer vse oft to swimme them. Let a fat horse
drinke oft, and a little at once, and a leane horse whensoeuer he hath appetite. Much rubbing is com∣fortable and cheareth euery member. Be sure to let your horse eate Grasse once in the yeere, for that cool∣leth the bloud, scourth away grosse humours, and giues great strength and nourishment vnto the body. If notwithstanding all these principles your horse fall into sicknes and disease, then looke into these Chapters following, and you shall finde the truest, best appro∣ued, and the most familiar medicines for all manner of infirmities, that euer were knowne or published. CHAP. II. How to cure all generall inward sicknesses which trou∣ble the whole bodie, of Feuers of all sorts, Plagues, Infections, and such like. SIcknesses in generall are of two kindes, one offen∣ding the whole body, the other a particular mem∣ber; the first hidden and not visible, the other apparant and knowne by his outward demonstration. Of the first then, which offendeth the whole body, are Feauers of all sorts, as the Quotedian, the Tertian, the Quar∣tan, the Continuall, the Hitique, the Feauer in Au∣tumne, in Summer, or in Winter, the Feauer by sur∣fet, Feauer pestilent, Feauer accidentall, or the ge∣nerall plague. They are all knowne by these signes; much trembling, panting and sweating, a sullen coun∣tenance that was wont to be chearefull, hot breath, faintnesse in labour, decay of stomacke and costiue∣nesse in the bodie: any or all of which when you per∣ceiue, first let the horse bloud, and after giue him
this drinke. Take of Selladine rootes and leaues, Anll a good handfull, as much Wormewood, and as much Rewe, wash them well, and then bruise them in a Mor∣ter; which done, boyle them in a quart of Ale well; then straine them, and adde to the liquour halfe a pound of sweet Butter, then being but luke-warme giue it the horse to drinke. CHAP. III. Of the Head-ach, Frenzie, or Staggers. THe signes to know these diseases, which indeed are all of one nature, and worke all one effect of mor∣talitie, arehanging downe of the head, watrie eyes, rage and reeling: and the cure is, to let the horse bloud in the necke three mornings together, and eue∣ry morning to take a great quantity; then after each mornings bloud-letting to giue the horse this drinke. Take a quart of Ale, and boyle it with a bigge white-Bread crust, then take it from the fire, and dissolue three or foure spoonfuls of Honey into it, then luke-warme giue it the horse to drinke, and couer his tem∣ples ouer with a plaister of Pitch, and keepe his head exceeding warme; let his meate be little, and his stable darke. CHAP. IIII. Of the sleeping Euill. THe Sleeping Euill or Lethargie in horses proceeds from cold, flemy, moyst humours, which binde vp the vitall parts, and makes them dull and heauie the signes are, continuall sleeping, or desire there
The cure is to keepe him much waking, and twise in one weeke to giue him as much sweet Sope (in nature of a pill) as a Ducks egge: and then after giue him to drinke a little new milke and hony. CHAP. V. Of the Falling-euill, Planet-strooke, Night-Mare, or Palsey. THough these diseases haue seuerall faces, and looke as though there were much difference betweene them, yet they are in nature all one, and proceeds all from one offence, which is onely cold flegmaticke hu∣mors, ingendred about the Braine, and benumming the senses, weakning the members; sometimes causing a horse to fall downe, and then it is called the Falling-euill: sometimes weakning but one member onely, then it is called Planet-strooke: sometimes oppressing a horses stomacke, and making him sweate in his sleepe, and then it is called the Night-Mare; and some∣times spoyling an especiall member, by some strange contraction, and then it is called a Palsey. The cure for any of these infirmities, is to giue the Horse this purging pill: take of Tarre three spoonefuls, of sweet Butter the like quantitie, beate them well together with the powder of Licoras, Anifeedes and Sugar∣candy, till it be like paste; then make it into three round Bals, and put into each ball, two or three cloues of Garlicke; and so giue them vnto the Horse, obser∣uing to warme him both before and after, and keepe him fasting two or three houres likewise, both before and after.
CHAP. VI. Of the generall Cramp, or Convultion of Sinewes. CRamps, are taken to be the contracting or drawing together of the Sinewes of any one member: but Convultions are when the whole body, from the set∣ting on of the head to the extreamest parts, are gene∣rally contracted and stifned. The cure of either is, first to chafe and rubbe the member contracted, with Vineger and common Oyle, and then to wrap it all ouer with wet Hay or rotten Litter, or else with wet woollen-cloaths, either of which is a present remedy. CHAP. VII. Of any Cold, or Cough whatsoeuer, wet or dry, or for any Consumption, or putrifaction of the lungs whatsoeuer. A Cold is got by vnnaturall heats, and too sodaine coolings, and these colds ingender Coughs, and those Coughs putrifiaction or rottennesse of the lungs. The cure therefore for them all in generall, is to take a hand-full or two of the white and greenish mosse which growes vpon an old Oake-pole, or any old Oake wood, and boyle it in a quart of milke till it be thicke, and being cold turned to Ielly, then straine it, and being luke-warme, giue it the Horse to drinke euery morning till his cough end. CHAP. VIII. Of the running Glanders, or mourning of the Chine. TAke of Auripigmentum two drammes, of Tussilagi∣nis made into powder as much; then mixing them
together till they be like paste, and making thereof lit∣tle cakes, dry them before the fire: then ake a Cha∣fing-dish and coales, and laying one or two of the cakes thereon, couer them with a Tunnell, and then the smoake rising put the Tunnell into the horses no∣strils, and let the smoake goe vp into his head, which done, ride the Horse till he sweate: doe thus once euery morning before hee be watred, till the running at his nostrils cease, and the kirnels vnder his chaps weare away. CHAP. IX. Of Hide-bound, or Consumption of the flesh. HIde-bound, or Consumption of the flesh▪ procee∣deth from vnreasonable trauell, disorderly diet, and many surfeits. It is knowne by a generall dislike and leannesse ouer the whole body, and by the stick∣ing of the skinne close to the body, in such sort that it will not rise from the body. The oure is first to let the Horse blood, and then giue him to drinke three or foure mornings together, a quart of new milke, with two spoonfuls of hony, and one spoonfull of course Treakle: then let his foode be either sodden Barly, warme Graines and salt, or Beanes spelted in a mill; his drinke Mashes. CHAP. X. Of the brest-paine, or any other sickenesse proceeding from the heart, as the Anticor, and such like. THese diseases proceede from too ranke feeding, and much fatnesse: the signes ar, a  in
his fore-legges, a disablenesse to bowe downe his necke, and a trembling ouer all his body. The cure is to let him blood, and giue him three mornings to∣gether two spoonfuls of Diapente in a quart of Ale or Beare; for it alone putteth away all infection from the heart. CHAP. XI. Of tired Horses. IF your Horse be tired, either in iourneying, or in any hunting match, your best helpe for him is to giue him warme vrine to drinke, and letting him blood in the mouth to suffer him to licke vp and swallow the same. Then if you can come where any Nettles are, to rubbe his mouth and sheath well therewith: then gently to ride him till you come to your resting place, where set him vp very warme; and before you goe to bed giue him sixe spoonfuls of Aqua vitae to drinke, and as much Prouender as he will eate. The next morning rubbe his legs with Sheeps-foot Oyle, and it will bring fresh nimblenesse to his Sinewes. CHAP. XII. Of diseases in the Stomacke, as Surfets, loathing of Meats or Drinke, or such like. IF your horse with the glut of Prouender, or eating raw food, haue giuen such offence to his stomacke that he casteth vp all he eateth or drinketh, you shall first giue him a comfortable drench, as Diapente, or Treaphamicon in Ale or Beare: and then keeping him fasting, let him haue no food but what he eateth out of your hand, which would be Bread well bak't and
old, and after euery two or three bits a locke of sweet Hay, and his drinke would be onely new Milke till his stomacke haue gotten strength: and in a bagge you shall continually hang at his Nose sower browne-Bread steep't in Vinegar, at which he must euer smell, and his stomacke will quickly come againe to his first strength. CHAP. XIII. Of Foundring in the Bodie. FOundring in the bodie is of all Surfets the mor∣tallest, and soonest gotten: it proceedeth from intemporate riding a horse when he is fat, and then sodainly suffring him to take cold: then washing a fat horse there is nothing sooner bringeth this infirmity. The signes are sadnesse of countenance, staring haire, stifnesse of limbe, and losse of belly; and the cure is onely to giue him wholesome strong meat, a bread of cleane Beanes, and warme drinke, and for two or three mornings together a quart of Ale brued with Pepper and Synamon, and a spoonefull of Treakle. CHAP. XIIII. Of the Hungry euill. THe Hungry euill is an vnnaturall and ouer-hastie greedines in a horse to deuour his meate faster then he can chew it, and is onely knowne by his greedie snatching at his meate, as if he would deoure it whole. The cure is to giue him to drinke Milke and Wheat-meale mixt together by a quart at a time, and to feede him with Prouender by a little and a little, till he forsake it.
CHAP. XV. Of the diseases of the Liuer, as Inflamations, Obstra∣ctions, and Consumptions. THe Liuer, which is the vessell of bloud, is subiect to many diseases, according to the distemperature of the bloud: and the signes to know it is a stiking breath, and a mutuall looking towards his bodie: and the cure is to take Aristolochia longa, and boyle it in running water till the halfe part be consumed, and let the horse drinke continually thereof, and it will cure all euils a∣bout the Liuer, or any inward conduits of bloud. CHAP. XVI. Of the diseases of the Gall, and especially of the Yel∣lowes. FRom the ouerflowing of the Gall, which is the ves∣sell of choller, springeth many mortall diseases, especially the Yellowes, which is an extreame aint mortall sicknesse if it be not peuented betime: the signes are yellownesse of the eyes and skinne, and chiefely vnderneath his vpper lip next to his fore teeth, a sodaine and faint falling downe by the high way, or in the stable, and an vniuersall sweat ouer all the bodie. The cure is: first to let the horse bloud in the necke, in the mouth, and vnder the eyes, then take two penny-worth of Saffron, which being dried and made into fine powder, mixe it  sweet Butter, and in manner of a Pill giue it in balls to the orse three mornings together: let his drinke be warme, and his Hay sprinkled with Water.
CHAP. XVII. Of the sicknesse of the Spleene. THe Spleene, which is the vessell of Melancholy, when it is ouercharged therewith growes painfull, hard and great in such sort, that sometimes it is vi∣sible. The signes to know it is, much groaning, h∣stie feeding, and a continuall looking to his left side onely. The cure is, take Agrimonie, and to boyle a good quantitie of it in the water, which the horse shall drinke, and chopping the leaues small, to mixe them with sweet Butter, and giue the horse two or three good round balles thereof in the manner of Pilles. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Dropsie, or euill habit of the bodie. THe Dropsie is that euill habit of the body, which ingenderd by surfets and vnreasonable labour, al∣tereth the colours and complexions of horses, and changeth the haires, in such an vnnaturall sort, that a man shall not know the Beast with which he hath beene most familiar. The cure is to take a handfull or two of Wormewood, and boyling it in Ale or Beere, a quart or better, giue the horse it to drinke luke-warme Morning and Euening, and let him onely drinke his water at noone time of the day. CHAP. XIX. Of the Chollicke, Belly-ake, and Belly-bound. THe Chollicke, or Belly-ake is a fretting, gnawing, or swelling of the Belly or great bagge, proceeding from windy humours, or from the eating of greene
Corne or Pulse, hot Graines without Salt or labour, or Bread dowe bak't: and Belly-bound is when a horse cannot dung. The cure of the Chollicke or Belly-ake is, to take good store of the hearbe Dill, and boyle it in the water you giue your horse to drinke, but if he cannot dung, then you shall boyle in his water good store of the hearbe Fumecrete, and it will make him lose without danger or hurting. CHAP. XX. Of the Laxe, or Bloody-flixe. THe Laxe or Bloody-flixe is an vnnaturall loosenes in a horses bodie, which not being staid will for want of other excrement make a horse voide bloud onely. The cure is, take a handfull of the hearbe Shep∣herds-Purse, and boyle it in a quart of strong Ale, and when it is luke-warme, take the seeds of the hearbe Wood-rose stampt, and put it therein, and giue it the horse to drinke. CHAP. XXI. Of the falling of the Fundament. THis commeth through mislike and weaknesse, and the cure is: Take Towne-Cresses, and hauing dried them to powder, with your hand put vp the Fundament, and then strow the powder thereon, af∣ter it lay a little Hony thereon, and then strow more of the powder, being mixt with the powder of Co∣min amongst it, and it helpeth.
CHAP. XXII. Of Bots and Wormes of all sorts. THe Bots and gnawing of Wormes is a grieuous paine, and the ignes to know them is the horses oft beating his belly, and tumbling and wallowing on the ground with much desire to lye on his backe. The cure is: take either the seeds bruised, or the leaues chopt of the hearbe Amaes, and mixe it with Hony, and making two or three balls thereof, make the horse swallow them downe. CHAP. XXIII. Of paine in the Kidnyes, paine-pisse, or the Stone. ALL these diseases spring from one ground, which is onely grauell and hard matter gathered toge∣ther in the Kidnyes, and so stopping the conduits of Vrine: the signes are onely that the horse will oft straine to pisse but cannot. The cure is, to take a handfull of Mayden-haire, and steepe it all night in a quart of strong Ale, and giue it the horse to drinke euery Morning till he be well, this will breake any stone whatsoeuer in a horse. CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Strangullion. THis is a orenesse in the horses yard, and a hot burning smarting when he pisseth: the signes are, hee will pisse oft, yet but a drop or two at once. The cure is, to boyle in the water which he drinketh good store of the hearbe called Mayth or Hogs-enell, and it will cure him.
CHAP. XXV. Of pissing Blood. THis commeth with ouer-trauelling a Horse, or trauelling a Horse sore in the winter when hee go∣eth to Grasse. The cure is, take Aristolochia longa, a hand-full, and boyle it in a quart of Ale, and giue it the Horse to drinke luke-warme, and giue him also rest. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Colt-euill, mattring of the yard, falling of the yard, shedding the Seede. ALL these euils proceede from much lust in a Horse. And the cure is, the powder of the hearbe Auit, and the leaues of Bettonie, stampe them with white wine, to a moist salue, and annoynt the sore there∣with, and it will heale all imperfection in the yard: but if the Horse shed his seede, then beate Venice-tur∣pentine and Sugar together, and giue him euery mor∣ning a good round ball thereof till the fluxe stay. CHAP. XXVII. Of the particular deseases in Mares, barrannesse, con∣sumption, rage of loue, casting foales, hardnesse to foale, and how to make a Mare cast the Foale. IF you would haue your Mare barraine, let good store of the hearbe Agnus castus be boyled in the water she drinkes. If you would haue her fruitfull, then boyle good store of Mother-wort in the water which shee drinketh: if shee loose her belly, which sheweth
a consumption of the wombe, you shall then giue her a quart of Brine to drinke, Mug-wort being boy∣led therein. If your Mare through pride of keeping, grow into too extreame lut, so that shee will neglect her foode, through the violence of her fleshly appetite, as it is often seene amongst them, you shall house her for two or three dayes, and giue her euery mor∣ning a ball of Butter, and Agnus castus chopt toge∣ther. If you would haue your Mare to cast a foale: take a handfull of Dettonie and boyle it in a quart of Ale, and it wil deliuer her presently. If she cannot foale, take the herbe called Horse-mint, and either dry it, or stampe it, and take the powder or the iyce, and mixe it with strong Ale, and giue it the Mare, and it will helpe her. If your Mare from former brusings, or stroakes, be apt to cast her foales, as many are, you shall keepe her at Grasse very warme, and once in a weeke giue her a warme mash▪ of drinke, this secretly knitteh beyond expectation. CHAP. XXVIII. Of drinkeing Venome, as Horse-leeches, Hens-dung, or such like. IF your Horse haue drunk Horse-leeches, Hens-dung, feathers, or such like venomous things, which you shall know by his panting, swelling or scouing, you shall take the hearbe, Sow-thistle, and drying it, beat it into powder, and put three spoonfuls thereof into a quart of Ale, and giue it the Horse to drinke.
CHAP. XXIX. Of Suppossitaries, Glisters and Purgations. IF your Horse by sickenesse, strickt diet, or too vehe∣ment trauell, grow dry and costiue in his body, as it is ordinary; the easiest meanes in extremitie to helpe him is to giue him a suppossitary; the best of which is, to take a Candle of foure in the pound, and cut off fiue inches at the bigger end, and thrusting it vp a good way with your hand into his fundament, present∣ly clap downe his taile, and hold it hard to his tuell, a quarter of an houre, or halfe an houre: and then giue him libertie to dung; but if this be not strong inough: then you shall giue him a glister, and that is, take foure handfuls of the hearbe Anise, & boyle it in a pottell of running water, till halfe be consumed, then take that decoction and mixe with it a pinte of Sallet∣oyle, and a pretty quantitie of salt, and with a glister∣pipe giue it him at his tuell. But if this be too weake, then you shall giue him a purgation, as thus. Take twenty Reisons of the Sunne, without stones, and tenne Figges lit, boyle them in a pottell of running water, till it be consumed, and brought to a gellie; then mixe it with the powder of Licoras Aniseeds and Sugar-can∣dy, till it be like paste, then make it into balls, and role it in sweet Butter, and so giue it the Horse, to the quantitie of three Hen egges. CHAP. XXX. Of Neesings and Frictions THere be other two excellent helps for sicke horses, as Frictions, and Neesings: the first to comfort
the outward parts of the body, when the vitall powers are astonished: the other to purge the head, when it is stopt with fleame, cold, or other thicke humours. And of Frictions, the best is Vingar and -grease melted together, and very hot chafed into the hoses bodie against the haire. And to make a horse neese, there is nothing better then to take a bunch of Pelli∣tory of Spayne, and binding it vnto a sticke, thru it vp a horses nosthrill, and it will make him neese without hurt or violence. CHAP. XXXI. Of diseases in the Eyes, as watrie Eyes, bloud-shtte Eyes, dimme Eyes, moone Eyes, stroke in the Eye, wart in the Eye, inflamation in the Eye, Pearle, Pin, Webbe, or Haw. VNto the Eye belongeth many diseases, all which haue their true signes in their names, and as touching that which is watrie, bloud-shotten, dimme, moone, stricken, or inflamed, they haue all one cure, as being generally but sore Eyes. The cure therefore is, take Wormewood, and beating it in a morter with the gall of a Bull, straine it, and annoynt the horses eyes therewith, and it is a most aproued remedy. But for the Wart, Pearle, Pin, or Webbe, which are euils growne in and vpon the Eye, to take them off, take the iuyce of the herbe Betyn, and wash his eyes therewith, and it will weare the spots away: For the Haw euery Smith can cut them out.
CHAP. XXXII. Of the Impostume in the Eare, Pole-euill, Fistula, after bloud-letting, any gld backe, VVthers, Sitfast, VVens, Nauell-gall,  any vlcer. THese diseases are so apparant and common that they need no further description but their names, and the most certaine cure is to take Clay of a mud or lome wall, without Lime, the strawes and all, and boyling it in strong Vinegar, apply it plaister-wise to the sore, and it will of it owne nature search to the bot∣tome, and heale it: prouided that if you see any dead or proud flesh arise, that then you either eate or cut it away. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Viues. FOr the Viues, which is an inflamation of the betweene the chap and the necke of the horse, take Pepper one penniworth of Swines grease one spoonfull, the iuyce of a handfull of Rewe, Vinegar two spoonefuls, mixe them together, and then pt it e∣qually into both the horses eares, and them tie them vp with two flat laces, then shake the eare that the me∣dicine may goe downe, which done, let the horse bloud in the necke, and in the temple veines, and it is a certaine cure. CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the Strangle, or any Bile, Botch, or other Impo∣stume whatsoeuer. ALL these diseases are of one nature, being onely hard Biles of Impostumes gathered together by
euill humors, either betweene the chaps, or elsewhere on the body. The cure is▪ take Sothernwood, and dry it to powder, and with Barly meale, and the yolke of an Egge make it into a salue, and lay it to the Impo∣stume, and it will ripen it, breake it, and heale it. CHAP. XXXV. Of the Canker in the Nose, or any other part of the bodie. TO heale any Canker in what part soeuer it be; take the iuyce of Plantine, as much Vinegar, and the same waight of the powder of Allom, and with it ∣noynt the sore twise or thrise a day, and it will kill it, and cure it. CHAP. XXXVI. Of staunching of bloud, whether it be at the Nose, or proceede from any wound. IF your horse bleed violently at the nose, and will not be stayd, then you shall take Bittony and stampe it in a morter with Bay-salt, or other white Salt, and stop it into the horses nose, or apply it to the wound, and it will stanch it: but if you be sodainly taken, as riding by the high way or otherwise, and cannot get this hearbe, you shall then take any woollen cloth, or any felt Hat, and with a knife scrape a fine Lint from it, and apply it to the bleeding place, and it will staunch it.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the diseases in the mouth, as bloody ifs, igs, La∣pas, Camery, Inflamation, Tngue-hurt, or the Barbs. IF you finde any infirmitie in your horses mouth, as the bloudie Rifts, which are Chaps or Rifts in the pallate of the horses mouth, the ligs, which are little Pustuls or Bladders within the horses lips, the Lam∣passe, which is an excression of flesh aboue the teeth, the Camery, which is little warts in the roofe of the mouth, Inflamation, which is, Blisters; Barbs, which are two little paps vnder the tongue, or any hurt on the tongue by the Bitte or otherwise; you shall take the leaues of Worme-wood, and the leaues of Shirwit, and beat them in a morter with a little Honey, and with it annoynt the sores, and it will heale them▪ as for the Lampasse they must be burnt away, which the ignorantest Smith can doe. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of payne in the teeth, or loose teeh. FOr any paine in the teeth, take Bettony, and seeth it in Ale or Vineger till a halfe part be consumed, and wash all the gummes therewith, but if they be loose, then onely rubbe them with the leaues of Ele∣campana or Horshelme, after they haue beene let bloud, and it will fasten them. CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Cricke in the Ncke. FOr the Cricke in the Necke, you shall first chae it with the Friction before specified, and then an∣noynt
and bath it with Sope and Vinegar boyld to∣gether. CHAP. XL. Of the falling of the Crest, Mangines in the Mayne, or shedding of the haire. ALL these diseases proceed from pouertie, mislike, or ouer-riding, and the best cure for the fal∣ling of the Crest, is bloud-letting, and proud kee∣ping with store of meat, for strength and fatnesse euer will raise vp the Crest but if the Mayne be mangie, you shall annoynt it with Butter and Brimstone, and if the haire fall away, then take Sothernwood, and burne it to ashes, then take those ashes and mixing them with common Oyle, annoynt the place there∣with, and it will bring haire preently, smooth, thicke, and faire CHAP. XLI. Of payne in the Withers. A Horses Withers are subiect to many griefes and swellings, which proceed from cold humours, sometimes from euill Saddles, therefore if at any time you see any swelling about them, you shall take the hearbe Harts-tongue, and boyle it with the Oyle of Ro∣ses, and very hot apply it to the sore, and it will as∣swage it, or else breake it and heale it. CHAP. XLII. Of swaying the Backe, or weakenesse in the backe. THese two infirmities are dangerous, and may be eased, but neuer absolutely cured, therefore
you finde hem, take  and and mixing them with a little Beane-meale char Backe, and it will strengthen it. CHAP. XLIII. Of the Itch in the taile, or of the generall Scabbe and Mangines, or of the Farcie. FOr any of these diseases take fresh grease and yealow. Arsnicke, mixe them together, and where the Manginesse, or Itch is, there rubbe it hard i the sore, being made raw: but if it be for the Farcie then with a knife slit all the knots, both hard and soft, and then rubbe in the medicine: which done, tie vp the Horse, so as he may not come to bite himselfe, and then after he hath stood two or three houres, take old pise and salt boyled together, and with it wash a∣way the oyntment, and then put the Horse to meate; doe thus two or three dayes together, prouided al∣wayes that you first let him blood, and take good store from him; and also giue him euery morning a strong scouring, or a strong purge, both which a shewed before. CHAP. XLIIII. Of any Halting whch commeth by straine, or before or behind, from the shoulder or hippe; to the Hoofe. THere be many infirmities which make a Horse halt, as pinching the shoulder, wrench in the shoulder, wrench in the neather ioynt, splating the shoulder, shoulder pight, straines in ioynts, and such
like: all which, since they happen by one accident, as namely, by the violence of some li or straine, they may be cured with one medicine and it i thus. After you haue found where the greife is, as you may doe by griping and pinching euery seuerall member; then where hee most complaineth there is his most griefe. You shall take (if the straine be new) Vinegar, Bolearmoniake, the whites of Egges, and Beane-flower, and hauing beaten them to a perfect alue, ay them very hot to the sore place, and it will cure it; but if the straine be old, then take Vinegar and Butter and melting them together with VVhea-ra, make it in∣to a Pultis, and lay it to the sore as hot as may be, and it will take away the griefe. CHAP. XLV. Of Foundring in the fete. OF Foundrings there be two sorts, a dry and a wet, the dry foundering is incurable, the wet is thus to be helpt. First pare all the  of his feete so thin that you may see the quicke, then let him toe, and let them bleede well, then stop the yne with Tallow and Rosen, and hauing tackt hollow shooes on his fee, stop them with Branne, Tarre, an Tallow, as boyling hot as may be and  once in two dayes, for a weeke together, then exercise him much, and his feete will come to their true vse and nimblenesse.
CHAP. XLVI. Of the Splent, Curbe, Bone-spauin, or any bny excression or ringbone. A Splent is a bony excression vnder the knee on the fore-legge, the Curbe is the like behinde the hinder hough, the Spauin is the like on the inside of the hinder hough, and the Ringbone is the like on the cornet of the hoofe. And the cure is, first vpon the top of the excression, make a slit with your knife the length of a Barly-corne, or a little more, and then with a fine corner, raise the Skinne from the bone and hauing made it hollow the compasse of the excression and no more: take a little lint and dip it into the Oyle of Origanum, and thrust it into the hole and couer the knob, and so let it bide till you see it rotte, and that Nature casteth out both the medicine and the Core. As for the Ring-bone you shall neede but onely to sea∣risie and annoynt it with the Oyle onely. CHAP. XLVII. Of the Mallandar, Sellander, Paines, , Mules, Crowne-scabs, and such like. FOr any of these sorances. You shall take Verdi grease, and soft grease, and grinding them toge∣ther to an oyntment, put it in a boxe by it selfe▪ then take Waxe, Hogges-grease and Turpentie, of each alike, and being melted together, put that salue into another boxe: then when you come to dresse the sore, after you haue taken off the scab and made it raw, you shall annoynt it with your greene salue of Verdi-grease,
and fresh grease onely for two or three dayes, for it is a sharpe salue, and will kill the cankerous humour, then when you see the sore looke faire, you shall take two parts of the yellow salue, and one part of the greene salue, and mixing them together, annoynt the sore therewith till it be whole, making it stronger or wea∣ker as you shall finde occasion. CHAP. XLVIII. Of an vpper Attaint, or nether Attaint, or any hurt by ouer-reaching. THese Attaints are stroaks or cuts by over-reach∣ing, either on the backe sinew of the fore-legge, on the heeles or nether ioynts, and may be safely hea∣led by the same former medicine and meane which healeth the Mallander, or Sellander, in the former Chapter, onely for your ouer-reaches you shall before you apply your salue, lay the sore plaine and open, without hollownesse, and wash it with beare and salt, or Vinegar and Salt. CHAP. XLIX. Of the infirmities of hoofes, as false quarters, loose hoofes, casting hoofes, hoofe-bound, hoofe-running, hoofe brickle, hoofe hurt, hoofe soft, hoofe hard, or general∣ly to preserue hoofes. THe hoofe is subiect to many mseries; as first to false quarters, which commeth by pricking, and must be help't by good shooing, where the shoe must beare on euery part of the foot but vpon the false quarters onely. If the hoofe be loose, annoynt it with
Pitch of Burgundy, and it will knit it, if it he cleane cast off, then Pitch of Burgundy and Tallow molten to∣gether will bring a new: if it be bound or straitned, it must be very well opened at the heeles, the soale kept moyst, and the cronet annointed with the fat of Bacan and Tarre. If the frush of the feet runne with stinking matter, it must be stopt with Soote, Turpentine and Bolearmoniake mixt together, if it be brittle or bro∣ken, then annoynt it with Pitch and Linseed-oyle mol∣ten to a soft salue, if it be soft, then stop it with Sope, and the ashes of a burnt Felt mixt together, if the hooues be hard, lay hot burning Cinders vpon them, and then stop them with Tow and Tallow, and general∣ly for the preseruing of all good hooues, annoint them daily with the sword or rinde of fat Bacon. CHAP. L. Of the Bloud Spauen, or Hough bonye, or any other vn∣naturall swelling, from what cause souer it pro∣cedeth. THese two sorrances are pustuls, or soft round swel∣lings the first on the inside of the hinder hough, and the other on the very Huckell of the hough behin, they are soft & very sore, and the cure is: First to take vp the veine aboue, and let it bleede onely from be∣low, then hauing knit it fast with two Shoomakers ends on both sides the slit, cut the veine in two peeces; then take Lin-seed, and bruise it in a morter, then mixe it with Cow-dung, and heate it in a frying Pan, and so apply it to the swelling onely, and if it breake and runne, then heale it with a plaister of Pich, and the
horse shall neuer be troubled with Spauen more; but if the swelling come by straine or bruise, then take Patch-grease, and melting it, annoynt the sore there∣with, holding a hot yron neare it to sinke in the grease, then fold a linnen cloth about it, and it will asswage all swellings whatsoeuer. CHAP. LI. Of VVinde-galles. THese are little blebs or soft swellings on each side the Fetlocke, procured by much trauell on hard and stonie wayes. The cure is to prick them, and to let out the Ielly, and then to drie vp the sore with a pla∣ster of Pitch. CHAP. LII. Of Enterfairing or Shackell-gall, or any gallings. ENterfayring is hewing one legge on another, and striking off the skinne: it proceedeth from weakenesse or straitnesse of the horses pace, and Shac∣kell-gall is any gall vnderneath the Fetlocke. The cure is, to annoynt them with Turpentine and Verdi∣grease mixt together, or Turpentine alone, if it ranckle not too much. CHAP. LIII. Hurts on the Cronet, as the quitterbone or Matlong. THe Quitterbone is a hollow vlcer on the top of the Cronet, and so is the Matlong, and the cure is: First to taint it with Verdigrease till you have eaten out the Core, and made the wound cleane; then you shall
heale it vp with the same salues that you heale the Scratches. CHAP. LIIII. Of wounds in the foote, as grauelling, priking, figge, retrayt, or cloying. IF your horse haue any wound in his foote, by what mischance soeuer, you shall first search it, and see that it be cleare of any nayle poynt or other splent to annoy it, then wash it very well with white Wie and Salt, and after tent it with the oyntment called Aegyptiacum, and then lay hot vpon the tent, with Flaxe-hurds, Turpentine, Oyle, and VVaxe mingled together, and annoynt all the top of the hoofe and cronet with Bolearmoniake and Vinegar: doe thus once a day till the sore be whole. CHAP. LV. To draw out Stubbe or Thorne. TAke the hearbe Detany, and bruise it in a mor∣ter with blacke Sope, and lay it to the sore, and it will draw out any Splent, Iron, or Thorne. CHAP. LVI. Of the Aubury or Tetter. THe Aubury is a bloody wart on any part of the horses bodie, and the Tetter is a cankerous vlcer like it: The cure of both is with an hot yron to seare the one plaine to the body, and to scarifie the o∣ther; then take the iuyce of Plantaine, and mixe it
with Vinegar, Honey, and the powder of Allome, and with it annoynt the sore till it be whole. CHAP. LVII. Of the Cords, or string-halt. THis is an vnnaturall binding of the sinewes; which imperfection a horse bringeth into the world with him; and therefore it is certaine it is incurable, and not painefull, but onely an eye-sore, yet the best way to keepe it from any worse inconuenience is to his limbes in the decoction of Colewots. CHAP. LVIII. Of Spur-galling, or fretting the sinne and haire. FOr this there is nothing better then Pie and Salt, with which wash the fore daily. CHAP. LIX. Of healing any old sores or wound. FResh Butter and the hearbe Ames chopt and beaten together to a salue will heale any wound, or any old sore. CHAP. LX. Of Sinewes being cut. IF the horses Sinewes be out, take the leaues of wilde Nepe or VVoine, and beating them in a morter with May-Buter, apply it to the sor, and it will knit the Sinewes.
CHAP. LXI. Of eating away dead flesh. TAke Stubwort, and lape it in a red Docke leafe, and rost it in the hot cinders, and lay it to the sore, and it will eate away any dead flesh. CHAP. LXII. Of Knots in ioynts. PAtch-grease applied as is before shewed for swellings, will take away any hard knots in the flesh, or vp∣on the sinewes. CHAP. LXIII. Of Venemous wounds, as biting with a mad dog, tuske of Boares, Serpents, or such like. FOr any of these mortall or venemous wounds, take Yarrow, Callamint, and the graines of Wheate, and beate them in a morter with water of Southern-wood, and make it into a salue, and lay it to the sore, and it will heale it safely. CHAP. LXIIII. Of Lyce, or Nits. THis filthinesse of Vermine is bred in a Horse through vnnaturall dislike and pouertie: the is: Take the iuyce of Beets and  beaten to∣gether, and with it annoynt the horses body ouer, and it will make him cleane.
CHAP. LXV. Of defending a Horse from flyes. TAke the iuyce of Pellitorie of Spaine, and mixing it with Milke, annoynt the horses body there∣with, and no Flyes will trouble him. CHAP. LXVI. Of broken bones, or bones out of ioynt: AFter you haue placed the bones in their true pla∣ces; take the Ferne Osmund, and beat it in a mor∣ter with the Oyle of Swallowes, and annoynt all the member, then splent it and role it vp, and in fifteene dayes, the bones will knit and be strong. CHAP. LXVII. Of drying vp sores when they be almost whole. ALLom burnt, vnsleckt Lime, the ashes of an old shoe-sole burnt, or Oyster-shels burnt, any of these simply by themselues, will dry vp any sore. CHAP. LXVIII. A most famous receit to make a Horse that is leane, and full of inward sickenesse, sound and fat in foureteene dayes. TAke of wheate-meale sixe pound, Aniseeds two ounces, Commin-seeds sixe drammes, Carthamus, one dramme and a halfe, Fennegrick-seeds one ounce two drammes, Brimston one ounce and a halfe, Sallet-Oyle one pint, Honie one pound and a halfe, White-wine foure pintes; this must be made into paste,
the hard simples being pounded into powder, and finely searst and then kneaded together, and so made into bals as bigge as a mans fist, then euery wating consume one of thosebals in his cold water, which he drinketh morning and euening for foureteen dayes to∣gether, and if at first hee be dainty to drinke the wa∣ter, yet care not, but let him fast till he drinke it, and after he begins to take it hee will drinke it with great greedinesse. CHAP. LXIX. How to make a white Starre. SLit the Horses fore-head the length of your Starre, and then raise the skinne vp with a cornet, and put in a plate of Leade as bigge as the Starre, and let it remayne so two or three dayes; and then take it out and presse downe the skinne with your hand, and that haire will fall away, and white will come in he place. The end of the Horse.
Of the Bull, Cow, Calfe, or Oxe. CHAPTER I. Of the Bull, Cow, Calfe or Oxe, their shape, breede, vse, choyce and preseruation. FOR as much as the male of all creatures are the principall in the breede and generation of things, and that the fruit which issueth from their seede, parti∣cipateth most with their out∣ward shapes and inward quali∣ties; I thinke fittest in this place, where I intend to treat of Horned-cattell and Neate, to speake first of the choyce of a fayre Bull,The coun∣tries for breed. being the breeders princi∣pallest instrument of profit. You shall vnderstand then, that of our English cattell (for I will not speake of those in Italy and other forraine countries, as other Authors doe, and forget mine owne) the best arbred in York-shire, Darby-shire, Lancashire, Staffordshire, Lincolne-shire, Gloster-shire, & Somerset-shire, though they which are bread in Yorke-shire, Darby-shire, Lan∣cashire, and Stafford-shire, are generally all blacke of colour, and though they whose blacknesse is purest, and
their haires like Veluet, are esteemed best; they haue exceeding large hornes, and very white, with blacke typpes; they are of stately shape, bigge, round, and well buckled together in euery member, short ioyn∣ted, and most comely to the eye, so that they are estee∣med excellent in the market, those in Lincolne-shire are the most part pyde with more white, then the other colours; their hornes little and crooked; of bodies ex∣ceeding tall, long and large, leane, and thin thighed, strong hooued, not apt to surbaite, and are indeed fit∣test for labour and draught. Those in Somerset-shire and Glocester-shire are generally of a bloud-red colour, in all shapes like vnto those in Lincolne-shire,Of not mix∣ing, and mixing of races. and fit∣test for their vses. Now to mixe a race of these and the blacke ones together is not good, for their shapes and colours are so contrary that their issue are very vncomely: therefore I would wish all men to make their breeds either simply from one and the same kinde, or else to mixe Yorke-shire with Stafford-shire, or Stafford-shire with Lancashire, or Darby-shire with any of the blacke races, and so likewise Lin∣colne-shire with Somerset-shire, or Somerset-shire with Glocester-shire. Now for the shape of your Bull;The shape of the Bull. he would be of a sharpe and quicke countenance, his hornes the larger the better, his necke fleshie, his belly long, straight and slender, his members in generall long and large, his forehead broad and curled, his eyes blacke and large, his eares rough within, & hayre like veluet, his muzell large and broad at the vpper lip, but narrow and small at the neather, his nosthrill crooked within, yet wide
and open, his dew-lap extending from his neather lip downe to his fore-boothes, large, side, thinne, and hairy; his breast round and bigge, his shoulders large, broad and deepe, his ribs broad and wide, his backe straight and flat, euen to the setting on of his tayle, which would stand high, his huckle-bones round and fayre appearing; making his buttocks square, his thighs round, his legs straight and short ioynted; his knees round and big, his hooues or clawes long and hollow, his tayle long and bush-haired, and his pyzell round, and also well haired. These Bulles as they are for breed,The vse of the Bull. so they are excellently good for the draught, onely they naturally draw better single, like horses, then in the yoake, like Oxen: the reason as I suppose being, because they can very hardly be match't in an equall manner. Now for the Cow, you shall chuse her of the same country with your Bull, and as neare as may be of one peece and colour,Of the Cow & her shape. onely her bagge or vdder would euer be white, with foure teats and no more, her belly would be round and large, her forehead broad and smooth, and all her other parts such as are before shewed in the male kinde. The vse of the Cow is twofold,Of her vse. either for the Darie, or for breed. The red Cow giueth the best milke, and the blacke Cow bringeth forth the goodliest Calues. The young Cow is the best for breed, yet they indif∣ferent old are not to be refused. That Cow which gi∣ueth milke the longest is best for both purposes, for she which goes long drie looseth halfe her profit, and is lesse fit for teeming: for commonly they are
subiect to feede, and that straineth the wombe or ma∣trix. Now for Calues: there are two wayes of breeding them:Of Calues, and their nourishing. the one, to let them runne with their Dams all the yeere, which is best, and maketh the good∣liest beast: the other, to take them from their Dams, after their first sucking, and so bring them vp on the fingar, with flotten Milke, the colde onely being taken away and no more; for to giue a young Calfe hot Milke is present death, or very dangerous. If your Calfe bee calued in the fiue dayes after the change, which is called the Prime,Obseruati∣ons. doe not reare it, for most assuredly it will haue the Sturdie, therefore preserue it onely for the Butcher; also, when you haue preser∣ued those male Calues, which shall be Buls, then gld the rest for Oxen, and the yonger they are guelt the better. The best time for rearing of Calues, is from Michaelmasse till Candlemasse. A Calfe would be nou∣rished with Milke twelue weekes, onely a fortnight be∣fore you weane it from Milke, let the Milke bee mixt with water, after your Calfe hath drunke Milke one moneth, you shall take the finest, sweetest, and softest Hay you can get, and putting little wispes into clouen stickes, place them so as the Calfe may come to them and learne to eate Hay. After our Ladies-day, when the weather is faire, you may turne your Calues to grasle, but by no meanes let it be ranke, but short and sweet, so that they may get it with some labour. Now of the Oxe:Of the Oxe, and his vse. You shall vnderstand that the lar∣gest are the best and most profitable, both for draught or feeding: for hee is the strongest to indure labour,
and best able to containe both flesh and tallow. Now for his shape, it differeth nothing from that of the Bull, onely his fare would bee smoth, and his belly deeper. That Oxe is fittest for the yoake, which is of gentlest nature, and most familier with the man. In matching your Oxen for the yoake: let them as neare as may be, be of one height, spirit and strength, for the stronger will euer wrong the weaker, and the duller will iniure him that is of free spirit, except the dri∣uer be carefull to keepe the dull Oxe to his labour. Oxen for the yoake, would by no meanes be put be∣yond their ordinarie pace: for violence in trauell heats them, heate breeds surfet, and surfet those dise∣ses which makes them vnapt to feed, or for any other vse of goodnesse. Your Oxe for the yoake will labour well with Barly-straw,Of his food for labour. or Pease straw, and for blend fodder, which is Hay and Straw mixed together, hee will desire no better feeding. Now for your Oxe to feede,Oxen to feed for the Butcher. hee would as much as might be, be euer of lusty and yong yeeres, or if old, yet healthfull and vnbrused, which you shall know by a good taile and a good pyzel, for if the haire of one or both be lost, then hee is a waster and will be long in feeding. If you see an Oxe doth licke himselfe all o∣uer, it is a good signe that hee is market-able and will feede, for it showes foundnesse, and that the beast ta∣keth a ioy in himselfe: yet whilst he so doth licke him∣selfe he feedeth not; for his owne pride hindereth him, and therefore the husband-man will lay the Oxes owne dung vpon his hide, which will make him leaue licking and fall to his foode. Now if you goe to chuse
a fat beast you shall handle his hindmost ribbe, and if it be soft and loosel, ike downe, then it shewes the Oxe is outwardly well fed; so doth soft huckell bones, and a bigge nach round and knotty, if his cod be big and full, it shewes hee is well tallowed, and so doth the fat croppe behinde the shoulders: if it be a Cow, then handle her nauell, and if that be bigge, round and soft, sure shee is well tallowed. Many other obser∣uations there are, but they be so well knowne, and common in mans vse, that they neede no curious de∣monstration. Now for the preseruation of these Cattell in good and perfect health.To preserue Cattell in health. It shall be meete that for the yong and lusty, and indeede generally for all sorts, except Calues, to let them blood twise in the yeere, namely, the Spring and fall, the Moone being in any of the lower Signes, and also to giue them to drinke of the pickle of Oliues mixed with a head of Garlicke brused therein. And for your Calues, be onely carefull that they goe not too soone to Grasse, and small danger is to be feared. Now notwithstanding all a mans careful∣nesse, beasts daylie doe get infirmities, and often fall into mortall extremities, peruse these Chapters follow∣ing, and you shall finde cure for euery particular disease. CHAP. II. Of the Feauer in Cattell. CAttel are much subiect vnto a Feauer, and it com∣meth either from surfet of foode, being raw, and musty, or from fluxe of cold humors ingendred by cold
keeping. The signes are trembling, heauy eies, a foa∣ming mouth, and much groaning: and the cure is; first, you shall let him blood, and then giue him to drinke a quart of Ale, in which is boild three or foure rootes of Plantaine, and two spoonefuls of the best Treakle, and let his Hay be sprinkled with water. CHAP. III. Of any inward sickenesse in Cattell. FOR any inward sickenesse or drooping in Cattell, take a quart of strong Ale, and boile it with a hand∣full of Wormewood, and halfe a handfull of Rewe; then straine it, and adde to it two spoonefuls of the iuyce of Carlicke, and as much of the iuyce of Houseleeke, and as much Treakle, and giue it the beast to drinke, being no more but luke-warme. CHAP. IIII. Of the diseases in the head, as the Sturdie, or turning-euill. THis disease of the Sturdie is knowne by a continu∣all turning about of the Beast in one place; & the cure is, to cast the Beast, and hauing made his feet fast, to slit the vpper part of his forehead crossewife, a∣bout foure inches each way, then turning vp the skin and laying the skull bare, cut a piece out of the skull two inches square or more: then looke and next vnto the panackle of the braine you shall see a bladder lye full of water and blood, which you shall very gently take out, and throw away; then annoynting the sore place with warme fresh Butter, turne downe the skin,
and with a Needle and a little red Silke stitch it close together, then lay on a plaster hot of Oyle, Turpentine Waxe, and a little Rozen melted, together with Flaxe hurds, and so folding warme woollen cloathes about his head; let the beast rise and so remaine three or foure dayes ere you dresse it againe, and then heale it vp like another wound, onely obserue in this cure by no meanes to touch the braine, for that is mortall, and then the helpe is both common and most easie. CHAP. V. Of diseases in the eyes of Cattell, as the Hawe, a Stroake, inflamation, weeping, or the Pinne or webbe. FOR any generall sorenesse in the eyes of Cattell, take the water of Eye-bright, mixt with the Iuyce of Houseleeke, and wash them therewith, and it will re∣couer them: but if a Hawe breede therein, then you shall cut it out, which euery simple Smith can doe. But for a stroake, inflamation, weeping, Pinne or web, which breeds excressions vpon the eye, take a new-laid Egge, and put out halfe the white, then fill it vp with Salt, and a little Ginger, and roste it extreamely hard in hot finders; which done, beate it to powder shell and all, but before you roste it wrap it in a wet cloth, and put of this powder into the beasts eye, and it will cure it.
CHAP. VI. Of diseases in the mouth, as Barbs vnder the tongue, Blaine on the tongue, teeth loose, or tongue venomed. THese Barbs or Paps which grow vnder the tongues of Cettell, and being inflamed doe hinder them from feeding, you shall with a keene paire of Sheares cut away close by the flesh, and if they bleed much (as they will doe if they bee rancke) you shall then with a red hot Bodkin seare them, and droppe on the top of the seared places a drop or two of Rozen and Butter mixt together; but if they bleed not, then only rubbe them with Sage and Salt, and they will heale. Now for the blaine on the tongue, of some called the tinne blaine, it is a blister which groweth at the roots of the tongue, and commeth through heat of the stomacke or much chaffing, and is oft very mortall, for it will rise so suddenly and so bigge that it will stop the winde of the Beast. The cure is, to thrust your hand into the mouth of the Beast, and drawing out his tongue, with your nailes to breake the blister, and then to wash the sore place with strong Brine, or Sage, Salt and Water: if you finde moe blisters then one, breake them all, and wash them, and it is a present cure. Now for loose teeth, you shall let the Beast blood in his gummes, and vnder his taile; then wash his chaps with Sage and Woodbine leaues, boild in Brine: Lastly, if the tongue be venomed, which you shall know by the vnnaturall swelling thereof: you shall take Plantaine, and boiling it with Vinegar and Salt, wash the tongue therewith, and it will cure it.
CHAP. VII. Of diseases in the necke, as being galled, bruysed, swolne, out of ioynt, or hauing the closhe. IF an Oxes necke be galled, bruysed, or swollen with the yoke, take the leaues of round Aristolochia, and beating them in a Morter, with Tallow, or fresh Grease, annoint the sore place therewith, and it will not onely heale it, but any straine in the Necke, euen if the bone be a little disordered. Now, for the Closhe or Clowse, which causeth a beast to pyll and loose the hayre from his necke, and is bred by drawing in wet and rainie weather: you shall take the ashes of an olde burnt Shoe, and strowe it vpon the Necke, and then rub it ouer with Tallow and Turpentine mixt together. CHAP. VIII. Of the Pestilence, Gargyll, or Murraine in Beasts. THis Pestilence or Murraine amongst Beasts is bredde from diuers occasions; as from rancke∣nesse of blood, or feeding; from corruption of the ayre, intemperatenesse of the weather, innundation of floods, or the infection of other cattell: much might be said of the violence and mortalitie thereof, which hath vtterly vnfurnished whole Countries: but to goe to the cure; you shall giue to all your Cattell, as well the sound as sicke, this medicine, which neuer failed to preserue as many as haue taken it: take of olde strong Vrine a quart, and mixe it with more then halfe a handfull of Hens doung, well dissolued there∣in, and giue it your Beast to drinke.
CHAP. IX. Of the misliking, or leannesse of Beasts. IF your Beast fall into any vnnaturall mislyke or leannesse, which you shall know by the diowring of his hayre; you shall then cause him first to bee let blood, and after take sweet Butter and beat it in a Morter, with a little Mirrhe, and the shauing of Iuory, and being kept fasting, make him swallow downe two or three Bals thereof; and if it be in the winter, feed him with sweet Hay, if in the Sommer, put him to grasse. CHAP. X. Of the diseases in the guts, as Fluxe, Costiuenesse, Chollycke, and such like. IF your Beast bee troubled with any sore Laxe, or bloody-fluxe, you shall take a handfull of the seeds of Woodrose, and being dried, and beaten to powder, brew it with a quart of strong Ale, and giue it the Beast to drinke. But if the beast be too drie, or co∣stiue in his body, then you shall take a handfull of Fennygreeke, and boyle it in a quart of Ale, and giue it him to drinke; but for any chollycke or belly ake, or gnawing of the guts, boyle in the water which hee drinketh good store of Oyle, and it will helpe him. CHAP. XI. Of pissing of Blood. IF your Beast pisse blood, which commeth eyther of ouer-labouring, or of hard and sower feeding, you
shall take Shepheards purse, and boyle it in a quart of redde Wine, and then straine it, and put to it a little Synamon, and so giue it the Beast to drinke. CHAP. XII. Of dropping Nosthrils, or any colde in the Head. IF your Beasts nosthrils runne continually, which is a signe of colde in the head; you shall take Butter and Brimstone, and mixing them together, annoint two long Goose-feathers therewith, and thrust them vp in∣to the nosthrils of the Beast: and vse thus to doe euery morning till they leaue dropping. CHAP. XIII. Of any swelling in a beast whatsoeuer. IF your Beast haue any outward swelling, bathe it with Oyle and Vinegar exceeding hot, and it will asswadge it; but if the swelling be inward, then boile round Aristolochia in his water. CHAP. XIIII. Of the worme in the taile. THere is a worme which will breede in the taile of a beast, and doth not onely keepe him from fee∣ding, but also eateth away the hayre of the taile, and disfigureth the beast. The cure is, to wash the taile in strong lye made of vryne, and Ashwood ashes, and that will kill the worme, and both heale and drie vp the soare.
CHAP. XV. Of any Cough or shortnesse of breath i Cattell. IF your beast be troubled with the Cough or short∣nesse of breath, you shall giue him to drinke diuers Mornings together a spoonefull or two of Tarre dissol∣ued in a quart of new Milke, and a head of Garlicke cleane pild and bruised. CHAP. XVI. Of any ipostume, bile or botch on a beast. IF your beast be troubled with an impostume, bile or botch, you shall take Lilly roots, and boyle them in Milke till they be soft, so that you may make them like pap, then being very hot clap it to the sore, and then when it comes to be soft open it with a hot Iron, and let out the filth, then heale it vp with Tarre, Tur∣pentine, and Oyle mixt together. CHAP. XVII. Of diseases in the sinewes, as weakenesse, stifnesse, or sorenesse. IF you finde by the vnnimble going of your beast, that his sinewes are weake, shrunke or tender: Take Mallowes and Cheekweed, and boyle them in the dregs of Ale or in Vrine, and being very hot, lay it to the of∣fended member, and it will comfort the sinewes. CHAP. XVIII. Of the generall scabbe, particular scabbe, Itch, or scurfe in cattell. IF your beast be troubled with some few scabs here and there on his body, you shall onely rub them off,
and annoynt the place with black Sope and Tarre mixt together, and it will heale them. But if the scab be vniuersall ouer the body, and the scabbe mixt with a drie scurfe; then you shall first let the beast bloud, af∣ter rubbe off the scabs and scurfe till the skinne bleed, then wash it with old Vrine and greene Coporas toge∣ther, and after the bathing is drie, annoint the bodie with Bores grease and Brimstone mingled to∣gether. CHAP. XIX. Of the hide-bound or drie skinne in Cattell. THis griefe commeth of ouer-much labour and euill keeping, and aboue all other beasts your Lin∣colneshire Oxen are subiect vnto it, the signes are a dis∣coloured and hard skinne, with much leannesse: The cure is to let him bloud, and to giue him to drinke a quart of strong Ale brewed with Myrrhe, and the pow∣der of Bay Berries, or for want of the Berries the Bay-tree leaues, and then keepe him warme and feed him with Hay that is a little mow-burnt, and onely looketh red, but is not dustie or mouldy, for that will get him an appetite to drinke, and drinking will loosen his skinne. CHAP. XX. Of the diseases in the Lungs, especially the Lung-growne. THe Lungs of a beast are much subiect to sicke∣nesse, as may appeare by much panting▪ and shortnesse of breath, the signes being a continuall
coughing, but that which is before prescribed for the cough will cure all these, onely for a beast which is lung growne, or hath his lungs growne to his side, which commeth through some extreame drought ta∣ken in the Summer season, and is knowne by the cough, hoarse or hollow coughing, you shal take a pinte of Tanners Oze, and mixe it with a pinte of new Milke, and one ounce of browne Sugar Candy, and giue it the beast to drinke, this hath beene found a very pre∣sent cure. CHAP. XXI. Of the biting with a mad-dogge, or any other venemous beast. IF your beast be bitten with a mad-dogge, or any o∣ther venemous beast, you shall take Plantaine, and beat it in a morter with Bolearmoniak, Sanguis draconis, Barly meale, and the whites of Egges, and plaster-wise lay it vnto the sore, renewing it once in foureteene houres. CHAP. XXII. Of the falling downe of the pallat of a beasts mouth. LAbour and drought will make the pallat of a beasts mouth to fall downe, which you shall know by a certaine hollow chanking in his mouth, when he would eate, also by his sighing, and a desire to eate but can∣not: The cure is; you shall cast the beast, and with your hand thrust it vp, then let him bloud in the pal∣late, and annoynt it with Hony and Salt; and put him to grasse, for he may eate no drie meate.
CHAP. XXIII. Of any griefe or paine in the hoofe of a beast, and of the Foule. TAke Mugwort and beate it in a morter with hard Tallow, and apply it to the hoofe of the beast, and it will take away any griefe whatsoeuer. But if he be troubled with that disease which is called the Foule, and commeth most commonly by treading in mans ordure, breeding a sorenes and swelling betweene the cleyes, you shall for the cure, cast the beast, and with a Hay-rope, rubbe him so hard betweene the same that you make him bleede, then annoynt the place with Tarre, Turpentine, and Kitchin fee, mixt together, and keepe him out of the dirt, and he will soone be whole. CHAP. XXIIII. Of Bruisings in generall, of what part of the body souer they be. TAke Brokelempe the lesse, and frie it with Tallow, and so hot lay it to the bruise, and it will either expell it, or else ripen it, breake it, and heale it, as hath beene often approued. CHAP. XXV. Of swallowing downe Hennes-dung, or any other poy∣sonous thing. IF your beast haue swallowed downe Hennes-dung, Horse-leeches, or any other poysonous thing, you shall take a pinte of strong Vinegar, and halfe so much Oyle or sweete Butter, and two spoonefuls of
Treacle, and mixing them together on the fire, giue it the beast warme to drincke, and it will cure him. CHAP. XXVI. Of killing Lice or Ticks. BEasts that are bred vp in woods vnder droppings of trees, or in barraine and vnwholesome places are much subiect to Lice, Ticks, and other vermine. The cure whereof is to annoynt their bodie with fresh Grease, Pepper, Stauesaker, and Quicksiluer beaten to∣gether till the Quicksiluer be slaine. CHAP. XXVII. Of the Dewbolne, or generall Gargill. HOw soeuer some of our English writers are opi∣nioned, this Dewbolne or generall Gargill is a poysonous and violent swelling beginning at the neither part of the Dewlap, and if it be not preuented the swelling will ascend vpward to the throat of the beast, and then it is incurable; therefore for the preser∣uation of your beast, as soone as you see the swelling appeare, cast the beast, and slit the swel'd place of the Dewlap at least foure inches in length: then take a handfull of Speare-grasse or Knot-grasse, and thrust∣ing it into the wound, stitch it vp close, then annoynt it with Butter and Salt, and so let it rot and weare a∣way of it selfe: if you perceiue that his body be swel'd, which is a signe that the poyson is disperst inwardly, then it shall be good to giue him a quart of Ale and Rew boyled together, and to chafe him vp and downe well, both before and after.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of the losse of the Cudde. A Beast will many times through carelesnesse in chawing, loose his Cudde, and then mourne and leaue to eate: The cure whereof is, to take a little sower Leauen and Salt, and beating it in a morter with mans Vrine and Lome, make a pritty bigge ball, and force him to swallow it downe, and it will recouer his Cudde. CHAP. XXIX. Of killing of all sorts of wormes, eyther in Oxe, Cow, or Calfe. THere is nothing killeth wormes in the bodies of cattell sooner then Sauen chopt small and beaten with sweet Butter, and so giuen in round bals to the beast, nor any thing maketh them voyd them so soone as sweet Wort, and a little Sope mixt together and gi∣uen the beast to drinke. CHAP. XXX. Of the vomiting of Bloud. THis disease commeth through ranknesse of blod, got in fruitfull pastures after hard keeping; inso∣much that you shall see the bloud flow from their mouthes: The cure is, first to let the beast bloud, and then giue him to drinke Bolearmoniacke and Ale mixt together.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Gout in Cattell. IF your beast be troubled with the Gout, which you shall know by the sodaine swelling of his ioynts and falling againe, you shall take Galingall and boyle it in the dregs of Ale and sweet Butter, and pultis-wise lay it to the offended member. CHAP. XXXII. Of milting of a beast. MIlting, is when a beast will oft fall, and oft rise as he is at his labour, and cannot indure to stand any while together, proceedeth from some stroake or bruise eyther by cudgell or other blunt weapon: And the cure is, not to raise him sodainly, but to giue him Ale and some Pitch mixt together to drinke. CHAP. XXXIII. Of prouoking a beast to pisse. IF your beast cannot pisse, steepe Smallage in Ale a quart, and giue it him to drinke, and it presently helpeth. CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the ouerflowing of the Gall in beasts. THe ouerflowing of the Gall is euer knowne by the yellownesse of the skinne and the eyes of the beast: And the cure is, to giue him a quart of Milke, Saffron, and Turmaricke mixt together, to drinke after he hath beene let bloud, and so doe three mornings to∣gether.
CHAP. XXXV. Of a beast that is goared eyther with stake, or the horne of another beast. TAke Turpentine and Oyle, and heate them on the coales, and then taint the wound therewith, and it will heale it. CHAP. XXXVI. Of a Cow that is whetherd. THis disease is when a Cow after her caluing can∣not cast her cleaning, and therefore to compell her to cast it, you shall take the iuyce of Bettony, Mugwort, and Mallowes, of each three spoonefuls, and mixe it with a quart of Ale, and giue it the beast to drinke: and also giue her to eate scorched Barly, and it will force her to auoid her burthen sodainly. CHAP. XXXVII. Of drawing out Thorne or Stubbes. TAke blacke Snayles and blacke Sope, and beat them to a salue, and apply them to the sore, and it will draw the griefe to be apparant. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of purging of Cattell. THere is nothing doth purge a best so naturally, a the greene weedie grasse which groweth in Or∣chards vnder trees; nor any medicine dth purge them better then Tarre, Butter, and Sugar-Candy mixt together, and giuen in bals as big as a Hennes Egge.
CHAP. XXXIX. Of being shrew runne, or shrew bitten. A Shrew Mouse, which is a Mouse with short vneuen legges, and a long head, like a Swines, is a vene∣mous thing, and if it bite a beast, the sore will swell, and rankle, and put the beast in danger; but if it one∣ly runne ouer a beast it feebleth his hinder parts, and maketh him vnable to goe: the cure then for being shrew bitten, is the same which is formerly shewed for the biting of other venemous beasts: but if he be shrew runne, you shall onely draw him vnder, or beate him with, a Bramble which groeth at both ends in the Furrowes of Corne lands. CHAP. XL. Of aintnesse in labour. IF your beast in his labour, and heae of the day, chaunce to faint, you shall loose him, and driue him to the running streame to drinke, and then giue him two or three Ospines full of partcht Barley to eate, and he will labour fresh againe. CHAP. XLI. Of breeding Milke in a Cow. IF your Cow after her caluing cannot let downe her Milke, you shall giue her a quart of strong pos∣set Ale, mixt with Annis-seedes, and Coliander seeds, beaten to powder, to drinke euery morning, and it will not onely make her Milke spring, but also increase it wonderfully.
CHAP. XLII. Of bones out of Ioynt, or bones broken. IF any beast haue a bone broken, or misplaced, after you haue set it right, and in his true, place; you shall wrappe a plaister about it, made of Burgundie Pitch, Tallow, and Linseede-Oyle, and then splint it, and let it remaine vnbound fifteene dayes. CHAP. XLIII. Of the rot in beasts. IF your Beast be subiect to rottennesse, which you may know by his leannesse, mislike, and continuall scouring behinde; you shall take Bay-berries, beaten to powder, Myrrhe, Iuye leaues, Elder leaues, and Feather-fewe, a good lumpe of drie Clay, and Bay salt, mixe these together in strong Vrine, and being warme giue the Beast halfe a pinte thereof to drinke, and it will knit and preserue them. CHAP. XLIIII. Of the Pantas. THE Pantas is a very faint disease, and maketh a beast to sweat, shake, and pant much. The cure is, to giue him in Ale and Vrine mixt together a little Soote, and a little Earning to drinke, two or three mo∣nings before you labour him.
CHAP. XLV. Of all manner of wonds in beasts. TO cure any wound in Beasts giuen by Edge-toole, or otherwise, where the skinne is broke; take Hoggesgrease, Tarre, Turpentine, and Waxe, of each like quantitie; and a quarter so much Verdigrease, and melt them all together into one Salue, and apply it to the wound, by spreading it vpon a cloath, and it will heale it without breeding any rancke, or dead flesh. The end of the Bull, Oxe, Cow, and Calfe.
Of Sheepe. CHAPTER. I. Of Sheepe in generall, their vse, choyse, shape, and pre∣seruation. TO enter into any long discourse of the praise or profit of Sheep, or to showe my reading by re∣lation of the Sheepe of other Countries, were friuolous, be∣cause I am to write much in a very little Paper; and I speake onely to my Countrymen the English, who desire to know and learne their owne profit. Know then, that whosoeuer will stocke himselfe with good Sheepe, must looke vnto the nature of the Soyle in which he liueth: for Sheepe, according to the Earth and Ayre in which they liue, doe alter their natures and proper∣ties: the barraine Sheepe becomming good in good soiles, and the good Sheepe barraine in euill soiles. If then you desire to haue Sheepe of a curious fine Staple of Wooll,Of staples of wooll. from whence you may draw a thread
as fine as silke, you shall see such in Herefordshire, a∣bout Lempster side, and other speciall parts of that Countrie; in that part of Worstershire, ioyning vpon Shropshire, and many such like places, yet these Sheep are very little of bone, blacke faced, and beare a very little burthen. The sheepe vpon Cotsall hils are of better bone, shape and burthen, but their Staple is courser and deeper. The Sheepe in that part of Worstershire, which ioyneth on Warwickshire, and ma∣ny parts of Warwickeshire, all Leycestershire, Bucking∣hamshire, most part of Northamptonshire; and that part of Nottinghamshire which is exempt from the Forrest of Sherwood, beareth a large boned Sheepe, of the best shape and deepest Staple; chiefly if they be Pasture Sheep; yet is their wooll much courser then those of Cotsall. Lincolneshire, especially in the Salt Marshes, haue the largest sheepe, but not the best Wooll, for their legges and bellies are long and naked, and their Staple is courser then any of the o∣ther: the Sheepe in Yorkeshire and so Northward, are of reasonable bigge bone, but of a staple, rough and hairy; and the VVelh sheepe are of all the worst, for they are both little and of worse staple; and indeed, are praised onely in the dish, for they are the sweetest Mutton. If now, knowing the natures and properties of the sheepe of euery Countrie,Of the choice of Sheepe. you goe about to stocke your ground, bee sure to bring your Sheepe from a worser Soyle to a better, and not from a better to a worse. The Leare,Of the Leare. which is the earth on which a Sheepe lyeth, and giueth him his colour, is much
to bee respected: the red Leare is held the best, the Duskish, inclining to a little rednesse, is tollerable, but the white or durtie Leare starke naught. In the choyce therefore of your Sheepe, chuse the biggest boned, with the best wooll; the staple being soft, grea∣sie, well curled, and close together, so that a man shall haue much adoe to part it with his fingers. These Sheepe, besides the bearing of the best burthen, are alwayes the best Butchers ware, and goe soonest away in the Market. Therefore, in the choyse of Sheep for your breed, haue a principall respect to your Rammes, for they euer marre or make a flocke: let them then, as neere as you can, haue these properties or shapes.The shape of a Sheepe. First, large of body in euery generall part, with a long body, and a large belly; his fore∣head would be broad, round, and well rising; a cheere∣full large eye, straight short nosthrils, and a very small muzell, by no meanes any hornes, for the dodded Sheepe is the best breeder, and his issue neuer dan∣gereth the Dame in yeaning, as the horned Sheepe doe: besides, those Sheepe which haue no hoes are of such strength of heade, that they haue oft beene seene to kill those Sheepe which haue the largest hornes and best wrinkled: a Sheepe would haue a large vpright necke, somewhat bending like the necke of a Horse, a very broad backe, round buttockes, a thicke taile, and short iointed legges, small, cleane and nimble; his wooll would be thicke, and deepe, couering his body and belly all ouer; also, all his face, and euen to his nosthrils, and so downewards to his very knees and hinder houghes. And thus, accor∣ding
to the shape, properties and soyle, from whence you chuse your Rammes chuse the rest of your flocke also. The best time for your Ewes to bring forth their young ones,When Ewes should bring forth. is, if they be Paster-Sheepe, about the latter ende of Aprill, and so vntill the beginning of Iune; but if they be Field sheepe, then from the be∣ginning of Ianuarie till the end of March, that their Lambes may be strong and able before May day, to follow their Dams ouer the rough Fallowe lands, and water-furrowes, which weake Lambs are not able to doe; and although to yeane thus earely in the win∣ter, when there is no grasse springing, and the sharpe∣nesse of the weather also be dangerous, yet the Hus∣bandman must prouide shelter and sweet fodder, and the Shepheard with great vigilance be stirring at all howers to preuent euils, for the reasons before shew∣ed: and though the Ewe at the first bee scant of Milke, yet as the warme weather increaseth, and the grasse beginneth to spring, so will her Milke spring also. Now for your Lambes:Ordering of Lambes. about Michaelmasse you shall separate the male from the female; and hauing chosen out the worthiest, which you meane to keepe for Rammes, put them aside, and then gueld the rest, which euery orderly Shepheard can doe sufficiently; for there is no danger in gulding young Lambes. The first yeere a male Lambe is called a weather-Hogge, and a female Lambe an Ewe-Hogge: the se∣cond yeere the male is a weather, and the female a Theafe, and then she may be put to the Ramme; but
if you let her goe ouer that yeere also, then shee is a double Theafe, and will both her selfe be the good∣liest Sheep, and also bring forth the goodliest Lambe; whence it comes, that the best Sheepe-masters make more account of their double Theafes then of any other breeder. You shall obserue neuer to sheare your Lambes till they be full Hogs:Needful ob∣seruations. you shall euer wash three dayes be∣for you sheare: the best time of shearing is from Ine to August, Ewes are euer good breeders from three yeeres old till tenne: Rammes are good riders from foure yeres old till their mouthes breake. If you would haue your Ewes bring forth Male Lambes, note when the North winde bloweth, and driuing your Flocke against the winde: let your Rammes ride as they goe, and this will make the Ewes conceiue Male Lambes: so likewise, if you would haue female Lambes, put your Rammes to the Ewes when the winde bloweth out of the South▪ Now for the generall preseruation of Sheepe,The preser∣uation of Sheepe. feed them as much as you can vpon high grounds, which are dried and fruitfull, the grasse sweet, yet so short that it must be got with much labour: but if you must force perforce feed vpon lowe and moyst grounds, which are infectios, you shall not bring your sheepe from the Fold (for I now speake to the honest English Husbandman) vntill the Sunne be risen, and that his beames beginne to draw the dewe from the Earth; then hauing let them forth, driue them to their place of feed, and there, with your dogge, chase them vp and downe till they be wearie, and then let them ei∣ther
feed or take their rest, which they please: this chasing, first, beateth away mill-dewes, and all other dewes from the earth, as also those webbes, kelles, and flakes which lying on the earth, and a sheepe-licking vp, doe breede rottennesse: also, this chasing stirreth vp that naturall heate in a sheepe, which drin∣keth vp, and wasteth the abundance of moysture, which else would turne to rottennesse. Besides, a sheepe being thus chased and wearied, will fall to his food more deliberately, and not with such greedinesse as otherwise he would, and also make choyce of that meat which is best for his health. If a shepheard once in a moneth, or alwaies when he hath occasion to handle his sheepe, rubbe their mouthes with Bay Salt, it is an excellent preseruatiue against all man∣ner of sicknesse, and very comfortable for a sheepe al∣so: for, a sheepe will very well liue, and not abate of his flesh by rubbing his mouth once a day with Bay Salt onely. Now, for as much as, notwithstanding these principles, a sheep falleth into many infirmities, here∣after followeth the seuerall cures of all manner of diseases. CHAP. II. The signes to know a sound sheepe, and an vnsound sheepe. IF a sheepe be sound and perfit, his eye will be bright and cheerefull, the white pure without spot, and the strings red, his gummes also will be red, his teeth white and euen, his skinne on his brisket will be red, and so will each side betwixt his body and his shoul∣der
where wooll growes not, his skinne in generall will be loose, his wooll fast, his breath long, and his feete not hot; but if he be vnsound, then these signes will haue contrary faces, his eyes will be heauy, pale, and spotted, his breast and gummes white, his teeth yellow and foule, and his wooll when it is pulled will easily part from his body; and when he is dead open him and you shall finde his belly full of water, his fat yellow, his Liuer putrified, and his flesh moyst and watrish. CHAP. III. Of sickenesse in generall, or the Feauer amongst sheepe. CHange of pasture is a great cure for sicke sheepe, yet if you finde any more particularly troubled then the rest: Take Pulioll royall, and stamping it, mixe the iuyce with VVater and Vinegar the quantity of halfe a pinte, and giue it the sheepe with a horne luke warme; and by no meanes let the sheepe be much chaft: also in these sicknesses the shepheard must haue a great care to note from whence the disease groweth, if it proceed from cold, then to driue his sheepe to shelter, if from heat, then to feed them in shady and coole places. CHAP. IIII. Of the gnerall Scab or Itch in sheepe. THis generall Scabba or Ich in sheepe is of all dis∣eases the most common amongst them, procee∣ding from raynie and wet weather, which falling vpon their skinnes, if they happen to be chafl or hea∣ted
after, they presently breake forth into the scabbe, which you shall know by a white filthy scurfe sticking vpon their skins: and the most vsuall medicine for the same, which all shepheards vse, is to annoynt the place with Tarre and fresh Grease mixt together, but if vp∣on the first appearance of the Itch, you steepe Pulill Royall in water, and wash the skinne therewith, it will keepe them from running into the scabbe. CHAP. V. Of killing Maggots in sheepe. IF a sheepe be troubled with Maggots, you shall take Goose-grease, Tarre, and Brimstone, and mixe them together on the fire, and then annoynt the place there∣with, and it will kill the Maggots. CHAP. VI. Of the red water. THe red water is a poysonous disease in sheepe, of∣fending the heart, and is indeed as the pestilence amongst other cattell: therefore when you finde any of your sheepe infected therewith, you shall first let him bloud in the foote betweene the clawes, and also vnder the tayle, and then lay to the sore places Rew or VVormewood beaten with bay Salt, and it helpeth. CHAP. VII. Of Lung-sicke, or any Cough or Cold. IF your sheepe be troubled with any sicknesse in his Lungs, which you shall know by his coughing and shortnesse of breath, you shall take Tussilaginis and
Lungwort, and stamping them, straine the iuyce into a little Hony and Water, and giue it the sheepe to drinke. CHAP. VIII. Of the worme in the Claw of the sheepe or in any o∣ther part. THis Worme breedeth commonly before, between the clawes of the foote: but wheresoeuer it breedeth, it is knowne by the head, which is like a tuft of haire, and will sticke forth in a bunch. The cure is, to slit the foot, and draw out the worme without breaking it: and then annoynt the place with Tarre and Tallow mixt together, for Tarre simply of it selfe will draw too much. CHAP. IX. Of the wildfire in Sheepe. THis disease which is called the wildfire is a very infectious sicknesse, and will indanger the whole flocke; but howsoeuer incurable it is held, yet it is cer∣taine, that if you take Cheruile, and stamping it with old Ale, make a salue thereof, and annoynt the sore therewith, it will kill the fire, and set the sheepe safe: and, though some, for this disease, bury the first infected sheepe aliue, with his heeles vpward, before the sheepe Coat doore, yet this medicine hath beene euer found more effectuall. CHAP. X. Of the diseases of the Gall, as Choller, Iaundise, and such like. THese diseases are knowne by the yellownesse of the sheepes skinne: And the cure is, to take Plantaine
and Lettice, and stamping them together, mixe their iuyce with Vinegar, and giue halfe a pinte to a sheepe to drinke. CHAP. XI. Of the tough fleame or stoppings in sheepe. IF your sheepe be stopt in the head, breast, or wessand, eyther with tough fleame or other cold humours, which you shall know by the running of the nosthrils, then take the pouder of Pulioll-royall, and mixing it with clarified Hony, dissolue it in warme water the quantity of halfe a pinte, and giue it the sheepe to drinke, and it will loosen the fleame. CHAP. XII. Of broken bones in sheepe, or bones out of ioynt. IF your sheepe chance to breake a legge, or haue any other bone misplaced, you shall after you haue set it straight and right againe: first bathe it with Oyle and Wine, and then dipping a cloth in molten Patch-grease, roule it about, and splint it as occasion shall serue, and so let it remaine nine daies, and then dresse it againe, and at the end of the next nine daies, the sheepe will be able to goe. CHAP. XIII. Of any sickenesse in Lambes. IF your Lambe be sicke, you shall giue it Mares-milke, or Goats-milke, or the one dammes Milke mixt with water to drinke, and keepe it very warme.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the Sturdy, Turning-euill, or Mor-ound. THese diseases proceed from ranckenesse of bloud, which offendeth the brayne and other inward parts. The cure then is to let the sheepe bloud in the eye veines, temple veines, and through the nosthrils, then to rubbe the places with young Nettles bruied. CHAP. XV. Of diseases in the eyes, as the Hw, dinee, r any sorenesse. IF your sheepe haue any imperfection in his eyes, you shall droppe the iuyce of Selandie into them, and it is a present helpe. CHAP. XVI. Of water in a sheepes belly. IF a sheepe haue water in his belly betwene the out∣ward flesh and the rimme, then you may safely ad∣uenture to let it forth by making a little hole through the flesh, and putting in a quill, but if it be betweene the rimme and the bagge, then it is incurable, for you may by no meanes cut the rimme asunder: when the water is let forth, you shall stitch vp the hole, and an∣noynt it with Tarre and Butter mixt together. This water if it remaine in the bodie will rot the sheepe. CHAP. XVII. Of the tagd or belt sheepe. A Sheepe is said to be tagd or belt, when by a con∣tinuall squirt running out of his ordure, he be∣rayeth
his tayle, in such wise that through the hea of the dung it scaldeth, and breedeth the scabbe there∣in. The cure is, with a paire of sheares to cu away th tags, and to lay the sore bare and raw, and then to throw earth dried vpon it, and after that Tarre and Goose-grease mixt together. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Poxe in sheepe. THe Poxe in sheepe are small rd pimples like pur∣ples rising on the skinne, and they are infectious. The cure is, to take Rosemary and boyle the leaues in Vinegar, and bathe the sores therewith, and it will heale them, change of pasture is good for this disease, and you shall also separate the sicke from the sound. CHAP. XIX. Of the wood-euill or Crampe. THis disease is a weakenesse or straning of the sinewes, got by colds and suiets: it is very mor∣tall, and will runne through a whole flocke. The cure is, to take Cinkfoyle or Fie-leau'd grasse, and boyle it in wine, and giue the sheepe a pinte thereof to and keepe him warme, and chafe his legges with Oe and Vinegar. CHAP. XX. Of making an Ewe to loue her owne Lambe, or any other Ewes lambe. IF an Ewe grow vnnaturall, and will not take to her Lambe after she hath , you shall take a litle
of the cleane of the Ewe, which is the bed in which the Lambe lay, and force the Ewe to  it, or at Fest chew it in her mouth, and she will fall to loue it natural∣ly: but if an Ewe haue cast her Lambe, and you would haue her take to another Ewes Lambe, you shall take that Lambe which is dead, and with it rubbe and dawbe the liue Lambe all ouer; and so put it to the Ewe, and she will take as naturally to it as if it were her owne. CHAP. XXI. Of licking vp poyson. IF a sheepe chance to licke vp any poyson, you shall perceiue it by a sodaine swelling and reeling of the sheepe. And the cure is, as soone as you ee it stagger, to open the mouth, and you shall finde one or mo blisters vpon the tongue roots, you shall presently breake them with your fingers, and rubbe them with Earth or Sage, and then pisse in the sheepes mouth, and it will doe well. CHAP. XXII. Of Lambs yeaned ske. IF a Lambe be yeaned sicke and weake, the Shep∣heard heard shall fold it vp warme in his Cloake, blow into the mouth of it, and then drawing the dames dugges squirt Milke into the mouth of it. CHAP. XXIII. Of making an Ewe to be easily deliuered. IF an Ewe can hardly bring forth or yeane he Lambe, you shall take Balsaminte or Horse-mint,
and put either the iuyce or powder of it into a little strong Ale, and giue it the Ewe to drinke, and she will yeane presently. CHAP. XXIIII. Of teeth loose. IF a Sheepes teeth be loose, let him blood in his gummes, and vnder his taile, and then rubbe his teeth with Earth, Salt, and Sage. CHAP. XXV. Of increasing Milke in Ewes. NOthing increaseth Milke in Ewes more then change of Pasture and feeding: driuing them one while to the Hils, another while to the Valleyes: and where the Grasse is sweetest, and the Sheepe eateth with best appetite, there see you continue longest: for touching giuing them Fitches, Dill, Annis seedes, and such like, this change of ground will make milke spring much better. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Staggers, or leafe sickenesse in Lambes, or elder Sheepe. THE Staggers is ingendred in Sheep by surfetting on Oake leaues, Hathorne leaues, or such like, which Lambes are very apt vnto: it is a colde corrupt blood, or leame, gathered together about the braine: and indeed is suddenly mortall. The best cure is, to take Asafetida, and dissolue it in warme water, and pu the quantitie of halfe a spoonefull into each are
of the Sheepe or Lambe, and it is a presentre∣medie. CHAP. XXVII. Of wormes in the guttes of Sheepe or Lambes. SHeepe are as subiect to wormes in their guts and stomackes as any other cattell whatsoeuer, which you shall know by beating of their bellies with their feete, and by looking continually at their beles. The cure is, to take the leaues of Coliander, and to stamp them, and then mixing the iuyce thereof with Hony, to giue it the Sheepe to drinke, and then chase him a little, and keepe him two or three howres fasing. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the losse of the Cudde. THat which helpeth the losse of the Cudde in Oxe or Cow, the same is a present remedie for sheepe, and is spoke of before in a former Chapter. CHAP. XXIX. Of sauing Sheepe from the rot. THis disease of rottennesse is the cruellest of all o∣ther amongst Sheepe, and extendeth his violence ouer all the flocke; nay, ouer Towneships and Coun∣tries: and though it bee held of most men incure∣ble, yet good gouernement, and this receit I shall deliuer you, will not onely preuent it, but preserue your Sheepe safe: therefore, as soone as you perceiue that any of your Sheepe are tainted, you shall take Adraces; which is a certaine Salt, gathered from the
salt Marches, in the heat of Sommer, when the tide go∣ing away, and leauing certaine drops of salt water on the grasse, then the violent heat of the Sunne turnes it to salt: and to speake briefely, all salt made by vio∣lence of the Sunnes heat onely, is taken for Adraces, of which there is infinite store in Spaine. With this Adraces rubbe the mouthes of all your Sheepe once a weeke, and you shall neuer need to feare the rotting of them, for it hath beene well tried; and, as I imagine, the experiment was found out from this ground. It is a rule, and well knowne at this day in Lincolneshire, and in Kent, that vpon the salt Marshes sheepe did neuer die of the rot; no other reason being knowne therefore, but the licking vp of that salt, and without doubt, it is most infallible and most easie. CHAP. XXX. A few precepts for the Shepheard. IT is meet that euery good and carefull Shepheard know what food is good for Sheepe, what hurtfull; that following the one, and eschewing the other, hee may euer keepe his Cattell in health. The grasse that is most wholesome for sheepe, is that which hath growing in it good store of Mellilot, Clauer, selfe-heale, Cynckefoile, Brome, Pympernell, and white Henband. The grasse which is vnwholesome for Sheepe, is that which hath growing amongst it, Spearewrt, Pennywort, or Penny-grasse▪ and any weeds which grow from inundations or ouerflowes of water; likewise, Knot grasse is not good, nor Meldewd grasse. Of all rots the hungar-rot is the worst, for it both putifieth the
flesh and skinne, and this is most incident to field. Sheepe, for to Pasture Sheepe it neuer happneth. The next rot to it, is the Pelt-rot, which commeth by great store of raine, immediately after a Sheepe is ne shorne, which meldewing the skinne, corrupteth the body; and this also is most incident to field-sheepe, which want shelter. There bee little white Snailes which a Sheepe will licke vp, and they will soone rot him▪ There will grow vpon an Ewes teats little drie scabs, which will stop the Milke; when the Lambes sucke, the Shepheard must haue care to pull them away. A Sheepe will haue a bladder of water vnder his chinne sometimes, which the Shepheard must be care∣full to let out and lance, or the Sheep will not prosper. It is good not to sheare Sheep before Midsommer, for the more he sweateth in his wooll the better and more kindly is it. If you will know the age of your Sheepe, looke in his mouth, and when hee is one sheare hee will haue two broad teeth afore, when he is two sheare, hee will haue foure broad teeth afore; when hee is three, hee will haue sixe, and when he is foure sheare, hee will haue eight; and after those yeeres his mouth will be∣gin to breake: for, touching that rule of the een∣nesse and vneuennesse of the mouth, it is vncertaine, and faileth vpon many occasions. The end of the Sheepe.
Of Goates. CHAPTER I. Of Goates, and of their Natre▪ SEeing Goates are not of any ge∣nerall vse in our Kingdome, but onely nourished in some wilde and barraine places, where Cat∣tell of better profit can hardly be maintained, as in the moun∣tainous parts of VVales, in the barrainnest parts of Cornewall and Deuonshire, on Malborne hilles, and some few about the Peake: I will not stand vpon any large discourse, but as briefly as I can giue you their natures and cures.The nature of Goates. You shall then know, that the Goate is a beast of a hot, strong, and lustie constitution; especially, in the act of gene∣ration, that they exceede all other Cattell: they de∣light to liue in Mountaines that be high, craggie, and full of Bushes, Bryers, and other wood; they will feed in any plaine pastures, but their speciall delight is in
brousing vpon trees, they are so nimble of foote, that they will goe in places of the greatest danger. The profit which commeth from them, is their Milke, which is an excellent restoratiue, & their Kids which are a daintie Venison. For the shape of the Goate:His shape. hee would haue a large body, and well hayred, great legs, vpright ioints, not bending, a neeke plaine & short, a head small and slender, large hornes, and bending, a bigge eye, and a long beard, & his colour white, blacke, or pyde. Some doe vse to sheare them, to make rough mantles on; but it is not so with vs in England. The shee Goate would haue large teats, and big vdder, hanging eares, and no hornes, as they haue in many places. These Goates would bee kept in small flockes,The orde∣ring of Goates. or heards, as not aboue a hundred in a heard: they must in the heat of sommer haue much shade, so in the win∣ter likewise much shelter, for they can neither endure extreamitie of heate nor cold; especially, the violence of winter, for that will make the shee Goate cast her Kidde, or bring it forth vntimely. They loue Mast well, but yet you must giue them other food to mixe with it. The best time to let the male and female goe together, is about the beginning of December. If you house Goates in the winter, let them haue no litter to lye on, but the floore paued, or grauelled, for otherwise their owne heate will annoy them: they must also be kept very cleanely, for they can endure no filthy a∣uours. For the young Kids, you shall in all poynts order them as you doe your Lambes. Now, for their preseruation; if they be suffered to goe and chuse
their owne foode, they are to themselues so good phisitions, that they will seldome or neuer be troubled with any inward sickenesse; onely the vnnaturall ex∣cesse of their lust maketh them grow soone olde, and so both past vse and profit. For those particular dis∣eases which accidentally fall vpon them, here fol∣loweth the cures. CHAP. II. Of the pestilence in Goates, or any inward and hidden sickenesse. IF you perceiue your Goates to droope, or looke with sullen or sad countenance, it is an assured signe of sickenesse; but if they foame or lather at the mouth, then it is a signe of Pestilence. The cure is, first, to seperate them from the sound, then to let them blood, and giue them the Buds and Leaues of Celodine, with rushes and reeds to eate, and it is a present remedie. CHAP. III. Of the dropsie in Goates. GOates are very much subiect vnto the Dropsie, through the excesse drinking of water; the sign whereof is a great inflamation and heate in the skin: the cure is, to seeth Wormewood in Water and Salt, and giue a pinte thereof to the Goate to drinke diuers mornings, for to slit, and let out the water vnder the shoulder is not so certaine and safe a cure. CHAP. IIII. Of stopping the teats. THere will ingender in the teats of Goats a cer∣taine tough hard fleame which will stop the Milke
from issuing; which to cure, you shall with your n∣ger and your thumbe pull it away, and then annoint the place with Hony, and the Goates Milke mixt to∣gether. CHAP. V. Of Goates that cannot Kidde. GOates, aboue other Cattell, are troubled with hardnesse in Kidding, by reason that if they bee chafed or hunted, their Kids will turne in their bellies: the remedie then to preserue them from that danger, is to keepe them quiet and vntroubled vntill they haue Kidded. CHAP. VI. Of the tetter, or drie scabbs in Goates. TO heale any Tetter, or drie scabbe in Goates tak blacke Sope, Tarre, Hogges grease and Brimstoe, mixe them well together, and annoint the sores thre∣with, and it will heale them. CHAP. VII. Of guelding Kiddes in the Sommer season. KIds being guelt in the Sommer season, as those which are late Kidded must necessarily be; the Flie will be so busie with the soare, that with their blowings they will breede such store of Maggots in the wound, that it will indanger their liues: to defend them then from such annoy of the lie, you shall take, Soote, Tarre, and thike eame, and mixe them well toge∣ther, and annoi the wound therewith, and it will both heale it, and keepe the Flie away.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Itch in Goats. IF your Goats be troubled with an Itch, so that they cannot feede for clawing and biting them∣selues, you shall wash their skinnes with old Cham∣ber-lye, and greene Coporas well boylde together, and it will slay the Itch. CHAP. IX. Of the Tuell stopping in Goats. GOats when they are sucking on their dammes, or when they are new kidded, will commonly haue a great laxe or squirt, so that the ordure which commeth from them if it be not well cleansed and taken from them, it will with their owne naturall heates so bake and drie, that it will stop vp their Tu∣els, so that they cannot dung, which if it be not hol∣pen the Kidde will die. The cure is, to cleanse the place, and open the Tuell, and then put into it an inch or there about of a small Candles end dipt in H∣ny, and then annoynt all the Tuell ouer with Ca∣pons grease. CHAP. X. Of the Staggers or Reeling euill in Goats. IF your Goats be troubled with the Staggers or Reeling euill, which is a disease bred in them by the violent heate of the Sunne, you shall take Bay Salt and Verdiuyce, and mixe them together, and giue the Goat halfe a pinte thereof to drinke; or
else take House-leeke, and Dragons, of each a like, some grounds of Ale, with a little new Milke, stampe the hearbs, and then tayle them together, then put thereto a fewe Geues grossely beaten, and then boyle it againe, then coole it, and giue the sicke Goate three or foure spoonefuls thereof to drincke, and it will cure her. Now for any other infirmities which shall happen vnto Goates, you may cure them with the same medicines which you cure sheepe, for their natures doe not much differ. The end of the Goate.
Of Swine. CHAPTER. I. Of all manner of Swine, their natures, vse, shapes, and preseruations. ALthough Swine are accounted troublesome, noysome, vnruly, and great rauenours, as indeed their natures are not much diffe∣ring from such qualities, yet the vtilitie and profit of them, will easily wipe away those offences; for to speake truely of the Swine, he is the Husband∣mans best scauenger, and the Huswifes most whole∣some sinke, for his foode and liuing is by that which would else rot in the yard make it beastly, and breed no good meanure, or being cast downe the ordinary sinke in the house breed noysome smels, corruption, and infection: for from the Husband-man he taketh Pulse, Chaffe, Barne-dust, Mans-ordure, Garbage, and the weeds of his yard; and from the Huswife her Draffe, Swillings, Whey, washing of Tubs, and such
like, with which he will liue and keepe a good state of body, very sufficiently, and though he is accoted good in no place but the dish onely, yet there he is so louely and so wholesome that all other faults may be borne with. He is by nature greedy, giuen much to roote up grounds,The nature of the Swine. and teare downe ces, he is very lecherous, and in that act tedious and bru∣tish▪ he is subiect to much anger, and the fight of the Boares is exceeding mortall: they can by no meanes indure stormes, windes, or foule weather, they are ex∣cellent obseruers of their owne homes, and excee∣ding great louers one of another: so that they will die vpon any beast that offendeth their fellowes. Now touching the choyse of Swine, you shall vnderstand that no Country in England breedeth naturally better Swine one then another,Of the choyse and shape of Swine. but if the race and keeping be alike, the proportion and good∣nesse will be alike: therefore in the choyse of your Swine, chiefly the Boares and Sowes which you breed of, let them be long and large of body, deepe sided, and deepe bellied, thicke thighes, and short legs, for though the long legged Swine appeare a goodly beast, yet he but couseneth the eye, and is not so profitable to the Butcher: high clawes, thicke necke, a short and strong groyne, and a good thicke chine well set with strong bristles: the colour is best which is all of one peece, as all white, or all sanded, the pyde are the wor and most apt to take the meazels, the blacke is tolle∣rable,The vse and profit of Swine. but our Kingdome through his coldnesse fin∣deth them seldome. The vse and profit of Swine is onely (as he Hus∣bandman
saith) for the roofe, which is Bacon, for the spit which is Porke, Sowse and Puddings, and for breede, which is their Pigs onely. To haue too many Sowes in a yard is not good for their increase, and bringing forth is so great, that they will for want of food eate one another: A Sow will bring forth Pigs three times in the yeere, namely at the end of euery tenne weeks, and the numbers are great, which they will bring forth: for I haue knowne one Sow haue twenty Pigs at one litter, twelue, fourteene, and sixteene are very common; yet a Sow can bring vp no more Pigs then she hath Teats, therefore looke how many he hath, and so many Pigs preserue of the best, the rest cast away, or put to other Sowes which want, yet giue sucke. A Sow will bring Pigs from one yeere old till she be seauen yeeres old: The Pigs which you reare after you haue chosen the best for Bores or Sowes, to breed on, geld the rest both males and fe∣males: the males will make goodly Hogs, which are excellent Bacon or Porke, and the females which are called spayd-guilts, will doe the like; and breed a great deale more grease in their bodies, whence it comes that the Husbandman esteems onespayd Guilt before two Hogs. Young shots which are Swine of three quarters, or but one yeere old are the dain∣tiest Porke. Now for the preseruation of Swine, it is contayned in their gouernment and food, and is all that belon∣geth to the office of the Swineheard. The order∣liest feeding of Swine is (when you keepe them, but in good state of body, and not seeke to fat them) in
the Morning earely when you vnstie them is to giue them Draffe, Pulse, or other garbage, with swillings, in their troughes, and when they haue eaten it, to driue them to the field, where they may graze and roote for their food: and of grounds the soft marish and moo∣rish grounds are the best, where they may get the roots of Sedge, Reeds, Rushes, Knot-grasse, and such like, which is wholesome for Swine: and at the fall of the Leafe it is good to driue them to hedges, where they may get Hawes, Heps, Sloes, Crabs, or such like fruit, which is also very wholesome: and the poorer sort will gather these fruits, and keepe them safe to feed their Swine with all the Winter. When Euening com∣meth, you shall driue your Swine home, and then fil∣ling their troughes with Draffe and Swilling, let them fill their bellies, and then stye them vp, so shall you keepe them from doing other hurt or iniuries. If once in a fortnight you mixe with your Swillings some Radle, or red Oaker, it will preserue them won∣derfully from Meazels and all inward infections. And thus much for the generall discourse of Swine: Now I will proceede, to their particular infirmities, and other businesses. CHAP. II. Of the Feauer, or any hidden sicknesse in Swine. THere is no beast maketh his sicknesse so apparant as the Swine, for when he findeth any griefe or distemperature in his body, he presently droopeth, for∣sakes his meat, and will not eat till he finde in himselfe a perfect recouery: Therefore when you shall so finde
him to forsake his meate, you shall first let him bloud vnder his tayle, and vnder his ares, and if they bleed not freshly enough, you shall beate them with a small sticke, and that will bring forth the bloud; then wrap about the wounds the barke of a yong Osier, and then keepe him warme, and giue him to drinke warme Swillings, well mixt with Barly meale, and red Oaker. CHAP. III. Of the Murren, Pestilence, or Catharrein Swine. THese diseases being all of one nature are very much incident to Swine, and spring from many grounds, as from corruption of bloud ingendred by the eating of rotten fruit, or too much Butchers gar∣bage, and many times by eating too ranke grasse, where in is much young Hemloke; the particular signes are, moyst eyes, and their heads borne on one side, but the generall knowledge is there fasting and mortality. The cure is, to giue them in warme Wash, Hennes-dung, and boyl'd Liuerwort, with a little red Oaker. CHAP. IIII. Of the Gall in Swine. SWine will oft haue an ouer-flowing of the Gall, because choller is much powerfull in them, which you shall know by a swelling which will rise vnder their Iawes: And the cure is, to stampe Gall-wort▪ or Saffron, and mixe it with Hony and Water, and then strayning it, giue it the Swine to drincke by a pinte at a time.
CHAP. V. Of the Mealels in Swine. THis disease of all other is most common in Swine, and with most ease helped; as thus, you shall take the oldest Vrine that you can get, and mixe it with red Oaker till it be thicke, and about the quantity of an Ale quart, then mixe it with a gallon of warme sweete Whey, and giue it the Swine to drincke after he hath beene kept all night fasting. CHAP. VI. Of Impostumes in any part of a Swine. SWine will haue Impostumes in many parts of their bodies, as vnder their throats, their eares, bellies, and oft vpon their sides. The cure is, if they be soft to launce them, and let out the matter, and then heale them with Tarre and Butter, but if they be not soft, then let the Swine bloud vnder the tongue, and rubbe all his mouth, chappes, and groyne with Wheat meale and Salt, and the Impostume will goe away. CHAP. VII. Of vomiting in Swine. IF your Swine doe vomit and cast vp his meate, you shall giue him spelted Beanes to eate, and they will strengthen his stomacke. CHAP. VIII. Of Leannesse, Mislike, Scurfe, and Manginesse in Swine. THese diseases proceed from corruption of bloud, ingendred by lying wet in their sties, hauing filthy
rotten litter, or much scarcitie of meate. The cure is, first, to let the Swine blood vnder the talle, then to take a Wooll-Carde & to combe off all the scurffe and filth from the Swines backe, euen till his skinne bleed: then take Tarre, Boares grease and Brimstone, and mixing them well together, annoynt the Swine therewith; then let his Stie be mended, his Litter be sweet, and giue him good warme food, and the Swine will be fat and sound very sodainely. CHAP. IX. Of the sleeping euill in Swine. SWine are much subiect to this disease in the Som∣mer-time, and you shall know it by their continuall sleeping, and neglecting to eate their meate. The cure is, to house them vp, and keepe them fasting twentie and foure houres; then in the morning when hunger pincheth them, to giue them to drinke water, in which is stampt good store of Stonecrope; which, assoone as they haue drunke, they wil vomite and cast, and that is a most present remedie. CHAP. X. Of. paine in the Milt. SWine are oft troubled with paine in their Milts or Splens, which proceedeth from the eating of Mast, when they are first put thereunto, through their ouer greedie eating thereof, and is knowne by a ree∣ling, going of one side. The cure is, to giue them the iuyce of Wormewood, in a little Honyed water to drinke, and it will asswage the paine.
CHAP. XI. Of the vnnaturallnesse of Sowes. MAny Sowes are so vnnaturall, that they will de∣uoure their Pigges when they haue farro'd them, which springeth from a most vnnaturall greedinesse in them: which to helpe, you must watch her when shee farroweth, and take away the Pigges as they fall, then take the wreckling, or worst Pigge, and annoint it all ouer with the iuyce of Stonecrop, and so giue it to the Sow againe: and if shee deuoure it, it will make her cast and vomite so extreamely, that the paine of the surfet will make her loathe to doe the like againe▪ But of all cures, the best for such an vnnaturall beat is to feede her and kill her. CHAP. XII. Of the Laxe or Flixe in Hogges. FOR the Laxe or Flixe in Swine, you shall giue them Verdiuyce and Milke▪ mixt together to drinke, and then feede him with drie foode, as spletted Beanes, Ackornes or Ackorne huskes. CHAP. XIII. Of the lugging of Swine with dogges. IF your Swine be extreamely lugged and bitten wih dogges; to preuent the ranckling and impostuma∣tion of the soare, you shall annoint it with Vinegar, Sope, and Tallow mixt together, and it will cure the same.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the poxe in Swine. THe poxe is a filthy and infectious disease in Swine, proceeding from corrupt blood, ingendred by pouertie, wet lying, lowsines, and such like; and the Swine can neuer prosper which hath them. The cure is, to giue him first to drinke two spoonefuls of Treakle in a pinte of Honied water, which will expell the in∣fection outwardly, then to annoint the sores with Brimstone and Boares grease, mixt together, and to se∣perate the sicke from the sound. CHAP. XV. Of killing Maggots in the eares or other parts of Swine. IF Maggots shall breede in the eares of your Swine, which haue beene lugged with Dogges, for want of good looking vnto, as often it happeneth: you shall take eyther the sweetest Worte you can get, or else Hony, and annoynt the soares therewith, and the Mag∣gots presently will fall off and die. CHAP. XVI. Of feeding a Swine exceeding fat, either for Bacon, or for Larde. DIuers men,The feeding of Swine in Wood Countries. according to the nature of diuers Countries, haue diuers waies in feeding of their Swine, as those which liue neare vnto Woods, and places where store of Mast is, turne their Swine vnto the Mast for sixe or eight weekes, and then hauing
got flesh and fatnesse on their backes, to pringe them home, and put them vp in Sties, and then feed them for tenne dayes or a fortnight: after with olde drie Pease giuen them oft in the day, and a little at one, with water, as much as they will drinke: for this will harden the flesh, and fat so, that it will not consume when it comes to boyling: this manner of feeding is good, and not to be disliked. Now,The feeding of Swine in Champaine Countries. the feeding of Swine in champaine Coun∣tries, which are farre from Woods, is in this manner: First, you shall stie vp those Swine which you intend to feede, and let them not come out of the same till they be fed, but haue their food and water brought vnto them: now, the first two dayes you shall giue them nothing; the third day you shall earely in the morning giue them a pretty quantitie of drie Pease or Beanes; at noone you shall giue them as much more; at foure a clocke as much more, and when you goe to bedde as much more, but all that day no water: the next day you shall feede them againe at the same houres, and set water by them that they my drinke at their owne pleasures; and twice or thrice a weeke, as your prouision will serue you, it is good to fill their bellies with sweet Whay, Butter-Milke, or warme wash, but by no meanes scant the proportion of their Pease: and by thus doing, you shall feede a Swine fat enough for the slaughter in foure or fiue weekes. There be other Husbandmen in Champaine Coun∣tries,Of feeding at the Reke as in Leycestershire, and such like, that turne thr Swine to Pease-reekes, or stackes, set in the Fields,
neare vnto water-Furrowes, or rundles, so that they may let the water into the stacke-yard; and then morning and euening cut a cutting of the stacke or reeke, and spread the reapes amongst the Swine: this manner of feeding is best for small Porkets; and will fat them reasonably in three weekes or a mo∣neth. If you feede Sheepe amongst your Porke, it is very good, and daily at this houre practised; for by that meanes you shall not loose any of your Graine, for what your Sheepe cannot gather vp, your Porkets will. Now,Of feeding of Swine in or about great Ci∣ties. for such as liue in or neare about great Cit∣ties, or Townes, as London, Yorke, or such like, and haue neither great store of Mast, nor great store of Graine; yet they haue a manner of feeding as good, and somewhat more speedier then any of the other, onely the Bacon is not so sweet or toothsome; and thus it is: They stie vp their fatlings, as is before said, and thn take Chandlers▪ Graines▪ which is the dregges and off all of rendred Tallow, as hard skinnes, kels, and fleshly lumps, which will not melt, together with other course skinnes of the Tallow, Suet, or Kit∣chin fee, and mixing it with warme Wash, giue it the Swine to eate three or foure times in the day, and it will suddenly puffe him vp with fatnesse; then bestow of euery Swine a Bushell of drie Pease to harden his flesh, and you may then kill them at your pleasure. The onely danger of this food is, it will at first some∣times make Swine scoure; especially young Pigges, if they eate it: but assoone as you perceiue such a fault, giue vnto your elder Swine Milke and
Verdiuyce, and to your Pigges Verdiuyce onely. Now,Of feeding Hogges for Lard, or Boares fo Brawne. lastly, the best feeding of a Swine for Larde▪ or a Boare for Brawne, is to feede them the first weeke with Barley sodden, till it breake, and sodde in such quantitie that it may euer bee giuen sweet▪ then after to feede them with raw Mault from the floore, be∣fore it be dryed, till they be fat enough; and then for weeke after, to giue them drie Pease or Beanes to harden their flesh. Let their drinke be the washing of Hoggesheads, or Ale Barrels, or sweet Whay, and let them haue store thereof. This manner of feeding, breeds the whitest, fattest, and best flesh that may bee, as hath beene approued by the Husbands. The end of the Swine of all sorts.
Of Conies. CHAPTER. I. Of the tame rich Conie, his nature, choyce, profit, and preseruation▪ ALL sorts of Conies may as well be kept tame as wilde,The nature of the Cony. and doe aboue other Beasts delight in imprisonment and solitarinesse, which proceedeth from the strength of melancholie in their natures, being creatures so much participating on the earth, that their delight is to liue in Holes, Rockes, and other darke Ca∣uernes. They are violently hot in the act of genera∣tion, and performe it with such vigour and excesse, that they swound, and lie in traunces a good space after the deed is done. The males are giuen to much crueltie, and would kill the young Rabbets if he could come to them: whence it proceedeth, that the Fe∣males
after they haue kindled, hide their young ones, and close vp the holes, so that the Bucke-Conie may not finde them. The Female, or Doe- wonderfull in their increase, and bring ones euery moneth: therefore, when y tame in Boxes, you must obserue o wat as soone as they haue kindled, to put them  e Bucke, or otherwise they will mourne, and hardly bring vp their young ones. The Boxes,Of Boxes for tame Conies. in which you shall keepe your tame Conies, would be made of thinne Wainescot boards some two foote square, and one foot high; and that square must bee deuided into two roomes, a greater roome with open windowes of wyar, through which the Conie may eede; and a lesser roome without light, in which the Cony may lodge, and kindle, and before them both a Trough, in which you meat, and other necessaries for the Conie: and you may make Boxe vpon Boxe in diuers stori your Bucks by themselues, and your Do by themselues, except it be such Does as haue not brd, and then you may let a Bucke lodge with them▪ , when your Doe hath kindled one , and another, you shall take the first from her, and put them together into a seuerall boxe, amongst Rab∣bits of their owne age; prouided, that the boxe ee not pestred, but that they may haue ease and liberty. Now,Of the choyce of rich Conies. for the choyce of these tame rich Conies, you shall not: as in other Cattell, looke to their shape, but to their richnesse, onely ellect you Bucks the largest and goodliest Conies you can get: and for the
richnesse of the skinne, that is acounted the richest, which hath the equallest mixture of blacke white haires together, yet the blacke rather shadowing the white, then the white any thing at all ouermaste∣ring the black, for a black skin with a few siler haires is much richer then a white skinne with a few blacke haires: but as I said before, to haue them equally or indifferently mixt is the best aboue all other, the Furre would be thicke, deepe, smooth, and shining and a blacke coate without siluer haires though it be not reckoned a rich coate, yet it is to bee pre∣ferred before a white, a pyed, a yellow, a dunne, or a gray. Now for the profit of these rich Conies,Of the pro∣fit of rich Conies. (for vn∣lesse they did farre away, and by many degrees ex∣ceed the profit of all other Conies, they were not worthy the charge which must be bestowed vpon them) it is this: First, euery one of these rich Conies which are killed in season, as from Martilmas vntill Candlemas is worth any fiue other Conies, for they are of bodie much fatter and larger, and when ano∣ther skinne is worth but two pence or three pence at the most they are worth two shillings, or two shillings sixe pence: againe they increase oftner, and bring forth moe Rabbets at one kindling then any wilde Cony doth, they are euer ready at hand for the dish, Winter and Summer, without charge of Nets, Fer∣rits, or other engins, and giue their bodies gratis, for their skinnes will euer pay their masters charge with a most large interest. Now for the feeding and preseruationOf the fee∣ding & pre∣seruation of Conies. of these
rich Conies, it is nothing so costly or troublesome many haue imagined, and as some (ignorant in the skill of keeping them) haue made the world thi for the best food you can feed a Cony with, is the swee∣test, shortest, softest, and best Hay that you can get, of which one load will serue two hundred coupl yeere, and out of the stocke of two hundred, you may spend in your house two hundred, and sell in the Mar∣ket two hundred, yet maintayne your stocke good, and answere euery ordinary casualty. This Hay in little clouen sticks would be so placed before the Boxes that the Conies might with ease reach it, and pull it ot of the same, yet so as they may scatter nor wast any. In the troughes vnder their Boxes, you shall put sweet Oates, and their water, and this should be the ordinary and constant food wherewith you should feede your Conies, for all other should be vsed but Physically, as for the preseruation of their healthes; as thus, you shall twise or thrise in a fortnight, for the cooling of their bodies, giue them Greeues, as Mallowes, Clauer-grasse, Sower-docks, blades of greene Corne, Cabbage or Cole∣wort leaues, and such like, all which cooleth and nou∣risheth exceedingly: some vse to giue them some∣times sweet Graines, but that must be vsed very sel∣dome, for nothing sooner rotteth a Cony: you must also haue great care, that when you cut any grasse for them, or other weeds, that there grow no young Hem∣locke amongst it, for though they will eate it with all greedinesse; yet it is a present poyson, and kils sodain∣ly: you must also haue an especiall care euery day to make their Boxes sweet and cleane, for the strong a∣uour
of their ordure and pisse is so violent, that it will both annoy themselues, and those which shall be fre∣quent amongst them. Now for the infirmities which are incident vnto them,Of the rot in Conies. they are but two: the first is rottennesse, which commeth by giuing them too much greene meate, or gathering their Greeues, and giuing it them with the Dewe on; therefore let them haue it, but seldome, and then the drinesse of the Hay will euer drinke vp the moysture, knit them, and keepe them sound without danger. The next is a certaine rage or madnesse,Of madnes in Conies. ingendred by corrupt bloud springing from the ranckenesse of their keeping; and you shall know it by their wallow∣ing and tumbling with their heeles vpward, and lea∣ping in their Boxes. The cure is to giue them Hare∣thistell to eate, and it will heale them. And thus much of the tame rich Cony and his properties. The end of the foure-footed Beasts.
The second Booke. Of Poultrie. CHAPTER. I. Contayning the ordering, fatting, cramming, and curing of all infirmities of Poultry, as Cocks, Hennes, Chic∣kens, Capons, Geese, Turkies, Phesants, Partridges, Quailes, House-doues, and all sorts of Fowle what∣soeuer. And first, of the dung-hill-Cocke, Henne, Chic∣ken and Capon. SOme small thing hath beene written of this nature before, but so drawne from the opini∣ons of old Writers, as Italians, French, Dutch, and such like, that it hath no coherence or con∣gruitie with the practise and ex∣perience of English customes, both their rules and climbes being so different from ours, that except we were to liue in their Countries, the rules which are Printed are vselesse, and to no purpose. To let passe
then the opinions of strangers, and come to our owne home-bred knowledge, which is so mixed with all profitable experiments, that it needeth not the mo∣dels of other Nations so much as men would make vs beleeue. You shall vnderstand that the ng∣hill Cocke (for the fighting Cocke deseeh a much larger and particular discourse) is a Fowle of all other birds the most manliest;Of the dung∣hill Cocke. stately and maiesticall, very ame and familiar with the Man, and naturally incli∣ned to liue and prosper in habitable houses: he is hot and strong in the Art of generation, and will serue tenne Hennes sufficiently, and some twelue and thir∣teene, he delighteth in open and liberall planes, where he may lead forth his Hennes into greene pastures, and vnder hedges, where they may worme and bathe themselues in the Sunne, for to be pent vp in walled places, or in paued Courts is most vnnaturall vnto them, neyther will they prosper therein. Now of the choyse and shape of the dung-hill Cocke,Of the choyse and shape of the Cocke. he would be of a large and well sised bodie, long from the head to the rumpe, and thicke in the garth▪ his necke would be long, loose and curiously bending it, and his bodie together being straight, and high vp erected, as the Falcon and other birds of pray are, his combe, wattles, and throat would be large, great compasse, iagged, and very Scarlet red, his eyes round and great, the colour answering the colour of his plume or male, as, gray with gray, red with red, or yellow with yellow, his bill would be crooked, sharp, & strongly set on to his head, the colour being sutable with the colour of the feathers on his head, his mayne
necke-feathers would be very long, bright, and shi∣ning, couering from his head to his shoulders, his legs straight, and of a strong beame, with large long spurres, sharpe and a little bending, and the colour blacke, yellow, or blewish, his clawes short, strong and well wrinckled; his tayle long, grosse and bushy, his wings rather broad then long, and couering his body very closely, and for the generall colour of the dung-hill Cocke, it would be red, for that is medici∣nall, and oft vsed in Cullisses and restoratiues. This Cocke should be valiant within his owne walke, and if he be a little knauish, he is so much the better; he would be oft crowing, and busie in scratching the earth to finde out wormes and other food for his Hennes. Now for the Henne, if she be good a one, she should not differ much from the nature of the Cocke,Of the He her choyse and shape. but be valiant, vigilant, and laborious both for her selfe and her Chickens. In shape the biggest and largest are the best, euery proportion answering these before descri∣bed of the Cocke, onely in stead of her Combe she should haue vpon her crowne a high thicke tust of feathers: to haue many and strong clawes is good, but to want hinder clawes is better, for they oft breake the Egges, and such Hennes sometimes proue vnna∣turall, it is not good to chuse a crowing Henne, for they are neyther good breeders no good layers. If you chuse Hennes to sit, chuse the elder, for they constant, and will sit out their times; and if you will chuse Hennes to lay, chuse the younger, for they are lusty and prone to the act of ingendring, but for
neyther purpose chuse a fat Henne, for if you set her, she will forsake her Nest, and if you keepe her to lay▪ she will lay her Egges without shelles. Besides, a fat Henne will waxe sloathfull, and neither delight in the one nor the other Art of nature, such Hennes then are euer fitter for the dish then the Henne-house. The best time to set Hennes to haue the best, lar∣gest,Of setting Hennes. and most kindely Chickens, is in February, in the increase of the Moone, so that she may hatch or dis∣close her Chickens in the increase of the next new Moone being in March, for one brood of March Chickens is worth three broods of any other: you may set Hennes from March till October, and haue good Chickens, but not after by any meanes, for the Wi∣ter is a great enemy to their breeding. A Henne doth sit twenty one daies iust, and then hatcheth, but Peacocks, Turkies, Geese, Ducks, and other water∣fowle sit thirty: so that if you set your Henne, as you may doe vpon any of their egges, you must set her vpon them nine daies before you set her on her owne. A Henne will couer nineteene egges well, and that is the most, in true rule, she should couer, but vpon hat number soeuer you set her, let it be odde; for so the egges will lye round, close, and in euen proporon together: It is good when you lay your egges first vn∣der your Hennes, to marke the vpper side of them, and then to watch the Henne, to see if she busie her selfe to turne them from one side to the other, which if you finde, she doth not, then when she riseth from her egges, to feede or bath her selfe, you must supply that office, and turne euery egge your selfe, and
your Hen of so much the lesse reckoning for the vse of breeding: be sure that the Egges which you lay vnder her, be new and sound,Choyse of Egges. which you may know by their heauinesse, fulnesse, and cleerenesse, if you hold them vp betwixt the sunne and your eye-sight; you must by no meanes, at any time raise your Henne from her nest, for that will make her vtterly for∣sake it. Now, for helping a Henne to hatch her Egges, or doing that which should be her office, it is vnnecessa∣rie, & shalbe much better to be forborne then any way vsed; or to make doubt of bringing forth, or to thinke the Henne sitteth too long (as many foolish curious housewifes doe) if you be sure you set her vpon sound Egges, is as friuolous, but if you set her vpon vn∣sound Egges, then blame your selfe, both of the losse and iniurie done to the Henne in her losse of labour. A Henne will be a good sitter from the second yeere of her laying, to the fift, but hardly any longer: you shall obserue euer when your Henne riseth from her nest, to haue meate and water ready for her, least strayning too far to seeke her foode, she let her Egges coole too much, which is very hurtfull. In her ab∣sence you shall stirre vp the straw of her nest, and make it soft and handsome, and lay the Egges in or∣der, as she left them: doe not in the election of your Egges, chuse those which are monstrous great, for they many times haue two yolks, and though some write, that such Egs wilbring out two Chickens, yet they are deceiued, for if they bring forth two, they are com∣monly most abortiue and monstrous. To perfume the
nest with Brimstone is good, but with Rosemary is much better. To set Hens in the winter time in stowes or ouens is of no vse with vs in england, & though they may by that meanes bring forth, yet will the Chic∣kens be neuer good nor profitable, but like the plan∣ting of Lemon and Pomegranate trees, the fruit will come a great deale short of the charges. When your Henne at any time is absent from her nest, you must haue great care to see that the Cocke come not to sit vpon the Egges, (as he will offer to doe) for hee will endanger to breake them, and make her loue her nest worse. Assoone as your Chickens be hatch,Of Chickens if any be weaker then other, you shall lap them in wooll, and let them haue the ayre of the fire, and it will strengthen them to perfume them with a little Rosemary is very whole∣some also; and thus you may in a siue keepe the first hatcht Chickens till all the rest bee disclosed (for Chickins would haue no meate for two dayes) and some shels being harder then other, they will take so much distance of time in opening: yet vnlesse the Chickins be weake, or the Henne rude, it is not amisse to let them alone vnder her, for she will nourish them most kindely: after two dayes is past, the first meat you giue them should be very small Oatemeale, some drie, and some steept in Milke, or else fine wheat-bread crummes, and after they haue got strength, then Curds, Cheese-parings, white bread crusts soak'd in Milke or drinke; Barley-meale or wheate-bread cal∣ded, or any such like soft meat that is small, and will easely be deuided. It is good to keepe Chickens one
fortnight in the house, and after to suffer them to goe abroad with the Henne to worme, for that is very wholesome: to choppe greene Chyues amongst your Chickens meate will preserue them from the Rye, and other diseases in the head; neither must you at any time let your Chickens want water, for if they bee forc'd to drinke in puddles, it will breede the Pippe: also, to feede vpon Tares, Darnell, or Cockell, is dange∣rous for young Chickens. You may by these foods before said,Of feeding and cram∣ming Chic∣kens. feed Chickens very fat vnder their Dams: but if you will haue fat cram'd Chickens, you shall coope them vp when the Dame forsaketh them, and the best crammes for them is Wheat-Meale and Milke, made into dough, and then the crammes steeped in Milke, and so thrust downe their throats; but in any case, let the crams be small, and well wet, for choaking. Foureteene dayes will feed a Chicken sufficiently: and thus much briefely for your breede. Now,Of preser∣uing Eggs. because Egges of themselues are a singular profit; you shall vnderstand, that the best way to pre∣serue or keepe them long, is, as some thinke, to lay them in Straw, and couer them close, but that is too colde; and besides, will make them mustie: others will lay them in Branne, but that is too hot, and will make them putrifie: and others will lay them in Salt, but that makes them waste and diminish: the best way then to keepe them most sweet, most sound, and most full, is onely to keepe them in a heape of old Malt, close, and well couered all ouer. You shall gather your Egges vp once a day,Of gathe∣ring Egges, and
leaue in the nest but the nest Egge, and no more; and that would euer be in the after-noone when you haue seene euery Henne come from her nest seuerally: some Hennes will by their cackling tell you when they haue layd, but some will lay mute, therefore you must let your owne eye be your instructer. Now,Of the Ca∣pon, when to carue him. touching the Capon, which is the gult Cocke-chicken, you shall vnderstand, that the best time to carue or gueld him, is, assoone as the Dame haue left them, (if the stones become downe) or else assoone as they beginne to crowe: for the Art of caruing it selfe, it is both common and easie, yet much sooner to bee learned by seeing one carued, then by any demonstration in writing. These Capons are of two vses:A Capon to leade Chickens. the one is, to lead Chickens, Ducklings, young Turkies, Peahens, Phe∣sants and Partridges, which hee will doe altogether, both naturally and kindely, and through largenesse of his body will brood or couer easily thirtie or thirty and fiue; hee will lead them forth safely, and defend them against Kites or Buzzards, more better then the Hennes: therefore the way to make him to take to them, is, with a fine small Briar, or else sharpe Nettles at night, to beate and sting all his brest and neather parts, and then in the darke to seate the Chickens vn∣der him, whose warmth taking away his smart, hee will fall much in loue with them, and when so euer hee proueth vnkinde, you must sting or beat him againe,Of feeding or cram∣ming Ca∣pons. and this will make him hee will neuer forsake them. The other vse of Capons is, to feede for the Dish,
as eyther at the Barne dores, with craps of Corne and the chauings of pulse, or else in Pennes in the house, by cramming them, which is the most dain∣tie. The best way then to cramme a Capon (setting all strange inuentions apart) is to take Barley-meale, rea∣sonably sifted, and mixing it with new Milke, make it into a good stiffe dough; then make it into long crams, biggest in the midst, and small at both ends, and then wetting them in lukewarme Milke, giue the Capon a full gorgefull thereof three times a day, Morning, Noone, and Night, and he will in three weekes bee as fat as is fit for any man to eate. As for mixing their crames with sweet Worte, Hogges-grease, or Sallet-Oyle, they are by experience found to breede loath in the Birds, and not to feede at all; onely keepe this obseruation, not to giue your Capon new meat till the first bee put ouer; and if you finde your Capon hard of digestion, then you shall sift your meale finer, for the finer your meale is, the sooner it will passe through their bodies. And thus much for the Ca∣pon. Now of their infirmities, they follow in order. CHAP. II. Of the pippe in Poultrie. THE Pippe is a white thinne scale, growing on the tippe of the tongue, and will make Poultrie they cannot feede; it is easie to be discerned, and pro∣ceedeth from drinking pudled water, from want of water, or from eating filthy meate. The cure is, to pull off the scale with your naile, and then rub the tongue with salt.
CHAP. III. Of the roupp in Poultrie. THE roupp is a filthy bile or swelling on the rompe of Poultrie, and will corrupt the whole bo∣die. It is knowne by the staring and turning bake∣wards of the feathers. The cure is, to pull away the feathers, and opening the sore to thrust out the ore, and then wash the place with Salt and Water, or with brie, and it will helpe. CHAP. IIII. Of the flxe in Poultrie. THis fluxe in Poultrie commeth with eating too much moyst meate. The cure is, to giue them Pease branne scalded, and it will stay them. CHAP. V. Of stopping in the belly. STopping in the bellies of Poultrie, is contrarie to the flxe, so that they cannot mute, therefore, you shall annoint their vents, and then giue them eyther small bits of bread, or Corne, steept in mans vrine. CHAP. VI. Of Lice in Poultrie. IF your Poultrie be much troubled with lice, as  is a common infmitie, proceeding from corrupt foode, or want of bahing in sand, as▪ or such like▪ you sall  Peppe small beaten, and mixin i with
warme water, wash your Poultrie therein, and it will kill all sorts of vermine. CHAP. VII. Of stinging with veneus . IF your Poultrie be stung with any  thing, as you may perceiue by their lowring and swelling, you shall then annoint them with Rewe and Butter mixt together, and it helpeth. CHAP. VIII. Of sore eyes in Poultrie. IF your Poultrie haue sore eyes, you shall take a leafe or two of ground-Iuie, and chawing it in your mouth, sucke out the iuyce, and pit it into the sore eye, and it will most assuredly heale it. CHAP. IX. Of Hennes which crow. IF your Hennes crowe, which is an ill signe and vn∣naturall; you shall pull their wings, and giue her to eate eyther Barley scortched, or small wheate, and keepe her close from other Poultrie. CHAP. X. Of Hennes that eate their Egges. IF your Henne will eate her Egges, you shall onely lay for her nest-Egge a piece of Chalke out like an Egge, at which oft picking and loosing her labour shee will refraine the euill.
CHAP. XI. Of keeping a Henne from sitting. IF you would not haue your Henne sit, you shall bath her oft in colde water, and thrust a small feather through her nosthrils. CHAP. XII. Of making Hennes lay soone and oft. IF you feed your Hennes often with toasts taken out of Ale, with Barley boilde, or spelted fitches, they will lay soone, oft, and all the winter. CHAP. XIII. Of making Hennes leane. BEcause fat Hennes commonly either lay their Egges without shels, or at the best hand lay very small Egges, to keepe them leane, and in good plight for laying, you shall mixe both their meate and water with the pouder of Tylesheards, Chalke, or else Tres, twice or thrice a weeke. CHAP. XIIII. Of the Crow-trodden. IF your Henne be trodden with a carryon Crow, or Rooke, as oft they are, it is mortall and incure∣able, and you shall know it by the staring vp of her feathers, and hanging of her wings, there is no way with her then but presently to kill her.
CHAP. XV. Of the Henne-house, and the scituation. NOw for as much as no Poultry can be kept eyther in health or safety abroad, but must of force be housed, you shall vnderstand that your Henne-house would be large & spacious with somwhat a high roofe, the wals strong, both to keep out theeues, and vermine, the windowes vpon the Sunne rising, strongly lathed, and close shuts inward; round about the inside of the wals vpon the ground would be built large pens of three foot high, for Geese, Duckes, and great fowle to sit in. Neare o the eauings of the house would be long Pearches reaching from one side of the house to the other, on which ould sit your Cocks, Hennes, Capons and Turkies, each on seuerall Pearches, as they are dis∣posed: at another side of the houe in that part which is darkest, ouer the ground pens, would be fixed hampers full of straw for nests, in which your Hennes shall lay their egs; but when they sit to bring forth Chickens, then let them sit on the ground, for otherwise is dange∣rous: let there be pins stricken into the wals, so that your Poultry may climbe to their Pearches with ease: let the flore by no means be paued, but of earth, smooth & ea∣sie: let the smaller fowle haue a hole at one end of the house made to come in and out at, when they please, or else they will seeke roust in other places, and for the greater fowle the doore may be penned Euening and Morning; this house would be placed eyther neare some Kitchin, Brewhouse, or else some Kilne, where it may haue ayre of the fire, & be perfumed▪ with smoke, which to Pullen is delightfull and wholesome. And thus much of the Cocke, Henne, Capon, and Chicken.
CHAP. XVI. Of Geese, their nature, choyse, and how to breed on. GEese, are a fowle of great profit many waies, as first for foode, next for their feathers, and lastly for their greafe. They are held of Husband-men to bee fowle of two liues, because they liue both on land and water: and therefore all men must vnderstand that ex∣cept he haue eyther Pond or Streame, he can neuer keepe Geese well. They are so watchfull and carefull ouer themselues, that they will preuet most dangers▪ Grasse also they must necessarily hau and the worst, and that which is most vselesse is the best, as that which is moorish, rotten, and vnsauory for cartell. To good grasse they are a great enemy, for their dung and treading will putrifie it, and make it worse then br∣raine. Now for the choyse of Geese,The choyse of Geese. the largest is the best, and the colour would be white or gray, all of one paire, for pyde are not so profitable, and blacke are worse: your Gander would be knauish and hardy, for he will defend his Goslings the better. Now for the laying of egges,Of laying egges and sitting. a Goose beginneth to lay in the Spring, and she that layeth eareliest is euer the best Goose, for she may haue a second hatch. Geee will lay from February till Iune, and ordinarily a Goose will lay twelue, and some sixteene egges; some will lay more, but it is seldome, and they cannot all be well couered: you shall know when your Goose will lay, by carrying of straw vp and downe in er
mouth, and scattering it abroad; and you shall know when she will sit by her continuing on the Nest still after she hath laid. You must set a Goose vpon her owne egges, for she will hardly or vnkindly fit another Gooses egges; you shall in her straw when you set her, mixe Nttle roots, for it is good for the Gostings, thir∣tie dayes is the full time that a Goose sitteth, but if the weather be fayre and warme, shee will hatch three or foure daies sooner: euer when the Goose riseth from her Nest, you shall giue her meat, as flegge Oates, and Branne scalded, and giue her leaue to bath in the water. After she hath hatched her Goslings, you shall keepe them in the house ten daies,Ordring of Goslings. & feede them with curds scalded, chippings, or Barly-meale, in Milke knoden and broken, also ground Malt is excellent good, or any Branne that is scalded in Water, Milke, or tappings of drinke. After they haue got a little strength, you may let them goe abroad, with a keeper, fiue or sixe houres in the day, and let the damme at her pleasure intice them into the water; then bring them in, and put them vp, and thus order them till they be able to defend themselues from vermine. Af∣ter a Gosling is a month or sixe weekes old,Of green Geese and their fatting. you may put it vp to feed for a greene Goose, and it will be per∣fectly fed in another moneth following; and to feed them there is no meat better then legge Oates, boyl'd and giuen plenty thereof thrise a day, Morning, Nooe, and Night, with good store of Milke, or Milke and Waer, to drinke. Now you shall vnderstand one Gander will serue well fiue Geese,Of Ganders. and to haue not abo orty Geese in
a flocke is best, for to haue more is both hurtfull troublesome. Now for the fatting of elder Geese which are those which are fiue or sixe moneths old,Fatting of elder Geese. you shall vn∣derstand that after they haue in the stubble fields, and during the time of haruest got into good flesh, you shall then chuse out such Geese as you will feede, and put them in seuerall pennes which and darke, and there feede them thrise a day good store of Oates, or spelted Beanes, and giue to drinke Water, and Barly-meale mixt togethe▪ which must euermore stand before them, will in three weekes feede a Goose so fatt a needfull. Now lastly,Of gathe∣ring Geese feathers. for the gathering of a Gooses you shal vnderstand, that howsoeuer some  ad∣uise you for a needlesse profit to pull your a yeere, March and August: yet certainely it is nought and ill: for first, by disabling the flight of the Goose, you make her subiect to the cruelty of Foxe, and other rauenous beasts, and by vncl her in Winter, you strike that cold into her which her sodainly, therefore it is best to stay till time, or till you kill her, and then you may imploy all her feathers at your pleasure, eyther for beds, , or Scriueners. For infirmities in Geese,Of the Gar∣gel in Geese. the most and worse are subiect vnto, is the Gargill; which is a stopping of the head. And the cure is, to take three or foure cloues of Garlike, and beating them in a with sweet Butter, make little long balle
and giue two or three of them to the Goose, fasting, and then shut her vp for two houres after. CHAP. XVII. Of Turkies, their nature, vse, increase and breeding. TVrkies, howsoeuer by some writers they are held deuourers of Corne, strayers abroad, euer puling for meate, and many such like fained troubles, as if they were vtterly vn∣profitable, yet it is certaine they are most delicate, ei∣ther in Paste, or from the Spit, and being fat, farre exceeding any other house-fowle whatsoeuer; nay they are kept with more ease and lesse cost: for they wil take more pains for their food then any other Bird, onely they are enemies to a Garden, and from thence must euer be barred. They are when they are young, very tender to bring vp, both because they haue a straying nature in themselues, and the dammes are so negligent that whilest she hath one following her, she neuer respecteth the rest; therefore they must haue a vigilant keeper to attend them till they can shift for themselues, and then they will flocke together and seldome be parted. Till you fat them you neede not take care for food for them; they loue to roost in trees or other high places. Now for your choyse of such as you would breede on;The choyse of the Tur∣kie-Cocke. your Turkie-Cocke would not bee aboue two yeere old at most, be sure that he be louing to the Chickens; and for your Henne she will lay till she be
fiue yeeres old and vpward. Your Turkie, be a Bird large, stout, proud, and he walketh deiected, he is neuer good treader. The Turky-Henne if she be not preuented will lay abroad in secret places,Of the Tur∣kie-Henne, her sitting. therefore you must watch her, and bring her into your Henne-house, and there com∣pell her to lay. They begin to lay in March, and will sit in Aprill, and eleauen egge, or thirtee most they should couer: they hatch euer fiue and twenty, and thirty dayes. When hatched their broods be sure to keepe the warme, for the least cold kils them, and feed  with Curds, or greene fresh Cheese cut into peeces. Let their drinke be Milke  or  and Water: you must be carefull to feed them oft; Turky-Henne will not like the House-henne call Chickens to feed them. When your Chicks strength, you shall feede them abroad in some walled grasse-plat, where they cannot stray, or be at charge of a Keeper. The dewe is much ∣full vnto them, therefore you must house night, and let them abroad after Sunne the Morning. Now for the fatting of Turkies,Of feeding Turkies. sodden ∣ly is excellent, or sodden Oates for the , and then for another fortnight cramme in all sorts as you cramme your Capon, and be fat beyond measure. Now for their in when they are at liberty, they are such good ∣tions for themselues, that they will neuer trouble owners, but being coopt vp, you must
is before discribed for Pullen. Their egges are ex∣ceeding wholesome to eate, and rstore nature d∣cayed wonderfully. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Ducke, and such like water-fwles. THe tame Ducke is an exceeding necessarie fowle for the Husbandmans yard, for shee asketh no charge in keeping, but lieth of corne lost, or other things of lesse profit. She is once a yeere a very great layer of egges, and when she it∣teth she craues both attendance and  for be∣ing restrayne from seeking her food, she must be hel∣ped with a litle barly, or other oer  of corne, such as else you would giue vnto Swine  it∣ting, hatching and feeding of her all points to be obserued in such manner as before with the Goose, onely after they are they will shift better for their food then will. For the fatting of Duckes or , you may doe it in three weekes, by giuing them any of Pulse or graine, and good store of water. If you will preserue wilde-Ducks,Of wilde-Duckes, and their orde∣ring. you must all in a little peece of ground, in which is or Spring, and couer the toppe of it all buer with a strong Net: the Pond must be set with many  of Oziers, and haue many secret hols and eckes in buses and other placs to hide the Duc in, for that will make the delight and fd . The wilde Ducke when
the Drake, and hide her Nest, for he else will Egges. When she hath hatcht she is most  to nourish them, and needeth no attendance more thn meate, which would be giuen fresh twise a day, as ∣ded Branne, Oates, or Fitches. An house Hnne will hatch wilde-Duckes egges, and the meate will be much better, yet euery time they goe into the water, they are in danger of the Kite, because the Henne not guard them. In the same manner as you wilde-Duckes, so you may nourish Tayles, , Sheldrakes, or greene Plouers. CHAP. XIX. Of Swannes, and their feeding. TO speake of the breeding of is needlesse, because they order themselues in that any man can direct them, they build their Nests, you them to remaine vndisturbed, and it will be but for the feeding of them fat for the dish, you feed your Cygnets in all sorts as you feed you ▪ and they will be thorow fat in seauen or eight , eyther coop't vp in the house, or else in some priuate Court; but if you would haue in shorter space, then you shall feede them in Pond, hedg'd or payl'd in for the purpose, little drie ground left where they may it and themselues, and you may place two troghes, of Barly and VVater, the other full of old
on which they may feede at their pleasure, and thus doing, they will be fat in lesse then foure weekes: for by this meanes a Swanne keepeth himselfe  and cleane, who being a much dfiling Bird, liueh in drie places so vncleanely that hoe cannot prosper, vnlesse his attender be diligent to dresse and his walke euery howre. CHAP. XX. Of Peacocks, and Peahennes, their increase and orde∣ring. PEacocks, howsoeuer our olde writers are to deceiue themselues in their prai∣ses, are Birds more to delight the eye by looking on them, then for any other parti∣cular profit; the best commoditie rising , being the clensing and keeping of  the from venemous things, as Toads,  and like, which is their daily foode: whence it , that their fleshis very vnwholesome, and vsed in great ban∣quets more for the rarenesse then the nourishment; for it is most certaine, roste a Peacocke or Peahenne neuer so sore and drie, then set it up, and looke on it the next day, and it will be blood rawe, as if it had not beene rosted at all. The Peahenne loues to lay her Egges abroad in bushes and hedges, where the Cocke may not finde thm, for if hee doe hee will breake them; therefore assoone as shee begins to lay  he from the Cocke, and house her till shee haue brought forth her
young, and that the cronet of feathers rise at their foreheads, and then turne them , and the Cocke will loue them, but not Peahnnesits iust thirtie dayes, and in her graine, with water, is food good enough: before Chickens goe abroad you shall feede them with greene Cheese, and Barly-Meale, with water; they goe abroad the Dame will prouide for them▪ The best time to set a Peahenne is at the beginning of the Moone, and if you set Henne-Egges amongst Egges, shee will nourish both equally. Th chickens are very tender, and the least colde the therefore you must haue care to warme, and not to let them goe  bu Sunne shineth. Now, for the feeding of labour you may well saue, for if they liue where there is any Corne stirring, they will , and being meate which is seldome or neuer , mattereth not so much for their fatting. CHAP. XXI. Of the tame Pidgeon, or rough footed. THE tame and rough footed Pidgeon dif∣fers not much from the wilde , onely they are somewhat bigger, and familiar, and apt to became; bring not forth aboue one paire of at a time, and those which are the least of euer the best breeders. They must haue their and boxes made cleane once a weeke; for they
much in neatnesse, and if the walles whited or painted they loue it the better, for they de∣light much in faire buildings. They will bring their young ones once a moneth, if they , and after they are once pyr'd they will  be di∣uided. The Cocke is a very louing and naturall Birde, both to his Henne and the young , and will sit the Egges whilest the Henne feedeth, as the sits whilest he feedeth: hee will also feede the young with as much painefulnesse as the Dame dth, and is best pleased when he is brooding them. These kinde of Pidgeons you shall feede with white Pease, and good store of cleane water. In the roome where they lodge you shall euer haue a salt cat for them to pke on, and that which is gathered from  is the best: also, they would haue good , Grauell and pybble, to bathe and withall, and aboue all things no vermine, or other Birds, come , especially Sterlings, and such like, which are great Egge-suckers. And thus much of the tame Pidgeon. CHAP. XXII. Of nourishing and fatting Hearnes, Bitters. HEarnes are nourished for  ey∣ther for Princes sports, to the  their Hawkes, or out the Table at of bringing them vp with
out of the nests before they can flie, and into a large high Barne, where there is many  and crosse beames for them to pearch on: then the floore diuers square boords with rings in , and betweene euery boord, which would be square, to place round shallow tubbes full of then to the boords you shall tye great  of dogges flesh, cut from the bones, according  the number which you feede; and be sure to house sweet, and shift the water oft, onely the must be made so that it may raine in now an thn▪ in which the Hearne will take much delight. you feed her for the dish, then you shall feed with Liuers, and the intrailes of Beastes, such like, cut in great gobbets; and this  of feeding will also feede either Gull, Puet, or but the Bitter is euer best to be fedde by ∣cause when you haue fed him you may tie together, or else he will cast vp his meate CHAP. XXIII. Of feeding the Partridge, Phesant, and . THese three are the most daintiest, of all other Birds, and for the you may feed them roome, where you may haue where they may runne and selues, in diuers corners of the roome; idst you shall haue three wheate sheaues, their eares vpward, and one with the
ward, and neere vnto them shallow Tubs with water, that the Fowle may pecke the wheat out of the eares, and drinke at their pleasures, and by this manner of feeding you shall haue them as fat as is possible: as for your Quailes, the best feeding them is in long flat shallow boxes, each boxe able to holde two or three dozen, the foremost side being set with round pinnes so thicke that the Quaile may doe no more but put out her head, then before that open side shall stand one trough full of small chilter wheate, and another with water, then one with wheate againe, and another with water; and thus in one fortnight or three weekes you shall haue them exceeding fat. CHAP. XXIIII. Of Godwits, Knots, gray-plouer, or Curlewes. FOR to feede any of these Fowles, which are esteemed of all other the daintiest and deerest, fine Chilter wheat and water giuen them thrice a day, Morning, Noone, and Night, will doe it very effectually; but if you intend to haue them extraordinary and crammed fowle, then you shall take the finest drest wheate-meale, and mix∣ing it with Milke, make it into paste, and euer as you knead it sprinckle into it the graines of small Chilter-wheat till the paste be fully mixt therewith; then make little small crammes thereof, and dipping them in wa∣ter, giue to euery fowle according to his bignesse, and that his gorge be well filled: doe thus as oft as you shall finde their gorges emptie, and in one fortnight
they will be fedde beyond measure. And with these crammes you may feede any Fowle, of what kinde or nature soeuer. CHAP. XXV. Of feeding Blacke-birds, Thrushes, Felfares, or any small Birds whatsoeuer. TO feede these Birds, being taken olde and wilde, it is good to haue some of their kindes tame to mixe among them, and then putting them into great Cages of three or foure yards square, to haue diuers troughs placed therein, some filled with Heps & Hawes, some with Hempe-seed, some with Rape-seed, some with Linseed, and some with water, that the tame teaching the wilde to eate, and the wilde finding sch change and alteration of food, they will in twele or four∣teene dayes grow exceeding fat and fit for the vs of the Kitchin. The end of the Poultrie.
Of Hawkes. CHAPTER I. Of the generall Cures for all diseases and infirmities Hawkes, whether they be short winged Hawkes, or long winged Hawkes; and first, of Castings. HAwkes, are deuided into two kindes, that is to say, short win∣ged Hawkes; as the Gos-hawke and her Tercell, the Sparrow-Hawke, Musket, and such like, whose wings are shorter then their traines, and doe belong to the Ostringer; and long-winged Hawkes, as the Faul∣con-gentle, and her tercell; the Gerfaulcon and Lerkin, the Lanner, Merlin, Hobby, and diuers others, which belong vnto Faulconers. Now, for as much as their infirmities, for the most part, proceede from the in∣discretion of their gouernours, if they flie them out of season, before they be inseamed and haue the fat, glut, and filthinesse of their bodies scoured and clen∣sed
ou, I thinke it not amisse first to speake of Hawkes castings, which are the naturallest and gentlest purges or scourings a Hawke can take, and doth the least of∣fend the vitall parts. Therefore you shall know, that all Ostringers doe esteeme plumage, and the soft feathers of small Birds, with some part of the skinne, to be the best casting a short winged Hawke can take; and for the purging of her head, to make her tyer much vpon sheepes rumpes, the fat cut away, and the bones well couered with Parcely. But for long-winged Hawkes, the best casting is fine Flannel, cut in∣to square pieces of an inch & a halfe square, and all to iagged, and so giuen with a little bit of meat. By thee castings you shall know the soundnesse and vnsound∣nesse of your Hawke: for when shee hath cast, you shal take vp the casting, which wil be like a hard round pellet, somewhat long, and presse it betweene your fingers, and if you finde nothing but cleere water come from it, then it is a signe your Hawke is sound and lustie; if there come from it a yellowish or filthie matter, or if it stincke, it is a signe of rottennesse and disease; but if it be greazy or slimy on the one side, then it is a signe the Hawke is full of grease inwardly, which is not broken nor dissolued: and then you sll giue her a scouring,Of scou∣rings. which is a much stronger purg∣tion; and of Scourings the gentlest, next asting, is o take foure or fiue Pellets of the yellow roote of Sea∣dine, well clensed from filth, being as bigge as great Pease, and giue them out of water, arely in a Mor∣ning, when the Hawke is fasting, and it will clese her mightily. If you take these pellets of Selladine,
and giue them out of the oyle of Roses, or out of the si∣rop of Roses, it is a most excellent scouring also, onely it will for an houre or two make the Hawke somewhat sickish. If you giue your Hawke a little Aloes-Cicatrie, as much as a Beane wrapt vp in her meat, it is a most soueraigne scouring, and doth not onely auoyd grease, but also killeth all sorts of wormes whatsoeuer. If your Hawke by ouer-flying, or too soone flying, be heated and inflamed in her body, as they are much subiect thereunto, you shall then to coole their bodies, giue them Stones. These Stones are very fine white pibbles, lying in the sands of grauelly riuers, the big∣nesse wherof you must chuse according to the bignesse of your Hawke, as some no bigger then a Beane, and those be for Merlins or Hobbies; some as bigge as two Beanes, and they are for Faulcons-gentle, Lanners, and such like, and some much bigger then they, which are for Gerfaulcons, or such like. And these Stones if they be full of crests and welts, they are the better, for the roughest stone is the best, so it be smoth and not greety. And you shall vnderstand that Stones are most proper for long-wing'd Hawkes, and the number which you shall giue, at the most, must neuer exceede fifteene, for seauen is a good number, so is nine or eleauen, according as you finde the Hawkes eate, more or lesse: and these Stones must euer be giuen out of fayre water, hauing beene before very well pickt and trim'd from all durt or filthinesse. And thus much of the Hawks, Castings, Scowrings, and Stones.
CHAP. II. Of Impostmes in Hawkes. IF your Hawke haue any Impostume rising vpon her, which is apparant to be seene, you shall take sweet Rayss, and boyle them in Wine, and then cruhing them lay them warme to the sore, and it will both ripen and heale it: onely it shall be good to scoure your Hawke very well inwardly, for that will abate the fluxe of all euill humours. CHAP. III. Of all sorts of sore Eyes. FOr any sore Eye there is nothing better then to take the iuyce of ground-Iuie, and drop it in∣to the Eye. But if any filme or webbe be growne before you vse this medicine, then you shall take G∣ger finely seyrst, and blow it into the Eye, and it will breake the filme, then vse the iuyce of Iuie, and it will weare it away. CHAP. IIII. Of the Pantas in Hawkes. THe Pantas is a stopping or shortnesse of winde in Hawkes. And the cure is to giue her the scowring of Selladine, and the oyle of Roses, and then to wash her meate in the decoction of Tussilaginis, and it will helpe her. CHAP. V. Of casting the Gorg. THis is when a Hawke, eyther through meat which she cannot disgest, or through surfet in feeding, ca∣steth
vp the meate which she hath eaten, which is most dangerous: And the onely way to oure her is to keepe her fasting, and to feede her with a very little at once of warme bloudy meate, as not aboue halfe a Sparrow at a time, and be sure neuer to feede her againe till she haue indued the first. CHAP. VI. Of all sorts of Wormes or Fylanders in Hawkes. VVOrmes or Fylanders, which are a kinde of wormes in Hawkes, are eyther inward or out∣ward: Inward, as in the guttes or intrayles, or out∣ward, as in any ioynt or member: if they be inward, the scowring of Aloes is excellent to kill them; but if they be outward, then you shall bathe the place with the iuyce of the hearbe Ameos mixt with Hony. CHAP. VII. Of all swellings in Hawkes feete, and of the Pine in the foote. FOr the Pinne in the sole of the Hawkes foote, or for any swelling vpon the foote, whether it be soft or hard, there is not any thing more soueraigne, then to bathe it in Patch-grease moulten, and applied to, exceeding hot, and then to fold a fine Cambricke rag dipt in the same grease about the sore. CHAP. VIII. Of the breaking of a Pnce. THis is a very dangerous hurt in Hawkes, especi∣ally in Gerfaulcons, for if you shall breake or riue
her Pounce, or but coape it so short that she bleede, though it be very little, yet it will indanger her life. The cure therefore is presently vpon the hurt with a hot wyer to eare it till the bloud staunch, and then to drop about it Pitch of Burgundy, and Waxe together, or for want thereof a little hard Marchants Waxe, and that will both heale it, and make the Pounce grow. CHAP. IX. Of Bones broke, or out of ioynt. IF your Hawke haue any bone broke or misplaced; you shall after you haue set it, bathe it with the of Mandrag, and Swallowes, mixt together, and splent it, and in nine dayes it will be knit, and gotten strength. CHAP. X. Of inward bruisings in Hawkes. IF your Hawke eyther by stooping amongst , or by the incounter of some fowle, get any bruise, which you shall know by the blacknesse or bloo∣dinesse of her muts, you shall then annoynt her meat euery time you feede her with Sperma-Caet ll er mutes be cleare againe, and let her meate be and bloudie. CHAP. XI. Of killing of Lyce. IF your Hawke be troubled with Lyce, which is a generall infirmitie, and apparant, for you shall see
them creepe all ouer on the outside of her fethers if she stand but in the ayre of the fire. You shall bathe her all ouer in warme Water and Pepper small beaten, but be sure that the Water be not too hot, for that is dangerous. CHAP. XII. Of the Rye in Hawkes. THis disease of the Rye in Hawkes proceedeth from two causes; the one is cold and poze in the head, the other is foule and most vncleanely feeding, the Faulconer being negligent to feake and cleanse his Hawkes beake and nares, but suffering the bloud and filthinesse of the meate to sticke and cleae thereunto. For indeede, the infirmity is nothing else but a stop∣ping vp of the nares, by meanes whereof the Hawke not being able to cast and auoyde the corruption of her head, it turnes to putrifaction, and in short space kils the Hawke: and this disease is a great deale more incident to short-wing'd Hawkes then to long. The signes whereof are apparant by the stopping of the nares. And the cure is to let your Hawke tyer much vpon sinewie and bony meat, as the rumps of Mutton (the fat being taken away) or the pynions of the wings of fowle, either being well lapt in a good handfull of Parsely, and forcing her to straine hard in the tearing of the same, and with much diligence to cleanse and wash her beake cleane with water after her feeding, especially if her meate were warme and bloudie.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Frounce. THe Frounce is a cankerous vlcer in a Hawkes mouth, got by ouer-flying, or other inflamation proceeding from the inward parts; foule and vncleane food is also a great ingenderer of this disease. The signes are a orenesse in the Hawkes mouth, which sore will be fur'd and couer'd ouer with a white scurfe or such like filthinesse; also if the vlcer be deepe and ill, the Hawke will winde and turne her head awrie, making her beake stand vpward. And the cure it to take Allome, and hauing beaten it to fine powder, mixe it with strong Wine-vinegar till it be somewhat thicke, and then wash and rubbe the sore there∣with till it be raw, and that the scurfe be cleane taken away. Then take the iuyce of Lolliam, and the iuyce of Ra∣dish, and mixing it with Salt, annoynt the sore therewith, and in few dayes it will cure it. CHAP. XIIII. Of the Rheume. THe Rheume is a continuall running or dropping at the Hawkes Nares, proceeding from a gene∣rall cold, or else from ouer-flying, and then a sodine cold taken thereupon: it stoppeth the head, and breeds much corrption therein; and the signes are the drop∣ping before said, and a generall heauinesse, and some∣times a swelling of the head. The cure is to take the iuyce of Beets, and squirt it oft into the Hawes nares. Then when you feede her, wash her meate in
the iuyce of Broomewort, and it will quickely purge, and set her sound. CHAP. XV. Of the Formias in Hawkes. THe Formicas in Hawkes is a hard horne growing vpon the beake of a Hawke, ingendred by a poy∣sonous, and cankerous worme, which fretting the skin and tender yellow welt betweene the head and the beake, occasioneth that hard horne or excression to grow and offend the Bird. The signe is the apparent sight of the horne. And the cure is to take a little of a Buls gall, and beating it with Aloes, annoynt the Hawkes beake therewith Morning and Euening, and it will in very few dayes take the horne away. CHAP. XVI. Of the Fistula in Hawkes. THe Fistula in Hawkes is a cankerous hollow vlcer in any part of a Hawkes body, as it is in men, beasts, or any other creature: the signes are a continu∣all mattering or running of the sore, and a thin sharpe water like lie, which as it falles from the same will fret the sound parts as it goeth. The cure is with a fine small wyer, little stronger then a Virginall wyer, and wrapt close about with a soft sleaued silke, and the poynt blunt and soft, to search the hol∣lownesse and crookednesse of the vlcer, which the pli∣antnesse of the wyer will easily doe, and then hauing found out the bottome thereof, draw forth the wyer, and according to the bignesse of the Orifice, make a
tent of fine lint being wet, which may likewise bend as the wyer did, and be within a very little as long as the vlcer is deepe, for to tent it to the full length is ill, and will rather increase then diinish the Fistula▪ and therefore euer as the Fistula heales, you must make the tent shorter and shorter. But to the purpose, when you haue made your tent fit, you shall first take strong Allome water, and with a small serindge suirt the sore three or foure times therewith, for that will clense, drie, and scoure euery hollownesse in the vlcer: then take the tent and annoynt it with the iuyce of the hearbe Roberte, Vinegar, and Allome, mixt together▪ and it will drie vp the sore. CHAP. XVII. Of the priuie euill in Hawkes. THe priuie euill in Hawkes is a secret hart-sicknesse procured either by ouer-flying, corrupt food, cold, or other disorderly keeping, but most especially for want of Stones, or casting in their due seasons: the signes are heauinesse of head, and countence euill▪ ∣duing of her meate, and foule blacke muteings. The cure is to take Morning and Euening a good piece of a warme Sheepes heart, and steeping it either in n Asses Milke, or new Goats Milke, or for want of both the new Milke of a red Cow, and with the same to feede your Hawke till you see her strength and lust recouered.
CHAP. XVIII. Of wounds in Hawkes. HAwkes, by the crosse in counters of Fowles, especi∣ally the Heron, by stooping amongst , Thornes, Trees, and by diuers such like accidents, doe many times catch ore & most grieuous wounds: the signes whereof, are the outward apparance of the same. And the cure is, if they be long and deepe, & in places that you may conueniently, first to stitch them vp, and then to taint them vp with a little ordinarie Balsamum, and it is a present remedie. But if it be in such a place as you cannot come to stitch it vp, you shall then onely take a little Lint, and dippe it in the iuyce of the Hearbe called Mouseare, and apply it to the soare, and it will in short space heale it. But if it be in such a place as you can by no meanes binde any thing thereunto, you shal then onely annoint or bathe the place with the aforesaid iuyce, and it will heale and drie vppe the same in very short time; the iuyce of the greene Hearbe, called with vs, English Tbacco, will likewise doe the same: for it hath a very speedy course in healing and clensing, as hath beene appro∣ued by diuers of the best Faulconers of this King∣dome, and other nations. CHAP. XIX. Of the Apoplexie, or falling euill in Hawkes. THE Apoplexie or falling euill in Hawkes, is a certaine vertigo or dizinesse of the braine, pro∣ceeding from the oppression of colde humors, which
doe for a certaine space numbe, and as it were mor∣tifie the senses: the signes are a sodaine turning vp of the Hawkes head, and falling from her pearch without baiting, but onely with a generall trembling  all the bodie, and lying so, as it were, in a traunce a little space, she presently recouereth, and riseth vp againe, but is sicke ad heauie many houres after. The cure thereof is, to gather the Hearbe Asterion, when the Moone is in the Wayne, and in the signe Virg, and taking the iuyce thereof to wash your Hawkes meate therein, and so feede her, and it hath beene found a most soueraigne medecine. CHAP. XX. Of the purging of Hawkes. THere is nothing more needfull to Hawkes then purgations and clensings; for they are much sub∣iect to fat and foulenesse of body inwardly, and their exercise being much and violent, if there be neglect, and that their glut be not taken away, it will breede sickenesse and death; therefore it is the part of euery skilfull Faulconer to vnderstand how, and when to purge his Hawke, which is generally euer before she be brought to flying: and the most vsuallest season for the same, is before the beginning of Autumne; for commonly knowing-Gentlemen will not flie at the Partridge till Corne be from the ground; and if he prepare for the Riuer earely, hee will likewise beginne about that season: the best purgation then that you can giue your Hawke, is Aloes Cicatrine, wrapt vp in warme meate, the quantitie of a French Pease, and
so giuen the Hawke to eate euer the next morning after shee hath flowne at any traine, or taken other exercise, whereby shee might breake or dissolue the grease within her. CHAP. XXI. For a Hawke that cannot mut. IF your Hawke cannot mute, as it is a common in∣firmitie which happeneth vnto them; you shall take the leane of Porke, being newly kild, whilest it is warme, to the quantitie of two Wallnuts, and lap∣ping a little Aloes therein, giue it the Hawke to eate, and it will presently helpe her. There bee diuers good Faulconers, in this case, which will take the roots of Selandine, and hauing clensed it, and cut it into little square pieces as bigge as Pease, doe seepe it in the Oyle of Roses, and so make the Hawke swallow downe three or foure of them: and sure this is very good, and wholesome, onely it will make the Hawke excee∣ding sicke for two or three houres after. Neither must the Hawke be in any weake state of body, when this latter Medicine is giuen her. Also, you must obserue to keepe your Hawke at these times exceeding warme, and much on your fist, and to feede her most with warme Birds, lest otherwise you clung and dry vp her intrailes too much, which is both dangerous and mortall. CHAP. XXII. The assuredst signe to know when a Hawke is sick. HAwkes are generally of such stout, strong, and vnyeelding natures, that they will many times
couer and conceale their sickenesses, so long till they be growne to that extreamitie, that no helpe of phi∣sicke or other knowledge can auaile for their safe∣ties: for when the countenance, or decay of stomacke: which are the ordinarie outward faces of infirmities, appeare, then commonly is the disease pastremedie: therefore to preuent that euill, and to know sickenesse whilest it may be cured, you shall take your Hawke, and turning vp her traine, if you see that her tuell or fundament eyther swelleth or looketh red, or if their eies or nares likewise be of a fiery complection, it is a most infallible signe that the Hawke is sicke, and much out of temper. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Feuer in Hawkes. HAwkes are as much subiect to Feuers, as any rea∣tures whatsoeuer, and for the most part they pro∣ceed from ouerflying, or other extraordinary heats, mixt with sodaine coldes, giuen them by the negli∣gence of vnskilfull keepers: and the cure is, to set her in a coole place, vpon a pearch, wrapt about with wet cloathes, and feede her oft with a little at a time, of Chickens flesh, steeped in water, wherein hath been soaked Cowcumber seedes. But if you finde by the stopping of her nares or head, that shee is more off∣ded with colde then heate, then you shall set her in warme places, and feede her with the bloody flesh of Pidgeons, washt eyther in white wine, or in water, wherein hath beene boyld either Sage, Marioram, or Camomill.
CHAP. XXIIII. To helpe a Hawke that cannot digest or indewe her Meate. IF your Hawke be hard of digestion, and neither can turne it ouer, nor emptie her panell, which is very often seene, you shall then take the heart of a Frog, and thrust it downe into her throat, and pull it backe againe by a thread fastened thereunto once or twice sodainely, and it will either make her indewe or cast her gorge presently. CHAP. XXV. Of the Gout in Hawkes. HAwkes, especially those which are free and strong strikers, are infinitely subiect to the Gout, which is a swelling, knotting, and contracting of a Hawkes feet. The cure thereof is, to take two or three drops of blood from her thye-veine, a little aboue her knee, and then annoint her feet with the iyce of the Hearb Holyhocke, and let all her pearch bee annointed also with Tallow, and the iuyce of that Hearbe mixt toge∣ther. Now, if this disease (as often it happeneth) be in a Hawkes wings, then you shall take two or three drops of blood from the veine vnder her wing, and then annoint the pinious and inside thereof with Vn∣guentum de Althea, made very warme, which you may buy of euery Pothecarie.
CHAP. XXVI. Of the stanching of Blood. IT is a knowne experience amongst the best Faulco∣ners, that if the Gerfaulcon shall but loose two or three drops of blood, it is mortall, and the Hawke will die sodainely after; which to preuent, if the blood proceed from any pounce, which is most ordinarie, then vpon the instant hurt, you shall take a little hard Marchants Waxe, and drop it vpon the soare, and it will presently stoppe it; if it be vpon any other part of the Hawkes body, you shall clap thereunto a little of the soft downe of a Hare, and it will immediately stanch it; and without these two things a good Faul∣coner should neuer goe, for they are to be vsed in a moment. And thus much of the Hawke, and her diseases. The end of the Hawke.
Of Bees. CHAPTER I. Of the nature, ordering, and preseruation of Bees. OF all the creatures which are behouefull for the vse of man, there is none more necessarie, wholesome, or more profitable then the Bee, nor any lesse troublesome, or lesse charge∣able.The nature of the ee. To speake then first of the nature of Bees; it is a creature gentle, louing, and familiar about the man which hath the ordering of them, so he come neate, sweet, and cleanely amongst them; otherwise, if hee haue strong, and ill smelling sauours about him, they are curst and malicious, and will sting spitefully, they are exceeding industrious and much giuen to labour: they haue a kinde of go∣uernement amongst themselues, as it were a well or∣dered common-wealth: euery one obaying and fol∣lowing their King or Commander, whose voyce (if
you lay your eare to the Hiue) you shall distinguish from the rest, being louder and greater, and beating with a more solemne measure. They delight to liue amongst the sweetest Hearbs and Flowers that may be; especially, Fenell, and Walgilly-flowers, and there∣fore their best dwellings are in Gardens: and in these Gardens, or neere adioyning thereunto, would be di∣uers Fruit trees growing, chiefely Plumbe trees, or Peach trees, in which, when they cast, they may knit, without taking any farre flight, or wandering to finde out their rest: this garden also would be well fenced, that no Swine nor other Cattell may come therein, as well for ouerthrowing their Hiues, as also for offen∣ding them with other ill sauours. They are also very tender, and may by no meanes endure any colde: whence you must haue a great respect to haue their houses exceeding warme, close, and tight, both to keepe out the frosts and snowes, as also the wet and raine; which, if it once enter into the Hiue, it is a present destruction. To speake then of the Bee-hiue, you shall know there bee diuers opinions touching the same,Of the Bee-Hiue. accor∣ding to the customes and natures of Countries; for in the Champaine Countries, where there is very little store of woods, they make their Hiues of long Rye-straw, the roules being sowed together with Briers; and these Hiues are large and deepe, and euen pro∣portioned like a Sugar-loafe, and crosse-bard within, with flat splints of wood, both aboue and vnder the middest part: in other Champaine Countries, where there wanteth Rie-straw, they make them of Wheat-straw,
as in the West countries: and these Hiues are of a good compasse, but very low and flat, which is nought: for a Hiue is euer better for his largenesse, and keepeth out rayne best, when it is sharpest. In the wood-Countries they make them of clouen hassels watteld about broad splints of Ash, and so formed as before I said, like a Sugar-loafe. And these Hiues are of all other the best, so they be large and smooth within; for the straw Hiue is subiect to breed Mice, and nothing destroyeth Bees sooner then they, yet you must be gouerned by your ability, and such things as the soyle affoords. Now for the wood-Hiue,The trim∣ming of the Hiue. which is the best, you shall thus trimme and prepare it for your Bees: you shall first make a stiffe morter of Lime, and Cow-dung, mixed together; and then hauing crosse-barred the Hiue within, dawbe the outside of the Hiue with the morter, at least three inches thicke, downe close vnto the stone, so that not the least ayre may not come in: then taking a Rye-sheafe, or Wheat-sheafe that is new thresh't, and binding the eares together in one lumpe, put it ouer the Hiue, and so as it were thach it all o∣uer, and fixe it close to the Hiue with an old hoope, or garth, and this will keepe the Hiue inwardly as warme as may be: also before you lodge any Bee in your Hiue, you shall perfume it with Iuniper, and rubbe it all within with Fenell, Isop, and Time-flowers, and also all the stone vpon which the Hiue shall stand. Now for the placing of your Hiues,The placing of Hiues. you shall take three long thicke stakes, cut smooth, and plaine vpon the heads, and driue them into the earth triangular∣wise,
so that they may be about two foote aboue the ground: then lay ouer them a broad smooth pauing-stone, which may extend euery way ouer the stakes about halfe a foot, and vpon that stone set your Hiue, being lesse in compasse then the stone by more then six inches euery way; and see that the dore of your Hiue stand directly vpon the rising of the Morning-Sunne inclining a little vnto the South-ward: and be sure to haue your Hiues well sheltred from the North-winds, and generally from all tempestuous weather: for which purpose if you haue sheds to draw ouer them in the Winter, it is so much the better. And you shall place your Hiues in orderly rowes one before another, keeping cleane Allies betweene them euery way, so as you may walke and view each by it selfe seue∣rally. Now for the casting of your Bees,The casting of Bes, and oding the Swarmes. it is earlier or later in the yeare, according to the strength and good∣nesse of the stocke, or the warmth of the weather. The vsuall time for casting is from the beginning of May till the middle of Iuly: and in all that time you must haue a vigilant eye, or else some seruant, to watch their rising, least they flie away, and knit in some ob∣scure place farre from your knowledge. Yet if you please you may know which Hiues are readie to cas a night before they doe cast by laying your are after Sunne-set to the Hiue, and if you heare the Master-Bee aboue all the rest, in a higher and more solemne note, or if you see them lye forth vpon the stone, and can∣not get into the Hiue; then be sure that stocke will cast within few houres after. As soone as you perceiue
the Swarme to rise, and are got vp into the ayre (which will commonly be in the height and heat of the Sunne) you shall take a brasse Bason, Pan, or Can∣dlesticke, and make a tingling noyse thereupon, and they are so delighted with Musicke, that by the sound thereof, they will presently knit vpon some branch or bough of a tree. Then when they are all vpon one cluster, you shall take a new sweet Hiue well drest, and rub'd with Hony and Fenell, and shake them all into the Hiue, then hauing spread a fayre sheete vpon the ground, set the Hiue thereon, and couer it all cleane ouer close with the sheete, and so let it stand till after Sunne-set, at which time the Bees being gathered vp to the top of the Hiue (as their nature is) you shall set them vpon the stone (hauing rubd it well with Fe∣nell) and then dawbe it close round about with Lime and Dung mixt together, and onely leaue them a dore or two to issue out, and in at. There be some stockes which will cast twice or thrice, and foure times in a yeere, but it is not so good, for it will weaken the stocke too much, therefore to keepe your stockes in strength and goodnesse, it is good not to suffer any to cast aboue twice at the most. Again, you shal with pieces of bricke or other smooth stones, raise the stocke in the night three or foure inches from the stone, and then dawbe it close againe, and the Bees finding house-roome will fall to worke within, and not cast at all; and then will that stocke be worth two others; and in the same manner, if you had the yeere before any small swarmes, which are likely to cast this yeere; or if you haue any earely Swarmes this yeere, which are like∣ly
to cast at the latter end of the yeere: both which are often found to be the destruction of the stockes: in either of these cases, you shall inlarge the Hiue as is before said, by raysing it vp from the stone, and it will not onely keepe them from casting, but make the stocke better, and of much more profit, for that Hiue euer which is of the most waight is of the best price. Now when you haue mark't out those old stocks which you intend to sell,Of selling Hiues. (for the oldest is fittest for that purpose) you shall know that the best time to to take them, is at Michaelmas, before any frosts hin∣der their labour: and you shall ake them euer from the stone in the darke of night, when the ayre is old▪ and eyther drown'd them in water, or smoother with Fusbals, for to chase them from their some doe, is nought, because all such Bees as are thus frighted from their Hiues doe turne robbers and spoyle other stocks, because that time of the yeere will not suffer them to labour and get their owne liuings. Now if you haue any weake Swarmes, which com∣ming late in the yeere cannot gather sufficient of Winter prouision;The preser∣uation of weake stocks. in this case, you shall feede such stocks by daily smearing their stone before the place of their going in and out with Hony and Rose-water mixt together, and so you shall continue to doe all the strength of Winter, till the warmth of the Spring and the Sunne-shine bring forth Flowers for them to labour vpon. You shall also continually looke that no Mice, Dares, Clocks and such like vermine breed
your Hiues, for they are poysonous, and will make Bees forsake their Hiues. Now lastly,An excel∣lent secret. if any of your stockes happen to die in the Winter (as amongst many, some must quaile) you shall not by any meanes stirre the stocke, but let it re∣maine till the Spring, that you see your Bees beginne to grow busie; then take vp the dead stocke, and trim it cleane from all filth, but by no meanes stirre or crush any of the Combes: then dash all the Combes, and besprinckle them, and besmeare all the inside of the Hiue with Hony, Rose-water, and the iuyce of Fenell, mixt together; and dawbe all the stone therewith. Also then set downe the Hiue againe, and dawbe it as if it had neuer beene stirred, and be well assured, that the first Swarme which shall rise, eyther of your owne, or of any neighbours of yours within the compasse of amile, it will knit in no place, but within that Hiue, and such a stocke will be worth fiue others, because they finde halfe their worke finisht at their first entrance into the Hiue, and this hath beene many times approued by those of the most approuedst experience. And thus much touching the Bee and his Nature.
Of Fishing. CHAPTER. I. Of Fishing in generall, and first of the making of the Fishpond. FOr as much as great Riuers doe generally belong either to the King, or the particular Lords of seuerall Mannors, and that it is onely the Fish-pond which be∣longeth to priuate persons, I will as a thing most belonging to the generall profit, here intreate of Fish-ponds. And first touching the making of them, you shall vnderstand that the grounds most fit to bee cast into Fish-ponds are those which are either marish, boggie, or full of Springs, and indeede most vnfit either for gra∣zing, or any other vse of better profit. And of these grounds, that which is full of cleare Springs will yeeld the best water: that which is marish will feede Fish best, and that which is boggy will best defend the Fish from stealing. Hauing then such a piece of waste
ground, and being determined to cast it into a Fish-pond, you shall first, by small trenches▪ draw all the Springs or moyst veines into one place, and o drayne the rest of the ground, then hauing mark't out that part which you meane to make the head of your Pond, which although it be the lowest part in the true leuell of the ground, yet you must make it the highest to the eye; you shall first cut the trench for your Flood-gate, so as the water may haue a swift fall, when you meane at any time to let it out; and then on each side of the trench driue in great stakes of sixe foote in length, and sixe inches in square, of Oake, Ashe, or Elme, but Elme is the best: and these you must driue in rowes within foure foote one of the other, at least foure foot into the earth as broad, & as farre off each side the Floud-gate as you intend the head of your Pond shall goe: then begin to dig your Pond of such compasse as your ground will conueniently giue you leaue, and all the earth you dig out of the Pond, you shall carry & throw amongst the stakes, and with strong rammers ramme the earth hard betweene them till you haue couered all the stakes; then driue in as ma∣ny moe new stakes beside the heads of the first, and then ramme more earth ouer and about them also; and thus doe, with stakes aboue stakes, till you haue brought the head and sides to such a conuenient height as is fitting. And in all this worke haue an es∣peciall care that you make the inside of your bankes so smooth, euen and strong, that no current of the wa∣ter may weare the earth from the stakes. You shall dig your Pond not aboue eight foot deepe, and so as it
may carry not aboue sixe foote water. You shall all the bottome, and banckes of the Pond, with sods of Flotgrasse, which naturally growes for it is a great feeder of Fish: and you shall lay very close together, and pinne them downe with small stakes and windings. You shall vpon one side of the Pond, in the bottome, stake diuers Bauens or Faggots of brush-wood, wherein your Fish shall cast their spawne, for that will defend it from destruction; and at another end you shall lay sods vpon sods, with the grasse sides together, i the bottome of the Pond, for that will nourish and breed Eeles: and if you sticke sharpe stakes slat-wise by eue∣rie side of the Pond, that will keepe theeues from ob∣bing them. When you haue thus made your Ponds, and haue let in the water, you shall then store them▪ Cape, Breame and Tench, by themselues; and Pike, Perch, Eele, and Tench by themselues: for the Tench being the Fishes Phisition is seldome deuoured: also in all Ponds you shall put good store of Roch, Dace, Loch▪ and Menow; for they are both food for the Fishes, and also not vncomely in any good mans You shall to euery melter put three spawners, and some put fiue, and in three yeeres the increase will be , but in fiue hardly to be destroyed. And thus for Ponds and their storings. CHAP. II. Of the taking of all sorts of Fish, with Nets, or otherwis IF you will take Fish with little or no trouble, you shall  of Salarmoniake a quarter of an ounce, of
young Chiues as much, and as much of a Calues Kell, and beat them in a Morter till it bee all one sub∣stance, and then make Pellets thereof, and cast them into any corner of the Pond, and it will draw thither all the Carpe, Breame, Cheuin, or Barbell, that are within the water, then cast but your shoue-net beyond them, and you shall take choyse at your pleasure. If you will take Roch, Dace, or any small kinde of Fish, take Wine-Lees and mixe it with Oyle, and hang it in a Chimney-corner, till it be drie, or looke blacke, and then putting it into the water; they will come so abundantly to it, that you may take them with your hand. If you will take Trout, or Grailing, take two pound of Wheate-branne, halfe so much white Pease, and mixing them with strong Brine, beat it till it come to a perfect paste; then put Pellets there▪ of into any corner of the water, and they will reort thither, so as you may cast your net about them at your pleasure. But if you will take either Pearch or Pike, you shall take some of a beastes Lier, blacke Snailes, yellow Butter, Flies, Hogges blood, and Opoponax, beate them all together, and hauing made a paste thereof, put it into the water, and bee assured that as many as are within fourtie paces there∣of will presently come thither, and you may take them at your pleasure. Lastly, if you take eight drammes of Cocke stones, and the kirnels of Pyn∣apple trees burnt, twice so much, and beate them well together, and make round balles thereof, and put it into the water, either fresh or salt, any Sal∣mon or great Fish will presently resort thither: and
you may take them, either with net or otherwise. Also, it is a most approued experiment, that if you take bottles made of Hay, and greene Oziers, or Willow mixt together, and sincke them downe into the midst of your Pond, or by the banke sides, and so let them rest two or three dayes, hauing a corde so fastened vnto them that you may twitch them vpon land at your pleasure: and beleeue it, all the good Eeles which are in the Pond will come into those Bottles, and you shall take them most abundantly: and if you please to bayte those bottles, by binding vp Sheepes guttes, or other garbage of beasts within them, the Eeles will come sooner, and you may then draw them oftner, and with better assurance. There be other wayes besides these to take Eeles, as with Weeles, with the Eele-speare, or with bobbing for them with great wormes; but they are so generally knowne and practised, and so much inferiour to this already shewed, that I hold it a needlesse and vaine labour to trouble your eares with the repetition of the same, and the rather, sith in this worke I haue labou∣red onely to declare the secrets of euery know∣ledge, and not to runne into any large circum∣stance of those things which are most common and familiar to all men. And thus much of Fish, and their generall knowledge. FINIS.
