17717 99847796 12857
THE TRAGEDIE OF CLEOPATRA Queen of Aegypt. By T. M. Acted 1626. Luc. —quantùm impulit Argos, Iliacasque domos facie Spartana nocenti, Hesperios auxit tantùm Cleopatra furores. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for Thomas Walkly, and are to be sold at his shop at the flying Horse neer York House 1639.
TO THE MOST ACCOMPLISH'D Sr. Kenelme Digby. Sr. THat it pleased you to cast an eye of favour upon these poor Plays has given me the boldnesse, not only to publish them (which I thought not to have done) but to shelter them, though most unworthy, under that name, to which for authority and approbation the richest pieces that this nation can boast, might be proud to flie. You are to learning what learning is to others a gracefull ornament; and known not on∣ly able to receive, but fit to make that which we call literature; it being nothing else but rules and observations drawne at the first from such able natures as yours is; and by your daily con∣versation is better expressed, then wee by wri∣ting can define it. Your composition was made to justifie those old Philosophers who resembled a man to the whole world. For as in the world
all varieties do meet to make a perfect harmony so in the largnesse of your soule the severall a∣bilities of most different Nations are conjoyned to an honourable advantage of one entire tem∣per, where the predominancies are magnanimity, prudence, and gentlenesse. But I dare not offer to crowd into a narrow Epistle your nobl Character, which will require a longer Trea∣tise and a better pen. For the defects in these two Plays, I that have already been so much obliged to your goodnesse in other matters, can∣not here despaire of your forgivenesse, which i the only thing that puts confidence into Your most obliged and devoted servant Tho. May.
THE TRAGEDIE OF CEOPATRA. Actus Primus. TITIUS, PLANCUS, CANIDIUS. TITIUS. SHame and dishonour to the Roman name A triumph held at Alexandria Only to honour Cleopatraes pride? PL. Ah Marcus, this Aegyptian Queen was made be the ruine of Antonius. CA. be the pleasure of Antonius. PL. ow can you jest Canidius, on a theame sad? CA. Plancus can you prophecie sadly on so merry an occasion,
As is the love of Ladies? TI. Let Canidius Have his own way, Munatius, tis in vain To talk to him. CA. Would you could let me have Antonius his way, upon condition I suffer'd you to censure gravely of it, And prophecie my ruine. But my Lords, You were as good be merry too, and take Your share of pleasure in th'Aegyptian Court. You'l do no good with these perswasions. He loves the Queen, and will do so in spite. Of our morality. PL. Tis too too true, That face of hers, that beauty in the bud Not fully blown, in yeers of innocence (If any yeers of hers were innocent) Set off with no adulterisme of art, Nor cloath'd with state and pompous Majestie, But in a fortune clouded and distrest A wretched prisoner in her brother's Court, Yet then I say that charming face could move The manly temper of wise Julius Caesar, That Ma in heat of all his active warre, When he pursu'd the flying Pompey hither, His sword yet reeking in Pharsaies slaughter At sight of her became a dotng Lover: And could we think that our Antonius A man not master of that temperance That Caesar had, could finde a strength to guard His soul against that beauty now set off With so much wealth and majesty?
CA. No surely. I did not think Antonius was an Eunuch. Nor could I have believ'd he had been worthy To be a successour in Caesa power, Unlesse he had succeeded him in her. Great Julius noble acts in warre and state Assur'd the world that he was wise and valiant: But if he had not falne in love with her I should have much suspected his good nature. PL. Nay then, Canidius, it shall be yours. CA. Or what indeed were greatnesse in the world If he that did possesse it, might not play The wanton with t? this Aegyptian Queen Is a state beauty, and ordain'd by fate To be possest by them that rule the world. Great Pompey's sonne enjoy'd her first, and pluck'd Her Virgin blossome. When that Family, Plutarch. Whose ruine fill'd the World, was overthrown, Great Iulus next came in as conquerour To have his share, and as he did in power, Succeeded him in Cleopatrae, love. Now our Antonius takes his turn, and thinks That all the legions▪ all the swords, that came To make his greatnesse up when Julius dy'd, Could give no greater priviledge to him Then pwer to be the servant to this Queen. Thus whosoere in Rome be conquerour His laurell wreath is Cleopatraes love. And to speak justly of her, Nature teem'd To build this woman for no meaner height. Her soule is full of greatnesse, and her wit Has charms as many as her beauty has. With Majestie beyond her sex she rules
Her spatious Kingdomes, and all neighbour Princes Admire her parts. How many languages Speaks she with elegance? Embassadors From th' Aethiopians, Arabs, Troglodites, Plut. From th' Hebrews, Syrians, Medes, and Parthians Have in amazement heard this learned Queen Without the aid of an interpreter In all their severall tongues returne their answers; When most of her dull predecessor Kings Since Ptolemaeus Philadelphus time Scarce understood th' Aegyptian tongue, and some Had quite forgot the Macedonian. TI. How well Canidius descants on this theame! PLA. I'll lay my life it pleases him; the man Is deep in love, and pity tis he has So great a rivall as Antonius. CA. Well use your wit upon me; but I doubt If any man could search your secret thoughts, Tis envy, not morality that makes You taxe his love, how gravely ere you talke. TI. But can Canidius think it should be just In our Antonius to forsake for her His lawfull wife the good Octavia? CA. Then like a Roman let me answer, Marcus. Is it become a care worthy of us What woman Antony enjoys? have we Time to dispute his matrimoniall faults, That have already seen the breach of all Romes sacred laws, by which the world was bound? Have we endur'd our Consuls state and power To be subjected by the lawlesse arms
Of private men, or Senators proscrib'd, And can we now consider whether they That did all this, may keep a wench or no? It was the crime of us, and Fate it self That Antony and Caesar could usurpe A power so great; beyond which we can suffer No more worth thinking of. Nor were't to us Any great fortune if Antonius Were honest of his body. PLA. Have we then, Who have been greatest Magistrates, quite lost All shew of liberty, and now not dare To counsell him? CA. A shew of liberty When we have lost the substance, is best kept By seeming not to understand those faults Which we want power to mend. For mine own pa I love the person of Antonius; And through his greatest loosenesse can discern A nature here, honester then Caesars. And if a warre do grow twixt them (as surely Ambition would ere long finde out a cause Although Octavia had not been neglected) Rather then Rome should still obey two Lords, Could wish that all were Anthony's alone. Who would, I think, be brought more easily Then Caesar, to resigne the government. TI. Would I could think that either would do so. Here comes her servant Mardio. Enter Mardio. MAR. Noble Lords, The Queen by mee entreats your company At supper with the Lord Antonius.
CA. Marcio return our humble services, Wee 'll instantly attend her. Now my friends, Can you a while put off austerity, And rigid censures, to be freely merry? TI. It may be so. Wee'll try what wine can do. Exeunt. A Feast preparing. EUPHRONIUS, GLAUCUS, CHARMIO. EU. Glaucus, let more of this perfume be got. GLA. I have enough in readinesse; or else 'Twould be too late to think on't now, the Queen Is upon entrance. EU. Charmio, art thou sure Those tapers stand just as the Queen commanded? CLA. Tis the same order that Antonius When last he feasted here, so much admir'd; And said 'mongst all the curiosities Plutarch. That he had seen, the placing of those lights. Did not the least affect him. EU. Though the Romans In power and warlke state exceed us farre, Yet in our Court of Aegypt they may learn Pleasure and bravery, but art thou sure That all things here are well? CHA. As exquisite As the Queens wish would have it. Hark they come.
ACHOREUS the Priest, ANTONIUS, CLEOPATRA, CANIDIUS, TITIUS, PLANCUS. CLE. To say, my Lord, that you are welcome hither Were to disparage you, who have the power To make your self so, what ere you see In Aegypt is your own. AN. What Aegypt holds If I be judge, not all the world besides Can equalize. CLE. Will't please you take Your place, and these your noble Roman friends? AN. Father Achoreus, sit you neer to mee. Your holy Orders, and great age, which shews The Gods have lov'd you well, may justly challenge A reverence from us. CLE. Great Julius Caesar Did love my father well; he oft was pleas'd At houres of leisure to conferre with him About the nature of our Nile, of all The mysteries of Religion, and the wonders That Aegypt breeds. ACH. He had a knowing soule, And was a master of Philosophy As well as Warre. AN. How like the spangled sky These tapers make the high-arch'd roofe to show? While Cleopatra like bright Cynthia In her full orbe more guilds the cheerfull night.
Shee's still at full; yet still me thinks she vexes, And grows more fair and more majesticall. CLE. My Lords, you Romans, whose victorious arms Have made you Masters of the world, possesse Such full and high delights in Italy, That our poor Aegypt can present no pleasure Worth your acceptance: but let me entreat You would be freely merry, and forgive Your entertainment. ANT. 'Tis an entertainment That might invite and please the Gods. Me thinks, Jove should descend, while Clepatra's here, Disguis'd for love, as once for fear he was, When bold Typhus scal'd the starry sky, And all the Gods disguis'd in Aegypt lurk'd. Love were a nobler cause then fear to bring him, And such a love as thine. CLE. If I could think That ere great Jove did play such feats as those, I'de now beleeve that he were here disguis'd, And took the noble shape of Anthony ANT. This complement so farre transcends, it leaves No answer for a wit so dull as mine. A Song. NOt hee, that knows how to acquire But to enjoy, is blest. Nor does our happinesse consist In motion, but in rest.
The Gods passe man in blisse, because They toile not for more height; But can enjoy, and in their own Eternall rest delight. Then, Princes, do not toile, nor care; Enjoy what you possesse. Which whilest you do, you equallize The Gods in happinesse. TI. Minutius Plancus, I was thinking now How Hannibal was charm'd at Capua, When that delicious place had mollifi'd His rough and cruell soul, and made him learn The lessons of soft love, and luxury. PLA. There was no cause, Marcus, for such a thought. For our Antonius in the heat of all His active life knew how to revell well. ANT. Let this soft Musique cease, and louder sound. This second course is mine. Call in Lucilius. Enter LUCILIUS with three Crowns. Fair Cleopatra, for addition Plutarch. To what thou hold'st, the world-commanding Rome Presents these Crowns, and by my hand invests Thee, Cleopatra Queen of wealthy Cyprus, Of Coelosyria, and Phoenicia. Blush no, my Love, nor let Romes bounty force Thy modesty▪ these Crowns from thy fair brow Receive more lustre then they can bestow.
TI. I think he need not greatly fear her blushing. PLA. No Marcus no; alas these petty Kingdomes (Though too too great to be so ill bestow'd) Are not the scope of her ambitious aymes! CLE. My Lord, I dare not make excuse, or plead Unworthinesse, where once Antonius wisdome Has made election to conferre his favours. ANT. Admire not, friends; the God-like power of Rome Is more declar'd by what it gives away Plutarch. Then what it holds. But these are still our owne And Cleopatra Romes deserving friend. CA. I cannot choose but think how fit a state For Cleopatra Cyprus Kingdome is; And shall believe that it was ominous That noble Julius Caesar after all Those foure rich triumphs which he held at Rome When he resolv'd with like magnificence To build a Temple to the Goddesse Venus, From whom his house derive their pedigree Within his stately Temple, to expresse The Image of that Goddesse, he set up Fair Cleopatraes figure in the place Supposing her to be the Queen of Love. You know my Lord Antonius, this is true, And Cyprus ever was fair Venus Ile. AN. 'Twas well observ'd noble Canidius. CA. Fill me some wine. Health to the Cyprian Queen. AN. Drink it to me Canidius; and I thank thee. Let it go round, my ftiends.
CLE. I ever thought My self much bound to brave Canidius Since I was happy in his company. AN. How fit it is, no other Cyprian Queen, But Cleopatra shall the Poëts know, Whose fancies now shall raise that Kingdome higher. More amorous now will Paphos mountains show, And all those flowery Meads▪ the Fields of love, Ore which no windes but Western ever blow. The aire it self will yield a sweeter breath While Cleopatra reignes the Cyprian Queen. PLA. How amorous in his language he is grown. TI. The times, I fear Minutius, will require A rougher language shortly. We shall heare Assoon as any news can come from Rome. AN. But long ago was I enforc'd to know That Cleopatra was the Queen of love, When first I met thee in Cilicia, Plut, And down the silver stream of Cydnus, thou In Venus shape cam'st sayling, while the aire Was ravish'd with thy Musick, and the windes In amorous gales did kisse thy silken sayls. Thy maids in Graces habits did attend, And boys, like Cupids, painted quivers bore, While thousand Cupids in those starry eyes Stood ready drawn to wound the stoutest hearts. CLE. You came like Mars himself in threatning arm To ruine me, and my poor Country then. I took that shape, because I knew no strength No power on earth was able to resist The conquering fury of Antonius.
AN. That face of thine resisted me, and did So sweetly conquer, I was proud to yield; And more rejoyc'd in that captivity, Then any Roman in a triumph did. Enter Hipparchus. How now, what news with thee? HIP. Letters from Rome, my Lord. AN. From whom? HIP. Geminius. AN. To morrow wee'll peruse them. No affairs Of what import or height so ere, shall have Power to disturbe the pleasures of this night. Our theam to night is love, which oft has made The Thunderer himself a while lay by The weary burden of his government. Come lead away. 'Twere fit to read them now. None knows what gain a little time may be AN. You may peruse them Titius; lead away. Exeunt. Manent TITIUS, PLANCUS. Can no affairs of what import so ere Break one nights pleasure? well Antonius, The tottering state thou holdst, must be supported By nobler vertues, or it cannot stand. PLA. Cyprus, Phoenice, Coelosyria, Three wealthy Kingdoms got with Roman bloud, And our forefathers valour, given away As the base hire of an adulterous bed. Was Cyprus conquer'd by the sober vertue Of Marus Cato, to be thus bestow'd?
TI. This act will please yong Caesar. PLA. 'Twill displease The Senate, Marcus, and Antonius friends. TI. Alas, he knows not what true friendship means, But makes his friends his slaves, and which is worse Slaves to his lusts and vices; could he else Slight our advise so? men, whom Rome has seen Wearing her highest honours, and of birth As great as his. Unlesse he change his minde I shall believe my friendship was ill plac'd, And strive to place it better. PLA. This last act Will quickly be at Rome. TI. They have enough Already, noble Plancus; think you not It will be censur'd that the Roman name Was much dishonour'd by that base surprize Dio. Cass. Plutarch. Of Artuvases the Armenian King? Whom through the streets of Alexandria He led in triumph bound with golden chains Forcing the captive King, (if all his threats Could have enforc'd so much) prostrate t' adore Proud Cleopatra, as if all his acts, And all the honour of his armes were due To her and not to Rome. Calvisius too Plutarch. In Senate late accus'd him for bestowing On Cleopatra that so farre renown'd And famous Library of Pergamus, In which there were two hundred thousand Books. How many such wilde actions have her charms Enforc'd his weaknesse to?
PLA. His Testament, Which now at Rome the Vestall Virgins keep, Of which we two are privy to the sealing, Should it be known, would stirre all Romans hate, Willing his bodie, though he dy'd at Rome, Dio▪ Plutarch▪ To be interr'd at Alexandria. But if a warre 'twixt him and Caesar grow (As needs it must, although not yet declar'd) For Caesar now is levying men and money Through Italy, Spain, France and Germany, Against what foe can his designe be bent But our Antonius? if a warre I say Twixt them should happen, tell me, noble Titius, What should we do? TI. Fight for Antonius. PLA. True friend, were he himself, or were there hope, Or possibility he could be so. But shall our valour toile in sweat and bloud Only to gain a Roman Monarchy For Cleopatra, and th'effminate rout Of base Canop? shall her timbrels fright Romes Cp toll, and her advanced pride Tread on the neks of captive Senators? Or, which  more, shall th' earths Imperiall seat Remove from Rome to Aegypts swarthy sands? For who can tell if mad Antonius Have promis'd her, as Cus Marius once Promisd the Samnites, to transferre the state? TI. It may be so, his dotage is enough To grant it her, her pride enough to aske it. Manutius Planus, in this whole discourse Thou speak'st my very thoughts no more, here comes
ucilius, whither so fast? Enter Lucilius. LU. My Lords, own to the Fort to wait upon the Consuls, he Roman Consuls both, Titus Domitius, Dio. Sueton. nd Caius Sssius are from Rome arriv'd ere at Pelusium, what the matter is s not yet known. PLA. Wee'll go along with thee; This now begins to look like businesse, Marcus. Exeunt. Actus Secundus. ANTONIUS, SOSSIUS, DOMITIUS, CANIDIUS, TITIUS, PLAN∣CUS, VENTIDIUS. AN. TIs not the place, nor marble wals that make A Senate lawfull, or decrees of power, But convocation of the men themselves The sacred order by true Magistrates. Then Rome is here; here both her Consuls are, Here are her axes, and her falces born, And no small number of that sacred order Are here assisting, when the barbarous Gaules Had taken Rome, when all the Senate fled, And with Camllus their Dictator then
At Veii liv'd, Rome then at Veii was, As now in Aegypt. Fathers, know the face, Of your assembly, know your lawfull power. Consult, decree, and act what ere may be Happy, and prosperous tor the Common-wealth. SOS. Whilst power of laws, whilst reverence of the Senate, And due respect t' a Consuls dignity Could give protection to the Consuls persons We did maintain thy cause Antonius Against proud Caesars faction. Now since laws Are put to silence, and the Senate forc'd, The Consuls sacred priviledge infring'd By rage and lawlesse armes, we are expell'd, And suffer banishment to be restor'd, And re-indeniz'd by thy conquering sword. Now justly draw it. Fate approves thy cause, And on thy conquest sets a glorious prize, Greater then all thy former wars could give▪ Sextus Pompeius, Marcus Lepidus Are ruin'd both, and all competitors Are tane away; Fortune has left but one To share the world with thee; nor canst thou share The world with him, his pride would barre thy right▪ And Caesar's glory dim Antonius light. Thou canst not shine unlesse alone thou shine. Or all the world, or nothing must be thine. DOM. The Consulship, that was design'd to thee, The Senate have revoked, and decree 'Gainst Cleopatra warre, but meant 'gainst thee. What would their malice dare Antonius, Had Fortune frown'd, thy Kings and Provinces Revolted from thee, that dare now povoke Thy growing fortunes and assisting Gods? Their injury has made thy quarrell just.
Be speedy then, and lose no time of action: SOS. Caesar is needy; his Italian souldiers Dio. Plutarch. Are apt to mutiny for want of pay, And might with ease be tempted to revolt. CAN. We need them not; our strengths are greater farre Then Caesar's are; our praeparations readier. Nought but delay can question our successe. Shall we decree the warre? AN. tay noble Romans; efore we publish a Decree, or shew he reason our arms so justly tane; eigh but with me the means and strength we have. now worthy friends it is no desperate warre our valours are engag'd in; briefly thus: ur Roman strength is nineteen Legions. en Kings in person will attend our Camp, he Kings of Africk, Comagena, Thrace, Plutarch. pper Cilicia, Paphlagonia, f Cappadocia, Pontus, Palaestine, f rich Arabia, and Galatia. ur strength at Sea five hundred fighting ships ell rigg'd and mann'd: our treasuries are full; nd twenty thousand talents to the warre oes Cleopatra freely contribute. hy speak I more? the Crown of all my strength, ur loves and spirits are. The injuries which we ground our just and lawfull warre, briefly these. Caesar unjustly holds hose Provinces, and armies all, that late Dio. Plutarch. long'd to Pompey and to Lepidus fusing to divide them, or deliver he moity which appertains to me ough oft demanded by my friends at Rome,
And letters from my self▪ besides he levies Both men and money ore all Italy, Which country, as you know, by our agreement Belongs to both, and should be held in common. TI. Most true. CA. These wrongs are past all sufferance. Thy warre is but defensive, to regain Thine own unjustly taken. DOM. The warre's just. SOSS. And Caesar the beginner of these broyls From whom the wrong first sprung, most justly may Be judg'd an enemy to the peace of Rome. AN. If Fortune aid us in a cause so just, And we return victorious, noble Romans, I make a vow, and let it be recorded, Within two moneths after the warre is ended, Di I will lay down the government I hold, And freely then resigne my power again Unto the Senate and the people of Rome. SOSS. Let it be six moneths rather; for two moneths Di Will be too short a time to settle it. DOM. Sssius speaks well, my Lord. ANT. Let it be so, And all the Gods assist me as I mean A just and true performance. CA. All the Gods Preserve Antonius father of his Country.
OMN. Author and Champion of our liberty. Exeunt. manent TITS, PLANCUS. TI. et them believe that list; for me, I think The resignation of a power so great ill be a temperance too great for him re to expresse. PLA. r if he would, he must ke leave of Cleopatra, and her pride ill hardly grant him that. TI. or will I fight To make her Mistris of the world and him▪ ave you consider'd, noble friend of what e lately spake? PLA. nd am resolved Marcus. he friends and followers we shall bring with us ill make us welcome guests to Caesars side. seems the City favours Caesar much hat both the Consuls fled from Rome for fear. or is our action base; the scorns and wrongs have endur'd at Cleopatraes hands Plutarch. ould tempt a moyle to fury, and both sides tand equall yet. TI. ome let's away; tis time. Dio. PLA. gypt farewell. TI. arewell Antonius. Exeunt.
SELEUCUS, GLAUCUS. SE. How suddenly the Scene is changed here From love and banquets to the rough alarms And threatning noise of warre! GLA. The change, Seleucus Is not so suddain as you speak; this storm Has been expected long; the two great Lords Of all the Roman world, Antonius And Caesar have in heart been enemies These many yeers; and every man has wonder'd 'T has been withheld so long, considering How much complaining has been daily made By them, their friends, and factions 'gainst each other Whose cause is justest let the Gods determine. SE. No other justice then ambition Makes them to draw their swords; no other cause Then that the world cannot endure two Suns. GLA. The thing that troubles me, Seleucus▪ is I hear it spoken in the Court, the Queen Her self in person will associate Antonius to the warre. SE. I hear that rumour; But hope it is not true, how nakedly And in what great confusion would this land Be left! and what addition can her person Among so many Roman Legions Bring to Antonius? GLA. Let us enquire The certainty; I fain would be resolv'd.
SE. necessity must know, before he Queen can go, that order may be taken bout the Fort I keep, what strength she means o leave within it in her absence. GLA. rue, hat reason will excuse thee for enquiring. Exeunt. CLEOPATRA, CANIDIUS. CLE. oble Canidius, I'll entrust no more, or use more circumstances; for I know o whom I have referr'd my businesse, nd trust your wisdome. CA. oyall Cleopatra. so fortify'd with reasons now Plutarch. hat maugre Sossius and Domitius ith all their best perswasions, I'll prevaile shall not stay behinde; fear it not Madam. CLE, ave Roman, wear this jewell for my sake; nd be possest of Cleopatraes love. cond my suit, there lies not in my power thing to grant I should deny Canidius. CA. he favours, Madam, you can give, have power oblige the greatest Monarchs of the World. CLE. ready, worthy friend; he'll straight be here. Exit Can. one but Canidius has the power to work ntonius in this action, which the rest ll all oppose, I know; a thing on which y state, my hopes, and fortunes all depend.
He must perswade Antonius to take Me with him to the warre; for if I stay Behinde him here, I run a desperate hazard; For should Octavia enterpose her self In this great warre (as once before she did) And make her brother, and her husband friends Wher's Cleopatra then? but here he comes. ANTONIUS, CLEOPATRA. AN. Sweet Cleopatra, I should plead excuse For leaving thee awhile, but that the cause Is of a nature so immense and high, And brings effects of such advantage home, That thou I know art pleas'd it should be so; And with a patience canst resolve to bear So small an absence, that my wish'd return May call thee mistris of the subject world. CLE. Cannot Antonius then be fortunate If Cleopatra go? s there in me So bad an Omen? did I think there were, Not for the world would I desire to bear You company but rather die at home. AN. Farre are my thoughts from giving entertainment To such fond dreams. I would not venture thee. CLE. My life and fortunes both depend on yours. As much in Aegypt will my danger be, As in your army, and my torment more, To die each houre for feare: and to remain In sad suspence till messengers can bring The news so farre: but if my company Distast my Lord, I cannot wish his grief.
AN. Can Cleopatra think her heavenly presence, Can be distastfull, or not valued more Then all joys else; parted from thee I think, All places sad, all lands disconsolate, Before this life I prize thy company, But must not have it now, do not entreat; have deny'd it to my self already. nd in the Camp should be asham'd to rise rom Cleopatraes arms, when wars ough noise Shakes all the world, when Kings and Senators Are venturing lives and fortunes in my service. Oh stay behinde! and let thy presence make Egypt a place, to which I would desire f Caesar's fortune conquer, to retire. CLE. f that should happen (which the Gods avert) What land, alas! could comfort me, or lend A safe retreat to vanquish'd Antony? Thou would'st disdain to draw a wretched breath, And I as much should scorn captivity. But I had thought the Roman Antony Had lov'd so great a Queen with nobler love; Not as the pleasure of his wanton bed Or mistris only of some looser houres, But as a partner in his highest cares, And one whose soul he thought were fit to share In all his dangers, all his deeds of honour. Without that love I should disdain the other. AN. Do not mistake me, noble Queen, I know Thy brest is full of high heroike worth. CLE. How can you think it so, that could so long n times of peace and pleasure recreate Your self with me in Aegypt Court; yet now
When honour calls, reject my company? AN. I should desire it rather then my life; But that my Roman friends are all against it. Enter SOSSIUS, DOMITIUS, CANIDIUS. See here they come, if they agree tis done. Now noble friends on whose oraculous counsels And matchlesse valour my whole fate depends, Speak what you think, should Cleopatra go In person to the warre, or stay behinde? SO. I have delivered my opinion, And so has my Colleague. AN. What thinks Canidius? CA. I think tis fit, my Lord, the Queen, whose bounty Has brought so great assistance to the warre, Should not be left behinde, besides her presence Will much encourage her Aegyptian souldiers, Of which a great part of the fleet consists. Plutarch. AN. Tis true Canidius. CLE. Let not my sex Disparage me, for which of all those Kings That now in person serve Antonius Have more experience in affairs of weight Then I, my Lord, which have so long been privy To your high counsels, and in love to you And your designes who should compare with me? AN. What think you friends? you heare Canidius. DOM. If you be pleas'd, I will subscribe.
SOS. I, things go so. CLE. wishes are effected. AN. , and Plancus are both fled to Caesar. CAN. shall not need their help my Lord, at all. AN. me, let's away. CLE. strengths are ready all, wait but your command. AN. oke like Bellona. idius, return you to your charge bring those sixteen Cohorts down to sea; Plutarch. me at Samos with them, both the Consuls go along with me. Great Father Mars, all you Gods, that from the skies behold Roman labours, whose propitious aid vanc'd my fortunes to so great an height, ke perfect that, which you your selves begun. is the swords last work, the judging houre Nations fates, of mine and Caesar's power. which the stars and destinies attend, all the fortunes of Mankinde depend. Exeunt ACHOREUS. hat dire portents sent from the wrathfull Gods? hreaten th'astonish'd world? What plagues are those hich in the skies prodigious face I read? umultuous Nature teems with monstrous births, if the throws would break her labouring wombe.
What ruine lesse then Chaos shall involve The mourning face of Nature? what great fate, What kinde of mischief is it? oh ye Gods, Why did you adde to wretched men a care So past their strength to bear, to let them know By sad presages their ensuing woe? Unknown and secet let your vengeance be, And none foresee their following misery; But hope as well as fear. Jove hide thy dooms; Keep shut, oh fates, your adamantine books! Let not the bainfull curiosity Of humane knowledge search your secret counsels, And read your purposes, to nourish so A killing fear before the danger grow. Enter SELEUCUS, GLAUCUS. SE. That Comet's gone. GLA. It mov'd directly upward, And did not vanish till it seem'd to reach The firmament. ACH. What talk you of my sonnes? GLA. That Comet, father, ore the Graecian Sea. ACH. It was a strange one both for form and greatnesse, And bodes some mischief whersoere it light. The Gods avert it from our Aegypts coast. SE. Pinnarius Scarpus had received news That Italy and Rome it self are fill'd With prodigies: an ugly Owle of late Did fly into the house of Concord first,
Thence being driven away it pearch'd again Within the Temple of the peoples Genius. There, though all striv'd, it neither could be caught, Nor driven away, but flew at leisure out. A sacred Trophey on Mount Aventine, Dio. Victoriaes Image on the Theater Dio. By suddain tempests were thrown down and broken. GLA. In Rome and other parts of Italy Sudden and strangely kindled fires have done Exceeding waste; and we are certifi'd That now Sicilian Aetna nourishes Dio. More horrid flames then usually it does, And farther casts his scorching entrails forth, Blasting the fields and burning up the corn. SE. A two-legg'd Dragon in Etruria Dio. Full fourscore foot in length was lately seen, Which after much annoyance of the Country t self with lightning was consum'd at last. But these portents do threaten Italy. ACH. Alas, my sonne, there need no prodigies To shew the certain losse of Italy. For on both sides do Roman Eagles stand, And Rome must bleed who ere be conquerour, Besides her liberty for ever lost When this sad field is fought: but that's not all, What clime so farre, what region so remote, But that the Roman fortune reaches thither? All nations share in this. GLA. What hast thou got By all thy conquest Rome, by all the bloud Which thy ambition through the world has shed, But rais'd a power, which now thou canst not rule,
Nourish'd a Lion to devoure thy self? SE. Would none but Roman bloud might quench the fire Of Romes dissentions, and no land beside Be forc'd to pay the forfeit of their pride. With evill Omen did Aeneas first Transport the reliques of Troyes fatall fire To Italy, that kindled greater there It might at last like lightning through the world Rend every Nation. Was it not enough, That first your conquests strew'd the earth with slaugh¦ter And dy'd all Regions with their natives blouds, But your dissentions still must tear the world? ACHO. I'll go within, and make an offering To great Osiris. Exit Achoreu GLA. Well may it succeed. Aegypt will flourish if Antonius conquer. SE. If he should fall, the fury of the warre Would light on Aegypt most, and we should rue That ere Antonius lov'd this haplesse land. Enter MARDIO. Oh Gentlemen, the strongest news, that ere Was seen in Aegypt. GLA. What's that Mardio? MAR. Thousands of people with astonishment And fear beheld it: on those fruitfull plains That Southward ly from Alexandria, Where never rain was known to fall before, whole showers of blod, whose colour set
A purple die upon those verdant fields; And in the clouds that horrid noise was heard That meeting armies make, beating of drums. Shrill trumpets sound, armor against armor clashing, As if the bloud that fell, dropp'd from the wounds Dio. Those aëry battails made. GLA. This is more strange Then all the rest: this is our own Seleucus. SE. Well Gentlemen, I'll to Pelusium, And fortifie the town to keep our foes, f foes be conquerours, from entring there. GLA. Yes, and our friends, if they be vanquished, Keep out our friends, Seleucus, if their presence May pluck a warre, and ruine on our heads. SE. As there's occasion wee'll determine that. Enter ACHOREUS. Avert your ange, Gods, if all too late Our prayers came not now. GLA. What is it father? our looks, I see, are full of ruth and wo. ACHO. wretched Aegypt, ah unhappy land what hast thou so stor'd the wrath of heaven? he grieved God refus'd his offering ellowing aloud that all the Temple rung, nd from his sacred eys the tears run down. ould I could contradict, or not beleeve he skill which surest observations teach. his signifies a change of government.
GLA. What heaven is pleas'd to send, we much endure. ACO. True sonne; and let a wise man place his strengths Within himself, nor trust to outward aids. That whatsoever from the Gods can come May finde him ready to receive their doom. Exeu Actus Tertius. Enter PINNARIUS SCARPUS with Souldiers. PIN. TIs not Antonius, worthy souldiers, But Rome herself to whom you owe your valours What he could claim, you have perform'd already; And serv'd him truly, whilst he was to you A Generall, to Rome a Magistrate. You are discharg'd from all obedience You ow'd to him, by fate it self, and may Nay, ought to follow him, whom Roman fates Appoint your Generall, the noble Caesar Great Julius heir, not to his name alone But spirit and fortunes, which have both appear'd In this so great and finall a defeat Given to Antonius. Before we knew not
o whom the Gods and Fortune had assign'd Our service souldiers; now they have declar'd. nd let us follow where they please to lead. or faith is impious striving to sustain That side, whose fall the Gods themselves ordain. SOL. esar, Caesar, Caesar. PIN. our judgments guide you right; for could you think o small a strength as ours could raise again The desperate state of faln Antonius, nder whose ruine all those legions sunk? hat madnesse were it, souldiers to preferre A hopelesse civill warre before the weal And peace of Rome? and desperatly provoke The prosperous fortunes of victorious Caesar? have already to Cornelius Galus Dio. By letter signify'd our purposes. Who sent from Caesar now is marching hither, To joyn his strength with ours: but hak his Drum Give notice of his comming. Enter GALLUS. Hail Pinnarius. PIN. Ah hail Cornelius Gallus, Most wish'd for, an most happily arriv'd At Paraetonium. GAL. Victorious Caesar With love and favour greets Pinnarius Scarpus, Caesar, then whom the world acknowledges No other power; whom Fortune now has made ole Lord of all.
PI. I, and my souldiers With Paraetonium are at Caesar's service. Whither's Antonius fled? GAL. Hither to Aegypt With Cleopatra? 'Twas a victory So strangely given away, as not the like In former times I think has ere been heard; On which especially so great a price As the sole sway of all the world depended. The Fleets encountred both, while with the Camps On either shore stood to behold the fight, Di▪ Heer the Caesarian, there the Antonian Fleet With equall hopes came on, with fury equall. And long maintain'd a sharpe and cruell fight, With mutuall slaughter, while the Oceans face▪ Was forc'd to lose his colour, and rceive A crimson die. The ships Antonius had Were tall, and slowly did like Castles move. But Caesar's small, yet quick and active, stirr'd Dio▪ Florus▪ Plutarch▪ On every side with all advantages. Long fortune doubted, and bright victory Knew not which way to lean, but kept them both In equall ballance; till Antonius Himself at last betray'd his glorious hopes. For when his Mistris Cleopatra fled, Plutarch▪ Dio▪ Florus▪ Although a while within his manly breast The Roman honour strove 'gainst wanton love, Love got the conquest, and Antonius Fled after her, leaving his souldiers there To sell their lives in vain; who many houres Though he were fled, made good the navall fight. And had Antonius stay'd, it may be fear'd Caesar had not prevail'd: at last the Fleet Wanting their Admirall, though not without
Much slaughter, fled, or yielded all to Caesar. PIN. But what became of all his strength on land? GAL. Nay, there's the wonder, there's Antonius madnesse, And such a madnesse as will strike amazement To all that heare it told: after his flight He nere return'd, though in the campe he had Under the conduct of Canidius And other Captains nineteen legions Fresh and unfought, which might with reason hope Had he been there, to have recover'd all. They still remayn'd encamped, and though oft ollicited by Caesar to revolt Were kept from yielding, by Canidius n hope of Antony's return. Untill anidius fearing his own souldiers minds Plutarch. nd Caesar's anger fled away by night, They then despairing yielded all to Caesar. Who by this time I think's arriv'd in Aegypt. About Pelusium. PI. Will you view the town? GAL. With all my heart, noble Pinnarius. Exeunt. Enter CaeSAR, AGRIPPA, TITIUS, PLAN∣CUS, THYRES, EPAPHRODI∣TUS, PROCULEIUS. Cae. ntonius then with Cleopatra's fled To Alexandria. AGR. Tis certain, Caesar.
PHA. They say the vanquish'd Queen most cunningly: Dio▪ (Fearing it seems, to be excluded else From her own Kingdome) fain'd her self victorious, Landing in Aegypt with triumphant songs Her ships all crown'd with laurell, to deceive The credulous people: where being enter'd once She leaves unpractis'd no strange tyranny; And, as we hear, to win the Parthan King Unto her side, beheaded Artavasdes Di▪ King of Armenia, and the Parthians o, Who was her prisoner, that Artavasdes, Whom Anthony so basely had surpris'd. TI. Caesar, 'twere fit to take Pelusium Before we march to Alexandria. Cae. 'Twas our intent, good Titius, not to leaue A town of that import behinde our backs. Go Proculeius, summon it, and know We her the Governour will yield or no. Exit. Pro▪ Enter. Servant. What news with thee? SER. Caesar, a messenger From Cleopatra craves admittance. Cae. Bring him. Enter EUPHRONIUS. Queen Cleopatra to great Caesar wishes All health and victory; and humbly proffers Her self and all her fortunes to his service: ▪ In token of which she here presents by mee
This Crown and Scepter. TI. rave and ominous. EUP. umbly entreating Caesar's noble favour To her and hers; the rest of her desires o please it Caesar to peruse the same, This letter holds. PLA. warrant a love-lettet. Cae. But tell me first, where is Antonius? EUP. ll truly tell (though it may seem to some ncredible) that great Antonius A man of late in conversation o free, and full of jollity, in a strange Deep melancholly has retir'd himself Plut. Strabo lib. 17. To Pharos Ile; where like Athenian Timon, Who did professe a hatred to mankinde, And fled all company, he lives alone; And on the solitary shore has built A little house to feed his frantike humour, And imitate that Timon's life, whose name He takes unto himself: no friends at all Nor servants are admitted to his presence, But only two, Roman Lucilius And Aristocrates the Graecian. Cae. Not Cleopatra? then I doubt the man Grows weary of these worldly vanities. AGR. never heard of such a change as this. Give me the letter. I'll peruse it now He reads.
AGRIPPA, AGR. CaeSAR. they retire. Caes. Here the woman writes That for her liberty, and to confirme The Crown of Aegypt to her self and children To gratifie my favour she has hid Dio▪ Plutarch▪ Within her pallace a great masse of gold. Unknown t' Antonius. AGRI. 'Tis like ennough, For Cleoptraea's rich, and long has been, Besides the sacriledge she lately did In robbing all the Temples of the Gods About these parts. Cae. I would not lose this gold, Nor willingly let Cleopatra die Before her person have adorn'd my triumph. AGR. That will be hard to bring to passe, and must Be wrought with subtilty: you must not send A threatning message back; for if you do, All's lost, her life, her gold and all are vanish'd. For Cleopatra, as in all her acts It has appear'd, is of a wondrous spirit, Of an ambition greater then her fortunes Have ever been, though she so long have sway'd A soveraignty ore half the Roman world, Trod on the necks of humbled Kings, and rul'd Antonius as her slave: her haughty spirit Will never stoop so much as to a thought Of such captivity. Cae. I do not mean
To let her know my minde, or once suspect I can help it, but I have it now. hyreus come hither; I must now rely pon thy wisdome, care, and diligence an employment that concerns me neerly. ut I am confident: go with this fellow Dio. Plutarch. To Alexandria; use to the Queen Thy best and most perswasive Oratory. Tell her I love her, and extremly dote On her admired beauty, thou art wise nd need'st no great instructions; the successe do not doubt, the woman's credulous, nd thinks all men are bound to be in love With that insnaring face; if thou perceive he will be wrought on, winne her to betray ntonius to my hand: the way to woo her leave good Thyreus to thy eloquence And cunning working of it: spare thy reply to Euph. id him come hither. Commend my hearty love To Cleopatra; bid her fear no ill From me at all. What I desire from her My freed man Thyreus has commission To utter to her self. Epaphroditus, So see him well rewarded. EPA. Health to Caesar. Exeunt. Epa. & Euph. Enter PROCULEIUS. The Governour is stout, and does resolve To stand th' extremest hazard of the warre Before he yield Pelusium. Cae. Let him rue His stubborn loyalty, souldiers make ready For the assault; 'tis shame so small a town▪
Should stay our fortune in the full carreer. Exeunt▪ ANTONIUS disguis'd like TIMON, reading. Here bury'd do I lie; thou gentle wave Callimah Epigr de Timone▪ Keep hatefull man from treading Ti∣mons grave. Reader be gone; enquire no more of me, A curse upon thee whatsoere thou be. ANT. Good, good; oh Timon, Athens nere could boast A wise philosoher but thee. Thou knew'st The nature of all men, that all were false; True Timon, true, they are all Knaves indeed. Thou wisely hat'st that wicked thing call'd man, Whom other forced Philosophers admire, And call a noble creature, and partaker Of divine nature: they were fools, fools Timon, All other Sects were fools, and I will follow No sect but thine; I am a Timonist. That's not enough, Timon himself I am. Enter LUCILIUS, ARISTOCRATES. Yonder he sits, see Aristocrates How much unlike that great Antonius, Whose person late so many legions guarded, So many Kings attended as their Lord. ARI. Antonius, where? thou art deceiv'd Lucilius, That's Timon man. LU. How canst thou jest at this This wofull passion, which alone's enough To melt his foes and Caesar into tears. ARI. We feed this foolish passion, to give way,
nd keep aloof thus. I'll go to him. Timon. AN. a! what art thou? be gone I say from me. et you to Caesar man: I hate you all. ARI. hate thee, Timon; dost thou think 'tis love as brought me hither? I am come to vex thee. AN. Oh welcome, what's thy name? i'st Alcibides? ARI. Hast thou forgot me? ANT. Dost thou hate all men? ARI. Why dost thou think me so unnaturall To love a man? but may we not love women? AN. Yes, they may be belov'd; provided always That they be false. ARI. True Timon, wicked women May be belov'd, because they ruine men. ANT. Right, right; and now I better think upon't I'll set no gallowses or gibbets up As I entended once, for men to come And hang themselves, I'll keep a bawdy house. ARI. A better way by farre, 'twill ruine moe, I wonder, Timon, at that foolish plot That I have heard, that in thy gardens once In Athens thou did'st set up gallowses For men in discontent to hang themselves. How few think'st thou would be so mad to do it? But to a wench they'll come, and then the office That thou shalt have will be of more account.
For where have you a man of any fashion That now adays turnes hangman; but a Pandar Is on employment that befits a Statesman, A thing requires good parts and gravity. ANT. I'de try that course; but tis too slow a plot. Oh for a speedy way to kill the world I have done somewhat in my days; my wars And bloudy battels were not made in vain. For I was once Antonius, and a Roman, As in the wars of Troy Pythagoras Before that transmigration of his soul, Had been Euphorbus. AN. Thou art like him still. ANT. And when I was Triumvir first at Rome, AN. That was a time indeed, then I could heare Of those good deeds, which must be still a comfort To your good consciences, though they be past. When Rome was fill'd with slaughter, flow'd with bloud. But they perchance were Knaves that were proscrib'd▪ And might have done more mischief had they liv'd. AN. No, they were honest men; I look'd to that. ARI. 'Twas well, and carefully. AN. Behold the list. But one among the rest most comforts me, That talking fellow Cicero, that us'd To taxe the vicious times, and was forsoeth A lover of his Country.
ARI. Out upon him, Then he was rightly serv'd: for is it fit In a well govern'd state such men should live As love their Country? had 't not been for him Catiline's plot had thriv'd. AN. Tis true, I'm sure Caesar was on that side, he favour'd it. ARI. Yes, Caesar understood himself; ther's hope That this young Caesar too will prove as good A Patriot as ere his father was. ANT. He will do reason man: he is of nature Cruell enough; in that proscription t did appear; but now he'll reigne alone. ARI. Oh for such factions as were then a foot To rend the state, and fill the world with slaughter. ANT. Oh, let me hug thee Alcibiade. Enter CANIDIUS, LUCILIUS. CA. s that he yonder? wt strange shape is that? LU. None talks with him but Aristocrates, Who following his own way, and suiting just With his conceit thinks to reclaim him so. CA. The news, that I shall bring, will make him worse, And fright that little reason that is left Quite from his brest.
LU. It cannot so Canidius; Perchance to hear th'extremity of all Will cure his fit; it cannot make him worse. For death it self were better and more noble. CA. How weak a thing is man that seats his hopes In fortunes slippery, and unconstant favours, And seeks no surer strengths to guard his soul? Wanting a strong foundation, he is shaken With every winde, orethrown by every storm. And what so frequent as those storms in fortune? Whose fairest weather never brings assurance Of perpetuity but come what will I'll tell him all. LU. Do, good Canidius. ANT. Well Alcibiades, I am resolv'd I'll to the wars again, and either conquer Mine enemies, or take a course to starve And kill up my own souldiers, and so be Reveng'd on some body: One of these two May easily be brought to passe. How think'st thou? ARI. Yes, yes: but lets to Court, and there consult. Enter MARDIO. See who comes here, now for our bawdy project▪ Here is a servant I must needs preferre Well vers'd in bawdry, Master of the art. Come neer brave Mardio, come. MAR. My businesse Is not to you;
ARI. Mark him but well, and tell me How he would execute the place. MAR. My Lord, The Queen entreats your presence at the Palace, The grieved Queen, who in your absence pines, Who suffers in your grief. ARI. Well urg'd old Eunuch. ANT. Ha! what of her? will she revolt to Caesar? MAR. She's farre from that, my Lord. ANT. What i'st he says? ARI. He says the constitution of her body Cannot hold out unlesse you visit her. MAR. The Queen shall know it, Aristocrates. ARI. Did you not say she pin'd and languish'd Sir, And what's the difference? tell your tale yourself. ANT. What does she say? does she not hate me man? MAR. Oh no my Lord, she loves you as her life. No spite of fortune that she has endur'd, Or can hereafter fear, grieves her so much As does your absence and strange melancholy. ARI. Well Mardio, thou art fittest for the place. CAN. My Lord Antonius?
AN. Ha! mo men upon us? CA. I come to bring thee heavy news Antonius. The forces all, which thou didst leave encamp'd At Actium, horse and foot are gone to Caesar. And all th' auxiliary Kings; no strength At all is left thee, but what here thou hast At Alexandria. AN. Ha! LU. This sinks into him. CA. It makes a deep impression in his passion. ARI. And may perchance expell his other fit. AN. All you here yet! then I have friends I see. But tell me, can you be so mercifull As to forgive that most unmanly fit I have been in? oh, I am all in blushes. CA. My Lord, take better comfort. AN. Dearest friends. I will be proof 'gainst any fortune now. Plutarch. Come let's together to the Court, and there Drown sadnesse in rich cups of Meroë wine, And laugh at Fortunes malice, for your sight More cheers my spirits, then her frowns can dull them. Exeun.
Actus Quartus. CLEOPATRA, GLAU∣CUS. GLA. MAdam, all drugs with pain and torment kill That kill with speed. No easie way to death Is wrought but by a slow and lingring course, Where Natures strength is by degrees subdu'd, And yielding so decayes insensibly. No art at all can make a drug that's quick And gentle too. No poyson but the Aspe Of all the mortall brood of Libyaes Snakes Kils with a suddain, and yet easie death As if brought forth to contradict our skill By envious Nature, who disdains frail man Should hope to finde her secrets wholly out. None but that Serpent, Madam, can effect Plutarch. What you desire; of which I here have brought. CLE. Leave it good Glaucus; leave the potion too. Tis quick, thou sayst. GLA. Yes Madam; but too painfull And violent.
CLE. Well leave them both with me. Exit Glaucus. Let none adventure on prosperity But with a spirit still prepar'd to die. Let them keep certain death still in their power That dare be great and happy, nought but that Frees states when they are fall'n. Well did wise And liberall Nature on mankinde bestow A gift so soveraigne as power to die, An Antidote 'gainst Fortunes cruelty, That is the deere preservative, that must Controll the spite of Fortune, and redeem A wofull life from lothed servitude. One venome's gentle; tother rough and cruell. But tis not safe to trust mine honour so, On doubtfull props: the poysons both may fail▪ Or differ farre from what vain fame reports Their operation. Tis experience That must confirme me. Mardio is return'd. Enter Mardio with two prisoners. MAR. Here are two men, Madam, condemn'd for murder To cruell death, and are to die to morrow. CLE. Come neerer both, and tell me, dare you die? Dio. 1 PRI. Great Queen, necessities strict law imposes Plutarch. That doom upon us; in forc'd actions Courage can have no triall. CLE. Dare you die A lesse dishonorable way, to scape The common hangman's hand, and from a Queen Receive your death, and that an easier death?
BOTH. Most willingly, great Queen; we are prepar'd. CLE. Give them their lots, Mardio; the shortest lot Is to die first. 2 PRI. That lot is mine. CLE. The Aspe shall be thy fate: now Aspe confirme What fame reports of thee; stay thou thy draught Till he be dead: feel'st thou no pain? 2 PRI. A faintnesse seizes me, and I would sleep. MAR. How gently he lies down? and scarcely strives Against his death at all. CLE. I think he's dead Already. Sure he feels but little pain. I am confirm'd. MAR. He's dead and stiffe already. CLE. Wee'll try no more, as for thy draught of poyson Thus we discharge thee of it, and from death Doom'd by the law our royall pardon frees thee. Publish it Mardio. PRI. The Gods preserve Royall and gracious Cleoptrae's life. Exeunt. CLE. I am resolvd'; nought but the Libyan Aspe Shall be renown'd for Cleopatraes death. Thou precious worme, that canst redeem alone The losse of honour at a rate so easie, That kill'st as gently as the hand of age,
And art miscall'd a plague of Africa, Since thou alone mak'st barren Afrike envy'd, By other lands, though fruitfull, wanting thee. Who crosse the Seas, and hence at highest price Transporr the Aspe as choisest Merchandise. On thee I trust, one gentle touch of thine Can free this life from lothed servitude, From Caesar's triumph, the base peoples mocks, Proud Liviaes scorn, and mad Octaviaes spight. But why are all my thoughts turn'd to despair? Why think I now of death? me thinks my Genius Checks this cold fear, and Fortune chiding tels me I am ungratefull to distrust, her now. My race of life and glory is not run, Nor Clepatraes fortunes yet arriv'd At that great height that must eternize her, And fix her glorious name aboue the stars. I long to hear what answer Caesar sends. I do not know his temper, but he's young; And why should I despir? are Cupid's fires Extinguish'd quite? are all his arrows spent? Or is this beauty, that can boast the conquest Of Julius Caesar; and great Antony, So waned now, it cannot move the temper Of one, whom youth makes fit for Cupid's conquest? Enter EUPHRONLUS, THYREUS. EUP. Madam, your gifts were more graciously receiv'd, And Caesar with a smiling brow return'd All seeming love and friendship; he has sent His free'dman Thyreus to attend your highnesse, And to impart his counsels to your eae.
CLE. He's welcome to us. What's great Caesar's will. Exit Euphro. THY. Caesar's best wishes, royall Cleopatra, None but your fairest self can ratifie. No power on earth can give what Caesar wants But you, great Queen. For let your Majesty Give credit to poor Thyreus though the meanest Of all the servants that attend on Caesar, Ther's none about him is more neer in trust To whom he's pleased to impart his thoughts▪ And secret wishes: nothing but your love Can crown his happinesse. CLE. We are no subject For Caesar's mocks though in our worst of fortune THY. You are the Queen of Fortune, and still ho A lasting Scepter ore that fickle Goddesse (Fickle to others, to you true and constant) Your radiant light lends that blinde Goddesse eyes▪ And guides her to your service, making all Actions, nay losses steps to greater honour. The late defeat at Actium, which your errour Perchance miscals a losse, was Fortunes labour To make you greater, and remove your brightnesse Which was ill plac'd (as Diamonds coursly set) From old Antonius to yong Caesar's love, A fitter sphere for those fair eys to shine in. CLE. Without these courtings, Thyreus, if great Caesar Please to embrace our friendship, we and Aegypt Shall do him faithfull service. THY. Mighty Queen,
If my rude speech have err'd, I humbly beg That you would please to think it zeal in me To do my master service, and such service As he esteems the best, to gain your love, I oft have heard him (let your Majesty Not be offended with that truth I utter) Ravish'd with fame of your perfections, And noble spirit; call Antonius happy, Whom fortune brought to Aegypt, to behold That Queen, whom he so much desir'd to see. But when his ey beheld your portraiture Drawn by a skilfull, and a faithfull hand; He oft would say it was a likely seat To hold those Graces. Such perfections Were fit for none but Caesar's to admire. CLE. There was a Caesar, lov'd me once; but I Am not so proud to think it was my merit, Though he would say I did deserve farre more Then he could utter, that great Julius, Whose name and actions fill'd the triple world. THY. Though all in him were great, yet nothing greater Then his adopting so divine an heire. This Caesar, Madam, for your dearest love, Besides that power and greatnesse, which the world Both knows and fears, brings such a youth and beautie To plead for him, as in a mean estate Might move a Princesse love: which that your eys may better read, I here from him present His true, and most unflatter'd portrairure. CLE. The fairest form that ere these eys beheld. Where all the best of each best modell meets, Cupid's sweet smiles, lodg'd in the eye of Mars, Gaymed's chek th' Imperiall brow of Jove
Where love and majesty are proud to dwell. THY. His age, great Queen, is yet not thirty yeers. CLE. I nere till now saw beautie: but Thyreus May we repose a confidence in thee As our true friend? we will deserve thy love. THY. To do divinest Cleopatra service Is all poor Thyreus pride: in serving you I best discharge my dutie to my master. CLE. Then briefly thus; because I would not have Any take notice of long privacie Twixt thee and me, and instantly w'expect Antonius here, I will devise some means How to deserve great Caesar's love, and act What he shall thank us for: mean while stay here With us, good Thyreus, for we cannot yet Dispatch thee with that message we entend. THY. I will attend your highnesse. CLE. Till anone Farewell, good Thyreus: but be neer about us. Exit Thyreus▪ What more then this could all the fates contrive? What more then Caesars love could I have wish'd On which all power, all state, and Glories wait. But oh the weak and fluctuating state Of humane frailty still too much deprest Or rais'd too much 'twixt fears and flattring hopes! But hence base fear; a Princely confidence Fits Cleopatraes minde and beautie better.
Enter ANTONIUS, CANIDIUS, LUCIIIUS, ARISTOCRATES. My dearest Lord. AN. Ah sweetest Cleopatra, In this embrace, and this Ambrosiake kisse I am again possest of all my wealth, Of all my fortunes. Had the angry Gods Purpos'd to wreak their fury fully on me They had not left my life so sweet a comfort. CLE. Possest of you I stand above the reach Of Fortunes threatning, or proud Caesar's power. Nought but your grief, and melancholly had Power to deject my spirits. AN. Thy true worth Deserves a happier friend, that could bestow Not take alone his happinesse from thee. In thy sweet love, and these my faithfull friends I still am happy, I have lost no friends. All that are gone from me to Caesar's side, Ingratefull Titius and Domitius. Plancus, Silanus, Dellius and Hipparchus, Were Fortunes friends not mine. CLE. Let's in and feas▪ This day we'll dedicate to mirth and freedome: To crown your welcome hither. AN. Sweetly spoken. Let not a woman teach us souldier To be magnanimous.
CLE. Thi? feast we'll stile The feast of fellow-dyers: for no band Plutarch. No tie of friendship is so firme as that They live in love that mean to die together. Exeunt. CaeSAR, AGRIPPA, TITIUS, PLANCUS, ARIUS. Cae. Grave Arius, in thy troubled looks I read Fear for thy native Alexandria; But banish fear, and know thy power with Caesar, If they obey our summons, none shall die. But though to th' utmost they resist, thy will Shall rule our Justice. AR. Humble Arius. Is too much honour'd in great Caesar's favour. Cae. We give but what we owe, a debt so great As mine to thee can nere be overpay'd. Great Alexander, whose victorious hand Founded that City, whose eterniz'd name For ever honours it, though in great deeds He past our glory farre, shall not exceed Caesar in piety: he oft would say He ought a better being to his Master Then to father; one meer naturall, The other mentall, and diviner farre. Who's that?
Enter EPAPHRODITUS with FERGUS. EPA. Fergusiu the Philosopher Condemn'd to death by you. Cae. Dispatch him then. EPA. He craves a word with Arius ere he die. ARI. What is it brother? FER. Ah good Arius, Plutarch. Wisemen, if truly wise, save wise men still. ARI. Most mighty Caesar. Cae. Arius, no more, I know what thou desir'st; Fergusius live; That thou know'st him has sav'd thee. FER. Victorie, And fame still wait on Caesar. Cae. Let's away And march with speed to Alexandria. AGR. Caesar, your horse are weary: 'tis not fit Too much to toil them, for I fear a sally From Alexandria. Cae. They dare not man. AGR. Antonius is strong in well-provided And skilfull horsemen; and despair of favor
(Since twice you have refus'd his propositions) Will put another valour into him. Cae. What conquest can Antonius hope for here? AGR. His hopes (as nere as I conjecture them) Are to break through your troops, and get to Sea. For yet he has a Flet, that may transport him To other lands, to gather new supplyes. But any fortune would prove higher farre To him, then staying here, without all hope To be shut up in a besieged town. In my opinion let your march be ▪ And gentle; that the horse may be refresh'd. And we prevent the worst. Cae. Let it be so. Exeunt. Enter LUCILIUS, ARISTOCRATES. LU. How formlesse is the forme of man the soul, How various still how different from it self? How falsly call'd Queen of this little world? When she's a slave, and subject not alone Unto the bodies temperature, but all The storms of Fortune. ARI. What occasion Make thee thus offer at Philosophy? LU. Where hast thou liv'd thou shouldst not know th' occa∣sion? The fits and changes of Antonius Are theam enough: how strange a loving soule Is the late hater of mankinde become!
ARI. That is not strange, he's out of breath with cursing And now 'tis time to stop his mouth with kissing. But what can he conceive of this same Thyreus That holds such secret conference with her? LU. He cannot choose but see it. ARI. Unlesse love Have blinded him, she carries it so plainly. Well, I shall think if there be knavery in't, (As knavery there must be) that Cleopatra Is not so subtle as we took her for. LU. He must be told it, if he will not see Upon my life there is some plot of treason Which yet may be discover'd. ARI. Heer they come Let us go fetch Antonius if we can. CLEOPATRA, THYREUS. CLE. Pelusium shall be rendred up to Caesar Dio. Plutarch. By our command to our Lievtenant there Seleucus, whose obedience we not doubt. THY. Noblest of Queens, you make Imperiall Caesar As much a debtor to your courtesie As he's already captive to your beauty. CLE. Nor do we wrong Antonius at all In giving up a town which is our own▪ It may be thought tis done to weaken him▪
Alas, Antonius is already fall'n So low, that nothing can redeem him now Nor make him able to contest with Caesar. He has not only lost his armies strength But lost the strength of his own soul, and is not That Antony he was when first I knew him. I can do Caesar now no greater service. Though I shall never want a hear to do it. But we shall quickly see th' event of things; Antonius now is desperate, and puts His hopes upon the fortune of one sally, Which will be suddenly perform'd, before That thou canst bear a message back to Caesar. ANTONIUS, LUCILIUS, ARISTO∣CRATES. AN. Hands on that Thyreus there, to prison with him. THY. To prison! ANT. Yes; away with him I say. Plutarch. THY. Caesar would not have us'd your messenger So ill. AN. Thou wert no Messenger to me. CLE. For my sake dearest Lord. AN. Oh for your sake? I cry you mercy Lady, bear him hence. Exit Thyreu. I had forgot that Thyreus was your servant. But what strange act should he perform for you?
Is it to help you to a happier friend? CLE. Can you suspect it? was my truest love So ill bestow'd? Can he, for whose dear sake A Queen so highly born as I preferr'd Love before fame, and fondly did neglect All names of honour when false Fulvia, And proud Octavia had the name of wives, Plutarch. Requite me thus? ungratefull Anthony; For now the fury of a wronged love Justly provokes my speech. ANT. Oh Cleopatra, It is not Thyreus but this heart of mine That suffers now, deep wounded with the thought Of thy unconstancie: did Fortune leave One only comfort to my wretched state And that a false one? for what conference Couldst thou so oft, and in such privacie With Caesar's servant hold, if true to me? Which with the rack I could enforce from him. But that I scorn to do. CLE. You do not scorn To wrong with base unworthy jealousies A faithfull heart: but if you think me false Heer sheath your sword: make me the subject rather Of manly rage then childish jealousie. It is a nobler crime, and fitter farre For you to act, easier for me to suffer. For live suspected I nor can nor will. The lovely Aspe, which I with care have kept▪ And was intended a preservative 'Gainst Caesar's crueltie, I now must use Against Antonius basenesse a worse fo
Then Caesur is: farewell, till death approve That I was true, and you unjust in love. ANT. Stay Cleopatra, dearest Love, forgive me Let not so small a winde have power to shake A love so grown as ours: I did not think That thou wert false: my heart gave no consent To what my tongue so rashly uttered. Nor could I have out-liv'd so sad a thought. Let Thyreus be releast, and sent to Caesar. Enter CANIDIS. Now is the time to sally forth, my Lord, The fo is tir'd with marching, and your horse Are readie all, and wait the signall only. The least delay loses the action. ANT. I come Canidius; dearest Love farewell. Few houres will tell thee what Antonius is. Exeunt. CLE. How timorous is guilt? how are my thoughts Distracted sadly now? on every side My dangers grow: for should Antonius Return in safety home, and know what past 'Twixt me and Thyreus, I have lost his heart, And cannot choose but fear him: if he die I am not confident of Caesar's love. 'Twas but a servants tongue I built upon. 'Tis best to make all sure: within there, Eia. EIRA. Madam! CLE. Are all things readie in the tombe?
EI. Yes, Madam; Carmi's there and Mario. CLE. Then thither will I go, if fate contrive A future state of happinesse for me, It is my castle: if my death they doom, I am possest already of a tombe. Exit. Actus Quintus. ANTONIUS, LUCILIUS, ARISTOCRATES. AN. DEfeated are my troops, my fleet revolted, The Seas and Lands are lost; and nothing now Is left Antonius but a Roman hand, A sword and heart to die. You truest servants, Whose faith and manly constancie upbraids This wicked age, and shall instruct the next, Take from a wretched hand this legacie. Fortune has made my will, and nought but this Can I bequeath you. Carry it to Caesar; If he be noble, it contains enough To make you happier then Antonius can.
My glasse of life and Empire now is run, And from this hand expects a period. LU. My Lord, take fairer hopes. AN. Fie, fie, Lucilius; Lose not thy former merits in perswading A man, whom once thou lov'dst to such a shame As to preferre a loath'd captivity Before a noble death. Thy looks speak grief Dio. Enter EROS. Speak Eros, wher's the Queen? ERO. She's dead my Lord. Plutarch. When those unhappy tydings came to her Of your defeat, she straight shut up her self Within her tombe, and dy'd. AN. Oh Cleopatra, Why have I lingred thus, that thou a woman Should'st teach so old a souldier how to die? Fortune, I blame not thee; I have enjoy'd What thou could'st give, and on the envy'd top Of thy proud wheel have long unshaken stood. Whom Kings have serv'd, and Rome her self obey'd; Whom all the Zones of earths diffused Globe, That know inhabitants, have known, and fear'd. Nor is my fall so much degenerate. My strength no arms but Roman arms subdue, Plutarch. And none, but Monarch of the world succeeds. Glutted with life and Empire now I go Free and undaunted to the shades below. Here Eros, take this sword, perform the promise Which thou hast made, to kill me whensoere
I should command: make no reply in words. ER. I will be true or die. Stand fair; your Eros Will be your Usher to th'Elizian fields. Kils himself. AN. What hast thou done unfaithfull faithfull Eros Dio. Plutarch. Too kindly cruell, falsly vertuous? I'll trust no more, to be no more directed By such examples: but we must be speedie. The gates ere this time are set ope to Caesar. Fair Cleopatra, I am comming now To dwell with thee, and ever to behold Thy heavenly figure, where nor time nor death Shall make divorce of our eternall loves. Thus, thus I come to thee: unfaithfull sword▪ I never knew thee slow in giving death Till this sad houre, some friendly hand lend aid▪ And with another wound release my soule. Enter MARDIO. Where is my Lord Antonius? Oh sad sight The Queen enclosed in her tombe desir'd To take her last leave of you. AN. Is she living? Tis welcome news, convey me quickly, friends, Plutarc. Dio. Exeunt. Oh quickly thither, that I may expire That breath that's left in Cleopatrae's arms.
AGRIPPA, GALLUS, EPAPHRODITUS, PROCULEIUS, Citizens. AGR. Go you, Epaphroditus, and besiege The Palace, to surprize Antonius; You Proculeius, and Cornelius Gallus, Go presently to Cleopatraes tombe, Wo her with all your art and eloquence With all assurances of Caesar's love To leave that place, and yield her person to him. Spare no attempts of force or policy To draw her thence: for you the Citizens Of Alexandria, cheer your fainting hearts, I'll mediate in your behalf to Caesar, To spare the City. CI. Thanks to the most noble And good Agrippa. AGR. Heer he comes himself. Enter CaeSAB, ARIUS, TITIUS, PLANCUS. Cae. The palenesse of your fear declares your guilt. But that, though nere so great, shall not exceed Our clemencie, to let you know it was Your happinesse to be subdu'd by us. Mercy shall rule our just severitie. First for your founder Alexanders sake, Plutarch. Dio. Next for the love of reverent Arius Our Master heer whose goodnesse far out-weighs
All your offences and rebellions. CIT. Caesar in goodnesse, as in greatnesse, bears Equalitie with Jove. Enter ACHOREUS. ACHO. Hail mighty Caesar. Cae. What's he? ARI. Achorus, Osiris Priest, A good and holy man. Cae. We dare believe thee, And therfore welcom him. ACHO. Please it great Caesar, To give Achoreus leave to wait on him Into the ancient Temples of our Gods To shew th' Aegyptian rites and mysteries, And all the Deities that we adore. Cae. Most willingly Achoreus, I would see Dio. Gods, but not Oxen. TI. He has blank'd the Priest. Cae. I fain would see great Alexander's herse Sueton· The mansion once of so divine a soul A spirit greater then the world it self, Whom the world fear'd but could not satisfie. ACH. Within the vault of our Pyramides
His bodie yet all whole may Caesar see. And all the bodies of our Ptolomeys. Cae. I'd see Kings only, not dead carcasses. Sueton. Dio. But see, Epaphroditus is return'd. Enter EPAPHRODITUS, LVCILIUS, ARISTOCRATES. Cae. Speak man, where is Antonius? EP. Slain, my Lord. Cae. How? slain? what hand durst do it? EPA. His own hand. Cae. That was our fear: cruell Antonius. Too cruell to thy self, to Rome, and me How white a day have all the people lost? How great might Caesar's happinesse have been Had but the fates permitted me to lay These conquering arms aside, and once again Embrace thee, dear Antonius, as a friend Thou worthy aider of my infant fortunes, Plutarch. Thou brave revenger of great Julius death, Witnesse these tears, though I were forc'd to warre (Whilst thou preferring forreigne love before Caesar's alliance, did'st reject my kindred, And scorn my love) I still could honour thee. But since too cruell fate denies to me So great an happinesse as to expresse This love to thee alive, let thy dear ghost Behold my Pietie, and see the honours
Caesar will do to thy sad funerall. LU. Most royall Caesar-like dissimulation. ARI. I hope how ere 'twill serve our turns Lucilius. Now is the fittest time. Cae. What men are these? EPAP. Two of Antonius truest servants, Caesar, Who bring a letter from their dying Lord. Cae. Let me peruse it well, it shall be granted. Your lives and fortunes both are safe, and since We ever lov'd fidelitie, you shall If so you like, be welcome to our service, LU. 'Tis our desire; our lives and fortunes ever Shall do great Caesar true and faithfull service As they before did to Antonius. Cae. Where did he die? EPA. In Cleopatraes arms By her with ropes let up into the tombe, After his deadly wound. Cae. Is she there still? Enter GALLUS. Now I shall know; speak Gallus, what's the news? GAL. We came and call'd at Cleopatraes tombe, Dio. Plutarch. Who from above made answer, and deny'd
To yield herself, but upon Caesar's word. When I with best persuasions strove to winne her, And held her talk awhile, whilst Proculeius On tother side the tombe espy'd a place That open stood, by which the Queen receiv'd Dying Antonius, which he scaling enter'd Behinde the Queen: but had he not been speedy She there had slain herself: a maid of hers Spy'd Proculeius entring, and aloud Cry'd out oh Queen thou art surpriz'd alive. She drawing a short poniard was restrain'd By Proculeius, who both held her hand And spake her fair; at last obtain'd so much By strong persuasions of your clemencie He drew her thence, and got her to the Palace. Where now she is, and Proculeius stays. But her desire is still to speak with you. Till when from us she will admit no comfort. Cae. We will in person presently go see her. Protect me Pallas 'gainst false Venus charms. Exeunt. CLEOPATRA in mourning. Known mischiefs have their cure; but doubts have none, And better is despair then fruitlesse hope Mixt with a killing fear: my thoughts are now More black and balefull then this sad attire. If Caesar come, I do not fear his chiding I have a certain Antidote 'gainst that. 'Tis not his anger, but his love afflicts My doubting soul, whether that love will prove Fained or true, yet may straight apppear.
He's not so old, nor I so ignorant But that his actions, gestures, words, and looks Will make his heart lie open to my view. Enter CaeSAR, and EPAPHRO∣DITUS. Cae. How sweet a sorrow dwels upon that brow! How would she look in smiling dalliance? Oh pardon me thou powerfull God of love, That durst presume to tempt thy Deitie. Forgive my confidence. I now excuse Antonius weaknesse, but stay there my heart, My vertuous Livia is more fair then she, CLE. Hail mighty Prince; for that high name the Gods. Dio. Plutarch. Who reft me of it, have bestow'd on thee. Cae. Rise Cleopatra, Caesar's victory Takes nought from you. CLE. Oh let me never rise Till Caesar grant my suit. Cae. Good Queen stand up, And freely speak what you desire: CLE. I beg A boon but small, which Caesar nere deni'd His greatest enemies. Cae. And can you think I should deny it you? Do but expresse it▪
CLE. That thou would'st kill me Caesar; I have liv'd These many yeers too long: I should have dy'd Dio. When that great Worthy, that renowmed Caesar Was basely murther'd in Romes Capitoll. Surviving him was my unhappinesse. But I have liv'd to see his sonne inherit Dio. His state and Empire, and controll the world. Cae. Be cheery Cleopatra, fear no wrong At Caesar's hands. CLE. Death is no wrong at all. I have deserv'd it, Sir. Cae. But can you think That we, whose clemencie so many men And stubborn enemies so oft have prov'd, Should now at last be cruell to a Queen? But we must chide you, that so long together Have sided with Antonius, and with him Conspir'd the wrack of Rome. CLE. That's soon excus'd. If 'twere a crime to love Antonius Dio. Plutarch. (Which I confesse I did, and his large favours Truly deserv'd it) think it was not mine But fates own crime, that first allotted me To his protection: had your share of rule In Egypt lyen, I had been Caesars friend. Cae. Besides with men and money you give aid To Caius Cassius in Philippi field Who murther'd Caesar in the Capitoll.
CLE. Caesar, as false as truth it self is true. I was accused to Antonius Plutarch. Appian. For that before; but in Cilicia I quickly cleer'd those causelesse jealousies, Witnesse thou glorious starre, which the great soule Of noble Julius, when he left the earth, Added to heaven, how innocent I am From any fault in that: but Caesar know Dio. Against thy father not the act alone, But even suspition shall be purg'd with death. I can no longer live. Cae. What have I done? I fear my rashnesse has too far betray'd Dio. My thoughts to Cleopatra: gentle Queen Be comforted; expect at Caesar's hand Nothing but love and friendship: do not wrong My goodnesse with unjust suspition All former grievances are quite forgot. Your port and state shall be maintain'd at full. Your houshold servants not diminished. Epaphroditus, see the Queen attended As fits her stare and honour; and till next We visit you, rest with a full assurance Of our best love and friendship. CLE. All the payment That my poor fortunes can return to Caesar Is thanks and service. Cae. Epaphroditus. EPAP. Caesar. they whispr.
CLE. Yes. whisper on; you cannot over-reach My jealousies: no signes of love at all, Exit Caesar. No smile, nor amorous glance, I was deceiv'd, And meerly coosen'd by base Thyreus. But I must hide my fears, and cleer this brow The better to effect my purposes. EPA. How fares your Majesty? CLE. Never so well As now I am, I did not think great Caesar Had been so full of love and courtesie. EPA. Oh Madam, Caesar's th' unexampled mirrour Of royaltie, and does as far exceed All petie Kings in goodnesse as in power. And if my humblest services in ought May give content to royall Cleopatra I shall be proud to be commanded still. CLE. Thanks good Epaphroditus. That love is true that's shew'd in misry. But what have I forgot? I had a note Of some particulars I meant to give To Caesar's hand and quite forgot it here. Nor would I trust the cariage of a thing Of so great consequence to every hand. EPA. Will you command my service? CLE. I shall rest Indebted to your love; Caesar will thank you. It much concerns both his estate and mine. Dio.
Be speedy good Epaphroditus, for I long to heare his answer. EPA. Fear not Madam. A quick performance, it rejoyces me To see her look so cheerily again. Exit Epa. CLE. So now my trouble is remov'd, I come, I come my dearest Lord Antonius, Never till now thy true and faithfull love. My much abused Lord, do not disdain Or blush t'acknowlege Cleopatra's name When tears and bloud have wash'd her spotted soul▪ Wert thou alive again, not all the world Should shake my constancie, or make divorce Twixt thee and mee: but since too late, alas, My tears of sorrow come, I'll follow thee, And beg thy pardon in the other world. All crimes are there for evermore forgot. There Ariadne pardons Theseus falshood. Dido forgives the perjur'd Prince of Troy, And Troilus repentant Cressida. Though false to thee alive, I now am come A faithfull lover of thy dust and combe. Exit. Enter AGRIPPA, GALLUS, and two Psyls. GAL. Marcus Agrippa, I have here provided As Caesar gave in charge two Libyan Psyls. All Afrik yields not fitter for his purpose. AGRI. They look like likely ones.
GAL. They have been prov'd, And have already on my souldiers, When they were bit by Serpents, done strange cures, Past all belief or hope, recall'd fled life Back to his mansion, and beyond the power Of Aesculapius have suck'd and charm'd The mortall venome from their dying limbs. These two, Agrippa in their infancy Their doubting sires to try their lawfull births Plinius. Solinus. Lucanus. (As Eagles try their Eaglets 'gainst the Sun) Expos'd to mortall Serpents, and were so Confirm'd in what they sought, the trembling Snakes Durst not assault the Infants. Enter CaeSAR. AG. Here he comes. Cae. Are those the men? GAL. Yes, Caesar. Cae. Carry them To Cleopatraes Palace; let them wa Neer to Epaphroditus. What's the news? How fares the Queen? EPA. Never more cheery Sir. Her looks expresse her hopes; nor in her words Can she conceal her inward cheerfulnesse. But one thing, Sir, she sai'd she had forgot, Which neerly did concern both you and her; And that in such a cause she durst not trust A common messenger, requesting me To give it to your hands.
Cae. She has deceiv'd thee, And all of us; the worst that I could fear Is come to passe: oh run Epaphroditus, I'll follow thee with all the speed I can. But all too late, I fear, our speed will come. Exeunt. Enter CLEOPATRA crown'd, attended by GLAUCUS, MARDIO, EIRA, CHARMIO, shee takes her state. ANTHONY's Herse brought in CLE. This is my second Coronation day; But nobler then the first, and fuller farre Of reall honour, and magnificence. Nor till this pompous houre was Cleopatra A perfect Queen, alas, I did not sway A Scepter over fortune, or command As now I do, the destinies themselves. I wore a painted honour, a meer shadow Of Royall state, and such a feeble Crown As warre could threaten, treason undermine, And every puffe of Fortune blow it off. My state is constant now, my thoughts above The fear of dangers or opposing foes. MAR. What new addition has she got off state? GLA. I cannot tell, nor can I guesse her meaning. CLE. Glaucus and Mardio, leave the room a while. Exeunt Glaucus and Mardio. Come hither Girles, I will no longer hide My joys from you; in such attire as this I go to meet my dear Antonius.
CHAR. Madam, he's dead. CLE. Alas, thou art deceiv'd. He lives my Charmio in the other world, And stays for me; I have been too too slack In comming to him: this that here lies dead Was but the house that lodg'd my dearest Lord, That earthly Mansion, that did once contain The kindest, noblest, and the truest soule That ever liv'd; and this our second meeting Is farre more sweet, and full of noble love Then when we first met in Cilicia, When our magnificence and pomp did fill The world with wonder and astonishment. Why weep you girles? is it to see your Mistris Greater then ere in Glory? if you lov'd me, You'd weep to see great Cleopatra led A wretched captive through the streets of Rome Before proud Caesar's chariot, mock'd and flowted, And from a Queen become Octaviaes drudge. No, no, my girles, I will be still my self And from this seat of state look down in scorn On Rome, and Caesar's threats as things below me. EI. Nor heer shall my attendance leave you, Madam, I'll wait upon you to th'Elisian shades. CHAR. Nor will poor Charmi be left behinde. CLE. My earthly race is run, and I descend As great a ghost as Theban Semele, When her ambitious love had sought and met The Thunderers embraces, when no Pile Of earthly wood, but Jove's celestiall fire Consum'd her beauties reliques, and sent down
Her soul from that Majestick funerall. Farewell thou fading remnant of my Love. When I am gone, I'll leave these earthly parts To keep thee company: never to part, But dwell together, and dissolve together. Come Aspe, possesse thy mansion; freely feed On these two hils, upon whose snowy tops The winged Cupid oft has taken stand, And shot from thence the proudest hearts on earth. Corruption now, and rottennesse must seize This once admired fabrick, and dissolve This flesh to common elements again▪ When skilfull nature, were she strictly bound To search through all her store-house would be pos'd To tell which piece was Cleopatra once. Sweet Aspe, I feel thy▪ touch, and life begins From these cold limbs to take her gentle flight. A slumber seizes me; farewell my girles. Thus let the Romans finde me dead, and know Maugre the power of Rome, and Caesar's spleen That Cleopatra liv'd, and di'd a Queen. CHAR. She's dead, and Eira too. I heare a noise. There is no dallying now; I must bespeedy, And use the common and sure way to death. She stabs her self.
Enter CaeSAR, AGRIPPA, TITIUS, PLANCUS, GALLUS, EPAPHRODITUS, PROCLEIUS. Cae. We come too late, and all in vain I fea Our care has been. EPA. Here lies her servant bleeding, Not dead: speak Charmio, how dy'd the Queen? CHA. A death that well beseem'd her royall birth. . AGR. See Caesar, see; the mark upon her brest, And here the fatall authour. Cae. 'Twas the Aspe. Be speedie now, and use your utmost power Sueton. Dio. You skilfull Psyls, call back this royall soul To her fair seat, and take from Caesar's bounty Above your wish: suck thou the wounded place, And mutter thou thy strongest charms to fright Pale death from thence, and you inernall Gods, If ere to humane prayers you could lend An exorable eare, 'tis Caesar begs, Caesar, whose sword has sent to your black shades A hundred thousand souls, and still has power T'enlarge your Empire, begs in lieu of all But restitution of one soul alone. TI. How royally she dy'd? PLA. No conquer'd Prince. Did ever finde a nobler way to death.
Had feeble Perseus known so brave a course, He had redeem'd his captive life from shame. And not depriv'd the Conquerour of fame. Cae. Is there no hope? PSY. She's gone past all recoverie. Cae. We will no longer strive 'gainst destiny. Though thou art dead, yet live renowm'd for ever; And let this action speak thee to the world A fo not shaming Caesar's victory. No other Crown or Scepter after thine Shall Aegypt honour: thou shalt be the last Of all the raigning race of Ptolomey: And all, and more then what thy letter crav'd Will Caesar grant with dead Antonius In richer state then ere proud Memphis saw Sueton. Dio. Plutarch. Her Kings inter'd shall Cleopatra lye. Thy dying figure carv'd in fairest stone Shall my triumphant chariot wear, for all To gaze and wonder at thy form and worth. Aegypt no more a Kingdome, now a Province Cornelius Gallus, is thy government. And here let Caesar sheath the civill sword, Whose fatall edge these twenty years has ripp'd The bleeding ntrails of afflicted Rome. Heer let our labours end: advance brave friends Our prosperous Eagles home to Italy, To reap the fruit of all our wars and toils, And fill great Rome with conquer'd Aegypts spoils. FINIS.
The Speakers. Antoniani, Aegytii, Caesarei. Marcus Antonius. Marcus Titius. Munatius Plancus. C. Canidius Crassus. Caius Titius Domitius. Lucilius. Aristocrates. Cleopatra, Eira Charmio. Achoreus. Sossius. Seleucus. Glaucus. Mardio. Caesar Augustus. Marcus Agrippa Cornelius Gallus. Pinnarius Scar∣pus. Euphroneus. Proculeius. Thyreus. Epaphroditus. The Scene AEGYPT.
