18417 99848371 13461
THE IOVRNALL, OR Day∣ly Register, CONTAYNING A TRVE manifestation, and Historicall declaration of the voyage, accomplished by eight shippes of Amsterdam, vnder the conduct of Iacob Corneltszen Neck Admirall, & Wybrandt van Warwick Vice-Admirall, which sayled from Amster∣dam the first day of March, 1598. SHEWING THE COVRSE THEY kept, and what other notable matters happened vnto them in the sayd voyage. sailing scene Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burby & Iohn Flasket: And are to be sold at the Royall Exchange, & at the signe of the blacke beare in Paules Church-yard. 1601.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP∣FVLL, MASTER Thomas Smith, Sheriffe of the honorable Citie of London, and Gouernor of the famous companie of the English Marchants trading to the East Indies, Sumatra, Iava, the Isles of the Malucos, Banda, and the rich and mightie Kingdome of Chyna: and to the right VVorshipfull the Aldermen, and the rest of the Commit∣ties and societie of the said corporation. William Walker vvisheth all prosperitie and happie successe. RIght Worshipfull, who so takes but a sleight surueigh of the present state of things, must needes be forced to ac∣knowledge both the great and generall benefite likelie to ensue of this your in∣tended East Indie voyage, the successe prouing answerable to these forward be∣ginnings: and also the danger and losse on your parte, if it should (which God defend) fall out otherwise then well. The benefit is most apparant, if we do but consider either the necessitie of the enterprise, or the gaine depen∣ding thereon. That the searching of new trades, & aboue all other, this to the East Indies, is more then necessary, both the restraint of traffique in the King of Spaines dominions, and also the vnder-rate of the Hol∣landers spices, in regarde of those brought out of the Indies by the way of Turkie, doe too plainelie demonstrate. Hereunto you may adde the venting of diuers naturall commodities, which otherwise would lye dead, and likewise the employment of tall and seruiceable Ships, and the increase of our Marriners knowledge in Nauigation: the gaine both to the augmenting of her Maiesties Customes, and the enriching of all the Aduenturers cannot chuse (as your selues best knowe) but proue in time extraordinarie Wherein, though I were silent, yet the Portugale Carracks, and within these few yeares also the Ships of Hol∣land, and Zealand doe in a manner proclaime so much to all the world.
The danger in attempting this action no man can doubt of: it be∣ing subiect to like difficulties and misaduentures with other honorable exploytes of the same kinde, and in that respect also farre more com∣mendable and praise-worthie: and so the losse (if matters should mis∣carrie, which God forbid) cannot be little, seeing the charges haue been so great. These considerations (right Worshipfull) being seconded by the perswasion of M. Richard Hacluyt, a man for his matchles industrie in collecting the English Voyages, most incomparably wel deseruing of this state, preuailed so much with me, that being stirred vp with the zeale of a true Patriot or well willer to my natiue Countrie, I could not lesse doe, then cast into your East Indie treasurie this poore myte, I meane my labour in translating this little pamphlet, which containeth matter so agreeable and pertinent to this your present purpose. For herein the Hollanders (who borrowed a great part of their light All these Ʋoya∣ges, and sundrie other important discourses of the East Indies, Pegu, China, the Malucos, Philippinas and Iapan, are to be found in the second and third volumes of M. Hakluyts English Ʋoya∣ges, from vs, namely out of the famous Voyages of Sir Francis Drake, Ma∣ster Thomas Candish, Master Iames Lancaster, Ralph Fitch, and Thomas Stephans, their forerunners in those parts, and haue had speciall assi∣stance in their late Nauigations by the meanes of Master Iohn Dauies, Master Timothie Shotton, and other skilfull Pylots of our Nation) doe in ample manner requite vs with the like: acquainting vs with their Voyages, discoueries and dangers, both outward and homeward; with their negotiation and traffique at Iava, the Malucos, and other places, with the disposition of the naturall inhabitance, and the slye sullen practises of the Portugals, and likewise with the quantie and value of Spices and other commodities which they brought home. Heere therefore your Captaines, Masters, and Factors (notwith∣standing they are very sufficiently informed alreadie) may in some sorte be directed how to shape their course to auoide many perrils, and to enioy seuerall kindes of Marchandize for which you send them. And albeit both your selues and they also, in regarde of your deepe insight and experience in these matters, may seeme not much to stand in neede of this my endeuour, yet remembring an olde rule in lawe, that Superabundans cautela non nocet: sure I was, that some good might come hereof, but harme none at all. It may please you therefore (right Worshipfull) to take it in kinde part, if not for the worthines of the matter, yet for the sincere intent of him that offers it, who in this, and in all other your worthie disseignes, wisheth you most prosperous successe, and stands continuallie deuoted to your seruice. Your Worships most vnfainedly affected, WILLIAM WALKER.
THE IOVRNALL, OR daily Register, containing a true ma∣nifestation, & Historicall declaration of the voy∣age, accomplished by eight ships of Amsterdam, vnder the conduct of Iacob Corneliszen Neck Admirall, & Wybrandt van Warwick Vice-Admirall, which sayled from Amsterdam the first day of March, 1598. shewing what course they kept, and what other notable matters happe∣ned vnto them in the sayd voyage. IN the name of God, Amen. In the yéere of our Lord 1598. the first day of March, sundrie worshipfull Marchants & others, louers of our countries welfare, rigged and furnished sixe tall shippes, with two Pinnases, to sayle vnto the East Indies, whose names hereafter follow. The first shippe was called Mauritius, wherein Iacob Mauriti∣us. Corneliszen Neck of Amsterdam was Admirall, and Goua∣ert Lanszen master. The second ship was called Amsterdam, wherein Wy∣brandt Amster∣dam. Warwicke of Amsterdam was Ʋice-Admirall, and Cornelis Ianszen Fortuin was master. The third ship was called Holland, whereof was master Hollan∣dia. Symon Lamberts Mau. The fourth shippe was called Zealand, whereof was Zelan∣dia. master Claes Ianszen Melknap.
The fift was called Gelderland, whose matter was Iohn Gelder∣land. Bruin. The sixt ship Vtrecht, whereof was master Iohn Mart∣zen. Vtrecht The seuenth being the greater Pinnase, was called Vries∣land, Freeslad whose master was Iohn Corneliszen. The eight ship was the smaller Pinnase called Ouerysell, Ouer-Ysell. wherein Simon Ianszen Hoen was master. In these aforesaid eight ships were some 560. men, mu∣stred the 9. day of March. The 13. day of March we set sayle, and departed from Amsterdam, and the nine and twentieth day of the said Mo∣neth, the great ships were towed ouer the Pampus by thrée water ships. The fourth of April the ship called Hollandia, came néere vnto the sand of Encusen, where she was forced to cut down her foremast, by reason of the great storme, and fowle wea∣ther: and the two and twentieth day we came to the Tex∣ell, where wee remained eight dayes for a good winde to carrie vs thence. The first day of May we set saile from the Texell, hauing Anno 1598. The. 1. day of May we sailed from the Texell. the wind at South east. The third day we passed by Douer, where we spake with certaine ships of warre, and the fourth day wee had sight of Wicht, Portland, and Beuiser. The tenth day came a small ship of Enchusen, into our fleete in the Spanish seas, which came from Aueren, and a∣bout two houres after, our smaller Pinnases sayled after her with letters, and brought some ten thousand Oringes with her, which were distributed among the ships: so that euerie man had eight Oringes. The 11. day we were in the height of the Burlings, at which time 25. men in the shippe called Gelderland were christened.
The 15. day we had fight of the Iles of Madera and Sar∣tes. The 17. day before noone we were passed the Ilandes of Canaria, namely, Gomera and the Palm. The 23. day we passed by the salt Ilands, to wit, the Ile of May and S. Iago. The nine and twentieth day being in the height of fire degrées, wee were forced to strike our sayles, by reason of tempests and fowle weather, which continued about two howres. The first day of Iune we tooke a Torteyse, waying an A Tor∣teyse ta∣ke way∣ing 143 pounds. hundreth thrée and fortie pounds. The 5 day Gerrit Ianszen of Alkmar leapt ouer boord, into the sea, out of the great Pinnase. The 6. day came a flying fish into the ship called Gelder∣land, which was very strange vnto vs. The 8. day we passed vnder the Equinoctiall line with a fine fresh gale, and then euerie messe had a canne of wine al∣lowed them. The 25. day euery messe had thrée cannes of wine allow∣ed, The sho els of Brasilia passed, for which was great ioy among vs. for ioy that wee were passed the shoels of Brasilia, lying 18. degrées south the Equinoctiall line. The 26. day the small Pinnase lost vs, by reason of the mists: and the twentie seuenth day the Admirall sent out the Shippe called Hollandia to seeke the saide Pin∣nase. The eight and twentieth day of the saide Moneth in the morning, wee sayled towardes the Iland, and after wee were approached neere vnto the shore, we manned two boates, and rowed on land to seeke for some refre∣shing. The 29. day the ship Hollandia returned into the fléete with the small Pinnase, at which time the first execution
of iustice was done aboord the ship called Gilderland: at this place wee saw mightie shoels of birds, as great as Storkes. The 24. of Iuly we tooke the height of Cape de Bona Esperance, which lieth 33. degrees from the E∣quinoctiall line. The 27. of the said month, we saw driuing on the wa∣ter great long logges or truncks of wood, whereof some were 20. or 25. fadome long: we saw also great store of great birds, which is a verie good marke of the Cape de Bona Esperance. The 28. day of the sayd month, wée fastned againe our Cables to our Ankers: the same night we had a great storme, so that we were forced to take in our sayles: and we saw the same night a Corpus sanctus in our maine The 29. of Iulie, foure of our ships lost our cōpanie, being in the height of C. Bona Espe∣rance. Euery measure or mut∣skin is the eight part of a quart. top mast, or a light burning as cléere as a candle. The 29 day, wée lost the companie of foure of our ships, but betwéene the 30. and the 31. day in the night, thrée of them returned vnto the fléete, so that wee wanted but one, which was Claes Ianszen Melknap of Horne. The 31. of Iuly in the morning, we had sight of Cape Bona Esperance. The 2. day of August we dranke our last Béere, and we beganne our first allowance to drinke water, foure mutskins or measures euerie day, and thrée of wine. The 7. of August wee had againe a stout gale of wind at South east, so that wee were forced to strike our top masts. The 8. day towards the euening it lightned and thun∣dred mightily, so that we were glad to take in our sailes. The same night we lost our Admirall, the Hollandia, and the small Pinnase, by meanes of the great thunder and lightning. The 14. day our Committées and masters had bene
aboord the Ʋice-Admiral, and had diminished our allow∣ance of wine, ordayning vs one and a halfe mutskins or measures of wine, and sixe of water for euerie messe. The 15. of August, wee saw a little place in the Sea, where the water séemed to boyle, as a kettle that seetheth on the fire: the water was of a berie gray colour, it ex∣tended the length of an arrow shot, and in breadth the length of a shippe: we sayled through it, but wee percei∣ued not any great strangenesse therein. The 17. day iustice was executed in our shippe, for some offences therein committed. The 18. day we met with a contrarie winde, and we kept our course for the most part South east: the same day we saw many Whales. The 20 day we had store of raine, with thunder and lightning, at which time the Ʋice Admiralles fore-top-mast was broken in three peeces: the same day the wind changed, so that we held our course East Northeast, ma∣king good way. The 22. day of the sayd month, the ship called the Ze∣land returned to our fleete, which was about 25. dayes after she had beene missing, so that now wee were fiue ships in companie. The 24. of August, the companie of the Zealand fet∣ched another mast out of the Gelderland, to make ano∣ther fore-mast, for shee had lost her mast in the foresayd storme, when she parted from vs, and had beene in great daunger. The same day wee had sight of the land called Saint Laurence or Madagascar, which gaue great ioy and com∣fort to all in our shippes: and the 25. day we made to the land, for wee saw wee could not passe the necke land of Madagascar, therefore we ankered neere vnto the necke of the land, which was the first time that we did cast any
anker, since we departed from the Texell. The 26. day in the morning, we manned foure boats, Foure boates rowed to the shore of Mada∣gascar, & what happe∣ned vn∣to them neere the shore. and rowed to the land, to see if wee might there find any refreshing: & comming neere the shoare, the beate of the Vtrecht was with the folke therein ouerturned, and one of the quarter masters of the boate drowned, called Iohn Pamer of Amsterdam: and the same day we had a storme, so that we were forced to depart thence, for our Ʋice Ad∣mirall, the Amsterdam, the Zealand, the great Pinnase, and the ship of the deanerie & Chapter of Vtrecht lost e∣uerie one of them an anker, but the Gelderland rode out the storme. The 17. day of the sayd month in the morning, wée wayed our anker, and sayled after the other ships, which were vnder sayle in sight, hauing a fayre wind, we kept our course East South east, to reach the Cape of Saint Sebastian, and the 29. day in the morning we left the said Cape behind vs. The 30. day wee passed the Cape de Iulian, and were becalmed, the wind contrarie, and darke weather. The 4. day of September, all the Marchants and Ma∣sters Septem∣ber. went aboord the Ʋice-Admirall, where it was a∣mongst thē debated, whether wee should put into the bay of Antongil, or direct our course towards Bantam: but in the end it was concluded to kéepe our course. The 5. day of September wee were allowed againe three mutskins of wine, and foure of water, without The Ile de Cer∣ne, other wise cal∣led the Iland Mauriti∣us. porrage, by reason of the scarcitie of water: the same day we had also a good wind, so that we held our course East, and East and by North. The 17. day wee had sight of an Island, called Ile de Cerne, which seemed to be verie hillie, so that we had good hope there to find fresh water, whereby wée were al greatly reioyced, for our ships began to be vexed with the
skuruie disease. How they came to the land Mauriti∣us, wher they found a very fit and faire hauen, fresh water, and birds which they caught with their hands. The 20. of Septē ber most of our people were on shoare, where a Sermon was made in the fore∣noon, & another in the af∣ternoon. The 18. day in the morning, wée rowed with two boates towards the shoare of the Isle de Cerne to sée if we might there find any fresh water, or releefe of victualles: and comming néere the land, wee rowed along the shoare, but could not find any open place conueuient for landing: whereupon our boate with the Committees went aboord the Ʋice-Admirall, where it was appoynted that our boate should row to another part of the Island, to search for some conuenient place of landing: whereupon (the boate manned with seuen men, after they had rowed to shoare and made diligent search) found a very faire cio∣sed hauen, where fiftie ships might lie, defended from all winds, and good ground for ankeridge: towards the eue∣ning the boate returned, and came aboord the Ʋice Ad∣mirall, bringing with them eight or nine great birds, and many small, which they had taken with their hands: also they found there very faire and swéete water, that came from the hilles, which caused great ioy in the shippes a∣mong our people, that they might haue their bellies ful of fresh water. This hauen is the fairest and fittest that a man may possibly find for refreshing. And the ninetéenth day we went further vp into the Island, where we found passing good ground to anker and rode at, fouretéene fa∣dome clay ground. The 20. day the most part of all the people went a shoare, where they heard a Sermon made by a Mini∣ster of the Ʋice-Admirals shippe. It was now iust foure moneths and twentie dayes, since wee had set foote on a∣ny shoare, and that day we had double allowance of wine, for a remembrance of the Faire kept the same day at Amsterdam: and the same day we did nothing (because it was Sunday) but heard two Sermons in the morning and at afternoone, praysing and giuing heatlie thankes
vnto Almightie God, that he had conducted vs to this wi∣shed place of refreshing, for if wee had not found this place, many a man had not liued to tell what hee had séene, for the scuruie disease beganne mightily to vexe our people, and our water for the most part stunke, and was as blacke as kennell water, and (as the Pilot affir∣med) wee were then 500. leagues from Bantam: wee named this Island Mauritius. The 21. of the same month in the morning, our boate rowed to another place of the Island, to sée if they could find any inhabitants: in the end they came to a fresh riuer which descended from the mountaines, but they could not sée any people in the land. At this place wee fetched our water: for a man may row in with a boat, and with ease strike the same into the boate, so that it is a maruai∣lous commodious place to water. In this riuer our peo∣ple tooke so great quantitie of fowle, as they were all a∣ble to eate, for when we came neere them, they sate still, and could not flie from vs, so that we with our handes might easily take them: whereby wee noted that the land was not inhabited. The 23. day certaine of our people went out with a small boate to fish with a net, which the Ʋice-Admirall had brought with him, for there was excéeding great plentie of fish. The 24. day certaine were appoynted to row with a long boate to the land, to search if they could finde any other hole or place to come forth, beside the same which we had alreadie passed, by reason that the wind was con∣trarie, so that wee could not returne the same way wee came. The 25. day some that had beene sent abroad retur∣ned, but they found not any people in the land: the same day all of vs with great diligence carried water aboord
our shippes. The 27. day was another Sermon made so the com∣mon Another Sermon prea∣ched in the land Mauriti∣us. Marriners on the land: and there was an Indian, one of those which was brought into Holland in the last voyage from Madagascar, who willingly became a Chri∣stian, and receiued Baptisme, and was named Laurence. The same day the long boate returned, but could find no depth for our shippee to passe out. The 29. day, some of our people returned (which had béene sent into the land) without any desired newes, but onely that they had found a place where many Cokar∣trees grew, bringing some of the nuttes with them, and we furnished our selues with fresh water. The 30. day some of our people went a shoare to get Cokar-nuts, at which time we had our first allowance of bread, to wit, euerie day one pound and a quarter. The second day of October, we had a faire wind, and Octo∣ber. The se∣cond day of Octo∣ber wee sayled from the Island named by vs Mauriti∣us. we set sayle, but in the mouth of the hauen wee were be∣calmed, so that wee were forced to tow the shippes out with out boates, but our Ʋice-Admirall was put backe when the other shippes were out: we sent our boate man∣ned to helpe him also out, but so soone as they were come aboord, it began to blow a little gale, whereby the Ʋice-Admirall got out, and then wee directed our course to∣wards Bantam East, and East and by North. The 17. day we made an end of our last butter, and the wind was verie scant. The 28. and 29. of October, the Sea was of a won∣derfull white colour, so that we imagined that wee were neere to some land, but wee could not discrie any land at all, and the same day in the morning wee had the sunne ouer our heades, and this was the second time that the sunne was right ouer vs.
❧ A description of the Island de Cerne, which was now named Mauritius, lying 21. degrees to the South of the Equi∣noctiall line. THe Island de Cerne, named by the Hollanders Mauritius, lyeth 21. degrees to the South of the E∣quinoctiall line, and is in compasse some sixe miles or leagues, verie little more or lesse. Such as will saile into this Island, must bring the two highest hilles into one, leauing the sixe small Islands on the right hand, kéeping tonne fadome water. On the left side of vs lay a small Island, which we named the Island of Hem kerken, and the bay of the sayd Island of Cerne, we called after the name of our Ʋice-Admirall, The bay of Warwick: it hath a very faire hauen, where fiftie shippes maylie, defended from all windes and wea∣ther. This foresaid Island Mauritius is not inhabited, nor neuer was, by all that we could iudge, for many and of∣ten times we ranne vp into the countrie, and found no people: but we iudged by the tamenesse of the birds and fowles that it must bee an vnfrequented place, by reason that men might take them plentifully with their hands. It is a verie hie hillie land, so that for the most part it is couered with cloudes, and somtimes there passeth such a smoke or mist ouer the land, that a man can hardly see The sci∣tuation and fer∣tilicie of Cerne. one another. For the most part it is all stonie ground, not withstanding very aboundant of wilde trees, which are there in innumerable sort, standing so thicke, that a man can hardly passe by them. These trees are as faire &
euen wood, as may be found in any Countrey, as blacke as pitch, and as smoothe as a bone: on the out-side is a verie thicke greene barke, and vnder the barke is the black Eben, some with verie faire redde wood, and other some yellow as waxe, of which three sorts of wood, wée brought a little from thence for a proofe, and is found to be excellent faire and good. Also it hath Palmites trees, whereby we were greatly Palmites trees. refreshed, they grow like to the Cokar-trees, aloft in the toppe it carryeth the branches thicke and spreading: the same we cutte downe, and hauing taken out the pith, did eate: we made sometimes sallads thereof, which strongly purged and refreshed our bodyes. We landed in this Island almost all our people, and found the same to be verie good and healthsome, so that we erected there some tents and cabbins, wherin we laid our sicke and diseased, which we brought from our ships, and there remained vntill they were recouered, which was in verie short time: whereby wee noted, that this Island was of a sweete and wholesome ayre. After wee were all landed, wee had a Sermon in the forenoone, and another in the afternoone, thanking, and praysing God, that hee had brought vs to a place of so good refreshing for if we had not come to this place, many of vs had not liued to tell newes, for the scuruie disease beganne mightily to raigne among our people, and our water for the most part stunke, and was as blacke as kennell water: this happened iust when in foure months and twentie dayes before we had not set footing vpon a∣ny land. Being now in the Isle Mauritius, we rowed with one of our boates to another place of the land, to search what inhabitants wee could find, but found none, onely wee came to a fresh riuer, which fell from the mountaines,
where we tooke in fresh water for our ships. Some of our companie went a fishing in a small Of the multi∣tude of fish. cocke, with a nette which the Ʋice-Admirall had brought with him, and we found that there was wonderfull plen∣tie of fish, so that at one draft we tooke néere two barrels and a halfe of fish, and could hardly draw the net, by rea∣son of the great number of fishes therein: and we tooke euerie day so great quantitie of fish, that we were not a∣ble to spend the same while it was fresh and sweet. Here we took a Chorn-backe that was so big, that wee, with the Marriners of our ship, had sufficient to eate thereof at two meales. Here are great numbers of Torteyses, which are so big, that 4 of vs might stand vpon some one Torteyse, and yet it crept away with vs, in the shelles or shieldes whereof, tenne of vs haue had roome to sit. This Island is very fruitfull, and plentifull of fowles, The fer∣tilitie of Cerne. as of Turtle Doues, whereof there are such plentie, that 3. of vs haue in one afternoone taken 150. and if wee had beene able to carrie them, we might haue taken more with our bare hands, & killed them with cudgels. There are also great plenty of russet Parrets, & of other colours: there are also other great fowles, as big as our Swans, hauing great heads, & vpon their heads a skin, as if they had caps on their heads: they haue no wings at all, but in place of wings, they haue 3. or 4. black quils, and where their taile should be, they haue 4. or 5. small curled fea∣thers, & their colour is grayish. Wee named these fowles Walghfowle (partly because they were tough in eating, how long time soeuer they sod: yet the crop & breast were very good meat) but specially because we could take store of Turtle Doues, which were more delectable in taste. There are yet other sorts of fowles good to bee eaten, which are called Rabos Forcados, because their tayles
are like in fashion to a taylers shéeres. These fowles are so tame, that a man may take them with his hands as they sate on their nest, and also kill them with staues and cudgels, insomuch that in the space of one halfe howre, we could fill a boate with them: whereby we presumed that there had neuer béene any people in the Island, for the birdes shunned no man, yea, they scarcely would for∣beare to come and sit on our heades, and so suffer them∣selues to bee taken. In this Island we did set vp a Smithes sorge, where our Smith made and mended some Iron workes, and the Shipwrights made also a boate for the Vtricht, for she had lost her boat before Saint Laurence Island. In this Isle de Cerne before mentioned, we found a∣bout 300. pound waight of waxe, whereon stood Gréeke Letters. We found also a Netting, with a Capsten bar, and a great Maineyard: whereby iudged, that some ship had there suffered wracke. In this Island, our Ʋice-Admirall caused a shield of wood to be made & fastned to a trée, to the end that if any The Ad mirall nayleth a boord or a shield to a tree, & the rea∣son thereof. ships arriued at that place, they might perceiue ye Christi∣ans had béen there: & thereupon was carued these words following, Christianos Reformados, reformed Christiās, with the armes of Holland, Zealand, and Amsterdam. Also there is in this Island a very large plain, wherof our Ʋice-Admirall caused a garden to be made, & paled it round about, & after did sow and plant al sorts of fruits, to proue if they would there grow & increase. Our ships also left some Hens there, to proue whether they would there increase or not. Sundry times we sent of our folk vp into the Island, to vnderstand if there were any inhabitants on the further side of the Island: they were sometimes 3. or 4. dayes out before they returned, but they neither saw nor heard of any, no not of any 4. footed beasts.
A further and more particular de∣claration of the Island de Cerne, otherwise called Mauritius, No. 1. THis is the entrance of the Isle Mauritius, lying East Northeast. A wilde Palm-tree, which wee set here for a Beacon, if perhaps any ship should chaunce to arriue here. The Crosses are all rocks, which lie vnder the wa∣ter. Is a little Island, where wee gathered Indian Nuttes. These are swéete riuers, where we caught such plenty of fish with our cock-boate, that somtimes we had 50 fi∣shes at one draught (which we named Trenchors by rea∣son of their flatnes) together with many other smal fishes of diuers sorts, so that oftētimes we thought that our net would breake, and with our ship-boate we were often∣times forced to helpe them to vnlade the cocke, because they could not without great labour and danger of sink∣ing, bring the cocke aboord: and (which is very strange) they swom in such innumerable multitudes hard along the shoare, that men might take them with their hands as they stood on the land, yea, oftentimes we killed them with our halfe-pikes. This is a fresh riuer, where wee filled our water with our boate: and heere wee caught a Thornebacke which was almost three yards in compasse, besides her taile, so that our people had much to doe to get it into the boate. Our Ʋice-Admirall sayled about this corner or necke of the land for his pleasure, & caused Oringes, Lemons, peason, beanes, and all kind of other graine to bee sowed, which he had in the shippe, to see if the same would grow well there or no, to the end the same might hereafter
serue for refreshing of such as should chaunce to come thither. These are small Islands, against which the Sea ma∣sheth sometimes casting vpon the land many Tor∣teyses. A repetition or more plaine mani∣festation, of such things as we found and saw in the Island Mauritius, and of such matters as we there did in the time of our abode. No. 2. These are Torteyses which liue on the land, and haue no finnes to swimme, being so great, that they will créepe away with a man standing on their shelles, which they carrie on their backs, & they liue vpon crabs, which are as bigge as a mans foote. Is a fowle altogether as bigge as a Swanne, hauing two or thrée curled feathers behinde at her taile, without any wings, but in place of wings they haue thrée or foure smal black Quils: of which fowle we caught some, with store of Turtle Doues, and other birds, which our Marri∣ners with great ioy brought aboord, dealing to euery ship part of their wild fowle, after they were first sent ashore to search for the déepest fresh riuers, and what harbour there was for our shippes: whereupon the next day wee went to the hauen with our shippes, taking one of those Marriners into euerie shippe for a Pilot, which had béene a shore the day before. These fowles we dressed and sod, but we found them so tough, that we could not (how long soeuer they sod) séethe them tender, but were faine to eate them so tough as they were. As soone as wee were entred into the Hauen, our Ʋice-Admirall sent some of vs with
the long boate ashore, to spie if there were any inhabi∣tants in the Iland, but wee found no creatures, except onely great quantitie of Turtle Doues, and other birds, whereof we caught, and killed with cudgels, great num∣bers: for seeing they had not beene accustomed to be fea∣red by any people there inhabiting, they had no feare of vs, but would sit still, suffering themselues to bee killed with staucs and cudgels. To be short, it is a plentifull land of fish and fowle, and so abundant, that in all our voyage we found not the like. This is a Palme trée, which carrieth leaues so great, that a man may shrowd himselfe with one of them from the raine, and not be wet: if in this trée a hole bee bored, and a quill or tap put into the same, immediately there runneth out wine or liquour, hauing a swéete and plea∣sant taste like vnto sacke, but if it bee kept thrée or foure dayes, it waxeth Towre, and therefore it is called the Palme trée. This is a bird or fowle, which we called Rabos Forca∣dos, for that their tayles are in shape resembling a Taylers sheeres: they were very tame, and little lesse then a fadome long, when they were stretched out: their bils are long, their backes most part blacke, and their breasts white: they eate flying fishes which they catch, and the guttes or garbell of other fish and fowle, as wee found by experience: for when we cast abroad our garbell of such fish and fowle as we had taken, yea of their owne kind, they would straight wayes come and deuoure the same: their flesh would not be sodden tender. Is a bird, which we named an Indian Kauen, almost as big againe as a Parret, they are of two or thrée sun∣drie colours. Is a wild trée, whereon (for a memorie if any other ships should there arriue) is nayled a board, hauing thrée
srutcheons or armes grauen or cut thereon, so wit, the armes of Holland, Zealand and Austerdam: to the end they may know that ships of Holland haue béene at that place. This is a Palmites trée, where of our Marriners cut downe many and cut out the pith (marked with the letter A) which we found to be an excellent remedie against the scuruie disease: it is some thrée or foure foote long, within very white, and hath a sweete taste. Some of our people ate the pith of 7. or 8. of these plants. A Bat or flying Mouse, hauing a head like vnto a Monkie, and flie in this Iland in great numbers, they hang themselues on the  by the wings, and often times they fight and bite one the other. Here our Smith set vp a forge to repaire our broken iron workes, and such other things as were needfull to be mended abeard the ships. These are cottages made by vs of trées and boughes,  where our Smith and Coopers did forge and hoope their Caske, that we might bee readie to sayle thence with the first faire wind. At this place our Preacher made euerie Sunday two  Sermons: in the morning one half of our people went ashore, and at afternoone the other halfe, to heare the ser∣mon. In this place was a man Christened, borne in the I∣land of Madagascar, and named Laurence, with one or two of our company which had not béene christened. Here we tooke so great abundance of fish, that it may  séeme incredible to be written, yea at one draft we tooke two barrels and a halfe of many sorts.
To the gentle Reader. IT is to be vnderstood (Gentle Reader) that all the eight shippes kept companie, vntill they came neere to the C. de Bona Esperance, where they were parted and seue∣red by tempests and foule weather, namely the eight day of August, 1598. but these fiue ships kept together, to wit, the Amsterdam, the Zealand, the Gelderland, the Vtrecht, and the great Pinnase called Freesland, which happened to fall with the Island Mauritius, where we lay foureteene dayes, without any knowledge what was become of the other three shippes, the Mauritius our Admirall, the Hollandia, and of the small Pinnase called the Ouer-Ysel, which three shippes came from the Island of Saint Marie, and from thence sailed to Bantam. Of which three shippes we will make some relation, and of such matters as befell them in the Island of Saint Marie, at Bantam, and in their returne. After that these thrée shippes were parted and seuered How 3. ships ar∣riued at the Islād S. Mary, & tooke the king thereof prisoner. by storme and foule weather, from the company of the other shippes, they were driuen vnder the Island of Saint Mary, where they tooke the King prisoner, and afterwards ransomed him for a Cow and a fatte Calfe. In this Island we found not any great matter, com∣ming thither in a time out of season, for the Orringes were but blossomed, and the Lemons verie small, but we found some Sugar Canes, Hennes, and such like: And the people of the Countrey came to vs with two or
three small Oringes. Here we saw a strange manner of The manner which the In∣diās vse to take whales. hunting: there were certaine Indians in a Canoas or boate, which had spied a Whale at Sea, who with their boate made out to take her: and after they had struck into her body an harping Iron, whereunto was fastened a long rope made of the inner barkes or péelings, next to the bodyes of trées, the Whale finding her selfe wounded, descended into the deepe, and they viering the rope to the whole length: not withstanding the Whale drew the boat after him as easily as if it had been a straw: but the Indians assuring thēselues vpō their expert swimming, feared not drowning, nor the ouerturning of their boate. Now after they had thus continued a while, vntill the Whale had tyred her selfe, and was out of breath, they towed her to the shoare, betwéene wind and water, and afterwards at low water they hewed her in peeces, and euerie one of them tooke as much as hee desired. Wee might haue taken thereof at our pleasures, but it looked so greazie, & bacon like, that it went against our stomacks. Afterwards wee sayled to the great bay of Antongil, where we filled our vessels with water. Our Indian, whose name was Madagascar, might haue remained at this place, but hee excused himselfe, that he would rather go with vs apparrelled, then remain in a place naked where he was vnknowne. Wee went vp the fresh riuer with our long boate, to seeke for fresh victuals, but the people of the Countrey made signes vnto vs to returne, for that there was nothing here to be had: yet wee rowed thrée leagues higher, but wee sped accor∣ding to the sayings of the Indians. This scarcitie was by reason that the Kings of the Island had warre, where∣by all things were spoyled and wasted, insomuch that the inhabitants themselues dyed with hunger and penurie. One of their Kings was slaine, wherefore wee stayed
there but fiue dayes: but sayling from thence, we directed our course towards Iaua, and with Gods helpe arri∣ued at Bantam with all our thrée shippes as before, to wit, Mauritius our Admirall, whose master was Gouert Ianssen, and Corneles Hermskerck, one of the Com∣mitees, the ship Hollandia, wherein Simon Lambert∣sen Mau was Master, S. Wte N Committees, who died before Bantam, in whose place was chosen Iohn Ian∣son Smit. The third being the small Pinnase called the Ouer-Ysil, whose Master was Simon Ianson, Arent Hermanssen of Alkmer was Commissioner, and Iacob van Neck was Admirall and chiefe Commaunder of the whole Nauie, in the end we arriued with great celeritie before Bantam, the 26. day of December, 1598. As soone as we were come vnto Bantam, we practised How 3. shippes procu∣red the friend∣ship of those of Bantam, & what gifts they presented to the king with all possible spéed, to attaine the friendship and good liking of these of Bantam, to which end Hemskerck was sent before to the town, to offer them trade and dealings in Marchandize (for they suspected we had been the same that had been there the last yeere, & that kept themselues so long at sca, and that wée were Pirates & théeues, as the Portingales had heretofore perswaded them) but wee excused ourselues, and made sufficient answere, after wee had sent Abdol vnto them, who was of that place, and brought thence the last yeere. The sayd Abdol, ha∣uing declared the good and friendly entertainment hee had found with vs, together with the rarities & singula∣rities which he had séene in our Countrey, & that wee had now many yéeres maintained mortall wars against the king of Spaine and Portingall, wee had fauourable au∣dience, and presented our gifts vnto the king being but a child: but the chiefe gouernour ephate, who had ye king∣like authoritie, receiued our gifts in the kings name, in verie thankfull manner: the gifts were a gilded cup, & cer∣taine
péeces of veluet, and other draped silkes, with faire drinking glasses, & gilded looking glasses; & withall were presented letters of credite, vnder the hand & seale of the worthie Lords the States, and of his Excellencie Graue Maurice, which were with great reuerence and créeping on their knées receiued. After that all these matters were finished, we began to buy and sell with those of Bantam, insomuch that the 4. day after, we began to lade, & before the end of 4. or 5. weekes the ships were almost laden. Thus after we had remained there some foure wéeks, our other 5. ships came sailing towards vs in good safety, hauing none of their people, or but very few sicke. Then we put out our flags, auncients, and streamers, saluting each other with our great ordinance in the best order. Immediately after came certaine of their Praus or boates aboord vs, bringing great plentie of Hens, egges, Cokar-nuts, Bonouas, Sugar Canes, and Cakes of Rise. This was eucrie day to do, changing and bartring with them for wrought Tin: wee had for a Tin spoone as much victuals as a man was able to eate in seven dayes. Abdol did vs great hurt: for hee had not onely reported that there were fiue ships to come after vs, but also that there were more ships in rigging, to come thither out of Zealand, which was cause, that whereas at the first we The pri∣ces of pepper at Bantā payed but 3. péeces of royals of eight for 55. pound of pep∣per, afterwards they raised it to 4. royals of eight: it was all royals of eight that they sought for; wares were no∣thing so well esteemed as money. It was very strange to vs, to see how the people of Iaua would signifie vnto vs, that there were fiue ships to come, shewing vs 4. fin∣gers and a thumb, which signe they made, saying, Lyma Shepen, meaning thereby, that there were yet 5. of our ships to come: for Lyma in their language signifieth fiue. Here the gentle Reader is to vnderstand, yt besides the
aforesaid three ships, a fourth (namely the great Pinnase called the Vriesland, wherof Iacob Cornelisson was ma∣ster, and Wouter Willekens Commissioner, laded in this place for Holland: all which foure ships being fully la∣den, gaue notice to all men of the town, that they would depart homewardes, and that therefore all such as they ought any money vnto, should come and receiue their payment. Afterwardes (hauing made good prouision of Rise and Anno 1599. the 11. of Ianu∣ary, 4. shippes well la∣den, de∣parted from Bantam towards Holland Diuers Com∣modi∣ties. water) they departed thence, and sayled vntill they came néere vnto Sumatra, where they tooke in fresh water: for the water of Bantam is white, and after a while groweth full of maggettes. At this place they bartred kniues, spoones, looking glasses, bels & néedels, for many things, and much fruit; as Millons, Cucumbers, Onions, Gar∣licke and some small store of Pepper, but excellent good. Some fewe dayes before the departure from Bantam of these foure ships, the other foure that had determined to séeke their lading further, and to that end to sayle to the Ilands of Moluccos, tooke leaue of the said laden ships, and the same night wherein they set sayle to depart, they thundred such a peale of ordinance, that it was heard o∣uer all the Iland, and the whole towne of Bantam was vp in armes, not knowing what the meaning thereof was: and thus these eyght ships parted from cath o∣ther. The people of Bantam were very glad that they were gone: for euerie day they would inquire of vs when wee would depart: and to hasten our departure, they vsed all diligence to deliuer vs such wares as we had bought, for it was nothing at all pleasant vnto them, to sée vs lie there with eight ships together. The foure ships aforesaid sayled from Sumatra, and came to the Iland of S. Helena, where they refreshed thē∣selues
eight dayesieng: there they found a Church, where∣in were some celles or boothes, with the Image of Saint Helena: there was also an holy water vessell, with a sprinckle but wee left all things as we found them, with certaine writings and memories of our being there. The Island of Saint Helena (as Iohn Huyghen wri∣teth) Description of the Islād of Saint Helena. aboundeth most plentifully with Kids, Coates, wilde Swine, Phesants, or Firid-hennes, Partridges, and Doues, but by meanes of much shooting and hunting, vsed by all and sundrie such shippes as there arriue, they are so wilde & hard to be taken, that it was too too much paines and labour to vs to seeke after them. The Goates after they were shot, would runne from vs to the toppes of the stéepest Mountaines, where it was vnpossible for vs to come vnto them. Neither could we get so much fist, here as we gladly would haue had, but here we looke in our fresh water, whereof we had sufficient store vntill we came into Holland. In this Island we left behind vs Peter Gysbrechtsson, The cause why Pe∣ter Ger∣brant∣ion was left in the Islād Saint Helena. Boat-swane of the great Pinnase, because he had strucken his master or shipper. We would willingly haue begged his pardon, but after that the orders & articles were read whereunto we were al sworne, we could not, but (for exā∣ples sake) execute iustice. Notwithstanding, her had thus much fauour that there was deliuered vnto him some por∣tion of bread, oyle, and Rise, fish hookes and a peece with some quantitie of gunne powder, and so we all tooke, our leaue, and committed him to God, hoping that he will pre∣serue him from all ill, & no doubt he shall come thence well inough, for as much as all ships which saile to the East In∣dies, must touch at this place to water & refresh thēselues. As we departed thence, we saw afarre off, a small shippe, which seemed to vs, as neere as we could gesse, that it was a French man, directing his course thitherward wee hope
that he is come into France in the same ship. From this Island we sayled, and in short time, without any misaduenture, arriued in the Texell the 19 day of Iu∣ly 1599. God be praysed for it, to whom we cannot giue sufficient thanks for so good a voyage as we made: for since the time that Holland was Holland, there neuer came thi∣ther ships so richly laden, for they brought 400. last of Pepper, one hundreth last of Cloues, some store of Paces, Nutmegs, and Sinnamum. To conclude, we finished this long voyage in lesse then 15. moneths: for in seuen mo∣neths we sayled from the Texell to Bantam, the time wée lay still and were in lading, was 6. wéekes, and in 6. moneths wee returned home to Holland from Bantam, in which time outward & homward, we sailed 8000. leagues. The Marchants and venturers of the ships went with all spéede to the Texell, to order all things aboord the said ships, and to refresh the Marriners. The Committees, Cornelis Hemskerck, with Henrick Buyck, went with al spéede to his Prince-like Excellencie, declaring vnto him, not only these acceptable newes of the return of these ships from Bantam, but also deliuered vnto him letters, together with rich presents from the king of Iaua. The 27. day of Iuly, the Admirall, with the ship Hol∣landia, 1599. 27. Iuly. came before the town of Amsterdā with great noyse of 8. trumpets: the towne bestowed wine on them for their welcome, and all the bels were rung for ioy. Gentle Reader, you haue breefely heard the successe of the 3. ships which lost the company of the other fiue: here∣after shall follow the Nauigation & successe of the other afore-said fiue shippes. THe 1. of Nouem we met with another storm at sea, with Nouem∣ber. much raine, & mighty wind, wherby our Ʋice-Admirall, the same night with the great Pinnase, lost our company. The third day the Ʋice-Admirall with the Pinnase
returned vnto vs: the same day we saw many birds, and very much wood and trées driuing on the water. The 13 same night dyed one of our folk in the ship of the Deane∣rie and Chapter of Vtrecht, which was the first man that dyed in the fléet. The 6. day of the said Moneth in the afternoone, there came néere vnto our ship a spoute, which is a whirle wind that taketh and carrieth the water vp out of the sea, which falling into a ship, will carrie away all things that are loose, and indaunger the ship: wherefore we tooke in our sailes with all spéed, tearing least perhaps they might therby receiue some dammage, & in striking of the maine yard, our principall sayle-maker, called Ioost Janson of Amsterdam, looking ouer-boord, to sée if any part of the sayle hung in the water, suddenly (as he was putting his head ouer the ships side) the mayne yarde fell loose from the mast aboue, and smote the said Ioost Ianson on his head starke dead, which was a great mischance, and he was the first man that dyed this voyage in that ship. The 7. day in the morning we cast the said Ioost Ian∣son ouer-boord. The 9. day his goods were sold before the maine mast, which were well solde, for that one Ryail of 8. was ac∣counted for 8. Gildernes and a halfe. The same day wee were put to our first allowance of Oyle, to wit, wéekely two Mutskins, which maketh of our wine measure about halfe a pinte. The 12. day the Ʋice-Admirall came aboord our ship to minister iustice, which was the first execution of iu∣stice that he did in these ships. The same day we had sight of an Island, and were in the night come néere to the land before we wist thereof, for it was a very low land: then we discharged a péece to warne the other ships thereof, & then wended and put roome-ward.
The 13 day we saw thrée other small Ilands, where∣vpon the little Pinnase sayled that euening before vs, to see if we might saile on the farther side of one of the I∣lands or not, but the water was too shallow, for there lay out a great necke or corner of the Island, therefore wee cast about to seaward, and the same euening we cast our sounding lead in the first quarter, and had 20. faddome, and casting the lead againe, found but 15. faddome, the third time 11. faddome, and the fourth time 9. faddome, insomuch that we were in great danger of the sholes, but God preuented the same, for we held our ship turning, and suddenly came into the deepe, escaping the great danger wee were in, to lose our ship and our liues: for, doubting greatly that we should méet with great stormes and tem∣pests betwéene the Islands, we were drawne out of the right way, and brought into this error. The 15. day wee had againe shallowe water at 13. faddome, but wee were out of sight of any land, which was a great wonder to finde such a shallow in the Sea so farre from any shore, for we could not sée any land at all. The same day, we had againe a faire winde, so that we must hale in our sheates, and set our course East and by South, and East Southeast: the same day we shot a great Toonny, whereof there were in that place very ma∣ny, wherewith we made good chéere. The 16. day of the saide moneth in the morning, wée had sight of another Island, so that we let slip our sheates to sayle beyond it. This Iland stretcheth to the South and North, and lyeth very low, and pleasantly to sée to: in the euening we were past this Island, and pulled in again our sheates: we held our course most East and by South, and East Southeast. The 22. day in the afternoone wee had much rayne with a stouts gale of winde, so that wée were constray∣ned
to take in our top-sailes, the same night it lightened wonderfully. The 24. day the Ʋice-Admiral gaue signe by putting out his streamer or banderoll, that all the Pilots should come aboord him, to take counsell together what course were best to be kept. The 25. 26. and 27. dayes, wee had very still and calme weather, but towards the euening the wind came South southwest, and wee helde our course most East southeast. The 28. day in the morning the wind slacked, and we directed our course East, and East, and by North: wee turned by the wind, the weather being very faire, in the night the winde came Westerly, so that we shaped our course East southeast, and Southeast and by East. The 30. day the Ʋice-Admirals preacher came aboord our shippe, where hee made vnto vs a godly and learned Sermon. The first day of December we had the wind faire, and Decem∣ber. the same day wee began first to eate of our smoaked or dryed flesh, which remained as yet very good and swéete. The 2. 4. 5. 6. and 7. dayes we had calme and still wea∣ther, with variable winds, and some while a pretie little gale, and sometimes small showres of rayne: this day we might beholde squales and snakes driuing in the water, whereby we knew that we were néere vnto the land. The 8. day wee had also mutable windes with some small showres and gusts of rayne, with thunder, the wea∣ther being very still and calme, and towards the euening it began to blow a fine swéete gale from the West north∣west, so that we haled in our sheates, and held our course East southeast: the same night a flying fish came flying into our ship. The 9. day it blew a fine gale, the wind westerly, and
we held our course for the most part East Southeast: a∣bout noonetide one of our company fell from the sprit∣saile yard, and was drowned, for before we could hoyse out our boat, he sunke: his name was Gerbrand Iacobs∣zen of Alckmar, and a common marriner. There fell another ouer-boord also, who was one of the vnder Ship∣wrights, and was browned with the other. His name was Tymon Ianszen of Amsterdam; so that this day we lost two of our company. The same day also dyed one aboord the Ʋice-Admi∣rall, and one aboord the Pinnase: Thus in this one day we lost foure men in in our fléete of fiue ships. The 10. day the wind continued fayre, shaping our course most East Southeast, the weather faire: at noone we tooke the height, and found we were eight degrées to the South of the Equinoctiall line. The 12. 13. and 14. dayes continued faire weather, except new & then a little missing raine, and the same day we saw multitudes of birds, and scum of the sea, driuing vpon the water, which caused vs to iudge that wee were not far from the land. The 21. day our Ʋice-Admirals boate came aboord vs, at which time happened an extreme storme of winde and rayne, so that wee were constrained to take in our top sailes: and because the storme continued long, it was thought good to take in the Ʋice-Admirals boate afore∣said, fearing least our boat should haue drawne her vn∣der water: wherfore we cast about to Lée-ward, to take in the boat, but in hoysing it ouer, the rope, which was fa∣stened before to the boat, brake, and therewith one of the quarter masters fell ouer boord, but we help him present∣ly and saued his life. The 25. day in the night, about thrée houres before day-light, we had a shrewd gust of raine and wind, so
that we were glad to take in our sailes. The 26. day in the morning wee could sée but 2. of our 15 shippes, but in the euening we came againe together, and with our fore-sailes euery one of vs put loofe, fearing wee should come too néere the sholes, and the Moone was so barke, that we could hardly discerne the length of a ship from vs. The 27. day in the morning wee put out againe all our satles to make more way, hauing a fine full gale from the West Northwest with faire weather, and at afternoone we saw an Island called the Isle de Gano, wherewith we were all greatly comforted and reioyced. The same night wee had a very hard tempest with contrary winds, which lasted two houres, and then the winde was againe good, and we shaped directly our course towards the maine land of Sumatra. The 28. day in the morning wée sawe the mayne land 1598. The 28. Decem∣ber we saw the maine land of Sumatra of Sumatra, which is a very high Countrey declining with a point towards the Strait. All this day wee sayled for the most part East Southeast towards the shore. In the euening wee spake with our Pinnase, and de∣maunded if they knew the place: and the Master answered vs that hee knew the place very well: wherewith wee left off to demaund any farther, but sayled forth Southeast and by East. The 29. day in the morning wee had a shrewd gust of rayne and winde, with very darke weather. In the eue∣ning the Pinnase cast about to Lee-ward, and stayed for the shippes to speake with vs: whereupon wee tooke in our Wee came in∣to the straight of Sun∣da. sayles, and ranne with our fore-course onely, to the end we might by daylight be before the strayts. The 30. day in the morning beeing come into the Straites of Sunda, in the after-noone wee discryed fiue
small sayle vnder the shore, but they came not aboord vs, by reason that the wind was very great, & blew a mightie storme: we layled along the shore, to wit, the coast of Iaua. The same day all the ships cléered all their ordinance, & in the euening we cast our Ankers a good mile from Ban∣tam, néere vnto two small Islands, for we would not come before the towne in the night time. The 31. day we wayed our Ankers, and sailed towards We ar∣riued at Bantam. Bantam; in the way came a small boate of our other ships a∣boord vs, with foure mē, declaring vnto vs that our Admi∣rall, the Hollandia, and the smal Pinnase were at Bantam, almost fully laden, and that they had beene there a moneth and foure dayes: with which good newes we were all mar∣uailously reioyced, and in the afternoone we came into the roade with exceeding ioy, where our sayd other three ships lay, at which time were but fifteene of our men dead since our comming from Holland. Presently came many of the Countrey people aboord vs, bringing vs Hennes, Egges, and many other sorts of fresh victuals & fruits, which seemed very strange vnto vs. The first day of Ianuarie many commodities were Ianuary. brought aboord vs to barter and trucke, as Hens, Egges, fruits, and such like. The second & third dayes, their Prawes or boats con∣tinued to come aboord vs so aboundantly with all kind of Marchandize, which they offered vs in truck, that we could hardly passe through them in our ships, some with Hens, some with Bonanas, & some with garlicke, and other fruits. The 4. day the Admirall came aboord all the ships, gi∣uing order to seperate the fléete, namely, that the 4. laden The ships se∣uer thē-selues. ships should returne homewards, & the other 4. should saile to the Islands of Moluccas: the Ʋice-Admirall in the ship called Amsterdam, was made Admirall, & one of our Com∣mittees, Iacob Hemskerck Ʋice-Admirall, in the Gelder∣land,
of these sayd foure shippes appoynted to goe to the Moluccas, and Iohn Ianssen Carel was appoynted to bee Ʋice-Admirall in the Hollandia: in stead of Wybrandt Warwick, Corneles Ianson Fortuiin, was appoynted ma∣ster in the great Pinnase, Iohn Cornelisson was appointed master in Melcknaps place, and Melcknap was put master into the Amsterdam, and Woulter Willekins, Commit∣tees in the Vtrecht, was placed in the great Pinnase, the Pilot of the Amsterdā was shipped into the great Pinnase, and the master of the sayd Pinnase was againe appoynted to sayle in the Amsterdam, which was Admirall of the fleete for the Moluccas. The fift, sixt, & seuenth dayes, many Prawes or small boates continued to come aboord vs, offering vs fresh vic∣tualles in trucke. The eight day in the euening we hoysed our sayles, and The 8. day of Ianuary the 4. ships de∣parted from Bantam towards the Is∣lands of Moluc∣cas. departed from Bantam with our foure ships, towards the Moluccas, to wit, the new Admirall, Wybrandt van War∣wicke, the Ʋice-Admirall, Iacob Hemskerck, the Zealand, whereof Iohn Cornelisson was master, and the Vtrecht, whereof Iohn Martssen was master or shipper. The 11. day we ankered before a riuer lying betwéene Bantam and Sakentra, and is about some foure leagues from Sakentra, two little Islands lying right ouer against it, and fiue other Islands right before you, about some halfe league from Sakentra. The 12. day we made prouision of water with all pos∣sible diligence, for two of our ships were appoynted to sayle before, to make prouision of fresh victualles: by noone wee had in all our water, and then wee and Melc∣knap sayled together away, and the next morning we cast our ankers before Sakentra, about a league from the land. The 13. day in the morning, the Sambander or gouer∣nour came aboord vs with one of their Prawes, or little
boates, demaunding what wee came for, because wée rode in that place with our shippes. Our Ʋice-Admirall made answere, that wee came to buy fresh victuals: with which answere they were well pleased, saying there was inough of all things to bee had, and offered vs a present of a certaine fruit which they call Maugenus, which our Ʋice-Admirall receiued, remune rating him with a looking glasse, and a couple of drinking-glasses of small valewe. The afternoone following he departed again from whence he came, with two of our Committees, to make prouision of fresh victualles. The same euening our Admirall with the Vtrecht came vnto vs. The 14. day in the morning, one of our boates rowed a∣shore The king fendeth a Bull vnto the Admi∣rall for a present. to buy more fresh victualles, who returned aboord to∣wards the euening, bringing much good victualles vnto the Admirall, with a Bull sent vnto our Admiral by the king, which was distributed among the foure shippes. The 15. day in the morning, so ne of our boates were sent againe to the shore for more fresh victualles, who re∣turned at noone, and after dinner wee wayed our ankers, and sayled from Iaketra. The 16. day in the morning we let fall our ankers, be∣cause the weather was very darke: for wee could not passe the neck of the land, which there stretcheth out, about some three leagues from Sakentra: at noone we sayled thence, but towards the euening wee cast out our Ankers againe. The seuenteenth day wee wayed our Ankers againe, sayling, forward with a Northwest wind, and very faire weather. The 20. day of the sayd moneth we saw the Island cal∣led Lybock, and in the afternoone we saw that it lay East∣ward of Iaua, with three other small Islands: all this day we had the wind Westerly, for the most part keeping our course East, and East and by South.
The 21. day the Committées and Masters of the The 21. Ianuarie 1599. we came before the I∣land Tuban. shippes were commaunded to come aboord the Admirall, where they sate together in counsell. The same day wée made with the land, and in the night wee came before a Towne called Tuban. The 22. day in the morning, two long boates were manned and sent to the shore, with two of the Ʋnder-Committées, to sée if they might there make any prouisi∣on of fresh victuals. The same day in the euening, the long boats returned to the shippes, bringing with them a Portingall gentle∣man of the Countrey, which had renounced the Christi∣an religion, and taken vpon him the religion of the Coun∣trey. This sayd Renegado spake with our Admirall, saying wee should at that place haue lading sufficient to our con∣tentment, if we would slay there thrée or foure moneths. The 23. day in the morning, a long boate with thrée cocke-boats rowed againe to the shore, to buy Rice and o∣ther victuals. The same day in the euening, we saw ma∣ny people assembling in euery stréete with their weapons in very gallant comely sort after their manner, hauing very many Gentlemen among them on horse-backe, which could very well ride and mannage their horses, in running, Tourneis, breaking of lances, and hunting, which pastimes we sawe the same euening on their mar∣ket place. Tuban is a little Towne, wherein is vsed a very large Descrip∣tion of Tuban. trade of all kinde of Marchandize, as of Silkes, Lyn∣nen, Chamblets, and many garments, wherewith they clothe themselues, and of all other sortes of commodities. At this place is plentie of fresh victualles to be had. In this Towne dwell many rich Gentlemen, vsing great trade in pepper, which they send to other Townes
from thence in shippes, which they call Ionken: These gentlemen are marueilous proud and stout, their appa∣rell is like vnto theirs of Bantam, bragging with their daggers hanging at their sides. Also these gentlemen haue many slaues and seruants, insomuch as they go not once out of their doores, without x, or xx, persons follow∣ing them, which waite with great diligence and care. The 24. day in the morning, two long boats rowed ashore to receiue the king, for he had promised to come a∣boord, to sée our ships, to which ende our Ʋice-Admirall went ashore with the saide long boats, who was by the king brought into his pallace, shewing him all his wiues, women and maydens, and all his horses, which were marueilous faire. At noone the Ʋice-Admiral returned a∣boord, the shippes bringing the Kings sonne with him, for the King himselfe would not come. In the euening wée brought him againe to the land, honouring him with six∣téene great shot out of the 4. ships, wherein hée receiued great pleasure and contentment. The description of Tuban, which is a Towne scituated in the Island called Iaua Maior, where we arriued the 22. day of Ianuarie, 1599. finding therein store and great plentie of fresh victuals. No. 3. THis Towne of Tuban is a very fine place, or Town The sci∣tuation of Tu∣bā, and of the e∣state of the king and peo∣ple ther. for trade in marchandize, walled round about, hauing gates of wood, made very trim and gallant after their countrie fashion, the King is a Prince of great power, and (as is there by the Inhabitants reported) hee is the mightiest King of all the countrie of Iaua, insomuch that when he goeth into the field, he is able to raise within the
space of 24. houres, many thousand men, both on foot and horsebacke. The King holdeth himselfe very maiestical∣ly, accompanied with many Gentlemen of great state and qualitie, his Court is royall, and very stately, worthy to be séene of strangers. In this Towne dwell very many Gentlemen, which are great dealers in buying and selling of silkes, Cham∣lets, Calikuthes, & of apparell which they vse to weare, and are there made in the Countrie. They haue shippes, which they name in their language Ionken, these ships they lade with pepper, sending the same to Baly, where they barter for slight or simple apparell made of Cotton Their dealings in trade of mar∣chan∣dize. cloth, or Callikuts, whereof great store are there made. And after they haue so made change of their pepper for these wares, they send the same to Banda, Ternati, Phlip∣pina and other adioyning Countries, rechanging that ap∣parell for Maces, Nutmegs, and Cloues, and hauing la∣den their shippes with those commodities, they returne home. The common people for the most part get their liuing with fishing, and bringing vp of cattell, whereof they haue great plentie. They driue their cattell out in the morning, and in the euening they fetch them in a∣gaine. They goe apparelled like vnto those of Bantam, wearing a cloth about their middles, their bodies vp∣ward being naked, and a dagger which they call their Kriis at their side. Commonly the Gentlemen cast ouer their bodies a mantle made of Camels haire, which they call a Pitguen, whereof, and of their daggers they are not a little proude. Such as are of any calling or counte∣nance, haue many seruants and slaues, which waite on their masters at an inch, so that if they go but out of their houses, ten or twelue of these slaues followe them, and wheresoeuer they goe, a small chest is carried after them with béete leaues, which they eate with chalke or lyme
and gréene Nuts, called in their language Ladon, the same being so chawed vntill all the moysture be out, they spit it out of their mouthes. ❧ A declaration of the maner of their Horses, and comely fashion vsed in decking and trimming them, together with their order in Turneys and running with their Launces, shewed vnto our Mar∣chants the 23. day of Ianuarie, to congratulate or wel∣come them, which was by those people accomplished very gallantly. THe Gentilitie of Tuban haue great delight & plea∣sure Of their Horses, & howe they are trim∣med. in their Horses, for all such as are of any abili∣tie, wil kéepe a horse, wherin they take great pride. Their Horse are of a very small stature, their legs are small, but they run very swiftly, vsing rich & costly Saddles made of Ʋeluet, and some of Spanish Leather, painted with grisly Dragons & fearefull Diuels, for the most part gilded: the saddles are made like vnto ours, but with lower backs behind the seate. Their bridles are gar∣nished with precious stones, which are as white as Ala∣blaster: the bits are also made very fine & costly, with 2. bosses of siluer, whereof some are white & some gilded, ac∣cording to th'estate & degrée of the master or owner of the horse: some of those bosses are made of copper also, for the meaner sort of people. They ride oftentimes out of the towne, 3. or 4 in a companie more or lesse, bragging, out∣facing, & bearding each other as they ride, run, or turne their horses, striuing who can best run the ring, spring, leape, cariere, manage, force, and gouerne his horse, in the best and most gallant maner.
Their Speares or Launces are cōmonly of a very light wood, made round & smal which they vse very finely & cun∣ningly in all their Turnyes & warlike exercises, chasing & running after each other with such fury, as if they had to do with their enemies, or meant the matter in good earnest: when the one commeth néere vnto the other, the hindmost (which runneth after the other) declining or abasing his staffe, passeth forth before the other, then is he followed by him that was before the foremost, who setting spurs to his horse, & giuing him the bridle, followeth as fast as his horse can run, vntil he bee before him, & then the other followeth him again, bidding ech other the base in this sort, vntil their The ma ner of running with their Launces on hors∣backe. horses bee wearyed. This their maner of war-like exer∣cise on horse backe, wee saw: there the 23. day of Ianuarie, 1599 accomplish to by many gallant Gentlemen in the Market place, to honour and welcome our Marchants, who were there present, made to the end we might sée their bra∣uerie & cunning in riding, whereat the king himselfe was present on horsebacke, whose apparrell was a mantle or Pytgin of veluet, cast ouer his vnder-garment, & a dagger hanging by his side with a golden haft, hauing thereon the picture of a Diuell. They had great changing of horses: for as soone as one horse was wearied, a fresh was presently brought, and the other led away: they shewed themselues very magnificent and stately in their riding, running, and chasing in this their war-like pastime. At this place we found great plenty of fresh victuals, as The fer∣tilitie of the Coun∣trey. 1599. 24. Ia∣nuarie. Oxen, Goates, Hennes, Egges, Fish, & other fruits, as Co∣kar-nuts, Lemons, Bonanas, Maugas, & many other sorts, very good & holsome to be eaten: also wee bought very good Rice here at a reasonable price, so that we found this place very good and fit to make prouision of fresh victuals. The sayd twenty fourth day in the night we hoysed our sayles, and departed thence with two of our ships, namely
the Zealand and the Ʋice-Admirall, for the Admirall and the Vtrecht remained there at Anker, for they were to receiue of the King, Cattell and Rise, for certaine wares which the King had bought of them. The 25. day at noonetide we sayled by Sydago, where Schellinger was murthered in the first voyage: we passed forward along the coast, vntill we came vnder the shore of Iaua, where we cast our ankers the same euening, (for we could not reach the corner or necke of the land, which stretcheth from Madura) where wee sent out our boat to sound the depth, but returned the next morning to the ships with small intelligence, by reason that there grew a great storme. The 26. day, the Admirall and the Vtrecht came vnto vs, casting their Ankers vnder the land of Iaua and Madu∣ra: for the water is very shallow before the straight of Ma∣dura, insomuch that our Admiral sate al the night aground, not receiuing any hurt at all, for it was in that place a ve∣ry soft clay ground. The 27. day in the morning, wee and Melcknap sayled The 27 day wee ankered in the straights of Ma∣dura, by reason of great tem∣pests. thence, but the Admirall and the Vtrecht stayed behinde, for our Admirall durst not venter ouer the shallowes, but afterwardes they sayled thence to the East end of Madura, and anchored before a little towne called Arosby, to buy Rise and other fresh victualles. The same day at noone wee cast our Ankers betweene Madura, and the Land of Iaua, to wit, in the straight of Madura, where a mightie streame runneth, so that wee were forced to stay for the Tyde: at afternoone wee sayled thence, and towards the euening let fall our Ankers before a little Towne called Iortan, where one of our Comittees went ashore with the long boate, to inquire for a Pilot, to bring vs vnto the Islands of Moluccas, but returned the same euening with a Lambe, which the King had bestowed
on our Ʋice-Admiral, not bringing any Pilot with them, which was the principall cause of our comming thither, for here at Iortan is the Roade, where all the shippes of Iaua lie. The 28. day in the morning, we sent a long boat to the shore to buy Rice and other necessaries, but they returned presently, bringing with them the Sabander, and in the afternoone the Kings brother came aboord vs, with a Pre∣sent, which he gaue to our Ʋice-Admiral. The same day, some of our companie spake with a Dutchman that dwelled there in the Country, exercising great trade in Pepper, Nutmegs and Cloues. The 29. day our long boate went ashore againe, and bought all prouision of fresh victuals. The 30. day we sent againe to land to buy Rice, and to enquire after a Pilot, which wee found: the same night came a boate aboord vs with folke therein, shewing vs, that néere fortie of our men of the Admirals ship and of the Vtrecht were taken, and imprisoned in a very strong little Towne of the Countrey of Madura, called Aros∣bay. The 31. day, the before mentioned Renegado of Tu∣ban, The king of Tuban sendeth a pre∣sent to Graue Maurits. came to vs at Iortan, bringing from his King a ve∣ry faire present to be deliuered vnto his princely Excel∣lencie, which was a Kriis or dagger, and two speares or launces made after their maner, verie faire and costly: vpon the handle of the dagger was the kings owne coun∣terfeit or picture, made all of pure gold, and set with preci∣ous stones, worth 500. Gildernes, or 50. pound starling, and the blade of the dagger was indented and made after their fashion. The first day of Februarie we arriued before Madura, Februa∣rie. anchoring néere vnto our Admirall, hauing with vs the Renegado of Tubā aforesaid, who had promised to do his
best, to procure libertie to our imprisoned people, but found no good successe, by reason that the King demaunded so great a ransome for the prisoners, whereby wee were driuen to attempt by force to redéeme our people, which fell not out to our best contentment, notwithstanding I will bréefely relate the same vnto the courteous Reader. A true declaration of our attempt in the Island of Madura, before a little Towne cal∣led Mosbay, done by vs for the releasement of our peo∣ple (by force of armes) that were there imprisoned, and of our ill successe in the said attempt. N o. 4. THe Island Madura lyeth on the North side of Iaua Maior, The si∣tuation of the Is∣land of Madura. stretching out to the East end of Iaua; The Inhabitants are apparelled as the people of Iaua: they are very industrious, and painefull in all their actions. On the West end of Madura is situated a smal towne named Arosbay, strongly walled with gates and stages whereon they kéepe watch in the night, which are verie fit, and aptly placed to serue them at such times as they are visited by their enemies. But to come to our purpose, and speake of our attempt, we wil leaue to speak any further of the situation of Arosbay. Ianuarie 27. 1599. after wee had anchored vnder the land of Iaua, wee found a mighty shallow or banke, which stretcheth out euen vnto the mouth of the straight of Madura, & so runneth forth to the land of Iaua. This banke in some places is but sixe fadome deep, and in other places déeper or shallower as it may fall out, by reason whereof we were constrained to part company (as before is partly declared) concluding among our selues, that the Ʋice-Admirall (which was the Geldria, with the other ship called the Zelandia) should saile to the straight of Ma∣dura, (lying betwéene the Island of Iaua and Madura) to
a little towne named Iortan, which is the place whereun∣to the Jauanars come with their ships, attending there for a faire wind to go to the Islands of Moluccas. At this place therfore we meant to take in a Pylot, to bring vs to the Islands of Moluccas: this was the onely reason that brought vs hither. In the meane while our Admirall and the Vtrecht, sailed to the West and of Madura, where they let fal their anchors before a small towne called Arosbay, & sending their long boat to the said towne, to buy Ryse & other victuals, the mariners were no sooner landed, but they were all apprehended, vnarmed, & taken prisoners, the most part of them spoiled of their apparell, and other rags giuē them to couer their bodies. The Admiral séeing that the said boat stayed so long away, and returned not, sent a cocke-boat with thrée men to the shore, to know the cause why the other stayed so long frō the ships. These 3. men were no sooner come to the shore, but they were also taken prisoners by the inhabitants of the said towne, and carried to their fellowes. After that they were thus dealt with, ye commitees which were takē in this sort among the rest, obtained of the king licence to send 3. of their compa∣ny vnto their Admiral, to aduertise him of this imprison∣ment, conditionally, that the said 3. men should presently returne to the towne, after they had béene aboord their shipe: which was accordingly agréed and accomplished. After that the Admiral vnderstood of these proceedings, he sent a boat vnto the Ʋice-Admirall to aduertise him hereof. Who presently waying his anchors, droue downe the streame vntill he came before yt said towne Arosbay, where the mariners were imprisoned. Euery day letters were sent to & fro, to come to some agréement for ye liberty of our people: but yt K. demanded a great ransom, namely ye 2. blacke péeces of ordinance which were in ye Admiral, some nūber of cloths, & péeces of veluet, We 1000. rials of 8
This demand pleased the Admiral nothing at all, answe∣ring, that if they would content themselues with money or wares, hee would with all his heart agrée with them: but as touching the Ordinance by thē demanded, they be∣longed not vnto him, neither had he any power or autho∣ritie ouer them▪ for they belonged vnto his land, or state of whence hée was. This maner of parle continued in this sort fiue or sixe daies, and euery day their demands were more vnreasonable then other. In the end the Admirall called all the Marchants and masters aboord him, coun∣selling together what was best to bée done. Then they concluded to land some of their company, and with force of armes to deliuer the prisoners, (for wee were aduerti∣sed, that our men were kept in the long boate wherewith they went ashore, as yet lying in the hauen before the gate, without bonds, fetters, or close prison) meaning so∣dainly, and before they of the towne should be able to pre∣uent vs, to deliver our men: but we failed of our purpose. The 5. day of Februarie, after we had very well and in good order with 150. men manned and armed thrée long boats, and thrée ship boates, we rowed to the shore, where wee found a great multitude of people before the towne, among whom were two Portingals, who came vnto vs with flags of peace or truce in their hands, say∣ing they would agrée with vs: which was nothing but deceit and knauerie, for they assembled themselues verie strongly within the towne. Whereupon some twentie of our Muskettiers leapt on land, discharging their muskets among the thickest, so that thrée or foure of them fell downe dead: and running towardes the place where the long boat lay with the prisoners, our Ʋice-Admirall cal∣led vnto vs to returne into our owne boat, and to bring her in néerer vnto the towne, which we did: in the meane while the townsmen were come out at another gate, mea∣ning
to enuiron vs, and so to enclose vs in the hauen, that we should not be able to returne. We perceiuing their in∣tent, sent presently two of our boats to the bome or barre, to kéepe the hauen frée for our returne: for if the enemie could haue possessed the corner, it would haue returned to our great hurt. While wee were thus in skirmish one with the other, they had cléered their brasse Bases, dis∣charging them very terribly among vs, they had also ma∣ny calieuers, and great store of Bowes and arrowes, wherewith they shot among vs, so that it séemed that ar∣rowes rained vpon vs: they thought as soone as our pow∣der was spent, to deale easily ynough with vs, but wée stayed not so long, by reason that the weather beganne to grow very tempestuous, the water was much falne, and besides we thought good no longer to hazard our liues in vaine, wherefore we retyred to our boats, and pulling vp the dregs, rowed out of the hauen towards our ships, for the wind began to rise more and more: and beeing some shot off from the land, the Admirals boat with 36 men, and the boat of the Zealand with 13. men, were with the waues & billowes turned topsie-furuy and ouerthrowne: wee that were in the other boates were not able to helpe them, for it was as much as we were able to doe, to pre∣serue our owne boats aboue water, so that many a man came to his end by this mishap, some being drowned, and others killed by the wilde people on the shore, but some that hapned to swim to the one side of the towne, were sa∣ued by the Renegado of Tuban, which stoode by as the men came to land, and intreated for their liues, perswa∣ding the people to take them prisoners: whereupon they were suffered to come to the land: and knéeling on the ground, the people laid sand on their heads, in token that their liues were saued, but so many as swoome to the other side of the land, were put to the sword without mercie,
Thus there died 25. of our mē, to wit, 15. of ye Admirals, one of Iohn Martssens ship, & 9. of the Zealāds. The pri∣soners were the same euening led through the town, and kept without the gates in a countrey house. The Trum∣peter and the Corporall were bound and fettered, the rest were bound together, and three of them were shrewdly wounded, & those which we meant to haue rescued, were carried to other places, separated in two companies. The 6. day they were remoued from the place where 1599. the sixt of Fe∣bruarie. they were kept, and on the way met all together, except 6. which were led to another place, the rest were carried a mile into the Countrey, where they were put into a caue vnder the ground, and kept with a strong gard: here the Trumpeter and the Corporall were released of their bands and shackles. The 7. day they were brought againe out of the den, The Pri∣soners are brought out of the den, & how it befell them af∣ter∣wards. The pri∣soners raniome made for 2000. ryals of eight. (the Trumpeter and the Corporall being led apart before the King) the said Corporall was by the king demanded if he would stay & serue him, promising to bestow on him 2. of his wiues, & many other rewards. Whereunto the Corporall answered, his desire was rather to liue with his fellowes aboord the shippe, hoping that his Captaine would find means for his release, if it were possible. Thē were they led againe to their companion prisoners, and in the gate of the towne they met the rest of their com∣pany, being then 51. in number all prisoners: from whence they were led al together to a little Islandlying on the towne-ditch, hard by the towne, where they were night and day garded with a strong watch. The eight day we beganne againe to parle about the prisoners ransome: and in the end it was agréed to pay 2000. péeces of Rials of eight, in spice or in wares at the Kings pleasure. The 9. day eight of the Prisoners were sent aboord,
and their ransome carried a shore. The 10. day were 12. deliuered, and their ransome sent to the King, and this continued the 11. and 12. vnto the 13. day, vntill all the prisoners were released. The 14. day wee had all our folke aboord, two except, whereof one was taken with the rest. the other had in the night hid himselfe, which two willingly remained behind, greatly to the disliking of our Admirall. The same day the Vtrecht discharged three peeces of Ordinance, for ioy that our people were deliuered, and hauing hoysed our sayles, departed thence, and the same euening came to the other shippe: and sayling together in company, wee shaped our course East and by North, a∣long the coast of Madura, hauing the wind West South-west, at which time (our ships being vnder saile) our Master Iacob Martssen dyed. A breefe repetition of the Island of Madura. MAdura is a very fruitfull land, hauing such plentie of Descrip∣tion of the Isle of Ma∣dura. Rise, that it spareth and nourisheth al the adioyning and bordering places thereabouts. This graine or Rise groweth there on a most fat fruitful clayey ground, com∣parable to any ground in our ground, and is so plenti∣fully watered, that when the ground is plowed, the Ox∣en and plowmen goe in the water halfe knee deepe or more, and the Rise like wise groweth knee high in great aboundance, so that their neighbours cannot misse the helpe of this Island, but it wanteth shipping, by reason of the sands or shallowes that stretch all along the coast thereof. The people thereof liue most by théeuerie and spoyle of others, taking with their smal boats or prawes, all they can get at Sea, as wel from their neighbours, as
from strangers, and yet their neighbours so robbed and daily spoyled by them, dare not reuenge themselues, for feare lest they should shut vp the passages, and not suf∣fer any thing to bee transported out of their Countrey, whereby they should want meanes of sustentation and food: neither is it an easie matter to hurt them, for that no shipping can come neere them. Touching their weapons and vse thereof, they are like vnto the same of Iaua, as well for Elephants, Hor∣ses, Pikes, Launces, and Targets: and besides, they haue the vse of Curtelares and Daggers, with the Diuels picture on them. The Kings seruants are all Gentle∣men, hauing their Kruiislen or Daggers trimmed and garnished with siluer, but none else of the land may weare the like. The 15 day we cast the dead Shipper aforesaid ouer∣boord, within sight of the Clifts of little Iaua. The 16. day the Admirals boat fetched the Ʋice-Ad∣mirall aboord their ship, to choose new officers for the Ad∣mirall, in place of those that were lost at Madura: wée held our course East and by North with a fine gale. The 17. and 18. dayes we had sight of the Island Ce∣lebes, kéeping our course East, and East and by North. The 19. day in the morning, we saw the Island Com∣bayna, which lyeth some 18. leagues from Celebes, and the same day we had sight of another Island called Bou∣ton, and stretcheth East South-east from Combayna some eight leagues. The 20. day wee sayled about the Island Bouton, A sandy banke not no∣ted in the Card. where the Admirall called aboord him all the Masters and Committees, to aduise themselues in their affayres. The 21. day in the morning, wee were vnder the Is∣land Cebesse, where wee found a shole, which appeared not vnto vs in the Card: we had sayled the same night be∣yond
it aboue the length of a shot with a great péece, be∣fore we perceiued the danger: wherefore wee must ac∣knowledge that the Almightie God preserued vs. This banke or shole is some two leagues long, stretching for the most part East and West, and ought to bee regarded and well noted: it lyeth betwéene these two Islands Bouton and Cebessa, almost in the mid-way: heere wee found that our Compasse drew againe towards the North-east. The 22. and 23. dayes, the weather was raynie, wee holding our course North-east towards Amboyna. The 24. day the Ʋice-Admirall came aboord the Ad∣miral, to conferre with him, at which time the Commis∣sioner of the Zealand was shipped into the Vtrecht, and the Commissioner of the Vtrecht was placed in the Zea∣land. The same day died a boy aboord our shippe of the Bloudy Flix, called Lieuen Rooeckessen, and was kee∣per of the Masters Cabben: in the euening we threw him ouer-boord. The 25. day we had sight of the Island Boora: in the 25. Fe∣bruarie, 1599. a quar∣ter-ma∣ster fell from the top into the sea. morning was a great gust of wind and raine, so that wée were forced to take in our top-sayles: at which time one of the Quarter-masters fell out of the top into the Sea, but he chaunced to hold fast by a small rope, whereby we haled him againe into the shippe without any hurt at all, which was greatly to be wondred at: for it blew so out a gale, that wee were hardly able to beare our courses: the wind came about to the South-west, wee held our course North-east towards the next land in sight. The 26. and 27. dayes, the weather being calme, we droue along the shore of the Island of Blau, hauing now and then a small gale of wind, very variable. The 28. day in the morning, wee rowed aboord the Admirall to fetch the Preacher: for there were two of
our saylers, both yong men, which desired to be instructed by him in some poynts of the Sacrament of Baptisme, and to be baptized. The first day of March wee arriued néere vnder the March. Island of Blau, which lieth on the East end of Boera: then might wee behold before vs three other small Is∣lands, the one called Atybotty, the second Manipa, and the third Gyra: these little Islands lie before Amboyna. The second day we sayled beyond Blau, and towards the euening came two Prawes or little boates vnto our Admirall, refusing to come into his ship, but kept them∣selues behind, and lying by the Admirals boate: in the meane while the Ʋice-Admirall sent his boate aboord the Admirall, to know what newes those Prawes brought: but so soone as they marked that our long boate rowed towards the Admirall, they presently rowed a∣way in al haste towards the shore, we holding our course directly towards Amboyna. The third day in the morning, wee came before the Straight of Amboyna, which was verie narrow, after we were entred into the mouth thereof, the weather fell calme, so that we droue backe againe, by reason of the strong streame or currant. About noone there came thrée Prawes or small boates aboord vs from a little towne called Matel, lying on the Mountaines of Amboyna, and in the euening we came before a little towne called Itou or Iton, situated in the Island of Amboyna.
The description of the Island Am∣boyna, and the situation thereof, with the wea∣pons, behauiour, and inclination of the people, of their going in their apparrell, and maner of their Gallies. THis Island Amboyna lyeth néere so the Islands of The si∣tuation of Am∣boyna. Moluccas, about some 24. leagues from the North∣west side of Banda. In this Island groweth great plentie of Cloues, and great aboundance of fruit, as Oringes, Lemons, Ci∣trons, Cokars, Bononas, Sugar-canes, and such like, which things are to be had there maruallous cheape, for a man may haue 80. Orringes for a button, insomuch that here wée found our selues wonderfully accomoda∣ted with all kind of fresh victualles. The inhabitants are very simple people, their apparrell for the most part like to theirs of Banta, and so go likewise all the people of the Islands of Moluccas, they liue for the most part by the trade of Cloues, néere and hard in their dealings: their weapons are commonly Pikes, the end armed with i∣ron, in maner of a broade arrow head, or of an harping iron, which they throw with great strength and assu∣rance, insomuch that they will hit the breadth of a dallar: they vse also shields in their warres, and Curtelaxes. The poorer sort of people commonly carrie a great knife in their hands, wherewith they doe their worke. They bake great Cakes of Rise, with Sugar and drie Al∣monds, which they carrie to the adioyning Islands to sell or change for other wares. They vse much Rise in making of great loaues of bread, after the shape and fashion of a Sugar-loafe, which commonly they eate as bread with other meates. They haue also the vse of
Gallies, whereof they are very proud, and boast not a lit∣tle of them: they row them maruailous swiftly, and are made after the shape and fashion of a Dragon: before is a Dragons head, and at the sterne it is shaped like vn∣to a Dragons taile, hanged and decked with flagges and pendons, as we our selues saw when we came first before Amboyna, at what time the Admiral of the Seas there, came aboord vs, with 3. very rich & gallant Gallies, ful of men, & well appoynted, which they call in their language Karkollen: they rowed about our ships with great ioy & mirth, singing, and playing vpon Copper Basons, & long Droomes, which they carrie vnder one arme, and with one hand they played vpon the Droome in accord with the sound of the Basons, wherunto the slaues sung likewise in accord as they rowed, which was very pleasant to heare. Euerie one of these Karkollen or Gallies had 3. Bases, all which they discharged to honour and wel∣come vs: wee discharged also all our Ordinance, to con∣gratulate and answere their courtesie, and then let fall our Ankers, kéeping good watch all the night, for we vn∣derstood that they kept a watch all night on the shore, which wée might easily discerne. Afterwards the Admirall came aboord vs, demaun∣ding to what end we came thither, and what we desired. Whereunto was answered, that we came in trade of Marchandize, & to that end had brought with vs all sorts of Marchandize: with which answere he seemed to vs to be glad, willing vs to come aland, where he would agree with vs. The next day the Ʋice-Admirall went ashore to accord & conclude some great bargaine, where he was in very friendly sort welcommed and receiued, bringing him into a Tent made of their sailes vnder a trée, where they conferred with each other about trade and full la∣ding of our ships.
Another description of the Iland Amboyna, where we arriued with our foure ships the third day of March, 1599. Together with the maners and fashions vsed by the people of the countrey. No. 5. IS a Boore, or countrey man dwelling in some country town or village, as he goeth to his labour in the woods or forrests, commonly carrying a knife in his hand. Is a common man, that is of some better qualitie then the other, with a pike about some saddome & a halfe long, which they commonly carrie with them, in casting whereof (with great force) they are very expert. Is a woman going to the market to sell her wares, ca∣rying the same with her band aloft. Is the Admirall of the sea, as hee bseth to go with his seruants after him, whereof one holdeth a Tiresol or Ca∣napie ouer his head. His apparell is a Pitgin with wide sléeues, which commonly he turneth vp vpon his shoul∣ders, hauing a coat made of silke, most like to the fashion vsed by the Portingals. Is the Gallies which they name Karkollen; they row them very swiftly, and are made after a marueilous Anno 1599. March. 4. great store of fruit brought aboord. strange maner and fashion. THe 4. day in ye morning, great store of al sorts of fruits were brought aboord our ships to truck, as Oringes, Lemmons, Citrons, Cokars, Bononas, & many others, which they sold vs very good cheape: for, for one Cinne spoone we had so great store of all sorts of fruites, that we knew not what to doe there with. They brought vs
also great plentie of their bread to be sold for money or in change, the same was made with almondes and sugar, very medicinable for a loose bellie, wherewith our people were vexed. Towards the euening we remoued more Eastward off the Towne, where our shippes might haue better rode, for wee lay first at 36. faddome, very ill ground, but now we rode at 50. faddome sandy ground. The 5. day the Admiral of the sea came aboord to view The Admi∣rall of the sea cōmeth aboord our ships. our ships, wondring not onely at our great Ordinance, muskets and other artillerie, but also that we were so well prouided of all other necessaries, hee was a very readie man with a péece, wherein he tooke most delight. The 6. day in the morning the Ʋice-Admirall with 3. of the Committées went ashore, to conferre with the Captaine, and to know whether we could there be proui∣ded of sufficient lading for our shippes or no. After that they were landed, they were mette by the chiefe Lordes of the Land, saluting and reuerencing each other after their Countrey maner, shewing themselues very glad of our comming, and said that we should there haue suffici∣ent fraight for two of our ships, which we were very glad to heare: afterwards, bringing the Ʋice-Admirall vnder a place of shaddow from the Sunne, they remayned to∣gether in conference néere 3. houres. In the afternoone the Ʋice-Admirall returned to the ships, bringing with him the King of Ternates his brother, with many gentle∣men desirous to sée our ships: and afterwards, toward the euening they returned to the shore, at what time wee ho∣noured them with fiue great shot, whereof two were laden with bullettes, for so they had desired of the Admi∣rall. The seuenth day in the morning, they brought vs great store of fruit aboord our shippes, offering the same in change.
The 8. day in the morning, our vnder-Cōmittees were sent ashore, to speake to the Gouernour of the land for an house to lay in our wares, which was presently granted, and to that end one appoynted vs. The 9. day all the Committees and Masters were a∣boord the Admirall, where they deliberated and conferred together, what ships should bee chosen to séeke their la∣ding at some other place, for we vnderstood that here we should not find sufficient fraight for all our foure ships. The same day about noone Carpenters were sent a∣land, to repaire and make fitte the house which was ap∣poynted vs for our wares. The 10. day Iustice was executed in our shippe the Gelderland. The same day store of fruits was brought aboord our shippes, and wee were very earnest to hasten the repairing of the house. To the Reader. THe Gentle Reader may please to vnderstand, that the foure shippes (namely the Amsterdam, the Vtrecht, the Zealand, and the Gelderland, arriued the third day of March before Amboyna, where, perceiuing that they should not find sufficient lading for all the foure ships, af∣ter consultation had, it was determined to separate the ships, & to send 2. of them to Banda, namely the Zealand, whereof Iohn Cornelissen was Master, & the Gelder∣land, whereof Iohn Bruiin was Master. The ele∣uenth day of March therefore, these sayd two Shippes sette sayle from Amboyna, leauing the other two Shippes behinde them, the which remayned there
two moneths after: where leauing them, we will proceede with the nauigation of the other two towards Banda, de∣claring vnto you the rich and speedie lading which they there found, and afterwards returne to speake of the na∣uigation of those other two, to wit, of the Amsterdam, whereof Claes Ianssen Melknap was master, and of the Vtrecht, whereof Iohn Martssen was Master, who al∣so departed from Amboyna the 8. day of May toward the Islands of Moluccas. Thus much I thought good to note vnto the fauorable Reader, that hee might the better reade and vnderstand the order, and whole discourse of this Voyage made by the 8. shippes, which sayled from Amsterdam the 13. day of March 1598. to the East Indies. THe 11. day of March at afternoone we parted from 1599. March 11. our consorts at Amboyna towards Banda, but the Zealand lay still, by reason that she could not weigh her anchor: wherefore we were faine to stay vntill the shippe was lighted: for in that place is very bad anchoring, and wee imagined that the Cable was wound about some stone: wherefore that night we turned to and fro to haue his companie. The 12. day in the morning, the Zealand with our 1599. March. 12. shippe the Gelderland, set sayle together, but for that it was calme weather, wee could not make any way. The 13. day about noone the Zealand came aground in the straight of Ceru, néere an Island called Ielau, where a mightie currant runneth, and the weather very calme, so that the streame droue her vpon the banke, which lyeth before this little Island: but God
blessed her, sending a fine gale, whereby she presently got out an Anker, and so wound her off. Thus with great ioy and comfort we sayled foorth together. At after noone, two Praus or Boates came aboord vs, telling vs that there lay a Portingale ship vnder the Iland of Noesau: which Iland lyeth in the mouth of the straight of Cera, towards the east end of Amboyna? the people whereof are Cani∣bals, or deuourers of mans flesh. The. 14. day very calme, with a fine gale towards the euening from the north-west, we holding our course south∣east towards Banda: The same euening we had sight of the Iland Banda, lying from vs south-east. In the night time we came by an Iland called Loel Setton, lying on the North-west end of Banda about some 5. Leages. This little Iland is not inhabited, neither dare any man A strange tale, if it be true. presume to come into it (as our Pylot reported, that was in our Ship.) The people are wonderfully afeard thereof: for they are of opinion, that it is the habitation of Sathan, in so much that when they approach neare vnto this Iland with their shipping, they know not how to make haste enough to passe from or by it: which we might easely per∣ceiue by our Pylot, who tooke a Boate-hooke in his hand, placing himselfe before in ye Ship, where he stood drawing and pulling the hooke towardes him, imagining that there∣by we should the sooner leaue the land behind vs: but after he was wearie with pulling, he laide the hooke before ouer the Shippes side, not suffering vs to take the hooke away before we were passed this little Iland: and when it was a little calme & still weather, this prettie fellow went whist∣ling with his mouth vp and downe the Ship, meaning therewith to call and intice the Diuell: whereby we saw that these people were very weake of beliefe. The 15. day we saw two Ilands more, lying South∣west of Banda some leage and a halfe: the one is called
Polleway, and the other Polleruyn, which lie some halfe a league distant from each other. At Noone came aboard vs one of the Praus full of people, from the Iland Polle∣ruyn: they are very nimble and lusty men: they were ap∣parrelled with a garment made of Cotton cloth: their weapons were Pikes, which they throw with their hands. In the euening we let fall our Anker in ye Riuer of Ban∣da, The 15. day we came into the Ri∣uer of Ban∣da, but the Zealand stayed yet behind, by reason ye weather was so calme and still. The same euening came many Boates aboard vs, telling vs that there had been 2. Por∣tingale Ships laden there, and that it was three Moneths since they departed thence: and they brought with them great plenty of Nutmegs, Maces, & Cloues: and said there was lading plenty to fraight our Ships. The 16. day about noone, the Sabander came abord to speake with the Ʋice-Admiral, at which instant Melcknap let fall his Anker by vs, at 14. fadome sandie ground. The. 17. day an other Sabander came aboard vs from a little Towne called Ortattan: we offered to bestow on him a present, but he refused it, saying he would the next day come againe aboard vs. The. 18. day the Sabander came againe aboard vs, Agreement made with the Saban∣der for liber tie of trade. A Baer is 100. li. of their waight. with whom it was agreed freely to buy and sell, and to trade with all Marchants at that place, paying 4. Baers of Maces for Anchorage and Toll, or Custome, of our goods: promising vs a Ware-house to lay our Marchan∣dize in. Towards the euening he returned to land, & we honoured him with the ten peeces of ordinance. The. 19. day out two Committes went a shore with Carpenters to mend and repaire our Ware-house. The. 20. day the great Turke of Bantam came a∣board vs, to speake with our Admirall, saying, we should haue store of Marchandize there to lade our Ships. The. 23. day we began first to discharge and carrie
some goods a shore, into the Towne Ortattan. The. 24. day we began first to buy and sell. The. 25. day the Ʋice Admirall sayled to the other side We began to buy and sell. of the Iland, meaning there to hire an house, because more resort of people was on that side then els where: for there all the auaners dwell, which bring yearly Mar∣chandize thither, and are great dealers. The. 26. day we began to trimme and Kauke our ship, that we might be ready as now & then to take in lading. The. 27. day they began to buy and sell on the other side of the Iland, in a little Towne called Nera. The. 28. day we began first to rummege our holde, to take in lading as it came aboard, receiuing the same day Our first sales, buy∣ings, and time that we began to lade. store of Nutmegs and Maces. The. 29. and 30. dayes we were busie on all hands in buying and selling. The 31. day the other Ship tooke in her first lading, to wit, Nutmegs. The. 1. 2. & 3. dayes of Aprill we were all very busie, & Aprill. occupied about the sale of our wares & buying cōmodites. The. 4. day we receiued letters from our Admirall ly∣ing before Amboyna, aduertising vs that there was little lading to be had there, by reason that the Inhabitants had great wars with the Portingals, who finding themselues grieued with our being there, sought to haue our trade for∣bidden at that place, & that our people should not there come a shore: for the Portingals had a little Castle on the west side of Amboyna, wherewith they greatly annoyed the people of the Countrey. The. 5. day they of Nera tooke our waights from vs, forbidding vs to vse our trade any longer, vntil we had a∣greed with the Gentlemen, for they sought & demaunded to haue some beneuolence or reward bestow vpon them, wherupon we shut vp our doores.
This, 6. day of April, we receiued the first goods a∣boord The. 6. day of March 1599. the waightes were taken from vs by those of Nera, our Ship from Ortattan, namely Nutmegs. The. 7. day the Commissarie of the Zealand went a∣shore at Nera, where he agreed with the Gentlemen to bestow on them 60. li, of Mace: whereupon, the waights were againe deliuered vnto vs, with licence to buy and sell, as deare and as good cheape as we could. The. 8. day we laboured on all hands to discharge and land our commodities. The. 14. day we sent our long Boate manned with 14. men to Amboyna, to vnderstand how all thinges went with our Admirall. The 26. day the said long Boat returned from our Ad∣mirall, declaring that he had not aboard the Ship aboue 5. Last of Cloues: but that he hoped very shortly to haue more. The. 28. and. 29. dayes, we were very busie on shore in buying and selling, and we began as well as our o∣ther Ship did, to buy of the auaners, Maces, Nut∣megs, The price of Nutmegs Cloues and Mace. and Cloues: we bought the Baer of Mace for 60. peeces of Ryalls of eight, the Baer of Cloues for 45. Ry∣als of eight, and the Baer of Nutmegs for 6. Ryals of 8: a Baer is 100. li. of Bandas waight: euery pound is fiue pound and a quarter of Hollands waight. These prises lasted not long, for they sought to enhaunce their Spices. This moneth we laboured dayly in discharging and land∣ing our marchandize, battering the same for Nutmegs, Cloues & Mace: our goods was in great estemation, and good request, going so fast from vs, that we could hardly serue the buyers, & so continued all day from morning to the euening, waighing with two paire of ballances as fast as we could waigh, insomuch that somtimes in one day we receiued a Last of goods, & some dayes two Last: which we thus wayed and receiued by small waightes.
From the first to the last day of May, we continued May. these affaires, dayly sending aboard and lading our Ships. The. 8. day a great mightie Snake of II. foote long came creeping in at the hance of the Zealand: which the company killed and did eate. The. 5. of Iune they of Labbetacken came with foure Iune. Galleyes before Nera, skirmishing with the inhabitants of the said towne of Nera, where some men were slaine and many hurt. Nowbeit that these two townes lie so neare together, that a man may go betweene them in an houre space, or there abouts: they are mortall enemies to each other, not sparing one the other vpon any oppor∣tunitie or aduantage that they can take, keeping very strong watch in the woods, and on the shores, where they waite for their enemies. They vse shields about some foure foote long, with verie heauie Sables or Curtelaxes, the haftes or handels whereof are couered with tinne, and are very cunning and expert in the vse of them. They haue some Calyuers and Baesses of brasse, which they vse in their Galleyes, and for defence of their townes: when they go into the field against their enemies, euery man carrieth with him two Dartes, or Iauellings, made of ve∣ry hard wood, some fadome and a halfe long: in casting whereof they are so perfect and exact as may be, yea, they throw them with such force, that they slay their enemies therewith: and hauing spent their dartes, they draw their Sables: wherwith, and with their shields, they stoutly incounter each other pel mel. They haue also Caliuers as is aforesaid, but not many. They make great account of Salads and head peeces: for if they get one of them on their heads, they thinke themselues well defended from all perrills. The same day was our Ʋice Admirall on the strand a∣mongst
them in the skirmidge. The. 17. day in the morning they of Nera, Lontoer, They of Nera make a road with their gallies vpon their enemies, & of their successe. and Pollerbay, went out with their Gallies to a little Iland called Wayter, where they slew certaine of the people, whose heades they hunge about their Gallies in despight of those of Labbetacke, wherewith they retur∣ned to Nera with great pride and glory, carrying their na∣ked swordes openly through the streetes imbrewed with the blood of their enemies. Some of these their enemies heades they buried, wrapping them first with Callicute cloth, before they put them into the earth. The. 29. day, the Zealand tooke in her last lading of Mases and Nutmegges: on which day, our workemen laboured mightely on the House, which our Admirall caused to be built for such as were appoynted to remaine there. The first day of Iuly, we also of the Gelderland tooke Iuly. in our last and full lading. The. 2. day of Iuly our vice Admirall went a shore The Admi∣rall taketh his leaue of the Saban∣der & Gen∣tlemen. to take his leaue of the Sabanders and Gentlemen, and to desier their helpe and fauours to those that should there remaine of our people, which they promised to accom∣plish: so after the Admirall had bestowed on them sundry gyftes and rewardes, he tooke his leaue, and at after noone set sayle, but within a while after was forced to cast his Anchor, for that he saw not well how to get out.
The description of the Iland of Banda, (which lyeth 4. degrees and a halfe Southward of the Aequinoctiall line) of their religion, aparrell, disposition, and inclination: together with their weapons, and order of warres, vsed by them against their enemies. THe Iland Banda, lying some 24. leages The Iland Banda is some so leagues in compasse. from Amboyna (bringeth foorth great plentie of Maces and Nutmegges) and conteineth some 5. leages. The people being at warres continually among them selues are seuered into three factions: the chiefe Towne whereof, is called Nera. Among all the Ilandes of Moluccas, this Iland yeel∣deth the greatest quantitie of Nutmegges, insomuch that the people of I aua, Malacca, China, and many other neighbouring Ilandes, doe heere vse and exercise verie large trade in buying and selling, bringing hyther their goodes and marchandizes from all places: where, after they haue stayed two or three monthes, and made sale in barter, or otherwise, they returne home in their shypping: vsing at their first comming, to buy a Woman to do their businesse, and dresse their victualles: but when they haue finished their affaires, and are ready to depart thence, they cast off the sayd Woman to goe where she will, vntill the next yeere, that they come thither againe. The most part of the Inhabitants are commonly Hea∣thens, of Mahomets religion or beliefe, wherin they haue so great deuotion, that they will not go the watch, or re∣turne from it, before they haue made and poured out their
praiers & orizons in their Temples, which in their speach they call Musquita, alwayes washing their feete before they enter into their said Musquitas, (for commonly they haue great pots filled with water before their said Mus∣quitas) wherewith they clense & wash them selues: which done, they go into ye Church or temple, where pouring out their prayers with cryings & howlinges, yea so lowd, that a man may heare them verie easely aboue 20. houses from their Musquitas, pronouncing these wordes for the most part two or three times: Stofferolla, Stofferolla, Ascehad an la, Ascehad an la, Yll la, Ascehad an la, Yll lol la, Yll lol la, Machumed die rossulla. And as they pronounce the last word, they strike their face with their hand: in which cer∣rimonie, they haue great deuotion. They vse also other prayers, which they vtter not with voyce, but mumble them and iumble them softly to themselues in a very strange manner: such prayers ended, and hauing spread a matte on the earth, they stand thereon, casting their eyes twise or thrice vp toward the heauens, and then fal∣ling on their knees, they lay their heads three or foure times on the ground. This ceremonie they vse often, both in their Musquitas, in their houses, & also openly abroad. The Inhabitantes meete often times together in their Musquitas, bringing their victuals with them: where they make good cheere, and feast one another. They vse the like feastinges often times in the Woodes, assembling sometimes 100. persons in a companie, to make good cheere, and to be merrie togither: of such assemblies they make great accompt, taking great delight, pleasure, and contentment therein: and commonly such meetinges are vsed, when they will conferre together of common wealth matters, and such like, of some waight or moment. They make sharpe warres one against an other, yea the townes lying scant a mile or leage distant frō each other,
are deuided. This enimitie hath continued long & many yeeres in this Iland, for that they of Lambetack (a towne situated some litle leage frō Nera, the principallest towne of the whole Iland) heretofore cut downe, or ouerthrew certaine trees within the circut or liberties of Nera: from hence I say, such mortall hate, and bloodie warres hath so long since taken such deepe roote in the hartes of those people, that neuer since they could be reconciled, but with∣out all mercie, or sparing one another, or keeping of any quarter, vpon all aduantages & stratagems, they murther and kill one an other like Dogs, as wee in the time of our beeing there, haue often and sundry times seene. In the night they keepe very strong watch as well in the woods, as within their townes, calling & crying one to an other all the night long, to thend they should not fall a sleepe. Now when they meane to make any attempt, or to take any enterprise in hand, commonly they come with their Gallies, which they row so swistly as a Shippe can sayle with a reasonable gale of winde. These Gallies do great seruice: neither are they altogether ignorant in the vse of their Baesses, whereof euery Gallie hath two of brasse. They vse also Hand-gunnes, or Caleeuers, in their warres, with sundry other instruments and weapons, as Sheeldes, with a great Sable, called in their language Padaug, which they handle and vse in very good sort, tea∣ching their children while they are young, to fight & play at fence. They haue also Pikes commonly in their wars, made of very hard wood, which they cast very certainely and neare, as we our selues haue often times seene. They haue also an other kind of weapon most common & vsuall among them, the end is of Iron, made like vnto a small harping-yron, wherein they put a sticke, fastning thervnto a little thinne coard, which they throw into the bodyes of their enemies when they come neare togither, and draw
it to them againe with the string: when they go against their enemies, they set a murrion or head piece vpon their head, whereof they haue good store among them, wearing in them commonly a Parradice bird in stead of a feather, thinking themselues sure and safe enough when they haue such an helmet on their head. Some of the Gentlemen haue Corslets or harnesse, wherein they thinke they can take no hurt of their enemies. Now when they enterprise any attempt with their Gallies, they make a most hideous noyse with crying, calling, hooping, hallowing, playing on Drums, and Bason, as if they were all out of their wittes: the Gen∣tlemen (standing aloft in the Gallie with their weapons in their hands) make many crooked leapes, springing this way & that way: he which can spring best, thinkes himselfe the trimmest fellow, and is not a little proud thereof. On the sides of the Gallies are stages of Canes, made to passe euen with the water, whereon the slaues sit to row, or ra∣ther skoope & shouell the water, for in stead of Oares they vse shouels made of wood, 2. or 3. sitting together, shouell vp the water, & casting the shouel ouer their heads, poure out the water ouer the side of the Gallie: in doing where∣of, they make a wonderfull noyse with singing, after their manner: others sitting by them, which play vpon Drums, & somtimes vpon Basons also. They are very subtill and The dispo∣sition & in∣clination of the people. stout men in their warres, seeking and visiting their ene∣mies with great courage and assurance, as we saw our selues at what time they of Labbetacke came with foure Gallies before Nera, euen right before our lodging, offer∣ing skirmish most brauely to each other on the land, wher∣in some were slaine & some hurt. This spited the inhabi∣tants of Nera, who in reuenge, taking the opportunitie of The at∣tempt of the people of Nera a∣gainst their enemies of Waygar. the time rowed out the next morning with 5. Gallies to a little Iland named Waygar (the people whereof kept
watch that night in Labbetacke (for they are confederats, & hold with those of Labbetacke) where they put to the sword most of the people that were in the said Iland, bring∣ing their heads from thence with them to Nera, fastened one by another to a rope, for their greater glory & triumph, which they hold with all their pompe of flags, streamers, banners, pennons, & banderels, shooting very lustily with their Baesses that lay in their Gallies. They also brought with them a woman prisoner, which the Sabander of the Iland kept for his slaue. They also brought an other wo∣man with them, but they cut her in the midle in two pee∣ces with a Sable or Curtlar, in so much that they liued most beastly with the people, whereby we might see that they were a most bloody & tyranicall nation. But not con∣tented that they had thus butcherly prayed vpon their neighbours, and murthered them, 5. or 6. dayes after in despight of their enemies, they went vp & downe the streets bragging, with their weapons yet red with the blood of their enemies, for in such bloody actions they take a mer∣uelous pride, especially that they had so well effected this bloody stratagem: yet not withstanding this their mortal hatred, they buried the heads of their slayne enemies very honourably, the order whereof was thus. After that they were with their Gallies returned, the heads being orderly placed on a staffe, fastened thereunto (as before is said) with a rope, they are brought before the house of the Sa∣bander or Gouernour, and laid vpon a great stone vnder a Tree, to the view of all the people, that they might see how valiantly they had behaued themselues against their common enemies: whence (after they had so lien the space of an houre) they were taken, and wrapped in Calli∣cute, or cloth made of Cotton, and laid in a platter, & so carried to the place of buriall: & being put into the earth, they burnt great store of franckensence ouer the graues,
according to the manner and custome of the Countrey. Furthermore, when a man dyeth, the women that are Their ce∣remonies vsed ouer the dead. alyed in friendship or kinred, weeping and lamenting, call and cry to the dead corps very loude, thinking with such calling and mourning that the Course shall againe receiue life: but seeing that it remayneth dead, without mourning they prepare are a great Banquet, inuiting all their friendes, and such as accompaned the dead corps to the fu∣nerall, which is carried vpon mens shoulders, in such sort as is commonly vsed in our Countrey, but that they lay a white peece of Callikute ouer the dead: then is the corps followed to the Graue first by the men, and the women after: the dead being layd into the earth, they burne Fran∣kensence one whole day and night thereouer, put into a vessel for that purpose: and vnder a penthouse, or such like, which is made ouer the graue, burneth a Lampe al night▪ the next day in the morning after the buriall, come thither all the common people, Gentlemen, and others, making their prayers ouer the Graue: which maner of ceremonie they keepe and obserue for many dayes. These things we saw and behelde with our eyes, and demaunded of them why they vsed such kind of ceremonies: They answered interogatiuely, demaunding of vs if we did not the like when any died in our Countrey. We demaunded further, what they prayed ouer the dead▪ Their answere was, that the dead might not rise againe: which they steadfastly be∣leeue, supposing that if they should not so pray ouer the Graue of the dead, he would againe reuiue: such is their lamentable misbeliefe. In this Iland are many old folke, for their great yeeres very lustie and well disposed: for we How the women im∣ploy them selues in their houses haue often times seene a man there of 130. yeeres old, yea and many others of great yeeres. They liue by the profit of their fruites, The women do there the worke & labour, while the men walke idely vp and downe the streetes:
they neuer walke abroade with their husbandes, but keepe at home at their worke and businesse, as drying of Nutmegs, and shaleing the same: wherein, and in other such like, they imploy their time. Hereafter foloweth the way of the Iland of Banda, which lyeth about some 24. leages from Amboyna. No. 6. The signification of certaine Pictures or Counter∣faites, according to the letters A. B. C. &c. as followeth. No. 7. SIgnifiyng the order vsed by the Admirall in his lan∣ding, to make agreement with them for trade, where he was very gladly and friendly entertained with great honour and reuerence, bringing him into a Tent made of Sayles, placed vnder the trees, and fastned from one tree to an other: vnder which they sate. Is the Gouernour of the Land: a very old man. Is the King of Ternati his brother. Is the Ʋice-Admirall, with an Interpretor stan∣ding behinde him, which interpreted all matters vnto them. Are Gentlemen, sitting in companie vnder the Tent. Is the Admirall of Sea there, standing a part in the side of the Tent with his seruantes.
Is the Gouernour, his house. Is the common people, sitting with them in the side of the Tent, to heare what was sayd, Are Hollanders with their Trumpets, appoynted now and then to sound, wherein these Nobles and the rest, tooke great pleasure & delight, woondring great∣ly thereat. A description how those of Banda vse to make them selues terrible vnto their enemies, when they ioyne in fight. No. 8. COmmonly when the people of Banda enterprise any matter of warfare, they haue great assembles and meetinges: the reason, whereof is, the Iland hauing 5. or 6. Townes, and (as I sayd before) be∣ing seuered into three partes or factions, deadly hate and malice each other. Nera is the principallest Towne of the Iland, Labbe∣tacke, Combeer, & Waeyer, Townes of the same Iland, ioyne together in mortall hatred against the Nerans. On the other part, Lontoor, lying on the other side of Nera, with two other Ilandes lying some leage from Banda, called Polleuine, and Poelway) hold and take part with the Nerans. Now when any of these confederats pretend any attempt against those of Labbetacke they come with their Gallies to Nera, where the people of Banda prouide a Banquet, euen against the instant that the execution of their attempt is appoynted, inuiting al their people there∣vnto, & holding the same openly in the streets: and sitting side by side, there is brought and layde before them a peece of a leafe of the Bonanas plant, for or in stead of a trencher, with a peece of their bread (which they call Sago:) then is set before euery one a messe of sodden Rise in a dish or por∣renger
made of the leafe of a tree, and therein a bit of flesh, wherevnto they fall with good appetite, like rauening beastes, casting the Rise with their fingers into their mou∣thes: in the meane season, and while they sit thus at their victualls, commonly the Gentlemen with their weapons in their handes, come into the streetes where this good cheere is kept, dauncing and fighting (as they daunce) one with an other, while their drummes and basons, standing one against an other, make them musique: after the sound whereof they daunce, and play at fence, vntill they are weary: then are their weapons taken from them, & they ledde thence to their houses, in whose place an other daun∣cer succeedeth: and thus continueth as long as they are at their banquet. No. 9. The Gallies of Banda vsed by them in their warres, (called in their language Caracora) are light and swift, neither are they vnexpert to row them in very good order. They make them commonly weake of timber, cut out of one peece for the inner part of the Gallie: the outside is made of planckes, lyned vpon the ioyntes, and bound to∣gether with roopes: and commonly the same roopes are fastned therevnto with the lyninges, euery lyning is some faddome one from another: in the finishing whereof, the lyninges are so placed, that they lie leuell vppon euery plancke, which are pinned in the inside of the Gallie on both sides of the lyninges, for the strengthning & binding together of the worke: then they Rauke her with a cer∣taine substaunce made of the inner barke or peeling of the Indian Nut-tree (which they call Clappus) after the same hath bin beaten with an hammer vntill it be like vnto Towe. Pitch they hane none, but instead thereof, they daube all the seames, chinkes, and ioyntes, with Lyme, tempered with some other substaunce, which lyeth so fast
that the water cannot wash it away. A. Is a slaue of Banda (which they call Leschar) com∣ming from the Garden with fruite, and wine of Palme, which they themselues drinke. B. A poore Woman comming from the wood with all kind of fruites, which the carrieth to the Market to sell, hauing the same in a Mat made of Canes, which they carrie behind them, fastned for their ease to a hood on their heades, hanging downe at their backes. No. 10. Is the description of our House in Nera, wherein was our Warehouse to buy and sell in, for money or in bar∣ter, shewing how the people came to the same, bringing their wares to be waighed. Their waightes are iust and true, called Katti in their language. One pound of their waightes maketh fiue pound and a quarter of our pounds. The Beame is made of wood which we receiued with the waightes of the Sabander or Gouernour: after which waight, all others that they vse are made. No. 11. A litle Turke named Goeytyen, of whom we bought much wares, and receiued great friendship. A Gentleman, as he goeth in the streetes with a slaue after him, commonly apparrelled after their manner, whereof they are very proud. A woman of Banda, as she goeth in the streetes with a woman slaue (commonly) waighting on her, which carryeth a Hatte for her. Mistresse to keepe her from Sunne burning when she putteth off her tire. No. 12. Is a Mappe, shewing the maner of their Foote-ball play, spurning the Ball one to the other standing round,
and one man in the middle: one of them smiteth the Ball first to his fellow as high as a man is able to throw it. It is made of Spanish Reede, interlaced one with another, of the fashion of a Sylera mundi, being a great shame and reproch to him that misseth and hitteth not the Ball with his foote when it commeth to him, for then the rest and others standing by mocke him, and laugh him to scorne. This play is greatly esteemed among them: sometimes they will spring & leape vp, and hit the Ball as it reboun∣deth: and sometimes turne them selues round about as the Ball reboundeth, and yet smite the Ball to his fellow before it shall come to the ground. No. 13. When the Inhabitantes of Banda go out in Warfare, they carry a Shield in one hand and a Sabel in the other, which they call Padaug: and commonly they haue also a Speare or Picke, which they cast at their enemies: and after the same is so cast, they vse their Sables, which they hould with their hand behind the Shield vntill they haue discharged them selues of the Picke. The. 5. day of Iuly in the morning, we set sayle and Anno. 1599 the 5. day of Iuly we set sayle from Banda. departed from Banda, discharging all our Ordinance for our farewell: which they liked very well. About noone we were past Banda, and directed our course North-west towardes Amboyna, with a faire gale. The. 4. day in the morning, we saw the Iland Noese∣leau, the Inhabitantes whereof are Canibals, or eaters of mans flesh: from thence we sayled to the straight of Cera, but by reason of the storme that we then had, we were fal∣len too low, missing the right channel or entrance, where∣fore we turned vp and downe, thinking to passe at the Westerne gappe of Amboyna, but the wind came contra∣rie,
with very foule weather, raining, lightning, and thun∣dring, so that we were forced to take in our Sayles. The 6. day we shot off two peeces before the Westerne gap of Amboyna, to thend that the Maister and Com∣mittes of the Zealand should come a boord to consult to∣gether what was to be done, and it was thought best to set our course towardes Iaua, for we could not reach Am∣boyna, where our Admirall lay. We sayled for the most part South, and South and by West. The 7. day we had a fine gale from the South-east, holding our course all the forenoone South South west: and at after noone we haled in our Sheates, and held our course West South west, the weather faire. The 8. and 9. dayes, we held our course West South west: at after noone we tooke the height, and found 4. de∣grees and an halfe Southward of the line Aequinoctial. the weather being very faire. The 10. day we continued our course West South west: we had sight of the Iland Cebesse, and perceiued that it was parted in 7. or 8. little partes or portions, with a great necke or corner lying out 6. or 7. leages in length, wherefore we durst not sayle forwards that night. The 11. day in the morning, we held our course West South west and South west towardes the Iland Bou∣ton. And at noone taking the height, found 6. degrees about the middest of Bouton. The 12. day in the morning we sayled beyonde the Iland Combayna. At noone we tooke in our sayles, and lay still vntill the last quarter before day, that we might be before the straight of Celebes by day light, for in that place it is narrow. The 13. day in the euening we passed the straight of Celebes, and founde that there ran a mightie streame or currant.
The 14. day in the morning it was calme, and at after noone it began to blow a litle gale. The 15. and 16. dayes, we made a great way, holding our course most West, and South west and by South: and sometimes West and by North. At after noone we saw two small Ilandes, the one lying from vs South South east, and the other South South west. The 17. day we tooke the height, finding 7. degrees lacking one quarter. At noone we had sight of the East ende of Madura, lying South west off vs. We helde our course along the coast of Madura West, and West and by South. The 18. day in the euening we were hard by the towne of Arosbay, lying on the West end of Madura: in which place, we lost our men outwardes bound, as is before de∣clared. The 19. day we were against the land of Iuban and Sydaye, holding our course West and by North: and at after noone North west, towardes the high land of Iapan. The 20. day we saw the high land of Iapan. The same euening dyed one of our Marriners, called Renier Rey∣neirszen vander Schellingh. The 21. day we draue in the calme vnder the high land of Iapan. The 25. day we helde our course directly, for we knew not where we were. Towardes the euening we sawe the Ilandes of Iaketra. And the same night we let fall our Anchors. The 26. day in the morning we set sayle againe, and had sight of the east corner of Iaketra. And in the after noone we Anchored before Iaketra. The 27. day our Boate rowed a shore to buy freshe victuals. The 28. and 29. dayes we were busie to make prouision
of victualles, as Rice, Hennes, Coquers, and such like. The same day the King sent a young Steere to our Ʋice-Admirall. The. 30. day our Boate went againe a shore to buy Rice, for there were two Ships come thyther with Rice, which came in good season for vs. The 1. 2. and 3. dayes of August, we spent in buying August. 1599. of fresh victualles. In the euening came to vs from Ban∣tam a long Boate from the Ships of Zealand, the long Barke and the Sunne, shewing vs that they had lyen at Bantam 4. monthes and an halfe, and now waighted for the next season or haruest. The 4. day the Admirall, with the Marchants, went a shore to speake with the King. In the euening the Boate returned towards Bantam. The. 5. day we made further prouision of fresh victuals on the shore. The. 6. day we sayled from Iaketra to the fresh Riuer to take in water. About noone we ariued, and let fall our Anchors before the sayd fresh Riuer, beginning the same day, and so continuing all night to bring water a boord, making all the haste we could to haue in our water. The. 8. day about noone, we sayled towards Bantam, casting our Anchors the same night about some. 4. leages from Bantam. The. 9. day in the morning, about. 10. of the clocke we set sayle againe: in the euening we let fall our Anchors before Bantam, where presently the Maisters and Mar∣chantes of the aforesayd Barke, and of the Sunne, came aboord vs, declaring that there were 36. of their men dead, so that they were hardly able to sayle their Ship. The. 10. day our Comisares or Marchantes, went a shore to buy some Purselayne, Dyshes and other thinges. The. 14. day about noone, the Gouernour of Bantam
came aboord vs, accompanied with some. 400. men, viewing our Ship, and offering great friendship, requiring our Ʋice-Admirall to go with him a land. The 19. day we departed from Bantam, meeting with a sharpe gust of wind and raine, which continued some hower. The 20. day in the morning we were past ye coast of Iaua, shaping our course the most part of the day South-west. The same day our alowance of water was againe lessened: to wit, euery day one Ran & a Mutskin of Arake: a Wine which the wild people of the countrey vse themselues to drinke, making it with Rice, and is a very strong Wine in taste. The 22. day about noone it rained, thundred, & lightned, with so great a winde, that we were forced to take in all our sayles. This storme continued two howers. The 23. day it was very faire weather: we shaped our course as before, the wind East South-east. About noone the Carpenter of our Ship died, called Peter Lauwelssen of Harllem, which was the third man that died in our returne homewardes. The 24. day in the night foule weather, the wind South South-east, keeping our course most part West, and South∣west and by North, bearing onely our mayne-sayles. The 25. 26. 27. 28. and 29. dayes, ill sayling weather, the wind South South-east, in so much that it was as much as we could do to beare our mayne-sayles. The 31. day the weather began to be somewhat fairer, so that we might put out our top-sayles. The first day of September we tooke the height, & were September. in 15. degrees lacking 3. quarters: at noone we sent our Boate aboord the Zealand to fetch the Maister and Pilot, to thend we might confer togither what course were best to be kept: their conclusion was to sayle West South-west, vntill we should come to 20. degrees, for the storme droue vs far to the Southward. We held our course West south-west, with
a fine gale from the South south east. The 4. day in the night we had the wynd East south east, with faire weather, shaping our course most South west, & by south, and haled in our sheats. The 8. day we were in twenty degrees, holding our course west south west, the wind being East south east with a fine gale: in the morning we cast a man ouer board, who died of the bloody flixe, his name was Daniell Kogher of Ham∣borgh. In the euening we shaped our course one poynt lo∣wer, running for the most part west and by south, with a fine gale. The 10 day we were in 21. degrees 14. minutes, keepe∣ing our course for the most part west and by south, the wind being South east. The 14. day the wind was contrary, blowing from the South west with ill weather, so that we were glad to take in our sailes. The 15. day in the morning, we sayled west north west, with variable winds, and as we iudged, we were vnder Tro∣pico Capricorno The 20. day we were in 26. degrees lacking 15. minutes, shaping our course west and by south, with still weather, be∣ing 150. leagues from Saint Lawrence as we gessed. The 24. day the wind was contrary, blowing very hard from the North west, and raynie weather. The 26. day we had fairer weather, shaping our course most West and by south: the same day we were in the height of 29. degrees 15 munites. The 30. day we had 28. degrees and an halfe, holding our course North west, and by west, the wind westerly: and we iudged our selues to be 100. leagues off Cape de Roman. The first day of October the wind came faire towards the October. euening, holding our course West and by south. The 2. day the wind continued good, holding our course
most West and by south: the wind South east, with very faire weather. The 5. day we were in 30. degrees and an halfe, shaping our course westerly, the wind blowing from the South. The 12. day we had the wind contrary, from the North north-west, with a great tempest, so that we were forced to take in our topsailes, and to beare onely our maine sayles. The 14. day we were in 34. degrees and 20. minutes, kee∣ping our course West south-west, with ill weather, the wind blowing from the North west: here we saw many Birds. The 19. day a contrary wind out of the South-west, and West south west, with a great gale. The 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. and 25. dayes the weather was very still and calme, with a South-east wind, keeping our course for the most part West and by North. The 29. day it blew a mighty storme out of the North, and North-west, so that we tooke in our sayles: the same night it lightened and thundered mightily. The 30. day we were in 33. degrees and an halfe, ges∣sing that we were 150. leagues off the Cape: and (as we iudg∣ed) West, and West and by North from vs: toward noone the weather cleared vp. We shaped our course most North∣west, and by West, the wind being South-west, and West South-west. The first day of Nouember we continued our course Nouember. North-west, and North west and by North, the wind being Westerly and West south west. The 2. day still weather, but towards the euening blew a fine gale East north-east, sayling most West and West & by North. The 3. day continued a faire East and East north-east wind, holding our course for the most part West, with a fine gale and cleare weather, but towards the Euening grew a great Storme, so that wee were gladde to take in
our sayles, shaping our course West, the wind being North-east. In the night the winde came againe about to the West South-west, with a stout gale. The 4. day we fardelt vp our Maine-sayle, holding our course most North-west, and North-west and by North, with a stoute gale. The 5. day we tooke a Turtle Doue, which came flying into our Ship: whereby we presumed that we could not be farre from land. The 10. day at noone tide we saw the land of Ethiopia, in the height of 32. degrees and a halfe, namely the neck land of Lahnera. Towardes the euening the wind came about to the Eastward: our course was South and by West, and South South-west. In the night time our sprit sayle was rent from the Yard. The 11. day we shaped our crurse most part South South-west, with a contrary wind from the East and East South-east, with darke weather. At this place was great store of fish, whereof we caught some store. The same night was a rousing storme from the East, & East South-east: we kept our course most South-west, and South-west and by South. The 12. day it continued very blustering weather. In the night we tooke the height, and found 35. degrees, as we ges∣sed 15. leagues from the land. The same euening we sayled south-west, making hard way, the wind being at south-east. The 13. day in the morning, the Zealand was as farre be∣hind vs that we could hardly discerne her from our sterne: wherevpon we tooke in our Maine-sayle, making way with our fore-sayle, keeping our course most South-west, with darke weather, & a very ill wind blowing from the south east. And in the morning after we had brooke our fast, we shaped our course West south-west. At noone we tooke the height, and found 36. degrees, and sailed West, iudging the Cape de Anguillos to be some 5. leages off vs, West and by North.
The 15. day we had 37. degrees and 15. minutes, holding our course west south west, the wind being west north-west. The 16. day about none, the wind came about to the north-east: we sayled West north west, with very faire weather: at after noone we had store of raine, with lightning, & contrary and changable windes. In the euening it cleered somewhat vp, yet it blew very hard from the North east: we shaped our course most West North-west, sayling onely with our fore∣course: about which time, many of our people began to fall sicke, in so much that at this present 22, men lay sicke. At noone we shaped our course Northwest, the wind being East South-east, with a fine gale. The 18. day we were in 37 degrees 15. minuts: our course north-west, gessing the Cape Anguillos to lie northerly of vs. The 20. day we were in 34 degres & 22. minutes, holding our course North west, the wind South east & at East, with a fine gale & cleere weather. The Cape de bona Esperançe lying East and East by South off vs some 28. leagues. The 21. day, and so to the last day of this moneth, the wind continued South-east, shaping our course most of the time North-west, making good way, & having very faire weather. The 30. day we were in 23 degrees and 15. minutes: at noone we passed the Tropique of Capricorne. holding our course yet North west the wind being South east. The first day of December we had 22 degrees 20 minuts, the same day we had the Sunne againe right ouer our heads. December The 2. day we had 20. degrees and an halfe, continuing our course North west, the wind South east: the same day we mounted and cleered our Ordnance. The 6. day we were in 17. degrees & 8. minutes, and con∣tinued our course North west. The 7. day in the morning after breakfast, we had sight of the Iland of S. Helena, lying off vs West North west: to∣wards the euening we tooke in our sayles, letting the Ships
driue, for we were not able to reach the Iland this day. The 8. day about noone, we let fall our Anchors in the Roade, at 30. fadome, some two shot length from the shore: our Maister, and vnder Comissarie, presently rowed a shore to looke for freshe Water. And the same euening, they brought a boord Goates and Hogges, which were caught on the land. The 9. day we carried all our sicke people to the shore, and afterwards filled fresh water: some of our people run∣ning vp into the land to seeke after Cattell, brought some a boord our Shippes with them, which made our Marriners very gladde: but wee founde no Orenges, whereof we had most neede, for those that were trubled with the scuruie disease. The 14. day out people raunging about to seeke for Goates and Swyne, (as God would) came to a very faire pleasant valley of Orenge trees: whereof they plucked some 4000. and brought them aboord, which meruelously refreshed and cheered vs all. The 31. day wee brought out sicke againe a boord the Shippes. The first day of Ianuary, we departed from S. Helena Anno. 1600 First day of Ianuarie. homewards, shapeing our course most, North-west, with a very fine gale blowing from the South-east. The 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. dayes we continued our course North west, with faire and cleare weather, the wind being South-east, and East South-east. Here we saw many flying Fishes. The 14. day we began to haue small shewers of rayne, the wind at South-east: we continued our course North-west, makeing faire way. The 18. day at noone, wee crossed the Aequinoctiall line, with a fine South-east gale. This day we saw plenty of Fishe swimming called Dorados, whereof wee tooke
some store. The 22. day maruelous calme, with rayne, lightning, and thunder. The 23. 24. 25. 26. and 27. dayes, still weather, with some small showers, and little gales of wind, now and then: the wind very mutable: in the meane while, we made good cheere with Dorados, where of we caught plenty The eight and twentie day continued still weather, vn∣till the first quarter in the night, the wind comming to the East South-east, with a full gale, we held out course North west. The thirteth day in the morning the Moone has eclip∣sed, being in 5. degrees in the foote of the Crosse, wee helde our course North-west, the winde being at North North-east. The first day of February to the 5. day, we continued our Februarie. course West north-west, the wind being North and by East, with a fine gale in our top sayles: at what time we began first to haue sight of the North Pole, which we had not seene in long time before. The 6. day at noone we had 8. degrees, we sayled North-west, the wind blowing North north-east with a fine gale, running close by the wind: towards the euening we held our course North north west, the wind being East and by North. The 7. day we were in 9. degrees houlding our course North west, and North west and by north, with a North east wind. The 10. day we were in 12. degrees, continuing our course North west and by north, the wind North east. The 13. day we had 15. degrees, iudging the Ile de Mayo 150. leagues east off vs. The 14. day in the morning, the wind came againe to the South east, and East South east, but very calme
weather, our course most Northerly. The 22. day. 23. degrees and an halfe, iudging our selues then vnder Tropuo Cancri, holding our course North north∣west. The 25. day we saw great store of Saragassa, driuing on the Seas, with a great gale out of the North east: our course was North North west. The 26. day, in 28. degrees, holding our course North North east, with a fine gale. We iudged the Ile of Palme 300. leagues East off vs. The 11. day of March 41. degrees, our course North east March. and by East. In the euening the wind contrary, blowing from the North east, with much raine and wind. The 12. day the wind continued very high, so that we were faigne to take in our toppe Sailes, and the weather so darke, that we could not take the height. The 13. day we tooke in our Sayles, letting our Ships lie at hull, for it blew a mightie storme from North east. The 14. day some two howers before day, the tempest be∣gan to ceasse: we put out our Sayles, shaping our course North and by East, being in 42. degrees. The 15. day blew againe a very hard storme from the East South-east, so that we sayled onely with our courses, sayling North-east and by East. The 16. day the storme continued, so that we were faigne to strike our top Mastes, and runne with our courses Sou∣therly. The same day our alowance of wine was lessened and made but two Mutskins for a messe. The 24. day we were in 48. degrees, our course East North-east. The same euening we sounded, but founde no ground. We iudged that we were too farre about the West. The 25. day we were in 48. degrees and an halfe, shaping our course Easterly, to thende we might reach the length of the Channell: for we were shot too farre Westward: the
wind scant, in the euening we cast our Lead, but found no ground. The 29. day mistie weather, so that the Zealand dischar∣ged a peece, supposing they had seene land, but it was a banke of mist. The 30. day in the euening, we had sight of England, supposing that we were some 6. leagues from land. The same night blew a mightie storme out of the North North-west. In the second watch of the nyght we saw two Shippes, but we spake not with them. The 31. day in the after noone, we turned Westward, the storme continuing very hard. The same night we saw an other sayle, but spake not with them. The second day of Aprill the Zealand made a signe to vs Aprill. to send our Boate aboord them, about some conference and counsayle that was to be taken, for their Bolt-sprite was broken, so that they could put no Sayle therevnto. At after noone the wind was againe contrary. The 3. day it blew a very stoute gale from the North-east. Our alowance of Oyle was deminished to two Mutskins a day. The 6. day we spake with two French-men: These were the first Shippes we had spoken with: the wind being North∣east. The 10. day we spake with a smal Shippe that came from Calis Malis, laden with Wine, whereof we had two Pipes. The same was bound for Callice in Fraunce. The Shippe and Maister were of Euckhusen, the Maisters name was Iohn Frantslen, but the company were all French-men. The 11. day we passed by the Kaskets. The same mor∣ning Anno 1600 the 11. day of Aprill. the small Shippe aforesayd, parted from vs. The 12. day in the night, we lost the company of the Zea∣land by reason of the mist. The 13. day we heard nothing of her. In the night we
ran Northward, taking in our top-sayles, to thend we might come together agaiue. The 14. day in the morning we were neare to Faire Lee, hauing sight of a Flecte of 30. Sayle, but could vnderstand nothing of the Zealand. About noone we saw Douer Clifts, hauing a fine South west wind a long the coast of Fraunce. The same night we left Douer behind vs. The 15. day in the morning we saw Callice & Dunckerk, where we met with a Northerly wind, and at noone turned towarde Douer Roade: at what time the Zealand came againe to vs, and the same euening we let fall our Anchors in Douer Roade. The 16. day in the morning, the Boate rowed to the shore to buy some fresh victualies, the Wind North North west, with a very hard gale. The 20 day came a Post to vs from London with Let∣ters, which he deliuered, with other newes to our Ʋice-Admirall Afterwardes, with great ioy to all the Marchantes and Owners whom▪ it concerneth, were ariued (God be thanked) in safetie in the Texel: where the Nutmegs were vnladen, and put into bagges, and sent to Amsterdam, to the great admiration and comfort of the people, where they were layde vp in Warr-houses: which with the other Spices, yeelded a most pleasant sweete smell to all the neighbours dwelling there aboutes. And it is most true, that these Nutmeges were so fresh, that Dyle was pressed out of them: the like whereof were neuer brought from Lysborne.
Hauing thus finished, and declared the ariuall of these two Shippes in the Texel, we will returne to the other two, namely the Amsterdam, and the Vtrecht: which (after they had lyen two months at Amboyna, before Tuban, and could not there finde sufficient store of lading) sayled thence the 8. day of May towards the Ilands of Moluccas. THe 13. day of March Anno 1599. March, the two Ships lying before Tuban, there ariued three Ships of warre from Iaua, full of Souldiers, which were sent for by the Tubans, to ayde them against the Portingals, and to take a Castle, which they there helde, committing dayly great out∣rage and mischiefe against those of Tuban, because we were suffered to lie there. These Iauaners were receiued with great ioy and triumph: who (after their landing) fell to making of Boothes and Cottages, running ouer all the land, clyming the Coquar trees, and gathering the fruites, to the great damage & dissyking of all the people of Amboyna. The 20. day some of vs were a shore to kill fowle with our Peeces, where wee killed greene Pidgions as great as Duckes. The 25. day Iohn Cornelissen of Edam, died: who was the first man that was buried there on the land.
The 29. day was a letter sent to the Ʋice-Admirall lying at Banda. The 30. day some lading in small quantetie, was brought aboard, for that they could not agree on the prises. The last day, the Admirall went ashore to agree about the price of wares, but effected nothing. The first day of Aprill, Isack Henricksen of Rees died, & Aprill. was buried on the land. The 2. day Gisbrecht Wolfertsen died also, and was buri∣ed on the land. The 10. day the price of Cloues was agreed, viz. for 35. The price of Cloues. peeces of Ryals of eight the Baer: the Baer waying 550 li. The 12. day was agreement made for the price of head peeces, viz. 250. li. of Cloues for euery head peece of Mur∣rion. The 13. day we tooke in some Cloues. The 19. day the long Boate returned from the Ʋice-Admirall at Banda, (which is some 28. leagues from Tuban) from whom we vnderstood, that the said Ʋice-Admirall had taken into his Ship, some 30. Last of Nutmegs, and Ma∣ces, and it was supposed, that at this time, he had in his full lading (for the Boate had been 5. dayes on the way) and that the other Ship of Melcknap began to lade also. The 20. day the Portingales attempted to take a little Towne in the Iland of Amboyna, not effecting any thing, but that they killed two men: for the people of the Iland as∣sembling, made head against them in the ayde of the towne: in which company 4. of our Marriners went in the Boate with the King of Ternates his Brother, which seemed strange vnto them, and as a mirracle, that the Hollanders would take their partes in their warrs, as enemies to the King of Spaine and Portingall. May. The 2. day of May Iohn Martsen, a Wallon and our Trumpeter, died, and was buried on the land.
The 8. day we bartered for some small quantitie of Cloues, of which commoditie was no great store in this Island to bée had, but wonderfull plentie of Rice, inso∣much that for a looking glasse of a blancke, or of a pennie of sterling money, we had fiftéene or sixtéene pounde of Rice, and so accordingly after the same rate for all other wares. In the end, we set saile and departed thence to∣wards the Island Moluccas carrying with vs a Gen∣tleman belonging to the King, who gaue himselfe out to be the Kings brother, but it was not so. This gentleman tolde vs that the Kings father of Amboyna had in his life time 70. married Wiues, besides his other concu∣bines, and that the King now liuing, had 40. married wiues, besides his other women or concubines. The 14. day, died Albert Petersen, in Iohn Martsens ship. The 16. day, in the night wée crossed the Line, ha∣uing sight the next morning of the Island Ternate and Tidore. The 22. day towards the euening we let fall our an∣chors Anno 1599. The 22. of May. vnder the Island of Ternate, and rode at fiftéene fathome. The 25. day, dyed one Iacob a Flemming, and was buried on the land. The 28. day, the King of Ternate came aboord vs, but The King of Ternate com∣meth aboord. not into our ships, desiring our Admirall to come into his gallie, which the Admirall did, betwéene whom was long conference by interpreters, so that we supposed he would haue come into our ships, but hée would by no meanes: excusing himselfe, first that the ladder had no conuenient couering, although there was a péece of woollen cloth cast ouer it, then it was too late for him, and it was now time for him to goe to his prayers, for said he, the Sunne is now very lowe.
The 29. day, the King came the second time to vs In what tri∣umphant manner the King came the second time. with 32. gallies; maruailouslie well trimmed and appoin∣ted with some hundred bases of brasse, rowing in tri∣umphant maner thrice about ourships, with great noyse of singing, drummes and copper basons. In the meane while, we made our selues readie with our ordenance, muskets, pikes, and other artillerie, placing some of our men aloft, and other some beneath, to make resistance if nèede had béen, and that if they had offered vs any vio∣lence: but in the ende there came none néere our ships, but onely the Kings galley, who sent into our ship one of his Captaines to confer with our Admirall by an inter∣preter, but the King himselfe would not come aboorde. Towards the euening, the King returned with two gallies onely, the one wherein the King was not, had a boate, or one of their Praus, and rowing a good way from our ships, the King in the meane while boorded vs with his gallie, and being come into our ship, desired (after salutations, and some other spéeches with our Ad∣mirall) that our Gunner might make a shot at the Praw or boate, which the other gallie had brought, and was now a drift a good way from the said gallie, to sée how néere he could shoote with the great péece, which was ac∣cordingly accomplished, and a very faire shot made, to the great contentment and liking of the King, perceiuing well that if the shot had béen made at one of the great gallies, it would haue pearced and runne thorow the same. The 29. day, towards the euening, Raynard Reinerd∣son dyed, and was the same night buried on the land. The 30. day, the King came againe vnto vs with one The King commeth se∣cretlie aboord vnknowne to vs. gallie in very simple sort, to sée how we would behaue our selues, giuing vs to vnderstand that the King would come aboorde vs, who was in a little boate in person,
to wed by the said gallie vnknowne to vs, supposing that he would come afterwards, and comming close to our ship, went into the gallie, demaunding for many strange things, too long to heere repeated. The last day, was a spirite in Iohn Martsens Cabin a∣bout midnight, making such a rumbling and iumbling, that all that were in the Cabin ran out in great feare. The 2. day of Iune, all our principall officers were Iune. with the King on land, with certaine presents which they deliuered vnto him, reporting at their returne, that Presents car∣ried to the King. there were some store of Cloues to be had, and that the next day, some should be sent aboord vs, to see what com∣modities we had, and to make price with vs, to the ende we might trucke with them for some of theirs. The 3. day, some of the people accordingly came aboord vs to see our wares, but we could not agrée vpon any barter, but for readie money they offered their baer for 120. péeces of Royalls of 8. but we would not make no offer vpon so high a price. The 10. day our dyet was shortned, to wit, euery day once flesh or fish, and the other three meales Ryce. The 11. day, our Marchants went a shoare, thinking to speake with the King, but could not, by reason that it was their Sabboth day. The 12. day, our people went againe a shore, carrying with them some marchandize: the same euening the King came aboord vs, but not into our ship, but desired to haue a gilded Musket, which was fréely giuen him: but as we A gilded Mus∣ket giuen to the King. vnderstoode, his answere was, it should be paide for in his tole or custome, rated at two baers and an halfe, taking the tenth pennie of his tole. The 18. daye, wée receiued the first Cloues aboorde, The first Cloues brought a∣boord, and 600. viols of glasse, solde for one baer of Cloues. Three Orkins is a pennie sterling. Iulie. The price of Cloues. namely some two baers, and euery day more or lesse, for which, we bartered for the most part viols of glasse of an
orkin the péece, and had in trucke one baer of Cloues for 600. of those viols. The last day, our dyet was againe diminished of flesh and fish, and were appoynted weekely but twise flesh, and as often fish. The 9. day, the price was agréed of Cloues for mo∣ney, viz. the baer for 54. peeces of Royals of 8. the baer waying 620. pounde. The 11. day, the people of Ternate made an attempt vpon a village in the Isle of Tydore, from whence they brought swordes and shieldes (as trophes) whereon hung the eares of their slaine enemies, which they pre∣sented vnto their King, with a woman of Portugal, whom they afterwarde solde for a slaue. The 24. day, they of Ternate made another sallie vpon the said Island of Tydore, returning with fiue heads and some prisoners, whereof they killed one as hée came on land, and cut off the head of another, who was a stran∣ger, and came in trade of merchandize to Tydore. The 25. day, the King of Ternate came aboord our ship, The King commeth a∣boord the Ad∣mirall. viewing the same in euery corner, and desired our Admi∣rall that he would leaue some of his people there with him, and so going vp and downe the ship, all that he sawe liked him well, and comming into the Cooke-roome tooke vp the bellowes, which he desired to be giuen him, and as he stoode, blew with the bellowes into his mouth as if he had not been well in his wits. The 28. day, the King came againe aboord, so earnest∣ly viewing the same in all parts and places, as if he had ment to buie the ship, but his chiefe intent was to haue some of our people to abide with him, but there were none that would harken vnto his perswasions. The 29. day, came a Praw or small boate from Ban∣da, signifying vnto vs, that our two ships there, were al∣most
laden, yet we could not vnderstand the certaintie of them, for it was sixe wéekes since they came from Banda. The 4. of August we receiued some further portion of August. lading aboord our ship, preparing our selues to departe from this place. The 5. day, the Admirall went a shore to speake with the King, who lay in his galley néere the shore. The 6. day, the Admirall went againe to the land with store of Merchandize to bestowe on the King. The 12. day, the Marchants with all their marchan∣dize came aboord, to the ende wée might depart thence homeward. The 13. day, the King came aboorde vs, where he bar∣ganed in trucke for 250. baers of Cloues, to be deliuered the next growth or haruest. The 14. 15. and 16. dayes, the King and Admirall agréed that fiue men and a boye should remaine there, with whom he left great store of commodities, and some portion of money, to buye and ingrosse all the Cloues a∣gainst the comming of the next ships, their names that were so appoynted to remaine there, were Franck Ver∣does, The names of those that were left in the Island of Ternate for trade. cousen german to the Skoute or Sheriffe, William Verdoes of Amsterdam, Dirick Floritssen of Harlam, Ia∣cob Lambertsson of Amsterdam, Iohn Iansson of Grol, Cornelis Adriausson of Leyden, and the boye, Hendrick Iansson of Amsterdam.
A description of the Isle of Ter∣nate, lying 28. leagues from Banda. IN the Island Ternate, is small store of victuals to be had, and is without any kinde of cattell, except some very few Goates, and some small store of Hens, and but little fish. There groweth no Rice, neither any kinde of graine to make bread, but they make the same of trées, which being cut downe and clouen, they take an hammer made of a thicke réede, wherewith they beate the same clouen wood, which yéeldeth a certaine dust, like vnto sawe-dust (which they call in their language Sagge) where of they make their bread, which is very white, and the loues foure square, of the breadth or bignes of the palme of a mans hand, wherewith they vse their princi∣pall trade, for whatsoeuer they buye or sell, is all with this bread. There are plentie of Coquars, and Bonanas trées, with some Lemon and Orange trées, but meruei∣lous quantitie of Cloues, so thàt it is very poore and scant of victuals. The people are kinde and good of nature, but of beggerly condition, euen the King himselfe and all his gentlemen, as well as the common sorte: neuerthelesse, they hate théeuerie, in so much that not a théefe can there
escape the rope. It happened while we were there, that a boy of 11. or 12. yeares olde had stolen a leafe or two of Tabaco, wherewith he was taken, and led thorow the streetes with his hands bound behinde him, after whom followed all the boyes of the towne mocking him, and crying in their language a théefe, a théefe. They are great enemies of the Portingals, for right ouer against this Island, lieth another Island called Tydore, planted with Portingals, they holde no quarter with each other, but kill one another like dogs, as it happened at our be∣ing there, the 20. day of Iulie, 1599. at what time they of Ternate went out to the Island Tidore, where they on a sudden set vpon a village, slew thrée of the inhabitance, and brought away 43. prisoners: among whom was a young man of 21. yeares olde, sonne to the King of Ty∣dores brother, who (after he had béen brought to the Kings presence, and some spéeches vsed betwéene them) was lead out of the pallace with a rope about his necke vnto the sea side, where hée was commaunded to wash his hands: the young man stooping so to doe, one that stoode bebinde him, smote him on the backe with his Sable that he fell to the grounde, and presently another man lent him another blowe, wherewith his lyuer and lungs hung out of his bodie. Hauing in this dispitefull sorte shewed their merciles hearts, the bodie was towed into the sea, at the sterne of a Praw or small boate, and so suffered to driue away. Their chiefe weapons are pikes of réedes, which they cast at their enemies with their hands mer∣ueilous right and stronglie: they vse also great broade swordes and long shieldes, which séeme to be made of some boorde, foure foote long. Some of them vse Muskets and hand-guns, but in very small number, for of them∣selues they haue none, but such as they get from the Por∣tugales. At such times as the Sunne or Moone are eclip∣sed,
they make great sorrowe and lamentation, supposing that their King (or some other of their chiefe men) shall dye (as we our selues sawe the sixt of August, about eyght of the clocke in the euening, the Moone then being eclypsed) the people kept such a howling, praying, crying, and mourning in most hideous wise, with smiting vpon drummes and copper pans, as was most straunge to be∣holde. Wherefore we demaunded of them the cause why they cried and mourned in such sorte, they answered vs, that the Moone was eclipsed, and that therefore their King, or some of his blood should dye. The eclipse passed, and séeing that the King nor any of his blood is dead, they make great ioy: and the next day holde as it were a pro∣cession: those that goe formost carrie in their hands Purcelane dishes, followed with others bearing Pikes, Halberds, Muskets and Gunnes, after whom thrée Lampes are carried, made after the manner as they painte in our countrie a bunsh of grapes of the land of Promise, then followeth a boye appareled in kingly ap∣parell, before whom is borne a gilded fanne, then follow many women, as well young as olde finely decked after their manner: all this is done for ioy that no man is dead. Wée tolde them that there were men in our countrey, that knowe, and can tell long before when any eclipse shall be of the Sunne or Moone, which they thought to be impossible, and wondered thereat, as if it were a myracle.
A declaration of the Cardes and figures of the Island of Ternate here∣after following, according to the numbers and letters. No. 14. IS the Island of Ternate, where we arriued the 22. day of May, 1599. with two ships. A. Is the Island Tidore inhabited with Portugales, betwéene whom is mortall enimitie. B. Is an Island not inhabited, lying betwéene both the other Islands, but néerest vnto Tidore. C. Is a Riuer where we fetcht our fresh water out of a Well, in a village. D. Is the Kings Galley or Karkol, trimmed most brauely, and comming from Ternate with 31. other gal∣lies in companie, with a most terrible noyse of singing, crying, and playing on drummes and copper basons, rowing their galleys with woodden shouels in stead of oares, two & two sitting together, flourishing or casting the same (as they rowe) ouer their heads, and so powre out the water ouer the side of the galley, rowing in this sorte about our ships. E. The place where they rowe into, one before ano∣ther, and there lie side by side.
No. 15. IS the towne of Gammelamme, lying in the Island Ter∣nate, where we traded, the howsen whereof are made of a thicke Réede or Cane, clouen and interlaced one in the other. A. Is our two ships comming vnder sayle before the Towne. B. Is a galley that came aboorde vs, which after they had demaunded of whence we were, and receiued our an∣swere, bad vs in very hartie manner welcome, and were meruailous glad of our comming thither. C. Is a galley appoynted for the warres. D. Is a stake, whereupon stoode the head of one of their enemies, which they had fastened with a rope, put into the mouth of the head, and comming out vnder the chinne. E. Is their market place, where they kéepe their markets vnder a trée, to shadowe them from the heate of the Sunne. F. Is their Temple or Musquita. G. Is the Kings Court or Pallace, built of stone. H. Is a little house standing before the Pallace, where an yron cast péece of ordenance lyeth, the which Captaine Drake, by force of ill weather was compelled to cast ouerboorde, and afterward taken vp by these people. I. Is the house which the King gaue vnto those of our nation, which we left behinde vs. K. Is the house wherein we vsed our trade. L. Is a Cloyster, called S. Paul, built in times past by the Portugales. M. Is a stone house built by the Portugales.
N. Is the house wherein the Kings Interpreter dwelleth, and is of Chyna, speaking good Portugale. O. Is a Tower or Stéeple whereon lay a Brasse péece. P. Is an vninhabited Island lying betwéene Ter∣nate and Tydore. Q. Is the Island Tydore, kept by Portugales, who are great enemies to those of Ternate. R. The hole or gappe where all the ships must passe, for all along by the towne, it is full of rockes and shoels, at which rockes, the people with their boates catch fishe when the water is lowe, which they find in little plashes or puddles of water betwéene the rockes. S. Is a boate of pleasure. T. Is their manner of fishing for great fishe: first, they catch some small fishe with a little casting net, then setting a long cane right an ende in the foreparte of the boate, in the ende whereof they make a hoale, thorowe which is put a long rope or corde, and in the ende of the corde is fastened a fishehooke, with a leafe ouer it, that thereby the line may drine with the winde, then one that sitteth behinde casteth out his small fishe towards the hooke, which they kéepe hanging close aboue the water, whereby they deceiue the great fishe, and so with the booke take them. Also they vse certaine baskets which they lay in the water, so that they sinke to the ground, and hauing so line one tyde, they looke ouer the boates side, to sée if any fishe be in the baskets or not, wherein if they perceiue any fishe, one of them tumbles ouer boorde, and diuing into the water, bringeth vp the basket, and so take out the fishe. Here might be obiected by some, how it might be possible that they should see and discerne 15. 16. or 17. fathome déepe whether there were any fishe in the baskets or not, let this sufflie for answere,
that the water is there so cléere, that a man may out of the ship sée the anchors very plainely as they lye in the water, and easily beholde multitudes of fishes swim∣ming, yea in the very bottome of the sea, as manifestlie as if it were but a foote déepe. V. Is a Marchants ship of Ternate, which goeth from one Island to another, laden with Rice, Sagge and spices. No. 16. THe King of Ternate going to the Temple to offer sa∣crifice, before whom goeth a young boye with a sworde on his shoulder, carrying a booke in the other hand, then followe a certaine number of the Kings men of warre, after whom commeth one bearing a Francken∣sence-pot or vessell, and is followed by the King, ouer whose head is borne a Tyresol or canopie, then come o∣thers of his souldiers or men of warre, with their En∣signe displayed, being now come before the Musquita or Temple, they wash their hands and féete (to which ende certaine water-pots full of faire water are prepared) that done, they enter into their saide Musquites, where they spreade a white cloth on the grounde, and falling on their knées, knitting their hands together, doe often lay their faces on the grounde, mumbling certaine wordes or prayers to themselues. In the saide Musquites is placed a pulpit, hanged with a white cloth: and in stéede of a clocke, there hangeth a kinde of Drumme, whereupon they smite with a greate stricke. They haue also a bell hanging in their Musquita, but without a clapper, whereon they smite at such time as any rumor or other sturre is in hand, at what time euery man, rich and poore, must come out of his house, some with Pikes, some with
Sables and shieldes, some with Muskets, and some with gunnes: but of these are not many so armed. To conclude, their order is such, that it would make a man laugh to sée them. No. 17. THe King of Ternate his galley, hauing stages on ei∣ther side made of Spanish réedes or canes, manned with slaues that rowe, sitting two and two together, and so made, that the outer parts are passed euen with the water, and that some may sit within the galley and rowe, hauing a sheaffe of arrowes lying by them. In stéede of oares they vse shouels, casting the water from them a∣long by their sides. Aloft sit certaine men knocking vp∣on Drummes and basons, and is appoynted with seuen brasse Bases, with certaine pikes standing right an end, which are much longer than any vsed in our Countries. Also, on the galley is placed a bedstead wrought all ouer and gilded, whereon was hanged the breast and backe parts of the Kings armour, with his helmet, all co∣uered with red veluet, and on the bed was spread a very fine wrought couerlet, whereon sometimes the King sit∣teth, and sometimes lieth, alwaies shaking his legge as if he had the Palsie, and hauing one by him with a fanne, fanning ouer his face. The King was a verie thicke and corpulent man, well set, hauing a great head, and all his members correspondent: he is a mightie Prince, ha∣uing vnder his obedience thréescore and ten Islands, and is meruailouslie honoured and feared of all his subjects.
No. 18. ARe fencers of the Moluckish Islands, called in their language Bakeleyers, wearing an headpeece, beauti∣fied with a Paradice bird instead of a feather. When they méete to fight or fence one with another, they stand alwaies vpon one leg, thereby being the reader to leape and spring forward or backeward. Now when the one leapeth in towards the other, the same springeth a good way backwarde, alwaies resting himselfe but vpon one foote, and thus they spring forward and backward with such agillitie and nimblenes, that it is a thing very plea∣sant to beholde, Their apparell is a Pytigen, made of Cal∣licute cloth, with bréeches of the same, or some other stuffe of silke, cut vpon very faire white, and made after the fashion of the Spanish bréech. The women of Moluccas going abroade, and hauing their heads couered from the Sunne with Callicute cloth their garments are made of Callicute, drawne out with sundrie and diuers cullours. When they fetch their water, they vse a very thicke cane, some fathome and an halfe long, wherein they put or lade the water with a dish, and so carrie it home on their shoulders. The 19. day, we set sayle from Ternade, to shorten our voyage. The 21. day, we crossed the Lyne, néere vnto an I∣sland called Macha, and is one of the Islands of Mo∣lucca. The 22. day, was our last ordenarie flesh day, remai∣ning onely but for two or thrée seethings, insomuch as all our victuals was spent, except a little oyle and drie bread which was full of wormes, and some small store of Rice
and water, and were allowed but one Mutskin of wine daylie. The 30. day, we had sight of the Isle of Oba, sayling to the Northwarde thereof, the same is a very great Island. The 6. day, we came to the west ende of Oba, to the Anno 1599. the 6. of Sep∣tember. westwarde whereof lye so many Islands, that it is hard∣ly possible to tell them, and full of sholes, which greatlie amased vs. These Islands lye some two leagues and an halfe, to the west of the Lyne. The 10. day, a chéefe waying some seuen pounde, was The price of an Hollands cheese aboord the ship. solde for 12. Gilderns 10. Styuers, which is fiue and twentie shilliugs sterling. The 11. day, we let fall our anchors vnder an Island, lying to the westwarde of Oba, where manie other Islands are, but we knew not their names, for in the Py∣lots Cardes were found but two Islands in the place where all these Islands are, this place is excellent good for anchoredge, where we had 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. and 23. fathome, faire sandie grounde, the next morning we set sayle againe. The 12. day, we let fall our anchors againe vnder the same Island, by reason that Iohn Martsson sayled from our companie, to séeke way betwéene the Islands, but the next day came againe to vs, for the Admirall discharged a péece to the ende he should returne. The 13. day, Iohn Martsson returned to vs, and then we sayled thence together, but towards noone we cast out our anchors againe, for that Iohn Martsson could not kéepe vs companie, by reason of a great tempest that then blew, but towards the euening he came to vs, and then sayled thence together, but could not goe farre, by reason of the shoels, wherefore we cast out our anchors againe, and rode at 9. 10. 12. and 15. fathome.
The 14. day, wée hoysed vp our sayles, and went thence, but at afternoone let fall our anchors againe, at what time came a boate or Praw from the land vnto vs, telling vs that the Island was called Bankore, and the o∣ther next was Sabobe, and warning vs of the great num∣ber of shoels in that place, and moreouer shewed vs that to shun them, we must sayle to the aforesaid Island Sa∣bobe, where we might prouide our selues of water and other fresh victuals. Their King as he sayd, dwelled be∣hinde Sabobe, in an Island called Mithare: these Islands lye in two degrées southward the Lyne. The 16. daye, we sayled thence towards the Islands The 16. day, we were com∣passed with Islands. from whence we came, at afternoone we let fall our an∣chors againe, and within an houre after set sayle againe, and in the euening cast out our anchors againe, then some of our Saylers went vp to the maine top Mast, from whence they discried, and tolde some thirtie Islands lying round about vs, within the compasse of fouretéene or fif∣téene leagues, but by no meanes wée could get out of them. The 17. day in the morning, we hoysed vp sayles a∣gaine with a South Southeast wind, shaping our course South Southwest, and Southwest and by South to sea∣wards, whereby (with Gods helpe and prouidence) wée got cléere of the Islands, sayling thorow a very narrow channell or gappe, leauing the necke of the land that lay out, on our star boorde side, where we found a little nar∣rowe place to get out, for on our larboorde lay thrée little Islands, where many shoels were to the southward, and as farre as we could discerne, we might sée a fyre, and at afternoone we saw another great fyre in the open Seaes some foure leagues from land, which we left on our star∣boord, hauing a very fine gale of winde. The 18. daye in the morning, wée sawe againe high
land, which stretched out a great length. The 22. day, we came néere to this aforesaid land, meaning to sayle about that way to the Eastward, but for want of winde could not: in conclusion, we agréed to shape our course along the coast Eastward, and to goe a∣bout to the Westward, and so put forth our foresailes. The 23. day, Iohn Martsson discharged a péece, being very néere aground, hauing but two fathome and a halfe water, and was faine to towe the ship with their boate from the shoels (the weather being very cléere and faire, as God would) and afterward came aboord vs, declaring that he had séene sixe boates, but not spoken with any of them, neither could he learne what Island that the same was, our Pylots supposed it to be Boere. The same night Iohn Martsson came agrounde, but wound himselfe off with a bowe anchor, but lost a planke of his ship, some fathome and an halfe long, howbeit, the ship (God be praysed) remained tight, it was an vncer∣taine or vnéeuen ground: for hauing cast his leade, and finding 40. fathome, before they could cast out the leade againe, the ship sat fast aground, but being now off, we ran East Southeast of that place. The 25. day, Iohn Martssons folke were a shore, where They goe a∣shore at Ta∣bocke. they spake with some of the people, who tolde them that the land was called Taboke, and that there was plentie of Rice, Goates, and Hennes. This is a very great Land, for by all iudgement, we had sayled some 30. leagues a∣long the coast thereof, and now at last were come where was abundance of sholes, and yet could sée no ende of the land, insomuch that we were constrained to returne the same way we came. The land lieth so bending with cor∣ners, that it cannot be well described, except it were ex∣plained corner by corner. The first day of October 1599. The first day of October was allowed a kan of Wine
to euery messe, for toye that we had reached the East ende of Tabocke, where we found many other small Islands. The same night Iohn Martsson droue a ground on the East ende of the said Island, the weather being very calme, the ship sate before aground, hauing behind twen∣tie fathome water, whereupon they cast out their bowe anchor behinde at the gallerie, and so in winding her off, she swayed to the sholeward, but wound her off againe with the Capsten, and pulling vp their anchor, they found the same to be broken, for the shanke was in two peeces, but they got them vp into their ship, by reason that the Buy rope was twisted about the Cable. The 2. 3. and 4. dayes we lay at hull, about some two degrees Southward of the Lyne, by reason of extreame winde, and tempestious weather, the Sunne being for the most part ouer our heads. The 5. day, Salomon Dirikson of Harlyng dyed, who was a quarter Master, and before had béen the Stowers mate. The 6. day, our last Rice was spent, in so much that the Cooke drest vs no more victuals, our féeding was then bread and water, with one Mutskin of Wine, and A Mutskin is the eight part of a quarte. one of Honie euery day to a messe. The 9. day, our allowance of bread was increased, so that we had some fiue pounde of bread allowed for fiue dayes, this day we made an end of our fishe. The 10. day, was a kanne of Wine allowed to euery messe, because there was nothing else to eate but drie bread. The 11. day, William Hermanson Klock of Alckmer, was appoynted quarter Master in place of Salomon Di∣rickson, so that he was both quarter Master and Cor∣porall.
The 12. day, Wouter Egbertsson of Bréewolt was appoynted Gunner. The 16. day, our allowance was appoynted to be fiue poundes and one halfe of bread for seuen dayes. The 17. day, we sawe two Ioncken or boates, but spake not with them, being then at the East ende of Bot∣ton, and hauing fiue degrées and sixe minutes: now we knew where we were, for outward bounde towardes Amboyna, we were by the same Island, and had fiue degrées. To the Easte of this Island Botton, lye thrée other Islands, from whence many corners and shoels stretch to seaward toward the South-east. In sayling towards Amboyna, the said three Islands must be left on the star∣boord, and so running forward out by Botton, there lye o∣ther two Islands to the Northward, which must be left on the larboorde, sayling forth betwéene both, this is to be well obserued, by reason of the sholes in that place stretching from those thrée Islands. The 20. day, wée passed thorowe the straight, be∣twéene Anno  the 20. of Oc∣tober Selebes and the Soles, where two Islands lye right in the middest of the gap, betwéene which we ran, they lye a good league one from the other: it seemed that there was a fire in one of them, we might sée boates passe from one Island to another. This gappe lyeth from Ban∣tam some 30. leagues, and as we returned homewards, we left many Islands on our starboorde, which lye in 5. degrées and 50. minutes. The 21. day, we had 5. degrées and 50. minutes to the Southward of Selebes, sayling thorowe the straight. This land stretcheth for the most part West and by North, and East and by South, here we made an ende of our last smoked fleshe, and euery messe had a kan of Wine.
The 22. day, we passed by the Island Selebes, which stretcheth West and by North, and East and by South: from the straight it is some 20. leagues long Westward, with lowe grounde lying before it, and thereon very hye and hillie ground, as it were doubled or indented, the South end whereof lyeth in 5. degrées and 50. minutes, and as a man passeth from the West ende forward in comming towards it, sayling some eyght or ten leagues along by it, there appeareth a round high hill like vnto a cocke of haie in the fieldes, séeming to lye farre off from the rest outward: but approaching néere thereunto, it lyeth plainelie farre within the Land, the ground before it being very lowe, and stretching at least two degrées thorow the Line on the North side, so that it is aboute some eyght degrées long South and North. The 23. day, we sayled ouer a shallow of sixe fathome déepe, wending West and by South, in fiue degrées and sixe and fiftie minutes, about some eyghtéene leagues from the Land, the winde being Southeast, at what time we had sight of a small Island from our Maine top, lying to the Northwarde of vs. The same euening we sayled ouer the shallowe, at 12. 13. 14. and 15. fathomes, which continued thrée glas∣ses, wending West, and West and by North. The 24. day at noone, we had a dish of Rice and a Kan of Wine, being the first day since the 30. of August, that we sayled without view of Land. The 25. day, halfe the night time, we sayled againe ouer the shallowes, the winde West, and West and by North, at some twentie fathomes depth, and as we ges∣sed wee were about 90. leagues from the west ende of Selebes. The 29. day, wée sawe the Land of▪ Madura, as wée guessed, where we had béen imprisoned, hauing fortie
and fiftie fathome with claye grounde. The last day we were againe allowed a dish of Rice, Anno 1599. the 29. of Oc∣tober we saw Mednra seeing euery day Land, but could not haue any certaine knowledge what Land it was. The 2 day of Nouember, we had sight of the length of the maine Land of Madura, to the Northwards wher∣of lyeth the Island Laybock, some 18. leagues distant. We ran betwéene them, hauing sight of land euery day. The 5. day we left the Island Carman Iava behinde vs, lying some 20. leagues from Laybock, most East and West a sunder, finding sometimes 30. 35. 40. 45. and 50. fathome depth, all good clay ground. The 9. day we passed by another Island, where eyght or ten trées stand in the water a little from the Island, lying some 20. leagues from Karmen Iava, most West and by North, and East and by South from each other, where we sayled about by the North. The 13. day, we came before Saketra, where we made some prouision of Rice, and were (God be thanked) deli∣uered of our former penurie and hunger: héere we heard that the Ʋizadmirall was departed from Bantam, about thrée moneths past. The 16. day, we sayled from Saketra, anchoring the same day before the fresh Ryuer, where we furnished our selues with water, the Chinans brought vnto vs Aracca and Rice in most plentifull sorte, which we bought for some fiue pence the pound. The 17. day, wee sayled thence towards Bantam, where two Dutch ships lay. The 18. day we spoke with them, they were the Long barke, and the Sunne, which had lyne eyght moneths and tenne dayes before Bantam, (and were departed from thence in the night time, not re∣freshing themselues) where they had so néerely bartered all; that in the ende (for want of money) they trucked
also the whistles from about their neckes, and yet had not effected any great matter, for both the ships had but 60. last of Pepper and Cloues together, and farther were weakened 55. men. The 19. day wée arriued before Bantam, where wée We arriued before Ban∣tam. The price of Pepper, Ma∣ces, & Cloues. were much made of: Iohn Martsson hauing taken in his first Pepper but the fifth of this moneth, and bought the same by the bagge, euery bagge waying fiftie pounde, for the which they paide foure péeces of Ryals of 8. and an halfe, but at the last foure Ryals of 8. for a bag. The Maces and Cloues are bought by the Baer, waying 500 pound, the Maces for 80. and the Cloues for 65. péeces of Ryals of 8. The 15. of Ianuarie 1600, our Admirall went a shore to the Magistrates of Bantam, bestowing on them sundrie presents and giftes, and dealt with them about farther trade, wherein they agréed very well, with thankes and due salutations on both parts, which done, he tooke his leaue after he had giuen the boate vnto the Gouerner of Bantam, wherein he came ashore, hanged with Skarlet cloth, and appoynted with two murthe∣ring péeces, but those people haue small knowledge how to vse the same. The 20. day we brought all our Marchants aboorde, hauing almost solde all their wares. The 21. daye, one of our Marchants went againe ashore, with a small parcell of Ʋeluet, and returned Veluet. with twentie bagges of Pepper, made of the sayde Ʋeluet.
The discription of Bantam. THE manners and policie vsed in Ban∣tam are very strange, for when a man dyeth, leauing behinde him any goods, whether he haue children or none, the King seazeth vpon the widow, chil∣dren, and goods, appropriating all to himselfe: making the Mother his slaue: and if a man of China desire to buye the Mother or daughter, he selleth them, and if afterwards they chance to haue children betwéene them, it happeneth to her a∣gaine as it did after her first husbands death, if the King doe vnderstand of any goods left by the deceased: such as haue any wealth, haue no other meanes to preuent this mischiefe, but onely to marrie their children while they are young, whereby they may inherite their Parents goods: wherefore they are married when they are but twelue or thirtéene yeares of age and younger, if they be of very rich Parents: and (which is more strange) some∣times such rich children haue two or thrée Wiues, accor∣ding as they abounde in wealth, and this is done to pre∣uent the King of the possessions of their goods after they are dead. In their trade and traffike, they are meruailous thée∣uish, both the people of China and lava, in so much that they let not to helpe themselues with false waights, fal∣sefying and mingling their Pepper with blacke sand and small stones, to make it weigh heauie: they are also false
of their word or promise, and giuen to man-slaughter: for if it so chaunce that two fight, and the one killeth the o∣ther, he which liueth (knowing that he must dye) will stab and kill euery one where he can or may, sparing net∣ther man, woman, nor childe, no not the children sucking the Mothers breast, so long vntill he be ouercome by force and multitude of people: then is he brought before the Gouernour, who pronounceth sentence vpon him, and after such iudgement giuen, hee is thrust into the breast with a dagger, that he falleth to the ground: but it chaunceth seldome that such an one is apprehended alsue, for commonly they are slaine before they be taken. The 21. day of Ianuarie, we set sayle from Bantam to∣wards Holland, but at afternoone we lay still by reason of the calme, yet towards the euening we hoysed vp our sayles againe. The 26. day, we were put to our allowance, to wit, euery day sixe Mutskins of Atack, at which time we were not passed the Islands of Iava. The 28. day, we were in the height of 8. degrées, the euening still and calme, the wind Westerlie. The 3. day of Februarie, we had the winde at South∣west, so that we sayled Southeast, and South Southeast with a fine gale. The 4. day of Februarie we were in the height of 10. degrées, and could not sayle higher then South and by East, and South Southeast, with a reasonable gale, the winde being Westerlie. The 12. day, our chiefe Barber (master Christopher an Easterling) dyed. The 14. day, the Sunne passed ouer our heads in the height of 13. degrées and 12. minutes. The 16. day, our Corporall Iohn Peerson, being an Englishman borne, dyed in Iohn Martssons ship.
The 26. day we were in the height of 19. degrées with a fine gale, shaping our course for the most part West Southwest with a full gale. The 27. day a flying fish flew into the Amsterdam at the hause. The 3. day of March we were in the height of 23. de∣grées 50. minutes, we sailed with a forewinde according to our hearts desire. The 16. day we were in the height of 35. degrées, hol∣ding our course West and by North. The 18. day was a Mutskin of Aracks bestowed on the most of the chiefe officers, to the number of sixtéene persons, after the second watch according to the Admi∣rals direction, the winde being then Northerly, so that we could not saile neerer than West Northwest. The 19. day the common Marriners made request to haue one Mutskin of Arack in the night, as the officers had, which was denied, except they would content them∣selues with one lesse of their allowance in the day, and drinke the same in the night, so that the officers had soure Mutskins, and the rest thrée at euery meale, the winde as before. The 22. day in the night, we had the winde againe at Southest with a fine gale, setting out course Northwest and West Northwest. The 23. day Iohn Iacob sonne of Medenblick dyed in the Amsterdam. The 26. day wee had the winde contrarie at West Northwest, which blew very hard. The 29. day in the night the winde came faire againe from the North, and then wée kept our course West and by North, and West Northwest: all these dayes the winde was so variable, as it might possible be in our owne countrie, and (as the Pilots sayd) wee were two
hundred leagues Estwards of Capo de Bonna Esperance. The first day of Aprill wee turned by the winde, ha∣uing a storme from the West. The second day (being Easter day) we were allowed to our Easter egges a dish of small beanes, with a dish of dried fish, and a kan of Sacke, in liew of Arack. The third day Iohn Ianson of Ossenbrugh Cooper in the ship of Iohn Martssen dyed. The 6. day of the sayd moneth, the winde was againe faire at Northest: but it lasted not long, for here the windes are marueilous variable, with very many du∣rable stormes. The 13. day wee had sight of land about some 70. leagues Estward of the Cape, in the height of 34. degrées and an halfe, and found ground at 80. fathomes, or there∣abouts, being yet as wee gessed fiue leagues from the land, we turned again by the winde, being West South∣west with a storme. The 17. day wee had the winde faire againe at Est Southest, the Pilots held a parley, and iudged the Capo de bonna Esperance to be from vs 68. leagues Northwest and by West. The 19. day the winde was contrarie from the West. The 22. day wée were in the height of 37. degrees and 40. minutes, wee wended to passe the Cape, and then for the most part wee sailed North Northwest, and North∣west and by North. The 24. day wee saw land againe: wherefore wee put someward, yet we could not saile higher than South and by West. The 25. day wee had againe faire weather, the winde first South; afterwards Southest, and so Esterly. The 27. day, we were in the height of 34. degrees and 40. minutes Westward of the Cape, and (as the Pilots sayd) 16. leagues from the land, the winde as before.
The first day of May wee had a fine gale from the South, and were in 32. degrées. The 9. day of the sayd moneth we were in the height of 22. degrées fiue minutes, we saw euery day Trombus or Reedes driuing, which (as men report) driue néere a∣bout the Cape, the winde Northwest. The sixtéenth day about noone wee had sight of the Island of S. Helena, wherewith wee were all greatly comforted. The 17. day in the morning we had sight of a Carrack néere vnto the land, being the Admirall of the Portugals Fléete, sayling into the roade of S. Helena, where lay at anchor thrée other Carracks, whereby wee were forced to put into the old Roade, which is the first valley that you come vnto after you are passed the Northwest cor∣ner, or necke of the land, and the Roade where the Car∣racks lay is the third valley beyond the sayd necke of the land, so that we lay within Sakar or Minion shot of each other: wee sent vnto them foure men to parley with them, but I cannot write what communication passed. The same euening came another Carrack making to∣wards the Roade, sailing about the Northwest necke hard vnder the shore, insomuch that she came so néere vn∣to vs, that they haled vs, and demaunded of whence wee were: and vnderstanding that we were Hollanders, see∣king to refresh our selues in that place, (refusing the land) they cast about, and directed their course North∣west to seaward. The 18. day foure of our men went vp into the land at S. Helena, it is a very high hillie land, beautified and in∣riched with very faire and pleasant valleys, with great aboundance of Goates, and some store of Swine: wee meant to prouide our selues there of fresh water, but the Portugales would not suffer vs, so that we were with∣out
hope to make any prouision of water at this place: for they had ordained a strong watch on the shore, which was the onely cause that wee could not here refresh our selues. The 21. being A scention day, wee sailed thence (with God his helpe) homewards, and being vnder saile, wée descried another Carrack making towards the Roade, which was the sixt Carrack that we had now seene, wée directed our course Northwest and by West. Furthermore, touching the Island of S. Helena, the same is a very fruitful and an healthsome land, with such incredible multitude of fish in the Roade, that it may seeme a thing hardly to be beléued, the most part Mac∣kerell, and some other small fishes, as Breames, and o∣ther sorts which haue great eyes like vnto Haddocks, but their bodies more flat. The 25. of the same moneth wee were in thirtéene de∣grées, with a Northest winde, but it lasted not long be∣fore it turned againe to the Southest, and so it continued for the most part after we were past the Cape. The 30. day in the morning we had sight of the Island called Ascention, which lieth eight degrées Southward the Line, and the same euening we cast our anchors neére to the shore thereof. The same night we set men ashore to take view of the place, and the next morning wee sent more of our people to search and view all places, but found no fresh water, no not so much as one draft. This Island is full of stonie rocks & holes, like vnto the sinders of Sea-coales which are thorowly burnt: wee saw some Swine also in this Island, not without great marueile how they could there liue, for there is neither trée, leafe, nor grasse, and that much more is, a man is not able to describe the bad∣nes and barrennes of the ground: but a man may there
with endgets hill plentie of Seamewes, although some store of people remained there for a time. Also we tooke there some Tortesses, whereof we brought foure aboord our ships, which were so great, that some of them were esteemed to weigh foure hundred pound. There was al∣so some reasonable store of fish to be taken. The last day of May in the euening wee wayed our anchors, hoysed our sailes, and departed from the Island Ascention, with God his helpe, sailing homewards with a fine gale from the Southest, shaping our course North∣west and by West. In the end, after great paynes, trauaile, and sicknes, which we specially suffered for want of fresh water, these two ships arriued in the Texell, and afterwards being discharged of our lading, we came with great comfort to Amsterdam, to the incredible ioye of the owners and Marchants (as may well be thought) seeing now all the eight ships were with great profit safely returned to to their wished home, which had béen sent out the first day of March 1598. in companie to the Islands of the East Indes. The Almightie God be blessed and praised therefore, who with his mightie hand gouerned and brought vs home tho∣row the fearful waues, and ra∣ging gulfes of the Sea.
Some words of the Malish speech, which language is vsed throughout the East Indies, as French is in our Countrie, wherewith a man may trauell ouer all the Land. The Portugals speech is apt and pro∣fitable in these Islands, for there are many Inter∣preters which speake Portugall. ALtogether Samoanga Aske it Minta Ashamed Malon Any thing Bacabaren Alas. Saya BKing it againe Combaly a Bull Carboo a Brother Addollaley a Beard Tganga a Boane Backy Better Parma Blood Darna to let Blood Bewangdarner Bookes Kytab to Buye Bilby Baked or burnt stones Batta Blacke Ita Bagges Corni a Boye Catsion to Burne Baccar a Bat that flyeth Lavo a Bird Borron Beastinesse Cheehoo a Billet Cayo a Boate Prau the Bellie Penot Beholde Doduer a Borer Alforees.
COme hither Maree to cut off Pang a Crab Horra Charge the péece Sombo bedyl Cloues Syncke a Cyuet Cat Gatto d'algalia Calamus Dirimguo Copper Tambagle Custome or vse Esteedat Chuse Damare a Cap Nasse a Childe Buda a Curtesan or wooer Cemoeda a Cast péece Bedyl the Cough Capello. DEath Mattu two Dayes past Balmarys d'aula Ducks Bebe a Dogge Hanghee I Desire it not Tyeda mau to Demaunde Betaugia to Dye Bantaren Dishes Pyennig the Day. Arys. EGges Teloor to Eate Makan Eyes Martye Eares Talynga Eye browes Alys Early. Pagy FOlly Bengo Found Botonuum Faire Apon Feare Tacat Fish Ican Farther off Bapa Friendship Pondarra
Forehead Batock Fingers Iaryiary Forget Lampa to Fight Baccalayo Flesh Lalyer to Forgiue Ampo a Foote Goumo my Father Beta babpa a Frend Maety pooty Fyer. Apy. GƲnpowder Ooby a Goate Camby God be with you Tyngal Guts Perot Go Pegy Go we Mary Giuen Berny Gréene Ise Great Basaer Glasse Lora Good Bayck not Good Tyeda bayck Gold Mas Good morow Tabea Goe a way Tachghy to Gaine Menang Galingal Lancuas Ginger Alia Gréene herbs. Dyngin. HEe Itowen the Hye priest Cadda How much Batapa Héere Chyny How doe you Bygimana the Hart Aly to Help Toulong Hayre of the head Ramboret
the Hand Tanga the Head Kokodang Heauie Brat How sell you that Barappeitu a Henne Ayam an House Roema I haue it not Tyetada I Haue it Ada a Hog or swine Saby Hard waxe. Caiu Lacca. I Thanke you Teymacache I am sicke Byte secata I Manyte Inke Mangsy Is there Beeff an Interpretor Iorbissa It is much Soeda Is out Pacasuyra. KEepe good watch. Tage a Knife. Pieson to Kill. Benue Kéepe silence. Dyem Know. Kiunal a King. Rutgee. LEaue Sone Leade Tyma a Lampe Palyta Light Arynga to Liue Lagaua Lye downe Baryng Leaue off Ganga Let it alone Iangemast Lyme Capyer a Lord Queay a Looking glasse Sarmi a Lawnce or pike Tomba Lips Lambbyder
to Leaue fréely Lepas to léese Ilan Little. Selykit. MErcifull Caruguanler a Marchant Fetor to Make Bretoun to Morrow Ysouck a Man Orang Money Sarfy to Marry Barwin a Master or Lord Queay the Maner of the Countrie Negry Mustard séed Saiani Many or much. Banghe. NO Tieda the Night Malam Newes Yrotdon Néere Gyla a Naiel or spike Koko a Néedle Naroen Nutmegs Palla Nuttes Calappey the Necke. Goulon. Oyle Nuagia Ours Quitabota Olde Tua an Olephant Catgha an Ore Saby Out of that Padyni Out of the way. Lalau. POore Backeyen a Pearcer or borer Alforces to Pay Chyny Put vp Passai Pens Calamp Paper Cartas Pepper Lada
Pearle-mother Neffa Pinnes Caluenetten long Pompions Iacca a Pillow. Bantel. RIce Bras to Reache Dusta to Rise vp Bangs Rye Balacca a Ring Chynsyn a Rope. Taly. SMall Citghel Synamon Caiumains Sad Chynta Skarlet Faccalata miera to Sweare Sempa Sweete Manys the Sabbath day Ionmahet Salute Baesart Sister Addeparapas the Shoulders Baon Salte Matary Siluer Peca Sicke Sabyt I am sicke Byte secata Should Tehylacca Stéele Negle a Sword Padang Shéeres Goethieng a Shield Salwacke Strike Pockul a Smith Goeda Small Kytchyl Spicerie Oberbedyl Strong Cras a Ship Capal Siluer Salacha
a Stone Batu Salte Garram to Sell Iou wal a Swéetcheart Nay moeda a Swine or hog Saby. TAke away Ambel There Sana to Thinke Engat They Dya I Thanke you Tarrima casse Téeth Anton Tongue Ilat Tarrie a little Nanthy Tamaryndis. Aassa. VIneger Tsuyka an Ʋncle Mana to vnderstand Taven Ʋse, or custome Esteedat I vnderstand it not. Tyeda tau WIthout Blou waer to Worke Kareya to Warre Backelay a Woman Paranpoan a Wooer Cemoeda Where Dymana to Win Menang Warme Penas Woe, or alas Saya Wée Dep a Water-pot Lande Where is it Manaoden Water Eyer Well Sousa What say you Abbacatta Wood of Aloes. Garro. YEasterday Balmary You Pakanera
the Yéere Tauwn Young Monda Yce Dalan. Some Iauanish words. PEpper Syhang Mace Massa Nutmegs Palla Cloues Syancke Water Eyer Water Baya Siluer Salorcka Péeces of 8. Serpy Casses, or Cassia Petys Fish Ivack A Dagger. Cryssen A Ship Capella There is too little. Courang A great péece of Ordnance Bedyl besar A Gun or Péece Bytsyl To eate Mackan Paper Cartaes Wine Arac A Hogge Sieleng An Oxe Alomba Christians Vrangy Strangers. Oranleyo. Counting in the Molucas tongue. One Satu Two Dua Thrée Tyga Foure Enpat Fiue Lyma Sixe Nam
Seuen Toufiou Eyght Delappan Nine Sambalan Ten Sapolo Eleuen Sabalas Twelue Duo balas Thirtéene Tyga balas Fouretéene Enpat balas Fiftéene Lyma balas Sixtéene Nane balas Seuentéene Toufiou balas Eyghtéene Delappan balas Ninetéene Sambalan balas Twentie Dua pola One and twentie Dua pola satu Two and twentie Dua pola dua Thrée and twentie Dua pola tyga Foure and twentie Dua pola en pat Fiue and twentie. Dua pola lyma. FINIS.
