18777 99845821 10745
THE VALIANT ACTES And victorious Bat∣TAILES OF THE ENG∣lish nation: from the yeere of our Lord, one thou∣sand three hundred twentie and seuen: being the first yeare of the raigne of the most mightie Prince EDVVARD the third, to the yeere 1558. ALSO, OF THE PEACEABLE AND quiet state of ENGLAND, vnder the blessed go∣uernement of the most excellent and vertuous Prin∣cesse Elizabeth: A compendious declaration written by C. O. And newly tran∣slated out of Latine verse into English meeter. By I. S. Nob so la statque vinica virtus. AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Walde-graue
¶The names of the kinges of Eng∣land in whose dayes these warres and great aduentures haue bene made. Edward. 3 Richard. 2 Henry. 4 Henry. 5 Henry. 6 Edward. 4 Richard. 3 Henry. 7 Henry. 8 Edward. 6 Phillip, and Mary.
¶TO THE RIGHT WOR∣shipfull Sir William Mohun Knight, longlyfe, and heauenly felicitie. IF Maroes Muse, if Homers sacred vaine, (VVhich auncient Poets, intombed lye in molde:) Virgil  neth the  deeds of Ae s. er bla seth the ac of Achilles  sonn to Th tia. Parnassus Nimphes had bett into my braine: If that their skill, my slender quill did hold: Then (worthy sir) your prayses manifold, VVith Troian Dukes should lifted be to skie, Or Thetis Impes, whose fame shall neuer die. But bitter Fate, and cruell destinies doome, Such cunning rare, denide haue to bestowe, On me poore lad, to Homers lofty roome I may not clime, but cowching lye full lowe, Cher VVith Cherilus, and Virgills vaine forgoe. They of their store, did spred and blase their skill, I of my want do testifie my will. VVherefore in worth accept my willing hart, VVhich what I could, not what I would, haue brought, Of Artaxerxes play the princely part,   y ki Of fountayne flouds, who drunke a harty drought, VVhich to his mouth with handes Synaetes rought. Syntes  poore  Phillipp  oble  of Let Macedonian Phyllips courteous minde, (Right worshipfull) within your brest be shrinde. The Persian king in bosome shrouded close, A silie bird, which shund the hawke by flight, And did her selfe for safetie there repose, Till that her foe were soared out of sight. So these my toyles accept with countenaunce bright, VVhich I present here humbly to your hand, Your like, or loth, may cause them fall, or stand. Here Martiall feates by valiant Brutes atchiu'de, Here hard exploites, here battailes fiercely fought,
then the valew of the gift. Howbeiti the toyle and labour in trnaslatyng was myne, t ectation and pleasure in reading shall be yours, if any be, which I would it were as much as I could wishe, to your contentation, and good like: and to my great cōfort, and hartes desire: Both incouragements to incense me hereafter, to attēpt some other thing which shall be peraduenture more pleasant, I will not say more profitable vnto you for besides the notable gestes and high exploites, of our Britaine kings, and other particular personages deciphered in this small volume, here also are liuely expressed, & blased forth, the haut stomackes, & famous actes, of our English natiō in generall, their cōquests in Fraunce, their victorious bales in Scotland, their memorable aduētures in Spaine, their valure in Iustes & combates at home, their order of bat∣taile, their kinde of munition, & Artillery, whereby they haue atchieued so many cō∣quests, and haue bene most redoubted, and terrible to their enemies: I meane Arche∣ry, which laudable, and martiall exercise, how greatly it is now in these our dayes, falne into decay, we shall I feare me, if constrained to indure those bruntes, and attēpt those aduentures, and perills which our forefathers haue done, to soone for our selues, though it to late repent. I haue not presented it here, as a thing exquisitely done, but as a worke rudely ouerranne, rather then curiously absolued and perfited. If any one hereafter to the better explication of the Poets meaning, to the liuelier bewtifiyng of his Countries exploytes, and famous attempts, and to the greater delight, and vtili∣tie of the reader, shall in a more loftie vaine, and heroicall stile polishe and publish this Authour a new, who I confesse deserueth a trāslatour farre better then I am, then let these my toyses be brent and cōsumed to ashes, deuoide of farther name & memory. In the meane space if you vouchsafe to turne them ouer, for your solace at vacant times I hope you shall reape some vtility be the matter, though not by the meeter, in which, though you here, and there finde a scape, I beseech you passe it ouer with patience, and perswade your selues, that if God send me lyfe and health, vpō information thereof, it shall be in the next Aeditiō reformed. As for you my Maisters, and Teachers which read this Author in skoles, you must not be offended, though euery verse aūswere not your expectation, according vnto the Latin, for as the worshipfull Tho. Phaer in his Preface to his Aeneads affirmeth, beside the differēce of a construction, & a trāsla∣tiō, there are many things which seeme delectable, and pleasaunt, in the Latine tong, which cōuerted into English, would either be so intricate that none could vnderstād them, or so vnpleasaunt that none would vouchsase the reading of them. Wherfore I haue Imitated the counsaile of Horace, in his booke intituled De Arte Poetica, where he commendes and allowes him as a good interpretour, amongst other pointes Qui quae non sperat nitescere posse, relinquit. and haue somewhat in some places omitted, though i but little, and somewhat alte∣red, though not much, altogether for the ease of the reader and the better vnderstan∣ding of the whole worke. The Authors meaning as neare as I could I haue kept per∣fect and inuiolate. And so fare ye well most frendly Gentlemen. Yours to vse. IOHN SHARROCK.
¶ William Bluett: studient in the Vniuersitie Colledge in Oxenford in praise of the work and Author. CEASE, cease hence forth you worthy Englishe wightes, at straungers deedes, to take such admiration: Since far they come behinde the noble Knights, VVhich fostred haue bin, in our Englishe nation. Cease cease henceforth, to wonder at the actes Of martiall Caesar, and renowmed Pomp, Cease, cease to talke of Alexanders factes Of Scipio, Hanniball, or the warlike Fabie. Cease, cease a while, to turne the books of Liuius Plutarch, Tacitus, Appian and Curtius. Of Homers tales, or Virgill very fables, Of Thucidid or Herodotus bables. Behold a wight from Parnasse lately prest, Hath Phoebus sent whose penne, of auncient name Our noble Henries, Edwardes, and the rest, Enrolled hah in bookeof lasting same. VVhere you may see the virtues manifolde: Of this your countrie done in former yeeres: Patternes to followe, where keyou may behold, If you will imitate such noble Peeres. Nowe, if his voice, you do not vnderstand, Or liffer had in speache of this our land This Autor read: harke what the Muses haue Of that decreed and done which you do aue. They praied Syr Phoebe in humble wise of late, From out his sacred mount, to send some on, That might this worke into our tongue translate: VVho looking round about, his Helicon Sharrocke espied amongest his learned bnd: VVho straight (as apt and able both) hee bindes, This worthy worke to take forth within hand, Thereby to profitte you his countrie driends: VVho yeelding straight: God Phoebus hest and will Hath this performd with speed, and skilfull quill. Cease Zoilus to carpe: the Muses him commend Be silent Momus; Phoebus did him send. Hortatorium eiusdem W. Bluetti ad authorem. vt ad altiora contendat. Perge age: quid dub as? Parnassi scande cacumen: Dexter Appollo tibi, dextera Musa tibi.
❧ TO THE MOST EXCEL∣lent and most mighty Princesse Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England Fraunce and Ireland QVEENE, Defendresse of the Fayth, &c. REnowmed Nimph, of Britaine land, the guidance great, & staie, Which dost most glorious shine in peace, & true religious waie Which glittering in thy liues deserts, & manners radiant light, Exceld'st Zenobia, or if one excelled her, by right, In rule which Iuno, Uenus faire in forme, Minerue in art Expressest, and more virtue shrinst, then female sexe in hart: Come fauorable, happie slide, to these attempts of myne, Thy gratious looke (O goddesse) shall, as power of godhead shine. The worke is hard, I may not prop so huge, and vast a molde, Lesse with thy friendly aspect, thou (mee goddesse) do behold Looke friendlye, (goddesse bright) and see, what hard exploites of yore. Thy great forefathers haue atchieu'd, three hundred yeares and more. Whose royall chaier, and Diademe, since thou (O nimphe) sustaines, Their glory wonnne in bruntes of Mars, vnto thy laude remaines, Nor tis vnmeete fearce battailes, to a virgin to expresse, Then pleasaunt peace, the brunts of wars did Pallas please no lesse. Therfo this work (most worthy Queen) with gratious coūtenāce take, Thy iudgement settes mee bolt vpright, or fondred flat doth make, Though all men mee abiect, and spurne, I nought them all regarde, It is inough, if from my Muse thy liking bee not bard, God graunt that longe in natiue peace, thou maist enioy the crowne, And eke excell thine auncestours, in glory, and renowme. Your Maiesties most humble and dutifull subiect, C. O.
❧ The notable Battailes and high exployts of the English nation. HOw valiauntly the warlike race of mightie Brute did beare, Thēselues in blouddy campes of Mars, how they the trēbling speare. Mars God of battaile. With courage shooke, and troupes of foes by force in fight did foyle, Full fiften hundred yeares agoe, when Caesar first this soyle. With Romish army did assault: his Story teacheth playne, Iul us Caesar. Caesars Com∣mentas. Which yet doth many a noble act, of this our land containe. And if that treason his attemptes, had not propt, and vp bore, In vayne had Iulius set his foote vpon our English shore. In vayne Gradiuus ofspring had their banners brood displayde, Gradiuus one of the names of Mars from whom Romu∣lus first kyng of the Ro∣maines dis∣ded. Britaines paid tribute and did homage to the Empe∣rours of Rome. Ciuil diffen∣tion, present destruction of a cntry or cōmon weale Erinnis a fury breeding dis∣sention. Nor homadge to the Romish king, nor tribute had bene payde. But what is of that force what Realme is of that might and power, UUhich ciuill hatred cannot cause the enemy to deuower? The common people what doe they not breake, and bring to nought, UUhen once dissentions headlong heat, their retchlesse braines hath rought? UUat doth not discord quite consume, diminish, and decay, UUhat foule Erinnis, fearefull fende, doth rule and beare the sway? A pearelesse Prince was Caesar sure, a warlike, haut, and bold, UUhose worthy actes in memorie, deserue to be enrold: So many kingdomes brought by force, the Romane yoke to hold. But what? could he without the power diuine, and sacred hest, Of high Iehoue, such nations fierce, by force haue ouerprest? The Germaines he by dince of sword subdued in Martiall field, A nation which inprowesse will not to the Latine yeld. Both stout in armes, and haut of hart▪ the warlike Galls he tamde, I atines of La∣tini people in Itali. UUhose vertue rare, to shine in peace, and wars, hath still bene framde. UUhy then alone to Romaines, did the glory of war redounde? UUhy then the world so vast, to bend at Caesars be was bounde, Galles of th the people Galls in Frau. Eche countryes force, by blouddy Mars made subi is might: Or quayled quite, before his power, and army came  sight? Undoubtedly that Iesus Christ, our sweete Messias be:
All nations should be linkt in league, which hatred earst had torne. All thinges must haue their course, and their disposed order sure: Which also limittes haue, beyond which time, they cannot ure. The first that euer Monarch hight, that proude, and pompoue towne, Which walles of bricke, full huge, yconipast, to her great renowne, Semyramis wife to kyng Ninus of Per∣tia gouerned the first Mo∣narchie. Nylus a great riuer in Ae∣gipt by whose inundation with the heat of the sunne is the country adiacōt made frutefull. Alexander Magnus king of Macedonia the second Monarch. The Romains vnder Romu∣lus had the third Monar∣chy but ra∣ther vnder Iulius Caesar. Did Babilon containe, and Aegipt, through thy fluent streames, O Nyle, when Sol from hye, thereto doth bend his blesing beames: Replenisht full of corne, and wine, and oyle, and cattell store, Did foster vp, to other landes, warres scarse were knowne before. A few yeares after that, the Greekes the pse of warfare wanne, Who other nations farre, and neare; sung ouerranne: The Italians than the pompe of Greece prest with might, and mayner Which shortly after by the Gothes, were forst to yeld agayne. As wallowing waues successiuely, the one the other driues: So he which was depriuer now, an other Prince depriues. It's God almighty, which all mortall thing th becke doth guide, UUhich seas, and landes doth rule, and eke the Starrie region wide. He, he, is God of armes, whose thunder dint, resounding shakes, He is the God of armyes to, which giues at will, and takes. UUhich trembling terrour bringes, and manly courage ads agayne, UUhich victors makes, and conquered foes, by swourd yeldes to be slayne. For he behold his enemies force, quite craches with puissaunt might, UUhich Gods hye sacred will esteemes, most worthy of by right. The Thratian nation fierce, through deedes of armes renowmed are The prayse of all the natiōs in Europa. The Scithian and those cotryes whiche lye neare the North Pole at the people Getae and Sauromatae and others. And they which Northerne nipping cold doth pinche, a people rare, For Martiall feates, in wit, and manly force who doe excell, And other pointes of Chiualrye, in fight too prompt, and fell. Usde oft to blouddy Mars, the Germaynes, corps which hugie haue, The Polon, and Dalmatian, the Hunne, and doughtie Swaue, The Flemming, Frenchman fierce, the Spanyard, and the Brytaine haut, The Scot also through manly hart, prompt for to giue assaut: The noble feates of Mars, in warfare vse, with might, and mayne, And neither of the Sommers heat, nor winters cold complayne: But by their acces, their auncestours, through myndes vnconquered stayne. Thou warres O mighty kyng doest send, as scourge, and dart most dire, Sinnes iust reward, when nations proude, prouoke thee vnto ire. And for their foule, and filthy factes, some dreadfull penaunce pay. UUhen others by Ioues mighty hest, doe beare the palme away. Therfore the prayse of eche exployte, and glory great of warre, Referd must be to God aboue, whose becke doth make, and marre.
Let him to me intending now, of blouddy warres to sing, The Author uocation. Beginnyng bee, and author firme, this worke to end to bring. Let him with his omnipotent, and heauenly power diuine, Bdrd the third began to gne Au. 1520. in the xv yeare of his age. Support, and fauour this attempt, and enterprise, of myne. From William sprōg, hight Conquerour, that stout, & Princely Peere, King Edward, third of that name, gan the Britayne crowne to weare: When scarse the number small, of thrise fiue yeares, he had full filde, A counsellour sage, at home, which seedes of Iustice dayly tilde, Edward a godly Prince. VVherof this was one Longbeardes ha eile, paus ted houdes else. Gay coates gcelesse, ma nes England thstleus. The Scottes entring into ngland as faire as Stan∣hop parke were compast rosd by kyng Edward who thought to subdue there but by ea∣son of se of his host they   the king by n self of Sir Ed∣ward Morti∣mer, who the bare great sway in Eng∣land deliue∣red vp those Charters and Patentes. But more scil∣lict to spite the kyng of England. Edward Ba∣liol kyng of Scotts duen out of his co trie comes in∣to England. The Oration of Baliol to kyng Edward. And statutes made, and lawes consirmde, the common state to ease, But chiefly he imployde his care, the Lord of Lordes to please. Foure times the glittering Sunne, ech signe in heauen wandred had, The fift the when through Cancers armes, he stealing gan to gad: A chosen true of Martiall knightes, king Edward hauing got, Cntented battaile for to wage, agaynst the busie Scot. The greatest part of all his Realme, with wordes do more increase, His Princely ire, for that the Scottes, had brake their league, and peace. Hereto a Caunte full of reproth, against this noble land, UUith an old grudge was ioynde, since they on Stanhop were in band. Moreouer at Northampton, vy the kinges chief Casketts torne, UUherein they left their bandes of league, the seales tane of beforne. These causes iust incenst the valiaunt English hartes to fight, And cleane expelde all faintyng seare, which might their myndes afright. But yet by speaches fayre, repent if that perchaunce they would: And eke amend their traitrous myndes, if that which Iustice should, Atrribute due vnto the Crowne of England, they would pay, To winne the Scottes, the courteous Prince, first frendly did assay. But they no white at all relent, but more, intende to bring, Some meanes, whereby to worke the death, of Baliol their king. UUhich spying out their treasons false, all perilles to refrayne, Attaines the English coast by stealth, and so auoydes their trayne. And setts abroch vnto the king, what fraude they did pretend, Ungratefull Scottes, their soueraigne leyge, to bring to fatall end. And then requestes in himib sort, his grace his case to ayde, For thus (permitted for to speake) in dolefull sort he sayd. He which made heauen, and earth, and men, and beastes of brutish hinde: In guidyng thinges most prouident, assuredly did mynde, That kinges, of kinges should neede the helpe, & should their succour craue, And he which had receaued, most commoditie, should haue. A gratefull hart, to beare for aye, the giuers actes in mye. And sure I thinke it Gods behes, that some are here assignde,
Under some lucklesse Planet borne, in some vnhappy houre, UUhich in this world, most griping grief, and sorrow shall deuoure. And to what end: for that the Lord, most perfit, good, and kinde, In ample sort, to good men giues good giftes, with willing minde. And will his like haue for to ayde, men plunged in distresse, But what auayles by circumstance, my minde for to expresse? Wherfore in brief, vnto the cause it selfe, ile me addresse, Of late a kingdome I possest, my fathers onely heire. And did that stifueckt people well, with rayne restricted beare, I liu'de deuoyde of feare, in pleasaunt peace, and de my lande, UUhen sodainely a tumulte made, of rebels false  de: Me vnwares besiegeth round, suspecting nought at all, And hauing chosen captaines fit, besets my pllace wall. UUhat should I doe, vnhappy wight, such daungers prest at hand: And at that pinch, when not a frend was by my side to stand: Helpe from the Gods, with voyce submisse, and lowly minde I crau'de, God heard my plaint, and in my hart, this was forthwith ingrau'de: od present at faythfull prayers. To flie the watch, by scaping through a window in the night. From whence, I here am come (O king) vnto thy land by flight. And vnder this, that nation vile, their vile offence haue closde, That I, not in their Peers, nor in their people, trust reposde: But to to much, your grace esteemde, and Britaines lou'de to neare, My natiue country now I want, my wife, and children deare. oore, and needy wretch, here wander in a forraine land, thing but hope remaines, a sorie comfort still at hand: Unto distressed wightes, which neuer sure their mindes forsakes, Till gasping breath begonne: my broken hart which somewhat makes: For to reuiue, and will in time, more frendly Fortune bring. Some pitie take, I pray, vpon my trauailes past O king. But if you will vouchsafe to take, the tuele of my state: While I am here tormented with the scourge, of bitter fate: And me into your fauour high, by good lucke, shall receaue, You Baial shall his state ychangde, of thousand thrals bereaue: And eke your Fame throughout the world, shall blased be therfore. This is the summe of my request. then this, I aske no more. He hauing ended his discourse, forthwith to make reply, King Edward him address, of Britaine land the glory hye. All thinges within this wauering world, to fickle chaunce, are thrall, The aunswere of kyng Eid. ward. The turrettes  huge in hight, sustaine the greater fall. He that is nothing mou'de at all, with beggars state most base,
Nor yet is daunted, with the lookes, of frowning Fortunes face. But with a minde vnmoued beares, all losse no whit apalde, He ought by right, a prudent man, and stout in deede, be calde. A vertue patience is, which other witnes doth surmount, Therfore this aduerse lucke despise, and therof make no count. For God himselfe, hath limittes put, vnto thy cares no dout, Which at his pleasure, he will end, when times are turnde about. Expect a while, till ripe corne eares, Autumnus heat shall bring, And greene grasse, by the blasing beames, of Phoebe aloft shall spring.  one sillable take for the Su two sillables for the Mo. That for the barbed courser braue, the earth may prouend yeld. Meane time, against this nation false, to fight, fit for the field, I armour strong will get, and souldiours stout, through all my land, I will collect, and what thinges els, for warres in steede may stand. The fautors shall be quite destroyed, which that vile caue sustaine, And ouer that vnbrideled nation fierce, ile make thee raigne. If God shall graunt, and set will in thy fathers seat againe: Thus said the English puissant Prince, the Court with murmour cract, On euery side, resounding shrill, a foule, and filthy fact: Ech one cries, for cankred nation proud, their lawfull king, Of royall-scepter to bereaue, and worke his bale to bring. Few dayes expired weare, and stealing time not farre had start, When doughtie knightes, and souldiours braue, the king from euery part, Selected had, and Captaines stout had chosen stoare at hand, Preparation for warre a∣gaynst Scot∣land. The troupes of horsemen set in ray, and many a mightie band. Of footemen (floct in heapes before) being all disposed: (the masse, Of coyned gold, for so great wars, and siluer, taken was, Gold and l∣uer borne on carres to pay the souldi∣ours. Out of the chestes, wherein all goodes confiscate hourded are, And to be borne, on carres was layd, no dout most gratfull ware) Forthwith the warlike Princes both, the Britaine first in sight, And after him the Scot, before the towne that Barwicke hight, UUith walles aloofe erected, strong yfenct, their tentes they place, UUhich bordreth neare the  fieldes, where Twede doth run his race. Twede a mighty riuer runnyng by Barwicke. A fortresse Barwicke is, with ample walles succincted round, Cut out from craggie rocke, and bulwarkt vp with baulkie bund. That from the dreadfull dint of sword, it can hit souldiours shield, Barwicke b∣sieged. Descriptiō of Barwicke. Flora the Goddesse of flowers and greene . And will not to the bouncing blowes, of warlike ingine yeld. Fast vnto which conioynde of hollowed rockes, , lyes A turret, mounted vp aloft, vnto the Starrie . And farre, and wide, beholdes the champion fieldes of Flora bright, UUith sundry sortes of armour full, and valiant knightes yfright.
And many a fort, fit for defence, the walles on ech side garde, That dreadfull force, of forraine foes, from Barwicke quite is barde. Twede saues that side, which Southwinde shrill, with moistie winges doth And on that part, the salt sea flouds, with bellowing, bouncing beate: (weat, Which Titan from Aurora fled, with fierie face beholdes, tan the unne. The Northside hath a castell fayre, which it gainst foes imboldes. With natiue people, which the wooddy mountaines ioynt thereby, Inhabite, and the Scottish realme, which wholy there doth lye. Yet all these fenced fortresses, could safetie not afourde, Nor Princes tower the dwellers shroude, from dinte of direfull swourd, For after that the English campe, the fayre broad fieldes throughout, Was spred, and compast had the walles, with hollow trench about: With hugy heapes of molde vp cast, the Scottes all trembling closde, The assaul∣ting of Bar∣wicke. Their iron gates, and walles, with spanges, and boltes of steele composde: The common sort doe fortifie, and propp with hugy es. On th'other side, with heue, and sheue, all thrunging thicke, on flockes, The English army, gay in glittering coates, indeuour fast, Some fierie flashing brandes amayne, to toppes of garrets cast, Some tende the double, leaffed doores, with barres of steele to teare, But Vulcans frying flames to quench, the Scottes doe water are, Vulcanus God ers Iubs smith Ech fountaine fre drawne dry, in euery street, the towne throughout. And more of fiery force, the present perill, lesse to dout: The entrie of ech gate, with heapes of rubble thicke they throng, The Britaines gaue so hot assault that the Scottes drew all   walles and pies drye to quench the fired places of their towne. All passage barring quite, and water scalding hott, among The Britaynes, he wing out a way with blouddy blade, they fling. Nor vnreuenged thus scapes the Scot, for some the whurling sting, Some others downe the pearcing shaft, to galy shadowes ding. Not light of day, the towne besiegde, not darke, and duskie night, Could rest permit, their irefull myndes so glowing hot to sight, Desire of deepe reuenge, had made, and kindled more, and more. In a cle darkesome night, they fayne the walles to scale therfore: The dubbling dromme resoundes, and ladders, ladders, ech one calde, UUhich makes the Scotts to shreike, so trēbling feare their mindes appalde, Now there be seckes an entraunce through the wall, an other here: In coates of lyncloth clad, through darksome shades, milke-white appeare, The valiant race of Brute▪ no sombring seepe, their eyes to touch, The towne besiegde permits, hope on both partes, and feare is such. Meane time in ege full thirtie dayes, expired were, and past, UUhen cruell dearth, and famine fell, doth pinch the Scottes at last, The Scottes like to sa▪  h. Closde fast within their walles, and needefull foode ech where doth want,
A little bread, was sold for gold, it was so rare, and scant. Their fish was spent, they had no flesh, nor other victualls, A little eger wine was left. Forthwith together calls, His mattes, the Chieftaine of the tower, and thus he speakes in brief. UUhich of you all is ignorant, that here we want relief? UUe can by no meanes flie from hence, nor from our charges swarue, And tis a dreadfull kinde of death, through hunger pale to stare: The Orati of the liuete∣naunt of Bar∣wicke to his souldiours. Chiefly for men of body sound, and full of solid strength: Of his accord the apple ripe, doth fall from tree at length. But hardly he by force, vnripe, is pluckt from of his plant. UUhat vse haue men of ioyntes, and limbes, if gratefull foode  want: UUhat frute hath life, both head, and handes, shall languish, and decay, If fostring good they lacke. Therfore now (maes) what doe you say? UUill you that on conditions, the Citie yelded bee? UUhich by the Britaynes stout subdued, ere long time you shall see, UUith griesly dynt, of blouddy blade, her men and children kilde? Or will you that we all doe pe, and be by famine spilde? The Captaine thus his whole intent explande, his speaches endes, When straight, with hurly burly noyce, a diuers sentence rendes, The fickle common sort. But all in fine, doe thus agree. A streamer white as driuen snow, wide ope in sight to see: Out of a turret top, they hang, a signe of peace to bee. And more right humbly pray to haue, some parle with the king, Or with some noble man, to him their message for to bring. From out the kinges pauilion straight, on to the walles was sent, To know their mynde, and to returne their purposed intent. UUhen lowly, thus a souldiour sage, begins to frame his speach. The troupe of men besieged here, most humbly doth beseech, Such frendly fauour to be showne, that through the mercy great, Of Edward peerlesse Prince, a few dayes truce they may intreat. And promise plightes, the fort to yeld, and towne, as to him thrall, If on that side, where Northarne pues, doe batter Barwicke wall: In darcke night shade, sent from the peeres, and primates of the land, Into the Citie doe not scape of armed men a band, Eight day truce. UUith succour, and prouision frought, within full eight dayes space: And that vnto the Britaines they, by iust right will giue place, And eke deliuer vp the tower, vnto the Princes grace. Their plighted promise to confirme, the king would pledges haue, To whom (which truce made for a time) in number twelue they gaue. Pledges ta∣ken. But long the sleightes, and subtill guiles, of that vile nation ye,
May not be hid, in whose hart rootes, and bowels, lumpes do lye, he Scott  their ce . Of fraude ingraft, by natures skill, that needes not artes deuise. For scarse Syr Phoebe with blasing beames to, the world had compast thrise: When carefully the English campe, doe keepe their watch, and warde, And other some supply the roomes, which others earst did garde. The fourth day comes, when Southwind blastes, along with whistling ide, And in the UUesterne Ocean floudes, Sol gan his front to hide. The night drawes on, and shadowes quite the earth, with darknes blind. In quiet rest, all men, and foules, and beastes of sauage kinde, UUear softly layd, and weried corps, refresht with slombring sleepe. The watch, the Nothside of the towne, takes onely care to keepe. Lest on that part the wylie Scot, by stealth should entraunce get, Bycause it was as couenaunt, twixt both the nations set, That on that side their hoped aide, to come, they would in take, Or of the tower besiegde, forthwith the Britaines owners make. But here behold, in glomy shadowy night, a fearefull foe, Dacett, the chiefest Scottish Peere, three miles in compasse thoe, Dactt with a fewe other enters Bar∣wicke in the ight. Had trast beside the English campe, and ouer Twede had past, Into our borders, all on orse, with army ying fast. And though the bridge, of hard rocke framde, was ransackt, and vp torne, Cleane to the walles, that ouer hit, no passers might be borne. Yet hardy Dacett through the streames, attainde the warlike tower, Some of his men in chanel whelmde, for fishes to deuouer. Straight wayes a clamour loude, from Barwicke rought the starry skies, And gladsome newes of present aide, through euery street forth flies: UUhich shortly after turned was, to dolefull plaintes, and cries. The Scottes truce brea∣kers. For of deceipt and trecherie, they all with shame conuicted, Forthwith which iustly they deseru'de, with penaunce weare afflicted▪ Fame of this thing so speedely, with flickering fehers fled, That tydinges to the king was brought, as he lay in his bed. Day light appeares, when fayre in sight was to a Iybet trust, The pledges hanged. One of the pledges, whom forthwith succeede an other must. By straite commaundement from the Prince▪ who had decreed, ech day, Them two, and two, to hang, till all weare dead, and made away. Then, then, at length that nation faithlesse rued, their traiterous mindes, When he farre of, of faithfull frend, the breathlesse body findes: Hye tottring in the ayre, tost to, and froe, with whurling windes. He by infamous death, complaines stocke diffamde to bee, Whiles in prospect of all, his sonne is tied to fatall tree. The wretched mothers onely hope, and solace in distresse,
The women eke with hayres vnfold their dolours doe expresse, Famine op∣preseth the Barwicke souldiurs & inhabitantes. One sorrow and calamitie mittigateth an other. And howlinges loude doe make, and naked brestes with bouncing beat, But for bicause that hunger dire, and scarsitie of meat, A deadly plague, through all the towne, doth headlong range about, And foode from hungrie iawes of men, by little plucketh out, Deuouring victualls all: those dolefull sorrowes were the lesse. But here behold an other guile their famine to redresse. That to the English campe vnwares, of men  selie bande, Might range abrode, and victualls bring from out the Scottish land, And other ayde procure, eight dayes truce more they pray the king. But he their fraude foreseing, smiles, yet grauntes to them that thing. Truce the se∣cond tyme. True glory he, and high renowne, not golden booties sought, For well he did perceaue by chraft, the matter to be wrought. The Tenttes in peace doe rest, and Barwicke souldiours careles srt, And weried limbes through tossing toyles, with pleasaunt sleepe comfort. For meate was none, whereby their hungrie stomakes fill they might. And now through midst of heauen hye sir Phoebe had tane his flight, And ouerra the hugie shoulders broode of Leo fierce, All headlong prone descending downe, where Vesper first doth perce, The duskie cloude. An army great, in glittering harnish dight, An army of Scottes sent to remoue the fige. When from the mountaynes toppes in rankes, appeares wide ope in sight. As sheepe in brode fieldes floct, goe greene grasse nibbing here, and there: Or as on pleasaunt hills, where young lames skipp with sporting chere, The number is confusde: so thicke on troupes they bleating goe: The Ramme amongest the milke white ewes, himselfe doth loftie showe, Excelling both in courage haue, and strength of body great, And fenced with his hooked hornes, reuengement fell doth threat: None otherwis the Scottish armed bandes, on tops of hills, From farre do shew them selues, and fieldes with thousandes thick vp fis. Whence downe in good aray they march, into a valley plaine, And euery one within his bandes, his footesteps doth containe. Ech standard bearer doth his streaming banners broade display, And taller by the heades the valiaunt Captaines leade the way. Twede at that time her bankes with swelling floudes had ouerflowne, By reason of the salt sea spring. That way to flie was none, Left for the English armed bandes, that hope was quite bere. UUherfore the bragging Scotte, to humane frre which onely cleft, The mighty power, of high Iehoue, respecting nought at all, Presumptuolie with swelling hart, himselfe doth victor call. And vauntes that Britaynes all at once, shall slop to dit of launce,
And shall of sharpe two ed bl, abide the greisly glaunce. Thus they before the battaile foug, the triumph blasde, and spred, Puft by with hope, and natiue pride, which full their fancies fed. Moreouer hope of rescues neare, the cowe besieged had, UUhen farre on pning plaines, the Scottish armyes thick to gad, They had espied, and euery one hi natiue armour knew, And eke their nobles standerdes all, when first they them did vew. The Frasiers brethren twaine and chiefest of the martiall rout, The of Scot∣tish Nobles. The forefront of the battaile led, with Gwalter Stuard stout. Then Greham, Card, Parkeys Gordon, Gramat next, and Bride. And Gilbert Douglas fierce, and Morreys Abbhyn by side. All dect in pretious purple , the common  ours beare, The Scottes deuide their army into three battai∣les. The pearcing laun and some in hand▪ do wiel the die speare. All clad in stealed Iackes, with glittering  gorgeous gay, UUhose gastlie threatning okes, their inward anger did bewray. These Peeres the second army guides, and last, whose force exceedes In martiall actes, and to the first, are not vnlike in deedes, First Moyses, Morys then, and Valam, with that mighty Gordein, and Alen Stuard, then whom Sotherland th cheere UUith honour due, and Ruffy shyning all in armour bright, Then comely Alexander Brus then Ceton, doughtie ight, Last Lyndesey, Gros, and many more, whose fame and glory hye, Through all Europa costes so vast, to their renowne doth flie. All sprong of royall bloud, from auncient stockes descending all, But of the conunon sort whose names to minde I cannot call The English army. Full sixtye thousand fighting men did stand in battaile ray: On th'other part the ofspring stout of Brute did not delay, But ready makes their swourdes, and drierie dartes, with nted endes, Their sinowye bowes, and trustie strings, the shaft which whuling sendes. Their filed steeleheades strong, the sturdy stemme which stedie beares, UUith plumes of fethers deckt, which crested hellmett loftie reares. Most godly to behold, thus standes ech bande, which Tytaus rayes, By reason of the reflexe of the sunne. The exhorta∣tion of the king of Eng∣land to his souldiours. Doe more set out, ech order placde: the king thus boldly sayes. Ye Britaynes comne of aunciedt race, I doe reioyse to see Your manly lookes, which plaine foreshewes, your hartes from terrour free, All trembling feare of death expeld. So doth it men beseeme. And such as worthy me their king, and Captaine, I doe deeme. That Prince which garded is, with doughtie ddes, in battaile , And tendes by force of blouddy Mars. to striue in quarell go He shall more holdly enterprise, in fight his foe, to quell,
And mates for strength, and valure good, I thinke of you so well As of his warlike Macedons great Alexander thought, UUhen he against the Persians, and king Dalos fought, The Monarch proude of Asia all. Dur cause most good and sure Now who doth dout, for what a Princes fame can more procure: Or greater honour wynne, theu to restore a banisht hing. And him vnto his fathers seat, and regall scepter bring: UUhat open iniuries of late, this people false haue showne: I neede not now to ripp agayne, they all to you are . Ile teach them if I liue, Gods honour due not impayer, Nor sacred Iustice to infringe, nor Prince from royall chayet, His right by birth, by force to plucke. Now long wilt thou O Lorde Behold and suffer to remaine these sinnes, so much abhorde? The prayer of the kyng of England. Be thou from starrie region hye, reuenger of this wrong, Let vigour from aboue discende, vs suppliant soules among, And bashfull feare, let feeble make, out foes which vs . Dout nothing valiant hartes, Gods puissant might will be at . Let euery one forth girde the trembling speare, with courage , UUhy stay I now,  good euent, I tookens feele n out. A pollicie to animate his souldiours. UUherfore goe  our ensignes spred, and ers in the UUith   assault  foes, yplung▪ in deepe Thus hauing sayd, Prince Edward mightie Peere doth make  . UUhen straight the English campe with clamour loude the skies doth Redoubling still amaine, ours, ours, the virtorie is, hye loue, His haly sprite doth breath on vs, and sendes he   . Meane time the army large, is  strong UUith bowes, and arrowes good, which swiftli    string, The threefold mayled coate of proufe, with squared head  pearce, And now with blast of sounding trompe, the warning, gin, forth fierce UUith eger mindes, the onset first, the valiaunt Britaynes giues, The shiuering shaftes doe dymme the ayre, so thicke erh  driues. And as glommy shower, with  ,  , The light with sh  , which sodainely All trembling makes mens myndes, and pleasa fieldes to  compells, Eth mortall wight, and to returne for succour where he dwells: None otherwise the shaftes thicke she, lose the are day light, UUhilst Britayne bold the bended bow, doth pull with manly might. The salt sweat  through labring ha,    , UUhilst peaceing arrow through the ayre, by force  passage seekes. Both armyes bustling meete and man, to man , in that ,
Not so with gastly Cyclops strokes, mount Aetna did resounde: Vulcane as Poetes sayne had his smithey in mount Lem∣nos in Cicilie where he with his ma∣tes wrought. A great scath by the Eng. Archers done to the Scotts. Nor Vulcan fiery God, in dungeon deepe, such noyce did make: UUhilst that his monstrous mates by turnes, the massie fledge did shake, UUith twhick, twhack, thūpe thump, boūcing fast, as thūderinglike did roare, UUith clattering classing loude, of swourdes, the trampled Barwicke shoare, And all the mountayne Halindane. Some take into their brayne, The whurling shaft, and strugling knocke the earth, in deepe disdayne. He fighting farre aloof, is fiercely through the shoulders pusht, He dyes on poynt of mawrish pike, his thigh most greiflie crusht. The most part yeld their faintyng breath destroyed with gastly wound, Euen through the bulke, their brest plates torne, where natures skill hath Unto the trembling lunges, the liuer full of liuely heat, (bound. The battayle yet hanges doutfull, none hath gotten vantage great. But after the assault more hott, and vehement gan to ware, The noble Prince Plantagenet his foes with pursute backes. The gorye bloud, the flesh ygasht, with drierie dint of swourde, Spins through amayne, as fluent floudes doe scoure the gurtie foorde. Or as the blustring Southwind blacke, the fieldes doth moyst with showres, In winter season cold, from duskie cloudes, which forth he powres. Who can declare the slaughters fell and labours of that day? Who can with floudes of trickling teares; the sorrowes iustly way? Of slaughtered bodies who the number great, and names can tell? How many thousandes eke the swourde in Plutoes pitt made dwell? What grones were heard, what sobbing sighes euen from the hart rootes UUhilst out of dying corps, ye flying ghostes their passage sought? (brought? O ruthfull shape of thinges, with breathles bodies couered is The earth, on plumpes which lye, and honour of sepulture misse. And as the greedy woulfe which rauine hunger forth imboldes, UUhen be by shoouing long hath brust a way into the foldes, The seelie sheepe by teares, eke rauening hott bloud streames out suckes, And halfe deuoured carkasses oerhippes, and more downe pluckes, UUhich are aliue, proceeding fast with blouddy iawes to spoyle: None otherwise the Brytaine sterne, with trampling feete doth soyle, His sloughtred foes, and hott pursues the quicke in fight to foyle. Downe dinging some with speares, and poles, to Lethe riuers brinkes Lethe a riuer in al. UUho so dare once resist. The Scott this seyng backwardes shrinkes And shiuering seekes to turne his backe, and saue himselfe by flight: Agayne the progenie of Brute strikes loftie skies with shright: Still following fast in chase, the starting foe to quell by might. And floct in troupes, as often as the aduerse enemies crue,
Starke mad in mynde, begins agayne the battaile to renewe: The Scottes slaine and pu to flight. So oft vnto the conquerours might it waxing feeble bendes. At length the glummy shadowye night, the blouddy battaile endes. Then sounding trumpet shrill, retires the weried Britaines fast, The Retrai sonded. By Princes hest, and from the field, aloud, Retrait, doth blast. The enemy quayled thus, free, vncontrolde, reioyse at will, The souldiour might, and take of rest, and quiet sleepe his fill. It glads them for to thinke of bitter toyles, and turmoiles past, Bacchus God of wine. Ceres God∣desse of corne and such like prouision. And then God Bacchus froothing boules, and Ceres giftes they tast, To animate their hartes, no eye for pure toy winkes that night, But shewing his exploites, and hard aduentures in the fight, Ech one vnto his mate; of daungers past takes then delight. Meane space (for nothing can be found more swift then fleeting time.) The morne is come, and Titan cleare begins aloft to clime, And with his beames the fayre broode fieldes doth set wide ope in sight. Then myndefull of the succour sent, and power from God almight, The godly Prince on bended knees, commaundes his campe throughout, That euery soule with reuerence, and prayer most deuout, Edward the next morning after the bat∣taile fought with all his army doe prayse the Lord. Should serue the Lord, and on his name high solempne prayse bestow. The mightie God, which for our sakes, the enemy brought full low, That in the starrie firmament, thrise holy raignes for aye, The Lord of Sabaoth eke, which condigne honour beares away, Most worthelie be celebrate, and feared, without end, In ages all, all nations eke, let to his Godhead vend. Of thundring Ioue the most redoubted might, who can abide? UUho can his force withstand, which roaring floudes with beck doth guide? And earth rough ragd with baulkes, and ayrie region running round, His glory great therfore with solemne tunes let Britaynes sound. All victory comes from him, and from hye heauen to men discendes. These thinges thus done, his tentes he leaues, and course directly bendes, Renowned Prince, vnto the place, wherein the field was fought. And there he learnes of such as were tane captiue, to him brought, The number of the Scottes slayne in the battaile was xxxv. thou∣sand fiue hū∣dred. The names of those redoubted Peeres, that there had gott their bale, UUhich some resemblaunce had in face, of former lookes, though pale Through want of bloud they were, that scarse you might their countnance But when vntoucht he did the race of warlike Brute espy. (try. And lackt but onely thirtene wightes of all his mighty trayne, Thirten Eng∣lishmen one∣ly lost. (Those which were hurt were shortly healde by medicines helpe agayne) Ertolling both his armes aloft to glittering starrie skie, He thus exclaimes amaine, and to the Lord of hostes doth try.
O Lord thrise mightie in thy deedes, how much doe I thee owe, What fauour great vpon this realme of myne doest thou bestowe? Meane time one of his Captaines had the whole brood field survued, And Carkasses with clottes of dirt bedaubd, which would haue rued Ones hart to haue beheld, their mestiue lookes with teares imbrued. And findes full xx. thousand Scottes and fiue to be by flight Safe home returnde, so that destroyed by Brytaines fell in fight Of all the Scottish army huge, thirtie fiue thousand weare. Which sloughtred number to augment, which noblest bloud did beare Of all their realme, fiue hundred Peeres were sent to limbo lake. Plantagenet these thinges thus knowne, returne doth speedie make Unto his tentes, whom by the way a Legate meetes in hast Declaring how the Barwicke Lordes would yeld themselues at last And leaue their goodly towne, which rong stone walles do surely arde, If by the mercy of his grace their liues might all be sparde: And that with bagge, and baggage, they might freely thence depart. The godly Prince the late shed bloud, lamenting at his hart Their liues with good will grauntes, but goodes, & substaunce, doth denay, Which on my souldiours must (quoth he) bestowde be, for their pray. Prouookementes, to incense their mindes, aduentures hard to proue. UUhat doth not mortall men to do leane pined hunger moue? UUhat doth not aduerse fate, conculking backward folke constraine? Neede is a direfull dart. To saue their liues they therfore faine Conclude, and onely with their clothes their natiue towne forsake. Barwicke elded. Forthwith Prince Edward of the tower by right doth seison take. And Barwicke giues vnto his men with all her substaunce free. UUhose not inricht goodes to possesse of which no owners bee? Though thousand troublous thoughtes turnild, the king, now here, now And restlesse rage, of clogging cares, his mynd did peece meale teare: (there, Yet chiefly Baliol he respect, wherfore with helping hand, Baliol resto∣red to his kingdome. He sets him in his Graundsiers seat, and Princelie throne to stand. Inricht with es of coyne, and garded strong with warriours stout. And after garrisons were placde ech where, the towne throughout: Tyme styding warnes the kyng, the South partes of his realme to see, To London therfore hying fast, in short time comne is hee. King Edward returnes to London. UUhich fayre broode streates addornes, and forth with solempne triumph Unto his royall pallace braue, whose comming there abides, (rides, The Cytizens, his safe retourne applauding, and his feere, The Princesse Phillip, with her sonne, which lookt with smiling cheare. His noble prayse and high renowne through euery streate doth range,
And glory past the vncoth coostes of Ake people strange. The swift report of this new warre, beyond the bankes fue out, Of Ganges liquid floudes, the mirrour of our world no dout. The king vnweryed sturres, and circuite makes throughout the land, Survewing townes, and fortes, and in what case ech thing doth stand, But chieflie at Newcastell he doth loue to make his stay, Which from the Scottish borders farre, is distant not away. Here whilst he lawes confirmde, and for offenders stablisht paynes, King Baliol comes, and after him a troupe of nobles traines, His homage for to doe, as customde was in elor age, And eke to shew his frendlie hart, which should at no time gage, Wherfore admitted for to come before the Senate sage: On bended knee, as in degree inferiour, he submitts Edward Bali∣ol comes to Newcastell e doth homage to king Ed∣ward. Himselfe, King Edward on his throne, with regall scepter sitts; And biddes with chearefull voyce, him prostrate to be tane from ground, Commending highlie this his face, that though in duetie bound, Yet vncompelde, he honour giues, and ayde by promise plightes If that his traitrous subiectes should against him bend their mightes. He: scillic the king of England spea∣keth comfor∣table wourd to Baliol. Of common weales affaires, and of God Mauors noble art, Much talke was spent, he biddes him haue a haut vnconquered hart, And not to beare in minde, his former thralls, and irkesome fate, But courage stout to haue, concordant to his present state. To Saintes celestiall yelding prayse, and to the powers diuine: He more submisse doth humble thankes referre, and thus in fine In sondrie sortes of talke, and sporting mirth a day they spende, And then another, till away Plantagenet did wende, And Baliol king to Edenbrowe his progresse straight did bende. The Moone increasing oft, had now repayrde her glittering gleames, UUhen Edward with swift slyding hull deuides the surging streames, Requested by the Flaunders Earle on causes of great weight For to consult, to bothes behoofe, in time redounde which might. UUhom kindred neare, and eke his spouse, to Britaine monarch knit, Edward say led into . And hauing had on their affaires such talke as they thought fite, They strike a league, and heauenly bodies bright, to recorde call, UUhich neuer during terme of life, be abrogated shall. The Peeres of Flaunders on their othes, this league a vowe to keepe. This done the king to England backe the salt sea udes doth sweepe. These  the French man galles, and fills his minde with doutfull , UUhen through the streetes of Paris, pompous towne, this fame had spred, And rumour running fast, vncertaine who it first should reare,
And did likewise the irefull hart through burning choler teare. Pillip de Valloys kyng of Fraunce threatneth England. Edward sum∣moneth the French kyng and beareth the armes of France inter∣mixt with th' English. Claimyng Fraunce to be his by inheri∣taunce, Preparation fo warres. Gold at that tye made in England by art. Edward say∣leth into Flaū ders. Of Valoys king of Galls, wherfore his Lordes to counsell tane, By dreadfull Mars it was decreed to worke the Britaines bane. Small matter finding out, and that vniust, to build vpon, But th' English Rector fraude preuentes, with vertue pure anon, For he to blouddy warres the Frenchman summons, as right heyre Unto the crowne, and armes of Fraunce with th' English mixt doth beate. For that his vncle Charles did to ioyes supernall passe, No issue left behinde, whose sister true, and coheire was The comely Lady Isabell, out from whose loynes did spring, (She comne of auncient lyne her selfe,) the mightie English king. UUho with these causes iust of ire prouookt, in bagges doth fold, A masse of siluer pure, and hugie heapes of glittering gold. And ready gettes ech thing, for present warres which he thinkes meete. But first he goes the Flanders Earle his faithfull frend to greet, And to consult beyond the seas. A mightie army gardes His maiestie, which hollow hull from flashing surges wardes. And now in midst of weltring waues, the nauy fleetes apace, UUhich with his boystrous blastes the Northwinde cold along doth chase, His lustie laddes to copp, with whistle shrill the carefull guide Commaundes, where standing one, of Shippes a nauy huge descryde, And aske, how many: aunswere makes, on wooddie mountaines hye, So many as are tender okes esprong. Then of what countrie: Of Fraunce (quoth he). Forthwith the king biddes ech man to addresse, Him selfe to fight, and armour strong to set in readinesse. And that no man should turne the sterne, and course intended leaue, On payne of losse of that deare ioynt, to which the shoulders cleaue. Don Phaebus now, with glimering rayes, the hye heauen costes deuides, And loftie in his chariot bright, the windes quite calmed, rides. Stout Valoys his vp sturres, the broilyng battaile to begin, Shipp, fast to shipp conioynes, the clasping grapple, hellish ginne. A great bat∣taile on the sea▪ neare ude. On both sides fiercer growes the fight, bloud, bloud, pursues full fast, He headlong tumblyng downe, in gulfie channell quicke is cast, A pleasaunt bait for frisking fish, he gasht with goory knife, Into the surging salt sea floudes is throwne deuoyde of life, And so one man with double corture, hath his fatall end. Moreouer huge vnwieldie stones, the English souldiours sende, Downe frō their hollow topps, which Celtanes brainepans battring rende, And bodies brusing teare, and hatches sprinke with braynes, and bloud: The sharpe side swourd th' assault likewise doth make more fierce, & woode.
The French defend themselues with poles, and stoutly breake the blowes, Both nauyes fierce amayne, with sanguine streames of red bloud flowes. But th' English eger presse their foes with much more force to sting. Alas what stony riuer rough from stickle Alpes whose spring, With winter showers augmented is, with greater force doth fall, Into the broode seas gaping gulfe? no semblance now at all Of greenish colour cleare, dame Thetis wallowing waues retaine Thetis god∣dese of the sea. But purple hue do beare. So deepe woundes poure bloudstreames amaine: As liquid water droppes, through broken pipes, and conduites straine, Besprinkling all the grounde. No man by flight lookes life to gaine, Nor ouglye shape of death, doth any strike in staggring stound: And now eight long houres fled, Syr Titans lamp had compast round, The fight in∣duced from XII a clocke at noone till day breake ne morning. The ayrie region vast, and bending beake to deepes downe stelt, Then midst of sommer was, in Cancers house Don Phoebus dwelt. The skirmish hotter growes, and more, and more, doth anger swell, Haut courage kindleth ech mans mynde. The gastly bickering fell Not night as blacke as pich, nor direfull darknes stintes and stopps. This barke salt water leakes, and surges high through thinkes in hopps, Her ribbes by force out torne. There might you see huge hulkes half burnde, Their men on scriking, drowne, we drowne, into the channell turnde. Theirage yet restles rampes, and Britaines force with hardier might, As though euen then they entred had into that fatall fight. So feruent waxt their moodes, as though some sad vnlucky starre, Did threat destruction dire to fall, on th' one part of from farre. But th' aspect of God Mars agaynst the Gaules more cruell was, The timber bourdes, and beames, do not them shrine from death alas, Which those behinde, in darke night shade, themselues thought for to hide, And now almost deathes drierie dart the enemies all had stryde, For thirtie thousand in that fight their swift ghostes did conuay To Limbo low: end of the night, and dawning of the day, Thirtis thou∣sand slayne of the French∣men. Edward vi∣ctor. Was finall end of warres also. The famous conquest light On Edward mightie Peere, the aduerse nauy most in fight Tane either captiue, or destroyde, few saude themselues by flight. To thundring Ioue, Plantagenet the chief laude doth betake, And biddes ech man to him prostrate, his humble duetie make, And honour iust ascribe. Thinges finisht thus, backe home againe Edward re∣turning into England goes to VVindles Castell. Prince Edward hies & through the flouds, with brasen keele doth traine Who landes at London tower, which mighty Thāmes with waters cleare Soft slidyng, passeth by. Then Windsor noble castell neare He goes to see, and royall banquetts makes, with costlie cheare,
To be preparde, for foure dayes space, and there to him both call  George is feast. The English primates chief, with their espoused Ladies all. Ech peere in his degree deuout to sacred temple hies, The Priest his rites performes, and tributes laude to Ioue in skies, God seru'de, downe sits cch one, at Tables large, with naprie spred, In parlonrs richlie houg, with Aras wrought with silken thred. Where fountaine waters bright, were brought to wash, of custome old, Then Ceres daintie dishes come, and massie boules of gold, With Bacchus filde, which auncient shapes of Britaine kinges did hold, Bacchus God of wine, vsed for wine it selfe. By skilfull art ingru'de. The king, and Queene, in loftie seates Both ioyntlie sit. And lower downe, the nobles at their meates In seemely sort are placde. Whose pretious clokes ou shoulders hinge. Three hundred Seruitours eke, successiuely arow did bring Forth daintie cates, chargde to attend, and cupps with wine to fill. When euery slate sufficed was, and satisfied at will: The tables voyded were, and from the siluer Ewers still Sweet smelling streames agayne to wash. Then takes the king in hand A mightie gobblett full of wine, which on the bourde did stand, And drinkes Carouse to all his guestes, they pledge him in like sort. Thus passing time, with sondry iestes, and meekle pleasant sport, This king this motion makes. Letts now my Lordes some maistries trie, UUhich may be gratefull shewes, to all my people standing by, Quoth he, what aunswere make ye Sirs: They willing, yea, reply. Straight trappers golden, golden bitts; and sadles guilt with gold, Prouided are, and ech man horsd on trampling courser bold. The king in armour bright ingrauen, on foming sleede is sett, And now ech knight, a bunchie speare, of ashe in hand doth gett, The stoure begins, and rushing swift, with peise they presse, to skies The splinters shiucring small, and fragmentes broaken, ratling flies. But he in midst of foreheard, which with sturdie troncheon strake His foe, and course redoubling swift, his stafe most often brake: He bore the palme away, and of those iustes the honour wanne. The first in∣stitution of the golden Garter. And now the bye heauens light, the night with shades had oueranne, The Turney cudes, the Prince, and Peeres, to banquet home them hast, UUhich Gods thēselues you would haue sayd, might haue vouchsaude to tast. At foure dayes end, the king for all contendours prises fitts, And garters, studded thicke with pearle, about their leggs he knitts, UUith pretious gemmes, ybrought from Easterne regions farre permixt, The Carbuncle which glittering rayes out yeldes, among infixt. Moreouer chaines of fined gold, from vtmost Indies brought,
UUith glittering Iasper stones beset, to ech, most costlie wrought A double leaffed tablet fayre, of gold, depending downe. And of this orvet knightes of noble ocke, and high renowne, In number xx. foute, he made, whose frates in warre should gaine Eternall fame, and bids this rite their progenie to retaine. A noble deede no dout, which retchles time, with restles winges, Shall not deuour, nor tract of yeares, commite to Lethe springes. Meane time the French king nteth not, iniuriouslie to spite The Britayne nation stout, and eke to warres them to incite. The English Monarch discontent hereat, and mou'de in mynde, King Edw yning to him the ar of VVarwic &  arl more waste the VVester stes of Fraunce. The kyng  turned no calleth a Pa lit wh in he she  Crown of Fraunce be his by  heritance. Forthwith his mates to be in warres, foure noble Earles assignde, And wastes with fiery flames, and dint of smourd, both townes, and towers, Along the UUesterne coastes of Fraunce, downe fortes, by force he scoures. UUith eight score shippes of warre strong fenst, the enemy to sustaine. At length returnes not hauing lost his least, and plest swaine. Declaring straight vnto his Lordes, what requi he thought, First how, and what reprochfull factes, against vs haue bene wrought By the vnfaithfull Frankes, then how his vncle Charles voyde Of issue died, whose Crowne by right he ought to haue inioyde, Heresn a counsell generall was ca, throughout the land. In which these pointes aboue the rest were borne the king in hand First that by taskes, and subsidies, great store of gold in come, And that ech subiect was arste, to pay a greater somme, By Parliament decree. More that much golden vessell large Should coyned be, of these new warres for to defrait the charge: Vessell coi to make m ney. And though that burdens more then meet, on manyes neckes were layde, t withut grudging to the king, ech man his mercement payde. All other thinges establisht were for common weales behoue. And herewithall the Senate endes, and Counsailours home remoue. Staight armour is prepaide, by strait commaundement from the king, Preparatio for warre. The valiant Britayne youth, in sturdie steele coates glittering spring Great plumpes of horsemen stout, & cluttering troupes of footemen thrungde, And now with good lucke on, through mounting surges swift they plundge, The endly Northarne gales, their hoisted sayles driue orth amaine, Till Normandie at last a fertile soyle of fruite, and graine, The Brita  arri at  die Aol Go the wind    them the selues. The Britayne fleet in harbour safe from Aeol did containe. Their wery corps here well refresht, their tentes they farther moue, And houses riling spoyle, their formers owners quite out droue. Come hourded vp in ort in broade barne bayes, by country swaine And otes the warlike praunser fatts, the straw lest to remaine.
For needefull vse. Vulcanus brandes the roofes downe ratling teare. Yong children reft of home, their wofull mothers wandring beare:  ranne. Their fathers lately sent by fawchon dint to shadowes dombe. These but preambles are to greater warres in time to come. And in what place through runging wide, in broode fieldes cause of stay Is offred there the army huge, doe pitch their tentes that day, At length they came to Caen. Of craggie rocke, a bridge whose side he assaul∣ing and sub∣uyng of ane. Doth garde, through passage strait, which weltring streames rough vnder Th'assaut begins, & more, and more, the fierce fight kindleth wrath, (slide. The Chieftaine of the towne, with souldiours stopps the strait bridge path. To barre the enemy out. The French downe groueling headlong throwes rchery doth uch pre∣ayle. Celtane of Celtaea peo∣le in Fraunce The Hrle of Tanca . The whirling shaft, vntill at length they came to handy blowes. Then stayne with gastly wounde the Celtane spurling kickes the ground. One Earle captiue tane: an other eke no lesse renownd, Through Tancaruilla, of which place he title beares, and name. The remnaunt armour cast st de, all captiue thralls became, The king the walles downe beates, and fort consumes with fierie flame. This towne thus sackt, proceedes with wings, on both sides strongly armde. rom Cane the army pro∣ceedes fur∣ther into Nor die and  brea∣th ray. with bows, which would we pearcing stēme, ye Frēchmās pride haue charmde: The army, and with sloughter dire, and sword, all thinges decayes, Much like a noysome pestilence, which when he roming strayes, Creepes in by stealth, and mortall men with deadly venome slayes. Or as rough roaring Easterne pufes when through their caues they rush, Downe woodes, & mighty trees, with boystrous blastes they threatning push. And okes vp mounted huge in hight, their rootes torne, battring crush, On th'other part an army great, with faynt hart halfe afright, King Valoys gathered had, into the next fieldes broode in sight alloys ga∣hereth an ar∣y. Yet durst he not incounter with our bandes, in open warres, Or battaile ioyne, and so ntright, disside, and end the iarres. But rought with feare, in wooddy mountaines wandring farre vs froe, He watcheth what we doe, and whether we intend to goe. With wary mynde, respecting well his owne estate, and realme, And more commaundes his campe, the bridges all to ouerwhelme. ridges of ome broken owne to eepe backe  English my. ridges of ome broken owne neare Paris by the  f Valloy. That by that meanes the enemies force they might barre of, and stay Their iourneys eke. But when to valiant Britaynes ech hard way He easie saw, and that no stopp could hinder their intent. With all his troupe of armed men he straight to Paris went. And gardes the Citie walles, which shiuering feare had shakt before, Commnding peecemeale downe, the Sequane bridges to be tore. Now safe the Frenchmen thinke themselues with gurtie riuer deepe
Incompast roue, howbeit they watch, and ward, doe dayly keepe. Suspecting both the fierce assault of mighty Brutus race, As also least the light fire flames their fayre towne should deface. Their iourney hasting fast the English campe is comne at hand But after downe the Bridges broke the king did vnderstand: Ech place of entrance eke with great endeuouring fenced sure: He fretts disple ase in mynde, and thoughtes turmoiling, more his fure Augments, till he at last pon this finall sentence stayes. To builde the bridge agayne, and loftie arches vp to rayse, Ouer those floudes, which by the walles of auncient Paris glide, The Bridge a Paris built b the English campe in tw dayes. Which lesse then two dayes space doth finish quite, that fayre and wide, Ech souldiour passage hath. In battaile ray, and now they stand, Beyond the riuer bankes prouoking Frenchmen hand, to hand, For to incounter fayre in martiall fieldes. But when agayne No equall offer made of fight they see, in great disdaine The Britaynes moue their tentes, and passing forth from place to place Phaeton th sonne of Ph bus by mis∣gouernyng his fathers chariot had almost burn the whole world. The Britaine proceeding to Callice pitch their tentes neare the forrest of Crsse or Crssey. No towne vnburned leaue, that Phaetons flames agayne to trace That land throughout, of that way one had lookt, he would haue thought. Untill at length the army stout, the broad playne fieldes had rought, Neare Cressy des, & there their tentes dne pitcht, to make some stay. A valley  there lyes, with springing medowes fresh and gay, Through midst of which a brooke with siluery streames cuts forth his way One side of which a hill, with fertile soyle for tillage fitt, Besetts, to Paris wardes, which rustick swaine with plough doth slitt, In ioyfull time of peace. On th'other side adiacent lye Some pleasaunt hillockes eke, but chiefly stickle mountaines hye, Whose topps do Cresseis groues of oke trees thicke besett, containe, And darksome dennes, where brousie beastes of sauage kinde remaine. UUithin this vale the English campe, of former toyles of shooke Their werinesse, with dulcet sleepe, and gratefull viandes tooke. UUhen sodainly a spie from mountaines topps in post hast runnes, Valoys Insu eth the Eng∣lish army with a grea boost. And warning giues, that Valoys king of Galls in armour comes, UUith thousand thousandes garded thicke. A sound the trompet shrill Giues forth, and with Tantara thrise, ech souldiours eares doth fill. The valiant English hartes, armes, armes, redoubling loude out cald Forthwith king Edward adds. Take tooles in hand no white apalde, Ye ladds of martiall Brutus bloud, high thundring Ioue this day, King Ed∣wardes ex∣hortation t his souldiou before th battaile. Hath hard my voyce, and hath betooke into your handes a pray. The king himselfe not onely comne, with this huge hoost I heere, But eke throughout the Realme of Fraunce of auncient stocketh Peere.
Wherefore so ost a Nation tamde by for, in blouddie , Shall victors dreaof stely Doues shall Lions feare the sight: Now God forbid, and turne that lot to bett lucke I pray. If that among the heardes, a fearefull captaine lead the way, The followers neuer will be fierce in fight, but backward sway. And you I vouch with faint, and fearefull men, shall warre this day. They come with spoyles, and booties rich; the Britaine home to lade, You all with robes of silke, and glittering gold, shall rich be made, You precious ringes shall weare, and purses make with gent strout: If that you will stand to't, like valiant lads, and fight it out. And sley with galy gaping wound the Frenchmens trembling rout.  English battailes pla∣ced. The first bat∣taile was led by the Prince of VValles beyng but xviii. yeares of age. The king cau∣seth his army to retire neare the woode to auoyde backe os∣s. Thus sayd: the hoast in culed sort is set, and ordred right, The winges stout archers garde, with whitling , and armour light. His sonne and heyre, the beardles. Prince, the king in forefront plast, Which had not yet of eightione yeares, the act out fully : Nor on his cheekes the soft and  lockes, you might discerne, By reason of his youth the weightie workes of Mars to learne: The maine battaile, he himselfe in gliering armour brodered takes, And backward to retyre the  all,  neere he makes To Cresseis baulky boothes, all   thereby to voyde. And more that by that meanes, the    be , By marching vp against the hill, and disaduantage by The vnegall soyle, in the assault. But when the Galles did spie The Britaine backe to draw, more rash, then wise, forth fast they hie, The French  king the  to hau fled, in∣sues and as∣sailes them. The horses of the French∣men hurt with arrowes throw their riders and breake the rayes. And spurde their cours fierce, supposing Britaines for to flie. The trompets sound,  mies shout, the noyse hie heauen doth pearce, The English raes  their enemies troupes, assayling , With yew bowes bended stife, which flickring flights forth whistling sends The warriour praunser hurt with stripe, his rider flinging trendes Out of his sadle, and with hard horne hoofe his maister kickes, An other horse, within whose paunch, a long stamne staggering stickes, His countrimen downe driues, and raies disturbing, backward runnes, Outragious, springing fast, and stables seekes from which he comes. Then other after others raungt, their sitters all outwrencht, And here, and there, crosecoursing fease, nor hedge, nor dike deepe trench, Can stop their furious swinge, but bye pathes scattered seuerall trace, The goorie blacke bloud drops, the ground besprinkling in the race. And now the footmen forth are comne, and fierce with weapons fell The battaile doe, restaure; the English stripe, with stripe repell. The theiftaines of the Frenchmen strecht along, with gaping wound
Digd in, by dint of drierie blade, lie strugg on the ground. The noblest of the French army  slayne. The Duke of orreine. The Duke of Alanson, or Dalanson. He first, which cruell borderers on banks of Aibis floud Acknowledgd for their Prince, then noble, Lorein fierce, and wood, Then of Dalanson Duke, then Harcourt Earle, and many more, Who from: their auncient peegree, their worthie titles bore: Or els from castels fayre, or warlike countries, drew their name. A number of the common sort, then also had their bane. The king with gastly gleiue, like thunderbolt driues forth away, The king and  Ed∣dward his sonne fight valiantly. Thirtie thou∣sand Prench men syne. So doth the Prince his sonne, whose Britaine virtue bright that day Did shew it selfe, and of what force it was, and puissaunce good: In which were thirty thousand slaine, and fieldes moyst made with bloud. UUhith when aloofe from hie hill top king Valois did behold, Forthwith backsliding fast, through swift course borne of horses bol, His countrie b attainde. A foule reproch to Fraunce no dout, And blot most blacke to him, for at his heeles a greater rout, He slying after drew, then Britaines were which causbe him flee, Valois seeing such slaugh∣ter of his men flyeth. So much it is, at first assault, of courage fierce to bee, In blouddy martiall fieldes. The campe throughout, then ioyes at will Ech hart, and kes sweet consent, ech care with tes doth fill. Of Frenchmen thus the pillage sweet, and precious gold possest, The Britaine victor. Our men vto their tentes, in shadowy euening them addrest. Next morne s soone as glittering globe of Phoebe vpstart, the Frankes Mutabilis a∣lea Martis. Together flot, and once againe in order set their rankes, UUith armes to trie, if that perhaps Mars chaunce would wauering bee. The next da after the bat∣taile the Frenchmen gathered them selues againe who by these thre Bales of VVarwike Huntington and Nor∣thampton were clean subuerted & distroyed. Callice be∣sieged. UUhich, first the king intreated hard by earnest suite, that he UUould giue them leaue, in open field, once more with Galles to fight, These three Earles stout, of Warwike first, a haunt, and egar knight, Then Huntington, and after him Northamptons chiefe renowne, All vnawares, in skirmish hot, the Frenchmen batter downe. Then lawfully king Edward might the large fieldes raunge at will, Resistance none is made, against his bandes, but all is still. The Frenchmen dare nomore, the brunt of Britaines force abyde, Nor them against, in open campes, their quarrell to disside. Three dayes here spent, the king his tentes remoues, & backward goes, To Caleys shoares and towne with trench, and bulwarke round doth close. UUhen wonne by fraud, and fauning flatterings smooth of Valois king, The Scottish scepter bearer vades our , and downe doth fling, Dauid king of Scottes  instigation  the French king inuad England. All thinges to frying flames. The prudent ene her husband lacke, For to suppresse these fale periude irruptions, doth not slacke But bandes of armed souldiours vp collectes, nor need she had
Th'inhabitantes it Poytiers call, neare which withouten bound An open plaine there lyes, in which no tree with shadowy limbe, Nor braky bush doth grow, a place most fic for skirmage grim: Prince Ed∣ward and the ench kyng oyne battaile care . Here both the armyes meet, on ground out blacke bloud gushing powres, The horsemen topsie tayle are turnde, death conquered Frankes deuou The rayes are broke, and remnant yet aliue the battaile shunnes, Through swift pursute thevictor pantes, and starting lightly runnes, His footestepps thick, thick fetching fast. as in a champion plaine, When as the watchfull grayhound hath a wattkin spied, full faine He springeth on, his pray to get, he life for to maintaine. The greyhound gaping wide. with greedy iawes, threats still to catch, The hare herselfe from byting chapps, away doth scudding snatch: So is in hope of pray, the Britayne swift, and dreading bane, The Frenchmen flie, but in the flight most are subdued and tane. The king himselfe into the tentes was captiue brought, and chose King Iohn aken. More rather for toyeld, then life by dint of swourd to lose. Forthwith in slidyng hull, through flashing floudes to Britaine shore He was conueyed, where prisoner like, the seruile yoke he bore: To teach him of the Britaine king, his Lord, to obey the lore. There were ken in this attade at Poytiers 500 of the iefest of all aunce. Now noble Prince Plantagenet two kinges did captiue hold, And gentle prison many Peers of both landes did infold, Of auncient stockes esprong, which Britaines tooke in blouddy fight. But clemencie of Edward king resplendent shinde so bright: Such vertue rooted in his brest and mercy did remaine The two inges Dauid of Scotland nd Iohn of aunce , with he rest of the aptiues. Edward the  dyeth efore the .  one f the three adies of  whiche tts the ed of mans . ward the ther dyeth. ichard the cond began  raigne 377. That on conditions, and for raunsome, he mist agayne, Ech one vnto his country soyle, and kinsfolkes linkt in loue. Those kinges high, glory followeth fast, which battaile so do moue, So to contend in dreadfull warres, immortall prayse atchiues. Good shepheardes vse to sheere their sheepe, and not to skie with kniues. He noble Monarch sparde the suppliant, downe the proude supprest, Thrise happy sure, if Atrapos fell Goddesse, had not wrest To vnripe death, his noble sonnes, Prince Edwardes fatall thredd, But hauing first begott a tender babe, in wedlocke bedd, UUhich Richard had to name, whom as his heyre he left behind: And whom his  dying to beare the regall mace assignde. According as this nations lawes, and auncient rites did binde. The child the slender age of eleuen winters did not passe, UUhen that with Princely , his head adorned was. But when he neare to mans estate through riper yeares was start: No man can well declare, how for from  awtie hart,
And maners eke he swaru'de, in mynde vnlike how he became. Contrarily disposde, to mighty Sier, and noble dame. But antike vertue still, in breastes of Britaine Peers was shrinde, And manlie courage bold which in the auncient primates shinde, By natures force ingraft. that in God Mars aduentures hard, The ofpring worthy of such Syers, with them might be comparte: And freely durst to tollerate, what tossing toyles you would. The nobles (seyng thus the feates, of mighty Mars waxe could For that the king secure and pleasant peace, sought to vphold) And fearing sloughtfull Idlenesse, her poyson should instill Corrupting them, and more least from Bellonaes warlike skill,  Go desse of Bat∣taile. Long discontinuaunce should degenerate the Britaines hartes: Incensing them to filthy lust, soft sleepe, and sluggish partes: (The king therof aduertizde first), a solempne Iustes they make, Iustes &  nyng at the Tilt between Englimen & foreyners. Foure and twenty Bri∣tayne Pee prouoke as many as will come. Southfield. The counterfaited worke of Mars. The quiuering speare to shake, At Tilt, and Torney eke, th'appoint for foure and xx. dayes, Which number iust of Britaine Peers, as challengers forthwayes To externe nations Legats send, such tydinges for to blase. That Britaynes iustes triumphantlike will keepe for one monthes space. Ioint to the Citie lyes a field, from Smithes deriu'de the name, Th'outside of London walls, an ample place fit for the same, Here shall the race be pight, and certaine limitts measured out, Let hyther make repayre, of noble bloud ech champion stout. All nations shall haue safe conduct. And they which shall doe best, And to the ground most doughtie knightes, out of their seates shall wrest, Most in ∣ber. Or sturdy stafe shall oftnest crack, they massie heapes of gold, Shall for their seruice haue, and pretious rewardes rich shall hold: King Richard them bestowing, of manly fortitude the hier. This publisht thus abroad, to many Cities far, and nyer. On this side, and beyond the Alpes: as manlier courage hold, Possest ech forraine hart, by worthy lynage high extold: He horse, and armour getts, and swift through salt sea surges springes. From Fraunce comes th Earle of S. Paule, his heire & with him bringes. To whom a frutefull land of fish, Bataue the Duchie yeldes. And many more of noble byrth, out of Italia eldes. From sondry regions of the world, likewise agaynst that day, Full many a Peere of royall bloud, at London made his stay. The king of England from the tower, which mighty Caesar built Proceedes, whom foure and xx. doughtie knightes in harnish gu Doe after traine, along proud pompous London streated brode:
In number euen (which mounted braue on milke white palfrayes rode) Them ioyntly after trace, their portlike Ladies, richly drest With golden neckbandes bright, mboso with stones, their corps inuestd With golden roobes of needle worke, with shapes of hartes of gold, In wrought, whose neckes eke golden crownes most curious did infold. The Britaine king these liueries would haue his landes to bee. The forriners with precious genunes ydect, with gallant glee, Of no lesse coly workmanship, did sumptuous garmentes weare, And goodly to be seen, on trampling steedes, did armour beare, Of Iron sweltes, and gold, yforgd: most gratefull sightes to see To common people much amasde. To Smithfield comne they bee At last. Then Circle wise in rankes, the Tiltyard fayre about They all suruewing traste, both Challengers, and challengd rout. oth the En∣glishmen and einers be∣aues them∣elues stoutly. The bard horse mounts an end, and with his heeles the ayre doth beat, Carreyring forth, and back, with studded raines yfurnisht neat. The hollow brasse trompe shrill, with Taratantara skies doth threat, The Torneyars iustling meet, with might, and maine, and labours great, They tire themselues, now salt sweat dropps downe still, from top, to toe, And panting puffinges following fast, out of their mouthes doe goe. The point of ratling speare, the thinne ayre, small dishtured teares, The troncheon burst beforne, to ground the enemy stombling beares. The lookers on reioyse, and clapping handes a shout vp reares. Now glommy night approching neare, one dayes contention endes. On morrow to renew the warlike sport, ech champion wendes, courage all to their auncestours, through doughtie deedes They plainely shew. True glory sure from hard exploites proceedes. The third day comnes, of sondry peoples flocke the assembly large Doe wonder at the Captaines mighty actes, how they did charge UUith peise, the trembling stafe, and lustie armes aloft did lift, And eke with what fierce courage was indued the courser swift. UUith clashing loude of armour, skies through bouncing bobs resound, Ech day for the contendours, knightes, his proper pleasures found, An  full foure and twentie dayes, in Torneying were expirde: And time the Britaine king to weyghtier causes fast requirde. UUherfore the stranngers he for manly prowesse much extolde, Rewarding them with massie chaynes, of pure, and fined gold, And looded home with other giftes, to natiue soyle doth send. That bagges with heapes of coyne  vp, their masters downe did bend. But th'English challenge makers Fame requird for their reward, To be commended for their factes, they onely did regard:
And ech vnto his proper home the Iustes thus finisht hies, When to the king his nephew thus, with wordes expresse, applyes The noble Duke of Lancaster ybred, in Gaunt that towne. Iohn of Ga Duke of Lan∣caster desired aide of king Rio inuado spaigne. Gaunt. Deare nephew to thy vncle, of Grandsyers stocke the chiefe renowne, Thou knowest I thinke that if an iniurie committed bee, Gainst linage of Plantagenetts, of what impaciencie, Of mind they are, forthwith by dint of swourd, requyring right, Such courage was ingraft in our forefathers great of might. T'imitate myne auncestours, why should it yrke my minde▪ Renowned Prince, within your realme caulme peace long time hath shinde, No foe deccipt pretendes, nor bickering dares your force to trie, Whilst vncle to your maiestie, and princes of spring, I, Behold my spouse in wedlocke bandes conioynd, of Hispanig land Her fathers onely heir, by force the Spaniard to withstand. And barre from kingdomes rich, which, publike lawes her giues as due. UUherefore of souldiours stout (by your commission large) a crue, Let me collect, this warfare long, to vndertake with me, And of my spouses right, by wars to seeke recouerie, And Iustice rites inuiolate, by dreadfull Mars maintaine. His vnkle speaking thus, with friendly speach the king againe Receaues, at lengh this aunswere makes, aydst his noble traine. I can not sure but much commend thy stomack haut, and bolde, The aunswee of king Ri. In no respect behind in courage, our forefathers olde. Goe with good luck vnto the land which floud Iberus streames Doe famous make, and what as dower vnto thy wyfe pertaines, By custome due, which Nations all haue erst allowed for right, If that the Spaniard will not yeeld, that stoutly win in fight. True heyres to be defrauded, both Gods lawes, and mans deny, Almighty Ioue to ayde the right, will succour send from hie. Herewith he him dimisde. The Duke with mighty nauie straight, Strong armed for those combrous wars, with hardy souldiours fraightd, The sounding salt sea sweepes, with vertuous spouse, and daughters twain. His cause distrusting straight, of peace conditions offreth faine Spaigne inua∣ded by the Duke of Lan∣caster. The Spanish guide, which being tane, forthwith eyght carres with coyne Full loaded to the Duke he sendes, moreouer doth enioyne Himselfe, ten thousand poundes, of yearely tribute for to pay, In Bayon Castell fayre, which then did Britayne Prince obey. But th'English Duke for recompence, vnto the Hispaigne king In mariage linkes his daughter, which first from his loynes did spring. That so the happie concorde of this late confirmed peace,
Might through a  kinde of league, establisht, more increase. The Spnvard teth For peace. Peace graun∣ted. Constāce the Dukes eldest daughter ma∣ed to the kyng of Spayne. Anne the se∣cond daugh∣ter to the kyng of . The Lusitaan Prince (for so ther ou they did agree) The second daughter tooke to wife, with solempne pompe, and glee. These matters thus performde, by power of God th'almighty guide. To antike seates agayne, through Ocean vast, they backward slide, And he withall his traine, are laued safe on Britayne shore. Few dayes expirde; the Princes leaue by suite obtainde before: A bragging Scottish Earle hight Marley enters English coastes, On frothing palfrey borne, and challenge making boldly boastes, To London comne, within the listes, to iust with pointed speare: With whosoeuer durst contend. the Prince was present there, And thousands of the common sort, in plumpes thick thrungo that tyde. Lord Mobray valiant Peere these Scottish bragges could not abide, An insolent challenge of  Sco,  the Englishmen The    in the Tor∣ney. But goodly to behold, in armour close, his steede he takes, And downe with force the Scot out of his saddle shogging shakes, And horse with mighty push, of steeled troncheon throwes to ground. Wherewith the lookers on, with shouts applauding, loude resound. He all astoynisht lyes, two ribbes in sonder craced quite, Whom set vpright, his feeble feete could not support one white. Wherfore from thence he was to lodging neare adioyning borne, Where shortly, through the grief augmented more, distract, and torne, He yeldes his breath, by force of armes, so he which honour sought, In armes doth honour lose, and challengd combatt dearely bought. Next Darel Scottish Peere Lord Courtney Britaine did prouoke, And loftie lookt for prayse, but of like Fortune felt the stroke: In force inferiour far. The third companion in the race, U that he iustling ranne, of valure small, and listes did trace, Fiue boystrous blowes downe driues, and conquered Cocburne it did shame For to haue strous, no glory got, retourning whence he came. But the contendours chief, Lord Haubers mighty limbd, and next Haut macke Courtney stout, whose venging right hand sore had vext, And backe repeld the foriners, which challengd Britaines bold: Through foolish pride puft vp: with condigne honour were extold. Those torneys finisht thus, and things at home set in a stay, King Richard to the sauage Kernes imbarkt did take his way Ireland sub∣ by kyg Richard. And them by warres resting fierce, with little bloudshed, downe He brought the Britaine yoke to hold. Then shortly from the crowne, And pretious Princely diademe, himselfe he did depose: And Henry Duke of Lancaster to old the scepter chose.
Now Henry fourth of that name king the Britayne state did guide UUhose stout, and puissant valure then sufficiently was tried, Henry the fourth began to raigne 199. UUhen for his Ladies dower, his father Spanyardes made to stoupe, UUhen Sier, and sonne, and after them, of men a warlike troupe, From Callice sandes proceedyng forth, did enter Gascoine soyle, And foes by drierie dint of blade, and reaking fiers did foyle. The meekle vertue of the man, and stocke so much renownd, Throughout the world the Britaynes foes, through feare put in a sloud. He yet a very youth through these aduentures hard did passe, That glory whole by due desart, on him bestowed was, Of ech exploit, were it atchiu de at home, or forraine coast. Besides his flowing wealth, this king himselfe might happy boast Through noble progenie, to whom his vertuous Lady fayre, Foure sonnes of wondrous towardnes had borne, of which the heyre Of comely stature tall, when manly yeares he neare had rought, Full many a ventrous enterprise wich courage bold he wrought. Of equall yeares, and maners eke, companions to him sought. Yet nothyng he vniustly did, nor straide from vertues line, Belou'd of all. within whose youthfull visage then did shine, The very image of those deedes, which comne to riper age, He should absolue. Now twise seuen yeares his Syer by counsell sage The Brittish atient land had rulde, with loue and laude of all. Till waxing crooke through age, him finall end of life did call, Incroching fast, and sicknes dire procurd his fatall fall. Forthwith his fathers royall crowne, the seyre apparant takes, To whom the Britayne Peers on bended knees their homage makes, Henry  fit succe∣deth his fa∣ther 1412. UUith sckipping harts, for glad, their countenaunce eke expressing ioyes, But he among his mates, somewhat addict to wanton toyes Before, forthwith (his father dead) became both stayed, and graue, And from the Court his leude licentious panions old he draue. More for such fawning hangbies, he priscribde a penalcie, Henry bani∣sheth from the Court, all his leude cō∣panions, left they should corrupt him by their euill counsell. If once they should appeare in place, whereas the Court did lye. Thus changde in all his actions, he doth as a Prince beseede, For counsaylours vsing such as sage, and of great wit, he deemde. And seldome ceast from taking care, what best might stand in steed, For coon wealthes auayle▪ much shepheard like, which taking heede Unto his foldes, long winters nightes, with painefull watchinges wastes, And whilst what was his right, reuoluing deepe in thought he castes, And what vnto his auncestours perceiude in elder age, He calls to mynde ow king of Galls, incenst with furious rage
Had sondry wayes indamaged, and hurt the Britayne kinge, UUherfore a counsaile straight be calls, and causes good doth bringe, UUhich might prouoke the valiant Brutes those wars to take in hand, Unto which point agree, all peers, and primates of the land, That backe againe, by dreadfull wars, the kinges right should be sought. Forthwith for to requyre his owne away by Frenchmen rought Legates sent into Fraunce to require the king of Eng∣landes right. The king doth legates send of polisht witt, and councell rare, Unto the king of Fraunce, from him, this message to declare. The most renowned Britayne guide king Henry, much doth muse UUhat this vniustice moneth you and rigour for to vse That you the plighted league haue torne. UUhy others proper right, Doe you with clasping clumbes by force out wrest, and wrieth by might▪ UUhat moues you thus despitefully against the English land? Them absent cruelly to pill, but when they be at hand, The Oration or speech of th English Legate. If brandes of dreadfull Mars they stirre, (I needes must speake the troth) Your cause is foundred still, and forct your iustice yeeld, though loth. UUherfore to Britaines  restore, away vniustly tane, Or dint of swourd, and fierie force, expect to breed your bane. And that which we out of your handes may not by fayre meanes wring, Unconquered Mars shall wrest. Such hope doth feed our noble king, That Ioue of heynous wickednesse be iust reuenger will, UUho bids s this to say, and princelike threats this to fulfill, Unlesse, your minde to better chaungd, you ware, repent in time: The chaunce of Mars is mutable, not one way doth incline. UUhen these wordes vttered had th'imbassadour from Henry sent, Forthwith hot  burning blacke the Frenchmans hartstringes rent The pallace vast, which burly burly noyce, consusde doth ring, And disagreeing angers rage, their mindes doth glowing sting. The king all wroth at last, did ope his mouth in great disdaine, The reply of the king of Fraunce. A labour hard to get, but kingdomes got, for to maintaine Is virtue great. If he deserue high fame, and worthy prayse UUhich through vnfriendly Mars (perchaunce vniust) doth goe his wayes As victor chief, subduing landes, to beare his seruile yoke: Ist not vnto the conquered, if courage they reuoke? A greater glory, of their legs, the fettring boltes to shake? And neckes from yooke to pluck, and force, by force, recuile to make? "Some howre, to some more happie chaunce, then other doth portend, "And ficle Fate will not remaine to one firme to the end. "The Frenchman now doth rule, towre the Britaine bare the sway, UUe florisht haue in time, and haue beene Troians doe you say.
Ten yeeres wars first expirde, by Greekes the Troians were subdued. Fraunce after many Sommers, hath her antike force renued. And me her captaine now againe begins to looke aloft, Her iniuries reuenging bold, and setting foes at nought. Yong boyes do terrifie with threats, with bugges, make Girles auaunt, No vaine colluding shadowes, can the manly courage vaunt, Nor boasting brags, nor florisht blade, with threatning trakes forth showne. UUhat that your king to manly yeeres, is nothing neere yet growne, Inexpert quite of dolefull wars. Let it suffice, that he For his disport doe tosse the ball, at home, and shunning flee The glittering tankes, of mighty Mars: let riper age those guide, Therfore this aunsweer take, and thus declare it was replied: That Frenchmen will their countrie coastes, and natiue cities shryne, With armes; in spite of all their foes, that thereat do repine. The Legates aunswered thus, to natiue soyle in hast they hie, And wourd by wourd declare, the manner of the Frankes replie. The scofe the king not taking well, all other thinges derides. Meane time his royall nauie huge, at Hampton he prouides, And forth through wandring salt sea floudes, with friendly gales he slides Henry sayleth into Fraunce. For Ioue almight, the Southwindes coucht in caues did close containe, That both the King, and captaines stout, with all their warlike traine, Unlooked for, on th'ennimies shore their ankers fastned faine, And ships forsaking, far and wide did all thinges wracke and wast, And houses brued with bloud, and roofes with reaking flames down cast Now puissant Henry in his tentes, one night away had past: When Phoebus rising, cloudes consumde, and brought againe the day, And with his radiant light, ech place in broad sight, did bewray. Which way, that mighty floud which flowing forth from Roan doth fall Into the sea, and with his rage, the rocky shoores doth ball: Seine a migh∣tie uer  from a  floweth by Roan nd through a great part of Fraunce, & at length falleth in at Ca or Kd Ca where are two strong townes. And with his sprinkling maketh moyst the bordring campes annext, Neare to the tentes, whereas his mouth, with gaping iawes wide strecht, UUithin the compasse of sixe howres, still salt sea floudes doth sup: And out againe, gainst customde time, doth belking perbrake vp: Two warlike townes, with mighty walles, ycompast round, they spied, On this banke one, that other built vpon the farther side. Forthwith the king commaundes them both with bandes besiegd to bee, Against them both the whirling crosbow shot to be let flee, And walls with ingine forgd of yron hard, to batter downe, This vnaccustomde kinde of torment fell, put in a stounde, The Celtaines closd within their walles, boyes, mothers, ed siers,
But to his great affaires (as he was wise) doth fit the time. Henry goeth agayne into Fraunce. If that perchaunce his fathers Law, which then in yeares did clime, Him absens should desire to see: the coast of Fraunce agayne He goes vntill, where comne, the Duke of Burgoine sheweth plaine, How that the Dolphin tumultes made, and reared vprores newe, Pretending faithles fraude. Against his foe, a warlike crue The king doth therfore send, his false attemptes for to withstand: But causes of more weight, he needed than to take in hand, And not for to respect at all, the Dolphins sielie band. Which valiant Britaines prest at hand, dares manly nought to done, But two dayes iourney of aloof, doth warie still them shunne. This did he at the first, that corne and victualls, might abound, Throughout his campe, and needefull foode might not be wanting found. Henry offreth the Dolphin battaile which he re∣fuseth. Who hauing all thinges bought at last, the Britaine proffer makes Of battaile, in an equall soyle, which trembling he forsakes, In number, and in puissance, not with Brutes to be comparde. That place moreouer vnto which, the warlike English garde, Approching drawes, the yong man shunnes, worse then a dogg, or snake, That he refusing flies, and course contrary swift doth take. When that the doughtie Britaines campe Northparts of Fraunce attainde, He thence his power remou, and with his bandes to Narbone ttainde. And hit inuading doth vesege, which from the Celtanes might, The Duke of Bedford straight acquites, and Dolphin puts to flight. Meane time the king with broilyng heat, and toyling labours brake, Henry taken with a feuer. Him languishing, effebled sore, a feuer sharpe doth take, The heauens intemperate ayre, and scorching dog star sweltring hott. Was cause, that neare vnto his hart, the deadly poyson gott. How be it he iourneyed still, with wondrous grief tormented fore. Till that his hart, and limbes, still faultring, fainting, more and more, He will perceau'd the struggling panges of ghaly death draw neare. His brother Humffrey posting comes, and Bedford Duke so deare. And doe with trickling teares, this sodaine thaunce lamenting rue, Most dolefull wightes. The king at last, these wordes, with grief out drew. (With both his handes extended bye to heauen) I much do owe O God almighty guide, but worthy thankes therfore bestow, I cannot, that in bloming youth so fresh, I hence depart, Unto this day, not hauing felt, dame Fortunes bitter dart. The speach of Henry before his death. That in this life all my attemptes. with good successe haue gone, That to thy heauenly power O God referred be alone. And to his brother? turning, sayes, why thus with mestiue hart,
Doe you this mourning make, and deepe sobs let with grief depart: I do reioyse my fatall houre, and death to be at hand. That must with equal minde be borne, which no man can withstand. By sacred league of brotherhoode, I do beseech you all, That Henry you my tender sonne, regard, loue, foster shall, And honour as your king, and specially with heauenly feare, You will informe his minde, so shall he worthy be, to beare The scepter of so noble a Realme, and purchase endlesse fame. Henry in his death bed committe his hyre H∣ry with hi wife Queen Catherine to his brothers and exho∣teth the to loue and  . My louing spouse which of the race, of mightie Princes came, Which is aboue all other left, a pensiue wretched dame: With godly duetie her sustaine, so doth it Brutes beseeme. And concord, greatest gift of God, that fauour, and esteeme. The Bedford▪ and the Burgoine Dukes, let them the Frenchmen guide, And to Duke Humfreys gouernance, let Britaines stout be tide. This carefully to be fulfilde, I bid, commaund, require. More Normandie a fertile land, which vnder their empire. Our auncient graundsiers did in elder age by right retaine, Which lost, by dint of sword, and conquering arme, I got agayne, That do you keepe by force, with iust warre that do you defend. Now death approching neare, did Henry bring to fatall end. The onely honour of his land, dame vertues shining light, From age, to age: to come, of stomacke hie, vnconquered might, Whose gentle hart his loyall frends alone, not onely lou'de, But enemies did embrace also, of faith, and Iustice proude, Henry the sixt his  was crowned at Paris. 1422. Of euerlasting memory, the king now layd in grounde: The Iunior Henry chearefull babe, with diademe was crownde At Paris, and about the streetes, as custome was did ride. But icle Fortune wauering dame, will not still firme abide. UUhich with her turning wheele is alwayes tost, in compas wise. The Frenchmen here the tender Prince, rebelling, do despise, A periur'de nation false, and violate their faithes yplight: In sacred Sinode late beforne. But Bedford Duke by might. Doth tame their rage, great slaughter made, and Dolphin puts to flight. The king peace thiefly lou'de, when that to ripe yeares he attainde, And gastly bickering skirmages, of dreadfull Mars disdainde. And neuer busied was, in ciuill hatredes restlesse race, But voyde of care, with settled minde, did gratefull rest imbrace. To prayer much addict, and oft on God in secret cried. But wicked people fell, such godly kinges cannot abide, But loothes them, and detestes with vertue, vice cannot agree:
And glimmering light, darke duskish cloudes eschewing swift do flee. The gentle disposition, therfore of Britaines guide, When that the Dolphinne and the rest, of Celtaine peeres had spide: They blouddie battaile moue, and some by fraud betraying take, Some townes by conquering might, vnto their force to yeelde they make. The Britaines hope retired backe, and hearts to faint began, Since Henry fift of that name kinge, a stout, and valiant man, UUas laide in graue. Hereon a cause insude of greater griefe, For the. Duke of yorke clai∣med the crown whose sonne and heire, Edward Earle of h after∣ward' obtai∣ned it by name of Ed∣ward the fourth. VVilliam cō∣querour first Duke of Nor∣mandie. For suddaine strife at home, concerning rule, and title cheife, Perdition threatning dire, increasing kindled more the iarres, Muse silence keepe, or muttring soft, the Britaines ciuill warres In dolefull verse declare, because that gastly woundes againe, By touching blede afreshe, and doe renew the former paine. Old Henry now forgotte, none Normand nation stout regards, UUhich barren, and bereft, all destitute, of auncient wardes, In vain doth denth of William monarch haunt, bewailing rue. Faire citties wresting out by force, from their possessours true, The Dolphin through the region vast of Fraunce doth roming strake: Prohibited of none, and townes assaulting first, doth take. A willing people to subdue it is an easie thing, And freely offering vp their handes. Howbeit small glorie bring It came vnto the conquerour, th'out bloudshed landes to winne. Such hurlie burlie, ciuill broyles, the Britaine land within, How could they force of forraine foe, oppose them selues, to bend? The Britaine is the Britaines foe, the hand, the wombe doth rend, What that the foote, with rechles anger mou'd, the head doth crushe? And Citizens, do Citizens, in furious rage through pushe, UUith drierie blade? his Lord, the slaue, his man, the master slaies. Fell slaughter beares the swaye, and blouddie Mars wide raging straies. Alacke for little breach, the Brother workes his brothers end, One neighbour, thrustes an other out, no place could safetie lend, From sauage enemies rage, the holy sanctuarie vailed naught, Which euer safety heretofore, to wightes distressed brought. These places were most famous made, through griesly slaughters vast. Saint Albones, Blore, Northampton, Banbury fields, and Barnet plast At S. Albons was foght the first battaile betweene kyng Henry and the Duke of Yorke. Blore heath field. 2. Neer copped hils, Wakefielde, Saint Albones than the second time, And Northerne Exam, which with Scottishe borders doth confine. So that the husbandmen, that habite neer those blouddie soiles, Out wayling to this day, as often as the plough turmoyles. Those fieldes, where casting furrowes large, of men halfeburied bones,
The chawg souldiour wth, with uglte showtes the ses doth rend, And now they di wear, as farre  urdie  to  The onse gi∣uen valiand, by the As∣c. The whistling shaft, with strength pul vp. Shote, Shoote, the Captaine Ye Britains stout, your prsing ems, & stent kering flights, reights Applie your bending bowes, applie, your hatrd enemies scoure, Like hailstnes thick, when ttling downe doth fall a winter shoure. The arrowes girt, forth flie, and light of Sunne obscure do make. In shoulder wounded deepe, with beating pawes, the ier doth rake, All endlong reed aooft, the ourser flerce, his master cast. The Celtaine horsemen galled thus, more sauffer thincke at last Upon our footemen for to ruime, with point of charged speare. Forthwith our  ronglie sens with bowes, to ground to beare: They fiersly presse with launce, the sight than bloudie wareth more, Stabd in with sharpened stakes, euen as the Prince had shewed before, The horses foundred lie, vpon the ground, their sitters slaine By drierie blade: And when no shaftes their quiuers did retaine. The bowmen take their gleiues, and downe their enemies tombling fell, The King endeuoring, fierce with sword in hand beres him well, Ech noble Captaine did the same, and with them all the rout. The bouncing Helmet knockes, did shrill resound the woudes throughout, With clattering clashing loud of harnish, ringes the waters cleere: And morning grones the bordring hils, and hollow valeis neere Of dying soules receiue. The goorie bloud streames so abound: As doth the earth with standing pooles, when Saturne old is founde. And Ioue inferiour in degree, Mars, Sol, and Venus neate, Hermes, and Lune, in Cancers house, Pisces or Scorpion weat, Duke of B layne. Iust through the brainpanne with a shaft the Duke of Barre yshot Comes tumbling of his steed his fainting spirite, and hart bloud hott, Out through the deadly wound disperst, in thinne ayer vanisht quite. Some of  nobles of Fraunce syne. The noble Duke of Alanson with fatall arrow smitte, The timber pulleth out, but steelehead leaues in scull remaine, Dire death inses the deadly wound, wherefore in deeps disdaine His steed hee falleth fro, and hard earth rending with his seeth, His aierie ghost out startes, and thinne in starie region fleeth. Like bane thy Duke O Brabant bringes vnto his fatall end. These Peeres the first ranke did conduct, the seconds guiders send, Like wise their dying spirites, to Plutoes kingdomes, large to flie As th'Earle of Nauarre with whome O Sans, thy Byshoppe te, Eight Earles more beside, their flickering ghostes did send to se: With grieslie wound y, And of those Peeres which Barons hight
Aboue an hundred lost their liues. Of Knightes and Squiers in ght  God o  l these cit∣tances ex∣ressed in son y places ane no∣ing els but e dyed as ndyng to utoes king∣es to  the riuers . &c. ue times full sixtene score their breaths out gaspt, the common sort Unto ten thousande soules and mor did Stigie varge transportt, Of Celtans army huge. Three hundred. Britaines onely slaine And in the handes of Henry king the victorie did remaine. Alack the Duke of Yorke with staggering launce his death wound gott, Where first agaynst our men, the bickering skirmage waxed hott. And Suffolke Earle' huge heapes of ghostes, first sent to Limbo lake, Of Frenchmen Peers, his vitall breath, with hart bloud did forsake. The Captiue Celtane Lordes, were safely kept in trustie hold. These thinges thus done, his men inricht with th'enemies spoyles, and gold, The noble Victor with his fleet, hastes backe to Callice shore, And cutting ore the strait sea gulfe: of auncient kinges of yore, To royall pallaces he wendes, triumphantlike a trayne, And after him he drawes. the Maior of pompous London fayne, UUith all his troupe of Aldermen, in roobes of Ermines clad, The Citizens f London eaue home e kyng th great solempnitie. Three miles agaynst his royall grace, for honours sake gan gad, To testifie their dueties, all the Citizens doe the same. And to expresse their ioyes, that he the Celtanes pride did tam, The Clergy eke their sacred temples left, doe solempne sing, o in like ma∣er doe the . The streetes throughout, deserued laud to the eternall king. The common sort with noyse, resounding brim, do after trace, Long prosperous health, beseeching God, to giue vnto his grace. This solempne pompe, the captiues all, in order sett, insue, Unto the Victor Prince his Court, where entertainement due, By Henryes hest, they shewed had. In fleeting barke yhore, Behold Sygismund taketh land, vpon English shore. vgismunds he Empe∣our cōmeth o England o treat a ce be∣weene kyng  and he French yng. UUhom courteously the Britaine Monarch hye, a gratefull hoast His auncient frend receaues, and welcome bids to Albion coast. Now loftie horned stagges, now sielie does they hunt in chase, Now hawking likes them best, and hollow winged gossehaukes race: Whilst lesser sort of birdes, for dread all shiuering, he fests. When leysure seru'd, and clogging cares expeld were from their brests: The Emperour thus begins. Most royall Prince, through fame renownd UUhich blasted hath thine actes, throughout the world, with trōpetts sound: he speach of   halfe of  Frankes. Spare now the conquered Galls, at length from blouddy wrs abstaine, You goorie bloud haue drawne inough, and foes-on heapes haue laine: UUhy doe you tire your selfe? and subiects weare with endlesse paine? Your late atchiued  in mynde will still remaine. Let peace be rooted in your hart, loue peace, then which the Lord,
A greatet gift on mortall men, at no time doth afforde. King Charles doth entreat the same, his Legate it doth pray, Which present in your royall Court, for that pretence doth stay. All cause of strife remoue, let loyall league of truce be plight. King Henry shall of Frenchmen haue, what lawfull is by right. Behold how tender babes, of Sters bereft, do howlinges make, And widowes mourning waile, their husbandes sent to Stigie lake. Consider pondring deepe, vnto the Lord how we are wrought. Sigismund had king Henry neare, by this persuasion brought To condiscend: who deepe in thought, now this, now that way strayes, Uncertaine what to doe, to pittie rare addict alwayes. And doutlesse the intreatie had, preuailed of his frend, Had not, (the French Embassadour intreating for to end, Which earst the Emperour had proposde) a post from Harflu comne, Declaring how the Realme of Fraunce, warres to renue begonne. And how of Englishmen, of late was made a slaughter dire, eare bankes of Seine. All burning woode, and furious standes in yre, The French∣men viola their . Prince Henry, hearing thus the Britayne souldiours to be slayne, Which few, could not the mighty power, of Celtane king sustaine. And stopping straight the Legates mouth, intreating still for peace, He sayes, reuengement shall insue, wherfore your suite surcease. The Emperour▪ was ashamed, that for that periurde nation bad, He suppliant, low, with speaches fayre, his frend intreated had. UUho ready to depart, with royall giftes in Princely guise Presented, sacred league of truce, with Britaine king contriues Sygismond  Henry strike a league during their  Sy∣gismond de∣parteth. And country soyle, through surging seas, by prosperous gales attaines. Forthwith resounding loude, the brasen trōpe his hoarse voyce straines, The egar youth thrunge thicke on flockes, with hartes incensed mad And by commaundement from the Prince, ech one in armour clad, The hollow hull vp fills, and through the rough seas scouring passe, Till Normandie a fertile land of large corne fieldes, and grasse, The kyng of England re∣neweth his warres in Fraunce. On rockie shores put out, receaues the warlike Britaine traine. His souldiurs here refresht: he Touche at first assaultes amaine. The Frenchmen hard, endeuoring fierce resist, by dint of sword, The blouddy onset beating backe, but that small helpe could ford, For conquerde, they to Britaine victor stout, to yeld were fayne, And Britaine campe within their walls perforce eke entertaine. From thence he mou'd his siege to Cane, which he did not subdue, Many townes in Normandie subdued. But with great bloudshed on both partes. But doutlesse vertue true Cannot be tamde. In first assault, he cleane their power did quell,
Howbeit the bickering, then at Cane at no place was more fell. He fauoured sacred temples all, and sanctuaries eke he sparde. UUhich when the trembling habitantes, by fame broad bruted hard: Admiring in their mortall foe, such wondrous vertue rare: And how he did preserue Ioues houses with religious care: The Normand people doe commit themselues vnto his grace, And to his campe with victualls in troupes did flocking trace: Conueying basketts heaped full of bread, to them apace. Then he with conquering force, Alencon did assaulting get, Next Argenton, fayre Constance doth without resistance set UUide ope her gates: But Laudum, and Falesia populous towne, In vayne expecting natiue ayde, at length were conquered downe. And vnder the subiection brought, of Britaine monarch weare. Then Larcha bordering neare on bankes of Seine, which hie doth reare Her rampier walls with turretts fenced strong, next conquered was. And many burrowes more beside, whose vulgar names I passe. Roan last of all remainde, which costly warres, and glittering gold, UUhich fined siluer, pretious plate, abondantly doth hold: The Normand Citie chief, which by a hugie mountaine side, Is situate, neare chanells deepe, where mighty Seine doth slide. Here Rumor spread, that Britaines army vast, was neare at hand. The husbandmen, and such as neare did eair the bordring land, Did hether bring their chiefest stuffe, transportyng it in carres, Persuaded, that so strong a towne could not be wonne by warres. The Britayne king with trenches deepe, and rampier bulwarke bankes, The towne inclosing round, doth fierce besiege with warlike rankes. Roane besie∣ged. Rockes rolling huge, and loftie towers downe throwing, an ingine vast A ramme, of steele swelts strong yforgd, by martiall skill was plast, So that with crooked hornes, he might the walls ransacking teare, Agayne the Normans fierce, from hie walls crest do battaile reare, And rough rockes tumbling rolde, & wrest'd from far the trembling speare UUith hott assault, and courage fierce, on both sides it was fought, Till Fleeboates armed strong, the king into the riuer brought: On euery side to stopp, that through Seines gurtie streames, no ayde Of men of armes, or victuals, should be by ships conuayde: The towne besiegd to helpe. Then Famine dire, doth raunging stray Throughout the Citie large, and want of foode doth much dismay The feebled souldiours poore. wherfore of boyes a combrous flocke, And sielie women weake, out of their gates they thought to locke, UUith point of threatning blade, the English Captaines that denyde.
Howbeit our deathes vnto our land, small safetie can procure. If we resistaunce make, all vnreueng'd we shall be slayne, And troth we must confesse, our goodes, and substaunce, will remaine To Henry king of Brutes, both towne and gorgeous turretts, gay, If ought offended were tofore, that pardon we thee pray, And if no succour from our Prince be sent, for our redresse, UUithin eight dayes, then entrance make, and freely do possesse, Hold and enioy, our towne, with luckie chaunce, this let vs craue To spare our liues, such mercy sure becomes it kinges to haue: This vertue rare thine auncestours, did earst renowned make. UUhat here the Celtane to obtaine demaundes, that let him take, Replyes our king, and here withall, vnto their proper place Eight dayes truce. The Frenchmen home he sent, truce was confirm'd for foresayd space. Eight dayes expired were, no helpe was sent, no natiue ayde, The promise was requir'd: then howling parentes halfe dismayde, UUith sucking babes, then virgine troupes, from antike dwellinges strayde. The Celtane people all, out of their gates in plumpes thrust thicke, ∣ded. All sad, of armour stripe, most wretched, emptie, poore and sicke. And habitations new for to prouide, they were constrain'de. Forthwith throughout all Britaine townes, the crier loude proclaimde, By strait coaundement from the king: that who so Harflu will Englishmen goe to inha∣bite Harflu, their owne country left. Beyond the Seas inhabite, and the fieldes adiacent till Or practise handy craftes, or follow greedy marchantes trade, Or turne the earth with crooked full, or delue, and digg, with spade: Let him to Harflu hie, where certaine place for his abode. Upon the asker by the kyng, shall freely be bestowde, Nor onely he, shall it inioy, but after him his heyre. Forthwith vnto the salt sea shoores, much people make repayre, Expecting onely prosperous gales, to cause the hull to glaunce. And where as nearest passage was vnto the realme of Fraunce: UUhat presse of people floct, in so short space, it wondrous was. That for inhabitantes great store, no place did Harflu passe. UUhich garded strong with men, the king his tentes gan to remoue. UUhen as a Scout into his eares, this vncoth tidinges droue, That through the bridges broken downe, he should no passage gett, That sixescore thousand warlike Galls, did neare approching iett, Bridges  Some. All dight in steelecotes strong, to beare the brunt from naked brest, And saletts glittering eke, with white plumes staring through the crest, Henry was aduertise  a great  of French approching So huge a troupe of horsemen, as in elder age no wight, Hath seen before, vnbridled, fierce, oer broad fieldes scoure in sight.
Plantagenet no whit disturbde, with this vast army, gads Still forward, and vnto his mates, he fearcer courage adds. His course directing straight, with stomack bold, against his foes. And for that Vespers shadowes glomme, anon would Sol inclose: Sol, the sunne Neere to the wouddy thickets dark, to pitch his tentes he chose. Then vnto his pauilion straight such Peeres as seemde him best. He bids repayre, there to consult, vpon the daunger prest. Henry a little before night calleth his Lordes to Counsaile as concernyng their daunger through the multitude of their enemies Thetis God∣desse of the sea vsed for the Sea. A stratageme o sleight to intrapt the the enemy by fraude. For scarce three miles th'enemies powre, was distant from the place. A little now before the night, they comne vnto his grace, There do decerne by councell wise, what meetest they do thinke. Amongst the rest (Don Titans beames now couch in Thetis brinke) The souldiours all commaunded were, sharpe pointed stakes to chuse, Out of the groues, whereof the king most prudent showes the vse. That on them, fastened in the ground, the troupes of horsemen fierce, Might light, in midst of race, which throgh the coursers hoofe would pearce. This secret guile, that formost rankes, should from the enemies close. Fraud is a vertue great, in dreadfull warre, to trap out foes. Meane time, vntimely dusky night, from hie heauens rushing prest, And mortall men, their wearied limbes, in sweet sleepe laid to rest, Forgetting troublous cares, that fresh they might to labour rise. Howbeit with drowsie slombring clogd, few Britaines shut their eyes, Some stringes vnto their sinowy bowes do fit, some whetstones plied In sharpening arrow heades, which might through harnesse pearcing slyde, He to th'almighty king his wife, and children doth commend, As though in fight the sequent day, should bring his faall end. He put his gold away, in hope that on the morrow morne, He shall the Frenchmans gaine, as customed was of old beforne. The glittering morning fresh, vnwares the Britaines, clearely shone, Armes, armes, ye English harts, with cries which rought the heauēly throne, The valiant captaines call, take armour, armour take, we pray, Your weapons gripe in hand, to twig your strong bowes forces laye: And chiefly in the hottest broyle respect to keepe good ray. These wordes no sooner sayd, but ioynt the bandes in order went, The English army set in order. Expecting foes approch with mynde to blouddy battaile bent. When sodainly a Scoutwatch spurres to courser setting swift, UUhich watching had the night before, to vnderstand their drift Survewd the enemies campe, cries, cruell Frenchmē, Frenchmen comme Like as in midst of winter cold, the sounding South wind glomme, UUith showring flawes, & duskish mistes, made thick, doth whirling runne.
Or as Orion clouddie starre, with countenaunce blacke doth fr, The hugie mountaine tops, being farre aloof, and neare, with sway Rough rushing windes flie out, and with their rce do ke away: So doth the Celtane army ast,  broad thes fayre in sight The Sunne vpstart, approch, displaying insignes glittering bright. The earth doth trembling shake, with hollow oof of trampling steedes, Through thrunging thicke on heapes, the pilming dust to skies proceedes. Sturd vp with horsemen plumpes, and bandes of footemen flocking fast, This morning had the king, into a founder stomber cast, Then e of custome vsde, so voyde of care sweet rest he takes▪ Untill one of his Peers into his be tent entrance makes, And him with touching soft, out of his pleasant sleepe awakes. Declaring how the Celtane hoast, within two miles were comne, And how into great ieopardie his campe was like to runne: Wherfore he prayes hi shew, what by his Captaines should be done. The king euen as he was, vnclothd, his liuely corps doth take, Henry rising out of his bed prayeth God to ayde him. Out of his bed, on bended knees, and thus doth prayer make. O hye and mightie king, I suppliant fauour do require, Thou greatest, puissance great, into thy seruantes Lord inspire. On thee I plant my onely hope, do not thy seruaunt leaue, The enemy to his horse, to thee alone, we trusting cleaue. If I as victor chief this day, the conquest shall obtaine: Thy Godheads wondrous prayse from age, to age, which shall remaine, In holy temples, sacred men, and women eke, shall sing. This pryer finisht thus, the rankes to place, forthwith the king Commaundes, and quickly clad, his glittering armour fitting fast, He starteth out, with skippyng pace, and through the rayes he past. Demaunding of his mates, what cheare, and hope their myndes possest, With chearefull countenance all do aunswere make, we hope the best. The Duke of Yorke for honours sake, then downe himselfe inclinde, The Duke of Yorke besee∣cheth the king that he might lead the forefront of the bat∣te. And sayes, renowned Prince, a thousandes causes moue my minde, To testifie my loue, and bounden duetie to your grace, ert to my country soyle, wherfore graunt that the formost place, Of all the battaile I, and forefront may conduct as guide, So shall I by my worthy deah eternall fame prouide: And lesse I be deceau'd, by false illusions of my mynde, I shall by drierie dint of blade, the dastarde enemy grinde. And euerlasting glory will such noble actes succeede. He endes his tale. Plantagenet approchyng, him with speede Takes vp from ground, and frendly doth this courteous aunswere ford.
Since thou my kinsman deare, doest offer of thine owne accord, The kyng graunted the Duke of Yorke the con lucting of the fore∣front. Such gratefull seruice, as no thought imagine may a part, More gratefull,  hy th I ye for thy most gratefull hart. A worke of high   thou  ll,  the same, Thy warlike n vnto thee   straight to battaile frame Thy selfe, and dreadfull foes to come, by may courage tame: And through thy great exploites in warre, deseru'de laud beare away. Without delay the Arthets stout, are sett in battaile ray, Of which the greatest part, in sondry winges deuided weare. The martiall rankes which tronthesn pies, claspt in their hands did beare. The ensigne of the king, in armour thick did compasse round. The Earle then which by the name of Suffolke was renownde, The Earle of Suffolke. The right wing did conduct, the Warwicke Earle the left hand rout, Both armde with souldiours old, which twangd there bowes with courage The Earle of VVarwicke. A troupe of horsemen light, the piken rankes did firmely garde. (stout. The reregarde such as browne bill date, and  keene did warde, Like Giantes strong, with hugie limbes, and campe behinde did close. Here was the Britaynes power, this hinde of battaile ray they chose. The army ordred thus, the king demandes, what time a day? About the time in which our Priestes accustom'd are to pray: The nobles aunswere make; throughout the townes of Albion hie, Be of good cheare ye Britaynes ut, the king doth straight reply. For in this , the sacred clarkes, do pray for our successe, The kyng of England ex∣horteth his souldiours to fight. Goe to my lads, your valure so by great exploites expresse: That like to your forefathers old, this day you may depart, Whose handes in fight, not onely haue the Frenchmen made to start, But manly lookes haue stoinde, and forst to flie with broken hart. All feare expell, death dreadfull is to none of gentle kind, If to be ouercomne by destinies lott we be assignde: The last gasp of my vitall breath, shall be blowne out this day, For me as captiue, to redeeme, no man shall tribute pay, Nor for my raunsome Brittish land, shall any charge defray. He sayd. Like minde was to them all, the army showting hie Redoubleth loude the noyce, and promise plightes that all would die On paint of goarie blade, if Fortune victory should denie. Meane time towardes the Celtanes hoast, began to wend away The army all, and broad in sight, their bankers to display. Behold of dreadfull Mars the trompet gastly noyce out blue, Prouokementes dire of blouddy slaughters fell, then to insue. The armies both bloudthirstie neare, and neare, their footestepps drue,
The share vprooting reares, and brings to light, in steede of stones: At Northa∣ton was foughten the third battaile where the kyng was ta∣ken prisoner in the field. The fourth famous bat∣taile was at VVakefield where the Queenes pow et slue the Duke of York with his sonne the Earle of Rut∣land, and de∣stroyed his hoast. The fift bat∣taile fought at S. Albons againe, where in the Queene discomfited her enemies and deliuered her husband. The battaile at Exam fought be∣tweene Ed∣dward the fourth, and the Lord Mo tague lieuete∣naunt of the North to re∣couer the crowne for kyng Henry the sixt. The battailes at Banbury, Barnet, Todeastell, and Teuxbury were fought in Edward the fourthes dayes. Henry Earle of Richmond at Bosworth slue Richard the third, beyng third brother of Edward the fourth, and then maried the Lady Elizabeth daughter to kyng Edward, and obtaineth the crowne, he first ioyned the houses of Lancaster and Yorke beyng long tyme at variaunce. Doe curse, and banne with dolefull playnts, those ciuill battailes fell, In which an hundred thousand wights, the blooddy blade did quell. Todcastle eke through battaile strange, a noble name doth gayne, In which full thirtie thousand men, in dolefull sort were slaine. The last broyle of this ciuill war, did Teuxburie contayne. Which townes yet standing, of those warres are testimonies good, How then that flowing riuers ranue, conuerted into blood, So many dreadfull foughten fieldes, the faction of two kings, Did cause, which mightie Ioue at last vnto conclusion brings. Here Bosworth blooddy warres, and others moe, I will omit, By which king Henry seuenth eternall fame, which will not flit From age to age continned still, in memorie attaynd, UUho first but Earle of Richmond, then king Edwards daughter gaynd. In wedlocke linked fast, and with her Britaine crowne possest. That did the lawes require, and English Primates chiefe request. This God th'almightie guide, as authour chiefe, did bring to passe, And thus at length the rage, of ciuill hatred ended was. He rayngd vnto his subiects all, a noble prince most deare, All externe enemies far and neare, his puyssance great did feare. He worshipt chiefly God, and godlines, and iustice lou'de, And craftie wicked men, he hating, sharpely still reprou'de. Full twentie yeeres and three, belou'de of all he ware the crowne, Of forrayne princes high esteemde, and had in great renowne, A king of iustice rare, of prudence, manners, courage bolde, who dying left the dyademe, to Henry stout to holde, His heyre, with wondrous welth, huge heapes of siluer pure, and golde. The ende of the first Booke.
HE from him tender yeares, the workes of mighty Mars esteemd, try . 509. That other giftes most singular, which well a Prince beseemd: As well of body, as of minde, I do not here declare. How puissant, courteous eke, how he his shoulders loftie bare Aboue the rest, with comely face adornd, and vertue rare. The fourth time haruest yellowish waxt, since first he ruld this soyle, And hott Autumnus scorching flames, the earth did chapping broile: UUhen Henry valiant Britayne king, did fearefull wars vp rere, And cruell Frankes, to blouddy campes, of dreadfull Mars did stere. The Romane bishop him incenst these warres to take in hand: UUherfore the surging floudes he cuts, and doth at Callice land, The Citie filling full, with thirtie thousand souldiours stout. Foure noble Captaines onely tane, out of the warlike rout: A great expe∣dition into Frantic. Lord Talbot martiall Peere, and eger Poynings fierce in fight, Rice ap Thomas floure of Wales, and Somerset a doughtie knight. UUhich Henry had foresent, to fragrant fieldes where Turwyn standes. ir Rice ap Thomas Turwyn a walled fortresse strong yfenest with warlike bandes. In tune of pleasant spring, as boystrous windes with whirling blastes, On ground all sweeping sheere, and slubble light, and dust vp castes: Or as the earth, with croked teeth, of sickle sharpe, is shorne: So downe the heardes of deare, with th'English horsemen thick are borne. They troupes of prisoners take, and droues of beastes, subdue by might. The king insues, and thirtie thousand men in harnish dight, Turwyn Of hard brasse beaten forgd, in siege gainst Turwyn walls he pight. Under the Britaine king the mightie Emperour serues for pay, Maximilian the Emperour, seues kyng Henry, for pay. And blouddy Germaines fierce, in bruntes of warre renownd alway. Nothing to souldiours is disburst for hyer, but fyned gold: Of which ech tent throughout the campe, such wondrous store did hold: That money for to coine, the king of siluer was constrainde. Rewardes stout courage brought, and hier in armes haut hartes maintaind. The Celtane horsemen troupes with valiaunt Brutes do battaile make, To rescue theirs, but all in vayne they weaker armour take. The palme of conquest wonne away, the puissant Britayne beares, The enemies all thrust through, with sharpned pointes of thirling speares. The walls with roring Cannon shot, all groueling battred downe, Doe easie passage giue, and entraunce large into the towne, And Frenchmen fild with shiuering dread. Now Turwyn Britaines hold, And conquered spoyles, of ransackt towne, the king decks manifold. Turwyn wonne. UUhose mighty puissance great, in feates of Mars, with flickring winges, Swift sliding through the ayre, Report, to bordring Cities bringes.
In Tornay famous Citie strong, when that these newes were told, Tornay ren∣dred payes, the king ten thousand duckets for yearely rent. For very grief she grones and grauntes for tribute sommes of gold. And gates wide open fetts, permitting Britaines entrance bold, UUithin her walls, and subiect now, vnto new Lordes becomne, Extincting former lawes, of Henry king takes new in romne. Meane time kyng Iames which then of Scottes the regall mace did beare, And to confirme the league, till warres of Britaines ended were, UUith Frankes in hand, the sacred hoast had tane not long beforne, VVhilst kinge Henry is busie in Fraunce Iames King of Scottes inua∣deth England And on the holy Sacrament, had most deuoutly sworne: For to obserue the rouenantes, then plighted to his frend: Himselfe with flaming fire, and sword, against our bankes doth bend. And sixtie thousand souldiours hard, all armed, training fast In absence of their Lord, the Britaine borders wide doth wast. The Surrey Earle of English bondes, assignd lieftenant, stright Of valiant Brutes an army chose, and to augment his might, He noble Peers of auncient race descended, to him ioynes, Scroupe, Stanly, Latymer, of stomacke stout, and sturdy, loynes. Lord Dacres present was, and Clifford harnisht glistering gay Than Bulmer, Butler than with Haward Admirall of the sea: And Edmond to him mynd, sprong of one line of Grandsiers old, UUhich first assailde his foes, couragious knight, aduentring bold. Both dight in brestplates black, so made by salt seas springling drop, Lord Haward admirall and his brother in blacke har∣nish The Scott had pitcht then tents on flodden hill. The enemy planted was, on Flodden mountaines crested topp. And when approching fast, the king perceau'd, in battaile ray, UUith banners broad displayde, the Brutes toward him take their way, Dismounted from his steede, where glory vaine incenst him forth Or feruent angers rage (which in such case is little worth) He forefront of the battaile leades, and straight assailes his foes. On sturdy buckler bosse, the Britaine bare the enemies blowes, And venging gleine, with goary bloud, downe runnyng red, imbrued. Three long houres, armyes both in doutfull bickering fierce pursued. The Scott with two large greifley woundes, the sharpe sword edge doth stay: Iames king of Scots slain and all his ar∣mie discomfi∣ted. So doth he for his faithles part, deserued penaunce pay. Part sau'd themselues by flight, the remnaunt downe to death are cast, Renowned Henry, thus of nations twaine, returnes at last Chief conquerour to his natiue land, where thus his foes destroyde, Then after many yeares he rulde, and quiet peace inioyde. At length the Northarne borderers, abusde were of the Scott, But he Embassadours doth send, the trespasse out to blott, A Scottish le∣gate comes into England. And to acquite himselfe, which done the Legates home retire.
But after that, on this side Britaines grudgd, and Scottish Ire, On that side is incenst, for on their borders grewe a strife, And secret murmuringes went, how quarrels dayly waxed rife, Betwixt the peoples twaine. Scarse thrise dame Phoebes glittering flame Repayred had her blazing beames, and circle round became: When as a mightie power of Scots well arm'de with troncheon speares, One part on foote, the other hors'd on praunsing steedes, vp reares Themselues, and in Nouember when the high heauens rayne down powrd, The Scots reaking into ngland ore Carlile. Irruption making fierce, with sword and fire, our borders scourd. There is a Citie hight Carlile, with strong walles fenced round, Built in the Northpart of this land, which without balke or bound, In valley playne is set, and faire broad campes doth bordring vue, Out of this fortrest warlike towne, the kinges lieuetenant drue. And other partes adioyning neere, which are in Cumberland, Two thousand Britaines harnisht bright, gainst all the Scottes to stand. Which hautie hearted Wharton, doth conduct in open fieldes, And egar onset giues, dishiuering speares, and battering shieldes. VVharton with two M. uldiours bdues the cots and uts them to ght. But Scottes, a chilly feare theyr trembling hartes possessing stright, Astonisht were, at first assault: and by Ioues power almight, UUere conquerde, battered downe, all groueling on the duskie ground, Some takes the bushy groues, and dungeon caues with rough rockes bound. Some swift to mountaynes toppes, with tale okes froughted, flying gate: The king of Scottes himselfe, which on a hill side lurking sate, Afright with this euent, and of his men the sloughter vast: To passe a gurtie floud, himselfe into the channell ast. The riuer through wilde winter showres, then flowed aboue the brinkes, Wherfore in midst of striuing streames he, gulping waters sinkes. ames King of cots swim∣ing ouer a uer as some y was drow ed. Besides all those which flight preseru'd, and were in skirmage slaiue, A number captiue of the Peeres, and commons did remayne, UUhich wearied sore, and sad, that night Carlile did safe containe. The common sort with iron beltes, and shackles fettred fast. UUhich for a mashy muck of coyne, all raunsom'de at the last: As conquerours, and conquered betweene them could agree: Doe haste them home to natiue soyle, from bondage quited free. But all the nobler sorte, from race of auncient Peeres esprong, The Chiefest  Scotland aken priso∣ers, sent to he Towre. From thence to London Tower with swift course were conueyed along. UUhere they inclosed fast, the first night were constrayned to stay, All mourning, pensiue wightes, sweet liberties freedome tane away. The next morne glomy shadowes dimme, from hye heauens had depres'd, UUhen godly Henry mindfull sill, of wretched wightes distres'd: Commaundes the Captiues all, adornde in robes, as white as milke,
The kinges rich pretious giftes, all curious wrought with finest silke. Through midst of London vnto him, gentlie to be coayde. The clemen of King He∣ry. Then of the hard vngratefull harts of Scottes, but little sayde: There olde accustomed fraud ingraft, he reprehendeth much. Yet all with wondrous leitie, and pleasaunt countenance such, As louing parentes vse to haue, when they their children deare, Sprong from their proper loyns, correcting chide, to put in feare. The Captiues on the other side, did render ample speech, Both for themselues, and countrie soyle: and for their late dead leich, And farther did in humble sort beseech his royall grace, That he vnto their wordes would lend, his listening eare a space, King Henry grauntes, deepe silence straight ech man from talk doth hold: When thus the eldest of the troupe, of captiues thus he told. O Prince amongst all noble kinges of Europe most renownd, UUhose mightie praise through weightie workes in warfare doth abound. The oration of the Scot∣tish Captiu to King He rie. UUe conquered Scottes, thee conquerour, confesse with willing thought. Nor shame it is to such as you, vs subiect to be brought. what shame ist for the Panther weake, to'th Lion grim to couch: If sharper penance you appoint, deseru'de I hit auouch. Our vitall blisse, our finall bane, in your handes doth remaine: Howbeit to such a prince renownd, our death small prayse can gayne. Nor to be slayne, can profit bring, vnto your souldiers stout, Respect our sucking babes, and dolefull spouses scriking out: with teares the ruthfull funeralls, bewayling of their Lordes: As dead. Offendours to forgiue, it greater glorie fordes, If they offend which hest obey, of their annoynted king Then twentie hundred foes in field, to dreadfull death to bring. But now vnto our sute, which pondring wey with iustice right, Renowmed prince: we entrance made, thy coastes to wast by might, And wasted haue the bordring hamsettes neere with fierie flame: Haue not our men with coudigne death, paide penance for the same: Our king no longer vitall breath and aire supernall takes, But lucklesse chance, of lowring Mars, and life, despising hates. Perchance the Destinies so required, and God the eternall guide, would haue it so, vnto whose becke all thinges on earth are tyde. That of his wondrous clemencie, two kingdomes ioynt combinde Might be in friendly loue, and both haue one concordant minde: Discordant earst before, and endlesse league of friendship knit. This thing to bring to passe, occasion now is offered fit: which take O noble king, and of two lands procure the blisse,
A male child of great towardnes your heyre apparant is. Our Prince hath tae his fat all fall hi heire of female kinde, But lately borne, the Scottish crowne to weare,  left behinde. If these two Princes were conioynd in Hymens sacred bandes: The cause of all out bickering iarres wd que be out of hand. And eke in euerlasting peace both regions should be tide. Who can prohibitt this, if it by you be not deuide? If you commaund it to be so, which me aske and request? He sayd th one , both parties this steeme as best. Affirming it the wondrous worke of ye Iehoue to bee, For nations  in hatred st, by such meanes to agree. The king that present time, few wordes did render backe agayne, But them dis, condes  states beseemd to entertaine, And portlike house ,   Peer he frendly lenties, Expences all defrap, rich ires, gold, and siluer sdes, King Henryes cence. And more with massie golden chaines ech captiue he addornes. Now fearefull does they hunt, & chase er eepe hills thick with thornes, Now into hunting tts, they drue the swift aggs, haut with hornes. "But flattering pleasure puts a meane at lengeh unto her ioyes, "And nothing is so pleasaunt found, but it hath foure ayes. "To country gostes, more sweet in tast, is bee then patridg fine, "More gratefull eke then daintie cares, is powdred flesh of swine. Euen so the Scotts their country cold, then ours, more better sayes, Though all thinges likes them well, and all thinges they unwilling prayse. Such ardent loue of country soyle, mens mortall mindes doth taxe: In respect of which, all other ioyes dot soure and lothsome waxe. Wherfore they burning in desire, to see their natiue , And licence free for to depart, attaind at Henries hand: Whilst that they promisd golden mtes, and did perswade the king, How they two nations linkt in league, and endles truce would bring: The Scots set t freedome and pardoned without any aunsome on them. He froothing palfrayes fayrs, and bugy he apes of fined golde On them bestowd, and gratiy most chearefull did behold: Their raunsomes pardoning ke, Thus captiue Scotts dismissed ee With solempne shewes of wondrous ioyes, now welcomde home they hee, Unto the pallace of the Queene, which to her husband drownd, The sacred rites of funerall, performing  they found. These primates thus returned safe, the Queene their soueraigne dear. Demaundes what er, in Britaines ourt, and how they used weare. Ungratefull Scotts they first concelde, king Henries gratefull hart, And did disprayse the English guide (a vile vnworthy part)
Then dosefull her lamenting still, they earnest did exhort, The Britaine not to chuse, in wedlocke bed to be confor. The Sts d ht the Queene  mying h daughter to the Englishe Prince. Unto the Princesse fayre, but forraine sone in lawe elswhere get, And noble Celtane king in nations seuered far to fet. And peace for wars to change, to such as wars would boldly make, That fortune then in tune to fore, successe would better take. These sayings all, the Scottish Peeres vpheld, with one assent, And towards britaines borders straight, with sword, and er, they went. The periurde Scot, to burning wrath now Henry kindled had, And chearefull trumpets ratling sound, to broyles stout britaines bad. Foorthwith in solempne sort, were summond states of all the land, A haynous fact, eche one cries out, reuengement out of hand. By dreadfull sword, by reaking flames, eche sayes must be prepard. And promizd seuerally their helps, all cause of stay that bard This enterprize seemd long, to ieopard life none dout doth make, That Brytaines of such villanie, reuengement iust might take. The Captaines chiefe assignd, the Earle of Hartford vncle deere, To Edward tender Prince, and Dudley haut and warlike peere, Edward  of Heforde and Iohn Dudley Lord admiall with a nauy of ship pes enter Sotland. Which Henry Admirall of his Fleete, appointed had to be, In wit, and courage like, but far vnlike in sterce, for he, In mighty puissance fierce, of sturdie limbes, and ioynts, did passe, The other subiect lesse to yre, lesse wroth and dreadfull was: In fewe dayes did the enemies shore, with crooked keele attaine, Through weltring salt sea flouds, with prosperous gales blowne on amaine Without delay, with armed souldiours stout yfenst, they land, Their Marriners hot blooddy broyles, beginning out of hand. The foe rumies scattred here, and there, the countrie cottage tops, which ether clotted turfes, or flaggie marrish rushes stoppes, And couers from the winter showers: with flerie flames at burnd. Lieth ransact, to the ground by Vulcans blasing brandes was turnd. I eithe and E∣denborowe ransacked. And all the bordring region neere, did smoldring smoke vp reare, Of female sexe the dolefull mournings loud, the skies doe teare With scriking noyse, and aier throughout, yong childrens clamours ringes, All, sadnes did portend, a wretched shape remaind of thinges. To Edenborowe then our men, with tents remou'd proceed, Dere bickering blowes beginnes, with showres vplifted fierce indeed. The Scottes their entrie gates, indeuoring fast with ingines rambd, The Scottes placed their, ordinau full ag their g And ordinaunce roring loud, with iust charge of gunpouther crambd. On this side foundred is the Scotte, their Britaine breathlesse lies, Those gasht with goorie blade, those flame with shaft which flickering flies.
The bounchy ashen tronch, doth many riue with gaping wound, Sent far aloof, but more the whussing bullet dings to ground. At length part of the Britaines campe, the battred walls had scalde, Inuading fierce, with reaking fiers, and vutes and roofes downe haelde. The Scotts do flye for feare, their goodly Ordinance Britaines hold, The Scottes forsake their Ordinaunce. They shunne their sight, as does, doe houndes, as hindes, do Lions bold. The strong stone walls remainde, and housen pinions stared vast, All other thinges to ashes burnt, with Vulcanes sparkling blast. The castell yet of Edenbrow, vnconquered standeth stout, An auncient fort, with ouglie walls, of cragged rocke cut out, Depending on her strength, and burning with desire of fame, That she durst proudly boast, no forraine force her power could tame, "The euent, and finall end of thinges, doth try them false or true. But therof triall to be made, the kinges edict withdrue For present time: wherfore the valiant victor Britaines hoast, Fame leading them the way, with swift course sayle to natiue coast, In fleeting hull ybore, with chearefull noyse of trompetts sound: The shippes safe in their wonted roades, with mighty cables bound. When thus the nauy strong tawe ropes, to grapling ankers tyed: Lord Dudley martiall peere, straight waye to Princes court him hyed. Whom, many a right hand stretched out, doth welcome home full fayne, Where he saluted is, and salutations giues agayne. Before all others Henry Prince, to loftie skyes doth raise, His Admirall, and puissant corps, with minde vntamde doth prayse. UUith Princely wordes, and Princelike giftes, adds to confirme the same. Scarse through the twelue celestiall signes, done Phoebus glittering flame, Had stealing crept, when Britaines force, the Frankes prouokt to fight, Preparation of wars against Fraunce. UUhose king with cruell miscreant Turkes, a league of truce had plight. Out, out, a filthy fact, and deed vnworthy to be spake, For Christian king to doe, religious care which seemde to take: And of that title to the world so vast a shew did make. The king of Fraunce his league with the Turke. Agaynst him therfore for to warre renowned Henry bent, UUith suffrage of the primates chief, and councels graund consent. He armes of proofe prouides, and souldiours customed long to warres, And doughtie ladds, of courage stout, and prompt to bickering iorres. And valiant guides of stomacke haut, all such he bringeth out. The nobles present weare, and commons eke, a hugie rout, And first that Peee, whom Suffolke name, and title hye assignde, Up mounted on a trampling steed, in Tyrian purple shinde, UUith golden helmet deckt, whose copped crest did streeming stare.
Then he to whom like title, rich of sheepes woll Norfolke, are, Exulting skipping came, a Duke to wrothfull anger prest, The Dukes of Northfolk and Suffolk the Earle of Arundeil. Lord Paulet, Lord Russell appointed chiefe in this warfar. Howbeit of minde vnconquered, nor by Mars to be supprest. Then Arundell an Earle, of youthfull yeares a strippling braue, UUith Pawlet, which did corne, and needefull foode prouide and saue. Lord Russell then, which warlike troupes of burly ladds did trace, UUhich Deuon fostred vp, of white tinne mines a fertile place. Walles sent a iolly route, and Ireland eke a few did yeld, UUhich neither dred the bright drawne sword, nor blouddy foes in field, In running springoldes light, of hart, and handes of valure tried: The chosen Northarne crue, on warlike Coursers fierce to ride In mayled shurtes, of sturdy yron sweltes fine forged, dight, By swift course of their horse, could equall striue with birdes in flight. Sir Anthonie browne mas∣ter of the horse. Anthony Browne whose comely corps, if men you would behold, In portrature none excelde, nor in exploites of Mars more bold: Most willingly the horsemen troupes, by Princes hest did guide, From all the coastes of Britayne, came, thicke thrunging, far, and wide. A mighty power of Springoldes fresh, and store of palfrays fierce, The horne hoofe of the foming horse, the trembling earth doth pearce, And horsemen armde with sturdy launce, do runne with frisking pace. The campe thus ordred well, in long rankes marcheth on a pace, And aierie region vast, with clamorous noyse discordant fills. UUith armed troupes, the hollow vales, and loftie mounted hills: As with falne flakes of snow, or Titan set, with dropps of due: Or Tita set that is, or when the Sunne is set. You might all scattered thick, in complet harnish cluttering, vue, whose blasing brightnesse through the rayes of Phoebe so dimd the looke, Of vewers all, that Titans beames, away the prospect tooke. New rayment partie coloured made of woll by skilfull art, The souldiours of ech Captaine did disseuering set apart. Fine silken banners broad displayed, before ech and doth goe, The skipping souldiours of his guide, the Ensigne spread doth know. Euen as the fragrant floures aboue the greene grasse loftie show, In pleasaunt time of spring: and with their coloures do delight, If any man of fayre fresh fieldes, shall walke to take the sight: Such semblaunce hath out bands whilst oer ye playne heathes thick they gad, In silken iacketts fine, with skirtes imbrodered curious clad, Their glittering armour glimsing rayes, like Sunne beames casting fro. The discripti∣on of king Henry th. 8. King Henry loftier by the head, all boistrous, stout doth goe, A great and mighty Peere, where you his strong armes do behold, Or huge thighs sturdy pight, which art had closd in pretious gold.
And eke his manly corps, with mighty brestbont bolstred broad: By no force to be tawde, nor through with hard steele to be throad. Him armour strong inclosde, of finest mettall polisht wrought, Such as by fierie puissant God, yforgd you would haue thought, ulcanus. Or by the monstrous Cyclops vast, in smoldring Aetna caues. The workman, there sleepe clammering hills, and liquid flouds ingraues. Here shadowy darkesome woodes are set, their shrubby salowes lowe, Moreouer Themmes, which with straight course, into the sea doth goe The descrip∣ion of the workeman hip of kyng Henries har∣ish. And on that side whence Easterne windes, with boistrous blastes do sweepe, Were Seuerne grau'de, and Trent, two mighty floudes with chanells deepe, Whose weried streames to th'greedy gulf of th'Ocean vast do passe. On the vpper margent of the shining brestplate grauen was, The shapes of mighty kinges, and ginning of his auncient race, Edward Plantagenet the fourth there had his royall place, The liuely Image then, and antike forme of Henry sixt, Of mothers, and of fathers side, his grandsiers next were fixt. Then Henry seuenth with loyall spouse adioynd, in seates are stalde. By name of royall Salomon most worthy to be calde: For that he prudent was and godly eke, which vertues twaine, Unto a Princely Peer, eternall fame deseru'd can gaine. His sonne of yong and tender yeares, the staring hellmethad, Whom ruling here on earth, dire death did enuie youthfull lad. Two Princes, virgines last, by seuerall mothers brought to light, Successours to the crowne, so lawes, and rites requirde by right, Two royall chaires possest, ingrau'd in crest of headpeece bright. Where from his sturdy bow the king his flickering shaft did wrest, All showting loude out cried, that he therein exceld the best. Or whither he with straining force, did charge the shiuering speare, He had agayne the prayse. If valiant Hector liuing weare, And now Achilles should assayle, with gastly gleiue agayne: Like force of thunderbole, so he his sword with might did straine. But to de short euen as their king, the army all desires, To be the like, hye honours pricke their hautie stomackes siers, Incensing more, with courage great▪ aduentures great to take. The souldiour will be stout, which vnder stout guide wars doth make. Upon his armour honge; a vesure dect with pretious gemmes From vtmost Indies brought, & Emerauldes dazeling eyes with glemmes. The Diamond, shining Saphire eke, and Iasper were infold. His hangers guilt, his sword hilts gold, his buckler bosse of gold, Or if that any thing, then red gold were more pretious found.
And to be brief his gorgeous trappers gay, and bitt linkes round, Did cunning rare containe, and cost which such a king beseemd. The common sort thus richly dight, him not a man esteemd, But thought a God. For God himselfe, the heauenly monarch hie, Will earthly Princes haue also, in royall dignitie, To be, as Salomon in glittering ornamentes we know. And now the sea which through the strait clifes, rough with rage doth flow, By blastes of prosperous westerne windes, the Britaines ouer cast, At Callice landing safe. Refreshing toyles, and labours past, King Henry landeth at Callice. The king, and all his warlike troupe, their viandes gladlyer tast. And now the dimme night, weried corps, all drouping layes to rest. The greatest part do watch, perplexing cares them so opprest, Ech little stay or none, to wights destrous seemes delay. When Titan from the Easterne flouds, with bright beames gan his way, The dreadfull trompet soundeth shrill, ech tooles in hand doth take, And towardes coastes of Celtane kyng forthwith do iourney make: Towardes the glistering beames of Titans flashing charriot bright, There is an ample soyle, amongst the Galls, which Artoyse hight, A frutefull plague, for pasturing fieldes to feede the fleesie sheepe, Abounding eke with loftie trees, and bushie mountaines steepe, There see we stand aloof, with pompous houses Bulloine old, On rough sea shore ybuilt, with walls of hard rocke round infold, In elder age inuinsible by any forraine foes. This warlike fortresse proud, for to assault the Britaine goes, And rampier bulwarke casses, and towne with deepe trench doth inclose. Bullen besi∣ged. To those that were shut in, no hope remaind of comming out, Next to the walles fierce Dudley standes withall his dreadfull rout Of mariners, through flashing surges brought, a people fell Are mariners, and sterne, vnbrideled, such no force can quell. Which boistrous roaring floudes, with mighty whirle winde raging stoure, When in the gurtie channels low the ouglie rockes they scoure: Doth neuer daunt, with shinering dread, nor chilley feare procure, To whom nor ragged desart rockes, nor fierie flames, inure Doe terrour cold, nor daungers dire, by sea, or els by land. The Admirall of the sea, reioysde at this his warlike band. The mariners, themselues of such a Captaine happy deeme, So like, doth like, with willing hart imbracing, high esteeme. Of all the hugie Britaine campe these men one quarter weare, By which the Bolloyne Citizens, did vtter ruine feare. On th'other side doth Charles Brandon dire destruction threat,
And towne besiegd, withouten rest, and walles doth battering bent. Nor farre from thence stout Henry king, his warlike tentes hath pight. The English giue assault. From whence through thinne aire, ratling pearst with peise, the whirling And sparkling burning brands, to lofty tops of turrets flies, (flight, None of the shiuering enemies durst for feare lift vp their eies. Nothing but trembling terrour pale, within the walles remaind, At length from rampier tops, and crested walles, down iauelinges straind The Galls besiegd, and stoutly force, by force againe repelde, The gall re∣sist. And with their manly balute bold, to tacke the Britaines helde: The bickering blouddy groes, here feare, here glorie moue mens brests, The staggering launce with force, forth flying swift, both parties wrestes. Through gasht with gaping wound, out grudging ghoshes a number send, Most yet of these were slaine, which hye walles garrets did defend: And maimde with galy stripe, with grief vnto their homes are borne, He stoynisht, gasping breathlesse lies, he haltes his foote ytorne, With braines on ground besprinckled broad, no forme of bisage left An other spraules, with knocke of stone, he tumbleth peecemeale cleft. The ancient age in conquering fortrest'd townes, and cities, found The vse of ingine fell, with mightie beames of timber bound, Or els a Ramme, with hooked hornes, of sturdie iron wrought, which shogging pusht the walles, and hugie stones cut losened brought. This kinde of warlike ingine, in our age auaileth nought, Our men a torment much more dire, for dreadfull warres haue sought: The vse of the great gunne. There is a gunne composde of molten streames, of yre, or brasse, Of which a Frier (as some report) the first inuentour was, Wherewith in few dayes, strongest fortes, and townes, may down be bore, Which scarse in space of one hole yeare, subdued might before. That powder then, the hollow boored brasse, in equall wight Doe load, according to her charge, a rule directeth right Where it be more, or lesse, insuing which, close after ramd: If that a pellet fashioned round, of ire, or stone be cramd: And that with leuell iust direct, you peise her on her wheeles, UUho would beleeue, but triall true thereof experience yeeldes: That whurling fearce, like wind, it lightned all and set on fire, The bullet flies through th'ayre, and strikes what marke you will desire. Downe battering sturdie walles, with rockie stones full strong erect, Nothing against the whuzzing pellet swift, can force obiect. For what can stand against, although it were a mount of ire? The walled Citie strong, assaulted with his this torment dire, Doth beare off many bouncing bobs, with noyse resondes the skies,
And smouldring smoke as blacke as pitch, to heauens doth reaking rise. Both earth, and housen shake, as if with shog of whirlewinds rage, They from their deepe foundations mou'de did staggering beckning gage, UUith clamours loud which rought the starres, our men bestow their blows UUhen of the wall a hugie part, with rumbling crack downe goes: UUherewith both heauens, and seas doe roare, the mariners tents eke shril Iohn Dadley be chec the king that bee with his marriners might first scale the was▪ Resounding shake, whose captaine haut, the kinges pauillion till Him hies apace, on bended knees and suppliant him doth pray, That he the battered walles to skale might first begin the way: And that none from his souldiers bold, that worthie praise might get, Although the prayse with present danger prest, were ioyntly set, Bicause that dearer was then life, hie glorie, and renowne, And losse of breath, was to be changed, for worthie murall crowne. Corona mur lis in old time he that first entred the E∣nemies fort wanne great honour and therefore crowned with a gar∣land in the triumphe. As long as by him, and his men, the victorie were atchiu'de, He death a thousand wayes would take, if thousand times reuiu'de, He were againe. The king scarse would consent to his request, Such ardent Ioue of him, he had conceau'de, in royall brest, At length on morrow following next be licens'd was to take, In hand his wished enterprise: he condigne thankes doth make To Henry mightie prince, as though a pretious treasure great, He had found out, his sute obtaind, and humbly doth intreat, His Grace his wedded Lady deare, and children to respect. Forthwith for to returne no time at all he doth neglect To him desirous egar knight the night did longer seeme, Then it was wont to be, so fayne he would at bickering beene. His minde turmoyling this, and that, soft stealing sleepe refusde, Before day breake, his souldiers calde, as he of custome vsde, He bids their bodies straight, with lightest armour to be dight, Then many thinges reuoluing deepe in thought, the cleare day light He long expect'd, his sturdie bandes of Mariners repare: On warning small, assembling thick, as bid to costly fare. Then Dudley noble peere his mouth resolues amongest the rout. They that in all their time, no hard exployt haue brought about, Deseruing lasting fame (redoubted laddes) their liues forsake, The oration of Iohn Dud ley to his m riners. Much like dumbe players, from the stage descending, nothing spake: we were our country soyle, with life, and labour, borne to ayde, Or wherefore haue we in this world, so long like sluggardes stayde: The earth her seede, with large increase, referres to sowe againe, The fruitfull tree, in season due, her burden doth sustayne, The peare tree peares doth bring: The cornell Tree, doth Cornels yeeld,
These doe their maisters good, and profit tillers of the field, No creature els of vse so small, I can here call in minde, By whose increase some other thinges, no needefull fostring finde. Unto our country we were borne, no man can that denie, And doth not Iustice vs require for it agayne to die? What is the life of man, but stombring sleepe, or pleasant traunce: The action of cleare Vertue doth mens prayse, to starres aduaunce, Which simple glistereth not at all, but in her subiectes shines. Wherfore the warriour stout, on quarrell iust, she chiefly shrines. Some languishing in tormantes fell, with greeuous panges out blastes, Their flickering spirite to skies: whom blouddy Mars in warres down castes, They dye a worthy death, and in a moment yeld their ghostes, Disseuered thin in ayre, glad wandring, in supernall coastes. We in subiection are, and ours, to mightie Henries lore, By poures celestialls sound decree. That we to death be bore. If thundring Ioue do thinke it good, and Henry puissant Prince Command, we must obey, it were in vayne gainst pricke to wince. Than how much nobler ist, a high exploit, with willing minde To vndertake, then by constraint thereto to be assignde? Us victors euerlasting fame, and glory, shall endure. Howbeit but hard aduentures, can true laude in deede procure. And now attentiue marke I pray, whereto this speach is made, The king & counsaile haue decreed, that we shall first inuade, And ransact enemies walls, with ladders, fierce assaulting clime This gratefull prouince, after long request, to me, and mine, Permitted was, if euery one, to take his chaunce be bent, Than dout not but your Captaine I, do promise good euent. He whusted here, with shoutes extold to starrs, bring ladders calls Ech mariner, starse Captaines threates, can hold them from the walls, With such desire of prayse, and ardent loue of glory rought. But godly Henry pondring much in minde, him vnbethought, Not so much waying warlike townes, with rampier walls inclosde, The King considering the daunger that Dudley with his men wear like to runne into commaundes them to desist Bullen ren∣dred. That with his men to certaine bale, and drierie death reposde: He would nor fortresd Cities rich, nor kingdomes vast subdue. UUherfore by strait edict, from his pretence, he Dudley drue. Few dayes expired were, when Bulloine of her owne accord All armour layd aside, to Henry yeldes, as lawfull Lord. The Frenchmen all themselues withdrue, and gates wide open set, UUith streaming murrtons glimmering bright adornd, in Britaines let. Sixe thousand Galls, their antike seates, all pensiue did forsake,
The walls, with stately buildinges, fayre, and turretts Britaines take. The warlike Castells strong, with Captaines new yfenced were, And certaine garrisons of men, in stations settled there: Lieutenant of the conquered towne, the king that worthy Peere Assignd, which of his mighty fleet, did the protection beare. Forthwith with primates, garded swift he salt seas doth, deuide, Iohn Dudley Lieuetenant of Bullen. And through the walloing wrastling waues, to natiue land doth slide. Lord Dudley his committed charge respectes with wondrous care, Reuoluing much in thought, in great foresight and all thinges bare, And doth by secret pollicie, the wielie Frankes preuent, Sometime by fraude diminishing, and weakning their entent, Sometime in open fight, prouoking them to bickering blowes, Subduing Captiue some, but more the goarie blade downe throwes. No day past one, in which no hard exploit he did atchiue, UUhereby stout Dudleys name, through th'world so wide swift Fame did And glory greater waxt, renowned more in Celtane landes, And higher he accepted, was imbrast at Henryes handes. (driue, Thrise golden Phoebe, to her brothers lampe conioyned was, When from the puissant Britaine guide a Legate forth did passe, The Admirall to recall, on weighty causes of this land, The noble Order welcome him, fast clasping hand, in hand, The Britaine springoldes fresh, at his returne do shipp for glad, Few monthes expirde, swift fleeting Fame, throughout this land did blab, That Frenchmen had prepard, of warlike shipps, a nauy vast, For to inuade the Britaine coastes, and land with ruine wast. Preparation of the Frank against Eng∣land. Ech to defend prepares, hye beacons built, of fagotts light, UUeare on the copped cliffes, that kindled, they giue warning might, If on our shore, the enemies fleet, should steale in duskie night, And landing, downe with reaking flames, our country hamletts cast. Sols chariot bright with swift course had the head of Leo past, UUhen Celtane nauy huge, with boistrous blastes along are blowne. The sea now shewd no sea, if from a craggie steepe rocke, one By chaunce vpon the floudes, far vnderneath had cast his eyes, Or like a shadowy groue, or woode, with okes which loftie rise, It rather seemd to be, or field, with tall trees thicke ypight. UUith salt sea waters compast round, there lyes the Ile of Wight where shearing Southwind glome, with rough waues bounce the Britaine The enemies army vast, in hollow hull is thither bore. (shore, The French∣men with a great nauy it uade the Ile of wight. The grappling anker strong, is cast out of the sterne before, And with his whistle sounding hoarse, a signe by master ginne,
And prudent with immortall prayse, had Britaines haut contaynd, Since he the mightie scepter, of their happie kingdome bore, enry. 8. af∣er 3. yeares yeth. UUhen that th'almightie Ioue by fatall sicknesse waring more, Did warne him leaue this mortall life. alak, and waile a day: How manie Brutes with blubbering teares, their soft cheekes did beray▪ How bitterly the Britaine states, him-sick bewayling rued: All England droupes, bereft of ioy, with trickling teares bedewd. Phisition nought can vayle, nor holsome herbes found in the field, UUhich health accustomde wear tofore, to mortall members yeeld. No compound drugs could life prolong, nor pleasaunt potions brought, "Alas, to cure deaths drierie sting, in vaine is phisicke sought. Howbeit before his finall gasp, because his tender heire, Prince Edward yet was young, he states assignde the rule to beare, For a prescribed time, of which Lord Dudley high renownd, In royall tombe inclosde, hys worthie corps did lay in ground: With brinish teares. Of funerall now sacred rightes right done, By all the troupe of mightie Pieres, on Edward prince, his sonne, dward the sixt begunne o aigne  546. In solempne pompe, a pretious crowne of gold adorning round, His temples faire, was sett. The Britaines all in duetie bound, UUith one assent, him lawfull king, with reuerence great adore, And heir legitimate to his sier. The Earle of Hertford bore The title of Protector chiefe, and by his nephewes grace The Duchie tooke of Somerset, to him, and ofsprong race. The Earle of  crea∣ted Duke of Sommerset. Iohn Dudley made Earle of VVarwicke. His other vncle Seimer made Lord Admirall of his fleet. But Dudley by the title, he of Warwicke Earle dyd greet, From whence his ancient progenie, by long discent he drue, The greatest mirrour of his stock, and kindreds glorie true. As euerie man in great reuenues floev, with honor dewe So was he high extold and deckt with glorious title newe, A wondrous troupe of royall Pieres, the kinges court stately found, And lookers on, applauding loud, with shoutes vp reard a sound. All thinges haue limits true presirt. Now pleasant pasimes past, The counsaile causes of great waight, reuoluing deepe did cast. Of common weales affaires, of ancient forts falne in decay, They councell take aduisde of planting garrisons in a stay, In certaine places weake, and what auaild for common state, But chiefly they respect'd the Scottish realme, which bordering sate, Eche in remembraunce had the plighted troth of Scottish Peeres, which they had firmly vowd, to bring to passe in former yeares, Concerning linking fast their mayden prince, in wdlocke bandes,
And wisht that so might be procurd, the vnitie of two landes: UUith euerlasting peace, and endles truce thereon to spring Expedition of souldiours in∣to Scotland. wherfore when glittering Phoebe declinyng downe, his beames did bring Into fayre Virgos fae, straight armed troupes, of warriours, sent They gree to Scottish soyle to be, to know the Scotts intent. The Duke of, Sommerset Ealre of VVar¦wicke and Lord Dacies assigned chiefe in this warfare. Chief Captaines were assignd, the Prince his eldest vncle deare, And to him ioynt as mate, the Warwicke Earle, a puissant Peer, Whom warlike glory hye, of dreadfull Mars, had made renownd, And vertue rare, with ardent loue, in souldiours hartes had bound. The third companion to them knit, bold Dacres Lordling went whom doughtie ladds of Cumberland, to blouddy skirmage bent Their Captaine would elect, and after him in warfare trace. To Dacres faythfull Cumberland, the nurse of gentle race. The vulgar sort, their natiue Lordes, most arden do imbrace. A number of the Britaine Peers, to these warres put their name. And martiall knightes, of auncient rite, of golden Garter came. Lord Grai captaine of the horsemen. Amongst the which Lord Gray, of mighty lynes, and stomacke bold, Of th'armed horsemen troupes did for his skill chief guidance hold. A wondrous  rout, of common souldiours flockt beside. Howbeit before within the bankes of Scotts they once did stride, By Legates letters were foresent, their cause expressing plaine. That to their former plighted troth, they stedfast would remaine. By fayre meanes they were prayd, that Britaines cāp no force should showe, If promise vowed to Henry king, they would not now forgoe. In vayne are admonitions gin, if no man them regard, In vayne the deafe are counceled right, when councell is not hard. The Scot doth wars require, he will contend and end by blowes, He desperate nought respectes, where well, or ill, his quarrell goes. The Britaines equall cause, committed to Ioues power almight, Their stomackes boldned on all trembling terrour put to flight. Therfore the Duke of Somerset, his mates, and warlike bandes Insuing, pitcht their tentes, and armde remainde on Scottish landes. Howbeit nor sparkling brands they slong▪ nor with iniurious deedes, Did hurt, or damage any wight, fresh pasturing for their steedes, They onely tooke, all other thing from scath preserued sure. Lest troublous causes more to wars, the fierce Scotts should procure. Meane time the Earle of Arreine with furious anger stong, Which of the kingdome rulde the raines, til that the Princesse yong, Were comne to riper yeares, chose thirtie thousand warlike wightes, UUith weapons armed strong, gainst Britaines power to bend their mights.
By chaunce the day which shulde before the fatall battaile fought, The puissant Warwicke Earle on trampling palfray milke white, broughe Into an nple plaine, the foe to bickering calleth out. Here scoures the Scott, here Britaine rides, the Carreer round about And staggering tronch of poysoned launce, doth gird with courage stout. A light skir∣mage of the horsemen of both partes the day be∣fore the bat∣taile. He bloud out belking lyes, with goary blade through th'bowells pusht, His flickering ghost out flies, with point of sharpe speare greisly crusht. The courser furious sterce, his sitter cast, doth by pathes tracke, An other topsey turnde, a while stickes dead on palfrays backe, At length downe tūbling, gaiust the groud, his skull doth battring knack. But chiefly, and aboue the rest, of auncient Brutus race, With mighty puissance Dudley Peere, did Scotts downe hurling chase. The trampling feete a misty fog; and duskie cloud vp read: Much like as when a glomy ure, from aierie region teard. At length our horsemenging on, the Scotts to flie constraine, And to the campe with spoyles addrn'd returnes backe agayne. VVhori it was neare sunne set. Now scarfe the fourth part of the day remaind, and Phoebus lampe, In chariot swift conueyde, did hast to th'westerne Ocean campe. Behold from Scottish marlike cences, an erause comne doth pray, The Farle Arreine go∣uernour of Scotland sen. deth an He∣rault vnto the the Duke of Somerset, and the Harle of Huntley pro∣uoketh him had to hand. That vncouorolde vnto the Dulie a message he might say. Wherfore vnto his royall cent, with frequence great conuapde, He was permitted for to speake who thus distincklie sayd. what is the cause, that thus you strie; one realme to wast by might? Irruption making fierce, vnto our land what is your right▪ Is this the part of nation ioynt vp vicine borders knit? The sielie people batcring downe, with drierie blade to hit: But armour layd aside, forthwith depart, and leaue our land, Or of your bold inuasion looke reuengement out of hand. For of the valiant Scotts collected is a mighty band. A blouddy sckirmage on to morrow nert for to succeede, I do denounce, if to your coastes, you hast not backe with speede. Alacke that without losse of bloud, us battaile may be fought, With what abondant purple streames shall conquest chief be sought: How many mestiue wiues their husbandes fall shall wailing mone, Destroyde by cruell death, constraind to lye in bed alone: How many parentes of their sonnes, and ofspring deare berest, All comfortlesse in grief, to lead their old age shall be left: I tremble to expresse, nor you vnpunisht shall depart. wherfore the Scottish guide with wondrous pitie mou'de in hart, Towardes his countrey soyle, me bids this message to declare,
Unto the Duke of Somerset, since both haue cane the care. And guidance great of kyngdomes large, let both the common cause, Of kingdomes safetie moue, of legall truce he offreth lawes, Of that the Britaines will, their tooles, and armour layd aside, All glorylesse forthwith retire, in cause inferiour tride. Unlesse you doe, theu slaughter dire, in wars without remorse, Expect, the Scottish weapons fell, fall with such weightie force. Moreouer puissant Huntley Earle these wordes me vtter had. Huntley challenged. To th'mighty Duke of Somerset, lest Christian bloud be shad, And great effusion made, that the contention may be tride, Betweene them two, and armies both disseuered stand beside. So losse of little bloud, of all these sarres and end may make. And headlong prone dissensions rage, a souder may be brake, By one mans death, and warres vpsturde, a finall end may take. These wordes he vttered. when the Duke, replyde thus backe agayne, Determinate into your coastes, this army I did traine. Conditions not take, but graunt, of peace (that aunswere tell) The Duke of Somersets re∣ply. When Scotts had time, these daungers prest, they might haue voyded well, Now to to Ie to deale, by vayne colluding craft they tend. That Huntley Earle, with natiue pride puft vp, doth to me send, with him in combat for to loyne, through glory vayne extold, According to his nations guise, he prou'de, aduencreth bold. He as a priuate souldiour serues, nor beareth impery, If I were so I would him make his challenge dearely bye. Here warlike Dudley with this speach, the Dukes Oration takes, And faithles Scotts, with wordes more sharpe be reprehending shakes. The aunswere of the Earle of VVarwick to the messen∣ger. Your slipperie faith, and fickle troth, your periude glauncing tong, Us Britaines, though vnwilling, eggs to scoure your coastes along. Ioues anger iust, prouokes vs to reuenge such haynous sinne, He our attemptes shall prop, and force maintaine to striue therein. Howbeit if promise plightd you keepe, then foes vs not esteeme, we nothing will commit, but faithfull frendes it shall beseeme. But is with armes prepard, you meane in martiall campes to trie: Your selues with weights of puissance stout, to warre you shall espie. UUho will not laugh to scorne, such boastings vayne, such Scottish crakes: Thinke you that bugges, or prochant wordes vs Brutes afrighted makes: You erre the scope of heauen, and raunging rouine beside the way, Let boyes, and girles of tender age, such vayne illusions fray. That here your minde aboadment giues, great slaughters to insue. And dire destruction of your men, you prophesying tue:
The holy ghost offended, with such false periured wightes, Doth it foreshew, and to our power hath subiecte made your mightes. Of mighty armies God is one, alone, the very same, which huge Goath by the hand of Dauid small subdued, UUhose brainepanne rent, by stripe of sung the ground with gore imbrued He author of this quarrell iust, on iust cause tane in hand, By such as reuerence due his name, will alway firmely stand. But this, (that other thinges I passe) I cannot but admire, How Huntley or such confidence depending, durst aspire, And on him take, lawes to lay downe, to his superiour farre, Himselfe inferiour in degree, and honour eke, why darre He proudly should, to combat, and prouoke so noble a Peere, As Duke Protectour eke, of Edward Prince, and kinsman neare. But swolne with glorious natiue, pride, he vaunteth so by kinde, UUherfore if such desire to fight, such louging haue his minde, These wordes to Huntley shew, and message doe from me declare, I in my country am an Earle, and iustly may compare In honour with an Earle of Scotts, our title Warwicke hight UUhose Fame through Europe coastes along, renownd hath tane her flight. Though Castells fayre, at roote of mountaines set, his name addorne, And he from noble auncestours, the ofspring true be borne: If honour be respect'd, one order doth vs both containd. To morrow morne, when Phoebe vpstart shall lift his lampe agayne, And ouerspred the earth with light, Ile Huntley glorious, stout, The Earle of VVarwicke chalengeth Huntley to single cumbat Expect, we two will trie, both armour lesse, and fight it out. If this he doth deny, though better armde he do proceed, On horse backe; or on foote, to meet him sure I haue decreed. I nakt him naked will assayle, vnlesse our shirtes do close, Perchaunce our corps from shame, as nature seemelines doth chose. Ten Britaine Peers, to single combatt els do ten prouoke, Or twentie, twentie Scotts, if ye will graunt, and strike the stroke. Or I alone, will ready be, with him alone, to fight, If that I conquerour him subdue, our part shall haue the right, If Fortune at vs spurne, our armed troupes shall backward stright, Unto their borders wend my finall gaspe, or his, shall cease These iarring braules, and twixt both landes, establish future peace. How noble ist by dint of sword, this frayle life to forsake? Now profered opportunitie, of combat let him take, If that he list, to morrow morne, say I will ready bee. These speaches vttering forth, a mighty masse of red gold, he
Upon condition gaue, that he declare that message would, To Huntley Earle and more these wordes he him departing told, If that the Earle assent, and will with me contending fight, To morrow next, as soone as day on earth shall cast her light: Doe thou forthwith as messenger, thereof returne this night. And for the paines of gold receau'd, I double will the wight, Unto these wordes most willingly, the counsaile sage assent. Forthwith throughout the tentes, with flickering winges, swift rumor How mighty Dudley had an earle of Scotland challengd stout, (went Ech souldier skips for ioy, and loud resounding liftes a shout, And manly stomack takes, and hautie harted Dudleys prayse, To starry region hye, and heauenly powers extolde, doth rayse. The euening now in westerne coastes, with raies all fierie shinde, When fires bright burning the tentes throughout, of hard wood you might Scoutes sent to spie, a hugy rout of Scots brim to appeare, (finde: Returning shew, in steelecotes dight, our army setled neere: With carefull mindes, and waking eies, the watch their charges keepe, And now our men with gratefull cates refresht, and dulcet sleepe: Looke when Aurora goddesse bright, from roseall bed shall rise, And with beelight coruscant, shew the world vnto their eies. Till Huntley comes, in vaine his christaine lightes, still rolling casts The mightie Dudley here and there, no messenger, at last: Returnd an aunswere backe, though pure golde offered for his pay, At length the better halfe expirde, and midpart of the day: In valleies low appeare, the Scottish rankes in battayle ray, Prepared for to fight, and banners broad displayd did beare, Approching fast, But Brutes a hill, which hie himselfe did reare: Then interiect betwixt, ascended vp, that place more apt The Engli army is set order. Might be for skirmage grim. The horsemens guide the left wing lapt, The right, where Nauy lay at rode, a marrish moore did close, The vaward after Warwicke Peere, in long ranckes marching goes, Meane battaile to be ledy thee, O Sommerset remaind, The rearegard all behinde, in order Dacres stout containd. And now approching neere, the enemie armies bustled ferce, UUith dreadfull ratling noice, the clanging brasse tromp aire doth perce, The on set. And clattering classing armour ringes mens clamours loud abound, Not so with dashing waues, th'weltring mayne sea flouds resound: UUhen they the craggie cliffes, and rough rockes bellowing loud do scoure, Soone after Aeol puissant God of windes, the brethren foure: With endlesse discord rapt, from dongeon caues permits to stoure:
On th'other side the Scottes with panting pac, against the hill, Up clammering mount, and thick in plumpes, themselues do gather still. The harnisht horsemen troupes, with shiuering speares then furious rusht, Whose first ranke downe is borne, their huge corpes through with weapons But forth the other rayes, with sharp spur prick their trāpling eeds (pusht And fellowes deathes reuenging wrack which Gray ut captayne heedes, UUho euen at first assault, in mouth receae a gastly stroke, The Britayne army all, couragious fightes, Mars doth prouoke, Mens mindes incensing, wood, and gaping woundes doth vigou bring, More, neere those shores in harbour rode the nauy of the king: From whence through powlders furious force, composde of brimstone blue, uskelborow lde. Both bullets forgd of stecle, and iron chaines, red glowing flue. Full foureteene thousand Scottes their gstes to glommy Stigie lake, Downe sent in deepe disdaine, the rest to flight them did betake. Our men with toyling labours sore, the cheerefull trompet shrill, Doth backe againe retire, who gladly wend their tentes vntill. O what reioysing then, what wondrous mirth that night did last, The tentes throughout, eche takes delight, to talke of trauels past, Of dreadfull perils dire escapte, it is a pleasaunt thing, "UUith minde secure to thinke, but chiefly power of heauenly king, "Did their attemptes support. Iust Ioue a false cause, down will bring. The next day light appears, through vncoth coasts, and by pathes blinde Of th'chiefest Scottish primates fled, report remaind behinde. Some, desart mountains stickle tops did shrine, some, castell wall, Did firmely garde, that th'enimies campe appeard no where at all. The winter now approchte, and space of daies doth shorter grow, And blacke Orion cloudie starre, himselfe in heauens doth showe: UUherefore our campe, their warlike tentes remou'de to natiue land, Determining a fitter time, to take those warres in hand. The mightie Duke of Sommerset, and Warwicke Earle also, Are welcomd home, the nobler sort, of youth which then did go: UUith them to blouddy wars, all safe returnde with them againe, The noble king right handes to ioyne most royally did daine: And all the Princes friendes, in armes did willing them infold, Commending high their haughtie heartes, and manly courage bold. Meane time the Scottish Peeres with ckle lightnesse puft in minde, And Enuies rage vp swolne, that frustrate hope might Britaines blinde, UUith generall consent, in moneth which December hight Unto the Celtane nation send, that their young princesse bright, Right heire vnto king Iames, be knit in bandes of wedlocke might.
To the heire of Fraunce, If Henry king, this profer would not take, The Scots send into Frauncc to intreate a league be∣tweene the heires of Sc▪∣land and Fraunce. That so an euerlasting truce two nations, one, might make: Yet that the mightie guide of Frankes this would vouthsafe to yeeld, That for the loue, which loyall league twixt nations both did build: As Scottish, and the Celtane eke: he would not once permit, One of them torne by dreadfull warres, whereby the league might flit: Or spoyld by dint of th'enemies sword, to forreine empire bend, The Brutes by force of conquering hand, that onely to intend: And in the sequent spring, the surging flouds with nauy vast, Quite couered for to be, and troupes of horsemen flocking fast, To enter scottish landes, proposing this, their onely stay, The Scottish heire, from mothers lap by force to take away. which pray if they attayne, by aduerse lucke, and spurning fate: O woefull realme of Scottes O blacke and lamentable state, Nothing but mourning sobs, and blubbering salt teares left behind. UUherefore by Gods, by sacred rites they prayd, that cald in mind, Their auncient league, establisht erst, he would the virgin take, Before, for long delay doth often greater daunger make. which tender Impe, if with the king of Fraunce she be vp traind, Hymen God of wedlk with princely education eke, within his court containd: That then they had a certayne hope, of great good to succeede, which might the perfit happinesse, of both their kingdomes breede. And after that through yeares mature, she may in Himens Iace, Be nked fast, to whome he please, let king of Galls her place: Forthwith by princes hest, the Celtane Fleet launch'd from the shore, Is finely furnisht neet, and Galies swift with saile, and ore: which after from the callmy harbour close, wih Southwindes shrill, Swift sliding through the deepes, the Scottish realme they come vntill. The Princesse Mary now, to painted Pull with pomp was led, where for her princely Grace, was set a stately purple bed, Soft cushions vnderneath, with soft Downe stuft as white as milke And costly Arras, Cabbins decks, ywoucn of gold and silke. Great heapes of siluer plate was brought, with shapes of gold inwrought, And whatsoeuer els for virgin Princesse, meete was thought. Forthwith the comely damesell thus, a shipbord portlike plac'd, withall her virgine troupe, and men of armes which after trac'd: Shee steting fast is borne, the aire the spred sayles driuing on, And merry gales of winde them through the rough seas course anon. The flecte in order saild, as Swannes twixt fishie riuers bankes, whil'st middle, and the third, insues the first, and in long rankes:
The third day comes, and Phoebe the worlde with cleere light ouer goes Stout Dudley with his warlike mates, them selues in tents do close, So do the doughtie bandes, which London mightie Citie yeelds, Neere auncient Norwich walled towne, downe pitcht in open fieldes. Which when the country crautus, tought with pale feare, had espied, In briery brakes, and lucking holes, in shadowy groues they hide: In no place daring peepe, but after boldnes fiercer growne, In time, that all those soddaine panges, of feare away were flowne: They rushing thicke out brake, and to a valley bordring hye, To Dusson dale. No man remembring calde to minde, the daunger preasing nye: But armed stoode, with carres, and waynes, their winges incompast round, On thother side the princes hoast, with cheerefull trumpets sound. Proceedes, and first the blowes begins, and egar fight vp reares, The Rebels nclosed themselues with their ca∣riages on eue∣ry side o keep of the assaults of the Barle of war wickes horsemen. But Warwicke furious wroth, with blouddy blade his foes downe beares, At length, when beastlike backes to turne, on this side shame forbad, On that side certayne death the rebels , outragious mad: One part resisting fierce downe falles: the other groueling flat, Is battered, but stout Warwicke Peere, respected chiefly, that Least all at once were ouerthrowne, those men of peruerse wit: Hawbeit of courage such as daungers done should force to flit: He causeth through the Martiall field, an Herault loud to cry, The Harle of VVarwicke subdueth the rebels in Northsolke. If anie armour would abiect, which he most traiterously: Had tane in hand, and for his fault would pardon humbly craue: He should vnpunisht life, and goods, and former freedome haue. Which when the commons heard, they tooles, and armour laid aside, On bended knees, with mourning teares, and Pardon, Pardon cride. The mercy then of Warwicke Earle, did so resplendent shine, That penaunce of their haynous fact, he pardoned free that time. No Britaine now remainde, whom Giaunt like, rebellious rage, The Giants in old tie rebelled a∣gainst the Gods, and would haue pulled ubiter out of heauē. Did rechlesse beare away, none did from loyall duetie gage, But to their true annoynted king remainde and country stae. The Princes court, from this lugubrious war, did Dudley take, With solempne pompe, and ioy: with flitting wings, whom Fame did make Renowmed through the warlike townes, of Britaine kingdomes stout, How in king Henries dayes, he hard aduentures brought about, Whil'st that his thundring gleiue he rold, amongst the enimies rout. Not of deathes drierie launce, or dreadfull edge of sword, agast, He neuer doubtfull stoode, himselfe to daungers all to cast: If great affaires, or countries cause, required him to goe, Or hest of sacred king, incenst his minde for to do so.
Howe manie times with boties rich, and laud immortall wonne, Did he to natiue soyle againe, from externe Regions come: His enimies battered downe: or els in fearefull flight back driu'de, Whereby he royall dignitie, and endlesse Fame atchiu'de. God prospering the euent, which he begonne in luckie houre. Wherefore as yet he higher was, extolde in Fortunes bowre: The King him Duke creating, whom with ioy and mickle cheere, Northumberland did title giue, and honouring loue full deere. Him Lord chiefe Stuard eke, the Princes Court imbraced fayne, The Earle of VVarwicke created Duk of Northum∣berland. Till Atrapos the fatall threed of Edward cut in twayne, Renowned Edward from the paps framde of his noble Dame, Instructed in all Sciences, by learned men, became. Who Greekish phrase, with Latine speech conioyning in short space, The death of king Edward Did reape such ample fruite, that vnto none of princely race He was inferior found, which Britaine nation fostring reares, King Ed∣wards praise Nor Peere hee anie had, if flexile age, and tender yeares, Ye do respect, which three times fiue, and two, had scarse expirde, Or redy sharpnesse of his wit, or iudgement, ye requirde: In anie point to learning which, or morall vertues bright, Did appertaine, the Phoenix rare of Europe, and the light. UUhom death vntimely, like the flowre from tender stalke of rapt, From Britaines tooke away, and youthfull corps in coffin lapt. Death enuies on the earth, who sacred lawes obserue, and keepe. So boyes, and springoldes fresh, he with his dart away doth sweepe, which Ioue th'almightie king, vouchsafes to heauen to haue extold. The king thus dead, him after doth a woman scepter hold, UUhich Mary hight one of the sisters twaine, sprong of the race, Of Henry royall Monarch high, which did within short space: Mary begin∣neth to raign 1553. A Foreiner, her kinsman eke, king Phyllip Spanyard take, In wedlocke bandes, which penstue heartes vnto the Brutes did make. For seldome shall you marke, two realmes concordant to agree, Queene Mary marrieth to king Phyllip. UUhich farre by laudes, and seas disiungd, and legall friendship be. Here whilest this Bridegrome new, doth with his spowse himselfe delight Round garded with a mighty troupe, in purple Mantles dight, UUith hemme of gold about, beset with Emeraulds glittering bright: which wandring marchaunt had from vtmost bankes of Iudy brought. Phoebes burning lampe the front of Leo vast, had ouerought, And in the hye heauens region brode, now many signes oregone: Sitium, ernum is  the eight Calendes of Ianuary. The winter Solstice passed had with swift course borne anone. Secure and pleasaunt peace both Frankes and Britaines ioyntly bound,
UUhich league both Spanyardes, Fleminges, eke and Phyllips king And for because the feastfull time, the great yeare rold about, (wound Christmas he meaneth. Not without solempne pompe; and mirth, the Britaine land throughout, UUhich in Decembers nipping cold still falles: ech heart bereau'de, Of faithlesse fraud, which secret foe, in watching bed conceau'de: King Henry Celtane guide, with youthfull heat prouoked mad, And thirsting after endles Fame, great hope incensed had: In minde, that either Phyllip none was, or but halfe a man, And stablisht sacred bandes of league, to violate began, UUith reaking flames, all Flaunders coastes, then wasting broad in sight, Henry of Fraunce inua∣deth Flaun∣ders. Subduing droues of beastes, and troupes of men by martiall might. UUhich Hyspaigne king prouoked wroth, and cholers raging yre, Of all the Spanish Peeres incensing, kindled light on re. Not Autumne yet was come, that loftie Ceres frute might spring, with yellowish eares, and pastures large, the greene grasse fragrant bring: Nor of the earth, Sols scorching heat, the moysture had vp dride, That vnder hye heauens coape all night, the souldiers might abide: wherefore till hoped houre, of them desrous looked long, The nauy rigged is, swordes, flickering shaftes, and iauelins strong, with armour strong of proofe are got, flesh; bread, and wine, are bought, Preparation of warres a∣gainst the Frenchmen. That needefull foode for valiant men, might not be wanting sought. But in ech tent abound, huge chestes were packed full of gold, That they which fought with courage stout deserued hire might hold, From sondrie nations seuered far, full manie a martiall crue, King Phyllip willing so his Peeres, came to his warfare newe. Meane time the bewtions Queene, and noble spouse of Phyllip king, To ayde her husband bent a trustie troupe of men to bring: A legate sendes vnto the Frank, which dreadfull battayle bad, And did vnto that nation false, rough threates moreouer add. All Fraunce in vprore standes, with fearfull tumult, on her part, All England crackt with noyce, to blouddy Mars vpsturd, doth start. Diuers nati∣ons in phillips . All Flaunders, Aspurge eke, all Burgoine, and Tirolis strong, And many a doughtie Captaine Spaigne so mighty minges among. Full many eke whom dreadfull warres, long times had vexed sore, whereby their skill in workes of Mars, through vse increased more: In crested helmets streming dight, all glorious to behold, Their corps in harnish strong: with shieldes bright shining brode infold. The puissant captayne present was which Brunsweikes title due Doth beautifie, in harnish black, whom gardes a horsemen crue, This troupe at first assault, did daunt the Frenchmen sore with feare,
And downe with manly might, did many  borse tumbling beart. From Germanie likewise to aide, were sent a ch : Nor doughtie warriours wanting were, from out Italia land. Dalmatians fierce vnto these wars, and actiue Heynowes trast, Howbeit the chiefest confidence in Britaine bandes was plast. The narrow league of frendship plight, and wife requir the fame, To whom with her espoused feere, all daungers equall came. The Earle of Penbroke generall of Britaines rankes assignd, Three Earles more had linkt, first him whom Worcesters title shrind, Next him whom Bedford did adorne, with honours which beseemd So mighty a Peere, and lastly him which Rutland high esteemd. To these in like degree, for his exploites atchiu'de beforne, Was ioynd Syr Anthony Browne, of Anthony sier true ofspring borne. with whom stout Dudleys manly race, gay springoldes armour bare, And from what noble bloud they sprang, expresly did declare. The Palme tree cannot downe be prest, but loftier doth extend Her braunched top, if that with waight you goe about to bend, Her bowes, wh baistrous stemme, and springing liftes her crest to stars. Wars purchase high renowne, great honours are atchiu'd by wars. Hence springes the Princes loue, and gratious fauour offred growes, Hence commons like proceedes, if vnto Mauors bickering fawes For natiue countryes sake, you boldly do obiect your brest, Refusing daungers none, ech kinde of death to venture prest. This was ingraft by natures skill, if no man had instruct, The Dudleys, they with parentes milke, inuicted courage suckt. So much it is to spring, from valiant Sire, and noble dame, The chearefull Brethren three, in armour like exulting came. Of which the first, outstarteth fresh, of minde vnconquered bold, With shoulders broad bespred, hight Ambrose, whom rich clothes infold, Of purple hue, vpon his armour polisht fine with gold, Ioint by his side, in brethren loue, linkt fast, and natures bandes, That mutually one might defend, the others quarrell standes Robert his brother, borne with smiling fate, in luckly houre, Who as he gentle was, so stout, and bold, his foes to scoure. The third companion to these knit, which like loue did impart, Was Henry, voide of feare, of mighty force, and hautie hart. These three all striplings gay, had soft lockes scarse on cheekes sproug out, Such bodies fayre, as seldome yeldes the like this world no dout. A fourth, these Brethren had of elder age, whom stealing death, In floure of youthfull dayes, vntimely reft of vitall breath.
Through languishing disease, by bitter destinies cruell downe, To mightie Syer, and Grandsiers old, who like had sure become, Inferiour vnto none, in high exploites, of all his line, Such courage rare of minde, and force in hardie corps did shine. You would him sayd to be of Hercles sturdie armes, and brest, Such vigour great he had, where girding forth the stafe he wresd, On courser mounted braue, or strong in wrastling might expresd. What kinde of sap ingenerate, the Apple tree doth feede. In Autumne season, fauouring like, such Apples well proceede. So the couragious progenie, from valiant Dudley sprong, Do imitate their auncestours, both he whom death hath stong, And they which liuely now do skip the Spanish Peers among. And farther many more which were by knighthoode noble made, With warlike weapons strong were armde, the Celtane coastes to vade. which Primates stout, teen thousand wightes of Brutus race were bound, To gard, and now the time was comne, when clangring trompetts sound, These vncoth nations, far a part, togethers summond round. The season of the yeare the corne eare, causd, with reed, to strout, And for the barbed steed the earth, greene pasturing burgend out. The warlike region vast of Fraunce with fortrest Castels braue, Abondes ybuilt with hugie stones, out of the hard rocke claue. And euery side with Cities fayre, is garnisht wondrous gay, where towardes Spanish coastes she lookes, or clouddy Alpes, alway UUith slakes of snow bespred, or rising of the Sunne beholdes, Fraunce: rightly may be proude, of mighty townes, which walls infoldes. Here is a famous Citie, that of Quintines name doth beare, Saint Quin∣tinnes besie∣ged. which doth in fruitefull plot of ground, her buildings stately reare, Most plentifull of corne, and wine, within that ample field, King Phillip pitcht his tentes. when thus the towne besiegd beheild Herselfe with th'enemies tankes about, she stoinde with terrour stayes, And to to late the French kinges ayde, she craues the siege to rayse. For some the earth deepe trenching, downe to teare indeuored fast, Some for defence of rubble vp a bulwarke bancke did tast, Some scaling ladders framde, and firebrandes flang to turretts tops, The strong stone walls, with ingines fell, some other shogging pepps. But see, here none this secret guile, and subtile sleight espide, For when the glomy darke night shades, mens eyes with soft sleepe tyed: A Celtane Captaine with a band of Frenchmen close did slide, Into the towne, with poulder stuft great baggs ech souldiour brought. These things did luckly fay, whilst entraunce he by stealth had cought.
But like successe to thee did not O Memorancy fall, whilst eighteene thousand souldiours stout, he after him  call, Through wouddy bypathes blind,  hi mountaines neare to stray: Till that the duskie night, into the towne might fourd a way: Amongst thy hardie borsemen troupes (Renowmed Duke) he light, The best part of his army slayne, the remnant put to flight. But Brunsweik Duke the Captiues safe, in prison strong vp closde. Forthwith before king Phillip was the Captaine tae reposde. Then hurly burly sturre, and wondrous ioy through euery tent, was spred abroad, the noyse vpreard the aierie region rent. This good beginning, all of like successe aboadment takes, The souldiours fierce with cannon shat, the hard walls battring shakes, The diches are with rubble filde, and now the plaistring pusht, And losened with the vehement shot, three hugie partes downe rusht, And seuerall places three, into the towne gaue entraunce new. Then out of euery band, the king did take a chosen crue, In plated harnish white, them arming all, and bad inuade, The enemies towne, where passage free, the walls downe ransact made. The clamoring Ioude of warriours then, the hye heauens coastes doth fill The dubling dromme resoundes, the rattling trompetts clanging shrill Confused mixt with noyse of men, makes deafe the souldiours eares. Saint Quin∣tines ∣ted. Here egar Almaines fight, the Italian there him doughtie beares. On this side Spaniardes presse, by force through gaping wall to pearce, On that side garded strong in steele thrung thicke the Britaines fierce. But first before the rest, did hardie Henry Dudley tend, With course vnbrideled swift, the walles downe shogde for to transcend, So do his Brethren twaine, of puissance like, and courage found, Howbeit of Henry, whilst he stoopt, declining to the ground, I know not what to reare, or rip, anyron bullet brust Henry Dud∣ley slayne. His scalp, broad scattering brused braines, and corps dead layd in dust. He gentle spirite out gaspt, euen in his fresh and bloming yeares, Whom backe vnto the tentes, his mates conuayd with blubbring teares, His body clad in lincloth shroude, as Christian rite requeres. His brethren furious woode, burne in desire of deepe reuenge, As euery foe them meetes, with sharpe sword pusht, his necke he bendes Dissolu'd in quaking death, with raging ire, and bitter sting, The Britaine stout in armes, like thunder dint his foes doth ding. On euery side th'assant, gainst wretched Citizens wareth grim, A thousand grudging ghost are sent to gastlie shadowes dimme. Pale death their hartes afrightes, whom ransackt walls in compassd round,
He of the Celtanes happy is, whom goarie gaping wound, Hath groueling lay along o be rede by  skill. with shriking plaintes vp lift, their ruthfull houses weomen fil, And trembling in their armes, their tend sucklings do imbrace, Distract of minde through feare, and wandring stray from place, to place. Yong boyes do wailings make of armes such gastly horrour growes, And suppliant both their hauds, with plaint to heauens extending, throwes, with humble voyce beseeching Ioue, some mercy downe to cast. But they whose naturall moisture of their braine vpdried, was past, And could not weepe, whom crooked age, from death had shrowded free, Their countries fatall fall, and ruine of their towne to see: They from the bottome of their hartes, do greeuous grones out powre, Till midst of day more fiercer still, and vehement dus the stoute, Through courage haut, and mightie force of Phillips souldiours stout, But not without great streames of bloud, of the enemy powred out. The Citizens inclosd, suppose at hand the finall day, Of the subuersion of their towne, and houre of their decay. And now the army through the gates, wide doopt, had passage wonne, The Frenchmen, strke with chillie feare, in plumpes do backward runne. Saint Quin∣tinnes taken. Some shroud themselues in cellars blind, some beames in houses cops clime, A combrous rout to temples fled, themselues from death to shrine: And wretched wightes, in armes the alters clasping fast, infoldes. The victor with his armed bandes, the walls and strong fort holdes, The martiall troupes, in stately buildings fayre, do beate the sway, Which thee (Redoubted Phillip) seru'd  Lordes driuen away. The Celtane pompe is ouerthrowne both pretious robes, and gold, And massie bolls by goldsmithes act, , of siluer mold: The Spanyard souldiour sckipping takes, the  sides vp torne. And precious Arras curious wrought, by Germaines out was borne. Bed tikes the feathers powred forth, along the wayes were sprad, Set out to sayle, to byers such, as ready money had. Fine linnen Garmentes, wollen eke, in  did scattred lye, And pannes, and caldrons huge, which were preseru'd, neede to supplie, In seething meat, and instruments which kitchin ought to hold. A brasen pot, with platters large, of pewtet fine, was sold For two grotes prise, the cryer loude proclaiming first the same. what pretious houshold stuffe in all the town remaind that came UUith Iewels, rich attire, and Orient gemmes, in coffers found, Unto the victors pray, King Phillips laude hye heauens resound.
Which to his mightie Sier, in warlike honour they compare. Meane time the common people floct to sacred temples ware, And to the Sanctuaries of the Gods, themselues in heapes had bare. Expecting all with trembling hart, their finall gasp to breath, No sparke of hope to them remaines, them to preserue from death. which trying brunces of warres, in open broyles are ouerthrone, But God the affectes of hartes doth moue, and in his handes alone, Are dispositions eke, of earthly Princes euery one. What way his mightie hest, directeth forth, that way they take, He softneth, he, their brestes, and prone to good workes harts doth make. As mollified waxe to euery forme, is subiect brought, And stamps or tipes impression takes, o formers pleasure wrought. wherfore the Princes minde, more lenisted, through quenched heat Offeruent ire, through Ioues behest all iniuries doth forgeat, And souldiours straight commandes, for to desist from shedding bloud, Of male and female sere, now wondrous troupes of captiues stood. The impotent, and tender youth, with such, as wages hierd, Dismissed were, but the wealthier sort, as martiall lawes requi'rd, UUere kept in band, mong'st many Peers, esprong of worthy race, Shattillion, which of the towne the kinges liuetenant was: As Captiue was subdued, agayne to be redeemd for gold. A garrison of warriours then, here left the fort to hold: The king his tentes remou'de & Castell strong of Haune besetts, which Conquerd ransackt downe, he manye forts despoying getts. The Castell  Houne taken ransackt. while that this blouddy scourge did range in th' Easterne parts of Fraunce, The Admirall of th' English Fleet, his title to aduaunce. Lord Clynton, warlike Peere, of noble grandsiers old esprong, Unto the westerne Celtane coastes, was caried swift along. Three hundred Carickes vast, you might haue seen the surges hye with brasen keele to shere, whose tall tops rought the starrie skie. The fierie belking brasen peece, with tearing chaine shot hard, The Admiral of England with too, shipps sayleth into Fraunc and burneth Conque. Both pup, and side, and beaked sterne, of euery ship did gard, Distruction threatning dire, vnto the aduerse Celtane true. There is a Citie hight Conque, which Thetis waters blue, with raging stoure doe wash, that takes our shipps in wished road. Forthwith Alarme the trompet foundes, the souldiours fresh abroad, Out sckipping fierce, along the salt sea banckes, were scattered thick, Of all the Captaines haue, first Winter doth on drie land stick, Red flaking brandes of fire, to rampier topps forth hurling fast, which ragged walls, with smoldring flames incroching, lickt at last.
Not onely hugie ioistes, and beames vnweldie matter yeld, But Tunnes of oyle increasd the fire, then dwellers life to shield, From dint of wrathfull blade, flie backe, the walls with rattling noyce, Are ouerthrowne, the women sckrich, and boyes with dolefull voyce. And when no force for to resist preuayld, the stronger sort Of solide yeares, and hardy Ioines, all desart left their fort, And vncoth by wayes straunge, withouten path did pensiue stray. Not pillage noble Clinton sought, or spoyles to beare away, But glory great of warrs, both towne, and treasure, fire deuoures, To ashes eke consumde are turnd, both bordring townes, and towres, High blasing sparkles belching vp, in circles to the skies. A while bolde Clinton tentes downe pitcht, and in the playne fields lyes, At last with honour great adornd, to painted deck he hies. Meane time the Frenchmā cloking fraude vnder fayre frendships name, Two thousand souldiours led, and Alderne yland ouercame. Where with a nauy small yfrought with ladds of courage stout, Syr William Winter sayld, by force the Francons to driue out. Sir VVilliam VVinter with many of the Queenes shipps taketh gayne Al∣derne Ile ō he handes of e French∣men. The Ile as soone as of the Brutes, it far aloof was spied, In wallowyng surges rough to anker cast, the ship was tied. Sixe hundred warlike souldiours then of doughtie Britaines bold, Scelected were in all, which cockboates swift with ores, do hold, And on the craggie rough sea shore, on foote all safely setts. Here Winter prudent guide, (for long experience wisedome getts) That beastly hope of dreadfull flight, he cleane might ouerthrow, And greater courage kindled more, in ech mans minde might grow: As soone as on the dry land set, his armed rankes did wend, The emptie botes, vnto his fleet, he backe agayne did send, With speedy course to goe. Then thus he spake with countenance sage: The puissance of our Englishmen renownd in elder age, Me warning giues, that like mine auncestours, I nought at all, The words of Sir VVilliam VVinter to his souldi∣ours. Deaths drierie dart regard, which crooked age in time doth call, Or is by sicknes fell, with torments dire, and vexings brought, Death is of men to be contemn'd, that endlesse fame be sought. Behold with frothing floudes and stormy waues, vs compast round, Our enemies neare approch, perchaunce in number far more found. Howbeit vs Brutes in martiall feates, and courage fierce, behinde, Fraunce mightie is, these bandes you slow, and feebled faint shall finde. But graunt our enemies strong, with might and puissance stout indued, We through them with our corps, and valure, passage must reclued. Thinges of great waight, are not atchiu'de, without aduentures hard,
And victorie oft in dolefull fight, bold courage doth awarde. Which by how much more vehement, and fierce, its in you growne, By so much surer (valiant harts) wee all will downe be throwne, To Stigyan lake this day, lesse foes by sword, or flight, we quell, We conquest will atchiue, or famous death vs all shall fell. Stout heartes, a noble death, by mightie woundes, seeke to obtayne. And mates let Fame of worthie death, as prise of life remayne. If anie man for feare shall turne his backe which God forfeud, UUith shame in midst of weltring streames there let him take his nt. No cockbote shall him shrine from death, nor plancke from drowning saue, (Unspeakable reproch) no not if I the same would haue: If anie man me disobey, he life shall lose therefore, And to the maine mast trust aloft, with cottering windes be bore. Into the bickerings hard of Mars, I first will lead the way, UUith stomacke bold, and first in armes, I force of foes will say. The heart of him that first shall come, this hand shall riue in twaine, He sayd, they life, and labour cke, t'aduenture presse forth faine: And clamours loude vp lift, the trompe Alarme resounding blowes, The onset bidding blacke, in order Winter stoutly goes: Before the rest, and in his fist a sharpned tronch he claspt, His bodie couered all, with glistering armour buckled fast. Two thousand Frankes against our ranckes, themselues forth fiercely bare, UUhose Captayne marched first, and thought with ours for to compare, Uncertaine, where with pride conceaued, or mightie valure mou'de, Or onely but to make a shew, and backward would haue shou'de, If him his heeles to sticke vnto, for warnde had perils dire. But egar Winter let not backe this glorious Franke retire, Much like Ioues mightie bird, with grasping talents fenced strong, Sir VVillim VVinter mee∣ting with the Frenche Cap∣taine slaieth him valiantly UUhen with swift course, he chasing flies, the sholes of foule among, The smaller sort lets slip, the mightiest birdes with clawes downe pluckes, And fethers plumes, with nooked beake, and braines, and bloud, out suckes: Euen so the Brute couragious, doth the Celtane captaine vrge. And for because with bunchy pike, the enimie did insurge: with armour fenced like, and weapned like, on him fierce flies Stout VVinter, groueling dead on ground, now Frankes conductor Iyes. The other pillage of his foe, and rich spoyles doth obtayne. Meane time both parties mingling bloud, their courage stout did And gastly wound is recompenst with greistie stroke againe. (straine, The French∣men subdued. The Frankes retire, with flickering shaft stabd through in hastie flight, The Iland is subdued, and conquered yeeldes to Britaines might.
These thinges atchiu'de, and nisht thus. By Captayne Winters hes The Mariners their helmes, towardes the ragged shores do wrest, Then great reportes were made, of  skirmage fought that day, Applauding euerie one, their inward  did they bewray, UUhich noble conquest is to mortall men nt to defray. These thinges in August done. Then after in Decembers frost, The Frenchman it besieging, was vnhappy Callice lost, (Unspeakable mishap) which adge, and feeble folke contaynd, Clice lost. For the most part, within her walles, fewe souldiers fresh remaind. Howbeit fewe souldiers, cannot force, of many men abide, This auncient sort neglected, and a woman Prince beside, whome then a trecherous prelate made by peruerse councell stray, Her noble spowse in forraine coastes disseuered far away: Thirlby Bish∣oppe of Elye. Hereto, add rough and boistrous flouds which raging sweld that tide: And farre disiung'd beyond the seas, the sandy Callice banke, Unwilling it to take, the towne might thrust vnto the Franke. This fortresse lost, the Spanyardes wife, gan to consume away, whom eating eares, with parching griefe, brought to her fatall day. Queene Mary dyeth. Thus endeth the second Booke.
ELIZABETH QUEENE. OR A SHORT AND compendious declaration of the peacea∣ble state of England, vnder the gouernment of the most mighty and vertuous Princesse ELIZABETH. ¶ Wherevnto is added a briefe Catalogue or rehearsall, of all the no∣ble men which being nowe dead, haue been, or yet liuyng, are, of her Ma∣iesties Counsaile. Written in Latin verse by C. O. Done into Englshe, by Iohn Sharrock, Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile, dulci. AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Walde-graue. Anno. 1585.
To the worshipfull his approued good frend, M. IOHN ESTMOND Bacheiler of Law, one of the fellowes of Sainte Mary Colledge: commonly called the Newe Colledge in Oxenford. WHen as at the request, and earnest instigatiō of some of my frends, (worshipfull M. ESTMOND.) I had done into English meeter, the two first bookes, of that Poeme, of C. O. cōtainyng the battailes, & high aduentures, of the English Nation. I was determi∣ned there to stricke sayle, and to cast myne anker: knowing, that the longer my craced keele scoured the seas, the more water she would leake: & fearing, least that Scilla escaped, I should be sunke in Charibdis, or Libia shunned, I should be swallowed in Syrtes. If Cherilus that fielie Poet, had brought but a brief Pamphlet, when he dedicated a huge Volume, vnto the Macedonian kyng Alexander, his gayne peraduenture had bene the more, his paine vndoubtedly the lesse, in escaping a great many lashes, whiche he suffred, to his extreme grief and endlesse infamie. Euen so was I perswaded of my selfe, that the more I wrote, the more want of skill I shewed, whereby I might heape the more dislike, and so by a consequēce the more reproch. But when I called vnto mind (Gentle Syr). How greatly I should dye in your dett, for your manifold benefites, & frendly, yea rather fatherly affection, where with you did imbrace me, beyng your pupill in Oxon, to my no lesse comfort, the commoditie: It were incredible, to thinke, with what celeritie, and disdayne, I shooke of those terrifying causes, & how ardently I burned, with a vehement desire, yet at the least by this kinde of writtyng, (in as much, as I cannot otherwise suffici∣ently expresse my zeale and true affectiō) to testifie my good wil, and my hart full of all humilitie, and sinceritie towardes you, and
to bring to passe if I might, that in all ages, and posterities, as long as euer these my watchynges, and writtynges, shall liue amongst men: your name should neuer dye, but remayne as a patterne, to our nephewes, and ofspring, of all gentilitie, courtesie, and hu∣manitie. and that as euery fautor, and maintainer of good letters, is called ALTER MAECENAS, an other MAECENAS: so euery one which imbraceth his frend with faythfull loue, hateth no man, & is free from all basenes and slauerie of the mynd (as beseemeth a gentleman) might be named ALTER ESTMONDVS, an other EST∣MOND. Take therfore well in worth (deare Syr) these my simple indeuours, beyng a compendious declaration, and treatise, of the peaceable raigne, of our renowmed Lady ELIZABETH, compiled by Maister O. & by me metrized, as a certaine testimo∣ny, and the expresse tipe of my good will. Communicate them with your frendes, shroude them from my foes. This is all I doe request, this me thinkes I already see your Cour∣tesie, and gentlenes to graunt me. The Lord preserue you in health, wealth, and felicitie. AMEN. Yours assured in that he may, Iohn Sharrock.
❧ TO THE NOBLE, AND most vertuous Lady, indued with all kinde of good Literature, excellent, both in the Greek, and Latine tongue, the Lady MYLDRED, Wife to the right honourable Lord, Baron of Burghley, Lord high Trea∣surer of England. REnowmed Greece in elder age, with learned dames did shine, Whose written workes remaine as yet, with phrase mellifluous fine: Of Muses bright besprinckled, drawne out of Parnassus spring. Of female sexe, erst mighty Rome, a hugie troupe did bring▪ All expert in the Latine tong, how heit they lesser prayse, Adornd with natiue language wanne, their fame to heauen, to rayse, And euerlasting memorie, by writing to attaine: Than due is to those Noble Nymphes, which seuered farre remaine, In externe Regions wide, in tender yeares, whose natiue tong, Is to be learnd, the Romayne then, by toiles, and labours long, Of forme renewde, with limites straight, and bondes incompast round, As English Ladies, many may of worthie name be found, Which florish at this day, which through the world swift Fame doth blase. Who ioyne, like learned men, the Greekish tong, with Latine phrase. Yea which is more, like skilfull Poets, in dulcet verse they floe, Wherewith Homerus frought his bookes, or Mantuan Maro. If cause requirde, ex tempore, their meeters framing fine. O Nymphes, O noble Sisters foure, but (Myldred) vnto thine High fauour, as the chiefest, I appeale, be thou mine aide, And like an other Pallas, let thine Aegis strong be laide: Before my brest, that this my booke, feele not the byting i, Aegis the shield of Pal∣las. Of Theon, Viper fell, or carping Zoils slaunderous flawes. If me beholding with thy shining lookes, thou wilt defend: The Enuious, and Malicious crue, dare not me once to rend. So, as in sanctuary shut, I shall no daunger feere, Inferiour farre I know my Muse vnto the vertue cleere.
Of the renowmed Prince, howbeit the will of subiect true, May here appeare, if that the iust, and courteous reader view, And pondering way the worke aright▪ and not with censure hard. If that this long, and prosperous peace, hereafter  clarde By trompe more shril, I wish, and b, these writinges vnto nought By sparkling flames to be consumde, meane time, I them haue brought Renowmed Lady to be shrinde, vpheld, and set in stay, By your high honour, turne not from your Clyent I you pray, This doth your true Nobilitie, and manners meeke, in brest Ingraft, this doth your Godlines, require, aboue the rest. Your Ladiships in all humilitie. C: O. ¶ To the gentle Reader. IF verses you delight, with stately stile and sounding wordes VVhich loftie swell, seeke Poetts bookes, which such high thinges You will perchance affirme, that of so high, & mighty a Queene (affords. A worke should of more maiestie, and statelinesse be seene. I worthie her confesse, whome Homer should insugred verse, Or with the Notes, of warbling Lute Apoll great rehearse. I am no Poet, you pardon must me, since I pardon pray, If that a bourden ouer vast, do downe my shoulders way. My arte vnto the vertueyeeldes, of her a Prince so great, VVhich shuld be sounded by a trompe more shril, with winds repleat If others lye in silence shrinde, why should my Muse not sing? But when her laud, in fluent phrase, from one more learnd shal spring Then will I these my papers voyde the fiery flames to feed, Meane time the honour of her Grace, let these my verses breede.
ELIZABETH QUEENE. FOrthwith in royall throne, and regall chaire, as Queene was set, Elizabeth, a Princesse stout, wh Henry did begett, King Henry monarch high extold, amongst all earthly Peeres. Elizabeth, abornished euen from her ténder yeares, With manners meeke, with learnings lore, with wisedome e diuine, Excelling in the Greekish tong, and Latine phrase so fine. She knowes ech Countries language to through Europe all along, The Germaine, and the Italike, the French, and Spanish tong. In skillfull scanning of the law, she palme deserueth well, In comely feature, bewtie cleare, her visage doth excell. The courage of her mynde is such, as like is hard to finde, In female sexe, celestiall wisedome pure, so deepe is shrinde, within her royall brest. The mirrour of this age no dout. On earth a regallmace to beare from heauens dimised out. A virgin brooking gratefull peace, gaynst dreadfull wars oppose. Howbeit that of this Princely Impe the byrth day be disclosde: And from what happy mother sprong, so happy a byrth, made glad, The Britaines harts, through mestiue grones & sobbs which erst were sad: The Lady Anne a damsell bright, with Henry linked fast In sacred wedlock was, his conscience pricke, and mou'd at last, The best diuine of high Iehoue expresly to him showne, His brother Arthurs spoused scere, to cherish as his owne. which twentie yeares, and three, vnwittyng mighty Ioues edict, By Moyses mouth express, such bandes contractforbidding strict: He vsed had, (the Britaine Peers allowing this his fact) Lest that so rich a dower from his demaines should be extract Agayne to be repayde. The Romaine Bishopps Bull, this act Confirmed to, that lawfully one brother might obtaine, His brothers wife, if him behinde, suruiuour he remaine. Howbeit fewe yeares expirde, the Approbation of such bandes, Quite abrogated by the learned Lawyers of the landes,
Of Italy, and Fraunce (that here vnshewd, their suffrage hold, Our English Doctors all, through sacred knowledge high extold. The Censures of the Vni∣uersities of Italy and Fraunce a∣gainst the Pope. The Romish prelate proud, such actes for to allow, As though the heauenly lawes diuine vnto his becke did bow: And he himselfe exempted, did not vnder lawes abide, As subiect vnto Christ the head, the very church is tide. For head is one, sweete Christ alone, to which as corpes is knit, His flocke vnite, two heades cannot vnto one body fit. Hence did this ougly monstrous beast, first take his curelesse wound, One horne off torne, though nine remaine his front succincting round, And doth with shiuering dread, the hugie world put in a stound. The toune Princes of Europe more or lese are ment to be as ten hornes vnto this beast. Moreouer with diuine instinct inspirde, a prophet sage, Hath song the time to come, in which this hellish fend shall rage, Unarmde, his other hornes off torne, which earthly Monarches shall For time prescribde forsake, being spotted blacke and rough withall. wherefore in good, and luckie houre, by best of Ioue almights, Are worthily solemnized Hymeneus sacred rightes, Twixt Henry king, and Anne, with royall pompe, of honour due, Hymeneus or Hymen God of mari∣age. which more adornde, of Britaine Peeres a huge and stately true, with troupes of men beset, in silken vestures brauely clad. The States most pretious robes, with red gold spanges imbrodered had, And massie chaines of fined gold, on shoulders foulded bare. A solempne pompe at the mariage of Henry and Anno. The Courtlike Ladies blasing gemmes, their hands beseeming, ware, Their neckes, with Iewels glimmering bright, adornd, and ouches rare. On auncient beames bespred, was cloth of Arras curious wrought, Such as by Pallas proper hand ywouen, you would haue thought. All thinges did mirth portend, both boyes, and men of elder age, And virgine troupes, with solempne Himnes, did good successe presage. The holed boxe pipe fild with winde, doth plaiers will obay. Then might you see the springoldes fresh, in streetes to skip, and play. These open signes of commons ioy, might well the Queene delight, And with his new espowsed feere, reioyce the king by right. But after that of seede conceau'de, through wombe extended hye, Undoubted tokens to the world, the princesse did descrit: Almightie God, what wondrous ioy, the heartes of Britaines rought, What ardent hope, what decpe desire, eche noble stomacke cought, Anne great by King Henry. That to the king into the world a male childe might be brought Forthwith vnto the antike tower, of Caesar mightie king, The Queene with condigne pompè; a troupe of noble peeres did bring.
From whence she came, according to this nations guise of old, To take the princely Diademe (imbos'de with stones) of gold, Anne crow∣ned which hapneth to none but to the heires of the kingdom. Nestor lied three hudred yeares. The people all exclayming, Ioue your blisse, and ioies increase, God graunt you liue king Nestors yeares, God giue you good successe. And whil'st she did triumphantlike, in gorgeous chariot passe, With trampling milke white Steeds, of courage fierce, which caried was, With yeomen tall, of sturdie loines, in purple decked neat, Strong garded, as a prince beseemd: perfumes in euerie streat, We are made, as erst in elder age, when men in temples praid, Sweet smelling mith, and frankensence, were on the altars laid And as in time of Autumne when the round, and staring stalke, Standes bolt vpright, in furrowes large, that passers as they walke, Cannot discerne the ground, so thicke are sprong the reedes of corne: The eares all wauering with the windes, now here, now there are borne: None otherwise in euerie streete the people presse apace, The waies vp thrunging thick, that scarse remaines a standing place: Eche eie directly bent, vpon her gratious heauenly face. The Conditts eke, which liqued streames, accustom'd erst did scoure, The condui ran with wine at the coronation of Queene Anne. Did Bacchus sacred giftes of wine fresh frothing bolls out poure. The outside of eche house, faire hanging carpets brodered dight, And balmed odours eke of fragrant flowers breede much delight. Which ioyes augmented more the cheerefull countenaunce of the Queene, And thousandes thick of people, which ranne stragling to be seene, Most wondrous thrust on plumpes, from street, to street, insuing fast, And musickes skill, the eares did fill with many a chearefull blast. Now Phoebus hastning for to shrine in Ocean flouds his face, Beholdes the iourney of the Queene, as to the roiall place, Of Henry King she hied, in westerne side of London sett, The next day comes. The princely traine to Peters church doth set, VVhithall Sainct Peters at VVestmin∣ster. Where breathles corps, of Britaine kings, intombd are went to lye, The nobles first before, in order two and two do hye, As Princes Court requires, and Britaine nations antike rite. A king at armes, ech setts in rome, as honour doth inuite. His fellowes eke, in auncient coates of Armes resplendent dight, The solempne pompe doe much adorne, and bewtifie the sight. The troupe of Peeres insuing next, a stately Wagon showes, which palfraies white as driuen snow on bright bits champing drawes, The Queene, vnto the commons all, in robes of purple fine, with Diamondes, and Emerauldes beset, which glistering shine, with countenaunce full of modestie, adornd, and seemely grace.
Who with a troupe of courtlike Dames, which after her did trace, Into the temple wendes, with heart, and hand to Ioue extolde, Where in the midst of prayer time, a pretious crowne of gold, Her temples bright doth garnish braue, the priest with solempne vowes, Beseeching God, with fruit to spring, to blesse this late made spowes. These sacred rites performed thus, eche noble in his rome, Returnes vnto a royall feast, in order as he come. Chiefe Steward then of England was the Northfolke Duke assignd, The dignitie of Taster, th Earle of Arundell did binde. Thomas Duke of Northfolke made chiefe Steward of England. rle of Arun∣deil Tster. High Chaberlaine the Oxford Earle did decke as title new, The remnant comne of royall race perform'd their office due. In massie bolls, of fined gold, God Bacchus giftes were brought, And plenteous store of cates, was laid on tables curious wrought. This solempne banquett, time with certaine limites finisht quite, When Phoebus neere the euening starre, began with raies to smite, The Ocean salt sea flouds, and downe in deepes his front to hide, Declining prone towardes the coastes of Libia Region wide. The princely Court of Henry king, with murmuring noyce resounds, At the returning of the Queene, such wondrous ioy abounds. Nine times her glimmering light, the lampe of Phoebe had renued, And after the solemniz'd day, the tenth mouth fast insued. Phoebe two sillables vsed for the Moone. Don Titan had not yet, the face of Virgo ouerpast, Remaining in the aspect, of that heauenly starre, where placst Hermes, as in his mansion house, to be doth chiefe delight. Great learning wandring Hermes doth foreshew, and manners bright, But chiefly he portendes a happy witt, and iudgement quick. But if that Ioue exalted be, linkt in coniunction strick To Venus, and with them in friendly aspect Sol be tied: O goodly God, which so the course, of heauenly starres doest guide And force doest giue, and take again, as likes thy sacred hest, The childe borne shall be fortunate, with honour eke inuest: Shall royall seepter hold, and still in flowing wealth abound, Rewardes bestowing still, nor end of giuing shall be found, With heauenly wit indued also, adornde with counsaile sound, Eche vertuous worke attempting bold, in bruntes of Mars renownd, God this doth, bring to passe, not Planetts which their course do take, Within the Spheres celestiall, for Planets courses make: By powre of Ioue diuine, without whose aid they nought preuayle, Nor good effect can woorke. God in them is, which thouten faile Doth certaine houre of birth appoint, to euery mortall wight,
As him shall please, that Author was, which formed them aright. As other thinges, so Planets were the worke of God almight. The seuenth of December, (Ioue omnipotent to passe, This doutlesse brought) by course of yeares, the day of Sabaoth was, Wherein king Henryes noble spouse, in childbirth trauaild sore, Elizabeth borne on tht seuenth day of December being the sab∣both day. As griefe augmentes, so skilfull aged wife insisteth more, About her charge, sage matrons eke, of worthy race applied, Their industry to aid, when labouring Princes gan to slide In fainting panges, through burden ripe, deliuering vnto light, Howbeit vndoubted tokens were foreshewed, of former might. But after that into the world a childe of bewtious hue, Was brought, with members straight composde: as softned waxe, a true And perfit image fashioned beares: the people wondring much, The cunning workmans skilfull hand, in forming to be such: The aged Graundame cries amasde, her handes to heauen vp throwne, Ye people present praise the Lord, Christ Iesus laud alone, A Uirgin doth her mothers blisse, her fathers ioy increase, In time to come this Uirgine shall procure the Britaines peace. This is the onely hope, and solace of our English land. The king his footesteppes fetching fast, him hasteth out of hand, The mother, with her tender Impe to see, and wordes doth speake, Of comfort to his spowes, stick, and through fleshly frailenes weake. Forthwith for baptisme of this babe, the king his nobles bad, For to prepare, the Northfolke Duke chiefe rule, and guidance had, Elizabeth baptised and confirmed in the true faith. who in his hand a slender rod of Iuerie whitenesse bore. All thinges prouided, as the king commaunded had before: The Duke them willing, first the Barons went, an easie pace, In portlike guise then Earls, then mightie Dukes did after trace. The noble Duchesse in her armes. the infant small did hold, In swadling sheetes of lincloth soft, her tender corps infold. A pretious mantle brodered rich, vpon the which did shine, with golden gard adornd, imbosde with stones of Iasper fine: which eyes of the beholders dimmd; with dazeling glauncing rayes. Full many a noble Dame insues, and trustie seruaunces stayes At euery becke to runne, about the temple dores alwayes. Amongest the stately Peeres, the London Bishop present came, with milke white sfole inuest'd, as nunci age requir'd the same. Faire fountaine streames were yored, in pretious fout of siluet hght, The Godfathers, and Godmothers, their promise freely plight'd That in the liuely corps of Christ, Elizabeth vnited;
Should him receaue as head, whose corps the holy church perfited Her sureties were the Archbishop of Cannter∣bury, the du∣thesse of Norfolke and the Lady Mques of Exeter. Elisabeth po∣laimed heite vnto the Crowne by n Herault. And purged cleane from filthy drosse, and superstition, was. The Archbishop of Caunterbury, who did in honour passe The rest, chiefe Primate of this land, and Northfolke Duches bright with Exon Lady Marques then, did vow to Ioue almight, In her behalfe, that she should loue his preceptes, and his lore, when vnto age mature in time, she should attaine therefore. Forthwith she was confirmde, in faith of Christ our carefull guide. When as a king at Armes, with voyce vplifted loftie cried. Long may the royall ofspring liue, of her renowmed sire, Elizabeth, long may she liue, and to all blisse aspire, "And to the Crowne her father dead, let her succeede at heire. "The people all Amen exclaiming, noyce to heauens did reare: "which by the aire reuerrate, causde all the towne to ring: The witnesses, of happie daies abodementes good, did bring Unto the infant seuerally, rich giftes of fined gold, By skilfull Art ingrau'de, with shapes, of Britaine Monarches old, In which the Uirgine come to yeares, triumphing did delight. The surties giue gifts of pe gold. Three hugie chargers first, did warlike Dudley lift in sight, (For from the sacred tembles borne the royall offringes were, By princely state in solempne sort, as custome did require) The second gifts aloft, redoubted Haward high extold, Three mightie standing bolles. Three massie cuppes of pretious gold, Bestudded thick with stones, and radiant gemmes from Indy brought, Thou third Fittzwater wenst, before thy brode brest lifting loft. The fourth, and last (O Worcester) thy Earle succeeded straight. whose wearied armes, of curious place ingrauen felt the waight. And now the regall court was thrungd and full of people prest, The Primates lookes bewraid their ioyes, conceau'd in royall brest, with all their noble Dames, and Lordes, and Barons of the land. The Celler doores,, with wine repleat, to all men open stand. God Bacchus bolles deepe cares do quell, and ioyes in heart makes flowe. These thinges thus finisht, on the rout the king doth thankes vestowe, And many sendes vnto their homes: how beit the greatest part, Of noble race esprong, from Princes court do neuer start. Couragious springoldes eke, collect'd from all partes of this land, To bend, and vow at euery beck, all waiting ready stand. More to confirme their loue, towardes this Impe conceau'd in minde: with plighted oth on sacrament, themselues the people binde, Establisht, firme to stand, in faithfull duetie to her knit.
Not one, but all, this region ceastes throughout, vow not to sitt. The Englis people by o vowe their loyaltie and obedience vnto Queen Elizabeth. Meane time the Uirgin adding groth vnto her tender yeares, Increasd in fauour eke, of heauenly powers, and earthly Peeres, Whom commons loue succeeds. But when her mother tong she knew, Expressing signes of wondrous wit, and Iudgement to insue: She at her prdent sayinges, made astoinisht men to stand, And bookes desirous to be taught, would alway haue in hand. She scarse the letters with her eyes intentiue did behold, The toward nes of Eliza∣beth in her childhood. Their seuerall names, but thrise before by her instructor told: But perfect them at fingers end, as two monthes taught, she bare, Their figures diuerse made, deciphering well, by iudgement rate. Yea in few dayes (a marueile great it is to speake no dout) The Princely impe by industie, such sap had sucked out: That without councell to assist, she any thing could reed, So nothing intricate is found, nor difficult in deed," To willing mindes, deceauing toyles the loue of vertue true." Her mothers solace great, this Uirgin bright of roseal hue," Did ample hope foreshew, what helpe she should to Britaynes bee: The Aequinoctiall line, which dayes, and nightes, makes to agree In true proportion like, Don Phoebus lampe had banisht farre, From this our Climate, chasing fast towardes the Northarne starre, Description of the spring tyme. Then ready for to take a signe celestall by the way, which Venus mansion house to be, Astronomers do say. Then pleasant spring, appeares on earth, and rough hayle shoures depriues, Expelling nipping coldes, and into th'hard earth moisture driues. Then fieldes do fragrant shew, than all things budding blossomes beare, Then Nightingales with chirping notes, melodiously do were Away the lingring darksome night, and please the watchfull eare. Now was the tyme when gratefull rest, had layd in drowsie sleepe, Men mortalls weried bones, and bodies close in couch did keepe. The king therfore him hies to bed, so doth his royall Queene, His chamber he, she takes a rowme, ioynt to an herbour greene, With floures of sondry colours dect, most pleasant to be seene. where long and tedious houres she spendes, whilst studious she her booke Reuoluing turnes, which customde vse, of tender yeares she tooke, Till drowse sleepe, her daceled eyes, soft stealing on, vp closde. But when she thus a great part of the night had spent, reposde At last in loftie bed of state, (as Princely Ladies are:) with vowes deuout, of soule, and corps, she prayes high Ioue take care. Then drencht in deepe sleepe rest she takes, forgetting fancies past,
Now midst of glomish shadowy night, expired was, at last, Deepe silence dogges, and men, and beastes of saluage kind, had rought, when Morpheus in her grandsiers shape, the God of dreames him brought, Unto the Queene, (which long before, was in Seplcher layd) orpheus od of drea∣es. he dreame  Queene  where∣ she was ed of  death at  and of ny other ble c∣es. UUith beard downe dangling long, and head white hoar, and thus he sayd. O Anne (which layd in dead sleepe sound yet thought herselfe awake,) Feare not my daughter Anne, nor at this vision trembling quake, Behold thy Grandsier I, here present stand, of yore well knowne, From all contagion earthly free, I dwell in heauenly throne, Wherewith loues sacred ministers, I endlesse life obtaine, To liue so, is to liue in deede, thou liu'st to dye agayne. Prepare thy selfe with Sainctes in ioyes celestiall for to comme, To Christ, which heauenly boures hath built, and sitts in highest rowme, Desirous that his flocke, with him should raigne, Peace, endlesse blisse, Tranquillitie secure in deede, no chaunce, nor chaunge there is. What earthly honour can preuayle: what glory great of kings? What pompous wealth aboundant? what rich pretious vestements brings? UUhat prosite can bright purple robes? what glistering gemmes and gold? Can they mens mindes once better? or the sting of plagues withhold? Can they Deathes threatning dart, or vexin chaunces keepe away? All earthly thinges perswade thy selfe, do frayle fall in decay, On heauen thine eyelids firmely fire, seeke heauenly kingdomes hie, UUhich for Christes faythfull flocke, prepared are vndoubtedly. Now to what end this talke doth tend, with minde attentiue know: Foule enuie start with poysoning snakes, from gastly shadowes low: UUith hatreds brandes the world perturbes, in Princes Courtes her nest Erecting strong, that who so God, and Iustice, fauours best: And gratious in his Prince his sight, with credit great doth grow: So much the rather on his flesh, will enuious vipers gnow, And worke will with such secree, that he shall not pereaue, The venemous sting, till Atrapos s vitall breath bereaue, And by dire destinies fatall doome, he be entombd in ground. Thou knowest the mighty Britaine guide, by stablisht lawes profound, In his hye Court of Parliament (where mixt in Counsell seat, Both Peers, and People of the land, it earnest did iutreat:) His subtill nining fraude, now set abroch, and knowne: The Pope, with his Supremacle, out of his land hath throwne, And that no Bulls, from Romish seat hereafter should be sought, Whereby his pompe might be maintaind, by them in thousands bought. Wherfore the prudent Monarch, hath from his dominions all.
Him quite expelld, howbeit in Court his wilie fautors stall, And faultring dread lest that their fraude detected, and betrayde, Should in her glosing colours be portraid, and brode bewrayde. They shiuering feare, lest that thy rule, their rage to ruine bring, If fatall destinies in thy Prime thee with their bane should sting: (For that those traitrous villaines brue) they would triumphing sing, No farther dout, or daunger, then suspecting to impend. A foreshew ng of the extermina∣ting and io ting out of Idols. Howbeit about the hugie world, Sir Titan shall not end, Two times his wandring course, before that by the Counsailes hestes, All Idolls, props supporting both the Pope, and shauen crestes: Shall by deuouring greedy flames, be burnt, and turnde to nought, And Images be battred downe, with stones, of marble wrought. The floore of Ioues most sacred house, shall purg'd, and scoured bee. Meane time O happy England through thy Region by decree, Of Henry mighty king: the Crier shall promulgate loude, That vnto carued stockes, or stones, no knee shall once be bowde. These wondrous thinges thou shalt not see aliue, to come to passe. But relickes of the Challice, and such dreggs, and trumperie trash, Shall not till after Henries death be bauisht backe to Rome, From whence, as from the fountain head, and welspring, first they come. A boy then with coruscant vertue deckt, deuoyde of crime, Rest    by kg ∣dward. Againe shall bring (to Sainces celestiall deare) in happie time, The sacred wourd of high Iehoue, then superstition vaine, A foule, and filthy errour shall all desolate remaine, For seuen yeares space, which so doth sticke vnto religions side: As doth the clinging Iuie thrombe, fast to the Ene abide. Almighty Ioue, to heauenly blisse shall first this springold call: Before the worldes frayle glory, shall his hart seduce at all, Or lusting flesh incense him, by suggestion vnto sinne, A flattering foe, in floud of Acheron to plundge him in. Acheron o of te ue  uers of hell where  are men∣ted. The seuenth yeare of his raigne, shall him bereaue of regall mace. Whom after shall a married Queene succeed, in royall place, The Pope reducing. Then shall wofull England sliding backe, Fall prostrate downe to blockes, and ripp agayne the Romish pack. If any man do mutter once, by conscience terrour stong, Maries gou nement. Or once reuolue the testnt, write in his mother song: Or out of it conuince the Pope to swarue from law, and right, In vaunting his authoritie, equall with Ioues almight, With diuilish pride vp puf: he shall with scorching brands be burnd, With raging fiers consuming force, his bones to ashes turnd.
When that the noble Princesse, had the matter peisde aright, And cald to minde, that daungers such and lucklesse chaunce, as might Not be eschewie, must suffred be, and not ailde with grief: Few dayes expirde, in robes of state, and Princely bestmentes chief, All shining downe he comes, and musing, walke in harbour greene. By chaunce a Courtlike Lady than, prostrate on both her kneene, I know not what petition made, of royall stocke esprong Anne decla∣reth her dreame vnto a noble ma∣trone. Of mighty Peers, whose ielous loue, and secret truth erst long, In sondry pointes she had fortitide. to whom the Queene thus spake, O trustie Lady, manifest do not oer secretes ake. None present stands, we are alone, and leasure serues to talke, (For far apart, the portlike troupe, of britaine nimphes did walke) (And opes her lipps for to proceede, and faultring shutts againe.) At length she spake. when dulcett sleepe, me close in bed had laine: My maydes secluded all: Inrold in earth, in elder yeares, Ay me my Grandsier old, in antike forme, so brim appeares As when he drew his vitall breath, he was vnto me knowne, And in a long processe, my fatall houre hath to me showne: UUhich in this month, insuing next, the destinies will procure. The noble dame, sale trickling teares, bedewing her lookes demure: Astoinsht, sobbing sayes, no God auext, this bitter lot, The fancies of your troubled braine so vayne, remember not, But quite roote out, such parching thoughtes, as macerate your hart, "Out of a gladsome minde, fresh florishing age, doth bloming start, "Perplexing grief, hart strings of mortall men, vntimely freats, "And in his pinsers holding fast, their mindes with corture beats. Meane tyme a page doth warne, the royall king for to approch. But Anne desirous of her grief, the cause to set abroch Unto her trustie frend her dreame in order doth declare, And what the diuine oracles concerning England weare. More of king Henries mightie race, what should be the successe. Then of her tender Impe, in fine the fate the doth expresse. Her willing, truth, and faythfull loue, toward her to maintaine, Yet yong of yeares, which in processe, might recompence her payne. Then to the goodly Prince her spouse, she lowlie doth incline, For honours sake, who tokens great of loue, erprest that tyme: Both ioyntly side, by side, the fragrant garden trace about, UUhich sight the hartes did gladsome make, of all the vulgar rout. Sir Titan Venus glorious house, in heauenly coape had past,
And some degrees incroching made, in signe adiacent fast, Renowmed Anne for endlesse life, a short death doth exchaunge, Anne dyeth. Deuouring cares expeld, and in celestiall coastes doth range. Learne you that liue, what can, backbiting malice gobling fell. Blacke Enuie, gastly hagg, neare happy liuers, still doth dwell, UUhich filthy venome blew, of viperous tonges, insues as mate. Religion, and worship true, of mightie Ioue, which sate, All drownd, much like a burning coale, vp rakt in embers dead: Annes prayse for almes gi∣uing. In happy dayes, of vertuous Anne, disclosd her burnisht head. Of Anne, whose hand so bountifull, gaue almes vnto the pore, Ech day, and feeble creeples lame, and people blind vp bore: Ye wailyng widowes do lament, the black and dismall day, Ye children eke of Siers bereft, which tooke this Queene away. The Lady Iane, of Seimers bloud, stout Henry mightie king. In holy wedlocke rites espous, from which a babe did spring, Henry mari∣eth Queene Iane. A boy of wondrous towardnes, and manly vertue cleare. He was by sacred muses reard, and fostred vp most deare. To him in tender age, Elizabeth coequall cleft, Edward borne. Aa both to soone in springing yeares, of noble dames bereft. Howbeit that carefull prouidence, in Henries brest was shrind, That he a man of knowledge deepe, them to instruct assignd. The day in diuers partes was cut, for diuers studies fitt, Euen with Syr Titans springing lampe, they at their bookes doe sitt. These vertuous Impes, now this, now that, with mindes intentiue reed. First Iesus Christ, instilled was, their endlesse blisse to breed, The life, the rocke, the tracked path, to them which dread the Lord. Then bookes of ciuill gouernement, which preceptes did afford, And other noble Artes beside, for royall children meet. Sound knowledge daily did increase, and ripe wit polisht neet, Renowmed Henryes ardent loue, towardes them kindled more, And fauour of the Britaine Peers obtaind, and commons lore, Elizabeth three yeares by byrth, her brother went before, Inferiour in her sexe, but for bicause of riper age: Desirous laud, and prayse to winne, free from fell enuious rage: And that her brother Prince, incenst by her proceedings, might Be spurd more ardent, to attaine to Vertues sacred light: She here desistes, and qualities beseeming her degree, She practis els beside. Now silken vesture holdeth she, In lilly handes, and fitting fine, with pliant fingers small:
With needle worke imbrodereth rich, and ouerspreadeth all. Mineruaes pretious webbe, the vewers would haue voucht it sure, The hemmes distinguisht with a gard, of glistering mettall pure. Now doth she exercise her selfe, of solempne Lute to play, On warbling stringes, now more, now lesse, sad dumpes to driue away. The Nightingale her chirping voyce, so diuers scarse could make, Diuideo into sondry tunes: as she most sweetly strake, with quauering fingers small, and gentle touching of the strings. All men admiting much, whence that celestiall Musicke springs. Where daintie cates on tables spred, they were to take repast: Or after viandes all remou'de, in galleries they wast, The time: or els in gardens fresh, of fragrant sauour walke, Of vertue, of Religion true, of sayings wise, her talke Should still be framde, both godly speach, and true, she alwayes vsde, A token plaine, how that her hart, the spot of vice refusde. In old Palaemons learned Art, they both most skilfull weare. The Prince, and Lady eke, so deepe ingraft in minde did beare, Prince Ed∣ward, and Elizabeth skilfull in the Greeke and Latin tong. The Greekish phrase. with Latine speach conioynd, that in short space, Once reeding would suffise, to vnderstand the hardest place. That of the hugie world so vast, where Phoebus globe hath flamde, The lad the Phoenix might be calld, the virgin Pallas namde. Meane time with crooked age effeebled, Henry yeldes the ghost, whose death as hartes of Brutes it rent, and mindes perplexing tost: Henry 8. dyeth. So doth his heyre apparant then, with ioyes their brestes comfort, Incensing them to solempne mirth, and ioyes and pleasant sport. Elizabeth reuenewes large, takes by her fathers hest, Edward 6. crowned which her, of yearely rentes, beseeming her degree possest, Of Princelike houses stately built, and massie heapes of gold. wherfore far from the royall Court, in countrie she doth hold Herselfe alone, accompanied with her most carefull guide, A woman of great maiestie, of noble bloud beside, which alwayes in societie, to this yong Impe was tide. Admonishing with councell good, and exhortations wise, UUhat as conuenient, she should brooke, and what agayne despise. Of twise seuen yeares, the tender age she scarse had fully tract, When that mature, the virgin might, for spousall rites exact, when as behold, with portlike trayne, one vnkle to the king, Himselfe vnto her Princely house, in pompous sort did bring, And doth the tender Lady bright, with much ambition woe,
Forthwith through shame, with blushing he we, her eares did burning gloe' Attending not what Hymen ment, nor what this wooing Peere, With earnest sute did pray. Wherefore he parteth nothing neere. But he insistes againe and vrgeth more his sute to winne, Till from the princely Nimphe, he had that finall answeare gin, Declared by her gouernesse, he labour lost in vayne. More, that it better were, from his attemptes soone to abstayne. That fixt it sute in royall brest, of the high Lady bright, Not to be linkt, in wedlocke bandes, to any Britaine wight. Of Lordes estate: forgetting not, her father, famous king, And from what mightie auncestours, she by discent did spring. UUho would not here admire the noble courage of h minde: Yet soft through tender yeares, of roiall kinges, the gentle kinde. UUho would not wonder at her stomacke haue: far from the lure, Of Cupids how, which offered bandes of wedlocke, might procure Hereto accept. wherefore she seelde out from her stately houres Proceedes, or ruling Brother greetes, or Londons pompous toures, Doth ride to see, lesse called forth, on matters of great waight. Unto the Prince his maiestie, she then declming straight, Th'almightie king of kinges doth pray, for to preserue his grace. Forthwith, with swift course backe retiring to her dwelling place, On pleasaunt hill erect, which champion fieldes, of Flora Queene, Adiacent doth behold, neere fountaines bright, and riuers greene: Hatfield. Beset with trembling Aspe, and Beech, and Okes of wondrous hight. There Nightingales with chirping tunes, melodious breede delight, And whistling Throssell, which frequentes the brierie shrubby thorne. Hereunto studies such addict, as chiefly might adorne, The daughter of so geat a Prince, with loue, and laud of all, UUere they estates of hye degree, or meaner Fortunes thrall: The royall Nimphe, the sliding tract, of her life doth contere, (UUhen sacred rites of funerall, performde to Henry were) UUhilell Phoebe thou with thy furious steedes, whose nostrels sparkling Out blastes, in heauenly pole sixt times the signes, thou ouertakes. (flakes, Periphrasis sixe yeare for the Sunne once a yeare ouerg es the x signes, so that be mea∣neth by ouer∣taking the signes vi. times vi. yeare. Sometimes she greeuous plaintes doth make, of valiant Sire bereft, Her selfe all left alone, the ftckle worldes collusions left: UUhich of the greatest part, are wondered at, and high extold, In ciuill broiles, and combrous toiles, which doe themselues infold, UUhereas from such vexations free, they may at home remayne, Sometime her spirits reuiues, her brothers prosperous state againe.
Her future Destinie witting not, procurde by powers deuine, That she a regall port should beare, and great in glory shine, Amidst the troupes of Britaine Peeres, though no she frequence hate. In the seuenth yeare, that royall Prince, did yeeld to drierie Fate The vertuous Edward, Britaines stay, and comfort of their land. Edward the. 6 dieth. Queene Mary ruleth. The raynes of regall gouernment, straight Mary takes in hund, And popish trompery dregges, establisht sets againe aloofe, By Parliament, confirming lawes, new for the Popes behoofe: Such as her famous brother had set downe, extincted cleane. Here straight a rablement of priestes, with oile annointed gleene Throughout the land, like Bacchanalles and fiers, with red bloud feed. If any godly were, and Iesu lou'de, he had for meed His bowels braild with scorching brandes, and bones consumde to nought. But some by warning sent from God (for so beleue we ought) And harkening to the powers deuine, by fight their safegard sought. Their natiue country, Parentes deare, and frendes forsaken quite. UUhich, chaunge succeeding Edwardes death, a number did incite, UUith heartes, estraungd from Britaine soile, to liue in forraine landes. He fled in externe nations srates, he hating blouddy hands, And rage, of that massacring crue, seekes meanes those euils to shunne. UUhen here (out, out, for shame) a great comotion was begunne, The deadliest rage, and sharpest scourge, that can on kingdomes fall. Now these, now those, the quest attainted doth of treason call. In prisons strong a wondrous rout, of Brutus race were pent, But manie more to glomy streames, of Stigie lake were sent. UUithin the mighty Tower as soone as Courtney Earle vp closde: UUas to his certaine day of triall, to descend reposde: The Bishoppe of VVinches∣ter. The glorious Prelate proud, outragious wroth did fretting chaufe, UUith troublous conscience vext subuersion dreading, of thinges saufe UUhich were not to be feard. Yea bitter Hatreds poysned sting, Thee, and thy state, Elizabeth, did in suspicion bring, Holie sort I∣ronia cuius contrarium ve est Of craced faith, towardes the Crowne, That thou deuoyd of crie Hast liu'd, whose brightnesse of the minde, did so couscant shine, That Enuies eies, with radiant beames, it dazeled till this time▪ Ath, swoln with venbd malice fell, the holy sort forgettes. UUhich vile impatient crue, with wrathfull anger furious frettes, Till that the sielie lambe, (howbeit her keepers, courteous were) (For God the wolues had driuen away:) ydrencht, in deepe dispaire, In prison close was kept, all liberties freedome tane away,
That light affliction, and this gentle penaunce, did display The better knowledge, of the Lord, that so she might attaine UUisedome more deepe, which trace of time, to mortall men doth gaine. Such like affliction, mixt with griping cares, thy graundsier olde, To wondrous wisedome rare renowmed Henry seuenth extolde, which of an other Salomon, the noble name doth hold. Euen as a date tree downe depres'd, doth loftier lift her top, And how much more with boistrous blastes, Sir Aeol sturres to op, Her perching groth, by so much more, in hight she liftes her bowes: So through backbiting viperous tongues, the Lady nobler growes. And whome pernitious Enuies peise, downe keepes, her Vertues light, Through constant minde extolles, to starrie region, shining brigt. Howbeit the vile masse mungring crue, lamented at their hart, That th'end expected had not tane, their false, and trecherous part. Wherefore new guiles they do deferre, vntill a time more fit, And to themselues this kingdome vowe, in hope, if that it hit, That in their secret trappes now laid, the Britaine heire doe fall: Mrane time their furious rage doth roame, and tortures vseth all, Aboundant streames of Christian bloud, most ruthfull, moistes the land, And goarie flouds, alacke in pooles, of hit reieeted, stand. Ay me, and waile a day, young childrens corpes, fire brandes deuoures, And difference none put twixt their sexe, both men, and weomen, scoures. For he gainst Ioue almightie, is a foe outragious thought, If anie man his enemie, the Romish bishop cought, Out of the word of God, which takes away Christes honor due. And falsely, white that thing affirmes, which is of duskish hue. Yea so his heynous trecheries, with gloses couered beene, As at no time, our graundsiers olde, in elder age haue seene. That both the sense of touching, and of tast, doe fading fayle. If that ye take that priuiledge from bodies, what auayle, Can th'eare, or twinckling eie, vnto what vse shall fingers stand? Aa, haa, in deepe Charibdis gulfe uplung'd, the Britaine land For very grief doth grone, and ginnes of safetie to dispaire, Howbeit the ghost diuine of Ioue, her pitying vnaware: which with his bece the heauens, and seas, and earthly regions shakes, For the afflicted English state, a gratefull plaier makes. For from their hie vsurped seates, proud potentates are drawne, Downe headlong to the ground, which reuerent worship to be showne, Bad vnto Idols wrought in woode, or forgd of moulten brasse
The Prince with deepe perseuerance, scelected of the best Of Britaine states, a fewe; which long vse had with wisedome frought, And learning eke, Parnassus Nimphes to deck their wits had brought, By which proppes of eternall, Fame, vnder a mayden Queene, Renowmed England through the world, is bright blazed to beseene. First of her Counsayle Bacon was a wise and prudent Knight, licolas Ba∣ns Lord pri∣uy seale. Of polisht wit, who Britaine lawes, by iudgement scand aright, Whose sweete and sugred eloquence, in midst of Counsaile sage: Hath such his endles Fame atchiu'de, that though Fates headlong rage. Him hath destroide, he liues, and after death his vertues blaze. Lord Chauncelour he of England, and the Brodeseales keeper was. Whose honourable seat, Sir Thomas Bromeley doth beseeme, Thought worthie of that dignitie, by censure of the Queene. The prudent troupe of Senatours, their suffrage yealding like. Thomas Brockley Lord chaun∣colour. UUhich lawes in equall ballance weyes, and cancelling out doth strike, UUhich ouer ponderous to him seemes, that, which is good, and right, May thereof spring, and middle place possest may Vertue bright. Next thy Lord Marques (Winchester) his worthie seat did take, Renowmed whom the title high, of Treasurer did make VVilliam Paulet Mar∣ques of VVin chester. A man of wondrous grauitie, whilst that he ran his race, On earth, but crookt through age at last, to destinie he gaue place, Before all these came forth, blacke frowning Fortune spurning back. UUhose faith in danger dire at hand, from sincere heart extract, The Prince had tried, Lord Cicill, and of all the Counsaile sage, Lord Cicill! high treasurer of England. By Princesse verdict chiefe assignd, now stroke with drowping age, And worne in yeares, with study leane, and sickly on his feat. For great affaires, white hoary heares and crooked age to fleet, Doe cause before their time, which then scarse fortie yeares had rought. Seldome to sleepe addict, from slender diett seldome brought. Still graue, and modest found, at no time giuen to dallying play, UUhere that he talkt, or musing sate, it earnest was alway. A fuutor of religion true, of right he studious was, In this our age, thinges of great waight, borne for to bring to passe. UUhose loue towardes his natiue soile, and faith, towardes his Queene. UUhose wisedome, busied still about his countries causes seene: Beyond Europa borders, hath achiu'd him endles Fame, Nor here he first to aid his Prince, with learned counsell came: For in king Edwardes noble Court, he wondrous credite wanne, And Counsellour to his leich to be, in bloming youth began
UUhen mongst the Britaine Peeres, he hurlie hurlie tumultes, wrought By prudent circumspection, to quaile, and bring to nought. And whil'st some others furrowes deepe, in gurtie channels cast, Their hollow hulls tos'd, and turmoild, with Aeolls whurling blast: And sometime downe with headlong fall the infernall pitts do see: Ae lus God the windes. He both his honour, and his seat, and name preserueth free. How wary in Queene Maryes dates, he did himselfe behaue, And sailes which hung aloft at Mast, to windes relenting gaue, Because it better is, to yeeld, to rough and mightie force, Of raging floud, then stand against, and to resist his course, which doth a deadly perill prest, and certaine harme procure: By iudgement plaine, apparant doth expresse his wisedome sure: That for sixe yeares, amidst his foes, vnhurt he vpright stoode, Though persecuted with the hate, of Cayphas wicked broode. In euerie way, in euery streete, in London royall mart, To all mens dew proceeding forth: when as the greatest part, In forreine nations bannisht straide, him Ioue preseru'd at hand, Forth honour of our noble Queene, and profite of our land. He externe Princes Legates, heard attentiue, whilest the hest They of their Lordes declarde, and aunswere prompt againe express, In counsell graue a Nestor, which now noble Burghley hight, Of woodes, and auncient farmes, and Castles strong, adiacent pight. Baron of Burghley. which doth the common Treasurie of goods confiscate keepe. He being full aduertised, of waightie causes deepe: It worth rehearsall is, forthwith with what industrious care, He doth disside the strife, and right ascribes, by iudgement rare, Not aboue two daies space, deferring it, or three at most, Unlesse of pointes so intricate, the matter stand composde That without longer trackt of time, it may not be vnfold. which laud as chiefest, veriest eke, let this high Lordling hold. The mightie Earle of Arundel, is in this order tide, The Earles o Arundell an Penbroke Stewardes o the Queenes house. The Penbrooke prudent Peere insuing ioyntly by his side, Both Stewardes of the royall house, of their renowmed guide. The warlike Mauy of the Queene, came Clinton to thy care, whereof full thirtie yeares agoe, thou hast tuition bare, Nor to thy little honour it redoundes, three Princes strong, That thou hast seru'd, thy selfe of bloud of auncient Peeres esprong, Clinton Lord Admirall Earle of Lin colne. Atchiuing many hard exploites; a shipborde, and on shore, Lincolne this warlike Earle, hath with title due vphore.
Next, of the Princes Chamber, was Lord Haward chiefe assignd, A man to anger prone, howbeit of gentle courteous minde, Villiam ho∣ard. Whose vncle title high of Duke, and Nephew erst did binde, Whome dead, in like degree, the Earle of Sussex did succeede, he Earle of ssex high hamberlaine f England. A most redoubted Peere, of courage haut, and bold indeed. Thy royall Parsons gardon strong, and faithfull tride alwaies, Elizabeth, prest to attempt, the brunt at all assayes. In fearfull Mauors bickering iars, through minde vnconquered haut, e also was esetenant in eland. Who oftentimes the saluage Rerne, subdued hath in assaut, Whom noble victorie did adorne, in blouddy warres atchiu'de, Yet from a righteous Iusticer, he chiefest laud deriu'de, UUhen Mary did her flickering sp'rite out breath, the Britaine guide, By chaunce at Hatfield, with her troupe of Ladyes did abide, Her noble parson, with a true of yeomen garded strong. Robart Dudly Lord Dudley, on a palfray sterce, vp mounted swift along Doth thither post, his colour white as winters snow, tall pight, His buttockes brode bespred, his brest, and backe, most faire in sight. As mightie Alexanders steede, throughout the world renownd, Bucephalus, or courser fierce of Castor, whom men sound Castor & Pol∣ux, hatched fan agge by eda whom upiter rauish ed in forme of  swanne. Of Laedaes egge esprong: this in all pointes, resembling those, So with his hoofes carreieing in the thinne aire swift he goes. For of a stripling tought that arte, by riders, till this time He doth delight, on loftie steedes, all fierie, fierce, to clime. UUhere when he came, and license had to come vnto her sight, On bended knees, he prostrate falles, and duetie doth aright. Here Robert Dudley, then of comely corpes, and stature tall UUhome fresh, and blooming youth, commended goodly therewithall: Assigned maister of the horse, by her most royall grace: Master of the horse. Doth alwayes on her maiestie, attend from place, to place, As often as she rides, and like a true Achates kinde, Achates com∣panion of Ae∣neas in all his toiles & tra∣uailes. His mistres serues, her person next, insuing ioint behinde. And takes for guerdon of his paynes, and meede for vertue true, An honourable name, with large reuenewes thereto due. with portlike houses faire, and stately turretts huge in hight, whome Leycester her Earle acknowledgeth, and whom by right, Farle of Lece∣ster. with honour one all Albion land, doth worship and imbrace. For he exalted vp aloft, and set in royall place, By lowly mind, and courteous deedes, hath wonne the Britaines heartes. Pale Enuy, and of mallice fell the sharpe and poysoned dartes,
The myndes uf many noble men, with venome blacke bespott Howbeit this Peer is free, from raging Enuies filing dropps, He labreth all to helpe, not damage on poore men to heape, When that he can, hath still redound, vnto his glory great. Most bountefull, with stretched hand, he allmes deuout doth giue, Which aged and decrepit folkes, erect'd for to reliue Hospitall built by the Earle Lecester His hospitall, at Warwicke, shewes, with annuall rentes thereto. And Couentry can testifie, where godly Preachers doe, Continually the blessed word, of hye Iehoue set downe. To these annexed comes, which Huntington with chief renowne, Earle of Hun∣tington liefe tenaunt of Yorke. Adornes, and guidaunce great, of Britaines Northarne borders large, UUith Fame augmented high extolls, wherof long time the charge, UUith Counsaile rare, much grauitie, and faith vnspotted, bore: To him deserued prayse hath wonne, and Princesse fauour more Increasd, and natiue Countries peace, and safetie, made succeed. He in his yong and tender yeares did auncient authors reed, UUhich wisedome, and Philosophie, in Greeke, or Latine tong Containde, play mate to Edward Prince, of auncient race esprong, Scoolefellow and plaimare with king Edward the 6 Of mighty kinges, their bookes, and grauer studies layd apart. The Preachers word, this Potentate, hard with attentiue hart. UUhose life with vertuous manners most coruscant, glorious shind. The Warwicke Earle renownd in armes, of mighty Warwickes kind, Earle of war∣wicke. From noble stocke of Grandsiers old esprong, of stomacke stout: In skirmage grim, despising death, and glory seeking out, More pretious then his life: And Bedford Earle, which Iustice seedes, And godlynesse doth dayly sow, religious in his deedes: Earle of Bed∣ford. Professour true of Iesus Christ, a fosserer of the sicke, And needy soules: in Counsaile both, to Britaine Monarch sticke. Iord Huns∣don liesece∣nant of Bar∣wicke. To these that mighty Lord, renowmed Hunsden ioyntly ioynes, whose noble aunt, the gratious Queene, deliuered from her loynes, Espouso in Hymens sacred bandes, to Henryes royall grace. what should I all recite: one yet remaynes, who in this place, Queene Anne aunt to the Lord Huns∣den. Demeritts not, with sinallest laud, to be remembred here, Of noble stocke, of grandsiers old, yet he himselfe a Peere, Far more reno theri they. Sir Henry Sidney, prudent knight, Syr Henry Sidney. with the most noble order of the golden Garter dight. whom Ireland, thrise Embassadour, holding the royall mace, Hath seene, and exceuting lawes, set in his Ladies place. Nor onely seene, but felt, yea feard, and eke imbrac'd with loue,
That no man hath (as true report, and fame the same can proue) That Region entred in, with greater fauour of the same, Gouernde in greater awe, or with more wailyng from it came. Nor onely externe Irish coastes, his noble laud resound, Lord Presi∣dent of wales But Wales on part of Albion land, which doth on Seuerne bound, (Seuerne a mighty floud, which twixt the borders, sliding flowes) Her Presidentes most worthy prayse, with trompe of Fame out blowes. Under whose prudent gouernement, she long hath florisht, free: From daunger, that it doubtfull seemes, where they more happy, he Beyng there President, exult, or equall Iudge, reioyse. Long since renowmd Elizabeth Fraunce hard his sugred voyce, Thy Legate being than, of goodly stature comely sett. Nor Pary shall I thee, ydrencht in Lethe floudes forgett, Thomas Pary Which in extreme aduersitie, a faithfull counsailour wast, When Fortune had not yet the crowne, vpon thy Lady cast. And shewdst thy selfe a seruaunt true, which safetie didst respect, Of thy deare mistresse, when thou didst those traitours guiles detect. Into this sacred company the Duke of Northfolke chose, The Duke of Northsolke. Euen in the floure of all his time, his vitall breath did lose. Smith both with pregnant witt adornd, commended eke beside, Syr Thomas Smith. With all the noble sciences, whose councell hath bene tride, Both iust, and sound, by destinies tane, doth closd in Tombe abide. Let here Syr Frauncis Knolls, obtaine his seat amongst the rout, Syr Frauncis Knolls. A man of wondrous constancie, religious, graue, a stout Defendour of the fayth, who least he should destruction dire Behold, and godly men consumde, with scorching brands of fire: The blouddy English Clergy then incenst with outrage fell: He fled his natiue soyle, in externe costes, and those to dwell, Syr Frauncis Knolls, in Q. Maries dayes fled into Ger∣manie. Amongst the Germaines, rather there, to read a lothsome life: In mestiue grief, and there to dye, then painted Idols, rife In sacred temples see. Nor happy England had at all, Him backe retournd beheld, nor rich possessions home could call: But that renownd Elizabeth, her fathers regall crowne, Most glorious did sustaine, on whom her neace, in duetie bownd, Sir Frauncis loyall spouse, attendant serud at euery . The valiant courage of their mynde, his auncestours did deck, Aboue three hundred winters past, and corps most goodly pight, With dread, not to be daunted when of yore that mighty knight, Edward the third, did blouddy warres, agaynst the Celtanes reare,
Then doughtie Knolls most valiantly, himselfe in armes did beare, And did atchiue such hard exploites, as may the myndes delight, Of such as reed our Cronicles, whose noble ofspring, bright: Yet florishing at this day, shall make their nephewes yet to cente, To florish more, if mighty Ioue which sitts in highest rome, The godlines, and righteous minde, of the aged, Siet regard. Next Ambrose Caue insues. Then Hatton, which the Princes gard, Syr Ambrose Caue. Syr Christo∣pher Hatton master of the Garde. Of yeoman call doth lead, with chearefull hart, to Studentes pore A liberall Moecenas, none Religion fauouring more. What should I tell the giftes ingraft within his vertuous mynde: Or sharpnes of his witt, if cause you vrge it out to finde: In hearing of the Senate graue with what mellifluous phrase, And dulcett voyce he speakes, how louing he doth all imbrace And puissant, men couragious doth affect, and hurtes no wight. Ralfe Sadler with his penne, and Gwalter Mildmay scanning right, Sir Raph Sad∣ler. Syr Gwaltor Mildmay. The Arithmetricians Art: both cunning Clarkes, whome vertue gaind By long vse, hath extold, and wisedome in most thinges attainde: They both in Senate house perswade, and Counsaile graue downe lay, Chroftes, in his royall mistresse house, controller now doth slay, And with his valiant burly corps, adornes the Princes hall, UUhich erst, in campes of dreadfull Mars, did force the foe to fall. Syr Iames a Crostes. In Englandes chief affaires, one Secretarie to the Queene Is Walsingham, who Legate then, of Britayne Prince was seene. Secretary VValsingha At Paris, when the slaughter great and dire destruction was, And such effusion vast was made, of Christian bloud alas. A godly man of courage high, with bribe not to be bought, Nor by corrupting chraft from path of Iustice to be brought. Most happy sure, which suppliant doth talke with the heauenly king, But secreatly, as soone as clad  sr his bed doth spring. And of ech day by vowes deuout, oth good abodements take. O would that many such great kings would of their Counsaile make Then should no doubt ech common weale in blessed state remaine, And old Saturnus golden age would be renewde againe. Commended eke with sondry vertues rare the other was Willson, whose flickering ghost of late to aierie coastes did passe. D. VVilson. These doth the Princesse vse, these Counsailours hath she vsde of yore, For what to happy end with good successe may well be bore: If that with wauering minde you holesome counsaile do despise, Ech state into subuersion runnes deuoyde of good aduise,
And shall I hope triumph as long as Debora did raigne,    . Whose tracte of life, whose thoughts, whose crowne, almighty Ioue main- For many yeares, blessnd preserue, in calme peace to remaine: taine, And after mortall life, these worldly thoughtes, and crowne forlorne, UUith endlesse life, diuine affectes, and heauenly crowne adorne. FINIS.
