18903 99848771 13885
Sir THOMAS OVERBVRY HIS OBSERVATIONS IN HIS TRAVAILES VPON THE STATE OF THE XVII. PROVINCES AS THEY STOOD ANNO DOM. 1609. The Treatie of Peace being then on foote Printed. M.DC.XXVI.
SIR THOMAS OVERBVRY'S OBSERVATIONS IN HIS TRAVELS VPON THE STATE of the 17. Prouinces as they stood Anno Dom. 1609. the Treaty of Peace being then on foote. And first of the PROVINCES Vnited. ALL things Concurred for the rising and main∣tenance of this State▪ the Disposition of the people, beeing, as mute∣nous, so industrious and frugall; the Nature of the Countrey, euery where Fortifiable with water, the Scituation of it, hauing behinde them the Baltique Sea, which yeelds them all materials for Ships, and many other
Commodities, and for Men, hard before them, France, and England, both fearing the Spanish greatnesse; and therefore, both Concurring for their Ayde; the remotenesse of their Master from them; the Change of Religion falling out about the time of their Reuolt, and now the Marquise of Bran∣denburgh, a Protestant, like to become Duke of Cleue. The discontentments of the Low-Countries did first appeare, soone after the going away of the Kings of Spaine, while the Dutchesse of Parma Go∣uerned; to suppresse which beginnings, the Duke of Alva being sent, inflamed them more, vpon at∣tempting to bring in the Inquisition and Spanish Decimation, vpon the Beheading Count Horne, and Count Egmont, persecuting those of the Religion, and vndertaking to build Cittadels vpon all their Townes, which hee effected at Antwerpe, but enter∣prising the like at Flushing, that Towne reuolted first and vnder it began the Warre. But the more generall reuolt of the Prouinces happened after the Death of Don Lewis de Requiesens, and vpon the comming downe of Don Iohn of Au∣stria, when all the Prouinces, excepting Luxenburgh, vpon the sacke of Antwerpe and other Insolencies, Proclaimed the Spaniards Rebels and Enemies to the King; yet the abjuring of their obedience from the Crowne of Spaine was not in a yeare or two after. Holland and Zealand, vpon their first standing out, offered the Soueraigntie of themselues to the Queene, then the Protection, both which shee neg∣lected,
and that while the French sent greater ayde, and more men of qualitie then wee; but after the Ciuill Warre began in France, that kept them busie at home, and then the Queene, seeing the necessi∣tie of their being supported, vpon the pawning of Brill and Flushing, sent Money and Men; And since that, most part of the great exploits there haue beene done by the English, who were commonly the third part of the Armie, being foure Regiments, besides eleuen hundred in Flu∣shing, and the Ramekins, and fiue hundred in the Brill. But of late the King of France appearing more for them then ours, and paying himselfe the French that are there, they giue equall, if not more Countenance to that Nation. But vpon these two Kings they make their whole dependancie, and though with more respect to him that is stronger, for the time, yet so as it may giue no distaste vnto the o∣ther. For the manner of their Gouernment; They haue vpon occasion, an assembly of the generall States, like our Parliament, being composed of those which are sent from euery Prouince, vpon summons; and what these Enact stands for Lawe. Then is there besides, a Counsell of State, residing for the most part at the Hage, which at∣tends daily occasions, being rather imployed vp∣on affaires of State then of particular Iustice. The most potent in this Counsell was BARNA∣VILL, by reason of his Aduocates of Hol∣land. And besides both these, euery Prouince and
great Towne haue particular Counsells of their owne. To all which assemblies, aswell of the gene∣rall States, as the rest, the Gentrie is called for order sake, but the State indeed is Democraticall, the Merchant and the Tradesman being predominant, the Gentrie now but few and poore; and euen at the beginning the Prince of Orange saw it safer to relie vpon the Townes then them: Neither are the Gentrie so much engaged in the cause, the people hauing more aduantages in a free State, they in a Monarchy. Their care in gouernment is very exact and particular, by reason that euery one hath an imediate interest in the State; Such is the equality of Iustice, that it renders euery man satisfied; such the publike regularity, as a man may see their Lawes were made to guide, not to entrappe; such their exactnesse in casting the expence of an Armie, as that it shall bee equally farre from superfluity and want, and as much order and certaintie in their acts of Warre, as in ours of Peace, teaching it to bee both Ciuill and rich, And they still retaine that signe of a Common-wealth yet vncorrupted, Pri∣uate Pouertie and publike Weale: for no one pri∣uate man there is exceeding rich, and few very poore, and no State more sumptuous in all publike things. But the question is; whether this, being a free State, will aswell subsist in Peace, as it hath done hitherto in Warre, Peace leauing euery one to at∣tend his particular wealth, when feare, while the Warre lasts, makes them concurre for their com∣mon safety; And Zealand, vpon the least securitie,
hath euer beene enuious at the predominancie of Holland and Vtrich, ready to Mutinie for Religion: and besides, it is a doubt, whether the same care and sinceritie would continue, if they were at their Con∣sistence, as appeares yet whiles they are but in rising. The Reuenew of this State ariseth chiefely from the Earle of Hollands Demaynes, and Confiscated Church liuings, the rising and falling of Money, which they vse with much aduantage, their Fishing vpon our Coasts, and those of Norway, Contribu∣tion out of the Enemies Countrie, Taxes vpon all things at home, and Impositions vpon all Merchan∣dizes from abroad. Their expences vpon their Am∣bassadours, their Shippings, their Ditches, their Rampiers and Munition, and commonly they haue in pay by Sea and Land 60000. men. For the strength; The nature of the Countrie makes them able to defend themselues long by land, neither could any thing haue endangered them so much as the last great Frost, had not the Treatie beene then on foot, because the Enemy being then Master of the field, that rendred their Ditches, Mar∣shes, and Riuers as firme ground. There belongs to that State 20000. Vessells of all sorts, so that if the Spaniard were entirely beaten out of those parts, the Kings of France and England would take asmuch paines to suppresse, as euer they did to raise them: For being our Enemies, they are able to giue vs the Law at Sea, and eate vs out of all trade, much more the French, hauing at this time three Ships for our one, though none so good as our best.
Now that whereupon the most part of their Re∣uenew and strength depends, is their Traffique, in which mysterie of State they are at this day the wi∣sest; for all the Commodities that this part of the world wants, and the Indies haue, as Spice, Silke, Ie∣wells, Gold, they are become the Conueyers of them for the rest of Christendome, except vs, as the Venetians were of old; And all those Commodities that those Northerne Countries abound with, and these Southerne stand in need of, they likewise con∣uey thither, which was the auncient Trade of the Easterlings: And this they doe, hauing little to ex∣port of their owne, by buying of their Neighbour-Countries the former, and selling them againe what they bring backe at their owne prises, and so conse∣quently liue vpon the idlenesse of others. And to this purpose their Scituation serues fitly; for Riuers of the Rhene, the Maze, and Skeld end all in their Dominions; and the Baltike Sea lies not farre from them: All which affoord them whateuer the great Continent of Germany, Russia, and Poland yeelds; then they againe lying betweene Germany and the Sea, doe furnish it backe with all Commodities forraigne. To remember some pieces of their Discipline as patternes of the rest; The Watches at night are ne∣uer all of one Nation, so that they can hardly con∣curre to giue vp any one Towne. The Commissa∣ries are no where so strict vpon Musters, and where he findes a Company thither hee reduceth them, so that when an Armie marcheth the List and the Poll,
are neuer farre disagreeing. Their Army is euer well Clothed, well Armed, and had neuer yet occasion to mutinie for Pay or Victualls. The Souldiers com∣mit no where fewer Insolencies vpon the Burgers, fewer Robberies vpon the Countrie, nor the Offi∣cers fewer deceipts vpon the Souldiers. And lastly, they prouide well that their Generall shall haue small meanes to inuade their liberties: For first their Army is composed of many Nations, which haue their seuerall Commanders, and the Commands are disposed by the States themselues, not by the Gene∣rall. And secondly he hath neuer an implicit Com∣mission left to discretion, but, by reason their Coun∣trie hath no great bounds, receiues daily Com∣mands what to doe. Their Territory containes sixe entire Prouinces, Holland, Zealand, Virick, Groninghen, Oueriscell, and Ariezland, besides three parts of Gelderland, and cer∣taine Townes in Brabant and Flanders; the ground of which is for the most part fruitfull; the Townes no where so equally beautifull, strong, and rich, which equality growes by reason that they appro∣priate some one Staple Commodity to euery Town of note; only Amsterdam not only passeth them all, but euen Siuill, Lisbone, or any other Mart Towne in Christendome, and to it is appropriated the trade of the East Indies, where they maintaine commonly forty Ships, besides which there goe twice a yeare from it, and the adioyning Townes, a great Fleete to the Baltique Sea: Vpon the fall of Antwerp, that rose rather then Middleborough, though it stand at
the same Riuers mouth, and is their second Mart towne, to which is appropriated our English Cloth. Concerning the people, they are neither much deuout, nor much wicked, giuen all to drinke, and eminently to no other vice; hard in bargaining, but Iust, surly and respectlesse, as in all Democracies, thirstie, industrious and cleanly, dishartened vpon the least ill successe, and insolent vpon good; Inuen∣tiue in Manufactures, cunning in Traffique, and ge∣nerally for matter of Action, that naturall slownesse of theirs sutes better, by reason of the aduisednesse and perseuerance it brings with it, then the rashnesse and changeablenesse of the French and Florentine wits, and the equality of spirits which is among them and the Swissers, renders them so fit for a De∣mocracie, which kinde of Gouernment, Nations of more stable wittes, being once come to a Consi∣stent greatnesse, haue seldome long endured.
Obseruations vpon the State of the Arch-Dukes Countrie, 1609. By Sir THO. OVERBVRY. AS soone as I entred into the Arch-Dukes Countrie (which begins after Lillow) pre∣sently I beheld workes of a Prouince, and those of a Prouince distressed with Warre; the peo∣ple heartlesse, and rather repining against their Go∣uernours, then reuengefull against the Enemies, the brauery of that Gentrie which was left, and the In∣dustry of the Merchant quite decayed; the Hus∣bandman labouring only to liue, without desire to be rich to anothers vse; the Townes (whatsoeuer concerned not the strength of them) ruinous; And to conclude, the people here growing poore with lesse taxes, then they flourish with on the States side. This Warre hath kept the King of Spaine busie euer since it began (which some 38. yeares agoe) and spending all the Money that the Indies, and all the Men that Spaine and Italy could affoord, hath with∣drawne him from perseuering in any other Enter∣prise; Neither could he giue ouer this, without for∣going the meanes to vndertake any thing hereafter vpon France or England, and consequently the hope of the Westerne Monarchy. For without that han∣dle the Mynes of Peru, had done little hurt in these parts, in comparison of what they haue. The cause of the expensefulnes of it, is the remotenesse of those Prouinces from Spaine, by reason of which, euery
Souldier of Spain or Italy, before he can arriue there, costs the King an hundred Crownes, and not aboue one of ten that arriues prooues good; besides, by rea∣son of the distance, a great part of the Money is drunke vp betwixt the Officers that conuey it and pay it. The cause of the continuance of it, is, not only the strength of the Enemy, but partly by reason that the Commanders themselues are content the War shall last, so to maintaine and render themselues ne∣cessaries, and partly because the people of those Countries are not so eager to haue the other redu∣ced, as willing to be in the like state themselues. The vsuall Reuenew of those Prouinces which the Arch-Duke hath, amounts to 1200000. Crownes a yeare, besides which, there come from Spaine euery Moneth to maintaine the War, 150000. Crownes. It was at the first 300000. Crownes a moneth, but it fell by fifties to this at the time when the Treaty be∣gan▪ Flanders payes more toward the warre then all the rest, as Holland doth with the States. There is no Spaniard of the Counsell of State, nor Gouernour of any Prouince, but of the Counsell of Warre, which is only actiue; There they only are, and haue in their hands all the strong Townes & Castles of those Pro∣uinces, of which the Gouernours haue but only the Title. The Nations of which their Armie consists, are chiefly Spaniards & Italians, emulous one of another there, as on the other side the French and English, and of the Country, chiefly Burgundians and Wallons. The Popes Letters, and Spinola's inclination keepe
the Italians there, almost in equality of Command with the Spaniard himselfe. The Gouernors for the King of Spaine there suc∣cessiuely haue bin the D. of Alva, Don Lewis de Re∣quiesens, Don Iohn d'Austria, the Prince of Parma, the Arch-Duke Ernestus, the Cardinall Andrew of Au∣strich, and the Cardinall Albert, till he maried the Infanta. Where the Dominion of the Ach-Duke and the States part, there also changeth the nature of the Country, that is, about Antwerp: For all below be∣ing flat, and betwixt Medow and Marsh, thence it begins to rise and become Champion, and conse∣quently the people are more quicke and spiritfull, as the Brabanter, Flemming, and Wallon. The most remarkable place in that side is Antwerp (which rose vpon the fall of Bruges) equally strong and beautifull, remaining yet so, vpon the strength of its former greatnesse; twice spoyled by the Spani∣ard, and the like attempted by the French. The Cit∣tadell was built there by the D. of Alva, but renued by the Prince of Parma after his 18. moneths besie∣ging it, the Towne accepting a Castle rather then a Garrison to mingle among them. There are yet in the Towne of Citizens 30000. fighting men, 600. of which kept Watch nightly, but they allowed neither Cannon vpon the Rampier, nor Megazins of pow∣der. In the Castle are 200. peeces of Ordnance, and commonly seuen or eight hundred Souldiers. Flan∣ders is the best of the seuenteene Provinces, but the Havens thereof are naught.
Obseruations on the State of France, 1609. vnder Henry the Fourth. By Sir THOMAS OVERBVRY. HAuing seene the forme of a Common∣wealth and a Prouince, with the different effects of Warres in them, I entred France, flourishing with Peace, and of Monarchies the most absolute, because the King there, not only makes Peace and Warres, Calls and dissolues Parliaments, Pardoneth, naturalizeth, Innobleth, Names the va∣lue of Money, Presseth to the Warre; but euen makes Lawes, and imposes Taxes at his pleasure: And all this he doth alone: for as for that forme that his Edicts must be authorized by the next Court of Parliament, that is, the next Court of soueraigne Iustice; first the Presidents thereof are to be chosen by him, and to bee put out by him; and secondly, when they concurre not with the King, he passeth a∣ny thing without them, as he did the last Edict for the Protestants: And for the assembly of the three Estates, it is growne now almost as extraordinary as a generall Counsell; with the losse of which their Liberty fell, and when occasion vrgeth, it is possible for the King to procure, that all those that shall bee sent thither, shall be his Instruments: for the Duke of Guise effected as much at the assembly of Bloys. The occasion that first procured the King that Supremacie, that his Edicts should be Lawes, was,
the last Inuasion of the English, for at that time they possessing two parts of France, the three Estates could not assemble, whereupon they did then grant that power vnto Charles the Seuenth during the Warre; And that which made it easie for Lewis the Eleuenth and his Successors to continue the same, the occsion ceasing, was, that the Clergie and Gentrie did not runne the same fortune with the people there, as in England; for most of the Taxes falling only vpon the people, the Clergie aud Gen∣trie being forborne, were easily induced to leaue them to the Kings mercy. But the King hauing got strength vpon the Pesants, hath beene since the bol∣der to inuade part of both their liberties. For the succession of this Monarchie, it hath sub∣sisted without intermission these 1200. yeares, vnder three Races of Kings. No Nation hath heretofore done greater things abroad in Palestine and Egipt, besides all parts of Europe; but for these last 400. yeares, they haue only made Sallies into Italie, and often suffered at home. Three hundred yeares the English afflicted them, making two firme Inuasions vpon them, and taking their King prisoner; the second greatnesse of Chri∣stendome, next the Emperour, being then in com∣petition betwixt vs and them; And to secure them∣selues against vs, rather then the House of Austria, as it then stood, they chose to marry the Heire of Bretaigne before that of Burgundy. And for this last hundred yeares, the Spantard vndertaking them, hath eaten them out of all but France, and endangered
that too. But for this present, France had neuer, as France, a more entire greatnesse, though it hath of∣ten beene richer. For since the Warre the King is only got afore hand, the Country is but yet in reco∣uering, the War hauing lasted by spaces 32. yeares, and so generally, that no man but had an Enemie within three miles, and so the Countrey became Frontier all ouer. Now that which hath made them, at this time, so largely great at home, is their adop∣ting into themselues the lesser adioyning Nations, without destruction, or leauing any marke of strangenesse vpon them, as the Bretons, Gascoignes, Provincalls, and others which are not French; to∣wards the which Vnions, their nature, which is easie and harborous to strangers, hath done more then a∣ny Lawes could haue effected, but with long time. The King (as I said) enioying what Lewis the 11. did gaine, hath the entire Soueraigntie in him∣selfe, because hee can make the Parliament doe what he please, or else doe what he please without them. For the other three Estates; The Church is there very rich, being estimated to enioy the third part of the Reuenew of France, but otherwise nothing so potent as else-where, partly because the Inquisi∣tion is not admitted in France, but principally be∣cause the Popes ordinary power is much restrayned there, by the Liberties which the French Church claymeth; Which Liberties doe not so much en∣sranchize the Church it selfe, as conferre the Autho∣ritie the Pope looseth vpon the King, as first fruites,
and the disposing of all Spirituall preferments. And by reason of this neutralitie of Authoritie, the Church-men suffer more there, then either in Eng∣land, where they wholly depend vpon the King, or in Spaine and Italie, where they wholly subsist by the Pope; because the Pope is not able totally to support them, and the King takes occasion euer to suppresse them, as beeing not entirely his Sub∣iects: and to him they pay yearely both the tenth of all their Tithe, and of all their Temporall land. The Gentrie are the onely entire Body there, which participate with the Prerogatiues of the Crowne; for from it they receiue Priuiledges a∣boue all other men, and a kinde of limited Regality vpon their Tenants, besides reall supply to their e∣states, by Gouernments and Pensions, and free∣dome from Tallies vpon their owne Lands; that is, vpon their Demaines, and whatsoeuer else they ma∣nure by their Seruants; but so much as they let to Tenants is presently Tallie-able, which causeth pro∣portionable abatement in the Rent; and in recom∣pence of this, they owe to the King the Ban and the Arriereban; that is, to serue him and his Lieutenant three Moneths within the Land at their owne Char∣ges. And as in Warre they vndergoe the greatest part of the danger, so then is their power most per∣remptorie aboue the rest, whereas in time of Peace, the King is ready to support inferiour persons a∣gainst them, and is glad to see them to waste one an∣other by Contention in Law for feare they grow
rich, because hee fore-sees, that as the Nobilitie one∣ly can doe him seruice, so they onely misapplyed can doe him harme. The auntient Gentrie of France was most of it consumed in the Warres of Godfrey of Bulloigne, and some in those of Saint Lewis, because vpon their set∣ting out they pawned all their Feifs to the Church, and few of them were after redeemed; by reason whereof the Church possesseth at this day the third part of the best Feifs in France; and that Gentrie was after made vp by Aduocates, Financiers, and Mer∣chants innobled, which now are reputed auntient, and are dayly eaten out againe and repayred by the same kinde of men. For the people; All those that haue any kinde of profession or Trade, liue well; but for the meere Peasants that labour the ground, they are onely Spunges to the King, to the Church and the Nobi∣tie, hauing nothing to their owne, but to the vse of them, and are scarce allowed (as Beasts) enough to keepe them able to doe seruice; for besides their Rent, they pay vsually two thirds to the King. The manner of Gouernment in France, is mixt, be∣twixt Peace and Warre, being composed as well of Military Discipline, as Ciuill Iustice, because hauing open Frontiers and strong Neighbours, and there∣fore obnoxious to sodaine Inuasions, they cannot (as in England) ioyne euer Peace & security together. For the Military part, there is euer a Constable and a Marshall in being, Troupes of Horse and Re∣giments of Foot in pay, and in all Prouinces and
places of strength, Gouernours and Garrisons di∣stributed, all which are meanes for the preferment of the Gentry; But those as they giue security against the enemy, so when there is none they disturbe the enioying of Peace, by making the Countries taste somewhat of a Prouince. For the Gentry finde a dif∣ference betwixt the Gouernours fauour & disfauor, and the souldiers commit often Insolencies vpon the people. The Gouernments there are so well disposed by the King, as no Gouernour hath meanes to giue ouer a Prouince into the Enemies hand, the Commands thereof are so scattered: for the Gouernour Com∣mands the Country, and for the most part the chiefe Towne; then is there a Lieutenant, to the King, not to him of the same, and betwixt these two there is e∣uer Iealousie nourished; then hath euery Towne and Fortresse particular Gouernours, which are not sub∣alterne to that of the Prouince, but hold imediately from the Prince, and many times the towne hath one Gouernour and the Castle another. The aduantages of Gouernours (besides their pay from the King) are Presents from the Country, dead payes, making their Megazins of Come and powder more then they need at the Kings price, and where they stand vpon the Sea, ouerseeing of vnlawfull goods: Thus much in Peace: In Warre they are worth as much as they will exact. Languedoc, is the best, then Bretaigne. Prouince is worth by all these means to the D. of Guise 20000. Crownes a yeare; but Prouince only he holds without a Lieutenant.
Concerning the Ciuill Iustice there, it is no where more Corrupt nor expencefull. The Corruptnesse of it proceeds, first by reason that the King sells the places of Iustice at as high a rate as can bee honest∣ly made of them; so that all thriuing is left to Cor∣ruption, and the gaine the King hath that wayes, tempts him to make a multitude of Officers, which is another burthen to the Subiect. Secondly, the Presidents are not bound to judge according to the written Law, but according to the Equitie drawne out of it, which Libertie doth not so much admit Conscience, as leaue wit without limits. The ex∣pencefulnesse of it ariseth from the multitude of Lawes, and multiplicitie of formes of Processes, the which two both beget doubt, and make them long in resoluing. And all this Chiquanerey, as they call it, is brought into France from Rome, vpon the Popes comming to reside at Avignion. For the strength of France, It is at this day the greatest Vnited force of Christendome; The par∣ticulars in which it consists are these: The shape of the Countrey, which beeing round, no one part is farre from succouring another; The multitude of good Townes and places of strength therein are a∣ble to stay an Army, if not to waste it, as Metz did the Emperours; the masse of Treasure which the King hath in the Bastile; The number of Arsenals distributed vpon the Frontiers, besides that of Paris, all which are full of good Armes and Artillerie: And for ready men, the 5. Regiments bestowed vp & down in Garrisons, together with the 2000. of the Guard;
the Troupes of ordinary and light Horse, all euer in pay; besides their Gentrie all bred Souldiers, and of which they thinke there are at this present 50000. fit to beare Armes: And to Command all these, they haue at this day the best Generalls of Christen∣dome, which is the only commodity the Ciuill wars did leaue them. The weaknesse of it are, first the want of a suffi∣cient Infantry, which proceeds from the ill distribu∣tion of their wealth; for the Peysant, which con∣taines the greatest part of the people, hauing no share allowed him, is heartlesse and feeble, and con∣sequently vnseruiceable for all Military vses, by rea∣son of which, they are first forced to borrow ayde of the Swissers at a great Charge, and secondly to com∣pose their Armies for the most part of Gentlemen, which makes the losse of a battaile there almost ir∣recouerable. The second is the vnproportionable part of the land which the Church holds, all which is likewise dead to Militarie vses. For, as they say there, The Church will loose nothing, nor defend no∣thing. The third is the want of a Competent number of Ships and Gallies, by reason of which defect, first the Spaniard ouermasters them vpon the Medi∣terranian, and the English and Hollander vpon the Ocean, and secondly it renders them poore in for∣raine Trade, so that all the great actions of Chri∣stendome for these fifty yeares, hauing beene bent vpon the Indies, they only haue sate idle. The fourth is the weaknesse of their Frontiers, which is so much the more dangerous, because they are possessed, all
but the Ocean, by the Spaniard: for Savoy hath beene alwaies as his owne for all vses against France. The last is the difference of Religion among themselues, which will euer yeeld matter of ciuill dissention, and consequently cause the weaker to stand in neede of forraigne succours. The ordinarie Reuenew of the King, is, as they say now, some 14. Millions of Crowns, which arise principally from the Demaines of the Crowne, the gabell of Salt, tallies vpon the Countrie, Customes vpon the Merchandize, sale of Offices, the yearely Tithe of all that belongs to the Church, the rising and falling of Money. Fines and Confiscations cast vpon him by the Law; but as for Wardships, they are only knowne in Normandy. His expence is chiefely Ambassadours, Munition, Buil∣ding, Fortifying, and maintaining of Gallies. As for Ships when he needs them, he makes an Embarque; In Pay for Souldiers, Wages for Officers, Pentions at home & abroad, vpon the entertaining his House, his State, and his priuate pleasures. And all the first, but the Demaynes were granted, in the beginning, vpon some vrgent occasion, and after by Kings made perpetuall, the occasion ceasing; and the De∣maynes it selfe granted, because the King should liue vpon their owne without oppressing their Subiects. But at this day, though the Reuenew bee thus great, and the taxes vnsupportable, yet doe they little more then serue for necessary publike vses. For the King of Spains greatnes & Neighbourhood, forceth the King there to liue continually vpon his Guard; and the treasure which the Spaniard receiues from his Indies,
constraines him to raise his Reuenew thus by Taxes, so to be able in some proportion to beare vp against him, for feare else he should be bought out of all his Confederates and seruants. For the Relation of this State to others, It is first to be considered, that this part of Christendome is ballanced betwixt the three Kings of Spaine, France, and England, as the other part betwixt the Russian, the Kings of Poland, Sweden, and Denmarke. For as for Germany, which if it were entirely subiect to one Monarchy, would be terrible to all the rest, so being deuided betwixt so many Princes, and those of so e∣quall power, it serues only to ballance it selfe, and entertaine easie Warre with the Turke, while the Persian with-holds him in a greater. And euery one of those first three, hath his particular strength, and his particular weakenesse: Spaine hath the aduantage of both the rest in Treasure, but is defectiue in Men, his Dominions are scattered, and the conueyance of his Treasure from the Indies lyes obnoxious to the power of any Nation that is stronger by Sea. France abounds with Men, lyes close together, and hath Money sufficiently. England beeing an I∣land, is hard to be Inuaded, abounds with Men, but wants Money to imploy them. For their particu∣lar weaknesse: Spaine is to be kept busie in the Low-Countries: France is to bee afflicted with Protestants, and England in Ireland. England is not able to sub∣sist against any of the other hand to hand, but ioy∣ned with the Lowe-Countries it can giue Lawe to both by Sea, and ioyned with either of them two it is
able to oppresse the third as Henry the Eight did. Now the only entire body in Christendome that makes head against the Spanish Monarchy, is France; and therefore they say in France, that the day of the ruine of France, is the Eue of the ruine of England: And thereupon England hath euer since the Spanish greatnesse, enclined rather to maintaine France ra∣ther then to ruine it; as when King Francis was taken prisoner, the King of England lent Money towards the payment of his Ransome: And the late Queene (when the Leagers, after the Duke of Guise his death, had a designe to Cantonize France) though offered a part, would not consent. So then this reason of State, of mutuall preseruation, conioyning them, England may be accounted a sure Confederate of France, and Holland by reason it partly subsists by it; the Protestant Princes of Germany, because they haue Countenance from it against the house of Au∣stria, the Protestant Swissers for Religion and Mo∣ney; the Venetians for protection against the Spaniard in Italy: So that all their friends are either Prote∣stants or enclyning, and whosoeuer is extreme Ca∣tholike, is their enemie, and Factors for the Spanish Monarchy, as the Pope, the Cardinalls for the most part, and totally the Iesuites, the Catholike Princes of Germany, and the Catholicks of England and Ire∣land. For the Iesuites, which are the Ecclesiasticall strength of Christendome, France, notwithstanding the many late Obligations, hath cause to despaire of them: for they intending, as one Pope, so one King, to suppresse the Protestants, and for the better
support of Christendome against the Turke, and seeing Spaine the likelier to bring this to passe, they follow the neerer probability of effecting their end. No addition could make France so dangerous to vs, as that of our Lowe-Countries: for so it were worse then if the Spaniard himselfe had them entirely. As for their hopes of regaining Italie, it concernes the Spaniard immediatly ra∣ther then vs. Concerning the state of the Protestants in France, during Peace they are protected by their Edict: For their two Agents at Court defend the Generall from wrong, and their Chambres∣impartyes euery particular person: And if trou∣bles should arise, some scattered particulars might be in danger, but the maine body is safe, safe to defend themselues, though all France ioyne against them, and if it breake out into Fa∣ctions, the safest, because they are both ready and vnited. The particulars of their strength are, first their Townes of surety, two of which command the Riuer of Loyre. Secondly, their Scituation, the greatest part of them lying neere together, as Poictou, Zan∣ningtonge, High Gascoigne, Languedoc, and Daul∣phin, neere the Sea, so consequently fit to receiue succours from abroad, and remote from Paris, so that the qualitie of an Armie is much wasted
before it can approach them. The third, is the sufficiency of their present Gouernours, Bulloigne and Desdeguiers, and other second Commanders. And for the Princes of the Blood, whom the rest may, in shew, without emulation obey, when they come once to open action, those which want a party will quickly seeke them. The last, is the ayde they are sure of from for∣raine Princes: For whosoeuer are friends to France in generall, are more particularly their friends. And besides, the Protestant partie being growne stronger of late, as the Low-Countries, and more vnited, as England and Scotland, part of that strength reflects vpon them; and euen the King of Spaine himselfe, which is Enemie to France in generall, would rather giue them suc∣cour, then see them vtterly extirpated: And yet no Forraine Prince can euer make further vse of them, then to disturbe France, not to inuade it himselfe. For as soone as they get an Edict with better Conditions, they turne head against him that now succoured them, as they did against vs, at New-haven. Concerning the proportion of their number, they are not aboue the seuenteene or eighteenth part of the people, but of the Gentlemen there are 6000. of the Religion; but since the Peace they haue increased in people, as principally in
Paris, Normandy, and Daulphin, but lost in the Gentrie, which losse commeth to passe, by rea∣son that the King when he findes any Gent. that will but hearken, tempts him with preferment, and those he findes vtterly obstinate, suppresseth: And by such meanes hee hath done them more harme in Peace, then both his Predecessors in Warre. For in all their assemblies hee corrupts some of their Ministers to betray their Counsell in hand; and of the 100 & 6000. Crowns a yeare, which he paies the Protestants to entertaine their Ministers, and pay their Garrisons, hee hath got∣ten the bestowing of 16000. of them vpon what Gentleman of the Religion he pleaseth, when by that meanes he moderates, if not gaines: and be∣sides, they were wont to impose vpon him their two Deputies which are to stay at Court, but now he makes them propose sixe, out of which he chuseth the two, and by that obligeth those; & yet notwithstanding all this, in some occasions hee makes good vse of them too. For as towards Eng∣land he placeth none in any place of strength but firme Catholikes; so towards Spaine and Sauoy he often giues charge to Protestants, as to la Force in Bearne, Desdeguiers and Boisse in Bresse. Concerning the King himselfe, hee is a person wonderfull both in War and Peace: for his Acts in Warre, hee hath manumized France from the Spaniard, & subdued the League, being the most dangerous plot that hath bin layd, weakening it
by Armes, but vtterly dissoluing it by wit, that is, by letting the Duke of Guise out of Prison, and Capitulating with the heads of it euery one a part, by which meanes hee hath yet left a con∣tinuall hatred among them, because euery one sought, by preuenting other, to make his Con∣ditions the better; so that now there remaines little connexion of it amongst the Gentrie, one∣ly there continues some dregges still among the Priests, and consequently the people, especially when they are angred with the increase and pros∣peritie of the Protestants. For his Acts of Peace, hee hath enriched France with a greater proportion of Wooll, and Silke, erected goodly Buildings, cut Passages betwixt Riuer and Riuer, and is about to doe the same betwixt Sea and Sea, redeemed much of the Mortgaged Demaynes of the Crowne, bet∣ter husbanded the Money, which was wont to bee drunke vppe two parts of it in the Officers hands, got aforehand in Treasure, Armes and Munition, increased the Infantrie, and supprest the vnproportionable Caualry, and left no∣thing vndone but the building of a Nauie. And all this may bee attributed to himselfe onely, because in a Monarchy, Officers are ac∣cordingly actiue or carelesse, as the Prince is able to Iudge and distinguish of their labours, and withall to participate of them somewhat himselfe.
Sure it is that the Peace of France, and somewhat that of Christendome it selfe, is se∣cured by this Princes life: For all Titles and Discontents, all factions of Religion there sup∣presse themselues till his Death; but what will ensue after; what the rest of the House of Bour∣bon will enterprise vpon the Kings Children, what the House of Guise vpon the House of Bourbon, what the League, what the Prote∣stants, what the Kings of Spaine, and England, if they see a breach made by ciuill Dissention, I chuse rather to expect then Coniecture, be∣cause God hath so many wayes to turne aside from humaine fore-sight, as hee gaue vs a testi∣mony vpon the Death of our late Queene. The Countrey of France, considering the quantitie, is the fairest and richest of all Chri∣stendome, and containes in it most of the Countries adioyning. For Picardie, Normandie, and Bretaigne, resemble England; Languedoc, Spaine, Province, Italie, and the rest is France. Besides, all the Riuers that passe through it, end in it. It abounds with Corne, Wine, and Salt, and hath a Competency of Silke; but is defectiue in Wooll, Leather, Mettals, and Hor∣ses; and hath but few very good Hauens, espe∣cially on the North side. Concerning the People; Their Children at first sight seeme Men, and their Men Children, but who so, in negotiating, presumes vpon ap∣pearance,
shall bee deceiued, Compassionate to∣wards their owne Nation and Countrey; louing to the Prince, and so they may haue liberty in Ceremony, and free accesse to him, they will be the better content that hee shall be absolute in matter of substance; impatient of Peace any lon∣ger then whiles they are in recouering the ruines of Warre; the presentnesse of danger inflames their courage, but any expectation makes it lan∣guish; for the most, they are all Imagination, and no Iudgement, but those that proue solid, excell; Their Gentlemen are all good outward men, good Courtiers, good Souldiers, and knowing enough in Men and businesse, but meer∣ly ignorant in matters of Letters, because at fif∣teene they quit bookes, and begin to liue in the world, when indeed a mediocritie betwixt their forme of education and ours would doe better then either. No men stand more punctually vp∣on their Honours in matter of Valour, and which is strange, in nothing else; for otherwise in their Conuersation, the Custome and shifting and o∣uerspeaking, hath quite ouercome the shame of it. FINIS.
