19863 99856994 22652
A Balad intituled / A cold Pye for the Papistes▪ Wherin is contayned: The Trust of true biectes for suppressyng of Sedicious Papistrie and Rebellion: to the maintenance of t Gospell, and the publique Peace of Englande. Made to be songe to Laiamiza Noate. WHat Christian that the Lord doth feare, Can sobs & blubbering teares forbeare, the time to way vprightly? To se how subiects Ebbe and Flowe, Wherby great discord haps to growe, a thing God knowes vnsightly: Wherby our Queene and Realme we see, By such (alas) disquiet be, But God cut short the rage of those, As seeke to be their Countreis Foes, Beat down their brags their boaste deface, Unto our Queene Lord graunt thy grace, That she the sword from sheath may draw To vanquish such as hate thy law, Then shall we be: from daunger free, Graunt heauenly God, thus it may be. The carelesse Crew the shameles Route▪ Of Papists proud whose harts most stoute, thy Gospell are disdaining: Who secretly in corners lurke, Much mischeife here and there to worke, within our land remayning: Deface deare God for Christes sake, Then shall their Trayterous Treason ake, Preuent their hope wherin they stay, And disanuil their Golden day, Wherof they brag: and make great boast, Of Christ and his to scoure the Coast▪ They trust to treade thy Gospell downe, Against our Queene they fret and frowne, Thus thine and thee, contemned be, From all such Rebels, England free. And fortefie our Queene with grace, That she with sword from hence may chase, all those that haue assented: Against thy word and truth to iarre, Who seek to rayse vp Ciuill warre, as people discontented, With thy deare gifts so manifolde Which they and we do well behold, Styll giuen by thy good prouidence, Yet som withstand thy reuerence, Thy worship Lord they do disdaine, They seeke (as Truth) Lies to maintaine, God graunt our Queene may looke about, From hence to weede, such Papists stout, Then shall we be, from daunger free, Graunt heauenly God so it may be. The discord in the North we knowe, Which through the Poape did spring and grow, was warely preuented: And some that his Aduauncement sought, A Hempen Hatchet iustly caught, Because they so assented: To take the Field agaynst all right Against the Trueth and Queene to fight: But if thy worde and Gospell deare, Had ben so taught and preached theare As it hath ben in London longe, They wolde haue shund suche Treason stronge, And duely done Obedience: Unto our Queene: with reuerence: Whose mercye may: procure alwaye▪ Her Subiectes Hartes in Trueth to staye. ¶Yet many seke for to despyse, The Fowntayne, whence suche Grace doth ryse, Our Queene and Soueraygne raygnynge: And vp and downe they vse to goe, Lyke Rebelles, Discorde for to sowe with Lyes of their owne faynynge: What? doth the Princesse Curteousie, Of you deserue suche Iniurie? That suche Rewarde ye render now, To her, whiche so doth tender you? Shall her true loue reape suche Disdaine? Or thinke ye now as Lordes to raygne? Our Queene beares not a Sworde for nought Your Duties now ye wyll be taught: I trust her Grace, within short space: All peruers Papists wyll hence chace. ¶And where as mercye hath ben cause, That ye transgresse her Highnesse Lawes: I trust ye shall knowe truelye: That Iustice Sworde shall cut you short, Whiche to worke mischiefe thinke it sport, As Rebelles most vnrulye: Beware therfore, ye Papists prowde, Whiche seeke in Dennes your selues to shrowde, To worke your wiles as voide of feare, In casting Billes now here, now there, Which seemes our Queene and Crowne to touch And ye your selues cannot advouche, The hangman giue you not such checkes, That Tiburne chaunce to breake your necks, Trust me ye may, if ye do play, The Rebels thus, you must that way. ¶For when such Wicked plants are gone, Englande shall haue no cause to mone, Nor future Foes be doutynge: God graunt the Sworde may shun the Sheathe, And by the Rootes suche Weedes bereaue, For many here are scowtynge: Who seeke as muche as ere they maye, This lyttell Brittaine to betraye: And all because we Christ professe, As present tyme doth proue no lesse: But God confownde poore Englandes Foes And safely keepe our Ryall Rose: From suche as woulde her highnesse harme, With NESTORS yeares her Person arme: Graunt her thy Grace, in euery place, The Force of Rebelles to deface. FINIS. Iohn Phillip. ¶Imprinted at London, by William How, for Richard Iohnes and are to be solde, at his shop ioyning to the Southwest doore of Paules Church.
