20864 22105171 25062
A TRVE RELATION VVITHOUT ALL EXCEPTION, OF Strange and Admirable Acci∣dents, which lately happened in the Kingdome of the great MAGOR, or MAGVLL, who is the greatest Monarch of the East Indies. AS ALSO VVith a true Report of the Manners of the Countrey; of the Commodities there found, With the like of sundry other Countreyes and Ilands, in the EAST INDIES. Written and certified by persons of good import, who were eye-witnesses of what is here re∣ported. LONDON Printed by I. D. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head Pallace. 1622.
Late and admirable Newes, from the East Indies, and the Countrey of the great Magor, testified by persons of great import, as shall appeare. IN the yeare of our Lord 1618. and in the moneth of Iune, we arrived at the Cape of Good hope, where we found the people of the Countrey, albeit Heathen and Idolaters, yet very kind and friendly vnto vs, for some small quantitie of I∣ron and old Copper, we had of them vpon exchange Beeues and Mutton. This Cape (otherwise called the Cape of Bona Speransa) is very temperate, and agreeth well with the constitution of our people. Foure or fiue hundred persons, sicke of the scurvie, and other diseases of the Sea, they all recovered their health perfectly within a very few dayes. They haue a very pleasant drinke, which they call Toddye, like in taste to white Wine, which distelleth from the Pahneto trees. At our departure from this Cape we sayled two or three dayes in a Sea like in collour to whey, whose bottome could not sound. We came afterwards to the Countrey of the great Magor, or as some call him Magull, his Lascar, which is his Traine, which followeth and alwayes goeth with him in his progresses, consisteth vsually of
200000. people of all sorts. These lodge all in fayre Tents, richly hanged, which being pitched accor∣ding to the order of that Countrey, they make a ve∣ry gorgeous and glorious show, as of a most beauti∣full and large Cittie. This Magor, hath a place called the Maoll, in which he keepeth a thousand women to serue his lustfull desires. When he maketh his progresse, his Concubines goe with him in all sumptuous maner, carried vpon Elephants in Castles, richly covered, or vppon mens shoulders, in a frame made like the vpper part of a Coach, but not so close covered. He hath vnder him 37. Provinces, and very many goodly Citties: the length of his Countrey is 2800 myles: the breadth 1900 myles. When he admitteth to his presence the Persian Embassador, or the Embassador of any other migh∣tie King, when he giueth them either louing or kind speeches, or lookes, then the Embassadors in token of thankfulnesse, kisse the earth. But Sir Thomas Roe the King of Great Brittaynes Embassador would not so much derogate from his place, to abase himselfe so demissiuely. Notwithstanding, he was alwayes en∣tertained with more and greater respects then any o∣ther Embassador. This Magor, doth euery yeere weigh himselfe in a Ballance made for the purpose; first, he weigheth himselfe with waights of Siluer, next he weigheth himselfe with waights of Gold, and lastly, with Iewels, and precious stones: his waight of siluer, and gold, he giueth away liberally at his pleasure, after
he is weighed, he mounteth into his Throne, and then he throweth amongst the standers by, a great quantitie of Siluer and Gold, made hollow, like to the forme of Nutmeggs, and such other Spices, which his Countrey doth afford. These ceremo∣nies being ended, then he beginneth to Carowse and largely to drinke with his Nobles, till they be all drunke. The Scales with which he is weighed, are all of massie Gold, richly beset with precious stones. No man hath any Land in this Magors Countrey but himselfe, he giueth pentions and taketh away pentions at his pleasure. No child inherits any thing which his Father had in possession, but at the plea∣sure of Magor: all Honor and Gentilitie dyeth with the person who had any, and returnes backe to the Magor. He sheweth himselfe in publike and open maner to the people, at the least, three times in a day; first, at the Sunne-rising, to which he maketh low Reue∣rence. Secondly, at noone, at which time he seeth Elephants fight, or some other pastimes prouided for him. Thirdly, before the Sunne set, but when the Sunne is setting he descendeth from his Throne, and sheweth as low obey¦sance as he did at the rising. At all these times, whosoeuer commeth vnto him as a Sutor, vseth no other meanes for his dispatch, but to hold vp a paper in his hand, and he is heard immediately, and encountreth the best fortune which Sutors can desire, for either he presently ob∣taineth his Sute, or hath a present deniall; there are no masters of Requests, nor any delatory references vpon any petition.
Magors people are gouerned by no other lawes but what lie in his breast, and the breasts of his coun∣sellors, yet there is no place where businesses are sooner dispatched, or where Iustice is more vpright∣ly and vnpartially ministred. Cursero, the eldest Sonne of Magor, being of an haughtie and aspiring Spirit, practised to take from his Father both Crowne and kingdome, but Magor not onely tooke his sonne prisoner, but with him some 2000. of his chiefest followers, having taken his sonne, he placed him to see the execution of those two thousand he had taken. The manner of the execution being terrible, for they were put into the ground vpon sharpe stakes, and so left to dye. After this execution, Magor shut vp and sealed his sonnes eyes, so that for three yeares he saw no light of Sunne or Moone at all: seaven yeares he kept him in close Prison, but at this time he hath a little more liberty. This Prince is of a different disposition from his Father, for he keepeth but one wife, and is a great fauourer and protector of Christians; he is generally beloued of all men. Magor will not vndertake, nor do any businesse of import, but as he shall be directed and counsailed by his Astrologers, and Magitians, when they tell him the day and houre are fortunate then hee adventureth vpon any thing, hee cannot endure to heare any talke or mention made of Death which is the most desperate and greatest follie which our age can or doth afford, nay what madnesse is it? not to heare talke, nor make provision for that which cannot bee avoyded. God hath pointed nothing more certaine then Death, because wee should ever
consider of it; and nothing more vncertaine, then the houre of Death; because every houre we should be provided for it. Magor being much delighted, with Astrologers, Magitians, and Witches, of which his Country is replenished, there came vpon a time one of that Crue vnto him, and presented vnto him an Ape; telling Magor, that the Ape could doe strange and admirable Tricks: well quoth Magor we will make tryall of your Apes skill, and cunning, & thereupon commanded the Ape and her Master to be carried out of that roome, into another that they might not see what was done, in their absence Magor tooke a Ring from his finger, & hauing al∣wayes about him a great number of Boyes, some 200. or thereabouts, which hee keepeth for vnnaturall and beastly vses, he gaue the Ring to one of the Boyes and bad him hide it, then these Boyes flocking to∣gether, the Ape and his Master were called for: now quoth Magor let your Ape trie her skill, I haue lost my Ring, let vs see if shee can finde it; the Apes Master commanded the Ape to fetch the Ring, the Ape went immedidately to the Boy which had the Ring and tooke it out of his bosome and brought it to Magor. Who wondring much at it, he caused the second time the Ape and her master to retire out of sight, and in their absence, hee caused his Secretary to write in severall papers, the Names of some twelue or fourteene, of the greatest Gods, and Prophets which either were heard or knowne to be worship∣ped, either in his Countrey or in any place of the World, which being written, they were mingled
on an heape and layd vpon a table, Then the Ape was called for, and commanded to take the Name of the greatest God & truest Prophet from amongst those papers, the Ape went presently to the Papers, and turning them vp, from amongst them all, one∣ly tooke out the Name of Iesus and delivered it to Magor, wherupon Magor and the rest of his Nobles, were much amazed: but vppon secret conference amongst themselues, they resolved to make further tryall: whereupon the Master and the Ape were commaunded to goe to a further roome, and some persons commanded to watch them, that the suspi∣tion, of all deceiueable courses might be taken a∣way, and cleered: the papers were written againe with the same Names, and more were added, which being done; the Ape was called for the second time, and to make choyce as formerly shee had bin directed, shee presently went to the papers and made the same choyce, which before shee had done: which stroke Magor and his Nobles in a greater a∣maze then at the first: notwithstanding a third tryall was made, but with the like & same successe, where∣upon a great Noble man humbly besought Magor that hee might make the fourth tryall, which was graunted him, this great man was called Mattolet Chan, which in their Language signifieth (the belo∣ved Lord) Hee caused the Names to be written the fourth time, and mingled together, and cast in a heape vpon the Table, the Ape was called as for∣merly shee had beene, and commanded to make choyce of the greatest God or Prophet, whose name was conteined in those papers. The Ape went pre∣sently
to the heape, and slightly and scornefully tur∣ned them over, but tooke vp no paper but returned to her master. Magor and his Nobles wondred more at this then of what passed before, and asked the Apes master, what might be the cause why the Ape would not bring any paper as before shee had done, but turned them vp in so scornefull a maner, perhaps quoth the master, the name which the Ape looketh for, is not there amongst them; then the papers be∣ing examined, the name of Iesus was missing, now quoth Magor, let the Ape shew cunning to fetch that paper, wherein that name is written. The Ape receiuing her command, made present hast to Mat∣tolet Chan, and leapt vpon him, and withall thrust her hand into his bosome, and drew out the name of Iesus, which shee brought hastily to Magor. This being so strange an accident, was wondred at of all the standers by, whereof some were Iewes, some Ma∣hometans, some Christians, with others. This hath beene averred to be true, by master Edward Terry, Preacher to Sir Thomas Roe, who heard it credibly reported, as aforesaid. And Sir Thomas Roe hath re∣ported the same for truth to sundry right honorable parsonages. Master Terry the Preacher hath often seene the Ape. The great Magor, and generally all the Indians of his Countrey are giuen over to fleshly pleasures: they may, and doe keepe as many wiues and concubines as they will, or are able to maintaine. What misery doe these Indians endure, to haue so many women a∣bout them, when as there be many English men are grieuously vexed to haue the company but of one.
But perhaps the Indian women are of a farre milder temper then the English, as hereafter shall be shewed. The Indians are more jealous of their women and wiues, then either Spanyards, or Italians. The Father will not trust his sonne, after he commeth to twelue yeares of Age, except he be gelded. The Indian wo∣men in their houses are commonly covered, and if any woman goe abroad vncovered, shee is reputed a Whore. Magors subiects are tall, and of comely personage, but of a tawnie coullor, but they are faint hearted; Magor will vsually say, that one Portingall will beate three of his subiects, and one English man will beate three Portingalls. In this Countrey there are many seuerall Sects, some called Banians, who will kill nothing that hath life, no not so much as snakes. They haue Hospitalls to keepe and cure lame Hor∣ses, lame Doggs, lame Birds, or any lame Creature, and when they be cured, they are set at libertie. The manner of that Countrey is to burne the bo∣dies of the dead, and the wiues willingly burne with their husbands. But of late the women beginne to breake that custome. The Indians vnder Magor, worship euill fauoured vgly Idolls, which they call, Pagods: their Priests are called Ioggis, or Bramines; their Church they call Muskitts; they goe on Pilgrimage to seuerall places; Some to Mecha in Arabia; Some to the Head of the Riuer Ianges, wherein they throw sil∣uer and gold, according to their abilities, and after wash themselues in the River, and then they thinke they are pure and cleane from all sinne.
These people haue many feasts, and many fasts, which they keepe with sundry idle Ceremonies, some of them mourne in blew, others as Iapa∣ners, mourne in white. They are skilfull in Phy∣sicke, especially, in Simples. The learning which they haue, which is but small, is in the Mathematicks, and in Naturall Phylosophy; they haue small store of Bookes, be∣cause there is no Printing amongst them; all their Bookes are Manuscripts. Their vulgar speech is called Industan. The speech at Magors Court, is vsually the Persian Language. Their learned tongue is the Arabian; the common people are very apt to immitate any thing which they see to be done by Strangers. I cannot let passe a strange and wonderfull re∣port which fell out in Magors Court, and hath beene by Sir Thomas Roe reported confidently for Truth. There was a Rasa, (so great Princes are called,) who was an absolute Atheist, who would alwayes scornefully, and disdainefully speake and dispute against the Deitie, not enduring eyther himselfe, or any other, where hee might oppose to acknowledge any God-head. This great Prince sporting himselfe among his Concubines, one of them who was most fauoured of the Prince, and might bee most bold with him, when hee was flouting, and iesting against the Deitie, pluckt from his breast an hayre, and withall a droppe of blood followed, which was not regarded at all at the first; This very place within very fewe dayes beganne to fester, and by degrees
grew to that extremitie, that the paine was intolle-rable, and withall prouing to be a Gangrene; having vsed all the meanes, which Physicke, or Surgery might afford him, it proued irrecoverable. This Ra∣sa seeing his estate, and that he had no hope of life, but a dreadfull expectation of imminent death, sent to Magor to take his leaue of him, Magor sent divers of his Nobles vnto him, to comfort him, with all the best offers and speeches which any subiect might de∣sire from so mightie a Monarch. Which when the Nobles had delivered vnto him, he made answere in this manner; My Lord Magor, is a great Monarch to command vpon earth, but there is a more omnipo∣tent Monarch, which hath absolute command and power in Heauen and Earth. You all know, I was an opposer, an enemy, a contemner of all Deitie, and against that omnipotent Maiestie of Heauen. He hath now shewed and manifested his power and Iustice vpon me, who now lye in torment, euery minute of an houre expecting to die. What I would not acknowledge in my life, I am constrained to ac∣knowledge and confesse vpon my death, for wee which liue at randome, and speake at large in our liues, when death worketh natures dissolution, wee are then compelled to change our former opinions, and to acknowledge our former errors. I was an A∣theist, by my owne experience I dare and can assure you, what is one of the greatest causes of Atheisme; wicked liues doe wish, there were no God to punish their offences after this life, and therefore doe flatter themselues in their life; they frame to themselues all the reasons they can deuise, to perswade themselues
there is no God. But my Lords, there is no Atheist which dare at the houre of his death maintaine and defend that Doctrine of Atheisme, which he did in life, for nature it selfe doth constraine them to a terri∣ble recantatiō at the houre of death, as you may now behold a grieuous example in me: what would not I giue? what would not I do? my Lords if I might haue longer time of life to acknowledge & confesse free∣ly and plainely that God head, which formerly I haue with scorne and malice so wickedly denied: who would haue imagined that I being a Souldier should not rather haue died vpon some honorable wound, given by sword or launce; then so shame∣fully to die vpon the plucking of one hayre from my breast, this kind of death, as it is most shame∣full to me, so it doth more manifest, and illustrate the Divine power to bee most Omnipotent and miraculous. My Lords, my vitall powers doe faile mee, I can speake no more, onely this for a fare∣well, which I pray you deliver also to my great Soveraigne Magor, doe you all flie and take heede of Atheisme, seeke out with all the care and dili∣gence you can, thou knowledge of the onely true and Omnipotent God, dare not liue those wicked liues, nor maintaine those horrible opinions whilest you are in health, which as you see most manifest∣ly in me are so terrible and horrible at this houre of my death; having ended these words, this migh∣ty Prince dyed. From Magors Countrey wee sayled towardes o∣ther Ilands, and arrived at an Iland called Zeloon, which Iland yeeldeth Cinnamon, and other spices
in great aboundance, it yeeldeth also Pearles, Ru∣bies, Saphires, Garnets, and sundry other pretious stones. From Zeloon wee arrived at an Iland called Sam∣matra, which yeeldeth Pepper, Gold, Beniamin, Camphire, with sundry other Rich Commodities, afterwards we sayled to Patanie, an Iland governed by a Mayden Queene. From this wee arrived at Iapan, which is one of the greatest and goodliest Ilands of the World, ha∣ving great store of Gold Mines, and of Silver, they haue Silver, of three sorts all vnstamped, they haue small plate, which goeth in the market for buying of victuales: they haue other peeces of plate vn∣stamped, more finer Silver, and that goeth in the Country, to buy all other commodities; they haue a third sort of plate, finer silver then any Spanish money, and this is carried away by Strangers. This Countrey is Governed by an Emperour, who hath vnder him 62. Kings, the Revenews of this Emperour are infinite, a great part raised by Rice, the People of this Countrey are proud and haughty, very warlike, yet exceeding obedient to their Emperour, and the Kings, to whom they are Subiects. They are very kinde to Strangers: Iustice, in this country is severe without partialitie; Theeues are not imprisoned but presently executed, If a murther be committed, and the murtherer escape, hee who apprehendeth him, hath 300. pounds gi∣ven him vpon the deliverie of the murtherer; so that fewe or none of the murtherers escape present exe∣cution: In this Countrey a man may walke without
danger all houres of the night, so he doe not misse∣behaue himselfe. If any controversie arise betwixt partie and partie, it is foorthwith decided, their Lawes are Leges talionis, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, and Life for life, they wor∣shipp and pray all to a Saint, called Ameda, whom they esteeme to bee a Mediator be∣twixt God and them; when a Souldier dieth, they are perswaded hee go∣eth presently to Ottango Fatech∣man the God of Warre. FINIS.
