22008 99855553 21048
decorative border A CATALOGVE OF THE KINGS OF SCOTLAND. Together with their seuerall Armes, Wiues, and Jssue. printer's or publisher's device LONDON. M.DC.X.
royal blazon and crown of King Malcolm III of Scotland MAlcolme, sur-named Canmor, that is, Great-Head, the third of that name, King of Scots, was the eighty & sixt King after Fergusius, that gouerned the kingdome of Scotland. This Malcolme was the sonne of Duncan, the sonne of Crinanus Prince of Cumberland, be∣gotten vppon the Kinswoman of Siward Earle of Northumberland. Vnto this Mal∣colme, Edward the Confessor King of England, gaue the kingdome of Scotland, to bee held of the Crowne of England, during the raigne of which Malcolme, King Edward dyed. Edgar Aetheling, or Adeling (vnto whom in equiry the kingdome of his deceased Kinsman king Edward the Confessour appertained) at that time remaining in Hungary, with his Mo∣ther, his Sister, and a great family, putting foorth to sea, with intent to returne into his Natiue Countrey, being tossed with contrary winds, at last landed vppon the coast of Scotland: where, being curteously entertained by this Malcolme, after much conference, and curteous offices (for at that time Malcolme spake the English tongue as his owne, which in those seasons was seldom vsed among the Scottish Nation, by reason that he had liued a banished man, fourteene yeares of his youth in England) Margaret, Edgars sister, for the excellent beauty and Noble carriage of her selfe in the Court of Scotland, so much pleased the fancy of Malcolme, that he desired her for his wife, and married her. By whom he had sixe sonnes, and two daughters. William the Con∣queror, in the sixt yeare of his raigne, ouerthrew this Malcolme in battaile, and of him as of his Leige-man, exacted the Oath of fealty and homage, which homage was performed (as saith Ro∣ger Houedon) at Abernethy in Scotland. The like did William Rufus by the saide Malcolme and his two sons, successiuely raigning Kings, one after another, as it appeareth by the Chronicles of Florentius a Monke of Worcester, William of Malmesbury, Roger Houedon, Henry of Hunting∣ton, and others. This Malcolme after he had raigned 37. yeares, and eight months, was slaine, with Edward his eldest sonne, at the siedge of Almeric or Anwik a Castle in Northumberland, Anno. Dom, 1093. and lyeth buried at Tinemouth, hauing before builded the Churches of Dur∣ham in England, and Dunfermeline in Scotland. He bore for his Armes, Or, a Lyon rampant Gules only, without any Tressure at all: for wher∣as it hath bin generally receiued, that the Tressure hath beene vsed in the Armes of Scotland from the time of Achaius King of Scots, who first made league with the French, which giueth some colour to the matter, being garnished with Flour-de-luces. Yet I make a question, vvho can proue any Armes, either with vs heer in England, or in Scotland, of that antiquity? Surely none, vntill of long time after, and much about the time of this Malcolme, if any at al then were. But out of all doubt, whensoeuer they first began to bear Armes, they bore the Lyon, only with∣out any tract or tressure, as is abouesaid, which I find continued in that order, vntill the time of Alexander the second King of Scotland, as apeareth by his Seal, who in his shield bore this Lyon rampant simply, without any addition. And his sonne Alexander the third, was the first that I finde, to vse the tressure floury, and that but a single one neither, as you may see it cut in stone at Westminster, in the time of the said Alexanders raigne: which Tressure, K. Edward the first vsed also but single, in the seals which he made for the matters concerning his kingdom of Scotland. And I make no doubt, but that whensoeuer this tressure was first assumed, it did imply, and was a token of certain and sure league made with the French, which afterward daily grew stronger and stronger, and to the intent that they would shew how willing they were to keepe it, of their sin∣gle Tressure, they made a double one.
royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King Malcolm III of Scotland MArgaret, the daughter of Edward the Out-law (son of Ed∣mund Ironside, King of England) & sister to Edgar Ethe∣ling, by whose death issulesse, shee was heire of the Saxon Kings and Monarchs: and Queene of Scotland, by mari∣age of Malcolme the third, king of that Realme. She dy∣ed in the Castle of Edenborough, in the yeare 1093. vpon report of her husbands death, foure dayes after his de∣cease. For her sanctity of life, shee was after her death, Cannonized a Saint, and remaineth registred in the Kallender of Saints. Shee was no lesse innobled by her mother Agatha, the daughter of Henry the fourth Emperor, Grand-childe vnto Lewis, and lineall descendant of Charles the great, then by her Father Edward, being the issue of so many holy and glorious Princes. Their Issue. Edward, who was slain with his Father at Alnwick, by the most valiant knight Morell, the 17. of the Calends of September, in the 37. yeare of the raigne of his Father. Edmund, who dyed a Child. Ethelred, dyed yong also Edgar, who slew his Vncle Donevald, raigned in his stead, and helde Cumber∣land by the guift of william Rufus. Alexander, who after the decease of his Brother, entered vpon the kingdome, and also held Cumberland by the graunt of Henry the first. Dauid, who raigned after the death of his Brother Alexander. Matild, or Mauld (sur-named Bona) vpon whose Vertues, was made this me∣morable Epigram, who was Queen of England, & wife to k. Henry the first. Prospera non laetam fecêre nec aspera tristem, Prospera terror ei aspera risus erant: Non decor effecit fragilem, non Sceptra Superbam, Sola potens humilis, Sola pudica decens. Mary, who was Countesse of Bullogne, married vnto Eustace, Earle of Bullogn, vnto whom she bare one daughter, Mauld, heire of the County of Bullogn, and married vnto Stephen, King of England, vnto whom she bare Eustace, who dyed before his Father. She dyed▪ 1115. the 27. of December.
royal blazon and crown of Kings Duncan II to Alexander I of Scotland An. Dom. 1096.DVncan, the base sonne of Malcolme, and after him, Edgar and Alexander, the lawfull children of Malcolme, succes∣siuely raigned ouer the Scots. This Duncan, forced Do∣nevald, Brother vnto King Malcolme to fly his Country, and by the graunt and gift of william Rufus, King of Eng∣land, raigned in his stead, after hee had performed his Oath of homage and fealty, made to the sayde king william Rufus. And after the said Duncan had raigned one yeare and an halfe, hee was slaine by Makpender, the Thane, and Earle of Mornes. An. Dom. 1007.Whereup∣on, the same King william Rufus sent Clito Edgar with an Army into Scotland, therein to seate his Brother in Law Edgar, the sonne of King Malcolme, after the expulsion of his Vnckle Donevald, who vsurped vpon the kingdom: and he gaue vnto the saide Edgar the Kingdome, and receiued the accustomed homage and fealty. The saide Edgar deceased the sixt of Ianuary, 1107. and vnto him succeeded Alexander his Brother, by the consent of King Henrie the first, Anno. Dom. 1107. vnto whom he also gaue the like Oath of homage & fealty. Seuenteene yeares raigned Alexander: but because both himselfe, as also his Brethren dyed issulesse, Dauid the youngest sonne of King Malcolme, succeeded in the Kingdome, Anno. 1124. who being more worthy then both his Brethren raigned prosperously, 29. yeares, and two moneths.
royal blazon and crown of King David I of Scotland An. Dom. 1124DAuid, commonly called Saint Dauid, the youngest son of King Malcolme the third, Edgar and Alexander his Brethren, beeing dead without issue, succeeded in the kingdome of Scotland, in the yeare of our Lord, 1124. Of proud persons, hee (a valiaunt Prince) was the tamer and confounder; towards his good sub∣iects, he was milde and mercifull; a Prince, Religious and zea∣lous. He maruailously reformed the Scottish Nation, whose maners were very rude, & also greedy of blood, out of their sa∣uage barbarousnes so accustomed to bloodshed, neither regar∣ding Age, nor Sex. He waged warre, and fought two mighty battailes with Stephen, King of England, assisting the iust quarrell of his Neece the late Empresse. For vnto Mauld the Empresse, the Daughter and heire of King Henry the first, and his Sisters el∣dest Daughter, he had made his homage and fealty. For when King Stephen had sent to demand homage of the said King Dauid, for the Realme of Scotland, as for all other the Lands and Seigniories which he held of him within England: King Dauid made aun∣swere, that both Stephen, he himselfe, with all the Nobility of England, were all seue∣rally bound by Oath, to the obedience of the Empresse his Neece, as the onely lineal and lawfull heyre to king Henry the first, her Father, whereof hee for his part made that conscience, as that during her life, hee would neuer acknowledge any other true inheritor to the Crown of England. Afterward notwithstanding, he gaue his son Hen∣ry, as hostage to k. Stephen, who in his Fathers behalfe did likewise swear homage vnto the said K. Stephen. The Northern Prouinces of England (viz.) Northumberland & Cum∣berland, he claimed in the name of Mauld the Empresse, which being gotten, hee long retained them as in his proper right, till King Henry, the son of the said Mauld the Em∣presse, disgesting with impatience, to be defrauded of so Noble a portion of his inhe∣ritance, regained the foresaide Frontiers from King Malcolme, the Grand-childe of Da∣uid, by his sonne Henry. And thus after many troubles, King Dauid slpt with his Fa∣thers, in the yeare of our Lord, 1153. in the eighteenth yeare of King Stephen, the 24. day of May; declaring his Grand-childe, the eldest sonne of his Sonne Earle Henry, as yet within age, his successour in the kingdome. He lyeth buried at Dumfermeling. A Prince he was, of great Vertue and Honour, who after his honourable marriage, and his vndefiled bed, hauing one only son borne vnto him, he euer after remained a wid∣dower. He builded many Monasteries; namely, Halyrude-house, Kelso, Iedburgh, Dun∣dranan, Cambuskeneth, Kinlosse, Metrosse, New-bottell, Dunfermelin, Holme in Cumber∣land, and two Religious places at New-Castle in Northumberland. He erected four By∣shopprickes, (viz.) Rosse, Brechin, Dumblane, and Dunkeld.
royal blazon and crown of Matild, wife of King David I of Scotland MAtild, or Mauld, one of the daughters & heires of VValtheof, earle of Northumberland and Huntington, and of Iudith his wife, the dau∣ghter of Lambert Earle of Lens, Neece of william the Conqueror, was Wife to King Dauid, and Widdow of Simon Saint-Liz, Earle of Nortumberland and Huntington. Their Issue. Henry Earle of huntington, the onely sonne of King Dauid, married Adama, the Daughter of william the second Earle of warren and Surrey, Sister by the Mothers side, to william the younger Earle of warren and Surrey, to Robert Earle of Leicester, and walram Earle of Mellent in Normandy, and Worce∣ster in England. Of whom, he got three sonnes, and as many daughters. He dyed at Calcone, in the yeare of grace, 1151. his father being yet aliue, & was there buried. His Lady Adama, founded a Monastery of Nuns at Hadington, and died in the yeare of our Lord, 1178. Claricia, eldest daughter of King Dauid. Hodierna, another daughter of King Dauid. The Children of Henry. Malcolme, King of Scots, the fourth of that name, eldest Son of Earle Henry. VVilliam, King of Scots, ather of Alexander the second. Dauid, his third sonne, Earle of huntington, that married Mauld, Sister of Ra∣nulph earle of Chester, by whom he had diuers children. Margaret, married to Conan, Earle of Brittaine, Anno. 1161. the seauenth of Henry the second; after whose death, she was againe married to Lord Bo∣hun, earle of Hereford. Ada, married to Florence, earle of Holland. Mauld, who dyed in tender yeares vnmarried.
royal blazon and crown of King Malcolm IV of Scotland An. Dom. 1153.MAlcolme, the fourth of that name (surnamed the Mayden, because he would neuer marry, as heereafter is shewed) the Grand-childe of King Dauid, being thirteen yeares of age, succeeded in the kingdome of Scotland, in the yeare of Grace, 1153. Henry King of England, son to the Empresse, invested this Malcolme with the Order of Knight-hood, and caused him to render vnto him the Countries of Northumberland and Cumberland, and in lieu thereof, resto∣red him again to the earldome of Huntington, of ancient right appertaining vnto him; hauing first, performed his Oath of homage & fealty for the king∣dome of Scotland, at Chester, in the yeare of grace, 1160. The Countrey of Galloway in rebelling against him, he visited in person with a mighty Armie, and subdued it. After he came vnto mans estate, the graue Counsellours of his kingdom perswaded him to take a Wife; but he euer refused to hearken thereunto, constantly affirming, that he had vowed chastity, which he obser∣ued all the daies of his life. He died at Iedworth, after he had raigned twelue yeares, and six months. But his body was buried at Dumfermling, a place ly∣ing almost in the midst of the kingdome, where for the most part the kings of Scotland haue beene accustomed to haue bin buried, euen to these our daies. After him, succeeded his Brother william, a man more fit for wordly affaires then his Brother, but for the Noble gouernment of the kingdome, hee could not be more happy then his Brother.
royal blazon and crown of King William I of Scotland Arma paterna An. Dom. 1165.WIlliam, Earle of Huntington in England, Brother vnto Malcolme the fourth, succeeded in the kingdom of Scotland, & was crow∣ned in the yeare of Grace, 1165. This William, as also Dauid his Brother, with all the residue of the Earles and Barons of the Kingdome of Scotland, became the Leidge-men of King Henrie the younger, the sonne of King Henry the second, the day after his Coronation, and sware vnto him fealty against all men, reseruing their allegiances due vnto Henry the Father (as yet li∣uing.) Howbeit, the same William hauing forgotten his duty, in hostile manner inua∣ded the Countrey of Northumberland, with a puissant Army, in the twentieth yeare of Henry the second, and vsed exceeding cruelty against the Inhabitants. Against whom, certaine Lords of Yorkeshire, making out (viz.) Ranulph de Glanvill, Robert de Stuteuill, Bernard de Balliol, VVilliam de Vesey, and others, they tooke him prisoner at Alnwick or Anwick, and surrendered him vnto the foresaide Henry. In the yeare following, the fifteenth day before the Calends of May, hee was per∣mitted to depart freely. And afterward, the sayde VVilliam, by the consent of the Pre∣lats, the Earles, Barons, and Nobles, and all others the chiefe persons of Scotland, comming vnto Yorke, in the foresaide yeare, the seauenteenth day before the Calends of September, he did acknowledge by his Letters Patents, vnto his Lord Henry, King of England, the sonne of Maud the Empresse, that he, his heires and successors, should for euer be subiect vnto the Kings of England, as vnto their Leige-Lordes. After the decease of King Henry, this william came againe to Canterbury, and did his homage vnto Richard the first, the sonne and heire of the saide Henry. And after his death also, the sayde William did his homage, and swore his allegiance to Iohn, King of England, Brother and heire vnto the foresaide Richard, on a heigh hil without the Citty of Lin∣colne, in the sight of all the people, vpon the crosse of Hubert Arch-Byshop of Can∣terbury. At last, falling grieuously sicke, he departed this life at Striueling, the day be∣fore the Nones of December, in the yeare of Christ, 1214. in the seauenty and two yeare of his age, and the 49. of his raigne: or as others say, in the 52. and lyeth buryed at Abirbrothoke, a Monastery which he himselfe had founded.
royal blazon and crown of Ada, first wife of King William I of Scotland The first wife. ADa, the daughter of Robert de Auenell, (saith Scot. Chronicon. was the first wife of king willi∣am, whose name and progeny to other Chroniclers are not very wel knowne; perhaps, for that he ma∣ried her, as yet being but a priuate person, and are therefore silenced or omitted of Historiographers. But his daughter Adama, begotten vpon her, he married vnto Patric of Dunbar, Earle of March. royal blazon and crown of Ermengardis, second wife of King William I of Scotland The second wife. ERmengardis, the daughter of Richard Viscount Beaumont, the sonne of Ro∣salin, Viscount Beaumont, & of Con∣stance, the base daughter of Henry the first and Kinswoman to Henry the second, was the second wife of King William. She was married vnto him at Woodstocke, in the Nones of September, in the yeare of our Lord, 1186. by Baldwin, Arch-Byshop of Canterbury, in the 33. yeare of the raigne of King Henry the second. Shee founded the Monastery of Bulmurinagh, & died the 3. Ides of Febr. 1233. in the 47. yeare after hir espousals, & lies buried in Bulmurinagh being of hir own foundation, as aforesaid. Children by his second wife. Alexander, King of Scots, borne vpon the feast day of Saint Bartholomew at Hadington, 1198. Henry, slaine by his Vnckle Malcolme. He was Father vnto Patric Galightly, one of the twelue Competitors for the Kingdome of Scotland. Isabel, maried to Roger Bigot Ea. of Norffolke, and Earl Marshall of England: and after∣ward to Robert Lord Roos, de Hamelak: from whom, discended William Lorde Roos, another Competitor of the kingdome of Scotland. Margaret, married to Hubert de Burgh, Earle of Kent, 1221. who dyed without issue by her. Mariorie, perhaps base, married to Lord Eustace of Vesey, vnto whom she brought the Barony of Sprouston for her Dowry. Aufric, married to William of Say in Ireland: from whom descended Roger de Amunde∣uile or Mundeuile, a Competitor also of the sayde kingdome.
royal blazon and crown of King Alexander II of Scotland An. Dom. 1214.ALexander the second, after the decease of William his Father, was crowned King of Scotland, at Scone, on the feast day of S. Ni∣cholas, with great honour, beeing but sixe∣teene yeares old and an halfe, when he be∣gan to raigne. A Prince, surely worthy of gouernment, & a man who towards the poore was bounti∣full, cherrished the good, abhorred the euill, and accusto∣med to doo right vnto all men with Iustice and equity. Hee obserued the peace most faithfull, with King Iohn, and Henry his sonne: vnto the which Iohn, and after∣ward to his sonne Henry, hee did his homage for the king∣dom of Scotland. And pacifying the rebellious Islanders, he departed the way of all flesh, at Kerueray, in the west Isles, in the yeare of our Lord, 1249. the second day of Iune, af∣ter almost thirty and fiue yeares of his happie and fortunate raigne, and lieth buried in the Monastery of Melros, in the 51. yeare of his age, and the 35. of his raigne.
royal blazon and crown of Joane, first wife of King Alexander II of Scotland The first wife. IOane, the Daughter of Iohn King of England, and sister to King Henrie the third, was Queene of Scotland, and the first wife of King Alexander, being espou∣sed vnto him, in the yeare of Christ, 1221. at Yorke, who comming out of Scotland desired to visite Canterbury, and in her returne towards London, died, the fourth of the Nones of March, leauing behinde her no issue, Anno. 1238. She lieth buryed betweene the Armes of Henry, K. of Eng∣and Richard Earle of Cornwal, her Brethe∣ren, in the Church of Tharent. royal blazon and crown of Mary, second wife of King Alexander II of Scotland The second wife. MAry, the Daughter of Ingelram of Guines, L. of Coucy in Fraunce, was se∣cond wife to K. Aexander. She was maried to him at Roxburg in Scot. in the year 1239. on Whitsonday. She di∣ed, 1282. beyond the seas. His Issue by the second wife. Alexander the third, King of Scotland, borne at Roxburg, the one and thir∣ty day of August, 1240. Margaret a Daughter, married to one Alan le Husee, vnto whō she brought forth Ermengard a Daughter also, maried to one whose sur-name was de Seu∣les. From whom Nicholas de Seules, one of the Competitors for the kingdom of Scotland discended.
royal blazon and crown of King Alexander III of Scotland An. Dom. 1249.ALexander the third, the sonne of Alexander the second, after his decease, was crowned King of Scotland. And because this A∣lexander at the death of his father was but nine yeare old, a great feare possessed the Gouernours of the child, least vpon contempt of his Nonage, vsurpations on euery hand should bee inforced vpon the Kingdome. Whereupon, in all hast, Messengers in the Kings name were dispatched vnto Henry the third, King of Eng∣land, both to continue the ancient league and amity, as also to re∣quest his daughter for their King in mariage, wherunto, K. Henry granted in all points, & so Alexander tooke Margaret, the Daughter of the said King Hen∣ry, for his wife, and afterward did his homage to the saide Henry Father in in Lawe, and to his sonne Edward, for the kingdome of Scotland. At last, in the yeare of our Lorde, 1285. The 19. day of March, the saide Alexander falling from his horse, vpon the sandes on the North side of Kyngorne, and breaking his neck, dyed, in the 37. yeare of his raign, and lyeth buried at Dunfermeling, hauing formerly builded the crosse Church of Peibles. After whose death, the kingdome of Scotland, for the space of sixe yeares, and nine mo∣neths, had no Gouernour, which produced many lamentable greeuances (as shall heer-after appeare.) He left one onely daughter and heire vnto the kingdome (named Marga∣ret) and she was married vnto Eric, King of Norway; who bare also another Margaret, (commonly called the Maiden of Norway, who presently after her Mother, also deceased issuelesse. Whereupon, Controuersie arose, as concerning the succession. For the king∣dome lay vacant by the tearme of sixe yeares, and nine months, as aforesaide, the state being promiscuously gouerned by sixe Vice-royes or Gouernours. The Gouernors for the South-side of Forth, were Robert Arch-Byshop of Glasquo, Iohn Cumin, and Iohn, great Steward of Scotland: for the North-side of Forth, were appointed Macduff, Earle of Fife, Iohn Cumin Earle of Buckquhane, and William Frazer Arch-Byshop of S. Andrewes, who being al worn out, at last, by the iudgement of Edward the first King of England, Iohn Balliol tooke vpon him the supreame authority ouer that kingdome.
royal blazon and crown of Margaret, first wife of King Alexander III of Scotland The first wife. MArgaret, the daughter of Henry the third, King of Eng∣land, and Sister vnto Edward the first, was wife vnto Alexander the third, King of Scotland. Shee vvas married vnto him at York, vpon the feast day of the Natiuity of our Lo. 1251. and dyed 1274. at Cupsum, the fourth of the calends of March, and lieth buried hard by King Da∣uid, commonly called Saint Dauid. royal blazon and crown of Joletta, second wife of King Alexander III of Scotland The second wife. IOletta, Daughter of the Earle of Dreux, in France, second vvife vnto Alexander the third, King of Scottes, whom he married, as ha∣uing good hope to leaue yssue by her to succeede him. She vvas ma∣ried vnto him in the yeare of our Lord, 1286. by whom hee left no successor. royal blazon and crown of Margaret, third wife of King Alexander III of Scotland The third wife. MArgaret, the Daughter of Guy de Dampier, Earle of Flanders, was third wife vnto this Alexander the thirde, by whom she had no issue. Shee was afterwarde againe married to the Earle of Guelders. Children by his first wife. Alexander, who dyed an vntimely death in the life time of his father, vvas borne at Iedworth, the 12. calends of Ianuary, 1264. Dauid, vvho also dyed in the life time of his Father. Margaret, married to Eric of Norway, sonne of Magnus, King of Norway. Of vvhom vvas borne another Margaret, the onely future heire of the kingdome of Scotland. Who being promised in marriage to Prince Edward, the sonne of Edward the first, King of England, comming out of Norway to be married, in her iourny about the Orchades, being very young, dyed. Whereupon, great contentions arising, concerning the succes∣sion of the kingdome, Edward the first, King of England, in the 18. yeare of his raigne, summoned the Scottish Nobility to a Parlament at Norham, there declaring vnto them his right of Soueraignty, Paramount ouer the kingdome of Scotland. Which being acknovvledged by the said Scottish Nobility, and seisin and possession of the Land and the Castles of the kingdom, being deliuered to him by the Competitors, he caused diuers In∣struments & Duplicats thereof to be sealed by them, vvhich to most of the chiefest Monasteries of his realme, he sent to be preserued for posterity. He then receiued in the claimes of the seueral Competitors: Of vvhich, the greatest right, and only discent of title, seemed to bee betweene Robert de Brus, and Iohn de Balioll, both being discended from Dauid Earle of Anguse and Huntington, Brother to Malcolme and William, and Vnckle to Alexander the last King, to whom he was next heire, & he suruiued the issue of his Nephew. Robert de Brus, the eldest son of Isabell, the daughter of the foresaid Dauid, claimed a presedency of right, as being by a degree nearer in blood then Balioll, to the last King, which was consonant to the law of Nations, the fittest rule to square out the interest of Kings. But either wearied as seemeth with the trouble of Competitor, or willing to shew a rare example of moderation in his election of a priuate life, hee resigned vp his claime and interrest of that kingdome to his sonne. The Original deed still remaining with Sir Robert Cotton, the heire of Bernard de Brus, his second Brother, and is in these words: OMnib{us} Christi fidelib{us} hoc praesens scriptū visuris vel audituris Robert{us} de Brus Dominus de valle Anandia salu∣tē in domino. Nouerit vniuersitas vestra nos concessisse & omnino remisisse karissimo filio nostro domino Roberto de Brus Comiti Karrik. & haeredibus suis, totū ius & clamium quod habuimus vel habere potuimus ad petendum reg∣num Scotiae, Ita quod nos nihil Iuris aut clamij ad praedictum regnum, nomine nostro petendum de caetero vendicare aut exigere possumus damus insuper & spontanea voluntate concedimus praedicto filio nostro & heredibus suis plenam & liberam potestatem dictum regnum petendi, & ius quod sibi competit in hac parte nomine suo prosequends prove voluntate sui melius nouerit conuenire & omnia faciendi que per nos ante tenorem confectionis praesentium poterunt expediri. In cuius rei testimonium praesenti scripto sigillum nostrum apposuimus et in Maius testimonium sigillum No∣bilis
viri Domini Gilberti de Clare Comitis glouerniae & Hertford presentibus apponi procurauimus. Datum apud Berwic, die veneris in Crastino sancti, Leonardi, Anno. gratiae, 1292. But in conclusion, Edward the first finding Balliol an easier instrument, apter to lean to his desire either of reducing that kingdom to his immediate obedience, or at least for retaining it within the reach of his soueraignty, preferred him for King, being the sonne of Deruergilla, the Daughter of Margaret, the first begotten daughter of Dauid, Earle of Huntington, great Vnckle vnto this Alexander the third. royal blazon and crown of King John of Scotland He was crowned the last day of Nouember, at Scone, vpon Saint Stephens day fol∣lowing.IOhn Balliol, the sonne of Iohn Balliol, and of Deruerguld his wife, the Daughter of Margaret, the eldest Daughter of Dauid Earl of Hun∣tington, great Vnckle vnto Alexander the third (who dyed without issue) by the suffrage of Edward the first, King of England, was ad∣uanced vnto the Royall Throne of the kingdome of Scotland, and did the accustomed homage, and swore allegiance vnto the sayde King Edward, at the Towne of New-Castle vpon Tine, in the yeare of our redemption, 1292. M. se & ter C. sed ab illis octo cherce, Hoc anno Domini tradidit dma Iohanni. For three yeares, and somewhat aboue, this Balliol gouerned the state of Scotland: But, for that he prooued slouthfull and negligent, the Scots depo∣sed him, as an vnprofitable member, in the yeare of our Lorde, 1292. S Chron. lib. 1 Cap. 6. From whence, he fled into France, and there dyed. Whereupon, Edward King of England, for ten yeares space, miserably afflicted the Scottish Nation, and by force entred the kingdome as farre as the Riuer Forna, where is the passage to Ros. Heere by the way it is to be noted, Some say it was this mans father. that this Iohn Balliol founded that Colledge in Oxford, 1263. which to this day beareth his owne name there: whose Grand father (by the Father side) Alexander Balliol, in like manner (as others his predecessors) were owners of Bernard Castle in the Byshoppricke of Durham: which sayde Castle it is reported, that one Bernard Balliol, pre∣sently after the Conquest of England by the Normans, erected, and named it after his owne name.Betweene the raigne of this Iohn, and Ro∣bert Brus, Willi∣am Walleys, with some others, op∣posed themselues against Edward, k of Englād. The which Walleys being afterwarde taken. Edw. the 1. did hang at Lon∣don, & caused his quarters to be fix¦ed vpon poles in many places in Scotland. Anno. 1305.
royal blazon and crown of Isabell, wife of King John of Scotland ISabell, the Daughter of Iohn, Earle Warren and Surrey, was wife vnto this Iohn Balliol, King of Scotland. Their Issue. Edward de Balliol, who after the death of Robert Brus, entred his fathers inheritance, and tooke vpon him the supreame authority of the kingdome of Scotland.
royal blazon and crown of King Robert I of Scotland An. Dom. 1306.RObert le Brus, Earle of Carict, (the sonne of Robert Earle of Carict, great Nephew of Isabell, the second Daughter of Dauid Earle of Huntington, great Vnckle vnto Alexander the third) hauing now put Balliol to flight, assumed the kingdome of Scotland, from which he held himselfe so long vn∣iustly debarred. And so vpon the feast day of the Annunciation of our blessed Lady, he was crowned King in the Monastery of Scone, in the year of Grace, 1306. But Edward the first, king of England, desirous to represse his actions, for his own aduantage, leuied a puissant army against him, vnder the direction & Lieutenancy of Aumary de Valence, Earle of Pembroke, at that time Deputy & gouernor of the kingdom of Scotland; who at Methwen encoūtred the sayd K. Robert: wherein the said Robert was ouerthrowne and put to flight, the 19. of Iune, 1306. But reinforcing his strength, he oftentimes renewed the war with Edward the first, second, and third, Kings of England, and was the mirrour of Chiualry in those dayes. This valiant King after he had raigned 24. yeares, being stroken with a Leprosie, dyed at Cardros, 1328. the 7. of Iune, the 2. of Edward the third, and lieth buried in the Monastery at Dunfermeling. King Robert being dead, Thomas Ranulph Earle of Murrey, was made Gouernour of the kingdome; but hee was poysoned at Musselburg, the 13. of August, 1332. It is reported, that Robert vpon his death-bed, willed three things in his Testament. First, that the Kings of Scotland should neuer alienate the Scot∣tish Islands nor bestow them on great personages. Secondly, that the Scottes should neuer giue a long nor determinate day vnto the English to fight on. Thirdly, he willed his heart to be deliuered vnto some woorthy knight, that had vowed himselfe to the warres in the Holy-Land, to carry it into the field with him, whensoeuer he shold fight against the Infidels: which accordingly he bequeathed vnto that Noblemā, Iames Douglas, for that he had heertofore made a Vow, that in proper person he would vndertake to fight against the Infidels aforesaide.
royal blazon and crown of Isabell, first wife of King Robert I of Scotland The first wife. ISabell, the daughter of Doneuald, Earle of Mar, the sister of War∣the, Earle of Mar, was wife of Robert Earle of Carict, who dyed before he had fully gotten the kingdome. Robert her husband beeing the second time ouerthrowne at Dalry. And as shee fled into Ros, was taken, and brought into England, vnto King Edward the first, and in England remained vntill the battell of Bannock, commonly called the battell of Bannocks Brne, fought in the time of King Edward the 2. royal blazon and crown of Elizabeth, second wife of King Robert II of Scotland The second wife. ELizabeth, the daughter of Han∣mer de Burgo, Earl of Vlster in Ire∣land, was the second wife of Ro∣bert Brus, King of Scotland, who dyed the 26. of October, Anno Dom. 1327. His Issue by his first wife. Marioria, married to that Nobleman VValter Steward, the sonne of Iames Steward, who dyed the seauenteenth of the Calends of August, 1309. great Seneschall of Scotland, vnto whom she brought foorth Robert Steward, who succeeded Dauid le Brus, in the Kingdome of Scotland. It was couenanted at Aire, 1315. by the Nobles of the kingdome, that if King Robert deceased without heire male, that then his Brother Edward Brus, should be King. And if the sayde Edward also dyed without male, that then, this Marioria, and so others of the kings Daughters, should succeede, in case they married to the good liking of the King and the Realme. His Issue by the second wife. Dauid, who succeeded his Father in the kingdome. Margaret, married to the Earle of Sutherland, who dyed in bringing forth, of Iohn her sonne. Which Iohn, dyed a pledge in England for his father Da∣uid. And according to the intaile, had succeeded, as descended from the el∣dest sonne, if he had liued. Maud, married to Thomas Isaac, by whom he had two daughters, Ioane & Katherine, that dyed at Striueling, by whom hee had this Maud, it appeareth not.
royal blazon and crown of King Edward of Scotland EDward Balliol, the onely sonne of Iohn Balliol, King of Scotland, came into Scotland after the decease of Robert Brus; affirming, that the kingdome appertained vnto him. And at Duplin obtai∣ning a great victory against the Guardians of Dauid Brus, and of the kingdome of Scotland, by the assistance of Edward the thirde, King of England, by the sword he made good way to his foresaid claime to the kingdome of Scotland, and accordingly tooke vpon him the regall Dignity, in the Monastery of Scone, the foure and twentith day of September, Anno. Dom. 1332. With whom tooke part, Dauid Earle of Atholl, Henry de Beaumont, Earle of Bucquhane, Gilbert de Vmfrauille, Earl of Angus, Raph Baron of Stafford, Richard Talbot, and many others the Nobles of England, who had Title vnto Lands in the same kingdome, in right of their wiues. The second yeare after, this Edward, King of Scots, did his homage vnto Edward the third, at New-Castle vpon Tyne, for the whole kingdome of Scotland, and the adiacent Isles, vpon the Feast day of Saint Geruais and Prothasius, the fourteenth Calends of Iuly, in the yeare of grace, 1333. Vpon occasion of which homage, the Commons of Scotland rose against both the kings in diuers parts of the kingdome. Whereupon, Balliol was inforced for a time to make his abode in England. In the Interim whereof, Dauid the son of Robert Brus, as yet a Child, and in the custody of Thomas Randolph, Earl of Murrey Protector, is crowned King: who afterwards growing vnto mans estate, proued a Prince of no lesse spirit then his Father, but not so fortunate. For Edward Balliol (Dauid as yet being yong, and Thomas Randolph deceased) inuaded the kingdome, and put Dauid to flight; who together with his Wife, (the Sister of Edward the third) was inforced to flye into France, where he lay obscurely, eight yeares and more. But at last, Dauid preparing for his returne, hee was receyued with the generall applause of the people, and Balliol reiected, necessity inforcing him to flye into England, vnto King Edward. Where weighing with himselfe his manifolde e∣iections; at last, freely released vnto Edward the third, King of England, his intire right vnto the kingdome of Scotland, for the sum of 2000. pound yeares for his maintainance, as appeareth by good record, Breuia directa Baronibus, 38. Edward, 3. in Scaccario. (viz.) Termino Michaelis, An. 38. Ed. 3. Rex concessit Edwar∣do de Baliolo nuper Regi Scotiae ex custuma portuū Kingeston & Sancti Botolphi, 2000. li. singu∣lis Annuis ad sustentationē secundū conuencionem factū inter dictum Eduardum Regem An∣gliae, & praedictum Edwardum de Baliole de concessione corone & iuris regni sui Scotiae.
royal blazon and crown of King David II of Scotland An. Dom. 1329.DAuid Brus, the sonne of Robert Brus, after the eiection of Balliol, in the yeare of our Lord 1329. was cald out of France (where∣in hee had now liued to mans estate,) to take on him the gouerment and rule of the Realm of Scotland, as King thereof, and vppon the 24. day of Nouember, in the yeare of Christ 1331. in the eight yeare of his age, and the thrid of his raign, in the Parliament at Scone, hee receiued the order of Kinght-hood at the hands of that Noble-gentlemā, Tho. Randolph Earl of Murry. The day following hee was Crowned, and an∣nointed with great honor (before whom, neuer was there any King of Scotland Crowned or an∣nointed.) Vpon the sameday, was also crowned and annointed Iohan his Q. Against this Dauid, Edward Balioll waging war, besiedged Barwicke, to whose aide also came that victorious Prince, King Edward the third. In the yeare of our Lord 1333. the 19. of Iuly, in the battaile at Halidon-Hill, where were slayne 7. Earles, of Ba∣rons and Knights 900. Esquires 400. and 3000. common Souldiers, & Bar∣wick was taken by the said King Edward the third the day after, being the 20. of Iuly. In this Dauids time also Edward the 3. besiedged Calis, which was then in the possession of Phillip of Valois the French King. Whereupnn this Phillip sent his ambassadors into Scotland vnto King Dauid, that according to their league he should enter England, so to diuert his enemy Edward, from the said siedge of Calis. Who condiscending vnto the French King, aduentured to inuade England, with a right puissant army of Scotsh-men, presuming, that Edward had left behind him none but church-men, & husband-men; and that the flower of the soldierie of England, had been ouer sea with the King their Soueraign. Whereupon, he Marched as far as Durham, where he was fought withal, and ouerthrowen by the inhabitants of Yorkeshire, & some few others: He himselfe, with william Douglas, and many others of the Nobles taken pri∣soners, by Iohn Coupland an Esquier of the North and commited to safe custo∣dy, vpon the vigil of Saint Luke the Euangelist, in the yeare of Grace 1346. Those that fought the said victorious battaile, were william Le-Zouch Arch-Byshop of Yorke with the Clergy of his Dioces, Gilbert de Vmfrauill Earle of Anegos, Henry Percy, Ralph Neuill, william D'eyncourt, and Henry Le-Scrope, with a very small Army of English-men, such as they could assemble in such a penurious season. The tenth yeare after, being ransomed, hee shewed him∣selfe a very modest Prince to the end of his life, which was at Edenburg in the 47. yeare of his age, and the 39. of his raigne; in the yeare of our Lord 1370. leauing no yssue behind him to succeed him. He lieth buried in the Monaste∣ry of Saint Crosse, before the great Alter there.
royal blazon and crown of Johan, first wife of King David II of Scotland The first wife. Iohan (surnamed of the To∣wer) the daughter of king Edward the second, King of England, and Sister vnto King Edward the third, was the first wife of Dauid King of Scots. who iorny∣ing into England to see her Brother, there dyed with∣out issue; and lieth buried at London, in the Church of the Friers Minorits. Hee Married her at Barwicke the 17. of Iuly 1238. royal blazon and crown of Margaret, second wife of King David II of Scotland The second wife. MArgaret Logi, the Daughter of Iohn Logi Knight, a Virgin ex∣celling all other of that time for beauty, was the second Wife of King Dauid, whom (as hee himselfe boa∣sted) he married rather for her form, then in desire of yssue. Notwithstan∣ding, when hee perceiued that shee had accomplished the age of foure and twentie yeares, and grew hope∣les of Issue, he forsooke her. Where∣vpon, shee appealed vnto the court of Rome, and after the expence of much Treasure, (to no purpose,) she dyed.
royal blazon and crown of King Robert II of Scotland An. Dom. 1371.RObert Stewart, sur-named the Hunter, the Nephewe of Dauid Brus, by his Sister, he was son of walter Stewart, begotten vppon the body of Margery, the sister of King Dauid, by the generall agreement of the whole Scottish Nation, is nominated king in stead of his deceased vncle, vpon the feast day of the Anunciation of our blessed Lady, in the year of our Lord, 1371. Against whom, in the very beginning, william Douglas opposed himselfe, affirming, that the right of that kingdome accrued vnto him by the aliance with the Balliols and Comyns. But perceiuing that George of Dunbarre, Earle of March, and his Brother the Earle of Murrey, and the Lord Erskine, (who had three of the strongest fortresses of the kingdome in their custodies, (viz:) the Castle of Maydens, Striueling, and Dunbreton) did strongly op∣pose against him, whereupon he renounced his pretension. And at last, the daughter of King Robert, borne in lawfull wedlocke, was giuen in marriage to Iames, son and heire of the saide william Douglas. This Robert amongest the Scots, was the second King of that name, and the first of the Stewarts: vn∣der which Sur-name, and vnder nine Kings of the name, for the space of two hundred yeares and more, euen vnto this day, haue the Scottes bin happily gouerned, and the famous Jsle of Great Brittaine in our dayes, into one Go∣uernment vnited, by our dread Soueraigne Lord King Iames, that now is. Vnto any of whom, this Robert was nothing inferiour in happinesse, as the man, whom during the whole time of his raigne, neuer felt the affliction of any aduerse fortune. He dyed with age, and not with sicknesse, the 13. of the Calends of May, in the yeare of our Lord, 1390. and in the 19. yeare of his raigne, in his Castle of Deidon, being full of dayes, (viz.) in the 74. yeare of his age, and lyeth buried in the Monastery of Scone.
royal blazon and crown of Eufemia, first wife of King Robert II of Scotland The first wife. EVfemia, the daughter of Hugh Earle of Ros, was the first lawfull wife of this Robert King of Scotland. who not long after hir husband Ro∣bert, was crowned in solemne ma∣ner, 1372. She died in the third year of his raigne, and in the year of our Lord, 1387. royal blazon and crown of Elizabeth, second wife of King Robert II of Scotland The second wife. ELizabeth, the Daughter of Adam Moore, knight, was the second wife vnto this King ROBERT, By whom, he hadde three Sonnes. His Issue by his first wife. VValter Stewart, Earle of Atholl, beheaded for plotting Treason against Iames the first. Dauid Stewart, Earle of Stratherne. Eufemia, married vnto Iames, the sonne of william Dowglas. His Issue by the second wife. Iohn, afterward named Robert, and succeeded his Father in the kingdome. Robert Stewart, Duke of Albany, Gouernor of Scotland, and Earle of Fife in right of his wife, and was Father of Mordac, Duke of Albany, and Gouer∣nour of Scotland. Alexander Stewart, Earl of Bucquhane, father of Duncan A daughter, married to Iohn of Dunbarre, the Brother of George Earle of March. A second daughter, married vnto Iohn Lyon, Lord Glammys, but of what name, or by what woman these two were, appeareth not in record.
royal blazon and crown of King Robert III of Scotland RObert Steward the third of that name, King of Scottes, Earle of Carict, whose name was first Iohn, succeeded his deceased Parent Robert the second, in the yeare of our Lord, 1390. He chaunged his name, as I conceiue, for that he deemed the name of Iohn, ominous & vnfortu∣nate; as first, being hatefull in the Balliols; and secondly, vpon animaduersion, that a king of France of that name was in battell taken prisoner by the English. This third Robert in a manner, waged continuall warfare with England, but alwaies with vncertaine and vn∣fortunate successe. Who after he had raigned sixteene yeares, and seen Da∣uid, one of his Sonnes made away by the subtilty of Robert Duke of Albany, & Earle of Fife, his Vnckle; and his other Son Iames in declining, by the Trea∣son of his saide Vnkle, to be captiuated by the English, wherein hee shewed himselfe a Prince more vertuous then polliticke: for with the English, his childe might haue beene in better securitie then amongst his owne people; for mony or mariage might haue wrought his deliuerance, as the euent pro∣ued. Their owne Annales record, that this Robert was a good man, but no good King. Hee dyed at Bucquhane, the fourth of the Calends of Aprill, vp∣on Palme-sunday, in the yeare of our Lord, 1406. and lyeth buried at Paslet. From this time, for the tearme of thirteene yeares, was the kingdom gouer∣ned by Lieutenants (viz.) Robert, and after him, by Mordac the son of Robert; which time being almost expired, Iames the Son of this Robert, beeing freely deliuered out of England, returned, and tooke vpon him the Royal Dignity.
royal blazon and crown of Anabel, wife of King Robert III of Scotland ANabel, the Daughter of Iohn Drummond de Stubhall, Knight, was wife vnto this Robert the third. A Lady for her admirable beauty, deer∣ly beloued of her husband. She died at Scone, 1401. and lieth buried at Dunfermeling. Their Issue Dauid, their first borne Duke of Rothsay, who dyed of hunger. Iames, who succeeded his father in the kingdom, and was the first of that name. Egidia, married to Earle Dowglas, who had issue, one onlie daughter, married to Henry Sinclare, earl of the Orchades, from whom is descended Wil∣liam Earle of the Orchades. A Daughter maried vnto the Earle of Angus. A Daughter married vnto the Earle of Dalketh. By what woman these thee dagh¦ters were, is not manfest by war∣rant of any of our records.
royal blazon and crown of King James I of Scotland IAmes Stewart, the first of that name amongst the Scots, the son of Robert the third, after his long and tedious abode in England, vp∣on certain conditions and couenants was freely deliuered, and re∣turning into Scotland, was re-aduanced to the regall throne in the yeare of grace, 1422. and in the next yeare following, hee made his homage for the kingdome of Scotland, at windsor, vnto Henry the sixt King of England his superiour Lord, Anno. Dom. 1423. This Iames was a Prince of an excel∣lent wit, very couragious; an excellent Wrastler, swift of foot, a good Mu∣sitian, and inferior to no man in eloquence of speech; all which, he had ex∣quisitely learned in England, during the time of his long captiuity. He was no lesse commendable for his Poesie in the Scottish tongue, whose Booke and Verses euen to this day, amongst the Scots, carry the prize and best com∣mendation. By the Treachery of his Vnckle the Earle of Atholl (who euer carried an aspiring mind vnto the kingdome) he was wounded to death with thirty deadly stabbes, in the Towne of Perth, the 21. of February, in the yeare of grace, 1447. and was buried at the Carthusians, in the one and thirtith year of his raigne, and the four and fortith of his age: for whom, he himselfe had built an house in the Suburbs of the same Towne. The parricides, the Earle of Atholl, and Robert Graham were punished most cruelly, but most worthi∣ly. Graham was reported to haue alledged for his excuse, that because the K. had proscribed and banished him, that therefore hee was not his subiect. So friuolous an excuse had the man of sinne, for euer and euer infamous, taken for his presumptuous offence. Whereuppon, the Scots haue this Rithmicall Prouerb in their owne language amongst them: Robert Gramen, he slew our King, God giue him schamen.
royal blazon and crown of Jone, wife of King James I of Scotland IOne (the daughter of Iohn Beaufort, Earle of Somerset in England, whom the said Iohn begot vppon the bodie of Margaret his wife, Dutchesse of Clarence, Sister & one of the co-heyres of Edmund Holland, Earle of Kent) was wife vnto this Iames the first King of Scotland, marryed vnto him at London, in the year of our Lord, 1423. who after the death of King Iames, tooke to her second hus∣band, Iames Steward, a young Gentleman, by whom shee had three Sonnes; the first, called Iohn, was Earle of Atholl; the second, called Iames, was Earle of March, and the third sonne was thought to be Byshop of Murrey. She di∣ed the fourth of the Nones of March. Anno Dom. Their Issue. Alexander, who dyed an Jnfant. Iames, the second king of Scots after his father. Twinnes. Marg. eldest daughter maried to Lewis the xij. k. of France. Ioan, Dutchesse of Austria. Elizabeth, Dutchesse of Brittaine. All yssuelesse. This King had three other Daughters, one mar∣ried to the Earle of Camphire in Zeland. Another married to the Lord of Dalketh. Annother to the Earle of Huntley. All dyed yssuelesse. By what Women these three Daugh∣ters were, is not ma∣nifest.
royal blazon and crown of King James II of Scotland IAmes, the second son of Iames the first, after the death of his father, was made King of Scotland, in the yeare of our Lord, 1447. Hee was called Iames with the fiery face, because he had a verie red mole on the one side of his face. This King, when hee came to mans estate, grew very strong, & tooke to wife, the daughter of the Duke of Gheldres. He arrested the Earle of Douglas, William and Dauid his Brothers, with Nicholine Hemming, Lord of Comirnald, at the Tower of Edinburgh, and caused them all to be beheaded vpon the Mount with∣in the saide Castle. From this time, after the death of Dou∣glas, he raigned Royally, and made Lawes according to his owne will; and afterward being at the siedge of Roxbo∣rough Castle (which the English had long held) where hee was very curious about the framing of warlicke Engins to assault the Castle, was there slaine by a great shot from the Castle, & the Earle of Angus standing by, was sorely woun∣ded, the third day of August, in the year of our Lord, 1460. in the 29. yeare of his age, and the 24. of his raigne. He was royally buried in the Monastery of S. Crosse at Edinburgh.
royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King James II of Scotland MArgaret, Daughter to Arnoldus of Egmont, Duke of Gheldres (was wife vnto the saide Iames the second) descended anciently from the race of the Dukes of Brunswicke. Their Issue. Iames, the third King of Scots, next following. Alexander Steward, Duke of Albany. Iohn Steward, Earle of Marre, who dyed yssuelesse. Anna, first married to Alexander, Lord of Boyd, af∣ter to the Lord Hamilton. Margaret, married to the Lord Creichton.
royal blazon and crown of King James III of Scotland IAmes the third, being a child of seuen yeares of age, after the death of Iames the second his father, was Crowned King of Scots, at Calcon. in the yeare of our Lorde, 1460. and when hee was twentie yeare old, he tooke to wife Margaret, the dau∣ghter of the King of Norway, and was marryed at Edenburgh, which brought him in dower the pretended right of the Kings of Norway, to the Orchad Islands, and the rest of the Islands there adiacent. In the beginning of his raigne, he ru∣led al things in quiet order, but in his latter time, by aduerse fortune, the most part of his Nobi∣lity conspired against him. He dyed at Sterling, in the yeare of our redemption, 1488. the xi. of Iune, in the 28. yeare of his raigne. royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King James III of Scotland MArgaret (Daughter of Christian King of Denmarke and Norway) was wife to the saide Iames the third, King of Scots. Their Issue. Iames the fourth King of Scots, after the death of his Father. Iohn Steward, Earle of Marre, who dyed without issue. Alexander Steward, Byshop of Saint Andrewes, and Duke of Albany, died with∣out issue.
royal blazon and crown of King James IV of Scotland IAmes the fourth, after the death of his father Iames the third, got vnto himselfe great power amongst the Scots, which for some yeares he very directly administred Iu∣stice by the same, and brought the kingdom vnto much quietnesse by his good gouernment. Insomuch, that the great thefts, robberies, slaughters, and such like vil∣lanies which had beene commonly vsed in Scotland, (about the borders especially) were euery where almost vtterly left off. But Lewes the French King vsed great and many perswasions vnto King Iames, that he should not desist in these bloudy enterprises, but rather increase thē, and the rather, thereby to offend Henry King of England, whose Sister the sayde Iames had married, and with whom hee had great league. At length through many hard perswasions and faire promises from the French King, hee leuyed a great power, and at a time vnexpected, inuaded England, al∣though (presently after it was knowne) he was admonished by King Henry, that although he were not ashamed of his deed, at least hee should feare the iudgement of Almighty God, who is wont to be reuenged on the perturbers of peace, and the breakers of leagues. For that warre being taken in hand a∣gainst all faith, and league sworne, had like euent, for by the English they were ouerthrowne, and King Iames himselfe was slaine in that battel, & with him, one Arch-Byshop, two Byshops, foure Abbots; Noblemen & Knights 34. besides 8000. common souldiers, and almost all the rest taken Captiues, also all their Ensignes; and 22. great peeces of Ordinance. This battaile was fought at Floddon-Hill, neere Branxton, a Towne in Northumberland, the 9. day of September, Anno. Dom. 1513.
royal blazon and crown of Margaret, wife of King James IV of Scotland MAgaret, the daughter of king Henry the se∣uenth, and Sister to the most Noble King Henry the eight, was wife vnto this K. Iames the fourth, who after the death of the saide King her husbande, was againe married to Archibald Dowglas, earl of Angus, hauing by him a daughter, called Margaret, borne at Hare-bottel Castle in England, Anno. 1516. who was wife vnto Mat∣thew Stewart, Earle of Lenox, Mother of Henry, which ma∣ried Mary, Queene of Scotland, and who were Father & Mother to our most dread Soueraigne Lord Iames, King of Great Brittaine, France, and Jreland, defender of the Faith, &c. whom God long preserue. Their Issue. Arthur, first sonne, dyed the 14. of Iuly, 1510 in the life time of his Father. Iames, the fifth King of Scotland. Alexander, born 1514. after his fathers death, D. of Rothsay.
royal blazon and crown of King James V of Scotland IAmes the fift, his Father being slaine in England, was k. of Scotland, in the yeare of our Lord, 1513. being but a childe of a yeare olde, when his father dyed, and was crowned, Anno Dom. 1515. at Scone, at which place, the Kings of Scotland haue beene vsually inaugurated. Vn∣der this King there was diuers conflicts, as wel by land as by Sea, betweene both Nations. Iohn Duke of Alba∣ny, Nephew to the deceased King, by the graue Counsell of the Realm, was sent for home out of France, to protect the young King, and to gouerne his land, and when he had assumed the gouernment, presently after, he with the French, began to make warre against the English, and all those great Lordes whom he thought to haue forsaken the King in his warre, hee put to death: for which cause, much distrusting his owne safety, he returned into France, and King Iames now comming vnto mans estate, he tooke to wife Magdalen, eldest daughter to Francis the French king, who liued not aboue one yeare with him. After whose death, hee married Mary, daughter to the Duke of Guise; by whom hee left one onely daughter liuing. King Iames dyed with griefe of mind, in the Castle of Falkeland, the xiiij. of December, Anno. 1542. after whose death, Iames Earle of Arran Lord of Hamilton his Kinsman, was constituted Gouernour to the young Queene, and also her Tutor.
royal blazon and crown of Magdalen, first wife of King James V of Scotland The first wife. MAgdalen, Daughter to Francis K. of France, the first wife to Iames King of Scots, who dyed without issue. royal blazon and crown of Mary, second wife of King James V of Scotland The second wife. MAry of Lorayn, daugh∣ter to Claudius Duke of Guise, and Sister vnto Duke Francis, and Widdowe of Longuevill, was the second wife to James the fift, which Mary died, Anno. 1560. His Issue by his second wife. IAMES ARTHVR Both died Infants. Mary, Queene of Scots, borne the seauenth day of De∣cember, on the vigil of the Conception of our blessed La∣dy the Virgin, Anno. 1542.
royal blazon and crown of Queen Mary I of Scotland MAry, onely daughter of Iames the fift, King of Scotland, being an infant at the time of her Fathers death, was de∣clared heire to the kingdome of Scotland, Anno. 1542. her Gouernour in her tender yeares, was Iames Earle of Ar∣ran, Lorde of Hamilton her Kinsman, who was also her Tutor. He for the saide Queene Mary, waged war with the English, denying to giue her in marriage to Edward the sixt, King of England, notwithstanding it was so agreed vppon by the chiefe Peeres of both kingdomes, which caused the battell at Musselborough field, where the English were Victors. The Duke of Somerset, Vnckle & Pro∣tector to the King, and Iohn Earle of Warwicke, after made Duke of Nor∣thumberland, being Generals; at first, the battell grewe doubtfull on which side it would fall, but at length it happily fell on the English side, in the mo∣neth of August, 1547. Queene Mary now comming to her prime yeares, was first married to Francis Dolphin of France, the fourth of December, 1566. af∣ter whose death, she was secondly married to Henry Steward, Lorde Darnley, eldest Sonne to Mathew, Earle of Lenox, by Margaret Dowglas: who begot of the saide Mary, a Childe of an excellent wit, and great hope, 1566. & was christened. Elizabeth Queene of England, of famous memory; Charles, King of France, and Philebert Duke of Sauoy, being God-fathers and God-mother: and named Charles-Iames, who now by true right of descent, is Ki. of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. whome. God long preserue.
royal blazon and crown of King James VI of Scotland IAMES, King of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, was sonne of Mary, Queene of Scots, and of Henrie Stewart her second husband, was borne at Edinburgh, in the ca∣stle of Maydens, the 19. of Iune, 1566. first crowned and annointed King of Scotland, at Sterling, the 29. day of Iuly. Anno. 1567. in the second year of his age: and in the year of our Lord, 1603. hee was most happily crowned and annointed King of England, France, and Ireland.
royal blazon and crown of Anne, wife of King James VI of Scotland ANna, Daughter to Fredericke the second, King of Den∣marke and Norway, and Sister of Christiern the fourth now King, was married to King Iames, the 0. of Au∣gust, after the vsuall manner of marrying such persons, the Kings themselues not beeing there. This marriage was solemnized at Gonemburgh, a Citty in Denmark, be∣ing there efpoused to George Keith, Earl Marshall, Go∣uernour of the North parts of Scotland, and of Marre, then Embassador for the saide King. This Queene Anne was borne at Scanderburg, the twelfe day of December, 1574. Their Issue. Henry, Prince of VVales, Duke of Cornwall, Rothsay, and Earle of Chester, was borne on Tuesday, the 19. of February, 1593. Iames, dyed young. Charles, Duke of Yorke and Albany, Earle of Ros, and Lorde of Ardmanoch. Lady Elizabeth, borne the 19. of August, 1596. Margaret, borne the 24. of December, 1598. dyed in Scotland. Mary. Sophia. Both dyed young, and lieth buryed at Westminster.
