24.5 23379030 26616
A BRIEFE DESCRIP∣TION OF THE whole worlde. WHEREIN ARE PAR∣ticularly described all the Monarchies, Empires, and kingdomes of the same: with their seuerall titles and situations thereunto adioyning. AT LONDON Printed by T. Iudson, for Iohn Browne, and are to be sould at the signe of the Bible in Fleete-streete. 1599.
A BRIEFE DESCRIP∣TION OF THE WHOLE WORLD. THe globe of the earth, doth eyther shewe the sea, or land. The sea generall is called by the name of the OCEAN, which coa∣steth all the world, and taketh his name in speciall, eyther of the place neere which it commeth: as Oceanus Britannicus: Mare Ger∣manicus: Sinus Persicus: Mare Atlanticum, of the hill Atlas in the West-part of Africke: or of the finder out: as Fretum Magelanicum: or of some other accident, as the Red sea, because the sand is red: Mare Mediterraneum: because it runneth betweene the landes of Europe, and Afrike: Ma∣re Icarium, because Icarus was drowned there, or the like. There be some few seas which haue no entercourse with the OCEAN, as Mare mortuum neare Palestina: Mare Caspium, siue Hircanum, not farre from Armenia, and such a one is said to be in the North part of America. The Straites or narrow seas are noted in the Latine, by the name of Fretum: as, Fretum Britanicum, the English narrowe seas, Fretum Herculeum, the straightes betweene Barbarie and Spaine, Fretum Magellanicum. &c. The earth is either Ilands, which are those that are who∣ly compassed by the sea, as Britannia, Sicilia, Corsica: or the continent which is called in the English, the firme lande,
in the Latine Continent. The olde knowne firme land was conteined onely in Asia, Europe, and Africa, Europe is deuided from Africa by the Mediterran sea, and from Asia by the riuer Tanais, whereby appeareth that the North-partes of Asia, and of Europe in olde time were but little knowne, and disco∣uered. Africa is deuided from Europe by the Mediterran sea, from Asia by the riuer Nilus: and so Asia, by Tanais and Nilus, is seuered from Europe and Afrike. De Hispania. TO say nothing of England and Ireland, the most we∣sterne countrie of Europe is Spaine: which is boūded on the South wth the Mediterran sea, on the West with the Atlantike, on the North with the Oceanus Cantabricus or the Spanish seas, on the East, with France, from which it is seuered with certaine mountaines, called Montes Py∣renei, or the Pyrenei hills. In this countrie heretofore there were many kingdoms: as the kingdome of Portingale toward the West, the king∣dome of Granada toward the South, the kingdome of Na∣uarre and Aragon towarde the East, and the kingdome of Castile in the middle of the land: but the whole dominion is now vnder the king of Spaine. De Gallia. THe next countrie is France: which is bounded on the West with the Pyrenei hills: on the North with the English seas: on the East with Germanie: on the South-east
with the Alpe-hilles: on the South-west with the Me∣diterran sea. This was in auncient time deuided into three partes: Aquitania which is toward the West: Celtica toward the North, and West: and Belgica which is toward the North. Belgica is some times called Gallia inferior, and sometime Germania inferior: but we call it commonly by the name of the Lowe countries: the gouernement where of at this day is not at all vnder France: but Gallia Celtica and Aqui∣tania are vnder the French king. France hath many petie gouernements that doe bor∣der vpon it: as the Duke of Sauoie, the State of the Swit∣zers, the Dukedome of Loraine, the Burgundians or Wal∣lons: against all which, the King is forted to keepe his fron∣tier townes. There is nothing more famous in this kingdome then the Salike lawe: whereby it is prouided; that no woman. nor the heire of her, as in her right, shall enioy the crowne of France a but it goeth alwayes to the heire male. The Switzers are a people called in olde time Heluetij. who haue no Noblemen or Gentlemen among them, but onely the citizens of their townes: the yearely officers whereof, and their councill, doe gouerne their State. De Germania, THe next countrie vnto France, on the East-side, is Germanie, which is bounded on the West with France, and the Lowe countries: on the North with Den∣marke, and the Danish seas: on the East with Prussia, Po∣lonia, and Hungarie: on the South-east with Istris, and Illyricum: on the South with the Alpe-hilles & with Italy. The gouernour generall of this countrie is balled the
Emperour of Germanie; who is chosen by three spirituall princes, the Archbishop of Colen called Coloniensis; the Archbishop of Ments called Moguntinus; and the Archbi∣shop of Triers called Treuereusis: and three temporal prin∣ces; the Duke of Saxonie; the Marques of Brandeburg; and the Countie Palantine of Rhine: which if they cannot agree, as to make a Maior parte in their election: then the king of Boheme hath also a voyce: whereof it commeth to to be saide, that there bee seuen Princes electors of the Empire. There is not that free libertie of choosing the Emperour out of any countrie, as was heretofore. But the election is tyed, within one hundred yeares vnto the house of Austria, and at this day of of them, the king of Bohemia is Empe∣rour, who is called Rodulphus. 2. Bohemia is a kingdome in the middle of Germanie, which is compassed rounde with a mightie wood, called Silua Hirciniae: The chiefe citie thereof is called Prage. In Germanie all are at a kinde of commaundement of the Emperour: but most of the Princes (otherwise) take on them as absolute gouernours in their dominion. So that they haue libertie of religion, they make lawes, they raise souldiers, they stampe money with their owne coyne▪ as absolute princes. So doth the Duke of Saxonie, the Arch∣bishop, and the rest. There are also free States and cities; which haue the same authoritie, as Argentine, Frankford, and other. De Italia. ON the South-side of the Alpes (and Germanie lyeth Italie, stretching it selfe out in length towarde the South, and East. It hath on the South-side the Iland Sicilia:
on the East, that part of the Med. which is called Mare A∣driaticum, or Mare superum; which seuereth Italie from Graecia: on the West side, that part of the Med. which is cal∣led Mare Tyrrhenum, or Mare inferum: and by some Ma∣re Ligusticum. This countrie for the figure thereof, is by some likened vnto a long leafe of a tree: it hath in the middle of it which goeth all in length, a mightie mountaine, named Mons Aperminus, which is likened to the Spina or ridge-bone of the backe: out of this hill spring diuers Riuers, which runne on both sides of it, into the Adriatike, and Tyrrhene, or Tuscane seas. The North parte of this Italie is that which in auncient time was called Gallia Comata, or Gallia Cisalpina,Gallia. inhabi∣ted then by the French-men. It is now called Longobardia, or Lombardie, wherein stand many rich gouernements: as the Dukedome of Millaine, of Mantua, of Florence, and others. It is for the pleasantnesse thereof, in respect of the soile, aire, waters, and great varietie of wines, and fruites, likened now by some to Paradise, or the garden of God. In this Italy, which was heretofore one intire gouerne∣ment in the florishing estate of the Romanes, are now ma∣ny absolute States, and princedomes, by the great policie of the Bishop of Rome: who thought it the best way to make himselfe great, to weaken the Empire. So he hath not onely driuen the Emperour out of all Italie into Ger∣manie: but hath diminished his Maiestie in both: by ma∣king so many petie gouernments, which hold themselues soueraigne rulers, without relation to any other. As there are many States in Italie, so one of the chiefest are the Venicians called Resp. Ʋenetorum, or the State of Venice: because they are not gouerned by any one: but by their Senate, & gentlemen, although they haue a duke: with whose stampe their money is coyned, and in whose
name all their executions of iustice are done. But this duke is euery way limited by the State. This Citie of Venice standeth in an Aestuarium or shal∣low of earth in the North-part of the Adriatike sea, so safely, that it is held inuincible. There is in it but one streete of firme land: into the other the sea doth flow at euerie tide. They haue beene a great and rich State; not onely posses∣sing much in Italie, as Padua their Vniuersitie, and other things which nowe they doe: but a great part of Illyricum and many rich Ilands in the Med. as Candie, called com∣monly Creta, Cyprus, Zacynthus, and other. The impouerishing of their state, hath partly beene by the encroching of the Turke: but especially By the decay∣ing of that trafique which they had to Alexandria in Ae∣gypt for their spices, and other riches of Persia. Arabia, and the East Indies. Since the course of the Portugals, to those Easterne countries hath beene by sea, by the backeside of Africa. Here standeth the Citle of Florence, a renowmed Ci∣tie of Lombardie, which is gouerned by a Duke, an abso∣lute Prince. This Dukedome is in the familie of the Medi∣ces, from whom came Katherine de Medices, the wife of Henrie the 2. King of France lately so well knowne by the name of Queene mother. In this Lombardie standeth also the Dukedome of Mil∣laine, a most rich and pleasant thing, which sometime had beene gouerned by a Duke of their owne: but of late hath beene possessed by the Spaniard, and sometime by the French, and is now in the gouernment and possession of the king of Spaine. A good part of Italie is vnder the Bishop of Rome, which commōly is called the land of the Church: where the Pope is a Prince absolute: not onely spirituall, as else-where hee claimeth: but also temporall: making lawes, requiring tri∣bute,
raising souldiers, and executing iustice as a Monarche. In the South part of Italie lieth the kingdome of Naples, which is a countrie very rich, and full of all kind of pleasure, aboundant in Nobilitie; whereof commeth to bee said that prouerbe: Naples for Nobilitie, Rome for religion, Millaine for beautie, Florence for policie, and Venice for riches. This was heretofore ruled by a king  r owne, till the time of Ioane Queene of Naples, who y deede of gift, did first graunt that kingdome to the Kings of Aragon in Spaine: and afterward by will (with a reuocation of the for∣mer graūt,) did bequeath it to the house of Anioy in France. Since which time the kingdome of Naples hath sometimes beene in the hand of the Spaniard, sometimes possessed by the French, and is now vnder the King of Spaine: vnto this is annexed also the Dukedome of Calabria. There be moreouer in Italie many other Prince-domes and States; as the Dukedome of Ferrara; the Dukedome of Mantua; the Dukedome of Vrbine; the Dukedome of Par∣ma, & Placentia: the State of Luca: the State of Genua, com∣monly called the Genowaies, which are gouerned by their Senate: but haue a Duke as they haue at Venice. There bee also some other, by which meanes, the glory and strength of Italy is decayed. De Dania, Suecia, & Noruegia. AS Italie lieth on the Southside of Germanie, so Den∣marke lieth on the North, into the middle of which land the sea breaketh in by a place called the Sound. The Im∣poste of which passage bringeth great riches, as an ordinarie tribute to the King of Denmarke: this is a kingdome, and ruled by an absolute gouernour. On the North and East side of Denmarke lieth Suecia, commonly called Sweden or Swethen: which is also a king∣dome
of it selfe. Where the King professeth himselfe to bee Rex Suecorum, Gothorum, & Ʋandalorum. Wherby we may know that the Gothes and Vandales which in times past did waste Italie, and other Nations of Christendome, did come out of this country. On the Northside and West of Sweden lieth Noruegia or Norway, which is at this day vnder the gouernement of the King of Denmarke, although heretofore it hath beene a free kingdome of it selfe. Within the Sounde, on the East part of the sea, lieth Dantzicke: where are three townes of Hanse-men, confe∣derates, and allies vnto the King of Denmarke. There is no great thing to be noted in these countries: but that from Denmarke commeth much come to the sup∣ply of other parts of Christendome: and that from all these countries is brought great furniture for warre, or for ship∣ping. As masts, cables, steele, fadles, armour, gunpowder, & the like. And that in the seas adioyning to these parts, there are fishes of much more monstrous shape, then else-where are to be found: The people of these countries are by their profession, Lutherans for religion. De Russia, siue Moscouia. ON the East side of Sweden beginneth the dominion of the Emperour of Russia (although Russia, or Moscouia it self doth lie some what more into the East) which is a great and mightie Monarchie, extending it selfe euen from Lap∣land, and Finmarke, many a thousand mile in length vnto the Caspian sea: so that it containeth in it a great part of Eu∣rope, and much of Asia also. The gouernour there calleth himselfe Emperour of Rus∣sia, great Duke of Mosconia, with many other titles of Princedomes, and Cities, whose dominion was very much
enlarged by the Emperour not long since dead: whome in Russie they call Ian VasilIwich, in the Latine Iohannes Basili∣des: who raigning long, and being fortunate in warre, did very much enlarge this mightie dominion. The people of this countrie are rude, and vnlearned, ve∣ry superstitious, a kinde of Christians: but rather following the Greeke Church. Their buildings is most of wood, euen in their chiefe Citie of Mosco: insomuch, that the Tartars wholy in the North-east of them breaking oft into their countries, euen vnto the very Citie of Mosco, doe set fire on their Cities, which by reason of their woodden buildings, are quickly destroyed. The passage by sea into this countrie (which was wont to be through the Sound, and so afterward by land) was first discouered by the English: who with great danger of the frozen seas, did first aduenture to saile so far North, as to compasse Lapland, Finmarke, Scrikfinia, and Biarmia: and so passing to the East by Noua Zimbla, halfe the way almost to Cathaio, haue entred the riuer called Duina: by which they disperse themselues for marchandize both by water & land, into the most parts of the dominiō of the Emperour. This Empire is at this day one of the greatest dominions in the world: both for compasse of grounde, and for multi∣tude of men: sauing that it lyeth far North, and so yeeldeth not pleasure or good trafique, with many other of the best nations. De Prusia, & Polonia. IN Europe, on the East and North corner of Germany lyeth a countrie called Prussia, in Latine most times Bo∣russia, in English Pruthen, or Sprusa: of whome, little is fa∣mous, sauing that they be gouerned by one, in a kinde of or∣der of religion, whome they call the Grand-master: and that they are a meanes to keepe the Moscouite & the Turke from some other partes of Christendome.
On the East-side of Germanie, betweene Russia & Ger∣manie, lyeth Polonia, or Poland, which is a kingdome dif∣fering from other of Europe: because the king there is cho∣sen by election by some of the Princes neare adioyning, as was lately Henry the third, King of France. These electi∣ons oftentimes doe make great factions there; so that inta∣king partes, they grow often there into ciuill warre. The king of Polonia is almost continually in warre, ei∣ther with the Moscouite, who lyeth in the East and North-east of him; or with the Turke, who lyeth on the South and South-east; and sometimes also with the Princes of Germa∣nie; whereupon the Poles doe commonly desire to chuse warriors to their King. In this countrie are none but Christians; but so, that li∣bertie of all religions is permitted, insomuch, that there be Papists, Colleges of Iesuites, both of Lutherans, and Calui∣nistes opinions, Anabaptists, Artians, and diuers others. This is that countrie, which in times past was called Sarmatia, the chiefe citie whereof is named Cracouia. De Hungaria, & Austria. ON the South-side of Germanie lyeth Hungarie, called in the Latine Pannonia; which haue bene heretofore deuided into Pannonia superior, and Pannonia inferiore it is an absolute kingdome, and hath heretofore bene ritch and populous. The Christians that doe liue there, haue among them diuers sortes of religions, as in Poland. The kingdome hath bene a great obstacle against the Tuckes comming in∣to Christendome: but especially in the time of Iohannes Huniades, who did mightily with many great victories re∣pulse the Turke. Here standeth Buda, which was hereto∣fore a great fortresse of Christendome. But the glory of this kingdome is almost vtterly decayed, by reason that the Turke, who partly by policle and partly by force, doth now possesse the greatest parte of it. So that the people are fled
from thence, and the Christians which remaine there are in miserable seruitude: Notwithstanding, some part of Panno∣nia superior doth yet belong to Christendome. That corner of Germanie which lieth neerest to Hunga∣rie is called Austria, which is an Archdukedome. Frō which house are come many of the Princes of Germany, and of o∣ther parts of Europe: so that the Crowne imperiall of Ger∣manie is now tied to some one of this house. In this countrie standeth Vienna that noble citie, which is now the principall bulwarke of all Christendome against the Turke: from whence Soliman was repelled by Ferdi∣nandus King of Hungarie, in the time of the Emperour Charles the fift. It was in this country, that Richard the first, king of England, in his returne from the holy land, was taken prisoner by the Archduke of Austria, and so put to a grie∣uous raunsome. The Archduke that now is, by the King of Spaine, is appointed in the place of the Duke of Parma, as gouernour of the low countries. Through both Austria and Hungarie doth runne the mightie riuer Danubius, as through Germanie doth runne the Rhene, whereon groweth Ʋinum Rhenum, commonly called Rhenish wine. De Graecia. ON the South-side of Hungarie, and South-east, lyeth a countrie of Europe called in old time Dacia, which is large and wide, comprehending in it Transyluania, Valachia, Moldauia, and Seruia. Of which little is famous, saue that the men are warlike, and can hardly be brought to obedience, They haue lately bin vnder the King of Hungarie. The riuer Danubius doth diuide this Dacia from Mysia, commonly cal∣led Bulgaria, which lieth on the South from Danubius, and is seuered from Graecia by the mountaine Hamus. From Hamus towards the South lieth Graecia, bounded on the West by the Adriatike sea: on the East, by the Thracian s, and Mare Aegeum: on the South, by the maine Medi∣teran
sea. This contained in old time foure speciall parts: Pe∣loponnesus, Achaia Macedonia, and Epirus. Peloponnesus, which is now called Morea, is the South part of Graecia, being Paeninsula, or almost an Iland: for that it is ioyned by a litle straight called Isthmos, vnto the rest of Gra∣cia. Herein stood Sparta, and the auncient state of Lacedae∣mon. On the Isthmos or straight, stood the famous citie of Co∣rinth, which was in old time called the key of Greece. On the West side of Graecia, next to Peloponnesus, stood the kingdom of Macedonia: so famous vnder Philip for conque∣ring al Graecia: and vnder Alexander, for vanquishing almost al the Easterne world: and for taking of the Monarchy from the Persians: and remouing it to the Macedonians. On the North-side of Macedonia being the North-west from Graecia stood the little kingdome of Epirus: where raig∣ned Scanderbeg, which was in his time so great a scourge to the Turke. The rest of Graecia was called Achaia, hauing on the North and East part thereof Thracia, on the North Haemus the hill on the West Macedonia and Epirus, on the South Peloponnesus, on the East those seas which diuide Asia the lesse from Graecia. In this part stood Thessalonica, to the which S. Paule wrote his Epistle; and Athens, and Thebes, and all the Cities of Boetia, and the Cities of the Achai, Argos, Elis, and many other. Macedonia is by the best Writers and by auncient de∣scription rather sound to stand on the North-side of Achaia, neere to the hill Hamus, and to Thracia, though some in ig∣norance haue taught the contrarie. In this countrie of Graecia were in auncient time manie Kingdoms and States, as at this day there are in Italie: as the Macedonians, the kingdome of Epyrus, the State of Athens, the gouernment of Sparta, the citie of Thebes, and very ma∣ny other places: in so much that almost euery towne had a peculiar gouernmēt. But now it is all vnder one Monarchy.
From Graecia, in olde time, did almost all famous things come. These were they that made the warre against Troy; that resisted Xerxes the mightie king of Persia; that had the famous Law-makers; as Solon in Athens, and Licurgus in Lacedaemon; that tooke away the Monarchie from the Persi∣ans; that brought forth the famous Captaines, as Themisto∣cles, Miltiades, Alexander, and many other that were the authours of ciuilitie vnto the Westerne nations, and to some in the East; as Asia the lesse, that gaue to Italie and to the Romanes the first light of learning: because from them a∣rose the first Poets, as Homer, Hesiodus, Sophocles, and di∣uerse other; the great Philosophers, namely, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and all the Sects of the Academicks, Stoicks, Peri∣pateticks, Epicureans, and almost all their schollers; the great Oratours, Demosthenes, and Eschines, and in one worde (the Mathematiks excepted, which came rather from the Caldeans, and the Egyptians) the whole flower of Artes and good learning. On the North east part of Graecia standeth Thracia, which though heretofore it hath beene distinguished, yet now it is accounted as the chiefe part of Greece. Heere on the edge of the sea-coast, verie neete vnto Asia, standeth the citie called Bizantium: but since Constantinople; because Con∣stantine the great did new build it, and made it an imperiall citie. This was the chiefe residence of the Emperour of Grae∣cia, sometimes called new Rome, and the glorie of the East; where the generell Councell was once assembled: and one of the seas of the Patriarkes: who was called the Patriarke of Constantinople. But by the great discord of the Christians, all Graecia, and this City is fallen into the hands of the Turke: who nowe maketh it his place of imperiall abode. It was wonne in the time of Constantine the last Emperour: so that by Constantine it obtained his honour, and by Constantine it lost it. In this citie lieth resident with the Turke an Embas∣sador or Agent for the Queene of England. The Christians
that doe liue now in Gracia are in miserable seruitude vnto the Turke. They disagree in many things from the doctrine of the Church of Rome. De Mari Europam & Asiam interiacente. IT is saide before, that on the North-part betweene Asia and Europe the riuer Tanais doth runne as a bounde of them both. This riuer runneth into a Lake called Maeotis palus, which bordereth on the confines of Scythia, or Tartaria. This Maeotis doth disburden it selfe into a wide sea cal∣led Pontus Euxinus. At the mouth of this sea, is a verie great straight, knowne by the name of Thracius Bosphorus, where the breadth of the sea is not aboue one mile, seuering Asia and Europe. On the side of Europe standeth Constantinople: on the side of A∣sia, a Citie called Pera, which for the nearenesse, is by some reckoned a part of Constantinople. After this straight, the sea openeth it selfe more large towarde the South: and is called by the name of Propontus. But then it goo weth again into another straight, which they write to bee in bredth about two miles. This is called Hel∣lespontus, hauing on the one side Abidus in Asia, and on the other side Cestus, on the side of Europe. This is that place, where Xerxes the great King of Per∣sia did make his bridge ouer the sea: so much renowmed in auncient hystories, which was not impossible, by reason of the narrownesse: the foundation of his bridge being rested on ships. Here also may appeare the reason of that storie of Leander and Hero: which Leander, is reported for the loue of her, to haue oftentimes swoom ouer the sea, till at last he was drowned. From this strait Southward, the sea groweth more wide,
and is called afterwardes by the name of Mare aege, and so discendeth vnto the full Mediterran. De Asia, & primo de Tartaria. ON the North-side of Asia, ioyning vnto the dominion of the Emperour of Russia: is Tartaria, in auntient time called Scythia: the bounds whereof did then extend them∣selues into a good parte of Europe, and thereof was called Scythia Europhaea; but the greatest parte of it lyeth in Asia; A mightie large countrie, extending it selfe from the North to the vttermost sea. On the East, to the dominion of the great Cham, or Prince of Cathaio, on the South, downe to the Mare Caspim. The Tartarians which nowe inhabite it, are men of great stature, rude of behauiour, no Christians, but Gentiles: nei∣ther doe they acknowledge Mahomet. They haue sewe or no Cities among them: but after the manner of the olde Seythians, doe liue in wildernesses: lying vnder their cartes, and following their droaues of cattell, by the milke where∣of they doe nourish themselues. They sowe no come at all, because they abide not long in any one place: but taking their direction from the North-pole-starre, they remooue from one coast of their countrie vnto an other. The countrie is populous: and the men are great warri∣ors: sighting alwayes on horsebacke with their bowe and arrowes, and a short sworde. They haue among them infi∣nite store of horses: whereof they sell many vnto the coun∣tries adioyning. Their ordinarie foode in their warres, is horseflesh, which they vse to eate rawe, being chased a lit∣tle by hanging at their saddle. They haue great warres with the countries adioyning: but especially with the Moscouite, and sometimes with the Turke. From hence came Tamberlano, who brought seuen hundreth thousands of the Tartarians at once into the fielde: wherein he distressed and tooke prisoner, Baiazet the great
Turke; whome he afterwardes forced to feede as a dogge vnder his table. They haue now among them, many prin∣ces and gouernours, as those haue one, whome they call the Crim Tartars: and those haue another, which are the Tar∣tars of Nagaia, and so diuers other. The English haue laboured to their great expences, to finde out the way by the North Seas of Tartaria, to goe in∣to Cathaio and China. But by reason of the frozen seas, they haue not yet preuailed. Although it be now reported, that the Flemmings haue discouered that passage: which is like to be to the great benefite of the Northeme partes of Chri∣stendome. De Cathaio, & China. NExt beyond Tartaria on the North-east parte of Asia, lyeth a great countrye called Kathaie, or Kathaia: the boundes whereof extend themselues on the North, and East, to the vttermost seas, and on the South to China. The people are not much learned, but more ciuill then the Tar∣tars, and haue good and ordinarie trafique with the coun∣tries adioyning. This countrie hath in it many Kings, which are tributaries, and doe owe obedience vnto one, whome they call the great Cham or Cane of Kathaia: who is the chiefe gouernour of all the land: and esteemed for multi∣tude of people, and largenesse of Dominion, to be one of the great Princes of the world: but his name is the lesse fa∣mous: for that he lyeth so farre distant from the best nati∣ons: and the passage vnto his countrie is so daungerous, ey∣ther for the perils of the seas, or for the long space by land: his chiefe imperiall Citie is called Cambalu. On the South-side of Kathaie, and East parte of Asia next to the sea, lyeth China. The people whereof, Osorius describeth by the name of Sine: and calleth their countrie Sinarunt regio. This is a fruitfull countrie and yeeldeth great store of ritch commodities as almost any countrye in the
worlde. It containeth in it very many seuerall kingdomes, which are absolute Princes in their States. The chiefe cittie in this countrie is called Quinsay, and is described to be of incredible greatnesse, Such a citie as were wont to bee in anntient time in the East: as Babylon, Nilus, and other. This countrie was first discouered by the late nauigation of the Portugals into the East Indies. The people of China are learned almost in all Artes, very skilfull workemen in curious fine workes of all sortes: so that no countrie yeeldeth more precious marchandize then the workemanship of them. They are great souldiers, very politique and craftie, and in respecte thereof, contemning the wits of other vsing a Prouerbe, that all Nations doe see but with one eye: but that themselues haue two. Petrus Mathaeus historiographer to the King of Spaine for the Easterne Indies, doth reporte of them: that they haue had from very auntient time among them: these two things, which we holde to be the miracles of Christendome, and but lately inuented. The one is the vse of guns for their warres, & the other is printing: which they vse not as we do, writing from the left hand vnto the right: or as the Hebrewes, and Sirians; from the right hand vnto the left: but downe∣ward directly: & so their lines at the top to begin againe. De India orientali. ON the South-side of China, toward the Molucco I∣lands, and the Indian sea, lyeth the great countrie of India: extending it selfe from the South-east part of the con∣tinent, by the space of many thousand miles west-ward vnto the riuer Indus, which is the greatest riuer in all that coun∣trie, except Ganges, one of the greatest riuers in the world, which lyeth in the East-part of the same Indies. This is that countrie, so famous in ancient time for the great riches ther∣of, for the multitude of people, for the conquest of Bacchus
ouer it, for the passage thither of Alexander the great through all the length of Asia: for his aduenturing to goe into the South Ocean with so mightie a Nauie, which fewe or none had euer attempted before him. This countrie had in auncient time, many absolute king∣domes and princes; as in the time of Alexander, Porus, Taxi∣les, and diuers others. In it were many Phylosophers, and men of great learning: whome they called Gymnesophistae, of whome was Calanus, who burnt himselfe afore Alexan∣der. The men of the South-parte of India are blacke, and therefore are called men of Inde. The cattle of all sortes that are bred there, are of incredible bignes, in respect of other countries: as their Elephants, Apes, Munkies, and such like. The riches hereof hath bene very great with aboun∣dance of golde: insomuch, that the Promontorie, which is now called Malach, was in times past named Aurea Cher∣sonesus. The commoditie of spice is exceeding great that commeth from thence. The Portingales were the first, which by their long nauigations beyond the Equinoctial, and the farthermost parte of Africa, haue of late yeares dis∣couered these countries of India. As heretofore of the King of Portingale: so now of the King of Spaine, who is repu∣ted owner of them. The Portingales did finde diuers small kingdomes at their first arriuall in those partes, as the king of Calicut, frō whence commeth our Calicut linnen: the king of Cam∣baia, the king of Cananor, the king of Cochin, and v∣ry many other; with whome, they first entring league for trafique, and hauing leaue giuen to build Castles for their defence, they haue since by policie, encroched into their handes a great parte of the countrie which lyeth neare vnto the sea-coast, and are mightie now, for the space of many thousand miles together. The king of Spaine hath there a vice-roy; whose residence, is commonly in the Imperiall citie called Goa. They doe euery yeare send home great
store of riche commodities into Spaine. The people of the countrie when the Portingales came first thither, were for the most part Gentiles: beleeuing no one God. But the Saracens, who reuerence the Prophet Mahomet, from the baies, or gulfes of Persia, and Arabia, did trafique much thither: so that Mahomet was known among them. But in one towne called Crangarior, they founde di∣uers Christians, diffenting in many things from the Church of Rome, and rather agreeing with the Protestants: which Christians had reteined by successe their religion, from the time of Thomas the Apostle: by whom it is recorded by the auncient Ecclesiastical historie, part of India was conuerted De Persia. THere be diuers countries betweene India and Persia: but they are not famous. Persia is a large countrie, which lieth farre West from India, it hath on the North As∣syria, and Media: on the West, Syria, and the Holyland: but next vnto it Mesopotamie: on the South, the maine Ocean, which entereth in notwithstanding, by a bay called Sinus Persicus. This is that countrie, which in auncient time was so re∣nowmed for the great riches and Empire thereof. These were they, who took from the Assyrians the Monarchies and did set vp in their countrie, the second great Empire: which beganne vnder Cyrus: and continued vnto Darius: who was ouerthrowne by Alexander the great. In this Countrie raigned the great Kings: Cyrus, Canibises, Darius the sonne of Histaspes, the great Xerxes, Artaxerxes, and many other: which in prophane writinges are famous for their warres against the Scythians, Aegyptians, and Graecians, and in the Scripture, for the deliuerie of the Iewes from Babylon by Cyrus; for building of the second Temple at Ierusalem: and for manie things which are mencioned of them in the Pro∣phecie of Daniel.
The people of this nation, although they were in former times very riotous, by reason of their great wealth: yet after that they lost their Monarchy by the Macedonians, they haue growne great souldiers: and therefore as they euer did strongly defend themselues against the Romanes: so in the time of Constantine, and the other Emperours: they were fearfull neighbours to the Romane gouernment. And of late time, they haue strongly opposed then selues agaynst the Turkes, euer making their partie good with them. They fight commonlie on horse-back & are gouerned as in times past, by a King: so nowe, by an absolute ruler and mightie Prince: whom they tearme the Shawe, or Sophie of Persia. He hath many countries, and small Kings in Assyria, and Media, and the countries adioyning tributaries. The Persians are all at this day Sarazens in religion, be∣leeuing on Mahomet: but as Papists and protestants do dif∣for in opinion concerning the same Christ so do the Turkes and Persians about their Mahomet: the one pursuing the other as heretikes with most deadly hatred. In so much, that there be in this respect almost continuall warres betweene the Turkes, and the Persians. De Parthia, & Media. ON the North-east, side of Persia, lieth that countrie, which in old time was called Paerthia, but now named Arach, of whose great warres with the Medians, or Arme∣nians, or Romanes, in Tacitus, and ancient histories are true. The countrie boundeth on Media by the West, which was in auncient time very full of people, whose fight as it is very much on hors-backe, so the maner of them continually was for to giue an onset, and then to runne their wayes: but to re∣turne againe like to the wilde Irish, so that no man was sure when he had obtained any victorie ouer them. These were the people that gaue the great ouerthrow to that rich Marcus Crassus of Rome, who by reason his coue∣tousnesse,
intending more to his getting of gold, then to the guiding of his armie, was slaine himselfe, & many thousands of the Romanos. The Parthians with exprobration of his thirst after mony, powring molten gold into his mouth after he was dead. Against these, the great Lucullus fought many battailes: but the Romanes were neuer able to bring them quite in subiection. On the West-side of Parthia (the Mare Caspium being on the North. Armenia on the West, and Persia on the South) Here lieth that country which in times past was called Me∣dia, but now Shiruan, or Seruan: which is at this day gouer∣ned by many inferiour Kings and Princes which are tribu∣taries, and do owe subiection to the Sophy of Persia. So that he is the soueraigne Lord of all Media, as our English men haue founde: who passing through the dominion of the Em∣perour of Russia, haue crossed the Mare Caspium, and mr∣chandised with the inhabitants of this Media. This Nation in former time was verie famous: for the Medes were they that remoued the Empire from the Assi∣rians, vnto them: which as in themselues it was nor great. So when by Cyrus it was loyned by the Persians, it was verie mightie, and called by the name of the Empire of the Medes and Persians. Here it was that Afryages reigned, the grand∣father of Cyrus, and Darius of the Medes: the chiefe citie of this kingdome, was called Ecbatana, as the chiefe citie of Persia, is Babylon. De Armenia & Assyria. ON the West side of the Mare Caspium, and of Media, lieth a countrie called by a generall name Armenia, which is by some distinctlie deuided into three partes: the North part whereof being but little, is called Georgia: the middle part Turcomania: and the thirde part, by the proper, name of Armenia: by which a man may see the reason of difference in diuers writers. Some saying that the countrie
whence the Turkes first came, was Armenia: some say Turcomania: and some Georgia: the truth being, that out of one, or all these countries they be discended. These Turkes are supposed to be the issue of them: whome Alexander the great did shut vp within certaine mountaines neare to the Mare Caspium. There is this one thing Memorable in Armenia: that af∣ter the great floud the Arke of Noah did rest it selfe on the mountaines of Armenia: whereas Iosephus witnesseth, it is to be seene yet to this day. The hils wheron it rested are cal∣led by some Noe montes. The people of this Nation haue re∣tained among them the Christian faith, as it is thought, from the time of the Apostles: but at this day it is spotted with many absurdities. On the South parte of Armenia bending towarde the East, lieth the countrie of Assyria, which is bounded on the West with Mesopotamia. This country was that land, wher∣in the first Monarchie war setled, which began vnder Ni∣nus, which the Scripture calleth Nimrod: liuing not long af∣ter Noahs floud. And it ended in Sardanapalus: continuing for the space of a thousand and three hundred yeares. The King of this countrie was Senacharib; of whom we reade in the booke of Kings: and here raigned Nabuchadnezzer, who tooke Ierusalem, and led the Iewes away prisoners vn∣to Babylon. In this countrie, is the swift riuer Tygris, neare vnto the which, was Paradise: vpon this riuer stoode the great cittie Niniuie, called by prophane writers Ninus: which was al∣most of incredible bignes, and exceeding populous: but the nearnesse of the riuer, and maruailous fruitfulnes of the soile, which Herodotus writeth: did returne their corne some∣times two, sometimes three hundred folde, and did yeelde sufficiencie for to maintaine it. This citie for a long time was the imperiall feat of the Monarchie: but being destroyed, as God foretolde it should be by the Chaldeans: the residence
of the king, was afterwards remoued vnto Babylon, a great citie in Chaldea, first built by Semiramis. De Chaldaea. Next vnto Assyria, lieth Chaldaea: hauing on the East side Assyria, on the West Syria, or Palestina: on the North Armenia: on the South the desart of Arabia. This countrie is often called by the name of Mesopotamia, which name it hath, because it lieth in the middle of two great riuers, Ty∣gris, and Euphrates: it is called also by the name of Babilonia, which word of it selfe properly taken, doth signifie only that part of the countrie which standeth about Babylon. The chiefe citie hereof was Babylon, the ruines where∣of doe remaine to this day. It was a rich and most pleasant citie for all kind of delight: and was the imperiall citie of the Assyrians: where Nabuchadnessar, and other their great kings did lie. It was to this citie, that the children of Israel were caried captiues: which thereof was called the capti∣uitie of Babylon. The kings of Persia did also keepe their re∣sidence here: it was built vpon the riuer Euphrates, some part of it standeth on the one side, and some on the other: hauing so the foundresse, Semiramis, the wife of Ninus. It is supposed by Diuines, that in this Mesopotamia, be∣tween the riuer Tygris & Euphrates, Paradice did stand: this was the country wherin Abraham the Patriarke was borne: vnto the which the Romanes could very hardly extend their dominion. For they had much to do to get any such gouern∣ment of any thing beyond the riuer Euphrates. From this people it is thought that the wise men came, which brought presents vnto Christ, by the guiding of a starre. For as in India and all the Eastern parts, so especially in this countrie, their Noble men and Priestes, and verie ma∣nie people, doe giue themselues to all Artes of diuination: Here were the great Southsayers, Enchaunters, and wise men, as they call them: here the first Astrologians, which
are so descibed and derided in the Scripture: and agaynst the inhabitants of Babylon and Chaldaea were the lawes of the Romanes made, against deuining Mathematicians: who in Tullie de Diuinatione, & Cornelius Tacitus, as also in the lawes of the Emperours, are ordinary called by the name of Chaldeans: and in deede from these, and from the Egytians, is supposed to haue sprung the first knowledge of Astronomie. De Asia minori, ON the North-west side of Mesopotamia lieth that countrie which is now called Nitolia: but in times past Asia minor, hauing on the North-side Pontus Euxinus, on the West, the Hellespont, and on the South, the maine Mare Mediterraneum. In the auncient writers, both of the Grae∣cians, and of the Romanes, this is oftentimes called by the single name of Asia, because it was best knowne vnto them, and they were not so much acquainted with the farther places of Asia the great. This countrie in generall, for the fruitfulnesse of the land standing in so temperate a Climate, and for the con∣ueniencie of the Sea euery way, and so many good hauens, hath beene reputed alwayes a verie commodious and plea∣surefull countrie. It is wholie at this day vnder the Turke. The mountaine Taurus goeth along from the West, vnto the East part of it. The greatnesse of it is such, that it hath comprehended many kingdomes and great prouinces, beside cities of great fame. On the South-east part thereof, neare Palaestina, ly∣eth Cilicia: the chiefe citie thereof is Tarsus, the countrie of Saint Paul: the place whither Salomon sent for great store of his golde, and prouision for the Temple, whither Ionas also fled, when he should haue gone to Niniue. In the straites of this Cilicia, neere to the mountaine Taurus, did Alexander giue the great ouerthrowe in person to Darius,
in the ioyning of their first battaile. Westward from Cilicia, lyeth the prouince called Pam∣philia: wherein standeth the citie Saeleucia, built by Seleucus, one of the foure great successors of Alexander the great. On the West of this Pamphilia, extending it selfe euen to the sea, is Lydia, where reigned sometime Croesus, who was so renowmed for his aboundant riches. Herein standeth as a sea-towne, Halicarnassus the countrie of Herodotus, and of Dionysius, who wrote the Romane Historie: which cittie was sometimes a kingdome, as in the time of Xerxes: to whose aide against the Graecians, did goe Artimisia, the Queene of Halicarnasse, and here raigned Ada another Queene, in the time of Alexander the great. Vpon the sea-coast, Northward from Lydia, standeth di∣uers of those cities, vnto the which, Iohn in his Reuellation did write his seuen Epistles, as Smyrna, Pergamus, Sardis, and Ephesus: but other of them, as Laodicia, Philadelphia, Thia∣tira, doe stand more in the inland. Sardis was a citie of great pleasure and profite: which is that place, the winning whereof by the Greekes did so dis∣please one of the kings of Persia; that he caused it euerie day at dinner to be remembred vnto him, that the Graecians had taken Sardis: and that he must not cease till he had recoue∣red it againe. Ephesus was one of the most famous cities of the worlde, the greatest glorie whereof did arise by reason of the most magnificent Temple of Diana, which was at Ephesus: to the building whereof all Asia the lesse did verie bountifully contribute. It is reported to haue beene two hundred yeeres in buil∣ding: and at seuen seuerall times, as otherwise, so especiallie by lightning, to haue bin set on fire: but the final destruction of it was by a base person named Herostratus: who of pur∣pose set it on fire, to make himselfe famous. More Northward toward the Sea-coast lyeth Phrygia,
which was the countrie from whence the Goddesse called Bona Dea, or Pessinuntia, and Cybile was brought to Rome. In this countrie liued Gordius, who knit that knot that Alex∣ander cut: hoping thereby to obtaine (as an oracle had fore∣tolde) the whole kingdome of Asia. In this countrie stoode Troy, the siege whereof by the Graecians, is made so famous by the Poetrie of Homer and of Virgil. Yet Northwarde from Phrygia lyeth the Countrie of Bithynia, which was sometimes a kingdome where Pru∣sias raigned, that had so much to doe with the Romanes. In this countrie standeth the citie Nicea, where the first gene∣rall Councel was held against Arrius the Heretike, by Con∣stantine the great: thereof called the Nicene Councell. Here standeth also Chalcedon, where the fourth general Councell was held by the Emperour Martianus, against the heretike Nestorius. From Bithynia East-ward, on the North-side of Asia the lesse, standeth the countrie of Paphlagonia, where was the ci∣tie built by Pompey the great, called of his name Pompeio∣polis. From thence Eastward, ioining to Armenia, is the king∣dome of Capadocia, which bordereth on Armenia: & North∣ward from thence, near to the sea called Pontus Euxinus, lieth the kingdome of Mithridates: which was called Pontus. This Mithridates had long warres with the Romanes, whose sub∣iects he caused to be slaine all in one night throughout Asia the lesse. He was afterward ouerthrowne by Pempey the great Romane. By him was inuented that preseruatiue a∣gainst poison, which of his name is called Mithridate. There were also in Asia the lesse some other small countries, as Ga∣latia, Lycia, Caria, and some other. De Syria, & Palaestina. SOuthward from Cilicia, and Asia the lesse, lieth Syria, cal∣led Palaestina, hauing on the East Mesopotamia, on the South Arabia, on the West Tire and Sidon, and the end of the
Mediterran sea. The people of this Syria, were in times past called the Aramites. In their language is the translation of the new Testament, called the Syriacke. In this countrie standeth Antioch, which was sometimes one of the famous Patriarks seas, and is a citie of reckoning vnto this day. Here also standeth now the Citie of Aleppo, which is a famous Mart towne for the Marchandizing of the Persians, and other of the East, and for the Turkes, and such countries as bee adioyning. Here standeth also Tripolis. The South part of Syria, lying downe toward Aegypt and Arabia, was the place where the children of Israel did dwel; beeing a countrie but of small quantitie, not in length two hundren Italian miles: yet was so fruitfull, flowing with milk and honie (as the scripture calleth it) that both it did main∣taine aboue thirtie kings and their people, before the com∣ming of the children of Israel out of Egypt; and also was suf∣ficient afterwarde to relieue the incredible number of the twelue tribes of Israel. It was noted of this countrie, that whereas by the good∣nesse of the Climate wherein it stoode, and the fertilitie of the soile (but especially by the blessing of God) it was the most fruitfull land that was in the world: nowe our trauailers by experience doe finde the countrie, in respect of the fruit∣fulnesse, to bee changed; God cursing the land, together with the Iewes, the inhabitants of it. It is obserued also for all the Easterne parts, that they are not so fertile as they haue beene in former ages. The earth as it were growing olde, which is an argument of the dissolution to come by the day of iudgement. Through this countrie doth runne the riuer Iordan, which hath heretofore beene famous for the fruitfulnesse of the trees standing thereupon, and for the mildnesse of the aire, so that (as Iosephus writeth) when snow hath layen in other places of the land, about the riuer it hath bin so calme
that men did goe in single thinne linnen garments. In this countrie standeth the Lake called Lacus Asphalti∣tes, because of a kinde of slime, or Bytumen, which dayly it doth cast vp, being of force to ioyne stones exceeding fast in building. This Lake is it, which is called Mare mortuum, a Sea, be∣cause it is salt and dead, for that no liuing thing is therein: the water whereof is so thicke, that fewe thinges will sinke therein: insomuch, that Iosephus saith, that an Oxe hauing all his legges bound, will not sinke in that water. The nature of this lake was turned into this qualitie, when God did destroy Sodome and Gomorra, and the citties adioy∣ning with fire and brimstone from heauen: for Sodom and the other cities did stand neare vnto Iordan, and to the Ma∣re mortuum: for the destruction of whome, all that coast to this day is a witnes: the earth smelling of brimstone, being desolate, and yeelding no fruite sauing apples, and such, which growing with a faire shewe to the eye lyke other fruite: assone as they are touched, turne presently to ashes: as besides Iosephus, Solinus doth witnes. The land of Palaestina had for inhabitants all the twelue tribes of Israell, which were vnder one kingdome, till the time of Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon. But then were they deuided into two kingdomes: ten tribes being called Israel, and two being called Iuda, whose chiefe Citie was called Ierusalem. Then the tribes after much Idolatrie, were caried prisoners into Assyria, and the kingdome dissolued: other people being placed in their roome in Samaria, and the countrie adioyning. The other two tribes were properly called the Iewes, & their land Iudaea, which continued long after in Ierusalem, and thereabout, till the captiuitie of Babylon: where they li∣ued for 70. yeares. They were afterward restored: but liued without glory till the comming of Christ. But since his time, for a curse vpon them and their children, for putting Christ
to death, they are scattered vpon the face of the earth as run∣nagates, without certaine countrie, King, Priest, or Prophet. In their chiefe Citie Ierusalem was the Temple of God, first most gloriously built by Salomon, and afterwarde de∣stroyed by Nabuchadnezzer. By the commaundement of Cyrus King of Persia, was a second Temple built, much more base then the former: for besides the pouertie, and smalnesse of it, there wanted fiue thinges which were in the former, as the Iewes write. First the Arke of the couenant: Secondly, the pot of Manna: Thirdly, the rod of Aron: Fourthly, the two tables of the lawe written by the finger of God: and fiftly, the fire for the sacrifice which came downe from heauen. Herod the great, an Edomite stranger, hauing gotten the kingdome, contrary to the lawe of Moses, and knowing the people to be offended therewithall, to pro∣cure their fauour, did build a third Temple, much more glo∣rious then the second, which was that Temple wherein our Sauiour Christ and his Apostles did teach. The Citie of Ierusalem was twise taken, and vtterly laid desolate: first by Nabuchadnezzer at the captiuitie of Baby∣lon: and secondly after the death of Christ by Vespatian the Romaine (who first began the siege) and by his sonne Ti∣tus, who was afterward Emperour of Rome: who brought such horrible desolation on that Citie, and the people there∣of by sire, sworde, and famine, that the lyke hath not bin read in any historie. He did afterward put thousands of them on some one day, to be deuoured by the beastes, which was a cruell custome of the Romaine magnificence. After this destruction, the land of Iudaea, and the ruines of Ierusalem, were possessed by some of the people adioy∣ning, till that aboute 600. yeares since, the Sarazens did in∣uade it: for the expelling of whome from thence, diuers Frenchmen, and other Christians, vnder the leading of Godfrey of Bullen, did assemble themselues: thinking it a great shame, that the Holy land as they called it, the Citie
of Ierusalem, and the place of the sepulchre of Christ, should be in the hands of the Infidels. This Godfrey ruled in Ierusalem by the name of a Duke: but his successors after him, for the space of sixe score yeares, called themselues Kings of Ierusalem: aboute which time, Saladine who called himselfe King of Aegypt, and Asia the lesse, did win it from the Ch istians: for the recouery where∣of, Richard the first, King of England, together with the French King, and the King of Cicilia, did goe in person with their armies to Ierusalem: but although they wonne many thinges from the infidels, yet the ende was, that the Sara∣zens did retaine the Holy land. The whole countrie and citie of Ierusalem, are now in the dominion of the Turke: who notwithstanding for a great tribute, doeth suffer many Christians to abide there. There are therefore nowe two, or more monasteries, and religious houses where Friers doe abide, and make a good commo∣ditie by shewing of the sepulchre of Christ, and other monu∣ments vnto such Christian pilgrims, as doe vse superstiti∣ously to goe in pilgrimage to the Holy land. The King of Spaine calleth himselfe at this day, King of Ierusalem. De Arabia. NExt vnto the Holy land, lyeth the great countrie of A∣rabia, hauing on the North-parte Palestina, and Mese∣potamia: on the East the gulfe of Persia: on the South the maine Ocean of India or Aethiopia: on the West, Aegipt, and the great bay called Sinus Arabicus, or the redde sea. This countrie is deuided into three partes: the North parte whereof, is called Arabia deserta; the South parte, which is the greatest, is named Arabia Foelix, and in the middle betweene both, which for the aboundance of Rockes and Stones, is called Arabia Petrea, or Petrosa. The deserte of Arabia is that place, in which God after the deliuery of the Israelites from Egypt, by passing through the red sea, did
keepe his people vnder Moses for fortie yeares, because of their rebellion; feeding them in the meane time with Manna from heauen, & sometime with water miraculously drawne out of drie rockes: for the country hath verie little water, al∣most no trees, and is vtterly vnfit for tillage or corne. There are no townes nor inhabitants in all this desert: in Arabia Petrosa are some, but not many. Arabia Foelix, for fruitfulnes of the ground, and conueni∣ent standing euerie way towarde the sea, is one of the best countries of the world: but the principall cause why it is cal∣led Foelix, is for that it yeeldeth many things in aboundance, which in other parts of the world are not to be had: as Fran∣kincense, especially the most precious balmes, myrhe, and many other, both fruits and spices, and it yeeldeth withall, store of some precious stones. This is that countrie wherein Mahomet wes borne, who being of meane parentage, was brought vp in his youth in the trade of merchandise; but afterward ioyning himselfe with theeues and robbers, his life was to rob such marchants as passed through Arabia; and to this purpose hauing gotten togither many of his owne countrimen, he had afterwardes a whole legion or more out of the Romane souldiours: who being offended with Heraclius the Romane Emperour, for want of their pay, ioined themselues to him: so that at length hee had a great armie, wherewith hee spoyled the countrie adioyning. To maintaine his credit & authoritie with his owne men, he fained that he had conference with the holy Ghost, at such time as he was troubled with the falling sicknes, and accordingly, he ordained a new religion, consisting partly of Iewish ceremonies, and partly of Christian doctrine, and some other things of his owne inuention, that hee might in∣ueagle both Iewes and Christians, and yet by his own fancy distinguish his followers from both. The booke of his reli∣gion is called the Alcoran. The people which were his Sec∣taries
(whereas in deed they came of Hagar the hand maid of Sara Abrahams wife: and therefore should of her be cal∣led Ismaelites, or Hagarens) because they would not seeme to be come of a bond woman, and from him whom they suppose a bastard: they terme themselues Sarazens, as com∣ming from Sara, they are called by some writers Arabians in stead of Sarazens, their name beeing drawne from their first countrie. In the countrie of Arabia standeth a citie called Mecha, which is the place where Mahomet was buried, and in re∣membrance of him there is built a great Temple: vnto the which, the Turkes and Sarazens doe yearlie goe on pilgri∣mage, as some Christians do to the Holie land. For they ac∣count Mahomet to be the greatest Prophet that euer came into the world: saying that there were three great Prophets Moses, Christ, and Mahomet: and as the doctrine of Moses was bettered by Christ, so is the doctrine of Christ amen∣ded by Mahomet. In this respect, as we reckon the com∣putation of our yeares from the incarnation of Christ, so the Sarazens account theirs from the time of Mahomet. The Turkes, whose fame began now about two hundred yeares since, haue imbraced the opinions and the religion of the Sarazens, concerning Mahomet. On the West-side of Arabia, betweene that, and Egypt, lieth the gulfe called of the country, Sinus Arabicus, by some Mare Erythreum, but commonly the red Sea: not of one Erythrus as some suppose; but because the sand and bankes there-about are in colour red. This is that sea, through the which, by Moses, the people of Israel were led, when they fled out of Egypt from Pharao: God causing by his power, the waters to stand on both sides of them, which they passed through as on drie land. This is that sea, through the which, the spices of the East Indies were in times past brought to Alexandria in Aegypt. and from thence dispersed into Christendome by the Ve∣netians:
which spices and Apothicarie drugs are found to be far worse then before time they were, by reason of the great moisture which they take on the water, by the long nauiga∣tion of the Portingales, by the backe part of Africa. This is that sea, through the which Salomon did send for his golde, and other precious marchandise vnto the East In∣dies, and not to the West Indies, as some lately haue dispu∣ted. Whereout the vanitie of that opinion may appeare, that America and the West Indies were knowne in the time of Salomon: for if he had sent thither, his course had beene a∣long the Med. and through the straights of Gibraltar, com∣monly called Fretum Herculeum, between Spaine and Bar∣barie. But the Scripture telleth, that the nauie which Salo∣mon sent forth, was built at Eseon Gabar: which there also is said to stand on the red sea: so his course might be East-ward or South-ward, not West-ward. In the desert of Arabia is the Mount Horeb: which by some is supposed to bee the same that is called the Mount Sina: where manie thinke it was, that Abraham shoulde haue offered vp his sonne Isaac: but it is certaine, that it was the place, where God in the Wildernesse, did giue vnto the people of Israel his law of the ten commaundements, with thundering, lightning, and earth-quake, in most fearefull manner. De Africa, & Egypto. FRom Arabia, and Palastina, toward the West, lyeth A∣frica; hauing on the North-side, from the one end of it to the other, the Mediter. sea. The greatest part of which countrie, although it hath beene gessed at by writers in for∣mer time, yet because of the great heate of it, lying for the most parte vnder the Zona Torrida, and for the Wildernes∣ses therein, it was in former times supposed by manie, not to bee much inhabited: but of certaintie by all, verie little discouered: till the Portingales of late beganne their naui∣gation
on the backe-side of Africa, to the East Indies. So ex∣act a description is not therefore to bee looked for, as hath beene of Asia, and Eurupa. Ioyned to the Holy land by a little Isthmos is the coun∣trie of Aegypt, which is a land most fruitfull, as any almost in the world, although in these daies it doth not answere to the felicitie of former time. This is it which in the time of Ioseph did relieue Canaan with corne, and the familie of Iacob, which did so multiplie in the land of Aegypt, that they were growne to an huge multitude, when God by Moses did de∣liuer them from thence. This countrie did yeeld exceeding aboundance of corne vnto the citie of Rome, whereupon Aegypt, as well as Cicilia, was commonly called Horreum populi Romani. It is obserued from all antiquitie, that almost neuer any raine did fall in the land of Egypt: whereupon the raining, with thunder, & lightning, and fire running on the ground, was so much the more strange: when God plagued Pharao in the dayes of Moses. But the flowing of the riuer Nilus ouer all the countrie (their cities onely and some fewe hils excepted) doth so water the earth, that it bringeth foorth fruit abundantly. The flowing of which riuer yearly is one of the greatest miracles of the world, no man being able to yeeld a sufficient and assured reason thereof: although in Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus, many probable causes and opinions are assigned thereof. It is noted of this riuer, if in ordinarie places it doe flow vnder the height of fifteene cubites, that for want of moy∣sture, the yeare is not fruitfull; and if it do flow aboue seuen∣teene cubites, that there is like to bee a dearth by reason of the aboundance of the moysture, the water lying longer on the land then the inhabitants do desire. In Egypt hath learning bin very auncient. But especially the knowledge of Astronomie and Mathematicks: whereof before the time of Tullie, their Priests would report, that
they had the discent for 1500. yeares exactly recorded, with obseruation Astrologicall: which as it is a fable, vnlesse they doe reckon their yeares by the Moone (as some sup∣pose they did euery moneth, for a yeare) so it doth argue knowledge to haue bene among them very antient: their Priestes had among them a kinde of writing, and of descri∣bing thinges by picture: which they did call their Hiero∣glyphica. This in times past was a kingdome, and by the Kinges thereof were built those great Pyramides, which were held to be one of the seuen wonders of the world, being mightie huge buildings, erected of exceeding height, for the mag∣nificence of their founders. There is part of two or three of them remaining vnto this day. In Aegipt did stand the great Citie Memphis, which is at this day called Cairo, one of the most famous Cities of the East. Here did Alexander build that Citie, which vnto this day is of his name called Alexan∣dria, bing now the greatest Citie of merchandize in all Ae∣gipt: of which Ammiamus Marcellinus doth obserue, that there is neuer any day, or almost hath euer bene: but that once in that day, the Sun hath bene seene to shine ouer A∣lexandria. This Citie was one of the foure principall seas, and remaineth so at this time. This countrie was gouerned by a King, as long agone, as almost any in the worlde. Here raigned Amasis, who made those good lawes spoken of by Herodotus, and Dio∣dorus Siculus, in whose writings the antient customes of the Aegiptians are worthie to be read. After Alexanders time, Ptolomeus one of his captaines had this kingdome, of whome all his successors were called Ptolomeis, as before time all their Kings were called Pha∣rao. They continued long friendes, and in league with the people of Rome, till the time of Iulius Caesar: but afterward they were as subiects to the Romaines, till the Empire did decaye,
When they had withdrawne themselues from the Ro∣maine gouernement, they set vp a Prince of their owne: whome they tearmed the Sultan, or Souldan of Aegipt: of whome, about 400. yeares sinee, Saladine was one. But when the race of these was out, the Mamalukes (who were the garde of the Sultan, as the Ianisaries to the Turke) ap∣pointed a Prince at their pleasure, till that nowe aboute an 100. yeares agone, or lesse, the Turke possessed himselfe with sole gouernement of the countrie: so that at this day, Aegipt is wholy vnder the Turke. There be Christians that now liue in Aegipt, for their tri∣bute vnto the Turke, as they doe now in Graecia. De Cyrene & Africa minori. ON the West-side of Aegipt, lying along the Mediter∣ran, is a countrie which is called in olde time Cyrene: wherein did stand that Oracle which was so famous in the time of Alexander the great, called by the name of the Temple or Oracle of Iupiter Hammon: whither, when Alex∣ander did repaire, as to aske counsell of himselfe and his suc∣cesse, the Priests being before taught what they should say, did flatteringly professe him to be the sonne of a God, and that he was to be adored: so that as the Oracle of Delphos, and some other were plaine delusions of Satan, who did raigne in that darke time of ignorance, so this of Iupiter Hammon may be well supposed to bee nothing else but a cousinage of the Priestes. In this countrie and all neare aboute where the Oracle stoode, are very great wildernesses: where did appeare to Alexander, for foure dayes iourney, neither Grasse, Tree, Water, Man, Bird, nor Beast; but onely a deep kinde of sand: so that he was inforced to carry water with him for himselfe and his company, and all other prouision on Camels backs. At this day this countrie hath lost his olde name, and is rec∣koned as a parte of Aegipt, and lyeth vnder the Turke.
Westward from hence, along the Mediterran, lyeth the countrie which in auntient time was called Afried minor: for as in Asia one part aboue another was by an excellencie called Asia, or Asia the lesse: so this parte of Afrike was ter∣med by the Romaines sometimes Africa simply, sometimes Afica the lesse. In this countrie did stand that place so fa∣mous, mentioned by Salust: vnder the neme of Phileni Arae, which was the bound in that time, betweene Africa and Cyrene. On the Notth and East parte hereof, in the sea neare vn∣to the shore, was that quicke-sand, which in times past did destroy so many shippes: and was called Syrtis Magna: as also, on the North and West parte was the other sand, cal∣led Syrtis parua. Some part of this countrie was heretofore vnder the Sultane of Egypt, whose dominion did extend it selfe so far to the West: & there it was deuided frō the king∣dome of Tunis: but it is now wholy vnder the Turke, and is commonly reputed as a parte of Barbarie. For now by the generall name, from the confines of Cyrene vnto the West, as farre as Hercules his pillars, all the whole space is called Barbarie: though it conteine in it diuers kingdomes, as Tunis, Fessa, and Marocco. De Mauritania Caesariensi. AParte of that countrie, which by a generall name is called at this day Barbary, hath in olde time bin cal∣led Mauritania, which was deuided into two partes: the East part whereof next to Africa minor, was called by the Romaines Mauritania Caesariensis, as the other was called Mauritania Tingitana. In Mauritania Caesariensis was the countrie of Numidia, the people whereof were vsed in the warres of the Carthaginians as light-horse men, and for nimble seruices very actiue. In the East-parte of this countrie standing in the Sea, was that amous Citie of Carthage, supposed to be built by
Dido, who came from Tyrus. This Citie was it which for the space of some hundreth yeares contended with Rome for the Empire of the worlde. In the Romaine histories are recor∣ded three great warres which the people of Rome had with the Citie of Carthage. In the first of the three, their contention was for the Iles of Cicilia, Corsica, and Sardinia: when the victorie fell to the Romaines, and the Carthaginians were glad to redeeme their peace with the leauing of those Ilands. The second warre was begunne by Hannibal, who brake the league, and after he had taken some parte of Spaine from the Ro∣maines, and sacked Saguntum, a citie of their friendes, came first ouer the Pyrenie hills to France, then ouer the Alpes to Italie, where he ouerthrew the Romaines in three great bat∣tailes: and much endaungered their state: he continued in Italie with his armie sixteene yeares: till Scipio attempting on Carthage, forced Hannibal to returne to rescue his owne countrie. There was Hannibal ouerthrowne, and his Citie put to a great pension by Scipio: who for his victorie there, was named Africanus. In the third warre, because the people of Cartharge still brake their leage, their Citie was razed to the very grounde, by the earnest and continuall sure of Cato the elder, fearing euermore so dangerous a neighbour, though Scipio Nasica counselled to the contrarie: fearing least if the dread of that enemie were taken away, the Romanes would grow eyther to idlenes, or to ciuill dissension, which after they did. It is reported of Cato, that he neuer spake his iudgement of any thing in the Senate, but his conclusion was thus: Thus I thinke for this matter, and withall, that Carthage is to be ra∣zed downe. And Scipio Nasica would reply in his conclu∣sion: Thus I thinke of this matter, and withall, that Car∣thage is not to be razed downe. In this countrie towards the West not far from Carthage stood Vtica, whereof the younger Cato was termed Cato Vti∣censis,
because hee killed himselfe there, in the ciuill warres betweene Pompey and Caesar: because he would not come within the handes of his enemie Caesar. Not farre from thence Westwarde standeth Hippon, which was the Citie where S. Austen was Bishop. This whole countrie at this day is called the kingdome of Tunis, the king whereof is a kinde of Stipendarie vnto the great Turke. The people that in∣habit there are generally Sarazens, and do professe Maho∣mets religion. De Mauritania Tingitana. THe other part of Barbarie that lieth along the Mediter∣ran. farthest into the west was called in olde time Man∣ritania Tingitana. The people of which countrie were those which almost in all olde hystories were called by the name of Mauri. Those of the other Mauritania being rather ter∣med Namidae. Into the Northwest part hereof did Hercules come, and there did set vp one of his pillars, which aunswereth to the other in Spaine, at the straights of Gibraltar in times past cal∣led Fretum Herculeum. On the South part hereof lay the kingdome of Bocchus, which in the time of Marius had so much to doe with the Romanes. In the Westpart of this Mauritania, standeth the hill called Atlas minor; and on the South part is the great hill called Atlas maior, whereof the maine Ocean which lieth betweene Mauritania and Ame∣rica, is called Mare Atlanticum. This hill is so high, that vnto those who stoode on the bottome of it, it seemed to touch heauen with his top: whereupon grew that fable of the Poets, that Atlas was a giant, who helde vp heauen with his shoulders. This countrie hath beene long inhabited by the Sarazens, who from thence, finding it to be but a short passage into Spain, did go ouer now seuen hundred yeers agone: and pos∣sessed there the kingdome of Granado on the South-side of
Spaine: till they were thence expelled by Ferdinandus and Elizabeth, or Isabell, King and Queene of Castile. In this countrie since that time, haue the Spaniards taken some cities and holdes: and so also haue the Portingales: which by the diuers euent of victorie, haue often beene lost and wonne by them. Here it was that the Emperou: Charles the fift had di∣uerse of his great warres agaynst the Moores, as well as in the kingdome of Timis. For the assistance of one, who claimed to bee King of a part of this Countrie, did Seba∣stian the king of Portingale goe with all his power into A∣frica, in the yeare 1578. where vnaduisedly bearing him∣selfe, hee was slaine togither with two other, dying that day, who claymed to bee Kings: so that there it was, that the battaile was sought: whereof it is said, that three kings dyed in one day: which battaile was the ruine of the king∣dome of Portingale: and the cause of the vniting of a to the Crowne of Spaine. Astrolegers did suppose, that the blaging Starre which appeared the yeare before did signifie that ill euent. This whole countrie doth containe in it, besides, some imperiall gouernment, two absolute kingdomes: the one the kingdome of Eezza, or Fes, which lieth on the North∣part toward the Mediter. and Spaine: the other is the king∣dome of Marocco, which lieth from about the hill Atlas mi∣nor, to the South and West part of Mauritania. These are both Sarazens, as be also their people: holding true league with the Turke; and with some other Christian Princes, a league onely for trefique or Marchandise. De reliquis Africae regionbius. maritimis. FRom beyond the hils Atlas maior, vnto the South of A∣frica is nothing almost in antiquitie worthy the reading,
and those things which are written for the most part are fa∣bles. In the new Writers there are some few things to be ob∣ferued As first, that all the people in generall to the South, lying within the Zona torrida, are not onely blackish like the Moores; but are exceedingly blacke. And therefore as in olde time, by an excellencie, some of them were called Ni∣grita; so that to this day they are named Negros, as then whome no men are blacker. Secondly, that the inhabitants of all these parts which bor∣der or the sea coast, euen vnto Caput bonae spei, haue beene Gentiles, adoring Images and foolish shapes for their gods; neither hearing of Christ, nor beleeuing on Mahomet, till such time as Portingales cōming in among them, haue pro∣fessed Christ for themselues; but haue wonne fewe of the people to imbrace their religion. Thirdly, that the Portin∣gales passing along Africa vnto the East Indies, haue fetled themselues in many places of those countries, building Ca∣stles and townes for their owne safetie, and to keepe the people in subiection to their great commoditie. One of the first countries famous beyond Marocco, is Guinea, which we call Ginnie: within the compasse whereof lieth the cape called Cape Ʋerde: and the other, the Cape of the three points, and the towne and Castle named Sierra Liona, at which places commonly all trauailers doe touch that doe passe that way for fresh water, and other shippe-prouision. Our English men haue founde trafique into the partes of this countrie: where their greatest commoditie as golde, and Elephants teeth: of both which there is very good store. Beyond that toward the South, not farre from the equi∣noctiall line, lyeth the kingdome of Congo, commonlie called Manicongo: Where the Portingales at their first arriuall, finding the people to bee heathens without God, did induce them to a profession of Iesus Christ: and to bee baptized in great aboundance: allowing of the principles
of religion: vntill such time as the Priests did teach them to leade their liues according vnto their profession: which the most part of them in no case enduring, they returned backe againe vnto their Gentilisme. Beyond Manicongo, so farre to the South as almost ten degrees beyonde the tropicke of Capricorne, lyeth the landes ende: which is a promontorie, now called by the name of Caput bone spei: which Vascus Gama the Portin∣gale did discouer, and so called it: because hee had there good hope that the land did turne to the North: and that fol∣lowing the course thereof, he might bee brought to Arabia, and Persia: but especially to Calicut in India. Which course, when himselfe and other of his countrimen after him did follow: they founde on the coast vp towarde Arabia, the kingdome of Mozambique, Melinde, Magadaxa, and other: whose people were all Gentiles, and now are in league with the Portingales: who haue built diuerse holdes for their safetie: of which Countries and manners of the people, he that listeth to reade, may finde much in the hystories of Osorius, and Petrus Maffeus. But there is no matter of any great importance. De Abissina, & imperio Pres∣byteri Iohannis. IN the inland of Africa lyeth a verie large Countrie, ex∣tending it selfe on the East, to some part of the redde sea; on the South, to the kingdome of Melinde, and a great way farther; on the North, vnto Egypt; on the West vnto Mani∣corgo: the people whereof are called Abissini, and it selfe, the dominion of him, whom wee commonly call in English Prester Iohn: but in Latine some tearme him, Preciosus Io∣hannes, because of his riches; but in the most part Presbiter Iohannes: writing of him, that as he is a prince absolute, so he hath also a Priestlike, or Patriarchall function & iurisdiction
among them. This is a very mightie prince, and reputed to be one of the greatest Emperours of the worlde. What was knowne of this countrie in former time was knowne vnder the name of Aethiopia: but the voyages of the Portingales in these late dayes haue best described it. The people therefore are Christians: as is also their prince: but differing in many thinges from the West Church: and in no sorte acknowledging any supreme prerogatiue of the Bishop of Rome. It is thought that they haue retayned chri∣stianitie, euen from the time of our Sauiour, being supposed to bee conuerted by the Chamberlaine of Candace the Queene of Aethiopia: who was instructed concerning Christ, by Phillip the Euang. in the Actes of the Apostes. Eu∣seb. in his Ecclesiasticall storie doth make mention of this. But they doe to this day retaine Circumcision: whereof the reason may be, that the Eunuch their conuerter not hauing any further conference with the Apostle, nor any else for him, did receiue the ceremonies of the Church vnperfect∣ly, retaining Circumcision: which among the Iewes was not abolished, when he had conference with Phillip. Within the dominion of Prester Iohn are the mountaines commonly called Lune montes, where is the first well-spring and arising of the riuer Nylus: which riuer running violent∣ly along this countrie, and sometimes hastely increasing by the melting of much snow from the mountaines, would o∣uer-run and drowne a great parte of Aegipt: but that it is slaked by many ponds, dams, & sluces, which are within the dominion of Prester Iohn. And in respect hereof, for the maintenance of these, the Princes of Aegipt haue paid vnto the gouernor of Abissines a great tribute time out of minde: which of late the great Turke supposing to bee a custome needelesse, did denye: till the people of the Abissines by commaundement of their Prince, did breake downe their dammes, and drowning Aegipt, did inforce the Turke to continue his paye, and to giue much money for the newe
making of them very earnestly, to his great charge, desi∣ring a peace. There be other Countries in Africa, as Agisimbae, Libiae in∣terior, Nubia, and other of whome nothing is famous. But this may be said of Africa in generall, that it bringeth forth store of all sortes of wilde beastes, as Elephants, Lyons, Pan∣thers, Tigers, and the like: yea, according to the Prouerbe, Africa sempor aliquid apportet noui. Oftentimes newe and strange shapes of beastes are brought forth there. The rea∣son whereof is, that the countrie being hot and full of wil∣dernesses which haue in them little water, the beastes of all sortes are inforced to meete at those fewe warring places that be, where oftentimes contrarie kindes haue coniun∣ction the one with the other: so that there ariseth newe kindes or species, which taketh parte of both. Such a one is the Leopard begotten of the Lyon, and the beast called Dardus, somewhat resembling either of them. And thus fat of Africa. De Insulis septentrionalibus. THe Ilands that doe lie in the North, are in number al∣most infinite the chiefe of them onely shall be briefe∣ly touched. Very farre to the North, in the same clymate almost with Sweden that is vnder the very circle arctick, ly∣eth Ireland, called in olde time Thule, which was then sup∣posed to be the farthest parte of the worlde Northward, and and therefore is called by Virgill, Vltima Thule: the coun∣trie is colde, the people barbarous, and it yeeldeth little com∣moditie sauing Hankes: in some parte of the yeare there is no night at all. Southward from thence lyeth Frizeland, cal∣led in Latine Frizelandia, whereas the Frizeland ioyning to Germanie, is in Latine called Frizia. On the coast of Ger∣manie, one of the seuenteene prouinces is called Zeland, which containeth in it diuers Ilandes, in whome little is fa∣mous, sauing that in one of them is Ʋlishing, or Firshing, a
towne of warre: and at Middleburg, in an other, a place of good marte. The States of the Lowe-countries doe holde this prouince vnited against the King of Spaine. These Ilands haue bene much troubled of late with inundation of waters. The Iland that lyeth most West of any fanie, is Ireland, which had in it heretofore many kings of their owne; but the whole land is now annexed vnto the crowne of England: The people naturally rude and superstitious; the countrie good and fruitefull: but that for want of tillage in diuers pleces, they suffer it to growe into bogges, and desertes. That is true of this countrie (which Solmus writeth of some other) that serpents and adders doe not breede here; and in the Irish timber, of certaine experience, no spiders webbe is euer founde. The most renowned Iland in the worlde is Albion, or Britannia; which hath heretofore contained in it many se∣uerall kingdomes; but especially in the time of the Saxons. It hath now in it the two kingdoms of England and Scot∣land: wherein are forue seuerall languages: that is, the Eng∣lish, which the ciuill Scots doe barbarously speake; the Welsh tongue, which is the language of the olde Britaines; the Cornish, which is the proper speech of Cornewall; and the Irish, which is spoken by those Scots which liue on the West parte of Scotland neare vnto Ireland. The commodi∣ties of England, and pleasures are well knowne vnto vs, and many of them may be expressed in this verse: Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, foemina, lana. This countrie, which in olde time was inhabited by the Britaines, was entered vpon by the Romaines, first vnder Iulius Caesar, and was long by them kept in subiection but it was an error in them, when they wrote that England would breede nor keepe no Wolfe. It was afterwarde ouer∣runne, and possessed by the Saxons: of whome, 7. kings
at once did raigne here. After that the Danes out of Den∣marke did inuade it, and much molest it. And lastly, vnder the leading of their Duke William, the Normans did con∣quere it, and established that gouernement, which to this day doth continue. And from whome, as from the Conque∣rour our ordinarie computation is deriued. The Scots were in times past a most barbarous people, of whome Saint Ie∣rome reporteth: that he sawe some of them in his time in France to feede on mans flesh. They were neuer wholy con∣quered by the Romaines. There be very many little Ilandes adioyning vnto the great Iland Britanie. As at the very North-point of Scotland the Orchades, which are in number aboue 30. The chiefe whereof, is named Orkney: where the people are barbarous, On the West-side of Scotland towardes Ireland, lye the Ilandes called Hebreides: where inhabite the people ordi∣narily tearmed the Redshankes. Not farre from thence, is the Ile Mona, commonly called The Ile of Man. The pecu∣liar iurisdiction of the Earles of Darbie, with homage not∣withstanding reserued vnto the crowne of England. On the North-part of Wales, is the Iland of Anglesey: which is reputed a distinct shiere towardes France side: on the South part of England, is the Ile of Wight: in Latine cal∣led Vectis: which is a good holde in the narrowe seas against the French. More neare Fraunce, are the Iles of Garnesey, and Iernesey, where they speake French, and are vnder the crowne of England. There be also many other, but of small accompt. De Insulis in Mari Mediterraneum. THere be many Ilandes in the Mediterran, renowmed in the olde writers: but the chiefe of them onely shall be touched. From the pillers of Hercules going Eastwarde, are two Ilands not farre from Spaine: which in times past
were called Insulae Baleares, for that the people oft then did vse, both for their delight and armour, Slings which they continually almost carried aboute them. And whereunto, as Plinie writeth: they did traine vp their children from their yost yeares. Not giuing them any meate, till they had from some Post or Beame cast it downe with a sling. Of these were those Funditories, or Sling-casters, which the Carthaginians, and Spaniards did vse in their warres a∣gainst the Romanes. The lesser of these which lieth most West, was called in olde time Minorica: and at this day Mi∣norica. The bigger which lieth more East, was called Maio∣rica: and now Maiorica. They are both vnder the dominion of the King of Spaine. More Eastward in the sea called Mare Inferum, or Tyr∣rhenum, lieth the Iland of Corsica ouer against Genua, and direct Southward from thence, lyeth the great Iland Sardi∣nia: Forthe quiet possessing of which two, the warres were oftentimes reuiued betweene the olde Carthaginians and the Romanes. For these two Ilands lie in the middle very fit∣ly. For both these are also at this day vnder the King of Spaine. And were the same which latelie the Cardinall of Lourain would perswade the old king of Nauarre in France, that if hee woulde leaue his religion, and become a Papist, the Spanish king should yeeld him either Sardinia, or at the loast Corsica, in recompence of Pampilona, and the rest of the kingdome of Nauarre, which the Spaniards by force did detaine from him. Farther yet to the East, at the verie poynt of the South∣part of Italy, lieth the great Iland of Sicilia, which some haue supposed to haue beene heretofore a part of the continent: but by an earth-quake and inundation of water, to haue bin rent off, and so made an Ileland. The figure of this Country, is Triquetra, or triangle three-square. There was also great contention for the Countrie be∣tweene the Carthaginians and the Romanes: but the Ro∣manes
obtayned it, and had from thence exceeding store of corne yearelie: whereupon, Cicilie was called Horreum P. Romani. Here stoode the goodly citie called Siracusa, which was destroyed and sacked by Marcellus the Ro∣mane. This was in times past a kingdom, where the two tyrants, the elder and the yonger Dionisius did reigne: where Hiero also, that great friend to the Romanes did remaine. It was afterward made a prouince, and gouerned by a Praetor, or Deputie of the Romanes: whereof, Verres was one so in∣ueighed against by Tullie. It grew afterwards to be a king∣dome againe: insomuch, that Tancredus was King of Cici∣lia, who went to the taking of Ierusalem with Richard the se∣cond, king of England. Here was likewise Phalaris the ty∣rant so famous, king of Agrigentum. This Countrey is now also vnder the King of Spaine: who among other titles, calleth himselfe king of both the Cicilies, reckoning this Iland for one, and that part of Italie for another, which is nowe called Calabria: and was in the Romane hystories named Maegna Graecia. There is nothing more renowmed in all Cicilia, either with the newe or olde writers, then the mountaine Aetna: which beeing on the out-side oftē couered with snow, yet by a sulphurie, or brim∣stonie water, doth continuallie burne within: yea, so that whereas it was supposed in the ages last before vs, that the matter beeing consumed, the fire had ceased: twise in our age it hath broke foorth againe, to the intollerable losse of all the Countrie adioyning: the ashes thereof, destroying townes and fruites which were within the compasse of ma∣nie myles about. This is that place whither Empedocles threwe him∣selfe, that hee might bee reputed a God. This is it whereof Virgill doth make his tract called Aenea, which the Poets did report to be the shop of Vulcan: where the Cyclops did frame the thunderbolts for Iupiter: and to conclude, this is
it which some of our grosse Papists haue not feared to ima∣gine to be the place of Purgatorie. Not farre South from Cicilie, lieth the little Iland called in old time Melite, whence those dogs come, which were so much desired vnder the name of Canes Melitenses. This is the countrie where S. Paul was cast vp, after his shipwracke in his iourney to Rome: where the Viper hanged on his hand, and did not hurt him. This Countrie is now called Malta, and is one of the places most renowmed in the worlde, for the repelling of the Turkes: when Soliman the Emperour of them, did send agaynst it a most mightie armie. It was then defen∣ded by those, who are called the knights of Malta: which by sea, doe great spoile to the gallies of the Turke that passe that way. Neare vnto Graecia and Peloponnesus: on the West-side toward Italie, is the Ile Corcyra, nowe tearmed Corfue: and not far South from that, is Cephalonia, and from thence South is Zant: called by Virgill Nemorisa Zazinthus: all which Ilands haue beene heretofore vnder the Ʋenetians: but are now vnder the Turke. In Zazinthus, our English marchants haue an house of a∣bode for their trafique. Southeast from Morea, lieth the great Iland Creta, where Minos sometime did raigne, so fa∣mous for his seueritie. This countrie was then called Heca∣tompolis, as hauing in it an hundred townes and cities. The Turkes haue wonne this also long since from the Ʋenetians: it is now called Candie, from whence commeth our ordinarie sugar of Candie. Betweene Creta and Pelopon∣nesus lieth Cythera, where was the fine Temple of Ʋenus: who thereof by the Poets, is called Cytherea. The Ilandes are many, which doe lie in the sea called Mare Aegeum, from the bottome of Greece, vnto the top of the Hellispont: as all the Cyclades, Euboea, the great Iland Samos, and Chios, so Scyro, where Achilles was borne,
and was king of that countrie. There was also Lesbos, & Lem∣nos, Metilene, and Ithaca, where Vlisses was king, and Andros, whether Themistocles was sent by the Atheniās for tribute: of which places, something may be read in the olde historie of the Greekes: Diuers of these did striue that Homer was borne in them: but of certaintie, many of those kinges which Homer saith, came with Agamemnon to the siege of Troye: were kings but of these small Ilands. Eastward from thence, not farre from some parte of Na∣tolia, or Asia the lesse, is the Iland Rhodus: the friendship of the inhabitants whereof, was in auntient time very much desired by the Princes that had to doe that way. So that A∣lexander first, and the Romaines afterwardes did embrace their league. Here was that huge and mightie image of the Sunne, which was Cholossus Rhodius, This countrie was long defended by those, who were cal∣led the Knightes of the Rhodes, against the power of the Turke; and it was a great bulwarke, to defend Christen∣dome: till that in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred twen∣tie and two: Solimon the great Turke did winne it from the Christians by force. From thence Southward, is the Ile of Carpathus: but in the farther end of the East parte of the Mediterraneum is Cyprus, which about 300. yeares since was a kingdome, & did afforde great aide to the Christians, that went to conquer the Holy land: but it is now vnder the Turke. The chiefe Citie thereof is Famagusta, which is an Archbishoppes sea: for Christians for their tribute doe yet liue there. In this countrey in olde time was Venus much honoured, and thereof it was called Cypria, as also Paphia: because shee had a Temple in a Citie there called Paphos. Neare vnto Siria stood the Iland Tirus, against the pride whereof, the Prophets doe so much speake. This was a rich citie for merchandise and nauigation in olde time, and
is the place from whence Dido and the builders of Carthage did come. The destruction of it is most famous by Alexander the greate. Of the rest of the small Ilandes, wee doe say no∣thing. De insulis in Mare Indico. THe Ilandes are very many that doe lie in the seas ad∣ioyning to the East Indies: but the most famous a∣mong them shall be touched. Among the olde writers, as especially appeareth by Solinis, was well knowne that which was then called Taprobana, which lieth vnder the Equino∣ctiall line. It was in that time a Maonarchy, where the Kings raigned, not by succession, but by election: and if any of them did grow intollerable, he was deposed, and inforced to die, with withdrawing from him all things necessary. This is nowe called Sumatra, and hath in it diuers Kings. Not far frō thence lye Eastward the two Ilandes called Iaua maior, and Iaua minor: which were also known to the olde writers, they haue also in them diuers Kings, as in ge∣nerall may be noted, that all the East part, either in the con∣tinent, or in the Iland, haue very many small Kinges and kingdomes. From thence yet more East, lieth a great num∣ber of Iles, which are now called the Moluccoes, which are places as rich for their quantity as anie in the world. From these it is, that the Spaniards haue yearely so greate quanti∣tie of all kindes of spice: neither is there any place of all the East Indies that do more richly furnish home their caractes then do these Moluccoes. Some of these Ilandes, the Spaniards haue gotte into their owne possession: with the Kings of some other they haue league: and a third sorte vtterly detest them. More North-ward ouer against China, lieth a greate Iland called Iapona or Iapan: the people whereof, are much of the same nature with the men of China. This countrey was first dis∣couered
by the Iesuites, who in a blinde zeale haue trauai∣led vnto the farthest partes of the worlde, to winne men to their religion; this Ilande is thought to bee very rich. The rest that bee either neare vnto Asia, or vnto Africa, be∣cause there is little written of them we passe ouer. De Insulis in Mari Atlantico. THere bee many Ilands which lie West-ward from A∣frica, and from Europe, as those which are called the Gorgades, that lie in the same climate with Guinea, which are foure in number: but not inhabited by men: but they are full of Goates. North-ward from thence in the same cly∣mate with the South-parte of Marocco, lie those which are called Canariae, or the fortunate Ilandes, which are seuen in nomber, being most fruitfull and very pleasant: and there∣fore called by that name. This is famous in them that it hath pleased all Cosmographers to make their Meridiane to be the first poynte where they doe beginne to reckon the com∣putation of their longitude, and vnto them after three hun∣dred and threescore degrees, to returne againe. From these Ilandes it is that those strong and pleasant sackes which are called Canari wines are brought, and from thence are fet∣ched those which they call Canarie Birdes: these Ilandes are vnder the Crowne of Spaine. More Northward from thence, lye these Ilandes which are called Azotes insulae, being sixe or seuen in number: of which Tercera is one of the chiefe: of whome, the rest by some are called the Terceraes, which are farre inferiour in fruitfulnesse vnto the Canaries, these were first vnder the Crowne of Portugale: and one of them was the last which was kept out from the King of Spaine by the Prior don An∣tonio: who now calleth himselfe King of Portugale: but the Spaniard at the last tooke this Tercera from him, and doeth possesse all these Ilandes tagether with the rest of the domi∣nion, which did belong to the Portingale.
De America siue Orbe nouo. ALthough some dispute out of Plato, and the olde wri∣ters that there was not onely a gesse, but a kinde of knowledge in auntient time, that besides Europia, Asia, and Africa: there was another large countrey lying to the West, yet he that shall aduisedly vse the coniectures made there∣vpon, may see that there is nothing of sufficiencie to en∣force any such knowledge; but that all antiquitie was vt∣terly ignorant of the newe founde countries towarde the West: whereunto this one argument most forcible may giue credite: that at the first ariuing of the Spaniards there, they founde in those partes nothing shewing trafique or knowledge of any other Nation: but the people naked, vn∣ciuill, some of them deuourers of mans flesh, ignorant of shipping, without all kinde of learning, hauing no remem∣brance of historie or writing among them, neuer hauing heard of any such religion as in other places of the world is knowne: but being vtterly ignorant of Scripture, or Christ, or Moyses, or any God: neither hauing among them any token of crosse, Church, Temple, or deuotion, agreeing with other Nations. God therefore remembring the prophecie of his sonne, that the Gospell of the kingdome should before the day of iudgement be preached in all coastes and quarters of the worlde: and in his mercie intending to free the people, or at the least some fewe of them from the bondage of Sathan: who did detaine them in blockish ignoraunce, and from their Idolatrous seruice, vnto certaine vile spirites, whome they called their Zemes, and most obsequiously did adore them: and raised vp the spirit of a man worthie of perpetu∣all memorie: one Christophorus Columbus, borne at Genua in Italie, to set his minde to the discouery of a new worlde, Who finding by that compasse of the olde knowne worlde, that there must needes bee a much more mightie space, which the sun by his dayly motiō did compasse aboute, then
that which was alreadie knowne and discouered: and con∣ceiuing that this huge quantitie, might as well by land as sea, could neuer satisfie himselfe, till that hee might attempt to make proofe of the veritie thereof. Being therefore himselfe a priuate man, and of more ver∣tue then abilitie. After his reasons and demonstrations layd downe: whereby hee might enduce men, that it was no vaine thing which he went about. Hee went vnto many of the Princes of Christendome: and among other, vnto Hen∣rie the seuenth, then King of England: desiring to bee fur∣nished with shipping and men fitte for such a nauigation. But these men refusing him: parly, because they gaue no credite vnto his newe narration: and partly, least they should be derided by their neighbour Princes, if by this Ge∣noway stranger they should be cousoned: but especiallie, for that they were vnwilling to sustaine the charges of ship∣ping. At last hee betaketh himselfe vnto the court of Fer∣dinandus and Elizabeth King and Queene of Castile: where also at the first, hee sound but colde entertainment: yet per∣sisting in his purpose without wearinesse, and with great im∣portunitie: it pleased God to moue the minde of Elizabeth the Queene, to deale with her husbande to furnish him foorth two shippes for the discouerie onely, and not for conquest. Whereupon, Columbus in the yeare 1492. ac∣companied with his brother Bartholomeus Columbus, and manie Spaniards: sayled farre to the West, for the space of three score dayes and more, with the great indignation and often mutinies of his companie: fearing that by reason of their long distance from home, they should neuer re∣turne againe. In so much, that the generall, after many per∣swasions of them to goe forwarde, was at length enforced to craue but three dayes: wherein, if they sawe not land, he promised to returne; and God did so blesse him, to the end that this voyage might not prooue in vaine, that in that space, one of his companie did espie fire: which was a
certaine arguments that they were neare to the land, as it sell out in deede. The first land whereunto they came was an I∣land, called by the enhabitants Haity. But in remembrance of Spaine from whence he came: he tearmed it Hispaniola, and finding it to bee a countrie full of pleasure, and hauing in it aboundaunce of gold and pearle, he proceeded farther, and discouered another bigge Ile which is called Cuba, of the which beeing verie glad, with great treasure, hee retur∣ned into Spaine, bringing ioyfull newes of his happie successe. The Spaniards who by nature are a people proude, haue since the death of Columbus, laboured to obscure his fame, enuying that an Italian or stranger should be reported to be the first discouerer of those parts, and therefore haue in their writings since giuen forth: that there was a Spaniard which had first beene there, and that Columbus meeting with his cards and descriptions, did but pursue his enterprise, and as∣sume the glorie to himselfe. But this fable of theirs doth sa∣uour of the same spirite, wherewithall many of them in his life time did reproach him, that it was no matter of impor∣tance to find out these countries: but that if he had not done it, many other might, and would: which being spoken to Co∣lumbus at a solemne dinner, he called for an egge, and wil∣led all the guests one after another to set it vp on end, which when they could not do, he gently bruising the one ende of it, did make it flat, and so set it vp: by imitation whereof, each of the other did the same: whereby he mildlie did re∣proach their enuie toward him, and shewed how easie it was to do that which a man had seene done before him. To go forward therefore, Columbus being returned to Castile, after his welcome to the Princes, was made great Admirall of Spaine, and with a new fleete of more shippes, was sent to search farther, which he accordingly did, and quickly found the maine land, not farre off from the Tropicke of Cancer, which part of the countrie, in honour of Spaine, hee called
Hispania noua, and in respect whereof at this day the King of Spaine doth entitle himselfe Hispaniaram Rex. They found the people both of the maine land and Ilandes verie exceeding in number: naked without cloathes or armour: sowing no corne, but making their breade of a kinde of roote which they call Maies. Men most ignorant of all kinde of learning: admiring the Christians as if they had beene sent downe from heauen, and thinking them to be immortall: wondering at their Shippes, and the tacke∣ling thereof: for they had no shippes of their owne: but bigge troughes which they call their Canoaes: beeing made hollowe of the bodie of one Tree, with the sharpe bones of fishes: for iron, or such like instruments they haue none. The Spaniardes did here finde the people to bee most simple, without fraude, giuing them kinde entertainement according to their best manner, exchanging for kniues, glasses, and such like toyes, great aboundance of golde and pearle. The desire whereof, caused the Spaniards to seeke far∣ther into the countries: but the tyrannie and couetousnesse of the Spariards was such, in taking from them their goods, in deflouring their wiues and daughters: but especially, in forcing them to labour in their golde mines without mea∣sure, as if they had beene beasts: that the people dete∣sting them, and the name of Christians for their sakes, did some of them kill themselues, and the mothers destroyed their children in their bellies, that they might not be borne to serue so hatefull a Nation: and some of them did in warre conspire against them: so that by slaughter and otherwise, the people of the countrie are almost all wasted nowe with∣in an hundred yeeres, beeing before many millions: those which remaine are as slaues, and the Spaniards almost onely doe inhabit those parts. By reason that the countrie is exceeding rich and fruit∣full,
the Spaniards with great desire did spreade themselues toward the North, where they founde more resistance: al∣though nothing in comparison of warriours: but the great∣test of their labour was, for to conquere the kingdome of Mexico: which Mexico, is a Citie verie great and po∣pulous, as almost any in the worlde, standing in the midst of a great marish or fenne. The conquerour of this, was Ferdinandus Cortesius, so much renowmed in Spaine vnto this day. In the sea coastes of all this Noua Hispania the Kings of Spaine haue built many townes, and Castles, and therein haue erected diuerse fornaces and forges, for the trying and sining of their golde. De partibus Americae versus Septentrionem. THe rumour of the discouerie of these partes beeing blowne ouer Christendome: and the great quantitie of the land, together with the fruitfulnesse thereof, being re∣ported abroad, some other Nation did enterprise to set foot therein: as namely the Frenchmen, who sent certaine ships vnto a part of this counttie, lying North from Hispania noua, some fewe degrees without the Tropicke of Cancer: into which when they had ariued because of the cōtinuall green∣nesse of the ground, and trees, as if it had beene a perpetuall spring, they called it Florida; where after some fewe of them had for a time setled themselues, the Spaniards tooke notice of it, and being vnwilling to endure any such neighbours, they came suddainlie on them, and most cruelly slue them all, without taking any ransome, yet the Spaniards for want of men are not able to inhabit that countries, but leaue it to the olde people. The Englishmen also desirous by nauigation to adde
something vnto their owne countrie, as before time they had trauailed toward the farthest North part of America, so lately finding that part which lieth betweene Florida, and Noua Francia, was not inhabited by any Christians, and was a land verie fruitfull and fit to plant in, they sent thither two seuerall times, two seuerall companies, as Colonies to inha∣bit that part, which in remembrance of the virginity of their Queene, they named Virginia. But this voyage beeing in∣terprised on the charge of priuate men: and not thorowlie being followed by the State: the possession of this Ʋirginia is nowe discontinued, and the countrie at this present left to the old inhabitants. Northward from thence on the sea-coast, lieth Norom∣bega, which is the South-parte of that which the French∣men did without disturbance of any Christian for a time possesse. For the French-men did discouer a large part of Ame∣rica, on toward the circle Arctick, and did build there some townes, and named it of their owne countrie, Noua Fran∣cia. The Enlish-men about the yeare 1570. did aduenture farre, for to open the North partes of America, and sayled as farre as the very circle Arcticke, hoping for to haue found a passage by the North to the Moluccos, and to China, which hitherto, neither by the North of Asia, nor by the North of America, could bee effected by them, by reason of the verie great colde and yse in that clymate. The rest of the inland beeing an huge space of earth, hath not hither∣to by any Christian to any purpose beene discouered: but by those neare the sea-coasts it may bee gathered, that they all which doe there inhabite: are men rude and vnciuill, without knowledge of God. Yet on the North-west part of America, some of our English-men going through the straightes of Magellan, and passing toward the North by Hispania noua, haue touched on a Countrie where they
found good entertainement: the King thereof yeelding himselfe to the subiection of the Queene of England: wher∣vpon they tearmed it Noua Albion. De Peru & Brasilia. WHen the Portingales had first begun their nauigati∣on by Africa vnto the East Indies; some of them in∣tending to haue helde their course Eastwarde vnto Caput bone spei, were driuen so farre West-ward by tempest, that they landed in a large and great countrey, which by a ge∣nerall name, is called Brasilia: where they began to enter trafique, and with Townes and Castles to plant themselues, before that the Spaniardes had discouered Peru, which is the South parte of America. So that at this day, whatsoe∣uer the King of Spaine hath in Brasilia, it is in right of the crowne of Portingale. The countrie is large, hauing in it many people and seuerall kingdomes which are not all pos∣sessed by the Portingals: but so, that other Christians, as namely the Frenchmen, being driuen out of their countrie for religion, haue set footing there: though afterwardes a∣gaine they haue abandoned it. The inhabitants hereof, are men also vtterly vnlearned, but men more ingenious then the common sorte of the A∣mericans: goodly of bodie, and straight of proportion, go∣ing alwayes naked, reasonable good warriours after their countrie fashion; vsing to fat such enemies as they take in the warres, that afterwardes they may deuoure them, which they doe with great pleasure. For diuers of the people of these quarters, as the Caribles and the Canibals are all ea∣ters of mans flesh, In this countrie groweth aboundance of that wood, which since is brought into Europe for to dye red colours, and is of the place whence it commeth, called Bra∣zil-wood, the trees whereof are exceeding great. After that the Spaniardes had for a time possessed Hispa∣nia noua, for the desire of gold and pearle, some of them tra∣uelled
towardes the South. And as by water they found that sea Westward from Peru (which is alwayes very calme, and is by them called the South-sea, as the other wherein Cuba standeth, is termed the North-sea) so by land, they founde that huge & mightie countrie which is named Peru: where∣in the people are for the most parte very barbarous, and without God, men of great stature; yea, some of them farre higher then the ordinarie sorte of men in France, vsing to shoote strongly with bowes made of fishe bones, and most cruell people to their enemies. Among these, the Spaniards partly by force, but especially by perfidious treason, did get infinite summes of golde and pearle: wherein being allu∣red, and hoping for more (by reason that a great parte here∣of lyeth vnder the Zona Torrida) They haue heare and there scatteringly vpon the sea-coastes, set vp some Townes and Castles; but are not able to possesse almost any thing of the land: neither haue they as yet discouered the inwarde partes thereof. Some of these Spaniardes desirous for to see how farre this land of Peru did goe towardes the South, tra∣uelled downe till at length they founde the landes end, and a little straight or narrowe sea: which did runne from the maine Ocean towardes Africa into the South sea. One ma∣gelanus was he that found this straight, and (although it be dangerous) passed thorowe it: so that of his name, it is cal∣led Fretum Magelanicum, or Magelanes straightes. And this is the way whereby, as the Spaniards doe passe to the back∣side of Peru, and Hispania noza, so, whosoeuer will com∣passe the whole worlde (as some of our English haue done) He must of necessitie, for any thing that is yet knowne, passe thorowe this narrowe straight. Magellanus did finde on the other side towards the Pole, the maine continent: which also the Portingales in their voyages to the East Indies haue sometimes bene driuen vn∣to: whereof nothing is discouered, but that in one place they did see aboundance of Parats, and greater then ordina∣rie:
whereof they did call it Psittacorum regio. This is thought to be a mightie huge countrie, contey∣ning in compasse all the degrees of longitude, in the conti∣nent thereof, and is supposed to goe vnto the South pole: By reason that no sea is yet founde to breake in, or breake through the same. There be also described by some of our late writers, cer∣taine great Landes towardes the North-pole. And our English-men in their Nauigations haue touched Gronland: but the nature of them, and whether they be such, and so many as is reported, is not certainely knowne. FINIS.
