24112 99843044 7751
THE ART OF MEMORY, THAT otherwyse is called the Phe∣nix. A boke very behouefull and profytable to all profes∣sours of scyences. Gram∣maryens / Rethoryciens Dialectyke / Legystes / Phylosophres & Theologiens.
¶ The prologue of this present boke. FOr asmuch as many (ī th{is} tyme moderne yt p̄sētly rē¦neth) be of a slow memory & late mynded, this lytell boke was made & composed, for to gyue and presēt it to all people, al∣beit that at the begynnynge it was dyrected to the Italyke nacion. Knowe ye therfore all noble reders that yf any do kepe these preceptes and cōmaūdementes of this boke, easyly & in short tyme he may touch ye sūmite, & reach ye heyght of th{is} art It is of a great effect and profyt to them that haue nat theyr myndes prompte, stronge and redy. For it semeth more to be inuented by dy∣uyne inspyracion than by arte or scyence of mankynde. I haue also founde by wrytynge that whan the
authour of this presēt worke expe∣rymented his knowledge through al the Itallies that many affirmed to haue seyne this worke more dy∣uyne than humayne, so that some dyd blysse thē by great admiracion The author reported that he had no teacher of this art, but yt it came to hym by inuencion throughe the socour and help of god that lyght∣ned and inspired his spyrite. Rede therfore my preceptes ryght dere & dyscret persones and yf thou take laboure & dyligence to vnderstāde these purposes perfytly thou shalt gather the grayne therof, and bere with the great & prosperous worke of proffytte and honoure. THe fyrste conclusyon shalbe suche. This arte is, and con∣systeth of places and magnytudes The places be as cardes or scroll{is}
or other thynges for to wrytte in. The ymages be ye symylytudes of the thynges that we wyll retayne in mynde. Than I wyl fyrst p̄pare my carde wherin we may colloke & ordre ye ymages in places. And for the foundacion of this fyrst cōclu∣syon I wyll put foure rules. THE fyrste is this. The places are the wyndowes set in walles, pyllers, & anglets, with other lyke. THE .ii. rule is. The places ought nat to be to nere togyther nor to fare a sō∣der. For the nerenesse trouble great¦ly the naturall memory, by the op∣posytion of thynges for yf ye places were to fare dystaunt. We wyl re∣cyte with a lytel leaser the thynges that shalbe gyuen to places, where by they shalbe of meane dystaunce. And that shalbe done whan one is. vi. fote fro ye other. THE .iii. rule is suche. But it is vayne as me se∣meth.
For it is the opynyon of tal∣kers that the places ought nat to be made where as mē do haunt, as in churche and comyn places. For it suffyseth to haue sene church va∣caunt wher as people walke nat al¦way and in that hath ben taught ye cōtrary experyence. Whiche is the mayster of those thynges. THE .iiii. rule is th{is}. That the places be nat to hye. For I wyl that the men set for the ymages or in the steade of ymages may touch the places, yt whiche I haue iudged as behoue∣full. I take than the churche great¦ly knowen by me, the partyes wher of I do cōsyder, and go into it wal∣kynge it .iii. or .iiii. tymes, and thā retourne home to my house, & there I tourne in my thought to remem∣bre the thynges by me sene. And in that maner I gyue the begynnyng of the worke to ye places on ye ryght
syde of the gate fro the whiche men go in the ryght pathe or yle to the hygh auter ther I fyx and ordayne the fyrst place, and the seconde on ye walle next it a .v. or .vi. fote of. And yf there be any notable thynge set, as a pyler in the wyndowe, or other lyke, there put the place. And yf the notable thyng be nat there, or lacke I feyn that in my ymagynation or at myne arbytre ymagynary al∣though some forgynge these plac{is} wolde leaue thē, fearynge that he shulde put in forgetfulnes. The thynge opposyd to that is taken & suffred, so that he be myndfull to haue constytued and ordeyned the place. And so to be {pro}ceded fro place to place tyl yt ye fabrycant of ye pla∣ces retourne to the same gate. And these thynges to be done on ye fyrste walle of the churche, al thyngs lest that be in the myds therof. And yf
any desyre to haue ye circūferēce of the places entre by ordre in to a mo¦nastery, and fyll it ful all of places or cōpare the places on the walles without the churche. And he that wylbe remēbred of many thynges, must cōpare many plac{is}. But bicau¦se yt I haue wylled to surmoūt all the men of Itally by habundaūce of thynges and holy scryptures, in Canone lawe and Cyuyl, and in o∣ther authoritees of many thynges, whyle that I was but yonge ado∣lescent I haue prepared a C. M. places. And now I haue added to them ye other .x. M. places wherin I haue put the thynges which are to say & vtter by my selfe, so yt they be promptemēts whan I wyll expe¦ryment the vertues and strengthes of my memory. And whan I do leaue my coūtre assigned I visite ye cytyes of Itally as a pylgryme or
a wayfarer. I may frely say that I bere with me all my thynges, and yet I ceas nat to edyfy. I do you to wyte yt the places in any churche or mynster is sene onely for to re∣pose & marke the thig{is} which must be recyted euery day as be ye argu∣mentes, reasons, hystoryes, fables and predicacions made in Lenten. And let this offyce be deputed to these places onely. And I haue set & declared at the ende for these pla∣ces a thynge that shalbe Iudged necessary and vtile. For I wyl that the yonge infāts shalbe couyetous herof by my ryght documēt ensyg∣ned by the places so constytuted & put in ordre, by oftē repetynge, thre or foure tymes in a moneth. For the repeticion of plac{is} can nat be praysed in any maner.
THe seconde conclusyon shalbe that whan any hath the carde or scroll I wyll shewe the maner to wryt in the same, as I was some tyme beynge yonge adolescent in ye cōpany of sondry noble mē. It was proposed of thē to recyte names of men, that one of ye assystens shulde say I denye nat that. And these be the names that folowe. I dyd set in the fyrst place a certayne frende of myne hauynge the same name. In the seconde place lykewyse, and as names dyd I colloke & set in place as they had named, and they thus collocated were by me recyted af∣terwarde. And let the collocatoure aduyse him to set alway his frende doynge the thynge that he is accu∣stomed to do comynly, and procede this cōclusion clerely, and names knowen. And yf the frende be kno∣wen haue suche a name Boxdrab,
Zorobabell, than set ye same thinge that is spokē or named in his place I say asmuche of lyke thynges in names of beastes as of the hors, ye oxe, and asse, do that the hors be set in the fyrst place. In the seconde ye oxe, and the asse in the thyrde. And thus must be done in thynges that haue no lyfe, as the boke, the cote, ye gowne, & of other thynges in lyke∣wyse. But he wel ware that thou be nat deceyued, yf the boke were set in the fyrst place, and the cote in ye seconde for so thou mayste symply whan thou shulde recyte ye names The offyce of this arte is to excyte the mynde naturall yt neuer is nat nor can be admonested. For ye gest of the ymage is to set and vnset & apposyted therfore ye ought to be set in the place that moueth. And yf it can nat moeue to be moeued with another, put such a thynge in
the hande of mouer, bycause that by the mouynge the memory be moued to the naturall. But some yonge man of his spyryte & subtyll wyt wyll saye that these preceptes & commaundementes be nat per∣fyte in all partyes. For ye ampt set in the place moueth. And howbeit bycause that it is so lytell it cā nat moue for the grayne of peper put ī the hande of the mouer nor also lyft it, whiche I graunt, yf ye onely ampt be there collocat. But yf ye set a multytude of ampts moūtynge & descēdynge on a tree. That yt ye one∣ly ampt coude nat do alone, ye mul∣tytude wyll do it. And the frende also wyll moue in the place dyuers graynes of peper. Some other yonglynge wyll cōtraryenge. The full bely doth nat moue me ye mul∣tytude of fleas, may nat be set nor well collocated. But I wyll collo∣cat
there for the flea the frende ta∣kynge a flea. And I haue afore set in the place of the flea the ryghte excellent mayster of all thē of oure tyme the good phisitien Gyrard of Uelonne, ye whiche I behelde ones takynge a flea. THe .iii. cōclusyon is al of gold yf I take men for the lettres of the alphebete, and so I haue the lyuynge amages. For I set for the lettre. A. Anthony. B. for Benet, & so the other persones and names of whom the fyrst lettre is that which I wyll collocat. And I do set by ye lettres some fayre maydēs for they excyte greatly my mynde and fre∣quentation whan I was yonge I dyd collocat Iunipere pistorien or of pyse which I loued greatly. Be∣leue hardily to my sayenges that yf I set the fāyre maydens mooste
facylly and decently recyte this yt I haue set in my memory. Reteyne th{is} secret very behoueful thā into ye artificiall memory, whiche I haue of a lōge whyle put in science. And for feare of blame or shame ye thou wolde haue a remembraunce incō∣tynent collocat fayre maidens. For the mynde by the location of may∣dens & vyrgyns is a merueylous mouynge to hym that hathe sene ye wytnes testyfyeth the thynge. But this behouefull precept can nat {pro}∣fyt to thē that haue women in hate and dyspyle thē. Nor shall nat fo∣lowe the fruyt of this art but dyffi∣cylly, and slowly, howbeit all good and chast men are except. For the preceptes yt hath borne me so much honesty I ought nat to hyde, saing yt I desyre, & enforce me wt all my powers to leaue it to my successors excellently lerned in goodnes.
THe .iiii. conclusion is, that the ymages of the alphabete, or ye names demonstratyfs of lies shuld be well reteyned & fyxed in mynde and often repeted, I begyne than this wyse yf it chaūce me to sette in place of this copulatyue. And I set in place Eusebe & Thomas, howe¦beit that in this ordre eusebe be in place, & Thomas standynge afore hym, but yf Thomas holde of eu∣sebe, and eusebe holde the copulatif of Thomas that is mas, yt of mas we se this pronowne of Thomas And in ye place apposed in this arte the rule is suche that fyrst in ordre is moost presed of the place, and so of the ende. And fyrst we wryte in this copulatyfe and lykewyse in ye place. And lyke thinges is to be obserued generally in all dyctions, & other thīgs to be colloqued.
THe .v. cōclusiō is ī ye syllables of .iii. letts, in whō we {pro}cede thus, for yf ye vowel be in ye myddel as th{is} syllable (bar) I take than ye ymage of the last lettre and adde some thinge therto, of the which let be ye begynnyng in lykewyse to the two other letters yt do procede. Thā yf I set in the place of Raymonde smyttynge the place with his stafe, the syllable (bar) shalbe reysed in ye place. And yf Symon hyt ye place we shall haue the syllable belowe. Than lete this rule be kept whiche is thus. Repeted there where ye vo∣wel is in the myddle of the syllable of the letters the ymage of the laste letter .R. is taken apposynge ano∣ther mobyle, or mouynge her selfe to the two letters afore. But yf the vowell beyne the ende as the sylla∣ble (bra) than I colloke to yt ymage of ye fyrst letter of yt thynge mobyle
or mouynge, wherof lete the begyn¦nynge be lyke to ye two folowynge Than I set & appose Benet amōge the Frogges in the place shal haue the syllable (bra) And yf I set Tho∣mas I shall haue the syllable (tra) The habundaunce than of these thynges that begyn as the syllable yf they be redyly had here great v∣tylyte and profyte. But yf the vo∣well be in the begynninge, making any syllabl{is} as ī th{is} word (Amo) thā alway the ymage of the fyrst letter is to be colloqued in the place of ye thynge hauynge hys lyke begyn∣nynge of the syllable folowe, yf ye harnest turne ye mylstone, th{is} worde (Amo) set there shalbe ye place. And yf, this eusebe, rede, this word, enio to vs ye must alway knowe yf we may {pro}fytably collocat, the diction of thre or foure syllables, and it is no nede. For in vayne one is to be
made by many thynges whan it may be by few. It suffyfeth to haue set the fyrst or seconde syllable, we may always collocat the totall dyc¦tion of two syllables as, Pater, I wyl set in the place the thynge or ye man for the ymage of the syllable. Pa. as Paule, and for the syllable, ter, sythe that the vowell is in the myddel I wyl take Raymonde ha∣uynge a pyece of lynnene clothe in his hande. I conclude than thus nobly that the ymages of ye alpha∣bete adioyned togyther, and the ha¦bundance of ye thynges begynning as the syllables wyl serue vs euer, yf the ymages do lacke in thē. For yf I can haue other I wyl leaue these wherof we shal speke in the o∣ther conclusions. THe .vi. conclucyon is in these dyctions, breade, wyne, wood, and other like. And in al dygnitees
as is the Emperour, the Kynge. &c And so of eche I make collocacion by the sōunde of ye voyce, the which all thynges do vnderstande, and ye Rustykes in theyr demonstration, and to speake more euydēt they are concordinge & vnyformal in speche vulgar and latyn. In suche dycti∣ons I demaunde none other yma∣ges. But put that same that ye sayd dyction soūde, and all the syllables of suche dyctions may be by good mention collocate easyly. For in ye body of man I haue sounde yma∣ges of cases so that the head is the case Iuuima. The ryght hande the genityfe. The lyft hande ye datyue, The ryght fote the accusatyue, the lyfte fote the vocatyue. And the bely or stomake the ablatyue. And for the synguler nōbre I set a fayre mayden naked. And for the plurell the same mayde, well arayed and
rychely or her that I wolde be re∣membred of. Or I wyll collocate some thynge, or a man yf it be some thynge as bread I wyll collocate a mayden all naked in the place tou∣chynge ye bread with her ryght fote And yf I wyll collocat any dyctiō I set a man constytued in offyce or dygnyte as a Bysshop, I collocat a Bysshop in the place, smytynge ye bare erth with his ryght fote. And yf thou consyder dylygently these thynges, O ryght swete reder, thys mention wyll shew very goodly vn¦to the, and thus I was accustomed for to collocat these dyctions. THe .vii. conclusyon is that we may collocat dyctions by soū∣de of the voyce, Iestures of the bo∣dy, of the symilytudes, and of their ymages. I vse it ofter for I set my frende for the dyction. I knew a do¦ctour
that had alway in his mouth communication of ye law spekynge of the tyme of appellations. Thys doctour of law sayde he coulde say all the lawe by herte or rote only I than wyllynge to collocat the sayd lawe I set thys dolour that alway hytteth laughters, & by the Iestes of the body are set ye ymages whan any Iestures be made in the dycti∣on I make my frēde (for this worde spolio) the whiche dyspoyleth a∣nother. And for this worde, Rapio, I set my frende rauysshynge some∣what by force, by symylytude I set the ymages whan I fynde ye thyng at the dyction semblable letters, howbeit that they are vnlyke in sy∣gnyfycation whan I colloke well for this worde cano. THe .viii. conclusyon is for the lordes Iurisconsultes, a law∣yers. And I wyll begyne to speake
of the volumes of the cyuyll lawe. And whan I wyll gyue these thyn∣ges to the places I take ye colours of ye couerynges, as for F. veteri. a blacke skynne. For ye Code a grene skynne. For a volume a skynne of varyable colour. For the instytuti∣ons a lytell boke. And ye autentyke a Notary hauynge a great Instru¦ment. For ye autentike I set a may∣den hauynge a pryuylege. For the boke of feodes, I set some castell. For the decret autentyke I sette an olde man wrytynge in the place, by cause ye auctorytees of holy fathers is in it. For yt decretalles a bysshop syttynge in a chayre. For clementy∣nes, a mayden named Clemence. For the syxt, an instrument, so cal∣led in Itally, wherof Ouyde wry∣teth. Altera pars staret, pars altera duceret orbet. For ye conmētatours of the lawe I set thē that haue lyke
name. But I take the ymage of ye glose of the doctryne by my selfe of me fyrst gyuen in ye collocacions of dyctions. And I haue for the Dy∣gestes fayre Iunipera gyuynge a harp to a florentyne, that he maye synge the Iester of Rome. The al∣legations of ye decrete shalbe thus collocated, for a mayden is set for ye allegation. And this mayden ma∣keth a cloth or a cedule. And set for the question ye fayre Iunipera bea∣tynge her mayde. And for the con∣syderation I set a preste consecra∣tynge the hoost. And for Penaunce I set Iunipera shryuyng her to me of her lyght synnes. THe .ix. conclusyon shalbe, that I wyll shew how plac{is} ought to be gyuen to ye rubrysshes of eche lawe, & set two ymages for ye same as I am wont, for yf I wyll remē∣bre
me of the rubrysshe of transacti¦on I set Thomas hauyng frogges or the gest of the body. I feyn two men that wolde nat of longe tyme cease theyr contension and debate and gyuynnge eche to other tokēs of peace. That is the fayre ymage of the rubryshe of the transactions But the pryncyples of the lawes where as chapyters be set in place by alphabete or sounde of voyce sy¦mylytude or gestures of the body, wherof is spokē afore and playnly ynoughe. THe .x. is in collocatynge, argu¦mentes. For the whiche I am accustomed to set two images. The fyrst is the gest of ye body, as yf one sayd thus. The testamēt a vayleth to none but yf it be made with .vii. witnesses. Therfore I feyne the te∣statour to haue made this testamēt
before two wytnesses, and a rynge that sealeth the sayde testamente. The seconde ymage is it that collo¦gateth two other diction more prin¦cypall of the argument. Take here of an example, thou Iurisconsul, of this phylosophres wote my mea∣nynge. Whan in the act the wyll is demaunded of any, he ought to {pro}∣cede. Here be sondry wordes, but it suffyseth to collocat & set the wyll fro procedynge. And than we may say by and in memory ye other par∣tyes of the argument of the collo∣cation of two or thre dyctions. The other thynges we shall recyte ele∣gantly, & beleue this yt the mayster hath experymēted it ryght well. THe .xi. conclusyon, and thus I haue the ymages vnto the nō of a C. whiche are .x. I haue also .ix ymages of the nombre begynninge
from one to ye nōbre .x. The whiche I haue dyuyded on the fyngers of men. I haue gyuen to the fyrst fyn∣ger of the ryght hande for the fyrt nōbre, or for one. The seconde for ye secōde, or for two. And so I procede to ye .iiii. fynger of the left hande. And bycause that these thynges may the better be retayned in myn∣de. I saye the fyrste fynger of the ryght hande to be of the Gelfes, The seconde of the Gelbilayts. The thyrde of the Iewes the forth of the rynges. The v. of the eares. And so of the lefte hande I call the fyrst fynger of the Gelfes, for Gelfes be estemed ryche and of great estymation, the seconde of the Gelbelayts. And the thyrde of the Iewes, For yf ye poynt to a Iewe with that fynger he wyll loke away fyersly. And who that wyll knowe the cause, shall fynde it
euydent. Therfore I call the forthe and the .v. euen so for the nombre of a M. I haue set here, yf any nō∣bre be to me {pro}posed easyly to haue the ymage of the same. The conclu¦syon is suche, yf any shulde aske yf that in one selfe place he ought to set many thynges. I answere thus yf I wolde put the thynges in pla∣ces that are {pro}posed to me of other bycause that I ought forthwith to reherce the sayde thinges proposed I wyll collocat onely in the place the ymages of one thynge. But yf I dyspose to set in places the thyn∣ges that I rede ī my bokes, so that I maye recyte by herte in remem∣brynge them, I doubt nat to set very often in one pla∣ce the ymages of ma¦ny thynges
THe .xii. conclusyon shalbe ve∣ry propre. That is I wyl ma∣ke and shewe in what maner ought to be made the ymages of nombres for all nombres that we can thynke I haue onely founde .xx. ymages. And therfore I wyll descrybe them chyefly, For ye nombre of .x. I take a great crosse of golde or syluer, for the nombre of .xx. I take the symy∣lytude of ye lettre of yren or of wood vnioyned to any thynge that is rounde. For we shall wryte the nō∣bre of .xx. in ye carde or scroll in this maner, or for .xxx. and ye symilytude of this fygure is coniunct in thys maner to the thynge. Therfore I shall fynde some examples whiche I wyll set wherby the reder maye vnderstande in the more easyly, al∣though it be of a rude wyt or con∣clusiō, yf I wyl say .ii.q.iii. I must haue a glfe in the place holdynge
in his ryght hande a crosse. and a Iewe that with all his strengths seketh to take it fro hym by vyolēce of that made fro the ryghthande. Yf I wyll say .ii. Corinthios .iiii. I wyll feyn the Gebelyn in the place that shall holde a curtayne in his ryghthande shewynge it to a fayre mayden whiche shall receyue it in her ryghthande, for the fourth fyn∣ger I wyll set a mayden maryed. And so I collocat and set for the. iiii. and .ix. nombre, yf I wyll re∣membre me of penaunce in the .iiii. dystynction, I wyll colloke an olde preeste and nat yonge to whom Iu¦nipera shal shryue her fautes. And she shall do a woūderous thynge, for she shall absolue the preste hol∣dynge her ryght hande ouer his head, and so of the other. And by∣cause that this be nat that processe let vs here make an ende of the
art of memory artificyall, and pre∣ceptes, of whome all thynges is cōprised simplycytyuely, at ye lest so explycityuely to leaue any thynge, that I promysed to wrytte in this place to Iudge an vtyle thynge herī in place to set in ye .v. place a hande of gold In the .x. a crosse gyl∣ted, in ye .xv. a hāde of syluer. And in the .xx. ye ymage of ye same nombre. And this my doctryne teacheth for to do in all other thynges
Thus en∣deth the art of memory / other wyse called the Phenix. Tran∣slated out of french in to en∣glyshe by Roberte Cop∣lande. And Impry∣ted at London in Flete∣strete at the sygne of the George by Wyliyam Myddylton.
