25085 S119603 99854810 20257
A CONTI∣NVANCE OF ALBIONS ENG∣LAND: By the first Author. W. W. PARNASSO ET APOLLINE DIGNA printer's device of Felix Kingston LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for George Potter, and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard, at the signe of the Bible. 1606.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE SIR EDVVARD COKE, KNIGHT, Lord Chief-Iustice of his Maiesties Court of Common-Pleas, &c. GReat Caesars haue lesse Poems grac't, Lesse in Sublimitie this plac't, (Vnworthie though your Deapth, I graunt, Yet might Ours past great Patrons vaunt) Wooes your Allowance, whom my Muse Doth its select Mecaenas chuse. If with the right-hand what I giue Be taken with the left, should grieue So much more lesse by how much more This meant I orphanag'd before: Which now to you, as destinate, I, yours deuoted, dedicate: Most humbly, William Warner.
TO THE READER. BY diuers importun'd to this, I send it foorth, such as it is. This idle Arte that lets it thriue Was Midwife to the Abortiue: Doe dandle, knock it on the head, All one to me aliue or dead. The Musists, though themselues they please, Their Dotage els finds Meede nor Ease: Vouch't Spencer in that Ranke preferd, Per Accidens, only interr'd Nigh Venerable Chaucer, lost, Had not kinde Brigham reard him Cost, Found next the doore Church-outed neere, And yet a Knight, Arch-Lauriat Heere. Adde Stows late antiquarious Pen, That annald for vngratefull Men: Next Chronicler omit it not, His licenc't Basons little got: Liu'd poorely where he Trophies gaue, Lies poorely There in notelesse graue. As These in Theirs, so we in Ours, And who write best lose better houres, And most what but for Nods doe cense Saints, senselesse of more Recompence.
No maruell, Poëtrie seemes gon To Bedlam now from Helicon. Yea most her Priests Intemperature So diffreth from their Literature, Their Literature obscenously So suteth to Scurrilitie, As if, Aonides, it hold, You from your sacred Hill of old Pierides will dare to skold. Mnemosynes, retract I this, Ambrosia sweete and Nectar is Your food, and yee eterniz'd liue, Not as yee take, but as yee giue. Inuested with Imperiall Robe, Or circumfer'd the varied Globe, Arts, Armes, or what, for what, or who, Out-liues one Age vnles by you? For Homer, at Achillis Tombe, This blist did Alexander doome. In Mysteries oft as in those Ilias, Trans-shapes, Aeneidos, In patent Letter also ye Make longest dead aliue to be. Thrice-noble Thrice Three Ioues high Breede▪ How happie ye whom happiest neede? Nor sleepeth your Anagraphie The sensuall Follies of the Hie, Nor crested Chorles that for Coynes skill, More Standings heare than Bellies fill, Nor those could wish ye them passe-by As if a dungled Asse should die. Yet he that fierd th' Ephesian Phane
Did it your Pens Report to gaine: As Faux, that him might scorne Compeere For Proiect more prodigious heere. Thus vertuous and prophane, in few, Haue Perpetuitie from you, Praisd or dispraisd examplarlie, So profiting Posteritie. Sixe passed Presses past vs ill, As, not vnlikely, this Presse will. Muse, that twi-bucketted hast bin, Emptedst poore wit poore winde to win, Twice towredst to a seuerall Steeple, Didst kenne no Patrons but the People, Shunne Eares vnarted, rude, precise, Seeke Loues that ours shall sympathize. Theirs W. W.
A Table for euery of the seuerall Bookes, to find out the speciall Stories and matters, directing from their Chapters. The fourteenth Booke. A Parabola, or comparatiue Relation from the English-Raignes since the Conquest, to the late Raigne of Queene Elizabeth. Chap. 80. More tending to the like Argument, &c. Chap. 81. Her Life, Vertues, Death, Detractors, into Particulars epitomi∣zed: And of the letter. P. Chap. 82. An Entrance into the Historie of the Picts, somtimes a martiall Nation here: Of Scotlands fatall Chaire, and of certaine an∣cient Predictions here lately effected. Chap. 83. Of the first Scotch-King in this Isle: The first Armies betweene them and the Picts: Their appeasement, And a Slaughter of the Britaines. Chap. 84. Warres betweene the Picts and the Scots: How the Britaines dealt aduantagiously against Either People: The Romanes successe Here, and of the Picts their Prowesse. Chap. 85. How the Picts debelled the Scots: Of Queene Cartandis: More of the Romanes, and of the King of Penthlands death. Chap. 86 How the Scots recouered their Countrie: They and the Picts chased the Romanes: Subdued and inthralled the Britaines, And of the Britaines then Sloth and Effeminacie. Chap. 87 How the Britaines subiected themselues to the Armoricans or French-Brutaines: Of the Saxons, and more of the warlike Picts. Chap. 88 A Tale of a faire yong Nunne and an old Pandresse. Chap. 89
Of the long continued League and Confedracie betweene the French and Scots against the English: Impacable warres be∣tweene the Picts and the Scots, and of an Elusion fatall a∣gainst the Picts. Chap. 90 A Tale of Robin-goodfellow. Chap. 91 Of the mercilesse End of the Martiall King and kingdome of the Picts. Chap. 92 The fifteenth Booke. OF the Propagators of vs moderne English: An Entrance into the Historie of Wales, &c. Chap. 93 Of Makbeth the Tyrant: Of the noble Scot Fleance: The pas∣sage of loue betweene him and the Kings Daughter of Wales, and of their royall Posteritie. Chap. 94 Of the most barbarous and vnexampled preuented Massacre, plotted against the whole Parliament and State of Great Britaine, 1605. &c. Chap. 95 A few Cautions for Papists: Their senselesse Seduction: Popes, Papisme, and their trecherous Policies in part described. Chap. 96 Of S. Austin and the Clerkes of Bangor. Chap. 97 Of moderne Hypocrites, & schismaticall Singularitie. Chap. 98 A Merriment of a saintish vnsanctified Hostesse, &c. Chap. 99 A speaking Vision, set downe in the person of good Queene Elizabeth. Chap. 100 The sixteenth Booke. HOw the Principalitie of South-Wales and the Lordship of Glamorgan were subdued to England: Of Iestin his faire Daughter: The vanitie of curious Ornaments and arted Beautie. Chap. 101 A merrie Iest, by occasion of a Perwig: Of Pride: Our vaine Progresse throughout this life: Of the Intemperance and Amisses in some Iusticers. Chap. 102
A plaine Loue-letter, from a countrie Bachelor to Iestins faire Daughter. Chap. 103 Her opinion of honest Plainnesse, Opposition to Pride and Flatterie, Approbation of the meane-Estate, and Resolution for her Louer. Chap. 104 Of Nest, Lady of Brechnock, her dishonorable Reuenge against her owne Sonne, &c. Chap. 105 Of William de Bruse his inhumane Crueltie. Chap. 106 Of Wales intirely subiected to England, &c. A Monarchall Re∣uerture of Brute his Diuident, &c. Chap. 107 FINIS.
THE FOVRTEENTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. LXXX. SET Is the soueraigne Sonne did shine when paperd laste our penne, Yet still alike the Lighte, so God makes Fa∣uorites of men. And hee eternall bids that wee our terren Gods obay, As Ours shall we, though should to vs his Edict other say, Than that we sing our England now in Brit∣tane, howbeit, Not suddenly we can, perhaps, innatiue Termes forgitte. Nor shall, nor shoulde yt aught distaste that England alters name, Sith it nor Yts laste Mistresse can by aught be outed fame. Nor Britane as a nouell Name to England we admitte, Sith frequent and authentick be Aucthorities for it. Nor Albion to haue been, or but a Fiction we dispute: But, if no Fiction, Albion then is Senior vnto Brute. Yea, that this Latter was haue been for Names-skill, would confute, When in that primer Race of Kings in name the Sixth did sute. Then Albions England, our poore Lynes, be Britanes England now, Or eyther, nayther, or what-else: Okes breake when reeds but bowe. But who takes notice of a Toy, the Title or our Booke?
Or how should Either preiudice though curiously mistook? Auspiciously then, Muse go on, remembring by the way Our late interred Mistresse, and of all our Masters say Their varied Reignes, so Hers from Theirs the better to purtraie. Yea speake, and speake aduisedly, Those that in Thes be read, (Not Romists, nather Humors in Preiudicacie lead) Whose in this Catalogue of Reignes compeered hers last dead. All heere was then contraryed when the Conqueror was King, and oft his vassalde English he gainst forraine Swords did bring Rufus, that for excessiue Chase vnpeopled many a towne, And perisht in that sporte, was not of few malign'd his Crowne. Like deare to Mercury and Mars, first Henry voyded not That Auarice and Rigor to his Virtues were a blot. From Stephens first Intrution to the poynt of his decease No tongue was lesse familier heere then was the tonge of Peace. For Empery more puissant than was second Henry none; Yeat his Ambitious prelats, Queene, and sons disturbd that Throne. The valerous Cor-de-lion by his warres and ransome so Exhausted Treasure, as no more, but Gods, could men forgoe. Saue that the better worser spead, Iohns raigne mighte be compar'd, To Michaels and the Dragons fight, so Crowne and Miter squarde What with a French-imbulled-Kinge, and Barrons often broyls, Third Henryes thence prouoked war that publique-weale turmoyles The French, Welsh, Scots, becaus their skorge, yll brook't first Edwards glory, Nor welcō'd we a ceaselesse war, though full of worth his story. Yf what was second Edwards Rule be askt, is aun'swerd thus, So turbulent as may be wisht that neuer such rule vs, Third Edward was armipotent, his Subiects nerethelesse him murmuringly did tax that them taxes did oppresse. The second Richard ouerkind to Parasits, and foe to aunchant Cronets, feweld all might fier to Englands woe. But his Erectment hardly did fourth Henry pleade vnto: and that he gainde the Cause at length, loue more then law did doe:
Whether fifte Henryes costly warres, or death (he so belou'd) More touched His ingrudge or greefe, a question may be mou'd. Sixt Henry, rare for Sanctity, more fit for Cowle than Crowne, and ouerruled in his rule, much pittied, was put downe. Fourth Edward in reuerted raigne to Yorkests found small reste, Or England foyzon: Kings contend and Comons be opprest. His Infant sonne Edward the fift, vncrowned not vncroste, Mou'd cōmon tears when for his Crown both Crown & life he loste, The Regi-cids, third Richards reigne, was tragick vnto all, And lastly to himself▪ for so to ryse is so to fall. Seauenth Henry, the Vnitor of those Flowers that long dissented, Of his Retriuers Prooling much (as well he might) repented. Eight Henry, though victorious and triumphant, was not quitt of mvrmerd Axes: Recluses vn-cloystred grudged yt. Sixt Edward, of most pregnant witte and virtues, Englands hope, Too young to stint his Princes stryfes vext, not vnvext, the Pope. Queene Maryes nature good, abus'd by Romes seducing Crew, might haue allowance, saue for blood from Saints her Butchers drew. How also from the Fourth to the Eight of Henryes did ensue A long deuouring ciuill warre, is History too trew. But we haue seene such peacefull warre, such warlike peace, and all So blest in prosperous Policie as Times admire it shall.
Chap. 81. NOR be it vnderstood not all fore-cited faulted much, But were for most renowned Kings, though Sub∣iects greefes we touch. Obserue we rather, euer since that Phocas prouded Rome With that big Title, supreame Sea, most Chronicles doe doome. (The workes for most of Friars and Monkes) all Princes bad or good, Not as they were, but as against or with her Pomp, they stood. Hence trecherous Vassales, Kings owne Sonnes, rebelling by her Bull, Whilst Princes good seem'd penn-Forelorns fild Romes Pantheon full. Then rather sportiue be her pennes than powrefull to depraue, Where willfull error blindeth not. But leauing Rome to raue, this Normaine race of Kings we taxe of Publique-weale offended for harshar Priuates than may be gainst her deceaste intended: Though all that royall Streene had much wherein to be commended: May there succeeding Off-springs such euen with the Sunne be ended. Elizabeth, compared yeat with Theis whence she descended, Not them among a Paritie is fully apprehended: For this heauen-rapted Lady best may Reignes Idea boste: and yee that faste for better faer may kisse, perhaps, the poste. O Stomacks cloyd with dainties, Churles amids Aboundance poore, Be your Phisition Pilles, and Wante Remembrancer of Stoore. Had not the same (an other-Same) succeeded that succeeds, Yee lesse had wrong'd the Phaenix dead, and more approu'd her deeds. Nor meruell we that Popelings her nor Puritanes should brook, The present Maiestie from Such like censuring must looke.
Nay, euen for very Nouelties that Vulgres doe affect, the best continued Gouernment as tedious they reiect, The Grecians, Romanes, euery Realms digests, obseruing this, Extenuates the wonder: Then a greate wonder is, That when so many learned Clarks and others shee did rayse, Or for a Metaphysick hold the Proiect of her prayse, or slothfully be scilent, or for weeping cannot write, or think from gratefull Offices her Toombe should them acquite, Or (likelier) tract of Lucre, which doth such a sent prefer, As in that present pleasante Chase they are at losse of her, That we touch first the Shoore wherto their statelier ships shold fare, which ydlie ride at anchor, whilst what we shall doe we dare, That is, at farthest but to haue of her a kenning, and Let Pilots expedite the rest that better knowe to lande. First though suppose an Elegie the proheme of my Muse, For her, whome shoulde we also blanch we also should abuse. Then let vs rather faulte to Art than Office, sith we owe To her heroick virtues more then how to pay we knowe, Of Expeditions, Vioges, Ayds vnto forreyn States, Tryumphant Victories, Escapes from many trecherous bates, Commenced in her Raigne in fewe we formerly did touch, her in-bred Vertues howbeit clame betterd Muse by much. Liue euer though, not for th'art myne, my Muse (no Muse, god wot) But in this Forehead of our Songe by Please-times now forgott. For those great Artists that did her aliue euen deifie, Now to her sowle-vnbodied doe meere Temporizers dye. When none so resteth glorefide by selfe-Achiuements, as By fame-retriued Digests that from lauriett Pennes doe pas. She blessed one, vnblissed now, re-blissed might he liue, If that a Legend of her life he to the world shall giue. Expecting which, some pen-past Tracts of ours in Theame so deepe Shall to the compleate Science of that wowed Author sleepe: Sufficeth her into her lawdes we through A Cranny peepe.
CHAP. 82. ELIZABETH (Euen Heer me thinks, repeating but thy name Illustrious turne our lynes, thy selfe sufficing to thy fame) That sleepest sweetly to thy selfe that so to vs did'st wake, From vs in letters leaste, not laste in loue, these Nombres take. to be suspect to adulate (although our eares haue heard vngratefull tongues) of feare no cause, for truth will bee preferd. From long imprisonment, and still expectance to haue dyde Of papalle Furie, God, on whome she euermore relyde: Maugre her Foes (not then a few, for scarce a Prince beside By Rome not either awed, or could other Loore abide) possessed her of Englands Throne, vs of the Gospells lighte, By her with constant zeale vphild gainst Schismes and potent spight. A princesse fayre in flower of youth to heauen-wards more deuoted, Or one in all that Earth affoords aboundantler that flooted, Yeat lesser vpon wordly Pompe, Maiestick though, that dooted, And dying old a Virgin, times by-passed none haue noted, The mighty King of Sweuen sewd to wedde her for his Queene. Braue Troupes with Valoies heire of Fraunce, heer for the like were seen. The Archduke too of Austrich, and greate Potentates a many much laboured her Marrage, not obtayned though of any. Howbeit affablitie and intertainmentes sweete, Mixt with admired Maiesty, in her did ioyntly meete. None better aunswerd Ambasies in whatsoeuer tongue: Effected more in Christndome, yea, Infidelles among:
Our either Achademyes heard her learning much expresse: No Lady Could more Courtshipp, or well-nigardiz'd yt lesse, For Musick, portly Gate, and daunce did more applause possesse: More louing to her subiects, and from them more loue did winne: Rewarded more well-doings, and was greeued more at sinne: Had causes more of Rygor, yeat more mercifull there in: Preserued more of the publique Peace, our Realme becomming so Even Achelous horne to vs Palladium gainst the Foe. Her Bountie ofte innabled gainst their Foos themselues to quitte, Distressed Kings and States, the Law of Nations praysing yt: Whence Forrens did our Labours, whilst at home in peace we sitt. She and her Senators vnlike those Citizens that so Once doored on their Treasure that, subdewed by the foe, And lockt into their Treasury, hee doom'd them starue or feede Vppon theyr goulde, which, yf ymploy'd, had helpt them in their need Nor lesse her prayse in this (And may all Princes like obserue) She choose a Coūsell wise, and not from theyr Designes would swerue And whoso greate whom she not awde, what Fauorite spard shee, Yf dangerous to the State. Not aught in rashnesse would decree. Her Temperance, rare virtues and heroyck parts were such As perfect Panegyricks heere should but defect too much. More blessed year, her Sowle, that should no longer heere soiourne Did vnto God, from whome yt cam, in Sanctitie retourne. The passed, present, following Dayes were gloomy, Aier, yea marble And trūkes of trees seem'd then to weep, no birds were heard to warbl Beasts silent, that with Rationales was all a-mort suppose, When heauen resum'd her soule, and earth it Paragon should loose. Rest may that better parte of thine with God, and it in graue In sweet security, till both vnited glory haue. And should Succession fault in not remunerating thee With such a Monument, as is both wish't and hop't shall be, Thy long and glorious Scepter and innatiue Virtues shall Eternize Trophies to thy Ghoste, and checke Detractors all.
Of which are some would States-men seeme, but Parasits more sure, (and such, no doubt, respected where they would their hopes immure) Doe from the Pollicy of those her dayes, and from that State whereby and wherin she did rule and leaue this Realme of late so derrogate, as if death sick, and meanes exhaust for better, had England languisht, only to this Change for health a debter. What Pollicie precelled though it she preceded in? Or can to Her succeeded be Precellant? who hath byn? vngratefull, or forgitfull men, or Apes to Innouation, Though with a prudent King indeede be eik't an ancient Nation, Knowe our Weale-publiques blisse is now a parale'lld Creation, wherein Religion and our Lawes persever in their Station, Yea blisse vs doth the Simpathy of Nows to Thens Relation. For when the Sun that now is sett in our Horizon shin'd, Yt gaue a lefte completion to our Weale in euery Kind. to hers like Raygne, saue his that raignes, more wisht is than deuin'd: A Phoenix for a Phoenix t'ys in his Suns-rise we finde. More to theyr proper Elements inaugurated none, Than shee to hers by-passed, he to his possessed Throne. And may his practis'd Royalty, and royall precepts frame His Issue to like issue, and we pray and hope the same: And may those tongues fall-fowle that her interred shall defame. What Princes though but some, at least for others faults, wil blame thē faults which wold Parlaments could cleanse as can a letter name thē. For of our Alphabet the. P. doth omenously begin Of these this much distasted Ranck, She taxt perhaps therin, Though vse-full euery one, and none, by her abuse a sinne: As Proctors, Puruiors, Purseuants, Post-stagres, Peter-men, Promotors, Paritors, and, as offensiue now and then, Two for their Functions reuerent Pees. Besides which three-times three, Papists and giddy Puritanes, were other Rankes not free Of Publique-weales Antipathie, prooling and peruerse, P. Which happely may faulct as much euen now as, raigning She:
Rests then by lawfull meanes Amisse in Pees amended be. Now let vs briefly ouerrun vnto his present Throne, That holds of God by Nature, Law, and Worth this Isle his owne, The Stories Nationall of Picts and Scots, once Kingdomes twaine Within the same, the former long armipotent in vaine, The latter altring now in Name through new-inlarged Raigne. From These some doubt an Antidate of their arriuall Heere, Of Those to haue been Pre-Regnants Authorities be cleere. Mean while thy Lawds, Elizabeth, toucht Here touch short of thee, Of Whom Posterities shall speake more gratefully than wee, Would I could work vnto thy Worth, though then I ceast to bee. But for we cannot saile thy Seas, our sailes we therefore strike, And loth to leaue, of thee take leaue, that hast not left thy like. Of Picts, Scots, Welsh be now abridg'd, such Turnes as times did see, Howbeit little Statrie, and among is mixed glee. CHAP. 83. WHether of Agathirsian Scythes, or Humbers Heere Remaigne, Or Brutaines, braue Recusants of the Romane seruile Raigne, (The last the Likeliest) were the Picts exact dis∣pute that will, Those curious Ambiguities we leaue to others skill. But briefly (for we must be briefe, since Enuie did prouide Their fame, if possible their Name, from Historie to hide) We shall the warlikenesse compend of those fame-wronged Men, Obscur'd in all their Monuments by Scots, and curbd in Pen.
Yeat not the Legend proper to the Scots can wholy blanch Their Mention, or thē name but needs their Prowesse must aduāce. Much owned of the English, all of Brutaines Continent The Scots possesse, was then and ere that Ferquard Hither sent The fatall Chaier, cald Penthland, till the Picts, a People stout, Were by th'inuading Irish-Scots long thence debelled out. But for we nam'd the fatall Chaier (the Stone we meane therein) First whence, and how esteem'd we shall to calculate begin. The Scots (how truly censure as ye please) do father it The Stone that Iacob, when as he from Esaus wroth did git, Did sleepe vpon, whilst Angels on a Ladder came and went, And the Messias from his Loynes was promis'd to be sent, A iourney safe, a safe Returne, a broodious Issue, and To them Confirmance to enioy all Canans happie Land. One Gathelick from Egypt brought that Stone, their Stories say: But if be askt how thither brought, why sufferd there to stay, When long time after Moses Thence did Iacobs Seed conuay, May thus be answred: Iacob, note (so ceremonious still That to his Births, his Burials, euen his Wels, as good or ill Did then and there betide, gaue names assining) not in this On which he saw such Visions, had such Promises remisse. For, saith the Text, he sacrifiz'd thereon, and named it The House of God: nor, when returnd from Laban, did forgit To pay his Vowes thereon, and had it still in high Esteeme: At his Remoue to Egypt then from Canan may we deeme, Amongst so many Carrages, he left it not behind. But likely is his Seed, led Thence, There left it, for we finde That, saue a Pittance fitting them Thence flying and pursew'd, Not aught of Theirs they carrie he fore-warnd that all fore-vewd. Their Legend hath, this Gathelus, to Pharaos daughter wed, In whom the Plagues of Egypt for the Hebrues terror bred, (For, saith the Text, with them also thence many Strangers fled) Obseruant of the Hebrew Rites solemniz'd on that Stone,
Vnto Gallicia (of his Name Port-Gathleck thenceforth knowne) Transported it, the which his Seed did Thence to Ireland bring, And Thence to Penthland, crowning thē on it their Heer-first-King. First Edward wanne it Thence to vs, though Prophesies did sing: The Scotes sall bruke that Realme as natiue Ground: Gif Weirds faile nocht) quhair eir this Chair is found. Gallicia, Ireland, Scotland, and now England, altering Name, As seuerall Reuolutions thus of Time produc't the same, Haue seene this Prophesie performd, by Destinie not ame. Nor price nor prayer back from Hence this sacred Stone could win, Which of our Coronations since the locall Rite hath bin. Time, Place, and Persons too inferre some Likelihoods: they say That Gatheleck was Cecrops sonne, that then in Greece did sway. The Pharao Achoris (whom they doe Bochoris mis-name) Neere then ruld Egypt, Howbeit succeeded by the same Heart-hardned Pharao, Chencres, whose pursute the Seas did tame. The ancient Irish Manners and their Superstitions add, Which, if conferd with Egypts, Thence may be intended hadd. But, not without some Mysterie, both pretious and propitious, Ere superstitious Papistrie, begeting Reliques vitious, Had men mis-lead, thousand of yeeres this Stone was held, and is. Howbeit pardon vs if here we intimate amis, As sometimes Some, alluding Ours it winding to the taile Of Troies Palladium hailed from the Greekes to Ilions baile. But also with the Shrine the Saint we presently possesse, Vniting Crownes, Scotch Prophesies performed nerthelesse. But what of Prophesies? t'is God effecteth all in all: Our Fathers longed for this Day: may we it happie call. And happie Mary hadst thou bin, and it both Kingdomes good, Had not false friends thy Marrage Here with our yong Prince with∣stood. But it effecteth in thy Sonne that in thy selfe did faile, And where we feard tēpestuous Gusts we hope a prosperous Gaile. Iames, Io-Pean sing we thee: long liue, raigne, and preuaile.
No doubt from Natures Secrets Spirits teach admirable skill, Be Sagist, Lamist, Strigist though, or Pythonist that will. I haue (not superstitiously) obserued times not few Old Wordings, which vnhapned are vnheeded, prouing trew: Mongst others, worth the note, an old & common Speech in Ware: Where Men, askt idly it whereof the Asker might despare, Would answer, that performance should or paiment be, When as the King comes vnto Wiggen: And that comming came to pas When first he entred Ware, euen when it vnexpected was. So base a Cottage once, but now vsde with a better Thing, Begot that saying first: thus Time with it doth wonders bring: They liue did word it many yeeres ere hapt or borne this King. * More serious this: his Highnesse then a Tenderling, did I (A Puple) reade, wrote time past kens, of him this Prophesie, Or call it as yee please, that Terme Clerks to these Times denie: Post Iacobum Iacobus, Iacobum Iacobus, quoque Quintus, At sextus Iacobus Regno regnabit vtroque. After a Iames shall be a Iames, a third Iames, and a Fourth, A fift Iames also, but the Sixt shall sway the Scepters both. Besides three youthfull Queens that stop that Currant likely might, Great Interruptions, ouer-blowne, we also could recite. But by the Deitie it so was destinate, and who Reioyceth not that that great worke of God is not to doe? How Hence, with more than much adoe, the Scots at last expell The Here predominating Picts ensueth now to tell.
CHAP. 84. WHen from the Hebredes the Scots had footing in this Isle, They and the Picts allie and held in peacefull League a while: So populous, so circumspect, in Walls and Armes so strong, That of such Neighbourhood the Brutes so ielious were of wrong, As gainst the wilinesse of These, and warliknesse of Those, They more affected Policie than hazarding of blowes: Fore-seeing such Combinement might their Enuie ouermatch. A fained Ambasie therefore they to the Picts dispatch: With blandishments, like Aesops Fox deluding Aesops Crow, The hansell of their Scepter new congratulating so, The Britons Wealth and Prowse also they arrogated such, And from the Scots by Contraries did derogate so much, Remembring (which the Picts themselues could not forget) the day In Oracle, when Thence the Scots should driue the Picts away, With many like Atractiues and Ditractions to and fro, As none but Brutaine now was friend, and none but Scotland foe. Anon through Penthland was proclam'd Auoidance in short space Of euery Scot on paine of death: wherefore like law tooke place In Scotland also: neither part the punishment omit That might inflict the Penaltie, the Britons glad of it. Whereby from Riots did it grow to Termes of open warre, The which with Aides vnto the Picts the Brutons did prefarre. But Things seem'd then more intricate than that the Scots alone
Yeat oft it haps, by how much more high Dignities preferre, So much the more, though lesse secure, men liue irreguler: But Insolencie hath a time aswell to fall as erre, To which no Opportunities but doe Effects efferre: Then, breathing Clods, from Actions ill let ill Euents deterre. One Dowall, There then gratious, slew this Nathak at the last, And Rewthar, wedded to the King of Penthlands daughter, plac't In Scotlands Throne, howbeit in Minoritie: wherefore One Ferquhard, for this law infring'd, brought all things in vprore. Or rather vnder this pretex he drifted soueraigne Sway, Whereto did this Occasion seeme to him a troden way: And former Popularitie, whereto Ambition weads, Had furnisht him of plebale Friends, a Beast of many heads. On which, as if on Pegasus, ambitious Gallants ride, Though it an euer-break-neck haue such forged Persees tride. Vnhappie Popularitie, that like to Aesops Ape With culling kils thy Darlings, whilst the lesser loued scape: Senselesse Ambition, that forgets or not obserues at all That, if not selfe-Straines, Policie must temporize thy fall: Fond Vulgers, that a Phaëton a Phoebus vse to call: For in bi-fronted Ianus is your Science none or small. Well, howsoeuer, Ferquhard troupes the flower of Scotlands Prowse: All Penthlands Chiualrie no lesse of Dowals act allowes. Now either People had displaide their Onsets, and was fought A Battell, dearer than the which no Souldiours euer bought, For slaughter as perseuerent as may be said or thought. Whereby their either Kingdome heere some following yeeres did faile: For, in this Disaduantage, them the Britons did assaile, And did the Scots to Ireland, and the Picts to Orkney chase: Where either liued in Exile, till altred thus the case. Impatiently they twice sixe yeeres Prescription Hence endure, When with such Forces as they had, although but small yeat sure, They (met of such forelorned Soules yt since their Countries wrack,
Remote from Men, in Woods and Caues had liu'd in fearfull lack) Returne, and with those despret Bands, incountering their foes, Had now the better of the Field: Whence this Attonement groes: That Scots and Picts their owne, as earst, should amplie reposseed Till Iulius Caesars Entrie, so of Warres this Isle was freed. Him to resist, that out of Fraunce the Britons did inuaide, Came Picts and Scots, repelling Hence the Romaines by their aide. Howbeit, in the following yeare he wonne a Tribute hence, Which might haue faild him, had as earst concur'd the Picts defence. As yet the Northern Regions search the Romaines did neglect, Vntill (vnto whose Ruines none can certainly direct, Though Penthlands pride for stately Towers & strength of walls pre∣tended Vespasian wonne Camelon, still hild Romes, till Rome there ended. Bellona seemed in this Ile her Residence to haue: Where, of three Scepters, scarcely one it selfe afoote could saue. The Romaines, vnder diuers of their Caesars-selues, but still The worthiest of their Generals this Ile with Armes did fill At diuers times, with diuers change of good and bad euent, But to it tackling euer found vndanted Penthland bent. For when the Britons were subdewd, and Caratack the Scot, That for his Courage and Conduct continued glorie got, Euen then and nerethelesse the Picts did not in courage quaile, But, oft Victorious, of themselues the Romaines did assaile: Hence chacing some their Presidents, and some their Legions slue: The Romaines would not giue thē peace, and could them not subdue. Who, brauely breaking thus the Ise to Scots, their old Consorts, Both twaine made hauock of their foes, demolishing their Forts, Till Romaines now in either Land were dispossessed quite, And, drifting oft Reentries, oft repented them of fight. Heere only Brutaine hild for Rome, and many yeares from thence Arm'd still against the Picts and Scots, with losse for recompence. But leauing Romaines thrilled thence, and Brutes by Rome opprest, What hapt meane while betwixt the Picts and Scots shall be digest.
How Brutons chased hence the Picts and Scots it hath been said: And toucht shalbe how These thrald Those, for all their Romain aid. Ensueth first how Picts draue hence the Scots, though Scots at last Extirpt the Picts: for worser heere then Fortunes Lotterie past. CHAP. 86. PRetious is Peace, yet be obseru'd how warlike Nations oft Haue thereby than by outward Armes more Inconuenience cought: These two bellosious People cleer'd no sooner forren swords, But euery Toy a Trumpet to some ciuill Broyle affords. Nor could their Northerne Climate brooke two Suns in it to shine, For sometime This, and sometime That did violently decline. But, passing by their either oft Domesticke Discords great, Of either Kingdome shouldering the other we intreate. The former Lawe, disabling all in Nonage Scotlands Raigne, By three competing Gardenship was now in tearmes againe. Of which one Romaks (also of the Picts bloods-royall) Plea Was swords, not words, and did of Scots by Picts great numbers slea: For which both he and Picts became so odious to the Scots, As to destroy both him (then King) and them they sleepe no Plots. As Romaks Entrie, so his Raigne tyrannous was, vntill His Nobles did conspire, and him by armes pursued kill: Against the Picts their Power as yet inabled not their will. Wherefore to them, preparing then Reuenge for Romaks death, They sent Excuses: but in vaine their Legates spent their breath.
Saue Armor would no answere serue the Picts: whereof did grow A Battle fearce, where either tooke and gaue the ouerthrow: For both their Kings did perish, & with bloud the fields did flow. Vnto the Picts succeeded though the better of that fight: But shortly after with the like the Scots did them requite. With such perseuerant hatred and ferocitie they both Afflict each other, as but bloud might qualifie their wroth: Vntill the Picts (impacable, say Scots, by Romaines aide) Disseizen of the scottish Raigne within this Ile had made. And whosoeuer, if a Scot, that howsoeuer kept Themselues vnslaughtred was exild, no Sexe or Age except Romak, Angusian, Fethelmak, and Eugen did succeed In Septer and in slaughter: And of Pict-kings three we reade Succeedingly then also slaine in this infestious strife: And of a pitious Storie of King Eugens widowed wife: Also of Hergest King of Picts, too much to Rigor bent, In banishing the Scots, the which himselfe did soone repent. For, whilst he thought to him and his no safetie vnlesse All scotsh-Soules from their bodies or their Soile he dispossesse, By curious search Cartangis, Queene to Eugen slaughtred late, Like to a second Hecuba condoling Priams fate, Was haled from her husbands Tombe, washt with her hartie teares: Who, when before Prince Maximus the Romaine she appeares, And was demaunded why she had against the Edict staide, The bewtious Queene, with teares among, this sober Answer made. I am, quoth she, of husband, friends, riches, and hope bereft, And by how much the more I thus in Miserie am left, So much the lesse am to be feard: ah, then me thinks my foes Might brooke my Presence, at the least to sport them in my woes. Not Brutaine, where my Father rules, shall see me thus deiect: Then giue me death in Scotland, els my dying life protect. The valerous Romaine President, commiserating her, Besides Exilement pardoned, he richly did prefer
The good distressed Lady. But the Picts enuying it, Dispoyled Her and Hers, and did els-what too much vnfit: Nor on the Felons to do Lawe did Maximus omit. Whereat, so farforth as he might, King Hergest then repinde: And how he added Scotland to Romes Empire puts in minde The President, whom nerethelesse the Queene did gratious finde, And, mauger Hergest, her abode in Scotland he assignde. There did she daylie Obsequies vnto her Husbands Ghoste, And prayed for their valiant Soules that perisht in his hoste. Also King Hergest him bethinks of his late error now, When more nor lesse he could than as the Romaines him allow: And for his old confedrate friends the Scots was ill apaide, In whose exile he had himselfe and his to Rome betraide. For where as they, combined, gaue euen to the Romaines peace; To either People now, disioynd, did wonted freedome cease: Small things by Concord prosper, great by Discord do decrease. The Picts Succession to the Crowne, their auncient lawes and all Were by the Romaines disanuld, and nought brought in but thrall: In which respect the Suffrings of the Scots to theirs were small. Then Hergest, whose great spirit could no Seruitude abide, Inuolued in Impatience, stabd himselfe, and so he dide. By this vnhappy Quarrell thus eight Kings were made away, Scotland no Kingdome then, and this of Penthland in decay, Two forren Armies fell that to restore the Scots assay.
CHAP. 87. THe Scots, that more than fortie yeares had been in hard Exile, Were by the Picts, that vnder-went the Romaine yoke meane while, Recal'd by double Ambasie: who, though they were disperst, By labourd Opportunities of their returne conuerst. Fergus (a fatall name vnto the Scots beginning-Raigne, And why not This their first king here, & Scots for Gothes mistain?) One neerest of the blood, who then in Denmarke did remaine, That with the Gothes had sacked Rome, and Thence brought wealth & fame, Collects an Armie, and arriues in Scotland with the same. To whom assemble soone the Picts, and, Quarrels passed-by, Against the Romaines Either did their forces whole applye: And in their Territories slew and made their foes to flye. When Victorine (then either Realme to Rome in Prouince was, As Britaine too) thither, to stay their forward Swords, did passe Of Romefied Britons and Emperials warre so great, As, after bloodie Battels, coold theirs and those others heate. For both their Armies, broken with these Battels, did returne: Esteeming it in vaine as yet against the Prick to spurne. Meane while in friendly League the Picts and Scots together liue, And Skermidges both of and to their foes did take and giue. One Placidus, by Victorine for Rome Deputed then, Fought with the Picts and Scots vnto the losse of most his men. To either Propriarie so was either Realme againe Of Romaines left, to leaue their holds to saue their liues then faine.
Yet both their Kings in following fight did brauely tyne their liues: Whence long the Romaine cause against the Armes cōfedrat thriues. But neuer did the Picts omit occasion when they might Reuenge them on th'Emperiales by their Stratigmes or fight. In fine, the Romaine Monarchie Els-where did languish so, As their disabled Conquests heere they of themselues forgo. Reforming first their thrise-reard wall of fourescore miles in length, Against the Picts defencelesse, though of wondrous Art & strength: When thence▪forth long the Picts and Scots did Brutaine so inthrall, As lastly in their Ayde they did the Saxons hither call. Who, by Degrees (the Welsh except, so named Saxonlie) Subdued Brutaine (England now) vnto their Soueraigntie. The lacerated Empire of the Romaines, though with griefe, Disclaim'd the Brutaines, at the least could yeeld them no reliefe. Imbellious through their Policie, adde Pestilence thereto, Succeeded with th'vnlabourd Earths sterilitie: but who Wold think that Plētie more offence thā war, death, dearth, should do? The Earth then fertile, men became effeminat and vaine, Luxurious, Idle, Bacchanists, and gladly intertaine, Like Issachres, their Seruitude, Their foes but aske and haue Conditions such as they themselues, how grosse someuer, craue, Tribute, with Pledges at the Picts their owne Deuotion: so A sensuall, seruile, sinfull life the Brutons vnder-go. Romes Policie, in plentie Sloth, and ciuill Discords heere From that it was, brought Brutaine thus to Nullitie wellneere. O Brutons (diffrent Brutons from your Auncestors, that oft Victoriously gainst these your Foes and Romaine Legions fought: Who, had ye neuer been secure, had neuer you subdude, Nor needed on th' Armoricanes that Raigne ye should obtrude) Euen now for then I should be greeu'd at your dis-brittish't swords, But that your then resumed Prowse, when Welsh amends affords. And, that your Arthure comes againe, so far-forth we allow It Prophesie, as Brutaine dead with him reuiueth now:
That is, Brutes Baptisme of this Ile, that ana-baptizd grew By diuers names in diuers parts, Iames doth through-out renew. That Arthur Tuder was your Prince, and yee, inthrald before, Were then infranchiz'd one with vs adds it fulfild the more. But to our Brutes, in mind deiect and warr-bit, be progrest. CHAP. 88. SOme (not degenerated though) oft instanted the rest, To imitate their Auncestors, and Slothful∣nesse detest: By rightfull Armour to remaund Theirs of their foes possest, Their liues to better, with their foes couragi∣ously to cope, Not to be Fortunes Infidels, but better times to hope. Which Counsell wrought, & soone their foes had newes how they conspire, It being to the Picts and Scots fresh fewell to their fire. For, hearing Constantine with his french-Britons now ashore, And all reuolted heere from them, for first Reuenge therefore They slew the brittish Pledges: Then conuent their Forces all, And with the Brutaines fought a Field, to Eithers losse not small. This Constantine th' Armoricane, of Brutaine now made King, The scotch King slaine, and Picts repeld, did both to reason bring. And disciplind in martiall and in morall Practise his, Till him a Pict did murther: Nor like death his Sonne did misse, By trecherie of Vortiger, that his Successor is. How, odious to his Subiects, he inuits the Saxons aid, Who thence till now haue Lorded heere, it hath els-where bin said.
Faire Virgin, quoth he, ouer-faire to be a Virgin euer, Although a Recluse yet to be a Relaps feare thou neuer: Increase and multiplie, saith God: or should but Nature preach, Assure thee such a Votaresse might iustifie a breach. I dare absolue thee of thy vow, on perill of my Soule, That am as thou a Regular, but now farewell my Cowle. Then like himselfe he shewd himselfe Gallant euery way, And did by Art, gifts, Eloquence, and what not her assay? But all in vaine, so opposite to Loue did she perseuer, As that vnto his Pandresse Arte he was enforc't to leaue her. Now by your blessed Beades, quoth she, your self you quitted well Against his importunitie. Yet this I must you tell: He is a proper Gentleman, sharp witted, sweet of hauour, Of good parts, great possessions, and well worthy of your fauour. Amongst your Sisterhood I know are amorous Wenches some, But for they are professed I must reuerently be domme: For she that Sainct-seems, lookes demure, turns vp the white of eie, At Shrifts and clergie-Standings can a common-Place applie, Hers Indenotion, not to be Deuotion were a lie. So powerfull is Religion as, but cloaking vnder it, Auoyds to be expresly taxt of want-zeale, or want-wit. Your superstitious vowes, if broke, at most are veniall sinne: Or rather, kept, you do gainst God and Nature fault therein. Admit the Gentleman should speed, should I against it spurne? No, not to let it were lesse fault than still to let him burne. Poore Girles (not Gods) but few of you so sainctified I know, But sometimes to coniectures of Concupiscence ye grow. And what prouoking more thereto than liues which yee do leade, In pleasant Mansions, idle Ease, selfe-Pranking, fill of bread? And lustie flesh takes little keepe of letting fall a Beade, But into Sinnes restraind vs most so much the more doth leade. If needs you will that marriage nor mens loue shall you allure, Nature and Vowes are tempted oft, but Guanors Tombe makes sure:
(Was thither by the Trot traind forth the Nouesse, so to proue Whether she would a Virgin die, or might be hoped loue) That you by Nature should be chaste (the Contrarie who not?) I hardly can beleeue: but if? what harme I pray were got, If should you tread vpō her Tombe, whence Barrennesse doth gro, And end of amorous Burnings, since your vow importeth so? The Nunne, that euermore had heard and held it as her Creed, That she that trod vpon that Tombe of such Euent should speed, Did blush (and blame her not that so was put vnto her shifts) Thus on the Beldame did retort instance of her owne drifts. Mother, quoth she, good manners were the Elder former go. What I, that hope a husband, nor despaire of issue? (So An Aunchanter than I hath had) by sweet Saint Pancrace, no, The old-wife said. Nor, quoth the Nunne, meane I to be the furst Of this our Age treads on that Tombe to women so accurst. But thus a possibilitie of yeelding from the Nunne, And by the subtle Exorcist of prizing being wonne, They back returne, that at the Tombe more durst not than was done. She, that at least so blur'd an Eie, for battle fought and all, Euen to sollicite earnestly, on such fresh hope, did fall. How Cresida scornd Troilus and Plauges had manifold, How oft the Goblin Incubus Loue-wronged had contrould, And Iphis for the Cyprian Lasse fore-did himselfe she tould. Like tales and Metamorphosies passe many in this chat: Nor lackt the Ballad of the Maid transformed to a Cat, And Arthurs Queene, there tombd, so doombd, for falsed loue, fell pat. So many Incantations, lyes, feares, hopes, instanced shee, With amorous Sonners feelingly of passion and loues glee, As lastly did the non-plust Nunne vnto her Charmes agree. But leauing Guanora her Tombe, and none on it to tread, (For Women be nor Fooles, nor Saincts) ensueth now to reade, (Which asks a tragick Penne to write) the dire downe-fall of those That florished so long and found at last too bitter foes.
CHAP. 90. WHen Charles the Great for France of Scots Con∣fedracie obtain'd Of mutuall aides against English, which hath thence till now remain'd, Els, likely, ouer either Realme long since had England raign'd, At least by intermariage, still by that Compact restraind: For nere hild League lesse violate or permanent like while, French rescuing Scots, and Scots the French, abrode and in this Isle: Which God, in Nature now and law dissoluing, ill appayes Enuious Fraunce it selfe that helpt and harmed vs that wayes: Who questions then an Vnion that such inconuenience stayes? What Nation seuers Policie where One one Land obayes? Our Elders opportuned like occasion hereunto, When whatsoeuer they had done that League did still vndoo: No maruell, selfe-securitie France in that loue did woo: But be an Vnion perfected, and storme it skils not who. The Scot, I say, him to secure of Picts, refusing so To tripertite that League, did wed (whence Penthlands ouerthro) Fergusia, Hungust King of Picts his sister: Alpine, sonne Of this said Marriage, challenge to the Pictish Throne begun. Which, had it not bin destinate to Scots, had neuer bin, Behou'd such obstacles to be disperst ere it they win, Nor swords more resolute than theirs could counterpleade therin. Achaius, Alpins father dead, were inter-Regnants twaine Succeedingly ere Alpine was by lawe enabled Raigne.
Both dying issulesse, to him did Scotlands Crowne accrew: Who also, from his Mother, claime to Penthland did pursew: Where, though he ends disastrously, two ante-Kings he slew. For Penthland was no easie taske to win, though lastly wonne, Yet with the losse on either part of many a mothers sonne. The Picts distasted nothing more than that a forren birth Should them subiect, rather than which they all had vowed death. The Scots also in Alpins right had all oblig'd their blood: Nor more was sworne on either side than whereunto they stood. Succeedingly two Pict-Kings fell in two such bloodie fields, As was indifferent whether part subdude, for neither yeelds: But either, sadly for their slaine, and gladly for returne, Retier their weakned Forces that in wisht reuenge did burne. When season serued Alpine soone did recollect his Armes: To Brudus King of Picts likewise his fierie people swarmes. More resolutely than these two no Armies euer met, Nor Captaines that mens courages more thā these Kings did whet. When long was fought on either part with doubtfull warres euent, On Brudus side the better of that bloudie bargaine went. No ransoming of Scots, but all subdued then were slaine: In which vnchancie battell was King Alpine Prisnor taine: From whom, first manacled, they hewd his better-worthy head, And pold it on their Citie walls for signe how Scots had spead. O too too erred iolitie, and insolencie strange, Transporting Fortunes wantons past expectance of a change. Some Scots impatiently indur'd such View of their disgrace, Who faind them Picts, and gaining so conuenient time and place, Conuaied thence King Alpins head, well guerdond of his sonne: By whom to renouate the Warres his Nobles thus were wonne. Their former losse dishartned them so much that when, in vaine, He oft had wowd their aids, he seemd expectant to remaine: Conuenting, as for other cause, them, feasted, and prouides Their Lodgings in his Pallace, and in euery Chamber hides
One clad in fishes scales, a club of Muscane in one hand, In th'other was a bugle horne, and all at midnight stand Before each sleeping Nobles bed, & through the horne thus spake. * Thou scottish Heros, at the least to God his Angell wake: Kenneth your King must be obaid, and Picts be ouerthrowne, * Assist him lest thou perish now th'Almighties will is knowne. The wakened Lords beleeud that Voyce not humaine, & behild, (For naturally that wood in darke giues Shine, which now had fild Each roome) the vision, in a tryse that vanished, for when The wood and scales were hid was all in sudden darkenesse then. This voyce and vision did affright the Nobles, and next day Each vnto other did the same in secrecie bewray: All iump of one same time, sight, speach, and therefore all beleeue It was from God, and for the warres so long delayed greeue: The King did fraine their whisprings, and themselues to him they shreeue. Who likewise did affirme himselfe so visited that night: By which Elusion all were brought against the Picts to fight. Like guiles were frequent in those dayes, so Exorcists and Friers Confirmd in superstition men, and spead their owne desires. Of Fairies, Goblins, walking Lights, & like chat Grandams much, Nor am my selfe incredulous that haue bin, and be such: Yet sauoreth, me thinks, a Lie this that of late befell, Which, though report should fable, is no harmefull iest to tell.
CHAP. 91. A Shepheard, whilst his Flock did feede, him in his Cloke did wrap, Bids Patch his Dog stand Sentenell, both to secure a nap, And lest his Bagpipe, Sheephooke, Skrip, and Bottell (most his wealth) By Vagrants (more then many now) might suffer of their stealth. As he twixt sleepe and waking lay against a greene Banks side, A Round of Fairie-Elues, and Larrs of other kind, he spide: Who in their dancing him so charm'd, that though he wakt he slept, Now Pincht they him, antickt about, and on, and off him lept. Mongst them, of bigger bulke and voyce, a bare-breecht Goblin was, That at their Gamboles laughed, like the braying of an Asse. At once the Shepherds Bagpipe (for they also vsed it) Was husht, and round about him they, as if in Councell, sit. Vpon whose face the breechlesse Larr did set his buttocks bare, Bespeaking thus his beau-Compeers, like Caiphas in his Chaire. Poore Robin-good-fellow, sweet Elfs, much thanks you for this glee, Since last I came into this Land a Raritie to see: When Nunnes, Monks, Friers, and Votaries were here of euery sort, We were accustomed, ye wot, to this and merrier sport. Wo worth (may our great Pan, and we his Puples say) that Frier, That by reuealing Christ obscur'd to Christ did Soules retire. For since great Pans great Vicar on the Earth was disobaid In England, I beyond the Seas a Mal-Content haue staid. Whence, by a brute of Pouder that should blow to heauen or hell
The Protestants, I hither came, where all I found too well: And in the Catholick maine Cause small hope, or rather none: No sooner therefore was I come but that I wisht me gone. Was then a merrie world with vs when Mary wore the Crowne, And holy-water-sprinkle was beleeud to put vs downe. Ho ho ho ho, needs must I laugh such fooleries to name: And at my crummed messe of Milke each night, frō Maid or Dame To do their chares, as they supposd, when in their deadest sleepe I puld them out their beds, & made themselues their houses sweepe. How clatterd I amongst their Pots and Pans, as dreamed they? My Hempen Hampen Sentence, whē some tender foole would lay Me shirt or slop, them greeued, for I then would go away. Yee Fairies too made Mothers, if weake faith, to sweare that ye Into their Beds did foist your Babes, and theirs exchang'd to be. When yee (that eluish Manners did from eluish Shapes obserue) By pinching her that beat that child, made Child & Mother swerue, This in that erd beliefe, That, not corrected, bad that grew: Thus yee, I, Pope, and Cloysterers all in one Teame then drew. But all things haue gone crosse with vs since here the Gospell shind, Nor helps it aught that She that it vnclowded is inshrind. Well, though our Romish Exorcists and Regulars be outed, No lesse Hypocrisie mongst some their Contraries is doubted: And may they so perseuer and so perish Robin prayes: But too too zealous people are too many cloy my wayes. For that this Realme is in the Right, Rome in the wrong for Loore I must confesse, though much is else as faultie as before. To Farmers came I, that, at least, their Lofe and Cheese once freed For all would eate, but found themselues the parings now to need: So do their Lādlords rack their Rents: though in the Mannor-Place Scarce smoakt a Chimney: yet did Smoke perplex me in strāge cace. I saw the Chimneys cleerd of fire, where nerethelesse it smokt So bitterly, as one not vsed to like, it might haue chokt. But when I saw it did proceed from Nostrels, and from Throtes
Of Ladies, Lords, and sillie Groomes, not burning skins nor Cotes, Great Belsabub, thought I, can all spit fier as well as Thine? Or where am I? it cannot be vnder the torred Line. My fellow Incubus (who heere still Residence did keepe, Witnes so many dadlesse Babes begot on Girles asleepe) Did put me by that feare, and said it was an Indian weede, That feum'd away more wealth than would a many thousands feed. Freed of that feare, the noueltie of Cooches scath'd me so, As from their drifts and cluttering I knew not where to go. These also worke, quoth Incubus, to our auaile, for why? They tend to idle Pride, and to Inhospitalitie. With that I, comforted, did then peepe into euery one, And of mine old acquaintances spide many a countrie Ione, Whose fathers droue ye Dung-cart, though the daughters now will. I knew whē Prelates, & the Peeres had faire attendance on none. By Gentlemen and Yeomandrie, but that faire world is gone: For most, like Iehu, hurrie with Pedanties two or three, Yet all go downe the winde, saue those that hospitalious bee. Great'st Ladies with their women, on their Palfries mounted faire, Rode through the streets, well waited on, their artlesse faces bare, Which now in Coches scorne to be salued of the aire. I knew when men-Iudiciall rode on sober Mules, whereby They might of Suters, these, and they aske, Answere, and Replie. I knew when more was thriu'd abroad by war than now by peace, And English feard where they be frumpt, since hostile tearmes did cease: But by Occasion, all things are produced, be, decrease. Times were whē Practize also preacht, and well said was well-done, When Courtiors cleerd the old before they on the new would run, When no iudiciall place was bought, lest Iustice might be sould, When Quirts, nor Quillets ouerthrew, or long did Causes hold, When Lawyers more deserud their fees, & fatted lesse with gold. When to the fifteenth Psalme, sometimes, had Citizens recourse, When Lords of Farmers, Farmers of the poore had more remorse.
No sooner ioyne the Battels but the Saxons them withdrew, And neutrally from hils aloofe the Execution view. The Picts so weakened, Donskene yet from Donskene no whit swarues, But still a dauntlesse heart vnto a dismall houre resarues: And what a complet Captaine might in nothing did omit, Incountring and incouraging, when, where, and what was fit: Nor their innatiue Prowesse did his People then forgit: Nor Field was euer fought with more perseuerant Swords than it. The Scots (to whom all Britaine in times Reuolutions was Inaugurated) did their Maine at fearelesse hazard pas: Whilst Picts, that should vnpeople now, as fruit vnripened fell: For Scots at least with Picts alike might slaughtred Corpses tell. Seauen times that fatall day the Picts renewed fight in vaine, Till almost all did perish, and their valiant King was slaine: At Donskene so vnto the Picts both ended Realme and Raigne. Camelon (now in rubble, then a spatious Citie strong, Wherein the Romaine Presidents had hild their States of long, Nor could for bewtifull this Isle boast like, else books be wrong, Though hardly now (as Verelon) it Ruins found among) Held Pictish yet: to which those few that had escaped flead, Beseeged now: the which to race, and all therein for dead The Scots had vowed. Whereupon such despret Sallies bread, That, had not hate in scottish hearts bread Lethargie of feare, Their Obstinacie had giuen place to dreadfull Obiects theare. But losse nor labour Kenneth cares whereby the Picts might fall: Whilst these esteemd incessant toyles and greatest dangers small. When long, and to the Scots themselues the Siege had lossefull bin, (For Picts had vowed not to loose, as Scots the Towne to win) And that such famine had inrag'd within the walles, so sore, As that they were inforst to eate what Nature did abhore, By Stratagemes effecting was at last the Citie lost: In winning which alternallie it ouer-dearely cost. But Victors were the Scots, that spar'd nor Priest, nor Sexe, nor age,
But slaughter all, and quite race downe Camelon in their rage. Thus, after twise sixe hundred yeares, this Citie and that State Were cleane extirpt, through Scots, thereto ordaind by shiftlesse fate. Who also wrought in all, so farre as then in them did lye, That euen the very name of Picts to future times should dye. But neither Swords, nor fir'd Records, nor alterd names of all, Nor Enuies-selfe, this of their worth extinguish, hope we shall. THE FIFTEENTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. 93. THE Scots thus conquerd Penthland, when two Nations more remaind Within this Iland, also to their Empire pre∣ordaind, Britons (now Welsh) and Saxons (now cald Eng∣lish) either twaine From then a world of time remote vnited to their Raigne: And Ireland also (whence they were) in Englands right they gaine. But by what Currants resteth now in breuitie to say, More facle, by how much the more I see that wished day Of all by-passed ages now effected fully in His Maiestie, that Monarchie doth of this Ile begin.
The Picts thus past, more of the Scots shall be remembred, when The Welsh, more aunchant Incolants, distaske our willing pen. For Welsh and Scots, so far-forth we Aborigens may name, As that they held them heere intier since first they hither came. We Modernes are compounded of them both, Picts, Romaines, and Armoricanes, Danes, Normaines, all once breeding in this land. Since Brittish, English, Scottish, and the Danish bloods vnite In Englands royall Issue now, what wrongs haue they to right? But that, for Consanguinitie, we may, coleaug'd with those, God set before, set dread behinde of whatsoeuer foes. May all their virtues grifted in our Natures shew euents In this our Eden worthy still at least of such discents. Rome heere preuailing, latenlie, old Britons, Picts, were said, Of their self-painting, whēce foe-feard they did thēselues perswaid. Rome outed, Pictish Britons did Brittish Reuolts inuaid, Because those Lattres (basely thought those Formers) Rome obaid: For these though seuerd earst were one. Then Scots extirpt the Picts: Then came the Saxons, and to Wales debelled Brutes Relicts: Where yet they are a People, and had there their natiue Kings, And in that war-saud Countrie in their Countrie, acted things Whereof (their insufficient Bard) my Muse too skantie sings. At last to th'englisht Normaine yoke them ciuell discord brings. Of Britons (saxonlie cald Welsh, or Strangers) touch we heere Occurrents, as in weale or woe the same concernd them neere: Yea progresse we awhile through Wales, where Brute his off-springs seed, Vnder their natiue Princes long did many a glorious deed: And that those Britons braue Remaines time frō tumultuous brings, Was not our Armor, but our late Alacritie of Kings. For, since protected in same Lawes, and mixt with vs in blood, Bad Brookers they of violence prou'd Voluntaries good, And to themselues haue happy, to our State haue loyall stood. Cadwalader, as is before, transfreated, forst thereto By what th'inuading Saxons and the Pestilence did do,
The Things of Wales, as Saxons too, confusedly did stand: The cause Pluralitie of Kings aduanst in either land. Till Saxons did in Lhoyger (so the Welsh cald England) chuse (Which honor thence West-Saxon Kings in that Heptarchia vse) A souereigne Generall for their warres against their cōmon foes, And Brittish-Cambries (Welsh men now) a like Superior choes, Twixt which Alienigenests not sildome warfare groes. King Rodericke, surnamd the great, did monarchize at last Wales, that had neere as many Kings as Cantreses in times past, Reducing all to three, whereof were Tributaries twaine Vnto the third, North-Wales, which thence did Paramount remaine. Of North-Wales, South-Wales, Powys-land, making bequests he dide, And his three Sonnes those Diuidents in Thrones distinct supplide. Of all things there, long out of ioint, in order as they fell Through vsurpations, ciuill warres, and Danes were long to tell, But of those indigested daies this merits obseruation, At ods they euend against Aliēts, nor mixt bloud with forren natiō. Yet, though against the Welsh-Kings will, our royall Surname now (If Historie therein we may authenticall allow) It Seedster from that kingly Streene deriues, ensueth how. CHAP. 94. ONe Makebeth, who had traitrously his sometimes Souereigne slaine, And like a Monster not a Man vsurpt in Scotland raigne, Whose guiltie Conscience did it selfe so feelingly accuse, As nothing not applide by him against himselfe he vewes,
No whispring but of him, gainst him all weapons feares he borne, All Beings iointly to reuenge his Murthres thinks he sworne, Wherefore (for such are euer such in selfe-tormenting mind) But to proceed in bloud he thought no saferie to find. All Greatnesse therefore, saue his owne his, driftings did infest: Wit so is wisedomes Excrement, and dangerously transgrest. But Pomp, nor Policie, the poore in spirit shall be blest, When at the generall Doome our Soules and Sathan shall contest. One Banquho, powrefulst of the Peers, in popular affection And prowesse great, was murthred by his tyrannous direction. Fleance therefore this Banquhos sonne fled thence to Wales for feare, Whome Gruffyth kindly did receiue, and cherisht nobly there. This grew so rare in Court, as him did euery Eie and Eare Desier to see for person, for discourse delight to heare. King Gruffyths Daughter, Paragon for bewtie and for wit, He followed with such Offices to complet Courtship fit, That each to other sympathiz'd such setled liking, as Her heart to his, his heart to hers transplantiuely did passe. In other Courts for either Sexe not amorous to appeare Was not to be a Courtior, but such boldnesse faulted theare: Her lou'd of him, him lou'd of her, was patent to them both, Yet dombly so, and either that should th'other noote it loth. Not he, by Sonnets passonate, did giue the world to wit That he was turnd Hermaphrodit, and she the cause of it: Nor borrowed she of Phaos box thereby to seeme more faire, As those that fondly rob themselues by Arte of that they are. Through this occasion lassly thus he nakt to her his heart: I pree thee, Fleance, tell quoth she, which I haue heard in part, The Storie of Fairies that foretold thy Fathers fate, For why? I know not why, but sure it throbs my heart of late. Throb may it so it thriue, quoth he, in you to that euent Diuind by them, nor hope I you can Destinie preuent: But howsoeuer thus it was. King Duncane when aliue,
To Makbeth and my father did great Dignities deriue, As chiefest for their births, their wit, and valour, also thay Held friendship long, and luckely in Scotch affaires did sway. Three Fairies in a priuate walke to them appeared, who Saluted Makbeth King, and gaue him other Titles too: To whom my father, laughing, said they dealt vnequall dole, Behighting nought thereof to him, but to his Friend the whole. When of the Weird-Elfes one of them, replying, said that he Should not be King, but of his Streene a many Kings should be. So vanish they: and what they said of Makbeth now we see. But murdred is my father, and of him remaines but me, Nor shall what they diuin'd effect, vnlesse, sweet Sweet, by thee. What blush you, Lady, pree thee let me busse that blush away, He said, and did it, She to seeke euen of a womans Nay. When Louers opportunely meet to chaffer fire and flaxe, Will somtimes falles too soone a worke, and Wit thereof doth taxe: This amourous Couples close Cōtract perform'd such earnest sport, As worser newes than would their tongues her belly did report. The fault apparant, Fleance was by furious Gruffyth kild, And she, deliuered of a Sonne, was in affliction hild. The rather for an Aliant had preuailed in that case, Than which amongst the Welsh-men thē was nothing more disgrace. And, soothly, vnto these our times in Europe scarce is knowne As North-Wales is, a Nation more intirely People-one, But that so long in one same Land haue hild them thinke I none, If be not naturall Irish for abode and Breede out-worne. From these so haplesse Parents yeat an happie Sonne proceeded, Well educated of the King, and prouing nobly deeded, At age admir'd for actiue, and for high imployments apt: But for the vertuous to haue bin enuied euer hapt. One taxing him of Bastardie, words more than he could brooke, Was slaine by him: who fearing Law his flight to Scotland tooke. Where Walter (for it was his name) exact of noble blood,
And Grand-sonne to the King of Wales, in publique fauour stood. Amongst great honors, which his great Achiuemēts well did merit, He was Lord Steward of the Land: which Sur-name all inherit Of him descended to this day: which Surname, and which Streene Hath blest the Scots with Princes eight, Ours also numbers neene: Great Monarke of great Britaine now, so amply neuer any: Long may he liue an happie King, of him may Kings be many. Boast of his triple royall blood from you yee Cambrian Brutes, Which to his high discents Else-where not lowest ranked sutes. For Tudor from Cadwallader, and Iames from Tudor claimes, From Gruffyths royall Daughter too himselfe a Brute he names, From Gladys, Mortimer his wife Prince Dauids sister and Vndoubted heire, he also hath in blood and ownes your Land. Great Britaine, sith a Briton doth remonarchize thy Throne, Remaūd thy name: Brute had, Iames hath the whole, as els had none. What then remaines, sith all is Ones, but all be one in all, And Schismes be reconcilde or scourg'd, for God quaints not with Baal. The great Surname of Steward, how it royaliz'd shall rest For amplier Storie, and of Wales shall be awhile digrest. CHAP. 95. SAy me, of gadding, whispring, and of reall Papists, who Wish not that Romes Palladium might as Greekes to Troy Here doe? Nay, which of most the Popes their deeds, in Pa∣ratie, did touch Of these vsurped Sur-names (Names purporting vertue much) As Clement, Pius, Benedict, with Boniface, and such?
The Contrary in these and their blind Dogmatists is true: Witnes Guy Faux his god-curst Taske set by a Pope-blist Crew. But thy Name, Faux, apts Latinlie vnto thy Nature bad: Saue pitie more euen Tigers iawes haue than thy blood-thirst had. France, Belgick, Spaine, Cis-Trans-Alpine, had they against vs arm'd, All they in this vnited Isle had (if at all) lesse harm'd, (For euen a Conquest, though it much addes, alters, and ablates, To, in, and from, a vassald State, not howbeit vn-States) Than this one Viper in his Denne, by one vnthought of blow, Hels stratagemous Quintessence, Romes selfe-created Foe: For henceforth who, not senselesse, to her Oracle will goe? Those all, I say; yea all the worlds ioynt Armour neuer had, Or could they would they barbarously haue bin so ruthlesse bad, As in a trice had been perform'd by Faux, abetted by Conspirators, more odious than their names to shame can dye. Yea, but that Prouender them prickt, by some that might haue said, Soule take thine Ease, here vp in store enough for thee is laid. But Gold, I trow, would be a God it gathereth so of Stile: To be a Noble, Soueraigne, nor an Angel, worth the while. Like to which Climaxie of Coyne wealth eleuates the minde To tract of Greatnesse, till mongst men be Lucifers declinde. Besides a many Innocents, not aim'd at or remorsed, His Maiesties, Queenes, Of-springs breathes from their sweet bodies forced, The Prelacie, Nobilitie, States-men, and State betraide, None to consult, none to commaund, obey, or be obeyde, Protestants, Papists, Puritanes, and Atheists by the eares, All in Confusion, Rapines, blood, in horror, Schismes, and feares, How many vnprepared Soules in that one tragick Blast Had, vnrepentant, what car'd Rome to whom or whither past? That Parlament, that should haue blist an hopefull Vnion here Twixt English and the Scots, had left nor Vnion, King, nor Peere, Nor of the royall Impes, nor whom, but better had been dead Than to haue seene those miseries that Massacre had bread: A Massacre? nay vilder than affining Terme is read.
Nor had those Diuels themselues sped as their Proiect had decreed, Whilst Britaine had a Chrishian, and that Christian blood to bleed: Nor any (if no Papist) though Mahumatist, or Iew, Or morall Idolast had brookt such irreligious View, Nor Forren State, or Potentate, the Pope respecting lesse Than Gods law, lawes of Nature, and of Nations to transgresse: Or, doubtlesse, had selfe-Butcherie amongst those Butchers bin, Like Wolues in sharing Praies, so God abhors such bloodie sinne: Through whō, themselues that dig'd for vs the Pit are falne therin. Romes Neros-fire, Guyse-Massacre, Herods Act, Hamons Minde, Our Iohn, French Henrie murdred, moe, nor any in that kinde, Pagan, nor Popish Crueltie here Parallel can finde: For blood and sower designes so farre beyond Example all, As Children now, when they be men, beleeue it hardly shall. Then, Britons, whē ye blesse your Babes, mixt may your blessings be With this, that they take Caution that did Papisme thus decree: Whence true Tradition of the Fruit may blanch thē frō the Tree. Yea, let them listen, lothingly, what Iesuites propound Gainst Kings & States, perfidiously t'aduāce their Triple crownd: For which, euen Atheisme (theirs except) disclaimeth any ground. Yet out of Practise, Purpose, Terme, and None it to relate May be that diulish Doctrine whence they now Equiuocate. For we may vouch our Age to haue begotten two such Twinnes, That Manual meant, This Mental brocht, as comprehend all Sinnes. To Gangrens as Decision fits (the sooner better) so This Latters Breath choake at its Birth, that else wil monstrous grow. When Hercules was preacht a God to so Beleeuers, it Was taxt a needlesse Doctrine: But this Loore▪Strife more vnfit, Sith Romes Amphibologie faults to Trust, Religion, wit: Of Paganisme, yea Atheisme hist, deriued from Hels Pit. The fabled Satyre came to dine, but when his hoste for Colde Did blow his Nayles, his Pottage too for heate, not stay he would, Disparitie from one same Breath, him scathed to behould. Tongues-Othes, Harts-Thoughts, Disiūctiues, by a Mētal reseruatiō,
What Lawes, whose life or State secure, should such not be Nugation? Such cannot be of God, therefore it selfe cannot but kill, When trulie falslie sworne doth sinne, yea Good that tracts of Ill. No Beasts, of whom but selfe-Repose to be disturbd is feard, Will suffer that amongst them this bigenderd Beast shall heard. Absurdities vncontrouerst, as silenst then let goe: It prouds a Schismatick when him disputes a learned foe. But, Infants-now, by yee be men, or might if ye shall liue, An vniuersall Hate is hopte to Rome an End shall giue: Hate? and an End right iusticed against that purple Whore: My soule for yours, if hers you hate, and shall imbrace our Lore. Wise is he that spake wisely thus the veritie in this, The Mysterie of Iniquitie in perfect Papisme is. Amongst a many Instancies, the vgliest was this Plot, Preuented earst miraculously: nor be the meanes forgot. Mount-Eagle (than that Names-birth, Gods preordinance more Strange In that darkt loue, meant sole to thee, such Prodigies should change) Mount Eagle thine as high a pitch as Prince-bird of thy kinde Did euer, and thy loyaltie liue in the Lions minde: Whose great-grand-Mothers Father too, Birds of thy feather foūd That, chiefly, thrown'd him in his Right, a Tyrāt then dis-crownd, For which, long ciuil warres so ceast, and this, should al confound, But God vsde thee a counter-meanes, rests England deeply bound To theirs and thine auspitious Bird, still to its Scepter sound.
CHAP. 96. COnsult thy selfe, dread Soueraigne, and thy Sena∣tors, how may The Romish Hydras heads be seard, or Monster ridde away. For sith they doome all Heretiks not suting to their Lore, And faith with vs not to be held, but foehood euermore, And sith for Murthers Merits, Othes Remissiō, heauē for Treason, Hath their Religion them to doubt, that all things dare, is reason: But God it is that broke the Snare, watch, pray we euery Season. And, as thy Courtiers, also let thy Commons, sacred King, Vnto thine affabilitie and bountie Poeans sing. Than which, is thought, that nothing more assures a Regall-Seate, Which seeming silly do, vndone, much Scathe to Scepters threate: Elizabeth, most sweet wert thou, in each heart-chayning feate. And miserable Papists, too delirously mislead, To whom are Othes, blood, what not Hels, may stand your Sect in stead? Indulgenced, Only to you, and only are forbod The Scriptures and our Churches, lest yee turne from Pope to God. O, rather take the warrantize of that sole Deitie That, bidding search the Scriptures, saith of him they testifie. Peruse them yet, frequent our Church, confer with our Diuines: So shall ye finde Rome false, and lesse to care your faith than fines: For to the Centure of selfe-Pompe directeth all her Lines: Nor can it be Religion that so diuelishly designes: As did your late preuented Plot, that Rome and Hell combines. For all yet said, is nothing to that more that might be said, Of our compleatest Parlament that should haue been betraid:
And new Rome, that for Infamie too long hath famous bin, Vncontradicted, for that Plot from Hell the Palme doth win. Sith Peters-selfe, first Patriarke in your Church, as yee pretend, Was taught, and taught, meeknesse and Loue, so liu'd, and so did end, Sith thirtie three succeeding in that Chaire were martyrd such, And all the Fathers There (of Stile no higher would they touch) Were abiect poore, till Constantine inritched them too much, And Phocas for his Priuats Rome the Supreme Sea promoted, How is it of Supremacie, as if from Christ, then doted? Well, if in Church-affaires ye in your Follies so admit, Yet that be Popes Heauens Porters, or the Gaylers of Hels Pit, Or that their Mittimus to This, Admittimus to That, Be worth a farthing of the Price, creed they that care not what. But certis, Papistrie, that in it selfe is so absurd, Of learned men and Princes, that conferre it with Gods word, Is vsde but for selfe-purposes and Policies a Staile, And whither will the head we know that thither will the Taile. What Warres, Inuasions, Rebels, Plots, at least since Luthers daies, But thence had hopes, Buls, or Pretexts, ye Maine meant other waies. How many Kings for Coyne-cause, or repelling but Pope-pride, Hath Rome infested, though with her the same in all beside? Most-what by Women, sillie Girles, youths, firie-wits, Ambitious, By great, by needy Mal-Contents, by Credulous, and Vitious, Work Romes Committees, & from flesh to fare much more delicious Penance their Puples: whitest Sons these Seedsters and Seditious. And, that for them libentiously Fooles-Catholike should erre, Pensions, Canonizing at least, on Rome-wrights they conferre. But, if had spead their barbarous Plot of vaulted Powder late, Then friends and foes, vncarde of them, had past in one same rate, And Agents too: Religion was the bye, the Maine the State. Deluded Soules, in only Christ ground all Faith, Loue, and Hope; A mortall Man, sinfull as ye, or worser is the Pope, Your Coyne of all his Practises and Pedlaries the scope.
So violently, blasphemously, and suddainly haue dide So many Popes, as in no Ranke of States hath hapt beside. And to vsurpe the Papacie, such treacherous Intrusions, For Romes Religion, and her Rites, such false and harsh Conclusions, Such Simonie, Pride, Briberie, and Brothelrie is There, Yea and Sodometrie, as not exampled are Els-where. Such is your God, his Oracle, his Orgies, and his Alter, O venture not your Soules for such, to heuen-wards through an halter. Babel is falne, Vr-Caldick squencht, Delphos in no request, Pantheon none for Ethnick Gods, Iewdaisme finds no rest, Mahumetrie hath but it time, the Arian and old store Of Heresies are silenced, hath Romes then Placcard more? Nay, let her looke a full Eclipse of her aie darkned Moone, By interponure of the Sunne that shall vnshine it soone. And (which is read as holy writ) the Legend of their Saints To wisemens View, vpon that Pale Anathema it paints. The Statute in Q. Maries raigne, when Poole re-Rom'd this Realme, Doth arrogate vnto that Sea in tearmes too much extreame. Yet some for selfe-Preferments, some to please, in blindnes moste, Or how soeuer, wrought it was that Rome did rule the Roste. But this be noted, worth the note, though Rome then soules re-got, The Abbie-Lands, though labouring it, she reposseeded not: Her trusted they with those, themselues with these, & quasht had bin That holie Statute, rather than a Land-saue not put in. The pride of that same Prelacie, far lesse than since and now, Euen in a Saint of theirs did our old Christians disalow, Concerning which ensueth here, the Storie when and how.
CHAP. 97. TO Austin, first of Kentish Saints, doe lend your eares a while: Not to his Legend (so absurd as, reade, would make yee smile, Or rather good men grieue that stuffe so grosse should men beguile) But of that Saint, whom Gregorie the Pope sent to this Isle, So mou'd by feature that at Rome he saw in Englishmen, Or Pagan Saxones, newly cal'd by name of English then. Note, diuers hundred yeeres before that Lucius here was King, The Britons had receiu'd the faith, and though did Saxons bring Hither with them their Paganisme and Christians did oppresse, Amongst the then Welsh-Britons was the Gospell nerethelesse, And Primatiue Church-Practise of trew Faith, for why? as yet From Popes was no corruption brought, nor any from them fet. But as their first Apostle, from Christs first Apostles, brought Immediat Christianitie, at Bangor was it taught Sincerely so, aboue those Clerkes till Primacie was sought By Austin, then Romes Agent, fam'd such wonders to haue wrought, As, if his Legend be no Lie (to deeme the best we ought) Meere Exorcismes (for Miracles were ceast) they may be thought. But sith not only Fathers in their bookes be falsefide, But euen the sacred Scriptures, to vphold the Papall pride, This Austin and his fellow Saints may also be belide. Of whom be reuerent Censure, that for most were men deuout, Though in their Legends (others works) meere Fables are set out.
CHAP. 98. NExt these of Saints, vnsanctified, that also sturre the State, Calumnize Church, our Liturgie, and Rites in criticke rate. Yet (let not men religious, or but morall good replie) What are they but the mapped Orbs of all Hy∣pocrisie? Of Humor, Pride, Peruersnesse fead, nor be Irreuerence spoke, Too aduantagiously from out our Rubrick they vnyoke, And Canons old and new by them are, too securely, broke, Yea and, offensiuely, vnto our Regulars, submis To meete Conformetie, that by Nouators dallied is. For in euasiue Discipline, and tolerating Lawe, Meant howsoeuer, baine from balme doe such Fantasticks drawe, And giddie Flights of Bussards oft deuote them to some Dawe: Who, howsoeuer he impungs our Order in Church Rites, Them tearming Romish Ragges, or with his leaden Sword thē smites, Yet whatsoeuer Papistrie exacted, payed yet, His scrupulous Reformitie, will nought thereof remit. Nay, Frier more did neuer preach deuotion to his Dame Than these Addition, nor for aught with-hild did so exclame. Which were indeed allowable in any more than These; That are in all but for themselues, all would, will nothing leese. Whose holy Noses ouer-hang at Markets, Staules, and Sacks, There hucking cheapth, here hearkening dearth, to set abroach their Stacks. And if of these Irregulars (as few haue) some giue-out,
They of their Owne prouided are sufficiently no doubt, Or know to lay their knife aboord, at others Costs, for Fare And greater Ease than Studie them or Pulpetrie can spare. Or if shall of Pluralities be likely Risses, then Their Saintships are as capable thereof as sinfull men. Say somethings faultie in abuse of good Lawes, what of so? A lawfull Calling, Season, Cause, still hand in hand should goe. Synods & Senats should they to preposterous Schismes giue place, Lawes would be sick of Lunacie, still alter would the Cace. The Adders Tayle, because it had the Sting, would hale the Head, Ensewd, the blind Conductor to a deadly Down-fall lead. Were Sailers scornd the Master for Director, him they drownd, A Tempest hapt, none could direct, and all a Shipwrack found. Of Plebales when they rush into Reformitie like ground, And like successe: themselues for most cannot themselues expound. Nor captiously be taine the Tearme of Puritane, but know, To Puritie faind of Impure, so knowne, we badder owe, Than by a bare Sarcasmus to obtrude on such the Lie Of them beloued: Censure then of me as censure I, That iterate, let Pharisies not Publicanes applie: And care not Termes, but cleere the Schismes in peruerse humour lead, And in a nick-nam'd Puritane an Hypocrite be read. For vpright hearts, for holie hands, for reuerent tongues and eares Be Scriptures only, and to God no secret but appeares. Then babble lesse, and practise more of Pietie, if not, By knowing good and doing ill the rather Hell is got. Sith These and Romes, so dangerously, to Innouation tend Against the Church and publike Peace, or breake or make thē bend: At least, sith such Antitheses to Truth vnuisard are, Yet selfe-accusing Consciences seducing not forbeare, Of Spleene or Singularitie, no such Seducers spare. Should Law lack force, or Iustice faint, as neither doth-or ought, This comforts yet, Things not of God come of thēselues to nought.
Omitting serious Errants, and few pitied wits of some Conceited, and exemplarly consorted, now though dumme, Hopte howbeit no Lethargie their Senses doth benumme, (For somtimes good men, till remou'd, to wrong Opinions leane) Be medeld but of ayrie Saints, our Hypocrits we meane, Of whom too many be obseru'd too subtile and vncleane. Mongst many of an Hang-by in that kind, who, saue for gaine, Sees Pulpets only, echoeth Paul, and Magdalen doth faine, The scriptum est, as did the Diuell, for her auaile applies, Not for an Oxe an Oth, but for each trifle twentie Lies, Tiers Catechizing, hangs at mouthes for scapes, when shall ye sware Be'r-Lady or but Mack, for hot encounter then prepare, Admireth others Faults, whilst she doth nothing more than worse, Not sticking cautilously the hier of Filthinesse to purse, For, may she opportune for Pence, liues not like lurching Blaine, At her a cast, for now my Muse is in a merrie vaine. CHAP. 99. THere is an Academie, which I reuerence so much, As gessed gainst it splenous thoughts me sple∣nously would touch: For as (so Historie) it was the Primer-schooling Heere, So euer haue Religion and the Muses held it deare: What of Precisians? most retract, did Papists Else-where so, Amisse were well amended: but too Wost-ward now we go. Not miles from it a Township is, I know not whether in
A neighbouring Mart more famous, or infamous for the sinne Of Beggers, Brothels, Cheaters, Bawds, and Vagrants once a yeere Resorting thither, then to put their sinnes in practise there. Farre be it though we taxe thereof those dwelling there, for why? Proctors nor Praetors euer could those Of-scummes thence put by. The harbouring then so fitting There, as those of Sort among Are faine thereof. But all this while we doe our Hostesse wrong, Who though she lack not of the age that Scriptures lot to man, In auaritious Prouidence lesse Arte the Diuell can: Her let vs Storie, as she swaies the Pot and dripping-pan. So farre-foorth as her empted Goomes permitteth Guests she greets, And promiseth to euery one soft lodging & sweet sheets: But who would thinke by misse of teeth yt she with profit meets? Full gorged mongst her Guests (for she with euery Company eates, And slauers out some Decate of worme-eaten home-spun feates, Or with her fellow Pharisies of Lecture-shreads intreates, Or as she gropeth humours, so afferring stuffe repeates, A Proteu to all profit, hers as euery pulse so beates, Well wotting now no thriuing if no hammering to all heates) She, eating as chap-broken, of teeth-fugitiues complaines, And for adiorned chewing so full fraughted trenchers gaines, Which she retaileth: neither with that bootie so refraines, But that some neighbour big with childe lusts this or that she faines, And fourthly for her gulled Guests a galling shot remaines. At table and in Stable when is frankly spent, and hopte The promisd Lodging, no such thing, for many so gaine-coopt Are glad, with fresh Expences for rear-banquets and great fiers, All night to shelter bedlesse there: her selfe meane time retiers To gnawed bones, and slubberd Scraps, and Trenchers, which she scrapes So as no licking for a Mouse her frugall fingers scapes, And with that sweet Compound condites such Gallimawfries as She dearely vttereth to the Swaines that to and fro then pas.
Her parts externall more to praise, in sooth, I know not how, Than that she eateth, grunts, and goes as clenly as a Sow, Splay-footed, gated like a Beare, and wasted like a Cow, And grease combust hides as a Maske her face of Baboon-forme. Not wrothfull though, who so will may howsoeuer storme, So she hath pay, that will be paid, if Bayard be in Stable, And Bayard shall be there, for none she intertaines not able. And though her wealth be great she hath no pride as may appeare, So sluttish is her Wardrobe that she doth and doth not weare. And he that at her Beauties best her kissed him repented, Then Lecherie must needes in one so vgly be preuented. She cannot be malitious doth with only Mony deale: Nor enuious, vnto only whom Vertues themselues conceale. And though that Gluttonie it selfe by her might be pourtraid, Yet Others, not her selfe, for that deformitie haue paid. Now, were our Hostesse purged of her couetous humour too, It were a Metaphysick more than Belzebub can doe: To whom I leaue both her and all such Hosteses, Amen: For better matter, could we hit thereon, attends our pen. This Toy tost-by, be now awhile contemplated vpon The God-protected Gouernment of that sweet Queene is gon. How happie her distaste of These, of Pope, and Papists all Was to her selfe and Hers, and how an Edict late for Baal, Such as was Iehues, seem'd proclaim'd: for whereto els should tend Such libertie of Trauell, or of Ours, that might defend Euen gainst true Christians Catholikes, nick-named, but thereby To our Religion or to Romes Affections so to trie? Sith pregnantly is Opposite our King to Papistrie. On These I ruminating thus into a slumber fell, And dream'd a speaking Vision, which did humour me so well, As would I could (which Arte cannot) it in its Essence tell.
CHAP. 100. ME thought I did conceit the Sight that marty∣red Stephen had, And from that glorious Heauen descend a Maide in brightnes clad: Her lookes had compleat Maiestie mixt with allacrious view, Whom by that Raritie to bee Elizabeth I knew. Friend (quoth she) small thy fame and lesse thy Fortune, howbeit Good-will I estimate aboue birth, wealth, or fluent wit, Thy Betters (once my Flatterers) me and themselues forgit, Thou with thy Mite remembrest me, and I remember it. As Palinur I come not of Aeneas to intreate Interment, it I had, and am behighted Tombrie great. Nor come I, sorrie Soule, to thee (as short of skill iwis As meanes to mend in Staterie aught, if were aught amis) As quarrellous, but to applaud what as I left it is, For which at least your prudent King and Councell boad yee blis. Nor come I from a Limbo, for there is but Heauen and Hell, And Soules immediatly are and continue as they fell, Though of a Purgatorie Popes the Fable dearely sell Of life Eternitie, of Ioyes I Infinencie haue, Yet rests a glorifying doome beyond what heart can craue: We are in God, and God in vs, and God and we in one Will not, vnlesse ye will, my Realme relict be ouerthrowne. I found it such as Papistrie affecteth it againe, And held it contrarie spight Rome, France, and insatiat Spaine,
Rebellions, and Conspiracies, and left an Heire to raigne Me likt he should, and ioyes he doth, yet write I thus complaine. Whereas, like England, not a Realme in Europe hath and had Such powerfull Foes and Schismes, in all so capitally bad, And God alone hath vndertaine your Cause and made yee glad, May seeme of your owne Policie and strength yee ouerwinne, Of thankfulnes so little, and so much yee shew of sinne. Wheras (Truths & Times work) the Pope grew Here estrāged too, As tirde in his attempts, and dride in all that he could doe, Neer comen to this as, nam'd, was askt of whēce that Beast & who? How is it (though your Leagues perhaps for Statrie and for Trades Be not amis, new times I know new Amitie perswades) That (which I held and left restraind, & whereby England thriu'd) By tolerated Trauell, and free Souldrie is reuiu'd Romes poyson, and too patent meanes for Plots to be contriu'd? But if be meant that so should Waspes be draind from out the Hiue, Then penance too may Policie those that it so doth shriue: For Altars not to arme with vs, against vs is to striue: Religion and Subiection be each th'others Relatiue. Now is it not as when, at once, all Kings adord the Beast, So much more poysnous now by how much more in power de∣creast, To be suspect in Citie, Towne, Court, Countrie, friendship, Feast, Nor maruell that Rome wins so fast, and, wonne, retaines so sure, Sith it to all is all in all, selfe-profit to procure. The Serpent that in Eden did to Mankinds losse intice, Is at her Councels President, to giue gainst ye aduice. Nor Mahomet his Alchoran more plausable than Hers: The cause that many a Woman, Youth, and Indigent so erres: For easie Preies intice a Theefe, Opinion much preferres: With Sensualitie in part permitted, and sinne bribed, And with this Mot, Sinne be assoyld, may Rome be circumscribed. O pestilent Religion (no Religion) that giues leaue, Or pardon to the fowlest Sinnes, nor only doth receaue
Your Fugitiues, but them returns fraught with Instructions such As brought, though by a beardles boy, your State may wholy tuch! Sith Plutos Gates ope nights and daies to all will goe or come, Shut yours to shut in yours, and theirs shut out both all and some. Nor of your Linsie-wolsie Roofes of Peeres can I be dumme: Nor of the Mechianisme of some your Great-Ones by the Drumme. Me thought like Tudor her stour Sier at it last said she fround: O God, quoth she, can Iustice sleepe where such Mis-life is found, In President a preiudice, in law sauz godly ground? Should such whom God & Nature els haue beutifide throughtout, For one base sinne to Vulgers be a by-word and a flout? No, be it yet remembred that was God his feare forgot, Who will forgiue true Penitents, and Time out-wears a blot: If at this Charme be stopt the eares, there is a hell I wot. There is an idle Schisme to Rome and you in Opposition, Which, should it speede, nor she nor yee met euer like Physition: Life for a Limme, meane Medicines without a meane applide, Which, though contraried in Pretexts, besibs that others Pride. Of it giue also Caution, and bid kill it in the bud: It euer harmed where it grew, and neuer will doe good, In Britaine as a Pestilence warne that it be withstood. Now that I mention Britaine, know that Name doth please me well: Since Brute till now a Monarchie nere of this Isle befell: Vnion in one same Policie adde, and auoid an hell: My Brothers Legend much against Pluralitie doth tell. How many seuerall Lawes at once had Britaine long agoe? The Britons theirs, the Romanes theirs, the Picts and Scots also. In neerer times (besides the Scots and Welsh) seauen Saxon Kings: Vpheld so many Lawes, an Eighth with him the Dane he brings: And all those Eight the Normaine found to Three digested, and Of all their creames compild one Law, now Common in this Land. Since when, attempted oft, had no Inuasion ouer-hand,
Ere when this Realme within it selfe continually did striue, And vnto seuerall Alliants op't a way for Conquests fiue. May Realmes, Religion, Lawes, and hearts in prosperous Vnion thriue. But that I know be lawes in force for Sabbaths, feasts of Saints, For Fasts, for Vagrāts, pestring now your Streets without Restraints, I should haue thought those too prophane and warrant lawes had bin, So common and so vncontrould is sufferance of such sin. Taxe England, fertill in good lawes that meete with each amis, For that it so remissiue in their Execution is. Warne, midst such Plentie, Pleasures, & this blessed Peace take heed, Lest from Securitie therein a sudden Scourge proceed. Who thought but all had bin as well as could the heart desire, When all stood at the sudden doome of one false sparke of fire, Which had effected, had not God stood Britaines Sentinell: Most though but wōder, few praise him, bid thou pray al proue wel. If Soules at rest for priuate wrōgs could grieue whē such appeares, Paintings, and Pleasances of some, in stead of Mourners teares, Accōpanying my Funeral, had grieu'd mine Eies & Eares. Did neuer Mother tender more her Childe than I the State, Howbeit some it recompence at too vnkind a Rate: Detractiue bookes at publique Saile, of moment so much lesse By how much more the Authors are obseru'd how they professe. In Heauen was wondred that on Earth an Edict should be seene, That English should not scandalize their late deceased Queene, Lycurgus, as of Patricid, that Law had left out cleene, Of such Ingratitude so small Expectance: though not rare The lust of Nouelties, sometimes from Quailes to Garlick-fare. But ye that thought I liu'd too long had found I dide too soone, Had not God better preordaind Succession than your Boone, Which like to that of Aesops Frogs had varied, till at last Some Storke had plaid ye Rex, and then had worser pleasd than past.
By Scipio and by Caesar so dealt Rome, and Carthage so By Hānibal, and Greece her Friends found Greece their greatest Foe: The tyrannie of pleball tongues most good most vndergoe. In few not knowing why malign'd, nor why Malignors haue Of late retracted, Romes except, that hate me in my Graue, Let it suffice I pardon all, and blessed may proceede The Gouernment, of Romerie and new Anabaptisme freede: And so farewell. And so I wakt, that wisht prolonged sleepe, For when I found I did but dreame I could not then but weepe. Farre be it though should any thinke the Vision could be Her, To doubt whose Soule to be with God were out of doubt to erre▪ But most-what seemed said we might for veritie auer. The neuer idle minde, in like Respondencie of zeale, Not seldome by Phantasma thus in Sleepes doth Soothes reueale. But idely hath and ouerlong been dreamed, think may some: Much more Elation though would this Relation well become, Euen she was dream't-off & the dreame, That for her worth, & This In it Particulars inuite discourse much lesse omis. Yet so hath been digressed and so dreamed as almost Our Muse, that scarce is entred Wales, it selfe in Wales hath lost.
THE SIXTEENTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. 101. SOuth-Wales was yet intierly Welsh, and Rees ap-Tudor Prince, When Rebels wrought that England it hath owned euer since: And thence the English by Degrees all Cam∣bria did inuaide: May neuer ciuill discord in this Isle re-reare be praide, Or if (the euer-losse of All) be sought no forren aide. For West-Wales (also Rees his Right) Rebellion first begunne, Inuiting Englist-Normaine Aides, that it and South-Wales wonne, And in a long and asperous Warre all Wales ere they had done. Impacably possessed though, till rather selfe-accord, Than often Armies wrought that we in milder Lawes it lord. This noble and vndanted Prince had had an ouer-hand Of diuers Rebels, Iestin and one Eneon, in the Land Of chiefe command, compact that whē this Eneon should be sped Of Aids from England, he in liew should Iestins Daughter wed: In birth and Education one right nobly and well bred. Great in King William Rufus Court Fitzhamon was, and hee To expedite against Prince Rees an Armie did decree.
Now Eneon, Iestins Agent, thus of English Troupes prouided, And other Rebels adding Powers, by swords was thus decided: Rees (euer earst victorious) now in valiant fight was kild, Fitz-hamon and his Knights had all behited them fulfild, To Eneon only was gainsaid the Marrage promisd him: Who therefore to the English Ships, that sailes and tacklings trim To haue departed, posted, and recalling them, perswaded Fitzhamon so gainst Iestin that Glamorgan he inuaded: And, though no easie Conquest, yet he conquerd it at last, Which thence frō him and his braue Knights frō heire to heire hath past. These were the first of Alliants that in Wales Possession wonne, And Rees thus slaine the Principate of South-Wales so was done. Now Iestin dead, no maruell that his daughter could not brooke This Eneon cause thereof, for she thus orphanag'd forsooke Her conquered Countrie, and vnknowne to all, vnlesse to One Her slaughtred Fathers friend in his late fortune ouerthrowne, Whom now she faind her Father (nor her father lou'd her more) Escaping, wealthily a Farme in England they did store: Whereas they liu'd a countrie life, belou'd, in State not poore: And Margaret (so now her name) where euer heard or seene, For beauty and sweet hauour was pronounst the Country-Queene: And by how much more bashful, & of tongue-pride mildly spare, Seem'd carelesse clenly in attire, her huswifrie did care, Nor scorning nor affecting Loue, so much more seem'd she rare, And rather than in haughtines did fault in too-submis, A fault the contrarie whereof in bastard Gentrie is. How often would the Swaines prepare their Morrice & their May To haue a sight of her, when all enamoured went their way? The sprewsest Citie-Lads for her would faine the Countrie-aire, And that their prouder Girles had but adultrate beauties swaire, Oft Courtiers faind or, Milke for thirst, or for their Hawke a Pigion, When, might they parle with her, no more was mingd of such pro∣uigiō. Combinement thus of Nature and of Vertue is admirde:
Though Natures gifts are oft with Arte by most too much attirde: But chiefly cleered Scalpes of haire with Periwigs supplide, To God and Nature sinne me thinkes, and men at least deride Gray-headed Crownes and vulgar Stuffe that so are finifide. For who can lesse than smile that sees vnstanch and riueld faces, To shelter coylie vnderneath Fannes, Tifnies, Maskes, Bongraces? O Cousnag to an amorous Eye, nor thence but thus ensues That such, not such as they would seeme, by such intice our viewes To censure them for also vaine, whose foule were els no newes. Nay, why should faces faire indeed bo-peepe behinde a Fanne, Or be conceild in Satten, now Vermiliond, now drugd wanne, Or any hold it Ornament to owne an arted haire, Sith men esteeme the fairest foule that so is fowly faire? Giue me a Girle that is her-selfe, Compounds if ye compare With Simples, be not Physicks, but sophisticated ware: Minerua suffereth violence when Phao makes her faire: May such be disarithmetickt his Creatures that are. Dust, Wormes-meate, Rottennes, that thinke your borrowed beau∣ties rare, That so obseru'd and sottishly from your Creation square, And not at all your pride-sick Soules but falsed faces care, Yea, and essentiall Beauties that of vertuous mindes be bare, Amend your such Amisses which should hoped Eyes despaire. And ye that haue the Aire parfum'd, bathe oft in Lotions sweete, Be borne like Romes Triumphants, Earth vnworthie your coy feete, Glitter in gold, pearles, pretious stones, haue beautie in it pride, With all that Ornament, wealth, Arte can any way prouide, Or soone must die, or see an age shall shew in you such change, As, looking back to youth, your selues shal to your selues seem strāge. Gray haires aboue your furrowed Brows, Noses & Mouthes cōtract, Lanke in-bowd Cheeks, like Lips & Chins, teeth rottē, & teeth lackt, Brawn-falne, crāp, stitches, belching, & much els as much vnsweet, With aches, palsies, and moe such your hastning Ends shall greet, And, dead, a million such not worth the simplest winding sheete.
If so, as so, then sooth good sooth in this said one, say I, Not borne at all were happier, borne, were happie soone to die, So progresse we in Vanities, pursues vs Miserie. Sith in these transitorie Turnes our Bodies thus transmute, To pampering, painting, prowding them meere vanitie impute. But chiefely Nature wrongd by Arte, of Prowdnes more than need, Cannot but to the Actors shame, mislike in others breede. For why? firme liking of a thing imagined, thinks me, Should quash in them imagin or imagined would be. Who knowes false fire and feares? Who fat with painted meates they see? Who flies a paper Giant? feares an Asse in Lyons skinne? Who fees a noted Idiot that with Arte a Cause must winne? A Coward armd like Hercules who is it doth not scorne? Esteemes a Kyte a Faulcon, though so belled and so borne? Then actiuely and passiuely much more, me thinketh, might Those needlesse Curiosities with Nature that condight Be apprehended meere Offence of Notion and to Sight. For can we thinke prompt Is not is? If not, what seeke we more Than as lists God naturalize, subtract, adde, strike, restore? Deuotion heathenish did and doth vile Creatures adore, Should Christians in a Christian thē count Blemish Eie sights Sore? No, Mightie▪Ones are to themselues for Placcards, rich, and poore, If virtuous, though deformed, hold full waight in wisemens Lore. Nor meant is here but modestly may arted be attier To Natures scarres, and cleanlied all doth decencie requier. Nor beate we here malignantly at sacred Beauties Luster, But to contemplate it aright proud Featur-fers we muster. And be it that Prescription doth naturalize in Court Some Errors to an habit, held for Ornament and Port, (For things in some vnseemly are not such to some of Sort) Yet might, me thinks, be wisht the Court were also prowder than That Vulgers should in Tinctures, Tiers, Maske, Fardingale, and Fan Coriue, a Gill be Lady-like, and Iack a Gentelman.
To Blowses, aping Niceties and Ante-physicks arting, Of Aesops Iay displumed me like guerdon of peruerting. Now roome Sirs for a Toy a Troth, els haue I heard a Lie: But howsoeuer, be it told for no Diuinitie. CHAP. 102. WAs once a Drudge, a sturdie Royle, whom Na∣ture friended so, As not the proudest head than hers a fairer haire did owe: So well her Lady likt thereof as, soundly whilst she sleepes, She sheares it off, for losse of which in vaine poore Malken weepes. Where was it, or who did the deede she could not learne of long, Till chanst her finde another haire old Lumber cast among. Her office was to emptie all that had of empting neede, With Ingresse free and Regresse for performance of that deede. I wot not how it came to passe, the Ladies Head-geere (she A sleepe) was off, so Malken chanst her haireles front to see. Soone fetcht she, and confers the haire earst found with hers yt slept, Her owne too with a Perwig that lay there, most choisely kept, And in that Scrutanie resolues, nor so resoluing errs, It found to haue bin Madams, it was perwigged once Hers. This tooke she thence, That left she there. Anon came Gallants gay To frollike with her Ladiship, and her vp-rising stay. Where cushend was the Perwig there was found a dustie Maine, The Ladie chafes, her Chamberers seeke euery nooke in vaine. Meane while, all tatterd, durtie, & whose chaers her face did smudge,
In comes, from seruing hogs or like, the rude perwigged Drudge, Salutes the Guests, offers to kisse, be kist, good sport they haue To see such foule from top to toe her only head so braue. Well well (quoth Malken) scoffe and scorne, My Lady is abed A Bodie only, Manners would some greet yee in her stead, And who should rather than my selfe that long haue been her head? Mine had she not shorne off and worne (eie-liquor here she shead) I had (beshrew her Maddamship) ere now (ha ho) been wead. Thus sham'd shee her might shame, for then were Perwigs newly bread, Though since too many, modest els, are in that Art misled: Vaine Eies not vnderstanding Thoughts howbeit so are fed. But yee, and yee whom Nature hath or Fortune prowded know, That vade ye shall as flowers forgot when and where yee did grow. For none, for whatsoeuer, hath or can themselues suruiue, But them vnto Posterities our Pennes preserue aliue, And famous or infamous shall at least those great-Ones be, That shall or shall not in this Life that future life fore-see: Howbeit, Perpetuitie Impenitents feare yee Of sinnes Rewarde, much more than all that All can else decree. Deathes Certenty, whē, where, & how vncertain, life throughout, Should curbe all selfe-Indulgencie and flesh so proudlie stout, That but as in a Labyrinth elaboureth about. Our Losses, Crosses, Passions, and Affections passing-by, Passe but along the Currant from our Births vntill we die, And finde we shall our Infancie a dreame of, who knowes what? The booke and birch to Childhood Checke more feelinglie than that: Adolescencie may be said A meere or merrie Madnes: And Manhood sildome sheweth more it bouldnes than in badnes: Old-age (in carke, drifts, shifts yt sweats) or ends when enters thriuing, Or Age-re-childed, decrepate (lifes vtmost) stints all striuing: Then Carrions be our Carcases, and to our Soules remaines For well or ill here done the doome of endles Ioyes or Paines. Then blessed infinitly thou beyond worlds pompe or pelfe,
That louedst God aboue all things, thy Neighbour as thy selfe. But now to Iestins Daughter where we left proceed we heere: To her reputed Father was a Yeoman dwelling neere, Richer, as is the Adage, by full many a Sheepe and Oxe, By farnesse from a Gentleman, a Lawyer, and a Foxe. Nor squard, as chanst, the Parson for tithe whit-meats, lambe, wool, Shocks, As some not pardoning poorest Soules their pēce for hēs & cocks, When that h'as all he all consumes on peacock Pride and smocks. This Yeoman was a Iustice to himselfe, his Neighbours all Him loued, and he loued them. If Variance hapt to fall, They went not to such Worships as like Tyrants men miscall: Which for couragious Iusticeship must be to them ascribed, Though at an Outlawrie their wits, some partiall, and some bribed, Must euermore be fawned on, haue Presents, purchase cheape, Carts gratis sent to their Remoues, and men their Corne to reape, Presses or Impositions els on him defects they heape, When their Retainors royst and wrong, yet out of Iustice leape. But if shall one, els honest, erre through choler, vrg'd abuse, Or casually, their grudge or gaer admit no termes of truse: When desprate Ruffins fraught with faults finde readily a Meuse, Or not at all are question'd, as sin-quitted by sins-vse. Yea, are not of Commissoned themselues some that sometimes Doe borrow of their Iusticeship for Caesar-dues and Crimes? But petite Trespasses and Those were yeelded faults and mended Were silenced, and none so great but Neighbours friendly ended Where dwelt this Yeoman, rich in State, yet richer in a Sonne Frugall and honest, richest when to Daughter-in-law he wonne This faire Glamorganean, that did termes of Gentrie shunne. But long conceald affection how it fadged superseade, Vntill the Yongmans letter that to her he wrote yee reade.
CHAP. 103. THat thou beest, Pegge, in better heale than I my selfe am now I wish, or that like sick for me as I for thee wert thou. The cause that now I write it is to let thee wit That I, By Cupid long since branded thine, must thee mate-quaint, or die. Small rest, God wot, a nights, few meales a day take I, loue-sick, And little heart in Possets, sops, a supping, or a Chick: Then loue me, Pegge, fornenter when is blabd abroad my plight, On thy too squamish Maidenhead the crime thereof doe light. But, wot'st thy what? I with our Cart haue bin whileare at Court, And saw the King (God saue his grace) & mought he heare report, How vs his Officers doe buse, almost in euery sort. Thy father would haue feoft on thee a Courtnall, faith t'was well Thou scap'st him, for if he be good, then none be bad in Hell. Lord, how he swaggerd in his silks, and seeing me by chance, As Peacocks viewed spread their tailes did he himselfe aduance! Yet once my fathers house was all his helpe: but let him passe With that same lustie horse that scornd the Millers loden Asse, Till turnd out lame, this one had corne, that other scarcely grasse: Such bastard Courtnals serue but Turns, besibbing Coyns of brasse. Thou, for t'hart monstrous faire, thinkst me not fine enough, I, but Perhaps wert better fancie me than such a Lustie-gut. Though with gay Brokerie may seeme he casteth thee to win, I better borrow could of Pride than he the silken Sin:
CHAP. 104. THis with a peece of Rie-paist seald, sent, and receiued, she Did meditate thereon, although obtuse in phrase yee see. The Surface of him-selfe, thinks she, exter∣niz'd is herein, May seeme he cannot flatter, nor me Flatte∣rie shall win, Oft Praysers are to vs as is to Birds the Fowlers gin. Alas, what keepe of Beautie, which indeede is but a blast? A Non-proficient at the least it must be at the last: Though thereof Poeans in mens Mouthes as in a Mould are cast. Fooles are we, and as foolishly doe Men aduance our pride, That vnto prizing Praysers tongues our tickled eares hath tide, Els our facundious Fooles might we more than they vs deride: To see them gallop Thersites when listeth them to crake, To out sigh Schyno when they feare a foyle and Troy would take: But shadowes we for substances Narcissus like mistake. For edged by such Artists, and they once possest of vs, The fairest Faire is foule or foole, and Pigs-nie but a Pusse, And A-per-se, obserued earst as Weathercocks doe winde, Oft to a too imperious Lord is, as nere She, declinde, Or glorious trash and Titles, whence ambitious thoughts proceed, Make Others enuie vs, or vs betraieth to vn-heed. O neuer lost Humilitie, nor Haughtinesse did win, An honest Man and meanes to liue is and my boone hath bin. The Greatest in her Greatnes oft I see hath discontents:
Nor doth an happie life consist in Titles, Robes or Rents. The Court hath been, the Countrie is to me familiar, either Not quit of Tediousnes, yet This than That preferre I rather. Among our Cattell, in our Fields, at Home may losse and harmes Vn-patient vs, farre diffrent though impatient Courts and Farmes. There Quarrel drifteth euē to blood, to Wealths losse, or disgrace, Here simply, at the least to saue Expence, they Peace imbrace: Or if too busie some-where Some, they are esteemed bace. The bodies glorious Ornaments, and gawdie Tires for head, (Extracts from Worme-webs, Mettles, Birds, yea thefts from her is dead) Shew more of sin, serue lesser thā a fleece of wool in stead. Were Pride no such Practitioner and Denizen allowd, I should haue been an Infidell that Pride could be so prowd. But Earth, Aire, Graue, Arte, Hell, & al gainst Nature now combine, Whereby our Soules shew duskie whilst our gilded Carrions shine. Refraine but Court and Citie then of neither finde we mis, A Dairie-dame, that minds not more, than Madam merrier is: Food, cloath, and habour competent should as thinke I suffise, Vpon the matter who hath more whom Fortune most supplies? And who be they that are not Earth, and must returne thereto? Then only Vertue vnto vs best Offices can doe. Now to an Husband: Gilberd is no Gallant yet no Gull, Not learned but well limmed, and couragious to the full, Frugall yet frollike, speakes with sense, his Breeding if respected, In wealth sufficient, neuer of Dishonestie detected, What would I more? Such should not, nor of me shal be reiected, Mine is a Loue preordinate to be to him subiected: Nor Fortune aught disparageth that loue to loue directeth: A Woman to a Man is all that loue twixt all effecteth. At modest Opportunities she yeelds her Loues consent: And Gilberd wiued Margaret, to Eithers hearts content.
CHAP. 105. FItz-hamon and his Complices thus hauing broke the Ice, From England Emulation did Newmarch for Wales intice, With Armes (as brauely answered of Welsh) did he inuade The Cautreds three of Brechnock, and thereof a Conquest made: And married Nest, Nests Daughter, that King Gruffyths Daughter was, And had a Sonne, Mahel, to whom his great Possessions passe, A worthy Knight: But Nest, whē was her Husband Newmarch dead, A too licentious life with one of her beloued lead. Mahel her Sonne, ill brooking it, fought with and wounded sore The same his Mothers Paramour, She much inrag'd therefore. And dares the Primecocks interrupt me in my loue, quoth she? Or thinks he vnreuenged it shall ouerpassed be? Forgets he Loue and Ladies to be Relatiues, and those But bastard Gentries that themselues not amorously repose? What Gallant almost holds it not the pietie of Clownes To haue but strict-confined loue in Hymaenean bownes? For Husband, Wife be tired Tearmes, Friend, Seruant courtly sounds. Who hath not heard amongst the Gods that Mars did Venus court? Then sentenced, not yet repeald, a tolerable sport: Penelope is Poëtrie, Lucretia fain'd report. Doe set her to the Distaffe, Batch, the Milk-paile, and such Chares, Hath all Attendance, Pleasures, Ease, lies soft, and finely fares, If these haue no Prerogatiue, nor be Preparatiues
To more than cōmon Courage, for no Saints such Maids or Wiues: Yet great and wisemen winke thereat, and liue the quieter liues, For nere the sooner her soule his possesseth he that striues. Grant must I that our Chaplaines well doe Chastitie commend, Yet Venall intimate they Lust sith so themselues offend. At least such as my selfe, not old, and in my Widowhood, May plead the same in Pardon, or my fault as thus make good: My Birth and State be greater than I yet a Husband finde, Meane while I am no Votarie, nor mortifide in minde: Some, and of Sort, haue been that haue (their wickednes the more) Euen whilst they liu'd in wedlock plaid hand-ouer-head the whore. Such neuer I: yet must belie my selfe for such, els how Should I reuenge me of the Boy that hath abusde me now? Adde that I wantond wedded, as now widowed, singly this, And ioyntly this and that will be but nine daies Chatiwis: And what of little prattle more that to my purpose is? Audacious Boy, that durst diuulge the amours of thy Mother, That impudencie, know thou, shall from me beget another, And to a Sister shall transferre a Births-right from a Brother. Long I, and ouerlong, haue liu'd if that my Cradle now Shall be my Tutor, let them that haue Patience it allow: A Meleagers Mother I my selfe to Mahel vow. She, winged thus by Nemesis, soone speeding to the King, Reueales her owne dishonour, so his liuelihood to wring From her own Sonne, and weepingly this Cuckoe-Song did sing. The Victor of Brechina to your Scepter Newmarch dead, My noble Husband (ah, would I had died in his stead, She said, as seeming soothly said, her teares did second so) Did I abuse, and for the Crime this Pennance vnder-goe, Besides my Conscience-scruple, that my selfe my selfe defame Before your Highnes, for it now too much imports the same. Mahel my Sonne (ah, would he were not scandalously such, But for he is, it is it that so deeply doth me touch)
I bore in Bastardie, and for I therein did amis, I hold me iustly plagued that my Plague a Bastard is. I haue a vertuous Daughter by my valerous Husband, She Inherit should his State: Vouchsafe, my Leage, it so may be. Was ministred an oth to her, that swore her sayings true: From Mahel to his Sister so she great Possessions drew. This noble lustie Gentleman land-stripped thus and then, Grew thenceforth shie of Women, and a Timon vnto Men. The Mother dide in Obloquie, the Daughter wedded was To Milo Earle of Hereford, and from their loynes did pas The Bruses, Bohunes, Staffords, all great Nobles in this Land: Yet in this Propagation great great Crosses vnderstand: Of Bruses only now be spoke, sith Wales is now in hand. CHAP. 106. WIlliam de-Bruse, of Brechnock Lord, inuited to a feast Sitsilt, of honourable Birth, and Others not the least Of South-Wales Gentrie, newly then from armour reconcilde To this de-Bruse, who brooded hate & hatcht it whilst he smilde. For whether (which he after fain'd) for slaughtred brother late Reuenge, or diffrent Sentences in things they then debate, Were motiues to the Murthers that he acted, was too true Wrong'd Rites of Hospitalitie on him Heauens vengeance drew. A signall giuen, his Seruants, arm'd and ambusht to that end, Slew those his Guests: so dangerous is a Foe reuerst a friend.
Not so content, he posteth to the murthred Sitsilts Place, And slew his Infant-Sonne before the suppliant Mothers face. Who, when she saw her louely Babe, whom lately she did hugge, Whilst that he smiled on her lips or sported with her dugge, Sprawle in his guiltles gore, and he that stabbed stabbing still, She nakt her breast, and said: so much (though not so much so ill) May here be done, ah, be it done, least leasure serue I pray That vnto thee and thine, grant God, befall as fowle a Day. Too too obdurate Sauage, if euen thou thy selfe shouldst see A Babe of thine bleed as bleeds mine, how might it torture thee? But bard were thine their Mothers Breasts: from home they strāgers so, The lesser thou canst apprehend a Parents ioy or wo. My Nurserie of this in me a doubled Nature bread, His smiles my Cordales, griefe my gall, death rēders me but dead. Had he (ah, had he) liu'd I had reciprocally spead. Wretch, stay, Good stay that stab (he meant a stab) perhaps my teares May balme those past, for yet me thinks a little life appeares. O be my God for that poore Good! Sweet hart-root, Mam is here: Is here? now woe is me that thou of helpe art nere the neere. No, he is gon, alas h'is gon, yet I liue, liue I? no, But as a Ghost, at least sweet Babe with thee would I were so, To be this Tyrants terror till he hence to hell shall goe. Then casteth she her self vpon her Sonne that breath'd his last: Nor goler blead his wounds but that her eies shead teares as fast. Her face admirde for faire, besmeard with blood-mixt teares, did adde The veiw more tragick: And as she this saying often had, Reuenge it, Sitsilt, happie yet in absence from this sight, Bruse said in scoffe she spake too late, his life had bod good night: And laughing left the Lady such as Niobe for like: Yet spead her Prayers, him and his God diuersly did strike. Bruse dide in Exile, his proud wife in Prison, one their Sonne Was stru'd, another braind as he his head-strong horse did run: And of that Progenie throughout, long nobled in Dens,
Our Histories tragediously doe varie hard Euents. To our Iniustice Iustice thus is God: repent, amend, Blood-drifters and Oppressors, els Hell, worse than thus, your End. CHAP. 107. THough to the Kings of England their Deuo∣tion got was much In Powys, West, and South-Wales, by the Eng∣lish and the Duch: Yet was our second Henry by a second Rees so plide (By North-Wales Princes also, thrice that Bat∣tell bid and bide) With Armes and Stratagems, as like did neuer him betide, From Stephen, or his rebell Sonnes, French, Irish, Scots or any, Himselfe escaping hardly with the losse of Souldiers many. * Crogen, a Terme vsde in reproch of Welsh-men, rather might Reproch the English, that with them did there defected fight. Of Henries Armie none approcht that Passage but were kild, Welsh-Crogen, in memoriall of that Slaughter, therefore hild A Terme reuengefull, when came Welsh to hand: as who would say, * Like Mercie as at Crogen ours receiued we repay. And though write some the Welsh preuail'd more by their Scite thā swords, Yet Enuies-selfe must grant that Wales had, and braue men affords: Yea, had not been suborned Wales against it selfe had faild That England, labouring it so long and dearely, had preuaild. Great was Prince Owen Gwyneth, but Prince Lewlin Monarke more, Except King Arthur, none in Wales had greater been before. From Rufus till first Edwards Raigne North-Wales held England tack,
But then did rather loyall hearts than wonted Prowesse lacke. Lewlin next to great Lewlins sonne Prince Dauid (Gladis wiude To Mortimer put-by) then rulde, and much by Armes achiude. But who against that Ages Mars first Edward might hold-out? Yet twice this Lewlin held him wag, and thirdly had no doubt, Had not he bin betraid and slaine at Buelht, a Warrior stout. Last Prince of very Britons, that from Brute vntill that day Had, in some part within this Isle, continued regall sway Two thousand and fiue hundred yeeres, two yeres if taine away. Edward, presuming Wales now won, the Welsh with commō voice Of any Prince, vnles Welsh borne, protested gainst the choice, Yea, euen of Edwards-selfe, except amongst them he should liue, Too well experienced what law by Proxie Princes giue. Much therefore did in action, more in murmor hence proceed, Till by this Policie the King did thus his purpose speed. * In Wales he at Carnaruon with his Queene the Winter pas, Where Edward his first-borne, surnam'd Carnaruō, Welsh-borne was: The King, conuening then the Welsh, made promise he would name Vnto their Nation such a Prince as none for ought could blame, Borne in their Countrie, and could not one word in English say, Whō gladly, on those Termes, the Lords of Wales swore to obey: * The King thē nam'd his Infant-Sonne, and progrest thēce away. Hence Englands Heires-apparant haue of Wales bin Princes, till Our Queene deceast conceald her Heire, I wot not for what skill. But now may Cambries frollike, for though vertuous many since, Yet parallel at least the best may their now hopefull Prince: And theirs is hapt the honour that Brutes triple Diuident To Locrin, Camber, Albanack, reuerteth whence it went: For Home-againe to Britons is intired Britaine sent. So inaccessible is Wales, so mountanous, and craggie, That to refresh my Muse, as els occasioned, Here lagge I, Only that to Elizabeth hath Office tithed bragge I. Was neuer Prince affoorded Muse a sweeter subiect then
Her life and Raigne, or Age thereto that apted choicer men. Yet, as if Perseus mounted on his Pegasus held out Some Gorgons head, stone▪ still stand all should go that Taske about. O that would He might it commaund it recommend vnto Some Artist, worthie such a worke of Raritie to do! Moses the Patriarkes, Caesar did himselfe and others sing, Stoore like heroick Pennes, and She were pen-worke for a King. Should then, liefe Lord, your royall-selfe vouchsafe an Ouer-view Of whomsoeuer arting it, to giue it Species true, Long after my decease may like (liu'd like) doe like for you: But howsoeuer, happely Liue, Raigne, your Foes subdue. FINIS.
