25235 S119651 99854858 20312
A REPLY AGAINST M. GILBERT BROVVNE Priest. WHEREIN IS HANDLED MANY OF THE GREATEST and weightiest pointes of controuersie betweene vs and the Papists, and the truth of our do∣ctrine clearely proued, and the falset of their religi∣on and doctrine laide open, and most euidentlie con∣uicted and confuted, by the testimonies of the Scripture and auncient Fathers; and also by some of their own Popes, Doctors, Cardi∣nals, and of their owne writters. WHEREVNTO IS ANEXED A SEVE∣rall treatise, concerning the Masse and Antichrist. By M. IOHN WELSCHE, Preacher of Christs Gospell at AIRE. EDINBVRGH Printed by ROBERT WALDE-GRAVE Printer to the Kings Maiestie 1602. Cum Priuilegio Regio.
royal blazon or coat of arms IN MY DEFENC GOD ME DEFEND PROV. 29.14. A King that iudgeth the poore in trueth, his Throne shall be establi∣shed for euer.
TO THE RIGHT EXCEL∣LENT AND MIGHTY PRINCE, IAMES the 6. King of Scotland, &c. Grace and peace be multiplied. I Hope it shall not be accompted pre∣sumption, (most noble Prince) to of∣fer to your Maiesty, the first fruites of these my simple and rude labours, se∣ing the cause is Iesus Christs, that King of Kings, and Lord of glorie, whilk is heir defended, euen the euer∣lasting trueth of God, against the venimous stings of one of the Reu. 9.3. Locusts of that Antichristian Kingdome. The right whereof does most iustly belong to your Maiesty, both in re∣spect of these rare and singulare gifts of knowledge and vn∣derstanding, whilk the Lord hes vouchsaued vpon your Ma¦iestie, in sik a plentifull measure, that your subiects does ac∣knowledge it at home, and strangers does admire it & com∣mend it abroade: whereby you are not only able to 1. Pet. 3.15 ran∣der a reason of that Faith whilk is in you; but also able to Tit. 1.9. stoppe the mouth of the aduersary, and convict the gainsaier whatsumeuer, by that 2. Tim. 13.15. worde of trueth wherewith your Maiesty hes bene brought vp from your ve∣ry infancy: so that all the wise men of Babel, I meane the
Cleargie of that Romane harlote, is not able to resist the mouth and wisedome whilk the Lord hes giuen to your Ma∣iestie. And also in respect of that supereminent power, (as Rom. 13.1 the Apostle calles it) whereby as you are most able, so are you most oblished to maintain his truth, propagate his king∣dome, and nurishe his owne spouse, whilk hee hes Act. 20.20 purcha∣sed to himselfe by his owne blood, by the breasts of your Maiesties gouernement, as it was promised of olde that his Esa. 60.16 spouse shoulde suck the breastes of Kings. So, who is more oblished, then ye, Sir? Who so sufficient and able e∣uery way to mantaine it, as ye Sir? Your knowledge bindes you: your profession bindes you: your soueraigne authoritie, as yeare a King in Israel bindes you. For, as the wisest king that euer was hes saide, and left it in write: or rather that King of Kings in him and by him, Pro. 8.15 Princes raigne by me. Ye holde your kingdome of him, Sir, and must lay down your crowne at his feet, and must stand vp and giue a recko∣ning of the gouernement of his Kingdome, of the mainte∣nance of his trueth, and of the nourishing his spouse in that day. Your knowledge, Sir, is able to iustifie it : your soueraigne authoritie able to defend it  Ye haue re∣ceaued that Heb. 4.12 Eph. 6 17, 2. two edged sworde of Gods Spirite in your mouth, able to wound, yea to consume that man of sinne and sonne of perdition: ye haue receaued that Rom. 13.4 sworde of justice and judgement in your hands, able to Psal 101.8. destroy betimes al the wicked of your kingdom and to roote out from the city of the Lorde, all the workers of iniquity. Ye know, Sir, Reu. 17.4.5. the abhomina∣tion of Babel, that as it is said of the verteous woman Pro. 31 26 Many wemen haue done vertuously, but thou sur∣mounts them al: so the contrary may be said of her: many hereticks hes taught erroneously, & worshipped & wrought
abhominably: but the Reu. 17.1. whoore of Babel, the Kirk of Rome, in heresie, in abhomination, in idolatry, hes surmoun∣ted thē all, that euer went before her, or euer shall come after her: Reu. 13.1.3 6. Manye beastes haue spoken blasphemously, but that Reu. 13. & 16.13.14. & 17.3.4.5.6. & 18.24. seconde beaste that hes two hornes like the Lambe, surmounteth them all in blasphemy, tyranny, cru∣eltie, and abhominable idolatrie, destroying and ma∣king marchandise of the soules of men and wemen. Other heresies did but subuert some fundamentall pointes of Religion, but the Kirk of Rome hes subuerted them all al∣moste. Of other heresies, some was but against the God-head of Christ, other some against his māhood, other some against his offices and benefites, or some one head or other: but the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome, is against them all. Iniurious to his God-head, in making him, not onely inferiour to the Father, in teaching that he is not  but also inferior to the very creatures, in praying to Mary to command her Son, Iure Matris impera Redemptori, as I heard your Maiesty most solidely proue, and so worse then the Artians. Iniurious to his man-hood, to all his offices, his benefites, and all the meanes, inward and outward, of the knowing & ap∣plying of him. And last of all, iniurious to his soueraigne glory, in cōmunicating it to stocks & stones, a peece of bread bones & ashes, & the skurf skarf of all things, as I hope, I haue made manifest in this my answere. So that moste iu∣stly it is called Reu. 13.11. 1. Tim. 4. the speach of the Dragon, and the do∣ctrine of Diuels by the Spirite of God. And if the pro∣fession of sik a Diuelish doctrine be too great an euill, what would the practise thereof be? I meane the idolatrous Masse that abhomination of desolation. The miserie, allace, were too greate, Matth. 9.36. to see the people of this countrie scattered as sheep without sheepheards, dying that second & euer∣lasting
death, for want of the bread of life and gospell of sal∣uation. But this would be the misery of miseries, if the Reu. 17.4 golden cupe of Babel, full of all abhominations, shuld be set to their head againe, to drink the deadly poison of their owne damnation. And certainly, if Amos. 8.11.12. this famine of the worde of God, whereby not onely Amos. 48. two or three citties, as the Prophet sayes, but twenty or thirty Paro∣chins in some places, should be compelled to goe to one, if they were desirous to drink the waters of life; this I say, is a iudg∣ment heauie ynough. But what a iudgement would this be, if they were compelled to byde at home, and it were but in their owne families, by that abhominable Masse, the rounde bread, the Gods of Babell. Surely a great many of the people of this countrie, does not 1. Reg. 18.21. halte nowe betweene these two thoughts, whether God be the Lord, or Baal: but hes forsaken the Lord and his Gospell, and in their heart desires the op∣portunitie to say to their round bread, these are our Gods who hes redeemed vs from hell, and these will wee worship, at least secreitly, til our strength grow, & our nom∣ber encrease. The reste of the iniquities of this land, were too great to prouoke the Lorde of hoastes, suppose this impietie, (whilk the Lorde forbid for his Christs sake) bee not added vnto all the reste, and aboue all the reste. For what sinne is comparable to idolatry? or what iniquity hes bene euer so se∣uearly punished, as idolatrie? a sinne that is immediatly a∣gainst God, against Christ, against his glory: a sinne that made Ex. 32.28. Num. 25.9. 2700 of the Lords owne chosen inheritance to fall in the wildernesse, for the golden Calfe, & Ba∣al-Peor. A sinne that prouoked the Lorde in sik a high measure, that it made him delyuer his owne people (whome he had planted in that land of promise, and to whome he had sworne to be their God) Iudg. 11.12.13 14.25. ouer in the hands of their e∣nemies
round about them, so that whithersoeuer they went, the hande of the Lorde was sore against them. A sinne that 1. Reg. 11 5.11. rent the kingdome of Dauid a∣sunder, and made ten parts of it to be giuen to Iero∣boam the Son of Nebat, suppose the person was cal∣led 2. Sam. 12 24.25. Iedidiah, the beloued of the Lord, & the promise was made vnto him, that 2. Sam. 7.12.13. his house and throne shoulde stand for euer. And finally, a sin that first mooued the Lord 2. Reg. 17 18. to put awaye Israel from before his face, & caused their land to vomit them out, without al hope euer to returne againe, and then made 2. Chro. 36.16.17.18 19.20.2. Reg. 25.10. his wrath so hote againste Iuda, till there was no remedye but the Temple, the Kings house, and the houses of all the nobles, were brunt with fire, the Kings sonnes firste slaine before his eies, then his owne eies put out, himselfe bounde with chaines of steill, and he and his people carried captiues to Babel, wher there they remained for the space of 70. yeares. Are not these things falne forth 2. Cor. 10 11. as examples to vs, & ar they not written for our instruction, as the Apostle sayes, vpon whome the ends of the world is fal∣len: and is not Reu. 17.4 the abhomination of Babel, their ido∣latrous Masse, as great abhomination in the eyes of the Lord, as 1. Reg. 11.5 Milcom the abhomination of the Ammonites. Is it a lesse idolatry to worshippe a Ex. 32.4. 1. Reg. 11.5 Iud. 2.13. golden Calfe, the gods of Egypt, or a grauen sheepe Aschtaroth, the gods of the Sidonians, then to worship a bit of breade, made of wheate, groūd in the mil, baken in the ouen, coniured and erected vp by a Idolatrous Priest, whilk is the God of Ba∣bel, the Kirk of Rome. Is there any more Godhead in the one, then in the other? Hes their idole of the Masse any more life, feeling, or mouing, then the idols of Egypt and Sidon had? and does not the Kirk of Rome giue as great, yea rather greater
worship and Religion to their round bread, then Iuda or Is∣rael gaue to their golden calfe, or to Asttaroth the grauen sheepe. For they worship it as their Creator and redeemer. And as the worship of the golden Calfe, is called Deut. 32.17. the worship of Diuels in Moses song: so the Idolatry of the Kirk of Rome, whereof their rounde breade in their Masse, is one of the principall, is called Reu. 9.20. the worship of Diuels, by the voyce that came from the foure hornes of the golden altare. For what Kirk or Kingdome vnder heauen is there to be found, who in the tyme of the blast of the sext Trumpet, when that fearfull army of the Turkes was loosed to ouerrun Christendome, does worship Idoles of golde and siluer, of brasse, of woode, and of stone, but the Kirk of Rome? And if the worship of God by Images, as Is∣rael did in the golden Galfe, whilk is but the breake of the se∣cond command, be called the worship of Diuels, shall not the worship of a false Creator and Redeemer, as they doe in their Masse, whilk is not only the breake of the first command, but also the stramping vnder foote of the sonne of God in the go∣spel, be most iustly called the worship of Diuels? And is not the Lord as iealous of his glory now, as he was then? and hes hee not sworne Esai. 42.8 that hee will not giue it to another? and hes hee not Reu. 13.14 15.16. & 14 8.9.10.11.12. & 16.1.2.10.19. & 17.1.2. & 18.2.3.3.5.6.21. & 19.19.20.21. & 21.21. threatned as seuere iudgements against the whoore of Babel, and the worshippers of the beaste and his image, and them that receaues his marke, openly or priuately, as euer he did against Iuda or Israel? Did he not cause it to be proclaimed, by an An∣gell with an loud voice, that the foundations of the earth might heare it, and tremble, that they shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of that pure wine, powred out in the Cupe of his wrath, and they shall be tormented day and night before the holy Angels
and before the Lambe: and the smoake of their tor∣ment shall ascend for euermore, and they shall haue no rest day nor night, that worships the beast and his Image. And heard not Iohn him that sate vppon the Throne, the judge of the whole earth, say, that Ido∣laters shall haue their portion in the lake that burnes with fire and brimstone, whilk is the second death. And seing the knowledge of our redemption surmounteth the knowledge of our creation: and the benefite of our redempti∣on exceides (by many degrees) the benefite of our creation: shall not the worship of an idole redeemer, and of a false Iesus, as they doe in their Masse, surmount by many de∣grees, the worship of an idole creator, as Iuda and Israel did? For the greater the light be, and the greater the mercie be that is bestowed vpon any, their sinne must be the greater. And as the light of the gospell is more 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13. glorious then the light of the law, so the idolatrie of these that are vnder the Gospell, must be more abhominable then the Idolatrie of these that were vnder the Law. Theirs was but Heb. 10.28. the dispysing of Moses Lawe: but this Idolatrie of their Masse, is Heb. 10.29. the stramping vnder foote of the bloode of Christ, and so worthy of sorer punishment (as the Apost. sayes.) And supose that the iudgement were to fall but vpon the commit∣ters of this sinne onely, it were too great, but it woulde reache further to a whole kingdome wherein it were committed, if by repentance and execution of iustice, it were not preuented. For shall Gen. 20.9 Abimelech King of Gerar, feare the iudge∣ment of God vpon his whole Kingdome for one a∣dultery only intended, and that in ignorance? And what may a whole land then feare for sik abhominable Idola∣trie in so cleare a light of the Gospell? And shall the ten tribes feare Iosh. 2 21. the wrath of God to bee kindled againste the
whole congregation of Israell, For the rebellion of the o∣ther two tribes, in setting vp an altar to sacrifice vpon as they thought? And what should wee feare then againste this whole land, if there were altars reired vp not to worship God on, but the Idoll of Babell. And if Iosua. 7. Achans theft, suppose both the person & the sinne was vnknowne: yea suppose there was no suspition, neither of the one nor of the other, spoyled all Israel of Gods presence, made them fall before their enemies, and made the Lorde refuse to be in the middest of them, vnlesse the sinne & per∣son was tryed and searched, and the Anathema taken away? And would not Babels Idolatrie be much more effec∣tual to spoyle all the land, if it were defiled therewith of Gods presence, to make vs fall before our enemies, and to make the Lord to departe from vs: suppose it were but in one person, se∣ing the sin is more odious in the Lords eyes, our light greater, and we more obleist nor they were. And suppose that this ab∣homination should be but in priuat families, yet it is 2. Tin. 2.17. a fret∣ting canker, as the Apostle sayes, that frait hath infected a member of the bodie, it will insect the rest; if it be not pre∣uented by cutting of the festered member. And the Apostle sayes, 1. Cor. 5.6. a little leauen leaueneth the whole lumpe, and experience hes taught that by proces of time a little leck, hath sunke a great ship, & one person infected with the pestilence hes infected a whole kingdome. The first Idolatrie of the land of Canaan began with Iug. 17.5.3. Teraphim Iehouae, siluer san∣ctified to the Lorde to bee an Image, but afterwarde it grew vp to the worship Iug 2.13. of Baall and Aschtaroth. It was in the beginning, but in one onlie familie, the familie of Iug. 17.1. Micah. but in proces of time, it passed from that familie to the tribe of Iug. 18. Dan. and from that tribe to all the rest of the ug. 2.13.14. Tribes: till at the last all Israell sinned & did that
whilk was euil in the sight of the Lord. So there is no questiō, Sir, & your Maiestie put not to your hand, as your haue begun to doe it will get foote in this land, & it would passe from fa∣milies to tribes, from priuate houses, to temples: from the worship of the round bread to the worship of stockes & stones, and so by one degree to another, till it haue made all guiltie, what by infecting, what by Communicating with their sinnes, and then bring the fearfull vengeance of God vpon all. And suppose, Sir, that you haue not neede to bee taught of any for that light and vnderstanding where-with the Lorde hes annoynted you, in so greate a measure beyonde many, doth teach you all things, and your Maiestie hes laid so sure foundation of maintenance, both of iustice and religion within your land, and hes begun so substantially to prosecute the same, (for the whilk from our harts we render glory and prayse to God.) So that all further exhortation of your Ma∣iestie would seeme to be superfluous, yet I must borrow leaue at your Maiestie, to be bolde with all humblenesse of mind & reuerence of hart, to God and to your Maiestie, to beseeke you by the price of Iesus Christ your Lord, to stirre vp the bowels of your compassion ouer this desolate countrie, for 1. Reg. 1.20. vpon whome are the eyes of all Israell but vpon you Sir? And what King is there vnder heauen vnder whose gouernement the gospel, hes had so free a passage, & the kirk of god hes had sik purity & libertie, in sik peace for so long a time in a whole kingdome, without heresie or schisme as vnder your Maiesties gouernement. So that wee were both vngrate to God and to you Sir, if with all thanksgiuing we did not acknowledge it. Take therefore for examples these worthie Kinges, who hes receaued a good reporte in the word of the Lord and now re∣sting from their laboures, hes receaued that incorruptible crowne of glory. Put on their affections Sir, and follow their
actions, that your report heir, and crowne heirafter, may be equall, 2 or rather aboue theirs. Let your heart q melt, Sir, with good Iosias, not for our fathers transgressions, as he did, but for Eze. 9.4. our owne sins, and the sinnes of this land: For God Act. 17.30 31. Rom. 2.16 regarded not the time of their ignorance, when the Gospell shyned not, but now since that light is bro∣ken foorth, he admonishes all men to repent, because he lies set a day (whilk cannot be far of) wherein he will iudge euerie one by the man Christ Iesus accor∣ding to his Gospell. And if that great Reu 10.1 2. Angel had not descended vnto vs, with that little booke open in his right hād, & the land had not bene once purged of idolatry, we should not Ioh. 15.21.24. haue had sinned, but nowe we haue no cloake for our sinne. Stirre vp your anger with Moses, Sir, who suppose he was Num. 12.13. the meekest man vppon the face of the whole earth, yet when he sawe the golden calfe his Ez. 32.19 anger was kindled, that he brake the Tables of stone, the Lords owne worke and write, brunt the Calfe in the fire, braied it in powder, scattered it on the waters, and made the people to drinke thereof. Follow the example of good Iehosaphat, Sir, who 2. Chron. 27.4.20. sought the Lord his God, walked in his precepts, lifted vp his heart to the wayes of the Lord, purged his lande of Idolatrie: and first sent Levites with his owne Princes to teache all the citties of his kingdome the law of the Lord: and after being admonished by the Prophet, for helping of the wicked, and louing them who hated the Lord, (suppose he was his neighbour king, joined in affinity with him) he so repented, that he went from the one end of his kingdome to the o∣ther, euen from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought his people to the Lord their God, and esta∣blished
religion, and justice in all the citties of his kingdome, and therefore the Lord was with him, he prospered, & had riches and honour in aboundance. What ioy of heart, Sir, brought Ezechias to the hearts of all the godly, aswell indwellers, as strangers, when he 2. Chro. 29 & 30.31. purged his land of Idolatry, brake the brasen serpent whilk the people had abused, opened the dores of the Tē∣ple whilk were shut vp, restored the worship of God, sent messingers with letters throughout al Israel, to conuert them to the Lorde their God, restored the Priests and Leuites to their ministry, as the Lord had commanded by his Prophetes, spake to their hearts, strēgthened them in their offices, prouided for their maintenance, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. Followe these examples Sir: send Pa∣stors throughout all the borders of your kingdome, to teache your subiects the Law of their Lord, and the Gospell of their saluation, establishe Religion and Iustice in all the citties of your Kingdome. Cause the Zach. 14 8 9. waters of life to runne frō the heart of your countrie, vnto the borders thereof, that publickly and priuately, the Lorde may be but one, and his name one, and he may be a soueraigne King in all your land, as it was prophecied and promised. Establishe Pastors in all your Kingdome, strengthen them in their offices, and speake to their hearts. Prouyde for their maintenance, that they be not distracted, but may be encou∣raged in the Law of their God, and in the execution of their ministrie. And when it is reported to your Maiesty, or ye heare of any, be they many, or be they fewe, be they man, or be they wife, be it publictly, or be it secretly, in any of the citties or parts in your Maiesties Kingdome, that they haue gone out to entise others to Idolatry, or hes committed Idolatry them∣selues,
ye try it, searche it, and seeke it out most diligently, for so the Lord hes most straitly commanded. And if it be true & certaine, that sik abhomination is done in your kingdom; take euill out of Israel, that he may haue mercy on vs, and multiply his blissings to vs. And then may ye Sir, (hauing done all these things) take God to recorde, that you are cleane from the blood of all your people, be∣cause you haue kept no meane back from thē, whilk your cal∣ling craued, but hes caused the whole counsel of God to be shewed to them: so that if they perishe their owne blood may be vpon their owne heades. And then shall forraine nations and strangers say of you Sir, as Reg. 5 7. Hiram, and the Queene of Sheba saide of Salomon, Blissed Reg 10.8.9. be the Lord God who hes set sik a wise and vnderstanding Prince ouer Scotland, to builde his Kirk, and to exercise iustice & iudgement there, it was for the loue the Lord had to his Kirk there, that he set sik a wise and vnderstāding Prince ouer them. Yea, Psal. 78, 4. the generations to come, shal tell to their children, and their childrens children, the great work of the Lord, whilk he hes done by you, Sir, in this land. I haue heard your Maiesty grauely protest, before God, in two generall assemblies, that it was one of your Maiesties greatest desires, and ye were euen, as it were, ambitious of that worke, to plant euery Parochin within your kingdome, with a Pa∣stor: that the posterities to come, might say, King IAMES the sext, hes done sik a notable worke in his dayes. Confirme your self, Sir, in that purpose: for ye know, Sir, who hes said, 1. Sam. 2.30. I will honour them that honors mee. There is no que∣stion, Sir, and I speake with confidence, if ye honour him in this kingdome, and be faithfull to him in the gouernement of it, he shal honour you: not only by making you to raigne in that euerlasting kingdome, but also by lifting you vp to bee
rewler ouer moe Kingdomes heir. The Lord annoynted Da∣uid King ouer all Israel: yet he gaue not the possession of it al at once, after the death of Saul, but first proued him with the gouernement of one Tribe seauen yeares and a halfe, & then finding him faithfull ouer that, he placed him rewler ouer all the rest, & established all Israel in his hand. So there is no question, and I am sure of it, if ye honour the Lorde to the vttermoste of your power, in the gouernement of this kingdome, and giue him a proofe of your fidelity therein: that as he hes giuen you the vndoubted right by birth, to bee a King ouer moe Kingdomes then this, so shall he make you rewler of them, and establish them in your hands: onely Sir, Iosua 1.6.7.8.9. be ye strong and couragious to do with al diligence as the Lord hes commanded you in his worde, and as ye see these faithfull Kings hes done before you. Decline neither to the right hand, nor to the left, & then assu∣redly I dare promise you in the name of the Lord, hee shall not leaue you or forsake you al your dayes, and none shall be able to stand before your face And as he was with Iosua and Dauid, so shall he be with you. For the Lord is true who hes promised, and then shalt thou pros∣per in all thy waies. And consider vpon the other part who euer prospered vnto the end, but these that walked as the Lord had commanded. For true is that whilk the Lorde spake by his Prophet to Asa, 2. Chro. 1.4 2. He is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seeke him, he wil be found but if ye will forsake him, he will forsake you. Was the Lord any longer with Saule, Ioash, Amazia, Vzzia, al Kings of Iuda, then they were with him? No, no: but from time they forsooke him, he forsooke them. Because Saule 1. Sam. 15 23. & 16.15. despised the word of the Lorde, in sparing whome he should not haue spared, the Lord despised him from be∣ing
King ouer Israell, and the Spirite of the Lorde forsooke him. Because Ioashe forsooke the Lord, 2. Chro. 24 20. in permitting Idolatrie at the request of his princes, the Lord forsooke him and his kingdome, and deli∣uered them into the hands of their enemies. Because Amatzia did euill, and obeyed 2 Cro. 5.16. not the councell of the Prophet, when he admonished him, the Lorde de∣termined to destroy him. Vzzia al the 2. Cro. 26.5.16.18. dayes that he sought the Lord, the Lorde prospered him, but frō time he lifted vp himselfe to corrupt himself, and to trespasse against the Lord his God, in passing the li∣mites of his calling, and inuading the Priests office, he had no honour of the Lord but was smitten with leaprosie. But let all these things be farre from your Ma∣iestie, since you see what euerie one of these hes done to Kings and Kingdomes before you, let your hearte be constant be∣fore the Lord your God all the dayes of your life, that priores 2. Cro. 25.26. & posteriores, be neuer registrate of your Maie∣stie as it was of them, neither in the bookes of the Lordes cōmentary before him, neither in the Chronicles of the kings of Scotland, but that both your former & latter may be that whilk is good and right in the eyes of the Lord. That both the Lorde may giue this testimonye to your owne conscience, and to the conscience of all his children, that hee gaue of Dauid, I haue founde you a man according to my owne hart that will doe all my will: and also, that it may be written of your Maeistie in the Chronicles of the Kings of Scotland as it was written of Dauid, Ezechias, Io∣sias, in the Chronicles of the Kings of Iuda, that King IAMES the sext, his harte was persite toward the Lorde his God all his dayes, and his gouernement was in sik peace and Iustice, that after him there was none like him of al
the Kings of Scotland: neither was there any sik before him, who did cleaue vnto the Lord his God, with all his heart, and followed all his commandements, and neither declined to the right hand, nor to the left. Nowe the Lord graunt to your Maiesty, that yee may finde this fauour in his eies for his Christs sake. I haue nowe taken this boldenesse, to offer these my labours vnto your Maiestie: as a testimony of my moste humble, and loyall hart vnto your Maiestie, as God the sear∣cher of the heart knowes. Your Maiestie did exceedingly en∣courage mee, to let it goe forth vnto the light, what by your Maiesties moste gracious acceptation of my indeuour, and moste fauourable censure, and approbation of my laboures: what by your Maiesties humane counsell and aduise, confir∣med by your Maiesties Priuiledge and authoritie to mee to publishe the same. Sik was your Maiesties humanitie to mee, not onely in these, but in all your actions, both publick and priuate, with all your subiects, of whatsomeuer ranke or degree. Ye kyith sik humanitie and affabilitie, that that saying of Trajanus the Emperour, that a Prince shuld be haue himself so to his subiects, as he would haue thē to doe to him, if he were a priuate man, is verefied in you, Sir, wherein certainelie ye need not to giue place to any of whatsomeuer ranke: you expres it so liuelie in al your actions, & I haue found it for my owne parte by experience. So that your Maiestie hes often caused me to remember, that notable saying of Titus that Romane Emperour, A subject should neuer goe sad hearted from the speach of his Prince: The whilk experience makes me to conceaue hope, that your Maiestie will pardon this my boldenesse, will accept in good part this my small myte. I therefore most humblie desire your Maiestie to accept it, as from your Maiesties moste hum∣ble
obedient seruant and subiect. For whose peace and prosperitie, I am alwaies earnest with the Lorde. Now the God of all peace, euen that King of Kings, powre all light and grace in all aboundance, more and more, vpon your Ma∣iestie, and so roote and ground your heart in Iesus Christ, that ye may honour him more and more in your life and cal∣ling heir, that ye may be honoured of him againe, both in this life, and in that day with immortall and euerlasting glorie. Amen. From Aire the 18. of Nouember. 1602. Your Maiesties moste humble subiect M. IOHN WELSCHE.
Vnto the godly and Christian Reader in this land, Grace, mercie and peace, from God the Father, and Iesus Christ his Sonne our Lord and onelie Sauiour. Amen. WHen I thinke, Christian Reader, of the vn∣searchable mercies, (for so I may call them) whilk the Lord, according to his rich grace, whereby he hes bene aboundant towards vs, (if euer towardes any) hes vouchsaued vpon vs: and of our great ingratitude and manifold iniquities wherewith we haue recompensed him againe: I cannot but tremble to think of these most fearfull iudgements of God, whilk we haue most iustly deserued, and whilk can∣not but most assuredly fall vpon vs, vnlesse with moste speedie and earnest repentance of al sortes, they be preuented and auerted. Eph. .8. For vnto what king¦dome or nation vnder heauen, hes God beene more liberall in communi∣cating, the Insearchable riches of his deare son in his Gospel, as vnto vs in this nation. Nay, vnto what one kingdome vnder heauen hes God beene so rich and superaboundant in mercy, as vnto this? There are but fewe king∣domes vpon whome the Lord hes caused the glorious light of his Gospel to shine vpon, a grosse darknesse couering the moste part of the kingdomes of the earth: and yet Scotland hes found this fauour in the eies of the moste high God. So that, that may be most truely said of vs, whilk is written of the land of Zebulon and Naphtali, Math. 4.1. A people that sate in darknesse sawe great light, and vnto them whilk sate in the region of death, light is risen vp. Many kingdomes vpon whome this light is risen, are but in parte deliuered from the bondage of that Reu. 13.11. & 17.4. second beast, and from that abhomination of Babel, a part worshipping the Lord, and a part worshipping Baal, I meane the I∣dole of the Masse, and their idoles of stock and stone. But our deliuerance was full, from that bondage: for that was fulfilled in vs whilk was promised and prophecied of olde, Zach. 14.9. That the Lord should be but one, and his name one And in these kingdomes where the Lord is but one, and his name one, that is, where he only is worshipped, some of them hes embraced him but as a Pro∣phet, to teach them, and as a Priest to satisfie for their sinnes, and to inter∣ceede
for them: but not as a soueraigne king to rule them, and gouern them by that forme of gouernement, whilk he hes prescriued in his word, with his owne Lawes, offices, and officers, retayning yet a part of that hierarchie of Babel, with some of her Lawes, offices, and officers. But the Lord was riche in mercy towards vs, in bestowing himself vpon vs, not only as a Prophet to teach vs, & as a Priest to satisfie for our sinnes, and to interceede for vs, but also as a soueraigne King, to gouerne vs with that selfe same forme of go∣uernement, whilk he hes commanded in his worde, and vnto the whilk only he hes annexed the promises of his blissin and presence, with his owne Lawes, offices, and officers. So that as the Prophet sayes, Zach. 14 he was not only one in vs, and his name one: but also a soueraigne King in our land. O Scotland, what nation was like vnto thee, that had the Gospel so free∣ly preached, his Sacraments so purely ministred, his censures and all the pri∣uiledges of his kingdome, in sik liberty executed, as thou had? for what one nation vnder heauen, hes God done so great things, as for thee? What one kingdome is to be found in the whole earth, where Idolatry was so ful∣ly rooted out, wherein all the meanes of his glory, and all the priuiledges of his kingdome, was so fully restored to their owne integrity and perfection, as they were first instituted, wherein all these meanes of the word, sacraments, and discipline, hes continued for so long a space in sik peace, in sik purity, in sik libertie, without heresie or schisme, as in thee, O Scotland. So that thy day hes bene like the day of Ioshua, Iosua 10.12. When the Sunne stoode in Gibeon, & the Moone in Aialon. For I know not if euer nation or kingdome hes had so long a day of the Gospell, in sik peace, purity, and liberty, as thou hes had? or if euer nation after vs, shall haue so long a day, after sik a manner againe. And it seemes to me, that as the Lord confirmed EZechiah of his promise, by causing 2. Reg. 20. the Sunne to returne back againe miraculously, by the de∣grees whereby it went downe: So the Lord hes confirmed his superaboun∣dant loue towards vs, in causing the light of the Gospell to returne againe, (as it were) oft times and that most wonderfullie and miraculously by the degrees wherby our iniquities in the righteous iudgment of God did hasten it to goe downe vpon vs. Yea the blessing of Abraham hes commed vpon vs. For hee hes blessed them that blissed vs, and hes cursed them who hes cursed vs, he hes striuen against them who hes striuen against vs, and hes made our oppressors to eate their owne flesh and to drinke their owne blood: no instru∣ment formed against thee, (O Kirk of Scotland) hes euer prospered: and the tongue that hes risen against thee, the Lord hes condemned, that all flesh might know that God was thy Sauiour, and the strong God of Iacob thy auenger. And certainly, if euer people might haue ben called Esai 62.6 Iephzibas, that is, the lords delite, or their land, and Beula, that is married vnto him, the Kirk and king∣dome of Scotland might haue bene so called. For the Lord had delite in vs, and our land had a husband, euen the Lord our redeemer, he was Esa 60.1 a orna∣ment vnto vs, he set Ezech. 16.14. his bewtie on vs, he Esai. 62 crowned vs with glory, and a Diademe by the hand of our God, was set vpon our heades. And true is that of vs, whilk our Sauiour spake to his disciples, Luc. 10.24. Many Kings and Prophets hes
desired to see the things that we haue seene, and heare the things that we haue heard, and hes not seene them, nor heard them. So who are so ladened with mercy and kindnesse as we haue bene? for we haue bene made Deut. 28.13 the head and not the taile, as the Lord promised. And surely if euer people shuld haue ben Deut. 32.15 to shurim, that is, vpright & streight in the eies of the Lord, we should haue bene so. No, who should haue bene so holy as we, who so Colos. 2.7 strong in Christ, and rooted and grounded in him, as we? who so riche in all grace, and frutefull in all good workes, as we? For who had so manye and so glorious meanes, to haue made vs to haue abounded in all grace, as we had? What could the Lord Esai 5.4 haue done more to vs, then he hes done? For we wanted no meane, that euer the lord cōmanded in his word, either to haue bred grace in vs, or to haue preserued it and encreased it? But they to whome meikle is giuen, meikle shall be requyred at their hands againe. For as the Lorde made vs a spectacle of his mercy, wherein he did demonstrate the riches of his free grace in Christ Iesus, vnto all the kingdomes of the earth, and aboue them al. So it had bene our part proportionably, to haue met him with thankful∣nesse againe: and to haue bene examples of all grace, godlinesse, righteous∣nesse, and of all good works, vnto all others, and aboue all others. Esai 1.4 But allace sinfull nation laden with iniquites, who is so sinfull as thou art? What nati∣on so polluted with all abhomination and wickednesse, as thou art? thy ini∣quities are moe then the sand of the sea, they are grown vp so high, Hosea 9.7. that the top of them teaches vp to the very heauēs: & the cry of them is like, yea be∣yonde the cry of Sodome: there is sik a burthen of iniquity vpon this lande, that (considering all circumstances both of the meanes, and of the time and space the Lord hes giuen vs to repent) I know not if euer natiō, was so great in the eies of the Lord, as this land is. Ezechiel 22 For may not that whilk the Prophete spak of Iuda, be most iustly said of thee, O Scotland: For art thou not reple∣nished with blood, from corner to corner, so that blood touches blood. Are not thy Nobles in thee, euery one ready to shed blood? In thee the father and the mother are despised: in the middes of thee, the widowe and the fa∣therlesse are oppressed: In thee, the very abhominations of the Gentiles ar committed. The discouering of the Fathers shame, and adultery with thy neighbours wife: thou art so laden with adulteries, incests, & whoredomes that the land grones vnder thee: thou hast prophaned his Sabboths, despised his Lawe, contemned his Gospell, withholden from him the fruits of his kingdome, and hes stramped vnder foote the blood of Christ, and hes grieued that spirite of grace. Matth. 21.41. So that when I think of the number and great¦nesse of our sinnes, I cannot but wonder that the Lord should not haue with drawne his Kingdome long since from vs, and haue giuen it vnto others, that would haue brought foorth the frutes thereof. Yea, I wonder, that he hes not caused the Land to vomite vs out, for the abhominations and sinnes where∣with we haue defiled it, in so great a light. And surely, when I think of the seueritie of the justice of God, in punishing other nations and kingdomes, for the contempt of his Gospel, & the withholding of the fruits of his king∣dome from him, my soule trembles. For, wherfore did the Lord reject the
naturall branches, that chosen generation, of whome the Fathers was, and of whome Christ was according to the fleshe, and gaue them and their posterity ouer to the hardnesse of their hearts this 1500. Rom. 11.21. & 9.5 yeare and more, to be damned for euer and euer in that euerlasting darknesse? and yet his wrath is not turned back: but because they would not be gathered, & know not in that their day, the things that belonged to their peace, and woulde not rander to him the frutes of his kingdome in due season. Mat. 23.37. Luc. 19.42 43. Mat 21 41. Reu. 2 5 2. Thes. 2.10.12. Reu 13.11. & 9 1. 2. Thes. .12. And wherefore did the Lord remooue his Candlestick from a great many of the Kirks, both of the East and the West, who was planted by the Apostles, and was once lanterns of light, and hes giuen them ouer to strong delusions to beleeue lies: the one to the impiety of Mahomet, and the sauadge tyrrant of the Kirk: the other to the bondage of that second beast, and fearefull darknesse of that bottomlesse pit. But because they receaued not the loue of the trueth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnes as the Apostle sayes. Now if God spared not them, but gaue them ouer to a most fearefull bondage both of soule and body, both spirituall and cor∣porall, temporall and eternall: how should we not feare, as great, or rather greater iudgements? seing we had al these as examples before vs, to haue sore warned vs, and to haue made vs to feare. For we are not to thinke, as our Sauiour sayes to the Gaileans, that they were greater sinners then we, but vn∣lesse we all repent, Luc. 13 we shall likewise perishe. And as though all our former sins were too light to pull downe and to hasten the Lords fearefull departing frō vs, Reu. 9.1. this darkenesse of the bottomlesse pit, whilk is spreading the selfe againe in this nuk of the countrie, and this abhomination of desolation, the Idole of the Masse, whilk is set vp in the priuate families of this countrie, is added vn∣to all the rest, and aboue all the rest. So that it is to be feared, vnlesse it be pre∣uented by a most speedy and earnest repentance of all sorts in this lande, Math, 11.23 that as wee haue beene lifted vp to heauen through his Gospell, so shall we be throwne downe in the bottomlesse gulfe of the Lords fearfull wrath & ven∣geance: and as we haue bene made a spectacle of his mercy vnto all nations and aboue all other: so we shall bee made a moste fearfull spectacle of his wrath vnto all other nations, and aboue all other. O therefore that th Lord would powre vpon vs that Spirit of grace and deprecation, that euen from the house of Dauid to the house of Leui: that is, from the Kings house to the Ministrie, 12.10.11.12 and from them to the people, from man to wise, that we might al looke vp to him, whome we haue pearced through with our iniquities: and murne vpon him, as or our firste for onely begotten sonne; and that wee might murne publikly and priuately, together, and a parte, euery congrega¦tion by them selfe, and euery family by themselues, and euery person by him selfe. Oh that we had hearts to repent, at the least, in the euening of this our day, before the Sunne went downe altogether vpon vs: and then there is no question the Lord would not remooue his Candlestick from vs, nor make his glory to departe, Reu. 2.5 . Sam. 4.22 but woulde continue his couenaunt with vs and our po∣sterity, and would couer all our enemies faces with shame, as with a gar∣ment: yea, he would scatter that darknesse that is beginning to ouerspread this land againe, 1. Sam. 5.3.4. and Dagon should fall before the arke of the Lord: and his last
fall should be worse then his first. Let me therefore be bolde with you, to beseech you: yea to charge you in the bowels of Iesus Christ, by the price of his blood, and by his glorious appearing to judgement, as ye would haue it comfortable to you, and as ye would haue his glory to remaine wih vs and our posteritie: yea as ye would not be arraigned guilty, in that great day, of the Lords bannishment, and remoouing of his glorious presence out of this land. (For, if we repent not, the Lord as he hes begun to depart from a great part of this countrye, so shall he moste assuredly depart from the rest of this land) I say, let me beseech you that euery one of you would try and search your sinnes, by the light of his spirite in his word, both the sinnes of our per∣sons and callings, that we would humble our hearts for them, Ezec. 9.4, and powre them out as water in his bosome, murning for them, and for the sinnes of the land: and that we would turne our feete to walk in all his precepts and commandements. And let vs who are the Watch men ouer the house of Israel, begin first. For the iudgement of God will begin at his owne house, Ezec. 3.2. & 33. and at the Sanctuary. For if we that are the lights of our people be darke∣nesse, how great must their darknesse be? & if we that is the salt of the earth to season them with grace, become vnsauerie: Mat 5.14. & 6.23 wherewith shall either they or we be seasoned. And if that we that is the stomack and the heart, as it were, be come senselesse, and dead? is it any wonder in suppose al the rest of the members be dead and senslesse? Let vs therefore first convert our selues, and then let vs with teares and murning, Cry aloude to our Congregations, Luc. 22.32. & spare not. Let vs lift vp our voices as a Trumpet, that the deafest & deadest may heare. Let vs shewe them their sinnes and defections, that at the least, Ezec, 3.3.4.5. they perishe not for want of warning, and so their blood be craued at our hands. Let vs be instant in season, & out of season, to preach the word, im∣proue, rebuke, exhorte, with all doctrine and long suffering, as we are most grauely charged by the spirit of God. Let vs admonish euery man, & instruct euery man publictly, and priuately: Col. 1 28.2.1.2. that we may doe our endeuour at the least to present euery man perfect, as a pure Virgine to Iesus Christ. And if they will not heare, let vs say to the earth, Earth, earth heare the word of the Lord, let vs rise vp and contend with the mountaines, and let vs make the hilles to heare our voice, and take them as witnesses against them. And then shall we haue this comfort in the daies of our afflictions, Iob 6.10 that we haue not kept backe the word of the holy one. And then shall we bee a sweete smelling fauour in Christ, as well in them that perisheth, as in them that are saued. Let you that are the people walke worthy of that great saluation that is brought vn∣to you, and be frutefull in all good works, denying al vngodlinesse, 1. Thes 2 12. Heb. 2.3 Tit. 2.11.12. and world∣ly lustes, liuing godly, soberly, and righteously, waytng for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of that great God, our Sauiour, the Lord Iesus. And you that are the Princes of the land, and magistrats of the countrey Remooue iniquity from your tents, and let not your famiis be huses of iniquitye. Shyne before your tennants, serrand, and housholdes, as lanterns of light, for sik maister, sik seruand. Be exemplers to them of godlinesse, sobriety, Iob. 11.14 Mica. 6.10. Matt. 5.16. Phil. 2.15. & righteousnesse, Clenge youth hates and handes from blood, oppressions,
whoredomes, Iob, 29.15.16 Esai. 58.7. Rom. 13.3.4. adulteries. Be an eye to the blinde, and a foote to the lame, and a staffe of comfort to the oppressed. Deale your bread to the hungrie, & hide not your eies from your owne fleshe, maintaine the godly, and be a terrour to the wicked. That your faces may chase away iniquitie, and sinne may hide the selfe from your presence. Take vengeance on all euill doers, and spare not where the Lord bids strike. And because a great manye of you, through your moste cruell and barbarous couetousnesse and sacriledge, Matth. 3.8.9. (the like whereof, I thinke, hes not bene heard of, no not amongst the Turkes & bar∣barous Americanes, that they spoile their God, and lets their worship decay for want of maintenance as ye doe in Scotland:) are the causes of the euer∣lasting damnation of a great part of the poore people, for want of the prea∣ching of the word of saluation vnto them. Ierem. 2.34. For their blood are sound vnder your wings: and their blood cryes more strongly from the low helles, to the high heauens against you, for wrath and vengeance, then euer Abels blood did against his brother Cain. Genes. 4.10 Nowe therefore at the last, repent you of it. Purge your hands of it: and at the least vouchsafe so meikle vpon euery Kirk, as may sustaine a Pastor to breake the breade of life vnto them and thinke the damnation of so many millions of soules of your pure brethren, who might haue bene saued for ought that ye knowe, if they had had the Gospell of saluation preached vn∣to them: too great guiltinesse, suppose ye had not blood vpon blood. O∣therwise, Deuter. 30.19. if ye will not, I call heauen and earth to witnesse against you, that the indignation of the Lord, shall roote you and your posterities out of the land of the liuing: and their blood that perish for want of teaching, shalbe laide to your charge, and ye shalbe arraigned as murtherers of their soules, in that great day. Deut. 27.23.18 And not onely that curse shall fal vpon you, whilk was commanded to be pronounced vpon Mount Hebal, for causing the blind to goe out of the way, whereunto all the people should say, Amen: But also, that most fearfull and irrevocable sentence shalbe pronounced, and execu∣ted vpon you in that great day, (by the iudge of the whole earth,) Departe from me ye cursed, Matth. 25.1 in that euerlasting fire of hell, to be damned with the Diuell and his Angels for euermore. Lay it therefore to your hearts, and flatter not your selues in a carnall and vaine presumption. Be not cruell to your owne soules, and to the soules of the poore people any more: otherwise yee shall most assuredly drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, and be casten in the great winefate of his wrath, where there ye shalbe tormented day & night Let euery one of vs therefore in the conscience of so great and singular mer∣cies, whilk the Lorde hes vouchsaued vpon vs, in sik a plentifull measure, harden not our hearts while it is called to day: eb. 4.5. Ioel. 2.13 but let vs rent them, & turne them vnto the Lord our God. and let vs not delay it, while he calles vpon vs by his worde, and spreades out his armes vnto vs. Otherwise, if we will not, but despyses the day of our salvation, then I protest vnto you in the name of the great God, that he wil heare the cry of our sinnes, and will abhorre vs great¦ly as he did Israel that he shall forsake his glorious Tents and Tabernacles in this land: Psal. 78.49.60.61 &c. and first giue ouer his strength to captiuitie, and his glory to
the hands of our enemies: and then accounting no more of vs, then of the myre in the streete, he shall deliuer vs ouer, both olde and young, Pastor & people, to the sworde of the enemie. For this I dare say, Matth. 11.43. if he take his king∣dome from vs, he shall not let Scotland be a free kingdome, as it hes beene before. For true is he who hes saide it, The nation and kingdome that wil not serue thee, shall perishe, and these nations shalbe vtterly destroyed. Esai. 60 12. And if he spare not his owne strength and glory, I meane his glorious Gos∣pel, but deliuer it ouer into captiuitie, into the hand; of his enemies, he shal haue no compassion of vs, but shall surrender vs ouer to the edge of the sworde to be consumed thereby: and as the Lorde hes beene more aboun∣dant in his mercy towards vs, then towards any others: Math. 11.21 22. so shall his wrath be accordingly. For if other kingdomes or nations, yea if Tyrus or Sidon, Sodom or Gomorrha: yea, if the Turkes or barbarous Americanes had heard the things that we haue heard, they would haue repēted long since in sackeloth and ashes and therefore our condemnation shalbe heauier, then any con∣demnation vnder heauen. Philip. 2.1 Nowe therefore if there be any consolation in Christ, if anye comfort of loue, if any fellowship of the Spirite, if any loue to his glorie, to his blood, to his Gospell, and if there be any com∣passion and mercy in your hearts, to this poore and sinfull land, and his poore Kirk and kingdome therein: repent you of your sinnes, Reve 17.14 reconcile you to God, take holde of his blood, washe you and cleanse you in it, vntill ye be white and bright in his eies. Bring him into the chalmers of your hearts, Ephes, 3, 17 Galat, 6, 14 Colos, 2, 12, 13 Ephes. 2.5.6 & make him to dwell in you, that he may crucifie your sinnes, and burie them in the graue with him, and may quicken and raise you vp together with him: and may set you in those heauenly places with himselfe. And then ha∣uing rooted and grounded your hearts in him, Colos, 2, 7 and hauing filled your soules with the aboundance of his presence, bring him out first to your families, & then to your tennants, seruands, neighbours and people. According to your callings instruct them, rebuke them, admonish them, correct them, and re∣forme them, and rest not till ye haue set him vp as a Lord, & a King in their hearts, or at the least, till you haue obtayned this assurance in your consci∣ence, that ye haue bene so faithfull and sincere in your callings, that if Christ be hid from any, to whome your callings or occasions hes reached: he is hid from sik onely as perishes. Now, oh that the Lord would giue vs these hearts, and so purge vs, that we might be thus fruitfull to the praise of his glorie: then assuredly would he repent him of all the euill, that he hes thought against vs: then should he haue delite in vs and in our posterity: and then these Cananites (I mean the relickes of that cursed generation of Babel, the Kirk of Rome) whilk is yet left vn-rooted out of this land, to try vs, and tempt vs, if we will serue the Lord our God: and to be prickes and thornes in our side, should not bring vs in bondage again, but should be made tributaries to Iesus Christ: yea our latter estate, should be more glorious then the former. Now let vs finde this fauour in thy eies, O Lorde our redeemer: and glorifie thy great name a∣mongst vs, by conuerting our hearts at the least the heartes of all thy chil∣dren, in mercie rather, then by confounding and consuming of vs in thy
wrah & indignation. For wherefore should thy enemies say, Take vp their God and their Gospell. Wherefore should they, O Lord our God, blaspheme thy holy Name, when they shall see thee angrie with thy owne inheritance and redeemed ones. Oh turne vs vnto thee, and put vs not away from thy face: and let not those that are thy enemies, triumph ouer vs. Purchase thy self an euerlasting name, through our conversion and repentance, that the enemie and the avenger may be still: and our hearts may be inlarged, & our mouthes may be opened, to proclaime thy euerlasting mercies, and to shout forth thy praises. Turne you vnto him you that are his children, & delites in his Tents. You that loue the beautie of Sion, and the glorious presence of his Redeemer, fill your priuie chambers with strong cries and many teares. Cause heauen and earth to be filled with grones and sighes of his owne spi∣rite in you: and take a claught of that Prince of life, ere he remoue altoge∣ther: and before he haue stollen himself so far away, that he cannot be foūd againe. And wrastle with him as Iacob did, and let him not departe out of your hearts: entreat him, yea enforce him, as it were, by your teares, and sor∣rowfull cries, not to leaue his owne Tents, and Tabernacle in this land: not to giue ouer his glorious Gospell, whilk is his strength and glorie, into capti∣uitie, in the hands of their enemies. Remember that he cannot abyde the intercession of his owne Spirit in his owne. He cannot hide his eies from his owne flesh and blood, he can deny nothing to his owne beloued Son, that makes intercession for his Saints. Let vs therefore step vp to that Throne of grace with all confidence: and assuredly, as he is true who hes promised, we shall find grace and mercy in the time of this our need: both comfort to our owne hearts, and it may be peace in our daies, that our eies shall not see the euils that are to come: and at that bright appearing of our Lorde of life, all teares shalbe wypt away from our eies. We shalbe clothed with those long white robes, and shalbe sed with the fatnesse of his house, and shall drinke of the riuers of his pleasures, whilk is at his right hand for euer∣more. For Sions sake in this land Christian reader, haue I thus written vnto thee, and for Ierusalems cause, haue I not kept silence at this time: that her glory and wonted brightnesse may be renued, and that the Kirk of Scotland whilk was the bewtie of Europe, and the praise of the whole earth for her liberty purity, and discipline: might be established in the same, and her sal∣uation and righteousnesse, might break foorth as a burning lampe, to all the nations of the earth: and that other Kirks in other kingdomes, whilk desi∣red to see our bewty and spirituall glory, and accounted them blissed whilk might haue had the occasion to haue dwelt in our Tents, to haue seene and enjoyed the same: yea who would haue beene contented to haue bought it with the price of their blood to their posterities: that they, I say, may see the continuance thereof, and may reioice. Turne thou O Lord our God, our hearts vnto thee, that thy glorious presence may be continued with vs for e∣uer, for Iesus Christs sake our Lord and redeemer, to whome be al praise and glory, for euer and euer. Amen. Nowe I come to this matter in hande: the occasion of it was this. There was one who was sometimes an hearer of the word with me, who shewe me
that he had bene in conference with a Papist, and he had broght him thus far, that if I would shewe him of any that professed our religion before Mar∣tine Luther, he would renounce his Papistry: and therefore desired mee to set them downe in writ. The whilk I did: and set it downe in this forme, as thou sees it heir. So this being carried to Maister Gilbert Browne, he writes an answere to it, and sends it to me. Vnto the whilk I haue made this reply. Thou hes them all three their: first, that whilk I did write, then his answere to it, and then my reply to his answere. Indeed it is true, christian reader, that there was many thinges that did hinder me, and withdraw me from this resolution, either to make anye an∣swer to it at all, or yet to let it goe forth to the light. As first, that so many thinges hes bene written alredie by the lightes and lanterns of this age a∣gainst that ruinous Babell, that all further conuictions seemeth to be su∣perfluous. Next, the conscience of my own tenuitie and weaknesse, together with a continuall burden of a fourfolde teaching euery weeke in my or∣dinary charge, beside others both priuate and publick duties, whilk not on∣ly my owne people, but also this desolate countrye craued, whereby I was letted to afforde that time and studie vnto it, as the grauitie of sik a matter required. And last of all, the consideration both of the person and worke of of the aduersary, that neither the one nor the other woulde bee accounted worthy of any answere at all, himself being both reiected and excommuni∣cated according to the expresse commandement of the holie Ghoste, as an heretick being peruerted and damned in his owne conscience, and deliuered o∣uer vnto sathan, that he might learne if it were possible not to blaspheme the e∣uerlasting trueth of God any more. And also denounced his rebell, Tit. 3.10.11.1 1. Cor. 5.5. 1. Timot. 1.2. for his tresonable attempts, both against this Kirk and Kingdome his worke also being so foolish in the selfe, as both I hard his Maiestie affirme, that he was a foolish reasoner in it: and also I hope, the indifferent reader shall see the same: his reasons & arguments being also so of answered vnto by the lear∣ned of our side, so that it semed but actum agere, to make anye further an∣swer thervnto: yet notwithstāding of al these impediments, these motions and reasons preuailed with me at the last, both to answer it, & also to let it go forth to the open viewe and sight of all men: to wit, the conscience of that dutie whilk lowe vnto the trueth of God, being so highly blasphemed & euill spoken of: the vnfained loue of the saluation of my countrie men, who for the most part, are blinded with the smoake of the darknesse of that bottomlesse pit: the railling and thrasonicall bragging of the aduersarye, both by word and writ, that it would neuer be answered: and that the mi∣nistry woulde neuer suffer an answer to come to light, because they knewe the answere to be vnworthie, and none other was able to answer to it: the most earnest preissing of a great many of my bretheren, who knewe the la∣mentable estate of this blinded countrye: the constant desire of all men in this countrie to see the same: together, with his Maiesties most gratious ac∣ceptation of my endeuour, and most fauorable iudgment of this my labour and most humaine councel to publishe the same, whilk did not a little in∣courage me: and last of all the expresse commandement of the holy Ghost
Answer a foole according to his follie, least he seeme wise in his owne eies, the whilk if it haue place in any thing, it must haue place here, where not onlie this seming wise in his owne eies, woulde vndoubtedly followe vpon my si∣lence, but also a seming wise in the eies of all, this nuik of the countrie al∣most: both to the preiudice of the euerlasting trueth of God, and also to the stumbling of the weake, Lib. de Trinitate cap. 3. & lib. cont. Mend. cap. 6 the further obduring of the obstinate, and the wounding of the hartes of al the godlye therein. Augustine hes a notable sentēce to this purpose. It is to be wished saies he, where heresie flourishes that all these who hes any gift of writting, that they all write suppose they shoulde write not only of the selfsame matters or questions, but also the self same things or argumentes, suppose perchance in other wordes. For, saies he, it is updien that hereticks vnderstand that there are not onely one or two, but many in the campes of the Catholickes, who dare with open face meete them. And he sayes there is another commodity that commes by the wryting of many: to wit, that by this meanes, the Catholick bookes themselues are more shortly and easily brought vnto the hands of al men, so that while as some falles vpon one, and some falles vpon others: yet notwithstanding they are all instructed to vse the same wea∣pons in their common dangers. The whilk how sitly it aggrees vnto this pur∣pose of mine, I leaue it to the judgement of all men, who knowes the estate of this blinded countrie, wherein that darknesse of the Antichristian king∣dome, is so far spred, the confident brags of the aduersary are so vniuersally credited, the people scattered as sheep without shepheards, lying wide open to all the assaults of the Diuell: atth. 9, 36 and the deceates of these rauenons wolfes, and their hands so ful of Papistical bookes, the deadly weapons of their own destruction, without any one booke, almost, for ought that I know, wherby either these that are peruerted, may be reuoked frō their errors, or these that are assaulted, may be sustained from yeelding to the aduersary, or those that are weake may be confirmed. Not vnlike the miserable estate wherein the Hebrewes were brought vnto, throgh the tyranny of the Philistims, wanting both sword and speare in the time of their warfare, hauing no smithes in their whole land, 1 Sam. 13 19.20.22. whereby they were compelled to go to their enemies to sharpen their Cowter, and sok, and other instruments Now as for the worke it self, I say no∣thing of it, but only recommends it to the blissing of God in all your hearts and consciences. The whilk also hes bene my earnest desire to God, from the first time that I put my hād to the pen cōtinually, that his effectual presence might be ioyned therewith, both to convict the contrary minded, & to cō∣firme the godly Read ye it therefore with that affection of heart, wherewith it was written, and desire ye that blissing in the reading of it, as I did in the writing of it: and then I hope through Gods blissing, ye shall reape some profite by it. Now the God of all mercy, and the Father of all light, illumi∣nate all our eies more and more: and cause the light of his glorious Gospell to shine in our hearts, and blesse all the meanes thereof, that we may be the children of light heir, and may be partakers of that euerlasting waight of glory heirater in Christ Iesus. Amen. From Aire the 18. Decemb. 1602. Yours in the Lord, M. Iohn We sche Preacher of Christs Gospell.
TO MAJSTER GJLBERT Browne Priest, defender of the Romish faith. I Receaued a booke of yours sent to me wherein is contained, partlye an answere to a little scrolle sent be me to a Catholick as ye name him: part∣lye your exhortation to mee, after the answere, together with some de∣mands, whereof ye craue to be resol∣ued by me and my bretheren. Your answere to my writing you haue subscriued, so I see you will stand by it: The other parte is not subscriued. It is a lamenta∣ble and pitifull thing, to see the glorious gospell of his deare Sonne our Sauiour so obscured and darkned in this country with the Reuel. 9.2 smoke of that kingdome of darknesse of yours, that hes ascended & come out of the bottomles pit, to their eternall damnation, who is blinded and deceaued thereby. I haue sorrow in my hart for it, and it is my earnest desire to God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that once in his mercy, the smoke of that fornace maye bee scattered by the light of his glorious Gospell, and the beames thereof maye shyne in their owne strength and clearnesse in this blinded country, that is drunken with the Reuel, 17.2 2. Thes. 2.5 abhominations of that harlote of Babell, and deceaued with her strong delusions whereof ye are vsed as the instrument in the Lordes Iustice: that as the rest of the land hes risen that first Revel. 20.5 resurrection from the death of her darknesse and her abhominations: so this country may also be partaker of the same, that in that great day they may rise that second resurrection to life and glory. I beleeue & therefore I speak, & that with confidence and assurance knowing by his worde, that Reuel. 14.8. Babel must fall
as the Reuel. 11, 13. tenth parte of it is fallen alreadie. The Reuel. 17.10 whoore must bee made naked and desolate, and her flesh muste be eaten vp. For true is the Lord who hes foretolde it, & that God who condemnes her is a strong God, therefore Reu. 18, 8.5. her plagues shal sal vpon her at once, death, famine and sorrow: for her sinnes are come vp vn∣to heauen, Reu. 17.4. Col. 2.23, 2. Tim. 3.5. Reu. 17.4.2. & 18.3.4.24. & God hath remembred her iniquities. And sup∣pose the cupe wherin she reached her fornications & abho∣minations to be drunken out of, be of golde, hauing a shew of holinesse & voluntary religion, yet the drink that is in it, is abhomination and Idolatry, wherewith she hes corrupted the earth, and made the nations drunken therewith. Let all the children of God therefore, that loues to be saued, forsake her, and goe out of her, least they be partaker of her iniqui∣ties and of her iudgements also: for her iudgement is pierced through to the heauens, and is lifted vp to the vppermoste cloudes. In vaine therefore doth anye man goe aboute to cure her with balme, for she cannot be healed. It is al but in vaine to you Maister Gilbert, or any man else, to display her banner vpon her walles, to strengthen her keepers, to ap∣poynt her watchmē, to prouid for her spyes, for the Lord hes both thought it, and will performe that whilk he hes spoken against her. The Lord is to recompence her, all the euil that she hath done to Sion; and his holy Temple, and the Saintes therein: for their blood is found in her. The Lord hes sworne by him self, euen he that made the earth by his vertue, that established the world by his wisedome, and stretched out the heauens by his prudencie: and yet man is so brutishe that he will not vnderstand, and so bewitched with her pleasures, that hee will not beleeue it. I beseech God who is able to quicken the dead, and to open the eyes of the blinde, and to cal the things that are not, to be: to open your eyes that you may vnderstand and beleeue these things, and to glorifie his owne name in your conuersion vnto the trueth, and if it be possible, for ye haue caused many to erre: and as Ieroboam caused the people to sinne, because he stayed them from cō∣ming vp to Ierusalem, to haue worshipped God aright, and made them to worship Idoles in their owne lande: So haue you done great iniquitie, and hes staied sundry of the Lords
people to come to mount Sion, the Kirk of God: where there they might haue learned his wayes, Reuel. 17  8. and walked in the same yea, whilk is worse, yee are the cause that many doe worship the abhomination of Babell, your rounde breade in your ab¦hominable Masse: & your woodden & stonie Idoles: and by the deceite of that golden cupe, ye make them drinke of the deadly poyson of the spirituall fornications, and abhomina∣tions of that harlote. And as the Lord put an impure spirit of errour in the mouth of Achabs false Prophets, to entise him to goe vp to Ramoch Giliad, that he might perish thereby, be∣cause the Lord had spoken euill against him, who entised and preuailed also. So hes the Lord put an impure spirit, and a spirite of error in your mouth, 2. Thes. 2. and in the mouthes of the rest of her false Prophets, to entise so many, as loues not the trueth in this sinfull country to beleeue your lyes, and to be deceaued with your strong delusions: that all these might be damned whilk had pleasure in vnrighteousnes, as the Lorde foretolde in the 2 Thes. 2. O that ye had an harte to turne to God, that as ye haue beene a stumbling blocke to many, to cause many to fal with you to the damnation of their soules; So ye may be by your conuersion to the trueth of God, the instrument of the rysing of many againe. O that treasure of wrath that yee haue hoorded vp againste your selfe in that greate day: for Sathan hes wrought effectually by you, if e∣uer by any in this land, with all power, & in all deceaueable∣nes of vnrighteousnes amongst them that perish. For cursed is he, and the Lord commanded to proclaime it in mount He∣ball, that causes the blinde to turne out of the way, and let all the people say, Amen. Deut. 27. What curse of the Lorde is then abyding you, who thinkes it good seruice to God to cause the blinde to wander, and turne away from the lighte of the Gospell; whilk is the words of eternall life to all them that beleeues. Oh remember, and lay it to your hart, the eternity of damnation. It is hard for you to kick against the pricke: the stone of the trueth that ye stumble at, will crushe you all in peeces at the last. Shut not your eyes at the clear light of life and grace, & harden not your hearte while it is called the day. And while yee are in the waye with your ad∣uersary
be reconciled to him: for the Lorde and his trueth a∣gainste whome you fight is aduersaries vnto you, or and e∣uer yee enter in at the portes and gates of hell, and be casten in that prison and giuen ouer to that iayler, you will neuer come out againe whill you haue payed the vtter∣most farthing, and that will be neuer, for it is eternitye of paines. Allace you deceaue others being deceaued your self, as the holy ghost foretolde it. 2. T m. 3.13. That euill men should waxe worse and worse, deceauing and being decea∣ued. The Lorde take away the vaile that is hung ouer your harte, that yee maye bee turned to the eternall weill of your owne soule, and the saluation of many that is blindlings led by you to the bottomlesse pit of condemnation. Because I haue compassion on you, & on this miserable country, ther∣fore this writ I vnto you. Fot allace who can bide it to be ba∣nished for euermore from such a wonderfull and euerlasting weight of glory, from the fellowshipe of the Lambe, and of all his glorified creaturs, man and Angell? who can compasse the eternitie of damnation in that vtter darknesse, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth for euermore? who can tell their terrors? who can nomber their sorrowes, who can reckon and count the eternal woes of the damned. Be not cruell to your own soule and the soules of your owne country men, loue not yours and their eternall damnation. Beleeue the Scripture & be not incredulous. Without that citie of God, that new Ierusalem, shal be dogges, inchanters, murtherers, and idolaters: and whosoeuer loueth & maketh lyes. Reuel. 22. Yea, their portion shall bee in that lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, whilk is the seconde death. Either wonderous blinded and indured must you be, or else in your owne conscience you know your Kirk & your selues to be murtherers of soules, Idolaters, luiffers and makers of lyes. For the vphold of the credite of your religion, and that not be the writtings of your enemies, but of your freinds men of your owne profession: yea, by your owne latine seruice set out in your owne bookes, for yee worship not the one true God in Iesus Christ through his spirite, but as Ieremie sayes of the Idolaters in his time, according to the nomber of your
cities ye haue increased the nomber of your God, and hes turned the glory of the incorruptible God, in the similitude and Image of corruptible creatures, & passing by the crea∣tor, whilk is blissed for euer, worships the creatures, Saints and Angels, stockes and stones and a peece of bread, oyle, and water, bones, and relickes, the skurfe skarfe of all things: yea and your head the man of sinne and sonne of perdition, (who is called God in your canon law, Dist. 96. Satis euidenter and whome your canonists calles, the Lorde God) the Pope, and to whome is giuen these thinges, that is peculiar & pro∣per onely to Iesus Christ: whilk by the grace of God shall appeare clearely, in our disputatiō following. For there is as direct opposition betwixt your heade & Iesus Christ, be∣twixt your religion and his, as is betwixt light and darknes, Christ and Beliall, the doctrine of diuels & the doctrine of saluation. But the Lords iudgements are vnsearchable and his wayes past finding out: he hardens whome hee will and hes mercy on whome he will. I thought it surely the Lordes good prouidence, that he hes broght you out into the campe now, and that nowe by write ye haue set your foote into the battle, who hes beene sik a sore enemie to the gospell of Ie∣sus Christ in this country, and hes resisted the preaching of it vehemently, that it may be seene that darknesse was but your strength, and lyes the foundation of your religion. But I leaue you to the Lord. Now as for that scrowe of mine, as ye call it, if it was so as you set it downe heir, there hes beene some little escapes in scribendo, in the writting. In the laste section (as I haue marked in yours heir and there, as may be seene in sundry places) whilk I haue corrected in this my answer as 1258. for 1158. next 129. for 1290. & Iames Gyles a threatning Friar, for to Iohn Geillis: and the Kirk of Grecia whilk with the reste of the Greeke and Easterne Kirks was moe nor the Kirks of Europe. And heereby are your margi∣nall notes whilk was aboue these places answered. Nowe as for the first parte of your booke wherein ye answere to that whilk I write, I haue answered it heir, and as for your exhor∣tation, and demands of me and my brethren, suppose it bee so foolish and friuolous (as euery one that hes but a sparke
of iudgement may see) that it is worthie no answere at al, for a more bairnely, foolish, and friuolous writting, red I neuer, yet you shall haue it by gods grace: but I waite firste to see if you will answere ought to this my reply. I haue set downe your answere fullie, and hes answered to euery poynt & ar∣gument seuerally: the like now Maister Gilbert I desire of you that if euer you can be able to put to your hand to make an answere, that you set down mine word for word, & answere euerie head and poynt thereof seuerally, as I haue set them downe heir, and shew what you graunt, and what you denie in euerie head, and argument as I haue done in yours: other∣waies, I wil take it for no answere, but for a manifest demon∣stration that ye are convicted in your conscience of the truth of our doctrine and of the falset of your owne religion. The two heades concerning the Masse and Antichrist, I haue put them in a seuerall treatise, whilk I haue annexed to this: and that both because they are the corner stones and fundamen∣tall poynts of your religion, and also because vvhen I offer∣ed to disproue them in word, whilk you shifted of vnder this pretence onely, because there vvas a brother of the ministe∣rie vvith me, vvhome ye vvould not suffer to be present; to be a vvitnesse and penner of our disputation only: but would haue him remoued from the hearing of it altogether: not∣vvithstanding that it vvas promised faithfullie, both by him and mee, and al the gentlemen that vvas present, offered as caution, that he should not speake a sillabe, neither secreitlie nor openly, during all the time of our disputation; but only be a witnes and penner of our conference vpon my part, ye hauing also both Maister George Ker, & another to haue writ∣ten for your part, and nothing to be vvritten, but that whilk should be subscriued by both parties. You not daring face your own cause, vpon so equal conditions, you desired to set them dovvne in vvrite, the vvhilk I haue done heir. Novve the Lord open your eyes to see the truth for Christs sake. A∣men. From Kirkcudbright the 6. of August. 1599. M. Iohn Welsche preacher of Christs gospell at AIRE.
The principall points handled in this first part, are these 1. THat the Kirk of Rome is not the Catholick Kirk, in no respect, as they vaunt of themselues, but a particular Kirk: and that impure, rotten, dead, & Antichristian. 2. That the Kirk of Christ both may erre, and hes erred in al ages, before the law vnder the law, in the time of Christ, after his ascension, in all ages, aswell severallie, as ioint∣ly, in councels both Prouinciall, and generall: and that the Kirk of Rome, and their heades the Popes of Rome, hes most foullie erred. 3. That the falset of the Religion of the Kirk of Rome may be sufficientlie made mani∣fest by comparing the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome, with the doctrine of Christ and his A∣postles, set downe in the Scripture, suppose all the rest of the circumstances of changes and mutations, as the first person, time place and so forth be not distinctly set down in histories. 4. The authour, time, place, and so forth of the reste of the circumstances of the change of the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome, is set downe distinctlie▪ first, as the Scripture foretolde it, and also some of the auncients and historiographers, in some particular heades, hes noted out these circumstances. 5. That our Religion was neither first invented by Martine Luther, nor yet first preached by him, but was inst tuted by Christ in his Scripture, and was professed by his Apostles, and the Primitiue Kirk, and the true Kirk of Christ in all ages. And that hee departed not from the true Kirk, but from the societie of Babel, and the pest of that Antichristian kingdome: & that he had the Lord Iesus, his Apostles, and all the primitiue Kirk, and all these that profes∣sed the true Religion, to be his predecessors. 6. Who should be supreeme iudge in all controversies of religion: to wit, the Lord Ie∣sus in his word, and not the Pope and his councell, as they say: and the true cause wherfore they decline the Lord, both to be Iudge in his word, & witnesse in his authentick scripture the Hebrew and Greeke fountaines, and will haue none to be iudges, but themselues, their owne Popes, the fathers and forgers of their owne religion, because they both knowe in their conscience that the principall points of their doctrine is not written, or warranted in the Scriptures of God. And also some of themselues through the forcible conviction of the trueth, hes bene compelled to grant, and to set it downe in write, that the principall pointes and foundaments of their Religion, hes not their authour, origen, nor beginning in the scrip∣ture, nor cannot be warranted and defended by the same: and therefore they knowe assu∣redlie, that if the Popes be not admitted to be iudge in their owne cause, their Religion will be gone. 7. That the whole certaintie of all their doctrine and religion, and of the doctrine of the Scriptures, by their owne confession, depends vpon the testimonie of the present Kirk: that is, the present Popes, and his Cleargie: and that the certaintie both of our doctrine, that it is of God, and also of the diuinitie of the Scriptures, depends not vpon the testimonie of the Kirk of Rome, for that were a weake threed, nor of the testimonie of anie Kirk only or prin∣cipallie, but vpon other most infallible grounds. 8. Sundry points of doctrine controuerted amongst vs, whilk were casten in as examples by M. Gilbert, to proue that his religion was warranted in the Scripture, and ours not war∣ranted by the same As 1. the absolute necessitie of Baptisme. 2. Freewill, and the possibilitie to keepe the commandements of God absolutelie and perfitely. 3. Transubstantiation. 4. The authority of Priests to forgiue sinnes. 5. The Sacraments of extreame vnction, imposition of hands, and of marriage. 6. That the band of marriage is d ssoluble for the cause of adulte∣rie. 7. Merites of workes. 8, Works of supererogation. 9 Christs locall descension to Hell. 10. Iustification by works. All whilks are most euidentlie convicted and confuted by the te∣stimonies of the Scripture: and manie of them also by the testimonies of the auncient Fa∣thers, and some of their owne testimonies of Popes, Cardinals, Doctors, and others. 9. That Fathers cannot be iudges of the controuersies of Religion, not yet the exposition
of the Scriptures should be tried by them: but onlie the Scripture to be exponed by Scrip∣ture: and their expositions in so far forth to be embraced, as they aggree with them. And that both because they may erre, hes erred, and also their expositions dissents one from another: and this is proued both by the testimonies of some of the Fathers and some of the moste learned Papists 10. That the Apocrypha is not Canonicall Scripture, whilk is also prooued by the testimo∣nies of some of their owne Popes, Cardinalles, and Doctors. 11. That the defection foretolde in the Scripture in the ime of the Antichrist, should be a vniuersall defection of all sorts, except the elect. 12. That the Kirk of Christ in the time of the Antichrists defection and tyrannie, shoulde be redacted to a small handfull, and should be latent, & lurke, for to escape his cruelty and tyrannie. 13. That the space of 1260. daies wherein the Antichrist should raigne, and the nomber of the true Witnesses of God that should preach the truth all that time, the space of their prea∣ching, their cloathing, the place of the ignominious handling of their carcases, and their re∣viving and ascending vp to heauen, as they are set downe in the Reuelation, is to be vnder∣stood not literallie, as Maister Gilbert does, but figuratiuelie after the custome of these pro∣phecies in this Revelation. 14. That the Popes are not the head of the Kirk, nor acknowledged by the Kirks in al ages to be the head thereof: but his Monarchie is condemned by Christ Iesus, and his Apostles in his word, by the Fathers of the Primitiue Kirk, by fiue sundry Prouinciall councels, and by nine generall Councels, and by fiue Vniuersities, and by the Kirks of Grecia, Asia, Mos∣couia, Aethiopia, Boeme, Piemont, and all the reformed Kirks throughout Europe, so that if it were but put to an assise of these, his Monarchie would be condemned. 15. That the Catholick Kirk is invisible, and in what respects we affirme she is invisible, & that the particular visible Kirks heir, may be obscured, rare, and brought to sik a few hand∣full, that they are not openlie knowne and seene to all: but onlie some of them amongest themselues, and some of them to their persecuters, as it was foretolde in the Scriptures of God in the time of the Antichrist, and as it hes bene accomplished in the time of Popery. 16. That our Religion was preached and professed in all ages, by Christ, his Apostles, the primitiue Kirk, the auncient Fathers, and by sundrie in the middes of Poperie, who were condemned and persecuted, and put to death manie of them, for speaking against their do∣ctrine, and that manie hundreth yeares before Matine Luther, & some immediatlie before him. 17. That we haue renued no old condemned heresies, but these that he ascriues to vs, either are not heresies in deid, but warranted by the Scripture, or else we doe condemne them as heresies, and detests them more then they: wherof some of them doth also better aggree to themselues. 18. That they are they in verie truth, who hes renewed the old heresies, of old hereticks whilk are condemned in the word of God, and that to the number of 40 and moe.
A replie against Maister Gilbert Browne priest. M. Gilbert Browne. Ane answere to ane certaine Libell or Writing, sent by M. IOHN WELSCHE to ane Catholicke, Tytle. as ane answere to ane obiection of the Romane Kirk. &c. I receaued ane little skroll, whilk was sent to you by M. Iohn Welsche Mi∣nister at Kirkeudbricht, in the whilk, there is meikle promised, and little done. And because it may appeare to some to be something, I will (God willing) an∣swere the same in particular. M. Iohn Welsche Reply. AS to your iudgement and censure of this my answere to your obiection, wherein ye think there is meikle promised and little done: I doe not regard it, for so long as your harte is bewitched with the pleasures of Babell, your light is but darknes: so while the Lorde annoynt your eyes, with that eye-salue promised in the Reue∣lation. 3. and purge your harte by faith, ye cannot discerne of thinges different, and giue vpright iudgement. What I pro∣mised, I am now by the grace of God readie to performe. And whether it was some-thing or nothing, meikle or little, that I did, let work beare witnes, and let them that loues the trueth iudge. M. Gilbert Browne. First he titles his libell, Ane answere to ane obiection of the Romane Kirk, whereby they go about to deface the veritie of that onely true Religion whilk we professe. God forbid that we Ye teach not the doctrine of Iesus Christ, therefore ye are not true Cath∣lick. Catholicks, whom he calles the Romane Kirk, se∣ing
that we are the onlie defenders The over∣throwers of it & Impugners of it. of the trueth, as our predecessors the pastors of the true Kirk was before vs, suld go about to deface the trueth. But we go about to impugne all false doctrine repugnant to the trueth, as False for ye do not as they did. the halie fathers of the primitiue Kirk did before vs, against the heretickes in their dayes, as Irenaus, Cypriane, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Basile, Grego∣rie, Chrysostome, with the rest of the true pastors of the Kirk. And seing that the Ministers We preach that same Euan∣gell that is writ∣ten in the Scrip∣tures. of this newe Evangell hes not onelie inuented sum here∣sies themselues, but also hes renewed many auld condemned heresies con∣futed by them before (as they You speake heere against your conscience. can not deny) as I fall giue sum examples afterward, as the heresie of Simon Magus, of Manichaeus, Pelagius, Aerius, Io∣uinianus, Vigilantius, with many vthers, what le can wee doe nor impugne the same, as our predecessors did before. M. Iohn Welsche his Replye. As to your answere: firste ye denye it and detestes it as a blasphemie: Nixt ye goe aboute to cleare your selues from the suspition of it: Thirdly ye challenge vs and our doctrine with the crymes of noveltie and heresie: And so ye conclude yee could doe no lesse nor impugne it. As to your denying of your defacing of the trueth of God, so doth the hoorish woman after she hes eaten, Pro. 30.20 she wypes her mouth and sayes, she hes not sinned, whilk is true as well in spiritual as in bo∣dilie fornication: So not-withstanding your Kirk hes buried the trueth of God in the graues of darknes, and did ouercure it with their traditions and glosses thir many yeares bygane, yet you wype your mouthes, and sayes you haue not sinned. But look to it in time, for ignorance, and zeil without knaw∣ledge will not excuse you in the day of the Lorde. Matth. 26.65. That you detest it as a blasphemie, so did the hie priest rent his cloathes and said Christ blasphemed, when he spake but the trueth. As for your golden styles whilk you take to your selues of Catholicks, defenders of the trueth, successors to the pastors of the true Kirk and im∣pugners of all false doctrine. Your doctrine indeede could not de∣ceaue so many, if it were not couered with thir styles; your poysone and abhomination would not be drunken so vniuer∣sallie, Apoc. 17.4. if it were not in sick a golden cuppe as this. So these are the byssope wherewith ye would wash you from this iniquity, and clenge you from this sinne. Matth. 7.15. But may not false prophets come in sheeps clothing? And the ministers of Satā can they not transforme
themselues as though they were the Ministers of Christ? 2. Cor. 11.13 14 Apoc. 24 & 8 Ioh. 8.37. Mat. 23.7 The Scriptures hes foretold it: & did not the false Apostles in Ephesus, call them∣selues the Apostles of Christ, and yet they were found lyars? And did not the synagogue of Satan call her selfe the synagogue of the Iewes, (that is, the Kirk of God) and yet they were not so, but the synagogue of the deuill? yea and did not Abrahams seede, and they that sate in Moses chaire, Mat. 7.16. Ioh. 10.11 and was the successours of Aaron, condemned the Sauiour of the worlde? There∣fore not by your styles, but by your fruites ye must be tryed. For if ye bee catholicks &c, ye will teach the doctrine of that good pastour, and chiefe sheepheard the Lord Iesus. So it is your doctrine and not your styles that must defend you. And because (Christian Reader) by this style of Catholicke, whilk they ascriue only to their Kirk, they cause the simple to erre, and leades many blindlings to damnation, therefore I wil take this visard frō them. Ye are not the Catholick Kirk, as ye style your self, and thus I proue it. Pope Pius the fift, who write a Catechisme according to the decree of the councill of Trent. He there sayes that the Kirk whilk is called the bodie of Christ, Catechism. conc. Trident in expo∣sitione symbol. whereof he is the head, is called Catholick, because it is spread in the light of ane faith frō the east to the west, receauing men of al sortes, containing all the faithfull whilk haue beene from Adam, euen vntill this day, The Kirk of Rome is not the Catholick Kirk or shall be hereafter to the end of the world professing the true faith, &c. Now I reason thus. The Catholicke Kirk comprehends all the faithfull from Adam till now, and that shall be hereafter to the end of the world, or else Pope Pius, and the fathers of Trent erres. But the Romane Kirk comprehends not all the faithfull from Adam till now, and that shall be hereafter: Therefore the Romane Kirk is not the Catholicke Kirk. Choose you now whilk of these ye will denye. The proposition I trowe ye will not: for then ye should bring twa incōueniences, the ane vpon Pope Pius and the fathers of Trent, that they haue erred in defyning the Catholick Kirk, and so the Kirk & the Pope may erre. The vther is vppon your selfe, who saide that your Kirk hes not erred. And so ye lose your stile of a defender of the Catholick faith: for this is a chief poynt of their faith, that the Kirk cannot erre. I hope therefore that these are Laby∣rinths
whilk yee will not wittinglie cast your selfe vnto, and so you must hold fast the proposition. All the question is then of the assumption. Whether the Romane Kirk comprehends all the faithfull from Adam till now, and whilk shall be to the end of the world, or not. First I say, a particular Kirk compre∣hendes not all the faithfull from Adam &c. But the Romane Kirk is a particular Kirk, or else the fathers of the counsell of Basile, aien concil. epist. synod 3. Verratus, disputa¦tionum contra Lutheranos tom  de authoritate apotest. vniuers. ccles. cap. 1. and Verratus a papist erres, for they call the Romane Kirk a particular Kirk. We grant (say they) that the Romane Kirk is a principall Kirk among vthers, but while you commend a parte forget not the haill. And they say, the vniuersall Kirk cōprehēds the Romane Kirk. Chuse you then whether will you contradict the fathers of the counsell of Basile and a Papist Verratus, and be so absurd as to call the arme of the bodie the haill bodie, ane arme of the Oceane sey the haill Oceane sey, or to goe from your ti∣tle that the Romane Kirk is not the Catholicke kirk. Secund∣lie, the Catholicke Kirk comprehendes them that were be∣fore Christ: But the Kirk of Rome comprehendes not them, for there was a Kirk, or euer there was a Kirk at Rome, and the Romane Kirk comprehends nane but them that acknow∣ledges the Pope to bee the head of the Kirk. But those that were before Christ neuer did that: Therefore the Romane Kirk is not the Catholicke Kirk. Thirdlie, the Catholicke Kirk is invisible: for at the least, neither are they that ar glori∣fied, neither are they that are to bee borne, visible. But ye wil not haue the Romane Kirk, but alwayes visible, therefore the Romane Kirk is not the Catholicke Kirk. Fourthlie, if the Romane Kirk be the Catholicke Kirk, then either it shall fol∣low, that the Pope is the heade of the Catholicke Kirk, or else that the Romane Kirk wants a visible heade. Choose you whether of these ye will, for the ane ye must, if ye will haue the Romane Kirk to be the Catholicke Kirk. But to say that the Pope is the head of the Catholicke Kirk, I trowe ye dare not be so blasphemous: for the gloryfied Saints, & Peter him∣selfe are of the Catholicke Kirk, or else (as I said before) Pope Pius and the fathers of Trent erres. And so then if ye will make him heade of the Catholicke Kirk, ye muste make him heade
of the gloryfied Saints and of Peter also. So then choose you whether will ye leaue the style of Catholicke, whilk ye claime as proper to your Kirk, or will ye haue the Pope the heade of the triumphant Kirk in heauen: or last of all, will yee haue your Romane Kirk to want a visible heade: ane of these ye must choose. So to ende this poynte, this style of Catholicke it is like the numbering of the people by Dauid: for as it brought him in a wonderfull straite, 2. Sam. 14. when he sawe it behoued him to choose, either seauen yeares famine, or foure moneths flying before his enemies, or three daies pestilēce. So this title of yours if you will bide by it, brings you in a wōderful strait: for yee haue not the choise of ane of three euils, but these three things must ye either choose, or else let this style of Ca∣tholicke goe; ane of you fighting against ane vther, the Kirk invisible, and the Pope not to bee the heade of the Kirk. Of the whilk, the least of these is more able to overthrow your Kingdome, then they all were able to haue ouerthrowne the Kingdome of Dauid, for they are the maine pillers of your Kingdome, your vnitie, your visibilitie, your Popes suprema∣cie, all whilk you must either lose, or else let your style of Ca∣tholicke goe from your Kirk. But howe will ye wrestle your selfe out of this? For if ye will beleeue the fathers of Trent, and Pope Pius, in defyning the Catholick Kirk, ye cannot eschew thir inconveniences. And if you wil not beleeue thē, that they spake trulie in that poynte, ye must accuse them of error. And so the Kirk hes erred, the Pope hes erred, and your selfe hes erred that said your Kirk hes the trueth in all thinges. Iohn. 11.50 And surelie as Caiaphas being hie priest that yeare, spake the truth when he said that ane muste die for the people, and not the the haill nation perish, suppose in  euill sense. So hes the fathers of Trent and Pope Pius here spoken trulie, Heb. 12, 23. Gal. 4, 26, both acor∣ding to the Scriptures, for the Kirk is called the assemblie of the first borne, whose names is written in heauen. And that new Ierusalem whilk is from aboue, whilk is the mother of vs al. And also according to the fathers, Clem Ale. strom. li. 7. & Bernard. cantic. 78. & August d catechis. nd. cap 20. & Gregorie & moral. in Ioh. li. 28. c. 9. who affirmeth that the Kirk is the companie of the predestinate, and all the elect are within the compasse of it, and are citizens of it. So as Mat. 1.17. Christ said to the Iewes. If I cast out deuils
by the prince of deuils, by whome then castes your children them out? So if we speake now by ane erroneous spirit, that sayes the Ca∣tholicke Kirk comprehendes all the elect, that was, is, and shall bee, and the Kirk of Rome can not bee the Catholicke Kirk. By what Spirit hes your councill and Pope and thir fa∣thers spoken the same? So not your children but your fathers shall be your iudges. Ye did mark some contradiction as ye thought betweene me and some vthers, vnto the whilk I will answere in the owne time. Let me therefore marke this ane now, and marke it (Reader). Ye haue heard now howe that all these with ane voice hes saide, that the Catholicke Kirk comprehends all the elect, that was, is, and shall bee: Is it any heresie then to holde this poynte? I think you will not, nor dare not say it. What will you say then to your generall councill of Con∣stance Sess. 15, art. 1. 6. who condemned Iohn Hus for the same Doctrine, the first, and sixt article, for saying that there is ane vniuersall Kirk, whilk is the company of the predestinate, and as it is taken in this sense, it is ane article of our faith. For these amongst the rest, was this pure innocent condemned and burnt as ane hereticke, and his doctrine as heresy: whilk of thir wil ye say now hes erred? whether the generall councill of Constance? or the fathers of Trent, Pope Pius, Gregorie, Austine, Clement, and Bernard? For sure∣lie if the latter erred not, then not onelie did the councill of Constance erre, but also hes broght vpō them selues innocēt blood, in condemning the innocent & ye trueth in him. And if the council of Constance erred not, in condemning thir arti∣cles of Iohn Hus, then haue they condemned the doctrine of the fathers of Trent, Pope Pius, Gregorie, Austine, &c. and their persones, in the person of Iohn Hus. Choose whilk of them ye will. I speak the trueth to thee in Christ (Reader) be not de∣ceaued. But open thy eyes and beholde the veritie it selfe condemned by a generall councill, & the professor of it burnt for ane heretick: But his Reuel. 17. & 18.24 blood & the blood of the rest of the martyres of God is found in this whoore of Babell, and therefore ane day she shall be recompensed for all her iniquitie. Goe out of her there∣fore and saue thy soule, Reuel. 18.45 that thou bee not tormented in the
lake that burnes with fire and brimstone, with her for euer∣more. Vtherwise I call heauen and earth to witnesse againste thee, that thou sall die in her sin, and the Reuel. 14. smoke of thy torment shall ascend for euermore. What now will you say to these things, that your Kirk is not the Catholicke Kirk, but a parte of it onlie. And is onlie Catholick, because of the Catholicke doc∣trine that she professes? But if this be true, wherefore then did your generall councill condemne it in Iohn Hus, and burne him for that doctrine, whilk both your self muste confesse to bee true, and is aggreable to Scripture, fathers, and your owne Popes. Next I say, suppose when ye are brought to this strait, ye muste say so: yet for al this, not onlie call ye your Kirk Ca∣tholicke, because of the soundnes of doctrine whilk yee sup∣pose she professes, but As appea∣reth by the epist. of Cardinal Cu∣sanus writing to the Bohemians. Cochlaeus histor Hussitar. lib. 12 also & speciallie to make the simple beleeue, that there is no saluation out of her. Therefore ye call it the onlie true Kirk, & ye Catholicke Kirk: for out of the par∣ticular Kirk there is Saluation, but out of the Catholicke Kirk there is no saluation. Thirdlie I saye, as the epistles of Peter, Iohn, Iames, and Iudas are intituled Catholick, not because of the soundnesse of their doctrine, whilk is common to the epi∣stles of Paul also, and al the rest of the Scripture, whilk in that respect may also be called Catholicke, but because they are written generallie to all: So the Kirk is called Catholick pro∣perly, not because of the soundnes of doctrine, for that is com∣mon to all the particular Kirks, that hes the puritie of Religi∣on, but because it comprehends all the particular Kirks and all the elect. And also to put a difference betweene the Kirk of the Iewes, whilk did comprehend but ane certaine peo∣ple, & the Christian Kirk since the comming of Christ, whilk is not bound to any certaine place or nation, or people, but indifferently receaues al, both Iew and gentile that beleeues. & therfore is it called Catholick: & therfore in our beleef we say not, I beleeue the Catholick doctrine, but the Catholick Kirk. So by this she is properlie distinguished from particular kirks, as the Mother from ye daughters, & the hail body from ye particular members. So thē if you would speak properlie of your Kirk, & not make your styles snares, to catch ye soules of
the simple, call her but a particular Kirk, and a member of the Catholicke Kirk, but yet dead and rotten, as shall bee shewen afterward by the grace of God. Vtherwise, if you will but call her the Catholicke Kirk, you first rob the mother, for she is properlie Catholicke, and also iniures the reste of the daughters: For in respect of the soundnes of faith, they maye also challenge the same to them. And thirdly, ye deceaue the soules of the simple thereby, by making them beleeue there is not ane vther Kirk but yours. And last of all, you are sacrilegi∣ous in decking ane adulteresse with the styles of the spouse of Christ. As to the thirde poynte, wherein ye calumniate the trueth of God whilk we professe, in calling it ane new Euangell, and olde renewed, and new invented heresies of our owne. These are indeede heauie words wherewith ye Act. 18.6. & 19.9. blaspheame the word of the Lord, and speakes euill of it to the people of this coūtrie. And therfore as the Apost. saith of them that blasphe∣med his doctrine. Rom. 3.8 Your damnation is iuste. For a woe by Gods owne mouth is pronounced against them that calles good euill, Isay. 5.20. Iude. 1.. and euill good, trueth falset, and falset trueth, and darknesse light, and light darknesse: But as the Archangell when hee straue with Sa∣tan about the bodie of Moses, did not blame him with cur∣sed speaking, but said, The Lord rebuke thee, so we wil not blame you with cursed speaking, but the Lord rebuke you. For yee speake heere the vision of your owne harte, and not from the mouth of the Lord: And ye are not the first that hes blasphe∣med the trueth of God, for so did the Iewes before you, call the doctrine of the Euangel a sect, a heresie, and the gentiles called it strange gods and a new doctrine, Act. 28. Act. 24. Act. 17. and the preachers there∣of, a setter forth of strange gods, and of new doctrine, and a babler. The Iewes said that Christ had a deuill, and yet as our Lorde testifies, Ioh. 8.44. It was they that was the children of the deuill. Ye say that we preach ane new Euangel, & olde & new heresies; but this is the sinne and the doctrine of your Kirk: Oliel. de sano a more, in his book de pericul. iss. empo. a larned man anno. 1192,  . 5. For to let that passe of that newe and euerlasting gospell, whilk your fryats invented & deuised, wherein was contained sic blasphemies as the heauen and earth abhorres to heare them: That God the
father reigned vnder the law: God the Sonne vnder grace. And the holie ghost was then that yeare to beginne his kingdome and to continue to the end of the worlde. And that Iesus Christ was not God, his Sacrament nothing, and his Euangell not a true Euangell. (O horrible blasphe∣mie) The whilk if God had not raised vp some men in those dayes to haue resisted it, as the Waldenses and vthers whilk ye call heretickes and infamous men, the gospell of Christ had beene loosed, and in steede of it, we woulde haue gotten ane new Euangel: The dreggs whereof yet remaines in your Kirk. But I will let this passe, because the wise men of Babell (I meane your clergie of Rome) sawe that that was too plaine ane iniquitie, therefore they caused it quietlie to be remoued and buried, and yet they not condemned as heretickes that preached it. But by the contrarie, the Waldenses and vthers that withstoode it, was condemned as heretickes and their bookes burned. To let this passe (I say) whilk testifieth what the world might haue looked for at your hands, if the Lorde had not prouided better for his poore Kirk. Your haill doc∣trine is Antichristian as shall bee proven heereafter, your Kirk Babell, Reu 17 your Kingdome that second beast Reuel. 13.11 that hes two hornes like the Lambe & yet speakes like the dragon, and your head the man of sinne 2. Thessal. 2 , and Sonne of perdition. And ye are they that hes renewed old condemned heresies, and hes inuented new of your owne, as shall be proued afterward, by gods grace. M. Iohn Welsche. Say they, our religion is so ancient that it hes continued euer by a lineall succession of Pastoures and Bishopes, from the dayes of Christ & his Apost. till nowe, neuer interrupted, neuer spoken against, but of late since Martine Luthers daies: But yours, say they, is newlie forged, and invented, neuer harde tell of but since Luther and Caluines dayes. Therefore yours can not be the true Religion, and ours must be the on∣lie true Religion. M. Gilbert Browne. This obiection consistes partlie of ane trueth, and partly of an vntrueth. It appeares be this that either M. Iohn knowes not our preeues, or if he dois he
alteres the same that he may the better oppugne his owne inuention. Our obiection, or rather ane of our prooues, whereby we prooue that we Catholickes is the onlie true Kirk of Christ, and hes the onelie truth in all things, is this. We haue aboundantly set downe to vs by the Prophets and Apostles in the holy write, that the kingdome and Kirk of Christ shall neuer faill in this earth and that the gates of hell shall not prevaile against it. But shall bee perma∣nent for euer, and shall haue alwayes the presence and assistance of the fa∣ther, sonne, and holy ghost, who shall teach it all trueth, and remaine with it for euer, as may be perceaued be thir places noted here, whilks wereouer longsome to be set downe at length. To the whilks I adioyne some of the an∣cient fathers exponing the same. Out of the olde testament. Psal. 60.5. read. August. vpon this. Psal. 88. v. 1.2.3.4.5, 29.30.31.32.33.34.35.36.37.38. read August. on thir places, Psal 104. ver. 8. read Aug. Ps. 110.9. Esa. 9.7. read. S. Hierom. on Esa. 51.7.8. read S. Hier. on Esa. 54.8.9. read Hier on Esa. 55.3.13. Esa. 59.21. read Hier. on Ier. 3.3.36 read Hier. on Ezec. 17.25.26. Dan. 2, 44, Dan, 7.14.27. Miche. 4.7. Out of the new Testament. Luc. 1.33. reade S. August. vpon the 109. Psalme. Math 10.18. reade heire Sainte Hierome vpon this place Luke. 22.32. Iohn. 14.16.17. Iohn. 17.18.19.20. Math, 28.20. 1 Tim. 3.15. Act. 5.39. Some of the ancient fathers. f ye take fai∣ling for an vtter ouerthrow of the Kirk of the elect, it is truth: but if you take it for rring, and ap∣plyes it to the vi∣sible particular Kirks then it is false. Hilari. de Trinitat. lib. 7. August. de vtili. credent. ca, 87. Ambros, lib. 9. cap. 20. Chrysost. in sermo. de pente. Clem. Alex. lib. 6. strom. in the end. And because the Scriptures and the ancient fathers of the primitiue Kirk concurres and agrees in ane vnitie. I would wish M. Iohn to consider the same, that the Kirk of Christ be all mens iudgements shall neuer faill, nor be interrupted nor broken. M. Iohn Welsche his Replye. I will followe your foot-steppes and firste answere to that parte whilk ye say is true, and then vnto that whilk ye say is false: And as to the firste, the grounde whilk ye laide downe wherevpon ye goe aboute to builde the trueth of your religi∣on, is the Kirk of Christ shall neuer faill nor bee interrupted &c. Athenaeus dip∣nso phist lib. 1. It is recorded in histories of one Thrasilaus a frantick man among the Greekes. Whensoeuer hee sawe any ships arriue at the hauen of Athens, he thought them all his owne, and tooke ane inuentarie of their wares, and met them with great ioye. Euen so it is with you, where soeuer you see the
name of the Kirk in the holy Scripture, and the promises of God made vnto the same, ye take all to be yours, and books the treasures of it: And boastes thereof as though they were your owne. Crying, the gates of hell shall neuer preuaile a∣gainst it. It shall neuer faile. It hes alwayes the holye Ghoste to leade it in all trueth. To remoue you therefore out of the hauen and to giue euery marchant his owne ware, and his owne ship, and to set the Kirk it selfe in possession of the Kirk we must distinguish the name of the Kirk. The Kirk there∣fore is taken some-times for the companie of the elect and chosen, whereof a parte is in heauen triumphing with Christ their Lorde; a parte heere in the earth fighting her battels, lying in her campe & awaiting for the victorie. And these are termed the invisible Kirk, because gods election cannot bee discerned by the iudgement of mans sensis or eyes, and we can not knaw wha are his chosen. And vnto this Kirk, that is, to the chosen appertaines all the promisses set downe in the scripture, and in them onlie are they fulfilled: Mat. 3.12. & 13 24.25 And sometimes it is taken for the company of them wha professes the true religion, wherein both the chaffe and the wheat; the popple and the good seede; the dregs and the wyne, the good and the euill are mixed together, the whilk suppose they be in the Kirk, yet they are not of the Kirk, no more nor the superflu∣ous humors of the bodie are true and liuelie members there∣of. So then if ye meane by the Kirk, The Kirk of the elect, and if ye meane by this, That it shall neuer faile nor bee interrupted, &c. onlie this, That it shall neuer be vtterlie abolished, but shall haue alwaies the presence of the halie Ghaist to lead her in all truth, yea and in all halinesse also, in safarre, as shal serue for her saluation: We grant that with you, Lib. 3. de Eccles. mili. cap. 13 as Bellarmine con∣fesseth of vs. And therefore he saieth, That many of their nomber spend but tyme, while as they goe about to proue that the Kirk heir be∣neath absolutelie cannot perishe, or make absolute defection: for Cal∣uine (sayeth hee) and the rest of the heretiques graunt that, but they speak and meane (saieth he) of the invisible Kirk. So if ye meane no farther but this, then Bellarmine telleth you that all the te∣stimonies of scripture and fathers, that yee haue heaped vp
heere to proue the same, is but to spend the time, and so are fetched as needlesse witnesses in a matter that is not doubt∣some or called in question. And if yee had vnderstoode his language, ye needed not to haue combered your selfe in fet∣ching of this mortar and stane, to builde vp your Babel: for this was not requyred at your hands. Genes. 11.7. with Apoc. 14.8. & 17 5. & 18.2. But because it is Babel whilk ye are bigging, a towre of confusion, therefore the lord hath sent sic a confusion of language amongst you that fewe of you vnderstands what another sayes, when some cryes for mortar, others brings stone. Bellarmine, the great maister-buil∣der, cryes for proofes to prooue that the visible Kirk heir beneth can not erre, neither in the matters whilk are neidfull to saluation, nei∣ther in the matters whilk are not neidfull, whilk she propones to be be∣leeued, or to be done, whether they be doctrine contayned in the Scripture or extra scripturam, that is, not contained in the scripture. He cryes to prooue that, and ye cumber your self in bringing in a nom∣ber of scriptures to proue that the Kirk shal alwaies remaine till the ende of the world, wheras in the examination of your proofes it will be found, that they wil go no further with you. But if ye meane of the visible Kirk, that it shall neuer faile, &c. that is, it shall neuer faile in doctrine, nor be interrupted in the same, not onelie in matters neidfull to saluation, but in all truth, as ye affirme of your Kirk, and as Bellarmine sayes, as hath bene saide before, If ye go this farre, as ye doe indeede, and as Bellarmine does, and your self must doe, if ye be a right defender of your Catholicke faith heere, or else there is no grounde whereupon ye can builde the puritie and trueth of your Kirk and religion. Then I say, that your ground is als false and erroneous, as the stuffe that yee builde vppon it, for both they haue failed, and hes beene interrupted, as shalbee prooued afterwarde. And marke this, Christian reader, as the Philistims Kirk wherein they praised their God, Iudg. 16 & moc∣ked Samson the Lords seruand, had two cheef pillers wher∣on the haill house leaned and was borne vp, so hes the Kirk of Rome two cheefe pillers, whereon the haill wecht of their Kirk & religiō hings: ye one whereof is this, that the Kirk can not erre: the other that the Pope is the head of the kirk. Take
these two from them, their house must fall, and their religion can stand no longer. For when they are brought to this strait that they see they cannot defend their religion, neither by the testimonies of the Scripture, nor yet by the examples of the Kirk of God, when she was in her greater puritie and sinceri∣tie, they are compelled to lay this as a grounde to holde all their errors on, that the Kirk of Christ cannot erre: So take this ground from them, their Kirk and religion cannot stand. Now, as to the testimonies whilk ye quote out of the olde Testament, and out of the first of Luke, vers. 33. in the new te∣stament, they onelie prooue that the Kirk and kingdome of Christ shall indure for euermore, and that his couenant made with her, is euerlasting. The whilk cannot exeeme the militāt Kirk from erring in points of doctrine, for both the chaffe & euil seed in the Kirk, that is, these that are called, but not cho∣sen, may erre, and that to death and damnation, and yet his Kirk and kingdome, and his couenaunt, remaineth sure, stable, and inviolate: for the Lord onelie offers his couenant vnto them, and they through incredulitie reiect it, and so he is not bund to sanctifie or saue them, meikle-lesse to keip them from error. And as for these who are called & cho∣sen, all these promises are made and performed in euerie one of them, and the couenaunt of God is so sure in euerie one of them, that our Sauiour sayes, None of them can perish. Ioh, 10.28 And yet for all this, euerie one of them may erre in doctrine, suppose not to death and damnation, whilk ye will not deny. And gif ye would, infinite examples not onlie of the Saints of God, of the laickes (as ye call them) but also of the Priests, Prophets, Apostles; yea, and of Popes also, and of your owne Doctours and Bishops, as a cloude of witnesses, would stand vp and a∣vowe the same in your face. Nowe I gather, seeing that the militant Kirk heir on earth hath but two sorts of persons in her, these that are called and chosen, and these that are onelie called but not chosen, & both may erre in points of doctrine, the one finallie to death and damnation: the other may erre, suppose not finally to death and damnation, & yet the coue∣naunt of God remaine sure, euerlasting, and inuiolate with
his Kirk. Therefore, I say, the promises of the stabilitie of Christs kingdome, and the perpetuitie of his couenant made with her, cannot exeeme the militant Kirk from erring in points of doctrine: sa ye haue lost your vantguarde. Let vs cum to the rest, and see if they will fauour your cause any bet∣ter nor the former hes done. The next place ye quote is the 16. of Matthew, ver. 18. Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke I will builde my Kirk, and the yets of hell shall not preuaile against it. And because ye trust that there is not a testimonie of scripture whilk shall feight mair for you nor this: let vs therefore try it to the vttermoste, and see how far it can be streatched out. What argument will ye frame out of this place? for, if you gather no more but this, Christ hath promised that the gates of hell shall neuer preuaile against the Kirk that is builded on the rocke, that is, on Christ: Ther∣fore the Kirk that is builded on him, shall neuer be alluterlie exstinguished and abolished by Satan. Then Bellarmine telles you that ye spend but time in proouing of this, for we graunt it, That the Kirk of the chosen shall neuer perishe. But if you go farther, and say: That the Kirk of Christ shall neuer erre, because Christ hath promised that the yettes of hell shall not preuaile against it: then, I say, either that exposition is false, or els ye gates of hel shuld haue preuailed long since against your kirk: for whē it preuailed against ye rock wheron the kirk was builded, it preuailed against the Kirk. For, raze & ouerturne the foundation of a house, the house cannot stand, seeing the standing of the house consists on the firmnesse and surenesse of the foundation thereof. Nowe the rocke whereon ye say the Kirk is builded vnto whome this promise is made, is Peter and his successors the Popes of Rome, for so ye all with one consent expones the same. mists annota¦tion vpon this place. Seeing then that they are the foundation of the Kirk, as ye say, and the yets of hel hes preuailed against them, as I shall proue by the grace of God: it must followe, if your exposition be true, that the gates of hell hes preuailed, not once onlie, but at manie times against the Kirk. For, first Peter himself erred in a matter of doctrine, when hee thought with the rest of the Apostles after the resurrection of Christ,
the kingdome of Christ not to be heauenlie but earthlie, Act. 1.6. not spirituall, but like the kingdomes of this world, proper to Is∣rael, not common to all by vertue of the promise: and also he is commanded to preach the Gospell to the Gentiles, Act. 10.20 doubting nothing. Whilk testifies, that he doubted before whether the Gospell shuld be preached to them or not, & therefore erred in a matter of faith, & that after he had receaued ye promise of ye haly Gaist. Ac. 10.14 And also he erred in the abrogation of the Cere∣moniall Lawe: for he beleeued that some meates were vn∣cleane after the death and resurrection of Christ, and there∣fore he refused to eate thereof. And this was a matter of faith also. And last of all, the halie Ghaist testifies, Galat. 2.11 that he went not a right foote to the truth of the Gospell, and therefore was rebuked by the Apostle Paule to his face. And as for them whome ye call his successors the Popes of Rome, not onlie may they be he∣retickes, but also some of them haue bene heretickes. And therefore if your argument be good, the gates of hell both may, and haue preuailed against them. That they may be he∣retickes, I wil fetche no other witnesses, but your owne coun∣cils, Canons, Cardinals, and your owne Popes: for they shall be your iudges in this matter. Lib. 7. de Rom Pontif. cap. 30 Bellarmine sayes, that the Pope being a manifest hereticke, ceaseth to be Pope, and to be head of the Kirk. De authoritate Papae, & Consilii cap. 20. & 21 Caietan a Cardinall saith, That the Pope beeing a manifest here∣ticke, should be deposed by the Kirk. Lib. 4. part. 2. cap. 20 Iohannes de Turre cremata a Cardinall saieth, That when the Pope falles in heresie, he is deposed of God. Lib, 1. cap. 2 Alphonsus de Castro, saith that the Pope as he is a Pope may be an hereticke, and teach heresie, whilk also hath sometimes (saith he) faln out in them. Serm. 2. de con¦secr. Pontificis. Innocentius the 3. and Hadrian the 2. Popes, as also the 6. and 8. Synode, and their owne Canon Dist. 40. cap. Si Papa lawe, doe testifie, that they may be heretickes. And also Pope Ha∣drian 6. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romano Pontif. cap. 2. And some of them haue bene heretickes also. Tertul. ad prax. Zepheri∣nus a Montanist. Damasus & Consil. Sinues∣sanum. Marcellinus, ane that sacrificed to deuils the idoles of the Gentiles. Athanas. in e∣pist. ad solit. vita. Hieron. in catal. scrip. fascic temp aetate sexta. Hermannus con¦tractus. Marianus Scotus compila∣tio chronologies Supplementum chronie. Platina Liberius ane Arrian, that deny∣ed the godhead of the son. Platina in  Anastas. & sup∣plement chronic & distinct. 19. c∣put Anastass falcic. tempor. Anastasius a fauorer of the Ne∣storian heresie. Liberatus in Breatio,  Vigilius ane Eutychian, whose heresie was, that after the incarnation of Christ, there was but one nature
in Christ, made of his diuinitie and humanitie, whilk ouer∣throwes the foundation of our saluation. Honorius a Monothe lite, and therefore damned and accursed in the 6. counsell of Constantinople. Act. 13. Ocea. in o∣pere 93. dicrum. Adrian de confir¦matione circa fi∣nem. Gerson in sermone de pa∣scha. Iohn the 22. held that the soules of the blessed being separate from their bodie, did not see the Lord before the resurrection. Sessione 11. Concilii Con∣stan. Iohn the 23. denyed eternal life, whereof he was accused, and deposed in the councill of Constance. Sessione 34. Eugenius the 4. deposed in the counsell of Ba∣sile for heresie. I omit the rest. Seing then these whome ye call the rock and foundation of your kirk haue erred, & that in matters of doctrine & religion, and in the principal points thereof, and that by the testimonies both of the scripture, & of your owne councils, doctors, Cardinals, and Popes. Ther∣fore, if your argument hald forth, then, I say, the gates of hell hath preuailed against your kirk, because they haue preuailed against the rocks & foundations thereof, for they haue erred as hath bene prooued, the whilk, I trowe, ye will not graunt. And therefore, the farthest that ye can gather heir, is but this: That the gates of hell, that is, the power of condemnation shall not katischyousin, that is, totallie and finallie ouercome: so that suppose they may ischyousin, that is, be strong, & make them to fail in manie things, yet they cannot preuaile totally and finallie against the kirk of God, that is, the elect and cho∣sen, who are builded, not on the Pope, but on the immoueable rock the Lord Iesus. I say further, this promise is made and performed in euerie one of the elect: For, the yettes of hell shall not preuaile, that is, get the finall and full victorie ouer anie of them. And therefore our Sauiour sayes, None of my sheep shall perishe, ob. 0. and yet ye will not deny, but euerie one of the e∣lect may erre. Therefore this promise doth not priuiledge the kirk of God from erring, but the chaffe and euill seede, that is, these that are called and not chosen, may erre, and erre fi∣nallie, 7 because this promise is not made vnto them, for they are not builded vpon this Rock: but vpon the sand: for none is builded vpon this Rock, but these who are blessed, and heareth the worde, and doeth it, as our Sauiour testifies. And the good seede whilk are these that are called and chosen, may erre,
suppose not finallie and totallie. The next place whilk ye quote, Matth. 26. is that prayer of Christ for Peter, Luc. 22.32. But I haue prayed for thee that thy saith saile not. It is true he prayed: It is true also that Peter faith fayled not: but yet it swouned, as it were, when he denyed his Lord and that by mainswering and cursing of himself: and yet he erred, both in the qualitie of Christs kingdome, Act. 1. & 10 Gal. 2 in the calling of the Gentiles, and in the abrogation of the Ceremonial law: as also, he went not rightlie to the truth of the Gospell, as hes bene proued. So this prayer was not that he should be kept absolutelie from all erring, for then it shall follow, that Christ obteined not that whilk he prayed for: seing he erred (whilk is impious to think) but that his faith should not decay final∣lie and totallie. Secondlie, the Lord Iesus prayed also for all the beleeuers, Ioh. 17.18.19.20. whilk place ye also quote, and yet there is not one of the beleeuers but they may erre, as your selues cannot deny, & we haue proued by examples of your owne Popes: for if any were exeemed from erring, in your iudgement it should be these that are the foundation of your kirk, whilk ye call your Popes, but they may erre, and haue erred, as hes bene proued. Thirdlie, I say, it wil not fol∣lowe, Christ prayed for Peters faith that it should not faile: Therefore he prayed for the Popes, whome ye will haue to be successors to Peter, that their faith should not faile (for that is the thing ye would be at) for their faith hes failed. 1. Timoth 4 For if by faith ye vnderstand the doctrine of the faith of Christ, as it is taken sometimes in the Scripture, then I say your owne Doctors, canons, councils, cardinals, and Popes themselues as they haue bene cited before, testifies that not onlie they may erre, but also that some of them haue erred, and haue beene hereticks. And if by that faith whilk our Lord prayed for, ye vnderstand that lyuelie faith, that embraces the promises of Gods mercie in Christ, whilk works by loue, & shawes forth the self by good works: Rom. 3.25 Galat, 5.6. 1. Iohn 2.4 as by keeping of Christs commande∣ments, and by louing ane another: Then I say, your own wri∣ters, friends, fauourers, & cardinals testifies of them, Platin, Gene∣brard, Cran in that they haue gone from Peters steps, that they gote the Popedome by bryberie &
barganing with the Diuell, That they were monstrous & prodigious men yea, rather beasts and monsters. So that of all men that euer pro∣fessed the faith of Iesus, they haue failed moste foullie in that lyuelie faith, as I haue prooued in another place concerning the Antichrist. As to that place whilk ye quote in the 14. of Iohn, ver. 16. and 17. Where the Spirite of Christ is promised to the Apostles, to dwell with them, and to remaine with them for euer: and in the 16. chap. ver. 13. that he shall lead them in all trueth. I answere. First, that was the Apostles prerogatiue, the maister-builders of the kirk of Christ, that in writing and teaching the doctrine of saluacion, they should bee led in all trueth, and in none euer since promised nor performed in that high measure. Second∣lie, this promise of the spirit of trueth to dwell and remaine in them for euer, and to lead them in all truth, is made and performed in al the beleeuers, in so farre as may sanctifie them and saue them: & yet ye wil not denie, but that euerie one of the beleeuers may erre. Therefore this promise will not reach so farre as to keip the kirk from impossibilitie of erring. As to that place in the 17. of Iohn, I answered to it before. As to the 28. of Matthew, I will bee with you to the ende of the worlde, I answere the same thing to it, whilk I answered to the former: that this promise is made, not to any visible and ordi∣nar succession, (for that is to tye the promises of God to per∣sons & places) but to the Pastors of the kirk whome he sends forth, and to all the faithfull: and is performed in them in so farre forth as may saue them, and inable them for his worke. But yet this will not exeeme them from all possibilitie of er∣ring. As to that in the 1. Tim. 3. ver. 15. the kirk is called the pil∣ler and ground of truth, therefore ye gather, It cannot erre. First, I wil aske you to whome the Apost. speakes so, & vpon what occasion he speakes it? Ye must say, To Timothie, that he might know how to behaue himself in the house of God, 1. Timoth 3.14 whilk is the Kirk: for so the Apost. wrytes. Then I aske, Is not that kirk wherein Timothy should haue behaued himself, called the ground & piller of truth? So the Scripture calles it, and ye cannot deny it. Nowe this
kirk was the kirk of Ephesus, then the kirk of Ephesus is called the ground and piller of truth. But first, the kirk of Ephesus fell from her first loue, and the Candle-sticke is threatned to be remoued from her, Reuel. 2.5 vnlesse she repent: She did not repent, but in time became worse and worse, and so heaped fault vpon fault, till Christ hath now remooued his candle-sticke from her, and delyuered her o∣uer to darknes and death, by taking his owne elect to him∣self, and giuing ouer the reprobate that hated the truth to the blindnesse of their owne minde: so that cietie is left desolace to the impietie of Mahomete, and she that was once called by Gods Spirit the piller and ground of truth, hath now lost the truth. Now, I say, that whilk may befall one kirk, may befall anie other kirk. Then that whilk is befallen to the kirk of E∣phesus, may befall any other: But the kirk of Ephesus was first craised, and then by little and little quyte ouerthrowne: and beeing bereft of the light of Christ, is nowe a kirk no longer. Therefore, I say, that there is no kirk on the face of the earth, howsoeuer they flatter themselues with glorious styles of Ca∣tholick, pillers and ground of the truth: whose bodie, that is, the elect and chosen in it, may not bee ouershadowed with darknesse, and ouertaken with faintnesse: whose chaffe, that is, the hypocrites in it, may not bee haillilie consumed with rottennesse and destruction, and whose whole frame and out∣ward gouernment, may not loose both their strength & bew∣tie. Thirdlie, I say, If the kirk cannot erre, as ye say, because it is the ground and piller of truth: and if the kirk of Ephesus be called the piller & ground of truth, as the scripture sayes; and seeing the kirk of Ephesus with all the kirkes of the East, (as ye cannot deny) hath condempned the Popes supremacy as heresie: Therefore one of these two must follow, either that the kirk, that is, the piller and ground of the truth, not onely may erre but hes erred, or els it is an heresie cōdempned ma∣nie hūdred years agoe, that the Pope is the head of the kirk, & so Papistrie is heresie. Iudg ye whilk of these ye wil choose. Laste of all, I say, Philip. 2.16 the kirk is called the piller and ground of trueth, because it is her office and dutie to holde out the worde of trueth, as lanternes and lights, by preaching it and practising it; as
the Priest is called the Messinger of the Lord of Hostes, Malac. 2.7. because his lips should preserue knowledge, and declare the message of God. But as there was Priests whilk shewe not foorth the message of God, but caused manie to erre in the law, and corrupted the coue∣nant of Leui: so there may be kirks, and haue bene, whilk haue not vpheld, and maintained the truth, but haue fallen there∣from. Nowe I come to your last testimonie of Scripture, Act. 5.39. In that counsell of Gamaliel to the councill of the Scribes and Pharisies, that if the doctrine of the Apostles be of God, that it cannot be destroyed. What do ye gather heere? That the truth doth remaine for euer? Bellarmine telleth you, that ye spend but time in prouing that, for we graunt it vnto you. It cannot (I graunt) be destroied, but yet it can be persecuted and re∣mooued out of places where it was before, and obscured and corrupted by mens glosses and traditions, as it hath bene this thousand and fiue hundreth yeares by the Iewes, to whome this was spoken. That if the doctrine of the Apostles was of God, they could not destroy it: and yet (as was saide) they banished it, and made the Lord to depriue them thereof, and to giue them ouer to the blindnesse and hardnesse of their hearts, because they would not embrace the trueth when it was offered. Seeing then there is not a sillab in Gods word, that wil vp∣holde this maine foundation of your kirk, (that the Kirk can∣not erre) take heede to your self, (M. Gilbert) in tyme: & build not the damnation of your owne soule and the damnation of the soules of manie others, vpon a point of doctrine that hath not God to beare witnesse to it in the whole scripture. I might end heere, but because this point, (as I said before) is the main piller that vpholdes the whole weight of their kirk and religi∣on: therefore I will vtterlie ouerthrowe the same, and I will proue out of the worde of God that the kirk in all ages, both may erre, Marc. 10.18. Rom 3.4.9 10.11 12. & 19. ver. & hes erred. And first the Scripture testifies, that it is onlie proper to God alone by nature to be perfitelie holy, and true and free from all errors. And contrariwise man by nature is vnholie, a lyar, prone to deceaue, and to be decea∣ued:
so that by nature he is nothing else but a masse of blind∣nesse and corruption: so that the light he hath, he hath it by free grace, by Gods Spirit, to make him see so meikle of his light in the face of Christ, as may saue him. But yet so long as they are in this house of clay, they see but in part: 1. Cor. 13.12. and that part whilk they see, is but obscurelie and dimlie, as the Apostle speakes. So that as long as they are in this worlde, they are subiect to sinne, ignorance, and errors. But as there are two sorts of men in the visible Kirk: some called and chosen, some called, and not chosen: and as in the diseases of the body some are curable, whereof men recouers, some are deadlie whereof men dyes: So is it in the errors of the militant Kirk, some are deadlie, & some are curable. The chosen that are called may erre but their errors are nor deadlie, as the errors of the Act. 1.6. Act. 10 Act. 11. Galat. 2 Reuel. 19. & 22 A∣poles were, they recouered by grace from them. The called that are not chosen, may erre and erre deadlie, and neuer re∣couer: as these of whome 1. Iohn 2.1 Iohn speakes: They went out from vs (sayes he) because they were not of vs, &c. Now seeing the visible Kirk heir beneath stands but of these two sorts, to wit, of these that are called and chosen, and these that are called but not chosen, and both may erre. Therefore it is manifest, that the Kirk militant heir beneath, may erre. And to prooue this more amplie, that she hes erred before the Law, vnder the law in Christs time, and after Christ. First, Adam being made in perfite holinesse and integritie, how foullie did he erre when contrarie Gods commandement, giuing more credite to the Diuell nor to his maker, he brake that first couenant. For, Contra Marcio∣nem lib. 1 Ter∣tullian sayes Who wil doubt to call Adams fall ane heresie? Nowe if Adam in his full light did not stand but so foullie erred, whilk is he that is come forth of his loynes, borne in ignorance and blindnesse, that dare challenge this prerogatiue to himselfe, Genes. 4 that he cannot erre, except the man of sin and sonne of per∣dition: that is the Popes of Rome. Now, he being thrust out of Paradice hath two sons: the elder Cain, for the murther of his brother is accursed of God, and the author of the Syna∣gogue of Babel, that is the wicked. The Kirk of God remay∣ned in the posteritie of Seth, Genes. 5 and at the last Religion began to
be so prophaned, that at length it grew to sik a height, that Religion being contracted onelie in the familie of Noah, it could be punished with no lesse nor with ane vniuersall Genes. 6 destruction of all liuing creatures by the floode, except onely these yt were preserued in the Arke with him. Of Noahs 3, chil∣dren two of them fel, both themselues & their posterity. The true Kirk and Religion remained in the familie of Sem. And neither were they free from Idolatrie, God calling Genes. 12 Abra∣ham out of his owne countrie, seruing Iosu 24.2. & 3 strange gods. His el∣dest sonne Ismael being Genes. 21.12 Genes. 25.23 Genes. 31.34. & 35.2. circumcised, is commanded to bee casten out of the Kirk of God. Isaac hes two sonnes, the elder is refused, the youngest is chosen, and so the elder with his posteritie fel away. Iacobs familie was not cleane neither from Idolatrie, being polluted with strange gods by his wife Rabel, till he clensed his house. And as for his posteritie, what stif∣neckednes, what rebelliō, vvhat idolatrie vvas amongst thē, so that no threatning, no blessing, no correctiō nor teaching, could keepe them in the puritie of Gods worship and religi∣on. Exod. 32. In the Kirk vnder the Lawe, the people are Idolaters, the hie-priest Aaron the maker of the Idole to the people. In the time of the Iudges after the death of Iosua, Iudges 1.12.13 they vvorship∣ped Baal and strange gods, and euerie man did that vvhilk seemed good in his owne eies, vvhen there was not a king in Israel vvhilk vvas verie oft in these daies, and therefore they are giuen ouer to the crueltie and tyrannie of their enemies round about them. 1. Samuel, 3.1 Proverb. 29.18 1. Chro. 13.3. In the time of Heli, there was no open vision. And Salomon sayes, where there is no visiō the people perish. In Sauls time the Arke of the Lord was not sought, and so there wan∣ted a cheefe parte of the publike vvorship of God: for God vvas consulted at the Arke. And in the time of Salomon in his old age, vvhen his heart was turned from the Lord, the Scrip¦ture testifies, 1. Kings 12 that they forsooke the Lord, & worshipped strange gods of the Ammonites. Such like in the time of Rehoboam Salomons sonne, Iuda committed Idolatrie, and builded hic places, wherein they worshipped contrary to Gods commandemēt. Iehoram King of Iuda, 2. Kings 14.22.23. 2. Chro. 21.11 & .10 made Iuda and Ierusalem to commit spirituall fornication and Idolatrie, as the house of Ahab
made Israel to commit idolatrie. Seing then the worship of God was corrupted both in Iuda and in Israel, and there was na other visible Kirk is vpon the earth, except in Iuda and Israel, will it not followe then, that all the particular Kirk is on the earth may erre, and fall also to idolatrie? Siclike in the time of Ahaz, 2 King. 16.10 11. &c a strange altar is placed in the temple of the Lorde, at the commandement of the king, by Vriah the Priest: & the king with the whole people at the kings com∣mandement, offers vppon that aultar, and the aultar of the Lord is remoued out of his place. In the time of Ioash, 2. Chro. 24.8 both the king and the nobilitie forsakes the house of the Lord and worships Idoles, so that the hote wrath, of the Lord was kind led against Iuda and Ierusalem for their idolatrie. Siclyke in the time of Achaz, he made hie places in all the corners of Ie∣rusalem, and in all the cities of Iuda, 2. Chro. 28 & there burned incense to strange gods. In the time of Menashe, the whole publike worship of God was so defaced, and idolatrie so vniuersallie set vp, that the scripture testifies, Iuda sinned more hainouslie nor the verie nations did, whome the Lord cast out before their face. 2. Chr. 33.9 The whole hoste of heauen was worshipped in stead of the true God. I beseek thee (Reader) to read this chapter, and there thou shall finde that there was not sa meikle as ane outward face of a Kirk at that time. Yea, 2. King. 12.3.4 2. King. 14, 4 in the verie time of good kings, as Ioash, and Amatzia, who both in the beginning em∣braced the worship of God, but yet made defection in the end. The hic places were not remoued, whilk was ane error in the worship of God. The scripture testifies that the feast of the Passeouer was not kept so preciselie, 2, Chro, 35, 18 according to the word of God since the dayes of Samuel, no not in the reigne of the best kings, as it was in the 18. yeare of Iosias, and there was 400. yeares and more betwene. Nehem. 8, 18 Also the scripture testi∣fies, that ye feast of the Tabernacles was not so kept, as it was thē, since the dayes of Iosua, whilk was more nor 1000. years. And all the time of the captiuitie, where was there any pub∣like face of the Kirk of God, with his publik worship vncor∣rupted in all things as the Lord commanded it? As concer∣ning the kingdome of Israel from the time of their renting a∣sunder
by Ieroboam from the Kingdome of Iuda, they neuer had the worship of God in integritie: but first worshipped God in the places where they shoulde not haue worshipped him, and after ane other manner, and by other Priestes, nor they were commanded. Next, they fell to the worshipping of Idoles, till they were transported out of their land, and scat∣tered vpon the face of the earth. What, shall I pursue the sayings of the Prophets, howe the onelie visible Kirk in the world is called an harlote? Esai. 1. Ier. 7 Esai. 57.10.11 Hoa 2 the Temple a denne of theeues: the Prophetes all blinde guides, and dumb dogs that cannot bark. Nowe, when God of his infinite mercie sent his onelie be∣gotten sonne in the world, the light, the life, the saluation of the world, what did the Kirk and the Cleargie, the Scribes & the Pharisies that sate in the Mat 23 chaire of Moses? Surely Christ had none so great enemies, as they were, who were the Do∣ctors, the lights, the successors of Aaron, to whome the lawe was concredited. When Christ testified of himself that hee was the light of ye world, they said, his Ioh. 8.13 testimony was not true. When others beleeued in him, they said Ioh. 7.47 they were deceiued. They ordaine Ioh. 9.22 that if any man should confesse Christ, he should be excommunicate. So that Ioh. 12.42 many that did beleeue in him durst not for them confesse him. They Luk. 6.7 watched him of purpose that they might haue matter of accusation against him. And when he cast out diuels, the Marc. 3 22. Scribes and the Mat. .24. Pharisies saide that he did cast out deuils by Beelzebub the prince of deuils. Luk. 23.2. They said they found him a man peruerting the nation, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar. They Marc. 14.64. condemne him in a solemne coun∣cil as worthy of death. Yea, as Christ testifies of them, Math. 23.13. they neither entred in the Kingdome of heauen themselues, nor suffered others to enter in. And yet they are these that if ye looke to their an∣tiquitie, they haue their beginning from Abraham: if to their succession, they succeeded to Aaron: if to their callings, they were Scribes and Pharisies, Math. 23 and sate in the chaire of Moses: If to the place, it was the house of God. If to the people whome they taught, they were the onelie people of God. If to their prerogatiues, to them appertained the adoption, and the glorie, & the couenant, Rom 9.4 & 5. and the giuing of the lawe, and the seruice of God, and the
promises, of whome are the Fathers, and of whome is Christ according to the fleshe, who is God ouer all blissed for euer, Amen. And if ye will looke to their Councel, they were solemnlie called to∣gether, where they condemned the Lord of life, and crucifi∣ed the Prince of glorie. What can you say to these? That they erred in the person of Christ, but not in the exponing of the Lawe, (as some of you sayes) But first, Moses did write of Christ, Iohn. 5.6. Rom 10.4. and Christ is the end of the Law: So that if they had not erred in exponing of the Lawe, they had not erred in the person of Christ, because the Lawe testified of Christ, and he was the end of it. Next, Math. 5. the Scripture testifies that they erred in ex∣poning of the Lawe, that they both brake the Lawe, and teached others so to doe. And therefore Christ sayes, Math. 5.20. Except your righteous∣nesse exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisies, ye cannot enter in the Kingdome of heauen. For, whereas the Lawe of God counts hatred murther, and lust adultery, and rash swearing vnlawfull swearing, and our enemies our neighbours, whom we ought to loue and to doe good vnto: They by the con∣trary taught that our friends was onlie our neighbors whom we should loue, Vers 43. and therefore they said that we should hate our enemies: that hatred was not the breaking of the sixt com∣mand, and lust no breaking of the 7. command: and rashe swearing, no breaking of the third command. And therefore the Lord Iesus in that fifth chapter of Matthew, doth vindicat the true meaning of the cōmandements from their fals ex∣positions. And he testifies of them that they did abrogate the Lawe of God through their traditions, Math. 15.6. and so in vaine they worshipped God, teaching for Gods Lawe (whilk he calles doctrine) mens precepts, whilk he prooues there by an example of abrogating & an∣nulling of that dutie whilk we owe to Father and Mother, commanded vs in the fifth commandement, by their tradi∣tion. And therfore he giues charge to his Disciples to bewar of the leauen (that is the doctrine) of the Pharisies. Seing thē they who had their ordinary succession from Aaron, erred: Math. 16 6, 10. how can the Doctors of your Kirk, yea, your Popes be priuiledged from erring? But it may be ye graunt all this; for how can ye de∣nie it? That the Kirk before the Lawe, vnder the Lawe, in
the time of Moses, in the time of the Iudges, in the time of the Kings, in the time of the captiuitie, and in the time of Christ erred: but yet the Christian Kirk hes greater priuiledges & promises that it cannot erre. Let vs examine this also, whe∣ther the Christian Kirk be priuiledged from erring, or not. And certainlie, if any Christian Kirk, at any time had this praerogatiue, appearandlie the primitiue Kirk whilk was in the dayes of Christ and of his Apostles should haue had it. But they had it not. Therfore what Kirk since vnder heauen can challenge it? For, in the time of Christs suffering the A∣postles & Disciples, who onlie then were the Christian Kirk yea, after that they had bene Apostles, and after that they had bene sent to preach the Gospel, and worke miracles, yet at that time, did they not erre in the article of Christs resur∣rection? Matth. 10 Act 1.6 Act 11 Act 10 Gal. 2 Alex. Habensis in 3. parte quest. vt. art 2. & Iohan. de Turre Crem. in lib. 1. de Eccl. cap. 30. 1. Cor. 3 & in lib. 3. cap. 61 and erred they not concerning the estate of Christs kingdome after the resurrectiō? And cōcerning the teaching of the Gentiles, after that they had receiued the holy Ghost And Peter himself, as hath bene showne. And sundrie Papists sayes that true saith remained onlie in the hart of Marie in the time of Christs suffering, was not heir then an vniuersall erring? Now to goe forward did not the Kirk of the 1. Cor. 3 & 11 & 15 Corinthians erre in building hay & stubble on the foundatiō & in the vse of the Lords Supper, & some of them also concerning the resurre∣ction of the dead? And the Kirk of Galat. 1. & 3 Galatia erred in being carried away to another Gospell, and in ioyning the Cere∣monies of the Lawe with grace in iustification? And what will ye say when the heresie of Arrius (who denied Christ to be the sonne of God aequall to his father) spred the self so far that it is testified that the Bishops of the haill warld became Arri∣ans, Theodo. hist. Ec∣cles. lib. 2 and Hi¦ed al contra Lu¦cis. cap 7. & in con. thanas. epst de Synod. A. & Scleue. that the haill warlde did grieue and wonder at it selfe that it was becum ane Arrian. What will ye say vnto all the Christian Kirks of the East, Grecia, Asia & Africa, Kirks planted by the Apostles: I meane not now of them that hes professed Maho∣metisme but of thē that admits the scripture, acknowledges Christ their Sauiour who hes their ordinar succession of Pa∣triarckes and Bishops aswell as your Kirk of Rome hes, who in nomber far exceeds these Kirks whilk acknowledges
your Pope to be the head of the Kirk. For first yours is but in Europe, except ye will claime to the newe found land, & not all Europe, for all the Kirks in Greece, whilk is a great part of Europe, acknowledges not your supremacie. Nowe take the Greeke Kirks from you, next the reformed Kirks in Scotland England, Germanie, Denmarke, France, Zea∣land, Holland, and other places, whilk hes gone out of Ba∣bel, whilks are all in Europe, your nomber will not be many that acknowledges your supremacie. And next take all A∣sia and Africa from you, whilk is the two part of the worlde, your nomber will be small in comparison of these that are a∣gainst your supremacie. Nowe all these detests your supre∣macie as tyrannie, and the worship of Images, your transub∣stantiation in the Sacrament, the Communion vnder one kinde, the single life of Priests. Either therefore ye muste graunt that the greatest nomber of Christian Kirks hes er∣red and does erre, or else that your Romane Kirk does erre and your supremacie, yea your religion whilk depends vpon your supremacie is the head of heresie. But it may be ye will say, that all vther Christian Kirks may erre, but that it is on∣ly proper to your Kirk not to erre. First therefore, let mee aske at you what can be the cause of that singular priuiledge whilk the Kirk of Rome hes beside all vther Kirks whilk e∣uer hes bene, is, or shalbe? Yea, aboue Adam when he was in his integritie (for he erred:) yea, aboue the Angels, for they remayned not in the trueth. Aboue the Patriarckes, Abraham, Iohan. 8 I∣saac and Iacob, yea, aboue Aaron, & the Kirk in the wildernes aboue the Kirk vnder the Lawe, yea, aboue the Apostles, & Peter himself before Christs suffering, in the time of his suffe∣ring, after the resurrection, after the receiuing of the holie Ghost: for they erred in all these times, yea, aboue the Chri∣stian Kirks that hes beene founded by the Apostles aswell as yours: that had the promise, the couenant, the seruice of god once in as great puritie as euer yours had, that hes their or∣dinar succession, their antiquitie, their vocation ordinar as∣well as yours hes vnto this day. Great surelie must be that priuiledge giuen vnto the Kirk of Rome that hes exeemed
her from errour, all by hauing erred. What is then your pre∣rogatiue aboue all other Kirks. I knowe that ye will say be∣cause of Peters chaire that was there wherein the Popes sits after him. First, then if Peters chaire hes such an prerogatiue that the Pastors who sits in it and the Kirk that cleaues to it. can not erre. I think surely the Lords chaire whilk was at Ie∣rusalem, whilk was called the Temple and seat of God, and Moses chair wherein the Scribes and Pharises sate should ra∣ther haue that prerogatiue to freeth the Kirkes and Pastors sitting in these chaires from erring, yea the kirk whilk the trueth it selfe Iesus Christ founded whom he taught with his owne mouth, and among whom he was crucified shuld with far greater right clame to that prerogatiue. But since al their seats hes erred, for the Temple became a den of theeues: The Scribes and Pharises that sate in Moses chaire condemned the Lord of glorie: and Ierusalem it selfe cried out Crucifie crucifie him. And the christian Kirk gathered there are long since far from the way of saluatiō. So that if neither the chair of God, nor Moses freed the Kirk of the Iewes frō erring, nor the chaire of Christ freed the christian Kirk there gathered from erring. How then can Peters chaire haue this preroga∣tiue aboue them al as to exeeme that Kirk and Pastors that sits therein from possibilitie of erring? What is this but to prefer him before them all, whose seat hes a priuiledge that neither God nor his sonnes, nor Moses seat had? O high blas∣phemie to be detested and abhorred of all christian hartes. But let vs see if it hes this prerogatiue whilk they ascriue vnto it, or not. And first if it could haue exemid any from er∣ring, should it not haue exemed himself especially from er∣ring? But as it hes bene showen he erred. Therfore it can not exeeme neither his successors, Act. 1.6. Gal. 2 nor yet the Kirk that ac∣knowledges them, from erring. Secondly if it had exeemed any Kirk from erring, should it not haue exeemed the Kirk of Antiochia especially, for surely Antiochia hes better right to clame to this prerogatiue, Galat. 2 11. nor your Kirk hes. For first it was Peters first seat. Next the Scripture bears witnes to it, that he was there. But neither was Rome Peters first seate, nor is
there so much as a sillabe in al the scriptures, to proue that e∣uer Peter was in Rome. But suppose Peter was there (for we wil not examine this now) whether is this prerogatiue (not to erre) giuen to your head, that is, to the Popes, or to the bo¦die, that is, the people, or to both? If ye say to the heade, (as ye doe indeede,) then what will yee answere to your owne writers and Fathers, to your owne councels and Popes. To your owne cannon law, affirming that Popes may erre and bee heretickes and should be deposed, and are deposed when they are mani∣fest heretickes (as hes beene proued before.) And what will yee say to your Popes that hes beene heretickes indeede, one of them an Arrian, another an Eutychian, the thirde an Nestorian, the fourth a Montanist, the fift deposed as an heretick. The sext denying that the soules of the children of God sawe Gods face whill after the resurrection. The seuenth denying life euerlasting, and others giuing themselues ouer in the hands of the Deuill for the Popedome, others repelling and abrogating the decrees of their prede∣cessors. Others sik monsters and beasts, so cruell to the dead and to the liuing, that your owne friends calles them monsters and affirmes of one Iohn the 12. o after some the 13 car. Tuecre summa de eccles. li. 2. c. 103. of them that the deuill shot him through whill he was abusing another mans wife, and so dyed with∣out repentance. Dare you say, and would ye haue the salua∣tion of mens soules, to leane to this poynte of doctrine that they cannot erre which is the rocke and foundation of your Kirk, whilk aboue all others hes erred most foullie. O mali∣cious and cruell man that woulde deceaue the poore flocke of Iesus Christ, for whome he shed his blood, with such here∣sie & abhomination. Then this prerogatiue is not graunted to your Popes the heade and foundation of your Kirk. And surely if the foundation may be turned vp side downe, and the head may become sensles and deade, I see not howe the house can stande, and the bodie can bee whole, and one of your greatest Papistes Bellarmine plainely confesseth, that if the Pope erre, of necessitie, tota ecclesia errabit. That is, Lib. 4. de Rom. pontifice cap. 3. the whole Kirk shall erre. Vpon the whilk I reason, If the Pope may erre, and hes erred, then the whole Kirk may erre, and hes erred: (so Bellarmine one of the learndst papists that euer was, writ:)
But the first hes bene proued by your owne Doctors, Cardi∣nals, Popes, councels, cannon law: Ergo, by your own doc∣trine the whole Kirk may erre. Here we might stay now and goe no further: for this sufficiently ouerthrowes this poynt of your doctrine, that the Kirk cannot erre, & that be the con∣fession of the learnedst of your side. But yet I will persew the rest. If you say it is granted to the body, then it is either gran∣ted to the people or to the Clergie. To the people, I trowe ye will not; for if your Popes may erre, much more may your people erre: And if he Apostles & other famous Kirks may erre, much more may your people erre: yea, if not, it should followe that your people were aboue their head the Pope, whilk I trowe ye will not say. If yee say the Clergie, then ey∣ther it must be your Doctors seuerally by themselues, or as they are gathered together in a councell. But as they are se∣uerall ye will not say. For your Bellarmines controuersies would conuince you to the face: for almost there are few controuersies whilk he handles (and he handles more nor 300) but hee brings in some of your owne writers dissenting from him, and whome in many places he confutes. And I think if Popes hes not this priuiledge, surely the Doctors of your Kirk seuerally hes not this priuiledge. But because (as Bellarmine confesseth if a generall councell erre, then the whole Kirk maye erre, ib. 2, de author concil. cap. 11 for it represents the whole Kirk. And therefore hee brings this in as a reason to proue (that generall councels can not erre, because the whole Kirk can not erre, for (saith he) the general councell represents the whole Kirk, therefore it can not ere. Let vs ex∣amine this: for if it be found that generall councels may erre surely your cause is gone. First then what will ye say to thir∣teene generall councels whereof seuen is vtterly reiected, and the other six are in part allowed, and in part reiected, whilk al hes erred as Bellarmine confesseth. De concis lib. 1 cap. 6 & 7 But it may be you answer that these was not approued by the Popes of Rome, & therefore they might erre, Bellarm. lib.  cap. 2 & 5 and hes erred, but these coun∣cels that are altogether allowed of him can not erre, nor hes not erred. Indeed it it true that this is your doctrine that nei∣ther generall nor prouinciall councell can erre that is allowed by the
Pope, & that generall councels lawfullie conuened may erre, vnles they followe the instructions of the Pope. Cap. 11 And therefore Bellarmine sayes that they may erre three māner of waies, 1. in defyning of anything the fathers of the councel dissent from the Popes legates. 2. If it be a∣gainst the Popes instruction suppose both the Fathers and the legates of the councell agree together. 3. They may erre before they haue receiued the Popes confirmation and iudgement, suppose all both fathers and le∣gates consent together, because (sayth hee) the Popes iudgment is the last from the whilk no man may appeall, and he may approue and dis∣proue the generall councell notwithstanding of their consent with his owne legates. And therefore he sayes in another place that the whole strength or certainty of lawfull councels depends only of the Pope. Lib, 4. de Rom. Pout side cap, 3 So then this is your last refuge. All depends on his instructi∣on & confirmation, he hes a priuiledge that he can not erre and the generall councels receiues the same through his ap∣probation and confirmation. But I answere: The Pope can giue no greater prerogatiue to others, nor he hes himselfe: But (as hath bene proued before) the Popes may erre, and haue beene hereticks: Therefore they cannot giue this pre∣rogatiue to others. And if ye will say (as some of you does) that the Pope suppose he may erre priuatly as he is a priuat man, & as a priuat teacher, yet he cannot erre as he is Pope in his office iudiciallie. Whereunto I answere firste, That some of your owne Kirk, as De potestate Ecclesiae Gerson and Almane, Lib, 1, cap, 2 contra here. Al∣phonsus de Castro, Loci Theolog lib, 6. cap, 1 Canus, and Pope Adrian the sext: all these teaches That the Popes may erre and teach heresie as they are Popes: Either therefore the Popes may erre as they are Popes iudi∣ciallie, and teach heresie, or else not onlie these Doctors of your owne Kirk, but also the Pope himself hes erred, & that in a point of doctrine: and so howe euer it be, the Popes as they are Popes, iudicially may erre in points of doctrine. Se∣condly, I say, besides nine Popes whilk haue bene hereticks, and that when they were Popes, sundrie of them hes made decrees not only contrary to Gods word, but also contrary one to another, and that in matters of doctrine. As for ex∣ample. Pope c, laudabilem de conversione insidelium and Alphonsius a Pa∣pist confesse that this Pope er¦red in desining a matter of faith, and Lyes he saw this decreet ex∣tant in the olde Decretals aduer. here. lib, 1. cap. 4. Celestine the third made a decree that when of maried persons the one falles in heresie, the marriage is dissolued, and
the Catholicke partie is free to marrie againe, Math 6. Math 9 9. contrary to the trueth of God. And also contrary to the lib. 4 decretal. cap Quanto decreet of Pope Innocentius the third. Thirdly, either your Cannon Law erres, or els Causa 12. quest 1. Dilectissimis Clements decreit that all things should be common, and that wiues also should be common. Gelasius De conscerat. cap. Competi∣mus Pope affirmes that the mysterie of the bodie and blood in the Sacrament cannot be deuided & that the Sacrament cannot be taken in one kind onlie without great sacriledge: and yet the Councell of Trent hes decreed the con∣trary, and the whole Romane Kirk practises the contrary. Pope Dist. 50. cap. Qu semel Martine decreed that the Priests who are deposed for any fault may neuer be admitted to anie degree of the Priest-hoode againe. Pope Distinct. 82. cap. Qui Syricius, & Pope Distinct. 82. cap Presbyter Calixtus hes decreed the cōtrary. Pope Gregorie the thirde hee permits one to haue two wiues if the first be siklie, Decret causa 32. quest. 7. c Quod propsu sti contrarie both to the gospell atth. 19 and to ane other Dectal b 4. tit. 9. cap. Quoni∣am decreet of the cannon lawe. Pope Dist. 40. cap. A quodam Iudaeo Nicholas saith, that that Baptisme which is ministred without expresse mention of the three persons of the Trinitie, is firme & sure ynough. But Pope Dist eadem de consecrat. cap. in Synodo Zacharie hes decreed the contrarie. All these decreites are set downe in their cannon law, and hes the strength of a law in the Romane Kirk, not as priuate mens, but as Popes decreits. And yet some of them are di∣rectly repugnant to the word of God, that thēselues cannot deny but they are heresies, and some of them so directlie re∣pugnant to the decreits of other Popes, that either the one or the other must be heresie. But it may bee ye will answere that suppose the Pope may erre as he is Pope, and that in matters of doctrine, yet he cannot erre with his councell, either prouinciall or generall (as Bellarmine saith). Where∣vnto I answere, first if general councels lawfullie conueened together, may erre in matters of doctrine, vnlesse they bee confirmed by the Pope, as Bellarmine grants: And if the popes may erre themselues alone, and that iudiciallie in matters of doctrine, as hes bene proued. Why maye they not erre also being ioyned together, seing councels hes this priuiledge onlie by his confirmation and allowance? As Bellarmine saith lib. 4. de Rom. pontisi. cap. 3. Secondly, I say, either Pope Steuen the 6. with his councell erred in condemning of Formosus &
his acts whilk he made as pope, Sigebert in  nico. Platina in vita ha¦rum & in decreing his ordinatiōs to be void & null, because the man was wicked by whom he was ordained: whilk is ane error of the Donatists, or els Pope Iohn the 9. with his councel of 72. Bishops, erred, in iustifying Formosus and his decreetes, and condemning the actes of Pope Steuen with his councell. Last of al, since general coun∣cels that hes bene confirmed by their Popes hes erred, In epist. ad Tha clum quae estin 2. actione 7. Syn. Canon 2 the sixt generall councel confirmed by Pope Hadriane hes sun∣dry errors whilk they themselues will not defend, as the re∣baptising of heretickes. For the counsell of Cypriane is confirmed there, wherein this is decreted. Canon. 13 And also it is ordeined that Elderis, Deacons, Canon. 67 subdeacons should not separate from their wiues contrarie to the canon of the Romane Kirk, as is saide there. And the mariage of catholickes and heretickes is iudged null and voyde, 1. Cor 7.13 Canon. 12 whilk your selfe can not denie to be an error contrary to the expresse trueth of God. And the forbidding of ministers to remaine with their wiues contrarie to the sixt canon of the Apostles. Either therefore a generall councell confirmed by a Pope hes erred, or els the Apostles hes erred in this canon, for they iudge them to bee the canons of the A∣postles. Bellarm lib. 1. de conciliis cap. 5 The first generall councell of Constantinople and the generall councell of Chaledon whilk are both by their owne confession approued by the Popes. And yet both these hes decreed that the Bishop of Constantinople should haue e∣quall priuiledges of authoritie honor and dignitie in eccle∣siasticall affaires with the Bishop of Rome, saue only the first place or seate the whilk by their owne confession is an error. Therefore either lawful general councels confirmed by the Pope, hes erred; or els the Pope is not the head of the Kirk, and hes not a preheminence of authoritie ouer the rest, for they haue made the Bishop of Constantinople equall with him, or els there ar two heads of their Kirk, the Bishop of Rome, & the Bishop of Constantinople, I omit the rest. Augustine saies that prouinciall councels may be corrected by generall councels, and of generall councels the former may be amended by the later, De baptisme con¦tra Donatistas lib. 2. cap 3 if they may be mended then they may erre. And here he speaks not of a matter of fact but of a matter of faith, for he speakes of
the baptisme of heretickes. Now to conclude seing the Kirks in all ages, before the law, in the time of the law, and in the time of grace, yea and the Apostles and Peter himselfe hes erred; and seing the Kirk of Rome that claimes this priui∣ledge of not erring aboue all other Kirks, hes erred also, and that not only her people whilk they call Laicks, but also her clergie seuerally & together in councels, aswell prouinciall as generall. And seing the head whilk as they say is the rock and foundation of the Kirk hes erred in life, in office, in matters of faith and religion, not as priuate men only, but as Popes, both by themselues alone, as also with their coun∣cels, aswel prouincial as general. Seing, I hope I haue proued all these things sufficiently, then may I not with the iudge∣ment of al men safely conclude, that that maine piller wher∣upon the whole weight and piller of your religion depends (that the Kirk cannot erre) that it is an error, and such a dange∣rous and damnable error, whereupon all the errors of your religion is builded, that whosoeuer will beleue it, they hasard the endlesse saluation of their soules. Ground then (christian reader) thy saluation not vpon this, that the Kirk cannot erre: for that is false: but vpon this, that as long as she stickes to the word of God written in the olde and new Testament she erres not, & when she swerues and it were but an inche braid from the Scripture, then she erres. And therefore two learned Papistes De examinat. part. 1. consid. 5. Gerson and Panormitan affirmes the one saith simplici non authorizato sed excellenter in sacris literis erudito &c. Extra de elect. cap. Significasti that is, that more credite is to be giuen to one vnlear∣ned & simple, but yet excellently besene in the holie write, in a poynt of doctrine: nor to the Pope. And such a learned man saies he ought to oppone himselfe to a general councel, if he perceiue the greater part to decline to the contrarie of the Gospel either of mallice or of ignorance. The other saith that more credite is to be giuen to an vnlearned and simple man that bringes for him the Scripture, nor to a whole generall councell. And this for answer to the testimonies of Scripture whilk yee cited. Now, as concerning the fathers testimonies whilk ye
bring in, they will serue you no further nor the Scripture hes done, for they will goe no further with you nor this that the Kirk of Christ and his couenant with her shall endure for euer, the whilk we grant, and they that will read them will finde them so. And if yee proue anie further out of them it shall bee answerd by Gods grace, for it were too fashions to the reader to set downe here the particular sayings of e∣uerie one of them. And if ye had formed your arguments out of them, I should haue formed my answer by the grace of God to euerie one of them. And this much concerning your ground, and the proofes of it. Now I come to that whilk ye gather of it. Maister Gilbert Browne. Of this we collect that our Kirk must be the only trew Kirk, and not theirs, Proue this by the Scripture M. Gilbert, and take it to you. But this you are not able to doe, for your Kirk hes failed in the substantial points of religion therefore it is not the onlie true Kirk. It onlie suffices to proue this by the Scripture False, M. Gilbert because ours hes neuer bene interrupted, nor hes failed in anie substantiall poynt of faith & religion since Christ & his Apostles dayes, and theirs hes done. To confirme this, I say, that Maister Iohn, nor no minister in Scotland can be able to assigne to vs the circumstances of all mutations and changes in Religion: That is to say, 1. The authour who first began out Religion. 2. The time when it was begun. 3. The place where it began. 4. The true Kirk who said against the same. 5. The matter it self whilk was changed or begun. 6. Nor the faithfull nomber from whome they departed. All these things we shall assigne to their Religion, and that since Christ and his Apostle,. 1. The first authour of their Religion, albeit not in all things, False, he neither inuented it, nor first preached it. was Mar∣tine Luther an Augustine Frier. 2. He began his Religion in the yeare of God 1517. 3. He began the same in Saxonie in the countrie of Almanie. 4. The Kirk of Rome, Italie, France, Spaine, Scotland, England, not the true kir but those who was drunken with your abho∣minations. And iustlie. Den∣mark, Swaden, Pole, an great part of Almanie, with the east and west In∣dies whilks were the trew Kirk, said against him. 5. The heades of Religion whilk he first said against were Pardons. He affirmed that man was onlie iustified by Faith. He denied the Supper of our Lord to be an sacrifice, &c. 6. He departed himselfe from all the Christian Kirks in Europe, Fal in the Indies and other places, and therefore he had no predecessors of his owne Religion, as we Ther is a dark∣nes faln vpon your eies, for there is no sik thing there. read in the Apologie of the English Protestants, that he and Zuinglius were the first that came to the knowledge of the Euangell, &
therefore none immediatlie before them. False, for he had all these who pro¦fessed the true re¦ligion to be his predecessors. Matth. 28.20. Then seing that there was none of his profession in the earth before him immediatlie, neither visible nor inuisible, he and his could not be the Kirk of Christ: for it hes euer stood, and neuer failed, no not the space of one day vniuersallie, because our Sauiour sayes, I shall be with you euery day to the consummation of the world. M. Iohn Welsche his Reply. As to your collection, the forme of it must be this. That Kirk onlie must be the trew Kirk that hes neuer bene inter∣rupted, nor failed in any substantiall head of faith and reli∣gion since Christ and his Apostles. But say ye, yours is such, and ours not: Therefore your Kirk is the true Kirk, and ours not. The proposition I graunt. But all the controuersie lies in the probation of your assumptiō. Yea, in stead of prouing ye say it is not possible to mee, nor to na Minister in Scot∣land to assigne to you the circumstances of all mutations & changes in your religion, as the person, time, place, &c. And then ye attempt to assigne al these circumstances of our re∣ligion, vpon the whilk ye conclude the falset of it. So we wil first see how ye proue your owne, and then see howe ye dis∣proue ours. Indeed this argument of yours is of sik accompt with you, that there are not manie of your writers, but they haue set it, as it were, in the vaunt-guarde of their hoste, and amongst the greatest of their strengthes and bulwarks, for to vp-holde their ruinous Babel. So Hammilton and Hay, in their demands to the Ministers of Scotland, so Campion, so Duraus Scotus against Whitaker in his defence: Vpon the 28. of the Acts. and on 1. Ioh 1. Bellarm lib. 4 de Eccles cap 5 so your Rhe∣mists: and so Bellarmine. Whereby it may be seene of what accompt this argument of yours is in the iudgement of your Kirk. But to answere to your argument: first, I say, If there be no mutations or changes in your Religion since Christ & his Apostles, then your religion and doctrine will be one with that quhilk is set downe in the Scripture of God. For you will not deny, I hope, but the Scripture doth sufficiently testifie, what doctrine and religion was in Christs and his A∣postles dayes. And so let it once be put in the ballance of the Scripture, and tryed thereby, and then I hope it wil sone be
made manifest how far it is changed. So, and you dare, M. Gilbert let once your Religion be set vpon the Pannel, and let it once haue an assyse of the Scripture, and then the plea will end, I hope. Next I say, it will not follow, We cannot assigne all the circumstances of changes in your Religion: Therefore your Religion is vncorrupted. For it sufficeth if we can proue the first onlie, that is, the matter or doctrine it selfe whilk is changed, and that by comparing it with the Scriptures of God, suppose we could not assigne all the rest of the circumstances of the mutation: as the time, place, au∣thor, and so forth: for the changes of manie things are moste notorious, and yet all the circumstances of the change ther∣of not knowne. We say then it is not needfull to seeke the beginnings and circumstances of the decayes and corrupti∣ons in your Kirk, when the corruption and change it selfe is so manifest, by comparing your doctrine with the written worde of God, that it cannot be denied. For will you say, that he who is deadlie diseased, is whole and sound, because I cannot tell you the first article of time, the place, and first occasion of the disease? When it is manifest that a citty is full of misorder and confusion, wil ye say that ye wil not be∣leeue it to be so, vnlesse you knowe the first beginnings and progresse of these misorders. If you sawe a ruinous house, would ye say, Proue me and tell me all the circumstances of the change of it, otherwise I will not beleeue it? Will ye de∣nie that a ship could be drowned, vnlesse it were tolde you all the circumstāces of the change of the lecke where-throw it drowned. If any found a man faln in a pit, shall he not be∣leeue that he is faln, whome neuerthelesse he sees to be ther, vnlesse it were tolde him, when and by whome he was caste into the same: Euen so, will ye not beleeue, or wil ye hinder al others to beleeue that your Kirk and Religion is ruinous, consumed, rotten, dead, drowned, & full of misorder, heresy, and confusion, vnlesse the first beginnings of these changes can be tolde you? We say therefore it is sufficient to proue the ruine and consumption of your Kirk and Religion, if by comparing your doctrine with the truth of God in the scrip∣ture,
we make euident the direct opposition betwixt them, suppose wee coulde not assigne all the circumstances of the change of it out of the histories, leauing it free to Historio∣graphers to write what they please, and omitte what they please. Thirdlie, it is manifest, that the Kirk of the Iewes in the time of Christ was changed both in doctrine & manners from that estate that it was in the time of Aaron, Eleazar, and sundrie others: and also the Kirks of Galatia and Corinthe that they were changed from the estate wherein they were. And yet I trow that neither ye, nor any Papist in the earth is able to assigne to me all the circumstances of the mutations and changes in the same, as the first authours, time, place, &c. & yet there was a great change in Doctrine and Religion in al these Kirks, as hath bene proued before. And we read that our Sauiour and the Apostles, conuicted them of a change, and yet they designed not the first authours, time, and place and so forth. The like I say of the Kirk of Greece, Asia and A∣frick, which in nomber exceedes yours. That there is a won∣derfull change in their Kirk and Religion ye will not deny, or els your Religion is heresie: for (as said is) they acknow∣ledge not your Popes supremacie, Transubstantiation, &c. And yet I trowe ye, nor na Papist in the earth is able to as∣signe al the circumstances of changes in their Kirk, and Re∣ligion which they haue presentlie: yea, more vnable to doe this, nor we are able to doe the same in yours. I meane not the heresies of Arrius, Samosatenus, Nestorius, Eutyches, Sergius, and the rest, whilk long ago were damned by the Councels of the Greek Kirks. (For I trow ye shal not be able to proue that they now maintain these heresies, whilk they condem∣ned and refuted long agoe.) But I meane of the present er∣rors and corruptions in their worship and Religion, whilk now they maintaine and professe. If then ye iudge the kirks of the east heretical, because they are not aggreable to your doctrine and Religion of Rome, and yet not be able to as∣signe the circumstances of the changes and mutations of the same? Will ye not grant the same libertie to vs to accompt and iudge your kirk and Religion failed, because it is not a∣greeable
to the doctrine of Iesus Christ, set downe in the Scripture, suppose we could not assigne to you the circum∣stances of the changes of the same. Fourthlie I say, if you haue read Epiphanius, there ye shall finde many heresies, whilk I omit for shortnesse, whilks he accompts heresies, whose beginnings and authours are vn∣knowne. Fifthlie, there is sik ane vniuersall complaint of the mon∣strous abhominations and decaies in your Religion, disci∣pline, & manners, & that by your owne Concil. Con∣stant. les 4 5. Trident. ses 6 Basil ses. 2. 3 councels, Bernard. in Cant. 3 Fa∣thers, Popes, Cardinals, & Fryars, that I would haue thoght it vncredible vnlesse I had read them, that either your owne mouthes should haue so condemned your selues, or else that the posteritie afterward shoulde haue bene so shamelesse as to haue boasted of the puritie of their Kirk and Religion. Therefore the Councel of Trent hes proclaimed it to the world in write, that the Kirk hes need to be reformed in the head and members. Nowe, I aske that of you concerning these abuses in discipline and manners, whilk ye aske of vs concerning your doctrine. Show me all the circumstances of mutation and change distinctlie, if yee can, what tyme, what place, by what authour &c. sik monstrous abhomina∣tions first brake in in your Kirk & religion. Now seing there is no man who hes a sparke of iudgement, that will doubt of that incredible change of manners and discipline in your Kirk, and yet the circumstances of the changes vnknowne: thinke ye then that ye shall assure men that no changes culd fall in your doctrine, vnlesse we knew the circumstances of the changes of the same? Sixtly, Matth. 13.27.2. the Scripture testifies that euē the tares whilk is the euill seede doth not appeare so soone as they are sowne, and that neither the times, nor the first author of them was knowne, no not to the most diligent laborers of the Lordes ground at the first: and yet it was enough to know them to be euill seede, by the difference that was seene betwixt them and the good seede, suppose the time, place, & author was vnknowen at the first. So it is proofe enough against
your doctrine, that it is but tares, if the difference be made manifest betwene it and the Lordes trueth in the Scripture, suppose the circumstances of the changes of it, can not be assigned. Seuenthly, theirs is likened to leauen and a canker, whilk doth not all at once infect the whole masse, and feister the whole bodie; but peece and peece: so your corruption came not in all at once, but peece and peece infected your Kirk & feistered your religion. And therefore it is no wonder sup∣pose the beginnings of infection and circumstances of it, hes not bene marked: for if they had broken in all at once, and in a suddentie ouerthrowne the whole Kirk, it had bene no difficultie to haue assigned the circumstances of the ouer∣throw of it. For if any hauing a whole constitution with an stroke were slaine, if an ship with an waue were drowned: it were no difficultie to assigne the circumstances of the sud∣den changes. But in a consumption, and in a leck that hes come in peece and peece in the body & in the ship, the be∣ginnings thereof cannot be so easily perceiued: for a little leck in proces of time will sink a great ship. And if it be so hard to discerne the beginnings of these things whilk our senses may grope, how much more hard is it to perceiue the beginnings of these spirituall corruptions whilk cannot bee perceiued by the natural man, but only by the light of Gods spirit by the spirituall man. Eightly, if now it be so in other heresies as the Scripture testifies of them that their begining are oft-times vn∣knowne, euen vnto the moste diligent labourers of the Lordes husbandrie and that they come in by little and little and doth not infect all at once, how much more is this true in your Antichristian religion, whilk (as it was fore-tolde) should deceiue all nations and make them drunken with the wine of her fornication. 2. Thes. And therefore your doctrine is termed in the Scripture an iniquitie, but an secret iniquitie: an vnrighte∣ousnes, but yet an deceiuable vnrighteousnes: a delusion, but yet a strong delusion; Reuel. 17. an abhomination and spirituall fornication, but yet put in a golden cup, that is, hauing the shewe of godlinesse
and religion, and your Kirk is called a harlot: but yet finelie decked in purple, &c. not like a harlot, but a Queene. Your kingdome is called a beast that speakes like the dragon, but yet like the lambe in his hornes, resembling the power & authority of the Lord Iesus. Seeing then your Kirk, kingdome & doc∣trine is such a mysterie of iniquitie, hes such a shew of godli∣nes, hes such a resemblance with the lambe, hes such cloakes of styles is so deceiuable, and is such a strong delusion, as the Scripture testifies of it: is it any wonder, suppose the begin∣nings of this mysterie, & of the whoredomes of this queene be not distinctly marked and set downe? Ninthly, it is likely ynough that the great credite where∣in the first Bishopes of Rome was for their pietie and godli∣nes, and the loftie estate of their successors after them, toge∣ther with their crueltie & tyrannie did so dazell on the one side the eyes of the godly, that they were not inquisitiue in marking the changes and beginnings of their corruptions, and so brideled the mouthes of other some that they durst not write the thing they saw, and if they write any thing, they write it but barely & corruptly, for the tyranny of your kirk was such, that none durst mutter against your Kirk and religion, but he was taken without further as an hereticke and condemned and executed where euer your tyrannie reached. Last of al, suppose they had bene written by the histories of euerie age, and that distinctly; yet considering the vni∣uersal power, craft and pollicie of your Kirk and kingdome, is it any wonder suppose they be not now extant at all, but either burnt, or els so falsifyed and corrupted that the begin∣nings thereof should not haue bene perceiued. For seing in the purer times when the power and dominion of your Kirk was not yet come to the height, Concilii Carthag 6 The oes one after another Zozimus, Bo∣nifacius, Caelstius, anno. 430. such was the ambition & falshood of your Popes that in the presence of a council of 217. Bishops in Carthage, wher Augustine was present, they did alledge a false canon of the councill of Nice, for to haue established their supremacie, and vnder one of their handes sent it to the councell by their legates: the whilk was espied
and found out by the whole councell, that not only it was decreed and ordained in that councell he should haue no prerogatiue ouer the Kirkes of Asrik, and that none should appeale to him vnder the paine of deposition and excom∣munication: but also he was rebuked by the fathers of that councel in their letters to him. If he was so bould then, what maruell suppose since he hes falsifyed and corrupted euery historie & writing, that he saw might beare anie wayes wit∣nes of the corruptions, tyrannies & abhominations of that Kirk and religion of his. And hence it is, I am sure, that we finde so little written of the beginnings of their corruptions, & of them that resisted it. And your Index expurgatorius deui∣sed in the councel of Trent for blotting out euerie thing in the writing is of men that might testifie of your corruptions, doth also sufficiently witnes vnto the world what ye did in the former times. So, to conclude this, suppose we could not assigne to you the circumstances of the changes of your reli∣gion, yet it followes not but your religion and Kirk may be corrupted and decayed. But to satisfie your demand, (suppose I hope the thinges alreadie said, will satisfie the consciences of the godly) what craue you? That all the circumstances of changes in your re∣ligion may be assigned to you? First then, I say, there is no∣thing that may serue either to make the man of God wise vnto saluation, or yet that may make him perfyte in euerie good work, but the Scripture testifies: for it is able to do both these. If these circumstances then serue either for saluation or perfection, I say they are set down in the Scripture, so that we neede not to goe to hystories to search the same. The first then ye craue, is the time when the change be∣gan. The Scripture tells you that the mystery of iniquitie began to work euen then in the Apostles dayes, and that it doth alreadie worke, and so grew on from degree to degree till he that with-held it was remoued, that is till the Empire of Rome began to decay, and the seat of it remoued from thence, as the fathers ex∣pounded it, Augustine, Chrysost. Hiero. & so the citie left to the Pope the man of sinne for him to set his th ne there: for
Rome that seuen hilled citie behoued to be the seat of the An∣tichrist, as it was foretolde by the Scripture. So, Reuel 17. if you wil beleeue the Scripture, you haue the time. What craue you next? The place? Lib. 2. de Roma∣no Pontisi cap. 2 Reuelat. 17. I say the Scripture testifies of the same that that mystical Babylon, whilk Bellarmine your chiefe campion grants to be Rome, that sittes vpon seuen hilles, that had the domi∣nion ouer the Kinges of the earth, that is the place where first your Kirk and religion began to decay. So there the place if ye will beleeue the Scripture. What craue you next? Reuel 11. & 17 Reuel. 13. & 1 The author? The Scripture also hes foretolde that the beast that came out of the bottomles pit, and slew the witnesses of God and made warre with the Saintes, and ouercame them, & made all to worship the image of the beast, and the harlot Babell, (the citie of Rome) the mother of whordomes, who made all nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, that is your head and Kirk, they are the au∣thors and mothers of this decay and corruption. What is the fourth thing ye require? The Kirk that said against the same? The Scripture will tell you that too: Reuel. 11. & 10 & 13. & 14 the two witnesses of God whom she killed, the woman that fled in the wildernes, the Saintes with whom she made warre, & who would not worship the beast nor re∣ceiue his image, the hundreth fortie and foure thousand that Iohn saw standing with the Lambe in mount Sion, who was not defyled with your idolatrie, but followed the Lambe whithersoeuer he went. These then are the true kirk whilk spak against your corrupti∣ons, who are like vnto Eliahs seuen thousand that had not bowed their knees to Baall. What craue you more? The matter it self they said against? The Scripture and ye will beleeue will satisfie you in this poynt also. The doctrine then that was said against was that mysterie of iniquity, 2. Thessal.  Reuel. 13. Reuel. 17.18 1. Timoth.  that deceiuable∣nes of vnrighteousnes, that strong delusion, that doctrine of the Dragon, that spirituall idolatrie and abhomination, that doctrine of Diuels in forbidding mariage and commanding abstinence of meate, & so forth of the rest. What craue you last? The number from whom they departed? The Scripture will also beare witnes of this, seing your religion is a departure from the faith, 2. Thessal.  then all these that euer professed the faith of Iesus set dovvne in his written word, euen the Lord Iesus the head, the Apostles,
the layers of the foundation, the primitiue Kirk, the woman that fled in the wildernes, the Saintes with whom ye made warre, and all the elect and chosen of God that abhorred your idolatrie: These are the true Kirks from whome you departed. What now craue you more? Will not the abun∣dance of the riuers of the Scriptures of God quench and sa∣tisfie this your desire, but that you must goe vnto the vn∣pure fountaines of mens writings, as though the Scripture were not sufficient not only to make a man wise vnto salua∣tion, but to make him perfite in euerie thing? These thinges I am sure will satisfie the soules of them that loues the trueth. But because you giue no credite to the Scriptures, but counts them as a nose of wax, Leo. 10. and as one of your Popes speaking to Bembus a Cardinall called them a fable of Christ, and yet such a fable as hes inriched your treasures. And Syl∣uester Prierias writing against Luther, saies that the Roman Kirk & Pope is of greater authoritie then the Scriptures. O horrible blas∣phemies of the holy trueth of God. Therefore we will goe to the histories, and se what they haue testified of these circum∣stances. And although all things heere be not expressed to the full, yet there is so much left vncorrupted and vnscraped out (by the gracious prouidence of God, that would not want his witnes in all ages) out of the fathers and your own writers, that I hope wil satisfie the consciences of al the mo∣dest & godly. Lib. 1. om. Clemēs Alexandrinus saies that the Apostles suc∣cessors receiued the doctrine from them, as the sonnes from their fa∣thers. But he subioynes that there was verie few children that was like their fathers. Lib. 3. cap. 16. Aegesippus as Nicephorus reportes, saies that the Kirk remained a pure virgine as long as the Apostles liued vnto Traians time, but they being dead, he writes that it was spedily corrup∣ted. So if ye credite the testimonies of these men, ye se the Kirk remaineth not long in her integritie. And if you would heare ought of your Rom. Kirk, Lib. 7. cap. 11. Socrates sayes that Celesti∣nus your Pope past the boūds of his preisthood. Read cap. vlt. Basilius de spiritu sancto, & there ye may se what change of religion was in his time. epist. 1.9 c. 19 Augustine testifies that the multitude of ceremonies grew so in his time, that the condition of the Iewes seemed to be more
tollerable, nor the condition of the Kirk. Now did not this sicknesse trow ye, grow be time? And to come to your owne wryters. in Canti 33. Bernard sayes, that ye Ministers of Christ (meaning of the Romane Kirk) serues Antichrist. And to the Pope himselfe, Eugenius 3. he sayes Lib. 4. And thou the shepheard goes forth being clothed with a glorious attyre, if I durst say it: these are the feeding places of Deuils rather then of sheep: thy court is accustomed rather to receiue good men, nor to make them good: not the euil profites, but the good decayes there. And in another place he sayes, From the sole of the foote (spea∣king of the Kirk of Rome) to the crowne of the head there is no health, nor soundnesse. And in another place he sayes, De cn Pauli. Psal. 91 ser. 6. What remaynes now (speaking of the corruptions of that Kirk of Rome) but that the mā of sinne be reuealed, the man of perdition, Daemonium non modò diurnum, sed & meridianum, that is, a deuilrie not only in the day tyde, but in the very noone-tyde. And to Fugenius the Pope he sayes, Lib. 4. In these secular attyres and powers thou hes not succeeded to Peter, but to Constantine. The day would sooner faile mee, nor the wryting of his complaints against the Kirk of Rome. Pope Hadrianus the 6. in his instructions to his Legates whilk were sent to the councel of Noremberg, he graunts and bids them say to the councel, that We know that in this chaire, (meaning Peters Sea in Rome,) for certaine years many abhominable thinges hes bene in it: the abuse in spirituall things, the excesse in com∣mandements, and in a word, all things are changed in a worse. And the councill of the Cardinals to Paule the third: they say, Out of this fountaine (holy father) as from the Troian horse, Dele card. hes broken so many abuses in the Kirk of God, sik heauie diseases, whereby we see now that she is dispaired almost of health. Aeneas Syluius a Cardi∣nall, who also was Pope afterward, sayes of your Kirk, That al faith hes perished in her, & loue is growne yee-colde. Ex epistola. 54. ad Caspar. Schlicke. Oratio. Cornelii epi. Bitóti 3 dom aduent, whilk was spoken in the councel of trent. And Cornelius Bitontinus Bishop, who was present at the councell of Trent sayes, Would to God (speaking of your Kirk) that vnanimes velut prorsus &c. all with one heart alluterlie they had not declyned from Religion to superstition, from Faith to infidelity, from Christ to Anti∣christ. (What would ye haue more? will ye yet be so shamlesse as to boast of the puritie of your Kirk?) and from God to Epicurisme. I leaue the rest, as Platin, Genebrand, Frier Mantuā, Nicolaus Clemangis,
Franciscus Petrarcha, Auentinus, and a nomber of others who are full of complaints of the abhominations of your Kirk of Rome, that certainlie I cānot but wonder at your shameles∣nesse in opening of your mouth, and saying, that your Kirk had the trueth in all things, and neuer failed nor was inter∣rupted, against sik a cloude of witnesses, whose testimonies ye dare not refuse. But I leaue you to the Lord. The lippes of a lyar is abhomination to the Lord. Prouerb. 20. So your owne mouthes shall rise vp in the day of the Lord, and condemne you that saies, Your kirk hes not failed in any substantial point of Religion. But you craue more distinctly the time, place, and persons, and so forth, that hes brought in this mutation and change. If these are to be accounted authours of your erroneous do∣ctrines who were the chief defenders thereof: then I say the Popes of Rome (for the moste part) are the authours of the same, for they were the chief defenders thereof, suppose they had not bene the first teachers thereof. For, otherwise Luther cannot be saide to be the authour of our Religion, as ye say, because he was not the first that taught the same, and that by your owne confession. For ye say, that sundrie other he∣retickes before Luther taught the same heades of doctrine whilk he taught, & whilk we professe now. As, that Fasting should be free, that onely Faith iustifieth, that man hes not free wil, &c. Next, because it were too longsom to go throw the whole heads of your Religion, therefore I wil onlie bring a fewe examples, and that in some of the substantiall points thereof. As for the sacrifice of the Masse, and the ceremonies thereof, I haue showne the authors thereof in another place therefore I omit that now. The first that euer tooke vppon him to exercise iurisdiction ouer the Kirks of the East, was Pope Victor anno 200. or 198. who tooke vpon him to excō∣municate the Bishops of the East, because they would not followe his fashion in the celebration of Easter. There the person, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 5.26 time, and place, resisted by Irenaeus bishop of Lions in France, & the Bishops of the East, & the brethren there, Polycarpus and sundrie others. The first that took vpon him the style to be called vniuersall Bishop, was the Bishop of
Constantinople, anno 581. Resisted by Pelagius, and after him Lib. 4. epistola 3.38.39 Gregorius Bishops of Rome. And yet for al this, Boniface Platina, Sabel∣licus, Manarus Scotus. Platina in vita Bonif. the 3. anno 607. obtained this style of Phocas the Emperour, the murtherer of his predecessor, complained of by the Kirk of Rauenna in Italie, and resisted by sundrie as shalbe prooued afterwards. The first that Euseb. lib. 5. cap 17 appointed lawes of Fasting, was Montanus the heretick, anno 145. accounted heresie by Apolonius and Augustine, against the fasting of the Manicheans The Manicheans were the first we read of that ministred the Communion vnder one kinde, as the Papists does now: and so forth of many other olde condemned heresies whilk your Kirk hes renewed, as shall be proued afterward. The firste that gaue inckling of Transubstantiation, was Mark a nota∣ble Magician anno 115. who by his inchantment hauing first caused a cup of white wine to beare the coullour of blood, made his followers beleeue that by his inuocation ouer it, that grace whilk is aboue all things, had powred his blood into the cup, refuted by Heres. 34 Epiphanius and Irenaeus. The first that decreed Transubstantiation in effect, Lib. 1. cap. 8. was Pope De consecrat. Distinct. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius Nico∣laus the 2. anno 1090. in causing Berengarius to recant, but yet it was not decreed as an vniuersall doctrine, before Pope Innocent the 3. his time in a councel of Lateran anno 1215. as de Sacrament. Tonstall witnesses. The Greeke Kirk neuer consented to it, Bertramus, Berengarius, Waldensis withstoode it. The firste that decreed the worshipping of Images was Hadrian in the 2. councell of Nice, against the expresse Scripture, after the example of Marcellina an heretick, who worshipped the I∣mage of Iesus, resisted by sundrie Fathers and Concil. Elibez. Concil. Constant Conc. Francof. councels, The first Distinct 82. cap Proposnisti that imposed single life and condemned mari∣age in their Cleargie was Pope Syricius anno 390. as the Ma∣nichees did before him, resisted by Sigebert & . Mutius sundrie. Let these ex∣amples serue as a taist to the reader. How stronglie nowe yee haue manned and fortified your own Kirk & Religion by your proofes, let the reader iudge. Now let vs see, how ye disproue ours. The question nowe comes in of the truth of our Kirk and Religion, whether it be from Iesus Christ, or not. You say, it is not from him, but
from others since his time. If ye had gone the straight way to haue proued this and to haue satisfied the consciences of men, you would at the nearest haue runne to the Scripture, and by the same haue disproued it. But you insteede of this goe a farre by-way, and would father our religion on fleshe and bloode, dust and ashes: in poynting vs out Martine Luther to be the father and author of the same, as though it had not an ancienter pedegre to reckon vnto, nor had not the begin¦ning & foundation of it, from the roote of Iesse, the bud of the Lord from whome it hes sprung. And for to get your self the better credite you busie your self in marking the circum∣stances of his preaching, as time, place, matter, opposition, &c. Now that ye are so skilled and acquainted with that hi∣story of Martine Luther, that you can assigne al these circum∣stances, it is no wonder, for that was the most notable and markable period of the decaying of your Babell, and of the erecting vp againe of the kingdome of Iesus Christ, whilk your head & clergie had stampt it vnder foote for so many yeares, whilk suppose the beginning of it was but like a little leauen, and as a graine of mustard-seed whilk of all seedes is the least. Yet now since it hes so sowred almost the whole masse, euen the most part of the kingdomes of Europe, whilk once was vnder your spirituall bondage, and hes growen vp into sik a high tree hauing faire and great branches, vnder the whilk the Lords sheepe may get reste and warmnesse, and in the whilk his soules that mounts vp-wardes to that kingdome, doth builde their nests, so that neither can all your purgati∣ons, nor yet all your axes of fire and sworde, of buls and par∣dons of preachings and writtings, stay the spreading of the one▪ nor cut downe the branches & roote of the other. That M. Luther began at that time, and in that place, and preached against these doctrines, we do not deny, and that is not con∣trouerted: But heere lyes al the questiō, whether if that do∣ctrine that he preached against, was antichristian or not, & whether that religion whilk hee neither invented, nor yet first preached (for sundrie before him did preach that same doctrine, whose names I set downe in my answere to your
obiection) but only raised it out of the graue of darknes wherein ye had buried the trueth of God. Heere then (I say) is the question whether that religion whilk he preached hes the warrant from Iesus Christ in his Testament or not? the whilk if ye euer disproue by the written word of God, then shall we grant you all that ye say, the whilk is as impossible to you to doe, no not suppose your King would call all your wisemen & cleargie together, Daniel 2 as it was to all the wisemen of Babell to tell and interprete Nebuchadnezar his dreame: yea, suppose your King would reward yow gloriously with honor and riches yf ye could do it, yet are ye not able to win your wages. Yea, suppose he would riue you in peices and make your house a iakes vnles ye did it, as the wisemen of Babell was, because they could not tell and interprete the Kings dreame. This is therefore the poynt whilk lies in question betwixt vs, whilk ye shuld haue proued if ye could. But know ye for a trueth, that suppose he raised out of the graue the trueth of God whilk ye had buried, yet was he neither the inuenter nor the first preacher of it, but it hes for ye beginning & author of it, Iesus Christ the Son of God, and the foundation of it in the new Testament of his holy Scripture. This for the author, time, and place whilks ye assigne. Now, to the Kirks that spake against him. I answere: they were but sik as was made drunken with the wine of your fornication, and deluded by your strong delusions, being de∣ceiued by the golden cup, Reuel. 17.4 wherin you propyned them to be drunken out, as it was prophecied of you. But the measure of your iniquitie being full, and the time of the lurking of the trueth of God being runn out, God of his infinite mercy by his ministry, and the rest that followed since, hes opened the eyes of a great part of these kingdomes who first sayd a∣gainst him, to se your Kirk to be the whore: Reuel. 17.1. & 13 11.2. Thes. 2.3.4 11. Reuel. 18.4 your kingdome to be the beast: and your head to be the Antichrist: your doctrine to be delusions, and your Rome to be that mysticall Babilon. And so the Lord hes made them beleeue and giue obedi∣ence to that commandement of his, goe out of her my people &c.
That ye call these the true Kirk that spake against him, that lies in the weights and ballance yet betwixt vs, for or ye proue them to be the true Kirk, ye must fist proue your doctrine whilk they then professed, to haue the warrant out of the word of God. So, let them haue the name of a Kirk, but of an impure and corrupted Kirk: of a Kirk infected by the pest of your doctrine, oppressed by the tyrannie of your Pope and cleargie, and consumed by the rotten humors of your Idolatrie. So then it was not the true Kirk, that is, the called ones by the light of the Gospell (for they are the true Kirk) that spake against him, but only these that were infect∣ed and poisoned with your abhominations, the whilk I grant did ouer-spread these nations as it was fore-told of her. Reuel. 17.2. &. . 3. &. 13.14. And as for these first heads of religion whilk he oppugned: Of your pardons, iustification by works, and the sacrifice of the masse, there condemnation is set downe in the great register and Testa∣ment of Iesus Christ the Lord of life as shall be proued here∣after. So that he was not the first that oppugned them. Now as to the last the Kirks from whome he departed, he depar∣ted not from their bodie, but from the consumption of your heresie, that consumed the body: not from the Kirk, but from the corruptions of your Idolatrie and abhominations in the Kirk. Not from the common-weale of Israell, but from your tyrānie & oppression of the cōmon-weale. Not from the ci∣tie of God, but from the pest of your doctrine, that infected the citie. And last of al not from the spiritual communion & societie of the Saints of God in these partes, but from the cōmunion with Babel with Antichrist, with the beast, & with ye Dragon, & that at the 1. Tim. 6.3 4.5. Matth 7.15. Act. 19. & 8 v. 1. Cor. 10.14. 2. Cor. 5.14.15 16.17.18. Hosea 4, 15. Reuel, 18 4, cōmandemēt of the Lord flie from Idolatrie; goe out of Babell my people. Nowe after you haue assig∣ned the mutations of our religion since Christ and his Apo∣stles (as you think) you gather the whole force of it together & makes the streame of your argument to runn as strongly as it can vpon our Kirk and religion, that the face and forme of it might be so washen away that it be not knowen to be a true Kirk. Your reason then is this. The true Kirk of Christ hes neuerfailed vniuersally for the space of one day, because our Sauiour hes promised to be with it to the end of the
world. But our Kirk was neuer before Martine Luthers daies, therefore it is not the true Kirk of Christ. As to your propo∣sition, if ye sake failing for erring in matters of doctrine, then I denie your proposition for I hope I haue proued suf∣ficiently before that the Kirk both may erre and hes erred in all ages. But if you take failling to be vtterly abolished and rooted out of the face of the earth, then I grant your proposition, that God hes euer a Kirk, the Kirk of his elect, with whom he will be to the end of the world. And as to your assumption, that our Kirk was neuer before Martine Luthers dayes, I deny it. Let vs see howe ye proue it. There was none (say yee) before his daies neither visible nor inuisible that professed his religion. But howe doe ye proue that, for that is still denied to you? For if our religion hes the olde and new Testament to beare witnes to it, and Iesus Christ to be the author of it in euerie poynt, as shall be made manifest by the grace of God, then I say whosoeuer they were from the beginning of the world to this day visible or inuisible that professed the true Iesus, the true Sauiour, his true doctrine and Sacraments wherin religion stands, they are our prede∣cessors, and are of our profession and religion: so then ye should first (if ye had gone squarely to work) haue disproued the heads of our religion not to haue their warrand from the tables of Christs Testament, or ye had concluded that we had none of our profession and Religion before Martine Luther. And this is the point you should haue begun at, for it is not the Kirk that makes the religion, but the religion that makes the Kirk. Haue we a warrant out of the word of God for our religion, then are we the true Kirk, and the succes∣sors of all them who euer from the beginning of the vvorld hes professed the same. Haue vve not this vvarrant then I graunt you vve haue no true Kirk. So there is the point of our controuersie, vvhether our doctrine be from God, out of his vvord or not. But hovve proue ye that Martine Luther had none of his professiō before him? First you gathered vp∣on the former things that all the true Kirks saide against him, and that he departed from them, vnto the vvhilk I an∣svvered
before that these was not the trew Kirk, but only so many of euery natiō who was deceiued by your doctrine, & whereof the Lord did cure a great many by his ministry, & by the ministrie of others whome the Lord did stirre vp since, so that neither did the trew Kirk who saw the trueth, speak against nor yet did he depart from their societie. . Reg 19.10.18 Next as the lord had a true kirk in Israel in the time of Elias, euen these 7000. whilk did not bowe their knee to Baal, who was neither known to Elias the Prophet nor yet to the per∣secuters: so did the Lord in the midst of your darknesse and Idolatry reserue to himself a true Kirk, euen these hundreth fortie and foure thousand whilk Ihon saw standing with the Lamb on mount Sion, Reuelat. 14.1 who did not defile themselues with your Idolatrie and did not worship the beast and receiue his mark: whilk suppose neither ye nor we had knowen, yet the Lord did reserue them as he promised. Thirdly, I say Martine Luther had sundry who professed his religion immediately before him, who was euen knowen to the world, as I shall proue afterward. Your next proofe is taken from an testimonie of one of our owne writers where ye alledge that it is written of Mar∣tine Luther and Zuinglius, that they were the first that came to the knowledge of the Gospell. I say ye are not faithfull in citing of this testimonie, for it saies not that they were the first that came to the knowledge of the Gospell, but these are the wordes that it was an easie thing to them (meaning of your Kirk) to deuise against vs (meaning the English Protestants as yee call them) these cursed speaches, when Martine Luther and Zuinglius first came to the Gospell. The Latine wordes are, cum Martinus Luther et Zuinglius primum accessissent ad Euangelium. So it saies not that they were the first that came to the Gospell, but that it was easie to you to spew out cursed speaches when they came first to the Gospell. So that this worde primum that is, first, is not in comparison with them that knew the Gospell before, but in comparison with that time in the whilk they themselues knew not the Gospell. It is an aduerb of time, and you take it for an adiectiue noune. But there
is a vaile ouer your eyes Maister Gilbert that yee can neither see vvhat vve or your selues writes: So then to conclude, seing the religion whilk Martine Luther taught, hes the warrant from Christs Testament; and seing all that euer professed the trew religion, that hes Christ to be the author of it in his Scripture, visible or inuisible, are his predecessors: Therefore the religion whilk Martine Luther taught was the trew religion. And seing your religion hes not Christ to be the author of it in his latter Testament, but is that apostasie & defection, that Antichristian kingdome that was forespo∣ken of in the Scripture: Therefore I conclude that your Kirk and religion whilk he oppugned is not the true Kirk & re∣ligion, but that Antichristian kingdome. And this for the first part of your obiection. Nowe we come to the se∣cond. Maister Gilbert Browne. As for the other part of the obiection whilk he alledges to be ours: that is, that our religion was neuer saide against, we say not so: Matth. 13.4 for why all here∣tickes and others infected with false doctrine hes euer saide against the same, almost at all times. A d therefore wonder not M. Gilbert suppose your mysterie of iniquitie so sone began. For how soone that Christ our Sauiour plan∣ted the trueth: the Diuell immediatly sewe Popple in the same, according to the parable set down in S. Matthew. Maister Iohn Welsche, his Reply. I come now to that part whilk ye say is vntruly alledged of you, whilk moued you to say that either I knew not your proofes, or if I knew them that I altered the same, that I might the better oppugne my owne inuention. Of my knowledge of your proofes I will speak nothing. But let vs see whether this be my inuention or not, or rather your own proofe. You, for the confirmation of the trueth of your Kirk and religion brought in this as a proofe, that I, nor no Mini∣ster in Scotland was able to assigne the trewe Kirk that spake against it. Either then yee proue nothing, or els this must be one of your proofes, because it was neuer spoken a∣gainst by a true Kirk. Now compare these words with mine, and see whether I speake ignorantlie or vntrulie of your proofes. I said, that ye affirmed your religion to be trew, be∣cause
it was neuer spoken against. Here our words are one, except this that ye ad (be a true Kirk) I vnderstād the same, and therefore I gaue the instances, first of Christ and his A∣postles next of the primitiue Kirk, thirdly of these that li∣ued in Poperie whilk spake against your religion; all whilk I appeale your conscience whether think ye that I iudg them a true Kirk or not. Now in that ye expound it otherwise of heretickes, this is neither my words nor meaning, but your owne inuention. So that by this it may appear that either ye haue not vnderstood my words alledging your obiection, or els ye haue altered the meaning of the same, that ye might the more easily answere to your owne inuentions, & gaine say my words. Maister Iohn Welsche his answer to the obiection. Your religion of the Romane Kirk was neuer instituted nor preached neither by Christ nor by his Apostles, as I offer me to proue by their writings: whilk is the only touchstone whereby all religion should be and must be tried. Maister Gilbert Browne. I think in this Maister Iohn takes vpon him an impossibilitie, for it is said that it is impossible to proue a M. Robert saie you is contrarie to this, that the word except it be preached is but a slaying let∣ter, therefore say you t cannot be iudge to the chri¦stian religion. Ser¦mon vpon Esai 1 & 6. Answe c. You belie M. Ro¦bert Bruce, for there is not sik a word of his in these sermons: this is twise that you haue falselie forged our testimonies. Ergo, it is impos∣sible to proue your Popes not to be the Anti∣christ by your re¦son negatiue propositiō, except it be set downe in the word of God, whilk is of authoritie: and that I am sure he cannot finde, because Papistrie by him is not so olde as the word of God is. But in the mean time Maister Iohn proues nothing He off rs very faire, and when euer he proues any thing contrary to vs, w th Gods grace he shall get an answer. And note here that Maister Iohn can say nothing to our argument, for to it he giues no answer. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. In your answere to this section, first ye thinke it impossi∣ble because of the forme of it. Next, ye say it is but an offer & I proue nothing. Thirdly that I answere nothing to your argumēt, nor can answere nothing. Now, of al these in order. And first to the forme: ye thinke it impossible to proue be∣cause
it is a negatiue proposition. Is not this a negatiue pro∣position that the Popes of Rome are not the Antichrist; you can not deny it. Againe, I ask is this sentence to be found in the vvhole Scripture; I trovv ye vvil neuer be able to finde it. Then I say if it bee true that ye say, Bellarm lib. 3 de Rom. Pontif. Sanders 40 de∣monstrations. then ye your selfe in your booke and this your ansvver, and Bellarmine and Sande∣rus and all the rest of you that takes in hand to proue the Pope not to be the Antichrist, takes in hand in your iudge∣ment an impossibilitie (and so doe ye indeede, not because it is a negatiue proposition, but because he is the Antichrist in verie trueth.) What vvould the Pope your head thinke of you, if he heard you say so? Certainly I think he would not inroll your name among the defenders of his catholick faith vvhereof this is the foundation. Secondly, is there not many formall syllogismes that hes the proposition or assumption negatiues, and wil you say they cannot be proued if the mat∣ter be true, because they are negatiues? What is this but to raise the foundation of Logick and Reason? Logick is not Rhethorick, & Physick is not Logick: both these are nega∣tiue propositions, & I trow neither of thē are so found in the Scripture, and vvill you say that it is impossible to proue them, because they are negatiues? What you meane by this I vnderstand not, Tim. 2.14. vnlesse you doe  striue about words, proue & improue, forbidden by the Apostle. Third∣ly, ye except these negatiue propositiōs, whilk are set downe in the word of God, whilk hes authoritie as ye say, I assume. But your religion in substance is condemned in the word of God: Therefore by your owne confession it may be proued, suppose it be negatiue: For Nazianzene saies, that these sentences that are collected out of the Scripture by a necessarie consequence are of the same trueth and authoritie with these sentences that are expresly set downe in the Scripture. Lib. 5. de Theolo¦gia. And wheras ye say Papistrie by me is not so olde as the Scripture, I grant that. What then? There∣fore it is not condemned in the Scripture; I deny that: for Antichrist and his kingdome are not so olde as the Scrip∣ture, and yet the Scripture condemned it. For not only con∣demns it present heresies, but also the heresies that was to
come. And seing Papistrie is that Antichristian religion, as shall be made manifest by Gods grace: therefore it hes the expresse condemnation of it in the word of God. The forme therefore of it, no wayes will make it impossible to be pro∣ued. As for the next thing, that I proue nothing, but offers verie faire. I answer it was not my purpose then, but I hope ye shall haue a proofe now of that whilk I offered then. As to the third then, that I can say nothing to your argument whilk ye would haue the reader to marke: vvhen I red this, I marked this, that ye would earnestly haue the reader per∣swaded of the inuinciblenes of your argument and my ina∣bilitie to answere. But what bring ye with you to perswade him of the same? Your reason is, because I haue not answered it. Will this follow, I haue not (suppose it were so as yee say) therefore I cannot? It will not follow (M. Gilbert) I haue not answered, I cannot answere to it. But as ye haue a new Theologie, so haue ye a newe Logick. But said I nothing to your argument? What is not ansvvered sufficiently in the same? Your argument vvas the antiquitie of your religion and continuance of it from Christ by a lineall succession neuer interrupted, &c. And the noueltie of ours. My answer vvas: yours vvas not institute by Christ nor his Apostles in his Scripture as ours vvas, and yours vvas gainesaide in the cheif poynts by the testimonies of the fathers the first 600. yeares, and the principall points of our religion confirmed by sundrie of their testimonies. Thirdly yours vvas that An∣tichristian apostacie that the Scripture fore-tolde should come, and in the height of your tyrannie and Idolatrie vvas gainsayed by many before Martine Luther, and ours vvas professed by sundry before him vvhose names I set dovvne, all vvhilk I offered to proue, and novve shall doe by Gods grace. Novv you say this is no ansvvere. But is that no an∣svver that cuts the verie throte of your religion if it be vere∣fied, & hoghs your argument, that it doe neuer stand vp to vnder-propp your religion againe? For that religion vvhilk is not instituted by Christ in the Scripture, vvhose maine foundations is gainsaide by the testimonies of sundrie of the
fathers of the first 600. yeare whilk is Antichristian, and whilk was gainesaid by the Saints that they persecuted and slew, hes not the continuance from Christ by a lineal succes∣sion neuer interrupted nor spoken against by a true Kirk till Martine Luthers dayes. This I am sure ye will not deny. But your religion is sik as I offered then to proue, and now hes in some poynts, and shall in other some poynts by Gods grace. The whilk if it be verifyed, then I hope ye will not de∣ny, but that your religion hes neither antiquitie, continu∣ance nor succession from Christ til Martine Luthers dayes. And that religion cannot be newly forged and inuented since Martine Luthers dayes, whilk hes the warrant and institution of it in the Scripture &c. This you cannot deny. But our religion is sik, as then I offered to proue and now hes done in some poynts and shall doe in other some poynts by Gods grace. Therefore our religion cannot be newly forged and inuented &c. but is the only true religion. So that this an∣swere if it be proued, doth sufficiently vindicat our religion frō noueltie. Now if this be no answere to your argumēt, thē I say no more, but ye will answer it the sooner. And because ye formed your owne argument your selfe in your answer to me, & I haue answered to it els; therefore I wil now insist no further vpon it. And as for your lineall succession of Bi∣shops it will come in question afterward, therefore I omit it now. Maister Gilbert Browne. As for the written word, it is true that it is a most faithfull witnes (& it be not corrupted) to Christ & his Kirk, as our Sauiour testifies him selfe: Iohn. 5, , of the whilk opinion there is sundry Protestants, chiefely young Merchiston in his discourse vpon the Reuelation in the 21 Proposition, and other places. 2, Cor, 3, 6. Iohn. 6, 63, Iohn, 14.15, 16. But that it ought to bee iudge to decide all controuersies in religion, Maister Iohn hes no Scripture for the same. It is the holy Ghost that must be iudge, and the holy writ must beare witnes thereto. For this cause the holy Ghost was giuen to the Kirk by the Father and the Son, that he might teach it all trueth This holy Ghost giues iudgment by the Pastors of the true Kirk, as he did by the Apostles and Priestes at the councell of Ierusalem. Act, 15, 1, 2, It hes pleased the holy Ghost and vs (sayes the Apostles) and so he hes euer done since the beginning of the Kirk, when it was trobled with heresies and false doctrine As the councell of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus & Chalcedon.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. You first here decline the Scripture as iudge, to decide all controuersies in religion. And you are not the first that hes done this, but all your Romane clergie with you. And sup∣pose there were not another thing to make the consciences of men suspect your religion that it is not found in the booke of God: yet this is a great presumption that ye giue out of it your selues. For what may all men think of the same, but that if ye were perswaded in your conscience to iustify your religion to be from Iesus Christ in his writtē word, ye would neuer decline the iudicatorie of it, and the declining of the same is an euident demonstration that yee are priuie with your selues in your own consciences that it is not from God in his writtē word. But wherfore say I that ye are priuy with your selues of this? Yee haue made it knowen to the world by your confessiō in your own bookes, that many of the cheife poynts of your religion controuerted betwene you and vs, whilk yee maintaine, hes not their originall be∣ginning, nor author in the Scriptures, but in your vnwritten traditions. So Petrus a Soto a papist of great name confessed. He cals all these obseruations Apostolicke traditions whose beginning principium, In his booke a∣gainst Brentius origo, & auhor cannot be found in the whole scripturs and then he reckons out a number of the chief and principal heads of their religion, saying, of the whilk sort are the oblation of the sacrifice of the altar, the inuocation or praiers to Saints, the prai∣er for the dead, the supremacie of the Pope of Rome, the consecration of the water in baptisme, the whole sacraments of orders, matrimonie, pennance, confirmation and extreame vnction, the merits of works, the necessitie of satisfaction, In his Catechism cap. 5. de precep∣tis Ecclesiae. the nombering ouer of the sinnes to the Preist. Canisius a great Papist sayes, that the worshiping of images, the set fastes and the sortie dayes of lent, and all that are done in the sacri∣fice of the masse, praiers and oblations for the dead, & alia and others, he saies all these are traditions because they are sik that they cannot be defended by the scripture. Lib 4. Panopliae cap. 100. & in si∣ne illis libri tab. 6. And Lindanus another great defen∣der of your Romishe faith and religion, he reckons out for Traditions, that there are seuen Sacraments, the consecration of the water and oyle in Baptisme, the reall presence of Christs fleshe and blood in the Sacrament, Communion vnder one kinde, that the Lordes
Supper is a Sacrifice, that it should be kept and adored, priuate Masses, Confession of sinnes to the Priest, Satisfactions, Pardons, Purgatorie, Part 3. & that Peter was in Rome. Martinus Peresius another Papist nom∣bers the single lyfe of Priestes amongst the vn-written Traditi∣ons. The trueth is strong, that hes so farre glanced in the cō∣sciences of some of you, and hes opened your mouthes to confesse and to set it downe in write to the worlde, that the principall heades of your Religion, yea the very foundation and ground of it, (as the supremacie of your Popes, and the Sacrifice of your Masse and the rest) are vn-written Tradi∣tions whilk hes not the beginning, nor originall, nor autho∣ritie in the Lords written word: and whilk cannot be defen∣ded by the same, as some of your selues haue confessed. So it is no wonder, Maister Gilbert, suppose ye refuse to haue the controuersies of Religion decyded by the same. Let the rea∣der nowe iudge what he may thinke of your Religion, that hes not God in his Scripture in the principal & maine foun∣dations thereof, as some of your selues haue confessed, to be the authour and beginner thereof. So what needes anie fur∣ther proofe against their Religion? out of their own mouthes the falset of their Religion is convicted. This therefore was the true cause (Maister Gilbert) wherefore ye refused to haue the controuersies of religion decyded by the Scripture. And for this cause also hes your Kirk heaped vp so manie fals ca∣lumnies, accusations, and blasphemies against the same, cal∣ling it obscure, Hosius lib. 3 de authorit. Ec. con∣tra. script. Andra¦dius lib. 2 orthod, explic. Lindanus in Panoplia sua lib. 3. cap. 6 darksome, doubtsome, Bellarm de verbo Dei lib. 4. cap. 4. not necessarie but onlie profitable, imperfect, Iuel pag. 521. Defens. Apolog. & Lodo¦uicus a canon a dead inke, a dumb and dead thing, Pigius contro. 3 de Ecclesia. dum Iudges, Eckius. a black Gospell, an inkine diuinitie, Pigius hierarch lib. 3 cap. 3. a nose of waxe that may be drawne euerie way, Foxe pag. 804. containing in them diuers erroneous & damnable opinions, Hermannus a Papist. whilk were of no greater authoritie nor the fa∣bles of Aesope without the approbation of the Kirk, and by the Pope Leo the 10. ex Iucl. defen Apolog. pag. 273 Pope himself a fable of Christ. And for this cause also, did they hyde it vp in an vn-knowne language, forbidding the tran∣slating of it in the vulgar language, and the reading of it by the people in their mother tongue, least they should haue perceiued the falset of their religion, & so it should haue lost the credite at their hands. So ye haue bene wise in your ge∣neration, Sed Veritas tandem vincet: but the trueth shall ouer∣come
at the last. You graunt it to be a witnesse, but yet you deale subtillie, while as ye put in an exception, if it be not cor∣rupted. Canus lib. 2. cap. 13, de locis The∣ologicis Lindanus lib. 1. c. 11, de optimo genere interpret Andradius def. fid. Trid, l. 4 Pagnin in epist, ad Clement, sep Arias Montanus tom, 8. Biblii Re∣gi in praesatie. For if you be of that minde with your Kirk, and espe∣ciallie with Canus, Lindanus, & the Colledge of Rhemes, you thinke the Hebrew and Greeke fountaines of the Scripture to be corrupted. And therefore it is decreed in the Councell of Trent, the olde Latine vulgare translation to be authen∣ticke, whilk notwithstanding by the confession of some Pa∣pists, as Andradius, Pagnine, and Arias Montanus, it hes missed the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost sometimes. So you not onelie put the Lord in his Scripture out of the benche, that he should not iudge & giue out the sentence of doome against your doctrine, but by this exception also ye remoue him from the barre, that his testimonie in the Hebrewe and Greeke fountaines against you, should haue no credite. Let all men iudge now what preiudice ye giue out against your owne religion, when as yee will not admit the Lord in his word in the Hebrew and Greeke fountaines neither iudge nor witnes. But you say, I haue no Scripture for mee, that the Scripture ought to be iudge. What will ye say then to Iesus Christ in the 12 chap. 48. verse of the Gospell of Saint Iohn, speaking to sik as ye are, He that refuseth me and receiueth not my words, hath one that iudgeth him, the word that I haue spoken it shall iudge him in the last day. Vnlesse now ye be a man of per∣dition, ye must confesse that the word of Iesus Christ, (wher∣of so much is written as may make a man beleeue, and by beleeuing to get eternall life) is iudge and iudges presentlie, and shall iudge also in the latter day.) Therefore the Apostle sayes, that God shall iudge the secrets of mens hearts by Iesus Christ, accor∣ding to his Gospell. So the Gospell shal be the rule of that great iudgement in that great day and so is it the rule of his wor∣ship while we are in the way to that iudgement. Suppose you nowe decline the iudicatorie of the same heere, because in your conscience ye knowe, and your owne mouthes haue confessed it, that ye are not able to iustify your religion ther∣by, yet nil ye will ye, ye shalbe iudged by the same worde in the last day. But whome will ye haue to be your iudge? Ye
say, the holie Ghost. Bellarmine sayes, that we and your Kirk aggrees in that, L b. 3. de verbi interpret, cap, 3. that the holy Ghost should be supreame iudge of all controuersies. But is not the Scripture the holy Ghosts owne infallible voice and breath? So then when the Scripture is iudge, the holy Ghost is iudge, because the Scripture is the immediate voice of the holy Ghost, & the holy Ghost hes gi∣uen out, and giues out his iudgement in all controuersies of religion in and by the Scripture: 2, Timot, 3 16 Roman, 1. and the holy Ghost illu∣minates the eyes of these that are fore-ordained to life, to se the trueth in the Scripture: and workes in their heart faith to apprehend it and beleeue it: and formes a spiritual iudg∣ment in their hearts to try and iudge, 1. Corinth. .1 for the spirituall man iud∣geth all things. And all this he workes by the meanes of the Scripture: for it is the onlie meane and instrument whereby the holy Ghost workes faith in our hearts. Thus I reason therefore: He onlie can be iudge in controuersies of religiō whose authority is sik that none may appeale from the same whose iudgement is infallible true, who will not be partiall nor fauour parties: and who is able to conuict and perswade the conscience of the trueth, and make the partie to rest in the same: But only the holy Ghost in and by the Scripture hes these properties, and no other: Therefore the holy Ghost in and by the Scripture is only iudge. And whereas you say, that the holy write must beare witnes to it, Petrus a Soto in his book against Brentius, Canisi∣us, Lindanus, and Mat, Peresius quoted before what will you say then to all the chiefe points of your reli∣gion almoste, whilk the learned and great defenders of your faith hes confessed, are vnwritten traditions whilk hes not their be∣ginning nor authoritie from the Scripture, nor cannot be defended by the same? Vpon the whilk I reason thus: That doctrine is not the holie Ghosts, whilk the Scripture beares not witnesse to: this ye say your selfe, for ye say, the Scripture must beare witnesse to it: But al the chief points almost of your religion, as the su∣premacie of the Pope, the sacrifice of the Masse, inuocation of Saints, the fiue bastard Sacraments, the worshipping of Images, Transubstantia∣tion, Communion vnder one kinde, Satisfactions, Pardons, Purgatorie, merites of workes &c. hes not their authoritie from the Scrip∣ture, nor cannot be defended by the same, as your owne Ca∣tholickes
(as ye call them) testifies: Therefore your doctrine and religion is not the holie Ghosts, and that by your owne testimonie. Nowe truelie (Maister Gilbert) I feare ye tyne your style, if you defend your religion no better nor this. And whereas you say, that the holy Ghost giues out his iudgement by the Pastors of the true Kirk: I graunt indeed that the Pastors giues out publike sentence in controuersies of Religion, be∣cause they are the Lords witnesses, messingers, and mouthes to testifie, proclaime, interprete and discerne his truth from falset. But first, the rule of this their iudgement shoulde be the word of God, vnto the whilk they are bound in all their testimonies and iudgements, from the whilk if their iudge∣ments swerue but an inche-broad, they are not the iudge∣ments of the holie Ghost: so that all their decreetes and de∣terminations in the worship of God, and man his saluation, should onlie be receiued accordinglie as they aggree or dis∣sent from the same. For the Apostle Galat. 1.8. pronounces him ac∣cursed suppose he were an Angell that woulde preache another Gospell then that quhilk he preached, and he preached Act. 26, 22. nothing but out of the Scripture. But your Romaine Kirk by the contrarie sayes, That their decreets and sentences should be taken without all tryall & examination because whatsoeuer they decree (say they) in manners or doctrine, Bellarm. de Ec∣clesia lib. 1. de concil. cap. 18. & lib. 3. cap. 14 whether they be comprehended in the Scripture, or not, they cannot erre. Next if it be asked of you whome ye iudge to be the Pas∣tors of the true Kirk, you will answere (as ye do) that your Kirk is the only true Kirk, and your Bishops and Popes the only true Pastors, so that they only must be the iudge to end all controuersies. Bellarm. lib. 3. de verbi interpret. cap. 5. & 9 & lib. 4. de Romano Pontif. cap. 2. And Bellarmine is plaine in this: for he saies the Pope is chiefe iudge in all controuersies in religion, either he him self alone or with his councell, and that in his iudgement and sentence all men should rest, & he should be obediently heard of all the faithfull in all matters of controuersie, whether he can erre or not: and their ca∣non law hes decreted that no man should rebuke him, suppose he should carrie with him innumerable soules to hell. Dist. 40. cap. Si Papa Bellarm. lib. 1 de concil. cap, 18. and Rhemist an∣notat. in 1. Thes. 2. ver, 12. & Ioan¦nes Maria vert¦tus editus anno 1561. & Hosias lib, de expres. ver. Dei pag. 97 And they teach that their decreets should not be examined of any whether they be aggreable to the Scripture or not: but that they
should be receiued, as the expresse word of God and the Gospell. But first iudge thou (reader) in what suspition they haue their religion in their owne harts, they haue declined the holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture, and that not only as iudge, but in the authentick Greeke and Hebrew as wit∣nes. So their religion cannot stand, if the Lord be either as iudge in his Scripture to giue out sentence of it, or as witnes in the authentick copies to hold his hand at the bar and de∣pone against it. Now whome would they haue as Iudges? Their owne Pastors and the Pope, and all their determina∣tions to be receiued without a triall, as the Gospell and ex∣presse word of God as though their religion could not bee iustified, vnles the Fathers and forgers thereof, the Popes & Bishops of Rome were set on the bench to be Iudges there∣of. Now what a vnrighteous thing is this, both to be partie and Iudge? For the chief controuersie is of themselues, whe∣ther he be the Antichrist or not? and his Ministers and Kirk Antichristian or not? But what shew of reason can you haue for this? The prince of life, the sonne of God, who is the righ∣teous Iudge of the whole world, in that great controuersie wherein it is called in question whether he was the Messias or not, desired not to be the Iudge, Ioh, 5, 3 for he saide if I testifie of my self (much more if I iudge of my self) my testimonie is not sufficient but referred this controuersie to the Scripture saying search the Scriptures &c. And yet you that are but fleshe and blood, Ioh. 5.39 dust and ashes, yea monsters and incarnate diuels, as your owne writers and Councels hes testified of some of your Popes (Concilium Constantiense) who may erre and hes bene heretickes, as some of your Popes hes beene, and that by your own testimonie, you wil not only beare witnes of your selues, but also be Iudges in the controuersies of your selues, reiecting the iudgment of the holy Ghost in the Scripture. Al men, saies the Apostle, are lyars, how then shal I certainly know but they may lie: how shall my conscience rest in their iudgment: shall I haue no better warrant for my saluation nor the testimonies of your Bishops and Popes who are but men and so may lie, who are party and so neuer will
condemne them selues, and who of all men hes moste foul∣lie erred? What is this but to make the voyce of your Bishops and Popes of greater authoritie nor the voice of God in his Scripture? for seeing it is the sense of the Scripture that is called in controuersie, and the sense of the Scripture, is the Scripture it self: and your doctrine is that I must em∣brace sik and sik interpretations of the Scripture that are called in controuersie, and my conscience must rest in the same, without further tryall, because he hes so decreed it: What is this, but not onelie to make him equal to the lord? (For God onlie hes that priuiledge to be beleeued, because he so speakes; mans testimonie so farre onelie is to be credi∣ted as it may be warrāted by the scripture:) but also to pre∣ferre his authoritie to the voice of God in his scripture, see∣ing he is iudge of the same, and not that onelie, but to hang my saluation vpon his voice and testimonie? And seeing ye will haue them iudges, what is the cause that their Canons, lawes, and determinations, are not as authentick as the Scripture, and insert in the Canon of the scripture? But let vs see your reasons. First you say, That the holy Ghost was giuen to the Kirk by the Father and the Son, that he might teach it all truth. I grant this, that the holy Ghost is giuen to euery one of the elect, aswel Pastor as people, to lead thē in all truth in so far as may bring them to saluation. And yet ye will not make euery one of thē iudges: next eueryone of the elect may erre notwithstāding of this promise, suppose not totally & finally and therefore cannot be Iudges of religion. Secondly, you alledge the example of the councell of the Apostles and El∣ders. It is true in that controuersie that arose among the Christians concerning the obseruing of the ceremonies of the law of Moses that the Apostles and Elders with the whole Kirk after reasoning defined the same, & writes the same to be observed by the Disciples euerie-where: but first they were Apostles and was infallibly gouerned by Gods Spirit that they could not erre in teaching and writing: but your Pastors are not Apostles and may erre. Next they assemble with the Elders and the whole Kirk, and all with one accord
defines. Act. 15, 12, 22 23 Bellarm. lib. 1 de concil. cap, 1. You in your councell excludes all except your Bi∣shops to be ordinarie Iudges to giue out iudgement and your Popes, neither Elder nor bretheren hauing power of voting with you. Thirdly, Act. 15. ver. 15. they define according to the Scripture (saying (a) as it is written &c.) This controuersie to make vs to vnderstand and wee will not bee more nor blinde, that this rule should be followed in all councels to determine in controuersies according to the Scripture. Vp∣on the whilk I reason if the Apostles who had that high mea∣sure of Gods spirit whilk neuer man had since, so that in writting and teaching they could not erre, if they, I say, did determine the controuersies of religion according to the Scripture, how much more then are all Pastors since who may erre both seuerally and ioyntly together in a councell, bound to follow the same rule? And whereas ye call their El∣ders Preists you stile them, not as the holy Ghost hes stiled them there, so their they are called  that is, Elders, and not , that is, sacrificing Preists as ye sup∣pone. Your third reason is, the practise and custome of the kirk in deciding the controuersies of religion in councels: we grant that this is a verie cōmodious meane to search & find out the trueth by the Scripture: for first the more they are that seekes the trueth, it is the more easily found. Next the consent of many in determining a trueth wil be of grea∣ter authority to repres heretickes nor if it were aggreed vp∣on only by a few. But yet they should determine nothing but that whilk is warranted by the Scripture, and their de∣terminations only in so far forth to be receiued as is aggre∣able to the same. And this we grant hes bene done in the councel of the primitiue Kirk. And therefore the Emperor Constantine speaking to the fathers of the councel of Nice saies sunt libri Prophetici et Apostolici qui apertè quid credendum sit, do∣cent &c. That is, there are the bookes of the Prophets and Apostles, who teacheth plainly what we should beleeue. All contention therfore laid aside, let vs take the soueraigne decision of these thinges whilk are called in controuersie, out of the scriptures whilk are inspired by God. And this we
grant, and this we craue. But that councels ought to deter∣mine any thing of their owne authoritie in matters of religi∣on whilk binds the conscience, without the warrant of the word, that we deny. Maister Gilbert Browne. The iudgement of God in cau∣sing sik a dimnes and darknesse to fall vpon your eies, it is to be wondered at. It is an wonder that Maister Iohn will refer any thing to the written word, seing that he and his hes no warrant that the same is the word of God but by the authoritie of the Romane or Papists Kirk. For vnderstand there was no Kirk worthie of credite, immediatly before Luther, but that Kirk. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. You wonder that I refer any thing to the Scripture. But what a wonder is this that ye are so far blinded of God that you think that a wonder in me whilk Abraham hes done, Luc. 16 29. Ioh, 5 39. Act. 26.22. Rom. 12. & 6.26 2. Tim. 3 16 2 Pet, 1, 19 Apoc 1.3. cap. vlt whilk the Prophets hes done, whilk our Sauiour and his A∣postles hes done, and whilk the fathers hes done (for all these haue referred the infallible testimonie and decision of the wil of God concerning his worship vnto the Scriptures,) yea whilk your selfe also hes done, for ye make it a witnes. But what hes moued you to think this a wonder in me, whilk so many and your selfe also hes done before me? Because (say ye) that he and his (that is, our Kirk) hes no warrant that it is the word of God, but by the authoritie of the Romane or Papist Rirk. I grant in deed (Maister Gilbert) that you and your Kirk are plunged in this blindnes and miserie that all the warrant that you haue not only of the Scriptures them selues, that they are inspired of God, but also of al your doc∣trine and religion is the testimony of your Romane Kirk, that is, Bellarm de sacr. lib 2. cap. 25 Lib. 1. contra Whitak. de au∣thoritate scrip. cap 10 of your Pope and Cleargie (for so ye interprete the Kirk) so Bellarmine grants that all the certaintie of all doctrine de∣pends vpon the authoritie of the present Kirk (meaning the Pope and his Cleargie) and Stapleton saies that it is no absurd thing not to beleeue God but for the testimony of the Kirk. Pigius saies, that it is not needefull to beleeue all that Matthew and Iohn write in their Gospels to be true, because that they might faile in memory & lie as al men may doe. Ecclesiast. hierarch. lib. 1. cap. 2. And Hermanus saies that the Scripture would be of no more authoritie then the fables of Aesope were not the testimony of the Kirk. And so blind and mise∣rable
must you be that hangs the certaintie of all religion, and of man his saluation vpon so small a threed as the testi∣mony of your Popes and Cleargie. What peace in consci∣ence can any man haue that professes your religion, whilk teaches that the certaintie and warrant of all the doctrine in the Scripture, and the Scripture it selfe, that they are of God, but the testimony of your Popes and Clergie? What is it to expone the certaintie of the Lords scripture and of al religion comprehended in the same, to the mocking & deri∣sion of the wicked, if this be not? Yea, is not this to prefer the voice and authoritie of your Popes and Cleargie to the voyce of God him selfe? For what is the testimony of your Kirk, but the testimony of men? And is not the scripture the testimony and voyce of God him selfe? Do ye not therefore lift vp the authoritie of your Kirk, that is, your Popes and Clergie aboue the authoritie of God in his word whilk as you say, that there is no other warrant of the Diuinitie of the scripture, but only the testimony of your Kirk? But God be thanked in Christ Iesus who hes deliuered vs from this blindnes: for we haue other warrants (Maister Gilbert) whereupon the certaintie of our saluation and the Diuinitie of the scripture depends, nor by the testimony of the true Kirk much les the testimonye of your Kirk whilk is Anti∣christian, and giuen ouer of God to beleeue lies, and so worthie of no credite. But how proue ye it? Ye say there was no other Kirk immediately before Luther, but that of yours; vvhilk was worthie of credite. Wherevnto I answer: first that is false: for there was a true Kirk immediately before him whilk ye persecuted, as I haue proued els where. Next I say, your argumnt will not follow: there was no other Kirk im∣mediately before him &c. Ergo, we haue no other warrant that the scripture is the written word of God. For we haue also the testimony of the Kirk of the Iewes concerning the olde Testament, and of the primitiue Kirk in all ages, con∣cerning both the olde and new Testament, whilk are not only other warrants nor the testimonies of your Romane Kirk, but also worthie of more credite. Next, I say we haue
many more principall and more effectuall warrants that the scripture is of God, nor the testimony of the Kirk, either past or present: as first the testimony of the holy Ghost, cry∣ing, testifying, and sealing vp in all consciences of the god∣ly, not only the trueth of the doctrine contained in them, but also the diuinitie of the scripture, Lib. 1. de authorit scrip, cap. 1.6.7 1, Ioh, 5, 6 whilk Stapleton denies not, and therefore the scripture sayes that the spirit (that is the holy Ghost) bears witnes that the spirit (that it is the doctrine) is truth. Secondly, the testimony of the Scripture it self warrand∣ing and testifying of it selfe, the whole Scripture is inspired of God. The olde Testament warranted both by the testimony of the selfe, 2. Timoth. 3 the histories and prophesies testifying of the books of Moses, and also by the testimonye of the new Testament both in 1 Pet. 1, 19. Luc, 24, 44. Luc, 16, 19. Ioh 5.39 generall, and also in Matth, 5, Math 19.7. & cap, 22 Ioh, 3, 14 particular as the books of Moses and the historical bookes, as the history of the Queene of Matth. 12 Saba, and of the widdow Luc, 4 of Sarepta, and of the Act, 2 Act, 13 Psal∣mes, in sundrie places, and of sundrie of the bookes of the old Heb. 11 Testament, and Matth. 1 Ruth also. And out of Esay, Ezechiell, and Ieremie, manie testimonies are cited, and out of the bookes of the smal Act, 7, 42 prophets. And sik like the new Testa∣ment hes the confirmation of it out of the olde Testament: for whatsumeuer thing were prophecied in the olde Testa∣ment concerning the Messias are fulfilled in the new Testa∣ment, so if the old Testament hes authoritie, the new Testa∣mēt also hes authoritie. And sik like 2. Pet, 3, 16 Peter by his testimonie confirmes the Epistles of Paull to be the written worde of God. Thirdly, the maiestie of the doctrine whilk shines in it, the simplicitie, puritie, and heauenlynes of the speache therein, whilk is not to be found in any other writings what∣soeuer, the ancientnes and antiquitie of them, as the bookes of Moses far ancienter then any other writing. 1. Kings 13 Psal 44 The accōplish∣ment of the prophecies and oracles in them as they were fore-told, their miracles and wonders whereof they testifie. The testimonies of the holie Martyres that shed their blood in the defense of the trueth of them, thei wonderfull preseruation notwithstanding of the rage and crueltie of sundrie tyrants who sought them out most diligētly to haue
destroyed them, all testifying of the diuinitie of the holie Scripture. So then to conclude this, seing we haue the testi∣monie of Gods Spirit, sealing vp the trueth of them in our hearts, aad the testimony of the scripture it self, testifying of the self so many manner of waies: and sundrie other argu∣ments out of the scripture it selfe: and the testimony of the Kirk in all ages, all warranting to vs the diuinitie of the ho∣ly scripture, I cannot but wonder at the vnsearchable iudg∣ment of God, in blinding you so far, that ye haue set it down in writ, that we haue no other warrand of the holy scripture but the authoritie of your Kirk. Maister Gilbert Browne. And albeit heir it were not necessarie to me to proue any heades of our Religion by the worde of God, because Maister Iohn hes promised to im∣proue the same by the word, whilk he is no way able to performe: yet to sa∣tisfie the Christian Reader, and that he may know that the word of God is onlie on our side and with vs, so that their exposition and notes be ta∣ken from the same: I will set downe (godwilling) some heads for examples cause, that that same doctrine whilk we teach and practise, is the same that our Sauiour and his Apostles preached before, and is written in the same that he calles the touchstone. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Howsoeuer ye say this (Maister Gilbert) that that doctrine whilk ye teach and practise in your Kirk, is that same whilk our Sauiour and his Apostles teached before, and is written in the Scripture, yet in very trueth there is nothing lesse in your conscience. For if you and your Romaine Kirk were so perswaded, wherefore then should ye haue declined to haue it tried by the same? and wherefore hes some of your owne chiefe pillers and defenders of your Romane religion who knowes the certaintie of the same, wherefore (I say) would they haue proclaimed it by write vnto the worlde, that the most part and the principall heads of their religion, are vn∣written traditions, whilk hes neither their originall, begin∣ning, nor authoritie in the Scripture, nor cannot be defen∣ded by the same? And wherefore would your Romane kirk
haue heapt vp so many fals accusations and blasphemies a∣gainst the same? and wherefore last of all would ye haue set vp your Pope & his bishops to be supreame and soueraigne iudge ouer the same, as you doe? But this you doe, because you knowe that if ye reiected the Scripture as far in worde, as ye do in deed, the consciences of the poore people would at the last withdrawe themselues from vnder your tyranny, and would goe out of your fellowship for the safety of their soules: so vnder the cloak and pretence of the Scripture, ye keepe them in your communion. And surelie, were not for this cause onlie, you would regarde no more of the testimo∣nie of the Scripture, nor of the testimony of the fables of Aesope. For, Bellarm. de sacr. lib. 2 cap. 25 Stapl. lib 1. cont. Whitaker. ca, 10 the chief authoritie and all the suretie and certainty of all Religi∣on with you, as Bellarmine and Stapleton confesses, is (not the testimony of the Scripture) but the authoritie of your owne Kirk. So I assure thee, reader, it is but for a shew that they bring forth the Scripture to proue the heads of their religion. Let the mat∣ter therfore be tried betwixt vs by these examples whilk ye set downe heere. Maister Gilbert Browne. Epist. 28. ad Hier. 1. We say with Saint Augustine that the Sacrament of Baptisme is so necessarie to infants, that they cannot come to heauen without the same, whilk is contrary to their negatiue faith, where they call it the Popes cruell iudgement against infants departing without the Sacrament. First, I say, that Christ taught the same doctrine in these words, Except a man be borne again of water and of the Spirit, Ioh. 3.5 he cānot enter in the kingdome of God. We say this is spoken properlie of the Sacrament of Baptisme, because there is no regeneration of water and the Spirite of God, but in Baptisme. The same is the doctrine of the Apostles also. When they exspected the patience of God (sayes S. Peter) in the dayes of Noe when the Arke was building, 1, Pet, 3, 20, 21 in the whilk, few that is eight soules, were saued by water, whereunto Baptisme being of the like forme now saues you also. Galath. 3 27 Act. 22.17. Act. 2 38 And Saint Paule sayes. For as many of you as are baptized in Christ, haue put on Christ. And Ananias saide to Saint Paule And now what tariest thou, rise vp and be baptized, and washe away thy sins, inuocating his name. Tt. 3.5. Rom. 6 3 4, 1, Cor 6, 11 Mat, 16, 16 And Saint Paule himself in another place, Christ hes sa∣ued vs by the lawer of regeneration and renouation of the holy Ghost. I thinke there is no Christian reader that sees these places, but he must say that Bap∣tisme is most necessarie to infants, except he will beleue rather the exposi∣tion of the Ministers, nor of the word of God.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. First, ye begin at the necessitie of the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme, whereof ye affirme that it is so necessarie, that infants cannot come to heauen without the same. As for Baptisme we graunt that it is a most effectuall seale and pledge of our ingrafting in Christ Iesus, and of the remission of our sinnes through his blood, & regeneratiō through his Spirit, so that either the neglect or the contempt of it, (because it is the ne¦glect and contempt of the couenaunt it selfe, and of Christ Iesus the foundation of the couenant) is damnable. But that it is so absolutelie necessarie to infants, that without it they cannot come to heauen: to wit, these whome he hes prede∣stinate, it being neither neglected nor cōtemned, but death preuēting the receiuing of it: that we allutterly deny as im∣pious, vngodlie, and cruell. For first I say there is none that is in the couenant of grace, & who hes God to be their god, and are holy, that can perish. This you cannot deny. But the children of the faithfull who are of his secret election are sik before they be baptised. And this I proue. The Lord promi∣sed to Abraham I will be thy God and the God of thy seede. Gen, 17, 17 Act, 2, 39. 2, Cor, 7, 14 And this Peter also testifies, The promise (saieth he) is made to you & to your children. And the Apostle sayes, that the children of the faithfull are holie: Therefore the children of the faithfull who are of Gods secret election, suppose they die without Bap∣tisme, doth not perishe. Secondlie, if Baptisme were abso∣lutelie necessarie to saluation, then the grace of God were bound to the Sacrament. This cannot be denied. But your Maister of sentences sayes, that the grace of God is not bound to the Sacraments, and it is impious so to thinke, that Gods free grace and saluation is bound to the instrument. Thirdlie, if Circumcision was not absolutely necessarie to sal¦uation in the old Testament, then Baptisme is not absolute necessarie now, because Circumcision was as straitly enioy∣ned to them, as Baptisme is enioyned to vs, and Baptisme is succeded in the roome of the same, but Circumcision is not absolute necessarie. For Lombardus is rebuked by the Do∣ctors of Paris because he so thought. And Dauid doubtes not
to say of his childe who died the seuenth day, and so before he was circumcised, I shall goe to him, &c. and so he pronoun∣ced that he was saued: and al the time that they were in the wildernesse, almost 40. yeares, Circumcision was neglected, whilk plainlie showes, that it was not so absolute necessarie, that saluation could not be obtained without it. Therefore Baptisme is not so absolute necessarie to saluation, as ye sup∣pose: for the grace of God is of no lesse force in the new Te∣stament, nor it was in the olde. Fourtlie, we read of sundry that receiued the holy Ghost before they were baptized, & seing the holy Ghost where he is, regenerates to eternal life: Therefore life eternall is not bound absolutelie to Baptisme Fiftlie, what a crosse and disturbance is this, that your do∣ctrine brings to the consciences of all these parents, whose children hes bene preuented by death, before they could be offered to be baptized? if they beleeue your doctrine, how often will this come in their minde, that their children are damned. And seeing the infants themselues are not in the cause that they are not baptized, but their death preuenting by Gods prouidence, or the Parents neglecting or contem∣ning the same, or persecution, or one impediment or other hindering, wherefore are ye so cruell to iudge them to bee damned for that, whereof themselues are causlesse? And last of all, if ye be acquainted in the histories of the Kirk of God in the first age, ye will finde many that delayed to be bapti∣zed, vntill their latter age, whilk they would neuer haue done and they had thought it simpliciter necessarie to salua∣tion as ye doe. And Ambrosius doubts not to say that Valen∣tinian wanted not the grace of Baptisme, suppose he wanted Baptisme it self: the whilk he would neuer haue saide, if he had thoght it absolutely necessarie to saluation. And Bernard sayes, I can not altogether despaire of the saluation of them who wants Baptisme not through contempt, but onlie through impossibilitie to get it. And in that same place hee sayes. So also if our Sauiour Christ for this cause. When he had saide, hee that beleeueth and is Baptised shall bee saued: did of purpose in repeating the sentence, omit to say: Hee that is not Baptised, but he that beleeueth not shall bee damned, for hee saw
that faith only might suffice to saluation, and without faith nothing can suffice. Iustly then might your Popes sentence and your own be said to be cruell, in our confession. But how proue ye this doctrine of yours to be Christs? Ye cite the three chap∣ters of Iohn where our Sauiour saies, Except a man be borne a∣gaine &c. vvhilk say ye is properly meaned of the sacrament of baptisme. Vpon the whilk ye infer the necessitie of the same. Whereunto I answere that interpretation of yours is false: for our Sauiour speakes not here of the sacrament of Baptisme: and that for these reasons: firste, our Sauiour speaks here generally of al men, and not of infants only, and therefore he sayes, Except a man be borne &c. speaking to Ni∣codemus who was a man and not an infant, so that if your ex∣position were true all men that died without baptisme and not infants only, are excluded from heauen. But that is false: for first the good theef was not baptised with water, and yet our Sauiour saide to him, this might thou shalt be with me in pa∣radise. And therefore our Sauiour speakes not here of the sa∣crament of baptisme: for he speakes of that new birth by water and the spirit without the whilk none can be saued: but this theefe and others were saued without the baptisme of water: therefore he speakes not here of it. Next our Sa∣uiour in that place speakes of that new birth by the spirit & water whilk is so absolutely necessarie to the saluatiō of al men that it admits no exception. This cannot be denyed. But Bellarmine makes two exceptions against the absolute necessitie of baptisme: one of martyrdome, the other of true conuersion and pennance, Lib, 1, de Baptis, cap. 6 whereof (sayes he) either of them supplies the want of baptisme. Therfore our Sauiour speakes not here of the sacrament of baptisme. Thirdly if we will be∣leeue Christ Iesus expounding him-selfe, and Scripture ex∣pounding Scripture, I say, by water is not alwaies meaned the sacrament of baptisme: but the purifying grace of Christ whilk is called the water of life, so our Sauiour speakes in the 4. chapter of Iohn verse 11. & 7. chapter verse 38, And in that same sense water is here added to the spirit to ex∣pound the more sensibly the efficacie of the spirit in wash∣ing
and clensing vs, as fire is added to the spirit in the 3. of Matthew. 11. vers. He will baptize you with the spirit and with fire, whilk is not properly vnderstoode of any naturall fire, but taken figuratiuely to expound more sensibly the force and eficacie of the spirit in burning vp our corrupti∣on. Fourthlye, what an absurd thing were this whilk shoulde follow if your exposition were true, that for the want of the sprinkling of a little water, the infants should perishe that are in the couenant, seing they were not the cause of the want of it. Further, I say, that suppose baptisme were here meaned: yet there is no sik necessitie as ye suppose, for if martyrdome and pennance may supply the want of this wa∣ter (as Bellarmine confesses) how much more may the holye Ghost supply the want of the same in infants: and if anye thing may supply the want of it, then it is not so absolutely necessary that al these infants are damned that wants it. Ioh 22.6.53 2. Our Sauiour speakes as generally and absolutely, Vn∣lesse you eate the flesh of the sonne of man and drink his blood, ye haue no life in you, whilk ye interprete of the other sacrament, so that if your interpretation were true, the Eucharist shuld be as absolutely necessarie to the saluation of infants, as you say baptisme is. But the first you wil not grant. Therefore the o∣ther must also be false. 3. If here ye would infer a necessitie of baptisme, then I say at that same time it began to be ne∣cessarie: for he saies not, he that shal not be borne againe &c. But he that is not borne &c. Lib. de Baptisme cap 5 But Bellarmine saies it was not necessary while Christs death, yet not while the Pentecost fiftie dayes after his death, therefore it is not like that any necessitie of baptisme is here vnderstanded: for it had bene good reason that Christs baptisme whilk was ministred while he liued in the flesh should haue bene as necessary as the Apostles bap∣tisme whilk was ministred afterward. But the first was not absolutely necessarie, as Bellarmine testifies, therefore neither is the second. And last of all, least ye should say all this is our exposition, Se. lib 4. distin. 4. cap. His autem the Maister of the sentences expounding this place, who suppose he be of this iudgement with you con∣cerning
infants departed, yet he saies that this place is to be vnderstanded of them who might haue bene baptized, but contemned the same: therefore this place imputes no abso∣lute necessitie of it. As for the rest of the places of Scripture whilk ye quote, they serue nothing to prooue sik an absolut necessitie of baptisme, as ye suppose, but only sets downe the effects of the same whilk are sealed vp in the harts of the be∣leeuers by the holy Ghost, as the inwarde worker, and bap∣tisme as the outward instrument, 1. Pet. 3.20.21. Tit. 3 5. Mar. 16 16 as our saluation through the death of Christ, our Gal. 3.27 vnion with Christ, and Rom 6 3.4 with his death, & Act. 22.17. & 2.38 1, Cor. 6.11. remission of sins, regeneration, mortification of the olde man. And therefore circumcision in whose roome baptisme is succeeded it is Rom. 4 called the seale of righteousnesse whilk is by faith. Take away therefore your exposition from these places, and there will no sik absolute necessitie of bap∣tisme follow here as ye suppose. And therefore Lib. 1. de sacr. Bapt. cap. 4 Bellarmine the learnedst of your writers, because he knew that these places whilk ye quote here could not proue sik an absolute necessitie of baptisme, nor haue no appearance to proue the same, doth not cite one of them for the proofe of the necessi∣tie, except only the third of Iohn leauing all the rest. And as for that of Augustine, we grant he was of that mind that bap∣tisme was necessarie to infants, but he was also of that iudg∣ment that the Eucharist was necessarie vnto them, and yet your Romane Kirk, nor you neither, I hope, wil subscriue to this error of his. Seeing therefore you dissent from him in the necessitie of the one, and that vpon good ground of the Scripture; why may not we also dissent from him in the o∣ther hauing so many groundes and reasons out of the word of God to the contrarie, as hes bene sayd? And this for the first point. Now let the christian reader iudge vpon whose side the word of God is. Maister Gilbert Browne. 2 Our doctrine is, that ane man by the grace of God may keep the com¦mands of God, and obey him, whilk is contrarie to their confession of faith Our doctrine in this is the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Christ saies, Matth. 19.17 If you will enter into lyfe, keepe the commands. And againe, If ye loue me keepe
my commands: Ioh, 14 15, 24 Mat. 21, 29, 30 And in another place, He that loues mee not, keepes not my wordes, &c. Also, Take vp my yoake vpon you, &c. For my yoake is sweet, and my burthen ight. Now I beleeue that no man can deny, but this yoake and burthen of Christ is his commands and Lawes. This same doctrine the A∣postles teached. Saint Paule sayes, I can doe all things in him that comfortes mee: Phil, 4, 13, & 2, 13 1, Ioh, 5, 3 and before, For it is God that works in you both to will and to accomplish according to his good will: and Saint Iohn sayes, This is the charitie of God that we keep his commandes, and his commands are not heauie Now farther nor these, we read that Gen, 6 9 Noe, Ge. 26.5 Abraham, Iob. 1, 22 Iob, were iust men, and o∣beyed God: and Saint Luke sayes, that Zacharias and Elizabeth his wife, were both iust before God, Luc, 1, 6 3. Kings 14 8, 4, Reg, 8, 3, 4. Reg, 20, 3, 4, Reg, 23, 25, 2, Par. 15, 15, and walked in all the commands, and iustifica∣tion of our Lord without blame. I here are many other places in the olde Testament of the same matter, of the whilks I haue noted som on the mar∣gent. Now holde away from these places the Ministers commentaries, and I beleeue that all men wil confes, that our doctrine in this, and the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles is all one. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. It appeareth that Maister Gilbert is loath that the secrete of the doctrine of his Kirk should be knowne to the people, because he knowes in his heart they would abhor the same: their owne harts and consciences witnessing to the contra∣rie. Therefore he hes hid vp the poison of it, and couered it as secretlie as he could. But that wherein you are darke, the rest of your Romane cleargie are plaine. For first, whereas ye say, that a man by the grace of God, may keepe the com∣mands, Lib. 4. de Iustifie, ca. 10. Gratia Dei adiunante Bellarmine expones more clearlie & sayes, By the helpe of the grace of God. And the Monkes in that forme of abiura∣tion set out anno 1585. sayes, that man by the new strength of grace infused in goodwill, may keepe the command. So that wheras your words would seeme to import that the grace of God is the onlie cause of this obedience to Gods commandements in the faithfull, and so I thinke euerie one almost who is not acquainted with the doctrine of your Romane Kirk wil take it, and so it may be ye teach them. The rest of your brethren are more plaine, in halfing it betwixt Free-will, and the grace of God helping Free-will, as though the strenth of na∣ture were the more principal cause, & the grace of God but a helper to it. And secondlie, whereas ye say, that a man by the grace of God may keep the commandements of God, &
obey them, Bellarm. cap. 19 pag. 364 Ex integro boro. & lib. 2. de Iustif cap. 3 Bellarmine sayes more plainlie that the Law of God is absolutelie possible vnto them, and they may absolutely fulfill the Lawe, and keepe the whole Lawe, and that the works of the righteous are absolutelie and simpliciter righteous, and proceeding of a perfite ho∣linesse, without all blemish of sinne, and that they please God, not for the imputation of Christs righteousnesse, couering their imperfections, and forgiuing them, but for the excellencie of the worke it selfe. So this is their doctrine (Christian reader.) Nowe, as hee hid his owne, so hes he hid ours also. For our confession of Faith saies, that our sanctification and obedience to Gods Law is imperfect, whilk worde he omitted: as though it had beene our doctrine that the children of God in no measure nor de¦gree keeps the commandements of God. Our doctrine ther∣fore is this: That of our owne nature we are Eph. 2.1 dead in sinne, & of our selues we are neither able to 1. Cor. .14 vnderstand, nor 2. Cor. 3 5 thinke, nor philip. 2, 1 3 will, nor doe those things that are pleasant to God, and ther∣fore we must be Ioh. 3 5. borne anewe againe, or we can doe any Ioh. 15.5 thing that is acceptable in Gods sight: and this Rom. 7.14.15 sancti∣fication of ours is not perfite, while we are in this life, but im¦perfect, euer some darkenesse, some rebellion, some dregs of the olde man yet remaining in vs, so that we 1. Cor. 13.12 knowe but in a parte, and our will is but renewed in part, and our heart sanctified in parte, from the whilk it cōmeth, that first we do not all the good that we are bound to doe, and would do, as the Rom. 7.15, 16, 17.18.19.20, 21 22.23.24 Apostle sayes: next that all our righteousnesse, as the Esai. 64, 6 Prophet sayes, is but as a menstrous cloute, euer smelling somewhat of the corruption of the olde man within vs: and so, that they haue need to be couered with the righteousnes of Iesus Christ, and their imperfection to be pardoned. By the only strength therefore of Gods Spirit who workes both to will, and to doe in vs, we begin heir obedience to the whole Law of God, but yet are not able perfitelie so to keep it, as our works may byde to be tried before the Lord in the ballance of his Lawe: and therefore we place the whole hope of our saluation in the onelie mercie of God through Iesus Christ, who is made to vs of God, righteousnesse, sanctification, and redemption: by whose mercy we obtaine the perfite remission
of our sins: and so we conclude with Dauid, Psal. 32. Blessed is hee whose sinnes are forgiuen him, and whose iniquities are couered. This now is the verie simple trueth both of our doctrine and theirs in this head. Now to answere you. Whereas ye say, that a man by grace may keep the commandements of God: if you meane that the onlie cause of the obedience of the children of God to his Law, is the renewing grace of God, and that this obe∣dience is sincere and heartie, not to one, but to al the com∣mandements: not onelie outward, but inward: suppose not in that high measure of perfection that the Lawe of God re∣quyres: then, I say, you contradict the doctrine of your Ro∣mane Kirk, and forsakes their error of Free-will concurring with grace, and of the perfection of man his obedience here to the Lawe, and so shakes hands with the trueth of God whilk we professe in this point. And so becomes a bad defen∣der of their Catholicke faith, as ye stile your self. And would to God your eyes were opened so to see and beleeue, sup∣pose ye lost that stile for euer. But if ye make Free-will the principall cause of this obedience (as Bellarmine cals it:) and if ye vnderstand a perfite obedience (as your Kirk teaches) then first tell mee why did ye not speake as plainlie as you thought? Were you afraied that the hearts of men shoulde haue skunnered with this your doctrine, if yee had beene as plaine in your write, as ye are in your own iudgement? Next I say, you haue the Lorde in his written word as contrary to this your doctrine, as light is to darknesse. For, as to the first the Scripture testifies plainlie that we are Ioh 5.25. Col. 2 13. Ephes. 2.1 dead in sinne, & that the Rom. 8.17 wisdome of the fleshe is enimity against God: and ther∣fore we haue neede to be Ioh. 3.5 borne againe: that is, to receaue a new life or euer we can be able to enter into the kingdome of God: and that it is God that Philip. 2.13 worketh in vs both to will and to do, and that of 2. Corinth, 3 5. our selues we are not sufficient to thinke any thing as of our selues, & that Gen. 6 5 all the imaginations of mans heart is onlie euill continuallie: Where then is there ony place left to Free-will? And as to the second, the Scripture sayes, Eccles 7.10. There is not a righteous man in the earth, who dooth good and sinneth
not, therefore no perfite keeping of the Law. And who Pro, 20. may say, my heart is cleane, and I am pure from sinne: if no man may say so, then no man can keep perfitelie the whole Law. And Rom, 3, 20, 2 by the workes of the Law no flesh is iustified in his sight, ther∣fore no fleshe is able perfitelie to keepe the Lawe, for if he could keepe the Lawe, hee would be iustified by the Lawe. But the Apostle sayes, that no fleshe can be iustified by the Lawe: Therefore none can keepe the Lawe. And therefore the Scripture sayes, Rom, 8 3  Act. 15, 10 that the Law is impossible because of the waik∣nesse of the fleshe. For the whilk cause the sonne of God tooke on him our nature to fulfill this impossibilitie of the Lawe. And Iames calles the Lawe a yoake whilk (saies he) neither we nor our Fathers were able to beare. If they said that they coulde not beare it, that is, perfitelie obey it, who obtained a high∣er measure of grace, nor euer any since did, what shall we then say of all other men after them? and what arrogancie and presumption is this in these of the Romane Kirk, to say, and to beare others in hand, that they are able to beare that yoake whilk the Apostles was not able to beare? And Iesus Christ hes taught vs to pray daylie, Forgiue vs our sinnes, Matth. 6 whilk needed not, if we were able to keepe the whole Lawe. And beside the plaine testimonies of the Scripture, euery mans owne dolefull experience telles them of their manifold and continuall sinning. What a damnable doctrine is this then, whilk blindes their eies so far, that neither they see nor feele the inward corruptions of their owne heart within them, re∣belling against the Lawe of God, nor yet the perfection whilk the Lawe of God requyres. Now to the testimonies of Scripture whilk ye quote: and first, that in the 19. of Matthew, If you would enter into life, keepe the commandements: I answere: the same is to be saide to you, vvho seekes for life and righteousnesse by the vvorks of the Lawe, Keepe the Commands. But that are ye vnable to doe, or any man else, except the man the Lord Iesus, (as hes beene proued:) and as vn-able as this young man was, to vvhome it vvas saide at the last, It is as impossible to him to go into heauen as to a Camell or Cable rope to goe through the eie of a needle. But ye
vvill say, Wherefore then vvould our Sauiour Christ haue commanded him to keep the commandements, if he would haue life? I ansvvere: not because he vvas able to doe it, but to bring him to a conscience of the breach of it, for by the Lawe as the Apostle sayes, Rom. 7.7 comes the knowledge of sinne. And to cast dovvne that presumption that he had of himself, that he had obserued and keeped the Lawe, that in conscience of sinne, he might be brought to seeke for life eternal in Christ Iesus onlie. And least Maister Gilbert, ye say that this is my expositi∣on: therfore heare what the Apost. saies. As many as are of the works of the law are vnder the curse: Galat 3.10.14 for it is written, Cursed is euerie man that continueth not in all thinges whilk are written in the booke of the law to doe them: and that no man is iustified by the law in the sight of God it is euidēt. Now this is spoken not only of the Iewes but of the Gentiles that beleeued in Christ Iesus, and were vnder grace: vpon the whilk I reason thus. If as many as are of the workes of the law are vnder the curse, and no man is iustified by the law in the sight of God, then no man is able to get life eternall by keeping of the law, and so this young man to whome Christ gaue his answer, neither had kept nor could keepe the lawe: but the first is saide by the Apostle, therfore the second is true. Next, the law requires a perfect obedience with all the hart, with all the vnderstanding, & thought, and strength vnto all the commandements, Mat. 22.37. Luc 10.17. Mar, 12.31 Deut. 27.16 Iac. 2.10 and that continually: so that Iames saies, he that breakes one is guiltie of all: and the law doth pronounce them accursed that continues not in the doing of all thinges &c. in this perfection. Now who is he that is come out of the loynes of Adam (except only the Lorde Iesus) who hes continued in the perfect obedience of all thinges without the breach of any in thought, word, or deede? Are you able (M. Gilbert) or hes euerie one of your Romane Kirks performed, or is able to performe this obedience that the law requires? Seing therfore yt none is able, & this young man neither had performed, nor yet was able to performe this perfect obedience to the lawe: therefore of necessitie it must follow that our Sauiour gaue him this command Keepe
the commandements, &c. not because he was not able to keepe them, but to bring him by the lawe to a conscience of the brek of them. As for the rest of the Scriptures whilk ye bring in, they are easilie answered, Iohn. 14.15, 24. 1. Iohn. 5.3. If yee loue mee keepe my commandements &c. and he that loues me not keeps not my word &c. I grant the Lord hes commanded obedience to his commandements. And I graunt they that loues him keepes them, and all the children of God loues him, and be∣ginnes also obedience to al his commandements. But yet as their loue is not in that perfection whilk the lawe requires, with all their hart, with all their vnderstanding, and with all their strength: so their obedience is not in that perfection. And neuer-theles the perfection of their obedience is forgi∣uen, being couered with the perfect obediēce of Iesus Christ, and through him is acceptable in his presence, and of him al∣so shall be crowned with a crowne of glorie, suppose freelie. And to proue this: if anie had obeyed the commandements perfectly, thē surely the Apostles Paule, Iames, Iohn, Peter, shuld haue done it: for they loued him in as great and greater measure of loue, nor euer anie since did. And our Sauiour testifies of them to his father that they had kept his worde. Ioh. 17.6. Rom. 7 1. Ioh. 1.8.9 But the Apostle Paule testifies of himselfe that he did not the thinge he would, but the thing that he hated that he did, and to will was pre∣sent with him, but to performe he found it not, and he saw a law in his members rebelling against the law of his minde, and leading him cap∣tiue vnto sinne. And Iohn saies of him self & of all men, if we saye we haue not sin we make him a lier & the trueth is not in vs. And him selfe twise would haue worshiped an Angell contrarie to the law. And Iames sayes that in many things we offend all. Reuel. 29.10. & 22.8 9. Deut. 6 13. Iames 3.2 Gal, 2.11.12 And Peter to whome our Sauiour said thrise: if thou loue me, keepe my lawes: went not with a right foote to the trueth of the Gospell. There∣fore none is able perfectly to keepe them. We se then there is a keeping of the commandements, & a keeping of them in perfection. The first common to all the faithfull, suppose not in an equall measure. The second one∣ly possible to Adam or he fell, and to the Saintes in that kingdome.
As for the 11. of Matthew, Take vp my yoke &c. for my yoke is sweete and my burthen light. And the 1. Iohn 5.3. his commande∣ments are not heauy. I answere. Our Sauiour and his Apostles calles his commandements light, sweete and not heauie, not because the perfection of the law is possible to anie to per∣forme in this life, but first because the Lorde Iesus hes taken away the curse of it, and also requires not of vs that perfecti∣on whilk the law requires vnder the paine of the ours of the law if it be not satisfied. And last of al because he by his spirit renewes the harts of his owne, and makes them able with ioy to begin that obedience: so that what they doe they doe it not vpon constraint, as being vnder the law: but willingly for the loue of Christ, Roman. 7 and they delight in the same accor∣ding to the law of their minde, as the Apostle speakes of him self. But yet with in they finde a law in their members re∣belling against the law of their minde, leading them captiue vnto sinne. So in these respects are his commādements cal∣led light and swete. But in the 15. of the Acts, the Apostles calls it a vnsupportable yoke, whilk neither they nor their fathers were able to beare. Rom, 3 20 & 7.14 &c. Gal. 3.10 And in the 8. to the Romans it is called impossible. As for the 4. of the Philippians 13. where the Apostle sayes. Hee is able to doe all things by him that comforts him. The Apostle speakes not here of his abilitie to performe the law in that perfection whilk the law requires: for he hes testified the contrarie both of him selfe and of all others, as hes bene saide. But onlie this, that through him hee is able to sustaine all sorts of condition, both to abound and to be in scarcitie, to be full and to be hungrie. This is not my exposition, but the Apostle so expounds him selfe in the for∣mer verse: so that I wonder vpon what shew ye could quote this testimony. As for the 2. of the Philippians, it is true the Lord worketh in his owne both to will and to accomplish: but yet it fol∣lowes not that they are able perfitly to obey the lawe. For, if that measure of grace had bene wrought in anie, it had bene wrought in the Apostles, but not in them as hes bene shewn, & that by their own testimonie: therfore in none els.
Next what can be more cleare for the ouerthrowe of your Free-will, nor is this place of Scripture. If the Lord workes in vs both to will and to performe, then wee are not able to will of our selues that whilk is acceptable to God. As for the examples whilk ye cite of Noah, Abraham, Iob, Zacharias, and Elizabeth, Dauid, Ezechia, Iosia, Iuda, and Asa, and these whome the Lord reserued to himself pure from the Idolatry of your Antichristiā kingdome forspoken ther. They walked indeed in integritie and sinceritie in the commandements and wayes of the Lord, and therefore hes receiued a good testi∣mony and reporte of Gods spirite in the Scripture, all whilk we grant vnto you. But that they answered the lawe in that perfection, that it requires; the Scripture whilk hes registred their walkings, and their owne testimonies will gainesay it. Roman. 4 Noah fell in drunkennesse, Abraham was not iustifyed by the works of the law, but by faith, whilk is a most sure argument that he fulfilled not the lawe. Iob sayes, Iob. 9.2.3.20 Luc. 1.20 if I would affirme my selfe to be righteous, my owne mouth woulde condemne me. Zacharias beleeued not the worde of the Lorde spoken to him by the Angell, therefore was striken dumbe. Dauid fell in adulterie, 2. Samu. 12, & 24 murther, and prouoked the Lords anger by numbering the people and he sayes of himselfe, Psal. 40, 13. Psal 130, 3. Psal. 143.2. my iniquities are more in number then the haires of my head. And in another place If thou mark ini∣quitie, O Lord who can stand? And enter not in iudgment with thy ser∣uant, for no man liuing should be righteous before thee. 2. Chron. 32, 25 2. Chron. 17.7 Ioh. 21.22. Ezechias heart was lifted vp. Iosias harkned not vnto the words of Necho according to the word of the Lord. Asa put his trust not in the Lord his God, but in the King of Syria. The like is to be sayde of these whome the Lorde did reserue to himselfe in the middest of the king∣dome of darknesse, that they did keepe the commande∣ments of God, but not in that perfection whilk the law re∣quired. For they were not more righteous then the Prophet Esay & the Apostles were. But the Prophet sayes, Esai 64. Iames 3 that we are all vncleane, & all our righteousnes is as a menstruous clout. And the Apostle sayes, in many thinges we sinne all. And Augustine sayes, Ad Bonif, lib. 3 cap. 7 all the commandements of God are accompted to be done when that whilk is not done is forgiuen. And in another place: Epist. 6 for the want
of loue it is that there is not a righteous man in the earth, that doth good & sinneth not. And In Galath. 3 Ambrose sayes, the commandements of God are so great that they are impossible to bee kept. And In Galath. 3 Ierome sayes, because no man can fulfill the law, and doe all things that is commanded. And Cantic. serm. 5. Bernard sayes, the commandements of God can∣not nor could not be fulfilled of any man. And In Galat. 2 Chrysostome sayes, No man hes fulfilled the Lawe. And In Gal. 3, lect. 4 Thomas, one of the chiefe pillers of your own Kirk writes, That it is impossible to fulfill the whole Lawe: and Lib. 11. in con∣l. cap. 20, Vega a Papist sayes, That venial sinnes are pro∣perlie against the Lawe. Vpon the whilk I reason, he that daylie transgresses the lawe, fulfilles not, nor is not able to fulfill the lawe, (for to fulfil the lawe and trasngresse the lawe are con∣trarie:) but your owne doctrine is, that no man can keepe himselfe at least from veniall sinnes, and Vega (as hes beene saide) sayes that veniall sinnes are against the lawe: There∣fore if your selues speake true, no man is able to fulfill the law. I conclude therefore that this doctrine of yours is con∣trarie to the doctrine of Iesus Christ and his Apostles, set downe in the Scripture, and also contrarie to the doctrine of the fathers, and contrarie to the doctrine of the moste learned, and chief doctours of your Romaine Kirk. And this for the second pointe of your doctrine. Maister Gilbert Browne. This is the third time that you haue belied and spoken falslie of our writings and doctrine Matth 23 37 Act 7.51 2 Pet. 39. 1. Tim. 2.4 3 Our doctrine is, that man of his Free-will may resist the will of God, whilk is contrarie to their doctrine, ratified by act of Parliament in the yeare 1560. And also against their Psalme booke of Geneua. Yet our do∣ctrine is the doctrine of Christ. For Christ said to them of Ierusalem, How oft would I haue gathered together thy children, but you would not? and Saint Steuen Ye stiffe-necked and of vncircumcised hearts and eares, ye alwayes re∣sist the holy Ghost, as your fathers, your selues also. The same was the faith & beleef of the Apost S. Peter sayes, Our Lord is not willing that any perish, but that al return to pennance and S. Paule hes, Our Sauiour God willes all men to be saued, and to come to the knowledge of the trueth. This was the doctrine of the Psal. 5.5. Ezec. 18.23 Ezech. 33., Prophets before. Nowe then if God willes that all men shoulde returne, & yet all men does not the same, whereof proceedes it but of their Free will, whilk wil not work with the will of God. Therefore our Sauiour sayes in sundrie places, If thou wilt enter into lyfe keepe my commands: If thou will be perfite goe and sell all that thou hes: Matth. 19.17 Luc. 9.23 He that will followe mee, let him deny himself.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for this third point of doctrine, I cannot wonder e∣nough what ye meane by it. For haue you sold your selfe so far to vn-trueth and lying, that for to bring the trueth of God whilk we professe, in hatred: you will father on vs that doctrine whilk neuer so meikle as once entered into our thoughts, let be to teach it or write it. Did you think when ye write this, that the truth of it would neuer come to light? or thought you that ye regarded not to be controlled of ly∣ing at the last, so being that for a season ye might make our Religion to be more abhorred through your calumnie? But frost and falset (as they say) will neuer haue a faire hinder∣end. If you meane then by resisting the will of God, a volun∣tary disobedience and repyning against the Spirite of God, and his reuealed will in his worde, as the testimonies whilk ye quote heere, imports: Then, I say, there was neuer man of our religion that professed, taught, or write the contrary: & ye will not finde a sillable neither in the confession of our faith confirmed by the act of Parliament, neither in our Psalme booke to the contrary. For our doctrine is flat con∣trarie to this: to wit, that man of his free-wil resists that that is good, and chooses the contrarie. So ye fight heir with your owne shadow. And if ye meane any other thing, set it down in plaine tearmes, and I hope, by his grace, it shalbe answe∣red. So I cannot wonder enough what ye meant to write, and subscriue so manifest an vn-truth. Now surelie, (Maister Gilbert) I thinke it had bene greater wisdome to you to haue saued your owne credite, and not for a little hatred to our religion, to haue blotted your self with lying and vn-trueth for euer. I would pray thee, Christian reader, if thou wilt not credite me, reade our confession thy selfe: and, I hope, thou shalt wonder with me what the man meant in subscri∣uing so manifest a calumnie. This for the 3. point. Maister Gilbert Browne. 4 Our doctrine is, that our Sauiour gaue his true flesh and very body & blood vnder the formes of bread and wine, to be eaten of his disciples at his
last Supper, and that to be receiued by their very mouth: and this I say by the written word, is the doctrine of Christ & his Apostles. Christ sayes, And the bread whilk I will giue you, Ioh. 6.51 Matth. 26, 7, 28 is my fleshe for the life of the world: and at the latter Supper, Take ye and eate ye, This is my bodie And Drinke ye all of this For this is my blood of the new Testament, whilk shalbe shed for many vnto re∣mission of sinnes: Marc. 14, 22, 24 And in Saint Mark, This is my bodie, and this is my blood of the new Testament, Luk, 22, 19.20 whilk shalbe shed for manie And Saint Luke sayes, This is my bodie whilk is giuen for you: and this is the chalice of the new Te∣stament in my blood whilk shalbe shed for you. This same is the doctrine of the Apostles. For Saint Paule sayes, This is my bodie whilk shalbe delyuered for you: 1, Cor. 11.24, 25 27, 2 and this Chalice is the new Testament in my blood: and whosoeuer shal eate this bread and drinke the Chalice of our Lord vnworthely, he shalbe guilty of the bodie and blood of our Lord: and after, For he that eates and drinkes vn∣worthelie eates and drinkes iudgement to himself, not decerning the body of our Lord: and in the chapter before, The Chalice of benediction whilk we do blisse is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? 1. Corinth. 10, 10 and the bread whilk we break is it not the participation of the body of our Lorde Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. I come nowe to the fourth point of your doctrine, your Transubstantiation and reall presence. The first ye quote, is the 6. of Iohn, And the bread whilk I will giue, is my fleshe, &c. This makes nothing for your reall presence. For first, our Sauiour speakes not heere of that Sacramentall eating and drinking, of his flesh & blood, in this sermon, whilk was not instituted a yeere after that: for he speakes heere of that ea∣ting and drinking of his flesh and blood, without the whilk there is no life. So our Sauiour testifies in the 53. verse, Ex∣cept ye eate (sayes he) the fleshe of the sonne of man, and drinke his blood, ye haue no life in you. But your selues graunts that men may be saued without that sacramental eating: therefore it is not of that whilk he speakes heir. Secondly, he speakes of that eating and drinking of his flesh and blood, whilk who∣soeuer so doth, hath eternall life to themselues: so our Sa∣uiour Christ promises in the 54. verse. But your owne do∣ctrine is, that the reprobate eates and drinkes Christs body & blood in the sacrament, and yet hes no life in them: ther∣fore he speaks not heere of that sacramental eating. Third∣lie, if he speake heere of the sacramentall eating as you say, then your Kirk not onlie hes erred foullie, but also hes bene and is the cause of the condemnation of your people these
manie yeares, because you giue them not his blood to drink And our Sauiour sayes not onlie, Except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man, but also, except ye drink his blood, ye haue no life in you. And this reason was so effectuall, that it hes moued sundrie of your own Doctors to expone this place, not of the sacra∣mentall eating and drinking of the bodie & blood of Christ, As Iansenius & Tapperus with sundrie others. but of the spirituall eating and drinking of him by faith. For they did se that it behoued them either to forsake this place, as not making for them, and graunt that it speakes not of the sacrament: or else to confesse that their Kirk hes erred, and through this error, hes bene the cause of the damnation of manie, in ministring the sacrament but vnder one kinde. And because you say, if our expositions were remoued from the Scripture, they would serue for you: whome therefore will you credite in exponing of this place? If our Sauiour, heare then howe he expones this eating and drinking of his flesh and blood in the 35. verse. I am the bread of life, hee that commeth vnto me shall not hunger, and he that beleeues in me shal ne∣uer thirst. So when we beleeue in Christ, we eate him: and when we come vnto him, (whilk is only by faith) we drinke him. So Tractat, 25 in Iohan. cap. 6 Tract. 26. & de doct. christians lib. 3. cap. 16 Augustine also expones this place. Beleeue, sayes he, and thou hes eaten. Lib. 1, Paedago. cap, 6. Clemens Alexandrinus and In Psal. 147 Hiero∣nimus & Supra psal. 90 vers, 3 Bernard al expones the flesh & blood of Christ fi∣guratiuelie. And if ye will credite none of these, then I hope, ye wil not discredite your own chief Doctors, who affirmes, that this place is not meaned of the Sacrament, but of the spirituall ea∣ting and drinking of Christ by faith. As Bellarm. lib, 1, de Eucharist, cap 5. Biel, Cusanus, Caietanus, Hesselius, and Iansemus. And if ye wil reply that manie others of the Fathers hes exponed this place of the sacrament, then Iansenius and Tapperus two Papists will answere you: That they did it only by way of application vnto the readers and hearers, to stirre them vp to the often receiuing of the Sacrament. So this place can serue nothing for your Transubstantiation, for it speaks not of the sacrament, but of his suffering vpon the Crose for the away taking of our sinnes, and the purchasing to vs of eter∣nall life. The next place ye quote, is the words of the institution,
as Matthew, Marke, Luke, and the Apost. rehearses them. Your argument is this: Christ calles the bread his fleshe, (and so Paule) and the wine his blood: therefore the bread is chan∣ged in his bodie, and the wine in his blood, the outwarde formes of bread and wine onlie remaining. This is the chiefe and principall ground of your reall presence and Transub∣stantiation. Whereunto I answere: First, there is not a sil∣lable heere that telles vs that the substance of the bread and wine is trans-changed in the bodie and blood of Christ, vn∣lesse ye will expone this word, is my bodie, for, it is changed in my bodie, Est & Fieri, sunt contraria whilk is a monstrous exposition: for both it is con∣trarie to the natiue signification of the worde est; that signi∣fies to be alreadie: (for to be alreadie, and to be in a change are contrarie) as also it hes not the like forme of speache in the whole Scripture to vvarrand it: from the first of Genesis, to the last of the Reuelation. (Bring one instance if yee can.) And Augustine sayes, August. in Genes quaest 117. in Psal 105. supr. Num. quaest 95. the solution of a question should be warranted by some example of the like speache in the Scripture, the whilk you are not able to do: therfore your exposition is without war∣rand. Next I say: By what arte of reasoning can you gather this doctrine out of these places of Scripture? Christ sayes of the breade, This is my bodie, and of the wyne, This is my bloode. Therefore the outwarde formes of the breade and wyne on∣lie remaines, but the substance of them is gone. Neuer sik a inkling in all these texts of this doctrine of yours. Thirdlie, this interpretation and doctrine whilk results vpon it, is fals, and that for these reasons. First, because it is plainely gaine-saide by the Scripture. Secondly, because it destroyes sun∣drie articles of our faith, and many blasphemous absurdities doth follow vpon it. 3. It destroyes the nature of the Sacra∣ment. And last of all, is vtterly repugnant to the words of ye institution. My argument then is this. That interpretation & doctrine whilk is gaine-saide, by the plaine testimonie of the Scripture, whilk destroyes the articles of our faith, and the fundamentall poyntes of our saluation, whilk hes many ab∣surdities following vpon it, whilk ouerthrovves the nature of the Sacrament, and last of all, vvhilk is contrarie to the
whole institution, must be false, blasphemous and erroneous. This cannot be denyed but your interpretation of these wordes this is my bodye &c. and your transubstantiation whilk ye gather vpon it, is sik. Therefore it must be errone∣ous &c. My assumption I proue thus. First your interpretati∣on is gainsaide by the plaine testimony of the Scripture. Your interpretation is that there remaines no true bread nor wine in the sacramēt, but the substance of it is changed. But Mat∣thew, Mark, Luke. and the Apostles all foure testifies that Christ tooke bread, brake it, & gaue it to his Disciples, & least ye shuld say yt it was true bread & wine before the consecration, 1. Cor. 10.16, but not after, ye scripture saies planely that it is bread whilk we brake, & bread whilk is eaten, and the frute of the Vine whilk is drunken in the sacrament. The Apostles saies, the bread whilk we brake &c. And as oft as ye eate this bread &c. Whosoeuer shall eate this bread &c. And let a man examine him selfe, and so let him eate of this bread &c. And our Sauiour sayes, that after he had giuen the cup and they had drunken of it, from hence forth shall I not drink of the frutes of the wine with you &c. Therefore true bread and wine remaines in the sacrament, contrarie expresly to your interpretation. 2. That your interpretation destroyes the ar∣ticles of our faith, I proue it thus. If this be true that the bread and wine be really changed in the bodie and blood of Christ in the sacrament, as ye expound the words: first it will followe that either Christ ascended not into heauen, because he remayneth in the earth in the sacrament: and so one of the articles of our beleefe is falsified. Or els, if ye say he a∣scended once, but yet discends continually to be present in the sacrament, then another article of our beleefe is falsified whilk saith, that he sitteth at the right hand of God his father. Act. 3.2  that is, whome the heauens must receiue till the restoring of all things And as Peter sayes, abides in heauen whome the heauens must containe while the time of the restoring of all things come. Secondly it will followe that Christs bodie is made of the bread: for if the substance of the bread be changed in the bodie of Christ, then it must follow that the bread is becomme the bodie of Christ, and Christ his bodie is made of that bread, as the wine was made of the water at the mariage of Cana in Galilie. And so Bel∣larmine
and Pope Iohn, Ioh.  Bellarm lib. 3 de Eucharistia fol. 399. Iohn 22. Libro orat. in∣script. antidotar. animae & the maister of Lombard. lib. 4 distinct 11. cap. B sentences grants that Christ is made of bread, and the substance of bread and wine is made Christs flesh and bodie, and so here another article of our faith falsified, whilk saies, that Christ his body was made of the seede of the woman, and not of any other matter, and like to vs in all thinges except sinne. Thirdly, it wil followe that Christ had two bodies together, one vnder the forme of a man, and an other vnder the forme of breade: one speaking and another dumbe: one giuing to his Disciples to eate, and another the selfe same thing whilk was giuen to be eaten: yea, it shall follow, if your exposition be true, in saying that Christs body and blood is vnder the formes of bread and wine in the sa∣crament, not only that there are two Christs, one in heauen at the right hand of his father visible, glorious and in one place: and another Christ in the earth inuisible, circumscri∣ued by no place: but also that there are as manie Christs as there are sacraments in the earth, yea, as manie Christs as there are bitts of bread in euerie sacrament, and so the foun∣dation of our saluation is ouerturned. Fourthly it will follow that the body and blood of Christ are separate, as the bread and wine in the sacrament whilk is turned in them is separa∣ted. Fifthly it will follow that his body is separate from his soule, and so a dead bodie, because the bread and wine are not changed in his soule, but only in his bodie. Sextly it will followe that the breade in the first supper being changed in the bodie of Christ, that the substance of the bread hes suf∣fered for vs, died for vs, and risen againe for vs: and hes a part of our redemption, whilk is blasphemous to think. Se∣uenthly, it will follow that Christ eated his owne bodie and dranke his owne bloode whilk is absurde: Hom. 83. in Mat. De consecr dist 2 canon. Nec Mo∣ses. for Chrysostome and your canon Lawe testifies that he eate the same thing whilk he gaue to his Disciples. And also he saies him selfe, from hence forth will I not drinke with you any more of the frute of this vine &c. So he drank of that whilk they drank of. And last of al it will followe that the Masse Preist is the creator of his creator: and so their Breuiaries and Lombardus, and Bellarmine grants. In their Breuiaries the Priest saies. Qui creauit me sine me, creatur mediate me: that is, He that created me without me is created
by my moyen. Distinct. 11, lib, 4. cap. 5 Lombardus saies, the Priests are said to make the bodie and blood of Christ, because by their ministrie the substance of the bread is made his fleshe. And b. 3. de Eu∣charist. cap. 24. Sacerdotes con∣fi unt corpus Christi ex pane Bellarmine saies, that the Preists makes Christ his bodie of bread. Now if their be no blasphemous absurdities, I know not what is blasphemie. Now chuse yee whether ye will subscriue to all these absurdities, whilk you with all the wit of the Romane Clergie is not able to eschew if ye graunt this interpretation of yours to be true: or will you forsake this interpretation of yours, as false, erroneous, and contrarie both to the plaine Scriptures of God, and the articles of our faith, and the grounds of our saluation. As to the third. Your interpretatiō destroies the nature of al sacra∣ments, & makes the supper of the Lord no sacrament, for e∣uerie sacrament consistes of an outward and visible signe, & of a spiritual thing signified by that signe: the whilk signe hes a resemblance with the thing signified. The signe is euer earthly, and the thing signified is heauenly, as shall appeare by all the rest of the sacraments, both of the olde and signe Testamēt. In Gen. 2.9. Apoc 2.7 Paradise ther was a verie tree for the signe and Christ the thing signified by it. In Genes, 17 9, 10, Rom. 4, 11. Deut, 30.6, Col. 2.11 circumcision there was a cutting of the skin, and the cutting off of sinne. In the Exod. 12.1, Cor 5.7.8. Ioh. 19.36. Passeouer there was a Lamb & Christ. And in the Heb. 4, 1.3, 4, 5. &c. Sa∣baoth ther was a day of rest, & eternal rest. In the Heb. 9 24 Sāctu∣arie there was an holy place, & heauen. In the 1, Cor 10, 4 wildernes there was an Rock yeelding water, and Christ yeelding his blood. In the Iohn .32, apparition there was a doue, and the holy Ghost. In the 1 Cor, 10.3 manna ther was bread, & Christ. In Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21 Bap∣tisme there was very water whilk washeth vs, and Christs blood washing our sinns. Therefore in the sacrament of the supper must be bread and wine feding this naturall life, and resembling our communion one with another, 1. Cor. 10, 16, 17. and Christs flesh and blood feeding our spirituall life: otherwayes this sacrament is against the nature of all other sacraments, whilk is absurd to thinke and should be no sacrament at all as Augustine sayes, Epist. 2 if the sacraments had not a resemblance with the things whereof they are sacraments: they shuld not be sacraments at all. But your interpretation and doctrine destroies both
the signes, & the resemblance whilk they should haue with the things signified in the supper, for ther is no outwarde signe there whilk is an earthly substance, but only accedents of collor, & quantitie, if your doctrine be true, & ther is no∣thing there to resemble eyther our spiritual nuriture by the flesh and blood of Christ, or yet our spirituall fellowship one with another: vnles you will say that accedents feeds, and nourishes, the whilk if you will say: then to say no more to it, but this: if you & your common clergie who is so bolde and strong in maintaining this monstrous Transubstantia∣tion of yours against the truth of God, were fed with no bet∣ter substance, nor accidents: then, I say, you would haue fain∣ted long since in the defence of it. Seing therefore your in∣terpretation makes the Supper to be no Sacrament, & ma∣kes it vn-lyke all other Sacraments, therefore it must be fals and erroneous. As to the fourth, that it is against the whole institution, and vse thereof, I proue it thus. First, I will aske you what was it whilk Christ tooke in his hand? if you say his flesh, then the text will say the contrarie, And Iesus tooke bread, in all the three Euangelists, and the Apostle Paule. So it was bread whilk he tooke, after he did take it, he blissed it: what did he blisse? but the bread whilk he had taken: so it is yet bread: after he blissed it, he brake it: what did he break? If you say it was his flesh or bodie, then the Scripture will say the contrarie: there was not a bone of him broken. And the Apostle sayes, Exod. 1 Iohn 19. 1. Cor. 10 It is bread whilk we breake. So it is bread whilk is broken. Then yet it is bread. After he brake it, he gaue it: What gaue he but the thing whilk he brake? 1, Cor. 10.17 & 11, 26, 27, 28 and what brake he but bread? so it is bread whilk he gaue. After he had gi∣uen it they receiued it, and did eate it. But what did they eate? But that whilk he gaue: and therefore the Apostle saies foure times, It is bread whilk is eaten, and vvhereof vve are partakers, and that after the consecration: for it is broken, giuen and receiued, and eaten, after the consecration. And when they did eate it, he saide, This is my bodie, what did he call his bodie but that whilk they did eate, and that was bread. So when then, Maister Gilbert, should this change
be? seing it is bread al the time while he tooke it, blessed it, and gaue it, and they did eate. For, I trow, ye will not say it is changed after it is broken, and giuen, and in eating. Se∣condlie, I will aske you, what are the wordes whereby this monstrous change is made, as ye suppose, of the substance of the bread, in Christs bodie? If this change be made by anie word spoken in the institution of this Sacrament: then, I say it must either be by this word: And he blissed it: or by these words, This is my bodie, &c. But not by the first: for after he blissed it, he called it bread. And the Apostle sayes it is bread whilk wee brake, therefore it remaines bread after the blis∣sing. Not by the other words: for if they be not spoken to the breade and wine, they cannot change their nature: But Marke sayes plainly they were spoken to the Disciples, And he saide vnto them, This is my blood: Marc. 14 24 In hs rational therefore they changed not their nature. And Durand a Papist saies, that this change is made by the blessing, therefore not by these words whilk were pro∣nounced after the blessing. And these words cannot worke a change: Genes. Ioh. 12 for they are not words importing an operation as these are, Let light be: let the earth bring forth fruit, come out Laza∣rus, and sik-like: but onlie signifying the things themselues, as these are, Thou art my welbeloued Sonne. So if these wordes shoulde haue wrought anie change, they woulde not haue bene This is my body &c. but Let this be my bodie: therefore there is no sik change at all heir as ye imagine. Thirdlie, it should followe that the Cup should also be changed in his blood, and in the new Testament, because Christ calles the Cup his blood and newe Testament, as he calles the bread his bodie. But this you will not say: wherefore then are you so absurd as to say the other. Fourthlie, I will aske you whe∣ther do ye receaue in the Sacrament that body whilk is mor¦tall, or that body whilk is glorified: for one of them you must receaue: either Christs bodie as it was mortal, or his body as it is now glorified. If ye say a mortall bodie, then I say Christ hes not a mortall bodie to giue you now in the Sacrament, for it is glorified: therefore ye cannot receiue it: if ye say an immortall and glorified bodie, then I say, ye must seeke an∣other
warrand nor this text of Matthew, Mark, and Luke. For at that time his bodie was not glorified. For the Sacrament was instituted before his death, and he was not glorified vn∣till after his resurrection: and if ye receiue that same body whilk the Apostles then receiued: then, ye receiue not a glo∣rified body. What a body is this then whilk ye receiue, nei∣ther mortall nor glorified? Fifthlie, the text sayes, they who receiues vnworthelie, receiues their owne damnation: But if Christes flesh and blood were there present, as ye say: then al who re∣ceiued it should receiue their saluation, because our Sauiour sayes, Ioh. 6.54 He that eates my fleshe and drinke, my blood hath lyfe euerla∣sting. Now I conclude, seing your interpretation of these pla∣ces of Scripture, and your doctrine of Transubstantiation whilk ye gather thereupon, first is plainlie gain-saide by the expresse testimonies of the Scripture, next ouerthrowes all the maine foundations of our saluation, and articles of our faith: thirdlie destroyes the nature of a Sacrament and ma∣keth it no Sacrament at all, and like no other Sacrament ei∣ther of the olde or new Testament, and last of all is contra∣rie to the whole institution thereof, as, I hope, I haue suffici∣entlie prooued: therefore of necessitie it must be false & er∣roneous. As for the 10. of the Corinth. 16. The Cup of blissing whilk wee blisse, is it not the communication, and the bread whilk we breake, is it not &c. I answere: this Sacrament of bread and wine, be∣cause it not onlie represents and seales vp to vs our commu∣nion both with Christ: but also by it, as by a most effectual instru∣ment the holy Ghost increases & nourishes this communi∣on, both with him, and amongst our selues: therefore it is called the communication of his bodie and blood. But this most clearlie proues, that there is no sik change heir as ye suppose: for the Apost. sayes plainlie, the bread whilk we break, and this breaking you say is after the consecration: therfore after the consecration true bread remains in the Sacrament and so there is no Transubstantiation in the same. But be∣cause you say the substance of the bread & wine is not there I pray you tell me whither are they gone? whether are they
turned to nothing, or are they changed in Christs bodie. If you say they are turned to nothing: firste, I say this were a strange kinde of reasoning: This is my bodie, therefore the sub∣stance of the bread is turned to nothing: next the Apostle should not speake truelie, to call it bread whilk is broken, and bread whilk is eaten, &c. if it were turned to nothing. Thirdly then this should not be called Transubstantiation, or chan∣ging of one substance into another: but an annihilation of one substance, that is, a turning of it to nothing, and a bring∣ing in of another substance in the roome of it. And fourthly Thomas of Aquine, Lib. 4. dist.  your great defender of this doctrine is a∣gainst this. But if you say, they are turned in Christs bodie, whilk the word Transubstantiation imports: then, I say, as oft as the Sacrament hes bene ministrated, as oft hes there bene some quantitie of substance ciked to his bodie: and it shall still grow in greatnes and quantitie, as long as it shall be ministred: but this is monstrous to thinke. And to end this, if you say there is no substance of bread and wine left in the Sacrament, then let me aske you whose are the white∣nesse, and readnesse, and roundnesse that we see: What meanes this taist in our mouthes of bread and wine, if there be no substance of them there. May we not say to you as Christ saide to Thomas, who doubted of his resurrection, Put thy finger heir, beholde my handes, put thy hand in my side, and be not incredulous but beleeue. So, may not we say to you, who doub∣teth whether the substance of bread & wine be heir remay∣ning yet, touch them, taist them, looke on them, and feele them, and be not incredulous, but beleeue. For beholde, there would not be sik a coullour, sik a taist and smell, and there were not substance of bread and wine heir. And I pray you tel me what is this that rottes then & growes in Mauks in the bread, and sowers in the wine, if they be long kept? If their substance remaineth not, will you say Christs flesh and blood rots and consumes & sowers, what is this but to mak him mortall, yea to crucifie him againe. And if you will not say that, then either must you confesse that their substance remaines and is not changed, or els Christs flesh and blood
is transubstantiated in these substances whilk rots & sowres, or els that the accidents is changed againe in their substan∣ces: & so ye shall not haue one, but maa changes in your Sacrament. Yea, if their substance be gone, and nothing but their accidents remaining, then how could Pope Victor the 3. and the Emperour Henrie the 7. haue bene poysoned with them, Fasciculus temp. Platina, Blond. accidents and Christs body could neither poison them nor be capable of poisoun: therefore they felt by experi∣ence that there was no Transubstantiation in the Sacramēt. So we see the textes ye brought with you, is against you as ye sword that Goliah brought to slay Dauid, cutted off his owne head. But yet you wil say, If the bread be not his bodie, why then did he call it his bodie: this is the chiefe thing you haue for your doctrine, and answere this, and the plea is wonne. Vnto this then I answere, 1, Cor, 11, 24 Luc. 21  whilk is giuen in the present time, that in that same sense he said This is my bodie, in the whilk he said afterward whilk is broken for you But there can be no sense of these words, but this; the bread was broken, and signified that his bodye shoulde be broken with the sorrowes of death: for his bodie was not broken be∣fore he suffered: and the Apostle sayes, it is bread whilk is bro∣ken: so then as the breaking of the bread signified the brea∣king of his body: so the bread signified his bodie: & as his bo∣dy was not broken indeede when the bread was broken: so the bread could not be his bodie in very deede when he so called it. For the resemblance & likenes therefore betwene the breade and his bodie the breade it is called his bo∣die: &c. and this phrase is verie frequent in the scripture to giue the name of the things signified to the signe, as shall be seene afterward. Maister Gilbert Browne. Now let not the Ministers come in here with their naturall reasones a∣gainst the omnipotencie of Christ that he cannot be in two places at once and with their figures, signes, similitudes, symboles and spirituall eating of an naturall bodie, with many the like: whilks are the inuentins of their owne braynes, Read the notes of the Scottish Bible in these places. not contayned in the written worde. And who can saie but that our doctrine in this is the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and not theirs.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Ye prevent our answers heere, and first ye bid vs hold a∣way our naturall reasons against the omnipotency of Christ, that he cannot be in two places at once. Whereunto I an∣swere: that we shall bring no reason, neither naturall nor supernaturall, against the omnipotency of Christ for we ac∣knowledg it, & adores it. But we say to you pretend not his omnipotencie for your monstrous imaginations, whilk hes no warrand of his will in his Scripture. For first we say, this argument of yours will not follow: Christ is able to make his bodie to be in two places, both at once, in heauen, and in the Sacrament: therefore he makes it to be so. For you must first proue he wil doe so: for your self, Maister Gilbert, can do ma∣ny things quhilk you doe not, because you will not, so from can to wil, it followes not. And if you say that Christ hes wil∣led so, because he saide, This is my bodie: I haue answered to it before, refute you it, and all your Romane Cleargie if you can. For you might aswell say, Christ willed the Cup wherin the wine was, to be changed in his blood and newe Testa∣ment, and himself to be changed in a wine Tree, Ioh 10. & 15 1. Cor, 10. Luc  1. Cor. 11 and a Dore and a Rock to be changed in him: because so hes he and his Apostles spoken, and these speaches are as true, as that; and yet there is no change heir. Next, I say, your owne schoole∣men and great defenders of Transubstantiation, Lib. 1. cap. 84. & lib. 2. cap. 25. con¦agent Thomas of Aquine and others, sayes that it is against the omnipotencie of God, to affirme that hee may doe anything whilk implyes a contradiction in the selfe, for that is rather to be called a weaknesse nor a power. And the Scripture affirmes, that God cannot lye, nor deny himself, nor be tempted, and that yea and nay is not in Christ: Heb. 6.2 Tim. 2. Iames 1.2, Cor.  but to Christs bo∣die both to be a true bodie like to vs in all things (to wit essential) except sinne, as the Scripture sayes, and to be in moe places at once, whilk makes him to haue not a true bodie like ours. For Augustine sayes, (speaking of Christs glorified body,) If it be a true bodie, it is then in a certaine place: August. ad Da¦danum and take away from bodies their quantities, they are no more true bodies) implyes a con∣tradiction, and is yea and nay in him: and Christs body both to be visible and inuisible at one time: to bee in a certaine
place in heauen with his owne length and bredth, & not to haue his owne length and bredth at once in the Sacrament, is a manifest contradiction, is yea and nay in Christ: therfore both by the Scripture and your owne doctrine, the omnipo∣tencie of Christ: cannot be alleadged or pretended for this your doctrine, whilk is yea and nay, and implyes a manifest contradiction. So this in very trueth, M. Gilbert is the inuen∣tion of your owne braine, whilk is alledged for your Tran∣substantiation, and wants the warrand, yea is gainsaide both by the written word, and your owne schoole-men. Next, yee would haue vs to hold away our figures symboles, and simi∣litudes: I answere: our owne figures we shall holde away: but these figures, symboles, and signes, wherein our Sauiour hes deliuered his trueth to vs, we must and will acknowledg So then, obeying rather God who hes set them downe in his Scripture, nor you who forbids vs to acknowledge them: & what a monstrous exposition woulde you make of infinite places of Scripture, if you woulde admit no figures in them, but all to be vnderstood plainlie and literallie as they were spoken. The Scripture ascriues to God eies, eares, seit, hands, & a face: and the Scripture calles Christ a dore, a vine. Nowe if you will admit no figures heir, but will haue all these places exponed literallie, as you will haue vs to doe in the Sacra∣ment: then you would be reckoned in the number of the old hereticks called Anthropomorphitae, who because they saw the Scripture speake so of God, they taking it literally and ex∣poning it without figures, as you would haue vs to expone the Sacrament, they thought that God was bodilie: yea, you must make another monstrous Transubstantiation of Christ in a dore, and vine tree, for so he calles himself. And to come to the Sacraments themselues, how many Transubstantia∣tions will you make in all the Sacraments both of the old & new Testament, if you will remoue figures and signes from them, and expone them literally, as you would haue vs to do in this Sacrament, Circumcision is called the couenant, and yet it was but the signe of the covenant: Gen. 27. Exod. 12 2. Cor. 1 Psa. 24 Heb 4. Tit 3 the Lamb in the Passeo∣uer, is called the Passeouer of the Lord, & yet it was but the signe
of the Passeouer: the rock in the wildernesse is called Christ, and yet it was but a signe of Christ: the Arke is called the Lord, and yet it was but a signe of the Lord: the land of Ca∣naan is called the rest of the Lord, and yet it was but a signe of that rest: and Baptisme is called the lawer of regeneratiō, and yet it is but the signe of our regeneration. Doe you thinke that the formes of speaches in all other Sacramentes are figuratiuely taken and the forme of speach in this Sacra∣ment only to be literallie vnderstood? what reason can there be of this diuersitie? But it may be you think that the forme of speeches in all other Sacraments should be taken figura∣tiuely: but the phrase of speach in this Sacrament is to be ta∣ken literallie. But first, what then will you say to this speach This is my body whilk is broken for you, and this, 1. Cor, 11. Luc. 22 Mar. 14.1. Cor, 13 the Cup is the newe Testament in my blood, and the Cup is my blood, and the bread whilke we breake, is it not the communion of the body of Christ, and the Cup whilk we blisse, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? al fi∣guratiue speaches, and to be vnderstood figuratiuelie: other∣wise Christ shuld haue bene broken in the Sacrament, whilk is both contrary to the Scripture, and also absurde. For then he should haue suffered twise, once in the sacrament, & once vpon the Croce: and not only should there be one Transub∣stantiation in the Sacrament, but manie: as of the cup in the blood of Christ: and of the bread and cup in the participatiō of the body and blood of Christ: and so you should not only haue one Transubstantiation, but manie. And howe I pray you can Sacramēts whilk are but figures, signes & symboles, be vnderstood but figuratiulie? And how can duo diuersa indi∣uidua alterum de altero praedicari in praedicatione, and be spoken of another, vvithout a figure, as it is heere. This bread is my bo∣die, &c. Can you or any at all of your Romane Cleargie, vnderstand sik propositions othervvaies then figuratiuelie? What an vnreasonable thing is it then to you to forbid vs to acknowledge figures in this sacrament, whilk is but a fi∣gure and signe, seing they are so frequently vsed in the scrip∣tures of God, and especially in sacraments, as also in this sa∣crament? So nil ye, wil ye signes & symboles, tropes, and fi∣gures
yee must admit in the exposition of this sacrament. Last of all ye thinke, a naturall bodie cannot be spirituallie eaten. Would you be so absurd and blasphemous as to haue Christs bodie naturally eaten? For then his bodie must be naturally chawed, A page haue blas¦phemiam digested, turned ouer in our substance, & casten out in the draught, and so be mortall and suffer a∣gaine. Let me ask you whether is Christs bodie the foode of the soule, or the foode of the bodie? If you say it is the foode of the bodie to fill the bellie, then I say it must be naturally eaten, but you are blasphemous in so thinking. But if you say it is the foode of the soule, as it is indeede, and as our Sa∣uiour sayes, then it cannot bee eaten naturally: for as the foode of the bodie cannot be eaten spiritually, Ioh. 6.35. so the foode of the soule cānot be eaten naturally, but spiritually by faith. And if you vnderstood this true eating of Christ by faith, all your contention woulde take an end. But this is the stone whilk yee stumble at, and therefore yee forbid vs to come in with a spirituall eating of Christs naturall bodie, as though it could be eaten otherwise nor spiritually by faith. Will you neither vnderstand the Scriptures nor the ancient fathers, Ioh 6.35. August tract. 26. in Ioh 6 & lib 3 de doctr. Christ cap 16. & Clemens Alex. Hieronim s. Basi¦lus Brnardus supra citat. lit Belarm. de Eu∣charist lib, 1. ca, 7 and your cann law de consecr. dit. 1, cap. V, Quid pa as den∣tes, Bleue and ou hes eaten Eph s.  Ihn. 16 nor your owne Kirk, who all acknowledge a spirituall eating of Christ by faith? What grosse darknes is this, wherewith the Lord hes blinded you aboue all, that ye cannot vnder∣stand it? As Christ dwels in vs and we in him, so doe we eate him & drink him. But the Apostle sayes, he dwels in vs by faith therefore we eate him and drinke him by faith. And seeing your Kirk grants that the eating of Christ corporally does no good, and the eating of him by faith only will bring eter∣nall life, as our Sauiour sayes: what needs then this corporall and reall eating of Christ? And why are yee like the grosse and carnall Capernats who can vnderstand no eating but a corporall eating of him? And what is the cause that ye can∣not vnderstand the doctrine of your owne Kirk whilk acknowledges a spirituall eating of Chirst by faith both by the worde and by the sacrament also. De consecra. list a cap. Vt quid I had neuer haue thought that ye had bene so far blinded of the Lorde. But I haue you to the Lord. Let the (Christian reader) now iudge
whether our doctrine or yours bee the inuention of mans braine, and whilk of them hes their warrant out of the writ∣ten word of God. Maister Gilbert Browne. And further, I say, of these words, 1. Cor, 11, 24 This is my bodie whilk shall be deliuered for you, whilk is an true proposition, and therefore this must followe. But there was no bodie deliuered for vs, but the naturall bodie of Christ: there¦fore it was his naturall bodie that he gaue to his Disciples to be eaten. Then if it were his naturall bodie, it was not natural bread. As Saint Ambrose expounds the same, let vs proue sayes he this not to be that that nature for∣med, but that thing whilk the blessing hes consecrate and greater strength to bee in blessing not in nature: for nature it selfe is changed by blessing. He hes the same more amplie in the fourth booke the fourth chapter de Sacramentis Maister Iohn Welsche his reply. First I answere, the words of the Apostle is not as yee cite them here whilk shall be deliuered, but  whilk is broken and in the present time, and so in Luke  whilk is giuen, so you are not faithfull in translating this place of Scripture, both contrarie to the Greeke and Syriak copies. Vpon the whilk I reason thus, this proposition is true, this is my bodie whilk is broken for you. So the Apostle sayes, but Christs bodie was not broken then reallie, for not a bone of him was broken at all, as the Scripture testifies: Exod 12. Ioh, 19, and the Scripture sayes and all men confesses that he suffered but once, so only his sufferings ar signified then by the breaking of the bread in the sacrament here: so as Christs bodie was not brokē then reallie, that is, suffered: but his suffering only signified by the breaking of the bread, so his bodie was not giuen reallie and corporallie to be eaten, but only signified. Secondly, I say, it is true, that Christs naturall bodie was de∣liuered to the death for vs: but yet it will not followe vpon this, that it was his naturall bodie whilk hee gaue to them to be eaten corporallie: for his naturall bodie was reallie deli∣vered to death for vs: and it was but giuen to them spiritu∣allie to be eaten. You muste coyne a newe Logick M. Gilbert or you can make these two sticke together: and the one ne∣cessarilie to follow vpon the other. For by that same reason
you may aswell conclude, that Christ gaue his naturall bo∣die to be eaten corporallie in the worde, for hee giues him∣selfe to Ioh. 6.35 Bellarm grants this also lib. 1. de Eucharist. cap. 7. be eaten in his worde aswell as in his Sacrament, and also he giues that same body to them in the word, whilk was deliuered to death: for the selfe same Christe is offered and receiued aswell in the worde as in the Sacrament. So from his bodilie death, to a corporal eating of him, it wil not follow. And further by that same reason you may aswell say that the fathers before Christ vnder the law, did eate Christs bodie corporallie, for they eate that same spirituall foode, & drank that same spirituall drink, in their Sacraments, whilk we doe now in ours. So the Apostle testifies, euen that selfe same Christ his bodie and blood whiilk was deliuered to the death, & yet it wil not follow, that they did eate his naturall bodie &c. As for Ambrose, it is true he so speakes: but hee ex∣poundes himselfe in that same chapter, while as he sayes, Be∣fore the blessing another forme or thing is named, but after the conse∣cration the bodie of Christ is signified: If the bread then signifie the bodie of Christ, it is not changed in his body. And because of this holy vse to signify the body of Christ, Ambrose sayes that the nature is changed by blessing: and that this is his meaning his words following will declare it, where he sayes. Shall not the words of Christ be of force to change the forme of the Elements. nter species clementorum In that same sense Ambrose saies, the nature of the elements is chan∣ged, in the whilk he sayes, the forme of them is changed, for he affirmeth both there. But you will not say I trowe, vnlesse you will ouer-throwe your transubstantiation that Ambrose meanes, that the forme of the Elements is changed in sub∣stance, but onlie in vse & signification, for you say the forms remaines, therefore you muste also graunt that Ambrose meanes not by the change of nature, the change of the sub∣stance of them, but only the change in the vse of them, from a common vse to a holy vse. And because it may be you will delay to subscriue to the trueth of our doctrine, vntill you heare the sentence and iudgement of the fathers. Therefore, I will set them down heere. Coa Marc l, 4 Tertullian sayes, This is my bodie, that is, a figure of my bodie. Chrysostome sayes, VVhat is that whilk
the breade signifies, the bodie of Christ. Theodoret sayes, Chrys. in 1, Cor cap, 10 Theodoret. dial. 1, and 2 The breade & wyne is signes and figures of the bodie and bloode of Christ. And hee sayes, Our Sauiour in the institution of the Sacrament enterchanged the names and gaue to the signe or simbole the name of his bodie: and these mysticall signes of these holy things whereof are the signes. Vnto the whilk he answeres, are they not signes of the body & blood of Christ. Hieronymus sayes That Christ by taking of the bread, Hier in Mat. 6 Cyrillus ad p Matth. 11 Bas. Liturgi Nauian. in orat. 2 de Pas. & funere Gorg. Cyprian lib 1. ep 6. eius contra A∣dima. cap, 12. & Psal. 3 whilk comforts the hearte of man, representeth the trueth of hi bodie. Cyrillus sayes, Our Sacraments auoweth not the eating of a man. Basilius and Na∣zianzen calles the bread and wine in the Supper  figures or signes of the bodie of Christ. Cyprian sayes, The Lorde called breade made of many graines his body and wine made of many grapes, his bloode. Augustine sayes, Our Lord doubted not to say: this is my bodie while as be gaue but the signe of his bodie. And he calles it the figure of his bodie and blood. And their canon lawe sayes, De consecr dist. 2 cap Hoc est. The heauenlie breade whilk is the flesh of Christ, is called after a maner the bodie of Christ, while as it is but the Sacrament of his bodie. And the glosse there sayes, The heauenlie breade, that is the heauenly Sacrament whilk represents trulye the flesh of Christ, is called the bodie of Christ but improperlie. I omit the rest whilk is exceeding many, and because if you be a right defender of the catholicke faith, you will say with the rest of your Cleargie, that the Pope cannot erre. Therefore a Pope, Gelasius by name sayes, Gelasius de ¦bus naturis in Christo Neither the substance of the bread, nor nature of the wine, ceasses to bee anye more nor they were before: but remaines in their owne substance. And hee calles them there, an image and resemblance of the bodie and bloode of Christ. Now tell me Maister Gilbert doe not these speake as plaine as we, will you avowe your Transubstantiation whilk they so flatlie denie. And as our Sauiour sayes, a kingdome deuided against it selfe cannot stand. So the manifolde diuisions amongst your selues, concerning this transubstantiation, is a verye sure argument of the falling both of you and your doctrine. Some of you expounds this word hoc. this Bonauenture Geson contra Florentium, ib, 4 of the breade as Thomas lib, 4. seu dist 8. Occam, in 4. se d. 13, q. 16, 17 Some of Christs bodie Innocent, 3. de offic. mis. pag. 3 obiect, 14. & Se¦tus in l. 40. d. 8. q. 3 and some calles it an Indi∣uiduum vagum Durandus rati∣onal. 4 some sayes it signifieth nothing, Holcot in  sent, quest.  and some sayes it signifieth a thing whilk is common both to terminus à quo and terminus ad quem.
Secondlie in the exposition of the vvord est, is. Some for it is: some for it is changed: 3. some Thomas. sayes the substance of ye bread and vvine returnes to nothing: some sayes The glosse of Gratin and the extra gats de conseci. dist. 2 c. Species. &c. simit. ext. de suma snitate it passes in the bodie of Christ. 4. some sayes Con oporte: & bglos. de cn¦secrat d st. 1 &c Cu Matha pa¦a vtrum de cle mis. the water in the Sacrament returnes to nothing: some sayes it is changed in the blood with the wyne: some sayes it is Thomas 3974 art 8 turned in Christs vitall humours: some sayes it is tur∣ned in the wyne, and after in the blood: some sayes ran. lib, 4 cap. 42 they dare not define it. 5. some sayes, Thomas epist. 59 & 3. quest 7. the wormes that are bred of the Sacra∣ment commes of the quantitie: other some sayes Durand. lib. 3. cap. 41 they are bred of the substance. 6. some sayes Christ Durand lb 4. cap 41 consecrated by the worde, he blissed: some by the Maist. Glbert. words, This is my bodie, and the blissing together: some Glos. in c. V∣trum in verbis perferri de cons. dist. 2 vvill haue the consecration to be made in heauen: and some franklie Scotus in repor dist. 8. quest. 2 confesses that they neither knowe the words nor the nomber of them whreby this consecration is made: and to omitt six hundreth the like, I will onlie touch these few glosan tt ibus some saies the body of Christ is taken bodilie with the mouth, Caan. tom. 2. cap. 2, & 3, & 5, some sayes that it feedes, Gos ibidem some sayes as sone as it is pressed with the teeth the bodie of Christ is caught vp to heauen. Durand. ration. lib 4. But other some sayes, it passeth from the teeth to the hearte, and then the bodilie presence ceases, Bonauenture 4 dst 13. ar. 2. q. 2 and other some will haue him to goe to the sto∣mack &c. but not to the minde. And yet hee sayes hee doubts whe∣ther he goes to the belly or not, for the varietie of opinions: and in so great varietie he sayes, what to holde is hard to iudge. And suppose he holdes it that that the bodie of Christ goes not into the bellie of a mouse or is casten out into the draught, because, sayes he, the eares of well disposed persons would abhorre it, and infidels & hereticks would iest at it, and laugh vs to scorne. Alexander de hales part. q 45. & Thomas of Aquine part. 3. q 80 art 3 & Anto¦ninus Archebi∣shop part. 3. tit, 13 cap, 6 Yet sundry others holdes that not only it goes into the belly, but also Christs bodie maye bee vomited vp or purged out in the draught, and that brute beastes may eat Christs bodie and it maye goe into the bellie of dogges and swyne. O filthie mouths & vncleane spirits, what hereticke, what Capernait was euer so grosse and carnal: yea, so barbarous & brutish, as ye are. So not only are yee more grosse nor the Capernaits who thought that saying hard: but also like the barbarous Canibales who eate the fleshe of man. O blinde leaders of the blinde, shall myse, dogs, and swyne, eate and drinke the precious bodie and blood of Christ? shall they then haue e∣ternall
lyfe? I thinke the eares of all Christians will abhorre this your doctrine, and their harts will tremble at it. Ex citatione Smithes sermon These absurdities, together with Scriptures and Fathers against the same, hes made some of your great pillers to say as Aga nst the cap¦tiu tie o Baby∣lon made by Lu∣ther Fischer, that no man can prooue by the words of the Gospell, that a∣ny Priest in these dayes, doth consecrate the very bodie and blood of Christ: and Lindanus b. 6 lib. 4 panop, and Caninus, and Pe∣tius a Soto saes, taditions hes not their author in the Scripture, supra citati others, that Transubstantiation is but a tradition whilk hes not the authour of it in the Scrip∣ture, nor cannot be defended by the same: and others, as Tonstal in the booke of the Sa∣craments. Tonstall, that it had bene better to haue left euerie man to his owne coniecture, as they were before the councell of Lateran then to bring in sik a question. I haue bene longsome in this, but yet it so behoued mee: because it is the ground-stone of their sacrifice of the Masse, and their other Idolatries & ab∣hominations. So then to conclude this, seing your doctrine of Transubstantiation is aggree-able neither to the doctrine of Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the ancient Fathers, nor your owne canon Lawe and Pope, as they haue bene cited: and seing ye are at sik variances amongst yourselues concerning the same: therefore it is to be reiected as hereticall, damna∣ble, and blasphemous by all Christians. And this for the 4. point of your doctrine. Maister Gilbert Browne. 5. Our doctrine is, that the lawfull Ministers and Priests of the Kirk of Christ, hes power giuen them by Christ to forgiue & to retaine sins, Iohn. 20.23. Matth. 9. . Matth. 16.19. Matth. 18.18. because Christ sayes to his Apostles, Receiue ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye shall for∣giue, they are forgiuen them, and whose sinnes ye shall reteine, they are reteined. And in another place, That ye may know (sayes Christ) that the sonne of man hes power in earth to forgiue sinnes, &c with sundrie other places, conforme to the same. And this is denied by the Protestants. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for the fifth point of your doctrine, that the lawful Mi∣nisters of Christ, hes power giuen them by Christ to forgiue sinnes, and to retaine them. If you meane that they haue this power as Gods witnesses, Ministers, and Embassadours, yea and Iudges too: (for the Apostle sayes, We iudge them that
are within) to testifie and to declare, to iudge and giue out iudgement according to Gods word, not only by the prea∣ching of the Gospell, and administration of the Sacraments ioyned therewith: but also by the censures, and discipline, in excommunicating the obstinate impenitent, and absoluing the penitent. If, I say, your doctrine be this, then you iniurie vs in saying, we denie it: and you needed not to haue quoted these places to confirme the thing whilk we both teach, and also practise. But what is the cause ye would not quote the place where we deny this doctrine? But if you meane that the lawfull Ministers of Christ hes an absolute power, & full authoritie, not as Ministers and Witnesses onelie, but as iudges & Lords ouer our faith, to forgiue or retaine by their owne authoritie, 4. Controv. tom. . pag and that the very pronouncing of the words of ab∣solution, is the cause of remission of sinnes, and that it so scattereth the sinnes, and makes them to euanishe, as the blaste of winde extinguishes the fire, and scatters the cloude, as Bellarmine sayes. If you meane so, this we vtterlie deny vnto you, and all men: because it is onlie proper vnto God. The whilk the Iewes suppose they were blinded did acknowledge: Math. 9. and so not so blinde as yee are. For it is onlie God that forgiues in Iesus Christ. It is on∣ly his death that hes merited it, & only faith that apprehends it, and onlie his spirit that seales it vp, and the word and Mi∣nisterie that declares it, testifies, and confirmes it. For the A∣postle sayes, He hes committed to vs the word and ministerie of recon∣ciliation, and we are in his stead to beseech men to be reconciled to God: so we are but Ministers of this. 2 Cor. 5 18.19 20. Homil. 23 Augustine is plaine in this: It is the Spirite (sayes he) that forgiues, and not you, meaning of the mi∣nisters, and the Spirite is God: it is God therefore who forgiues, and not we. There is one argument: God onlie forgiues sins, there∣fore not man. And againe, What is man but a sicke man to be hea∣led himself? Would thou be a physitian to mee, with me seike the physi∣tian thy selfe. Heir an other argument, He cannot be a Physi∣tian to others, who needes a Physition himselfe. Further, hee sayes, He that can forgiue by man, can also forgiue without man: for he may aswell forgiue by him, as by another. But to what purpose doe ye quote the 9. of Matthew, That the sonne of man hes power to
forgiue sinnes, for will you say, that the Ministers of the Kirk hes that absolute authoritie that he had? the whilk if ye doe, then are ye blasphemous. As for the word Priest, wherwith ye stile the Ministers of the Kirk, I know that you and your Kirk takes more pleasure in this soyle, nor in all the stiles whilk the holy Ghost hes giuen to the Ministers of the Kirk in the new Testament: for amongest the manifolde styles whilk are giuen to his Ministers, yet hes he neuer giuen this style of a sacrificing Priest, as proper to them, throughout the whole newe Testament. But as your office of Priest-hoode is not written in Christ his latter Testament, so neither is your stile of sacrificing Priests contained in the same. But new offices must haue newe stiles. Maister Gilbert Browne. 6. Our doctrine is, to make the Priests of the Kirk to annoint the seike with oile, in the name of our Lord, and to pray ouer him, because it is the doctrine of the Apostles, as we haue in Saint Iames in these words, Iacob. 4.15 August. tom. 4. super Leui. quest 84. Is any seik amongst you, let him bring in the Priests of the Kirk, and let them pray e∣uer him, annointing him with oile in the name of our Lord, and the prayer of faith shall saue the seik, and our Lord shall lift him vp, and if he be in sinnes, they shalbe remitted him. And because we find heir an externall forme, whilk is the annointing with oile, of an internall grace, whilk is remission of sins: therefore we say it is a Sacrament. Nowe take from these places the vaine subterfugies of our new men, that will haue him a Mediciner for the bodie in this, and not for the soule, the matter will be plaine of it self. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As to your doctrine of annointing of the seik with oile, & that not by euery man, but by a Priest: not in all seiknesses, but in the extremitie of death: not with euerie oile, but with oile consecrated by the Bishop: Cap. 7. de ex. vnctione (whilk Bellarmine makes es∣sential to this Sacrament) and that not all the parts & mem∣bers of the bodie, but the fiue organes of the senses, and the reines, and feete: and that by this forme of words, Let God forgiue thee whatsoeuer thou hes sinned, by the sight, hearing, smelling, &c. by this holy vnction, and his most godlie mercie. The whilk you will haue to haue two effects. The one, the health of the bo∣die, if it be expedient for the soule: the other remission of the
relicts of sinnes that remaines: and this ye make to be one of your Sacraments, And for this purpose ye onlie bring one testimonie of Scripture. So that all the shewe of warrand you can picke out of the Scripture, is this onlie place of Iames For I trowe with Bellarmine, & sundrie others, you haue seene that that place of Marc. 6.13. whilk is also alledged by the councell of Trent for the confirmation of this doctrine, would carrie no shew to make any thing for you, and there∣fore it may be you haue omitted it. But this place serues no∣thing for your purpose. For, first I say, this was a ceremonie annexed to the miraculous gift of healing, Marc. 6.13 as is plaine both by the text vsing the worde  and the Lord will lift him vp whilk is properlie spoken of the health of the bodie: and also by that place of Mark, where it is written, that the Apostles an∣nointed many sik with oile, and they healed them. The whilk gift was not onelie giuen to the Apostles, but also to the verie Churches, as is plaine of the 1. Corinth. 12. Vnto another is giuen the gift of healing, &c. Now seing this extraordinary gift is cea∣sed in the Kirk of God, wherefore will you superstitiouslie vse the ceremonie? So either avowe (Maister Gilbert) that your Priests hes this miraculous gift of healing, whilk I trow ye will not, or els leaue off the ceremonie? Secondlie, by this argument ye may aswell make all the rest of the ceremonies, (whilk our Sauiour and his Apostles, Peter and Paule, and the beleeuers in the primitiue Kirk, vsed towards the seik, blinde, lame, and dead) sacraments. As the Marc. 16.18 laying on of hands, whilk had both a command & a promise ioyned with it, Ioh 9.6 annointing of the eies of the blinde with clay, Ioh 5 Mat. 9 29. Act. 3.6. Act. . washing in the poole of Shiloam, &c. For why should not their examples be aswell followed, as the example of the Elders of the primitiue Kirk? & seing you vse not these ceremonies, because ye want the miraculous gift, whilk was ioyned with them, why doe ye vse this ceremonie superstitiouslie, seeing ye want this gift also? Thirdlie, I say, this place can make nothing for your do∣ctrine: for this place sayes, Call the Elders of the Kirk, and let thē, &c. but you call for a sacrificing Priest. This text sayes in the
plurall nomber, Call for the Elders: your doctrine sayes, one Priest is sufficient. This place speakes of oile, not mentioning a sillabe of consecration, blissing of it by the Bishop, and that nyne-folde salutation that ye giue vnto it, Haile, ô holy oyle, with the bowing of the knee, and other ceremonies. There is not a sillabe in this, nor in any other Scripture that speakes of these things, and yet your doctrine will haue all these ce∣remonies. This place sayes, And the prayer of saith shal saue the seik: and you attribute it to the ointment. This place puts no differences of seiknesse: but your doctrine is, that none be annointed, but he who is lying in the bed, & at the pointe of death. This place only specifieth the annointing of the seik, some of you reckons, as the councel of Florentine seuen parts: some, the fiue senses, as necessarie. Lib. 4 sent 4 dist. 23. quest. And therefore this moo∣ued Thomas of Aquine to say, That the forme of this Sacrament is not exstant in the Scripture. Now if it be not exstant in the Scrip∣ture, what to do haue we with it? seing the Scripture is able to make a man wise vnto saluation, and to make the man of God perfite in euery good worke? Fourthlie, Beda, Oecumenius, and Theophylactus in their com∣mentaries vpon these places and 2. de sacram. Thomas Waldensis & de heresibus. Alphonsus de castro, two arch-papists affirmes, that in the 6. of Marke, & 5. of Iames, the selfe same vnction and annointing is meaned. But de extern. vnct. Bellarmine & In Marc. 6 lansenius two other papists af∣firmes and proues by firme reasons, that that annointing in Marke is no Sacrament: therefore neither is this annointing in Iames a Sacrament, seing (as said is) in both the places the selfesame vnction is meaned. Fifthlie, I say, all the Sacraments the Lord hes instituted, are publick, and not priuate: but this Sacrament of yours is priuatlie ministred: therefore not a true Sacrament. Sextlie, all the Sacraments of the newe Testament should be ministred by them who haue the preaching of the Gospell concredited vnto them, and not by priuate Christians. In his epistle 1. cap. 8 But Innocentius the first, a Pope sayes, Priuate men may minister this, in their owne and others necessities: as also Thomas Waldensis a Pa∣pist. And yet the councell of Trent accurses them that so
sayes: Therefore it is not a Sacrament. Seuenthlie, Pope Innocent in that same epistle cited before calles it but genus Sacramenti, a kinde of Sacrament: therefore it is not properly a Sacrament. But you are more bold to cal it a Sacrament. Eightlie, all the Sacraments of Christ hes their warrand from the written worde: But Petrus a Soto calles this a traditi∣on whilk hes not the warrand in the written worde: In his booke a∣gainst ll. therefore it is not a lawfull Sacrament of Christ. And as to your argument: That it hes an externall forme of annointing with oile, of an internall grace whilk is remis∣sion of sinnes: I answere: this forme or ceremonie was ex∣traordinarie, as I prooued before, annexed to a miraculous gift of healing. The whilk seing it is now ceased, the ceremo∣ny also should cease. And this promise is not made to the an∣nointing (if ye will beleue the Apostle) but to the prayer of faith. The prayer of the faith, sayes the Apostle, shall saue the scik. And whereas ye say that we make him a Mediciner only for the bodie in this, and not for the soule: we answere: That this ceremonie as sundrie others, was onlie annexed to the extraordinarie gift of healing of the bodie, and was not seals of grace. And yet with the health of the bodie, the healing of the soule was oftentimes ioyned, as our Sauiour sayes to the Paralytick man: Matth. 9.2.6 Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, take vp thy bed & walke. Now whether these be our vaine subterfuges, or cleir grounds out of the Scripture, let the reader iudge. And wher as ye call vs newe men: let them be newe and moste recent, whose doctrine is most new. But, as hes and shall be proued by Gods grace, our doctrine is not new, but Iesus Christs in his olde and new Testament, and yours deuised since. Ther∣fore this title of noueltie most iustlie belongs vnto you. This for the 6. point of your doctrine. Maister Gilbert Browne. 7 Our doctrine is, that when our Priests (whilk are the onlie lawful Mi∣nisters now adayes) are called to that function, receiues the imposition of hands, with the grace of gift of the holy Ghost, because it is the doctrine of Saint Paule in these words: . Tim. 4.14 Neglect not the gift or grace that is within thee
whilk is giuen the by prophecie, with the imposition of priest-hoode. And there∣fore muste be a Sacrament, because it hes an externall forme, whilk is the imposition of handes, of an externall grace, whilk is the gifte giuen by the same. And for this cause Institut. lib 4 cap. 14. sect. 20 item lib. 4. cap 19 sect. 28 Iohn Caluin his selfe admits it to bee an Sacra∣ment: albeit in their confession they call it an bastard Sacrament of the Popes, and detests the same, although In lcis com. edit. 1543. de nu∣mer. sacrament. Melancthon hes the contrarie. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for the 7 point of your doctrine concerning the im∣position of hands in the ordination of the lawful ministers of the Kirk of Christ, because it is a ceremony whilk hes the foundation of it in the worde of God, and was practised in the primitiue Kirk, as in the ordination of Timothie here, and others: and is profitable both to put the Pastors in minde of his calling, that he is separated of God for the discharge of the same, and also the people that they imbrace him as one sent of God to them, therefore we both acknowledge it and practise it. But that either the gift of the holy Ghost is inse∣parably ioyned with it, or that it is a sacrament of the newe Testament properly (as you affirme) that we denie. As to the first, the gift of the holye Ghost is not inseparablie ioyned with it, first, because that is iniurious to the Lords free grace, whilk is not bound to any instrument, let be to a ceremonie. And also he speakes against experience: for how many, I pray you, doe receiue imposition of hands, who receiues not a new grace and gift of the holy Ghost amongst you? Mise∣rable experience these many ages both doth testifie it, Ex veteri Testa. quest 109. inter opera Augustini. and also one hes testified the same, saying, our Preists doth lay the word of blessing vppon many, but in fewe followeth the effect of that blessing. And certainly if any gift of the holy Ghost is ioyned with this ceremonie, it should be an abilitie to preach the word: for that is the principall part of the office of the Mini∣ster of the Gospel. But how many thousands are they among you in your Kirk wholes receiued this imposition of hands, and yet as vnable to preach the Gospel as Asses are? and last of all, what needed that tryall and examination, so straightlie commanded in the Scripture, whilk ought to be had of them that are to be ordained, if the holy Ghost were euer insepa∣rablie
giuen with the ceremonie. For wherefore is this triall and examination? And wherefore is Timothie so straightlie charged to lay his hands suddenlie on no man, but because it is onlie the holy Ghost who enables. The whilk also should be well knowne vnto his Kirk ere they presume to testifie the calling of God to them. For if it were true that ye say that the gift of the holy Ghost were ioyned with the imposition of hands inseparablie, 1. Timoth. 5.22 then the Apostle should rather haue commanded Timothie to lay his hands vpon manie in respect of the neede that the Kirk stoode in of all men, rather then to haue discharged him. And as for the place of Paule whilk ye cite here, Despise not the gift &c. This serues nothing for your doctrine: for if first the gift giuen to Timothie whilk the Apostles speake of, was extraordinarie, and so ordinarilie doth not euer follow the ceremonie. 2. It is not ascriued heere to the ceremonie of imposition of handes, but vnto Prophecy, whilk is giuen thee by Prophecie, wherby it was reuea∣led to the Kirk of the abilitie of this man. And so if there be anie prophecies that goes of you in your Clergie that the holie Ghost is giuen to you, then ye may claime vnto the same: but I think ye will not say that sik like prophecies go∣eth of you: therefore yee cannot claime to this testimonie. 3. 2. Tim. 1.14 Timothie is exhorted to keepe that worthie thing concredited vnto him through the holie Ghost. It was the holie Ghost therefore who was the giuer and preseruer of it. And as for the ceremonie it was a signe of the presence of gods spirit in them who was lawfully ordained. Now as to the second that ye will haue it a sacrament, because it hes a externall forme, and also a pro∣mise of grace. That will not follow: for then you should haue innumerable Sacraments: for prayer, almous-deeds, and the ordination of Magistrates, and manye other hes external formes, and hes promises of grace ioyned with them: and yet you will not say, that they are properlie Sacraments. For in all the Sacraments of the new Testament whilk properly are Sacraments, there must bee firste not onlye an externall action but an earthlie and visible Element, as water in Bap∣tisme, and breade and wyne in the Supper. And therefore,
Augustine sayes let the word be ioyned with the element, In Ioh. tract 90 and then it is a sacrament. Secondly, they must haue their expres warrant and institution from Iesus Christ in the Scripture, as baptis∣me hes Math. 28. and the Lords supper hes Math. 26. Third∣ly, they must not only haue a promise of grace, but a promise of remission of sinnes and sanctification: for they must bee seales of that couenant whilke is common to all Christians, as baptisme and the Lords supper is. But this ceremonie of imposition of hands wants all these three: for neither is there any earthly element, neither seales it vp the couenant whilk is common to al, but proper to the ministrie only: neither hes it the expres institution of Christ in al the foure Euangelists. and whereas in the 20. of Iohn he there ordaines his Apost∣les, we read, he breathed on them, and said, receiue the holy Ghost. but not a word that he laid his hands on them, or comman∣ded them to vse it to others. The whilk without all question he would haue done, if he had ordained it to be a sacramēt: and Petrus a Soto a Papist saies, that the making of the impo∣sition of hands to be a sacrament, is a tradition. Therefore it is not a sacrament properly of the new Testamēt. Secondly, if the ordination of any by imposition of hands were a sacra∣ment, the ordination of a bishop by the same especially, shuld be a sacrament: for the place whilk ye quote here is of Timo∣thie who was a Bishop as your Kirk affirmes. De sacramento ordinis lib. 1. c 5. And Bellarmine saies, if this be not a sacrament, then it cannot be proued by the Scrip∣ture that ordination by imposition of hands is a sacrament: and hee saies, if this be not granted they wil lose all the testimonies of the anci∣ents to proue impositiō of hands to be a sacrament, for they speake of the ordination of Bishops. But the In 4. dist. 24 ancient Schollers and Doctors of your owne Kirk, and Dominicus a Soto lib. 10. de iu∣stitia, & iure q i artic. 2 Dominicus a Soto a learned Papist affirmes, that this is not a sacrament properlie, and so neither the ordination of the rest of the ministrie can be a sacrament, se∣ing a Bishop is aboue the rest in your order. Last of al, Ses. 23. cap. 2, & 3 Bellarm. lib. 1. de sacr. od. cap 9. the counsell of Trent, is not against it and sundrie of the rest of your Clergie makes all the seuen orders of your Kirk, as Preists whilk ou distinguish in two sorts: to wit, in Bishops and inferior Priests, Deacons, sub-deacons, Exorcists, Lec∣tores,
dore-kepers, Bellarmine sayes singlip Iesu t sacmenta. ca. 9 Lib. 4 dist. 24. cap  autem and your Acoluthytes euerie one of them by themselues sacraments. And your Maister of sentences calles al the orders in the plurall number sacraments. So if ye durst let the people knowe the secret of this your doctrine, ye make not only seuen sacraments, but fourteene in verie deede. But this were dangerous to you to sowe abroad: for you feare it woulde cast your doctrine in some suspition with them, and be an occasion to them, to examine it by the Scripture, the whilk if they would once begin to doe, ye knowe your hope were lost. As for Caluine & Melanchton, they cal it a sacrament taking the worde in an ample sense, for these ceremonies that hes the foundation in the word: whilk hes a promise of a blessing ioyned with them: and not in that sense that bap∣tisme and the Lords supper are called sacraments, as Caluine in that first place whilk ye quote plainly acknowledges: for these are his wordes, Let the Christian Kirk (sayes he) be content of these, (meaning of baptisme and the supper) and let them not admit nor acknowledge, desire, or look for, any other third sacrament til the end of the world. And as for imposition of hands whilk the Kirk vses in their ordinatiōs, he saies, I wil not be against it that it be called a sacrament, so being I reckon it not among the ordinarie sacraments. And Me∣lanchton in that same place reckons vp prayer, almes, marri∣age, the Magistrat in the number of these vnto the whilks he giues this name of a sacrament, whereby he makes it plaine that he takes this worde sacrament, amply and larglie as hes bene saide before, and not in that sense that baptisme and the supper is called sacraments. So you play your selfe (Mai∣ster Gilbert) in the ambiguitie of this word sacrament, and deceiues the reader with the same. And whereas ye call your Priests the only lawfull Ministers now a dayes: I wil answer to this more fullie afterward, onlie this now: First, seing the fountaine and grounde vpon the whilk all the lawfull cal∣linges in your Kirk depends and is deriued, as your selues confesses, is the supremacy of your Pope, whome I haue pro∣ued to be the Antichrist in my other treatise, and seeing the office of your priesthoode in sacrificing the sonne of God, as ye suppose, is most abhominable, idolatrous and Antichristi∣an,
as I haue proued also there: therefore you are not onlie not lawfull Ministers of Christ, but the Ministers of Anti∣christ. And as for the style of Priest, I answered it before; it is not so much as once ascriued to the Minsters of the Gos∣pell to signifye their proper calling in the whole new Te∣stament. Maister Gilbert Browne. 8. Our doctrine is, that matrimonie is an bond vndissoluble, because our Sauiour saies, that which God hath ioyned together, let no man separate. Matth 19 6 Marc. 10.11 12. Luc. 16.18. Matth. 5 33 Matth. 19.9 And sik like he sayes: that whosoeuer dimits his wife and marries another, commits adultrie vpon her. And in Saint Luke we haue the same And Saint Mathew is of the same opinion (albeit one may put away his wife by him for fornica∣tion) this is the doctrine also of the Apostles of Iesus Christ. For it is written in Saint Paule, that an woman that is vnder a husband, her husband liuing is bound to the law, Rom. 7.2.3. 1. Corinth. 7.9 1. Cor. 7.10.11 but if her husband be dead she is loosed from the law of her hus∣band Therefore her husband liuing she shal be called an adulteres if she be with another man, and so forth. And in another place he saies, to them that be ioy∣ned in matrimonie, I giue not commande but our Lord: that the wife depart not from her husband and if she departs to remaine vnmaried, or to be reconciled to her husband. And let not the husband put away his wife. Now this is our re∣ligion of matrimonie, and plaine repugnant to the doctrine of the Ministers of Scotland that will licence a man to put away his wife and marie another. And they call the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles the Popes crueltie a∣gainst the innocent diuorced in their negatiue faith. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for your 8. and 9. points of doctrine concerning mar∣riage, the first that it is vndissoluble for no cause: the other that it is a sacrament. As to the first, I woulde scarselie haue vnderstoode this poynte of your doctrine, and your coun∣cel of Trent and others of your Clergie who writes of it, had not bene more plaine then ye. And I thinke, that there are few that knowes not this point of your doctrine otherwise, who can take it vp by this your writing. I wonder why yee are so darke in setting down your owne doctrine. But wher∣fore should I wonder, for darknes may not byde to se the light. Your doctrine then is this. Concil. Trid. ses. 24 canon 8 Bellarm. lib. 1. de matrim. cap. 14 First you make manie cau∣ses of separation & diuorcement, beside adultrie (expres a∣gainst the doctrine of Iesus Christ, he that shall dimit his wife ex∣cept
for fornication &c.) he makes her to commit adulterie. As 1. for the vowe of continencie to enter in a Monasterie or Nunnerie: 2. for he∣resie: 3. and for perrill of offending of God. Next, your doctrine is, That suppose there be many causes of separation betwixt the man and the wife, from bed and boord (as wee speake) yet the bonde of Mariage contracted and perfited, betwixt the faithfull, can no wayes be broken, as long as they both liue together, no not for adulterie. So that the partie innocent diuorced, Bellarm. lib. 1. cap. 12. maye not lawfullie marrie another, during the life of the guiltie partie: And if they marry, they cal it adulterie, and they wil haue the grounde of this to bee, because it is a Sacrament. So one errour followes and leanes vpon another. For if Marriage be not a Sacrament, then the bonde may be lowsed by their owne doctrine. But marriage is not a Sacrament, as shall be proued heereafter: Therefore the bonde is soluble. Our doc∣trine is, that the bonde of marriage contracted and perfited betweene two Christians, is broken by the adulterie of ei∣ther of the parties: so that the innocent diuorced, maye law∣fully marry another. As for our doctrine. It is plaine in the Scripture, in the 19. and 5. of Matthew: where there the Lord in plaine tearmes excepts the cause of fornication, saying: Whosoeuer dimits his wife except it be for fornication, and marries an∣other, commits adulterie. So then by the contrarie: hee that di∣mits his wife for fornicatiō (whilk is adulterie there) & mar∣ries another, commits not adulterie. And seeing the Apostle commands, 1. Cor. 7.2. That euerie man haue his owne wife, and euerie wife her owne husband, and that for the auoyding of fornication: and it is bet∣ter to marrie nor to burne. Therfore, the first marriage being dis∣solued by diuorcement iustly, according to gods worde; It is leasome to the partie innocent at least, to vse the remedie of marriage for the auoyding of fornication. Other-wise, if hee might not vse it, diuorcement were not a benefite, but rather a punishment, and the innocent shoulde be punished with∣out a fault. Now, as to the Scriptures whilk ye quote, Matth. 19.6. and 5.31. they haue that exception of fornication expreslie mentioned. And as for the places of Mark. 10.11.12. and Luke 16.18. and Romanes 7.2.3. and 1. Corinth, 7.39. they are
all to be vnderstood with that exception of fornication, that our Sauiour expreslie sets downe in the former two places, otherwaies Scripture should be contrary to Scripture, whilk is blasphemie to thinke, and our Sauiour is the best exponer of himselfe. And as for the 1. Corinth. 7.10.11. the Apostle speakes not of that separation for adulterie, but of a separa∣tion for a season, for other causes or variances, in the whilk ease the parties separated, are to remaine vnmaried, or to be reconciled together. And because ye will not credite vs nor the sonne of God so expreslie speaking in his Scripture, yet I thinke ye will giue some credite to your owne Doctours, councels, canons and Popes, whome if ye be a right Catho∣licke, ye thinke that they cannot erre. In comment Matth. 19 Caietanus a Cardi∣nall, lib. 5. annot in comment.  Cc∣taui. Ambrosius Catharinus Papists, holds this doctrine with vs against the religion of your Kirk, that Adultery breakes the bond of marriage, and that the innocent diuorced may marrie another. Pope Decret. causa 32. quest 7 cap. Concubusti Zachary, and the councell Decret. causa 32. quest 7 cap. Concubusti Triburiense, & another Ibid cap. Qu¦dam canon sayes, Ibidem cep. Si quis That incestuous adultery breakes the bond of marri∣age, so that the partie innocent, may marrie another. And Pope Gre∣gory the 3. suppose in a Ibid. cap. Hi¦veo canon he will not haue adulterie to breake the bonde of marriage, so that the pairty innocent may marrie another, contrarie to the doctrine of Christ our Sauiour, yet he Ibid. cap. Quid propususti. permits a man to marrie another, if his former wife being taken with some disease, be not able to rander dew beneuo∣lence vnto her husband. So suppose this Pope will not admitte that true cause whilk our Sauiour sets downe, of adultery: yet he sets downe causes himselfe, whilk wants the warrand of the word. And Pope Celestine the 3. set foorth a decree, that when of maried persons one falleth into heresie, the partye Catholick is free to marrie againe: cap. Laudabilem de convers. infidelium, confessed by Alphonsus a Papist, lib. 1. cap. 4. aduersus haereses. So then either your Doctors, Canons, Councels, & three Popes erres, or else the bond of marriage may be bro∣ken, and the innocent partie diuorced may marrie another. Your religion of Matrimonie therefore is not onely repug∣nant to ours and Iesus Christs, but also to your owne canons Councels, Doctors, & Popes. Let them therefore condemne
your cruell iudgement against the innocent diuorced. And therefore Bellarmine confesses, Bellarm. de mat. lib. 1. cap. 15 that in this point they haue many a∣gainst them, not onelie vs whome he calles heretickes: but also Latines, Greekes, and Catholickes. Maister Gilbert Browne. Eph. 5.23 9 With Saint Paule, we make it a Sacrament, as sundrie of the learned Protestants doe, as Lib. de vera & falsa r cap. de matrimonio Zuinglius, In lcis ditis, 1558. & 1558 Melancthon, and chieflie young Mar∣chinstoun, in his 22 Proposition of his discourse vpon the Reuelation, whose words are these. Thirdly, bodily marriage is by Saint Paule, called a symbole and a Sacrament of the vnion of Christ and his Kirk. And yet our new con∣fession detests the same, and will haue it but a bastard. Sik concord is be∣twixt Christ, his Apostles, and our new preachers of the Gospell: and also amongst themselues. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Lib, 1. de matri cap.  The 9. point of your doctrine is: you will haue Marriage a Sacrament of the newe Testament, and that properlie, and that accor∣ding to the institution of God, vnto the whilk the promise of the grace of iustification is annexed: so Bellarmine and the councell of Trent saies. But marke (Christian reader) their ground of this their doctrine. They say, the bond of marriage amongst infidels may be broken: but say they the bond of marriage amongst the faithfull cannot be broken. And they make the cause of this difference to be this, because the marriage of Christians is a Sacrament. So they reason. Marriage amongst Christi∣ans is a Sacrament: therefore say they, it cannot be broken. But what is their principal ground now, wherby they proue marriage to be a Sacrament? because (say they) the marri∣age of Christians is a bond indissoluble; therefore it is a Sa∣crament whilk hes the grace of Iustification ioyned with it. So mutuallie, one error vpholds another. Vpon the whilk I reason: If the bond of marriage may be broken for adultery then it cannot be a Sacrament: (this your Kirk graunts, be∣cause they make that the ground of this) but the bonde of marriage may be broken for adulterie, as hath bene proued before, both by the Scriptures, & also by your owne canons, councels, Doctors, and Popes: therefore marriage is not a Sacrament. Secondlie, in the sacraments of the new Testament, there
are earthlie elements: as the water in Baptisme: the bread and wine in the supper: and an expresse forme of words pre∣scriued in the newe Testament: as in Baptisme, I bapitze thee, &c. and in the Supper, This is my bodie &c. Matth. 26. They haue their expresse institution by Christ in the same, and hes the promises of remission of sinnes and iustification annexed to them. But none of these things are to be had in marriage. First, no earthlie element: next, no forme prescriued in the word of God: thirdlie, no expresse institution of it as of a sa∣crament: fourthlie, no promise of the remission of sinnes and saluation annexed vnto it. Therefore it cannot be a sacra∣ment of the new Testament properlie. Thirdly, if marriage were a sacrament, and sik a sacrament that signified and gaue the grace of iustification with it, Bellarm. lib. 1, de matrim, cap. 5 pag. 67 that is, remission of sinnes: then wherefore should your Kirk for∣bid all your Cleargie from the same? and wherefore shoulde ye abstaine from that sacrament, whilk is instituted of God, to giue remission of sinnes to you, and to make you accep∣table to God, as your doctrine sayes. Why shoulde yee de∣priue your self of that thing whilk may place you in Gods fa¦uour, and purchase to you remission of sinnes, (as ye say ma∣riage may doe) it is a token that either ye beleeue not your owne doctrine, or else preferres whoredome and adulterie, whilk is condemned of God, to marriage whilk is Gods or∣dinance and honorable amongst all men. Fourthlie, I say, if the marriage of Adam and Eua in Pa∣radise, and the marriage of all the Patriarckes, & Prophets, and Priests, and people in the olde Testament, was not a sa∣crament, neither is the marriage of Christians in the new te∣stament a sacrament. For they were symboles that repre∣sented our spirituall coniunction with Christ, aswell as the marriage of Christians in the new testament does: the whilk you will not deny. And Pope Leo sayes, Epist. 92. ad . That marriage was in∣stituted from the beginning, that they might haue in themselues a Sa∣crament of Christ, and his Kirk: but the firste you graunt your selues was not a Sacrament? therefore neither is the second a sacrament.
Fifthlie, that whilk is filthinesse and pollution cannot be a sacrament to giue forgiuenesse of sinnes: Dist. 82. cap, Pro∣posusti, & c, Plu∣rmos but Pope Syricius calles marriage pollution and vncleannesse: therefore it can not be a sacrament if he speake true. Sextly, if marriage be sik a sacrament as ye say, to giue re∣mission of sinnes, then it should be more excellent then vir∣ginitie, because virginitie hes not this promise: but this ye will not graunt, therefore it is not a sacrament. Vt Capreolus res  4. dist. 26 uest. Vnica uc. 3. Last of all, Durandus a great Doctor of your Kirk sayes, that marriage is not properlie a sacrament. As for that place in the 5. of the Ephesians whilk ye quote, where the Apostle sayes, This is a great mystery, speaking of the mutuall duties of man and wife. I answere: first, he calles not Mariage this great mysterie, but that band of our con∣iunction with Christ, as he expones himselfe: This is (sayes he) a great mysterie, and then he subioynes, I speak of Christ and his Kirk. Secondlie, suppose the olde interpreter doeth translate this word mysterie a sacrament, yet you know (if you know the Greek language) that  is called a se∣creat. Thirdlie, wil you haue all these to be sacraments pro∣perlie, whilk are called mysteries in the newe Testament, & whilk the olde interpreter and your Rhemists translates sa∣craments? then fall you not onelie make marriage a Sacra∣ment, 1. Tim. 3.16 Col. 1. Ephes 3 & 1. 2. Thes 27 Reue. 1.20 & 17 5 but also the chief articles of our saith, and the Gospell, and the 7. starres in the Reuelation, and the whore of Babel, and the iniqui∣tie of the Antichrist, all sacramentes. For they are all called  in the Greeke, and some of them are translated sa∣craments by the olde interpreter, and your Rhemists, as ma∣riage is. I wonder that ye quote Melanchton, as though hee were of your opinion, seing Bellarmine acknowledges plain∣lie (that he denyes it to be a Sacrament properlie as Baptisme and the Lords Supperis: Lib. 1 de matrim cap 1, & cap. 5. ) but onelie graunts that it is a Sacrament in some respects. But you regarde not what ye write, so being it may carrie anie shewe against vs. The same we answer to you of Zuinglius and Marchistoun. They call it a Sacrament but not in that sense that Baptisme and the Lords Supper are called sacraments, taking the worde improperlie and more
amplie, ac Bellarmine confesses of Melancthon. So heere is no discorde, Maister Gilbert, neither betwixt vs and Christ, nei∣ther amongst our selues. But in very deede, you are they who are at discorde both with Christ, & amongst your selus. For besid this that Bellarmine and Innocentius calles the marriage of the Gentiles Sacraments, because you may answere that they call them Sacraments improperlie as Melancthon, Zuinglius, and Marchistoun calles marriage a sacrament improperlie. So if they be at variance with vs for calling marriage a sacra∣ment, so is Bellar. lib. 1 de sacram. matrim. c. 3 Bellarmine & Pope Inno. c. gaude. de diuortis. Innocent at variance with your Kirk, for calling the marriage of infidels a sacrament. For as we denie marriage to be a sacrament at all properlie, so does your Kirk denie the marriage of infidels to be a sa∣crament properlie. But to let this passe I say because I will not deceiue the reader as ye doe with apperances of contra∣dictions through the ambiguitie of the words Lib. con. here. verbo. nupti heres. 3. Alphonsus de Castro Lectio. 2. de matrimonio. Petrus a Soto two of your doctors and sundry others sayes that mariage is not a proper sacrament of the newe Testament: and yet the councell of Florence and Trent and sundrie others of your Kirk sayes the contrarie. 2. In 4. dist. 26. quest. 3. Durandus a great doc∣tor of your Kirk sayes that mareage is not a sacrament properlye. 3. Some of our Kirk holds that carnall copulation in marriage is a part of the sacrament, lib. 1 de sacra. matrim. c. 5. pag. 88. some the contrarie that it is neither a sacrament nor a part of the sacrament, so Bellarmine testifies. 4. Durandus and your canonistes houldes that the sacrament of marriage doth not confer grace vnto them that receiues it, and yet our common doc∣trine is contrarie this as ibidem. Bellarmine grauntes. Last of all Canus a learned Papist affirmes that euerie marriage lawfully contracted among christians is not a sacrament: but onlie that whilk is made by the Minister in a certaine forme of words, the whilk Bellar∣mine and sundrie others denies. And you are of great diuersi∣tie concerning the matter of that sacrament amongst your selues. These are not now shewes of disorders & contradic∣tions, de sacra. matrim lib. 1. but they are so true and manifest that Bellarmine your chiefe campion hes confessed them. Iudge thou now (chri∣stian reader) whither is it wee or they that is at variance a∣mongst our selues. And this for the 9. poynt of your doctrine.
As for the tenth poynt: I haue answered to it, in the other parte of my treatise concerning the Masse. Therefore, I o∣mit it now, and I come to the 11. poynt of your doctrine. Maister Gilbert Browne. Our doctrine is that a man in the estate of grace doing good works merits of deserue a reward: whilk is the doctrine of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles: as maye bee perceiued in these places, and manye the like Gen. 17.. 2. Paral. 15.7 Eccles 16.15 Eccles 16.31 Psal. 118.112. Prov. 11.18. Sap. 5 16. Sap. 10.17  3.0 Ier 31 16 Feare not Abraham (sayes God) I am thy protector and thy rewarde great turn∣ly. In another place. Therefore be ye of comfort, and let not your hands be dissol∣ved, there shall be a rewarde for your worke. And in the booke Ecclesiasticus. All mercie shall make place to euerie one, according to the merite of his works. with manie more in the olde Testament, nor I am able to set downe heere But some of them I haue noted on the margent. And our Sauiour sayes, Matth. 5.12 Ioh. 5.29 Mat. 10 42. Mat. 16.1 Matth. 16 27 Matth. 25.34. Ma th. 10. Mar. 9.41. Luc. 6.35 Reioyce and be glade for your rewarde is great in heauen. And againe, They that haue done good things shall come forth to the resurrection of life: but they that hes done euill, to the resurrection of iudgement. And whosoeuer shall giue drinke to one of these little ones, one cup of colde water onely, in the name of ane Disciple, truelie I say vnto you, he shall not lose his rewarde And 1, Cor, 3, 8.14 1. Cor. 9.17.18 Eph. 6.8 Saint Paule sayes, Euery one shall receiue his owne rewarde, according to his labour: & 2. Iohn, ver. 8 Apoc. 22.12 S. Iohn sayes, Looke to your selues, that ye lose not the things whilk ye haue wrought, but that ye may receiue ane full rewarde And in his Reuelation, Beholde I come quicklie, and my rewarde is with mee, to rander to euery man ac¦cording to his works, with many more the like in the word of God What can our newe men say against this doctrine of Christ, his Apostles & Prophets, seing that there is no reward without merite, because merces and meritum hes relation together: for there is no reward promised in the word of God, but for doing and working And albeit God hes promised to rewarde all our good deedes, yet this promise is not without a cause: that is, to them that will labour and worke, and to doe according to his will. For he hes pro∣mised no rewarde to them that will not work, but to sik as deserues the same by their doings, as I haue noted before in the booke called Ecclesiasticus, the 16. chapter. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for your doctrine of merites of works wherein you say that a man in the estate of grace doth merite eternall life and glorie, & that aswell in respect of the worke it selfe, as of the couenant and pro∣mise made vnto it. Lib 5 de iustifie. cap. 17. So Bellarmine. Yea that the works are in vertue equal and of as great valor, as the reward of eternal life is, so that there is an equall proportion betwene the works and eternal life. And there are som of your Kirk and those of the learned amongst you who hes gone further, and affirmes that the good workes of the
righteous merites life eternal in respect of the worthines and excellencie of the work it selfe, Bellarm. lib. 5. de ustis. cap. 17 suppose the Lord had neuer made a promise or coue∣nant, as Caietanus a cardinall and Dominicus a Soto, as Bellarmi∣ne reports of them. And Maister Pa 15 Reinold sayes that good workes and euill are laide in different ballance, that good workes are the cause of heauen, as euill workes are the cause of hell. And In 5. quest de Iust. Andreas Vega sayes that the reward of glorie shall not be greater nor our good workes hes deserued. What blasphemie is this your doctrine? And surely if in any one poynt of your doctrine, you shewe your selues to be men, who not onlie knowes not the holines of God, the vnspeakablenes of that other life, the perfection and infinite vertue of Christs me∣rits, the perfection of his law, and mans infirmitie and weak∣nes; especially you manifest it in this point, for if ye knew a∣nie of these thinges, ye would neuer professe such damnable doctrine: for that our workes may merite eternall life (as ye say) and that not onely in respect of the couenant, but in respect of the worke it selfe there are fiue thinges required. 1. That the work be perfit according to that measure of per∣fection whilk the law of God requires, and the whole lawe must be fulfilled, and that perfitlie and continuallie. 2. The workes must not be debt, that is, sik workes as we are bound before to doe; for the paying of that duty whilk we owe al∣readie cannot merite properly a rewarde: for will you say that for the paying of that whilk you owe alreadie you de∣serue a reward? 3. There must be a proportion and equality betweene the worke wrought and the rewarde it selfe, for if the worke be lesse and the reward greater, then that whilk is more then the work is not of merite but of liberalitie. 4. The persons to whome the worke is done must be oblished and bound by right to rander and recompence the worker for the worthines of the worke, so that he is not iust and he do it not. And last of all the worke must be our owne and not an others, and the power our owne whereby it is done and not an others, or we can be saide properly to merite by the same. But all these conditions will faile in our workes: therefore they cannot bee meritorious of eternall life. For as to the
first the prophets sayes that all our righteousnes is as a menstrous clout. cap. 64 epist. in c. 3. And Iames sayes we all offend in manie thinges: and none there is that hes contained in doing all things written in the law in that perfection, whilk it craues of vs, as hes bene pro∣ued before: therefore our workes cannot be meritorious of eternall life. And as to the second all that we can do, or is a∣ble to do, we are bound to do it all readdie, by the vertue of our creation and redemption and his other blessings all rea∣die bestowed, yea they oblish vs to more nor we are euer a∣ble to pay, according to that saying of our Sauiour: euen so ye when ye haue done all that is commanded you say that we are vn∣profitable seruants, . 17.10. because we haue done that whilk was our dutie to do. Since therfore it is dutie it cannot be meritorious of eter∣nall life. And as to the third there is no proportion betweene eternall life and our workes, the reward by infinite degrees surpassing the work, and therefore the Apostle sayes the af∣flictions of this life are not worthie of the glorie whilk shall be reueiled: euerlasting life being onlie the iust reward of the sufferings of the sonne of God. Tim. 8.18. ser. 1. de annnn Bernard sayes what are all our merites to so great a glorie: & in vita Antonii. Athanasius sayes not suppose wee would re∣nounce the whole world yet are we not able to do anie thing worthie of these heauenlie habitations. As to the fourth the Lord is dettor to no creature: Rom. 11.35. for as the Apostle sayes who hes giuen him first, and he shall be recompensed: the Lord is all sufficient in himselfe and so needes non of your labours, and so our works cannot oblish him. ser. 16 de verbis Apostoli. And therefore Augustine sayes God is made a detter vnto vs, not by receiuing anie thing from our hands, but because it pleased him to promise. And to the last the Apostle sayes, What hes thou that thou hes not receiued? 1. Cor. 47. and if thou haue receiued it, why reioycest thou, as though thou had not receiued it? Seing therefore all our workes are imperfite, and seeing we are not able to fulfill the Lawe: and seeing all that we can doe, is but our duetie: and there is no proportion betwixt eternall lyfe & our workes, and that the Lord is debtour to no man, and all our abilitie of doing is from the Lorde onelie: therefore our workes cannot be meritorious of eternall life. In mauali. c. 10. Heare further what the Fathers sayes in this point. Augustine sayes, All my
hope is in the death of my Lorde: his death is my merite, my refuge, sal∣uation, lyfe, and resurrection: my merite is the compassion of the Lord. I shall not bee voide of a merite so long as the Lord of mercies shall not want. Origen who liued 200. yeares before him sayes, In epist. ad Rom c. 4. lib. 4. I scarsly beleeue that there can be any work whilk may of due demande the re∣warde of God forsomuch as euen the same that we can doe, thinke, or speake, we doe it by his gift or bountie. Then how can he owe vs anye thing, whose grace did preueene vs. And he sayes afterwarde, de bono mor. cap. 2. that the Apostle assignes eternall life to grace onlie. Ambrose sayes, E∣uerlasting life is forgiuenesse of sinnes, so then it is not merite. Ie∣rome sayes, That before God no man is iust, therefore no man can merite. And againe he sayes, The onlie perfection of man is, Aduersus Pelag. if they know themselues to be imperfite: and our iustice consisteth not of our owne merite, but of Gods mercie. I omit the rest for shortnesse. Nowe to your testimonies, and reason to proue your me∣rite of workes, whilks you shamefullie abuse, bringing forth Scripture to cloak your damnable doctrine: vnto the whilks I answere shortlie. That there is a reward laid vp with God for the workes of euerie one, be they good be they euill, and according to their works shall they be tryed, and euery man shalbe iudged and recompenced accordinglie, as the Scrip∣ture plainly testifieth. But that this reward of eternall lyfe promised, is of debt, and not of grace, and that our works are the meritorious cause of the same, that the Scripture neuer affirmes. For the Lord freelie and of his meere grace crow∣neth his owne workes in vs: and that, not for the excellency of the worke it self, but of mercie freelie for his Christs sake, as both I haue proued, and the Fathers hes testified. So these Scriptures serues you to no purpose. For the controuersie betwixt vs is not whether there is a rewarde promised, and whether it shalbe randered accordingly to the same, for that we graunt: but whether this reward is of merite or of grace. The Apostle sayes plainlie in the 6. of the Romanes, The wages of sinne is death: but euerlasting lyfe is the free gift of God. Rom. 6.23. &  17. And in the 8. of the Romanes, it is called an inheritance. Now if it be he∣ritage to them that are in Christ, and they aires of it through him, then it is not their merite. As for the 16. of Ecclesiasticus
it is Apocrypha, and the text hes not that word merite, as the olde interpreter whome ye follow, translates it, but according to his worke. As for the 118. Psalme, and the 16. of Matthew, ye are ouer-seene in the quoting of them, for they haue no sik thing. As for your reason, that a rewarde hes euer a relation to a merite, that is false. For the Apostle in the 4. of the Ro∣manes speakes of a rewarde that is vnputed freelie, not to him who worketh, but to him that beleeueth in him, who iustifieth the vngodlie, verse 5. ad Luc. .5 And in this sense the reward of eternall life promised & fulfilled in his Saints, is taken in the Scriptures And wher¦as you say, that there is no reward promised but to doing & working: that is false also, for there is a reward of eternall life promised to the beleeuer, ver. 5. And as for the promises of reward made to good works: it is true, it is made to them, but not as though our works were meritorious causes of that rewarde, but onlie that they are effects to testifie of our faith in the merite of Iesus Christ, in whome only the promises are made to vs and our works, and for whose sake onlie they are fulfilled in his Saints. For these causes therfore is the promise of reward made vnto works, first because all men by nature are hypocrites, and boastes of a vaine pretence of faith, vnto whome Iames sayes, Iames .8 Shew me thy Faith by thy works? to take a∣way therefore this vaile of hypocrisie from hypocrites, the promises are made to workes. 2. The promise is made to works to stirre vs vp to the doing of them: for we woulde be faint in doing good, and we knew not that the Lorde would reward them. It is true he hes promised no reward to them who workes not, because they in whome Christ dwelles they are not only iustified, but also sanctified, and brings forth the fruite of their sanctification. And this for the 9. point of your doctrine, whilk is so damnable, that both it derogates from the merite of Christ, and makes men to take away their con∣fidence from Gods onlie mercie and free grace: and swelles them vp with a vaine confidence of themselues, and bindes as it were their harts and mouthes, that they cannot with all their hart rander the whole praise of their saluation to Gods onelie free grace.
Maister Gilbert Browne. 12 We haue other works that are called works of Supererogation, whilk are workes of greater perfection, and are not set downe to vs as the com∣mands of God (without the whilk we cannot be saued) but as diuine coun∣sels adioyned thereto, they augment our glorie and rewarde in heauen: whilk is also the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Matth 1 21. Mar. 10 21 Christ saide to the young man, If thou will be perfite, goe self the things thou hast, and giue vnto the poore and thou shall haue treasure in heauen, and come folow mee so wee finde that wilfull pouertie, is a wk of supererogation. 1 Cor. 7 34 38 Sik like Saint Paule sayes, and the woman vnmarried and the Virgine thinks on the things that per¦taines to our Lorde that she maybe holy both in body and spirite: and afterward Therefore both he that ioynes his Virgine in matrimonie does well, and he that ioynes not, does better. Therefore Virginitie is a work of supererogation: for albeit Matrimonie be good yet the vther is better, & this was a counsel that Saint Paule gaue and no command. 1. Cor. 7 40 1. Cor. 9 14.15.23 1. Cor. 9.17.18.1 Luc. 10.35 Sik like Paul wrought an work of su∣pererogation when he preached the Euangell gratis, where he might haue taken iustlie for his labours. Christ our sauiour speakes of the same workes in the parable of the Samaritane, where he promised to the oistlar to recom¦pense him what euer he did supererogat vpon the wounded man, more nor the two pennies. And Dauid the Prophete did supererogate, Psal. 118.62.164 when he did rise in the night to giue God louing, & seuen times in the day, and so forth. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As though your former doctrine had not iniuried the me∣rites of the sonne of God, and his free grace enough, with the whilk (if the Apostle be true) your merites of works can∣not stand. For the Apostle sayes, Rom. 11.6 (speiking of our saluation) If it be of grace, then is it no more by workes, otherwise grace were no more grace: and if it were of works, then were it no more of grace, other∣wise workes were no more works; you yet eik this damnable and blasphemous doctrine to all the rest. And certainlie suppose ye will not let it fall to the ground, that your doctrine is the doctrine of the Dragon, and that your Kirk is that mysticall Baby∣lon, that mother of whoredomes, full of names of blasphemie: yet this your blasphemous doctrine sufficiently declares what you are. For I appeale your conscience, Maister Gilbert, if ye haue any vn-blotted out yet with the smoak of the bottom∣lesse pit, and the conscience of al men who euer felt the pow∣er of sinne in them, & the free grace of God renewing them: whether this doctrine of yours be blasphemous or not: That not only you may fulfill the Lawe, and doe all the dutie whilk God hes
commanded you, and thereby merite eternall lyfe: but also you may do more nor God hes commanded, whilk ye cal works of greater perfectiō, nor the Lawe of God requyres of vs, by the doing of the whilk, you say, you merite a greater degree of glorie in the kingdome of heauen, and as In his preface before de mona chis. lib. 2. Bellarmine sayes, That your religious Monkes liues a straiter, and more high kinde of life, then either the Lawe of God or man hes prescry∣ued. And that a man lib. 2. c. 13 &c. 6. Ergo si ad¦dam alterum gradum amoris amphus quam teneor. according to the ordor of sarum. may loue God with a greater and more perfite loue, nor is commanded him in the Lawe: yea, that a man may loue God with a greater loue, nor he is bound to loue him: and that these workes are not onely meritorious of eternal lyfe, and of a singular glory in hea∣uen, but also are profitable to satisfie for our sinnes: and that men may communicate of the aboundance of these their merites vnto others. And therefore, they haue in their seruice bookes this forme of prayer often, That by the merites of the Saints they may obtain grace and by the blood of Thomas (Archbishop of Canterbury) they may a∣scend to heauen. Reuel. c. 13. All whilk whether they be not words of blas∣phemy, and the doctrine of the Dragon, I appeale your con∣science before God in the great day, and the consciences of all men, as though it were not blasphemie ynough to say, that men may merite eternall life, and a greater degree of glorie in that life to themselues by their works: but also to communicate vnto others of the aboundance of their works and so not onelie to be sauiours of themselues, but of others also. And here (reader) I am compelled to speake this to thee suppose thou beleeue not that they haue written and will maintaine so horrible blasphemies I wonder not: for I speak the truth to thee in my conscience I lye not, I could not haue bene induced my self to haue beleeued that euer they durst haue professed sik damnable and deuilish doctrine and I had not red it my self in their owne bookes, yea I durst not haue bene so confident as to haue set it downe here vpon the re∣port of anie, except I had red it my selfe. But if the blinde lead the blinde both will fall into the pit together. The Lord deliuer his owne from sik damnable doctrine whilk of ne∣cessitie muste bring damnation vppon the beleeuers and professors of it. To answer you then, first if we be not able to performe all the duties whilk God requires of vs in his law,
then we are not able to doe workes of supererogation whilk is more then our duty, commanded in the law, as ye say. But the first I haue prooued before: therefore the second is true. Secondlie, if the Lawe of God be perfite, and prescriues more then we are able to doe, Psal. 1. then there is no works of su∣pererogation: this you will not deny. But Dauid sayes, The Lawe of God is perfite, and our inabilitie to performe it, I haue prooued before: therefore there is no works of supereroga∣tion. Thirdlie, what an absurd and blasphemous thing is this to say, that God hes not commanded to vs the workes of greatest perfection, (for Maister Gilbert calles these, workes of greater perfection) and so sik workes wherein he is moste glorified: but hes left them in our owne choise to doe, or not to do, as though the Lord had not commanded vs to glori∣fie him in the greatest perfection, nor yet we were bound to doe the same? Fourthlie, if there be any sik works of supere∣rogation whilk are of greater perfection nor the Law com∣mands: then it should followe, that the vowe of continency, wilfull pouertie, and monasticall obedience to their superi∣ours, should be works of greater perfection, and so please God more, then the loue of God with all the hart, with al the soule, with all the strength, with all the minde, Matth. 22. Marc. 12.29.30 with all the thought: (for the former are your works of supererogation, and the last is commanded in the Lawe) but this is absurd: therefore there is no sik works. Fifthlie, this was only pro∣per to the sonne of God to fulfill the Law of God perfitelie, and to doe more then the Lawe required: to wit, to die for vs who were his enemies: this doctrine therefore of yours spoiles him of this his glorie. Last of all, if none can merite eternall life through their workes at all: then none can aug∣ment their glorie and rewarde in heauen by their workes of supererogation. But the first I haue proued before: therfore the other must followe. And marke this (reader) how farre God hes blinded their mindes: for they deride, & they mock at that imputation of the righteousnesse & merites of Christ, Bellarm. lib. 2. de iustis. cap. 2. & Consil. Trid. can. 10 & Bellarm. lib 2. pag. 12 and they pronounce them accursed that so thinkes: but yet they teach that the works of supererogation whilk men does
may be communicate to others. As for the first place whilk ye quote Matth. 19. If thou wilt be perfite, &c. I answered to it before, in my answere to the second point of your doctrine: to the whilk I referre the reader. And so your wilfull pouer∣tie hes no ground heir. For if this man did not perfitely ful∣fill the Lawe, then was he not able to doe more then the law required of him: but the first is true as I proued before in the second point of your doctrine, and as the circumstances of the text testifies it, for he went away sad, and he put his trust in his riches: and so it was not onlie difficile, but impossible for him to enter in the kingdome of God, as our Sauiour sai∣eth, whilk had not beene true of him, if he had fulfilled the Lawe. And this was a speciall command to this man, to dis∣couer his hypocrisie. And all Christians is bound also out of the loue of their heart to Christ, to be content to forsake all that they haue before we renounce him, or his worde, when he so requireth of vs. And if wilfull pouertie be sik a worke of perfection as ye thinke, Pro. 30.8 wherefore then would the Pro∣phet haue praied, Giue me neither pouertie nor riches, but feede mee with foode conuenient. And if this be the worke of greatest per∣fection, what is the cause that your Abbots, Popes, Bishops, & Cardinals (for who should be perfite if not these?) will not sell al their reuenues whilk they haue, wherein they surmoūt the princes of the world, and so augment their glory in hea∣uen, and be perfite? But shall others beleeue and obey this doctrine of yours, when the greatest Patrons of it, beleeues and obeyes it not? O hypocrites who will beleue you! As for the next work of supererogation, Virginitie: it is true that the Virgine and vn-married, who hes the gift of conti∣nencie, thinks vpon the things that appertaines to God: and it is true, that if any haue the gift of continency, it is better to be vn-married, then to marrie, especiallie in the times of persecution. But yet it followes not that it is a work of super∣erogation: for to them who lies the gift, it is a commande∣ment: for he that hes the gift is commanded to vse it, and in losing it, he sinnes. And euery man is bound to glorify God to the vttermost of his power, and God is most glorified by
the single life of these, especiallie in the time of persecution, who hes the gift: and so it is not a counsell simplie but also a command, but to them onlie who hes the gift, & that so long onelie as they haue the gift. And the Apostle sayes in that same place whilk ye quote heir, that he thinks he hes the spi∣rite of God also, and so this iudgement of his was the iudge∣ment of the spirite of God, whilk binds and oblishes al them who hes the gift. But vnto these who hes not the gift, 1. Cor. 7. . 3. & 9 the Scripture hes a plaine command: For the auoyding of fornication let euery man haue his owne wife, &c. And if they cannot abstain, let them marrie, &c. And whereas ye say that Virginity is better then Matrimonie: that is not true simplie, but only to them who hes the gift. And since you say it is better, wherefore make ye Matrimonie a Sacrament to giue remission of sins? For shall not a Sacrament whilk giues remission of sinnes be better then an indifferent action, whilk men may doe, or leaue vndone, sik as ye say Virginitie is? As for the Apostles example 1. Corinth. 9. in preaching the Gospel freelie without wages to them: I answere: suppose it was leesome to him, & all the Ministers of the Gospell, to haue taken wages, as him self testifies and proues in that same chapter, from the 4. ver. to the 15. yet it was not expedient to him for the course of the Gospell amongst them. And men are not only comman∣ded to abstaine from that whilk is vnleesome, but also from the things whilk are leesome, if they be not expedient: and so he did no more heir then he should haue done. 1. Cor. 9.15 And ther∣fore he sayes, It were better for me to die, then that any shoulde take my glorie from me, whilk cannot be saide of these works whilk we are not bound to doe. And he sayes, Ver. 18 That I abuse not my au∣thoritie in the Gospell: but this would haue bene an abuse of his liberty with his people: therfore he was bound to doe it. And yet we reade that he spoiled other Churches as he sayes him self, and tooke wages from them. 2. Cor. 11. Phil. 4 And also the Kirk of Philip∣pi did communicate vnto him twise. As for the 10. of Luke, it appeares ye are scarce of proofes in quoting this place for your works of supererogation: for, will you say that the Samaritane was not bound by Gods
Lawe to ware more vppon his neighbour in his extremitie, then two penye worth? Hes not the law saide, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy self? And are we not bound to lay downe our life one for another, much more to ware out for him sik things as may serue for the comforte of this life in sik an ex∣tremitie. 1. Ioh 3.16 And the Greeke worde  is not to su∣pererogate (as ye take it) but to ware our further expenses. So your blindnesse is grosse in this. And as for that of Dauid in praising God night and day, so often, he was so farre from  king of himselfe that hee had done more then the Lawe required of him, that he neuer thought of himself that he had fullie obeyed the Lawe. And therefore how often prayes he in that Psalme, that the Lord would open his eies to vnder∣stand the Lawe, and giue him grace to performe the same. And in other Psalmes he sayes, Psal. 119.12 7. 1 27 3 psal. 40. My sinnes are me then the haires of my head. And if thou marke iniquitie who can stand? and there∣fore this was no worke of supererogation. And if you knew Maister Gilbert, (but the Lorde hes blinded you) either the perfection of the Lawe of God, or our inabilitie to performe it, or the vnsearchable loue and kindnesse of God whilk hes oblished vs to moe duties then euer we are able to do: (for when we haue done all whilk is commanded vs, yet we are but vnprofitable seruants:) you would be so far from defen∣ding these your works of supererogation, that ye would ab∣hor and detest this doctrine. Maister Gilbert Browne. 13. Our doctrine is, that Christ our Sauiour (according to the soule) descended to th Hels, as we haue in our beliefe. And this was the doctrine of the postles. Act. 2 24 For Saint Peter sayes, That God hes raised him vp, lousing the sorrowes of Hell, according as it was impossible that he should be held of it. And this he proues by the Psalmes of Dauid, Beholde thou wilt not leaue my soule  hell (sayes Dauid) nor giue thy holy one to see corruption. 15.8  29.3  49 10 This same is the doctrine of Saint Paule also: And that he ascended, what is it but because he descended also first into the inferior parts of the earth. He that descended, the same is he also whilk is ascended aboue all the heauens, that he might furth∣fill all things. Ye see in these and all the rest of our doctrine, wherein they diffr from vs, that the touchstone beares witnes to vs, and proues ours on∣ly to be the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and not their denying thereof.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Bellarmine graunts that we all aggree that Christ after a certaine manner descended into hell: but the whole controuersie is of the sense and meaning of it. We say, that he suffered the paines of hell in his soule vpon the Croce, and laye vnder the bon∣dage of death, and was held captiue in the graue, whilk in the Hebrewe is called SCHOL (whilk signifieth sometime Hell in the Scripture, and sometime the graue) for the space of three dayes: and in this sense we graunt he descended n∣to hell, and in this sense it is taken in our beliefe. But your doctrine is, That he descended locallie vnto Hell according to his soule, Bellm  4 de Christo cap. 16 first to giue to the soules of the Fathers essentiall blessednesse: and to de∣lyuer them out of that prison, and bring them to heauen. And this we say is neither the meaning of that article of your beliefe, nei∣ther yet hes it so mekle as a sillabe in the whole Scripture to warrand it. And as for the article it self, Lib. 4 de Christo cap 6 Bellarmine confesses that this article was not in the Creede with all Kirkes, as hee proues there by the testimonies of Irenaeus, Origen, Tertullian, and Augustine, who all exponed the Creede. And Augustine exponed it fiue times, and yet neuer mentions this article. And Ruffinus an auncient writer testifies, that this article was neither in the Creede of the Romane Kirk, nor of the East Kirks. And also it is not in the Nicene Creede, whilk was more nor 300. In his exposition of the Creede yeare after Christ. And Perkins a learned man affirmes, that three-score Creedes of the most auncient councels, and Fa∣thers wants this clause. Whereby it is most cleare that this article was not put in at that time, when the rest of the arti∣cles were gathered together, but hes crept in since, and that more nor 300. yeare after the dayes of the Apostles. For Au∣gustine liued in the 400. yeare, & the Nicene Creede was more then 300. yeare after Christ. And yet because it hes continu∣ed of a long time, and hes beene receiued by the consent of the Kirks of God, and does also carry with it a fit vnderstan∣ding and sense as hath bene spoken. Therefore it is to be re∣tained, but not in that sense as ye expone it. For first if this locall discension of Christ according to his soule into hell were true, and that it were an article of our faith, as ye say,
then the foure Euangelists, whilk are the sworne pen-men of the historie of his death and resurrection, c. 1.3 and especiallie Luke, who (as he sayes himselfe) intended to make an exact nar∣ration of the same, who also did amplie set downe the same, with all the circumstances thereof, they would not haue o∣mitted it being a speciall article of our faith, if your doctrine be true: Ioh 20.31 seing the end of their writing, as Iohn sayes was that we might beleeue, and by beleeuing haue eternall life. But they ne∣uer mention it, as your selues cannot deny. Therefore it can not be that he locallie descended into hell. Secondlie, the Scripture makes it plaine that Christs soule was in Paradise at that time with the thiefe: . 3.43 for he sayes vnto him, This night shall thou be with me in Paradise: for this cannot be meaned of his godhead, for it is euery-where: neither of his bodie, for it was in the graue. Seing therefore his soule was at that time in Paradise, it could not be in hell, except you will say that Paradise and hell are both one, whilk I trow ye will not say. Thirdlie, if the soules of the Fathers was not in hell, then Christ descended not thither: for ye say, Bellar. lib 4 de Christo cap. 16 That he descended thither for that effect to delyuer them: but they were not in hell, but in heauen, whilk our Sauiour calles Abrahams bosome, where Lazarus was betwixt the whilk and hell the Scripture testifies there is a great gulfe: Luc. 16.2 therefore he descended not lo∣callie into hell. Fourthlie, some of your owne learned Do∣ctors hes seene this errour of yours, and hes gone from it, as Durandus by name, In 3. distinct. 22 . who affirmes that Christs soule descended not to hell in substance, but in vertue, and proues it by reasons. And last of all, you are at sik variance amongst your selues con∣cerning this point, that some of you affirmes that Christs soule suffered paine in hell when it was there, as In  . Caietano, and 3. part qust 52 artic. 1 & 3 Tho∣mas of Aquine two great Papists: and yet 3. t ct. 22  Bonauenture and Bellarmine b 4 de Christo cap 6 Bellarmine affirmes the contrarie, that his soule was in the place of paine, and yet suffered no paine. Next Thomas of Aquine quest . affirmes, that Christ descended only into that place of hel called Lim∣bus Patrum, but Bellarmine sayes, It is more probable that he went to all the partes of Hell: and this is the consent whilk you Pa∣pists hes amongst your selues, not only in this point, but al∣moste
in all the points of your doctrine. Nowe as to the pla∣ces of Scripture whilk ye quote, they serue nothing to this purpose. For the 2. of the Acts, it speakes of that bondage of the graue whilk kept him vnder vntill he rose againe: and therefore the Greek word is ; whilk signifieth death, and not hell, as ye translate it heir: and Peter sayes, whome God raised vp. The Apostle speakes then of that part of Christ whilk had falne and was raised vp: but it was the body only and not the soule whilk fell downe and was raised vp: there∣fore he speakes of the sorrowes of death whereby his bodie was kept in bondage, and not of anye locall descension of Christs soule. As for the places of the Psalmes whilk ye quote heir, Peter brings them not in to proue this locall descension (as ye say) whereof he makes no mention: but to proue his resurrection as he sayes in the 31. verse most plainly: He know∣ing this before, speaking of Dauid, spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soule should not remaine in graue, neither his fleshe shoulde see corruption. So, if ye will beleeue the spirite of God in the A∣postle interpreting these places, they speake of the resurre∣ction of Christ, and not of the deliuering of the soule out of hell, for he was in Paradise, as he sayes himselfe: and it is the bodie that was raised, and not the soule. And the Hebrewe word is NEPHESCH, whilk not onely signifieth the soule, but also the life, as Gen 37.21. Let vs smite his soule, that is, take a∣way his life. And it signifieth also the body of the dead wher∣in there was life, as Leuit. 21. ver. 1. and 11. And this worde hel is SCHEOL in Hebrew, whilk most vsuallie is taken in the Scripture for the graue. So then the meaning is this, The Lord will not leaue his Nephesch, that is, the bodie wherein his life was in Scheol, that is, in the graue: whilk speach is vsual in the Scripture. Now as to the other Psalme 29.3. it is spoken pro∣perlie of Dauid, where hee thankes God who had saued his life from the handes of his enemies, whilk by a borrowed speach frequented in the Scripture, is called the deliuery of his soule from the graue. As for the 4. of the Ephesians, These lower parts of the earth is not hell, as ye expone it, but the earth it self, whilk in respect of the world is the lowest part: and so
it is taken in the 139. Psalme, ver. 15. where Dauid sayes, Thou hes fashioned me beneath in the lower parts of the earth, where heir it is not taken for hell, as you take it in that place of the E∣phesians, otherwise you must say that Dauid vvas borne in hell vvhilk I trovv ye vvill not say. So heirby is meant then the lowest and basest degree of his humiliation. So novve to conclude this: neither in these points, Maister Gilbert, nor in any point of doctrine vvherein ye differ from vs, is your do∣ctrine aggreable to Christs doctrine and his Apostles, as hes bene (I hope) proued sufficiently. You must therefore pro∣uide you for better vveapons and armour, and stronger de∣fences for the ouer-throvv of our doctrine, and vp-holde of yours, then ye haue done: othervvise your shotts vvill be but as shotts of paper, & your Bulvvarks but of intempered morter, vvhilk sodainly vvill rushe dovvn at the liht of the trueth of God. The Lord open your eyes to see the truth, & suffer you not to continue any longer, to cause the blinde go out of the vvay, as you haue done. Amen. Maister Gilbert Browne. 14 I thought to haue put in heir also of Iustification, whilk is the grea∣test head of controuersie betwixt them and vs: for they wil haue only Faith to justifie: into the whilk (only) they seclude all good works. But because I thinke to set this downe afterwarde, I haue not put it heir. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. This commeth in afterward: therfore I refer the ansvvere of it to that place. Maister Iohn Welsche. And our Religion whilk we professe, and all the particular heades of it, was instituted by Iesus Christ and his Apostles, whilk I offer me also to proue either by word or write, against whatsomeuer that will pleade the con∣trarie. The whilk if I faile in, I wil be content to lose my life therefore, by his grace. Maister Gilbert Browne. There is much promised heir, but nothing done, and it is ane thing im∣possible to him to doe. For why the difference chiefly that the Protestants d ffers from vs is in denying, abhorring, or detesting, as may be sene in their confession of faith, whilk they compell all men to sweare and subscriue. As we detest and refuse the vsurped authoritie of that Romane Antichrist, v∣pon the Scriptures of God, vpon the Kirk, the ciuill Magistrate, &c. except sik things were expresly contained in the word of God.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for my promise & performance, I ansvvered to that be fore, & whether that be a thing vnpossible to me or not, let this my answere be a trial thereof. You are bold ynough in∣deed in affirming it to be impossible: but what haue ye for you? You say, because the differēce chiefly that vve differ frō you, is in denying and abhorring. What a reason is this? Can we not prooue our religion out of the Scripture, because we deny yours whilk is contrarie to the same? Is it impossible to proue the trueth, because falset is denied and abhorred. What new Logick or Diuinitie is this, Maister Gilbert? I would neuer haue beleeued that ye had bene sik an vnskil∣ful reasoner, if your self had not bewraied the same. And cer∣tainlie your Kirk is not beholding to you: for if your reason holde forth, it vvill followe that it is impossible to you, or a∣ny man else to prooue the heades of your Religion by the Scripture: for in your confession of faith, and forme of abiu∣ration set downe by the Monkes of Burdeaux, anno 1585. there they deny and abhors the Protestants and their do∣ctrine, and compels all men who desires the fellovvship of the Romane Kirk, and their absolution, to main-svveare, re∣nounce, and subscriue the same. But I trowe your Kirk will not allovve this manner of reasoning of yours. And vvheras you say that the chiefe difference vvherein vve differ from you is in denying and abhoring &c. of your Religion. I aske you, doth not our Religion differ as far from yours, as yours does from vs? This you cannot deny. For are not two con∣traries equallie different one from another? Doth not light differ as far from darknesse, vvhite from black, Bellarm. in his preface before the controuer∣sies & in his pre∣face de summo Pontific e Christ from Antichrist, as darknes from light, black from vvhite, and An∣tichrist from Christ? And are not yours and our religions cō∣trarie one to another? But your selfe will not deny, and Bel∣larmine confesses that you differ from vs in the maine and substantiall points of religion: therefore of necessitie vvee must also differ from you in the maine & substantiall points of our religion. And so the chief difference wherein vve dif∣fer from you, is not in denying & abhorring, but in the maine
and fundamentall groundes of our Religion. Othervvise it shall follovve that the chief difference that ye differ from vs, is in denying & abhorring of our Religion, vvhilk I think your Kirk will not digest. Whereas you say that this may be seene by our confession of faith: Our confession hes not onlie the detesting and denying of your abhominable errors in generall & particular: but also the confession of our faith in generall: referring the particular heades thereof to that confession whilk is ratified and established by act of Parlia∣ment. And so heir Maister Gilberts vntruth and calumnie of our confession may be seene. As for this forme of exacting of an oth and subscription to Religion, The example of Moses. Deut. 29.10. and of Iosua 24.25 Iehoiada the hie preist. 2. Reg. 11.17. Iosia. 2. of the Kings. 23 3. Asa. 2. Chro. 15.12. And of the people retur∣ning from the captiutie of Ba∣bell with Nehe∣mias. Nehem 10. if you finde fault with it, you not onely gainesay the Scriptures of God, impaires Princes lavvfull authoritie, & the Kirk of their iurisdiction and lawfull povver: but also blots your ovvne Kirk, vvho, as may be seene in that confession of faith and forme of abiu∣ration set out by the Monkes of Bourdeaux, vvhereof vve spake before, does the same. As for this exception whilk ye put in heir, I answered to it before. Maister Gilbert Browne. For if this be a true ground of theirs, that nothing ought to be done or beleeued, but sik things as are expresly contained in the word of God: but their generall confession, or their negatiue faith is not expresly contained in the word of God: therefore it ought not to be done, nor beleeued. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for this ground whilk ye alledge to be ours: it appea∣res certainlie, Maister Gilbert, that as ye saide of me, eyther ye know not our grounds, or else ye wilfullie invert them for your own aduantage. For our ground is, that nothing ought to be done or beleeued in Religion, but that whilk may bee warranted by the testimonie of the scripture, either in words & sense together, or else by a necessary collection out of the same. The whilk with Nazianzene vve say, are of the same trueth and authoritie with the first. And according to this sense vve say that all the heades of our Religion, asvvell negatiue as affir∣matiue, are expresly contained in the scripture, and so ought
both to be beleeued and practised. These are but silly shifts, Maister Gilbert, whilk ye bring to discredite the trueth of our religion. You knew full well the blindnesse and simplenesse of the people in this countrie: and therefore you regarded not how sillie and simple your reasons were. Maister Gilbert Browne. That their Faith is contained in the word of God, so far as it differs from ours, he will neuer be able to proue, neither by word nor write. And if hee will cause our kings Maiestie to suspend his actes against vs, that we may be as free to speake our minde as he: he (a) shall haue a proofe heereof. But why refused you to giue a profe of this when I did offer it vnto you, be∣fore your owne familiars, where you might haue spoken as freelie as I, so these ar but words M. Gilbert and braggs onlie. If not, let him proue the same by write, and he shall haue an answere by Gods grace. As for his life we desire not the same, but rather his conuersion to the trueth. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for our abilitie to proue the trueth of our doctrine, I answered it before: iudge thou Christian reader of the same, by this my answere. As for the suspending of his Maiesties acts against you, that is not in our hands: and for all the good ye could doe, you haue but too much libertie. And if you speake no better for your religion, nor ye haue done else in this your answere, your Kirk will be but little beholden to you for it. And certainlie if you will binde and oblishe your selfe to face your owne cause, and defend your religion by word, I hope that licence of a safe passage & conduct would be graunted to you by his Maiestie, to let you speak for your selfe, what ye haue for you for the defence of it, for that space without any danger to your person, and that surer, and with greater safetie nor Iohn Hus had, who notwithstanding of his safe conduct, yet was brunt. And whereas you promise an answere, doe what you can, Maister Gilbert, for now it is time to pleade for your Baal. And let your answere be more firme nor this, or else ye will lose more then ye will winne by it. That you desire not my life, I am beholdē to you (if ye speak truth) considering the bloodie generation of your Romane Kirk, who these many yeares by past, hes spilt the blood of the Saints of God in sik aboundance, that it any can tell the starres of heauen, hee may number them whome your Kirk
hes slaine for the testimonie of the word of God. And as for that whilk ye call conuersion, it is auersion from the truth, and the losing of saluation: the whilk I hope shalbe dearer to me then a thousand liues, suppose they were all included in one. Maister Iohn Welsche. Secondlie, I offer me to proue that there be verry few points of controuersy betwixt the Romane Kirk and vs, wherein we dissent, but I shall get testi∣monies of sundry Fathers of the first six hundreth yeares against them, & prouing the heades of Religion whilk we professe. Let any man therefore let me downe any waightie point of controuersie, one, or moe, and he shall haue the proofe of this. Maister Gilbert Browne. Whome Maister Iohn calles Fathers heir, I know not, except Simon Ma∣gus, Nouatus, Aerius, Iouinianus, Pelagius, Vigilantius, and sik. For indeede there is none of these, and manie the like, but they were against vs, and with them in some heades. But I am sure, S. Irenaeus, S Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Au∣gustine, S. Hierome, S. Basile, S. Chrysostome with the rest of the holy Fathers is no way with them, 2.24. Math. 7.21. Math. 19.7. Matth 34.35. Ioan. 14.15.21 1. Ioan. 2.3.4 Rom. 2.13. 1. Cor 13.2. 1 Cor 1.19 Galat. 5.6. Tit. 1 16 De fie & operi∣bus cap. 14. and against vs, as Maister Iohn will not be able to proue for all his offer. As for example: It is a chiefe ground in their Religion, that onlie Faith iustifieth: This, I say, can neither be proued by the Scriptures, nor auncient Fathers of the first 600. yeares. For why the contrary is ex∣presly contained in the word of God. Doe ye see, sayes Saint Iames, that by workes a man is iustified, and not by faith onlie, with manie other places that aggrees with the same, as I haue noted heir on the margent. And S. Augu∣stine sayes himselfe, that this Iustification by Faith only was an old heresie in the very time of the Apostles. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for this calumnie of yours, the triall of it will come in afterward: therefore I referre the answere of it to that place And whereas you say, that you know not whome I call Fa∣thers, either your malice makes you to dissemble your know ledge in this, or else palpable must your ignorance be. And where ye say, that Irenaeus, Cyprian, &c. and the rest of the ho∣lie Fathers are no wise with vs, against you; and that I will not be able to proue it: I haue not only proued that already in sundry heads of our religion: but also that sundrie of your owne Popes, Cardinals, Doctors, Bishops, Councels, & Ca∣non lawe hes beene with vs in sundry points of our religion
whilk we professe, against that whilk ye professe. And as for that example of Iustification by Faith onely whilk ye cast in, whilk is one of the chiefe grounds of our religion: this I will proue both by the Scripture, and by the testimonies of the Fathers of the first 600. yeares. 2. Cor. 5.11 Our doctrine then concer∣ning Iustification is this: That as our sins was not inherent in Christ, but imputed to him, whilk was the cause of his death: so his righteousnesse whereby we are accounted righ∣teous before God is not inherent in vs, but imputed to vs: 1. Cor. 1.3 & therefore the Scripture sayes, that he is made of God vnto vs righteousnesse. Next, the onlie instrument that apprehends, & as it were, takes holde of this righteousnesse of Christ, is a liuely Faith, whilk works by loue, & brings forth good fruits so that neither is Faith a efficient or meritorious cause of our saluation (for onlie Christs death and righteousnesse is that) but onlie an instrument to apprehend the same. Neither is euery Faith this instrumēt: but onlie that liuing Faith whilk I haue spoken of: so that true Faith is neuer without the fruits of good works, no more then fire is without heate: and yet neither are our works, nor the work of Faith it selfe, the meritorious cause of our saluation: but only Christs death & righteousnesse: neither are the fruits of this liuely Faith, the instrument to apprehend and take holde of Christs righte∣ousnesse, but onelie Faith it selfe. This then is our doctrine, whilk is so plainlie confirmed by the Scripture, that hee must be exceeding blind that sees it not. The places to confirme the same, are these. Rom. 3.28. & Rom. 4.2 We conclude that a man is iustified by Faith without the workes of the Lawe. If Abraham were iustified by works then hes he wherein to reioyce, but not with God. Ephes. 2.9 By grace are ye sa∣ued through Faith, and that not of your selues: for it is the gift of God: Phil. 3.9. not by workes, that none should reioice. And I haue counted all things losse, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not hauing my owne righteousnesse whilk is of the Lawe, but that whilk is through the faith of Christ, the righteousnesse whilk is of God through Faith. Tit. 3.3 And againe, Not by the works of righteousnesse, whilk we had done, but ac¦cording to his mercie he saued vs. Seing the Scripture so expresly remoues all workes both of nature and of grace, both going
before Faith, & following after it, (and therfore the Apostle sayes, We are not saued by the workes of righteousnesse whilk we had done) and of all men, euen of those who were iustified alrea∣die and sanctified, as Abrabam, Paule, and the Ephesians were, from our iustification and saluation, as the causes thereof: therefore we are only iustified and saued by a liuely faith ap∣prehending the righteousnesse of Christ. Secondlie, the Scripture not onlie remoues works (as we haue saide) from the cause of our Iustification and saluation, but also ascriues it to Faith, as in these places, Whosoeuer bele∣ueth in him shall haue eternall life. And Thy Faith hath saued thee, &c. Ioh. 3.16. Luc. 8.48. Eph. 2.9. Rom. 4.3.4.5. & Rom. 3.26.28.30 And againe, We are saued through Faith. And man is iustified by Faith. And God shall iustifie Circumcision of Faith, and incircum∣cision through Faith. And Abraham beleeued God, and it was coun∣ted to him for righteousnesse. And least ye should say, the Scrip∣ture hes not by Faith onlie, reade the 8. of Luke, and 50. verse where our Sauiour sayes to Iairus,  Only beleeue and she shalbe saued. Therefore Faith is the onlie instrument to lay holde on the promise of God. And least ye should say this was not a iustifying Faith? I answere, this Faith whilk Iairus had, was that same Faith whilk the woman with the bloodie issue had: Luc. 8.48. Lib. 1. de iustif. cap. 17. pag. 84. but her Faith not onlie healed her bodie, but her soule also, whilk Bellarmine grants, and our Sauiour testifies saying, Thy Faith hath saued thee, &c. therefore this is a iustifying Faith also. Secondly, seing the Faith of miracles & iustifying Faith is both one in substance with your Kirk, as Bellarmine and the Rhemists sayes: cap. 5. lib. de iusti. annotat. in 2. Cor. 12. and if it be a greater work to worke miracles, as they say, then to be iustified: therfore if onlie Faith suffice to obtaine miracles, as Bellarmine graunts, lib. 1. cap. 20. pag. 97. why should not Faith only be also suffici∣ent to iustifie? for if it suffice for the greater worke, much more for the lesse. Thirdlie, the Scripture ascriues our Iustification to grace and not to workes: & so oppones them, that the one cannot stand with the other in the matter of our Iustification. Rom. 3.24. We are iustified (sayes he) freelie by grace, and not by works. And to him that worketh the reward is imputed, not according to grace, but to debt:
but to him who worketh not, Rom. 4.4. Rom. 11. but beleeueth an him who iustifieth the vn∣godlie, his faith is imputed to him for righteousnesse. And in another place, If it be of grace, it is no more of workes, or else were grace no more grace: but if it be of workes, it is no more grace, or else work were no more worke. Seeing therefore our Iustification is onelie of free grace, and grace (if the Apostle bee true) cannot stand with workes: therefore our Iustification is not by works, or else it were not of grace: and so not at al: and so the founda∣tion of our saluation were ouerturned. I hope therefore this our doctrine of iustification is plainly warrāted by the scrip∣ture. Nowe to the Fathers, Origen in epi ad Rom. cap. 3. who liued in the 200. yeare after Christ. Hilar. canon. 8. in Matth. in 300. seculo. Basil. in homil. de humilitate in seculo 300. Ambrose in c. 3. ad Rom. &c 4 & 9. in seculo. 300. Chrysost. in ho∣mil de fide & le∣ge naturae & in homil. 3. ad Tit. in seculo 400. August. lib. 1. con¦tra Duas Episto∣las Pelag. c. 21. in seculo 400. Cyrillus lib. 10. in Ioan c. 18. in seculo. 400. because ye say it cannot be pro∣ued by them, they spake as plainlie as we doe. Origen hath these wordes: And the Apostle sayes, that the iustification of Faith onlie sufficeth: (solius fidei) so that he that beleeueth allanerlie is iu∣stified, suppose no worke be fulfilled of him. Hilarius sayes, For onelie Faith iustifieth: fides enim sola iustificat. Basilius sayes, This is a perfite reioycing in God, when a man vaunts not himselfe of his owne righteousnesse, but knowes himself to be misterfull of true righteousnes, sola autem fide in Christum iustificatum, and to be iustified only by faith in Christ. Ambrose sayes, They are iustified by faith onely through the gift of God. And in the 4. chapter he hes thrise, by faith onely, sola fides. And in the 9. chapter also, Sola fides posi∣ta est ad salutem: that is, onlie faith is appointed for saluation. Chrysostome sayes, The thief beleeued only and was iustified. And in another place, If thou giues credite to thy faith, wherefore brings thou in other things, as though faith only were not sufficient to iustifie. Augustine, it is a knowne saying of his, Workes goes not before Iu∣stification, but followes him who is already iustified. And in another place, August. de fide & operib. c. 14. Theophil. in comment ad Galat c. 3, in the 800, age. Bernard sermo, 22, in cic. in the 1200. age. Howe vertuous so euer ye report the auncient righteous to haue bene, yet their vertue saued thē not, but the faith of the Mediator. Cy∣rillus Alexandrinus sayes, Man by faith onlie stickes in Christ, inhae∣ret Christo. Theophylactus sayes, only faith hes in the self the vertue of iustifying. Bernard sayes, Man being iustified by faith onely, shall haue peace towards thee. What more plaine now could the fa∣thers speake of Iustification by faith onlie, whilk you wil not deny Maister Gilbert? The reader may learne howe much credite  to be giuen to you who so boldly affirmed that nei∣ther
Scripture nor Fathers saide with vs against you. I hope they will try you before they trust you in time to come. For dare you say (Maister Gilbert) that I haue fained heir ought of these Fathers, and hes not brought in their own words spea∣king? Deny it if ye dare. Be not so impudent and shamlesse Maister Gilbert, in your vntruthes and lies againe: for by this ye will both discredite your self and your religion. As for the 2. of Iames whilk ye quote here, that by works a man is iustified and not by saith only. I answere. This word to be iustified, is taken in the Scripture two manner of wayes. First, to be accompted righteous before the tribunal of God: and in this sense, only a liuely faith apprehending the death and righteousnesse of Christ iustifies vs: and of this is the cō∣trouersie. Next, it is taken for a declaration of ones righte∣ousnesse, as in the 3. of the Romanes, ver. 4. That thou may be iu∣stified in thy words (that is, declared to be iust) when thou iudges. And in this sense it is taken in this place. So that this is the meaning of it. Ye see then, by works man is iustified, that is, de∣clared by his works to be iust, and not by faith onlie, that is, by the profession of his faith in Christ. So then Iames speakes not of our Iustification before God whilk is by faith only, but of the declaration of our righteousnesse before men, whilk he calles Iustification: and that for these reasons. 1. Other∣wise Iames should be contrary to Paule who sayes, That a man is iustified by faith without workes, whilk is blasphemous to think therefore Iames speakes of our Iustification before men, wher¦by our Iustification before God is declared and made mani∣fest. 2. The scope of the whole chapter, and whole Epistle te∣stifies the same. For his purpose is to cast downe the arro∣gancie and presumption of sik, who bragged of their Faith, as though the bare profession, that they beleeued in Christ, were sufficiēt to saue them, suppose they did not bring forth the fruites thereof. Therefore the Apostle takes this in hand to prooue that they are not iustified by a dead faith, but on∣lie by that faith whilk brings forth the effects thereof. And therefore he sayes in the fourteenth verse, What auayleth it my brethren when a man sayes he hes faith, when he hes no workes?
can that faith saue him? And in the eighteenth verse, Shewe mee thy faith out of thy workes, and I will shewe thee my faith by my workes. And because it may be ye say, this is my commenta∣rie, therefore heare howe one of your owne great and chiefe pillers Thomas of Aquine expones the same, from whose iudg∣ment, I hope, ye will not appeale. In Iacob. 2 Heir he speakes (sayes he) of workes that followes faith, not according to that sense wherein Iusti∣fication is saide to be the infusion of righteousnesse, but according to that sense that Iustification is called exercitatio iustitiae, the practise or declaration, and confirmation of righteousnesse. So if ye wil beleeue him, Iustification heir is taken not for our iustification before God, but for the declaration of our righteousnesse. And so the ordinar Glosse exponing that place writes, In Iacob. 2 Abraham was iustified without workes by faith onely: but neuerthelesse the offering vp of his sonne, was a testification of his faith and righteousnesse. What can be more clearlie spoken by any? Would you haue more then this? So thē this place of Iames speakes not of our Iusti∣fication before God, & therfore serues not to proue this your doctrine. As to the 2. of the Romanes, 13, It is true, it is not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of it whilk are iustified, if there were any who had fulfilled it. But the Apostle concludes in the third chapter, all vnder sinne, both Iewe and Gentile: and ther∣fore gathers that by the workes of the Lawe no flesh is iustified. And so we will leaue this to you to doe, and that also in the 19. of Matthew, spoken to the young man, Do the commands, &c. And as for the rest of the testimonies, I wonder to what purpose ye haue quoted them, except for to make a shewe of Scrip∣tures and testimonies. For they speake onlie of the necessi∣tie of good workes, whilk as they cannot be separate from true faith, so no man can attaine to saluation without them: because where euer Christ dwelles by true Faith, not onelie he iustifies them, but also sanctifie them, and makes them fruitfull in good works. The whilk we graunt, and therfore does vrge the same continuallie, knowing for a trueth, Heb. 12 14 Matth. 3.10 that without holinesse no man shall see God, and that the axe is laide to the roote of the tree, and that euery tree that bringeth not forth good fruite shalbe hewen downe, and cast in an vnquencheable fire. They speake
not therefore of the efficient or formall, or instrumentall cause of our Iustification, but of our sanctification with the fruites thereof, and therefore serues not to prooue the con∣trouersie that is in hand. As for Augustine his testimony, as you corrupt the Scriptures, so doe ye his testimonie also: for this was the opinion whilk was risen vp in the Apost. daies, as he testifies there: That is a deade faith whilk brought not forth good works. for these are his words: that some thought that faith onely was sufficient to obtaine saluation without workes, ne∣glecting to liue well, and to holde the way of God by good works, and being secure of saluation, whilk is in faith, had not a care to liue well, as he sayes. And in the end of that chapter he concludes the whole matter saying, How farre therefore are they deceiued, who promises to themselues euerlasting life throgh a dead faith. The whilk error we condemne also with you: for we acknowledge the necessitie of good works, as the fruites of a liuing faith: but not as the efficient, formal, or instrumentall cause of our iu∣stification. Maister Gilbert Browne. Further, I say, since the difference chieflie in religion betwixt vs & them is about the vnderstanding of the worde of God, Not we M. Gilbert, but one of the chief pil∣lers of your own Kirk, Caietan a Cardinall (whilk was sent in Ger∣manie against Luther) the Popes legate, who saies in plaine wordes that the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews doth gather in∣sufficient argu∣ments, to proue Christ to be the Son of God, that the 2. and 3. E∣pistle of Iohn, is not canonicall Scripture, that the Epistle of Iude is Apocri∣pha, that the last chap. of Mark is not of sound au∣toritie, that the historie of the a∣dulerous wo∣man is S Iohn is not authenti∣call, and of S. Iames E stle that te salutati∣on of it is pro∣phane. albeit they deny a great part of the same to vs: What is the cause that they will not abyde the tryall of the auncient Fathers of the first sex hundreth yeares, seing that they were of his Religion, as he affirmes, If he be as good as his word, the matter wilbe sone ended. And if our Religion be not found consonant to theirs in all things (wherein they differ from vs) we shall reforme the same. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. You said a little before, Maister Gilbert, that the chiefe dif∣ference wherein we differ from you is in denying, abhorring or detesting, &c. Now you say, that the difference chiefly of Religion betwixt vs, is about the vnderstanding of the word of God. How well these two aggrees, let the reader iudge. It is no wonder suppose you dissent from your brethren (as I haue proued in sundrie points before) seing ye dissent from your selfe. It is true indeede, that many of our controuersies are about the right sense and vnderstanding of the scripture, but yet if Petrus a Soto, Lindanus, Peresius, Canisius, all great and learned Papists speake trueth, the most part of the waighti∣est and chiefest points of your religion, whilk are in contro∣uersie
betweene vs, are but vnwritten Traditions, whilk hes not their beginning nor authour in the Scripture, and can∣not be defended by the same. And whereas ye would haue vs to refer the controuersies about the sense and right mea∣ning of the Scriptures, to be decyded by the writings of the Fathers of the first 600. yeares: we receiue their monuments and writings gladlie: but yet so, that we put a difference be∣tweene them, and the writings of the holy Ghost in the scrip¦ture. For as I haue prooued sufficientlie before, as I hope, that onelie the Scriptures of God hes this prerogatiue, to be ye supreame iudge of all controuersies in religion, & no other and the best waye to learne the sense of the Scripture, is by the Scripture it self: for seing all the Scripture is inspired of God, therefore it ought to be exponed by God in the same. For hee who made the Lawe can best interprete the Lawe. And the Leuits practised this in the old Testament, Nehem. 8 8. Act, 26.2. who ex∣poned the Scripture by the Scripture: and the Apostles in the new Testament, who taught nothing but that whilk the Prophets sayde should come to passe. And if a Father, yea a Saint, yea if an An∣gell would preach beside that whilk the Apostles preached, let him be accursed. So then, nothing can be a warrand to vs of the trueth of the sense of the Scripture, but the Scrip∣ture it self. And as for the Fathers expositions, as they may not be iudge (as hes bene saide) because they may erre, and hes erred, as hes bene proued, & your selues will not deny: & they dissent often-times one from another in the exposi∣tion of the same. So let their expositions be taken in so far as they aggree with the Scripture. For would ye haue vs a∣scriue that vnto them, whilk they themselues hes refused, & hes ascriued vnto the Scriptures onely? Heare therefore what Optatus the Bishop of the Kirk of Mileuitan a learned man who liued about the yeare of God 369. sayes, writting against the Donatistes who claimed to themselues only the title of the Kirk of Christ as ye do. They called for a Iudge, be bringes the Testament of Christ for a Iudge: and speaking to them of a point of religion that was controuerted, whether one should be twise baptised or not?
he sayes, You, sayes he, affirmes it is lawful, we affirme it is not law∣full, betwene your say it is lawfull, & our say it is not lawful, the peo∣ples soules doe doubt & wauer. Let none beleeue you nor vs, we are all contentious men, Iudges must be sought for, if Christians, they cannot be giuen on both sides; for trueth is hindred by affection. A Iudge without must be sought for. If a Pagane, he cannot know the Christiā mysterie; if a Iew, Optatus lib. 5. contra Parmeni∣anum he is an enimie to Christianitie. No Iudge therfore of this mat∣ter can be found in earth. A Iudge from heauen must be sought for. But why knock we at heauen when here we haue his Testament in the Gos∣pell. And he randers a reason of this in that same booke. Christ sayes he, hes delt with vs as an earthly father is wont to doe with his children, who fearing least his children should fall out after his decease, doth set downe his will in writting vnder witnesse: and if there arise de∣bate among the Bretheren, they goe to the Testament. He whose word must end our controuersie is Christ. Let his will be sought in his Testa∣ment, August. in Psal. 21 exposa (saieth he.) Augustine vrgeth the same reason of Optatus a∣gainst the Donatistes. We are brethren, sayes he, to them why do wee striue? Our father died not vntestate, he made a testament and so died. Men do striue about the goodes of the deade whill their testament bee brought forth. When that is brought forth they yeelde to haue it opened & red. The Iudge doth harken: the Counsellers be silent: the Crier bid∣deth peace. All the people is attentiue that the wordes of the dead man may be red and hard. He lieth void of life and feling, and his words pre∣uaile. Christ sitteth in heauen, and is his Testament gain-said? Open it let vs read. We are Bretheren why do we striue? Let our mindes bee pa∣cified, our father hes not left vs without a testament. He that made the testament is liuing for euer, he doth heare our words. He doth know his owne word, Pre. lib 4. contra heres. cap. 65 let vs read, why do we striue. Irenaeus sayes that the law∣full exposition of the Scripture whilk hes no perill with it, is according to the Scriptures themselues. What can be more plaine (Maister Gilbert?) And I ask you further? Would you haue vs to as∣criue more to the interpretation of the fathers, nor the learned of your Kirk does? Caietan. in praes. in commentatia in lib. Mosi As Caietan a Cardinall and Doc∣tor. Andradius the first sayes that God hes not tied the exposition of the Scripture vnto the exposition or sense of the fathers, (if God hes not bound it as he saies, why then should we bind it:) wher∣fore their he desires the reader, not to mislike it, if sometimes in
the expounding of them, he fall into a sense agreable to the text, though it goe against the streame of the fathers. If he speake trueth, then that sense that is agreable to the text suppose it bee against the streame of their expositions, is to be receaued & prefer∣red before them. And Andradius that learned man sayes, Andra. defen. sid. Trident lib. 2. At whose gifts the Italians won¦dered at, Oso ep. praefixa Andrad. fid. Trident. def. that the fathers spake not Oracles when they exponed the Scriptures, but might therein be deceiued. And he sayes more that the ouer-sights of the translation whilk they followed, must needs cause them som¦times to misse the meaning of the holy Ghost: and yet you woulde haue the sense of the Scriptures to be decided by them, who sometimes hes missed the meaning of the holy Ghost. And he concludes in the end, That the holy Ghost is the only and faith∣full interpreter of the Scriptures. Thus the fairest floures of your garden, and chiefest pillers of your faith hes written: so that if they speake true (whome I know not if ye will presume to contradict) the exposition of the Scripture is not tyed vnto the exposition of the Fathers: and it is leasome to goe with the text, against the streame of their expositions. And whereas you say, if I wilbe as good as my worde, the matter will soone be ended: I am glade of it, if you thinke as you speake. My word was, Maister Gilbert, as your selfe hes written it, that there be verie fewe pointes of controuersie betwene vs, wherein I will not get some testimonies of sun∣drie Fathers of the first 600. yeares, prouing with vs against them (meaning your kirk.) And I desired any man to set me downe any waightie point of controuersie, one or moe, and he should haue the proofe of it. These were my words. Now ye say, if I will be as good as my word, the matter will soone be ended. Whether I haue bene as good as my word in this or not, let the reader iudge. And I appeale your conscience Maister Gilbert, before the Lord in the great day, whether it be true or not. For not only in that example of Iustification, whilk ye cast in, but almoste in all the heades whilk are de∣bated amongst vs, I haue brought in sundrie testimonies of sundrie Fathers with vs against you. Yea, I haue bene bet∣ter then my worde in that: for I haue broght in testimonies of sundrie that liued after the 600. yeare: and not of these
onlie, but also testimonies of sundrie of your owne Doctors, Iesuites, Cardinals, Bishops, Canons, Councels, and Popes: prouing with vs in some points against your selues. I looke therefore (Maister Gilbert) that ye shalbe as good as your worde, and that the matter shall end heir betwene you and me. For both you haue saide that the matter would soone end, if I were as good as my worde: and also ye haue promi∣sed and subscriued with your hand, to reforme your religion in all things wherein it is not conforme to their testimonies. The whilk if you doe, then must you renounce the suprema∣cie of your Pope, the sacrifice of your Masse, your Transub∣stantiation, your Iustification by works, your merites of workes, your perfite fulfilling of the Lawe of God, your er∣roneous opinions that the kirk cannot erre, that the Scrip∣ture should not be iudge, with sundrie others. For in al these I haue brought the testimonies of sundrie Fathers: and in some of them the testimonies of your owne Doctors, Coun∣cels, Canons, and Popes with vs against you. Either therfore take shame and falset for euer-more vpon you, or else keep your word and your write, whilk ye haue subscriued heir, & reforme these points of your religion. As for that calumny wherwith ye charge vs to haue takē away a great part from the scripture, I know you meane the Apocrypha, whilk beares not the mark and stamp of Gods spirit, as beeing neyther written by Prophets, nor yet the most parte of them in the propheticall language the hebrewe tongue, wherein all the olde Testament was written, except some things of Daniel, and Ezra, whilk were written in the Chaldaick language, quhilk was knowne then to the Iewes: nor yet receiued as Canonicall by the Kirk of the Iewes, whilk Belar lib. 1: cap. 10. your Kirk will not deny. Nor yet acknowledged Cannonicall by the testimonies of sundrie Melito lib. 4. c 26. Euseb. Origen lib. 6. c. 25. Euseb. Athan. in sinop. Hilar. in prolog. explan. Psalm. Cyrill. in 4. cate∣ches. Ruffnus. in ex∣pos. simboli. Hieron. in pro∣logo galeato. Fathers, Synod. Lao∣dicen. canon. 59. confirmed by the councell Trullan. Councels, and of your Greg. Mag. in comment. in Iobum lib. 19. c. 16 Hugo. cardi∣nalis in prologo. Iosuae. Caietan a cardinall in fine coment. Hester. Arias Montanus who was present at the councell of Trent, in aedi∣tione quad am hebraicorum Bibliorum inter∣linearum inter∣pretationem. selues, also Papists of great name: some reiecting al, some more, some fewer: containing also many things repugnant to the trueth of God set downe in the Canonical Scripture. Last of all, wanting that maiestie of Gods spirit whilk so eui∣dentlie shynes in the Canonicall Scripture. And therefore
most iustlie say we, that ye vnderly the curse of God, pro∣nounced in his Scripture, Apoc. 22. for the adding vnto the holie trueth of God. And looke to it (Maister Gilbert, what you will say to your Cardinall Caietane, who hath denied sundrie bookes and parts of the Canonicall Scripture in the new Testament. Maister Iohn Welsche. Now, if the first thing I offer me to proue, be found of veritie: that is, that our Religiō is that self same, & no other, then that that Iesus Christ prea∣ched, and his Apostles, and theirs is not so: but deuysed by the man of sinne, & that Antichrist, that whore of Babylon, then the plea is wonne But if I prooue the second also, then I hope they will neuer open their mouth to speake euill of the trueth of God, as though it were but a new Religion. Maister Gilbert Browne. When Maister Iohn proues the thing that he is not able to proue, we shall doe the thing that we are not able to performe. but it is an wonder of him to put in so manie (ifs) and does nothing to the matter. For it is and true saying in Philosophie, that a conditionall Proposition proues no∣thing. It appeares he hes bene in haste, that he might not haue leasure to I proued all that was requi∣red at my hands then. proue any head for example of his promise. For we vnderstand that M. Iohn is a man who may erre, as manie man hes done before by his iudge∣ment. And therefore he must haue no I desire no credite without warrant, as your popes and your Kirk doth of her disciples. credence of vs, except he bring his warrand, and ye shalbe M. Gilbert is once beguiled for this is per∣formed. sure that he is neuer able to performe his sayings. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. This my reply, I hope, satisfies for answere to this sectiō. Maister Iohn Welsche. Thirdlie, I answere The Spirite of God foretels that when the Antichrist shall come, the defection shalbe vniuersall, and all nations shalbe drun∣ken with the wine of her fornication. Maister Gilbert Browne. Where this is written, Maister Iohn telles not. For I am sure, as it is set downe heir, there is no sik things in our Bibles, no not in their owne corrup∣ted Bibles, except they haue augmented them of new. That there shalbe an vniuersall defection, it is altogether repugnant to the word of God, as I haue shewed before; in prouing the Kirk alwayes to continue. For the same place where I beleeue he alledges too, hes these words, Apoc. 1 17. And it was giuen vnto him to make warre with the Saints, and to ouercome them: and power was giuen him vpon euery Tribe, and people, and tongue, and nation, ann all that inhabite
the earth adored it, whose names be not written in the booke of life of the Lambe Heir any man may see that the Saints of God that shalbe persecute by the Antichrist, and sik that is written in the booke of life, shall not make defecti∣on: then it shall not be an vniuersall defection. And also Maister Iohn af∣terward in finding some of his Religion that said against the Antichrist the Pope, the time bygane, is contrary to himselfe heir, that the defection shall not be vniuersall. And where he sayes that all nations shalbe drunken with the wine of her fornication, the text is otherwise: Becaus all nations haue drunken of the wyne of the wrath of her fornication: that is, that the people of all nations that hes obeyed her, shal be punished with the wrath of God and not that all the world should make defection. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. You fight heir against your owne shaddowe, Maister Gil∣bert) and whereas ye can finde nothing iustlie to quarrell in my wordes being rightlie taken, and taken as the Scripture takes them: you deuise a meaning of your owne braine, and would father it vpon me, that ye may the more easilie haue somewhat to speake against. For I neither spake it, nor mea∣ned it that the elect shoulde make defection in the time of the Antichrist: I am so farre from it, that suppose I beleeue assuredlie that this prophecie is fulfilled in your owne Kirk; yet I know assuredlie that the Lord reserued his owne elect to himselfe, Reuel. 14 who vvas keeped free from your Idolatry, as he promised, and histories recordes of some, whereof I did set downe some of their names. Domin. a Soto in lib. 4. sent. dist. 46 quest. 1. artic. 1 Bellarm. lib 3, de Rom. Pont. ca 17 But this is the doctrine of one of your ovvne Kirk, Dominicus a Soto, vvho beleeued it assu∣redlie, that the faith of Iesus Christ and Religion shoulde be vtterlye exstinguished through the persecution of the Antichrist, if Bellarmine speake true of him. And so turne the point of your sworde, Maister Gilbert, vpon your ovvne brother, vvho so taught, & not vpon me, vvho is farre from it. And if ye vvil say, where∣fore then called I it vniuersall? I ansvvere: because the scrip∣ture calles it a defection, vvithout any addition or restraint, & your Rhemists graunts, that this defection shalbe a reuolting of Kings, people, and prouinces, and the publick intercourse of the faithfull with the Kirk of Rome shall cease: and that the daylie sacrifice shall be abolished moste vniuersally throughout all nations and Kirks of the world by Antichrist himself. Annot. vpon 2. Thessal. 2. And Bellar∣mine
sayes, that he shall be Monarch of the whole worlde. Lib. 3. cap. 16 Therfore this kingdome by your owne confession shalbe vniuersal: & seeing his kingdome is an apostasy or defection, for as many as shall obey him, shall make defection from the faith: ther∣fore by the doctrine of your owne Kirk, it must be an vni∣uersall defection. And the Scripture sayes expresly, that he shall make all both small and great, &c. Reuelat. 13 Reuel. 14 8. & 18 3 to receaue a marke on their right hand, and on their foreheads: and that no man may buy or sell, &c. and that all nations hes drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Nowe, whether I might call that vniuersall whilk the Scripture calles all, and your Rhemistes and Bellarmine makes so generall and vniuersall, that it shall possesse all the kingdomes of the earth, let the Christian reader iudge. And let me aske you (Maister Gilbert) Doe you not beleeue that the Kirk is Catholicke, or vniuersall? Costerus a Iesu∣ite in Euchirid. and doe you not think with one of your owne nomber, that the Kirk is called vni∣uersall, because the faith of the Kirk is scattered in all nations: and yet for all this, all particular nations, and all particular men receaues not this faith? and yet notwithstanding it is vni∣uersall, and is called vniuersall still. And doth not the Scrip∣ture prophecie that in Abraham all the Nations shalbe blissed, Galat. 3.8 and yet for all this, there were, and is millions of the Gen∣tiles that are not blissed in him? Why then, in like manner, may not the defection in the time of the Antichrist be cal∣led vniuersall, although the elect be exemed from it? But wherefore insist I to refute this vaine quarrelling of wordes whilk serues to no purpose? So then, this that I said is both in your translation and ours in substance, and is not contra∣rie to that whilk I said afterward. As for that place of Scripture whilk ye cite heir, Apoc. 3.7.8. it is not spoken heir of the Antichrist, but of the persecu∣tion of the Romane Emperours. As for that calumnie of yours in calling our Bibles corrupted, and augmented: this is your sinne (Maister Gilbert) whereof one day ye shal make an accompt to the Maiestie of God, for the slandering and bearing false witnes of the trueth of God. And to speake the trueth, this is trew of you: for both you haue added to the
Scriptures of God, first the Apocrypha, next your Traditions, whilk your Kirk hes decreed to be receaued with equall reue∣rence and godlines with the Scripture: Concil. Tident. Se. 4 Gratus dist. 19. Et Al∣phnsu de gne¦r in thesau o Chr st relig 3. n. 5. thirdlie, the Decretal Epistles of your Popes, whilk some of you hes reckoned in the nomber of the Canonicall scripture. And also you haue corrupted the scriptures of God by your corrupt translation, especially that of the Colledge of Rhemes. The whilk to be trew, if time would serue, I might sone be able to proue, whilk hes bene sufficiently prooued by that learned and worthie man of God Doctor FVLK: vnto the whilk you, not al your cler∣gie hes not answered as yet, for ought that I know: nor ne∣uer is able to doe. And as for the last point wherein ye say, that the text is otherwayes then I set downe: let the Christian reader iudge whether my words be one in substance with this text or not for suppose this be set downe in the preter-time, and I spake it in the future-time: yet it is a prophecy of a thing to come: and your Kirk graunts it is not fulfilled yet, therefore they are both one in substance. And as for your exposition, where you expone this of the punishment of the people that hes obeyed her, and not of their sinne in communicating with her Idolatrie, that is manifestlie against the text. For this is set downe heir as the cause of her punishment, whilk is pronounced before in these wordes, Babylon hes salne, &c. Nowe the reason, because al nations hes drunken of the wyne of the wrath of her fornication, whereby in the Scripture is signified Idolatrie: and it is called the wine of the wrath, &c. because her fornication prouoked God to wrath. Osea 1. Ierem 3. And Aretas expo∣neth this fornication, a defection from euery good. And in the 18. chapter it is more euident, where after the denunciation of her fall, this reason is subioyned, Becaus all nations hes drunken of the wyne of the wrath &c. and the Kings of the earth hes commit∣ted fornication with her: and the marchands of the earth are waxed riche through the aboundance of her pleasures. The whilk as they cannot be vnderstood of the punishment, but of the defecti∣on: so this drinking cannot be vnderstood of their punish∣ment, but of their communication with her Idolatrie: and
yet how euer it be, this prooues that vniuersall defection, of the whilk I spake. Maister Iohn Welsche. And the K rk of God shalbe latent, and flee to the wildernesse, and there lurke, and be fed of God all that time secretly. Maister Gilbert Browne. It is an wonder to heare the word of God abused, not only with false ex∣positions repugnant to the words selfe, but also alledging the word falslye. For the text of Saint Iohn hes but this, (for he notes no place, because This is your i∣magination, and you are deceiued in it therefore correct your thoughts M. Gil. he knowes it may not abyde ane triall) And the woman fled vnto the wilder∣nesse, where she had ane place prepared of God, that there they might feede her, ane thousand, two hundreth, and threescore dayes. Heir there is no word that she shalbe latent, nor lurke, nor be secreat. And if Maister Iohn wil meane that the fleeing to the wildernesse, is nothing but to be inuisible, and to lye secreat: then it must followe that the whoore of Babylons selfe must be in∣visible and secret. For the same Saint Iohn sayes. And the Angell tooke mee away in spirite into the desert, and I sawe ane woman sitting vppon ane skarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemie, hauing seuen heades and ten hornes. This word (desert) signifies more properlie to be secret or invisible, nor the word (wildernesse) It is true appearandlie, that if this Woman si nifies the Kirk of Christ that in the time of the Antichrist, shee shalbe redacted to ane small number, as it were in ane wildernesse, and shall not possesse euery na∣tion, as she had wont to doe: but that she may be made invisible, and not to be seene, there is no true Catholick that expones it so. And siklike, this time shalbe but short, that is, for 1260 dayes, as the text sayes, whilk is but three yeares and ane halfe. And if Maister Iohns Kirk had beene but so long invisible, we should haue dispensed with the same. But it hes bene in∣uisible thir thousand yeares, as it is now professed in Scotland, and much more as young Marchistoun hes in his booke vpon the Reuel. cap. 12. ver. 14 Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Al that you can find fault with here, is this, that I said the Kirk in the time of the Antichrist, should be latent and lurk & be fed secretly: the whilk hes stirred you vp in sik a chol∣ler that you haue cried out with admiration that I haue a∣bused the Scripture: &c. Now tel me (Maister Gilbert) whe∣ther is it because these same wordes are not founde in the Scripture, or because the doctrine it selfe cannot be war∣ranted by the same? If the former, then I say you are but a quarreller about words, And all the doctrine whilk ye haue set downe in this your answer is not set downe in so manie
termes in the Scripture, and yet ye will haue it to bee the doctrine of Gods spirit, (suppose it be not so.) So it sufficeth that this whilk I sayd be warrāted by the Scripture, suppose the same termes be not found. If the other: then I say beside other places of Scripture, this same place whilk yee quote here confirmes the same. For knowe ye not that the wilder∣nesse is a place of refuge and secrecie from the tyrannie of their pursuers? And they that flies to the same, they flie to lurk there, and to be keeped close and secret from the rage of their persecuters for the safetie of their liues. So while it is prophecied that this woman (wherby is signified the Kirk,) whilk suppose ye condtionally expone so, 40. demonstrat. yet Sanderus one of your owne number expones it to be the Kirk without all doubt shall flie in the wil∣dernesse from the face of the Dragon, and that for her safetie, and there be fed &c. Is it not then manifest that she shalbe secret and lurk then, and not be so open and visible as she was before? And if this be an abuse of the Scripture, then not onelie your selfe hes abused it, but also sundrie of your owne Kirk, as the Rhemistes, Bellarmine, & Sanderus. For your selfe sayes that in the time of the Antichrist, she shalbe redacted in a small num∣ber, as it were in a wildernesse, and shall not posses euerie nation as she had wont to doe. For what is this els but to lurk and be latent, and to be fed secretly, in comparison of that estate wherein she was before? And therefore the onlie thing that I inferred on this in the end, was that no man should thinke that the Kirk of God was euer open and visible, in sik a florishing e∣state as it is now. And the Rhemists sayes that in the time of the Antichrist, Annotat. in 2. Thessal. this great defection or reuolt shalbee of kingdomes, people, and Prouinces, from the open externall obedience & communi∣on with the Kirk of Rome. So that their communion with her shall be in hart, and the practise thereof in secret, and he shall abolish the publike exercise of al religions trew or false, Bellarm. lib. 3. de Rom Pont. cap. 17. & 18 Sander. demonst 35. & 37 saue that whilk is done to himself: So that the Messe they say, shall be had but in secret then. And Bellar∣mine and Sanderus is of the same minde, that his cruell persecuti∣on shall stay all publick exercise of religion, and he shall make open warfaire with the whole Kirk, and shall endeuour to destroy the vni∣uersall estate of the whole Christian common weale, and shall shut vp
the doore of sacraments, and shall suffer no man anye more to enter in the Kirk of Christ, and shalbe Monarch of the whole world. Now if this be trew, whether shall the Kirk of Christ by your owne doctrine be fed secretly, or not be latent and lurk, in the time of the Antichrist, let al men iudge. But what a contra∣dictorious spirit is this of yours, who to gainesay the thing that I write, cares not to inuolue your selfe in a contradicti∣on, not only to the trueth, but also to your own Catholicks. Either therefore wonder at your owne Catholickes, who hes spoken as much and more in this poynt nor I did, and at your self also, who grants as much in substance as I mea∣ned, that ye and they haue abused the Scripture, or els leaue of to wonder at me, and wonder at the vaile whilk is hung ouer your owne eies, whilk hinders you not only to vnder∣stand the trueth, but also to vnderstand what your selfe and your owne bretheren teaches. Now as for your reason, it is not said that Babylō was in the desert, but that Iohn was taken in the spirit, that is, rauished in the spirit (as in the 1. and 4. chapter) into the desert that is, into a solitare and heauenlie contemplation of that vision whilk was afterward showne him. For as this carrying of him in the spirit signifies his spi∣rituall rauishing, so this desert signifies the solitarenes of his contemplation. And as that lifting vp of Ezechiell by the lockes of the haire of his head betwene the heauen and the earth, & that carry∣ing of him to the door of the innermost port towards the North, to see the abominations of Ierusalem, was only in vision, & not bodily. So I take this carrying of Iohn in spirit to the wildernesse to see the whoore of Babylon to haue bene in vision only, and not bodily. And whereas ye say that this worde desert signifies more properlie to be hid and invisible nor the word wilder∣nesse, I pray you tell me (Maister Gilbert) what is betwene desert & wildernesse? saue that the first is driuen from the La∣tine, & the second is English? Must you be set to the gram∣mer schoole againe? What fancie is this wherewith ye are possessed, that you put a difference betweene wildernes and desert? Is there anie difference, if you vnderstood the greek language, betweene  and , that is, betwene
desert and desert, wildernesse and wildernesse? And if ye haue e∣uer red the new Testament in Greeke, there is but the selfe same worde  in both these places, whilk signifieth desert or wildernesse. But where haue you bene when ye did imagine this difference? Appearandly ye haue bene drea∣ming in some wildernesse, or else wandring in the wildernes of your owne blind imaginations. As for the exposition of your trew Catholickes, we count not much of them. Al∣waies these whome ye call your trew Catholicks, Bellarmine the Rhemists, and Sanderus hes bene plaine in this matter, and hes spoken more in this poynt then we doe. And as for the time of this her secrecie and lurking 1260. daies whilk you expound literallie to be but three yeares and a halfe. I answer, this expositiō of yours is against first the custome of prophesies, whilk are expounded figuratiuelie and not lite∣rally, as these 70. weekes in Daniel concerning Christ, where there a daye is put for a yeare. Next, it is against the whole circumstances of ihe text: for will you expound this woman figuratiuely for the Kirk, as Sanderus does: and the wildernes vnto the whilk she fled, figuratiuely for the small number wherunto she shalbe redacted, as you doe: & the sun where∣with she was cled, and the moone whilk was vnder her feete, and the twelue starres that was vpon her head, and the red Dragon whilk per∣sewed her with ten heads &c. all figuratiuelie, and yet will yee expound the time of her being in the wildernesse literallie? What violence is this whilk yee will offer vnto the holye trueth of God, to expound all the rest figuratiuely, and on∣lie the time literallie? So then a day here is set for a yeare, as also it is taken in the same sense in the 2. chapter of the Re∣uelation in the Epistle to Smyrna, where it is said they shal haue tribulation for the space of ten dayes: that is, for the space of ten yeares. As for the invisibility of our Kirk, because that que∣stion cums afterward, therefore I omit it now. Only this, as your Hierarchie and abhomination of your Kirk grew, so did the puritie of the doctrine of Iesus Christ in his Kirk de∣cay. And as your Popes came not to their height at an in∣stant, and brought not in their abhominations at an instant
but peece and peece, and by longproces of time: So the pu∣ritie of the trueth of God decayed not at an instant, but peece and peece and by a long proces of tyme. For the de∣grees of your exalting, was the degrees of the depressing of the trueth of God in his Kirk. As for our dispensation suppose your Kirk vseth not to giue them without money laide downe, yet we will neither buie them, nor haue them for nought. So keepe your dispensations at home (Maister Gil∣bert) whill we send for them. Maister Iohn Welsche. And the Ministers thereof shal preach in sackcloth, that is, vnder persecu∣tion, all th , and at the last they shalbe put to death for the testi∣monie of Iesus, and for speaking against their false worship & Religion. Maister Gilbert Browne. It appeares to mee that Maister Iohn hes found some newe reuelation, other then that of Saint Iohn: for he notes no place to vs: Apoc. 11.8 and these words of his are no way in S. Iohn. and therfore as an invention of his own head, we will reiect the same. Indeede we haue in Saint Iohn, That God shal giue to his two witnesses, and they shall prophecy 1260 dayes clad with sackcloth But this can no wayes aggree with this purpose of his For why there shall be but two of thir: and there is more then two hundreth Ministers in Scot∣land. And these two shall prophecie, but our Ministers are no Prophets (al∣beit they foretell things oft times that is not true) and all the prophecies, if they prophecie at any time, is of euill and not of good. These two shal pro∣phecie but three yeares and ane halfe: but our Ministers hes prophecied these 38 yeares, if preaching be prophecying. And these two shalbe cled in sackcloth, but our Ministers, chiefly of Burrow townes, is clad in fine blak cloth, or silk. And so forth of manie more differences, as is contained in the 11 chapter of the Reuelation. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. It appeares to you that I haue found some new reuelati∣on, other then that of Saint Iohn. So did it appeare to the Iewes, that the Apostle Paule taught all men euery where against the Lawe of Moses, and yet it was the trueth, Act. 21.28 Act. 26.2. as he himselfe te∣stifies, he spake nothing beside that whilk Moses and the Prophets fore tolde was to come. So euery appearance is not trueth. It is but the scailes that are vpon your eies, that makes this so to ap∣peare to you: For the Scripture of God, and this reuelation of Iohn is sufficient to vs to make it manifest, that your head is the Antichrist, & your doctrine is that Apostasie that was prophecied to come: so that we neede no newe reuelations,
as ye do: for because the reuelations alreadie made by God to his Kirk, and written in his holy Scripture doth not war∣rand your abhominable and false doctrine, and your Popes supremacy, whilk is the foundation of all: therefore you and your Kirk flees to vn-written Traditions, & fained reuela∣tions to proue the same. As for example, because your Kirk hes not so much as a sillabe in the whole booke of God, to proue that Peters seat was translated from Antiochia to Rome, whilk is the whole fundation of all Poperie, Causa 24. quest. 1. cap. Rogamus. therefore your Pope Marcellinus in his canon law, grounds the certaintie of this vpon a fained reuelation, that Peter by the commandement of God did translate it. But to leaue you with your new reuela∣tions, what haue ye for you, for this your appearance? You say first, becaus I note no place: & next, becaus these words of mine, are no wayes in Saint Iohn. Therefore ye conclude it to be an invention of my owne. As to the first. Is this a good reason, I note not the place, therfore I haue found out some new reuelatiō: You must be sent to the Logick schools againe, to learne the right manner of reasoning. I noted no place, Ergo I could not, that will not follow. As to the second my words are no waies found in Saint Iohn, Ergo I haue foūd a new reuelation? But what if the sense be found? What if the self same doctrine be found in Saint Iohn, suppose not in the same words? Then it will not follow that I haue founde out a new reuelation, or that this is the inuention of my own braine. This place whilk ye quote heir, Reuel. 11.3. sufficiēt∣lie confirmes all that I saide. For your self will not deny, & Bellarmine, Bellarm lib 3. c. 6 Rhem. in annot. vpon Apo. cap. 11 Sand. in his de∣monstrations. the Rhemists, and Sanderus graunts, that these two witnesses are they who shall preach in the time of the Anti∣christ, suppose they expound them of Elias and Enoch, & that they shalbe persecuted, and put to death by him. What a blindnesse is this, Maister Gilbert, that hes ouersyled your eies, that for the writing of that same doctrin whilk the scrip¦ture warrands, your Diuines graunts, and your self will not deny, you haue saide that it appeared to you, that I haue found out some new reuelation. But iudge thou (Christian reader) what thou may presume vpon Maister Gilberts ap∣pearances.
But you say, this aggrees not with my purpose: and that because of the differences betweene these two wit∣nesses, & the Ministers of Scotland. First I do not meane by these two Witnesses the Ministers of Scotland onlie, but the Ministers of all the reformed Kirks in Europe, who hes de∣parted out of your Babel, and hes shaken off the yoake of the tyrannous bondage of your head, the man of sinne: and not onlie these who now liues, but these also who now rests from their labours, and sleepes in the Lord: of whome a great ma∣nie was persecuted, and put to death by your tyranny, for speaking against your abhominations. Now as to these dif∣ferences whilk ye marke: the fountaine from the whilk this springs, is your mistaking of the prophecies of God, and ex∣poning them literally, whilk according to the vse of prophe∣cies and especially these whilk are set downe in this Reuela∣tion, & all the circumstances of this text, ought to be expo∣ned figuratiuelie. These same two Witnesses are called two Oliues, two Candlestickes, and it is said of them, Reuel. 11, 4.5.6. &c. that fire commes out of their mouthes and destroyes their enemies. &c. If you will not be so absurde and ridiculous, as to expone these things lite∣rallie, but figuratiuelie: otherwise ye will make them Mon∣sters, Trees, and Candlesticks: why then doe ye expone this place concerning their number, worke, time, apparell, &c. li∣terallie, and not figuratiuelie as the rest of their workes, and properties must be exponed: the whilk if you had done, then would ye haue sene no difference betweene the Ministers of the Gospell that resisted your Pope, and these two Witnes∣ses heir: but the one to be the prophecie of the other, and the other to be the accomplishing of the prophecie. As for their nomber then, they are said to be but two, that is, fewe: & yet sik a sufficient nomber, as may proue & qualify any thing by the lawe. For by the lawe: Out of the mouth of two or three wit∣nesses, shall euery word be established. So the Ministers of the gos∣pell in the time of your Antichrist & darknesse, was but fewe at the beginning: and yet so manie, as serued for to establish the trueth of God by their testimonie, in the consciences of so manie whome God had appointed to saue. As for their
worke of prophecying, the Scripture calles preaching, pro∣phecying, . Cor. 12. & 13. & 19. Annotat. in 11. Reuel. and the Rhemistes graunts that these Witnesses shal preach against the Antichrist. And whereas you say, that we fore-tell oft times things that is not true: this is your ca∣lumnie and lie, Maister Gilbert, and so ought to haue no cre∣dite. And the prophecies of the Ministers of this land against your Antichristian kingdome, ye haue found by experience that they haue bene too true. And their prophecies are trew∣er then the prophecies of one of your Popes, Hildebrand, who openlie in the pulpit on the second holy day in Easter week, in the presence of diuerse Bishops, o in pag. 229. and Cardinals, and of the people and Senate of Rome, prophecied that the King whose name was Henrie should die before the feast of Peter next ensuing: or at the least, that he shoulde be so deiected from his Kingdome that hee should not be able any more to gather aboue the nomber of sex knights. And this he preached with this confirmation, neuer accept mee for Pope any more, if this prophecie be not fulfilled, but pluck mee from the aulter. But he was a false Prophet in the same, for neither was fulfilled. And whereas ye say, if they prophecie at any time, it is of euill and not of good: so said Achab of the Pro∣phete of the Lord, 1. Reg. 22.. and therefore he hated him: so you speake with the same spirit against vs, that Achab spak with against the Lords Prophet. And what good can be spoken of your Babel, since the Lord hes fore-tolde the ruine of it, & in part hes bene accomplished? and some of your owne nomber, as Hildegardis, Briget, Catherine de Senis hes for-tolde of the destru∣ction of your Kirk, & the reformation of the Kirk of Christ. As for the time, Fox. pag. 260. it was spoken of before, and I trow ye haue thought it too long, and yet be in paience, Maister Gilbert, for it must continue, and your Babel must downe. As for the clothing of sackcloth, it was the apparell of sik as was in do∣lour and in mourning, whereby is signified the sorrowe and dolour that shuld arise to the true ministers of Christ, throw the persecution of the Antichrist and his members, and their idolatrie and abhominations. The whilk hes bene so clearly fulfilled in the preachers of the Gospell since Iohn Hus his dayes, and before also, euen to this day, that he must be blin∣ded
of the Lord who sees it not. And whereas ye cast vp the clothing of the Ministry in this land, ye haue forgotten your self, and your Cleargie, and your head the Pope, with his tri∣ple crowne, with all the rable of his Prelates, Abbots, Bi∣shops, Cardinals, &c. as full of riotous pride and pompe, as euer were the Persians Kings, His clothes be made of precious stones, his gorgeous Miter dight, Bernard de con. sid ad Eugen. lib. 4. Platin de vta pontific. in Paulo 2. With iewels rare, with glistering golde, and with A precious stone called a carbuncle of the whilk kind, one that fell out of the Popes mytre by a mischance at his Coronati∣on was worth 6000. crownes Platin in vita Cle¦mentis. 5 Piropus bright. O verie Troian-trulles, not Troians. The pompe and glorie of whose court doth surmount all the pompe and glorie of all the Princes in Europe, as some that hes seene it reports. How then can ye iustly quarrell our at∣tire? Can you say that we passe the bounds of that modestye and comelinesse whilk the Apostle requires in the ouerseers of the Kirk of Christ, seeing you will haue all the outwarde pompe and glorie of your Popes and Prelates, according as it was prophecied of you, Reuel. 17. to be cōprehended with∣in the definition of comelinesse and modestie? But you are like the Lamians, of whome it is reported that they had but one eie: and when they went forth they tooke it with them to looke vpon others: and when they came in their owne houses, they laide it beside them: you looke to your neigh∣bours, but ye ouer-see your selfe. So for all the differences whilk ye haue yet assigned, it remains sure that by these two Witnesses heir are signified the Ministers of the Gospell. Maister Gilbert Browne. But note heir, I pray you, how well these new Euangelists aggrees in the exposition of this Reuelation of Saint Iohn: (for all their grounds and proo∣fes is vpon prophecies & darke speakings) Young Marchistoun in his book vpon the Reuelation, the 11. chap. 3. verse, expones these Witnesses to be the olde and newe Testaments, as he proues in the 21. Proposition: and Maister Iohn will haue them the Ministers. Marchistoun sayes, that to be cled in sackcloth, is to preach the word of God with the obscuritie of mens traditi∣ons and coloured glosses. Maister Iohn sayes heir, that the sackcloth signi∣fies persecution for the preaching of the worde. The notes on their Geneua Bibles printed at London, expones the sackcloth to signifie poore & simple apparell. And Bale vpon the same place writes, that this sackcloth signifies sober conuersation. God knowes if this and the like be wholsome doctrine to preach to the poore people, some one way, and some another, according
to the inuention of their owne braines, without any proofes. Maister Iohn Welshe his Reply. As for these diuers expositions whilk ye marke in vs, that hes so stirred vp your affectiōs, that ye cry out, God knowes whether this be wholsome doctrine to teach the poore peo∣ple, or not: I answere: that these diuerse expositions of ours, are all aggreeable to the Analogie of faith, as your selfe will not deny: and therefore cannot be called vn-wholsome do∣ctrine. Otherwise, not onlie the Fathers, but also your owne Doctors and Bishops, and Popes hes deliuered vn-wholsom doctrine by your reason, for they haue exponed innumera∣ble places of Scripture diuerslie, vvhilk is so manifest that I neede not proue it, and your self also hes deliuered vnwhol∣some doctrine heir, In the 10 point of your doctrine. for ye expone blessing and thankesgiuing for two contrarie things, and yet Bellarmine sayes, that some Catholickes takes them both for one. And what shal I say of your diuerse ex∣positions, whilk were tollerable, so being they were accor∣ding to the proportion of faith? Your contradictions one to another: and that not onely in exponing the Scripture, but in the maine points of your religion: some holding one thing and some another, as partlie hes, and partly shalbe marked, are manifolde. And if diuerse expositions of a place of scrip∣ture be vn-vvholsome doctrine, as ye say, then surely this point of your Catholick doctrine, whilk teaches, that the Scripture hes a fiuefolde sense, and that it may be siue diuerse wayes exponed, must be vn-wholsome doctrine, & then ye lose more then you can win by this. Bewarre, Maister Gilbert, that by this dealing ye bring not your selfe in suspition that ye are forsaiking your Catholick faith: for this is a point of it, as Bellarmine reports. Lib. 3. de interpr. Ver. cap. 3 As for your calumnies first in calling vs new Euangelists, I answered to that before: next in saying that all our proofes and grounds are vpon prophecies and darke sayings: first, you iniurie the holie Ghost in calling his pro∣phecies darke: for the cause of this is not in them, but in our blindnes. Secondly, ye speake too plaine an vntruth: for it is more then manifest that not onlie prophecies, but also the
plaine and simple doctrine of the whole Scripture is the grounds and proofes of our Religion, as is manifest by the points of doctrine whilk we haue handled heir. Maister Gilbert Browne. And it followes in Maister Iohn. And at the last (sayes he) they shalbe put to death, &c. Heir is twa things to be noted: First, that the Kirk shall not be invisible in the time of Antichrist: for if the Pastors of the Kirk be in∣uisible, how shall they be taken, and put to death? If the Antichrist and his members shall slay them, how can they doe the same, except they know and may see them? To be invisible, is not to be knowne or seene: but they will see and know them, or else they cannot discerne them from their owne, wherby they may put them to death, and saue their owne. The second thing to be noted, that our Ministers in Scotland except they be put to death by the Pope, they beare not the testimonie of Christ. For these are Maister Iohns owne words. And S. Iohn sayes, Apoc. 11.7.8 That the beast shall slay the two Witnes∣ses. Nowe by Maister Iohn, the beast is the Pope, and the Witnesses is the Ministers: therefore the Pope must slay the Ministers: and after that, their bodies mustly three dayes and an halfe, not in Scotland, but in Hierusalē, Apoc. 11.9.11.1 for there was the Lord of these two Witnesses slaine. And after, they must reuiue and ascend vp to heauen in a cloude in the sight of their enemies, & so forth. In his 14 Pro p. Whilk things I trust shall come to passe to none of them in our dayes, nor long after the Laird of Marchistons doomesday. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for the first thing whilk you infer heir, concerning the invisibility of the Kirk, because you haue the same argument afterward, I refer the ansvvere of it to that place. As for the second thing vvhilk ye inferre, that except the Ministers of Scotland be put to death by the Pope, they beare not the testimonie of Christ. I ansvvere: As it is true that it is pro∣phecied of the Antichrist, that he shal Apoc. 11.. slay the tvvo Wit∣nesses of God, and that he shall make vvarre vvith the saints and ouercome them: so is it Apoc. 11.12 13 15 17. & 13.6.8 9. & 18.2 likevvise prophecied that his crueltie shall not alvvayes continue, but at the last, the Lorde shall take his Kingdome in his owne hand, and the Gospell shalbe prea∣ched to them that dwell vpon the earth, and Babel that great cietie shall fall, so that the blood vvhilk your Kirk hes spilt of the saints of God alreadie in all the parts of Europe, these 300. yeares bypast, and that in sik aboundance, that suppose the Lorde
may nomber them, yet no man is able to nomber them. And the patience and suffering of our brethren, is an sufficient e∣uidence that both your Popes are the Antichrist, and they are the Ministers of Christ, suppose they slay no moe of them And although the Lorde hes shortened your power, yet ye want no goodwill to spill the blood of the rest. That ransac∣king of Germanie, that cruell persecution of Queene Mary, and bloodie inquisition of Spaine in the Iowe countries, and that most sauadge and cruel massacre of Paris, and that Spa∣nish nauy, whilk the Lord discomfited, with his owne migh∣tie and outstreatched arme in the 1588. yeare of God, doeth sufficiently testifie what hearts ye beare to the Ministers of Scotland, if your power were according to your malice: But fulfill ye the measure of your Fathers, that the blood of all the righteous may come vpon you. As for the prophecie of the ignominious handling of the bodies of these Witnesses after their slaugh∣ter: it is also fulfilled by your Popes, and their authoritie v∣pon the carcases of the Saints of God, whilk in all parts al∣moste, where euer their blood was shed, was most ignomini∣ously handled, as though they had beene not the bodies of men, but the dead carions of dogs and swyne. Let both hi∣stories, and some who yet liues beare witnesse of this. As for the time and place, and their reuiuing and ascending vp to heauen, it is to be vnderstood after the manner of prophe∣cies, mysticallie and figuratiuelie, as I haue prooued before. The time of three dayes and an halfe, signifying all the time of your tyrannous crueltie. The place of their ignominy is the streetes of that great Cietie, Reuel. 17.9 18. Bellarm. lib de Roma. pontif. cap. 2. Reuel. 12, 8. & 17.5 whilk heir is called Sodom & Aegypt, and the place where our Lord was crucified, not literallie, but ; spirituallie, as the Text sayes. And also cal∣led Babylon, in the 14. and 17. and 18. of the Reuelation, whilk is literallie that seuen hilled cietie, whilk hes dominion ouer the Kings of the earth, whilk as Bellarmine confesses, is Rome properlie. So as this great cietie is neither Sodome nor Aegypt, nor Babylon (suppose it be called so) literallie, but onely mysticallie and spirituallie, as the Scripture sayes, and your self will not de∣ny, for the likenes betweene them: Sodom, for her filthinesse
and vncleannesse: Aegypt and Babylon for her tyranny and crueltie euer the Saints of God, wherein she resembls them. So is she not literallie the place where Christ was crucified, but only mysticallie and spirituallie for the likenes betwene them: that as by the authoritie of the Emperour of Rome, his deputie Pilate our Lord was crucified, for the false chal∣lenge of treason against the Emperour, whilk was falsly and wickedlie laide to his charge: and therefore is saide heir by the holy ghost, to be crucified at Rome: that is, by the autho∣rity of the rulers at Rome: So by the authority of the Popes who now reignes & hes reigned these many yeares at Rome, Christ is crucified againe in his members, because they will not receaue his marke, and worship him. And as Ierusalem boasted her self to be a holie cietie, and the spouse of Christ, and yet was a harlote, a murtherer, Exod. 20. and a persecuter of the Saints: so Rome doth boast her self to be a holy ciety, and the spouse of Christ, and the head of all: and yet is nowe, and is long since become an harlot and a murtherer, & a pesecuter of the Saints. And if ye will aske, When did the bodies of the Saints lye in the streetes of Rome? I answere: As by the gates in the cietie in the fourt command, is not meant the gates of the cietie properlie, but the authoritie and iurisdiction of the cietie: so by the streetes of Rome is not onely meant the gates within the walles of Rome, but all the places and parts whither his power and dominion hes spred the selfe. So that all the places where the Popes of Rome hes exercised their tyrannie ouer the Saints, are called heir the streetes of that great Cietie. All these therefore who hes bene cruelly mur∣thered by the Popes authority in England, Scotland, France the low countries, &c and whole bodies hes bene cast out, & whose bodies hes beene ignominiously handled, they haue lyen in the streetes of that great cietie And as all the rest of this prophecie is to be vnderstood spiritually, so is this, reui∣uing and ascending of these Witnesses to heauen in the sight of their e∣nemies, to be vnderstood not literallie, but spirituallie. So this is not the meaning of the holy Ghost that these Witnesses whome the Antichrist shall slaye shalbe raised vp againe in
their owne persons (whilk yet shall be at the last day in the generall resurrection:) but that the Lord shall raise vp other Witnesses, indued with that same spirit, whilk they were in∣dued with: preaching the same trueth, and maintaining the same cause against Antichrist, as that prophecie in the 3. of Malachie of the sending of Elias before the comming of Christ, was fulfilled, Mat. 11.10.14. as our Sauiour testifies, not in the raising vp of Elias in his owne person againe: but in the sending of Iohn Baptist, in the vertue and spirite of Elias. So this prophecie concer∣ning the reuiuing of these two Witnesses, whereby was figu∣red the faithfull Ministers of Christ, who was murthered in the time of Poperie, as Iohn Wiclef, Iohn Hus, Ierome of Prage, M. Geore Wishart, and many others, is fulfilled not by raising vp of their persons againe, but of others his faithfull seruands, who in their vertue and spirit hes defended and maintayned ye same doctrine & cause against the Antichrist, as M. Luther, Caluine, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Maister Knoxe, and sundry others whome the Lorde hes, and dailie raises vp in all countries, for the ouerthrow of your Babel. As for your trust what will come to passe, we passe not, for so much hes bene fulfilled of these prophecies, whilk testifies your head to be the Anti∣christ, & the Ministers of the reformed Kirk to be the faith∣full seruands of Christ, and the rest concerning your daylie consumption and finall abolition, 2. Thessal. 2.8 Reuel. 18.2.21. & 19.20. we knowe assuredlie shall come to passe, because the Lord hes so thought it and said it. And as for any further proofe of the clemency and meekenesse of your Popes, if so the Lorde will, we desire it not. For as it is saide of the wicked man, Your compassions are cruell, and your by past cruelty testifies of what spirit ye are. And suppose you say you trust that this, amongst the rest, shall not come to passe, yet I feare you long to see that day vpon the Ministers of Scotland, whilk your brethren reioyced to see fulfilled in that cruell persecution of Queene Marie in England, and in that bloodie massacre of Paris, of the saints of God there: for we cannot thinke but that ye are of the same spirit & minde, whilk your brethren were of, otherwise ye are not a right ca∣tholick. As for the Laird of Marchistouns coniecture concer∣ning
the day of iudgement, he hes his owne probable rea∣sons, and if you be as good as your worde, as your fauourers hes reported of you, Mat. 24.36. we will see the refutation of his book by you. And suppose I know the time to be vncertaine to man, or Angell, as our Sauiour sayes: yet his coniecture thereof is in greater modestie and sobrietie, nor your determination thereof. Whereby if the doctrine of your Kirk be true con∣cerning the Antichrist, whome ye imagine is yet to come, & the time of his raigne, whilk ye say is to be but three yeares and an halfe: then not only the year, but the very day ther∣of may be knowne of them that liues in these dayes. For the Scripture sayes, He shalbe abolished by the brightnesse of his com∣ming: 2 Thes. 2.8. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Romano pontifi∣cat cap. 17. pag. 418. yea that whilk is greater arrogancie and presumption the learnedest of your Kirk, Bellarmine, hes taken vpon him to determine the verie day of the comming of Christ to iudgement: to wit, 45. dayes after the perishing of the Anti∣christ. It is manifest (sayes he) that after the death of the Anti∣christ, there shall be but 45. dayes to the end of the world. Maister Iohn Welsche. Now if all this be true, both concerning the Antichrist, the largenes of his dominion, the estate of the Kirk of God and his true Pastors al that time whilk I offer me to prooue by the Scripture, And also that the Pope of Rome is that only Antichrist that was to come, and is now disclosed, then I say, no man should thinke that the Kirk of God was euer open, and vi∣sible in that flourishing estate as it is now. Maister Gilbert Browne. But what if all these sayings of his be false, what shall follow then? but that Maister Iohn and the rest of the Ministers are deceaued, and deceaues others, with sik vaine & vntrue expositions vpon the word of God. For take away from it Maister Iohns owne inuention, & the worde shall neuer haue sik ane meaning. And although Maister Iohn offer neuer so oft to prooue the same, I say, he is neuer able to doe it, nor all the Ministers in Scotland. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. If all these sayings of mine concerning the largenesse of the dominion of Antichrist, the estate of the Kirk of God, & his true Pastors all that time, be false: then not onely haue I
bene deceaued, but also Bellarmine, the Rhemists, and Sande∣rus the chief defenders of your Kirk, hes bene deceaued, and deceaues others: for they haue spoken & written as much, & further in these points, then euer I did, as I haue prooued before by their owne testimonies. And yet I trow your head and Cleargie will iudge them to be as far from error, as you are. So either you or they, must be deceaued in this. And as for the fulfilling of these prophecies in your Popes of Rome, I hope it hes bene prooued sufficientlie, whilk ye nor all the Cleargie of Rome, is neuer able to improoue. As for the rest of your answere, wherein ye prooue that the Pope is not the Antichrist: I haue answered to it in the other part of my tre∣tise, concerning the Antichrist, therefore I omit it now. Maister Gilbert Browne. What he meanes that the Pope is now disclosed, I know not: for I vnder∣stand that he hes not bene like their Kirk, that sometimes is visible, & some∣times not: for he hes alwayes beene knowne by the visible Kirk to bee the visible head thereof in place of Christ. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. My meaning is this, that suppose in ye darknesse of Papistry he was taken to haue bene the Vicare of Christ, yet now the Lorde hes smitten him and consumed him by the sworde of his mouth, that is, . Thes. 2.8. the word of God: and hes discouered him to the full to all these, whose eyes the Lord hes opened, that he is that Antichrist, whilk the Scripture hes foretolde was to come. And where you say that he hes bene alwayes knowne by the visible Kirk to bee the visible heade thereof in place of Christ, I see you regarde not what you say, for the mainte∣nance of that head and kingdome of yours. For certainly ei∣ther hes the Lord wonderfully blinded you, or else ye speak against the light of your owne conscience. For are you eue able to produce one sillabe in the whole Scripture to proou this? Yea, hes not his Monarchie and supremacie bene con¦demned: first Math. 18 1. & 26. v. 25.26. Marc 10.42. Luc. 22.25. by the sonne of God: next, by the 2. Cor. . 1 Pet. 5. Ap¦stles themselues: thirdlie, by the Fathers of the primitiu Cyprian. epist. 55 ad Cornel.Kirk, in their synods and councels, both prouinciall and ge¦nerall,
as by the Bishops of Cyprian. epist. 55. ad Cornel. Africke, about the yeare 255. By the generall councels of 1. Canon 5.6.17. Nice, wherein was 318. Bi∣shops, anno 327. Of Canon. 2 3.5. Constantinople, wherein was 150. Bi∣shops, anno 381. Of Canon. 8. Ephesine, where was 200. Bishops, an∣no 436. Of Actio. 16. Canon. 28. Chalcedonense, anno 454. where there was 630. Bishops. Of Canon. 36. Constantinople 6. anno 681. where there was 289. Bishops. Of Canon. 1. Nicene 2. anno 781. where was present 350. Bishops. Of Canon. 17. Constantinople 8. where was present 383 Bishops, anno 870. Of the councell of Sessio. 4.5. Constance, wher was 1000. Fathers almoste, anno 1418. And of Sessio. 2.18. Basile, anno 1431, all generall councels, condemning your Popes supre∣macie, as your Kirk nowe affirmes of him, some more, some lesse. And also it is condemned by prouinciall councels, as of Canon. 6.12.23.14.15.19.20. Antioche, and of Canon. 11. anno. 404. Carthage, 2. and 3. confirmed in the generall councell of Canon. 26. Trullan, and 6. and by the councel of Canon. 22. Mileuis: condemned also by the Vniuersities of Appellation. vniuersi. paris. olione 10. ad fu∣tur, cons. infastic rerum expe. et fugi. Paris, and Aeneas Sylviu de gestis Basil. consil. lib. 1. Louane, and Colein, and Histor. de Eu∣ropa cap. 22. Vienna, and Comer. de re∣bus Poionorum lib. 21. Cracouia. So then by the authority of Councels, generall and prouinciall, and of Vniuersities, the Monarchie and superioritie of the Pope ouer all generall councels is disallowed. And suppose the Kirks of France and Germanie did honour them, and gaue them some preheminence, both of honour and power, being blinded at that time with the smoake that came out of the bottomlesse pit: yet it may appeare by their Ad Ludoui∣cum 11. pro. li∣bertate ecclessi gallican aduer∣sus Rom. aulum defensio parisi∣ensis cutiae. Gra∣uamina nation Germaniae ex∣hibita Maxim. 1 supplications that they did not allowe that full Monarchie of his, but mis∣liked it, & hated the same: yea In conuentu Bituricensi. France made lawes against it. Nowe these are sik whome your selues doe holde for Ca∣tholickes, and yet they acknowledged not the Monarchy of your Pope. The Kirks of Chalcho. con dereb. Tur. lib. 1. & 6 Graecia, and of Asia in the East, and of Iouius in Mos∣couia Moscouia, in the North, and of Aluarez in de∣scriptione aethio∣piae c. 77. & 83. Aethiopia in the South, and of Aeneas Syluius hist. Bohem. c 33 Boheme, Sleidan cour¦ment lib. 16. Prouince, M. Fox in the acts and mo∣ments lib. 7. Piemont, and the refor∣med Kirks that are this day in France, Flanders, England, Scot∣land, & so forth throughout Europe, all hes condemned your Popes supremacie. So that if his supremacie were to be put to triall by the iudgement & will of men, so many thousands of Pastors, Doctors, Synods, Councels, Vniuersities & Kirks through all ages, in all countries, of all sorts & estates, may
suffice to put the Pope from his supremacie: so that I thinke you may blushe, Maister Gilbert, that hes so boldly written that he hes bene alwayes acknowledged by the visible Kirk to be the visible head of the Kirk, seeing his Monarchie was neuer fully acknowledged vntill the Sessio. 11. Lateran councel, vn∣der Leo the 10. 1516. yeares after Christ. But seing the word of God is the only iust triall of it, and seing it is not written in the booke of life: therefore I conclude that his supremacie is not a citizen of that newe Ierusalem, but a childe of Babel: and therefore they are blissed that shall dashe it against the stones. Maister Gilbert Browne. That the Kirk at any time may be inuisible, it is repugnant to the worde of God in manie places, and to Maister Iohn also. For he giues examples afterward of sundry, as he sayes, that was of his religion, and opponed them selues to the Pope and his Cleargie: and that, sayes he, when he was come to the hight. If the true Kirk opponed the selfe to the Antichristian Kirk, then it was visible and knowne, and if it was knowne when the Popes kingdome was at the highest, much more when it was lowe. & so it was alwaies known by Maister Iohns selfe. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Whether oppugne ye your owne imagination (Maister Gilbert) heir, or that whilk I write. If the first, then you are foolish who fights against your self, as ye doe indeede: if the second, then I say, that whilk I saide was this: that no man should thinke that the Kirk of God was euer open and visi∣ble in that flourishing estate as it is nowe. For this is our do∣ctrine, Maister Gilbert, concerning the invisibility of the kirk the whilk because you know not, therefore you stumble at it and oppugnes only your owne inuention, and not our do∣ctrine: and therefore your reasons and Scriptures whilk ye bring heir, serues to no purpose, for they make nothing a∣gainst vs. We say that the Catholick Kirk whilk compre∣hends al the elect is alwaies inuisible, Ephes. 5.25 26.27.32. Psal. 45.13. Ioh. 10 27. 2. Tim. 2 19. Luc 11.28. Math. 7. both because the prin∣cipall part thereof is in heauen: and also because the senses of men cannot discerne vvho are true members of the Catho¦lick Kirk heir, their effectuall calling, their faith, loue, hope, and invvard graces: their vnion vvith Christ their heade,
their spirituall armour, vveapons, and vvarfare, Ephes 6, 12. 2. Cor. 12.34. and their head Christ Iesus, and their vvhole glorie is invvard and in∣uisible, and they shall neuer be seene all gathered together vntill that great day: So that suppose they may be sene out∣vvardlie, as they are men, and sometimes in respect of their outvvarde ministerie: yet in so far as they are a part of the Catholick Kirk: that is, in so far as they are chosen, and san∣ctified, &c. as hes bene said, they cannot be discerned by the senses of men and so are invisible. Next vve say that the par∣ticular visible Kirks are not alvvaies in one outward estate: sometimes outvvardly glorious, sometimes more obscure: sometimes openlye knovvne and seene by all: sometimes knovvne and seene but by a fevv: sometimes frequent, and consisting in manie, sometimes rare and consisting in fevve: sometimes adorned vvith outvvarde ornaments of peace, largenesse, outvvard glorie & multitude: sometimes againe wanting this outvvard glory vnderpersecution. But yet ha∣uing that invvard glorie of these invvard graces. So that when we say these particular Kirks are sometimes inuisible, we doe not meane as though they were knowne to none (for that is not our doctrine, Maister Gilbert, as ye imagine:) but that they are not so openlie knowne that they are patent to all to be the true Kirk: but knowne vnto them with whome they haue to do, and who professes the trueth with them. Yea sometimes, some of them are knowne vnto the very persecu∣ters and enemies by their constancie and perseuerance in their sufferings, suppose they allow not their profession. And in this state was the Kirk of Israell in the time of Elias, 1. Reg. 19.10. when he complained that he knew none left but himself of the true worshippers of God. 2. Chron. 2.24. 2. King. 16.10. And the Kirk of Iuda in the dayes of Achaz and Manasse Kings of Iudah. And siklike in the time of Christ, both in the time of his liuing amongst them, as also in the time of his death & resurrection, the Kirk was broght to a small handfull: the Princes, Priests, and Scribes, who only was in dignitie and authoritie, being persecuters of Christ, condemned him, and crucified him. And siklike in the time of the persecution of Diocletian the Emperour, and in
the time of the Arrian heresie whilk ouer-spred, as it were, the whole world. The whilk also our Sauiour foretold shuld come to passe: Matth. 18.8. Matth 24, 11.12. 2. Thes, 2, 1 Tim 4. Reuel. 9.1.2.3.4. & 12.6. & 13. vers. 14 15.16.17 & 14. v. 8 & 17. v. 2. & 18. v. 3. When the sonne of man (sayes he) shall come, shall he finde faith in the world? And by the Apostle also. And Iohn in the Reuelation, in the time of the Antichrist, confessed also by the learned of your own Kirk, as Bellarmine and the Rhe∣mists, as they haue bene quoted before: and by your self also who confessed that the Kirk of Christ should be redacted to a small number, as it were in a wildernesse in the time of the Antichrist. This now is our doctrine concerning the inuisi∣bilitie of the Kirk, whilk is neither repugnant to the word of God, nor yet to the examples whilk I brought in afterwarde against your Religion. For both these, Maister Gilbert, are true, and neither of them repugning one another: that the particular Kirks in the time of the Antichrist, are not so o∣penlie knowne, and so outwardlie glorious and flourishing, as they were before: but redacted to a small number, more obscure and more latent: partly through that vniuersall de∣fection, and partly through that extreame persecution of your Kirk and head: and that there was some that opponed themselues to the Pope and his Cleargie, and that euen whē he was come to the height. If you will make these repugnāt which are not aduersa, but only diuersa secundum magis & mi∣nus, then I say ye are repugnant to all rules of reasoning, and to the light of nature it selfe. Maister Gilbert Browne. Of this I may iustly make ane argument against Maister Iohn, that the Pope is not the Antichrist. The Woman that fled to the wildernesse is the true Kirk, and to flee to the wildernesse is to be inuisible, as Maister Iohn sayes. Now young Marchistoun hes that this inuisibilitie indured from the yeare of God 316. til our dayes, the space of 1260. yeares, whilk was by him all the time of the Antichrist. But by Maister Iohn Welsche, there was ma∣nie in that time that opponed themselues to the Pope, and said against him and his Religion and Cleargie: and therefore was knowne. Of the whilkes the Popes gart slay manie, And as the eth i as he sayes: Therefore it must followe, that ei∣ther the Pope is not the Antichrist, because hee did persecute but visible things, or else the Kirk was not inuisible all the time foresaide.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Let vs see the force of this argument that ye make for your Pope, that he is not the Antichrist. The woman, ye say, that fled to the wildernesse, is the true Kirk: that I graunt: & to fly into the wildernesse is to be inuisible by me. I answere: By me it is to be latent, and to lurke, to eschew the rage of her persecuters, and not to be openlie conuersant, as that all the worlde may knowe her: and yet not to be so latent, but that some of them are knowne both amongst themselues, as also to their enemies. And this is our meaning (as I haue said before) vvhen vve affirme that the particular Kirks some∣times becomes invisible. But you take it as though our mea∣ning were that ye kirk is so inuisible, that it is known to none whilk is your inuention, Maister Gilbert, and not our do∣ctrine: and therefore you fight without an aduersarie in this point. But to goe forward to the rest of your argument: you say, that by me there was sundrie that oppugned the Pope, and his Cleargie, and was put to death by them, This is true: and therefore the blood of the Saints is found in your Kirk. Now what will you gather of all this? Therefore say you the Pope is not the Antichrist, because he persecuts but visible things, or else, the Kirk is not inuisible. I deny that either the one or the other will follow. And because you made an argument against your Pope (I should haue said with him) that he is not the Antichrist, whilk is grounded vpon your owne in∣uention, mistaking our doctrine, and therefore hes no feete: I will make another for him that he is the Antichrist, the whilk you nor all your Cleargie will not be able to disproue. He is that vndoubted Antichrist, whilk hes redacted the kirk of Christ, as it were in a wildernesse, to a smal handfull: part∣ly through the pest of his damnable doctrine, partly throgh his extreame persecution, so that they were compelled to lurke and hyde themselues from the crueltie of his power. This you cannot deny, because the Scripture affirmes this of the Antichrist. But I assume, that the Popes of Rome hes done this these many hundreth yeares, as I haue proued be∣fore, and in the other part of my answere: therfore of neces∣sitie
it must followe, that the Popes of Rome are the Anti∣christ that the Scripture foretold should come. Answere this if you can. And as for the time of this inuisibilitie, it hes relation to the beginning, and grouth, and hight of your Antichristian kingdome: for as it grewe the Kirk was more and more ob∣scured: and when it was at the hight, the Kirk was in her E∣clipse: and as it hes decaied now since, she hes accordinglie spred her self abroade. If the Apostle be true that mysterie of iniquitie began to worke in his dayes: 2. Thes. 2.7 1. Ioh 4.3. for first the manifold here∣sies whilk were sowne in the primitiue Kirk, whereof the Popes of Rome hes renewed a great manie: as shalbe proo∣ued heirafter, was the first step to that Antichristian king∣dome. . of Ioh. ver. 9 Next, the louing of preheminence in the Ministry, ouer their brethren, as the scripture testifies of Diotrephes, who loued pre∣heminence, 3. of Iohn, vers. 9. and specially the aspiring of the Bishops of Rome to a domination and lordship ouer their brethren forbidden by Christ, whilk was manifestly kythed in Pope Victor, who did take vppon him to excommunicate the Bishops of Asia, for a light dissention of the celebration of Easter, Anno 198. And in others, as Cornelius, Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestine Popes, who did receiue to their Com∣munion those who were excommunicate in Africa, was the second step. Thirdly, if it be true that these impious and su∣perstitious decreits whilk your Kirk ascriues to the Popes of Rome before Constantine, be theirs: as is not lykelie that sik superstitions did creip into the Kirk of Christ it being vnder persecution: then, I say, the Popes of Rome euen before Syl∣uester by their superstitious decreits, made a further entry to that Antichristian kingdome. And because the Romane 2. Thes. 2.7.  Empire, was the let that hindered Antichrist to step vp to his throne: and the Reuelat. 18 cietie of Rome behoued to be his seat: therefore Constantine the great leauing the cietie of Rome to Syluester the Bishop of Rome, made yet the way more easie: till at the last, they first got the primacy of honour, next of authority and iurisdiction ouer their brethren: and then last of all did subdue the necks of Kings and Emperours vnto
them. The whilk they did not attaine vnto at the first, but peece and peece: and that not without long and great resi∣stance, both of the Kirk, (as I haue proued before) condem∣ning his Monarchie in all ages; and of the Emperours, as we shall see heirafter. And as they euer grew in their superiori∣ty, so did the purity of the Kirk of Christ decay: and as a pest infects not a kingdome all at once, but peece and peece: so did your Antichristian heresie: it infected not all at once, but peece and peece, till at the laste it went ouer all. While as then Marchistoun makes the beginning of his raigne to be in the 316. yeare of God, and the Kirk from thence to become inuisible: his meaning is, that then that let whilk the Apostle speakes of, was begun to be remoued, that his seat & throne might be in Rome: and from thence as they grew in height, so was the Kirk ay more and more continually obscured, till at the last the Lorde did scatter that darkenesse by the light of his Gospell whilk came to passe in our dayes. Maister Gilbert Browne. The Kirk that is set downe to vs in the word of God, Num. 20.4. . Reg. 8.14. Matth 16.18. Matth. 18.17. Act. 15.3.4. Act. 18.22. Act. 22, 28, 1, Tim. 3, 15 can no way be inui∣sible: for when the holy write speakes of the Kirk of Christ, it speakes of an visible nomber of men and wemen: and no wayes of Angels or spirites, as may be seene in these examples on the margent. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. I come now to your arguments. First you say that the kirk that is set downe to vs in the word of God can no wayes be invisible, becaus say ye, when it speakes of the Kirk, it speaks of a visible nomber of men and wemen, and no waies of An∣gels or spirits: I answere, this is most false: for the Scripture sets downe to vs that Kirk whilk is the Eph. 1.22.23 & body of Christ, and whereof he is the 5.23 head and Sauiour, and whilk is Col. 1.18 builded on the rock, whilk is called the Heb. 12.23 congregation of the firste borne, whose names are written in heauen, and that Gal, 4, 26 Matth, 16, 18 Ierusalem whilk is the mother of vs al. And this is the Catholick Kirk whilk com∣prehends al the elect, aswell triumphant as militant, whilk is inuisible for the respects before said, as I haue prooued. And suppose the elect that are heir militant may be seene as they
are men, and oft times also in respect of their outwarde pro∣fession: yet it follows not but yt they are invisible in so far as they are a part of the Catholick Kirk. And also that some∣times through the extremity of persecution, they may be la∣tent and lurke, so that they are not openly visible & known to all, as I haue saide before. As for these places of Scripture, to wit, Num. 20.4. 3. Reg. 8.14. Act. 15.3.4. & 20.28. & 18.22. & 1. Tim. 3.15. they speake all of particular Kirks, whilk we graunt vnto you are visible, suppose not ay alike, as hes bene proued. As for the 16. of Matthew, it speakes of the kirk of the chosen, for they only are builded vpon this rock, and against whome the gates of Hell preuailes not: and they are inuisible in respect before saide, as hes bene proued. As for the 18. of Matthew, it is quoted afterward: therefore I referre the answere of it vnto that place. Maister Gilbert Browne. Psal. 18 6. Read S, Aug on ths Math 5.15 Esa. 61.9. Dan. 2.35. Miche. 4 1.2. Read S. Hieron on these places. Aug. 1. Tract. in Epst. Io, Item de Bapt. lib. 4. c. 1 Matth. 18.17, Cy¦prian de simpli. prelat. Ier. 1. E∣pist. ad Damas. Aug lib. 19. con∣tra Faust cap. 11. Origen. homil. 30. in Matth Cyp. lib. de vni∣tat. Eccles. Chrysost hom. 4. in cap 6 Es. Aug lib. 3. contra Epst Parment. c. 3. Item. tract 1. in Epist. o tract 2. Item. E∣pist. 166. ad o∣atas. The Scripture also in many places compares the Kirk to visible thinges that cannot be vn seene. As, He hes placed his Tabernacle in the Sunne, A cietie cannot be hid set on a mountaine. It is also compared to a light set on a Candle-stick to lighten the whole house, and not to be put vnder a bed, or a bushell; with many the like whilk I haue omitted for breuities cause, sauing some noted on the margent. Moreouer our Sauiour commands vs to com¦plaine to the Kirk if our brother offend vs: and also, we ought to ioyne our selues to the true Kirk, or els we cannot haue remission of our sinnes. But how can a man complaine to it, if it cannot be sene? or ioyne himself to it, if it be inuisible? The Kirk of Christ may neuer want the true preaching of the word and right administration of the Sacraments: but these things are alwaies visible, because by the Ministers they are the signes and markes of the Kirk: therefore the true Kirk may be alwayes knowne by them. To be short, not only the word of God affirmes the Kirk to be alwaies visible, as I haue noted before: but also the auncient Fathers in all their works, as part∣ly I haue marked also. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for the 18. Psalme, it speakes not of the visibilitie of the Kirk there: but of the Lords wonderfull and glorious works & especially, in disponing sik a glorious place or Taberna∣cle, or throne, to the Sunne to shine in, the whilk demon∣strates the glory of the Lord. As for Augustines exposition, it
results of the corrupted olde translation, whilk was not ta∣ken from the Hebrew fountaine, but from the version of the septuagints: therefore Pagninus, Vatablus, and Arias Montanus a Papist, and Tremellius expones it not so, but after the He∣brew. Secondly, he meanes not heir of the Catholick Kirk, but of particular Kirks, whilk were exceeding far enlarged in his dayes: but yet this hinders not but that they should be obscured in the time of the Antichrist, as it was foretolde, & your Kirk acknowledges. As for the 5. of Matthew, 15.16. there, not the Catholick Kirk, but the Pastors of particular Kirks are compared to this light, whilk is set vp in the Can∣dle-sticke, and to the cietie set vp vpon the hill top, whilk cannot be hid, that is the eies of all is on them: and therfore they should be so much the more walk-rife and carefull, be∣cause their doings cannot be hid. As for Esa. 2.3. and Esa. 60 20. and Esa. 61.9. and Dan. 2.35. and Mich. 4.12. they prophe∣cie of the greatnesse and clearnesse of the Kirk of Christ in the time of the Mssias, and of the propagation of the Gospel throughout the world, and of the stabilitie and perpetuitie of Christs kingdome. But yet it followes not but both the Catholick Kirk is inuisible, as I said before, and that the vi∣sible Kirks may be obscured and darkened, as it was fore∣tolde in the time of the Antichrist. As for the the 18. of Ma∣thew, Goe tell the Kirk, &c. The Kirk is heir taken for the Pa∣stors and gouernours of particular Kirks, whilk we grant are visible: but yet it followes not, but that both they and the professors may be obscured & darkened, either through he∣resie, or through extreame persecution, or through both to∣gether, as it was foretolde in the time of the Antichrist, and hes bene fulfilled by your Kirk. As for the true Kirk vnto whome we should ioyne our selues. I answere. We can haue no saluation vnlesse we ioyne our selues first to the Catho∣lick Kirk, that is, vnto Iesus and his members by a spirituall communion, out with the whilk there is no saluation. Next, vnto some particular visible Kirk, by the outward commu∣nion of the word and Sacraments, &c. if we knowe it, and possiblie can ioyne our selues vnto it: for if either we knowe
it not, or may not, as these 7000. that bowed not their knee to Baal, then I say, saluation is not perilled. As for your last reason, the true Kirk may neuer want the true preaching of the worde, and right administration of the sacraments, I an∣swere, first, there is not the like necessity of the Sacraments as there is of the worde: next, suppose they haue it, & there∣by are knowne amongst themselues, and some of them also to their aduersaries: yet it followes not that they are so opē∣ly visible, that they are patent and knowne to al. As for ex∣ample: there is no questiō but these 7000. 1. Reg. 19 18 that did not bowe their knee to Baal, and these 1. Reg. 18.13 100. Prophets who was hid in the caues, and Act. 8.1 the Apostles when all were scattered through that persecution, as Luke testifies, had the exercise of the worde amongst them. And it is not likely that the Apostles wan∣ted some to teach, suppose they were not knowne to all: no not to their persecuters: otherwise they would haue beene persecuted. And siklike we doubt not, but in the time of Queene Maries persecution in England, and in other partes vnder that Antichristian tyranny but the Lord had his own both Pastor & people, amongst whome the trueth was prea∣ched, suppose neither we, nor their aduersaries knewe them all: for it is oft times for the safetie of the Kirk to lurke, and to be hid, that she may escape the furie and rage of her ene∣mies. As for Augustine, Cyprian, Origen, Chysostome, and Ierome whilk ye quote heir, they speake either of the perpetuitye & eternitie of the Catholick Kirk, or else of the largenesse and clearenesse of the particular Kirks whilk were in those daies whilk is neither against the inuisibility of the Catholick kirk nor yet against the obscure estate and small handfull of the Kirk of Christ, whereunto shee shoulde be brought in the dayes of the Antichrist, as was fore-tolde by the Scripture, and fulfilled in your Papisticall kingdome. For we graunt that in their dayes the Kirks of Christ was frequent & glo∣rious, but yet they did not ay remaine in that estate. For the Kirks of the East are almost ouerthrowne by the Mahomet, and the Kirks of the West by the Antichrist. So that partly by the one, and partly by the other, the Kirk of Christ hes
beene redacted to a small handfull, as hes bene said. Maister Iohn Welsche. Last of all I will set you downe the names of these worthy men, that in the midst of Poperie spake against their errors, and preached the same Reli∣gion that we preache. M. John hes not the right diet of these his holy fa∣thers. Answee. If it was so as you write it, it was error in scri∣bendo: and that whilk I write af∣terward might, haue taught you this, when I said this was 400. yeares past. I will but onelie name a fewe of them that was in the midst of Popery, when it was come to the hight, anno 1158. Gerardus & Dalcimus Nauarrensis did preach earnestly against the kirk of Rome, and called the Pope the Antichrist: and taught also that the Cleargy of Rome was become the whoore of Babylon, fore spoken in the Re∣uelation: this was 400. yeares past. In the yeare of our Lord 1160 one This Waldus & his sect had wiues and all other things common and so must M. Iohn and he fol∣low him. Answer This is falslie al∣ledged of him & his followers: but either your ca∣non law erres Causa 12. q. 1. Di¦lect ssimis, or els Pope Clmens was of this mind and so if you be of his Religion, you must be so; for albeit ye haue no wiues; yet o∣ther mens wiues hes bene made common to your Popes and your Cleaie in horrible adulte∣ries. Waldus a Citizen in Lions in France, with a great nomber taught that same doctrine whilk we teach nowe, condemned the Masse to be wicked the Pope to be the Antichrist, and Rome to be Babylon. They were per∣secuted by the Pope, & remained long in Bohemia. In he yeare 1112, the Pope caused an hundred persons in the countrie of Alsatia, whereof many were noble men, to be burnt in one day, for the maintayning of that same doctrine that we now maintaine against the Kirk of Rome. A∣bout the yeare of our Lord 1230. almoste all the Kirks of the Grecians whilk with the rest of the Kirks of Asia and Africk, who doth not acknow¦ledge the supremacie of your Pope, are moe then the Kirks of Europe, who submits themselues to him, did all renounce the Pope, and the Ro∣mish Kirk, because of their execrable simonie and Idolatrie, in the yeare 1240. In the countrie of Sueuia there were many preachers that taught freelie against the Pope, and affirmed he and his Cleargy were hereticks and Simoniacks, in the yeare 1250. or thereabout Arnoldus de noua villa a learned Spaniard taught freely against the Kirk of Rome, and a∣mongst the rest that the Pope led the people to Hell, for the whilk cause the Pope condemned him as an heretick, about the same time. Guliel∣mus de Sancto Amore, Maister & chief ruler of that Vniuersitie, taught that all the testimonies of the Scripture, spoken of the Antichrist, should be applied to the Pope and his Cleargie, and so taught them to be the Antichrist, and the whore of Babel, anno 1290. Laurence an Englishman and Maister of the Vniuersiie in Paris, proued mightily that the Pope was the Antichrist, and his Cleargie the synagogue of Babylon. About the same time Robertus Gallus a man of noble parentage, taught the Pope was an Idole, and said the iudgement of God would fal vpon him, and his Cleargie. Because I haue no time to write the doctrine of the rest that spake against the Pope. I wil but note their persons, Robert Grosshed Iohn Geylls, ane preaching Frier, anno 1253. Gregory Ariminensis, Fran∣ciscus de Rupe Scissa, Taulerus in Germanie, Gerhardus Rhidit, Michael de Cesena, Petras de Carbona, and Iohannes do Poliaco. Iohannes Ritheta∣landa, anno 1360. Armachanus the archbishop in Ireland 1360 Nicho∣las Orem, Matthias Parisiensis, Nilus archbishop of Thessalonica, Iohn Wiclef, and the Lord Cobham, and sundry others.
Maister Gilbert Browne. Maister Iohn hes set downe heir a nomber of It is false obscure and infamous persons, for the moste parte And this also iustlye condemned for heresies, without their workes or bookes whereby they affirme this that he alledge: and all This is also false for Gerard and Dulcimus Nauarensis whilk I first cit∣ed was almost 400. yeare be∣fore M. Luther and Caluine, & the Waldenss was more nor 30 yeare before them. two hundreth yeare before Caluine began their Religion, or therabout. Of the whilk I contend not, whether they spake against the Pope, or not. For all hereticks from the beginning hes barked against the Pope: but our contention is, whether sik heades of Religion, as they denied, were heresies, or not? whilk as yet Maister Iohn hes not But these heads is prouen that the Pope is the Antichrist & Rome Babell they are not he∣reticks, & there∣fore our religion was before Mar∣rine Luther. proued, nor is not able to defend these, whome hee calles, his worthie men: for appearandly by this all hereticks are worthie men by him, albeit they be not of his Religion in al things. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. You calumniat our Religion of noueltie, and sayes Mar∣tine Luther began it anno 1517. Vnto the whilk I answered, that our Religion hes Christ Iesus in the olde and newe Te∣stament to be the authour thereof, and hes the primitiue Kirk many hundreth yeares there-after, to be the teachers and professors thereof, the whilk I haue proued already by some examples, and that euen till the smoake of that Antichristi∣an darkenesse of yours did ouerspread al, as it was foretolde by the holy Ghost. At the whilk time also the Lord did reserue his owne elect to himself, euen these hundreth fourty and foure thou∣sand, whilk did not bowe their knees to your Baal, as it was fore-prophecied: whereof also a great manie is recorded in histories, and of whome I set downe some examples heir. V∣pon the whilk I reason: That Religion whilk is warranted by the Scriptures, and professed in the primitiue Kirk, &c. and hes sundrie that taught and professed it, and that euen in the middest of Poperie, when it was at the hight thereof; is not a new Religion, nor inuented by Martine Luther: but ours is sik, as hes bene prooued: therefore vnrighteous and blasphemous must ye be, who slaunders the Lords trueth & Religion of novelty, and fathers it vpon flesh and blood, whereof he is the authour. Your answere to the first two, we haue examined: now let vs see your answere to this: first you say they are obscure men, I answere: If you call them obscure because they wanted the outward glorie, welth, and renown of this world: then, suppose it were so, yet haue they Iesus
Mat. 13.54.55.56. Christ the Prince of life, who was called a Carpenters sonne: and his Prophets, of whome some were Amos. 1 1. heard mē and his Mt 4.18.21. Apostles who were fisher-men: and his Kirk who consists not of Cor. 1.  28. many wise, mighty, or noble, but of the foo¦lish, weake and vyle of the world. For them God hes chosen to confound the wise & noble, to be companions with them, and so they are the liker both the head and the members. It is true indeede your Popes and Cleargie are not obscure: for they haue the wealth and glorie of the world. But as Ber∣nard saide to the Pope, In this they succeede not to Christ or Peter, but to Constantine. But they receaue their good things in this life with the riche glutton, and therfore they must receaue their paine with him in the life to come. But why doe you call these obscure whome I named heir? are not some of them Friers, some of them Prouincials of gray riers, some of them Maisters and rulers of Vniuersities: some of them excellently learned, whilk your owne Kirk cannot deny: some of them Bishops, and Arch-bishops: some of them noble men: And some of them, as namely the Greeke and Eastern Kirks, in nomber, learning purity of doctrine, and godlinesse, farre exceeding your Papisticall Kirk. Who is worthie or famous, if these be obscure? are all men obscure and infamous to you but your Popes, and those who submits their necks to him? And if you think these too obscure men, to be called worthy men, then behold yet Maister Gilbert, more noble personages who hes resisted your Popes Monarchie. As K. Philip le bel of France, the Prelates of France ioyning vvith him in his dominions, about the yeare of God 1300. And Edward the third, King of England despised the Popes curse, & appealed from him to God, about the yeare of God 1346. And also sundry Em∣perours, as Constantine the fifth, Leo his sonne, and Constantine the sext in the East, and Henrie the 4. and Henrie the 5. and Frederick the seconde in the West. Will you call these Kings and Princes of the whole vvorlde, obscure men? So all sorts of men, Maister Gilbert, both rich and poore, Prin∣ces and subiects, and these also vvithin your ovvne bovvels being ouercome vvith the strength of the trueth of God, hes
spoken against your Religion. Why you call them infa∣mous and hereticks, iustly condemned I knovv not, except it be because they taught and professed the trueth of God, & condemned your Antichristian idolatrie and abhominati∣ons. But all are not infamous and hereticks vvhome ye call so: and surelie if murtherers, heretickes, adulterers, Sodo∣mites, open bargainers vvith the Diuell, and the vile mon∣sters of the earth, is to be called obscure, infamous, and he∣retickes: then your Popes are to be called so, who of all men that euer the earth hes born, hes bene the vilest monsters & hereticks, as I haue proued in my other treatise, concerning the Masse and the Antichrist. You say next that you cōtend not whether ye haue spoken against the Pope or not, for al heretickes hes euer barked a∣gainst him, and that sore against your hart, (Maister Gilbert) because you cannot deny but yee haue taught this doctrine with vs: and if it bee so (Maister Gilbert) that these men and Kirks and many thousand more of all sortes hes taught this doctrine with vs manye hundreth yeares before Martine Lu∣ther, for the first two whilk I named was almoste 400. yeare before him: then why were you so shameles both to write it & also speake it, to blinde your poore countriemen to their and yours damnation that our religion was begun by Mar∣tine Luther, & neuer professed before him. So leaue off (Mai∣ster Gilbert) to beguile the simple and ignorant people with this sottish and blasphemous reason of yours, (Martine Luther is the author of our religion) for nowe you are inforced to graunt the contrarie that infinite nombers hes taught the same doctrine before him. The truth is too strong for you (Maister Gilbert) that compels you to graunt the thing that ye woulde wish with all your hart the people neuer knew it: but comfort your selfe (Maister Gilbert) for the trueth will be victorious at the last, and your darknes daily more and more will be discouered. Indeede the least stroke that ye can giue for the defence of your Pope is to call them all heretickes who hes spoken against him, for I graunt the Pope and his Clergie is not sik fooles, as being their owne Iudges to con∣demne
them selues, and to iustifie them, who not onely hes taught it, but also sufficiently did prooue it, and many thousands sealed with their blood that he was the Antichrist, & his Kirk Babell. But with them, they haue the sonne of God, & the Apostles, Paule and Iohn heretickes: for they also did con∣demne his Idolatry, and tyrannie, and errors. But where a∣bout now will ye contend (Maister Gilbert?) ye say whether their doctrine be heresie or not? I would you and your Kirk would stand vpon this, and giue ouer all your other conten∣tions whill this were first prooued, whether their doctrine in so far as they aggree with ours: & ours, in so far as it dissents from yours, be heresie or not, that is, be against the scripture or not, the whilk if you would doe, then I hope our conten∣tions would soone be ended. But for as fast as you runne to this now, you will flee from it as fast againe, when we desire to haue yours & our doctrine, tried by the Scriptures whilk of them is heresie: and consequently, whether ye or we be heretickes? And therefore you euer refuse to let your doc∣trine be tried by the scripture, but runnes to your pretēded antiquitie, and successions, Councels, and lying miracles, & many other vaine starting holes, like a vvilde Fox, when he is hunted out of one hole he flies to another, and dare neuer abyde the faire fields. And marke their craft, reader, vvhen vve affirme that our religion hes Iesus Christ to bee the author of it in the Scriptures, as vve offer to proue the same, yee refuse this triall by the Scriptures, and sayes that Martine Luther inuented our religion, and vve had none that professed it, and taught it before him. When vve againe re∣ply that vvee had sundry of all sortes manie hundred yeares before him, euen vvhen your Kingdome vvas at the hight, and produces their names, they not beeing able to deny it, they slyp from that againe, and saies they contend not whe∣ther there was sik that taught sik doctrine or not: but they cōtend whether that was trueth or heresie: so they run from one starting hole to another. But I will ask you (Maister Gilbert) if it be proued that this their doctrine was not here∣sie, wil you contend any more then, shal the pley cease then?
will you euer slander our religion of noueltie in saying Mar∣tine Luther was the first that began it, and vvee had none who professed before him: but you will say, this you haue not proued? It is true I had not proued it then; but now I hope I haue proued it sufficiently that your Popes are the Antichrist, & your Rome Babell, whilk was one of the prin∣cipal heads of the doctrine whilk yee taught, and sundrie o∣thers also. Disproue you it if you can (Maister Gilbert.) Maister Gilbert Browne. But, he sayes, they preached the same Religion that he preaches, &c. Let Maister Iohn name any of these his Doctors, that he will abyde at in Religi∣on, and I shall let him see, that he was not of his Religion in all things. For that is the thing that we say, that albeit Maister Iohn and his brethren haue renewed many olde condemned heresies of heretickes: yet they were not of their religion in all things. And therefore this that Maister Iohn calles the only trueth, was neuer professed in all heades, as it is now in Scotland, before in no countrie, no not by any one man, let be by a nomber, whilke thing Maister Robert Bruse graunts himself in his sermons, in these words: And God hes chosen a few hearts in this countrie, where he hes begun his dwelling place, for God dwelles now in the harts and consciences of his own by his holy Spirit. And surely so hes he dwelt with vs these thirty yeares, in sik puritie, that he hes not done the like with no nation in the earth, he hes not remained with any nation without error and heresie so long, as he hes done with vs, &c. So God dwelt in no place without error and heresie the space of 10, yeare whill now in Scotland. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. But you say, they dissent from vs in some things, and is not of our Religion in all things. Wherunto I answere: that suppose this were true, yet it wil not follow but that they are of our religion, seeing they and we doe aggree in the maine foundations thereof. For we haue learned to call them bre∣thren, whilk do holde the foundation, as the Apostle sayes, sup∣pose they haue builded haye, 2. Cor. 3. strawe, or timber vpon the same. O∣therwise, if ye will be content to be measured with that same measure wherewith ye measure vs, if you will haue none to be accounted of your religion, but these onlie that professes with you in all things, as your Kirk does now: then not only (by your reason) shall ye want the Lord Iesus, his Apostles,
the primitiue Kirk, as ye doe indeede: and that not onlye in the first 600. yeare, but long after, till the thousand yeere: & long after that also, to be of your profession: because not on∣ly the waightiest points of your doctrine hes not their origi∣nall in the Scripture, and are vnwritten Traditions, by the testimonie of some of your selues: but also sundry points of your religion hes bene brought in after these dayes, beeing vnknowne in the former ages, as your selues will not deny, and I haue proued in some heads, in the other part concer∣ning the Masse. Yea, you shall want all the Fathers by this reason of yours. For there is not one of them but they haue their owne errors, whilk ye your selues will not defend: and the most part of thē are with vs against you, in many things, whilk you cannot deny: and that whilk is more, ye shal want almoste, all the generall Councels, except three or foure, & many of your owne Popes, Doctors Bishops, Cardinals, and Iesuites: for not onlie hes some of them had errors, and some of them bene heretickes by your whole confessions: but also some of them haue bene with vs in some points against you, as I haue proued before, so that I need not repeat thē now. As for example, lib. 19. c. 16.  morali. Pope Gregorie affirmes that the bookes of the Machabees are Apocrypha: and so hes sundry others of your Cleargie, as in lib operis biblioth. Sixtus Senensis, in fine coment veter. test. Caietanus, in editione, quadam hebr. bibli. Cum in∣terlineari in terr. Gelasius de du∣abus naturis in Christo. Arias Monta∣nus, Nugo Cardinalis, against you and with vs in the bookes of Apocrypha. Gelasius is against your Transubstantiation, also against your Communion vnder one kinde: and Pope A∣drian the 6. against this, that the Pope cannot erre and teach heresies. Panormitane against this, that it is not lawfull to Mi∣nisters to marrie after their ordination. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Cle∣ricis, c. 19. Bellarm. lib. 2. de purg. cap 4. Michael Bai, Gerson, & Roffensis all Papists, against your veniall sinnes. Bellarm. lib. de imaginibus. c. 8. Abulensis and Durandus & Peresius Pa∣pists, against your making of the Images of the Trinitie. A great many of you, as Alexander, Thomas, Caietan, Bonauenture, Marsilius, Almayn, Carthusianus, and Capreolus teaches, that that same worship should be giuen to the image, whilk is giuen to that whilk the image represents: and yet Durandus, and Alphonsus à Castro, & others is against this: therefore either the one or the other
is not of your religion. And ye your self if ye be measured by this measure, is not a right Papist, because you dissent from many of them in many things as hes beene prooued before. And certainlie, Maister Gilbert, if this reason of yours holde forth, you shall cut off from your profession sik a nomber of Popes, Councels, Iesuites, Cardinals, & Doctors frō your re∣ligiō, that it is to be feared, that they cut you off from being a right defender of their Catholick faith, yea from beeing a member of their synagogue, that for the defence thereof is compelled to cut off so many from the same. And secondly, I say, your reports concerning their doctrine, is not to be cre∣dited, but their owne apologies and writings, whereby it ap∣peares that it hes bene alwaies your fashion, the more to dis∣credite them, to charge them with a number of absurde opi∣nions, whilk they neuer held. As for example, you charge heir Waldus and his followers to haue had their wiues, and al other things common, whilk is your calumnie of them, and not their practise, or doctrine. For Gulielmus Parvus wrytes that their life was commendable, & Reinerus in his booke of inqui∣sitions, one of your owne religion, a writer of 300. yeares a∣goe, who was often at the examination of them, as he him∣self saies, confesses that they had great shew of holy lyfe, and that they beleeued all things well of God, and all the articles contained in the Creed, and liued iustly before men: and charges them that they ha∣ted and blasphemed solam Romanam Ecclesiam, the Romish Kirk only. So then, if his report be true, as I hope ye will not gain∣say, they were both far from that error, for that were neither to beleeue all things well of God, nor yet to haue a shewe of holy life, and to liue iustly before men: and also they were of our religion in all things. And where you say that we renew many old condemned heresies: I answer, that neither the doctrine whilk I affirmed they taught heir was heresies, nor yet themselues hereticks. But you and your Kirk who hes condemned them for the trueth of God, and hes renewd olde condemned heresies, as shall be proued afterward. And we haue renewd no heresie at all, but onely the trueth of God whilk your Kirk hes ob∣scured
and buried. Therefore your conclusion is false, that our religion was neuer professed in all points as it is now in Scotland before in no countrie, no not, say you, by anie one man. For it was taught & professed by Christ and his Apo∣stles, and also by all the primitiue Kirks in their daies, in all points, throughout all the partes of the world, where they preached the Gospel, as it is now in Scotland, as we offer to proue by their writtings, and I haue proued the same in sun∣drie heads heir. Next, the substance thereof was continued manie hundreth yeares in the Kirks of Christ, whill partlie by the heresies that sprang vp (for the popple was soone sowne among the good seede, and the mysterie of iniquitie began to work in the Apostles daies) and partly by the Ma∣homet, & partly by the darknes of Poperie, it was corrup∣ted peece & peece. And what difference can you finde be∣tweene the religion that the Waldenses professed, and vs; if ye will giue credite to their Apologies, and Reinerus testimonies of them? As for Maister Robert Bruses testimonye whilk yee produce, it serues no waies to confirme your purpose: but seeing ye abuse the testimonies of Scripture, it is no wonder suppose yee abuse the testimonies of men. For it is most true whilk he affirmes that the trueth of God hes continued for that space in this kingdome without heresie or schisme, as we neuer read it did in any nation in the earth, in sik purity without heresie and schisme for sik a long space. And yet it followes not but he hes dwelt in sundrie Kirks in sik puritie before, suppose not so long together, whilk you omit in your conclusion. Doth it follow by his testimony, but that our re∣ligion hes bene preached & professed in all true Kirks, in all points, suppose not so long in sik purity, as it is in Scotland? neither doth it followe but that the substantiall and maine points of our religion hes beene professed in all Christian Kirks, longer nor that space, suppose mixed either with som heresies or schismes. So you must coine a new logick (Mai∣ster Gilbert) before ye can confirme your proposition by his testimonie.
Maister Gilbert Browne. But That is con∣trarie to that whilk you saide before that they were all two hundreth yeare before them. heir it is to be noted also, that Maister Iohn can finde none be∣fore the yeare of Christ 1158. that said against the Pope and his religion, & none immediatly before Luther, the space of an 100. yeare and more. So the Kirk was without his Doctors, elleuen hundreth yeare and fiftie, or there∣about. And siklike Martine Luther had no predecessors to whome he suc∣ceeded in his Religion. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. You note two things heere whilk are both false: the one that I can finde none that said against the Pope and his re∣ligion before the yeare of Christ 1158. for our Sauiour and his Apostles and sundrie learned Fathers in all ages, and councels, both general and prouincial: and sum of your own doctors and Popes, hes spoken against the Monarchie of your Pope, and your doctrine & religion, as I haue proued before. And Reinerus a man of your ovvne religion testifies that some saide the Waldenses who had the same religion whilk we proses, was continued from Siluesters daies, who liued about the 320. yeare of God. And some said that it continued euen from the Apostles daies: therefore the first is false. The second thing is, that I can finde none before Luther immediatlye the space of 100. yeares and more. I see you are not ashamed to speake anie thing for the defence of your Kingdome, vvere it neuer so manifestlie false: for it appeares that eyther yee are not ac∣quainted vvith the histories of that age, or else yee dissemble it of purpose: for Iohn Wickles he left so manye behinde him in England vvho professed our religion, that though your Pre∣lates did molest them vvhat they coulde, yet they & their fauourers in short tyme grew to sik strength & multitude, that by the yeare 1422. (whilk was 100. yeares immedi∣ately before Luther) Henrie Chichesley the Arch-bishop of Can∣terburie writ to the Pope, that they all could not be suppres∣sed they were so manie, but by force of warre. The professors of our religion began to gather so great force in Bohemia af∣ter the burning of Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage at the coun∣cel of Constance, whilk was about the yeare 1417. (whilk was iust ane hundreth yeare immediatly before Luther) that they
were able not only to defend themselues by force of armes against the tyrannie of your Popes, but also obtained many notable victories, against the strongest power that the Pope did raise against them. In England William Tayler, was bur∣ned, anno 1422, and two yeares after that William White was burnt. And betwixt that time, and 1430. Father Abraham of Colchester, Iohn Wadden, and Richard Houington were burnt. And after that, Richard Wiche, and Iohn Goose, one Braban, and one Ierome, and others with him were burnt. Hie∣ronymus Sauonarola, a Monke in Italie, with two others, na∣med Dominick and Sylvester, were condemned to death at Florence, in the yeare 1500, with sundry others whome for shortnesse I omit heir. Nowe surelie, I cannot but wonder, Maister Gilbert, that ye should haue bene so impudent as to haue set it downe in write, that I could get none that profes∣sed our Religion, an hundreth yeare immediatly before Mar¦tine Luther. But the reader may gather what credite he may giue to your notes: and yet vvith sik impudent lies ye blind the poore people. Vpon the vvhilk I gather, that both these conclusions of yours, is false. For the Kirk of Christ in all ages, euen from the Apostles dayes to this day, hes euer had her owne teachers and professors, (vnto whome Martine Lu∣ther hes succeeded in his religion) suppose not in the like fre∣quencie and puritie, Apoc 9. and that by reason partly of the smoak of that bottomlesse pit, that is of your doctrine, Reu. 15. whilk darkened both the Sunne and the aire, that is, both teachers and people: and partly by your extreame persecutiō, whereby ye made warre with the Saints of God and ouercame them. But your smoak will euanishe away at the last, and the cleare light of the Lorde shall shine more and more, maugre all your hearts. Maister Gilbert Browne. But that Maister Iohn shall not thinke that we slander him and his with olde condemned heresies, let him read S. Augustine, Epiphanius, and others noted on the margent as of these, and many the like. 1 Nouatus forsooke the Pope of Rome Cornelius, and caused others doe the like, as Histo. l. 6. c. 33. Eusebius and lib. 6 c. 30. Nicephorus reports. 2 Aerius the heretick denied that offering or prayers should be done for the dead, & that fasting should be free, as Heres. 55. wrong cited is suld be 75. S. Augustine & Epiph declares. 3 Eunoninus and Aerius held that only Faith justifieth, as Heres. 55 & lib de side & operi∣bus. Augustine and Heres. 76. Epiphanius writes.
Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Now are we, by Gods grace, come vnto your last calum∣nie, in affirming that wee renew olde condemned heresies. This is indeede (Maister Gilbert) a heauie challenge, if it were true: but it is but like the rest of your calumnies: yea, it hes lesse appearance of trueth, nor any thing whilk ye haue spoken against vs. Alyar, Maister Gilbert, shall not enter in that heauenly cietie, Psal 15 Reuel. 19 & 2. but his portion shall be in that lake that burnes with fire and brimstone, and he that slandereth his neighbour (much more then be who slandereth the trueth of God) shall not rest in the Lords holy mountaine. But to come to the first, Nouatus intruded himselfe in another mans charge, and caused set vp himselfe against Cornelius the lawfull Pastor in the Kirk in Rome then, & that craftilie: and withdrew many of his flock from him, whilk is as contrarie to our doctrine, as black to white. For we teach that euery pastor should haue his owne particular flock, as Cornelius had then in Rome, and no man should intrude him∣self in another mans charge, as he did. So this is a calumny, Maister Gilbert. But your Popes are like Nouatus, who not only hes disturbed al the Christian congregations in Europe almoste, by setting vp and thrusting downe sik Pastors as he would, but also all the kingdomes in Europe. As for this do∣ctrine of Aerius, I answere you, as ye did me: I contend not whether he taught this doctrine or not, for the scriptures hes taught the same. But our contention is, whether they be he∣resie or not, whilk you haue not prooued, nor euer will be a∣ble to proue by the Scripture. It is true Epiphamus, & Augu∣stine following him, reckons him amongst heretickes, but The∣odoretus in his booke de fabulis Iudaerum, and the Ecclesiastical historie reckons him not amongst hereticks: and he was not condemned for an heretick in any Councell: that therefore whilk he taught according to the Scripture we imbrace. But as for the errors of the Acrians, whilk are errors in deede, and whilk are ascriued vnto them, as the damning of marriage, vr∣ging of continencie, requyring them whome they receaue to their fellow∣ship to forsake their owne proper things: these heresies, I say, your Kirk hes renewed, who damnes marriage, and vrges conti∣nencie
in your Cleargie, and receaues none to your religi∣ous orders, but sik as refuses their owne proper things. As to the third, the Aetian and Eunomian heresies, they secluded ho∣linesse of life from that faith of theirs, and taught sik a faith that might stand with whatsoeuer sinnes, and with perseue∣rance in them. Will you stand to this (Maister Gilbert) be∣fore the Lord, that we teach sik doctrine? Is not this our do∣ctrine, that only liuing faith whilk works by loue, & brings forth good fruits doth iustifie? But you are like to them that knowes no other iustifying faith, but sik a faith, as both the reprobates and the Diuels may haue. So this is your third calumnie. Maister Gilbert Browne. 4 Symon Magus, Marcion and Manichaeus denied that man had Fre-will as Heres. 46 S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and Heres. 42 Epiphanius makes mention. 5 Iouinianus affirmed, that Priests marriage was lawfull, after the lawfull vowe of chastity. He moued sundry Nunnes to marrie in the cietie of Rome He made fasting and abstinence from meat superfluous, as Heres 82. Item lib. 1. cap. 7 de peccat. merit. & remis. S. Augustine wrytes of him. 6 Vigilantius denyed the prayer to Saints, as Contra Vigi∣lant. S. Hierome writes: he despised the burning of lights and candles in the Kirks, in the day time, and the Relicks of Martyrs. Iulian the Apostata, was of the same opinion, as cont Iulian. Cyrillus declares. The same Iulian despysed the image of Christ and his Saints, as the forsaid lib. 9. contra Io lianum. Cyrillus makes mention. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As to this fourth heresie, they tooke away all the liberty & freedome of the Will in man, but this is not our doctrine. For we affirme that man hes a libertie and freedome in his Will in naturall, morall and sinfull actions: but not in these things whilk pleases God, before he be renewed. This is your fourth calumnie. As for the fifth, Iouinian taught, as Heres. 82 Augustine and In his 8. epist. in his defence of his bookes a∣gainst Iouinian. Ie∣rome sets it downe, and De Ecclesia mi¦litant. lib. 4. cap. 9 Bellarmine reports, that the married estate was equall with Virginitie. Vnto the whilk we an∣swere, that true and vndefiled Virginity we prefer alwaies, as the more noble and excellent gift in them to whome it is giuen: but we doubt not to say, but that marriage is better
in them, that cannot containe. And generally we dar prefer the honest marriage of Christians, before the proud & fained virginity of many Monasticall votaries, as In Psal. 99. Augustine saies, Lowlie and humble marriage is better then proud and hauty virginity. As to the second point, he affirmed indeede that the choyse of meates and fasting was no merite, and this is no heresie: But if this be heresie, Rom. 6.23. then the doctrine of the Scripture is heresies: for it teaches vs that life euerlasting is the free gift of God: as hes beene prooued before. This is your fift ca∣lumnie. As for the sixt of Vigilantius heresies, if the denying of prai∣er to be made to Saints be an heresie, then it is an olde here∣sie: Psal. 50.15. Isa. 42 8. Aug. de ciuitate de l. 22. c. 20. for it is the Lords who is the auncient of daies, for this is his doctrine: call vpon me in the daye of thy trouble, and I will deliuer thee. And let Augustine also go for an hereticke who saies that the Saints are not called vpon. As for the dispysing of the burning of lightes and candles in the Kirks in the daye time, I know not to what vse it serues, except to bee a signe that yee are blinded of the Lorde, who in the midst of the day, lightes your candles: did Iesus Christ or his Apostles so? And this was the custome of Pagans, whilk you haue taken from them. Irenaeus lib. 6. cap. 2. As for the despising of the relicks of Mar∣tyres: if he despised these, then he erred: for we both teach & practise that the bodies of the Saints should bee honorablie buried, and we do not despise them. But if he taught that they should not be worshipped, then I say he is not an here∣tick in this, Matth. 4.10 Deut. 6.23. but you are hereticks and idolaters who expres contrarie the commandement of God, doth worship the crea∣ture. And Vigilantius was no hereticke, nor his opinions con∣demned as heresies, only there was a hoate contention be∣twene him and Ierome. And as for Iuliane, he calumniated the Christians that they adored dead men for Gods, and the tree of the croce. Vnto whome Cyrillus answered that they adored not the signe of the croce, but God only. So this was but Iulians ca∣lumny against them. But if he had liued in your dayes hee might iustly haue obiected it vnto you.
Maister Gilbert Browne. 7 Valentinus the heretick denied the very bodie of Christ to be in the sa∣crament, as lib. 4. cap. 34. Irenaus sayes. 8 Symon Magus, Marcion, and the Manichees held, that God compelled man both to doe euill and good, as Haes. 46. S. Augustine, Vincentius Larnensi, In recognit. S Clement of Rome, and Haeres 42. piphanius hes in then works whilk is the doctrine of the most learned of the Protestants, as Melanchton, Caluine, In lib. de prae∣dest cont. Caui∣sycophant. Be∣Za and others. 9 The Nouatians denied Pennance, as Haeres. 38. S. Augustine affirmes. 10 The Manichees denied the necessitie of Baptisme, as the same Haeres. 46. S. Augustine reports. 11 Aerius, Eustachius, and the Manichees condemned fasting dayes or∣dained by the Kirk, as Epist. 3. cap. 4. Leo, Haeres. 75. Epiphanius, the councel of In prefat. Gangra, and as lib. 0. cap. 3. cont. Faust Ma∣nich. S Augustine recordes. 12 The Manichees vsed to fast on the Sonday only, as Haeres. S. Augustine, & scr. 4. de qua. S Leo witnesses Read for this also Concil. Gang cap. 13. & de consecrat. dist. 3. Ne quis. Ignatius ad Philip. de consecrat. distinct. 3. Ieiunium. 13 The Pepusians and Collyridians denied holy orders, and made it no Sa∣crament, as Haeres 4.24. S. Augustine and Haeres. 44.7. Epiphanius writes. 14 The Pelagians denied that confession should be made to a Priest, as our Hect. Boc. lib 9. cap. 19. Chronicle writer testifies. They deny also that Baptisme was neidfull to bairnes or infants, as Haeres. 88. S Augustine reports. 15 The Donatists denied the order of Monkes, and other religious per∣sons, as In psal. 132, S. Augustine, and Tom. 5, against the dispraiser of the monasticall life. S. Chrysostome writes. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Whether Valentinus taught so or not, I contend not: but the question is of this doctrine, of the reall presence, whether it be contrare to Gods word, or not; the whilk I haue proo∣ued sufficiently before in the fourth point of doctrine: and so the denying of it is no heresie. But yet it appeares not by this testimonie of Irenaeus, whilk ye cite heir, that he taught sik doctrine. As for the 8. heresie, it is a calumnie to ascriue it to vs, for Melanchton, Caluine, and Beza hes no sik doctrine. You are not ashamed, Maister Gilbert, of impudent lying. As for the 9. of Nouatus heresie, that is a calumnie to a∣scriue it to vs. I or Nouatus denied that there was any place of repentance to these, who after they were baptised, fel from the faith, by ony infirmitie, or violence of persecution, as E∣piphanius testifies of him that hee saide, No man who hes falne after Baptisme can any more obtaine mercie. But our doctrine is
contrare to this: for we teach that there is place to repentāce for any sinne, except the sinne against the holy Ghost, whilk is euer punished with finall impenitencie. As for the 10. of the Manichees heresie, their doctrine was as Augustine sayes there, that Baptisme serued nothing for saluati∣on to anye: and that none, who followed their sect, should be baptized. and therefore they broght in a contempt of Baptisme, whilk is contrarie our doctrine. For we teache that Christians and their children is to be baptized: and that the contempt of it is damnable, suppose not the want of it. As for the 11. and 12. heresies, we contemne not fastings that are appointed by the Kirk, for lawful causes: but we de∣ny that they should be tied to certaine and prefixed dayes, as your Kirk does: and we thinke it no heresie to fast on the Lords day, more then other dayes: both to stirre vp our re∣pentance, and to make vs more meet to holy and spirituall exercises, because it is not contrary to the word of God. As for Leo his Epistle, it is wrong quoted, for it should be Epist. 91. and there fasting on the Lords day is not like ours: for they fasted on the Lordes day, because they beleeued not that Christ was a true man, as Leo in that same place testifies whilk you will not say your selfe that we do, for we acknow∣ledge him to be a true man. As for the 13. heresie of the Pepusians and Collyridians, their doctrine was that wemen might be Bishops, and Elders, & might vse these publick functions, as these places whilk ye haue quoted, testifies: whilk is not our doctrine, but rather yours, who permits wemen to baptize, in case of necessity. That they denied orders to be a Sacrament, there is no sik thing to be found in these places whilk ye quote heir. As for the 14. heresie of the Pelagians, if they denied that these who were accused of any scandalous offence, & guilty thereof; should make their confession of it to God, his Mini∣sters, & the Congregation, for to take away the offence of it, then they erred, and our doctrine and practise condemnes this: but if they denied the absolute necessity of your auri∣cular confessions, then is it no errour, because there is na sik
thing commanded in the whole Scriptures of God. Nowe as for the testimonie of Boetius, I haue not seene it. As for their second heresie concerning Baptisme, they taught, as Augu∣stine reportes in that place, that Baptisme was not needfull to chil∣dren, because they were borne without original sinne, as they taught whilk is an heresie indeede: but this is a calumnie to ascriue it to vs, for we teach that children are borne in originall sin, and so shoulde be baptized. And surelie this heresie rather aggrees to you, who teaches that Marie was not borne in o∣riginall sinne, and therefore she needed not to be baptized. As for the last of the Donatists, denying the order of Monks. I answere: first, your Papisticall and Idolatrous Monkes, Bellari 2. de indulgentus are farre different from these whilk Augustine and Chrysostome de∣fended, and these of the Primitiue Kirk. For first they were bound to no prescript forme of diet, apparell, or any thing else, by solemne vowes of wilfull pouertie, and perpetual cō∣tinencie, as yours are, next, the former Monks remained in the order of priuate men, and laicks, and had no thing to do with Ecclesiasticall charges, whilk was afterward broken by Pope Boniface the 4. anno 606. But yours are not so: they haue Ecclesiasticall charges, and are more then priuate men. And last of all, suppose their kinde of life was mixed with some superstition, for the enuious man sone sowed the popple amongst the good seede, and the mystery of iniquity began sone to worke: yet their religion was not defiled with Idolatrie, worshipping of Ima∣ges, praiers to Saints, opinion of merite, the sacrifice of the Masse, and other abhominations wherewith your Papisticall Monkes are defiled. Next I say, these Monkes and religious orders of yours, hes not their foundation within the foure corners of the Scripture of God. Maister Gilbert Browne. These and many the like new renewed heresies by the Ministers, was old condemned heresies in the primitiue Kirk of the former heretickes, as testi∣fies the ancient Fathers: and therefore this is a true argument. What euer was heresie in old times is heresie yet, and the defenders thereof hereticks, as they were of olde: but these former heades that I haue set downe, with many the like was heresies in olde times, and the defenders thereof here∣tickes,
as testifies the auncient Fathers: Therefore they are heresies yet, & the defenders thereof heretickes. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. Now heere was all the cause (Christian reader) that made (Maister Gilbert) so oft to cry out of vs, that wee renued old condemned heresies, whereof some are sik as wee our selues condemne, and some are sik whilk doe better aggree vnto themselues, nor vnto vs: & some heresies he forceth vpon vs whilk wee neuer taught nor maintayned: and some are sik whilk are not heresies indeede, but aggreable to the Scrip∣tures of God. So that if we erre in these, suffer vs to erre with Iesus Christ and his Apostles. Now to answer to your argu∣ment whilk ye bring. What euer was heresie in olde times, is heresie yet, and the defenders thereof heretickes. I answer, if ye define heresie to be an error obstinately maintained a∣gainst the Scriptures of God: I graunt your proposition. But if ye define heresies in generall, to be whatsomeuer any one Father or Doctor, or some more hes rebuked as an heresie; then I deny it, for sundrie of the fathers hes maintained er∣rors themselues against the Scripture, and hes accused some doctrine to bee heresies, whilk hes bene aggreeable to the trueth of God, whilk you will not deny, I hope. For if you would, I could proue it both of the Fathers, Councels, and your owne Popes. Now to your assumption. But these former heads, say ye, whilk ye haue set downe with manye the like was heresies in olde tymes, and the defenders thereof here∣ticks, as testifieth the aunciēt Fathers. I answere that some of these are heresies indeede, and we abhorre and condemne them more nor yee, and some of these as falslie laide to our charge, and some of these are not heresies indeede, but ag∣greable to the Scripture. And therefore, your conclusion fals not vpon vs, who hes renewed no olde condemned he∣resie, and therefore is not heretickes. And where you saye many other like. I answere: It is true they are like, for they are both calumnies and horrible vntruths, and lyes as these hes bene, whereof one day ye shall make answer to the great
God that Iudgeth the quick and the dead. But the pit whilk you gged for others you haue fallen in it your selfe: for certainly in this you doe as theeues does, who the better to eschew the crime of theft whilk is iustly laide to their charge, and that they may the more easily escape in a fraye, doth cry out and shout out vpon others, common theeues, common theeues. Euen so do you: for these crimes whereof yee are guiltie your selues you falsly charge vs with. Therefore that all men may se that you are the men who hes renewed the olde condemned he∣resies, I will not do, as yee haue done to vs, that is eyther to lay to your charge sik heresies as yee maintaine not, or sik thinges to be heresies whilk are not heresies indeede, whilk ye did to vs. But in this I will deale sincearelye with you, fai∣ning nothing neither of them nor of you. 1. Simoniani, worshipped the image of Simon and Selenes, Ederus in Baby, pag, 5, whose heresie they followed: so doeth your religious orders worship the image of these, who were first authors of their orders. 2. The Basilidians worshipped Images, Irenaeus lib, c. 23. and vsed inuoca∣tions, so doe you. 3. Ireneus lib, 1, .3.24. Carpocrates had some painted Images in great estima∣tion, both of others, as also of Christ: So doe the Papistes paint Christ, and sayes that his forme was painted by Luke the Euangelist. 4. The old Idolaters did excuse their idolatry, August, in Psal, 113, in, con, 2, & Lactan, l, 2. c, 2 that they did not worship the Images, but the thing represented by the image: so doe you excuse your idolatrie. 5. Iren, lib, 1, c, 21, It was the custome of the old idolaters to afflict and whip their owne bodies, that they might please their owne Gods, so doe some of you nowe. 6. Iren, lib, 6, c, , It was their custome also to light candles at noone dayes, in the time of their seruice, so doe you. 7. Basilidiani, and Carpocratiani kept secret their doctrines, Iren, lib, 1, c, 23 Epiph, haeres, 24. counting all other men dogs and swine: so doe you keep se∣cret your mysteries from the common people, and will not suffer the Scriptures to be read of all: least, say ye, precious pearles be cast before swine.
Iren. lib. 1. cap. 18 8. Marcosij they spake some Hebrew words in Baptisme, to astonishe and afray the hearers: but you are worse, who in all your seruice speakes nothing but a vnknowne lan∣guage: and that, say you, to make there mysteries to be had in greater reuerence. August. de heres. cap. 16. Epiph. heres. 36. 9. The Heracleonites annointed their dead with oile, balme, and water superstitiouslie, and so doe you. Epip. er. 42 Au∣ad quod vult c. 27 10. Marcion and the Pepuzians hereticks, permitted wemē to baptize, so doe you. Epph. her. 19 an te Chistum. 11. The Ossenes taught, that it was not needfull that pray∣ers should be made in a knowne language: so doe you: and therefore your praiers are in Latine. Theodoret. diuin dec et. cap. de Bapt. 12. The Messalians affirmed Baptisme only to serue for the washing away of the sinnes going before it, so doe you. Epiph. heres. 46 13. The Tatians and sundry other heretickes affirmed marriage impure: so doth your Pope Siricius in their Priests. Gratianus epist. 82. cap. Proposuisti. 14. The Manichees damned marriage in their elect and perfite, but suffered it in the rest: so doe the Papists, in their Priests and religious men they damne it, August. epist. 74. but they doe tolle∣rate it in the laicks: 1. Timot. 4.1.2.3. and yet the spirit of God calles it, a do∣ctrine of Diuels to forbid marriage. 15. The Manichees they had the Communion vnder one kinde: Leo serm. 8. de uadragesi. so doth the Papisticall Kirk. The Councell of Con∣stance so decreed it, against the Scriptures, with these here∣tickes. Siklike their Fasting and your Fasting is alike: for they made choise of meates, and abstained from fleshe: but yet vsed their delicates, and so doe you. 16. The Manichees affirmed there was two beginnings: so doth Augustinus Steuchus a Papist, in sua cosmopoea, in principio Genes. where he sayes, that the Chrystalline heauen is coeternal with God. The whilk if it be true, then certainly it is God: for that whilk is without beginning is God, & so there are two gods. If Caluint or any of vs had written sik, how would heauen & earth haue bene filled with cries against vs? Epiph. heres. 48. 17. Montanus an heretick receaued the whole Scripture, but yet he denied that it contained all doctrine needfull to
saluation: so doth the Papists: & from this error springs their Traditions, their Ceremonies infinite in nomber, partlye Iewishe, partly Ethnicke. 18. Apollo. apud Euseb. lib. 5. c. 17. This Montanus was the first who prescriued certaine Lawes of Fasting, the Scripture appointing no sik thing: so doth the Papists, their fastings are vpon their prefixt and set dayes. 19. Tertul. de aim in fir. Montanus taught that small faults was to be suffered for after this life neither was the soules to be deliuered from the prison, till they had paied the vtmoste farthing. So doth the Papists also. 20. Siklike the doctrine of the Montanists was, In ib. de anima & Tert. de co. milius. that Abra∣bams bosome was beside Hel, or in the vppermost part of hel. 21. That the Patriarckes before the comming of Christ, was in Hell. 22. That onlie the Martyres soules goes immediatly to Paradise. 23. That praiers and oblations shoulde be made for the dead. 24. That extreame vnction shuld be giuē after Baptism. 25 That the signe of the Croce should be vsed, all whilk your Kirk hes renued. 26. Helcesaitae made two Christs: one aboue, Theodore another be∣neath: so doth your Kirk make two Christs: one in heauen hauing a true natural bodie with his owne essentiall proper∣ties, in a certaine place, visible: another in earth, made of the bread and wine, with all the essential properties of a true bo∣die, inuisible, in the Sacrament. 27. Sampsaei, kept the dust of the feete, Epip. haeres. 53. & haeres. 19. ant Christum. and the spittle of two wemē whilk they worshipped as Goddesses, whilk they affirmed did serue to cure diseases, and whilks they vsed as amulets: so doth your Papisticall Kirk, keepe the relickes of Saints, worships them, and carries them about, as seruing ei∣ther to preserue, or to recouer health. The like also was the superstition of the Ossens. 28. Cathars gloried in the merites of their workes, Isid. Etymol. lib. &c. de hefib. Christi and af∣firmed that they were made righteous, vvith an inherent
righteousnesse. The Papisticall Kirk in this heresie goes be∣yond them: for both they glorie of their workes, & affirmes that we are iustified with an inherent righteousnesse. Aug ad Quod∣vult, cap. 39 Epiph. haeres, 38 29. The heretickes called Angelici, and also the Caim, they worshipped Angels, so doe the Papists. 30. The hereticks called Apostolici, admitted none in their nomber, August. de haeres. cap. 40 Epiph. haeres. 61 but these who vowed wilfull pouertie, and chastity. So the Papists admits none to their religious orders, but sik, who vowes both. Augqst ex Phila∣strio quo. undam cap. 68. 31. There were some heretickes who went bare-footed, so doe the Franciscan Friers, & these who are called Cordigeri. 32. The Donatists denied that the true preaching of the word was a note of the pure Kirk: and therefore Augustine in sundrie places calles them back to the Scriptures: so doeth your Kirk. Epiph. haeres. 74 33. The Collirydians worshipped Marie, and therefore they are called Idolaters by Epiphanius, so doe the Papists. Epiph. in Pano∣plia. 34. Armenij worshipped the croce of our Lord, and ther∣fore they were called  that is, worshippers of the croce, so doth the Papists. 35. The Pelagians affirmed Adam would haue died, sup∣pose he had not sinned: so doth Augustinus Steuchus, a Papist of great name in his annotations vpon the 2. of Genesis. Hee sayes, Death is natural, and sinne is not the cause of it, and the infants and Adam would haue died, suppose they had not sinned. 36. Also, they affirmed that after the fall there was left in mana fredome to will good, and so doth the Papists, suppose they differ in this, that the Papistes ioynes grace to be a pre∣veener and worker with free-will. 37. The Pelagians affirmed that the Gentiles might by Philosophie haue knowne God, and bene saued. So Andra∣dius a Papist, lib. 3. orthod. explic. so Catharinus a Papist, who was present at the councel of Trent affirmes in his commentary vpon 1. Timoth. 4. That some vnfaithfull men may be saued, whilk is as mekle to say, as some may be saued who knowes not God, nor Christ, whilk is horrible, and more then Pelagian. 38. Also, they affirmed that a man may fulfill the Lawe,
and be perfitelie righteous, so doe all the Papists. 39. They affirme that infants wants originall sinne: so doth Pighius a Papist in his booke of controuersies, In 3 parte sum. mae quest. 27. art. 7. in the cō∣trouersie of original sinne, that in them that are baptized, original sinne is taken away: and he writes also that Marie was borne with out originall sinne: and Thomas of Aquine writes that Marie had the fulnesse of ll graces, whilk is to equall her with God. For only in him the fulnesse of all dwelleth: and many other he∣resies of the Pelagians hes the Papists renewed. 40. A kinde of heretickes called Anomi, taught that the obedience to the Law was not needfull, so doth the Papists. First, in affirming, that concupiscence without consent is not sinne, & is not forbidden in the Law. Secondly, some of them sayes, as Syluester Prierias, It is honesty (says he) but not of necessity that God should be loued aboue all things. And so De theolog. practit. tractat 3. cap. 16 concl. 1. numer. 11. Molanus another Pa∣pist affirmeth. The same cap. 8 conclu. 3 numer. 19. Molanus also sayes, that it is not cō∣manded of God that we should pray for our enemies in special: and yet the Scripture sayes most plainlie, Pray for them whilk persecute you. And in cap. 16. conc. 3. another place he affirmes that it is not comman∣ded that we should salute our enemies with a friendly and louing hart. And also he Tract. 2. cap. 20. conclus. 2 sayes, That he who doth not tell to him who is igno∣rant, his manifest defect is not vnrighteous. And againe cap. 23. conc. 5 he saies He who giues counsell to doe a lesse euill to eschew a greater, sinnes not. Siklike contrar the second command they vniuersally teach, that the worship of Images is no break of it. And they call the Croce their only hope. What horrible blasphemie is this? And In his booke de residentia cont. Cathar. Torrensis a Papist, obiected to Catharinus another Papist, that he denied the Law of Moses to be Gods law, and the precepts of Paule to be Christs precepts. Moe also I might bring, but these will suf∣fice. Nowe of these things I may most iustly conclude, that your religion hes renewed many of the old condemned he∣resies. And as you made one argument, so I will make ano∣ther. What euer was heresie in old times, is heresie yet, and the defenders thereof heretickes: this you cannot deny, be∣cause it is your owne proposition: but these former heades whilk I haue set downe (wherein I haue vsed no calumny as ye haue done) was heresies in olde times, and the defenders
thereof heretickes, as witnesses the auncient Fathers: Ther∣fore they are heresies yet, and the defenders thereof here∣tickes. And so by your owne argument many points of your religion, are old condemned heresies, and your selues here∣tickes, who doth defend them. Maister Iohns conclusion. One thing whilk I hope will cut off all controuersie, I offer to prooue, the Pope to be the Antichrist. And if this be true, then all men that professes him, secretly or openly, as it is said in the Reuel. 14. shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God. Maister Iohn Welsche, preacher of Christs Gospell, at Kirkcudbright. Maister Gilbert Browne. If this controuersie of ours shal not be cut away whil Maister Iohn proue the Pope to be the Antichrist, certainly it will indure ten hundreth thou∣sand yeare after the Laird of Marchistouns doomesday. Then it must follow (seing that is a thing impossible to be done) that all they that wil not opē∣lie and priuatlie obey the Pope, and reuerence him as the Vicare of Christ, because he is chosen by God to rule his Kirk heir on earth, that they muste drinke of the wine of the wrath of God. Our mercifull Lord illuminate Maister Iohn with his haly spirit & grace, that he may vnderstand the truth, and receaue the same, and so become one member of his true Kirk, whereby he may be partaker of the merites of Christ, that his soule may be safe, Amen. Maister Gilbert Browne Priest, and defender of the Catholicke Faith. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. It is not impossible to proue your Popes to be the Anti∣christ. It hes beene prooued alreadie by the learned on our side: to the whilk you, and all your Cleargie of Rome is not able to answere. It hes bene taught & sealed with the blood of infinite nombers of Christians: and I haue not taken so long a tearme as you haue set downe heir, and yet, I hope, I haue proued it sufficiently. Put all your might to disproue it if you can. And as to that threatning of yours, Maister Gil∣bert, wherein ye say that all these, who will not openly and priuatelie obey the Pope, &c, must drinke of the wine of the
wrath of God. If it may be beleeued, then howe doth this stand first with your Popes pardons, whereby he giues men pardon or licence to professe, subscriue, and sweare to our re∣ligion: as it is reported that some of your owne religion hes confessed it? Next, howe stands it with the dissimulation of your Iesuites, and seminarie Priests when they come to any place where our religion is openlie professed? Thirdly, what comfort is this whilk ye haue pronounced to your own poor countriemen, who doe not openly avow Papistrie, but hes subscriued and communicate with vs? Is this an open profes∣sion, or not? And if it be not, if ye be a true Prophet, then must they drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, then must they be condemned in Hel by your iudgemēt, because they professe him not openlie. And last of all, if this threatning of yours be true, then beside the many infinite thousands who professes him to be the Antichrist, you condemne to Hell all the Greeke and Eastern Kirks, who in nomber far exceedes them who obeyes you, and all the Kirks that hes bene 600. yeere and more after Christ: for they obeyed not the Pope openlie nor priuatlie as Christs Vicare ouer them, as I haue prooued before. And also you condemne a nomber of your Anti-Popes to Hell, with their Cardinals, Bishops, & Kirks who followed them: for they gaue out themselues to bee Popes, and did not obey the other. As also a nomber of the Fathers of your owne religion, who in two general councels the one of Constance, where there was almost 1000. Fathers: the other of Basile, did not obey the pope, in defining general councels to be aboue the Pope. So, if ye speak trueth, infinite millions of Christians in all ages, and innumerable Kirks, & thousands of your owne religion are condemned to hell. But this is false, Maister Gilbert, and who will beleeue you? And to the end nowe my conclusion yet holdes sure, that seeing his kingdome is that second beast that hes two hornes like the Lamb and speakes like the Dragon: and himself is that man of sinne, Reuel. 23. . Thes. 2. and sonne of perdition, that aduersary and Antichrist that was to come: Reuel. . & his doctrine is that Apostasie and abhomination foretolde in the Scripture: and his seat that Harlote and mysticall Babylon, that
mother of hoordomes, who is drunken with the blood of the Martyres of Iesus, whosoeuer receaues his mark on his forehead or hand, that is, openly or priuatlye professes obedience vnto him, shall, as the Angell proclaimed, drinke of the wyne of the wrath of God, yea of that pure wyne in the cup of his wrath, and he shall bee tormented with fyre and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lambe. And the smoake of his torment shall ascend for euer more: and they shall haue no rest daye nor night whilk worship the beast or his image. And as for your praier, I beseech God (Maister Gilbert) that he may open my eies, and inlarge my harte to vnderstande and imbrace his trueth more and more, and to make me to growe vp in that spirituall communion with Christ and his members more and more. But that whilk ye call trueth is he∣resie, and that whilk yee call the true Kirk is Babell: and therefore that doctrine and Kirk of yours is that strong de∣lusion and whore of Babell, with the whilk whosoeuer shall communicate is excluded from the me∣rites of Christ, and shall be pertakers of her plagues, and finallie shall bee damned. FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE REPLY AGAINST MAISTER GILBERT BROWNE PRIEST, CONCERNING THE MASSE AND ANTICHRIST. Wherein the abhominations of the one is most largely and fully set downe: and the Popes of Rome are prooued in the other to be the most vndoubted Anti∣christ, whilk the Scripture foretold should come. By MAISTER IOHN WELSCHE Preacher of Christs Gospell. PRINTED BY ROBERT WALDE-GRAVE Printer to the Kings Maiestie 1602. Cum Priuilegio Regio.
The seuerall things that are handled in the first part concerning the Masse are these. 1. COncerning the name it selfe, the variety of their opinions concer∣ning the deriuation of it, and the cause wherefore they giue it this stile of Masse is shewed: and that neither in proper termes, nor in sub∣stance it is to be foūd in the Scriptures of God, & therfore to be reiected 2. That the sacrifice of the Masse is neither figured nor foretolde in the olde Testament, nor yet instituted by Christ in the new Testament, in the latter Supper. 3. Is shewed the difference betwixt the Masse, and the latter Sup∣per, whilk Christ instituted: & it is proued that the Priests in the Masse does not the same whilk our Sauiour either did, or commanded to bee done in the latter Supper. 4. It is proued by the testimonies of sundry learned Papists, and great defenders of their Religion, that the Masse is not set downe in the Scripture, and instituted by Christ in the same. 5. That we haue all these things whilk our Sauiour comprised in the institution of the Supper, and they haue them not. 6. Solide, most cleare, and euident proofes out of the Scripture, a∣gainst the abhominable sacrifice of the Masse, whereby it is sufficiently confuted, amplified also by their doctrine and testimonies. 7. By the testimonies of the auncient Fathers euen vntill the 1000 yeare after Christ, it is confuted. 8. That it may bee knowne howe this abhominable sacrifice of the Masse crap in. First, the estate of the publik worship of God in the celebra¦tiō of the sacramēt of the Supper the first 300. or 400. year after Christ is set downe: next the manifolde meanes and degrees, wherby it crap in peece and peece: how it was first conceaued, formed, brought forth into the world, and then nourished, strengthened, and rooted in the hearts of all men, and vniuersally imbraced. And thirdly, the authors of the ce∣remonies of the Masse, who put to euery point of it, and in what yeare of God is set downe. So that betwixt the first that put to the firste peece, to the last that clamped to the last cloute, is a thousand yeare and more.
9. Is set downe the manifolde absurdities, abhominations, idolatries blasphemies, vaine, idle, superstitions, Iewish and Ethnick ceremonies of their abhominable Masse, as in a table, a great nomber: whereby it is made euident and plaine to all those who are not blinded, that of all worships and seruices that euer was deuised by man, it is the most ab∣surde, blasphemous, and idolatrous. 10. The manifolde oppositions and contradictions amongst them∣selues, concerning this their Masse, both in the matter, forme, effect, sub¦stance, and circumstances of the same: whereby it is euident, that it is Babel a towne of confusion: and that they and their kingdome cannot stand, seing they are so deuided amongst themselues in this point. IN THE SECOND PART CONCERNING the Antichrist, these heades are handled 1. The reasons that M. Gilbert brings for to defend his Popes frō be∣ing Antichrist are answered. Wherin it is shewed: first, that Antichrist should not be a Iewe, and repaire to the temple of Ierusalem, and the Iewes shoulde not receaue the Antichrist, as their Messias: next, that the Pope. suppose he pretends that he come in the name of Christ, & that he is the Vicare of Christ, and the seruand of seruands: yet he is nothing lesse. He hes neyther his calling of God in his worde, nor is left in the roome of Christ: but hes entered in, not by the doore into the sheepefolde, but another way, as a thief and briggane, to steale and deuoure, and does no true seruice to Christ, but tyrannizes ouer his pure flock, and o∣uer the princes of the earth. Thirdly, that the Antichrist should not bee one singular person, but a succession of manie, in the self same, Apostate kingdome and tyrannie. Fourthly, that for all his pretenses of humility and piety, yet he is an aduersary to God, and lifted vp aboue all that is called God. Secondlye, it is proued by all the markes whereby the Antichrist is discriued in the Scriptures of God. in the 2. Thes. 2. Apoc. 13. & 17. that the Popes of Rome are the vndoubted Antichrist, because to him only aggrees all these markes, and to none other. And first they are prooued to be the men of sinne, and sonnes of perdition, by their moste monstrous and abhominable liues, as their owne friends and flatteters, and Historiographers of the time, hes descriued them: a few are brought
forth as examples to proue this. Secondly, it is proued that he is an ad∣uersary to God, by comparing of his doctrine with the doctrine of Christ how it ouerthrowes his person, offices, Propheticall, Priestly and Kingly, and all his benefites, and all the meanes, outwarde and inwarde, of the knowing and applying of them: and that it depriues the Lord of his so∣ueraigne glorie, in communicating to stockes and stones, oyle and water a peece of bread, Angell and man, bones and ashes, and the moste vyle things that can be. And also howe it ouerthrowes the Sacramentes of Christ, and puts to others whilk he neuer instituted: & the whole frame of his Discipline and gouernment, whilk he hes commanded in his word His officers, his offices, his Lawes. And hes put himself in Christs roome and hes made newe offices, officers, & lawes, whilk the Scripture knows not of. Thirdly, that he hes lifted vp himself aboue al that is called God, or that is worshipped. First, aboue the whole Kirk, and all general coū∣cels: next, aboue al Kings, Magistrates, and powers: And thirdly, a∣boue the Angels in heauen, and aboue them in Purgatorie and Hell: & hes equalled himself with God himself, in his styles, and properties, and workes, and equalled himselfe to Christ Iesus. And hes also lifted vp himself aboue the God of heauen and his sonne Christ Iesus. Fourthly, that he sittes in the Temple of God as God, and so forth of the rest in the 2. Thessal. 2. chap. and in the Reuelation. Whereby it is shewen, that euery thing that is foretolde of the Antichrist, is fully filled & ac∣complished in them: and that Babylon that harlote, that is set downe in the Reuelation, is by their owne confession, Rome. Further, it is also prooued by the testimonies of sundry of themselues, and others, that the Popes of Rome is the vndoubted Antichrist, and Rome is that Babel.
The second part of the Reply against Maister Gilbert Browne Maister Gilbert Browne. WE haue onelie in our Kirk that heauenly action and Sacrifice, (whilk we call the blissed Masse) that our Sauiour did at his latter Supper, and was Leuit. 2. per to∣tum. Leuit. 6.20. prefigured by the Law of Moses, & forespoken by the Mala. 1.10. 1 Esa. 19 19.21, Esa. 56.7 Prophetes. For Christ beeing the chiefe Priest of all Priests (according to the order of Genes. 14.18. Psal 109.4 Heb. 73.17 Melchisedech in this action, & according to the order of Heb 9.12.13 14 Aaron vpon the Croce) tooke Mat. 26 26.27 bread and wine, and hauing giuen Luc. 22.19 thankes to his Father of heuin, Mar. 14.22 blissed the same, by the whilk 1. Cor. 10.16 blissing, and heauenly words he made them his bodie and blood, [as I saide before] and Luc. 22 29. gaue, or offered him∣selfe then for them, (that is) for his. And last of all gaue the same body and blood to his Apostles to be eaten, whilk we call to 1. Cor. 0 16. communicate. And when he had done the same, he commanded his Apostles, (and by them the lawfull Pastors of the Kirk till the worldes end) to doe the same, for the Luke 22.19. remembrance of him. And seing that our Priests does the same, as our Sa∣uiour did, how can Maister Iohn say that our religion (in this) was not in∣stituted by Christ? Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. I Come to the 10. point of your doctrine concerning the sacrifice of the Masse: whilk suppose ye call blissed, yet is it most abhominable idolatrie, as (by the grace of God) shall be made manifest. And firste concerning the word it selfe MASSE, you are of sik variety of opini∣ons amongst your selues concerning it, that As doctor Bel∣larmine in his an¦swere to Plessis de Mornay. de Eucharist. lib. 11. cap. 1. & Gene∣brard. in Liturg. S, Denis from the word MESSAH Deut. 16.10. that properlie signifi∣eth sufficiencie, but Bellarm. re∣futes this, lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 1 some of you sayes it is taken from the Hebrew: some Bullnger ibi∣dem from  that signi∣fies a secret san∣ctification, from the whik comes mysterie. from the Greeke, some As Bellarmine ibidem, and sundrie others from mitto, missio, or dimissio. from the Latine: and Some because the sacrifice and praiers is sent to God in the same, as Hugo de S Vict de sacram. lib. 2. part.  cap. vlt. some sayes it is called the Masse for one cause, and Some because an Angell as they say is sent vnto the same, as Lombardus in 4. sent. dist. 13 & Tho∣mas part 3. quest. 83. And some because the people is dismissed, ond send forth, as Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap, 1. some for an∣other.
I will only speake this of it, that it is vsually taken by the auncient writers, for the dimission, or skailling (as we cal it) of the Kirk, after the publict seruice was done to God, as Bellarmine graunts, in the first acception of this word Masse. And therefore in the end of your Masse, the Deacon cries, Ite missa est, that is, Goe your way, the Congregatiō is dismissed. But now the Papists takes not the word in this sense, for the skailling of the Kirk, or dimission of the people, after the seruice of preaching, prayer, & so forth: but for that abhominable sa∣crifice of theirs, wherin, as they suppone, they offer vp Christ his very bodie and blood, in a sacrifice for the quick and the dead as Maister Gilbert does heir. And for this cause they as Durandus li. 4. rational. diuin. call this sacrifice, the Masse, that is, first sent from the Father to vs, that Christ his bodie and blood might be with vs: next, sent from vs to the Father, that he may interceede, and may be for vs with the Fa∣ther. But how can he be sent from them to heauen? seing he descends in the mouth, stomack, and bellie of the Priest? for to be sent downe to the bellie of the Priest, and to be sent vp to heauen, are things contrarie. So by this stile of the Masse, as they take it, it is plaine, that either Christ descends from heauen in the earth dailie in the Masse, whilk Turrian. 1. tract cap, 11. fol 59 some of thē graunts also) whilk is contrary to an article of our faith, that he sits at the right hād of his Father, whom the Act. 3.21 heauens must contain vntil the time that al things be restored: or else their Masse-priests, dust and ashes, are the creators of their creator, whilk is a blasphemie. This mekle now for the name of the Masse, whilk al chri∣stians should abhorre, according to that of Psal. 16.4 Dauid, that he would not take the name of false Gods in his mouth. For that word, whilk is proponed by men for an article of our faith, whilk is not found in the Scripture, neither in proper termes, nor yet in substance, and by necessary consequence out of the same, should be reiected by the kirk of God, as a profane, and a ba∣stard worde. But the Masse is sik: for it is proponed by the Kirk of Rome, as an article of our faith: and yet it is neither found in proper termes, nor in substance, nor by any neces∣sary consequence out of the Scripture: Therefore it shoulde
be reiected; as prophane & idolatrous, by the Kirk of God. This for the name: nowe to the matter. This is one of the greatest controuersies betwixt you and vs, concerning your sacrifice of the Masse: whilk, as ye account it most heauenly, so we account it most abhominable, as that whilk iniures the sonne of God, whilk derogates from his death and passion, whilk is iniurious to his euerlasting Priest-hoode, whilk is i∣dolatrous, vaine, neidlesse, and frutelesse, whilk hinders and ouerthrowes the true seruice of God: all whilk shalbe made plaine of it, by Gods grace. The matter of our controuersie therefore is: Whether Iesus Christ, God and man, his bodie and blood be personally and corporally offered vp, in your sacrifice of the Masse, (as ye call it) and whether this your sa∣crifice be a propitiatorie sacrifice, for the sinnes of the quicke and the deade: this your Kirk affirmes and holdes, and this we deny. Now let vs see your reasons first, and then we will set downe what reasons we haue for vs out of the worde of God, to the contrary. As to yours. First, ye say it was prefi∣gured by the Law of Moses: next, forspoken by the Prophets and thirdly, done and instituted by Christ our Sauiour, and commanded by him to be done to the end of the world. As to the firste, This sacrifice was prefigured by the sacrifices of the olde Testament, for the whilk purpose ye quote Leuit. 2. and 6.20. Vnto the whilk I answere: that the sacrifices of the olde Testament were figures and shadowes, of that great & bloody sacrifice of Christ Iesus, once offered vp, vpon the croce, neuer to be offered vp againe, as Heb. 9.25.26.27.28. the Apostle saies: and of our spirituall sacrifices, and seruice to God, whereof the Rom. 12.1. Heb. 13.15.16. Apostle speakes in these places cited on the margent. The whilk also were fulfilled in that one, and only sacrifice of him selfe vpon the croce, for the sinnes of the world: and are ful∣filled in our spirituall sacrifices of our selues, & of the calues of our lips continuallie. But that these were figures of your abho∣minable sacrifice in the Masse, there is not a sillabe in the whole Scripture, to proue the same: for that whilk was prefi∣gured in the olde Testament, was, and is fulfilled in the new Testament. But the new Testament hes not so mekle as one
sillabe of your sacrifice of the Masse: therefore it could not be prefigured in the olde Testament. For if it were prefigu∣red by the sacrifices of the olde Testament, it behooued ei∣ther to be one with the spirituall sacrifice of all Christians, or else one with the bloodie sacrifice of Christ vpon the Croce: for only these two sorts of sacrifices are prefigured in the old Testament, and recorded to bee fulfilled in the new Testa∣ment: but your sacrifice of the Masse, is one with neither of them: for it is not one with the first sort, for they are spiritu∣all, and you will haue it externall: neither is it one with the other of Christs sacrifice vpon the Croce, for there he died, & there he shed his blood, and there he suffered the tormentes of Gods wrath, and indignation for our sinnes: and there he satisfied the iustice of God, and merited an euerlasting re∣demption to vs. But in your sacrifice of the Masse, your Ballarm. lib. 2. de missa. cap. 4. selues graunts, that neither is he crucified, nor is his blood shed, nor suffers he the wrath of God for our sinnes, nor satis∣fies properly the iustice of God for the same, nor properly merites remissi∣on of our sinnes in the Masse: therefore it is not one with that sacrifice of Christ vpon the Croce. For two seuerall actions whilk hes two different formes, & are done in diuers times, and places, for diuerse ends, cannot be one only, and the self same sacrifice: for it is the forme that giues a thing to be, and distinguishes it from all other things. But Christ his offering vp of himself vpon the croce, and your sacrifice of the Masse hes different formes, are done in diuerse places and times & for diuerse ends, therefore they cannot be both one. Further, if they were both one, then it should follow, that as the sacri∣fice of Christ vpon the Croce is of an infinite valure, so the sa∣crifice of the Masse should be of the same valure. But Bellarm. sayes, lib. 2. de missa. cap. 4. fol. 740. That the sacrifice of the Masse, is but of a finite valour, and the sacrifice of the Croce of an infinite valour. Therefore they can∣not be both one and the selfe same sacrifice: Therefore this sacrifice of your Masse, seeing it is not one with neither of these two sorts of sacrifices, is not prefigured in the olde Te∣stament. As for the second: that it was foretolde by the Prophets:
It is as true as the former: for all the sacrifices whilk were fore-tolde by the Prophetes in the olde testaments, are ful∣filled in the newe Testament. But the newe Testament, (as hes bene saide) makes only mention of these two sorts of sa∣crifices, Christs on the Croce, and our spiritual sacrifices: and not a sillabe of the sacrifice of the Masse: Therefore it is not fore-tolde by the Prophetes in the olde Testament. As for these Malac. 1.10.11 1 Esa. 19.19.21 sa. 56.7 Scriptures whilk ye quote, they speake of the spiri∣tuall worship of God, and of the spirituall sacrifices, whilk the Gentiles being called, should offer vp vnto God, vnder the Gospel, whereof mention is made in these Heb 13.15 16 1. Pet. 2.5. Rom. 12.1. Rom. 15.16. places. For either they speake properlie and literally, or else figuratiue∣lie. But if you say they speake properly of externall sacrifi∣ces then they speake heir of that legal, and ceremonial wor∣ship of the Iewes, and so these places does not appertaine to the new Testament. Or, if you will say they speak figuratiue∣ly, then, I say, they make nothing for your externall sacrifice in the Masse, whilk you will haue to be a sacrifice, not figura∣tiuely, but properly. So howsoeuer ye expone them, they cā no waies make for your externall sacrifice in the Masse. Ey∣ther therefore must ye proue this sacrifice of your Masse, in the newe Testament first, (whilk ye will neuer be able to do) or else the figures and prophecies in the olde Testament, wil neuer proue it, seeing there is nothing either prefigured, or foretold in the old Testament, but that whilk in the new Te∣stament is fulfilled. Let vs see therefore what you can al∣ledge for this your sacrifice in the new Testament. You say, that Christ the chief Priest (according to the order of Mel∣chisedech in this action, and according to the order of Aaron vpon the Croce) instituted it. Matth 26.26 Luc. 22.19. Mar. 14.22 (m) Matthew, Marke, and Luke: & commanded to be obserued to the end of the world. Before I come to the institution, there are two things to be examined, whilk you haue written heir. The first, that you say, that Christ, according to the order of Aaron did offer vp him∣selfe vpon the Croce. Vnto the whilk I answere: first, that you gainsay heir, two great Papists, Alanus and Bellarmine, wher∣of the Alanus de Eu∣char. lib. 2. cap 9. one sayes that Christ neuer sacrificed Aaronice, that
is, according to the order of Aaron. The Bellarm. de Missa. lb 1. cap 6 fol. 626. M. Gilbert contra¦d cts the learned Fathers of his Kirk. other sayes, that Christ his sacrifice vpon the Croce was neither according to the order of Melchisedech, nor yet according to the order of Aaron. And not only he affirmes it, that it is not according to the order of Aaron, but also he affirmes, that this should be certaine to al the faithfull. So, if you be of the faithful, and his doctrine be true whilk the Pope your heade hes priuiledged to bee printed, this should also haue beene certaine to you, & so you should not haue gaine-saide it. You had neede to bee ware of this (Maister Gilbert) to contradict so openly the learned fathers and maisters of your Catholicke faith, for by this doing, yee will both bewray your selues, that you haue no vnitie, and concorde one with another, and also ye will bring your selfe in suspition with your heade: that yee are not a defender of the Catholicke faith, seing you so openly contradict the mai∣sters and defenders thereof. Marke this (Reader) what con∣corde these men hes amongst themselues, some saying one thing, some another. Next, I say: if you referre this also to his person, that as this action was according to Aaron, so him∣selfe was a priest according to his order, in his sacrifice. Then I say, you both gainsay the plaine. Heb. 5.6.10 Heb. 7.11 Scriptures of God, and also the Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 6 learnedst of your Kirk. For, suppose it be true, that this sacrifice of his vpon the croce, did accomplish al the sacrifices of Aaron, and put an end vnto them, according as he said, It is finished: Yet he offered vp this sacrifice, not as hee was a Priest according to Aaron, (for he was not a Priest ac∣cording to his order at all) but as he was a Priest, according to the order of Melchisedech: and therefore the Heb. 5.6.7.10. Scripture ioynes both together: to assure vs that he offered vp himselfe vpon the croce, as he was Priest, not according to Aaron, but according to Melchisedech. The second thing is: that you say, For this is the proper significati¦on of the He∣brew worde HOTZSI as in sundrie pla∣ces of Scripture, Ezech. 21. Psal. 135. Exod. 8. Num. 30. & so the chaldaick paraphraste Amena which is to bring forth, & the greeke Exenegge & so Cyprian Epist. ad Caecil. & Chry∣sost. hom 35 in cap. 14. Gen & Ioseph. lib. 1. cap 19. & Ambrose vpon the 7, cap. Epist. ad Heb. he brought foorth for to refresh A∣braham &c And Cardinall Caie∣tan saith the same vpon the 14 of Gen. There is nothing writ∣ten there of a Sacrifice or obla∣tion: but a bring∣ing foorth of bread and wine to refresh the victours, saith he, Christ according to the or∣der of Melchisedech in this action, whilk you meane the Masse, did offer vp his body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wyne. It is true indeede, that Christ, according to the order of Melchi∣sedech is an hie-Priest, and not according to the order of Aa∣ron: but yet neither is it certaine out of the Scripture, that
Melchisedech did offer vp bread and wine, in an externall sa∣crifice. For the Scripture sayes only, he brought it forth, whilk is not to sacrifice. And it is certaine As these con∣fessis. that he gaue it to Abra∣ham, & his company to refresh them with, after the slaughter of these Kings. And the Heb. 7. Apost. whereas he sets down these things wherein Melchisedech was a type of Christ, he does not so much as giue any inkling of this: for there he compares Melchisedech with Christ: first, that as Melchisedech was both King and Priest, so was Christ. Next, as Melchisedech was with out father and mother, beginning, and ending, the Scripture not mentioning of it, so was Christ. Thirdly, as Melchisedech was greater then Aaron, and had a more excellent Priest∣hoode then the Leuiticall Priest-hoode, so was Christs. But neuer a word heir, of a sacrifice of bread and wine, wherein Melchisedech shoulde haue resembled the sacrifice of your Masse, as ye suppose. So you find out heir that whilk the spi∣rit of God found not out: and so ye make your self wiser then the holy Ghoste in his Epistle. But we will learne not to bee wise aboue that whilk is written, and to searche no further, then the spirit of God hes found out already. And suppose it were graunted to you (whilk yee are neuer able to proue,) that Melchisedech did offer vp bread and wine yet what to doe hes this with your diuelish abhomination of your Masse, where∣in ye say the substance of bread and wine is gone away, only the formes remayning. For if your sacrifice in the Masse, be like the sacrifice of Melchisedech, then the substance of breade and wine should remaine as it did in the sacrifice of Melchi∣sedech, and the bread and wine should be offered vp, and not Christs body and blood, as bread and wine only were offerd vp in Melchisedech his sacrifice, So then, either Melchisedech his sacrifice is not a tipe of your sacrifice in the Masse, or els true bread and wine remaines in the sacrament, and not Christ his bodie and blood whilk is offered vp. Choose you then, whether you will deny your sacrifice to be according to the order of Melchisedech, or else will you let goe your reall pre∣sence, your Transubstantiation, and your personal offering vp of Christ Iesus in your abhominable Masse, for one you must doe. Thirdly, if Christ offered vp sik a sacrifice at his
Supper, as was prefigured by Melchisedech, whilk you affirme heir, Ioh. 19.28. then must it follow that Christ fulfilled that figure per∣fitely: and so the same sacrifice needs no more to be offered vp againe, and so heir will followe the desolation of your Masse-Priests, whose worke is chiefly in repeating of this sa∣crifice againe. Fourthlie, I would aske you, Whether is this sacrifice, whilk ye say he offered vp according to the order of Melchisedech in his last supper, one with that sacrifice whilk he offered vp vpon the Coce, or not? If it be one, then, I say as he died and shed his blood on the croce, & purchased an euerlasting redemption by the same: so this sacrifice of your Masse must be ioyned with his death, and shedding of his blood, and must haue the like vertue and effect to re∣deeme vs, and so two absurdities will follow. The one, that Christ not only should twise haue died, once in the Supper, and afterward vpon the croce: but also dies, and is crucified continuallie: in your Masse, & yet the Scripture sayes hee dyed but once. The other, that that sacrifice of his vppon the croce is superfluous: for what needed him to die againe to redeeme mankinde, since the firste offering of himselfe in the Supper was a sufficient redemption. For if his sacrifice vpon the croce was a sufficient redemption, whilk you can∣not deny: and if the sacrifice of him in the Supper be one with that: of necessitie it must followe, that as his sacrifice v∣pon the croce was a sufficient redemption: euen so his sacri∣fice in the Supper must be a sufficient redemption for man∣kind. And therefore De euchat lib. 2. cap. 18. Alanus a great defender of your Ca∣tholick faith, saith, according to the iudgement of the coun∣cell of Trent, that the new couenant is founded on the blood of Christ offered vp in the Supper, before he was crucified: and that Christ was truly our Passeouer the day before he suffered: and he sayes, This is the foundation of all Christian doctrine, according to the iudgement of the councell. Nowe if this be true, that he was our Passeouer, before hee died, and the couenant was founded in his blood whilk he offered vp in the Supper: then, certainly, Christ di∣ed in vaine, whilk is more then blasphemous: and so blasphe∣mous must that doctrine of your Masse be, whilk carries
with it sik a blasphemie. And if you will say, it is not the same with that sacrifice vpon the croce: then, I say, first you are contrarie to your owne Kirk in this, who sayes, it is one with that sacrifice of the croce. Next, Christ his body and blood is not offered thē in the Supper: for his body & blood was offered vp vpon the croce, and so your Masse is gone, or else make two Christs: one in the Supper vnder the formes of bread and wine, whilk the Disciples sawe not: and ano∣ther who was offered vp vpon the croce, whilk was seene of all. So whether will ye go, and vnto what side will ye turne you, Maister Gilbert, for the vpholde of your Masse? for there are rocks and sand beds on euery side. So neither did Christ offer vp himself in a sacrifice at all in his last Supper, neither did he it according to the order of Melchisedech. But now let vs see how ye proue this sacrifice out of the instituti∣on. And seing this point of doctrine is sik a waightie point, as whereupon the saluation and damnation of soules does hing: The institution of the Supper makes nothing for the sacrifice of the Masse. therefore I pray thee (Christian Reader) deceaue not thine owne soule to thy euerlasting perdition, but take good head what ground is in the institution for this their sacrifice, for if they prooue it not heir, it will neuer be prooued by the Scripture. You say therefore that Christ tooke bread and wyne, we grant that, yet heir is no sacrifice. What then? Hee gaue thanks: yet heir is no sacrifice. What next? He blissed it. Yet heir is no sacrifice. And whereas ye say that by this blissing, and his heauenly wordes the breade and wine is changed in the body and blood of Christ: that I haue sufficiently (as I hope) ouerthrowne in my answere vnto the fourth point of your doctrine in the first part. But to returne to the wordes of the institution: after the blissing of the bread, whilk Luke expones by giuing of thankes: the text sayes, He gaue. What gaue he but that whilk he tooke, and had blissed? And what tooke he, and blissed he, but the bread? And therefore the 1. Corinth 10. Apostle sayes, The bread whilk we blisse, &c. So thē it was bread whilk he gaue, and not his owne body and blood corporally. And vnto whome gaue he it? the text sayes, Vnto his disciples, both in Matthew, Marke, and Luke, all with one consent. Now,
that whilk was giuen to his Disciples was not properly offe∣red vp in a sacrifice: for a sacrifice is an offering to God. And the text sayes heir, He gaue it to his Disciples. So there is not a sillabe in the institution, that can make for your pretended sacrifice. M. Gilbert addes to the instituti¦on a new giuing, wherof the scrip∣ture makes no mention. You heir corrupt the word of Iesus Christ wonder∣fully: for first you expone by Giuing, Offering vp in a sacrifice. Next, whereas the Scripture in Matthew, Marke and Luke hes but giuing once, and referres this giuing not to God, but to the Disciples: And he gaue it to the Disciples: you alledge heir two giuings: the one to God, whilk is your owne inuention, wher∣of the Scripture makes no mention: the other to the Disci∣ples, whilk is the forme of a Sacrament and not of a sacrifice: All the ground of the sacrament of the Masse. for a sacrament is giuen to vs, a sacrifice to God. So all the groūds of your sacrifice of the Masse is two: the one is, your deuised Transubstantiation: so one error leanes vpon ano∣ther: the other is, not the words of Christ, And he gaue it to his Disciples, but your owne wordes, and your owne exposition only, And he gaue, or offered vp himself then for them. These are your owne words, and not the words of the holie Ghost. So this sacrifice of your Masse, hes not the words of Iesus Christ as Matthew, Marke, and Luke hes set them downe, to be the ground of it: but only your owne words, and your owne in∣terpretation. For howe dare ye be so impudent as to affirme that Christ gaue it twise: once in an offering for his Disciples and another time in an sacrament to his Disciples, seing we will beleeue Matthew, Marke, and Luke, the sworne pen-men of the holy Ghost, who sayes only he gaue it to his Disciples as a sacrament, and makes no mention at all, that he gaue it to God as a sacrifice. Doe you thinke the Lorde will neuer take an accompt of you for sik a manifest lie of the sonne of God, of his Scripture, of his Apostles and holy writers who write it, they all saying, he gaue it to his Disciples, and you affir∣ming beside that giuing to them, that he gaue it, that is, offered it vp for them. O sinfull man! Who will venter the saluation of his soule vpon so small a threed: yea, vpon so impudent a lie, as ye make of the sonne of God. O repent, or else you shall one day feill the fiercenesse of the Lords hoat wrath &
indignation vpon your soule & carcase for euermore. Leaue off therefore to be the cause of the damnation of soules, for you deceaue them, and makes them beleeue that this mon∣strous abhomination of your Masse, hes Iesus Christ to be the author of it, while it hes not so mekle as a sillabe in the whole institution, that giues sa mekle as an inkling of it. Are you wiser then the wisest of your generation, Bellarmine, who for all the arguments that he brings, neuer so mekle as once gi∣ues an inkling of this your argument. For he thought it was too plaine a lie to affirme a double giuing heir, out of the wordes of the institution: and too absurd a exposition to ex∣pone, He gaue, that is, he offered it vp. And therefore he hes no sik reasoning for his sacrifice of the Masse. Yea, that whilk ye thinke is plaine out of the institution that Christ offered vp his body and his blood in the supper: he sayes, Bellar. lib. 1. de missa. cap. 12. fol 669. that the acti∣on of offering cannot be easily distinguished and separated from the o∣ther actions whilk was done ioyntly there together, by the words of the institutiō. And more plainly he sayes, lib. 1. de mis∣sa c. 24. fol 706. The sacrifice of the masse hes no expresse warrant in the institution of the Supper by their owne con∣fession. that the Euangelistes hes not expresly saide that Christ offered vp himselfe vnto the Father in the Supper. This is a plaine speaking: nowe your sacrifice of the Masse, hes no expres warrand out of the institution of Christ if you will beleeue him, whose controuersies are allowed by the Pope to be printed. But it may be ye thought that this your doctrine would haue bene swallowed vp without fur∣ther triall, and therefore you regarded not what you write. You haue stollen your selfe in sik credite with the simple a∣mongst you, who are deceaued & blinded by your lies, that ye are not ashamed to be plain ynough in speaking vntruths and lies of the word of God. But the Lorde will recompence this one day. But now to returne to the rest of the words of the institution, as ye rehearse them. And last of all ye say, Hee gaue his body and blood to his Disciples to be eaten: He gaue it spi∣rituallie, and they did eate it spirituallie: and he gaue the sa∣craments of his body and blood, the bread and wine corpo∣rally to them, and they did eate them corporally, suppose for a spirituall vse and end. For that whilk he gaue they did eat: he gaue the bread and wine, therefore it was bread & wine
whilk they did eate, and drinke. And therefore the 1. Cor. 11. Apost. sayes plainlie, for whosoeuer shall eate of this bread, &c. He calles it bread that is eaten. And our Sauiour sayes Matth. 26.29. Verely, verely from hence forth shall I not drinke of the fruite of this vine with you. That whilk he gaue his Apostles to drinke corporally in the latter Supper was the fruite of the vine, (so the Euangelistes saies.) But Christs blood was not the frutie of the vine: ther∣fore it was not his blood whilk they corporally dranke, but wine, whilk was the fruite of the Vine-tree. I goe forwarde. And when he had done this, ye say, He commanded his Disciples, that is, the lawfull Pastors of the Kirk to doe the same for the remem∣brance of him to the end of the world. That is true, that whilk he did heir, he commanded to be done by his Disciples to the end of the world: but neuer a sillabe heir that he offered vp his bodie and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine in the Supper, in a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead: Therefore he commanded not this sacrifice of your Masse to be done to the end of the world. And whereas yee restrict this commandement, Doe this, only to the Pastors, ye haue to vnderstand that as there is some thing heir whilk Christ did, whilk is proper to them, as to be the dispensers of these heauenly mysteries: so there is some actions heir, whilk is common also with them to the people: as to receaue, to eate, to drink these Sacramēts of his body & blood in his re∣membrance. Seing therefore this commandement, Doe this, is to be referred to the whole actions of the Supper: and se∣ing there is some actions in the same, whilk the other Christi∣ans should doe also: Therefore this commandement, Do this, is not to be restricted to the office of the Pastors only, (whilk ye doe) but common with them to the actions of the people. Now to your conclusion: Seing (say ye) your Priestes does the same in this sacrifice, whilk our Sauiour did: howe can I say that your religion in this, was not instituted by Christ. The preists in the masse doth not the same thing that Christ either command¦ed or did him∣selfe in the latter Supper. If ye doe the same that he did, indeed I will graunt you it. But you doe not the same whilk our Sauiour did: Therefore your religion in this is not instituted by Iesus Christ. The whilk I prooue. First, Christ took bread and wine in this Sacrament
and gaue it to be eaten and drunken: and bread was eaten, & wine was drunken by his Disciples. The difference betwene the Sa∣crament of the Supper, and the abhominable sa∣crifice of the Masse. But your Priest takes bread and wine, & coniures the substance of it away by your Transubstantiation, and onely remaines the formes of the breade and wine behinde: therefore you doe not the thing whilk Christ did. Secondly, Christ tooke bread and brake it you take bread and hangs it vp, and keepes it in a boxe, to carrie to the seik, and in processions. Thirdly, Christ tooke bread and gaue it to his Apostles: your Priests like gluttons in the sacrifice of your Masse eates it vp euery whit himselfe alone. Fourthly, Christ giues a Sacrament to strēgthen mens faith: but your Priestes giues a sacrifice to redeeme mens soules. Fiftly, Christ gaue it to be eaten, your Priests giues it to be worshipped. Sextly, Christ gaue bread, your Priestes say they giue God. Seuenthly, Christ gaue the Cupe to his Disciples, saying, Drinke ye all of this, your Priest drinkes all himselfe, and takes away the Cupe from the people, both in your sacrifice and sacrament. Eightly, Christ instituted the Supper, and commanded the Kirk to celebrate the same, as he had instituted it: but the Masse hes bene clamped vp by many sundry Popes: one made the Confiteor, another the In∣troit: another the Kyriceleison, another the Gloria in excelsis: and so forth of the rest, as shalbe prooued afterwarde. Ninthly, Christ intending to celebrate his Supper, changeth not his garment: but the Priest going to say his Masse, doth naught but cloth and vn-cloath, & euery garment carrying a great mysterie. The Priest saying Masse muste haue his head and beard shauen, and vpon his head a circle of haire, whilk they call a crowne: imitating the Priestes of the Gentiles in this, Baruh chap. 6. ver. 30. and not Christ and his Apostles. Tenth∣ly, Christ in the Supper vsed common bread, but the Popish Priest must expresly vse other manner of bread, baked be∣twixt two irons, whilk is properly, Wafers. Elleuenthlye, Christ made his Supper vpon a Table, the Popishe Priest must haue a consecrate Altar, with some peeces of relickes put in the hole of it, or else a marble stone, in the borders whereof are little peeces of cloth, whilk they call corporales, to
say his Masse on. Twelfthly, Christ in the celebrating of the Supper, preached & taught his Apostles: the Popishe Priest mumbleth betwixt his teeth certaine praiers: he turneth to and from the altar, one while his back, another while his face to the people: now goeth he from one side of the altar vnto another: now he singeth with an high voice, now with a lowe voice: now he lifts vp his armes, now he casteth them downe. Briefly, he seemeth to be a man whollie mad, not knowing what countenance for to vse. Thirtenthly, Christ in the Supper spake in a vulgar tongue, that al might vnder∣stand: the Popish Priest in their Masses, speakes in a strange tongue, whilk the most part of themselues vnderstands not. Fourtenthly, Christ first brake the bread, and then gaue it to his Apostles: the prophane Prieste first speaketh certaine wordes ouer the bread in his Masse, and then breaketh it, (or the accidents of it, as they say) at their pleasure. Fiftenthly, Christ after he had broken the bread sayes, This is my body the Popish Priest speakes the words, without breaking of the bread, and not content with the words of Christ, he addeth this word enim vnto them. Therefore you cannot M. Gilbert, but speake against the light of your owne conscience, when you say that your Priestes does the same in their Masse that Christ did in the Supper, and heir I appeale your conscience before the terrible and euerliuing God, and before Iesus Christ that shall iudge the quick and the deade, whether ye doe not speake in this against the light of your owne consci∣ence or not, and whether your Priests in your Masse, does the same whilk Christ did in the Supper or not? Thinke you not that you must stand before the liuing God, and giue a reckoning of these things. Repent in time, and cease to de∣ceaue the soules of your countriemen any more. But to con∣clude this: What adoe hes your Masse with the Supper of Christ? what likenesse is there betweene the one and the o∣ther? In the Supper whilk Christ instituted in the Scripture, we are remembred of his death & passion vpon the Croce, whereby he appeased the wrath of God for our sinnes, and of our duty towards him: whereby we acknowledge in our
consciences, that we are oblished to die to sinne, seing it be∣hooued the eternall sonne of God by his death vppon the croce, to redeeme vs from the same: vpon the whilk arises an earnest thankesgiuing in the hearts and mouthes of eue∣rie true Christian, for so great a saluation, purchased so won∣derfully, as by the death of the eternal sonne of God. In your sacrifice of the Masse is there any sik thing? Is there any re∣membrance of his death and suffering there? Is his death shewen to the people in a knowne language that they may vnderstand it? Is there any acknowledging of any dutie there, for his death? Is there any true thankesgiuing there? No, none. But in stead of these, a heape of wordes in an vn∣knowne language, and a diuersity of Apish gestures, & Mo∣rishe and Iuglers tricks, to feede the eyes of the poore peo∣ple, whilk neither the people, nor yet many of your selues do vnderstand. In the Supper we are also admonished of our spirituall coniunction with our neighbour, and of our duetie towards him, in that we are all partakers of one bread, made of many graines, and of one wine made of many grapes: to signifie vnto vs that we are all renewed and redeemed by one blood, members of one bodie, liuing by one spirit, draw∣ing life, motion, & feeling all from one head, being one with him, and so one with others, whereby followes our mutuall duties one toward another. In your Masse there is no com∣munion of the bread made of many graines, and of the wine made of many grapes, to signify this coniunction and com∣munion, either with Christ our heade or amongst our selues, the Priest eating and drinking all himselfe. In the Supper, according to Christ his institution by giuing, taking, eating, and drinking of the breade and wine by all the Disciples, whereby our bodily life is nourished and strengthned, is not only signified and represented our spirituall grouth in that spirituall communion with him, whereon our spirituall life depends: but also in the same, all the faithfull doeth truelie by faith eate and drinke spiritually his fleshe & blood, wher∣by they are made one with himselfe, flesh of his fleshe, and bone of his bones, whereby they are strengthned in that spi∣rituall
life, and confirmed in the hope of that glorie. But is there any sik thing in your Papisticall sacrifice? Is there any giuing, and taking, eating, and drinking of bread and wine by the faithful, either to represent our cōmunion with Christ and amongst our selues, or to strengthen vs in that spirituall life through his coniunction. Doe the poore people eate or drinke, either bodily, or spiritually in your Masse? Is there a∣ny action there to stirre vp their conscience? or any instru∣ction to incres their knowledge? Are they ought but idle be holders of a pretended mystery, whilk is both dumb & deaf, and of a Priest that eates and drinkes all himself alone? So that in stead of these heauenly dishes, whilk our louing Fa∣ther doeth propine vnto vs, vppon his Table in the Supper, what is there in your abhominable sacrifices, but a feeding with huskes, an apishe game, and Iuglers tricks to feede the fantasies of poore people, that sees but vnderstands not, that heares, but they knowe not what. So that in trueth there is as great likenesse betwixt Christs Supper, and your Masse, as is betweene the Table of the Lorde, Some of them∣selues hes confes¦sed and written that al men may know it, that the Masse is but an vnwritten Tradi¦tion, and is not in¦stituted by christ in the Scripture and the Table of Di∣uels, and light with darkenesse. Seing therefore there is sik a difference betwixt your sacrifice in the Masse, and Christ his Supper, as hes beene seene: therefore your Priests does not the same in the Masse, whilk our Sauiour did in the last Sup∣per. And therefore howe can you say, that your religion in this is instituted by Christ? And this is so euident, that some of your owne Doctors and learned writers hes beene forced to confesse the same. As In his book a∣gainst Brentius Petrus á Soto and Lib. 4. Panopl. Lindanus cō∣fesses that the sacrifice of the Masse, with many other points of their religion, is an vnwritten Tradition, whilk hes neither the be∣ginning nor authour of it in the Scriptures of God. And In Floretum. Gerson, a Papist, & exponer of the Masse sayes, that the office of the Masse was ordained by Saint Iames and Basile the Bishop of Caesarea, but the Sacrament of the Supper was instituted by Iesus Christ. And he al∣ledges the Canon De cons. dist. 1 Canon Iacobus. graece,  that is, they haue deliuered that mystical sacrifice in write to vs. Law for him. So first there is three hun¦dreth yeares betwixt Basile and Iames, whilk are the compo∣sers of the Masse. Secondly, he distinguishes betwixt the sup∣per and the Masse, and he sayes the Supper is instituted by Christ,
and the office of the Masse by S. Iames, and S. Basile. So if he speake true, the Masse and the Supper is not both one, and the Masse is not instituted by Christ, as the Supper is. And so out of your owne mouthes, your Masse is confessed not to be in∣stituted by Christ in the Scripture. Shamelesse therefore & impudent (Maister Gilbert) are ye in affirming that your re∣ligion in this is instituted by Christ. Maister Gilbert Browne. There are fiue chief things wherein the institution of Iesus Christ con∣sists (as I haue shewed before.) Of these fiue, the Ministers wants three of the chiefest in their communiō. First, a lawfull Priest or Minister. Secondly Thanksgiuing. Thirdly, blissing. Fourthly, giuing or offering. Fiftly, commu∣nicating. First, ane lawfull Minister; as after I shall shewe. Secondly, the blis∣sing of the bread and wine, whilk they haue blotted out of their Scots Bi∣bles, and put in thankesgiuing for the same, as if both were one: not the les, that both the Greeke, Mar. 14.22.23 and Latine is against them, and signifies two diuerse actions, both done or said in S. Marke at his Supper  benedicens, blissand, and  gratias agens, giuing thanks. And thirdly, gi∣uing or offering of his blissed bodie and blood to his Father for his faithful, whilk properly is to sacrifice, as the holy Fathers writes vpon the same. And as for their thanksgiuing, it is but an invention of their owne heade, as may be seene in their Psalme bookes: and their communicating is but of breade and wine, but ours is of the body and blood of Christ. So we only huae the true institution of Iesus Christ, & not they, & that by the triall of the touch∣stone. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. We haue all things that are comprised in the institution of the Supper by Christ You haue them not. As for the fiue chief things wherein ye say the institution of Christ consists: to wit, a lawfull Minister, 2. Thanksgiuing. 3. Blissing. 4. Giuing or offering. 5. Communicating. We graunt that a lawfull Minister is required, but not a sacrifi∣cing Priest heir, because there is no externall and outwarde sacrifice heir, as ye suppone, and as hes bene proued. And se∣ing your Prieste are sacrificing Priests of a sacrifice that hes not a sillabe in the word of God to beare witnes vnto it, and seeing their authority depends of the authority of the Pope, whilk is Antichristian, as shalbe proued heirafter: and seing the most part of your Priestes are admitted without the due triall and examination of gifts and manners: and the moste part cannot preach the Gospell, as experience teaches, ther∣fore
in your communion, or rather abhominable sacrifice of your Masse, (for how can it be called a Communion, where the Priest only eates and drinkes vp all?) there is no lawfull Minister: and seeing our offices is lawfull: to wit, the prea∣ching of the Gospell, the administracion of Sacraments, and Discipline: and seing our entry to the offices is lawfull also: by dew examination of life and doctrine: and seing the au∣thority of our calling is from God, who enables whome hee calles with gifts meete to discharge the calling, and from his Kirk examining, trying, testifying, approuing, or dayning, & consenting vnto the same: Therefore in the administration of our Communion there are lawfull Ministers. As to the second, Thankes-giuing, we grant also it is comprised in the institution of Christ his sacrament, and is required in the ce∣lebration of the same: But you say, our thankesgiuing whilk we vse is but an inuention of our own heads, as may be sene in our Psalme bookes. Wherunto I answer: If ye respect the matter contained in our Thanks-giuing, it hes the warrand of the Scripture, and so in that respect it is not our owne in∣uention. If ye respect the authority, we are taught & com∣manded by our Sauiour, both by his example, for he gaue thankes: and also by his commandement, Doe this, to doe the same. And so in that respect it is not our owne inuention. If you respect the end, it is Gods glory, whilk is the proper end of all thankes-giuing. If yee will respect the forme of this thankes-giuing: to wit, the words and order wherein it is cō∣ceaued: I say, it is left indifferent to the Kirk of God to form their praiers and thanks-giuings: so being the matter, end, & authority of the vsing of them publikly, haue there warrand out of the worde of God. So seeing the authoritye to giue thanks, and the matter also of our thankes-giuing, and end thereof is set downe in the worde, and seeing the Lorde hes left it free to the Kirk of God concerning the outward form of the same, the Scriptures not determining it, whilk your self, I hope, will not deny. For your canon hes many formes of praiers, and thanks-giuing in your Masse, whilk after that forme and order is not set downe in the word of God. Ther∣fore,
you iniury the Lords spirit and his Kirk, who calles our thanks-giuing our owne inuention. As to the third concerning Blissing, whilk you distinguish from thanks-giuing: and sayes, we haue blotted it out of our Scots Bibles, and put thanks-giuing in the roome thereof: & so you say, we want that part. First then, I wil aske you, Did not Luke and the Apostle Paule set down the whole forme & the chief points of the institution of that sacrament? Luk. 22 1. Cor. 11 I trow you will not deny it, for it were too plain an impiety for you to say, that either Luke the sworn pen-man of Gods spirit, or Paule, who saide, I haue receaued of the Lord, that whilk also I haue deliuered vnto you, that either of these had omitted the historie of the institution of this Sacrament, 1. Cor 11.23 a principall point ther∣of: but either this Blissing is one with Thankes-giuing, or else they haue omitted a principall point thereof, for neither of them makes mention in these places of Blissing, but onelie of Thankes-giuing: therefore it is one with Thankes-giuing. Se∣condly, I say, either the whole three Euangelists, and the A∣postle Paule, in setting down the institution of the sacrament of the Supper, omits a chief thing: to wit, the blissing of the Cup (whilk I trow ye wil not say) or else the Blissing of the Cupe is one with Thankes-giuing: for the Apostle Paule and Luke makes no mention at all of blissing, but only of thankes-gi∣uing: and the two Euangelists Matthew and Marke, makes no mention of the blissing of the Cupe: but sayes, that after, or Also he tooke the Cupe, and when he had giuen thanks, &c. therfore they are one. Thirdly, if ye wil credite one Euangelist expo∣ning another whereas Matthew and Marke hes this word, and he blissed: Luke and Paule hes these words, And he gaue thankes. And whereas Matthew and Marke hes this word Blissing after he tooke the breade, they vse the word thankes-giuing after he tooke the Cupe, to signify that they are both one. And ther∣fore if ye will beleue Scripture exponing Scripture, they are both one. Yea, what will you say to Bellarm. lib. 1 de sacr. Eucha. cap. 10. Bellarmine, who sayes that some Catholickes contends, that both the words to blisse, and to giue thanks in the Scripture signifies one thing: and therfore they interprete Thankes-giuing, Blissing. So if you will credite your
owne Catholickes, they are both one heir. And whereas you say, that both in the Greeke & Latine they signifie diuerse things: I answere: Indeed it is true that sometimes they signifie diuerse actions: as Num 6. Blissing, for the petition of a blissing. But yet sometimes also blissing is ta∣ken in the Scripture, for thankes-giuing, as both I haue pro∣ued in these places, as also, if ye will deny, there is places Luc. 1.65 Eph. 1.3 1. Pet 1.3 ynow in the Scripture for the contrary. And whereas you say that in Marke they signifie two distinct actions, I haue proued before they are both one. And last of all I say, if by blessing you meane the wordes of the consecration this is my body whilk is broken for you &c. as (d) Bellarmine affirms that the Romane catechist so expones it, Lib. 4. de sacram. Euch. cap. 13 and the Theologes commonly teaches the same: then I say wee want not that chiefe point, for we reherse the wordes of the institution. So howsoeuer the word (blissing) be taken, either for thanksgiuing, or for the sanctification of these elements to an holy vse, by prayer: whilk is cōprehēded in the thanks∣giuing, or for the words (as ye call them) of the consecration, we haue alwaies this blissing in our communion. And as for your houering and blowing of the wordes of Christ ouer the bread and challice, with your crossing and charming them, after the manner of Sorcerers, with a set nomber and order of wordes and signes: your hyding it: your rubbing of your fingers for feare of crummes: your first thortering, and then lifting vp of your armes: your ioyning and dis-ioyning of thumbe and fore-finger: and sundry other vaine and super∣fluous ceremonies and curiosities, whilk you vse in blissing of the elements: they haue neither command, nor example of Christs institution and action, and the Apostles doctrine and doing, in the Scriptures of God. Now as for the fourth, giuing, or offering vp of the body and blood of Christ to his Father, by the faithfull: We confesse a giuing to his Disciples, vvhilk you call afterward a commu∣nicating. But for another giuing, that is, (as you expone it) an offering vp of his body and blood to his Father, we allu∣terly deny it, as a thing not so mekle as once mentioned in
the whole institution, but contrary to the same, and Anti∣christian: and therefore we vtterly abhorre it, and detests it, as an inuention of your owne, as Antichristian, as idolatry, as abhomination, as that whilk derogates from that blissed & only one sacrifice, whereby he offered vp himself once v∣pon the Croce, neuer to be offered vp againe, as the Heb 9.25 Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 12 & cap 24. scrip∣ture testifies. And Bellarmine sayes plainly, that this offering vp is not expresly set downe in the words of the institution, and that it cannot be easily discerned. And as for the fifth a communicating we haue it, and that not only of the bread and wine, as ye here imagine, but of Iesus Christ God and man, his verye fleshe and blood, and al his blissings by faith spiritually: seing therefore we haue all these points whilk are requisite in the institution, a lawfull Mini∣ster, thanksgiuing, blissing, giuing, and communicating: ther∣fore wee haue the true institution of Christ in the sacrament. And because in this your abhominable sacrifice of the Masse, (as hes bene said) there is no communion, for the Priest takes all; and because you affirme the personall and corporall pre∣sence of Christs flesh and blood in your sacrifice, and the cor∣porall eating and drinking of it, whilk is Capernaiticall and more nor carnall, contrarie to the Scripture, contrarie the nature of a sacrament, contrarie the trueth of Christ his hu∣manitie, and contrarie the articles of our faith of his ascensi∣on, sitting at his right hande and there remaining, till his re∣turning in the last daye, all whilk your sacrifice of the Masse, and Transubstantiation in your communion ouerthroweth: Therefore you haue not the true institution of Iesus Christ according to the Scripture. I might end here, but because ye account the sacrifice of your Masse moste heauenly and the principall part of the worship of God, and wee account it a most abhominable idolatrie: Arguments a∣gainst the abho∣minable Sacri∣fice of the Masse. , herefore I will set downe some arguments against the same, whereby if you will you maye perceiue the abhomination of it. First I say, all lawfull sacrifi∣ces hes the expres testimonies of the Scripture to warrand the institution of them to bee of God. But your sacrifice of the Masse hes no expres testimonie of the Scripture, where∣by
it can be made manifest that it is instituted of God: there∣fore it is not lawfull. What now will you say to this, the pro∣position you cannot deny, for our Sauiour sayes, Math. 15 9. Ir. 7.24. in vaine wor∣ship ye me, teaching for doctrine mens commandements. And Ieremie reprooues the Iewes that they woulde not walke according as the Lord commanded them, but according to their owne willes. Col. 2.23. And the Apostle condemnes all voluntarie Religion. Therefore this is most certaine, that that Religion or sacrifice, whilk hes not expresse Scripture whereby it may be made plaine that it is instituted of God, is not lawfull: Rom 14.1. Rom. 10.17. for all that is done without faith is sinne: and faith hes only the word of God to leane to: And dare the creature be so bolde as to appoint a meane to worship God, without the warrand of his will in his worde? Nowe to the assumption, what can you say to it? Bring me an expres testimony out of the Scripture, that God hes instituted your Masse, and take it to you? Yea, if it be instituted in ony place of the Scripture, it is instituted in the laste Supper (for this you graunt your selues:) But there is not a sillabe in the whole institution, that Christ offered vp himselfe in a sacri∣fice in the same, as hes bene proued: Bellarm. lib. 1. de missa cap. 24. and Bellarmine the lear∣nedest of your Kirk confesses plainly, that the Euangelists hes not saide expresly that Christ offered vp himselfe in the Supper in a sa∣crifice. And therefore others of your owne Religion, Petrus a Soto in his book against Brentius. Lindanus lib.  Panopli Papists of great name, hes reckoned the sacrifice of the Masse a∣mongst the traditions, whilk hes not their beginning nor author in the Scriptures. So then by your owne confession, the sacrifice of the Masse hes not expresse Scripture to warrand it: yea, it is a tradition, whilk hes neither the beginning nor authour of it in the Scriptures of God. And I would aske this question of you: What can be the cause, wherefore the typicall sacri∣fices, and all the rites and ceremonies thereof, is so expreslye set downe in the Scripture of the old Testament, (whilk you will not deny) and this sacrifice of yours, whilk yee account more excellent then all these, not to haue bene expresly see downe in the newe Testament, neither the sacrifice, nor the rites and ceremonies thereof, yea, not so meikle as the very name of it? Is the new Testament (thinke ye) more obscure
then the olde Testament? (whilk is absurde to say.) Shall the olde Testament be cleare in setting downe the sacrifices and all the rites thereof, whilk is but the shaddowe: and should not the newe Testament, haue bene at the least, as cleare in setting downe the sacrifice of the newe Testament, whilk ye affirme to be the Masse, if it were sik, what an ab∣surde thing is this? Christian reader assure thy self, the Lord Iesus would haue dealt as louinglie, and plainly with thee, in setting downe the sacrifice of the Masse in the newe Testa∣ment, (if euer he had instituted sik a sacrifice) as he was in setting downe the sacrifices of the olde Testament. But thou may assure thy selfe, and thy conscience may leane vnto it, since he hath not so much as once expressed it in all the new Testament, therefore he hes neuer appointed it. Secondly, I say, in all the places of Scripture wheresoeuer the Apostles speaks of the sacrifices, whilk Christians should offer vp, they euer speake of spirituall sacrifices, and neuer speakes of this their externall sacrifice of the Masse. They neuer remember of this their sacrifice, of the offering vp of Christ in the Masse Looke throughout the whole newe Rom. 12. Heb 13 Phil. 4. Rom. 15. 1. Pet. 2. Apo. 2 Testament, and thou shall not finde this, as namely, in these places noted in the margent. Are you and your Masse-Priests more wise then the Apostles are? Whether shoule we then thinke & speake as they spak and thought, or as ye would haue vs? They ne∣uer spak of your sacrifice of the Masse, and bring one in∣stance, if ye can: therefore neither should we. We will be∣leeue them rather then you. Thirdly, that doctrine whilk is expresly gainsaide by the Scripture, must be false:) this you cannot deny:) but this your doctrine concerning the often and daily offering vp of Iesus Christ, his body and blood in sacrifice in your Masse, is expresly gainsaid by the scripture: for the Scripture sayes in sundry places, that he hes once offred vp himselfe, neuer to offer vp himselfe againe, Heb 10.10. By the whilk will we are sanctified, euen by the offering vp of Iesus Christ once made. 11. And euery Priest standeth daylie ministring, and oft∣times offereth one manner of offering, whilk cannot take away sinne 11. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sinnes, sitteth
for euer at the right hand of God. 14. For with one offering hath hee consecrated for euer them that are sanctified. Heb. 9.24. Christ hes entred into the very heauen to appeare now in the sight of God for vs, not that he should offer himself often, &c. 28. So Christ was once offe∣red to take away the sinnes of many. Heb. 7.27. Christ died once, whē he offered vp himself, Seing the Scripture therefore affirmes so plainlie, that Christ once offered vp himselfe, and you affirm that in your abhominable sacrifice, he offers vp himselfe often: since the Scripture sayes, the offering vp of Christ is once only and ye say it is often in your Masse: Therefore this doctrine of yours is plaine against the expresse sayings of the Scrip∣tures. For suppose ye will haue an vnbloody offering vp of Christ, yet the Scripture only acknowledges this bloody of∣fering vp of himself vpon the croce. Fourthly, I will aske you to what purpose serues the per∣sonall sacrifice of Christ in your Masse? It must be for one of two: to wit, either to satisfy for our sinnes, (and therefore ye call it a propitiatorie sacrifice) or else to apply that satisfacti∣on once made by his death vppon the croce vnto vs, (the whilk yee affirme also of it:) But for neither of these is Iesus Christ to be offered vp againe: therefore for no cause is hee to be sacrificed in your Masse. Not for the first, to satisfie for our sinnes, because the Scripture sayes plainly, that he hes sa¦tisfied for our sinnes, by his once oblation vppon thh Croce, neuer to die againe, and therefore our Sauiour sayes vppon the * Croce, It is finished. And our redemption and satisfactiō is ascriued only to his death once made, Heb. 1. & 9. & 10 Ioh. 19.28. Bellar. lib. 1. do Missa. cap. 25 and his blood once shed. And your selues will not deny this, but the death of Christ is a sufficient ransome and satisfaction for all the sins of the world, and therefore Bellarmine graunts this, that the vertue of his once offering vp vpon the croce, is infinite and euerlasting, to sanctifie vs: so that there needes not another sacrifice of the croce, or the repetition of the same. And the treuth of this is manifest: for if Christ must be offered vp in the Masse to satisfie for our sinnes, he must die againe, and suffer againe. For what is it to satisfie God, but to pay to God that whilk we owe? And what owe we vnto him for our sinnes, but death: for death is the
stipend of sinne? So that to satisfie God for our sinnes, is to die for our sinnes: and therefore we say, Christ hes once sa∣tisfied for our sinnes, because he hes once payed our debt, whilk is death: that is, he hes once died for our sinnes. So thē either Christ hes not fully satisfied for our sinnes, by his once death vpon the Croce, (whilk is impiety to thinke) or else the Lord craues a debt already payed, ouer againe: (whilk is blasphemy) or else Christ needs not to be offered vp in your Masse, to satisfie for our sinnes. And so your sacrifice of the Masse availles not for to satisfie for our sinnes. Let vs come to the next: If ye will say, he is offered vp in the Masse for to apply the vertue of the death of Christ vnto vs, (whilk your Kirk also sayes.) First, I say, Christ is applyed to vs, when he is offered, not to God in a sacrifice, but to vs in the word and Sacraments: therefore he should not be of∣fered vp to God in a sacrifice, but offered to vs in his word & Sacraments, that he may be applied to vs: for it is the worde and Sacraments whilk outwardlye applyes Christ and his death to vs, and not a sacrifice: for in a sacrifice the thing whilk is sacrificed, is offered to God, and not applied to vs. Next, I say, if your sacrifice serues but to apply the vertue of Christ his satisfaction vnto vs: then it is manifest, the satisfa∣ction is alreadie made: for first the salue must be made, be∣fore it can be applied. So your Kirk heir erres, whilk sayes your sacrifice of the Masse is propitiatory to appease the wrath of God, and also applicatorie to apply the same to vs. I say thirdly, if Christ should be sacrificed againe, that the vertue of his death may be made effectuall in vs: then also should he be conceaued againe in the wombe of the Virgine borne againe, die againe, and rise againe: that the vertue of his incarnation, birth, death, and resurrection, should be ap∣plyed vnto vs: for will you say, that he must be sacrificed a∣gaine to apply the vertue of his sacrifice vpon the croce vnto vs: and what reason then can ye pretend for you wherefore he should not be incarnate againe, die againe, and rise again that the vertue of these may be applyed to vs? Doe you think this absurde? What is the cause then that ye will not blushe
at the other. Fourthly, I say, if your sacrifice of the Masse be an application of Christ his sacrifice: then it is not the sacri∣fice it self: for the applying of the salue, is not the salue it self: and therefore since you say that it is the applying of Christ his sacrifice, wherefore should ye say that Christ is sacrificed in it: for these two cannot stand together. Fifthly, in Bap∣tisme, the sacrifice of Christ, and the vertue of his death is truely applyed vnto vs: and yet ye will confesse that Christ is not sacrificed in Baptisme. Wherefore then may not the vertue of this death and sacrifice, be applyed to vs in the sa∣crament of the Supper, and yet he not sacrificed againe in it. And last of all, neither you, neither any creature shoulde ap∣point or make moe meanes of the applying of Christ & his death to vs, then is set downe in his word: but his word on∣ly sets downe the inwarde operation of Gods spirit applying it to vs, and faith vppon our part apprehending it: and the worde the sacraments, and discipline proponing and confir∣ming the same vnto vs. But neuer a sillabe in the whol scrip∣ture, that the Lord hes appointed your sacrifice of the Masse to apply the death of Christ vnto vs. Seing therefore your sacrifice of the Masse, neither satisfies for our sins (for Christ by his death hes done that sufficiently) nor yet applyes the satisfaction once made by the death of Christ vnto vs, (for that is done by the spirit and faith inwardly, & by the worde sacraments, and discipline outwardly, and that sufficiently:) Therefore your sacrifice of the Masse is needlesse, and serues to no vse in the earth. Fifthly, the Scripture euer conioynes with the sacrifice of Christ, his death: so that he cannot be sacrificed but by dy∣ing, as the Scripture plainly testifies, Heb. 9.25. and 26. Not that he should offer vp himselfe often, for then must he haue often suffe∣red from the foundation of the world. Heb. 7.. Heb .1 The same may be seene al∣so in sundry other places, wherof I haue quoted a few on the margent. So the Scripture sayes, if he must be often offered vp, he must often suffer. And Bellarmine lib. 1. de Missa, fol. 725. sayes, That if there be not a true and a reall slaughter of Christ in the Masse, then the Masse is not a true and reall sacrifice. But the Scrip∣ture
sayes plainly that he hes but once died, and I trow you wil not say that he is to die againe: Therefore seeing he cannot die againe, he cannot be offered vp againe: for the Scripture acknowledgeth no sacrifice of Christ, but that whilk is ioy∣ned with his death. Lib. 1. de Missa cap. 2. fol. 693 & 604. Cap 27. lib. de Missa, fol. 726. & cap. 2. fol. 604. Sextly, Bellarmine graunts that in all externall sacrifices, the sacrifice must be changed. It is also required (sayes he) in a true sacrifice, that that whilk is to be sacrificed be alluterly destroyed. And in another place, That whilk is offered is ordayned to a true, reall, and voluntare destruction. But Christ now being glorified cannot be changed and alluterly destroied: therefore he cā∣not be sacrificed, if your selues speake true: or else as oft as he is sacrificed in your Masse, he is alluterly destroied, whilk is blasphemie. Seuinthly, the scripture sayes, Where ther is remission of sinnes there is no more offering: Heb. 10.18 that is, all externall propitiatory sacri∣fices ceases: but remission of sinnes is already obtained by the death of Christ, as the Heb. 1.3 Scripture testifies, and your selues will not deny. Therefore there needes no more obla∣tion of Christ in your Masse for the same. Eightly, the Heb. 9.22 Scripture saith, That without shedding of blood there is no remission: but in your sacrifice of the Masse there is no shedding of blood, as your selues graunts, for ye call it an vnbloody sacrifice: therefore by your sacrifice of the Masse there is no remission of sinne. Further, the Heb. 5. Heb. 7 Scripture acknowledges no other Prieste of the new Testament, but Christ only, These Priests sayes the Apostle to the Hebrewes, speaking of the Priests of the olde Testament, were many, because death hindered them to indure: but he, speaking of Christ, because he abydes for euer, hes an euerlasting Priest-hoode, whilk cannot passe from one to another. So Christ is the only Priest of the newe Testament. Now if it be true whilk you say, that Christ is offered vp in your Masse, and that by your Masse-Priestes, then are there moe Priests of the newe Testament then Christ, whilk is plaine against the Scripturs. What will you say to this? That Christ is the principal priest of the new Testament, and yours are secondary Priestes and
vnder him, by whose ministry he offereth vp himself to God But first, was not the Priests of the old Testament onely se∣condarie Priests? this you will not deny, seing their sacrifices were figures of his, and their Priesthood figures of his Priest hoode. But the Apostle oppones the Priesthoode of Christ, not to another principall Priesthoode, but to the Priesthood of men, whilk was but secondary, and sayes it cannot stande with that secondary Priesthood in the olde Testament: ther∣fore it cannot stand with your Priesthoode of the new Testa¦ment. And the reason whilk the Apostle alledges will not only serue, to exclude the Priests of the old Testament, that was but secundary Priests also: but also all other sacrificing Priests whatsoeuer, of the propitiatory sacrifice of the newe Testament. For the reason is, because he bydes for euer, and hes a Priesthoode whilk cannot passe from one to another, whilk wil serue aswell against your Masse-Priests, as against them: for they are mortall as the Priests of the old Testament were: and his Priesthoode cannot passe from one to another, as it might haue done amongst the Priests of the olde Testament, and also does amongst your Priests. For to what purpose should your Priesthoode and sacrifice serue, seing Christ his sacrifice hes fulfilled al the types of all the sacrifices of the olde Testa∣ment? If you say, to signifie Christ his sacrifice to come, as theirs did: then that is false, for he is sacrificed already. But if you say, to signifie and represent his sacrifice alreadie done: then I say, what needes him to be sacrificed againe for that purpose? for the word and sacramentes does represent him sufficiently: and so your Masse needs not to represent his sa∣crifice. And if you say it represents his sacrifice: then I say, it is not one with that sacrifice of his vpon the croce, whilk you will be loth to graunt, for your Kirk saith, that it is one with that in substance. And I say farther, Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 25 if you will say with Bel∣larmine, That this place of the Apost. only excludes absolutely the mul∣tiplication of Priests in the same dignitie and power with Christ: that then they exclude yours also. For if you offer vp the same sa∣crifice whilk he offered vp, then you haue the same power & dignity whilk he had. But this you say you doe: for it is no
matter of the difference of the manner, since the sacrifice is one. Seing therefore Christ God and man, whilk ye say yee offer vp in your Masse is of that same dignity, whilk he was of, when he was offered vp vpon the croce: and seing the e∣quall dignity of the sacrifice makes the equall dignity of the Priest that offers it vp: therefore sacrilegious are your Mas-Priests, and excluded heir by the Apostle. And thirdly, I say, This is a vaine distinction of yours, of principall and chiefe Priest, and secondary Priests: for this is the nature of this sa∣crifice of Christ that it cannot be offered vp by none, but by himselfe. And fourthly, if your Masse-Priests be but Mini∣sters in this sacrifice, and Christ the principall, (as you say) who offers vp himself by you: then I say as ye offer vp Christ as instruments, for your sinnes and the sinnes of the people: it should followe that Christ offers vp himself in your Masse by you, for his owne sinnes, and the sinnes of the people: But this is blasphemie, Heb. 7.7. and expresly gainsaide by the Scripture. And last of all, I say, seing (as your Kirk sayes) Christ his sa∣crifice in the Masse is one with that sacrifice vpon the croce: therefore as Christ offered himself vpon the croce, without the ministery of secondary Priests, so shuld he be offered vp in your Masse, without the ministrie of the same, or else it is not one with that. So your Masse-Priests are no waies to be called secondary Priests to Christ, except in that respect that Iudas, with the band of men of warre and hie-priests, were the instruments and ministers of Christ his taking, death, & crucifying: euen so you are the instruments and ministers of the crucifying of Christ daylie in your Masse, so far as in you lyes: and in this respect brook ye your stile of Masse-Priests. And because they haue a cōmon distinction in their mouths of a bloody and an vn-bloody sacrifice: for they affirme that sacrifice of Christ vpon the croce to be bloody, and that sa∣crifice of him in the Masse to be vn-bloody: Therefore I will take away this refuge & vaine starting hole from them. And first I say, this distinction of theirs of a bloody, & vn-bloody sacrifice of the self same thing that is sacrificed, wants al war∣nd in the worde of God. For there is not so meikle in the
whole new Testament as a sillabe, that telles vs that there is a proper sacrifice of Christ whilk is vn-bloody: and you ar neuer able to bring one instance to the contrary. Secondly, I say, it is repugnant to the Scripture: Heb. 10.10.11 12.14. Heb 9.24.25. for the * Scripture on∣ly acknowledges sik a sacrifice of Christ as is ioyned with his death, as hes bene proued before. See Heb. 9.24.25. Not that he should offer himself often, for then should he haue suffered often since the beginning of the world. Now if the Apostle his argumēt be true, that Christ cannot be offered vp often, because then he must die often: then this doctrine of yours is against the scripture, ye sayes, Christ may be offered vp often, and yet not die often. But if you wil say, this is spoken of that bloody sa∣crifice: I graunt that: and I say the Apostle knewe not, nor neuer spak of another sacrifice: and therefore your doctrine is vaine, that would haue another sacrifice, then euer the A∣postles in the whole Scripture hes made mention of. And I say thirdly, this distinction of yours cannot stand with your owne doctrine: for if there be a true sacrifice of Christ pro∣perly in your Masse, as ye say, then his blood must be truely shed, and he must truelie die, (for this is the nature of all sik sacrifices for sinne, as Bellarmine graunts it) lib. 1. de Missa, fol. 725. saying, If there bee not a true and reall slaughter of Christ in the Masse, then is not the Masse a true and reall sacrifice: And also, In all true, real, and externall sacrifices, the sacrifice must be a thing sensible and must be made holy of a prophane thing, as Bellarmine confesses: & these conditions he requires in the definition of the same: but this, I hope, ye will not say of Christ: for he is holye al∣wayes, and is insensible in your sacrifice, & cannot be slaine againe: therefore properly there can be no true sacrifice of Christ in your Masse, by your owne doctrine. To conclude this then: For these causes wee reiect this abhomination of your Masse. First, because Christ cannot be offered vp in a sacrifice, but he must die also, as hes bene prooued, and the Scripture testifies that he hes once died, and all christians confesses it. Secondly, because the death of Christ is a suffi∣cient satisfaction for our sinnes, and so we neede not that he should be offered vp againe to satisfie for the same. Thirdly,
because the spirit of Christ and faith, by the outward means of the word & sacraments & censures, is a sufficient meane to apply him to vs, and so wee neede not the sacrifice of the Masse for that end. Fourthlye, because Christ onely is the Priest of the new Testament, who hes no successors, & whose Priesthood cannot passe from one to another, because he li∣ues for euermore, and he only can be sacrificed by himself, & therfore he only can offer vp himself, whilk he hes once done vpon the croce. Fifthly, because the sacrifice of Christ vpon the croce is perfite, and the vertue of it indures for euer, and it cannot, nor should not be reiterate. Sextly, because the Scripture propones Christ now sitting in glorie at the right hand of his Maiesty, and not vnder the formes of bread and wine in your sacrifice. And seauenthly, because it is but the deuise of man, wanting God to beare witnesse to it in the Scripture, repugnant to that only one sacrifice of his vppon the croce, abolishing the frutes of his death and passion, tur∣ning the sacrament of the Supper, in abhominable idolatrie, causing men to worship a bit of bread, as the sonne of God: and last, because it spoiles men of the fruite of the sacrament Therefore in all these respects it is abhominable, to be dete∣sted, and in no sort to be communicated with. Vnto this I will adioyne some testimonies of some of the auncient Fathers, The testimonies of the auncient Fathers against the same, euen vntill the thou∣sand yeare after Christ whereby it is manifest what their doctrine and iudgement was concerning this point. Li. 2. Paedagog. cap. 2. & in strom Clemens Alex∣andrinus, who was neir the Apostles dayes, sayes, Wee sacrifice not at all vnto God, meaning with a reall and externall sacrifice but we glorifie him who was sacrificed for vs. And then hee sub∣ioynes what kinde of sacrifices they offered vp to God: to wit, a sacrifice spirituall, of themselues, of prayer, and of righteousnesse: and vpon what aultar, to wit, vpon the aultar of their soules, with the perfome of their prayers. In Typhon, & in expos. fidei. Iustinus Martyr saies, I dare saies he, affirme that there is no other sacrifice perfite and acceptable to God but supplications, and thankesgiuing. And he sayes, that Christians hes learned to offer vp these sacrifices only. aduer. Iudaeos. Tertullian saies, That it behooues vs to sacrifice vnto God, not earthly, but spirituall things, so we read as it is written, a contrite heart is a sacrifice to God. In epist. ad Rom & in homil 2. in Cant. & lib. 8. contra Celsum Origen
sayes, The blood of Christ is only sufficient for the redemption of al mē, what neede then hes the Kirk of ony other propitiatory sacrifice? And as for the sacrifice of Christians, he sayes, they are their prayers and supplications. It was a common reproach wherewith the Christians was charged by the Pagans three hundreth yeare after Christ, that they had no altars; vnto the whilk their common answere was, that their altars was a holy soule, not cor∣ruptible altars, but immortall altars. If then the Christians had no materiall altars the first three hundreth year after Christ as Lib. 7. Stro. Clemens Alexandrinus, Ibid. cont. Cel∣sum Origene, Minutius Foelix, and Lib. 2. & 4 Arnobius doe testifie: therefore it must followe they had no ex∣ternall sacrifices nor Masses all that time: so there was no Masses the first three hundreth yeare after Christ, seing there was no altars. Contra Matt. haeres 42. & 55 Epiphanius sayes, That God by the comming of Christ hes taken away all the vse of sacrifice, by that one sacrifice of Christ. In orat. 3. cont. Arrianum Athanasius sayes, that the sacrifice of Christ once offered vp, hes accomplished all things, and remaines for euer, and that he is a Priest without succession. The same sayes In Esaiae cap. 1. Irenaeus lib. 4, cap 34. Cyprianus de Baptismo Christi Athenag. in Apo¦log. pro Christia∣nis. Lactant. lib. 6. ca. 26. Euseb. de de∣monst. lib. 1. cap 6. & lib. 3. cap. 4. Greg. Nazianz. in Pasch. orat. 2 Euseb. Nissen. de coena Domini. Chrysost. aduers. Iudaeos orat 4. & in Ioh. hom, 17. & ad Heb. hom. 13. & homil. de cruce & spirit. 3. & in Matth hom 83. & ad Heb. hom. 26. & hom 17. & hom. 7. Cyrillus lib. 1. cont. Iulanum & ad Hebraeos homil. 11. Ambrosius ad Heb. cap. 10. & ad Theod. epist. 28. & in epist. ad Rom. cap 12. Hiero∣nymus in Esaiam, cap. 1. & in Psal. 26. & 49. & 50. Augustinus de fide ad Petrum Diacon. cap. 2. & de Trinitat lib. 4. cap. 1. & 14. & in Psal. 49. & de ciuitate Dei, lib. 10. cap. 4. & 6. Idem de tempore. Basile. And he saies further, There is no more question of a continuall sacrifice: for there is but one sacrifice whilk is Christ, and the mortification of his Saints. Be∣cause it were ouer longsome to set downe the sentences of the rest, therefore I will only quote them on the margent: & I would desire Maister Gilbert to reade the same. And if hee will beleeue them, I am sure he will leaue off to be a Masse-Priest any longer: for they all aggree in this, that the sacri∣fice of Christ vpon the croce, hes accomplished all the sacri∣fices of the old Lawe: and that the vertue of it is euerlasting and therefore should not be reiterate: and that the sacrifice of Christians are not propitiatorie, but only spirituall. Seing therefore the sacrifice of the Masse was so long vn∣knowne to the Kirk of Christ, it remaines now that we show by what degrees it crap in: for as after the going downe of the Sun, darkenes commes not in immediatly, but there is a twi-light before the darkenes come: euen so after the bright
starres of the primitiue Kirk had ended their course, in pro∣cesse of time, and peece and peece: first, the third part of the Sunne, Moone, and starres were darkened: till at the last the bottom∣les pit was opened, & that great darkenes came vp, as the smoake of a great fornace, that darkened both the Sunne and the aire. Out of the whilk this great abhomination of the sacrifice of the Masse did proceede. For Bertram. de corpore & sang. Domi. in Heb. 7. Bertrame who liued betweene the 800. and 900. yeare after Christ, sayes, Our Sauiour hes done it once in offering vp himselfe: for he hes once offered vp himself for the sinnes of the people: and this oblation is alwaies celebrate eueryday, but in a mysterie: and he sayes, that once oblation of Christ is handled euery day by the celebration of these mysteries or sacraments, in the remem∣brance of his passion. There he oppones a real sacrifice to a my∣stery, & Christs sacrifice once made, to a daily commemora∣tion or remembrance of his suffering. Haymo in cap. 5. Ose. & in cap. 2 Abac. & Malac. 1. Haymo siklike, rec∣koning out the sacrifices of Christians, he calles there, the praises of the beleeuers, the penitence of sinners, the teares of supplicati∣ons, their praiers, and almes. Theophilact in Ioan. cap. 8. & ad Heb. cap, 10 Theophilact, who liued in the 900. yeare after Christ, he sayes, That there is but one sacrifice, and not many: because Christ hes offered vp himself once. And he sayes in an other place: Christ hes offered vp himselfe once, a sufficient sacrifice for euer, and we haue neede of no other sacrifice: to wit, propitiatorie. And Anselm, in ep. ad Heb. cap. 10. Anselm who liued in the 1000. yeare of God and af∣ter, he sayes, That whilk we offer euery day is the remembrance of the death of Christ, and that there is but one sacrifice, not many: for it hes bene once only offered vp. And again, Our Lord, sayes he, bade take eate, not sacrifice and offer vp to God. So this was the doctrine of the moste learned, who liued 1000. yeares after Christ, that Christ offers vp himself but once, and that sacrifice, was suf∣ficient and euerlasting, and the sacrifices of Christians are spirituall: and the sacrament (whilk they called sometimes a sacrifice) was a commemoration of Christs one sacrifice, once offered vp vpon the Croce. But from thence vnto this time, this abuse and sacrifice of their Masse crap in, but by diuerse degrees, and by the concurrence of many causes.
The degrees and meanes wherby the sa∣crifice of the Masse crap in. First, I will set downe the estate of the publick wor∣ship of God in the Primitiue Kirk, the first 300. or 400. yeares after Christ, and then the meanes and degrees whereby this abhominable sacrifice crap in. FIrst, it is manifest, that in the primitiue Kirk, the commu∣nion or sacrament of the Lords Supper, Iustin. Martyr in apolog, 2. & Ter∣tul, apolog. Aug, de consecrat dist 2 cap, Quotidie Ambros, lib, 5, ca, 4, de sacramen was ministred e∣uery weeke once, vpon the Lords day: and in some place it was ministred euery day, as appeares by these places. And therefore Ambrose who liued in the three hundreth age, ex∣horteth to a dayly receauing of it. Next, from the Commu∣nion was excluded, first these who were not sufficiently in∣structed in the grounds of christianity, who were called Ca∣techumeni, that is, catechised and instructed by questions and answeres. Next, these who had not ended out their repen∣tance, and satisfaction to the Kirk who were called Poeniten∣tes, that is, penitents. And thirdly, these who were possessed with an euill spirite, who were called  All these, after that the first praier, the reading of the Scripture, the sermon, and the rehearsing of the Creede (at the whilk they were present) were ended, they were commanded by the Deacon to retire themselues, and to depart out of the assem∣bly or congregation, that place might be giuen to the faith∣full, who was to communicate, in these words: Ite, missa est: The origen of the word Masse Lib, 1, de Missa, cap. 1 that is, Goe your way, depart. And from this first came the word Masse in the Kirk of God: and this Bellarmine confesses, whilk in Latine is called missio, or dimissio, or missa: and in the Greeke  For the Pagans vsed that same word after their sacrifice was ended. In Apule, lib, 11 de metamorph. And the abuse easily growing in the frequent vsing of this word, it came to passe by time, that all the worship of God, as the first praiers, the singing of the Psalmes, the reading of the Scripture, the preaching of the word, the rehearsing of the simbolo, whilk was performed in
the assembly before the dimission of these who were catechi∣sed, As Bellarm. con∣fesses lib. 1. de missa cap. 1. Conc. Valent. ca. 1 Bellarm. ibidem. Alcuinus a Papist de officiis Eccles cap de celebrati∣one Missae was called Missa Catechumenorum. And the rest of the wor∣ship of God whilk was done after their departure, to the di∣mission of the faithfull, as the celebration of the Supper, &c. was called Missa Fidelium. So then this word Masse, whilk the Kirk of Rome ascriues nowe vnto their pretended sacrifice, came first from the dimission, or skailling of the people (as they call it) from the Lords seruice, and was neuer heard of in the Kirk of Christ, nor read of in any authour, Hebrewe, Greeke, or Latine, for the space of 400. yeare almoste after Christ. And Ierome who liued in the yeare 422. and was an Elder in Rome, who write so many volumes, made no men∣tion of this word Masse, at all. For that commentary of the Prouerbes whilk is ascriued vnto him, where mention is made of the Masse, See Marianus Vi¦ctorius Reat. in praefat. in 8. tom. operum Hier. * is not his: for beside other things there, men∣tion is made of Gregorie, who liued almoste 200, yeare after him. And Ambrose makes mention of it only once, and Saint Augustine twise or thrise, for al the volumes whilk they write if these books be theirs. For Erasmus in his censures vpon the sermons de Tempore, saies that many of them are found vnder the names of other authours, and sauours little either of Au∣gustines learning, or phrase. See Iames Gillotius in praefat. ad Am∣bros. And that neither of them in the exponing of the matter of the Sacrament, whilk they handled most largely: the one in sexe bookes, and the other most largely and frequently, and in the foresaide places: they vsed it in a far other sense, then it is taken nowe in the Kirk of Rome: for by this worde they neither vnderstood a sacrament, nor a sacrifice, as the Kirk of Rome does. For Lib, 5. epist. 33. Ambrose takes it for the whole seruice whilk was proper to the faithfull. And Augustine in In serm. 237. de tempor. one place, for the dimission of these who were catechised: and in the In sermone de tempo. 251 & 91 other two places, for the whole seruice, aswel of the Catechumeni, as of the faithfull. So rarely was it vsed by the lights of that age, and in a far other sense, then the Kirk of Rome takes it now. But what a strange change hes falne in this word Masse, the abuse growing by time more & more? First, from a commandement to the people to depart, Ite,
missa est, and that in euill latine, for Ite, missio or dimissio est, it passed to signify the seruice of God, and from thence to sig∣nify a sacrifice, and from thence to signify that opus operatum, that work wroght of that abhominable sacrifice of the Masse for the quick and the dead: so that now in end it holdes that place in the Romane Kirk, that Mineruas image, whilk (as was supposed fell out of heauen in a temple, in the cietye of Troy) did holde amongst them: so that, as they thought it was their onely protection and fortresse, and as long as they kept it, they were in no danger to haue beene ouercome by the Grecians their enemies. So doth the Papistical kirk think of this their Masse: and this for the 2. point, of the forme of the publick worship of God in the primitiue Kirk. Thirdly, after the dimission of the Catechumeni, the faithfull who was commanded to remaine and communicate, they did offer vp of their goodes, and first fruits vnto God, before they did communicate: whilk (for the most prrt) was of breade and wine: or of their first fruits of cornes & rasings, where∣of so much was taken, as did serue for breade and wine to the communicants. And the rest that remained, was ey∣ther eaten in common amongst the faithfull, whereof also some was sent vnto them who were sicke, or absent, in a testimonie of their communion with them: (from whence sprung that abuse and idolatry in the Kirk of Rome, The origen of the sending of the Sacrament to the sicke. in car∣rying of the sacrament, whilk they call the Lord God, to the sicke) or else was distributed vnto the poore. And when the Kirk waxed riche, as it did after the time of Constantine, the oblations abounded: and apart thereof was also imploi∣ed vnto the maintenance of the ministrie, as Ierome witnesses saying, Clerici de altari viuunt: altari servientes, altaris oblatione su∣stentantur. The Cleargie liues of the altar, and are sustained by the oblations therof: The whilk begat auarice in them: & their auarice brought in the sacrifice of the Masse, as we shall see afterward. Nowe these oblations whilk were giuen by the faithfull, for the sustentation of the ministerie, for the re∣liefe of the poore, & furnishing materials to the communi∣on, was called after the custome of the olde law Phil. 4. Heb. 1 Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32 Cypr. de Bleemo sina. sacrifices.
So the Apost. Paule, Irenaeus, & Cyprian calles them. And Pau∣linus epist. de gazophyla. pag. 349. calles the place where these offerings was presēted, a Table. And these was presēted vn∣to the Iustin. Matt, a∣polog. 2 Minister, who by praier did consecrate them vnto God, as is manifest by the praiers set down in the Liturgies. Tua ex tuis tibi offerimus: that is, Of thy owne, wee offer thy owne things vnto thee. And, Has oblationes famulorum, famularumque tu∣arum benignus assume, quas singuli obtulerunt: that is, Mercifully receaue these oblations of thy seruands whilk euery one of them hes of∣fered vp to thee: and sundry other praiers of the Masse, whilk can no waies be spoken of the sacrifice of the sonne of God, The meanes and degrees wherby this bhomina∣ble sacrifice of the Masse crap in and was concea∣ued, fomed brought foorth, strengthened, & embraced of all. without blasphemie, as shall be seene afterward. And this was the estate of the Kirk three or foure hundreth yeare af∣ter Christ. But the loue of God decaying, and the hearts of men and wemen waxing colde in the worship of God, the people did not communicate so oft. And therefore we reade of the complaints of the Ambros, lib, 5, c 4, de sacram: Chrysost, in epist a Ephes, August epist, 119 Fathers, of the rarity of the com∣municants, and of their vehement exhortations to the peo∣ple to cōmunicate euery day: or at the least, euery Saboth. But these exhortations did not profite, and therefore there was De consecratio¦ne distinct, 1, cap Episcopus, & dist , cap, Peracta, & cap. Hi qui in∣trant Canons and lawes made, to bind the people to com∣municate, at the least, euery Saboth: otherwise, to be thrust out at the Kirk dores. And also Carol, magnus lib, 1, cap, 138, 182, 167 Ciuill lawes for that same effect. But these lawes did gaine but little: for whether it was the obstinacy of the people, or that they were not prea∣sed vnto it by their Pastors, they did waxe more and more negligent in communicating. And therefore Distinct, 2, cap Saeculares, & cap Si non. & cap, Scis homo Ciuil lawes, lib. 2 cap, 45, ad 3, 38 Lawes were made, that if not oftner, at the least thrise in the yeare the people should communicate: to wit, at Pasche, at Christis∣time, & at Pentecost, otherwise not to bee reputed as Chri∣stians. But for all this the people did not communicate, for the most part: so that in end a Extra, de penit & remis, cap, Omnis law was made, that at the least once in the yeare, they should communicate: to wit, at Pasche. The whilk custome is yet kept in the Kirk of Rome. So by these degrees the Communion was loste in the cele∣bration of the Supper amongst the people: first, from a dayly communion in some places, to once in the weeke, and from
thence to thrise in the yeare, and from thence to once in the yeare: so that ordinarily there did none communicate but the Ministery and Cleargie. But in processe of time this cor∣ruption ouertooke them also: and therefore De consec. dist 1. cap. Hoc quo∣que. & cap. Om∣nes fideles. Lawes, both Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall was made, to constraine them to cōmunicate: & that at the least two or three should cōmu∣nicate with the Priest: the foot-steps whereof yet remaynes in the abbacy of Clugme, where the Deacon and sub-deacon cōmunicats yet with the Priest. And of this came the distri∣bution of the bread of the sacrament in three peeces, accor∣ding to the nomber of the communicants, whilk is yet vsed in the Kirk of Rome, suppose they haue drawn it now to sig∣nify a mysterie: and these three at the last was brought to one, and this one to the Clarke that rang the Bell. And at the last, some of the Priests themselues did abstain from cō∣municating: and therefore lawes was made, aswell De consec dist. 2 cap. Velatum est. Ec∣clesiasticall, as Carol. magn. lib 5. cap, 93. & lib, 6 cap. 118. & addi. 2 cap. 7 Ciuill, to constraine them to communicate at all times, after the consecration. So that by these degrees the communion in the sacrament, was lost also amongst the ministry: first, from an ordinary communion whilk they vsed it passed to three or foure, & frō the three to one, & frō this one to the Clark that rang the bell: The first step was the losing of the communion in the celebration of the Supper, first amongst the people, and then amongst the Cleargie, & ofttimes to the Priest himself alone. And this losing of the cōmuniō in the celebra∣tiō of the Supper, first amongst the people, next amongst the Cleargie, was the first step to their pretended sacrifice. Now when the people did communicat, there was so much bread and wine, in a great quantity brought to the Table, to bee consecrate by praier, as might serue them. Then as the nō∣ber of the communicants decaied, The second de∣gree or step was the diminishing of the materials of the commu∣nion. so was the bread & wine proportionably diminished. And as it came to this at the last, that none did communicate but the Priest & his Clark, and oftentimes none but the Priest only: so no more bread & wine was brought to the table, to be consecrate, but that that serued him. And so from many breades it came to one: and from a great breade to so smal a bread, that it might be parted in three: and in end it is come to the quantity of a de∣nier, as Durandus a Papist sayes. And sik like of the wyne, frō many great veshels, to small pottels, from many Cupes, to
one: and from a great Cupe to a small. And this was the se∣cond step to their pretended sacrifice. The third step, the auarice of the Priests. Thirdly, from the peoples negligence in communicating, proceeded their ne∣gligence in bringing their oblations: for these two were ioy∣ned together, their communicating and their offerings, a part whereof was taken for the maintenance of the Cleargy But the Priests they would not want their offerings, & ther∣fore they procured ciuill lawes to be made, to constraine the people to bring their offerings. Therefore Charles the great made a law, Ciuill lawes. Ca∣rolus magnus lib, 7. cap. 94. & lib. 6. That the people might be admonished to communicate, & to bring their offering euery Sabboth: for the one ceasing, the o∣ther ceased also: and the Priest did demand the one, vnder the pretext of the other. And heir was the third step, the a∣uarice of the Priests. But while as neither ciuill nor Eccle∣siasticall lawes could preuaile with the people to make them to communicate, and to bring their offerings: they deuysed this damnable doctrine, and taught it to the people, That not only the Lords Supper was a sacrament, The fourt step of their damnable doctrine, that the sacrament was a meritorious sa∣crifice aswell for the present as absent, for the communicants as beholders, for the dead as for the liuing and so was profitable onely to them that did communicate, but also it was a sacrifice to God, and ther¦fore was profitable for all them that were beholders of it, & by the me∣rite thereof they might obtaine mercie and grace: yea, that it was not only meritorious to the beholders, but also to all these for whome the Priest saide it, aswell dead as liuing, absent, as present, not only for the soule, but also for all other necessities, aswell of beastes as of men, so be∣ing they brought their offerings also to the Priest, the whilk they taught to be meritorious both for them and theirs. For to keepe the peo∣ple therefore in some deuotion, The causes wher¦fore the Priestes taught sik damna¦ble doctrine so di¦ligentlie to their people, was their owne gaine, for they were nouri∣shed by sik do∣ctrine as we say, and for to mooue them to bring their offerings vnto the Priests, this doctrine of Christs sacrament, that it was a moste meritorious sacri∣fice, and of the peoples oblations, that they were profitable for them & theirs, was first invented by the auaritious clear∣gie, and taught to the people. And therfore Charles the great in his Lawes, inioyned to the Priests to make the people to vnderstand distinctly the force of the Masse, how far it was profitable both for them and theirs, both for the liuing & the dead: and to the people that they should bring their offerings cōtinually vnto the Priest and that because their offerings to the Priest, was profitable both to thē
selues, and also to these that appertained to them. Nowe as for the Priests part, they needed not lawes to vrge them to teache this doctrine: for they were carried, as it were, with the char¦riots of their auarice to the performance of the same, for o∣therwise their Masses would haue beene left desolate. And from thence came this their doctrine, that the Masse serued Gabriel Biel lect. 85. in expos. canon. & in 4. sent. dist. 12. q. 3. to appease Gods wrath, to obtaine remission of sins, Missale in cano¦ne, & Pap Inno¦cent. 3. tract. de Missa. & Thomas de Aquine & Ec¦kius de Missa. lib. 1. cap. 10. Concil. Trident. ses 6 can 2 redemption of soules, & al spiritual grace & saluation: & that it serued for al o∣ther necessities, aswell of man, as of beast, aswell for the dead, as for the liuing, aswel for the absent, as for the present. And from hēce come this three-folde force Gabriel Biel lect. 26. whilk they ascriue vnto their Masse: the one most generall for all, another more speciall for him that sayes it: and the third after a mid way, whilk was in the hands of the Priest to apply it to what person, or persons, dead or liuing, it pleases him, equally or vnequally: and that God the Father dispenses the fruits therof according to the determination of the Priest. And from this did spring their treasures and riches, throgh the aboundance of the peoples oblations: and from this came also the riche donations, pre∣bends, Colledges, and lands, as may be seene by the com∣mon forme of their donations in their Charters: I offer to God all the things whilk are contained in this Charter, for the remisson of my owne sinnes, and of my Parents, to maintaine the seruice of God in sacrifices and Masses. Matth. 15.5.6. As the Scribes and Pharisies therefore taught the people, that by offring a gift, albeit they honored not their father and mother, yet they should be free, & haue profite, abrogating the commandements of God through their traditions: so did the Priests teach the people, that sup∣pose they neglected the commandement of God in commu∣nicating in the sacrament: yet by their presence at the sacri∣fice, and by their giftes that they offered vnto them, they should be free from that sinne, and shoulde haue profite not onelie to themselues, but also to all that appertained vnto them. And to content the people that they should not be of∣fended that they were depriued of the communion, and re∣ceaued nothing for their offerings, but a bare sight and hea∣ring of the Priest, eating and drinking all himselfe allone: they inuented their holy bread, whilk they distributed vnto
the people euery Sabboth: and the kissing of the Pax, that is the couering of the Challice, to supply the want of the com∣munion, whereby they might thinke that they were not al∣together frustrate of the same. And as for the people, because they receaued not the loue of the trueth, The causes wher¦fore the people so greedilie em∣braced it the iust iudgements of God, because they receaued not the loue of the trueth, there∣fore the Lord gaue them ouer to strong delusi∣ons to beleeue lies. Next, the plausi∣blenesse of sik doctrine, so well aggreing to their corrupt nature, & the great profite that was preten∣ded it would car∣rie with it. (for no exhortation or admonition, no Lawes Ecclesiasticall nor Ciuill, could make them to reuerence the Lords institution, in receiuing the sweet pledges of their sal∣uation as the Lorde had commanded) therefore the Lorde gaue them ouer, as it was foretolde, to strong delusions, that they might beleeue lies. And beside this iust iudgement of God, as this doctrin was most profitable to the Priests, so was it most aggreeable to their corruption, and therfore was easily em∣braced and beleeued. For what was more easie to practise, then to heare and see a Masse, and to bring their offering vn∣to the Priest? This required no examination of themselues before? No mortification of their sinne: no sad and heauie hearts, with feare and trembling to come to the same, as the Communion did, but only their eies to see, & eares to heare suppose they neither knew nor vnderstood what was said or done in the same. And yet what was so profitable as it was? whilk was able to obtaine remission of sinnes, & redemption of soules, to appease Gods wrath, and to obtaine all grace, and to helpe for all ne∣cessities, both for the liuing and dead, present and absent, man & beast as they affirmed. So this was not the strait way to saluation, for who was not able to practise this doctrine? that is, to see and heare a Masse. And yet our Sauiour sayes, The way is strait that leades to eternall life, and many shall seeke to enter in, and shal not be able. Matth 7.13 From this sprang the aboundance of their oblations, that they spared neither siluer nor golde, houses, landes, nor heritages: for what would not a man giue to get saluation so easily, both to himself and to others? So it was no wonder suppose the Priestes were earnest in beating in the eares of the people sik a profitable doctrine for themselues: for it was a golden myne vnto them. And suppose the people (hauing forsaken the loue of the truth, and being giuen ouer of God to beleue sik strong delusions for the contempt of his ordi∣nance,)
embraced sik a plausible doctrine, whilk broght hea∣uen to them and theirs, so easily, as they supponed: and by these degrees the pretended sacrifice of the Masse was not a little promoued. And yet these abuses crap not in, while af∣ter Gregorie the great, who liued in the 600. yeare after Christ suppose a great part of these abuses is ascriued to him. Hetherto now hes this sacrifice beene confusedly concei∣ued, and all things almost prepared for her birth: Other corrupt∣ous whlk crap in that ripened this monstrous birth 1. The consecrati∣on of als much bread and wine as might serue the Priest only De consecra. dist a c. Non oportet & cap. In sacra∣mento Gregor. in dialog from these now followeth other corruptions, whilk did ripen this mon∣strous birth: as first where the Priest was wont to blisse and consecrate by praier, so much bread and wine as might serue the whole people who did communicate in the primitiue Kirk: the communion of the people in this sacrament being lost, as we hard before, and the Priest himselfe alone, or at the least, two or three with him onely communicating: the oblations of the people whilk was not onely of bread, and wyne, and water, according to the expresse Canons of the Kirk, but (corruption growing with the riches of the Kirk) also of golde, siluer, of sheepe and nowlt, as we reade in the time of Gregorie. These oblations, I say, was not brought vnto the altar to be consecrated by prayers to God, but onely so much bread and wine as might serue the Priest onely, and whilk at last (the abuse growing) he began to make himself, and to bring vnto the sacrament. Vpon the whilk followed other two abuses. 2. As of before the peoples gifts and presents whilk they brought to the sacrament, were called sa∣crifices and obla¦tions: now this stile was taken from their gifts & offerings, & was ascriued onlie to the Priests action in consecrating the elements The first that the stile of (offering) and (sacri∣fice) in the sacrament was taken from the peoples action of offering and their oblations, for the whilk cause especially the sacrament was called a sacrifice: and therefore the praier in the Canon, was not in Gregories time pro quibus tibi offerimus for the whilk we offer vnto thee: but, qui tibi offerunt, who doe offer to thee. And their oblation was called sacrifices, as is manifest by the ordinance of Pope Gelasius, where it is ordained that the sacrifices whilk the people should offer vp in the Masse, should be distribute in foure partes. This stile (I say) of offe∣ring & sacrifice was taken from them, & ascriued only to the Priests action: & his action was called the sacrifice. And this was no little step to their pretēded sacrifice. The next whilk
did put euen some life and breath in it, 3. The applying of all the praiers whilk was made and said in th sanctification of the oblations of the people before vnto the sanctifi∣cation of that small round bread, and little Cupe whilk was reserued for the Priest onlie. was the applying of all the prayers whilk was vsed to be saide and made in the sanctificatiō of the oblatiōs of the people, to the sancificatiō of that smal round bread, & portion of wine whilk was re∣serued for the sacrament, and appointed for the Priest and the few that was to communicate with him. So that heere was a manifest change, wherein they passed from the obla∣tions of the gifts, whilk was presented to God by the people & offered to him in the sacramēt of the Supper, whilk were called sacrifices, as we haue prooued before: to a sacrifice of a round bread, & a little cupe of wine, whilk the Priest only, or at the least, with other two or three, eate & drink in the same, and consequently from a sacrifice of the fruites of the earth offered to God by the people, to a sacrifice of the eternall Sonne of God whilk the Priest supponed he offered vp to God in the same. So by this meanes it receiued, as it were, some life and breath. This alteration manifest by the praiers in their Canon & litur∣gies. This alteration is so manifest, that the praiers in their own Canon of the Masse and Liturgies will proue the same, Pre∣camur te, (saies the Canon) vt accepta habeas & benedicas haec do∣na, hac munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata, that is, Wee pray thee thou would accept and blisse these gifts, these presents, these holy & vn∣spotted sacrifices. And againe, Remember of them, pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis, pro se suisque om∣nibus: that is, These for whome we offer vnto thee, or who doeth offer vnto thee, this sacrifice of praise for themselues and all theirs. And a∣gaine, Supra a qua sereno & propitio vultu respicere digneris, & accep∣ta habere sicut accepta habere dignatus es munera Abelis, Abrahae, Melchisedech, &c. that is, That thou would vouchsafe to looke vppon them with a fauourable and merciful countenance, as thou hast vouch∣saued to accept of the gifts of Abel, Abraham and Melchisedech, &c. And againe, Iube haec perferri per manus Angeli tui in sublime al∣tare tuum: These praiers was not made of the sacrifice of the eternall son of God, but of the gifts and pre∣sents of the peo∣ple. that is, Command them to be carried by the handes of thy Angel vnto thy hie altar in the sight of thy maiestie. And againe, Tua de tuis, that is, We offer of thy owne, thy owne to thee. I would aske you, (Maister Gilbert) Dare ye in your conscience say, that these praiers were made of the eternall sonne of God,
whome ye pretend to offer vp in your Masses? For can ey∣ther the words themselues be vnderstoode of him, They cannot be applyed to him without great ab¦surditie. without great absurditie? or can they be applied to him without hor∣rible blasphemy? And may not euery one see, that they were conceaued and made of the giftes and sacrifices of prayses, whilk the people did offer vp to God in the sacrament? And they speake heir in the plurall nomber of many, and the sa∣crifice of the sonne of God is but one. Next, they are called gifts, presents, thy owne, gifts of thy owne, and sacrifices of praises, whilk cannot be spoken of the reall sacrifice of the sonne of God, whilk is a propitiatorie sacrifice: and are not called gifts, presents, and sacrifices of praises of the people. Third∣ly they say remember them who offers vnto thee their giftes for them selues and theirs, whilk cannot be vnderstood of anye, but of the people that offered their offerings of their fruites vnto the Lord. For you will not say that the people offers vp the Sonne of God, but only the Priest. And what Christian harte can think that these prayers can be applyed to him without horrible blasphemy: as to dust & ashes to interceed by pray∣er to God the Father for his beloued Sonne, Neither without horrible blasphe∣mie. to pray him to accept in his fauour, to bles and sanctifie his owne beloued Sonne who is the fountaine of all blessing and holines, and in whom the fulnes of the godhead dwelles: & to looke vpon him with a mercifull & fauourable countenance and to denyie to vouchsaue to accept of him in whome and with whome he is well pleased, Matth. 3.17. & 17 5. Pro 6.8.30. Coloss. 1.19. who is his fathers daily delight and ioy, and to accept of him as he did of the sacrifices of Abell, Abraham, and Melchisedech, com∣paring that blessed sacrifice of himselfe, with the sacrifices of the fruites of the earth, and beastes of the fielde, as theirs was: without the whilk neither their sacrifices nor persons would euer haue pleased God: and to pray to God the Fa∣ther to commande the Angels (in whome as Iob saies he sound no pu∣rity) to carrie his owne eternall sonne vp to heauen in his presence, as though he were not as able now to ascend from thence to heauen, if he were there: being glorified without the help of Angels, as he did after his resurrection. Now let any Christian hart iudge whether these praiers
can be conceaued without blasphemy of the eternall sonne of God or not. And after the consecration they haue this prayer in their Canon, By whome thou creates, sanctifies, quicknes blisses, and giues to vs all these good things, whilk can no wayes be applied vnto the sacrifice of Christ, vnlesse they will haue him a creature daily made, blissed and quickned in their Masse: but vnto the gifts and presents of the people, whilk they offered vp to God in the sacrament. And in the Litur∣gie whilk they ascriue to Clement, the prayer is pro dono obla∣to, Clemeus lib. 3 cap. 17 that is, for the gift whilk is offered vp, That it would please God to receaue it in his altar, through the intercession of his Christ, in a sweete smelling sauour, whilk no waies can be applied vnto the sacri∣fice of the sonne of God. For heir they are manifestly distin∣guished, the gift offered, and the intercession of Christ for the whilk they desire God to accept of the gift offered. So heir is a moste notorious corruption, wherein they apply all the praiers, whilk were firste conceaued and made of the gifts & presents of the people, whilk they offered vp to God in the Sacrament; to the pretended sacrifice of the sonne of God. The degrees of this change and corruption And from the offerings of the people whilk was ma∣ny, they passe to an oblation whilk was offered: for a sacra∣ment of praise, to a sacrament whilk the Priest consumeth all himselfe: from a sacrament to confirme vs of our saluati∣on in Christ, to a propitiatorie sacrifice of the sonne of God, for the redemption of soules: and from a commemoration of the death of Christ in the sacrament, to a reall immola∣tion and offering of him vp againe, and that not for the li∣uing only, but for the dead also. By these degrees then hes this monstrous sacrifice beene conceaued formed, receaued life, and brought forth into the world. Nowe many other things did concurre to the stren∣thening of her, and the rooting of her in the hearts and con∣sciences of men: as first the word sacrifice, whilk was frequēt¦lie vsed by the Fathers of the Primitiue Kirk, What things con¦curred to the strengthening of her, and rooting her in the hartes of men after she was borne. taken from the olde Testament, and the typicall sacrifices there, whilk they ascriued vnto the sacrament of the Supper, calling it a sacrifice. And that firste, because it was celebrated with
thankesgiuing, whilk are called the sacrifice of praise. Next, be∣cause they sacrificed themselues in a holy, liuely, Rom. 12.1.2.3 Heb. 13.15.16. & acceptable sacri∣fice to God in the same. Thirdly, because of their offering and al∣mes whilk they offered in the sacrament, whilk are called sacrifices wherewith God is pleased. And last of all, because it was a com∣memoration of that once offered vp sacrifice of the sonne of God, the vertue whereof is eternall and sufficient. The next was the vniuersall ignorance, both of Pastours and people, The vniuersall ig¦norance both of Pastor and peo∣ple through the inundation of bar¦barous nations through the barbarous nations of the Gotthes, Hunnes, & Wan∣dales, whilk spoiled & wasted the empire of the West, more then 100. yearefull, whereby all learning (almost) was buri∣ed: and the lights and toarches of the Kirk being exstingui∣shed, their successors beeing borne and brought vp vnder that barbaritie, in that common & publick ignorance, they were so far from chaissing away that darknesse, that they ra∣ther increased the same, being giuen altogether to seculare and worldly affaires, as the lawes of Charles the great do te∣stifie: commanding them that they should abstaine from seculare affaires from the Court, from warres, from Falconry from lechery, from games. Thirdly, the corruption of languages whilk entered in with these barbarous nations at that same time, 3. The coruption of languages through the mixture of people of sundry languages: wherby first the language became barbarous: next, not vniuersally vnder∣stood. And certainlye were not this, Satan could not haue preuailed so meikle, in causing this poison of this monstrous sacrifice to be so vniuersally drunken out by the people. For if they had vnderstood the lāguage, these words whilk they daily heard in their seruice, Sursum corda, List vp your heartes: And shew forth the death of the sonne of man, and confesse his Resur∣rection till his comming. These wordes might easily haue kept them in this knowledge, that Christ was aboue, and they should not seeke him bodily in the sacrament, because hee was not there really present, but was to come: and that the sacrament was not a reall offering of the sonne of God a∣gaine, but a showing foorth of his death, vntill his seconde comming. But two doctrines especially, whilk by processe of time
also entered in the Kirk of God, 4. The doctrine of Transubstantiati∣on & Purgatorie brought her to her full perfecti∣on and strength. brought this pretended sa∣crifice of their Masse, to her full perfection and strength: the one was the doctrine of Transubstantiation, that the bread and wine in the sacrament, by the words spoken, or rather mut∣tered by the Priest, was changed in the body and bloode of Christ. From time this was taught the people, then what followed but all adoration and worship to bee giuen to the sacrament, where Christ is really present. Then how coulde it be but a propitiatory sacrifice for the sinnes of the liuing, seing it was that self same body and blood, vnder the formes of bread and wine, whilk was offered vp vpon the Croce for the sinnes of the worlde. The next was that of Purgatorie, for seing (say they) that there is a fire of Purgatory after this life, where through men must passe to heauen: and seeing in these flames their sinnes must be purged: therefore a reme∣die must be fore-seene: and where is there a remedy to bee found, but in the sacrifice of the Masse, where the son of God is offered vp, that will releeue our soules after we are depar∣ted? These will helpe the soules of our Parents and friends that are there alreadie. Vppon the whilk was founded the Masses and sacrifices for the deade: and from thence came the most part of the donation of lands to the Kirks, to haue Masses saide for their soules. So then, to conclude, the losse of the communion in the sacrament of the Supper, The conclusion next the sanctification of the obla∣tions of the people, whilk at laste was turned to that whilk the Prieste consumed himselfe alone: thirdly, the aua∣rice of the Priestes whilk bred their damnable doctrine, that the Supper was not only a sacrament, but a sacrifice, &c fourthly, the applying of the praiers conceaued of the giftes of the people, vnto the rounde host and Challice, whilk the Priest consumed: fifthly, the abusing of the word sacrifice, whilk the fathers and Kirk vsed: sextly, the publick and v∣niuersall negligence and ignorance of Pastor and people: seauenthly, the confusion of languages: and last of all, their damnable doctrine of Transubstantiation and Purgatorie: These were the degrees by the whilk their abhominable sa∣crifice
hes bene created, nourished, entertained and perfi∣ted, in that measure and strength: that at the last it tooke sik deepe roote in the hearts of all men almoste, that nothing could roote it out, except only the power of the Lords spirit by the voice of his word. And yet this abuse was perceaued by (a) sundry, whome the Lord stirred vp, who taught, Arnold. de noua Villa, anno 1200. and Albigenses and Waldenses in France. That the sacrifice of the Masse was a manifest abuse; and that the Masses both for the liuing and the dead, was directly contrary the institution of our Lord. And some of their own Doctors in their writings doth cōtradict this propitiatory sacrifice of the Masse, as Distinct. 12. lib. 4 de consecrat. the Maister of sentences, and in summa part. 3. quest. 83. & 73. Thomas of Aquine, In epist. ad heb cap. 10 Lyra∣nus, affirming, That Christ once died for our sinnes, and that once ob∣lation is sufficient for all our sinnes, and that it cannot be reiterate: and that the sacrament is an ordinary memorial and representation of that only one sacrifice whilk was offered vp vpon the Croce: the whilk do∣ctrine of theirs cannot stand with their daily immolation, and reall oblation of the sonne of God in their Masse. And that nothing may bee lacking to the manifesting of it, The authors of the Masse, and yeare of God wherein euery one clamped & clouted to their own peece is set downe. we will showe also the authors and times of the entring in of the Ceremonies of the same. The mixing of water with the wine in the Challice, is ascriued to De conscr. dist 2. can. In Sacra∣ment. oblat, anno 111. Pope Alexander the first; he also put to this clause to the Masse, Qui pridie quā pateretur. 2. Sanct. sanct. Sanct. Dom. Deus Sabaoth, is put to by Pope Syricius the first, anno 121. 3. Gloria in excelsis is put to by Pope Telesphore the first, anno 139. 4. The singing of the Creid after the Gospell, put to by Pope Marke the first, (and accor∣ding to some by Pope Iulius the first,) anno 335. 5. The Masse like a beggers cloake patched & clam ed together of olde rotten rags of their own cor∣ruption, euil pla∣ced, & far worse owed together. Pope Ze∣pherine ordained that the wine should be put in glasses, and Vrbane the first ordained that the veshels should be of golde or siluer, or at the least of Tin, anno 213. 6. Pope Felix the first ordained to celebrate Masses in the names of the Martyres, aboue their graues and relickes, anno 267. 7. The offerture of the Masse is ascriued to Eutychian the first, anno 270. 8. The Kyrieeleison to Silvester the first, anno 314. 9. The celebrati∣on of Masses in linnen cloathes to Eusebius and him also. 10. The standing vp at the reading of the Gospell to Anastasius the first, anno 402. 11. The blissing of the Pax to dist. 2. e. Pace Innocentius
the first, anno 405. 12. The Antiphones, the Introits, and the Graduals, to Celestine the first, anno 427. 13. Orate pro me fratres & Deo gratias, & sanctum sacrificium to Leo the first, anno 444. 14. The ninefolde repetition of Kyrieeleyson, and the singing of Haleluiah to Gregorie the first, anno 593. 15. The singing of Agnus Dei thrise to Sergius the 1. anno 688. 16. The incense & offerture restored by Leo the third, anno 800. 17. Their Tran∣substantiation inuented by Lanfrancus, an Italian, anno 1036. Decreed in the councell of Lateran in substance, anno 1059. And made the 13. article of faith, by Decret. tit. 1. de summa trinit. & fide cap. Firmiter credimus. Innocent the 3. anno 1215. I omit the rest, as their Canon compiled by one na∣med Scholasticus, as Lib. 2. & 7. & 9 Gregorie witnesses, and sundry other ce∣remonies. So that betweene the first and last inuenters and authours of their Masse, it is more then 1000. year. And this meikle touching that abhominable sacrifice of the Masse, whilk is not the Lordes ordinance, but the inuention of the Popes, and Cleargie of Rome. Maister Gilbert Browne. I thought siklike to haue proued the ceremonies of this blissed sacrifice, by the same holy word: but because it were something longsome, I haue continued the same till another place. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. As for your Ceremonies, you did most wisely in reiecting the probation of them till another place: and so to hold the reader in ye halfe (as we speak:) because ye are neuer able to doe it: and it is good to delay to enterprise a thing that is im∣possible. But how can you be so impudent, as to write, that you wil proue the ceremonies of your Masse by the scripture seing the Masse it selfe hes not the warrand out of the same, out contrary and repugnant to the same, as hes bene proo∣ued. And I can scarcely thinke, (Maister Gilbert) that you haue spoken this in earnest, when you said, you would proue the Ceremonies of your Masse by the same holy word, whilk is the Scripture. Conc. . Sessi. 22, cap 5. For what then will you say to the Councel of Trent, who referres not the institution of them to the
Lorde Iesus in his written worde, but to the Kirk by the vn∣written Traditions. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 13 And to Bellarmine who saies the Kirk in∣stituted them, and so referres the institution of them, not to Christ in his written word, but to the institution of the Kirk and to youre owne Doctors, & Canon law, and writers, who ascriues the institution of them, to your Popes, and others of your Kirk, as I haue prooued before. O Maister Gilbert! What a preposterous loue is this that ye beare to your ab∣hominable sacrifice, that ye are not ashamed to write, that the very Ceremonies of it hes their warrand in the same ho∣ly worde, and that contrary your owne general Councell of Trent, and all your learned Doctors and writers. I thinke ye thought that we had neuer read your ceremonies, or ne∣uer knowne them, that ye write so boldly of them: Shall the Councell of Trent say they are instituted by the Kirk, by Apostolicall Traditions, whilk your Kirk confesses are not written in the Scripture: and yet are not you ashamed to say, they haue their warrand by the Scripture, and so open∣ly to contradict the doctrine of your owne councel of Trent I wil say no further, but surely either they erre in this, point, or else ye: and if they erre, then the general Kirk may erre, and hes erred: & so one of your maine foundations is gone. Choose you whether you will take this blot to your selfe, or let it fall on them. But because ye accounte this Masse of yours moste hea∣uenly: and ye vaunt, The horrible a∣buses of the Mas. that yee onely haue in your Kirk that heauenly action: and because it is the chiefest point of your seruice and worship, whilk ye giue to God in your Kirk: & also because yee so impudently affirme, that the ceremonies thereof hes their warrand out of the Scripture: Therefore I will discouer heir, as shortly as I can, the abhominations, absurdities, blasphemies, idolatries: vaine, idle superstitions, Iewish & Ethnick ceremonies of the same, that poore folks be not deceaued any longer therewith. For certainly, for as heauenly as ye thinke it is, I dare affirme that it is nothing else, but a very sinke and filthie closet of all abhominations, idolatries, and horrible blasphemies. So that as it is saide in
the Prouerbes of the vertuous woman, Pro. 31.23 that many weemen hes done vertuouslie, but thou surmounts them all: so it may be saide of the Masse: Many seruices and worships deuised by man, hes bene idolatrous, blasphemous and ab∣hominable: but this sacrifice of the Masse brought in the Kirk of God by Antichrist, in idolatrie, abhominations, and blasphemies surmounteth them all: so that the like of it hes neuer bene before it, nor neuer shall be after it. For beside the foresaid abuses, that it is a wil-worship instituted by mā, that it hes corrupted the Sacrament of the Supper, whilk was giuen vs to assure vs of the grace of Christ, and hes tur∣ned it in a sacrifice, and that a propitiatory sacrifice, & me∣ritorious not to the Priest onely, but to the beholders also: and not to the present only, but to the absent, and not onely for the liuing, but for the dead: that it hes abolished the death of Christ, and the vertue of that one sacrifice: and that it hes spoyled Christ Iesus of his Priest-hoode, and commu∣nicated it vnto others: beside these intollerable abuses, it a∣bounds and ouerflowes with other intollerable abhomina∣tions. 1. Abuse of the Masse, their en∣trie to the Masse either Iudaisme or Paganisme, or both, the ordi∣nance of Pope Celestin the first, anno 426 Et introibo ad al∣tate Del. As first, their altars in their Masse, wheron they think they sacrifice the sonne of God, and therefore in the beginning of their Masse, the Priest sayes, And I wil go in into the altar of God: whereby they renew either Iudaism or Paganisme: for their materiall altars was a parte of the Ceremoniall lawe of the Iewes, whilk was abolished by the death of Christ: and Nu∣na Pompilius 700. yeare before Christ, ordained that the Eth∣nicke Priest when he went about to offer sacrifice, that hee shoulde drawe neir to the altar. This entry of the Masse is said to be the ordinance of Pope Celestine the first, about the yeare of God 426. Naele And because the Priests takes the altars for the Table whereon the Supper is celebrate, whilk he cō∣founds with the abhomination of the Masse: and also becaus Maister Gilbert said he was minded to proue the ceremonies of the Masse by the Scripture: therefore I will aske him and his fellowe Priests these few things concerning their altars? Firste, where reade they that Christ did euer institute in the
newe Testament, The abuses of their Papisticall altars, first, that they must be of stone that the Table of our Lord should only be of stone, & not of timber, or any other mettal, as Dist 1. cons. c. Altaria si non 2. That they must be consecrate by the Bishop. their al∣tars whereon they chant their Masse, must be according to their lawe? Secondly, canon Non alii. where read they in the newe Te∣stament, that the Table of the Lord shoulde be consecrated with oile and chrysme, with a sprinkling of water, mixed of wine & salt, of ciphers of holy water, at the foure corners of the same, at the middle part: and that none may doe this but a Bishop: if a Clark doe it, that he be degraded, and if one of the Laicks doe it, that he be excommunicate. (What folly is this, that a Priest hes authority (as they thinke) to sa∣crifice the sonne of God, and yet he may not powre a little oile vpon a stone?) that the Bishop compas the altar seauen times, singing the 51. Psalme, Thou shall washe mee with hysope, &c. prophaning the trueth of God. And there to bury the relickes of some Saints put in a little shrine, with 3. graines of incense, that God for their cause may heare the praiers & accept of the sacrifice offered vp vpon that altar: and then annointing the Table of the altar with oyle, & singing, Iacob erected vp a stone, &c. Where, I say, read you these in the newe Testament, that Christ commanded these things to be done to the Table of his Supper, whilk ye doe to the altars where∣on yee say your Masses. And siklike, where read yee that none should chant their Masses, but on sik altars as are con∣secrated, and Canon Placuit vt Altaria 3. that the reli∣ckes of some ints must be there . That they are dedicate to o∣thers then God 5. The kissing of the altar by the Priest siklike that your altars are not lawful, wher there is not founde the bodies or relicks of some Martyres? Siklike, that ye dedicate your altars whereon ye chant your Masse to others then to Christ, as vnto the Virgine Mary, Pe∣ter, and other Saintes departed? And siklike, that the Priest should kisse the altar often? and namely, when he appro∣ches vnto it, carrying the Challice? Hes Christ commanded this? Hes the Apostles vsed them? Hes the Scripture made mention of them? What thinke you will you answere to God, when it shalbe said to you, Who required all these things at your hands? And wherefore also transgresse ye your own law in hauing moe altars then is necessarie, seing by it ye are Canon Eccles. vel Altaria. commanded by expresse tearmes, that superfluous altars be
destroied? To conclude this then with In epist. ad heb cap. 8. & 10 Ambrose, As our sacrifice, saies he, whilk is no other thing but our prayers and thanks∣giuing, is not visible, but inuisible: so our altar also is not visible but in∣uisible. The second abuse is in the confession of the Priest, that he saies in the entring of the Masse, I confesse to God almightye, and to the blissed Virgine, and to all the Saints that I haue sinned: in the whilk are sundry absurdities. First, that this confession is made not onely to God, but also to the dead who neither sees the secrets of the hearts, nor yet are able to giue remis∣sion. The second is, in the praier that is set downe in the lat∣ter end of it, saying, I pray thee blissed Marie, & all the hee Saints, and shee Saints of God, to pray to God, that I may haue mercie, wher∣in are two horrible abuses: 1. Tim. 2.5. 6. Confession to Saints, 7. Praier to saints departed. Rom: 10.14.1. Tim. 2.5.1. Ioan. 2.1. Ierem. 17.5 Psal. 50 15. Ier. 29 12. Matth, 6.9 Iac 1.17. Gen. 20, 1.2 2. Reg. 6.6.7. chr. 6.30 Esai 63.17. Eccles. 9.6. one, that he makes no mention of Iesus Christ our onely Mediator, and desires him not, to make intercession for him: next, that hee praies vnto the Saints departed, and makes them intercessors and Media∣tors, who neither knowes our necessities, and the secretes of our hearts, neither is able to heare or helpe vs, whilk wantes all warrand out of the worde of God. And seeing praier is a honor only due to God, and Iesus Christ is our only Medi∣ator and intercessor: therefore this praier to Saints depar∣ted is both idolatrous, and iniurious to Christ his intercessi∣on and mediation. This confession was instituted by Pontian and Damasus Popes, anno 335. and 368. The third abuse, is the absolution pronounced to the be∣holders of the Masse: Amen, Brethren and sisters by the mercy of our Lord Iesus, by the helpe and signe of the Croce, by the intercession of the Virgine Marie, by the merites of the Apostles, and of all the hee Saints, and shee Saints, God giue you mercie. First, this aggrees not with their priuate Masses, where the Priest and the Clark only are present: for how can the Priest speake truly, Amen brethren and sisters, since none is present but the Clark onely. Next, that whilk is only proper to Iesus Christ, to his death, merites, and intercession, to make the Father merciful vnto vs, and to make him to forgiue vs our sinnes, is taken from him heir, and communicate vnto the virgine Marie, and the
merites of al the hee Saints & she Saints: and whilk is most horrible, vnto the signe of the Croce: that by her intercessi∣on, their merites, and the help of the signe of the Croce, God might haue mercy. What horrible idolatry is this, to ioyne sik helpers to the sonne of God, who is a perfite Sauiour. To ioyne the merites of flesh and blood, to his merites, as thogh his were not sufficient to obtaine saluation. And as though men were not only able to merite eternal life to themselues but also had sik aboundance of merites that they serued to obtaine mercie for others: and so not only to make them sa∣uiours of themselues, but of others also. And that whilk is yet more horrible idolatry and blasphemy, (if worse can be) to ioyne with him the helpe of the signe of the Croce. Ther∣fore in their Breuiarie they say, Keepe vs Lorde with thy peace, &c. whome thou hast redeemed by the tree of thy holy Croce. And in a hymne, O Croce, haile O Croce, only hope, increase, righteousnesse to the godlie, and forgiue the guiltie. And in their breuiarie they say, We adore thy Croce ô Lord. Now what is it to mock God, if this be not: to substitute creatures, yea a very stock and a tree in the roome of the sonne of God, and to ascriue redēp∣tion vnto it: and to pray for righteousnesse and remission at the same, to adore it, and to call it their onely esperance? What place is left then to the blood & death of Christ? The fourth abuse is in this prayer of the Masse, We pray thee Lord, for the merites of thy Saints, whose relicks are heir, to forgiue mee all my sinnes. Where first, he makes no mention of Christ or his merites: next, hee prayes to God that for the merites of the Saints he may be forgiuen, so he puts them in the roome of Christ. Thirdlye, they haue the relicts of the Saints in sik account, that they haue made a law that it shall not be law∣ful to celebrate ony Masse, but vpon sik altars, e consecrat. dist cap. Placuit, v where the re∣licts of some Saints are. But to what purpose is this? To mak their altars commendable, and their sacrifices acceptable? But hes not the Priest, (as he thinkes) in his hands, Christ Ie∣sus the holie of the holiest? And is there relicts of Saintes more precious and worthie, then his blood is? yea, and what relicts, I pray you, for the moste part? not of Saints, but of
harlots and brigands: yea they haue so multiplied their re∣licts, that they haue made some of them to haue moe heads then one, to haue moe legs and armes then they were born with. As for example, Peter his whole bodie is buried in Rome in Annal. Eccles. tom. 1. & 3. Vatican, and yet the half of him is in another Via Ostiensi, Onu. d. y. vr b. Ec∣cles. cap. de Basi∣lica part of Rome, another part in Bellarm. lib. 2. de Eccles. trium. cap. 3 & 4. Constantinople, and his head kept in the Romae Onu ibidem. fourth place, and another part of his head in the Romae Onu ibidem. fifth place, another part of his head in the Pictauii Calv. admon. de reliq. sext place, and yet sundry of his teeth in Onu ibidem. other partes. So that if he had as many bodies, and bones, and teeth, and heades, and armes, and legs, as are said to be his, and are kept as his relicts, his bodie were monstrous. And the head of Saint Luther Postil. in Euang fest. exalt. cruce. Barbara was showne in so many parts, that it behoued her to haue seauen bodies, or at the least seauen heads. And that whilk is yet worse, they honor them, adores them, and praies vnto them: the whilk is so manifest by the ordinary practise of their Kirk, that it needeth no probation. Vnto this we may ioyne the fifth abuse, their images vp∣on the hostes of their Masse, and the rest of their Idoles and Images, whilk they call the bookes of the Laicks, wherwith they fill their Temples & Chapels: whilk they honor, adore and prayes vnto, saying vnto a stock, Thou art my father: & to a stone, thou art my mother: not onely without comman∣dement or example in the Scripture, but contrary the ex∣presse commandement of God giuen out of Mount Sinay in horrour and feare, so that the mountaine shooke, and Moses himselfe feared, Thou shall make thee no grauen Image to worship it. And contrary the whole Exod. 20. Deut. 4 15. Isa. 40.15 16 Ierem. 10.3. Act. 17.29. Rom. 1.23. 1. Cor. 10.14. 1. Ioh. 5.21. Apoc. 20. & 21, 8. Scripture, and also the do∣ctrine of the Tertul. lib. de corona militis. Orig. contra Ce¦sum lib 7. & 8 Lactant. de duin instit lib. 2 ca. 2 Cyprian. le van idol. Clemens lb. 5. ad Iac. frat. Chrysost. hom. 57 in Genes. 31. Concil. Eliber. canon. 36. with sundry others. Fathers. The sext abuse is in the prayer that the Priest sayes when he offers his hoste vpon the altar, Receaue holy Father this im∣maculate sacrifice whilk I offer vnto thee, for my owne sinnes, and for the sinnes of all the faithfull, both liuing and dead, that it may profite to mee and them to saluation and euerlasting life. And he praies the like when he offers the challice vpon the altar, That it may a∣scend in the presence of his maiestie, for the saluation of him and of all the worlde. Wherein the Priest commits horrible blasphemy
in ascriuing remission of sinnes and redemption, to the sa∣crifice of bread and wine, for as yet the words of consecrati∣on are not pronounced: and so by their owne confession they are yet but bread and wine: and yet the Priest sayes, he offers it to God for the sinnes of the quick & dead, and for the saluation of the world. Nowe what blasphemie is this to ascriue that to the sacrifice of bread and wine, whilk by their owne confession is not changed yet in Christs body and blood, whilk is only Ioh 1.29. Heb 9, 26. & 10 12. 2, Ioh, 1.7, & 2.2. Act. 4 12. proper to the blood of Iesus Christ. Next, that he offers this sacrifice for the saluation of the dead seing the elect departed are in heauen, and so they need no sacrifice for them: and the reprobate departed are in hel, so no sacrifice will auaill them. And as for Purgatory whilke they dreame of, the Scriptures knowes not sik a thing. I passe by the mixing of the wine with water, contrary the ex∣presse institution of Christ, and the necessity of the siluer & golden veshels, or at the least tin veshels in your sacrifice. The seauenth abuse is their magicall blessing of their in∣cense, after the manner of sorcerers, without the warrand of the worde, and the vertue whilk the Priest praies for, that it may chaise away the diuel, make whole euery disease: whilk hes no more vertue then their Exorcismes and adiurations, whilk the Priest makes in Baptisme, and in their other serui¦ces, by their holy water, by their lighted candles, their oiles, annointings, and other like ceremonies. And in this cere∣mony they either Iudaize: for the Iewes vsed this ceremo∣ny of incense vnder the law, to figure the sweet sauour of the sacrifice of the sonne of God to his Father: and so makes the death of Christ of no effect to them: or else they followe the custome of the old Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17 Romane idolaters. For we read more then 700. yeare before Christ, that they vsed incense in their sacrifices and other seruices, whilk they did to their Idoles. Some sayes, that Leo the third ioyned to the Masse this part, concerning the incense, about the yeare of God 800. The eight abuse is, in that they make their Masse a memo∣riall of Christ his incarnation, circumcision, resurrection, & ascension: and that they celebrate the same to the honor of
others then to God: to wit, to the honor of the Virgine Mary and of all the Saints, whilk is horrible blasphemie, to giue that whilk is Gods glorie to his creatures. And therfore they haue a Masse of our Lady, a Masse of S. Antone, a Masse of Saint Michael, &c. Now if the Masse be one with the Lord his Supper (as they say it is) then it is properly a memorial of his death, and it is instituted only to the glory of God, and not to the honor of any creature: therefore our Sauiour sayes, Do this in remembrance of mee, and not of his Saints. The nynth abuse (passing by their monstrous Transub∣stantiation, whereof I haue spoken in another place) is their round hoste, taken from the vse of the old Pollux in O∣nom. lib 6. & A∣lex. ab Alex. lib. 4 cap. 17. Romane idola∣ters 700. yeares before Christ, who had little round breade whilk was consecrated to the honor of their gods, whilk they did eate after the sacrifice. So it was not the spirit of Christ whilk taught you this forme, but the spirit of Numa Pompilius, the Magitian, who breathed this doctrine in you: for there is no word of this round bread in Christs Testament. The tenth abuse is the lifting vp of the sacrifice aboue their head, and the adoring and worshipping of the same, whilk is abhominable idolatry, to worship a bit of bread, as the great God and creator of al the world, contrary the expresse com∣mandement of God, Deut 6.16. Thou shall only worship the Lord thy God, & him onely shalt thou serue. And how can they excuse themselues from idolatrie, according to their owne doctrine: for they holde this, that if the Priest haue not an intention, (some saies actuall, Summa angel uch. cap. 26 other some habitual) that is, a purpose to con∣secrate, that the bread and the wine are not changed in the body and blood of Christ: and if he had a purpose to conse∣crate but the one halfe of the breade, the other halfe is not changed, but remaines common bread. They therefore that adores it, if the Priest had not that purpose, what doe they worship but the creature, and that according to their owne doctrine. And who can be certaine of the Priests intention? So who can worship in faith that god of theirs, seing they cā¦not be certaine of the intention of the Priest, vpon the whilk this change depends: and that whilk is done without faith, is
sinne. Secondly, their owne doctrine is, Bonauentura in compend. sacr. Theolog. lib. 6. that the intention of the Priest suffices not, vnlesse it be according to the insti∣tutiō of Christ: now sundry of their own learned Hugo de S. Victor. Gerardus Lori∣chius, doctors saies, that their priuate Masses, where there is no publicke communion, is not according to the institution of Christ: therefore by their owne doctrine, they are vile idolaters, both Priest and people, in worshipping a bit of breade that is made of wheate, as the great God: seeing by their owne doctrine there is no change there in their priuate Masses of the bread and wine in the body and blood of Christ. Last of all, Thom. p. 3. q. 83 Ioan de Burgo Pupilla cap. 3. Gerson contra Florent. extra de celebrat. Miss. seing there are sundry cases, and that very ordinary, wherein the Priest (by their owne doctrine) doth not con∣secrate at all: as if the Priest haue forgotten to put wine in the challice: if the bread be made of other thing then flowre if the water surmount the wine: if the wine be sowre: if hee left out one of the words of consecratiō: now what certain∣ty can the standers by haue, that the Priest hes falne in none of these cases. So with what assurance of faith can they wor∣ship their breaden God. To prooue this by some examples, that by their owne do∣ctrine they make the people to commit idolatry in worship∣ing of their breaden God. About the yeare 1536. there was foure Augustine Friars, hanged in Ciuil in Spaine, who had se∣cretly by night murthered their Prouinciall. The day fol∣lowing to auoide all suspition of the murther, they all foure said Masse, but they had no intention to consecrate, as they themselues afterward confessed: and so there was no Tran∣substantiation there, by their owne doctrine. And therfore, all these that heard their Masse that day, by their owne do∣ctrine committed Idolatrie, because there was no consecra∣tion there. I will set downe another example. There was a certaine Priest who being deposed for his filthie life, wherin he had continued for the space of 30. yeares with a harlote: beeing demanded by one, if he had truely repented him of this his abhominable life, and if he had put away this his cō∣cubine from him, with intent neuer to receaue her againe? he neuer had (said he) ony sik purpose. Being asked againe,
how then said he Masse euerie day, and made he no scruple to eate the bread of the Lord, and drinke of his holy Cupe, his conscience accusing him of sik an erroneous sinne? At the last, he confessed, that to auoide the vnworthie receauing of the body & blood of the Lord, he did not pronounce the sa∣cramētal words wherwith it is consecrate. And being vrged againe, how he durst commit so horrible a wickednesse, as to giue so great an occasion of so horrible idolatrie to the peo∣ple: who kneeling on their knees, casting themself on the earth, lifting vp their hands towards the altar, striking their breastes, did worship the vn-consecrated bread and cupe. Vnto whome he answered, that it was not so great a fault as hee saide of it: and that hee was not allone, but many moe did the same, whilk thought it not so abhominable an of∣fence, as he made of it. These two histories I finde written by a Spanishe authour, one Cyprian Valera, the title whereof is, Of the Pope and his authority, & of the Masse & the holines thereof. All these than that heard the Masses of these men, and adored the sacrament whilk they lifted vp, committed idolatrie by their owne Canons and decrees: for the last did not pronounce the words of consecration, & the other foure had not the intent to consecrate: and therefore there was no Transubstantiation there, by their owne doctrine, & so they worshipped bread and wine as their great redeemer & cre∣ator. But what a miserable religion is this, that depends vp∣on the intention of another: and therefore who can be cer∣taine, by their owne doctrine, whether it be God they wor∣ship or not in their sacrament. And this made a certaine in∣quisitor, an enemy to the trueth, fearing when hee heard Masse, whether the Priest had intention to consecrate or not to say, O Lord, if thou be there I adore thee: and so by this subtelty he thought to escape committing of idolatry. In the time of the Councell of Constance, there was three Popes that the Councell for their abhominations did depose, & elected another: these three not beeing Popes coulde not ordaine Priests, nor giue them authority to consecrate: so that by their owne Canons, all they that heard Masses of sik Priestes
as had their authority from them, committed idolatry. This same may be saide of them that heard the Masses of all these Priestes that were ordained by Pope Constantine the first, and the whoore Pope Iohn the 8. For neither of these had power to ordaine Priestes by their owne Canons. And as for Pope Iohn, there is no controuersie of it, because she was a woman, not capable of that authority by their owne Canons. And as for Constantine the first, he was a laick man, who without re∣ceauing any orders was by force named Pope. He not being a Priest himself, could not giue this authority to others. And so by their owne doctrine, all these that heard the Masses of sik Priests did commit horrible idolatry. And howsoeuer the Pope and his Cleargie affirmes it to be God, and not bread and wine, whilk they adore; yet ye shall see what estimation they haue themselues of that breaden God of theirs, by some examples. Pope Gregory the seauenth, vsed it for coniuratiō, and sought a response of it, and because it woulde giue him none, he caste it in the fire, and burned it, and so burned his Creator. They vse it to reuenge their wrongs, hatred and malice by it: and therfore Pope Victor the third in the yeare. 1088. was poisoned in the Challice by his sub-deacon. Sik∣like the archbishop of Yorke, poisoned in the Challice. Sik∣like Henry the seauenth, poisoned by a Dominican Friar in the Sacrament. They vse it for an Haruenger, sending it one or moe daies iourney before, with the basest sort of the peo∣ple. The Dominican Friars of the towne Auferra in France in the yeare 1536. did burne it, being vomite out by a Fria that saide Masse. And the Franciscans de alia Villa burnt the Cow whilk had eaten vp the sacrament out of the Priestes hand, and so in burning her, did burne their Creator with her. Molon, one of the Spanish inquisition, 35. yeeres since, being to goe into procession vpon the day of Corpus Christi, & the hoste that was to be put in the boxe, beeing so great that it could not be placed in the same, he being impatient to a∣waite whill another hoste had bene consecrate, demanded ane paire of sheares, and clipped his God and Creator: and so went on forewarde to their procession. Of the whilk we
gather two things. First, that their Popes and Ecclesiastical rable is without all God and religion, that makes so light of their God as to clip it and burne it, and vse it as the instru∣ments of their mallice & reuenge. Secondly, that this conse∣crate bread of theirs whilk they sell to the people to be wor∣shiped and adored is moste abhominable Idolatry, whereof one day they shall giue a reckoning to God: and thus much for the tenth abuse of their idolatrous Masse. The eleuenth abuse is, that in your communions, first con∣trary the institution of Christ, yee giue not the bread to the hands of the people to take, but puts it in their mouthes, as though their mouthes were holier then their handes. Next yee spoile the poore people of a sweete pledge of their sal∣uation, the sacrament of the wine; giuing them onely bread: contrary first the expresse Matth. 26.27 Marc 14.23 command of Iesus Christ drinke ye all of this: next, contrarie the doctrine of the August. in lib. sen prosp. Fathers, your owne De consecrat. dist 2. can. Dum frangitur hossia Cyprian. serm. 5. de lapsis canon law, and Pope De consecrat. dist. 2. can. Com∣perimus Gelasius. The second is that in your Masse, suppose yee speake of a communion and communicants, yet there is none at all; for your Priest eates and drinkes out all. And therefore haue yee eiked to the wordes of Christ eate all, drink all, contrarie the expresse insti∣tution of the Supper, take ye, eate ye, and drink ye all of this. And contrarie also to the doctrine of the auncient Hieron. in 1. Cor. cap. 11 Chrysost. in 1. cor hom. 18, Doctors of the primitiue Kirk, & of some Concil, 2, Antio cap, 2. Conc. 4. de Tolet. cap, 17. Councels, and some of your owne Alex. 5. epist. 1. de mystr. cerp. & sang. Calix∣cus de consecrat dist. 2, can, Per∣. Popes also. The twelfth abuse is in the praier contained in the canon f the Masse in these wordes. Looke mercifullie vpon these thinges to wit, Iesus Christ his body and his blood, whilk the Preist hinks he offers vp to God, & so Biell a exponer of the Masse nterprets the same;) and accept of them, as thou accepted of the sacrifice of Abell, of Abraham and of Melchisedeck. And in ano∣her place, the Preist praies vnto God to receiue that sacrifice (to wit of Christ) and to sanctifie it with the blissing wherewith hee san∣tified the oblation of Abell. ri benedictio. sand. Now if any thing can be said to be blasphemie, certainly this must bee blasphemie, to a Masse-Preist a sinfull creature to interceede betvveene God the Father, and Christ his Sonne to pray the Father that he
may sanctify his Sonne and accept of him; as though he were not fully sanctified in him selfe, and were not the fountaine of all holines to others, and as though the Father were not well pleased in him alreadie. And because the Masse-Preist vantes that in his sacrifice of the Masse he offers vp the eter∣nall sonne of God in a sacrifice to his Father for the sinnes of the quick and dead, I will aske him this: doth not hee blas∣pheme horribly, who vants that in some thing that he does hs is more acceptable to God, nor Iesus Christ is? This can∣not be denied. But I assume that the Preist vantes that in his Masse he is more acceptable to God, nor Iesus christ is: ther∣fore the Priest is a horrible blasphemer. And I proue the As∣sumption thus: The Priest vaunts that in his Masse he offers vp Iesus Christ to God his Father: the Prieste also in the Masse praies the Father, that he would sanctifie and accept of his sonne whilk he offers vp: Therefore the Priest vaunts yt he is more acceptable to god in the Masse, nor Iesus Christ is: for God regardes more the person that offers vp, then the thing that is offered vp. This is Irenaeus language: Irenaeus lib. 4. contra haeres. Valent. cap. 34 and for this purpose he brings forth the exāples of Abel and Cain, & their sacrifices. For he sayes, They two offered vp to the Lorde, but they were not both accepted of him: for Abell his sacrifice pleased God, be∣cause his person pleased him, and that because of his faith: but the sa∣crifice of Cain pleased not God, because his person pleased him not, and that because of his incredulity. Seing therefore that the Masse-Priest vaunts that hee offers vp Iesus Christ in his Masse to the Father: and seing the Priest must be more acceptable thē your sacrifice: Therefore it must follow that the Priest in the Masse vaunts, that he is more acceptable to God then Iesus Christ is, and so is a horrible blasphemer in his Masse. The thirteenth abuse is, that he compares the sacrifice of the sonne of God, with the sacrifice of Abel, Abraham, & Mel∣chisedech, whilk by infinite degrees surpasseth them all. The fourtenth. What horrible blasphemy commits the Priest, when he praies that that oblation whilk he thinkes to be Iesus Christ, may be carried to heauen by the hands of an Angel, as though Christ were not as powerful now to ascend
to heauen, as he was after his resurrection, and therefore hes now neede of the helpe of an Angell, to carry him to heauen What blasphemie is this? But let mee aske you, Maister Gilbert, Wherefore pray ye that he may be carried to heauē seing ye eate him, and makes him to descend in your belly, as ye think, and to ascend and descend are things contrary? And if ye will say, that first it mounts to heauen, & then de∣scends againe: then I say, first the accidents of the bread and wine are left there allone: for they are not carried to heauē, but remaines in your hand: and Christs body and blood are not vnder them, seing he is carried to heauen by the handes of an Angell: and so your reall presence is gone. Secondly, seing ye eate his body and drinke his blood, it must followe that ye must make a new Trāsubstantiation, to cause Christ come downe againe from heauen, and to make the bread & wine to be trans-changed againe in his body and blood, that ye may eate him and drinke him. And so these are manye voiages whilk ye cause Christ to make: First, to descend from heauen by the meanes of your Transubstantiation, then to make him to ascend to heauen by the meanes of your praier and then last of all, to make him againe descend from hea∣uen, that yee may eate him and drinke him. These are the blasphemies whilk followes on your blasphemous Masse. The fifttenth abuse, is in their praier for the dead, wher∣in they pray for a place of refreshment, light and peace for them, who hes died in faith, sleepes in peace, andrests in the Lord, and yet in the Masses that are said for them, they will not giue the Pax to be kissed, whilk is a signe of peace: let them aduise how they will reconcile this. But first I say, their praier for the dead, is without all warrand of the word: next, I would knowe who these are for whome the Priest praies: not for them that are in Hell, for they haue not died in faith, nor sleepes in peace, nor rests in the Lord: and praiers for them are needlesse, for out of hell is no redemption: not for them that are in hea∣uen, for what greater light or peace, or ioy can they haue nor that whilk they haue alreadie? not for them that are in Pur∣gatory, for beside that it is but the deuise of man, according
to their owne doctrine, they that are in Purgatory sleepes not in peace, but are tormented in fire, (if their doctrine of the fire of Purgatorie be true:) and so this prayer cannot be for them neither. The sixtenth, is your horrible cruelty against the sonne of God, in breaking the bodye of Christ in three cupons in your Masse, (as ye thinke) whilk is greater cruelty then the men of warre did to him vpon the croce: for they brake not a bone of him, and yet ye Masse-Priestes makes no scruple to part his body in three cupons. The seuententh, is your dipping a part of the hoste into the Cupe, whilk is without all warrand or example of the Scrip∣ture, and is against the doctrine of one of your Pope Iulius de consecrat dist. 2. can. Cum Omne crimen. Popes. The eighttenth, is in the praier wherein the Priest praies, that the receauing of Christ his body be not to his condem∣nation, seeing he meanes not heir by the body of Christ, the bread whilk is a seale of his body, but properly the body of Christ: whilk whosoeuer receaues, receaues not to death but to life; seing he is life and saluation it self. The ninetenth, is the blowing & mumbling of the Priests on the bread & wine, there turning of their back to the peo∣ple when they prouounce the words of consecration: their so oft signing with the signe of the Croce in their Masse, 25. times: their The ordinance of Honorius the 3. confirmed by Pope Innocent the 4. de celebrat dis. canon Sanc. & de custod. Eu∣cha. cap. 1. keeping and inclosing of Christs body (as they suppone) in a boxe: their burning of candles before it: their Ordinance of Pope Vrbane, an∣no 1564. who iued then. carrying of it in processions vpō their solemne daies whilk they call the feast of God, in their Temples, Villages, streetes: their carrying of it to the sicke and diseased, with these blasphemous words spoken by the Priest to the pati∣ent, Beholde my friend God your Creator, whilk I haue brought vnto you. What blasphemie is this? and what a God is this that cannot come by himselfe, but must be brought by another? and what comfort can this God bring to the patient, that cā not bring himself to the patient, but as he must be borne by the Priest? What a mockery of God, of his word, of them∣selues, and of the poore people, is this? Does their Priestes the thing that Christ did in the Sacrament? Did he any of
these things, or commanded he them to be done? Crossed he the bread and wine? Did he blow & mumble the words vpon it? Commanded he the bread to be kept in a boxe, to be carried in Processions, to be carried to the sicke, to burn candles before it? What spirite hes reuealed to you these things? seeing the spirite of Christ hes not reuealed them in the Scriptures? You must seeke therefore for a new Gospell, to proue these ceremonies: for the Gospell of Christ makes no mention of them: yea, this keeping of the sacrifice, it is forbidden by your owne De consecrat. dist. 2. cap. 3. Gra∣dibu. Canon law. So ye both fight a∣gainst the Scripture, and your owne Canon law. The twentieth abuse, is their manifold stiles and titles that they giue to their Masse, whilk cannot be all aggreeable to the same: some taken from the persons in whose name and honor they are celebrate: as the Masses of the Trinity, of the name of Iesus, of his croce, crowne, and fiue wounds, of our Lady, of the An∣gels, of the Saints: some taken from the persons and matters wherefore they are saide. For there are sundry sorts of Mas∣ses, for sundry sortes of persons and matters; as one for the Pope, another for the Emperour, the third for the King, the fourth for a man, 5. for a woman. 6. for the bridegrome. 7. for the bride. 8. for Prisoners. 9. for them that sailles. 10. for them that goes a voyage. 11 for the dead. 12. for him of whose soule there is doubt. 13. for the pest. 14. for the rage. 15. for the tempest. 16. for the fire. 17. for all sortes of diseases both of man and beast. And laste of all, some of their stiles are taken from the diuersity of times and seasons wher in they are saide: one sort of Masse for Sommer, another for Winter: one for the time of lent, another for the time of fleshe: one for Christ-mas, another for Pasche, another for Whitsonday, & other some for other feast daies. Nowe these Masses are so diuerse, that the Masse that is saide at one of these solemne times, cannot serue for another: the Masse for lent, cannot serue for the time of fleshe: the Masse for Pasch cannot serue for Christmasse, and so forth of the rest. In the whilk there are many horrible abuses. First, if the Masse be one with the Supper (as they say) then as there is but one Supper of the Lord, whilk is instituted only for the remem∣brance
of Christ, whilk is but one in generall for all: & wher∣of all the faithfull are partakers, of whatsomeuer ranke they be: be they great, be they smal, be they riche, be they poore; and whilk serues for all times. For, as our Sauiour did insti∣tute but one Baptisme to serue for all persons, & for al times so he did institute but one Supper to serue for all persons & all times. If therefore the Masse were one with the Supper, it should be but one for all persons, and for all seasons. But this diuersitie of Masses does testifie that it is not the institu¦tion of Iesus Christ, but the institution of Antichrist, & that it is not one with the Lord his Supper, as they falsly alledge: Yea, it doth testifie that they haue forsaken the truth of God and are giuen ouer of God to beleeue lies, and to be decea∣ued by strong delusions, that they might be damned. Secondly, what needes seuerall Masses of the Trinity, of the holy spirit, of the name of Iesus? for seeing the three per∣sons of the Trinity are one, & they all concurre in the worke of our faith, the Father giuing his sonne by his holy spirite in the word and sacraments: therefore this diuersity as thogh the persons of the Trinitie were separate, is needlesse. Thirdly, this woulde be marked: that suppose they haue stiled their Masses from sundry persons, yet they haue not ascriued a singulare Masse to Iesus Christ, that it might bee named simplie the Masse of Iesus Christ: and this, no questi∣on is not without the prouidence of God, that seeing the Masse is not the institution of Christ, but of Antichrist; not the ordinance of God, but of Sathan: he would not that sik a blasphemous and idolatrous inuention shoulde haue the same stile to be called the Masse of Christ simplie, without any further addition, as the Supper is called the Lords Sup∣per. Fourthly, they haue a seuerall Masse to the name of Ie∣sus, vnto the whilk Missale Ro∣manum. Boniface the sixth, hes giuen pardon of 3000. years to them, that saies this Masse deuotly: as though his name were a thing separate from himselfe: & as though there were some speciall vertue in the sillabes and letters of that name, after the manner of Magicians and Sorcerers. Fifthly, their Masses to his Croce and crowne, is manifest
idolatry, in ascriuing that whilk was proper to Iesus Christ, to the tree whereon he hang, and to the crowne of thornes whilk he bure: as though either they had redeemed vs, and not himself who was crucified on the tree: or else that they were one with himself, whilk are both blasphemy. Sixtlye, their Masses to the honor of the Virgine Marie, to Angels, & Saints is manifest idolatrye: for the Supper was not institu∣ted in the honour of any creature, but only to the honour of him who did redeeme vs. Seuenthly, wherefore serues a∣ny Masse for the Pope? for if he be sik a one, as himselfe and his Kirk hes written of him: to wit, that his will is heauenly, that he may make somthing of nothing, Extra. de translat epst. canon Quanto. in textu & glossa. Clement. 6. in Bulla. that he may of right dispense against right: that he may make righteousnesse of vnrighteousnesse, and that he may delyuer as many soules out of Hell and Purgatorie, and place thē in heauen, as pleases him, he needes no Masses to be said for him. Either therefore these sentences that are spoken of him are false, or else all Masses said for him are superfluous. 8. if the Masse be one with the Supper, then as the Supper was only instituted for the liuing, and not for the dead: and therefore our Sauiour in the Supper commands, To take eate, drinke, and to doe it in remembrance of him, whilk the dead cannot doe: so these Masses should not be for the dead. And for what dead are these, that these Masses are saide? If they say, for them that are in heauen or hell: I answere, the one needes them not, and they are vnprofitable for the other. If they say, for them that are in Purgatorie: I answere, this Purgatorye is but their owne inuention, to draw water to their owne mil, and to enriche the Popes treasures, for the Scripture makes no mention of it. Ninthly, their Masses that are said for them that are absent, as for the Prisoners, for them that sailles, & are in their voiage, &c. makes it manifest also, that the Masse is not one with the Lords Supper: for it was instituted not to them that were absent, but to them that were present. For in the Supper they are commanded to take, eate, and to drinke in remembrance of him, whilk the absent cannot do. Indeede it is true, that these that are present at the Masse does eate and drinke as little, as they that are absent: the on∣ly
vantage they haue is to be beholders of the Prieste eating and drinking all himself allone, and of these vaine and iug∣lers trickes of the Priest in saying of his Masse, whilk the ab∣sent canno see. Tenthly, how can their Priests please God in saying Masse for him, of whose soule it is doubted, seing it cā¦not be saide with faith, and whatsoeuer is done without faith the Apostle saies is sinne: and this doubting, as Iames sayes, Rom. 4 23 Iac. 1.6 cannot stand with faith: therefore this Masse of theirs for his soule of whome there is doubt, cannot please God? But what is all their religion, but coniectures, and opinions, and doubtings. Elleuenthly, is their Masses for the pest, tempest furie, fire, and all afflictions, and maladies, aswell of man, Masses for the pest, tempest, &c as of beast, whilk containeth intollerable and vile idolatry: for euery Masse hes his owne Saint to be a patrone, according to the subiect thereof, and euery Saint hes his owne office. Against the pest, the Priest sayes the Masse of S. Sebastiane, & S. Roch, for they are the patrons and defenders against it: af∣ter the custome of the Pagans, who honored Apollo & Aes∣culapius by feastes and sacrifices for to be saued from the con∣tagion of the same. Against the tempest, they say the Masse of S. Bernard, S. Graith, S. Barbe, and others, in stead of Iupiter whilk the Pagans worshipped. Against the rage or furie, they say the Masse of S. Hubert, who is the patrone of hun∣ters and dogs, as the goddes Diana was the patrone amōgst the Pagans. Against the fire they say the Masse of S. Anton, for they make him the patrone of it: and they say it is a grea¦ter oath to sweare vpon the arme of S. Anton, then when one sweares by the name of God. For a woman with child, they say the Masse of S. Margaret, in stead of Diana and Iuno whilk the Pagans worshipped for wemen with child. For a horse they say the Masse of S. Eloy, or S. Anton, yea, Alanus de sacri∣ic. euch. cap. 32 for a poor wifes hen, if it be sicke or loste. And for their pigs, they haue the Masse of S. Antone. But first what blasphemie is this, to haue their recourse to Saints, hee or shee, to obtaine of them, or by their merite, or intercession, health in sicknesse, &c. and sik like things, whilk are only in Gods hands to bestowe: for it is he only that sends health, and sicknesse, faire wether, &
foule wether, & so forth. Next, the Lordes Supper was not instituted to be a charme for sik diseases of man or beast, or for the fire, pest, tempest, &c. but for the remembrance of Christs death. So that if there were no more abuse in the Masse, but these two things, it is sufficient to make all men to abhorre sik abhominable idolatry. The twentie and one abuse, is their mixing of parcels of the Scripture, with their abhomination & idolatries in their Masse, after the manner of those who goes about to impoy∣son anie: who mixes their poison with some good food, that it may be the lesse suspected: or rather as the Magicians & Charmers does, who mixes with their diuelish practises, par∣cels of the Scriptures of God, and makes those to serue for their diuelish purposes, whilk was appointed to Gods honor So are all the places of Scripture, whilk are read and sung in their Masse, they are brought forth, not for the truth, but a∣gainst the truth for their idolatry and abhomination: & this they haue done, that their idolatry may bee lesse suspected by the simple. Next, what warrand haue they to prefer the Gospell, (as they call it) to the Epistles, in standing vp at the reading of the Gospell, and sitting at the reading of the Epistles, Rom. 1.1. Rom. 2 16. 1. Cor, 4.15. seing they are both inspired of God, and they both containe the Gospell of Iesus Christ, as the Apostle testifies. Thirdly, the Gospell and Epistles, were appointed not to be sung and chanted in the Kirk, (as they doe) but to be red & interprete: for the Psalmes and other hymnes in the Scrip∣ure are ordained for that vse. Fourthly, seing the Scripture whilk is read and sung in your Masse, is read and sung in an vnknowne language, as all the rest of your Masse is done: to what purpose does it serue? and what is it but a mocking of God, and abusing of the poore people. The twentie and two abuse, is their waxe candles whilk they haue burning in the time of their Masses, in the fair day light, mocking as it were thereby, both God the authour of all light, and the light of the sunne. And to what purpose cā they serue to burne in the day light, when the sunne is shy∣ning, but to beare witnesse against them in the great day,
that in the middest of the noone day, they groped in darke∣nesse, & that they haue put out the light of the Gospel, that should haue shyned in their hearts? What shall I speak of the rest of your ceremonies whilk are superstitious, idle, car∣nall, and Iewish? In attire like them: for as their Priestes were cled in an Ephod, a Myter, a broidered coat, a girdle, Exodus 28.4. a breastplate, and a robe. So with you your Priests must haue an Amice, an Albe, a girdle, a fannell: whereof some of them are taken from the fashion of the Pagans. For Numa Pom∣pilius when hee vsed to worship, Ouid. in Fastis. he couered himself with a kerchiffe or vaile: and he ordained that these idolatrous Alex. ab Alex. Priests should haue their Albe, and a painted coloured coat aboue it: as the Exod. 30.20 Iewish Priest had a lawer, wherat they must washe, before they sacrificed, so haue yours: as they Exod. 29.27 lifted vp a part of the hoste, so you lift vp the whole hoste: as they sounded the Num. 10.10, trumpets at their sacrifices, so you ring your belles. And what shall I speak of the rest of your vaine and superstitious ceremonies? in washing often, in crossing and blessing often, in censing often, in soft speach & whispe∣ring, in kissing of the Amice, kissing of the fannell, kissing of the stole, kissing of the altar, kissing of the booke, kissing of the Priests hand, and kissing of the Pax: in smiting and knoc∣king of the breast, in gesturing by rule and measure, in bow∣ing and becking, in spacing foreward and backward, & tur∣ning round about, and trauersing of the ground: his gesture so ridiculous, so changeable, so affectate in saying of his Masse, that a man would think a plaier were comming forth vpon the stage to play, when the Priest addresseth himself to the Masse: beside the musicke of your Organs where it may be had, and your threefold salutation of the Priest, Dominus vobiscum, whilk can haue no vse in the priuate Masses, where the Priest is himself allone together with the Clark. So that in truth it is more then Iewishe: for in ceremonies they are aboue their ceremonies, in orders more exquisite, in cautels more diligent: so that it seemes rather to be a stage play nor the worship of God. But I see it is fulfilled in them whilk was foretolde, that God woulde send them strong delusions, that they
might beleeue lies, that all these might be damned whilk loued not the trueth. Let the Christian reader iudge nowe, whether the Masse be an heauenly action, or whether it be not a sink and closet of all abhomination or idolatry, or not. As trueth confirmes the self, so falset destroies the selfe: A Kingdome deuided against it selfe (as our Sauiour saies) cannot stand: The manifolde contradictions one against ano∣ther, both in the matter, forme, & effect, sustance, & circumstance of their Masse. Therfore their divisions and contradictions amongst themselues concerning this their sacrifice of the Masse, is an euidēt token that yt kingdome cannot stand. Turrian. 1. tract cap. 11 fol. 59 Some of you sayes, Christ descends daily frō the bosome of the father to the altar, & ascends frō thēce to heauē again: other some Scarga artic. 11 fol. 335 saies the contrary, that he neither descends from heauē in the Masse, nor ascends from thence to heauen. 2. Bellarmine saies in a Lib. 2. de Missa cap. 4 part, that the sacrifice of the Masse does not satisfie for our sinnes, or merite properly the forgiuenesse of them. and yet in another Lib. 2. de Missa fol. 731 place he saies, that Christ offered in the laste Supper a sacrifice for the sinnes of the Apostles, and the sacrifice of the Masse (saies he) is one with that. And In canone miss. their Preists sayes in the Masse that he offers it vp for the redemption of soules: and the counsell Ses. 6. canon 2 & 3 of Trent calles it a true propitiatorie sacrifice for the sinnes of the quick and the dead. And Lect. 85. in exp. canon. & in 4. sent. dist, 12. qu. 2. Gabriell Biell a exponer of the Masse, sayes that the Masse is one in substance with the sacrifice of the Croce, and that it proceedes the selfe same effects; to wit, the appeasing of God his wrath: If it then ap∣pease God his wrath, and be offered for the redemption of soules, then it must both merite properly, and satisfy proper∣ly. 3. Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, fol. 6.6. Some of you affirmes that the sacrifice of the Croce, is more excellent then the sacrifice of the Masse, and the Vga de Missa thes. 141. vertue of the Masse depends vpon it: and yet some of you Vega thes. 137. saies, It is but one sacrifice with that of the Croce, the same sacrifice & the same Priest in both, how then can the one be more excellent then the o∣ther? 4. L b. 2. de Missa cap. 4. Bellarmine saies, that the valour of the sacrifice of the Masse is finite, and therefore it is oft repeated: but Tract 7 de ce∣lebrat Missae, cap 2. quest 1 Caietan a Car∣dinall saies, that the vertue, quantity, and effect of it, is infinite, as the suffering of Christ. 5. Possenus lib. contra Chyae∣um & Volanum. Some of them saies, that Christ is offered vp in the Masse by the words of the Kirk, when it is saide, Tua de tuis offerimus tibi, some when the words of the cō∣secration are pronounced: but Lib. 2. de Missa cap. 11 Bellarmine aggrees with
neither: he saies, the sacrifice is offered vp, not so much by the wordes as by the putting of the sacrifice vppon the altar. 6. Lib. 1. de Missa cap. 27. Bellarmine saies in a part, That if there be not a real and true slaughter of Christ in the Masse, then the Masse is not a true and reall sacrifice: for saies he, to a true and reall sacrifice, is required a true and reall slaughter of the thing that is sacrificed: for the essence, saies he, of the sacrifice stands in the slaughter. Vppon the whilk followes, that either Christ is daily truely crucified in the Masse, by their Priests, or else their Masse is not a true and reall sacrifice. And yet in another Ibidem cap. 25 part, he saies, that the sacrifice of the Masse re∣quyres not a true slaughter of the sacrifice. 7. Lib. 1. de sacr. cap. 20 Gaspa Casilius sayes, that there are two diuerse sacrifices in the Eucharist or Masse, the one of the bread and wine, the other of the body and blood of Christ: and yet Lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 27 Bellarmine and sundry others denies it, and sayes there is but one. 8. Pope Tract. de missa Innocent sayes, that the sacrifice of the Masse is offered vp for originall, venial, and mortall sinnes, & yet the Maister Lib. 4. sent. dist 12. cap. Posthc of sentences, and In Floret, lib, 4 Gerson sayes, that the Masse purges but veniall sinnes, & Thomas de A∣quina. Thomas of Aquine aggrees with neither of them, for he sayes, the sacrifice of the Croce was for our originall sinne, but the sacrifice of the altar, is for our ordinary sinnes. 9. M. Gilbert Browne saies, that their Priests does the same in the Masse, whilk Christ did in the Supper: but Lib, 1, de Missa cap, 27. . Bellarmine frankly graunts that Christ did not offer vp the bread by the same words, that their Priestes doe now in the Masse, therfore they doe not the same thing that Christ did. 10. Maister Gilbert Browne sayes that Christ did offer his body and blood to the Father after the consecration, but Ibidem Bellarmine sayes that neyther Christ nor his Apostles in the beginning did offer vp any oblation after the consecration. I leaue the rest of their contradictions, so that seeing they haue no concorde amongst themselues, neither in the matter, nor in the forme, nor in the effect, nor in the substance, nor in the circumstances of their pretended sacri∣fice: but that the Lord (as is saide in Hosea) hes deuyded their heartes: therefore their Masse must perishe. And seeing the Lord hes sent sik a confusion amongst them, that they vnder¦stand not the language one of another: some saying one thing, some another: therefore it is Babel the towre of confu∣sion
whilk they are building, and not the house of the Lord. By their owne do¦ctrine they are conuicted to be worshippers of a false God and a als Iesus in their Masse. To conclude this, they will haue their sacrifice not a cre∣ature, Turian. 1. tract. cap. 17. & Anto∣nius de Padua, ex Bellar. de Eu∣cha. lib. 3. cap. 8. but a Creator of all creatures: and therefore they worship it with the worship of Latriae, whilk by their own do∣ctrine is onely proper to God: therefore they sing after the consecration, It is not bread but God and man my Sauiour: and yet they say that this Scarga artic. 5 fol. 335. Creator both begins to be where he was not be∣fore, after the consecration: and ceases to be where he was before: and that he is not Turrian. tract. 1 cap. 21 euery where as God is. And they say that the Priest makes Christ his Bellarm lib, 3. de Euch. fol. 399. body of the bread in the Sacrament, & Christ this king Pope Iohn 22. lib. orat, inscrip. Antidotarius a∣nimae. & in Bre∣uiario & missali∣bus, Qui creauit me sine me, crea∣tur mediante me that is, he that created me with out mee, (that is the Priest) is crea¦ted by my moien that is, he makes that God, that made him. is made of bread. Now how can he be the true God, & a true creator, whilk hes a beginning, and ceases to be, whilk is not euery where, as God is, whilk is made of bread and wine by a Masse-Priest, and that by their owne doctrine? Howe therefore shall their Kirk be cleared from abhomina∣ble idolatrie, that worships that whilk they call God, creator and Sauiour: and yet sik a God, as by their owne doctrine hes a beginning and ending, and is not euery where, and is made of breade and wine by duste and ashes. O, woe be to their soules that worships God, whilk made not heauen and earth, and causes others to doe the same! And howe shall their Masse-Priestes be cleared from sacrilegious blasphe∣mie, whilk vaunts that in their Masse they daylie creat their Creator, and that of bread and wine: and so makes them∣selues Gods, and more then Gods, for God created but cre∣atures, but they (as they suppone) creates the creator. And as they worship a false creator in their Masse, so do they wor¦ship a false Christ and Sauiour in the same. For the scripture sayes, That the true Christ is made of the Rom. 1.3. Galat. 4 4 seede of Dauid, & of the seede of the woman, and not of any other substance. But the Christ whilk they offer vp in their Masse, by their owne doctrine, is made of bread and wine, and that by the Priest. So Ibidem Bellarmine confesses, and Ibidem Pope Iohn 22. For the one sayes, that it is no absurde thing to the Priest to make Christ his bodye of bread, and the other saies, that Christ the King is made of bread: Therfore they worship not Iesus the sonne of Mary who was made of the woman, and of the seede of Dauid: but a false Ie∣sus
made of bread, and baken in the Ouen, and formed by the Priest: therefore of all idolaters they must be the moste blasphemous and abhominable. And this meikle for the first head, concerning that idolatrous abhominable Masse. Nowe followes the second point concerning the Antichrist: that the Popes of Rome are that vndoubted Antichrist, that the Scripture foretolde should come. The other part concerning the Antichrist. Maister Gilbert Browne. IF the It was not my purpose then, Ioh. 5.43. Tract. 29, vpon Iohn. Pope be the Antichrist, what is the cause that Maister Iohn would not set downe some place out of the word of God that proues the same. But good reader, I will let you see how far Maister Iohn is against the word of God in this, and that by some examples onely. Firste, our Sauiour shewe vnto the Iewes, that albeit he came in the name of his Father, yet they would not receaue him: This title of ser∣uand of seruands will not excuse him, being indeid the title of cur∣sed Cham, for he is called the ser∣uand of seruands and so fit in the Lords iust proui∣dence for your Popes who is that man of sin. if another (saies he) shall come in his owne name, him ye will receaue. This no doubt, as Augustine expones the same, is meant of the Antichrist, that the Iewes shall receaue. Nowe it is out of all controuersie that the Iewes neuer receaued the Pope: Therefore the Pope is not the Antichrist. Againe, the Pope came neuer in his owne name but in the name of Christ, for he is called the Vicare of Christ, and the ser∣uand of the seruands of God: therefore he cannot be the Antichrist. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. I Come nowe to the second heade, whilk I offered then to proue: to wit, that your Popes whilk ye will haue to be the head of the Kirk of Christ, are the selfe same Antichrist, that the Scripture fore-tolde shoulde come. Thou wouldest knowe (Christian reader) of what waight this controuersie, is, Whether the Pope be the Antichrist or not? For this supremacy of his vnto them, is the foundation whereupon their religi∣on, and the safety of their whole Kirk depends: so that they cal it, the Rock whereupon the Kirk is builded, Rhemist. anno vpon Mat. 16 & Bella is prae∣face before that controuersie of the Popes supre∣macie against whilk the yets of Hell shal not preuaile. And Bellarm. calles him the foundation whilk vpholdes the house of God, the Pastor whilk feedes his flock, the Empe∣rour whilk gouernes his hoste, the Sunne whilk giues light to the starres,
that is, to the Ministers of the Kirk: the head whilk giues life to his bo∣die. So that remoue his Supremacy the house of God must fall, the flock of Christ must be scattered, the hoste of the Lord must be discomfited, the starres, that is the Ministery, must be darkened: and the body must ly still without motion. Isa 28, 16, & 8, 14.15 And he applyes these (a) prophecies, spo∣ken and fulfilled only in the sonne of God, vnto him: cal∣ling him that fundamentall stone in Sion, vpon the whilk the whole Kirk is builded: and that proued stone, against the whilk the yets of Hell hes neuer, nor neuer shall preuaile: and that corner or cunzie stone, whilk ioynes both Iewe & Gentile, as two walles together in a Christian Kirk: and that precious stone where∣from the infinite treasure of grace is moste plenteously de∣riued, vnto the whole Kirk: as vnity in doctrine, the bonde of peace, the vnity of faith, whilk is saluation it selfe, and the very life of Religion: and he sayes there is no way to Christ, but by Peter, in whose roome their Popes succeedes: so that in their iudgement there is no way to Christ, but by the Pope. And he calles him that rock of offence, and stumbling stone spo∣ken of in Esay chap. 8. Vpon the whilk whosoeuer shall fall, shall bee broken: and on whome it shall fall, it shall dashe him in peeces. O blasphemous mouth! Let the heauens be confounded at this. And therefore this is of sik a waight, that Boniface the 8. hes made it an article of our faith: whose wordes are these. We declare, Extra, de minori∣tate & obedien∣tia, cap. Vnam sanctam we affirme, we define and pronounce that it is altogether needfull to saluation to all creatures to be vnder the Pope of Rome. So that Bellarmine saies, when the Popes supremacy is called in controuersie, the summe of all Christianity is called in question: and when that is controuerted, then it is controuerted whether the kirk should stand any longer or not, or fall & dissolue. Vnto them there∣fore it is an article of faith, whilk must be beleeued and pra∣ctised vnder the paine of the losse of saluation. And vnto vs he is that selfe same Antichrist whilk the Scripture hes fore∣tolde, time hes made manifest, & the Kirk hes suffered. Vnto them he is the heade of the body of Christ, the Pastor of his flock, the sunne that giues light to the starres, the foundatiō of the house of God, and a mortall God amongst men: Vnto vs he is Gods enemy, the sonne of perditiō, the second beast,
and false prophet, the aduersary of true Religion, 2, Thes, 2. apo, 13 a pest in the bodie, a tyrant in the commonwealth, and Antichrist in the Kirk. So thou sees (Christian reader) of what wayght this controuersie is. Let vs see then how he defends him from being the Anti∣christ, and then you shall heare our reasons to the contrary. You aske wherefore I set not down some places of Scripture to proue the Pope to be the Antichrist: I answere: not be∣cause I could not, but because it was not my purpose at that time. But nowe I minde to doe it (God willing) after that I haue answered to your arguments. Your first reason is, The Iewes shall receaue the Antichrist: but they neuer receaued the Pope: therefore the Pope is not the Antichrist. I answer: Your Proposition I deny, that the Iewes shall receaue the Antichrist. For first I will aske you, Are you of that opinion with Bellarmine, the Rhemists, and the rest of your Cleargy, Bella 1. lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. cap. 12.. Rhemist. annot. vpon 2 Thes. 2 The Iewes shuld not receaue the antichrist as their Messias. that they shall receaue him as their Messias, whilk they looke for? If you be not of their minde, then beside that you dis∣sent from the doctrine of your owne Kirk, it is not probable that the Iewes woulde receaue him, if they thought not hee were their Messias. And if ye be of their minde, then I say, the Iewes will receaue none as their Messias, but these who are borne of the tribe of Iuda, and the family of Dauid in Beth∣lehem, and who shall reigne in Ierusalem. But the tribes are confounded, so that they cannot knowe it, and the family of Dauid destroyed by sundry Emperours: or at the least, so cō∣founded that they cannot be distinguished: and Bethlehem is destroyed, & the Temple in Ierusalem alluterly casten down: therefore the Messias whilk they looke for, will neuer come. And so (if this be true) the Antichrist whilk ye imagine heir will neuer come, since your Antichrist and their Messias that they looke for, are both one, as your Kirk suppones. And I say further, Sanderus and the Rhemists sayes, In 8. demonst. Rhemist. annot. v¦pon the 2, Thessa the Antichrist shall come of the tribe of Dan: if then he shall come of the tribe of Dan, (as they say) the Iewes will neuer receaue him as their Messias, because they know their Messias whilk they looke for, shall come of the tribe of Iuda. Therefore if Sande∣rus
and the Rhemists speake true, the Iewes shall neuer re∣ceaue the Antichrist at all. Thirdlye, I lay this ground whilk you cannot deny, that the Iewes are to be planted in again in the naturall Oliue: that is, they are to be conuerted to Christ, be∣cause their fall was but for a time, as the Apostle plainly fore∣telles, Rom. 11. Rhemist annot. v¦pon that chapter and the Rhemistes graunts it. Vpon the whilk I aske you, Maister Gilbert, whether shall they receaue the Anti∣christ, before, or after their conuersion? If you say, after: thē I say, after they haue embraced the true Messias & the Gos∣pell, how can it be that they will looke for another Messias, and receaue the Antichrist as their Sauiour. Next, we read of their conuersion in the Scripture, but nothing of their re∣iection of Christ after their conuersion. And thirdly, seeing (as your Kirk sayes) the Antichrist shalbe sent to them, and they shal receaue him, because they receaued not Christ Ie∣sus: of force then it cannot be after their conuersion. For the cause, to wit, their hardnesse of heart, and refusall of the true Messias, being taken away: this punishment should not bee sent vnto them after their embracing of Christ: so not after their conuersion. And if you say before their conuersion; thē I say, either must you make the reigne of your Antichrist lō∣ger then three yeare and a halfe, (whilk your Kirk does) & put a greater space betwixt the perdition of him, & the end of the world, then your Bellarmine puts but 45. daies betwene his perdition and the end of the world. lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. c. 17. Kirk does, and so ouerthrow your owne doctrine concerning the Antichrist, that ye may esta∣blishe your imaginary Antichrist. Or else what likelihoode is there that euer they shall be conuerted to Christ, whilk is against both the Scripture, & your owne doctrine? for seing the Iewes are to receiue him as their Messias, & seing he is to builde their Tēple, restore their ceremonies, & obtain ye Mo∣narchie of the whole world, especially by their help (as your doctrine affirmes) shall not this driue them further from Christ, Bella 1. lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. cap. 12.16. &c. and harden their harts more then euer it was before? And seing he shall raigne but three yeares and a halfe, and they cannot embrace the true Sauiour, as long as he raignes (for they cannot embrace both the Antichrist, and the true Christ together) and seeing after his death the day of iudge∣ment
shall come immediatly, or at the least 45. dayes after, (as Bellarmine sayes:) how can it be possible that they shal e∣uer be turned to Christ before the end of the worlde, if this your doctrine be true? Therefore they cannot receaue the Antichrist before their conuersion, and so they shall neuer receaue the Antichrist. So then to conclude this point, as the Messias whilk the poore blinded Iewes lookes for, will neuer come, the true Messias being come already, whome they cru∣cified: So the Antichrist whilk ye imagine will neuer come, for the true Antichrist (whilk either ye will not see, or else if ye see, ye will not confesse him) lurkes within your owne bo∣some, these many yeares, whome ye labour to couer, that he should not be seene. But how proue ye that the Iewes will receaue the Anti∣christ? Because our Sauiour sayes to the Iewes, If another shal come in his owne name, him ye will receaue. I graunt indeede our Sauiour so speakes. But firste I say, this other is not to be re∣stricted to the Antichrist only, Ioseph. de bello Iudaico, lib. 2. ca. 12. Pet. Gala. lib. 40. cap. 21. Bellarm lib. 3. de Rom. Pont. c. 12. but to be referred to all false Prophets, who shall come, not being sent of God, so Nonus, so Lyra expones it: and this was fulfilled long since in recea∣uing of Theudas and Cozban, and other deceauers whom they receaued. As for Augustine, it is true, he expones it of the An∣tichrist. But if Bellarmine reiects Augustins opinion concer∣ning the generation of the Antichrist, that he shall come of the tribe of Dan, because it cannot (saies he) bee prooued by the Scripture: shall it not also be lawfull for vs, not to be bound to the exposition of Augustine, vnlesse it be certain by the scrip∣ture: so giue vs that libertye whilk yee take to your selues. Your first reason then hes no feete: for this place speakes of all false Prophets whatsomeuer, whilk the Iewes should re∣ceaue: and it hes bene accomplished sundry times amongst them: therfore this yet remaines vnprooued that the Iewes shall receaue the Antichrist. This for the first part of the ar∣gument. The second part of your argument is, The Pope came neuer in his owne name, but in the name of Christ: therefore hee is not the Antichrist. Your antecedent I deny. For if ye will credite Franciscus Toledo if ye knowe him, writing vppon the
same place, he sayes, He shall come in his owne name, who truely shall haue no diuine vertue, The Pope come not in the name of Christ in truth but in his owne name, because Christ left him neuer in his stead or left na sik cal∣ling in his worde. but shall faine himself to be sent of God, as the false Prophets came in their owne name, because they were not tru∣ly sent of God. And this is that, saies he, whilk is said now (meaning in this place) if only shall come in his owne name: that he, is not tru∣ly sent of God, neither hes Gods power. So then a false Prophete is saide both to come in the name of God, and in his owne name: in the name of God falslye vanting so: in his owne name, because God sends him not, but he intrudes himselfe without a lawfull calling. Nowe to answere you then, I say the Pope comes in the name of Christ, as his Vicare, I grant he and his Cleargie so vaunts: but falsly. For the truth is, he hes come, and he commes in his owne name, and that truly, because the Lord neuer sent him, but he hes intruded him∣selfe without God his calling: therefore this can not free him but he may be the Antichrist. But howe proue ye that hee commes in Christ his name, and not in his owne name? Be∣cause (say ye) he calles himself the Vicare of Christ, and the seruand of the seruands of God. A pretty argument: hee so calles himself, Ergo he is so. Who will crdite either you or him in your owne cause? Is this all ye can do for your Pope? He is called so, Ergo he is so. Augustine saies, Non attendamus ad linguam, Tract 3. in epist. Ioan. sed ad facta. Let vs not take tent to the tongue, but to the deedes. For if al be asked, & all with one mouth confesse Christ, let the tongue cease a little, and aske the life Interroga vitam? and againe, whosoeuer denies Christ (factis) by his deedes, is Antichrist. The idolaters of Ephesus might haue reasoned so for their great goddesse Diana: Act. 19. shee is cal∣led a great goddesse, ergo she is so indeede. And what false Prophet yet euer came, but they said they came in the name of God, and they called themselues, & were called by these whome they deceaued, the seruandes and Prophetes of the Lord: and yet will you frame this argument for them, as you doe for your Pope. Ierem. 23.25 Ezech. 13 6.7. All the false Prophets said they came in the name of God, and were called by these whome they de∣ceaued, the seruands of God, therfore they came not in their owne name, but in the name of God. Did not the false A∣postles
Reuel. 2, 2 in Ephesus say they were the Apostles of Christ, & yet they were found liars: and did not the verse 9. Synagogue of Satan call themselues Iewes, and yet they blasphemed in so speaking. Does not the harlot with whome the nations of the earth hes commit∣ted fornication, Reuel. 18.7 say in her heart, she is a Queene, and yet shee is that great harlote. And is not her Reuel. 17 4 Cupe of golde, and yet the drinke therin is abhomination. And should not the Antichrist 2. Thes. 2.4 sit in the temple of God, and yet he is the sonne of perdition, and an aduersary to God, and to Iesus Christ. And Matth 4.8.9. said not the Diuell of himselfe, that all the Kingdomes of the world were giuen to him, & he would giue them to whome he would, and yet he was a lyar? So if this argument of yours will follow, The Pope is called the Vicare of Christ, & the seruand of the seruands of God, ther∣fore hee came neuer in his owne name, and so hee is not the Antichrist: you may with as good reason conclude, that the false Prophetes and false Apostles, came not in their owne name, but in the name of God, because they are called the seruands of God, both by themselues, and also by these who were deceaued by them. Yea, you may with as good reason conclude, that the Antichrist is not the sonne of perdition, & aduersary to God, and that all the kingdomes of the worlde are giuen to the Diuell, & that he hes the power in his hand of giuing them to whom he will: because the Scripture fore∣tolde of the one, that he should haue hornes like the Lambe, 2. Thessal, 2. & Reuel. 17 Matth 4. and the other ascriues this right and power to himselfe. It is good therefore that you cannot defend your Pope from be∣ing the Antichrist, vnlesse with him also you defend all the false Prophets, false Apostles, false Kirks, the Antichrist, and the Diuell himselfe, from being the thing whilk they are in∣deede. But who will venter the saluation of their soule, vpō this so sillie, and foolishe a reason? But I pray you (Maister Gilbert) let mee aske you this. Is your Pope the seruand of the seruandes of God, and the Vicare of Christ, as he calles himselfe? Dare you avowe this in the presence of him, who shall iudge the quick and the dead, that he is so, as he calles himselfe? Did euer Christ Iesus either tread vpon the necks of Kings, and Emperours with his feete? or was he euer lif∣ted
vp and carried vpon the shoulders of noble men? or did he euer giue his feete to Emperours to kisse, as your Popes hes done, as your owne histories does witnesse? And haue ye euer read what one of his owne Archbishops of Coleine, one of his owne religion, writes to Pope Nicolaus the firste, fiue hundreth yeares agoe, Auentinus lib. 4. annalium. speaking to him, he saies, Thou pre∣tends the person of the Pope, but thou playes the tyrant: we feele vnder the habite of a Pastor, a Wolfe, the stile belyes the Parent: thou vaūtes thy self to be Iouem. God by thy deedes, while as thou art the seruand of seruands, thou contends to be Lord of Lords, according to the discipline of Christ our Sauiour, thou art the least of all ministers of the Temple of God; but thou by the ambition of ruling goes to ruine: whatsumeuer lykes thee, Fucus factures Christianis. is leesome. This was euill in those daies, but there are worse since. And what now (reader) shal we say of the Pope, since his owne Arch-bishop hes so written of him? You say he is the Vicare of Christ, but Christ Iesus in his latter Testa∣ment, did neuer leaue him to be in his stead. For in the 4. Ephes. 11. He gaue Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists, Pastors, & Do∣ctors for the woorke of the ministerye, and the building of the bodye of Christ. But that he euer left a Pope to be head of the Kirk in his stead, to be a Monarch in this earth, to raigne in Rome, and to be Lorde ouer the seruands of God, there is not a sil∣labe in the whole book of God to proue it. And because you say he is the seruand or seruands: what seruice, I pray you, does he wherby he makes it manifest that he is a seruand in deede? For the principall seruice of the ministry of the Kirk stands in preaching the word, whilk he neither does, neither thinks that it appertaines to him to doe. Yea, what is it that appertaines to ony Lord, King, or Monarch in the earth, that he ascriues not to himselfe, and does not also practise? Yea, as though that were too little, what either stile or properties or workes, whilk are peculiar only to God his Maiesty, that he ascriues not to himselfe, as (God willing) shalbe prooued afterward in the third mark of the Antichrist. So that Auen∣tinus saies of the Pope, Lib. 7. He who is the seruand of seruands is the lord of Lords, and he desires to be as though he were God: hee speakes great things as if he were God: he changeth the lawes, establisheth his owne:
he reaues, he spoiles, he deceaues, he slayes: that man of perdition, whom men vses to call Antichrist, (speaking of the Pope) in whose fore∣bead the name of blasphemy is written: I am God I cannot erre. So what is this else, but a horrible mocking both of God & man to stile him the seruand of seruands, seeing hee hes lifted vp himselfe, so far aboue both God and man? So then to con∣clude this, as Goliah his owne sworde slew himself, so the rea∣son whilk ye bring to defend your Pope from being the An∣tichrist, doth most euidētly conuict him to be the Antichrist. He may iustly be called the Antichrist, who vnder pretence of the Vicare of Christ, and the seruand of seruands, is Mo∣narch and lord ouer all: this you cannot deny. Because the Scripture descriues the Antichrist to haue two hornes lyke the Lambe, to sit in the Temple of God, Apoc. 13. & 17. 2. Thessal. 2. to haue a golden Cupe: and yet to speake like the Dragon, to be aduersary to God, and to lift himselfe aboue all that is called God. But so hes the Popes of Rome done, as it hes, and shalbe proued by their owne doctrine and practise, and whilk you cannot de∣ny: Therefore he is in very deed that Antichrist whilk was to come. And this for your first reason. Maister Gilbert Browne. Secondly, Saint Paule in descriuing of the Antichrist, 2. Thessal. 2, 3. telles that he shal be but one, the sonne of perdition. Now then, if there shalbe but one chiefe Antichrist, whether is this present Pope he, or some other before him. For e∣uery man knowes that there hes bene moe then 230. Popes, as all the writers of their liues testifies. They cannot all be Antichristes, for that repugnes to Saint Paule, who hes put him in the singular nomber. And if Maister Iohn will followe the worde, as he sayes he does, where will he finde that there shalbe many chiefe Antichrists, and not one only? For that place of Saint Iohn where he saies, That now there is becommed many Antichrists, can no waies be vnderstood, but of the fore-runners of the great Antichrist. 1. Iohn 2.18. For at that time Maister Iohn will graunt himselfe, that the great Antichrist, the sonne of perdition was not begun. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. The Antichrist should not be o singular person, but a succession of many in one kingdome defection and ty∣rannie. Your second reason is, the Antichrist is but one singular person. The Popes hes bene many: therefore they are not the Antichrist. I deny your proposition, for there lyes all the
controuersie. We say the Antichrist is not this Pope, or that Pope an certaine person. But wee ascriue this name, to the whole seate and the succession of your Popes: we say the bo∣die and the kingdome of your Romaine Kirk, whereof your Popes are the heades, is that Antichrist whilk was to come. So if you proue that the Antichrist should be but a particu∣lar person, and not a body, a kingdome, a seate and successi∣on of men that are aduersaries to God and to Iesus Christ, I will graunt you haue sufficientlie cleared your Pope from beeing Antichrist. But content your selfe (Maister Gilbert:) this ye will neuer proue by the Scripture: and therefore ye must let your Popes be accounted the Antichrist still. And if this reason of yours be good, the Antichrist is one certaine person. Therefore the Popes, because they are many, are not the Antichrist; wherefore (I pray you) shall not this also be good: the Vicare of Christ is one certaine man, but the Popes are many: therefore they are not Christ his Vicare? What difference (I pray you) is there beetwene the one and the o∣ther? And if ye will say, the Vicare of Christ is not one singu∣lar man, but a succession of many in one office: why will ye not also graunt, that the Antichrist is not a singular man, but the succession of many in the selfe same impietie. So either choose you, whether will ye graunt that the Antichrist is not one singular man, but a succession of many; or else that the Popes are not Christ his Vicare: for the one ye must doe, if this reason of yours holde forth. But how doe ye proue that the Antichrist is but one singular person? You say, that Saint Paule telles that he shalbe but one. Howe woulde yee haue cried out, if I had fathered sik a falset vpon the spirit of God as you do heir? but let sik be far from mee. You say, Saint Paule calles him the sonne of perdition, and puts him in the singular nomber: therefore say ye, the Antichrist shalbe but one singular person. I feare ye take pleasure to deceaue the simple with sik sillie reasons. Our Sauiour Matth 12.35. saies, that a good man o anthropos, out of the treasure of his heart bringes forth good things. And he sayes, Marc. 2.27 The Sabboth was made dia ton an¦thropon, for man, and not o anthropos dia ton sabbaton, man
for the Sabboth. And also he saies, Luke 4 4 o anthropos man shal not liue of bread only. Also 2. Tim. 3.17 that o anthropos the man of God may be made perfite. And, 1. Timoth. 3.2. For it behooues ton episkopon a Bishop or ouerseer, &c. Heir are the same phrases of speach: they speak all of a man in the singular nomber, with that same greeke article o, as the Apostle speakes heir in descriuing the An∣tichrist, and yet I trow ye will not be so ignorant or impu∣dent, as to say, that our Sauiour and the Apostle speakes of one singular person in these places. So what warrand haue ye to gather that heir, whilk you dare not gather out of the like phrases of the Scripture? If then in these places there is not a singular man vnderstood, suppose they speake of a mā in the singular nomber; it will not follow that the Antichrist must be one singular person, because the Apostle speakes of him as of one man, in the singular nomber, for the phrases are all one: but the first ye must graunt: therefore the next will followe. Secondly, in the 16. of Matthew, our Sauiour saies, Epi taute te paetra, Vpon this rock I will builde my Kirk, he speakes heir in the singular nomber with the same article te, that the Apostle speakes of, in descriuing the Antichrist. Nowe let mee vse this same argument against your Popes, that they are not this rock vppon the whilk the Kirk is buil∣ded, as you say, as you haue vsed heir to proue that he is not the Antichrist. This rock vpon the whilk Christ promised to builde his Kirk, is but one singular person, because our Saui∣our puts him in the singular nomber (Epi taute te petra) Vpon this rocke: but your Popes of Rome are not one singulare person, but many: Therefore your Popes of Rome are not this Rock vpon the whilk Christ promised to builde his Kirk What difference is there betweene your argument for the Pope, and this argument against the Pope, seeing both are grounded vpon the like phrase? Choose you then, Maister Gilbert, whether will you haue the Antichrist, not to be one singular person, but a succession of many: or will you haue the Popes not to be the rockes where upon the Kirk is buil∣ded? for the one ye must. Thirdly, I say, the Apostle Paule sayes speaking of the Antichrist, that the mysterie of iniquity is
begun euen now to work. . Thessal. 2.7. 1. Iohn 4.3. And Iohn saies, this is the spirit of that An∣tichrist whilk ye hard was to come, and is euen now present in the world: and the Apostle saies, the Lord 2. Thes. 2.8. shall destroy him with his presence: and your doctrine is, that hee shall not come while the end of the worlde. Now what a monstrous man will yee make him, whose spirit was in the daies of the Apostles, and who must continue till the end of the world, if the Scripture be true, a man of fifteene hundreth yeare of age already. Is this credible? or are you able to perswade men that hes but the least drop of reason left in them, and beleeues the Scrip∣ture, that the Antichrist shuld be but one singular man, since the Scripture saies, that his spirite was present in the worlde and his iniquity euen then began to woorke in the Apostles dayes, that is, 1500. yeare since, and he shall continue to the end of the world. Fourthly, is it possible that one singular person can performe all these things, whilk either the scrip∣ture or your owne doctrine telles he shall doe? Reuel. 13. & 14. & 17. & 18 For the scrip∣ture sayes, he shall resemble the Lambe with hornes, he shal speake like the Dragon, he shall doe all the power of the for∣mer beast, he shal make al men to worship the beasts image, he shall make all, both rich and small, &c. to receaue his marke, &c. so that no man shal buy or sell but he that hes his marke, &c. so that all nations shalbe drunken with the wine of her fornication. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Romano Pont. & Rhemists an∣not. vpon 2. Thes. 2. and Sanderus in his demonstra. And your doctrine is, that he shall builde the Temple of Ierusalem, whilk the Turkes hes nowe in pos∣session, that he shall destroy Rome, that he shall abolish al re¦ligion, and all the outward ceremonies thereof, that he shall conquere and ouercome the strongest impires in the earth, and be Monarch of the whole worlde. Nowe, is it likely, or can it bee, that any one mortall man is able to performe so great and so wonderfull things? Was there euer yet anye King, Emperour, or anye other creature vnder heauen, that euer performed so great and wonderfull things, and especi∣ally in so short a time, as ye assigne to your imaginary Anti∣christ, as of three yeares and a halfe? That one ciety of Troy kept all the Grecians for the space of 10. yeares almost be∣sieging it, before they could ouercome it. The temple of Ie∣rusalem
was seauen yeares in building by Salomon, who had riches and wealth aboue all the Kings in the earth, who had an hundreth fiftie three thousand, 2. Chron. 2. and sex hundreth worke∣men for the same. That great Conquerour Alexander, with whome no Monarch is comparable, neither in power, nor happy successe, was not able to conquere all Asia the space of ten yeare, whilk was the fourth part of the worlde And shall we thinke that a miserable Iewe, by the helpe of their scattered people, being an enemy to God and all good men shalbe able to ouercome that great Monarchy of the Turks, against whome all the power of Christendome hes not pre∣uailed: & not only to ouercome them, but also to ouercome all the empires and kingdomes in the earth, and to restore the ciety of Ierusalem, and builde the Temple againe from the foundation, and abolish all religion, both true and false, except his owne: (for this is the doctrine of your Kirk con∣cerning the Antichrist) and that in so shorte a time as three yeare and a halfe, as you ascriue vnto him. Who will beleue you, Maister Gilbert? Will any Turke, Christian, or Iew him self beleeue, that any one man, suppose his age were neuer so long, and his person neuer so strong, can bee able to accom∣plishe and performe so many, and so wonderfull things, as your owne doctrine affirmes shalbe done by the Antichrist. So this doctrine of yours, that the Antichrist shalbe but one singular person, can neither stand with the scripture, nor yet with your owne doctrine concerning the Antichrist. Fiftly, as partly hes beene proued, this is the common phrase of the Scripture, in the person of one to vnderstand a multitude: & therefore Daniel in the descriuing of the Monarchies, he com¦pares them to sundry beastes in the singular nomber, to a ly∣on, a Beare, a Leoparde. &c. and yet by them was not signified one certaine person, but a succession of kings in the selfsame kingdome: and therefore the Antichrist is likened to a beast, to signifie a kingdome, Apoc. 13. & succession of persons in that king∣dome. De resurrecti∣one canis. Tertullian calles the Antichrist a ciety, whilk prosti∣tutes the selfe to fornicatiō, to wit, spiritual In Apoc. 17. Ambrose calles the woman cled with purple (who is the Antichrist) the ciety of the di∣uell.
Homil. 10. in Apoc, & homil. 13. & de ciuitate Dei, lib. 18 cap. 2. & lib. 20. cap. 19. Augustine calles that beast whilk is the Antichrist, the vn∣godly, and body of the wicked, who fights against the Lambe, a people contrary the people of God, whilk ioyntly with their head is called the Antichrist, a hereticall Kirk, whilk is called Babylon: nonnulli non ip∣sum Principem, sed vniuersum quodammodo corpus eius, id est, ad eum pertinentem, hominum multitudinem, simul cum suo principe, hoc loco Antichristū intelligi volunt. in Moralibus lib. 33. cap. 26. Gregory a Pope saies, the beast is a multitude of them who preaches the Antichrist. And In Apoc. 13. Thomas a Papist sayes, the beast (whilk is the Antichrist) is a body, & so not a singular person. And the ordinary glosse saies, The head and the body together makes the Antichrist. And Hugo a Cardinall calles him an Vniuersitie, or communalty. So not only the scrip∣ture and reason, but also the testimonies of these Fathers, & of some of your selues concurres all in this, that the Anti∣christ is not a singular person, but a body, an estate, a succes∣sion. So I hope the reader hes seene nothing, neither by scrip¦ture, neither by reason alledged by Maister Gilbert, wherfore the Pope may not be the Antichrist. Maister Gilbert Browne. Thirdly, Saint Paule sayes, He shalbe an aduersary, and is extolled aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped, &c. whi k no maner of way can aggree with the Pope. For he calles him self the seruand of God, & praies most humbly to Christ, and desires support at his haly mother and Saints. If he will deny this, I cannot tell what any man can say to him, but whether God will or not, he will haue the Pope to be the Antichrist, albeit it be re∣pugnant to the word of God. These are no darke prophecies, but mani∣fest sayings of Christ and his Apostles. I would wishe Maister Iohn to reade Saint Augustine de Antichristo, tom. 9. Maister Iohn Welsche his Reply. The pretences of the stiles of humi¦litie and pietie, hinders not but he may be, and is in verie deed an aduersarie to God and lifted vp aboue all that is called God. I come to your third reason. The Antichrist shall bee an aduersarie, and is extolled aboue all that is called God. I grant that: but your Pope is not an aduersarie &c. This I de∣nie: the whilk if you proue, then shall I grant he is not the Antichrist. Let vs see your prooues then, for they had neede to be sure, seing all your religion and safetie of your Kirk de∣pends vpon it: and if yee cannot cleare him from beeing an aduersarie to God, and from lifting vp him selfe aboue all
that is called God, or that is worshiped: then your head and your religion is gone. You say he is not an aduersarie to God because hee calles him selfe the seruant of God, and prayes most humblie to Christ. We answerd to this before. It is not his stiles whilk he sacrilegiously claimes to him selfe, Mat. 7.15. Tit 1.19. nor yet his forme of godlines that can free him from this: for Wolues wil be clad in sheeps skinnes, and false Apostles and Prophets hes pretended the authoritie and calling of God: and the Apo∣stle testifies that there are many whilk professe God in words, 2. Cor. 12.13.14. but de∣nies him in deedes: and Satan can transforme himselfe in an Angell of light. 2. Thes. 2. Reu. 1 And it was fore-tolde that the Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God, that is, in an eniment & high roume in the Kirk of God, and that he should haue two hornes like the Lamb, that is, as Augustine interpretes it, two Testaments as the Kirk hes: In Apoc. homil. 11. but yet speakes like the Dragon, that is, as he interpretes it, who vnder the name of a Christian pretends the Lamb, that he may spout in more secretly the poison of the Dragon: and that harlot who makes all nations drunken with the wine of her fornication should haue a golden cup, that is, a shew of godlines, Apoc. 17.4 Vpon Matthew treatise 28. and treatise 24. that hee might the more easily deceaue. And Origene saies the Antichrist holdes nothing but the name of Christ, neither does he his works nor teaches his trueth. Christ is the trueth, and the Antichrist is a disaguised trueth, a disaguised iustice and mercie. Hee takes the testimonies of his false doc∣trine out of the Scripture, for these that will not bee pleased otherwise, and he sitteth vpon the chaire of the Scriptures, shewing him selfe as though he were God. Epistol. 7. And Cyprian sayes that they teach dispaire vn∣der the pretence of hope, and perfidy vnder the pretence of faith, and the night for the day, and perdition in stead of saluation, and the Anti∣christ vnder the name of Christ. So then if ye will beleeue eyther the Scripture, or these testimonies of the Fathers, neither the stiles, nor yet the shew of godlines whilk your Popes hes will cleare them from being the Antichrist. And as to his humility towards men, we haue heard som∣what of it before: and as to his humility to God, we shal hear of it heirafter, whether he be so humble as he pretends or not And certainly, it had not bene possible that his spiritual ido∣latry and abhominations had bene so greedily drunken out
by all nations, if they had not bene put in Reuel. 17.4 a golden Cupe, & his 2. Th. 2.11 delusions had not bene so strong to deceaue, and they had not bene a & 10. deceaue-able vnrighteousnesse: that is, sik a vn∣righteousnesse as had the shew of righteousnes, that it might the more easily deceaue: and the Reuel. 13.11 doctrine of the Dragon had not beene so easily and vniuersally embraced, if hee had not had two hornes like the Lambe, that is, the pretence of the roiall and Priestly authority of the sonne of God. So he hes taken on these maskes that he may the more easily deceaue. It is not then these visards and maskes that will be able to hide him from these, whose eies the Lord hes opened. And as for the third thing, the inuocation of Saints departed, I say, this argument is so far from clearing him from being an ad∣uersary to God, that if there were no more, it is ynough to conuict your Popes and your Kirk, that they are aduersaries to God. For he is an aduersary to God, who robbes God of any portion of his glory, Isa 42.8. Psal. 50 14.15. and giues it to his creatures: My glo∣ry, saies the Lord, I will not giue to another. But the Pope & his Kirk does so, in giuing inuocation or praiers (whilk is a part of Gods glory and worship) vnto the Saints departed. For the Lord sayes, Call vppon mee in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and thou shall glorifie mee: therefore your Popes and your Kirk are aduersaries to God in this point. For wee Rom. 10.14. ought to call vpon them onlie, in whome only we ought to beleeue. But we ought only to Ierem. 17.5 beleeue in God: therfore we should only pray to him through Iesus Christ. And hee only should be incalled vpon, who knowes our necessities, & is able to heare our praiers, and to graunt them. But only God in Christ, the searcher of the heart doth these thinges: Therefore he only ought to be incalled vpon. Heir therefore ye giue out a sufficient euidence against your Popes & your Kirk, that you are Antichristian, and aduersaries vnto God: For that whilk ye bring heir to clense him, does fyle him. The Pope may be an idolater, & yet a hypocrite, he may speake like the Dragon, & yet be like the Lambe, he may confesse him in word, and deny him in deeds, he may be a raue∣nous wolfe, and yet clothed in a sheepes clothing Indeede, I will neither deny the hypocrisie nor idolatry of your Popes, for they both aggree vnto them: and that whilk Origen sayes of the Antichrist, is true of them: for they holde nothing of Christ, but his name: they neither doe his
workes, nor teaches his truth. And yet for all their hypocri∣sie and pretence of godlinesse and humility, these notes and markes of the Antichrist, as the worde of God hes descriued him, doth euery way aggree to them. So that if the word of God be true in setting downe the markes of the Antichrist, your Popes who beares these markes, of necessity must bee the same. You wishe me in the end to read Saint Augustine de Antichristo, tom. 9. It would appeare that you thinke, that the reading of that worke woulde haue altered my minde somewhat concerning your Popes, that they are not the An∣tichrist: and it appeares to me, by that your earnest desire, that the doctrine set downe in that treatise is worthy of all credite and authority, and that your self is of that selfe same iudgement concerning the Antichrist with the author of that treatise: for I thinke you would not haue wished mee to read that thing, whilk ye your selfe beleeues not to bee true. I therefore reade it, and reade it ouer againe. And be∣side many other thinges, I finde this in it: that the Antichrist should be borne of a Virgine, by the helpe of the Diuell, as Christ was borne of the Virgine by the worke of the holye Ghost. I wondered that you should haue wished me to read that booke, in the whilk there was so manifest an error, and that contrary the doctrine of your own Kirk. You should be∣ware of this (M. Gilbert:) for if your head and Kirk get wit of it, they will not only count you a bad defender of the Ca∣tholick Faith, as you say you are: but also it may be they sus∣pect you of heresie, who does wishe your aduersaries to read that booke, wherein so manifest an error is, and that against the doctrine of your owne Kirk. For who will thinke of you, but that ye are of that same opinion your self, seing ye are so earnest with others to reade the same. Lib. 3. de Rom. Pont cap. 12. Bellarmine that great defender of your Catholick faith, was more wise then you in this point. For first he saies, there is a manifest error in that trea∣tise: next he saies, It is certaine that that treatise cannot be Augu∣gustines, but it is probable, saies he, that it is Rabanus his worke. So to conclude this, I assure you M. Gilbert, I am of the same minde that I was concerning your Popes, for all the reading
of that worke: But I am not of the same minde towards you that I was before the reading of the same: for either I thinke ye haue bene very foolish in vishing me to reade that whilk ye beleeued not your selfe to be true: or else, that ye defend a manifest error, not only against the truth, but also against the doctrine of your owne Kirk. And let your Pope who is the bond of vnity amongst you, see to this: howe to recon∣cile you and Bellarmine, two defenders of his Catholick faith; you saying that that worke is Augustines, and Bellarmine flat∣ly denying it, and affirming that it cannot be his: you wish∣ing your aduersaries to read it, and Bellarmine confuting a manifest errour in it. But betwixt you be it. Now this is all that you haue saide for the defence of your Pope, whilk are but as figge leaues, whilk cannot hide his nakednesse. Arguments proo¦uing that the Pope is that vn∣doubted Anti∣christ Now I will let thee see (Christian reader) what wee haue for vs wherefore we affirme and teach, and is readie also (as thousands hes done before vs) to seale it with our blood that the Popes of Rome are the Antichrist, whilk the Scripture hes fore-tolde should come, time hes made manifest, and the Lord his mouth hes in a part consumed. And first, I will lay this ground whilk (Maister Gilbert) cannot gainesay, and the conscience of all men will subscriue to. That as the true Christ is sufficientlye descriued in the olde and new Testa∣ment, so the Antichrist is sufficiently descriued there also: and as he is to be beleeued, vnder the paine of the endlesse damnation of their soules to bee the true Christ, to whome the prophecies of the olde Testament concerning the Saui∣our to come, doth aggre; and of whome the new Testament testifieth that they are accomplished: So hee must bee that Antichrist whilk the Scripture fore-tolde was to come, to whome euerie one of the markes and properties of the An∣tichrist set downe in the same, doth aggree, and in whome they are found to be accomplished. Let vs therefore out of the Scripture searche the markes of the Antichrist, and then let vs see whether their Popes of Rome bee stamped with these markes or not. I speake not nowe of the many Anti∣christs wherof Iohn speakes, 1. Ioh. 2.18. whilk were fore-runners of that
great defection, whilk was fore-tolde shoulde come in the Kirk of God: but of that chiefe and great Antichrist, who not in one or two things only, but almost in all the points of his Religion, should be contrary to Iesus Christ, 1. Ioh. 4.3.2. Thes. 2, Apoc 11 13.17.18. whome the places of Scripture noted on the margent, does descriue. And while as I affirme, that the Popes of Rome are this great Antichrist, I vnderstand it thus: that they are the Prince & head of that defection and apostasie, whilk the Scripture fore-shewe and fore-told was to come in the Kirk. For I doe not thinke, that all the strength and force of the Antichrist, is included in the Pope: but the Pope & his kingdome whilk is contrary to the kingdome of Christ, is moste truely called the Antichrist: whereof, because the Pope is the Prince and head: therefore by that figure, taking the part for the whole, I call him the Antichrist. And in this we followe the scrip∣ture: for the Scripture speaking of the Antichrist, sometime calles it a defection, and a mystery of iniquity, and the se∣cond beast that hes the hornes like the Lambe, and the har∣lote: and sometimes points out the principall and chiefe in this kingdome, on whome the whole body of iniquity doeth hang: as when he writes heir, the man of sinne, and sonne of perdition, whilk is an aduersary, who extolles himself aboue all &c. whilk is most properly spoken, not of the bodie, but of the head. Hauing showne now in what sense we take the Antichrist, we will goe to the matter. And firste to that 2. Thessa. where he is descriued, and that by no darke prophe∣cies, as you say, but by plaine sayings. First therefore the Scripture calles him there, A man of sinne, and sonne of perdition. The whilk to be accomplished in your Popes, your owne hi∣stories, Cardinals, Councels, fauourers, Friars, friendes, and themselues, does sufficiently testifie. So that if they speake true of themselues (whilk you cannot deny) then of all the monsters that euer the earth hes borne, some of your Popes hes bene the greatest monsters. For in this point (Maister Gilbert) we deale not with you, as ye deale with vs: for ye cite our enemies as witnesses of vs, whilk should haue no credite and we cite your owne friends, and these of your owne reli∣gion.
So that they shall be fetched out as witnesses against you in this point, whether your Popes be the men of sinne, & sonnes of perdition, or not. What commandement is there of the first or second Table, whilk they haue not violated in the highest degree. 1. Whoremongers. 2. Adulterers. 3. So∣domites. 4. Incestuous. 5. Fosterers and maintainers of har∣lots. 6. Tyrants. 7. Diuelish, and Sorcerers. 8. In pride pas∣sing all creatures vnder heauen. 9. Atheists without God. 10. Periured. 11. Burreaus 12. Baudes, and marchantes of whores. 13. Sacrilegious. 14. Traitors. 15. Seditious. 16. Blasphemous. 17. Parricides. 18. Poisoners of Emperours, Senators, Cardinals, yea of their owne Parents and Sisters. 19. Helpers of the Turkes. 20. Drunkards. 21. Simoniaks. 22. Monsters. 23. Bastards. 24. Arrians. 25. Idolaters. 26. and so contentious, that sometimes there was two, some∣times three, and sometimes foure, all Popes striuing for the Popedome together. It were longsome and tedious to bring in their monstrous liues, as their own flatterers, Friars, Car∣dinals, and others of their own religion, hes written the same I will therefore only set downe a fewe for example, for the probation of this first point. A confirmer and allower of horri∣ble blasphemie and idolatrie. he died, anno 816 Leo the third, he by his authority allowed, and by his Buls confirmed a false and adulterous blood, whilk some lying deceauers affirmed to spring out of a certaine wodden Cru∣cifixe, to be the true blood of the sonne of God, and caused a solemne festiuall day to be made to the honor of  What horrible both blasphemie and idolatry was this? The Diuell himselfe could not haue done that whilk the Diuelish Pope did. Radolphus mo∣nachus Benedict lib. 5. cap. 32. & Marianus Scotus who died, anno 1086 and Sige∣bertus a Monke, who liued anno 1110 and Marti∣nus Polonus the Popes penitenti∣ar, and Laonicus Atheniensis li. 6. apodeixeos, and flores tempor. & Franciscus Pe∣trarcha. & Ioan∣nes Bocatius in libro de claris mu¦lierib. cap. 99. and Antoninus arch. of Florence, and sundrie others whilk for short∣nes I omit, as Platine, Mantua∣nus Baptista, and sundrie others. The Serpent whilk deceaued Eua, could not haue per∣suaded men that Christ Iesus, who (as the Apostle saies) but once shed his blood, and is now in glory at the right hand of his Father) did shed his blood againe, whilk this Pope con∣firmed and allowed. Iohn the 8. a Woman, or rather Ioane alone of that name, before called Gilberta, a harlote: who in the time of her Pro∣cession, brought forth a childe, and died thereof: sate in the Papal seate of Rome, two yeare, and six moneths, that all
might vnderstand, that that prophecie of the great whoore that sate vpon many waters, whilk is spoken in the Reuelat. 17. was fulfilled in the Idolatrous Kirk of Rome. And be∣cause some of you denies this, therefore I haue cited these authours, testifying the same. Steuen the 6. he caused take out of the graue, the carcase of Formosus, who had mansworne himselfe: and spoiles it of the Pontificall habite, and commands it to be buried againe in the burial of the Laicks, cuts off two of his fingers, & casts them into Tyber, and abrogates his decreets: and decreed that the ordinances of Formosus should be voide, whilk is a point of Donatisme, as Sigebert a Monke noteth. Cruel Nero ∣rogater of their predecessors de∣creets. But Roma∣nus the first, and Theodorus the second, Popes, his successors, they allow Formosus, and abrogates the acts of Stephanus, and so did Iohn the 10. by a councell of 74. Bishops, restored the acts of Formosus to the full, and abrogated the acts of Stepha∣nus, and condemned them. Yet for all this, Sergius the 3. ha∣uing casten downe Christopher the first out of his Papal seate: and afterward did cast him in prison, where he died: and so obtained this Satanicall seat by the helpe of Marozia his har∣lote; hee causes take out the body of Formosus, whilk had lyen eight yeares in the graue, degrades it from the Pontifi∣call honour, cuts off the three fingers whilk Stephanus the 6. had left, and with them casts his carcase in the riuer Tiber, & abrogates his acts, and ordained anewe them whilk was or∣dained by Formosus, whilk is a point of Donatisme. And this most filthie adulterer, begets Iohn the 12. an adulterous ba∣stard, who was Pope afterward, with Marozia his harlote. Pope Lando he begets in adultery Iohn the 11. Petrus Pre mon∣stratensis testi before hee was Pope: who afterward was Pope. Iohn the 11. or 10. Lando his adulterous sonne, he by the meanes of Theodora his impudent harlote, being then ruler of Rome, was first made Bishop of Bononia, Luitprand lib. 2. ca. 13. de impe Platine saies that this Iohn the 11 was the sonne of Pope Sergi, the 3. and then archbi∣shop of Rauenna, and then last of all, Bishop of Rome, with whome he wallowed himself in whoredome. But he by the meanes of Marosia his harlots daughter, is cast in prison, and there smoared. And her bastard sonne, whome some calles
Iohn the 12. whome Pope Sergius the third begat with her in adultery, is set vp in the Popedome: and he gouernes the same in that accustomed filthinesse. So the Kirk of Rome was gouerned by harlots, as noteth Luitprandus lib. 3. cap. 12. and was made a harlote, as it was prophecied of her, Ap. 17. Iohn, whome some calles the 13. of that name, he is sik a monster, that I knowe not if euer the earth did beare a gre∣ter, who had solde himself to all sorts of licenciousnesse, a∣dulteries, incests, and most horrible cruelties. Of his Cardi∣nals, Luithprandus in lib. 6. of some he cuts out their tongues, of some he cuts off their hands, of some their noses, of some their priuy mem∣bers. He is accused in a Synode of his owne Bishops, be∣fore the Emperour Otho, that he did not communicate, that he ordained Deacons in stables, that for money he made bairnes Bishops: that he defiled Virgines & strangers: that he made the pallace of Lateran a bordel-house, that be drāk wine to the Diuel: that in his gaming at the dice, he sought the Diuels helpe, that he committed a threefold incest: one with two sisters, another with his father his concubine, the third with his Niece: therefore hee was deposed from his Popedome. But afterwarde by the helpe of his harlots was restored to it againe, hauing deiected Leo the 8. who was pla¦ced in his roome by the Emperour. And laste of all in the very act of adultery, he is striken through, (as some saies) by the Diuell, God giuing out that sentence against him, and so dies without repentance. A monster of monsters. Cardinal Turre cremat, summa de Eccl. li. 3. c. 13 These are euill, but yet worse (if worse can be) did followe. For from Ioan the 8. who was a woman Pope and a harlote, for the space of 156. yeares, as some reckons to Siluester the second, who gote the Popedom in the 1000. yeare of our Lorde. For that space, I say, the Popes suppose they vowed holy chastity, yet they were sold to all lusts, and liued in all licenciousnesse, harlotry, adulte∣ries, incests, and in great contentions, cruelty, tyranny, and briberie: so that they might rather be called the Princes of Sodome and Gomorrha, then the Vicars of Christ. Genebrard a Papist saies, that for the space almoste of 150. yeares, from Ioan the 8. who died 884. anno, after Genebrards account: vnto
Leo the 9. anno 1048. about a fifty Popes did revolte wholly from the vertue of their antecessors, and were Apostaticall rather then Apostolical, and obtained the Popedome, some by money, some by force and bryberie: and so no maruell, saies he, suppose they vvere monstrous, and entered not in by the dore, but by the Postern gate. Chronol. lib. 4. seculo 10. But from Sylvester it appeares that the Diuell vvas then loo∣sed in his full strength and liberty: and the Antichrist reig∣ned then as a Dragon in the Kirk of Rome. For from him till Gregorie the seauenth, including them both, beeing 18. or 19. Popes, their ovvne Cardinall Benno vvrytes, that they vvere all inchanters or Sorcerers. Syluester the second, a teacher of these diuelishe artes: he by a solemne bargane vvith the Diuell, that if he vvoulde promote him to the Popedome, he vvoulde giue him both soule and body aftervvard, obtaines the same. He had a cop∣per-head in secreat, vvhilk alvvaies gaue him ansvvere of that vvhilk he demanded of the Diuell. He asked of the di∣uell hovv long he should liue? vvho doubtfully ansvvering him, that he should not die vvhill he saide Note what a thing is the masse seing with it the Diuel mocketh and deceaueth, euen the Pope himselfe. Concer¦ning these things whether they be true or not, see these Papists that writes the same, platin, Sabellicus Volater, Petrus Premostrat. Ben∣no a Cardinal, and in particular Friar Iohn de Pi¦neda part. 3. li. 19. Masse in Ieru∣salem: he reioycing at that, and neuer being purposed to goe to Ierusalem, yet not being vvare of the Diuell his subteltye, on a certaine day vvent to a certaine place in Rome, vvhilke vvas called Ierusalem, and there saying his Masse in that Tē∣ple, is sodainly taken vvith a feauer, and knovving by the noise of the Diuels, his death to be at hand, in the anguishe of his soule confessed his Diuelry, and as Benno a Cardinall vvrytes, he desires his hands and tongue, & (as some other vvrytes) his priuye members also, to be cut off, vvith the vvhilk hee sacrificed to the Diuell, and blasphemed God. Novv iudge thou (Christian reader) vvhether this seat and throne, and office of the Popedome, be of God, or not: whilk the Diuell can giue, and hes giuen to men, and vvhilk men can obtaine by Diuelrie. And iudge vvhether these men vvhome they call the head, light, and foundation of their Kirk, be Christs Vicars, or the Diuels Vicars, or not. Yea, iudge vvhether they are the very men of sinne, and sonnes
of perdition, and the Antichrists vvhilk the Scripture fore∣tolde should come in the Kirk, or not.) But yet this did not feare his successors: for they follovved his foote-steppes in these Diuelish artes. Benedict the 9. a Magician, and ob¦taines the Pope∣dome by that diuelishe arte: a worshipper of di¦uels, a filthie har∣lote his councel∣lers diuelish sor∣cerers, a seller of the Popedome, suffocate by the Diuell. Benedictus the 9. he vvas so skilled in these Diuelish arts of Magick, that before he vvas made Pope, in the vvoods he called vppon these euill spirites, and by his Diuelry caused vvemen to follovve him, for to satisfie his filthinesse. He by these his diuelish artes obtaines the Popedome, and makes his former companions Magicians, his most familiar coun∣sellers. But he fearing himself, solde the Popedome vnto his fellovve Magician, called Iohannes Gratianus, vvho vvas af∣tervvard called Gregorie the 6. for 1500. pound. Platine sayes, that by the iudgement of God hee is damned for the selling of his Popedome. So after he is deposed, he is suffocate by a Diuell in the vvoodes, & so he perishes. Of vvhome it is re∣ported, that after his death, he vvas sene monstrously to ap∣peare to a certaine Eremite, in his body like a Beare, in his head and taile like an Asse: and being asked hovve he vvas so monstrously transformed: he ansvvered, I vvander in this shape, because I liued in the Popedome vvithout reason, vvithout a Law, and vvithout God, (out of thy owne mouth thou art condemned.) There vvas sik tumults, contenti∣ons, and great slaughters for that throne, betvvixt Sylvester the 3. and Benedict his faction, that Benno a Cardinall sayes, the Kirk vvas rent in peeces; and by heresies, vnder the cu∣lour of svveete honie, vvas suffocate. And Platine a Papist sayes, that the good was oppressed and reiected: and they that might doe most by pride and ambition clam vp to that throne. But Gregorie the 6. buyes the Popedome (as hes bene said) & so at one time there are three Popes, whilk hes three sundry seates in Rome, whome Platin calles, Teterrima monstra most ougly monsters. Gregorie the 7. called otherwise Hildebrand that most ougly monster, Gregorie the 7. a vglie monster, a magician, he poi∣soned sex Popes before him, a in∣uder of himself in that throne, a worker of false miracles, his Bi∣ble a diuelish book, a traitor to the Emperor. hee hauing by the meanes of Brazutus poisoned six Popes his predecessors, to make a way to himselfe vnto the Popedome: he climes vp to that diuelish throne that same
night, without consent either of people or Cleargy. Of whome Benno a Cardinall writes, that he was a notable Ma∣gician: that when it pleased him he would shake his sleeue, and sparkes of fire would come out, whereby hee deceaued the mindes of the simple. Of whome the said Cardinall re∣ports also, that comming to Rome at a time, he left his book of his Magical and diuelishe artes behinde him through for∣getfulnesse: and remembring himselfe, he sends two of his most faithfull seruands about it, charging them straitly that they opened not the booke: but they the more they were forbidden, they were the more curious: and so opening the booke, and reading it, beholde the Angels of Satan appea∣red to them in sik a multitude, that skarcely did the two young men remaine in their wits: and the Diuels said vnto them, Wherefore haue ye called vs? why doe ye wearie vs? Tell vs what we shall doe, otherwise vve will fall vpon you? Vnto vvhome one of them ansvvered, Pull dovvne these high Walles vvhilk are neir Rome, vvho vvent and did it quickly, and so the young men came to Rome exceedingly terrified. This same Cardinall reportes of him that he see∣king by many deceatfull meanes to put dovvne the Empe∣rour, he hearing that the Emperour resorted often to a cer∣taine Kirk to his praiers, and hauing searched the place vvhere he vsed to bovve himselfe: he hired a Villaine to lay great stones ouer the beames of the Temple where the Em∣perour praied: that they falling on the Emperour, might crushe him in peeces: and so it might be reckoned for a mi∣racle of Gods iudgements. But it fel not out so: for the stone being so heauie, fell backvvard vpon him: & breaking a ta∣ble that vvas amongst the beames, the stone and the mi∣serable man fell dovvne vpon the floore of the Kirk: and so the miserable Villaine is crushed in peeces, vvith the same stone vvhilk he had prepared for the destruction of the Em∣perour. The same Cardinall also reportes, Iudge Christian reader whether this man be not the diuels Vicar, and not Christs Vicare. that he sought a response of the sacramēt of the lords body against the Em∣perour (as the Pagans vvont to do at their Idoles:) but whē he gote none, he cast it in the fire. For the vvhilk cause the
Bishop of Porteous in open Pulpite saies, that Hildebrand and vve should be burnt quick. He excommunicates Henry the 4. deposed him from his empire, and set vp Rodolphus Duke of Sueuia in the Empire, and sent him a crovvne vvith this verse, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho. He loused all his subiectes from their oath of obedience to him, and forbade his Bishops and Cleargy vnder the paine of Excommunication, to acknovvledge him. This Emperor vvith his vvife, and sonne, came in the Winter, and stoode before his Pallace bare-footed, three daies, in linning cloa∣thes: and all that time coulde not get accesse to this proude Antichrist: vvho answered that his holinesse vvas not at lei∣sure. Antoninus and Vincentius saies, that he granted to a Car∣dinall in the time of his death, that by the instigation of the Diuell he stirred vp hatred, enimity, and vvarres amongest many. Of vvhome also Cardinall Benno vvrites, that seeing the Diuell could not get Christ subverted by the Pagans: he laboured to subuert his name vnder the shape of a Monke, and pretence of Religion. The most cruell, arrogant, and treasonable tyrant Pope Alexander the 3. Alexander the 3. a cruell, arrogant & a treasonable tirant. He betraied the Emperour to the Turke. He continevves a debate for that Satani∣call seat 20. yeare: first vvith Victor, then vvith Paschalis, Ca∣lixtus and Innocentius, vvho vvere elected Popes, and succee∣ded one after another. He excommunicates the Emperor Frederick, and Pope Victor. He betraies the Emperour to the Souldane, sends his picture to him, and wrytes to him to cut him off, if he would liue in peace. He caused him to fal doun on the ground, and to seeke mercy, and then stramped vpon his neck, (the Monarch of the vvorlde) repeating that sen∣tence of the Psalme, Super aspidem & basiliscū, &c. Thou shalt walke vpon the serpent, & the cokatrice & thou shalt tramp down the lion & ye Dragon. (O blasphemous mouth, for this is spoken only of Christ.) And vvhen the Emperour ansvve∣red, Not to thee, but to Peter: he replyed, Both to mee, & to Peter. Boniface the 8. that threeformed beast, of vvhome the com¦mon Proverbe is, Boniface the 8. a threeformed beast, a deceauer  ell tirant that he entered in like a Foxe, rang lyke a Lyon, and died like a Dog: hee moste craftily deceaued his
Predecessor Celestine, by causing one to speake to him for ma∣nie nights through an vvhistle, as though it had beene the voice of an Angell: Celestine, Celestine renounce, for the burthen is greater then thou art able to beare. The vvhilk the simple man beleeuing, renounced the Popedome, and so he entered in his roome, and hauing inprisoned the simple man his Prede∣cessor, he vvas sik a cruell tyrant that he persecuted some of his Cardinals euery vvhere, spoiling them both of their li∣uings, offices, and their heritages. He wasted and spoiled the places where they were reset, so that they were compelled some of them to dwell in the woods, flying his cruelty. Some did venture vpon the cruell hearted Pirats, thinking to find greater humanitie with them, nor with their holy Father the Pope. He was also without all Religion: for when the arch∣bishop in Genua vpon Ashwednesday, vpon his knees, bare headed, doing his seruice in the Temple before the people: An atheist and mocker of Reli∣gion. this holy Father looking on him, took a great many of ashes and cast in his eies, saying these words, Remember man because thou art a Gibelline, and with the Gibellins thou shall returne to ashe. He nourished Harlots, he begate bastards, he affirmed that no man should iudge him, though hee carried a nomber of soules with him to Hell. Iohn the 23. taught, that the soules separated from the bo∣dies, did not see Gods face while after the resurrection, Who after some is the 22. An heretick, a ti∣rant, a perturbes of the publicke peace. and sent Friars to preach it. He was declared by the people of Rome (as Marius sayes) to be an heretick, a tyrant in the Kirk, and a perturber of the publicke peace of Christians. Benedict the 12. he bought from her other brother Gerardus with great giftes, a sister of Franciscus Petrarcha, Benedict the 12. a buyar of a har∣lots, a nurisher of harlots, death to the people, a Vi∣per to the clear∣gie, a wanderer from the truth. to commit villanie with. He nourished many harlots, of whome it is written, Iste fuit verò laicis mors, vipera clero, deuins à vero, he was a death to the people, a viper to the Cleargie, a wanderer from the truth. One part of Christendome, to wit, the Romanes, makes Vrbanus the sext Pope: another sorte makes Clement the sea∣uenth Pope, whereby was sik a schisme, that it went to their successors, and continued fourtie yeares. These Popes did
mutually by their bulles excommunicate one another: Popes schisma∣ticks, theeues, ti∣rants, wickedsowers of tares, trai∣tors, heretickes, antichtists, and sonnes of Beliall, by their owne do doctrine. Vrbane the 6 put 5. Cardi¦nals in sackes, & cast them in the sea, & drowned them, he con∣demned to deth 3. other Cardi∣nals, comman∣ded their heades to be cut off their bodies, to be rosted in a fomace, and be∣ing rosted to put them into sackes and whensoeuer he went from one people to an¦other, he carried them vpon hor∣ses as spectacles: & that they might be known to be Cardinals, he placed their read hats vpon the sacks. Colle∣nutius writeth this in his Nea∣politane historie, was euer Nero or Heliogabulus so cruell? they sent infamous libels one to another: wherein they called o∣ther mutually hereticks, schismatickes, Antichrists, tyrants, theeues, traitors, sowers of euill seede, and the sonnes of Be∣lial, and that worthily. Now because the Kirk of Rome saies that the Popes cannot erre, and that their iudgement is in∣fallible, and their decreetes moste sure: therefore, if this be true, by their owne testimonies they are hereticks, schisma∣tickes, and Antichristes. &c. Illyricus testifies, that Theodoricus Niem the Pope his most inward Scribe, faithfully set downe the history of the schisme of these Popes in three bookes: wherein he sayes, that he fand the diuelish craft of the Popes and their wickednesse whereby they horribly mocked God and Religion, vexed & tyrannized ouer the Kirk of Christ, to be sik, that suppose he had red, heard, and seene meikle of their wickednesse before: yet hauing red that booke, he sawe their wickednesse was ten-folde more then euer hee would haue suspected. And therefore he sayes, Truely nowe I assent vnto the Canonists, who affirmes that the Pope is neither God nor man: for, saies he, they are incarnate Diuels, and in mallice and wickednesse is worse then Sathan himselfe. Iohn the 24. after his Predecessor was poisoned, threatned the Cardinals to choose whome he would: for this cause na∣med they many, but with none of them was he pleased: then they praied to name whome he would Pope: he answered, Giue me S. Peters mantle, & I will put it vpon him, who shall be Pope: and when they had giuen it him, he put it on him∣selfe, and saide, I am Pope. He is accused before the Coun∣cell of Constance, of fourty waighty and graue crimes, whilk were sufficiently prooued against him. And Bellarmine saies, there was 35. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Rom. Pont. c. 14. articles proued against him: that he poisoned his predecessor Alexander, that he was an heretick, a Symo∣naick, a lyar, an hypocrite, a murtherer, a dicer, an adulterer a Sodomite, and what not? This also was laide to his charge, that he denied life euerlasting, and therefore is deposed, and another set in his roome. In his Epitaph it is written of him Pestis auaritiae me caecum reddidit, pphi aurū Plus iusto sitiens munera sa∣cra
cradedi: that is, the pest of auarice made me blinde, and thir∣sting ouer meikle for golde, I folde holy things too deare. Sixtus the fourth that vile and beastly monster. Sixtus the 4. an al lower of Sodomi¦trie, an inuenter and seller of new offices a builder of a solemne stewes in Rome, whereby he aug∣mented his rt. Wesselus Groningensis in his treatise of the Popes pardons, writes of him that he permitted to the whole familie of Cardinall Luciae, at the request of Petrus Ruerius Cardinall, and his brother to vse Sodomitrie, (O horrible abhomination!) the three moneths of the yeare, Iune, Iuly, & August. Agrippa sayes, that among ye Bawds, or maintainer of bordels of these latter times, Sixtus the fourth was famous: for he builded a meikle bordel-hous in Rome, both for whoredome & Sodomitry: he fed troopes of harlots, gayning thereby great sommes of money: for e∣uery harlote of Rome, euery weeke payed to the Pope, an Iulian pennie, whilk would amount in the yeare to twentie thousand Ducats. But they say it is now augmented, that it commes to fourtie thousand. In his Epitaph it is written, Riserat vt viuens coelestia numina Sixtus, &c. that is, Epitaphium. While hee was liuing, he mocked God, and dying, he beleeued there was no God. Ane adulterer, the destruction of the towne, Pemiciesque dei who past Nero in wickednesse, who was all wickednesse and vice together. Alexander the 6. he made a couenant with the Diuel, E Eusebio cap¦uo Hieronymi Marii. Alexander the 6 a bargainer with the Diuel for the Popedome. His counsellor was the Diuel, as Simo¦niack, an Atheist a Traitor, a ince∣stuous adulterer, with his owne daughter, a per∣mitter of Sodo∣mie, a poisoner of his Cardinalles. and gaue himselfe ouer to the Diuell, that by his helpe he might obtaine the Popedome: the whilk when he had obtayned, he so holily led his life, that he preased to doe nothing with∣out first he had asked the aduise of the Diuell. A Simoniack an Atheist also: of whome it is written, Vendit Alexander cru∣ces, altaria, Christum: Emerat ille prius, vendere iure potest. That is, He selled the croce, altars, and Christ himself: he bought thē first, and therefore he might sell them againe. A traitor also for two hundreth thousand Ducats, whilk he receaued from the Turke: he poisons the Turkes brother, Gemen Baiazetes, being then captiue in Rome. Who also called for the Turks to assist him against the french King. He committed vile in∣cest with his owne daughter Lucretia, of whome it is written her Epitaph, Alexandri filia; sponsa, nurus. He made one of his sonnes Prince of Scile, and another a Cardinall. He gaue li∣bertie
to Petrus Mendoza a Spaniard, a Cardinall, whose luste could not be satisfied, neither with a troope of harlots, nei∣ther with the Queene her selfe, to commit Sodomitry with his owne bastard sonne Zanathensis. (O horrible impiety!) He commanded to poison some of the Senators of Rome, and of his owne Cardinals, who were at a banket together with him selfe. But in the righteous iudgement of God, the Flagon being changed at vnawares by him that filled the Cups, he himself was poisoned, and so perishes. His Epitaph sayes, Fa∣mae contemptor honestae, &c. contemner of honesty, and all wic∣kednesse it selfe. And in another of his Epitaphes it is writ∣ten, that he destroied cieties and kingdomes, and wasted the world with sworde, fire, and robberie, to enrich his bastarde children: and that he tooke away the lawes both of God and men, and the Gods themselues, that he might more licenci∣ouslie sinne. In quodam com¦mentaio magist. Parisiens. Iulius the 2. a So¦domite, a cruel ti¦rant, by whose ti∣rannie 200 thou∣sand were slaine a mocker of Pe∣ters keies a seller of heauen, & yet gets not heauen himselfe. Iulius the 2. committed Sodomitry with two youthes of an honorable linage, whilk the Queene of France sent to a Cardinall to be informed. He was sik a cruell tyrant that by his tyranny in the space of 7. yeare, there was two hundreth thousand Christian men slaine. Of whome it is written that when hee went to the warres, he cast Peter his keyes in Tybris with this voice, Saint Peters keyes helpes not, let Pauls sword defend vs. Of whose pardons it is written, Vendit emm coelos, non habet ipse tamen, he selles heauen, but hes not heauen himself. Leo the 10. a beastlie monster, an atheist, he ac∣compted the gos¦pel of Christ a fa¦ble and yet a pro¦fitable fable for hat diuelish seat Leo the 10. a beastly man, borne to all licenciousnesse, a drunkard and Atheist without God, when one of his Cardi∣nals Petrus Bembus was repeating a sentence out of the Gos∣pel he answered blasphemously, What profite that fable of Christ hes brought to vs and our Kirk, it is sufficiently knowne to all ages. Whereby, though all the world should deny it, this horrible monster sufficiently declares, that he is that man of sinne, & sonne of perdition. Clemens the 8. and after some the 7. it is written of him that he was a bastarde, In comment. su∣perae magist. Patisiens. Clemens the 8. an anatomie of al abhomination a Venefician, a Sodomite, a murthe∣rer, a bawde, a Simoniack a harlote, periured, a sacrilegious man, a Diuiner, and a craftesman of all wickednesse. Of
whome Pasquillus writes in his Epitaph, Hic est perquem tot pro∣stant in vrbe puellae, &c. that is, a defiler of maidens, a banisher of honesty and chastity, a honorer of all vncleane persons, the infamy of the world, the decay of the Empire, a contem∣ner of God, a man of wickednesse, a publick enemy, a false and vngrate man, a tyrant, and sik a man as there was neuer a worsein the world. Paule the 3. a vile beastly monster as euer the earth bure: Paule the third a seller of his sisters chastitie, the poi∣soner of his mo∣ther and two si∣sters, incestuous with his owne si∣ster, niece, & daughter. he sold his sister to be a harlote to Pope Alexander the 6. that he might be made a Cardinall. He deceaued a certain maid of honourable parentage, and defloured her vnder the hope of marriage, of whome he begat Petrus Aloysius that vile So∣domite. He poisoned his mother and sister that he might en∣ioy all the heritage himselfe. He committed incest with an∣other of his sisters, and afterward poisoned her, because she loued others more then him. He committed vile incest and adultery both, with his Niece Nicolaus Quercaus his wife, who being deprehended in the very act by her husband, was so wounded by him, that he kept the marke thereof to his very end. He committed also incest and adultery with his owne daughter Constantia. And that he might the more licenciou∣sly enioy his beastly lust with her, he poisoned her husband, Eusebius c∣tivus. named, Bosius Sforsia. He exceeded Heliogabalus and Commo∣dus in filthinesse, defiling his owne sister, niece, and daughter He had 45. thousand harlots in a row, of whom he receaued tribute and toll euery moneth, who was familiar with him day and night. Iulius the thirde, what better was he, who against the wils of all his Cardinals made one Innocent with whome hee had done villanie, Cardinall: and admitted him to his domestick familiaritie. Vergerius writes, he abstained not from his owne Cardinals and that he vsed sik horrible blasphemies, as the most vilest bandes, and the most filthie villanes vses in the contempt of God. When hee missed his dish of Bacon whilk was not set at the table, at the command of his Physician, he brast forth in this blasphemie: bring me my dish al dispetto de Dio, that is, in despite of God. Againe, when he missed a dishe
of a could peacock, whilk he had cōmanded to keep to him, hauing other new rosted peakocks, he vomit out moste hor∣rible blasphemie against God. And when one of his Cardi∣nals answered, let not your holines be offended at so light a matter: he replyed, if God was so angrie for the eating of one apple, that hee caste out our firste parentes out of Paradise, vvherefore shall it not be Iesum to me vvho is his vicare, to be angrie for a peacock, seing it is far greater nor an apple. Novv let men iudge, vvhether the Popes of Rome beares this marke of the Antichrist or not, that is, vvhether they be men of sinne and sonnes of perdition or not. Much more might I haue brought for the manifesting of this poynte, as the threttie schismes amongst their Kirk, vvhilk neuer Kirk had so many, their mutuall contentions, strifes, cruelties, ex∣ercised one towards another. But I hope this will suffice to satisfie the conscience of all men, that the Popes are that man of sinne, and sonne of perdition. And certainlye if o∣thers had written their abhominations, then men of their owne Religion, their owne flatterers and friendes; it would haue seemed incredible. But their own writers hes by Gods prouidence, so discouered their abhominations, that I think the consciences of all men may be at a point in this. This for the first marke. 2. Thessal. 2.4. The second propertie of the Antichrist, as he is descriued in that same place, is to be an aduersary to God. For as the Di∣uell is called Sathan, that is, an aduersary to God: so his chief Lieutennant Antichrist, is called an aduersary, that is, op∣posed and contrary to God, and that not in life onely, but in doctrine, religion, and gouernement: and that not in one point only, but almost in all the substantiall points thereof. The whilk marke the Popes of Rome beares, and that not only in their liues, but also in the whole substantiall pointes of Religion. And to make this cleare, beside that whilk hes bene spoken, we shall compare the doctrine of Iesus Christ, and the gouernment of his Kingdome set down in the scrip∣ture, with the doctrine of the Popes, and the maner of their gouernement, that the contrariety of them may be known:
so that it shall be seene, that colde is no more contrarie to heate, and black to white, nor Papisme to Christianity and the religion of the Kirk of Kome, to the Religion of Christ Iesus. The doctrine of Christ stands especially in these two things: in the knowledge of his person, 1. Cor. 3. & in the knowledge of his offices. And therefore the Apostle sayes, I desire to knowe nothing but Iesus Christ and him crucified. Ioh. 17 And Christ him∣selfe sayes, It is life eternall to knowe thee to be the true God, and whome thou hast sent Iesus Christ. The doctrine of the Popes of Rome ouerthrowes both. And first to prooue this concer∣ning his person, Rom. 1.3. Gal 4 4. Heb. 2.17. the Scripture testifies that Iesus Christ is cō∣ceaued of the substance of the Virgine Mary, & that he hes but one true bodie made of the seede of Dauid, and of the seede of the woman, and not many: and that he is like vnto vs in all things except sinne. The doctrine of the Kirk of Rome is, Bellar. lib. 3. de Eucharistia, fol. 399. Pope Iohn 22. lib. orat. infer. Antidotarius ani¦mae. the Priests make Christs bodie of bread that Christ Iesus his body is made of the bread and wine in the sa¦crament: and their doctrine makes him to haue as many bodies as there is bits of bread in the sacrament: and not to be like his brethren in all things except sinne: for his bre∣thren can be but in one place at once, with their owne due proportion visiblie: But their doctrine of Transubstantiati∣on makes him to be both in heauen and earth, at once: in heauen visibly, in earth inuisibly: in heauen with his owne quantitie and proportion, in earth without his naturall pro∣portion: & not in one place of the earth only, but in innu∣merable places thereof at once: so that this maine founda∣tion of mans saluatiō, (without the whilk there is no eternal life) concerning the truth of Christs manhoode made of the woman, is alluterlie defaced and ouerthrowne by the do∣ctrine of the Popes of Rome, in making him to haue infinite bodies, not made of the seede of the woman, but of bread & wine: or at the least, made of two diuerse substances. And as they ourthrow the doctrine of his person, so they ouerthrow the doctrine of his offices. His offices are three: a Prophet, a Priest and a King, whilk are all ouerthrowne by them. As he is a Prophet, he hes reuealed his Fathers vvhole Ioh. 15.19. vvill vnto his seruands, and hes left it in register in his latter Te∣stament,
and hes forbidden Deut. 4.2. Re∣uel. 22.18.19. Gal 1.8. to eike, empaire, or to alter the same: and hes pronounced a woe and a curse vnto them that eikes, empaires, or alters the same: 2. Tim. 3.15.16. & that because it is sufficient to make a man wise vnto saluation, & to make the man of God perfite vnto euery good worke: Prou. 8, 9. Psal. 19.8.9.10. Psal. 119. & because it is pure & per∣fite and easie to al them that will vnderstand it. But they haue ma∣ny waies corrupted this Testament of Christ, by mingling and adulterating the same: first in that they Cone. Trident. Ses 4 Bud. aannot. prior is pandect. Andrad. lib. 4. Arias Montanus, tom. 8. bibl. reg. in prefat. giue diuine authority to the bookes called Apocrypha, whilk are humain. Next, in receauing, and commanding others to receaue Traditions with equall reuerence and affection with the Scripture. Thirdly, in their corrupt latine translation, whilk they haue made authenticall, whilk some of themselues confesses hes missed sometimes the meaning of the holy Ghost. Conc. Trident. Ses. 6. cap. 10 Fourth∣ly, in ioyning with the commandements of God their owne commandements, and that not as things indifferent, but as necessary to saluation. Sessi. 4. Fifthly, in condemning al sense & meaning of the holy Scripture, but that whilk they holde themselues. Last of al, in quarrelling the Scripture of imper∣fection, obscurity and ambiguitie, calling it dead & dumbe like a nose of waxe. They therefore who hes altered, eiked, and corrupted the Testament of Iesus Christ, confirmed by his death, whilk he hes left in write, for to instruct his Kirk in all things, and to make her wise to saluation, and perfite to euery good worke, doth spoile the Lord Iesus of his prophe∣ticall office: But the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome hes done so, Ergo they spoile Iesus Christ of his propheticall office. Heb. 9.11.12.15.2.25.26.27.28 Thirdly, they are no lesse sacrilegious and iniurious to his Priest-hoode. His Priest-hoode stands in two things. First, in purchasing vnto vs, by the vertue of that one sacrifice once offered vp vpon the Croce, an euerlasting redemption Next, in making continuall intercession for vs with his Fa∣ther: the whilks both are ouerthrowne by the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome. As to the firste, it is ouerthrowne manye waies: as first, our sauiour saies, that his soule was sorrowfull vn∣to the death: Mat. 26.37.38. &c. Heb. 57. Luc 0.44. Mat. 27.46. and the Scripture testifies that for the feare of that Cupe be swate drops of blood: and he send vp strong cries and sup∣plications
with teares, in the daies of his fleshe: and therefore he thrise vpon his knees praies that if it had beene possible that Cupe might be remoued from him: and vpon the Croce through the sense and feeling of that wrath, he breakes forth in that complaint, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken mee? Al whilk does testifie that he suffered more then a common death: to wit, the terrours of the wrath of God, whilk was due to the sinnes of all the elect. But the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome ranuerses this doctrine of our saluation, and teaches that Christ suffered not the wrath of God vpon his soule: whilk if it be true, then Christ hes not paied our debt sufficiently: for our debt was not onely the naturall death of the bodie, but the wrath of God vpon the soule: Ezech. 18.20. and therefore the Scrip∣ture sayes, the soule that sinnes shall die the death. Secondly, the Scripture testifies, Heb. 10.10.14 Ioh, 19, 18, 1, Timoth, 7, 6 1, Pet, 2, 24, 1, Ioh 1, 7, that Christ his death and blood is a suffi∣cient ransome for our sinnes, & a sufficient satisfaction vnto the iustice of God: they by the contrary ioynes to his satisfa∣ction, the satisfactions of men, both in this life, and in the life to come: in Purgatorie, and that not onely for their owne sinnes, but for the sinnes of others. What is this else, but to make themselues in a parte Sauiours of themselues, & saui∣ours of others also. Yea, what is this else, but to make them∣selues God? for who can satisfie the iustice of God, but God himselfe? Thirdly, as it hes bene prooued before, Christ of∣fered vp himselfe once, by shedding of his blood vppon the Croce, neuer to be offered vp againe, whilk hes purchased a euerlasting redemption: the whilk is the onely ground of mans saluation. Hovve they haue ouerturned this by their abhominable sacrifice of the Masse, and their sacrilegious Masse priests, I hope hes beene prooued sufficiently before: So that they haue both euacuat the vertue of the sacrifice of Christ vpon the Croce, in setting vp an other sacrifice for the dignitie of his royall priest-hoode, in ioyning vnto him Col∣legues and fellow-priests to offer vp himselfe daylie in their pretended sacrifice. Fourthly, as they spoyle him of his priest∣hoode, so doe they spoyle men of that redemption, righte∣ousnes,
and saluation, 2. Timoth. 1.9. Tit. 2.11. Eph. 1.5. & cap. 2. Ioh. 3.16. whilk his death hes purchased, both in the fountaine, matter, and forme thereof. The Scripture te∣stifies, that the onely fountaine and efficient cause of our sal∣uation is gods free loue and grace. They Masuenda in disput. Ratish. cum Bucero & Scholast. teach that a infidel by the workes of preparation (as they call them) euen done without Faith, may procure and merite Gods fauour. And also they ioyne with the grace of God, man his free will, as a partie worker with it, as though God did not renew it being corrupted, or re∣paire it being perished, Rom. 11.6. & 4.5. but only releeue it, being waike and raise it vp being faint: by the whilk they abolish (if the Apo∣stle speake true) the grace of Christ: for if our saluation be of grace, Rom. 5.19. it is not of works, & if it be not of works thē it is not of grace, and so not at all. As to thē matter of our iustification, the Scriptures ascriues it onely to Christe his obedience and his death. They by the contrarie, suppose they graunt that Christ hes fulfilled the Law, and perfitely satisfie God, yet they teach that this righteousnes of Christ is not our righteousnes by the whilk we must be iustified, Rom. 4.22.23.24 3.5.6.7. but they place it in our owne workes and in our owne merites. And of this comes the third, that whereas the Scripture testifies, that this righ∣teousnes of Christ is imputed vnto vs by faith, they acknow∣ledge Bellarm. saies lib. 2. de Pontifie. 2. that the impu∣tation of the righ¦teousnesse of Christ is not re∣quired to our iu∣stification. And the councell of Trent can. 10. ac∣curses them who saies that we are iustified iustos formaliter per Christi iustitiam) by the righteous¦nesse of Christ. not this imputation, but places the forme of our iu∣stification in the merite of our workes. And so they spoyle man of righteousnes and saluation. And as they haue spoyled Christ, of the firste parte of his office of his priest-hoode, so doe they spoyle him of the se∣conde parte thereof, vvhilk consists in his intercession: in ioyning vvith him innumerable intercessors and mediators, asvvell of Angels as of Saintes departed, at vvhose handes they seeke all maner of grace, vvhilk is onlie proper to Iesus Christ to giue: & that not only for the vertue of ye merites of Christ, but for their own merites & intercessiō. Euery Parish almost among them had their ovvn patrone: & euery mala∣die disease or calamitie their own Saint or Angell to run to. And as their doctrine hes robbed the Lorde Iesus of his priestly dignitie, and man of the benefite of eternall life pur∣chased to him by the same: So haue they robbed him of that
glorie and vvorship that is due vnto him, in plucking avvay his glorie frō him, & giuing it vnto creatures 1. as vnto An∣gels, & 2. vnto Saints departed, & especiallie vnto the vir∣gine Marie, 3. vnto their relicts, 4. vnto images of the Tri∣nitie, of the Saints, of the Croce, 5. vnto things consecrated, as vvater, oyle, &c. 6. and vnto the Sacrament of the Eu∣charist, vnto vvhome they giue that vvorshipe vvhilk is on∣lie due vnto God, as prayer, vvorship, vovves, sacrifices, &c. So that if they may be iustly called the Antichrist, vvhose doctrine spoyles Christ of the office of his mediation, & man of his saluation purchased thereby; and God of his due glo∣ry: vvhilk man is bound to giue him, for his creation, and re∣demption: and sets vp other Sauiours and mediators, other priests and intercessors beside him, and teaches another way of mans saluation nor he hes taught, and worshipes other Gods, nor the God that made heauen and earth, and after another māner nor he hes cōmanded: Then I say the Popes of Rome, may iustly be called and is in trueth the Antichrist and aduersarie to God: For they are guiltie of all this abho∣mination. And because I know that the poore and ignorant people, and these that are blinded with the strong delusions of that man of sinne, will not beleeue these thinges of him, and of his Kirk, but as Thomas saide of Christ, vnlesse I see the print of the nailes, and put my finger in the print of the nailes, & put my hand into his side, I will not beleeue. Euen so, vnlesse they see their idolatrie and grope it as it were with their hands, they will not beleeue it: therefore I am compel∣led for their conviction and information (that none of them that is ordained to saluation perish) to let them se their ido∣latries, and to make them to grope their abhominations, and that by their owne books. For I shal not speake heir begesse, for that were greate foolishnes to alledge heir anye other thing, nor that whilk is written in their owne bookes, seing he hes promised to giue an answere least he shuld challenge me of lying of them. I protest therefore (Christian Reader) that I shall forge nor faine nothing of them but shall one∣lie set downe those things whilk ar to be found in their owne
vvrittings. And first, they praye to the Archangels and An∣gels to defend them in battle, to defend them that none condemne them to keepe both their bodie and soule from godlesse desires and from vn∣cleane cogitations, In their seruice and Masse book secundum vsum Anglic anum. Horae beatae Ma∣riae, & suffragia &c. Printed anno 1520, to keepe their minde from pollution, to confirme them in the feare and loue of Christ. Secondly, they pray to the Saints departed, that by their merites and intercession, they may be defended from all euils, obtaine all giftes, and get eternall life. Yea, they seeke of them, defence in this worlde from all euils, and euerlasting life. And they pray to God the Father that by their merites & interces∣sion, they may be deliuered both soule and bodie from hell fire, & maye obtaine through their merites, faith, patience, and euerlasting life. So not onlie they make them intercessours, but mediatours: at whome, and for whose merites, they seeke saluation. And v∣pon this grounde came that Paganisme whilk they haue brought in the Kirk of God, whereby euerie nation, village, familie, euerie estate, and euerie maladie or affliction hes their owne Saint to be a patrone for them. Vpon the whilk also hes proceeded this canonizing of Saints, that is, to make men Gods. For they say that this canonizing of them is Antoninus part  summa tit. 12 to let men vnderstand that they should be adored and called vpon, as one of their owne Archbishopes Antoninus sayes. For hee sayes that 7. things appertaine to the canonizing of Saints. 1. To be reputed publickly to be a Saint. 2. To be prayed to by the kirk. 3. To haue temples & altars. 4. To haue offrings & sacrifices offered to their honour. 5. To haue a feastiuall day. 6. To haue an Image with a can∣dle in signe of their glorie. 7. To haue their relicts. And they saye that they may be directly prayed vnto with the Lords prayer, vvhilk our Sauiour formed onely to be saide to God the Father. Novv hovv shal they be excused from vile idolatrie in this? Lib. 5 cap. 4 Durand. ep. Ni∣mi. Pope Innocent sayes, that to the worship whilk is onely proper to god appertaines, temples, altars, sacrifices, feastes. And Durandus a Pa∣pist sayes the same. If this then be true, vvhilk this Pope and this Papist sayes, hovv then can they be cleared from idola∣trie, that giues vnto Saints that seruice, vvhilk by their own confession is onely proper to God, as Temples, Altars, Fea∣stiuall dayes, &c? And vvhat shall vvee say to Franciscus and Dominicus, Anno 1200. tvvo of their canonized Saints, in vvhose persons
they haue done that lay in them to haue abolished the me∣rite and the name of Christe? Of this Franciscus they saye in their booke Bartol. de Ps. lib. conformitat. of conformities, that hee is greater nor Iohn the Baptist. And preferring him in many things to him, they saye that Iohn receaued the word of repentance of Christ, But Franciscus say they receiued it of Christ, and of the Pope, quod plus est, whilk is more. Of Iohn it was reuealed by an Angell to his Father, what hee should be: but of Franciscus it was reuealed to his Mother, and his Seruands by Iesus Christ. Iohn was like the freind of the bridegroome: but Franciscus was like the bridegroome himselfe. They say, hee is better nor all the Apostles: For they left but their boates, but he left al to his very hose. They cal him Typicus Iesus, a typical Sauiour, a sin∣gular crucified one, who receaued in vision the same woūds whilk Christ hes, & suffred the same dollors: who is the way of life, who is the image of Christ, as Christ is the image of the Father. Yea whilk is more they prefer him to Christ Iesus. They saye, Christ did but praye, Christus ora Franciscus exora¦uit. but Franciscus by prayer obtained. They say, the Baptisme of Christ forgiues originall sinne, but Franciscus hoode much more. It is writ∣ten also vpon the porte of the Cordiliers of Bloyes, of this Franciscus, that his sinne shall be sought for, but it shal not be found, whilk is onely proper to Christ. Nowe these are not particular o∣pinions but approued by the Kirk of Rome: For Pope Grego∣rie the 9. Alexander the 4. and Nicolas the 3. ordained all the faithfull vnder the paine of heresie to beleeue all Franciscus markes. And their bookes are set forth by their priuiledges. As for Dominicus, Antoninus who was of that ordour com∣pares him with Christ, & in a manner preferres him to him, Antoninus arch epis. hist. 3. pars tit. 23, Cap. 1. par. 1. & 3 Christ, sayes he, did raise in all but three from the deade. Dominicus raised three in Rome, and by his prayer restored fortie to life. Christ af∣ter the resurrection being immortall, went twise to his disciples, the doore being shoote: But Dominicus (sayes hee) hauing as yet but a mortal body, whilk (sayes he) is more maruelous, Quod mirabisi est. went in to the Kirk in the night the doores being shut, that hee shoulde not walken his bre∣thren. And so foorth of the reste of the miracles wherein hee not only compares, but in a maner preferres him to Christ. Christ (sayes he) said after his death, all power is giuen to me in heauen & earth, This power (sayes hee) is not in a little commu∣nicat
to Dominicus, aboue all heauenlie, earthly, & infernall things, (and that in this same life) for he had the Angels to serue him, the ele∣mentes obeyed him. And in the end he applyes that whilk is on∣ly spoken of Christ in the 45. Psalm, He is more beautiful nor the sonnes of men: Also he sayes, that there was two images, the one of Paule, the other of Dominicus. At the foote of Paules Image, it was written, per istum itur ad Christum: By this man is the way to Christ. At the foote of the Image of Franciscus it was written, by this man the way is made easie to Christ. And maruell not (sayes hee) at this: for the doctrine of Paule and the rest of the Apostles, induces men to beleeue and to obey the precepts of Christ: but the doctrine of Do∣minicus induces men to keepe the councels of Christ, and therefore the way to Christ by him is easier. So he preferres him to Christ in miracles, and to the Apostles. But what shall we saye to that that followes? Christus est Do∣minus absolute, & authoritatiue: Dominicus au∣tem participali∣ter & possessiue. He is called (sayes he) Dominicus because he is like our Lord, and hee hes possessiuè and in possession that whilk Christ hes absolutely and by authoritie. Christ sayes, I am the light of the worlde: The Kirk (sayes hee) sings of Dominicus, ye are the lighte of the worlde. The Prophets testified of Christ, and so did they also (sayes he) of Dominicus and of his ordour, as in the 11. chapter of Zacharie, Where it is spoken of Christ. I haue taken vnto me two roddes, & I cal∣led one the staffe of beautie, and the other the staffe of bands. The staffe of beautie (sayes he) is the ordour of Dominicus: The staffe of bands is the ordour of Franciscus. So they abuse the Scripture. Hee compares him also with Christ, and in a manner, prefers him to him. Christ (sayes he) was borne vpon the bare earth, but least hee had beene ouer much hurte by colde, hee was put in to the cribe by his Mother: But Dominicus (sayes he) beeing in the custodie of his nurse, euen then abhorring the pleasures of the fleshe, was founde oft times ly∣ing vpon the bare earth. When Christ was borne a starre appeared, sig∣nifying, that he should illuminate the whole worlde: But (sayes hee) when Dominicus was borne his godmother sawe a starre in his fore∣heade, a prognostication of a new light of the worlde. The prayer of the Lord was euer hard whē it pleased im, but yet did not euer obtain that whilk hee prayed for, as when in the garden he prayed that the cuppe might be trāsferred from him: But (sayes he) Dominicus desired no∣thing of God, but that whilk hee obtained perfitely according to his de∣sire.
Christ loued vs and washed vs from our sinnes in his bloode: But Dominicus (sayes he) not being voide of that perfection of loue, hee tooke a threefold correction out of his owne hand euerie day, not with a corde, but with an yron rodde, euen to the effusion of his blood, and for his owne faultes whilk were very few, Qu minimae erant. another for them that were in purgatorie: the third for them that were in the world. And so dedu∣ces this comparison through all the partes of Christ his life. And in the end he sayes, that being to departe from this worlde, hee comforts his disciples, saying: let not this trouble you, for in the place where I go to, I shall bee more comfortable to you, nor if I were with you: For after death yee shall haue me a better aduocate nor yee coulde haue in this life. What blasphemies these are iudge thou (chri∣stian Reader) and yet they are authorized by the Kirk of Rome, because they serue to establish the Popes supremacy: For Gregorie the 9. canonized him as a Saint, and appoynted a festiuall day to be keeped to his honour: Anno 1223. And hee that writes these thinges is an Arch-bishope of Florence, a man fa∣mous among them. To him that will ioyne him selfe to this ordor of Frāciscus & Dominicus, for to merite the kingdome of heauē, & to redeeme their owne soules, or the soules of their friendes (as their bul of Fraternitie sayes) the Prouincial giues him the bulles of Fraternitie, by the whilk he is made capable of all the merites of the Conuent, and of the merites of all the Friars of that Prouince, of their Masses, prayers, fastings, abstinence, deuo∣tions, watchings, disciplines, &c. Whereby (as thogh it were to little for them to be Sauiours of them selues) they teache that they haue sik aboundance of merites, as also may serue for others. They haue a prayer to Thomas Becket, In their porte∣ous booke. who was made a Saint by Alexander the third in these wordes, Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, fac nos (Christe) ascendere quò ille ascendit. That is, make vs (O Christ) to ascend to heauē by the blood of Thomas, whilk he shed for thee. (Mocking as it were the bloode of Iesus.) Now as for the Virgine Marie, what tittle is proper to Ie∣sus Christ, whilk they haue not ascriued vnto her? What ho∣nour or worship is giuen to Iesus Christ, whilk is not giuen to her? Damascene sayes, praying to the Virgine Marie, I shall
be saued by hoping in thee. Thou is the saluation of mankinde. Antoni∣nus sayes, Part 3. summa tit 12 & part. 4. tit. 15. cap. 14. para. 7. Quia Christus non solum Aduo catus, sed etiam Iude est consti∣tutus, cuncta ita∣que discussuus, & quia nibilinul∣tum remanebit &c. ideo Deus prouidit de Ad∣uocata nobis nempe Maria, quae tota suauis est & mitis, & in qua nihil aspe∣rum inuenitur: ad thronum igitur e¦ius accedamus cum fiducia, vt it Apost. Heb. 4. vt gratiam & mi∣sericordiam asse∣quamur, in tem∣pore opportuno. Amen. Blasphe∣mouslie apply∣ing that place of Scripture to her, whilk the holie Ghost hes spo∣ken of Christ. That all they vpon whome the Virgine Marie turnes her eies are necessarily iustified and saued: and that Christ because he is both aduocate and iudge together, is too rigorous: for this cause, saies hee, God hes prouided an Aduocate, meaning of the Virgine Marie, in whome nothing is to be found but sweitnesse. And hee saies, The Seraphims willing to haue retained Marie as she mounted to heauen: Not (saies shee) for it is not meete that man shoulde liue his alone, (speaking of the euerlasting sonne of God, who sits at the right hand of his Father) I am giuen to him for to be a helpe to that worke of redemption by my compassion, and to that work of glorificatiō by my intercession: to the intent, that if he threaten to destroy the earth as in the time of the Deluge, I may appeare before him as the Raine∣bowe, to the intent that he may remember his couenant. And whilk is yet worse, (if worse can be) another Papist sayes, applying that whilk is onely spoken of Christ to her, God (saies he) said to her in her birth, I haue giuen thee to be a light to the Gentiles, to the intent that thou may be our saluation, (applying it blasphemously to Marie) to the end of the worlde, and a light to bee reuealed to the Gentiles. And againe he sayes, that all graces whilk runnes downe from the Father and the Sonne, commes by her, who (saies he) is a me¦diatrix betweene God and men: and no grace commes from heauen, but through her hands, and all grace enters in her, and commes out of her. And he sayes, She is a mediatrix of saluation, of coniunction, of iusti∣fication, of reconciliation, of intercession, of communication. And to be short, he sayes, the Father hes giuen to her the halfe of his kingdome, the whilk was signified in the persons of Assuerus and Hesther: and that he hes retained to himselfe iustice, & hes left to her to exercise mer∣cie. So that we may appeale from the Courte of the iustice of God, to the Court of the mercie of the virgine Marie. Whereby they most blas∣phemously prefer and lift her vp aboue the Lorde: for that Iudge vnto whom appellation is made, must be superior vn∣to to these Iudges from whome the appellation is made: there∣fore they blasphemously prefer the tribunall of Marie, to the tribunall of the God of heauen. In their porteous and seruice, and Masse bookes. And what shall I speake of her Letanies, Psalteries, and houres? Of her houres where she is called the Queene of mer∣cie,
who hes bruised the Serpents head, Gen. 3. whilk thing is spoken only to the first Parents of the sonne of God, and the restorer and sa∣uiour of mankind: the most godly, & most holy, the yet of heauen, the shy∣ning port of life, the mother of grace and mercy: our life, our hope, who makes the worlde to shyne by the light of the brightnesse of her peace, who only hes deserued to be next in honour to the Trinity, by whom the whole worlde liues next God. She is called the comfort of the desolate the saluation and hope of all them that puts their trust in her, the foun∣taine of saluation, grace, godlinesse, ioy, confort: the Queene of heauen, and starre of the sea, whome the Sunne honours: the promise of the Pro∣phetes, the Queene of the Euangelistes, the teacher of the Apostles, the comforter of the Martyres, the saluation and consolation of the quick & the dead, the bottomlesse fountaine of all grace, the port of Paradise, the Ladie of glorie, the queene of ioy, the Lady of Angels, What is Christ then, and what place is left to him? the ioy of the Saints, the only hope of the miserable, the Empresse of the Angels, the comforter of sinners, the keeper of the heart, the praise of all the Saints. And of her is sought in her houres and Letanies all these gra¦ces generallie whilk are onely proper to God through Iesus Christ to giue: as protection, receauing in the time of death, refuge in the time of miserie, remission of sinnes, the keeping of soule and body, holinesse of life, staying of the pest, calming of the seas, perseuerance in grace, the eschewing of sinne saluation and eternall lyfe: and that by her merites and praiers their sinnes may be forgiuen, and that beeing redeemed by her they may climbe vp to heauen. And they pray to Marie and Iohn Baptist, by the Redeemer, making Christ a me¦diatour betweene them and them. And they pray to Christ to defend them from his anger, and from the anger of his mother: & they pray her to giue her self and her sonne vnto them. What horrible blasphemie is this? O horrible blas¦phemie Who can giue Christ but onely God the Father. They say, God will giue them that worships her a rewarde heir, and heauen after. Howe shall I praise the redeemed by thee? (speaking of Marie.) And in the Prose of the Masse they haue this Praier, lure matris impera a Redemptori: that is, By thy motherly authority command the Redeemer. And as concerning her Psalteries, how horrible is it to see all that Dauid spake of the Father, Sonne, and holy Spirit, to be transferred and ap∣plied to her, without exception, from the beginning to the
end? changing onely the stile of the eternall Lorde, in the stile of our Ladie, Horrible blas∣phemy blaspheming, Blessed is he who loues Mary, feares her, and praises her name, who hopes in her. The heauens de∣clares thy glory, and the earth, and the fulnesse thereof. Blessed are all they who loues thee, because thou hast washen their sinnes in thy mer∣cies. Haue mercy on me, ô mother of mercy, and according to the bow∣els of thy compassions washe me from all mine iniquities: Saue me for thy names sake: Let Mary be lifted vp, & all her enemies will be seat∣tered. Lorde giue thy iudgement to thy Sonne, and thy mercy to the Queene his mother. Ladie, saluation and lyfe is in thy hand. O how good is God to them that worships his mother. God What greater blasphemie culd the Diuell him∣self vomite out. is the God of vē∣geance, but thou art the Queene of mercie. Come let vs worship the La∣dy, let vs praise the Virgine who hes saued vs: let vs confesse our sinnes vnto her: The Lord said vnto our Lady, Sit heir my mother on my right hand: O mankind reioice, because God hes giuen to thee sik a mediatrix and at the name of Marie let all knees bowe in heauen, in earth, and in Hell. Anno 1470 This Ladie Psalter was compiled by a Cardinall of Rome Bonauenture, who was canonized for a Saint, by Pope Sixtus the fourth. After the same manner haue they corrup∣ted the songs of the Prophetes, of Simeon, and of the Virgine, blaspheming after this manner, My soule reioyces in my Ladie, My soule magnifies my Ladie, &c. Now lets thou, ô Lord, the seruand of Marie departe in peace, because my eies hes sene the saluation of Ma∣ry. And to put an end to these abhominations, they ascriue vnto the Virgine that whilk the holy Ghost hes spoken only of Iesus Christ, Proverb. 8, 22, the euerlasting wisdome of his Father, The lord hes possessed me in the beginning of his way: before he made any thing, I was ordayned from euerlasting. And Pope Leo the 10. calles her Deam, a goddesse. In the generall councell of Lateran, in stead of praying to God through Christ for the assistance of his spirite, Epist, 17. Concil. Lateran, sub Iulio 2, & Le¦one 10, ses, 9, 10, &c Mattyrologium rom. act, 7, Anto∣ninus hist, part.  tit, 23. cap, 3, they craue the helpe and assistance of Marie. And Pope Pius the fifth acknowledges her for the victory of the Chri∣stians against the Turke, in their combate whilk was striken in the sea: and for that victory hes ordayned a yearly remē∣brance of her to be kept. And Antoninus one of their Arch∣bishops saies, that Christ sitting at the right hand of God the Father rose vp angrie to haue slaine all the sinners in the earth: and when none
was able to resist, his mother came to him and pacified him, till two of her seruands Franciscus and Dominicus might be sent to them: & that Christ answered, Beholde I am pacified and haue accepted thy face I appeale your conscience, Maister Gilbert, before the Lorde Iesus Christ, as ye must appeare before him in that great day whether these speaches, be not the speaches & blasphemies of the Dragon, or not: & whether this doctrine & religion of yours, be not idolatrous, blasphemous, & antichristiā, or not. Not onlie haue they spoyled the Lord Iesus of his media∣tion, intercession, and of his glorie due to him, and mankind of their saluation purchased by his blood, in ascriuing it to Saints, Angels, and to the Virgine Marie: but also in ascri∣uing them vnto their consecrate things, as their holy water, the tree of the Croce, the signe of the Croce, their golden, sil¦uer, and stonie Croces. For Thomas  part. 3. summae quest. 25. artic. 4. & Caicta. in com¦ment in illum Io∣cum Thomas. Et Andradius in lib. 9. orthod. explic. vnto the Croce they giue the worship of Latria, as themselues testifies, whilk by their owne confession is onely proper to God. And their praier to the Croce, and the signe of the Croce, is to help them, defend them, and saue them: and they adore it & worship it. They pray siklike that the holy water may be saluation vnto them, and that by the spar∣ging of the same: the health of their soule, the strengthening of their Faith, the security of their hope may be giuen them. Vnto the Images and reliques of the Saintes, they offer sa∣crifice, in burning incense vnto them, whilk the Scripture calles an oblation only proper to the liuing God. Therefore Ezechias brake the brasen serpent, because they burnt incēse vnto it. Marc. 9.49. 2. Reg. 18, 4. 2. Reg. 23. Pontif. Rom. part 2. Tit. de bene∣dict. nouae crucis. Careat omni peccato perpe∣trato. And the burning of incense to Baall is counted ido∣latry. They pray for their golden, siluer, & stonie croces, that as the worlde was purged from the gyltinesse of sinne by the Croce of Christ, so by the merite of this Croce, these who offers it vp, may be for∣giuen of all their actuall sinnes. Is not this to set vp their stonie &c. Croces, in the roome of the blood of Iesus Christ? They ascriue to the tree of the Croce, that whilk is only proper to God, saying, Salua caeteruam: that is, Breuia. Rom. in fest. invent. & exalt. sanctae crucis. Giue saluation to the assembly gathered together in thy praises. They worship their images after the same māner, as the Ethnicks did their idoles. And as the Baruc. 6.3 Ethnicks bure their golden, siluer, & timber Idoles vpon
shoulders, so do the Baron. nota in Marti Rom. Sleidan. com. lib. 9. Iodoc. meg. pe regr. Hieros. ca. 3 Pellic. in Barue cap. 6 Papists. The Ethnickes worshipped their idols, the Conc. Tid. ses. 25. Papists does the same, in falling down be∣fore the images of Saints. The Ethnicks decked their idoles with vestiments, as though they had bene men: so does the Papists with their images, whilk Molin, e∣pist. Valen. Salig. Espen. hist. Ec∣cles. Ecclesia re∣form. in Gallia, lib. 4. som of themselues thinks to be an abuse, and woulde haue it abolished. They lighted candles before their idoles, whilk their idoles sawe not, so does the Erasm. colloq, peregrin. relig er∣go, Polyd. Virg, de invent. rer. li. 2, cap, 23. & lib. 6, cap, 13. Papistes. There the faces of their Gods were made black through the smoake of their incense whilk vvas brunt in their worship, as it is exponed by some: so does the Miss Rom. de rit. ser∣vand. in celebrat Missae Papists burne incense to their golden, siluer, and copper idoles. And to be shorte in this, as their Priestes had their heades and their beardes shauen: howe like are the Pontif. 20. part 1. Pier, Valer. pro sacerd. barbis Pa∣pists Priests in this? They worship Thom. Aquin. part. 3. quest, 25 art, 2, & 4. Ant. Possev. bibl. se∣lect. lib. 1. cap, 10 also the image of Christ, with the worship of Latria, whilk themselues confesses to be pro¦per onely to God, confessed by one of their owne nomber, a learned Grego. de Va∣len. lib. 2. cap. 7. Iesuite. And therfore he defends that some kind of idolatry is leesome. And Bellarm. lib. 2. de Eccles. trium. cap. 23. Bellarmine sayes, that the wor∣ship of Latria is giuen truly to the image of the Croce, and the Crucifixe suppose he sayes, he thinkes it not saif to preach this to the people. They Conrad. Brun de imagin. cap. 7. stile the image of the Crucifixe, with the stiles only proper to God, The King of glorie, the Lord that is strong and mighty in battel the Lord of strength. Siklike, Ibidem when the image of the Doue at the Pentecoste, is let downe in the Temple with fire and water, then the Priest sayes, Receaue the holy Ghost. So Sacra. cerem. cecl, 20, lib, 1, tit. 7 doe the Popes giue the stile of the immaculate Lambe, to the images of waxe. The second Act. 4 councell of Nice, sayes of the image of Christ, This is Christ: and the Sessi. 25 councell of Trent. And in their Ibid. Sacra, consecration of their Images of waxe, they pray to God the Father, Let these immaculate Lambes, (speaking of the images) receaue that selfe same vertue against all the crafts and de∣ceats of the Diuell, wherewith that innocent Lambe his owne Sonne Iesus Christ, deliuered from the power of the Diuell our first Parents. And they sing of euery one of these wax images, whilk they call their Agnus Dei, Omne malignum, that is, these vvaxe ima∣ges breakes and annulles euery sinne, as Christs blood does. And to fill vp the heape of their iniquities, not only do they
worship the thing signified by the images, but the images themselues, as themselues Polydor, Virg. de inven. lib. 6. cap. 13 testifies. And Comment, li,  Pius secundus sayes, that in the Kirk of Saint Mary &c. there is an image of the Virgine, whilk the people worships mira religione, with a mar¦uelous Religion, as the giuer of raine and faire weather. And Lib, 2, de imag cap, 21 Bel∣larmine sayes, that the images of Christ and the Saints, ought to be worshipped properly & by themselues, as they are considered in them∣selues, and not only as they represent another thing. And he Ibide  cap. 8 saies that the image it self shuld be worshipped with that same kind of wor∣ship properly, with the whilk the thing it self represented thereby should be worshipped. The second generall councell of Nice is of the same minde. de reb his lib. 5. Marinaeus Siculus testifies that in Spaine in a certaine Temple, the Crucifixe of Christ is adored: and he sayes, Cuius imaginis inuocato numine: at the inuocation of the Godhead of the whilk image, sundry receaued their health. Pope Iohn the 22. formed a prayer to be saide to the image of Christ his face, kept in a sarke whilk they cal Veronica, and hes graunted ten thousand dayes pardō to them, that saies this praier deuout∣lie, Salue sancta facies redemptoris nostri. &c. In the whilk praier first these stiles are giuen to this image, as the face of our rede∣mer, wherein shynes the brightnesse of the Godhead, the beautie of the world, the glasse of the Saints, wherein the heauenly spirites desires to look in, the strength of our Christian faith, the destroyer of hereticks, our ioy in this life. Secondly, they pray to this image, to purge vs frō all the spots of our sinnes, to ioyne vs to the company of the blessed, to powre in light in our hearts by that vertue whilk is giuen to it, to in∣crease our merite, and to lead vs to heauen. When shall we tumble our selues out of the gulfe of these abhominations and idola∣tries? Blinde nowe must they be that sees not their doctrine to be the doctrine of the Dragon. Therefore doe I striue with you (saies the Lord) and with your posterity. For goe through all the regions of the earth, and see if there be the like abhominations, as is amongst them. For they haue chā∣ged the glory of God into vnprofitable idoles: O ye heauens be astonished at this, and be confounded and be ye desolat. For two euils haue they done: they haue forsaken the Lord, and Christ his sonne the fountain of liuing waters, and haue
made vnto themselues broken pits, whilk can holde no wa∣ter: that is, they haue made vnto themselues false Gods and false Christs, whilk cannot bring saluation vnto them. They haue giuen his glory vnto others, so that of all Idolaters that euer hes bene, they are the greatest. It is no wonder therfore suppose the Lorde hes caused it to be proclaimed by an An∣gell, Reuelat, 14 That he that worships the beast and his image, shalbe tormented in fire and brimstone, day and night, and the smoake of their torment shall ascend for euermore, and they shall haue no rest. I hope nowe the second point is sufficiently cleared, that they haue spoy∣led Christ of his Priest-hoode, and of that glory and honour that is due vnto him. Nowe as they haue spoyled him of his Priestly office, so haue they robbed him of his Kingly office. His Kingly office stands in two things: The one is, in the inward operation of his spirit: The other is, in the exercise and ministerie of the vvord, sacraments, and discipline, vvhilk he hes ordained for that end. As for the first. Hee by his Spirit prepares the harte by bringing vs to a sight and sense of our miserie, that vvee may runne to him to seeke for mercie: And then hee by his Spirit vvorkes that liuing faith, whilk makes vs fullie assu∣red of saluation, whilk workes by loue, and brings foorth the fruites of holines and righteousnesse, vvhereof prayer is one speciall. All whilk is taken away by their doctrine. As to the first: No sufficient knowledge of their miserie among them. For first their doctrine is, that we are not dead in sinne, but man hes free-wil: and then that concupisence after Baptisme is not sinne, & that the adoring and worshipping of Images, is not the breaking of the second command: And that the rewarde of euerie sinne is not euerla∣sting death. And that men euen without Maluenda in disputat. Ratisb. cum Bucero, & omnes fere scho¦lastici. faith maye merite the fa∣uour of God, and that after they haue obtained faith, they may not on∣ly fulfill the law perfitely, but also doe more: yea, loue God with a grea∣ter loue nor he hes commanded, and lead a more straite and heauenlye life nor either the law of God or man prescriues, as Bellarmine sayes: and that men may not onlie satisfie God for their owne sinnes, and me∣rite euerlasting life to themselues, but also may communicate of the su∣perabundance of their merits vnto others.
Nowe, is it possible that these men who so liftes vp them∣selues, in the conceate of their owne righteousnes, can haue the knowledge and sense of their miserie? And as for this full assurance of faith, without doubting they call it Presumption: And as for the fruites of holinesse, without the whilk no man can se God, let their fruits of their vowe of single life among their Clergie, & forbidding of marriage, whilk the Scripture sayes, is the doctrine of diuels, beare witnesse: whereby in∣numerable abhominations, murthers, adulteries, whoore∣domes, hes beene committed in their Cloysters, & Nunne∣ries, as their visitation doth testifie. And in a fish ponde their was found 6000. bairnes heades, whilk moued Gregory to re∣uoke that determination of his vpon this reason, that it was better to let them marrie, then to giue sik occasion of mur∣ther, as appeareth by an epistle of Hulderick Bishop of Aus∣burgh written to Pope Nicolas the firste. And Pope Pius the 2. sayes, that marriage was taken away for some reasons, but it should be restored againe for greater. This is ascriued vnto him. And as for true prayers whilk shoulde be in the Spirite, Rom 8.26. 1. Cor. 14. with sighs and sobbes that can not be expressed, in a knowne language, with words of vnderstanding, that men maye saye Amen, to them; in steede of this they teach vaine repetition and babling in prayers, as though God were serued by rec∣koning vp their muttrings, so many Auees, so many Pater no∣sters vpon a paire of beedes. They teache to pray in a strange language, whilk is a signe not to them that beleeue, but to them that beleeue not, whilk can not edifie nor build vp, no not the tower of Babel it selfe, suppose it be a tower of confusion. So by their doctrine they haue spoyled Christ of hi spirituall gouerne∣ment in the harts of his owne by the worke of his Spirit. And as for the outward gouernement by the word, sacra∣ments, and discipline: they haue both spoyled him of it, and also hes depriued the people of God of these meanes where∣by their faith may be wrought, nourished, and confirmed in their harts: For as for the word, beside their corrupting of it what by Apocrypha, what by Traditions, vvhat by the com∣mandements of the Kirk, vvhat by their corrupted transla∣tion
and their false interpretations, they haue starued the people of God for the want of them, in keeping them vp in a strange language, and reading them out so in their assem∣blies in a strange language: so that the people maye haue eyes and not read them; eares and not heare them, mindes and not vnderstand them, because they are keeped vp in a strange language. And therefore sundrie of our predecessors haue beene accused and burnt by them, for reading parcels of them being translated in the vulgare language. And as for ye sacraments, they haue increased the number of thē, by ad∣ding other fiue vnto them: they haue impaired them of their vertue, corrupted them with errors, polluted thē with cere∣monies, & haue spoyled the people of the fruite of them by reason they are ministred in a strange tongue, and they haue turned the Sacrament of the Supper, in a propitiatorie sa∣crifice for the liuing and the dead. They haue taken away the signe of the Sacramēt. They haue abolished the humanitie of Christ by their monstrous transubstantiation. They haue ta∣ken away the Communion vvhilk shoulde be in the Sacra∣ment, by their priuate Masses: & they haue spoyled the peo∣ple of a sweete pledge of their saluation, in taking away the cupe from them by their lamed cōmunion vnder one kind. And as for the discipline of Christ, they haue renuersed it also, the ordour vvhereof according to the scripture, is that the Kirk of Christ be gouerned by his owne Num, 3, 10. Heb 5, 4. Ephes, 4, 11 ministers, & his owne Exod, 25.30. Matth, 28, 20 lawes, set down in the word, for the 1. Cor, 12, 7, Eph, 4, 12 saluation of his people, all whilk they haue taken away. And first con∣cerning the Ministers of Christ, Pastours, Doctours, Elders, Deacons, vvhilk is giuen of God for the vvork of the Mini∣sterie and building vp of the bodie of Christe, they haue re∣moued them from the gouernement of the same, and hes set vp other office bearers, as Legats, Cardinals, Primats, Patri∣arcks, Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Canones, Persones, Vi∣cares, Arch-deacons, Priests, Abbots, Prouincials, Popes in∣quisitors, Commissioners, Officers, Procutors, Promoters, & the innumerable route of their Monkes, Friers, Iesuites, whose sectes and ordours as they haue beene reckoned by some, extends to an hundreth and one, all different in cere∣monies
and ordours one from another, all vnknowne in the Scriptures of God: Foxe-Monumēt And transformed the gouernement of the Kirk of Christ, into an visible Monarchie and kingdome of the Romanes, as it is named by Turrian Sand of the Popes suprem. Turrian de Ec∣cles. & ordinar. Minist, li, 1, cap, 2 a Iesuite: And the popes hauing set themselues in the roome of Iesus Christ the King of his Kirk, hes not only tumbled out Christ his officers and set in their owne, of whome they exact an oath of obedience to them: but hes lifted vp themselues aboue the hyer powers kings and magistrats, as shal be spoken hereafter. Clayming to themselues both the swordes, and authority, to giue and to take kingdomes at their pleasure, exacting an oath of o∣bedience of them, making them their vassals and tyranizing ouer the Kirk of God. And as they haue shot out the mini∣sters who should rule the Kirk of God, so haue they shot out his lawes whereby it should bee ruled. For this new prince the Pope, hes shot out the canon of the scripture, from being a rule to gouerne his kingdome; and in steede thereof hes set downe his Canon law, Decrees, Decreetals, and so forth: whilks decretall epistles Gratian the gatherer of the canon-law, Distinct, 19, i Canonicis. vvould haue reckoned in the number of the canonicall Scriptures. And to what end doth he vse these lawes? Not to further the saluation of Gods people, but to satisfie his own, (if yet a horse-leiche might bee satisfied) and his courteours insatiable couetousnesse, ambition, and lust. For this cause he hes taken in his owne hande, the election of Bishops from them to vvhome it belonged. For this cause hee hes not per∣mitted the causes of the Kirk to bee debaited vvhere they rose, as equity, reason, & peace vvould he should haue done: But he hes remoued them thence to be hard at Rome, what by reseruing of causes to himself, what by appellations, what by exemptions: And for the same cause hes hee committed the feeding and guiding of the flock of Christe to brute and beastlie creatures, in giuing the charge and commodities of the Kirk to whome he woulde: by presentations, preuen∣tions, reseruations, translations, prouisions, permutations, and commendations. Howe hes hee vvasted and seazed vppon the Kirkes goodes, vvith his pensions and firste
fruites and appropriations, Ammian. Marcel lib. 27. Baptist, Man. Fast lib. 5. Brn. ep. 42 Cone. Basil. ses. 21 so that he hes beene cryed out v∣pon of ryot, pryde, extortion, and symonie. And as for excommunication hee hath vsed it not against ye Bernard. ad Eu¦gen. lib. 1. & 3. Mantuan. syluar. lib. 2 wicked, of whom a sink hath flowed at al times in Rome, not against theeues, of Aeneas Siluius hist. de Asia mn. cap. 77. vvhome Rome is made a den, not against murtherers, for vvhome there is a Ibidem. sanctuary in the houses of Cardinals at Rome: not against adulterers, not a∣gainst vvhoores, vvhereof the Pope receaued sik tribute, as hes beene spoken: but against Emperours, estates, nations, vvho vvould not serue him at a beck, against anye man that denyed his parish priest a little teinds: against whole assem∣blies of the faithfull, vvhom hee by most villanous crueltie & trecherie, (as if they had beene sheepe appoynted for the slaughter) hes red away by fire, by torment, by svvord. And to ende this, what shall I speake of his tyrannicall Lawes? whereby he hes oppressed the Kirk of God, as of single life, auricular confession, choise of meates, apparell & daies, of newe and strange canonizing of Saints, of Pilgri∣mage to the holy land, of the vowes of Monkes and Nunnes, of the estates and rites of marriage, and of innumerable ce∣remonies, partly vnfrutefull, partly foolishe, partly impious. And what shall I speake of his dispensations against the old Te∣stament, against the Epistles of Paule, against all right and equity? That a King Henrie the 8 brother may marry his owne brothers wife, and an Philip King of Spaine. vncle his sisters daughter. And Pope Martine the fifth approued the marriage of one with his sister germaine. That Kirk of∣fices, and liuings, may be giuen to Bernard. epist. 4. & de consid. ad Eugen. lib. 1. & 3. boyes, to Simonicall marchants, and vnlearned persons: that Dist. 70. cap. Sa¦cerdotum. cap. de mult. de Praeb. one may haue plurality of benefices: that he Cap. Relatum de cler. cap licet canon de elect. in Sexto. who hes the benefice needs not to attend the office: that Cone. Constan¦sei. 19 promise may be broken with God and man: that subiects may be discharged of their oath to their Princes. And last of all, what shal I speake of his In∣dulgences and Pardons? in graunting so many hundreth & thousand yeares pardon of their sinnes to them that will de∣uoutly say their idolatrous praiers. Some giuing three hun∣dreth daies pardon, as Pope Celestine: some seauen hundreth yeares pardon, as Pope Boniface: some ten thousand yeares pardon, as Bo∣niface
the 6. some thirtie two thousand, seuen hundreth, and fifty fiue yeares pardon: Portuus book of Sarum Prented anno. 1520. and Sixtus the fourth hes doubled the time of this foresaid pardon: and some ten hundreth thousand yeares par∣don for deadly sinnes, as Pope Iohn 22. Heir is pardon for all sinnes, so that there be money. And as the Reuelation saies, Reuel 18. Baptist. mantua. calam. temp. l, 3. The very soules of men are made marchandise of. And one of their owne friends saies, Venalia Romae Templa, sacerdotes, altaria sacra, coronae, ignes, thura, preces, coelum est venale, Deus{que}. That is, Kirks, Priests, altars, crownes, fire, incense, prayers, heauen and God ar to be solde in the Kirk of Rome. To conclude this then: he is the Antichrist, whose doctrine and religion, ministery and disci∣pline, is directly contrary to the doctrine, religion, ministery and discipline of Iesus Christ. Againe, he is the vndoubted Antichrist, whose doctrine spoiles Iesus Christ of the truth of his humanity, of his Propheticall, Kingly, & Priestly offices, and sets himselfe and others vp in the same offices: & whose doctrine spoiles him of the glory whilk is due to him onely, for our creation and redemption, and giues it to creatures: and last of all, he whose doctrine spoiles men of their saluati∣on, must be that vndoubted Antichrist. But the doctrine and religion of the Popes of Rome and his Cleargie (as hes bene proued sufficiently) are sik: Therefore they are that vndou∣ted Antichrist, whilk the Scripture foretolde was to come. And this for the second marke. The third marke of the Antichrist, is that he exalts himself a∣boue all that is called God, and is worshipped: that is, aboue all powers and maiesties, both heauenly and earthly. He sayes not, Aboue God himselfe, but aboue all that is called God: that is, aboue all powers heauenly and earthly, as hes bene saide. He then is the vndoubted Antichrist whome the Scripture foretolde should come, who lifts vp himself aboue al powers aswell heauenly, as earthly: (this you cannot deny because the Scripture so affirmes) But the Popes of Rome hes lifted vp themselues aboue al powers, both heauenly and earthly: the whilk if it shall be proued, then of necessity it must fol∣low, that the Popes of Rome are that vndoubted Antichrist Nowe for proofe heirof, we shall set none other vpon their
assise, to file or cleanse them in this point, but their own ca∣non Lawe, their owne writers, their owne Bishops, & them selues. Anto. sum. part. 3 tit. 22. c. 5. Antoninus archbishop of Florence sayes, That his power is greater, then any created power: and that it extends the self to hea∣uenly, earthly, and infernall things. Of whome, saies he, that is true whilk is spoken of Christ in the 8. Psalme, Thou hes subiected all things vnder his feete, that are in heauen, in earth, or in hell, applying it to the Pope. What needes more? this is conviction ynough. But yet we will proceede and see how farre he hes lifted vp himselfe aboue all these. As for them in the earth, there are two speciall powers, the temporall power and the spirituall power. He claimes superiority ouer both, as is manifest by their owne doctrine. The Anron. in sum part. 3. tit 22 c. 5. Pope is ouer the worlde in steade of Christ. I am Boniface 8 Caesar, all the power in the heauen and in the earth is mine. We Extra de maio∣rit Vnam sanct, affirme and defines that it stands all creatures vppon the necessity of their saluation to be subiect to the Pope. The Dist. 40, cap Si Papa, Glos, extra, vacant, ad Apost Pope should iudge all, and be iudged of none, vnlesse he be found an heretick. And suppose he should drawe after him innumerable soules by heapes vnto Hell, yet no mortall man should be so bolde as to say to him, Lorde why doest thou this? How farre he hes lifted vp himselfe aboue the temporall power, Kings, Princes, & Emperours, let both their doctrine, and practise beare witnesse. The E monument. oxii Pope is as the Sunne to rule ouer the day: that is, the spiritualty: and the Emperor as the Moone, to rule ouer the night: that is, the temporalty. And as the earth is seauen times greater then the Moone, and the Sonne eight times greater then the earth; so is the Pope fourty seauen times greater then the Emperor. (p) And as the Emperor or Romane Princes takes of me their approbation vnction, and imperiall crowne: so they must not dis∣daine to submit their heads to me, Pope Clement 5. de iureiurando. and to sweare to me their oath of al∣leageance and fidelity. The Sext, de cretal. de sentent. & re¦iudicata, cap, ad Apost. Iem Glossa Pope may depose Kings from their king¦domes, and absolue their subiects from their oath of alleageance, and interdyte their kingdomes, and set vp others in their roome. Achilderik King of France, was deposed; and Pipine set in his roome. Pope Zachary. Causa 15. quest. 6. cap. Alius. Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Frederick the first, Otho the fourth, Frederick the second, and Conradus his sonne all Emperours, were excom∣municate and deposed by the Popes. Iustinianus, Otho the first,
Frederick the first, Henry the fifth, Sigismundus, Carolus the fifth, all Emperours and Monarches, admitted by the Popes of Rome to kisse their feete. And if this had bene their practise only, and not their doctrine: this Pride and arrogancy might haue bene imputed to the persons, and not to the seate. But his Author cere∣moniarum, lib. . & 3. doctrine is so: The Pope of Rome does reuerence to no mortal man. All men of whatsomeuer dignity or preheminence they are of, so soone as they come in the presence of the Pope, ought to kneill thrise downe, and to kisse his feete. The Emperour as soone as he sees the Pope with his bare head, kneiling to the ground, he worships him, and kisses his feete The Emperour holdes the stirroppe, whill the Pope leape on. So did Constantine the great, sayes their Dist, 96, cap Constant. canon law. The Em∣perour at the banket holds the water to the Pope to washe his hands, & brings the first dishe to the Popes Table. And if the Pope be to be car∣ried in a chaire, he, or the King, if they be present, ought to carry the Pope in the chaire on their shoulders. So this is cleare both by their doctrine, and practise, howe farre they haue lifted vp them∣selues aboue the Kings and Monarches of the world: so that Pope dist, 96, ca, duo Gelasius sayes, that Emperours are more inferiour to Popes then lead is to golde. Their superiority ouer the spirituall power of the Kirk of Christ, hes bene showne in parte before. But for the further proofe of it, they say Pope Marcel, dist, 17, cap, Syno¦dum That the Pope is aboue all generall Coun∣cels, and that they take their force and confirmation only by him. And Bellarm, de Primat, Pap. that he is supreame Iudge in all controuersy of Religion, whose iudgement is also infallible. And Symmachus Pope 99, 3, Alio∣rum. Pope Inno¦centius 9. q, 3, cap Nemo where God hes ordayned all causes amongst men to be iudged by men, he hes only reserued the Pope to be iudged by himself, and that he cannot be iudged by any, neyther of Kings, nor of the Emperour, nor of the whole Cleargie, nor of the peo∣ple. And that Anastas, q, 3. c Antiquis, Item 1, q. 3, ca, Quam vis, & cap Qua∣tuor, dist, 19, cap, Sic omnes, 9, q, 3, cap, Patet Pope Innocem 2, art, 17, q, 4, cap Si quis. dist, 19 ca, In memori∣am. Sext, decret, tit 7, de renuncia¦tione cap Quoni∣am he is Iudge ouer all the Kirks: and that without a Councel, both to absolue and condemne: and none to iugde of his iudg∣ment: and all to appeale to him, and none from him, whose iudgement must stand, as giuen out of heauen by the mouth of Peter himself, whilk no man must breake or retraite, no man must dispute or doubt of. And that Bellarmin, de Pont, lib, 4, cap,  & cap, 1 in omni re dubia, that is, in all controuersies of Religion, be must obediently of all the faithfull be heard, whether he can erre or not And that be may make lawes to binde the consciences of men, and that
he Anto. fum. 3. part. tit. 22. c. 5. may creat newe Religions. His power ouer them that are in Purgatory and Hell. Ibidem. According to his absolute iurisdiction, he hes power to spoile al Pur¦gatory, by the communication of his Indulgences and Pardons, except only them who hes only the Baptisme of the Spirit, and infants who ar in Limbo Patrum, and these Anton. tit. 22. c. 5. who hes not friends to doe for them The Pope may absolue from an infinite paine: to wit, from the paine of Hell, as Gregorie did who by his praier absolued the soule of Traian from the infinite paine of Hell. The Clem. 6. in bulla & Anton. ibidem cap. 6 Pope hes as great power in Pur∣gatorie and Hell, as that he may deliuer as many soules as are tormen∣ted there, by his Pardons, and with all speede place them in heauen, & seates of the blissed, as he pleases. 4. His power ouer heauen and all the powers therein. All Boniface the 8 power in heauen and earth is giuen to me sayes Boniface the 8. The Clemen. 6. Bulla Troilus in tract de canonizatio∣ne sanct. Pope hes so great power in heauen, that hee maye cano∣nize any dead man, and place him among the Gods: and that againste the iudgement of his Bishops and all his Cardinals. He Clem, 6. in Bulla commaunds the Angels to take soules out of Purgatorie, and to carie them to hea∣uen. His Baldus power is greater nor the power of all the Saints. God Anton. ibidem. tit 22. cap. 5 hes subiected the Angels in heauen to the Pope, and he is greater nor they in foure respectes: and no lesse honour is due vnto the Pope, nor to the Angels: and then greater (sayes hee) for the Pope receaues from the faithfull adoration, and kissing of his feete, whilk the Angell would not permit to be done to him by Iohn. What needes more now for the proofe of this marke? Doth not he lift vp him selfe aboue all that is called God, who claimes power ouer heauen & earth and hell? This they can not deny: But I assume, their owne Clarks, Doctours, Popes, and Bullets testifie this, whilk they can not choose but confesse also: Therefore of necessitie the Popes of Rome hes exalted themselues aboue all that is cal∣led God, and therefore they are that vndoubted Antichrist whilk was to come, and now is come. And as they haue exalted themselues aboue all heauenly powers, so haue they matched them selues with Iesus Christ: for these things are onely proper to Iesus Christ, To haue all power giuen him, to haue all things subiect to him vnder heauen, to bee greater nor all the Angels, to receaue that worship whilk the Angels
refuses, to command the Angels, to make lawes to binde the consciences of men, to create and institute new religions. And yet the Pope hes arrogated all these things to himselfe, as hes beene proued: Therfore he is that vndoubted Antichrist: for he that makes himselfe equall to the Son of God, lifts vp himself aboue all that is called God: (this can not be denyed,) But the Popes of Rome haue done so, in challenging to them selues these things whilk are onely proper to the Sonne of God: there∣fore they must be the Antichrist. Further, these thinges are proper to Iesus Christ only, to the head, the spouse, Epa. 5.23. Col. 1.8. Eph. 1, 21.22.23 Isa 28.16. Isa. 8 14. Matth. 21.42 Malach. 3.20. Matth. 28.18 2. Pet. 5.4. Col. 2.3 and foundati∣on of his Kirk, to be that corner stone, that precious stone, and that pro∣ued stone, to be that rocke of offence, to be the sonne that giues light to 2his Kirk, to be the Prince of Pastours, and to haue all treasures of wise∣dome and vnderstanding hid in him, and to haue all power in heauen and earth giuen him, and to haue the fulnesse of power. But all these things the Popes of Rome hes arrogated to themselues, as is ma∣nifest by these places quoted in the margent. Bellarmine in pre∣fat. de sum. pontif. lib. 1. ceremo. tit 7. de maiorita. cap. Vnam sanctam de constitut. cap. licet. In sexto. de translat. cap. Quanto. In glossa. Yea, he hes not left so much vnto Christ as his style, but it is ascri∣ued to him: For de consider. ad Eugenium Bernard writting to him saies, Tu es vnctione Christus, that is. Thou art Christ, &c. yea he hes claimed a grea∣ter power to himselfe, nor euer we read that Iesus Christ the Prince of glory and the Lord of life vsed, as to Clemen. 6. Pa∣pae Bulla deliuer dam∣ned soules out of hell, & make thē Saintes in heauen, & that as many as pleases him. So not onely hes hee made himself equal in au∣thoritie, in office, in styles with the Prince of glory the Lorde Iesus: but also hes lifted vp him selfe aboue him: And that there may be nothing wanting to make it manifest that hee is this Antichrist, as though it had beene too little to him, to haue lifted vp him selfe aboue all powers in heauen, in earth, & in hel: & to haue matched him selfe with the eternall Son of God, both in workes, styles, and offices and to arrogate a greater power nor euer he did exercise. He hes matched him selfe with the maiestie of the God-head, claiming to himself these things whilk are onely proper to the God-head, De translat. cap. Quanto as the Papists will is for reasone: He hes a heauenly at bitriment, he changes
the nature of things: Of nothing he makes something: He may depose & set vp in kingdomes whome he will: Panormitan de elect, cap, licet ab, He hes an absolute iurisdiction that no man may say to him, wherefore does thou this: He may liberare ex toto sicut ipse deus, that is, absolue a man from the whole as GOD may do: Yea that he may doe all that God may doe except sinne, the key not erring. All whilk thinges are onely proper to the Maiestie of God. And as he hes matched himself with the maiestie of God himselfe in his iudgement, will, and power: so doth hee claime to him the selfe same worship and adoration whilk is onely proper to God: This worship is onely proper to God To fall downe before his feete and to adore him, and therefore Sa∣than craued it of Christ, and he refused to giue him it: And Iohn would haue giuen it to the Angell, but the Angell refu∣sed it. Wherefore did Christ refuse to giue it, and the Angell refuse to receiue it, Reuel, 22, 8, 9 Math 4, 9, 10 but because it was writtē? The Lord thy God thau shalt worship, and him onely shalt thou serue? But that worship whilk the diuell craued to be giuen to him, and whilk the Angell refused as proper onely to God, that doth the Pope claime to him and receaue from others, as his owne Arch∣bishops and canon law, and men of his owne religion doe testifie. Antoninus sayes, he receaues adorations, prostrations that is worship & falling down before his feete, 3, part, sum, ti, 22, cap, 5. Printed Lugduni 1516 De donat, Con∣stant, p4g. 1 ij 1 Lib, 3, inst. Romae whilk (sayes he) the Angell refused to receaue of Iohn. Steuchus sayes, Constantine the Empetour worshipped the Pope as God, and gaue vnto him diuine honors, & wor∣shipped him as the liuely image of Christ. And Blondus sayes, that all the princes of the world worships the pope, vt summum Deum, as the most high God. Praefat, in institut And Iohannes Faeber sayes, the pope calles himselfe by words, the seruand of seruands, but yet hee permits himselfe to bee worshiped whilk the Angell in the Reuelation refused. And Fryar Mantua sayes, Cuius vestigia adorat Caesar; et aurato vestiti murice regis. Whose feete (meaning the Popes) or footestepes Caesar and the Kings of the earth adores or worshipes. And yet least any shoulde doubt whether he be the Antichrist or not, hee is not onely made equall with the Maiestie of God, in power, arbitri∣ment, and adoration, but also the very god-head it selfe, & the very style of the Maiestie of God is ascriued to him. A∣untinus sayes, Lib 7. the Popes of Rom: earnestly desires domination et Di∣uinitatem,
diuinity or God-head. And de electione: It is saide: Cap, Fundamen∣to in Sexto That he is tak n vp in the fellowship of the inuisible trinitie. And Baldus sayes: The Pope is a God in the earth: And the common voice of the Canonists is Domînus Deus noster papa, that is, the Lord our god the Pope. And he is called by his Doctors Optimus Maximus, Canonist, extra, Iohan, 22, cap Cum inter in glossa Stapleton in prae¦fat, in prine, fid, doct, Vict, in tom. 4, Hi¦eron, praefat, dist, 96, cap, Satis euidenter most good in grace, most greate in power. And Auentinus saies that it is written in his forehead, Deus sum, I am God. And Gomesius, sayes the Pope est quoddam numen; a certaine God-heade shewing himselfe to be a visible God in the earth. And in the coun∣cell of Lateran, one sayes to the Pope, Tu es alter Deus in terris: Thou art ane other God vpon the earth. And the Tridentine chapter calles him, Terrenū Deum an earthly God: And his canon Lawe sayes, It is manifest that the Pope was called God by Constantine. What needs more? He must be blinded by God that sees not the Popes to haue lifted vp themselues aboue all that is called God & is worshipped. But yet I saye further. He hes lifted vp himselfe aboue the maiestie of God: First in making yt to be Gods word, yt is not Gods word, in decreeing the A∣pocrypha to be canonicall Scripture. distinct, 19, in Ca¦nonicis And his canon Law rec∣kons in the decretall Epistles among the canonicall Scrip∣tures of God. Now what is this but to preferre his authoritie to the authoritie of God? He denies forgiuenes to them that breakes his lawe, but he selles the break of Gods lawe for money. It is certaine that there is no redemption out of Hell: and yet the Popes of Rome claimes that authority to delyuer soules out of Hell, and to make them Saintes in heauen. It is impossible to God ex iniustitía facere iustitiam, 2, Timoth, 2, 3 Heb, 6, 18 to make wrong to be right, because the Scripture saies, He cannot deny himself, and he cannot lie. But the Popes de translat, cap Quanto in glossa de conces, Prae∣bend, cap, Propo¦suit, 16, q, Qui∣cunque in glossa 15, q, 6, authorit, in glossa, dist. 32, Lecto Canonists saies, that he may ex iniustitia facere iustitiam, of wrong make right. His Canonistes also saies, That the Pope may dispense supra ius de iure, aboue right. And that he may dispense against the lawe of nature, against the law of God, against the olde Testament, against the Apostles, and that he may Vt citatura Iu∣ello pag. 59, de∣fens, apolog. Foxe pag, 785 & dispense against all the precepts of the olde and newe Testa∣ment. They say, he may dispense against the degrees forbidden in the Lawe of God. And that he may according to his absolute power dissolue the bond of marriage, vpon the consent of both the
parties, without any lawfull cause. And that he may dispense with oathes and promises made either to God or men. And some saies, that he may dispense that one may haue moe wiues then one at once, in some cases. Now what is this else, but to exalt himself a∣boue the Lord? And in a Conell. Later. sub Leone ses. 10 sermon in the councell of Late∣ran, it is there spoken of him by one of his owne Bishops, That all power in heauen and earth is giuen to the Pope. And that whilk is more, That in him is omnis potestas supra omnes potestates caeli & terrae: all power aboue all powers, both of heauen and earth. And Auentinus saies, that they desire to be feared more then God. To conclude this then, He that hes exalted himself aboue al powers in heauen, earth, and hell: he that hes equalled him∣selfe with the sonne of God, the Prince of glory, and with the maiesty of God in stiles, authoritie, office, and power: & he who hes lifted vp himselfe aboue the Lord Iesus, & aboue the maiestie of God; he must be that vndoubted Antichrist, whilk the Apostle Paule hes descriued: But the Popes of Rome hes done so, both by their practise, and by their do∣ctrine, as hes bene proued by their owne testimonies: Ther∣fore they are that vndoubted Antichrist who was to come. This for the thirde marke. So Ierome ad Gelasium, and Chrysost. vpon that place, & The odoret, & Thom. of Aquine a Pa∣pist, expones this place, and Aug. de ciui. Dei, li. 20 cap. 19. expones this temple to be the Kirk of God, wherein the An∣tichrist shal sit. The fourth marke of the Antichrist, set downe by the A∣postle is, That he sits in the Temple of God, as God. That is, in an e∣minent and high place in the Kirk of God. For least men should thinke that the Antichrist should be an open enemy to God, the Apostle sayes, he shall sit in the Temple of God, that is, in the Kirk of God: as it is taken, 1. Corinth. 6. where the Saintes in Corinth are called the temple of God. So the Antichrist is foretolde to be a housholde enemy, and not a forraine foe: and he shall withstand Christ not openly, but couertly. And though he be a deadly enemy to Christ, yet shall he pretend that he is in the Temple of God: that is, a member of the Kirk: and that he hes a throne, that is, a high dominion within Gods Kirk. Reue. 13.11 And therefore in the Reuelatiō he is called a beast whilk hes two hornes like the Lambe: that is, who in outward shewe is like the Lambe, pretending his po∣wer and authority. And as Primasius saies exponing that
same place, Those whome he seduces, he seduces them by hypocrisie of a dissimulate trueth: for he sayes, he were not like the Lambe, if he spak openly as the Dragon. And Augustine saies, Tract. 3 in epist Ioannis Let vs not take tent to the tongue, but to the deedes: let the tongue rest, and aske the life. Whereby it appeares, that they also are Antichrists, who de¦nyes Iesus Christ in their life. And therfore (alluding to Iu∣das) he is called the sonne of perdition, who not by open warfare should oppugne Christ, but by a kisse, as it were, shoulde be∣tray him. And therefore he is descriued also vnder the forme of a woman, a harlote: Reuelation. 17 2. Thes. 2. whereby is signified that he shall not be an open enemie in profession, but secreit and dissimulate. And therefore the Cupe wherein she reaches out her abho∣mination, is discriued to be of golde: that is, hauing a shewe of godlinesse. And his vnrighteousnesse, that is, his doctrine, is called deceaueable, because of the shewe of truth that it hes. And his iniquity is called a mysterie: that is, not a plaine and open impietie, but secreit: so coloured with shewes of trueth and godlinesse, that euery one cannot perceaue it. And yet for all this hypocrisie of his, for all this dissimulation & shew of godlinesse, he shall speake like the Dragon: that is, his doctrine shall be the doctrine of Diuels. Apoc. 13. His drinke shall be abhomi∣nation and fornication: that is, abhominable idolatry. Now to whome can this aggree? and in whome hes this bene fulfil∣led, except only in the Popes and Bishops of Rome. For doth he not call himselfe, the Vicare of Christ, the head of the Kirk and these that obeyes him onely the true Kirk, and true Catholickes? Who hes hornes like the Lambe, and yet speakes like the Dragon, but he? That is, Oraculo vocis mundi moderaris habenas, & me∣rito in terris cre∣deris esse Deus: that is, by the o∣racle of thy voice, thou reul the world, and worthilie is thou beleeued in the earth to be God. This inscription was written in Rome to Pope Sixtus the 4. who stiles themselues the seruande of seruands, the Vicare of Christ, the head of the Kirk, &c. but they? and yet for all this, who hes euer liued, taught, or spoken so blasphemously as they? In shewe of holinesse most vaunting and yet for all this, of all the creatures vnder heauen, the most monstrous. Of all idolaters, vnder the shewe and pre∣tence of Religion, the vilest and most abhominable: and of all creatures in the earth, they haue lifted vp themselues far∣thest aboue God, and that vnder the pretence of humilitie. And therefore the Scripture sayes, that the Antichrist shall
sit in the Temple of God, not as a minister teaching & prea∣ching the Gospel of the Kingdome, in season, and out of sea∣son: but as God; that is, claiming to himself these things that are proper and peculiar to God. The whilk the Popes of Rome hes done, as hes bene proued before. So to conclude this: He must be the vndoubted Antichrist, who suppose he hes lifted vp himselfe, aboue all that is called God; yet he sits in the Temple of God, as God: who hes two hornes lyke the Lambe, and yet speakes like the Dragon: whose abhomina∣tions are drunken out of a golden Cupe; whose doctrine is deceiueable: & a mysterie that is, who vnder the pretence of Christ, ouerthrowes Christ: But so it is, the Popes of Rome are sik, (as hes bene proued:) Therefore the Popes of Rome are the vndoubted Antichrist. This for the 4. marke. The fifth marke of the Antichrist, as he is descriued by the Apostle is in these words: Tertul. de resur∣rect. cap. 24 Ierome ad Gela∣sium. Chrisostom vpon this same place, and so al∣so Ambrose v∣pon this place, & Aug. de ciuit Dei lib. 20 cap. 29. ex∣pones it of the Romane impire. Ye know (sayes the Apostle) what withholdeth: namely, that he might be reuealed in his owne time. This Tertullian, Ierome and Chrysostome vnderstandes of of the Romane impire: the whilk as long as it flourished, & was in the full strength, the Antichrist could not climb vp to this his full hight & preheminence. So that it behoued that empire first to be translated, and peece & peece diminished before the Antichriste coulde come vp to his hight, for that stayed him. Nowe it is manifest out of the 17. chapter of the Reuelt. that Rome should be the seat of the Antichrist: And Bellarmine and the Rhemists does not deny it: & Rome was the seat of the Romane empire before. So then it behooued the empire to translate his seat from Rome, that Rome whilk was first the seat of the empire, might be the seate of the An∣tichrist. Now the issue and euent, is a sure and cleere inter∣pretation of this Prophecie: For Constantine the Emperour of Rome, translated his seate from Rome, to Byzantium called Constantinople in Greece. And peece and peece that empire of the Greeke Emperour began to decay. And was transla∣ted from the Greekes to the French-men by the Popes: and then from them to the Germanes, by the Popes also. So that both Rome and a great part of Italie, and at the last a great
part of the Empire is falne in the Popes hand. So that nowe he vaunts himselfe to be Monarch of the whole worlde, and all Kings and Princes gaue him their oath of allengeance: & the Emperours and Kings held their empires and kingdoms of him, and are but his vassals. (as their Canon Lawe saies) So that by the taking away of the Roman empire, the Popes did then climbe vp to their supremacie, & make themselues manifest, that they were the Antichrist. And so this doth al∣so aggree to the Pope of Rome, and to none other. He is the Antichrist, whose climbing vp was letted by the Romane empire, and who is builded vp vpon the ruines of the same: But the Papacie is sik: therefore the Papacie is that Anti∣christian kingdome. It is saide sextly, That Kingdome is that apostasie and antichristian monarchie, whose foundati∣on was begin∣ning to be laide in the Apostles daies, whilk should be first consumed by the word of God & alluterlie abo∣lished by the brightnes of his comming, but the Papacie is sik, therfore it is that antichristian kingdome Mat. 18.1.2.3.4. & 0.25, 26.27 Mar, 10.41. Luc 22.25. 2, Cor. 1. 24.1. Pet. 3.2.3 that this mysterie began to worke in the dayes of the Apostles: that is, the foundation of that apostasie was begun to be laid in these daies and that he shall continue til the Lordes comming: for he shall not be abolished but by the brightnesse of his comming, suppose he shall be first consumed with the sworde of his mouth: that is, discouered, and sore beaten by the Lords word. All whilk aggrees vnto Papistrie, for the foundations of it was soone laide, both of that Hierachie & supremacie of the Pope, and also of his damnable and erro∣neus doctrine. For that superioritie of the ministrie one ouer another, of Bishops ouer Pastours forbidden by Iesus Christ, soone crape in, whilk was the foundation or rather staires, by the whilk the Pope clambe vp to his Popedome and supre∣macie: and the olde condemned heresies whilk sprang vp in the primitiue Kirk, manye of them were the foundation of these damnable doctrines, whilk the Popes brought in after∣ward, as is proued in the end of the first parte. And as to his consuming by the Lorde his mouth, the Lord hes accomplished that alredie in some measure, and shall assuredly fulfill it daylie more and more: For since the time of the burning of Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage, About the eare of God 1415 and since the time the Lord stirred vp Martine Luther, & sundry others his faithfull seruands to preach the gospell of Christ, whilk was as it were buried in the darknesse of Papistrie, the supre∣macie
of the Pope hes taken sik a daylie consumption, that many of the Kingdomes of Europe now hes forsaken her, & the Lord hes put in their harts to hate her: But yet we know the dregges of it shall not be abolished alluterlie, whill the bright comming of the Sonne of God. It followes seauenthly, the maner how his kingdome and tyrannie shall be promoued, vpholden, and established: To wit, By the effectuall working of Sathan with all power and signes & lying wonders, and with all deceaueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse a∣mongst them that perishes: Whilk the Apostle calles strong delusi∣ons. And with this, that of the Reuel. cap. 13. (in the descripti∣on of the second beaste, whereby it is meaned the Antichristi∣an kingdome) does aggree that he did great wonders, and decea∣ued them that dwelt vpon the earth, by the signes whilk was permitted him to doe. Now certainlie nothing can be spoken more aptly of the Popes kingdome nor this: Fot vnlesse the Pope had had an effectuall power, strong and diuelish also, by signes and lying wonders: and vnlesse his vnrighteousnesse, that is, his false doctrine had beene exceeding deceaueable: that is, co∣vered with a faire colour of godlinesse: and vnlesse his delu∣sions had beene strong, his kingdome had neuer beene so farre inlarged, and so firmely established, as wee see it hes beene: and his damnable doctrine and errors woulde neuer haue deceaued so many nations as they haue done. For what is more common and vsuall in their mouthes nor miracles? What is it they vaunte so much of, as of their miracles? So that they make it an infallible marke of the Kirk. And howe I pray you hes a greate parte of their errours and superstiti∣ons, as the praying to Saints, and worshipping of Images, & pilgrimages, and other of their superstitions and idolatries, as purgatorie, the reall presence, their monstruous transub∣stantiation &c. how, I say, haue they beene so confirmed and so rooted in the hartes of ignorant people, but by their lying wonders and miracles, whilk they faine was done? Where∣of their golden legend are full, and sundrie yet liues who hes beene eye witnesses of the falset of their miracles. I will one∣ly set downe for example, some of the false miracles of two
Nunnes heir: the one of Magdalena de la cruz, Abbesse of the monasterie of the Franciscan Nunnes, who was condemned by the Inquisitours of Cordoua for her enormous offences and Couenant whilk she made with the diuell, as they saye in their sentence against her: she by the aide of the Diuell with whome she made a couenant when she was nyne year olde, became a singular hypocrite, and by his helpe wrought manye miracles, as that she appeared vnto Mariners in a storme being inuocated, and so the storme calmed: that she burned in flames like Seraphims, and was rauished in the spi∣rite, and harde wonders whilk mortall man could not vtter: (In this she was made another Saint Paule) that she was lif∣ted vp in the aire, and the Sacrament went visibly out of the hand of the Priest that said Masse, through the aire, & enter∣ed into her mouth: And when the Sacramēt went by she be∣ing in a garden, the wall of the garden opened the selfe, and then she worshiped it: Sik was the opinion of her holines that many Ladies of Spaine and the Empresse, seing them∣selues at poynte of child-birth, sent their mantels wherein the creature shuld be wrapped, that she should blesse them. She gaue to her beloued friends droppes of her monstrous bloode, and made them beleeue it was the bloode of Christ, she was condemned as a witch by the inquisitors of Spaine a∣bout the yeare of God 1540. The other of a Dominican Nun Priores de la Anunciada of Lisbon in Portugale, about the 1586. yeare of God, that shee had deserued to haue Christ visible for her husband, that he appeared to her often times, & tal∣ked with her, as one friend would talke with another: that she had the impression of Christs 5. wounds vpon her. And as the historie recordeth other infinite miracles did she. So that manye became Nunnes through the opinion whilk was conceaued of her holines and miracles. This story is written in french by one Steuen de Lusignan a Dominican Friar, and de∣dicated to the Queene of France, with this title, the greate miracles and moste holye wonders whilk this present yeare 1586. hath happened to the right reuerend mother Priores of the monasterie &c. in Lisbon, approued by Friar Lewes of
Granada & by other persons worthy of credite in Paris, prin∣ted by Iohn Bessant 1586. Hee alledgeth three letters sent from persons of great credite for his warrant: But shee was discouered, and confessed her hypocrisie: and that shee pain∣ted the wounds on her hands, and drew bloode on her side, and fained all the rest, that she might be esteemed holy, and therefore was condemned by the Arch-bishops of Lisbon & Brage, the Bishop of Guardia, the Inquisitors, & sundry others in the end of the 1588. yeare, as it is to bee seene in a booke printed at Siuill in Spaine 1589. Let these examples suffice to proue this marke that by lying wonders they haue establi∣shed their damnable doctrine. So that certainely their is no one thing that doth more confirme this, that their Popes is the Antichrist, and their kingdome antichristian: nor the ef∣fectuall working of Sathan by lying wonders, whereby their diuelish doctrine hes beene promoued and established. And what seeke wee further? Is it not manifest by their owne hi∣stories that their owne Popes to the nomber of 20. or moe hes wrought by the effectuall working of Sathan? So then to conclude this poynte: If the Apostle Paule bee a true Pro∣phet, whilk I trust no man will call in question, and if hee bee the true Antichrist to whome al these markes does aggree: that is, who is the man of sinne, and sonne of perdition; who hes lifted vp himselfe aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped &c. whilk can not be denyed: then of necessity it muste followe that the Popes of Rome are the selfe same Antichrist whilk was foretolde to come, because they beare all these markes of that Antichrist whome the Apostle de∣scriues, and no other. And if wee will come to the Reuelation, where the Anti∣christ is most clearely foretold: The markes of the Antichrist, as they are set downe in the Re¦uel. chap. 13. ag∣grees to the Popes of Rome. What is there in that Reuela. spoken of the Antichrist whilk is not fulfilled in the Popes of Rome. In the 13. of the Reuelation mention is made of two beastes, by the firste is signified the Romane Empyre by the whilk the Saints of god were persecuted the first 300. years: by the other is signified the Kingdome of the Antichrist, whilk rose vp immediatly after the diminishing and destru∣ction
of the Romane Empyre: the whilk Iohn calles another beast, distinguishing it from the former: whilk hee discriues first from his outward forme and shape, that he hes two hornes like the lambe, but speakes like the dragon, whilk hes beene accom∣plished in the Popes of Rome, as I haue shewed before. The second from his vvorkes that he doth. Firste, that hee did all that the first beast could doe before him. Secondly, that hee shall cause all to worshipe the firste beaste, vvhose deadlye vvound ws healed: Thirdly, that hee shoulde deceaue them vvhilk dwell vpon the earth by the vvonders and signes vvhilk vvas permitted to him to doe. Fourthlye, that hee should restore the image of the firste beaste. Fifthly, that hee should suffer none to buye or sell but sik as receaued his markes on their fore-head and hands. And the laste thinge from the whilk that Antichristian kingdome (whilk is repre∣sented by the 2. beast) is descriued, is the nomber of his name Al the vvhilk are so clearely accomplished in that papisticall Kingdome, these many hundreth yeares, that hee muste bee blinded of God, that sees not that the Popes are the Anti∣christ, and their Kingdome Antichristian. As to the first. Who hes exercised all the power of the former Emperours of Rome but they? Haue not they clai∣med to themselues the Monarchie of the vvhole vvorlde? Ths authoritie of both the swords? Hes not Emperours & Kinges sworne their oath of alleageance and fidelitie vnto them? taking their vnction, consecration & crownes of thē? And payed tribute vnto them? Haue they not kissed their feete? holden the stirrops? Led their bridles? Set thē on their horse? Haue not the Popes of Rome excommunicated Em∣perours and Kings? Deposed them from their Kingdomes? Stirred vp their subiects against them? Set vp others in their places? nd finallie vvhat outward power or tyrannie did e∣uer the Romane Emperours exercise ouer Kingdomes and nations? Yea vvhat crueltie, tyrannie, auarice, blasphemie a∣gainst God and his Saints, did they euer exercise, vvhilk the Popes of Rome hes not done? Yea, and hes ouercome them in all these things The vvhilk are so cleare and manifest, &
that by their owne practises, that they can not bee denyed. Doth he not affirme in his canon law that Constantine gaue the Pope all the kingdomes in the earth? Dist. 9.6. cap. Con¦stantius. c Venera¦bilem de electio-Steuchus de do∣natione Constan¦tini. Lib. 3. instan. Ro∣mae. And that all Kings reignes by the Pope? And that he transferres the Empire from nation to nation, and giues them to whome he will? And that all Kings are but the Popes vassals? And therefore sayes Blondus, Now the Princes of the world adores and worshipes the Pope as perpetuall Dictator, not Caesars suc∣cessor, but Peter his successor, and the foresaide Emperors vicar. Yea, sayes he, all Europe sends greater, or at the leaste as greate tribute to Rome, as they did in the former times: (to wit, to the Romaine Empyre. Ser. 1. de con∣uersione. ) And Bernard sayes, they are the firste in the persecution (speaking to the Kirk) whilk appeares to loue the primacie in the Kirk, and to be the princes thereof. As to the second, who is he that hes caused all to worship the first beaste: that is, hes brought a∣gaine that tyrannous crueltie and dominion ouer the poore Kirk of God, in setting vp idolatrie and abolishing the true worship of God, whilk the Ethnick Emperours did, but the Popes of Rome? For was not the Emperour of the East ex∣communicate, because hee woulde not suffer images in the temples? Haue not they filled the world with their Idolatrie as hes beene proued? Who hes made warre with the Saints and oppressed them in all the partes where there dominion might reach, but they? France, Germany, England, Scotlād, the Low countries, and al Europe beares witnesse vnto this. As to the thirde, who by lying wonders hes deceaued the world, but they? And as to the fourth, who hes healed the deadly wound of the first beast, in setting vp an impire heir in the West in the person of Charles the great, whilk was more nor 300. yeares so deadlye wounded through the incursion of other nations, that there was no impire in the West: Who (I say) did all this, but the Popes of Rome? giuing vnto them the stile or bare name, but taking by little & little ye substance of the whole impire to thēselues, so that Theodorik à Niem sayes the Romane empyre is so little now in lmany, Lib. 3. cap. 43. that their is some Bi∣shops or Archbishops that will spend twise as much, as they will doe of all the lands that is vnder their subiection: And some princes hes more land nor the Emperour hes. And if ye will looke to Rome (sayes hee)
and Italie, it was once the seate of the Empire, but now the Emperour hes nothing of it but the style. As to the fifth. Who is hee who hes caused make the image of the beast, and giuen a spirite vnto it that it should speake: That is, who hes set vp a very image of the Romane monarchie and hierarchie, in the whole frame of their gouernement in the Kirk of God, but the Popes of Rome? So that the whole frame of their gouernement and hierarchie, is a liuelie patterne and image of the Romane impire. For as in the Romane impire, there was an Empe∣perour whome all did worship as God: vnto whome there was ioyned a Senate, who was next in authority to him: so is the frame of the gouernement of the Papistical kingdome There is a Monarch the Pope; whome all are compelled, when they come in his sight, to worship as an earthly God, to whose sentence al must stand to, who iudgeth all, but can be iudged of none, who hes ioined with him a Senate of car∣dinals, who are next him in authority. Secondly, as in the Romane monarchie, the Emperour tooke vpon him not on∣ly the highest Kingly authoritie in all matters civill, but also the Priestly authoritie, and power ouer religion: and not that onely, but also to be Tribunes ouer the people, who had the power of forbidding and annulling of all decrees made by other Magistrates. Euen so the Popes of Rome hes vsurped all these three. First, the highest roiall authority o∣uer all Kings and princes: next, to be lords ouer religion: so that as Antoninus one of his arch-bishops sayes, Summa par. 3 tit 22. cap. 5 He may create new Religions: thirdly, to be tribunes; that is to disanull what someuer decree or iudgement, of anye Bishop or inferiour iudges: yea of synodall and generall councels, if they be not ratified by him. Thirdly, as in Rome was the heade of the empire, the Emperour and his Senate with him, and as the Emperours had their Magistrates vnder them, in all their prouinces, and places of their dominions, from whome all their authoritie was, and who was at their beck and com∣mandement: So in the Popes Kingdome, the Pope who is the head, and the Senate of Cardinals whilk is next him in authoritie, hes their seate in Rome: and they according to
the olde patterne of the romane impyre, hes their Bishops, arch-bishops, Abbots, Priors, Monks, Friars, &c. in all the places of their dominion vnder them: who hes their whole authoritie from him, and who all are his sworne men. So heir is then the liuelie image of the former beast. And as to the sext, Who did kill all them that would not wor∣ship the image. And this frame of gouernement of Popes, car∣dinals, Bishops, Arch-bishops, &c. and their Religion, but the Popes of Rome? The blood of infinite thousands does testifie this. And wha hes brought all vnder their bondage, both one & other, that none might buy or sel: that is, neither brooke Ciuill nor Ecclesiasticall offices, but those who were marked with his marke: that is, tooke on them his professi∣on, and was Catholickes (as he tearmes them,) Is not this sufficiently knowne, that none might haue offices nor bene∣fices in the Kirk, but they that receaued his marke, and or∣dours from him? And none might brooke their kingdomes and ciuill dignities, in so farre as lay in his power, but these that were of his profession. Clement. lib. 2. it. 9. Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores: Post homo fit Papae, recipit quo dante coronam. And Erasmus sayes in his Adagies, That neither Baptisme nor marriage nor sacrifice, nor psalmes, nor prayer, nor Sacrament, nor graue in the papisticall Kingdome are giuen without money. Nowe laste of all: to what kingdome or Kirk vnder hea∣uen, since this Reuelation was written, does the nomber of the name of the beast, heir set downe, aggree; but to the Latine Kingdome of the Popes, and their Latine Kirk: for heir is set downe the name of the kingdome of Antichrist. The nomber of the name of the beast heir set downe, is 666. and the letters of the name of this Antichristian kingdome  amounts to the same nomber of 666. 30 1 300 5 10  50 70 200 all wh lk being ioined together, makes 666 For what is the name of the Popish kingdome and hierarchie? Is not the Kirk called the Latine Kirk? Is not all the exercises of their Religion, almoste in Latine? And suppose the old Te∣stament be written in Hebrew, and the newe in Greek: yet, haue they not condemned the originals as corrupted, and haue they not authorized the Latine interpretation as on∣ly
authenticall? So that Papacie, is the very kingdome of Latines. Nowe the letters of this Greeke worde  whilk signifies Latine (for the Reuelat. was written in greek) doeth amount to the same nomber 666. And what other kingdome or monarchy vnder heauē can they showe whose name is sik, Iren lib. 5. cap. 25 Sed & Latinis no men 666. nume∣rum habet, & val de verisimile est, quia verissimum regnum hoc ha∣bet vocabuum. Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant 5 20 20 30 8 . 200 10 1 10 300 1  30 10 20 1  ROM  200.6.40.10 ITH 10.400. that the letters thereof amounteth to this nom∣ber? Ireneus an auncient writer, yea so auncient, that he sawe and heard Polycarpus who was one of Iohns Disciples, who re∣ceaued this Reuelation, mentioneth, that the name of this beast in this prophecie, is  And as the letters of this greeke worde  amounteth to this nomber 666: so does the letters of these Latine words, Ecclesia Italica, written in greeke letters, and of the Hebrew worde ROMIITH, that signifieth Romam. Is not this meikle nowe that this number of 666. aggrees to the name of the Papisticall kingdome, both in hebrew, greeke, and latine. In greeke  that is Latine: in Herew, ROMIITH, that is Rome: in latine Ec∣clesia Italica, that is, the Italian Kirk. For Italie is called La∣tium, that is Latine. What more woulde any man require? Will not this suffice to make it manifest, that the Popes are the Antichrist, to whome euery thing prophecied of the An∣tichrist by the Apostle Paule, and this Reuelation of the se∣cond beast, does so fitlie aggree? So that there can be none vnder heauen vnto whome they can be applied, but only to the Popes of Rome. But yet for the full manifestation of this point, we will goe to the 17. of the Reuelation. For, as his Kingdome was figured vnder a beast that had two hornes like the Lambe, in the 13. chapter: so there is the principall throne and seat of his Kingdome, figured vnder a great har∣lote, with whome the Kings and nations of the earth hes committed for∣nication. The whilk harlote is moste gloriously decked and richelie apparelled, Who hes a Cupe of golde in her hand, full of abhominations: in whose fore-heade a name is written: A mystery, that Babylon, that mother of whooredomes, who is drunken with the blood of the Saints and Martyres of Iesus, whilk is that great city, whilk raigneth ouer the kings of the earth, whilk sitteth vppon seauen mountaines. For the maintenance of whose kingdome, ten
Kings yealded vp their power & authority, to fight against the Lambe, and to ouercome him. That this great ciety is the ciety of Rome: it is so plaine, that he is more then blinde that sees it not. For what ciety did raigne ouer the nations when this Reuelation was receaued, but Rome? and what ciety, Capitolinus, Pala¦tinus, Auentinus, Caelius, Exquili∣nus, Quirinalis, Vi minalis. since the Pope clambe vp to his Kingdome, hes done the same, but Rome And what ciety sitteth vpon 7. hilles, but Rome, whose names are yet knowne? And what ciety hes bene the mother of all spiritual and bodily fornication, of all idolatry and abhomination, but Rome. Yea, what cie∣ty hes bene so enriched with gold, purple, & precious stones, but Rome? And what ciety hes beene drunken with the blood of the Martyres and Saintes, but Rome? All these things are so manifest, that not only some of the Fathers, as in praefat. ad Dydimum, & in epi. ad Algasium. Ierome, contra Marci. lib. 13. aduers. Iu∣daeos, cap. 9. & Tertullian sawe it: but also some of themselues confesses it, that this Babylon is Rome. Both Bellar. grants it plainlie, and also the Rhemists doe not deny it. I or Lib. 2. cap. 2, that great Iesuite Bellarmine sayes, that Iohn in the Reuelation euerye where calles Rome Babylon: and confirmes this, first by the testi∣mony of Tertullian, and then by the circumstances of the text For (saies he) there was no other ciety at that time that did raigne o∣uer the nations, but Rome. And it is most notorious (saies he) that Rome sittes on seauen billes. What now would ye haue more? And in another L b. 4 cap. 4. place, It appeares, saies he, that in the time of the Antichrist, Rome shall be made desolate, and shall be brunt, as it is gathered out of the 17. of the Reuel. and this shall not be vntill the end of the worlde. These are plaine speaches. And I say this great ciety of Rome, whilk is called heir mysticall Babylon, is not descriued heir, as she was the seate of the heathen Em¦perors, when they raigned in her, as the Romane Kirk saies, but as she is, and hes bene the seate of the Antichrist. For in the time of the Emperours, shee made not the Kings of the earth commit fornication with her: that is, shee did not pollute them with her idolatry and religion, as it is foretolde of this Rome: for she left euery kingdome free to vse their owne Idolatrie and superstition: But Rome since she began to be the throne and seate of the Antichrist, the
Popes of Rome hes propagated her idolatry and worship to all nations, and hes made all nations drunken with the wine of her fornication: and hes obtruded her religion to all na∣tions, against their wil, with fire and sword. And from thence hes proceeded all the warres and blood-sheds, in many na∣tions of Europe, because they did goe out of her, and depar∣ted from her idolatry. Further, all the partes of her description heir, aggrees to Rome, hauing the shewe of Christianity, and not as she was Ethnick vnder the Ethnick Emperors, as that purple and skarlet wherewith she was clade, that gilding with golde & precious stones, and pearles: whilk the Arch-bishop of Ra∣tisbon, Albertus Magnus, and the glosse interprets of the simu∣lation of pietie and meekenesse, and the spirituall graces of God: as faith, hope, charitie: all whilks (say they) she shall in hypocrisie pretend: but yet in truth haue nothing sik: but crueltie and vngodlinesse, the whilk can no wayes aggree with Rome, as she was in her Gentilisme: therefore of ne∣cessity Papisticall Rome is heir descriued, and not Ethnick Rome. Thirdly, that Rome is heir descriued, whilk was vp∣holden by the beast, vnto whome the ten Kings yeelded vp their power, to fight against the Lambe, as is manifest by the 12. and 13. verses of that 17. chapter. But this beast is not the empire of Rome, but the Antichristian kingdome: for these ten Kings had not receaued their Kingdomes all that time that the Romane Emperours were Ethnick, and long after: Therefore Rome as it is the seate of the Antichrist, & not as it was the seate of the romane Empire, is heir descry∣ued. And the Rhemists sayes, that some expones these ten Kings, of ten kingdomes, In their annota∣tions vpon this place. into whilk the Romane empire shall be deuided, whilk shall all serue Antichrist: therefore Rome as it is heir descriued, must be the seate of the Anti∣christ. Last of all, the Reuelation speakes heir of that Rome that shalbe brunt with fire, & be made desolate by the ten king∣domes, whilk God should stirre vp to hate her; & he speaks heir of that Rome whilk shalbe casten in the middes of the
sea: after the whilk shall followe the day of iudgement: But this cannot be Rome as it was the seate of the Romane Em∣pyre, The testimonies of themselues prouing the Popes to be the Antichrist, and Rome to be that mistical Babilon. but as it is the seate of the Antichristian kingdome: for it is more then a thousand yeares, since Rome left off her Gentilisme, & yet this prophecy is not accomplished in her. Vnto these I ioine the testimonies of some of their owne Monks, Bishops, Poets, Friars, historiographers, Emperours and Popes also, whereby it will be verefied, that this harlote is Rome, and the Popes thereof the Antichrist. Bernarde a Monke of Cluniak, who liued about 400. yeare agoe, writing vnto Peter the Abbote of that Monasterie, speaking of the ty∣rannous behauiour of the Cleargie and Bishop of Rome, he accuses them of sacrilegious bryberie, of bying and selling of the Bi∣shops Pall, the Ring, and of all Lawes and equitie. And he sayes in another place, Roma nocens nocet, at{que} viam docet ipsa nocendi, Iura relinquere, lucra requirere, pallida vendi: Non Deus est tibi Iesus Ro∣ma peristi. That is This hurtfull Rome, does hurte, and teach to be wicked, To leaue all lawe, and gaip for gaine, and sell a Popish Tippet. A greedie gulfe, a griping graue, a filthie iakes, Both bottomlesse, vnsatiate: and all alike she makes. By drinking thou art dry, & louder thou does cry, come bring me more: I pray thee cry hoe: but thou saies no: I hunger sore. I thinke thou makes golde thy God, not Iesus Christ. Rome what shall I say? what shall I doe, or tell thee what is done? Wealth weakeneth thee, wealth threatneth thee not to be Rome. Then let me speake it, and let me write it, Rome once thou wast. Then let me speake it, and let me write it, Rome thou art gone. And Iohn a Monke sayes, Curia vult marcas, bursas exhaurit, & arcas: &c. That is, The Court of Rome does aime at markes, it souks the purse, & soaks the arks: If that you minde to spare your arkes, come not at Popes nor Patriarkes: But if you frankly giue them markes, and with good gold stuf vp their arkest I warrand then you shall be free, from any kinde of penaltie Who is within? who is there? I. Why, what would ye? Come in. Bring you ought? No. Stand still. But I doe. Go ye then in. The same Monke also saieth, Roma manus rodit: quod rodere non valet, odit. Dantes exaudit, non dantibus ostia claudit. Curid curarum genitrix, nutrix{que} malorum. Ignotos notis, inho nestos aequat honestis. That is,
Rome is a raker, and spitefull hater of the emptie hand: She heareth the giuer, but others neuer, but letteth them stand. Her Courte a cage of cares: of mischiefes eke the mother: She vseth knaues like honest men, and strangers like a brother. The Archbishop of Colon and Traverse sayes to Pope Nico∣laus the first, Thou pretends the person of he Pope, but thou playes the tyrant. We feill a Wolfe vnder the weed of a Pastor: the stile belies the parent. Thou by thy deedes makes show as if thou were God: while as thou art the seruand of seruands, thou contendes to be Lord of Lords. According to the discipline of our Sauiour, thou art the least of all the ministers of the Temple of God. Thou through the desire of ruling, goes to perdition. Whatsomeuer thing pleaseth thee, is leesome to thee. Fucus factus e Christianis And Gregory a Pope sayes, I affirme this boldly vpon good assurance, that whosoeuer he be that calles himself, or is desirous to be called vniuer∣sal Priest, in that hautines of his, is a fore-runner of Antichrist, in that by swelling pride he preferreth himselfe before others. Arnulphus Aurelaensis vnto the councell of Rhemes, testifies this of the Pope, Whome (saies he) reuerend Fathers thinke ye this man so be? who sitting in a high throne, shynes in his purple and golden attyre? to wit, if he want loue, & be puffed vp by knowl dge, he is the Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe as though he were God. Bernard 400. yeare agoe, writing to Eugenius Pope of Rome, 2, Book to Eugen in conclusion he breaketh forth in these words. Thou hes more neede (saies he) to haue a rake in thy hand, 4. book to Eugen nor a scepter to performe the office of a Prophete. And in another place, after he hes de∣scriued and detested the pride of the Bishops of Rome, at last he concludeth the matter in these wordes, saying to the Pope, Heirein (saies he) thou showes thy selfe to haue succeeded not to Peter, but to Constantine. Peter is he who neuer knewe what belon∣ged to sik solemne shewing himselfe abroade, in braueries of precious stones, or silkes, or old, or ryding vpon a white Palfray, or being garded with a troope of tall fellowes, or enuironed wich a cmpany of ruffling seruing-men. Also in another place, In his epistle 230 speaking of the tiranny of the Bishop of Rome, he maketh an exclamation in this sort. At the first indeed (saies he) ye began to play the Lords but ouer the Cleargie, contrary to the counsell of Peter: 1. Pet, 5.3. 2. Cor. 1.24. and within a while contrary to the aduise of Paule (Peters ftllowe Apostle) you will haue dominion ouer the faith of all men. But ye stay not there: ye haue taken vpon you
more: namelie, to haue a peremptory power in Religion it selfe. Nowe what remayneth whereon ye might further incroache, except ye will go about to bring the very Angels vnder your subiection. And in ano∣ther place, Vpon the Cantic serm. 33 speaking of the behauiours of the romish Prelats, Hence commeth (saies he) that whoorish tricking, that stage-like at∣tire, that prince-like pompe, whilk dayly we see in them: Hence proceids the golde that they vse in their brydles, sadles, and spurres: in so much that their spurres are more glittering then their altars. Hence came their stately Tables, their variety of dishes, and quaffing cups: hence is∣sued their ionketting, banketting, their drunkennesse and surfets: hence followed their Viols, harpes, and shalmes: hence flowed their sellers and pantries so stuffed with wines and viands of all sorts: hence gote they their lee-pots, and painting boxes: and hence had they their purses so well lyned with coine. Fy vpon it. Sik men they will needs be, & yet they are our great maisters in Israel, as Deanes, arch-deanes, Bishops, and arch-bishops. These works of theirs are little inferiour vnto that filthinesse whilk they committed in darkenesse. And lastly he addes these words, For he is the very Antichrist. Frederick the seconde, foretolde the ruine of Rome, more then 300. yeares since in these wyrds, writing to Innocentius 4. Pope: Roma diu titubans, long is erroribus acta Corruet, & mundi desinet esse caput. That is, Rome rowling long about in errours, bound, & thrall, Shall fall at last, and cease to be the lofty head of all. And in his verse written against the Pope, hee affirmes plainely that he was that sonne of perdition & that head of the wic∣ked forespoken by Paule. And in his letters to the prelates of the world, he calles the Pope that greate dragon, that hes deceaued the whole world, that Antichrist, and that counterfite Vicare of Christ. E∣berharbus Bishop of Salsburgh, Aboue 380. yeares agoe. Auentinus lib. 7 speaking of the Bishops of Rome hee sayes: they onely desire to reigne, they can not abide peace: They will not cease till they haue stamped all vnder their feete, that they may sit in the Temple of God, & be lifted vp aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped. He who is the seruād of seruāds, is the Lord of Lords, and desires to be thought of, as if he were God: And hee sayes, that man whome they vse to call Antichrist, bee speaketh greate things as though he were God, in whose fore-heade that name of blas∣phemie
is written: I am God I can not erre. Franciscus Petrarcha a light of that age for his manifolde learning, calles the courte of Rome Babylon, and that harlote of Babell that sitteth vpon manye waters, the mother of Idolatrie & whoordōe, the refuge of heresies & er¦rors. And Petrus Iohannes pronoūced the Pope to be the Antichrist and the sinagogue of Rome to be that greate Babylon. And Matthias Parisiensis sayes, that Antichrist hes seduced al the vniuersities and colledges of the learned, so that they teach nothing soundly now: & the edict of the empire, vnder Lodouick the fourth, speaking of Pope Iohn the 22. sayes, Christians can not keepe the peace whilk is giuen them of God, for this Antichrist (meaning the Pope) And in another edict it is written, as he is a disaguised Pastour, so is he a mysticall Antichrist: and we declare him being the author of that Antichristian Empire, to be damned of heresie, & deposed by our right by the councell, sentence, and common consent of the princes and prelats of Germanie, the Priests of Italie, and people of Rome so desiring. And Auentinus in the historie of Hildebrand writes, that almost all the plaine, iust, simple, & vpright hes written, that then (to wit when he was Pope) the Empyre of the Antichrist began, because they sawe that come to passe at that time, whilk our Sauiour fore-tolde so manye yeares before. And to conclude this: Hadrian the 6. Pope, in his instructions of his legats to the conuention at Noremberge, he sayes: Thou shalt saye, that wee grant freely that God hes suffered this persecution to come vpon the Kirk for the sinnes of men, and espe∣cially of the priests and prelats of the Kirk. And againe hee sayes, we know that in this seate (speaking of that Pontificall seate in Rome) many abhominable things hes beene for some yeares, as abuse in spiri∣tuall things, excesse in commandements, and last of all, all things chan∣ged in worse. And the Popes Cardinals (speaking to Paule the third) sayes. From this fountaine (holy Father) as from the Troyan horse, so many abuses hes rushed into the Kirk, and so heauie diseases wherewith (as we may se) she is brought into a desperate estate, I omit the rest: Yee may se the trueth is strong that hes made their owne mouths to fyle themselues. To conclude this then: Hee must be the vndoubted Antichrist, and his kingdome Anti∣christian, vnto whome the whole markes of the Antichrist, as he is descriued in the scripture by the Apostle Paule, & Iohn in
the Reuelation doth aggree: But they all aggree vnto the Popes of Rome and his kingdome, as hes beene proued. Therefore they muste bee that vndoubted Antichriste who was to come. Secondly, he muste bee that vndoubted Anti∣christ, whome his owne Friars, Bishops, Cardinals, and some of themselues doth call Antichrist, and ascriue these things vnto him that belongs properly to the Antithrist: But his owne Friars, Bishops, Cardinals, & some of themselues hes so testified, as hes beene proued also: Therefore out of their owne mouths they are condemned to be that Antichrist, & their kingdome Antichristian. Now to put an end to this my reply, that religion is false whilk hes neither vnitie, succession, nor antiquitie: this you can not deny, because you make them the markes of your Kirk: But your religion hes neither vnitie, for that is broken by your manifolde contradictions and dissensions amongst your selues, whereof I haue marked some, and the diligent reader of your workes may gather many moe: Chrachtouius in his booke called Bellum Iesuiticum, hes gathered of two heads to wit the Masse and Antichrist 205. contradictions, let the Christian Reader iudge then what maye be gathered of the rest, no succession, neither personal, broken by their Popes who was Atheists, Schismatickes, heretickes, and by a vvo∣man Pope: neither in doctrine, being direct contrarye to the doctrine of Christ: no antiquitie, for the authors and origen of sundrie maine poynts of your religion is set downe heere, and al your Romane Cleargie, hes not satisfied Maister Iew∣els challenge this 30. yeare agoe, concerning the noueltie of 27. of your opinions. Therefore since it hes neither vnitie, successiō, nor antiquitie, it is a false religion by your own do∣ctrine. Secondly, that religion whilk is contrarye the Scrip∣ture, contrary the practise of the primitiue Kirk whilk opens a dore to all licenciousnes, whilk can bring no true peace & consolation vnto the consciences of men, whilk blusheth to be knowen and made manifest, whilk maintaineth manye greate absurdities, horrible blasphemies, abhominable ido∣latry that is the doctrine of Antichriste, & the doctrine of di∣uels,
whilk by their own mouthes is condemned, must be er∣roneous and false: But the religion of the Kirk of Rome is such as hes beene euidently proued before, therefore it must be false. Woe therefore belonges to their soules that pro∣fesses it openly or secrectly. REVEL. 14. And another Angel followed saying, Babylon that great citty, she hes fallen, she hes fallen: for she hes made all nations to drinke of the wyne of the wrath of her fornication. Ver. 9. And the third An∣gell followed them, saying with a loude voice, If any shall worship the beast and his image, and receaue the marke vpon his foreheade, or vpon his hand, he also shal drinke of the wine of the wrath of God yea of the pure wine, whilk is powred in the Cupe of his wrath, and he shalbe tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lambe, and the smoake of their torment shall ascend for euermore: and they shall haue no rest, day nor night, whilk wor∣ship the beast and his image: and whosoeuer receaueth the printe of his name. FINIS. Faultes escaped. PAge 20. line 15. read Apostles, pag 28. l. 1. for and by, r. others. pag. 31. l. 3. r. if in. pag. 32. l. 4. r decicets. pag. 33. l. 2. for he was, r. they were. pag. 40. l. 5 for theirs, r. heresie. pag 48 l. 36 r. the soules. pag. 56. l. 16. r. therfore. & l. 34 for do, r. dow. pag 67. l. 7. r is, & l. 16, for whilk, r. whill. pag. 68. l. 4 r the. pag. 73. l. 4. for three, 1. third. pag, 74, l, 28. for yet, r. yea. pag, 75, l, 3 for imputes, r imports. & l, 20 for the, r. this pag. 80. l 32. for euery, r. euer any. pag, 89, l, 20 r. expresse contrar. pag. 121, l, 26. for our, r. your. pag, 184, l, 13. for ye, r, they. & l, 16. for ye, r. they pag. 185, l, 30. for your, r. their. pag, 211, l, 22. r. fulfilled pag, 229, l, 33. for priest, r. Prouests. pag 230, l, 12. r in the. pag, 244, l, 29. for offers, r. offered. pag, 252. l. 21, for for, r. from pag. 263. l, 7, for ciphers, r. ciners. pag, 297, l, 7, r. not the. pag. 324, l, 8, for Franciscus, r, Dominicus, & l. 9. for made, r. maine: pag 325, l, 4. for and r. one pag, 327, l, 10. fo same, r. some. pag. 341. l, 37, for Papistes, r, Popes. And in the epist, to the Reader, and to M, Gilb. Browne. for this country read that country of Niddisdaill and Galloway, euery where. Good Reader, if thou shalt finde any more faultes, then these aboue corrected, eitherr in the matter, or marginall quotations, excuse the authour by reason of his far absence, in the time of the imprinting of this worke
