3220 99849580 14737
THE ELEMENTS OF ARMORIES. AT LONDON Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1610.
C. SALLVSTIVS CRISPVS. Verumenimuerò is demùm mihi viuere, et frui animâ videtur, qui aliquo negotio intentus, praeclari fa∣cinoris, aut ARTIS BONAE famam quaerit.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRIE, EARLE OF NORTHAMPTON, BARON HO∣WARD OF MARNHILL; LORD PRIVIE SEALT; LORD WARDEN OF THE CINQVE FORTS; ONE OF THE LORDS, COMMISSI∣ONERS FOR THE EARLE-MARSHALSHIP OF ENGLAND; KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER: VVOR∣THIE OF ALL THE HONORS DVE TO HIGH VVISDOME, VIRTVE, AND LEARNING; HIS MOST HONORED GOOD LORD. E. B. VVILLINGLIE, HVMBLIE, AND DESER∣VEDLIE, DEDICATETH THESE HIS ELE¦MENTS OF ARMORIES.
The Opinions, and Offices of sundry choyce, and quallified Gentlemen, friendes to the Au∣thor, touching these his ELE∣MENTS of ARMO∣RIES.
A Letter to the Author from the worthy, WILLIAM SEGAR Es∣quire, GARTER, principall King of Armes. SYR, I haue viewed your Elementary Booke of Armories, and, in my poore iudgment, doe approue the same no lesse singular for the deuice, then ge∣nerall for the matter, and absolutely the best of any in that kind. Your labours de∣serue encouragements by how much they are written freely, and ingeniously, and may be called as well the ALIMENTS as the ELEMENTS of AR∣MORIES, for that they nourish the mind of the Rea∣der with a profitable, and pleasing satiety of excel∣lent matter. Finis coronat opus, Your good Wine needs no Garland. Yet because it was your plea∣sure I should deliuer you mine opinion thereof, I haue aduentured to say thus much. And with the same recommend my loue vnto you. 14. April. 1610. Your louing friend WILLIAM SEGAR, GARTER
A Letter to the Author from the excellently learned in our Antiquities and in all other humane literature WIL∣LIAM CAMDEN Esquire, CLA∣RENCEVX King of Armes. SYR, whereas your desire is that I should de∣liuer my full opinion of your Booke which you lately sent, and submitted to my cen∣sure. I assure you if my iudgement be any (which I acknowledge to bee very little) you haue with that iudicious learning, & insight handled ARMO∣RIE the subiect of my profession▪ that I cannot but ap∣proue it, as both learnedly, and diligently discouered from his first cradle: And could not but allow it, if I were Censor librorum publicâ authoritate consti∣tutus, as you know I am not. Pardon me that I am so breefe, for neyther my head, nor my hand can as yet performe that which they should, and would, vntill the Almighty shall restore me to former (health) to whose protection I commend you, and yours, resting 11. Iune. 1609. Your louing friend WILLIAM, CAMDEN, CLARENCEVX.
A LETTER TO THE AVTHOR FROM HIS LATE DEARE FRIEND the Graue, and Courtly THOMAS BEDING∣FIELD Esquire, late Maister of his Ma∣iesties Tents, and Toilz &c. deceased. SYR, your ELEMENTS of ARMO∣RIES, I haue seene, but censure them I dare not: Blinde eyes can iudge no colours, and ig∣norance may not meddle with excellent conceit. This only: I will admire your Work, & wish you to proceed. If you permit these discourses to wander abroad, they shall meet with more men to maruail, then vnderstand them. That is the worst: I returned them in haste; fearing to foule the paper, or iniury the Inck. From Clerckenwel. 27. Mar. 1609. Your very louing friend THOMAS BEDINGFIELD. Postscr. SYR, if you adde, or write more, I pray you make me a partaker. I say with PETRARK. Stanco non satio mai.
A LETTER TO THE AVTHOR, from the learned young Gentleman. I. B. of Grace-dieu in the County of LEICES∣TER Esquier. SYR, I haue here with many thanks retur∣ned to you, your profound discourse of the ELEMENTS of ARMORIES, which I haue read ouer with great profit, & delight: for, I confesse, that till now I neuer saw any thing in this kind worthy the entertainment of a studious mind, wherin you haue most commendably shewed your skill, finding out rare, and vnknowne beauties in an Art, whose highest perfection, the meanest wits, if they could blazon, and repeat Pedigrees, durst heretofore (but shall not now) challenge. Our sight (which of all senses wee hold ye dearest) you haue made more precious vnto vs, by teaching vs the excellent proportions of our visible ob∣iects. In performance wherof as you haue followed none, so haue you left it at a rash, and desperate aduenture for any to follow you: For he, that only considers your choice copie of matter without forcing, will find it an hard talk to equall your Inuention, not to speake of your iudiciall Method, wherin you haue made your Workmanship ex∣cell your Subiect, though it bee most worthy of all inge∣nuous industry. Beleeue me SYR in a word, I cannot but highly admire your attempt so wel performed, and among many others will be an earnest furtherer of that benefit, which this dull age of ours (in this our country, carelesse of al but gainful Arts) claimeth at your hands. In which hope I rest. 29. Nouemb. 1609. Your most louing friend IOHN BEAVMONT.
H. C. To the Gentleman Reader. IF thou desire to knowe the reason why, Thou doo'st in Sheild the Armes of honour bear, This Booke will say that they by nature were The HIEROGLYPHICKS of Nobility. It shewes beside, how Art doth beautifie What Nature doth inspire, and how each-where All Arts conion'd in this Art do appeare, By structure of a choyce Phylosophie. GEOMETRIE giues Lines in ordred Place, Numbers ARITHMETICK, and thou may'st see How all in OPTICK Colours honour thee. But since that Virtue which adorn'd the race From whence thou did'st descend was ground of al, Haue care to follow it, or all will fall.
Mr. HVGH HOLLAND To his learned friend Mr. E. B. the Author vpon his ELEMENTS of ARMORIE'S. MY maister CAMDEN, sacred King of Armes, Who bounds with heau'n, aswell as sea our soile, So prosed and so praised hath thy toyle, As here no need is of my sorry charmes. To boast it though, my braines APOLLO warmes, Where (like in IOVE'S) MINERVA keeps a coile, Yet I a Drone shall but thy Hony spoile, Thou art the E.B. per Anagrama∣tismum vel Metathesin. Maister-BE of all the swarmes. Deepe is his iudgement, spatious is his witte, And high his fame that can in Armes enfold VVhat eyther Sea, or Land, or Heauen hold: Philosophers are in a greeuous fitte To see (whil'st Enuy doth with Reason Storme) New ELEMENTS, new MATTER, and new FORM.
Another of the same by Apostrophe to PHOEBVS, finishing in a symbolicall allusion, to the most noble Earle of NORTH∣HAMPTON. ON, bolt on PHOEBVS, spend thy golden Shafts, And guild these Papers with thy glorious rayes: Crown euery leaf with leaues of flowring Bayes, And crown the Author with thy laurell grafts. They treat the mystical'st of generous Crafts, That shewes what Arms were born in Antique daies, By whom, & where, why, and how many wayes, On Sheilds, and blades not set in dugeon haftes. Thou, & MINERVA grace them in the sight Of that great Lord, whose iudgment they rely on, For as no Eye dare face thy glorious light VVhen as Thou reignest in the golden Lion. So dare no Curre against them ope his Iaw, Once seis'd into the SILVER LION'S Pawe.
The Author To the generous, and learned READER. IN foure bookes it seem'd to mee, that the matter of Armo'ries (neuer as yet de∣liuer'd in the better, and remoter parts thereof, but euen vntill this day (for ought that euer I could gather to the contrary) remaining altogether vn∣toucht) was aptly (as in a PANDECT, or DIGEST) comprehensible. And those Foure (as I concei∣ued) might bee these: Their 1. ELEMENTS. 2. FABRICK. 3. MYSTERIES. 4. VINDEX. 1. The ELEMENTS teaching the simple, abstract, pure, and remote materials, and causes of Armo'ries, of which (as words of letters) they consist. 2. The FABRICK teaching the putting-together of those Elements, and how they constitute Armorial bodies; with other speculations proper to the compositiue part. 3. The MYSTERIES teaching what those Armoriall bodies so constituted do purport, meane, or signifie; all clea∣red with Rules, and Examples. 4. The VINDEX, Assertor, or Champion, teaching how this PHILOSOPHIE may bee freed from contempt, and who is truly Noble, and worthy to bee honored with Ar∣mories. But, generous, and learned Reader (for to such onely doth this part of humane letters appertaine) of those foure in proiect (through manifold Inter-turbations) there is only, and scarce performed vnto thee the first: The Elements of Armories; which here thou hast.
My farther scope, and counsels thou shalt bee priuie vnto▪ if thou make the tenth Chapter of the Booke worthy thy thorough-view; whether I transmit thee. Onely I must not here forget, that (without respect to my priuate) I haue, vpon occasion in all the course of my present youth spent much time, and coyne, to view in person the chiefe places of ENGLAND, and IRELAND, to conuerse the better with our Antiquities in that kind, aswell to perfect thereby mine owne speculations, as that I might (whē opportunity would) deliuer vnto thee things certain & pure, without abuse, or innouatiō. Other things briefly to praemonish thee of are these. 1. That a competent Reader cannot lack so much lan∣guage as may serue to interpret betweene him-selfe, and some few harder words, or places in the Booke. 2. That language onely, or common diligence can make no Armorist without Genius, and a Maister. 3. That the way to learne excellently, is to beleeue ex∣cellently, for a meane conceit of a profession begets but a small proficience. 4. That in the deliuery of Elementarie matter I haue, for thy cause, rather vsed interlocution, then set, or continu∣ous speech, as more apt to enter a Learner, for whose cause also at the end of the Booke are annexed sundry Tables. 5. That at the first reading to lay them downe, or away, either as too hard, or as now too stale, doth argue alike vani∣tie, the one of too much abiection, the other of too little stedfastnesse. 6. That if thou wilt vse the pleasant obiects, and condi∣mentall parts thereof to relish, and draw-on the rest the bet∣ter, thou holdest the right Rule of profiting thy selfe. 7. That all is properly meant, and written herein to them that are filij Artis, and willing to coöperate with the fauour of the Armoriall Muse. How thou (my READER) doo'st in present thinke of Ar∣mories, and what minde thou bringest with thee, as I know not, so (howsoeuer) I may yet say a little in this place, notwith∣standing that which is spoken throughout my whole Booke,
to the same purpose, considering the generall state of opini∣ons touching them, that thou mai'st the rather be induced to thinke thy diligence in perusall of the whole, not ill-emploid; or I, in thy riper, and sounder iudgment stand the more iusti∣fied, or at leastwise the lesse condemned for hauing taken so much paine to pleasure thee. Armories therefore occurring euery-where, in seales, in frontes of buildings, in vtensils, in all things; Monarcks vsing them, mighty Peeres, and in briefe, all the noble tàm maio∣rum, quàm minorum gentium, from Caesar to the simplest Gentleman, yet all of them (for the more part) most vnknow∣ingly, very few (euen of the most studious) do sildome goe any farther then to fill vp a wide Wardrobe with particular Coates: whose zeale notwithstanding is worthy to know the▪ better things thereof: that other beeing no more the thing, then bookes not vnderstood are learning. For in them (I may without racking the value affirme) are all the Thems, and Theorems of generous knowledges, from whence doth breath so sweet an aër of humanity as thy man∣ners cannot but take, and mix thereby with true gentility, and noblesse. The outward parts of her palace are beautifide with infinit obiects full of all variety & comlinesse: the walks▪ & mazes which she vseth are those enwrapped circles of ingenuous sci∣ences which the learned do entitle CYCLOPAEDIE: her Presence, and most inward retirements haue all the most CHRISTIAN, Haeroick, and Cardinall virtues, & for Hand∣maides excellent affections, without which the arguments, & externall testimonies of noblesse are nothing worth. Hee that in the trust of any auditories ignorance, or base∣nesse shall say, All this is vaine, must be answered, that this is no otherwise vaine then as Omnia vanitas. In any other good or honorable sense thou canst not (I thinke) but confesse that Armorie is a Maiesty worthy thy seruice: wherevnto if names of men, rather then things themselues can perswade, thou canst not bee vnknowing how many of our late, and presently both greatest, and wi∣sest haue heretofore, and now in present doe honor it.
Neither doth She want her part also in our Cōmon-weal and they, who sit chiefe in the primum mobile of state, be thinke themselues, how to enlighten BRITAIN with the beams of restored Honor. To praeöcupate more satisfaction till thy minde bee far∣ther knowne, were meerely for me to diuine of obiections, but when thou expoundest thy selfe vnto Mee, thou shalt be most assured of my farthest diligence to keepe thee Mine. FARE-WELL.
THE ELEMENTS OF ARMO'RIES. The Contents. 1. The conference betweene two Knights, Sir EV∣STACE, and Sir AMIAS, begun by Apostrophe. 2. The motiues thereof. 3. Single coates, and their Elements the matter. 4. VLYSSES taxation of his Antagonist proper to our ignorant Gentlemen. 5. The Maisters high perswasion of the studie. 6. Wisdome in it. 7. Marbles, coynes, characterismes, Hieroglyphicks, and the like, not so worthy of obser∣uation. 8. The Maister giues his lawes of hearing, and is endented-with for a familiar method. CHAP. 1. EVSTACE. BVt Sir, the happy confederacie of fit time, and place with my desires, hauing brought you into those straits out of which there is no euasion, saue onely by the abrupt of discourtesie; I must briefly presse you concerning the ELEMENTS of ARMOIRIES. A. I perceiue you are loth (good Sir EVSTACE) to be any longer ignorant. E. How can I choose but bee very loth, hauing accidentally the other day seene at your hands a sample of the ware, and since found it full of rich
metall, and not to bee base Marckasite, or stuffe vn∣worthy the garnish of honor: as also no lesse, for that now I can neuer close vp a letter, but my very seale, though dumbe, as it is, vpbraids mine igno∣rance, wherein when I behold mine Ancestors pecu∣liar coat of Armes, I must confesse they haue left me that, by which though I claime to bee a Gentle∣man, yet neither know I what it symboliseth, nor out of what ELEMENTS, reasons, or grounds of Arte, (your promised and singled vndertaking) mine or the like are composed. A. And what though you know not? E. Mary, I might very well resemble my selfe to one of those blew-gown'd Targat-bearers, who in LONDON vpon their Lord Mayors day, beare shields of Armes, with as little knowledge what they are, as proprietie in them: standing dully thereby (as hitherto I haue done) within full distance of that scorne, —neque enim clypei caelamina-norit, where-with the prudent GREEKE taxed his Anta∣gonist, in the strife of ACHILLES shield. A. Some-what you say now Sir EVSTACE: and as for mee, my youth, and leisure haue euer, I must confesse (to deale ingenuously with you) been taken with the study, as with that which seem'd, euen at first, the proper of noblesse, but afterward, of wis∣dome also. Which speculation, as ordinary dili∣gence can hardly reach vnto, so yet, if it shall not be found eccentrick to the Philosophers greatest circle, but mouing vpon the self-same axell with vniuersall
knowledge (I will not say comprehending it) neither may the speculation before-said seeme illusiue, nor hee, who neglects their deeper sense (seeing armes haue their certaine principles, method, vse, and the∣orie) and yet will challenge the honorable right of bearing them, disdeine to heare with the same An∣tagonist, Postulat vt capiat quae non intelligit arma. E. It can therefore be no vniust complaint, that no man hath hitherto handled this whole argument ac∣cording to the dignity, as if the fate thereof, and of our countries Historie were the same, which as yet hath found no Muse. A. An hard fate, you will easily confesse. E. A very hard, and very vnworthy. If therefore I can be content for the antiquities sake, to pore on a coine halfe-worne out, or (for like reason) on a Mar∣ble, where (though the letters were whole, and vnde∣faced) yet the antique character would make it hard to read, why not then as soone on the Hierogly∣phicks of armes, seeing armes, or armoiries, are no lesse properly the cypher of true Armorists, then Hierogramms of the AEGYPTIAN Sages? A. True. E. So shall it be my contentment (gentle Sir AMI∣AS) to obtaine by your friendship, the lustre, and aduantage which knowledge giues to them that haue it, aboue others. A. Yet so, as still I submit my selfe, and iudgment to theirs, that are indeed true Maisters of this myste∣rie. Onely looke not heere in the proofe of doct∣rines for vouchmēts of many authors (which are but
as rubs in a familiar discourse, and the proper am∣bition of Schollers) but rather in a place by them∣selues, if need require heereafter. For, seeing you will needes draw mee into this new, and perilous Sand, you are not as yet to hope any higher priui∣ledge then as of a puny auditor, whose chiefe part is to beleeue. How-beit (not altogether to tyrannize your obedience) take vnto you the liberty of de∣maund, and, where I chance to bee Magistrall, rest assured, that it is far from imposture in me, or wilful negligence. Although you might looke that I should perhaps haue bene more exact, and punctu∣al, had I made it the maine of my course, and not Pa∣rergon, Landskep, and By-worke onely; but much more, for that misdoubting my youth, and iudge∣ment, I had laid the thought thereof aside for the ninthe yeares censure. A rule not lesse important, and necessary for him that shall dare so high, and new a way in this kinde, as for those who meditate matter for eternity in Poems. E. I accept the law you giue. Neuerthelesse, though it bee not a Schollers office to prescribe a method to the Doctor, yet, because it is a principall rule of Decorū to speake to the vnderstanding of the party, and I knowe best what sutes my selfe; vse I pray so meere a catechizing method, as if you would instruct mee how to spell the crosse-row of Armes, for perhaps it may doe good the rather. A. I am not affraid least my playnesse may bee called insufficiency.
The contents. 2. VVhat the Maister vnderstands here by Armoiries, and Gentlemen 2. Of their supposed first deuisers. 3. That in God only their originall is to be found. 4. The notion of ensignement, naturall. CHAP. 2. EVSTACE. WHat therefore meane you by Armes? A. Such painted, hereditable, and Armoriall marks, as by which Gentlemen are knowne, first from the ignoble, and then one from the other. E. Why say you painted? A. Because colors giue them life, and they seeme not aliue, but (like the PROMETHEAN man of clay) both blind, and dead as it were, till quickned with the light of colours, as the other with fire from hea∣uen. E. Why hereditable rather then hereditary? A. As wel for that those Armoiries which ar of the first bearing, as those which escheat, or are buried with the Owners for want of heires, are not heredi∣tary, though both of them are hereditable: For they of the first sort came not from Ancestors, and yet may descend, (that is, may be inherited, if the prime atchieuer, or purchasour haue a line all successor) &
if the other do not descend, it is only through a faile, or fault in the bearer: But, how-soeuer, if they an∣swer not the rules of Armory (a word of large con∣tent, and comprehension) and that also with such Analogie as the qualities of circumstances do re∣quire (in which the reason of bearing liues, and whereof the skill is properly an appurtenance of symbolicall phylosophy, which handleth the causes and misteries of Armes) all the rest are nothing. E. Who is then your Gentleman? A. Simply, and onely for the present, the lawfull bearer of such markes, or tokens of Noblesse. E. Who first ordayned them? A. Meane you what man, or woman? E. I doe. A. You think that thing is knowne to Heralds, or to Armorists, but I suppose it is not. For, neyther OLYBION, nor ASTERIAL, nor any such cloud-borne creature euer did, as I conceiue, ordaine them. Al∣though, I cannot be ignorant, that the glory hereof is giuen by HERODOTVS to the CARES (people of ASIA the lesse) by others to the AEGIPTIANS: but both, with like proof, as the inuention of letters to the PHOENICIANS, vnlesse wee confesse them more ancient then the HEBREVVES. E. Indeed the Chiefes, and, as they are called, Co∣ryphes in euery profession, are commonly blazed the founders, as ATLAS in Astronomy, AESCVLA∣PIVS in Medicine, whose only fortune it was, to com after their fore-fathers obseruations, with better'd wits, and more dilligence. When as indeed, Sci∣ences
haue their foundations in nature, and neyther growe, nor decrease, but onely to vs, to whome time, and obseruation doe vnlocke them. A. Be that as it will, or may, I, for my part, know not him (to speake after my manner, that is, plainly) who first bare Armes (to vse the vulgar word) nor doe I acknowledge any primary author, but in al∣mighty God, the Prototypon, Arch-type, or ori∣ginal paterne. E. No? how then? A. Had Armes, or ensignes (like Heresies, or some mechanical crafts, as printing, and artillery) any first certaine author, it were a plaine demonstra∣tion against their primaeuity; but, if you wil haue me declare my selfe, my opinion is, that the notion of en∣signement is vniuersal, and natural, and that vse in warre did first deduce, or communicate distinguisht sheildes, from that notion, & (after bloudy warre) that ambition, to retaine in peace the honors, got∣ten by Armes, might take them downe from their triumphant Tholes, and sacred Trophaees, and so conueigh them to posterity; the sonne, holding him-selfe, no lesse the heire of his Auncestors glory, then of his name, and lands, by which, thinges haue in time growne so exact, and complete, as now wee see. E. Your opinion leads mine, though it seemes you straine the word Armes beyond the proper vse. A. To march strōg toward my Iustificatiō, I therfore
added Ensignement, or Ensigne, which comprehends the other, being in it selfe equiuocall to armories, and all other notes of noblesse, honor, or praeemi∣nence. E. So as you would bee thus vnderstood, that Ensignes, or Ensignement, began with the creation of things, and that the notion is imprinted in nature, though the whole vse, and limitation (as to the pur∣pose of our present Armories) bee not. A. You haue taken the iust height of my mea∣ning. The Contents. 1. The knowne vse of Armes, as antient at least as MOSES. 2. Vnknowne to the Maister, by what de∣grees they came to their present excellence. 3. Not very much to bee found of them in remotest anti∣quities. 4. The Maisters opinion of some shields in the famous old Poets. 5. About the time of CHARLES the Great, they began to take a rule, and in these later ages perfection. 6. The Fucus, and vnsure glosse of doubtfull, or forged antiqui∣ties disauowed. CHAP. 3. EVSTACE. ARmes then, euen in our sence, haue beene of long continuance. A. They haue: for they who, out of singularitie, or waxen seales a∣bout the NORMAN conquest, argue
to the contrary, doe make their flight but with ICARVS wings. E. When began they? A. That also is to mee vnknowne, but the eldest, and best record of their generall vse, is in the sacred stories written by MOSES. But I can aswell show the growth of a flowre, or the instances of motion in the shadow of a Diall, as sodeinly how, or when they came by degrees to the present magnificence, and flourishing estate wherein they are. E. Hath the encrease beene so insensible? A. The want of written monuments makes it seeme so. E. Certainly, the GREEKES, with whom hath bin the vniuersall Staple of antiquities (for, as for the LATINS (who but as it were a while since came to be learned) they haue not much, and the SYRIAN, CALDEAN, and more profoundly learned AEGYP∣TIAN (as the people, among whom the HEBREVVS, Gods owne Scholers, dwelt) haue little obuious) do heere, and there, make famous commemoration of Shields, and Crests. A. They do. But those deuises were, for the more part, arbitrary, not armorially formall. For, neither had ACHILLES shield in HOMER, nor that more artificiall one (if it bee lawfull to commit two such Poets together) of AENEAS in VIRGIL, any thing, almost, of that which Armorists call a coate, and whereof we entreate, but were rather, certain places of Art, for disposition, & conueiance, where the Po∣ets tooke occasion to vtter some maiesticall inuenti∣on, by way, either of abridgment, induction, recapi∣tulation,
or the like. Nor let any one imagin, that AGAMEMNONS deuise (or other described by HOMER) was precisely a faire coat of armes, vn∣lesse you would take some one, or two principall things of many; and the like is to bee said of those in VIRGIL. Neuerthelsse their examples do strong∣ly conuince the antiquity, or antienty of armes, which from the time of CHARLES the Great haue both growne more familiar,Henricus Au∣ceps say some. & by industrious men from time to time (the care of CHRISTIAN ho∣nor then most florishing) beene refined, lawes es∣tablished for their due bearing, and finally augmen∣ted with obseruations, applied to the seuerall digni∣ties of seuerall persons. So that now I see not why wee should not thinke them absolute in all their numbers, as one of the things (among very few) reseru'd to bee finished in these our daies. E. The common opinion is, that armes had a more certaine beginning. A. Perhaps so; for there are not wanting, who do say that almost before the flowd, such a Prince, commonweale, or Kingdome bare such, and such a Shield, or painted Symboll. In so much, that I, for my part, haue euer look'd, when on a sodaine these marueilous men would as readily tell vs what armes, or badge NOAHS Arke it selfe did carry in the sterne, as we out of the Acts of the Apostles written by S. LVKE, can informe our selues what name the ship which transported S. PAVL was known by. And albeit I am exceedingly farre from dishonoring, or from not zelously honoring, any venerable moni∣ments of wit, or antiquity, yet am I as far from pro∣miscuous
subscription to vncertaine glosses, or of vouching them to make a Fucus. The Contents. 1. The maister is necessarily drawne backe to demon∣strate that the notion of Ensignement (true fountaine of Armoiries) is naturall▪ 2. Scene in the heauens and countenances of men. 3. Proued in na∣tures owne practise, marking out her chiefe workes with notes of noblesse, 4. Examples, ALEXAN∣DER the Monarch, OCTAVIVS CESAR, and our souereign, King IAMES him selfe. 5. Their natiue markes. 6. Instinct, and common no∣tion causes of like armes to TYDEVS, and MI∣RAMAMMOLINE. 7. The like of CAS∣PAR, and BALTHASAR two of the Mages, or Kings in S. MATHEWS Gospell. CHAP. 4. E. May I beleeue that armes and ensignes, and the notion of ennobling by notes is vniuersall, and so, pri∣marily founded in nature? A. I intend not, as I said before, to encumber the leuell of my present way with many proofs; and yet it should seeme, like one of the incredulous, you craue a signe. ELEMENTS are the pole-star of my voi∣age; ELEMENTS the subiect matter of my discourse, and you may safely, in the meane space, beleeue. E. Yet a slight tast of this truth would do well. A. Whatsoeuer is vniuersally so taken vp, as that it is found, and practised (at leastwise in proportion to their knowledges) among all nations, aswell ciuill as Barbarous, that (vndoubtedly) hath foundation in nature, and therfore ennoblishment by external notes
as well as embasements, or brandings: For of con∣traries the reason is the same. E. Your antecedent is granted, but, that ensigne∣ment is vniuersall, and the notion thereof (true foun∣taine of armories as you pretend) naturall, which you assume to prooue, how doth that appeare? A. It will appeare as soone as you but cast your eye (though with-out enlarging spectacles) vpon the goodly booke of the world, the noble creatures wherein are admirably distinguished, with signes of that nobility. The heauens haue their ensignes, and notes, their colours, and charges, and of them some apparently more excellent then the other: And (not to make an exact enumeration of parts) doe but be∣hold the countenances of men, how, like to seuerall coates of armes, by complexion, lineament, and a thousand alterations of aspect, they are diuersifi'd, and that with degrees of dignitie, one from the other. Nature her selfe, for farther confirmation, shall present vnto you figures, wrought by her own hand, and penicill, as marking out by them her cheife Maister-peeces. For, of what other sort are (I beseech you) the genitiuall notes printed vpon some supereminent princes in their mothers womb? ALEXANDER the great was borne with the impressi∣on of a Lion, if I mistake not the figure: Nor lesse to bee admired was that, which SVETONIVS writes of OCTAVIVS CESAR, vpon whose brest, & bellie Genitiuae notae. as he calls them, were so dispeirst, as they imitated, both in their order, and number, the stars in the cele∣stiall
Beare. But I were too inofficious, if I should not here remember our own most renowned King, with those two, the principall Maiesties of the for∣mer worlds, for so much as, vpon him also, the fi∣gure of a Lyon was alike naturally set. E. Wee haue heere (in mine vnderstanding) na∣tures Heraldry in her owne works. A. Which workes as she hath thus ennobled, so Common notion (deriued out of her) taught TYDEVS (if I mis-remember not his armes in AESCHYLVS) and MIRAMAMMOLINE, a King of MOORES TYDEVS MIRAMAMMOLINE. (if SPANISH Heralds say true) to beare, in their se∣uerall sheilds, the resemblances of the starry firma∣ment with slender variations: Though men so far
in sunder as THEBES, and TOLEDO, farther in time, farthest in knowledge one of the other. Their countries, their languages, their religions, their ha∣bits, their manners, (the one a GREEK, the other a BRBARIAN) beeing most discrepant. Which effect of Common notion (hauing so celestial a paterne) is the more to bee wondered at, if two of the Kinges (commonly called of COLEIN, for that belike their reliques are there) who guided by the orien∣tall starre came to worship our SAVIOVR IE∣SVS CHRIST, bare the like arguments in their sheildes as VIRGILIVS PICTOr the Norim∣berger, CASPAR. BALTHASAR. in his booke of printed scucheons beares vs in hand. The pictures of which (more for
pleasure in the variety, then for any canonicall proofe, although I neyther can, nor doe disproue them) I haue heere bestowed vpon you. And thus much credit besides, must I needes doe this tra∣dition, that in the most noble mother Church of our nation, CANTERBVRIE, you may vpō a wal, on the left hand, as you enter into the North Ile of the first Quire, behold in uery ancient worke, two armories like to these, plainly painted in the Banners of those Kinges, where the whole story of their comming to adore our LORD, then newly borne, is pourtraid: which doth sufficiently discharge that Norimber∣ger from hauing first deuised them, those pain∣tings beeing vndoubtedly far older then his Grand-great-grand-father. The Contents. 1. The state of things, in their first rudenesse, surest Test to try the former proposition. 2. The necessity shewes their vniuersality. 3. How far we are to extend the word barbarous in speaking of the BARBAROVS, or SAVAGES. 4. The Analogie of outward dis∣tinctions, with the persons by them distinguished. 5. Names among the BARBAROVS. King HO∣LATA OVTINA his distinctiue notes. 7. The Nobles of MEXICO. 8. A secret fountaine of true Armories.
CHAP. 5. EVSTACE. IF I saw the vse vniuersall I could not but beleeue that the Notion were naturall. A. The vniuersality of the vse of Ensignements, or of ennoblishing by outward notes, is not hardly proued. Let the ciuil worlds, and people passe, as in the which it may truly be obiected, that there (like other ornaments) they might be perhaps excogita∣ted, and reflect wee but vppon Tramountain anti∣quities, or the state of people, and things such as they were in their first rudenesse, as the surest Test, and Touch to trye this proposition by, nothing then will wee bee more demonstrable. For, from pole to pole, and ouer the whole globe ordaind for the dwellings of men, no people is so forlorne, which af∣fords not proofe to this point, nor that as it were by a contagion, or taking from one and other, but meerely out of Common notion, which concluding the necessity of outward distinctions (for how o∣therwise shall the Soueraigne bee knowne from the subiect, or one worthy subiect from another? & my hope is that no man will be so super-paradoxall, as to deny a subordination in nature among men, and differences of degrees, and states, as there are of vse, and merit) by that Naturall light disposeth of those shapes which imagination tendreth for vsefull, and
that also with some Analogy betweene the quality of the person bearing, and the ensigne borne. For when wee talke of Barbarous nations, no man of any iudgement depriues them of their resonable part, though they want elegancie, and ciuill formes, or knowledges. This therefore being a matter fal∣ling necessarily into common sense, and vse, hee were very vnmindefull of the honour of our crea∣tion, who shold imagine that any people (how bru∣tish soeuer) could be without ensignement, & seue∣rall externall notes, and those also (out of the same naturall ground) not wanting the Analogy, and proportion whereof wee formerly spake. Which wee may gather by the names among the sauage INDIANS, those of their Princes, and peers being found to beare lofty significations, but the vulgar not so. And so farre forth doth nature instruct men to be obseruant hereof, that the very CANIBALS (An∣thropophages, or Men-eaters of AMERICA) are cal∣led among thēselues by the names of cruel beastes. Hence it is that you shall not truely read, or heare, that among any barbarous, the Lions skin, or like spoiles of the nobler creatures, are the indument of an ordinary groome; or that euery common soldier doth weare such feather, colour, or other distincti∣on with those of prime quality. So, HOLATA OV∣TINA (interpreted (I thinke) King of Kings) in FLORIDA was painted red, and none but he were so coloured, saue onely some such choyse young soldiers as were of principall agility. Common sense tells the rudest nations, that names of high
signification (such as glorious starre, light of the world, lamp of glorie, or as of ther Gods them∣selues, as was vsed in MEXICO, where all the noble had denomination of some one, or other of their Idols) do no way sort with a worthlesse groundling, or ignoble companion. But of this (as a secret foun∣taine of true Armories, and not the least mystery in the wisdome of nature, taught vs in Symbolicall Philosophie, in which the matter of armes is truely comprehended) elsewhere. Hereby it is (as I con∣iecture) cleared, that the notion is vniuersall, and therefore natural, and againe (turning but as it were the tables) we may say naturall and therefore vniuer∣sall. Many fest examples whereof it were not hard to depourtray vnto you out of the Barbarous worlds; the same being no lesse verifiable in the ciuill. And from this common notion; imprest in nature, Armes, or Armories (the present matter of our conference) claime their parentage. The Contents. 1. Things Elementary to the Elements of Armories. 2. The Maister refuseth not farther to demonstrate their vniuersality, 3. Without helpe of examples from the HEBREWS, GREEKS, or RO∣MANS. 4. INDIAN Anthropophages, FLO∣RIDIANS, and VIRGINIANS. 5. Their markes. 6. Notes of vassallage no original of armes. 7. The Maister beginns his vniuersall Suruey. 8. The BRIGANTS, & other BRITANNS.
9. Resembled by a famous antient writer to the old worthies at TROY. 10. Blew colour symbolicall to the BRITANS. 11. The AGATHYR∣SIAN Paintings. 12. GILDAS vouched. 13. Probable that the BRITANS had figures aswell as colours vpon their bodies, and Bucklers, 14. And the PICTS, or PIGHTIAD. 15. TO∣MITANS, or GETES. 16. Of the GER∣MANS, and SAXONS. 17. A famous place in TACITVS of the GERMAN shields, seconded with some other from thence of strange seeming purport. 18. Our HENGIST the SAXON his name, and probable armes. 19. In the rere of ex∣amples, CIMBERS, AMBRONS, TEVTONS. 20. A CIMBRIAN pauis, or targat. 21. The de∣uise of a CELT. 22. The GALLS had peculi∣arly painted armes. 23. The shield of a SAGVN∣TINE. 24. From EVROP into AFRICA. CHAP. 6. EVSTACE. SHall I deale ingenuously with you (Sir AMIAS) for mine own better instruction? A. In any wise I beseech. E. First, Sir then I must needs con∣fesse, and do, that these are very sound sinews of argument for so much, but because the farther handling of the naturall originall of ensignements seemes to me a matter of very special momēt right∣ly to enduce your future speech of the Elements of Armories, as being Elementary euen to those
elements, I could desire a more spred, and dilated proofe, altogether sutable to mine ignorances, did I not feare your to much trouble. A. You meane, it should seeme, by a more spred, and dlated proofe, the view be like of some particu∣lar examples of Ensignement in al ages, and places. E. I do indeed. For so I may behold not onely the infancy, and cradle-age of armories, but also what they were in their Embrion, nay, what they were in their seed. A. You hope to much Sir EVSTACE. Neuerthe∣lesse I may not enuy some touches of example vn∣to you out of the Barbarous, and lesse ciuill worlds, as most forcible: Sequestring the HEBREWS, GREEKS, and ROMANS, as to polit for that pur∣pose, and as reserued for some more eminent vses: Though you turne mee thereby to the Vniuersity againe as it were, for that I cannot satisfie your al∣lowable desire, but by the vse of some such pickt flowers, as heretofore, in that sweet noursery of ge∣nerous knowledges, came to my hand howsoeuer. E. They can hardly be better employd. A. The new worlds therefore (as is said) are in∣stead of all, as presenting to vs the prime simplicity of our creation, where, vpon the first discoueries, nothing being super-induced by commerce, were not yet the said Barbarous, and more then Barba∣rous CANIBALS, or TOVOVPINAMBAVLTS found with distinctions among them, and (in their kind) cognisances vpon them? The shoulders of the naked
FLORIDIANS are badged with the markes of their Lords. But I had rather (for that they are knowne vnto vs by the noble trauailes of our ENGLISH) exemplifie the like out of the descriptions of VIR∣GINIA. This marke consisting of three parallel Arrowes trauersed barre-wayes as you see, is the branded badge of sundry principall men in SECOTA, and set vpon the backs of their vassals there. And this of the chiefe Lords in POMEIOOC, and AQVASGACOCK. The like vsage was among the
ROMANS, and others of old (who yet neuer heard, nor dreampt of AMERICA, neither do all of vs (as I suppose) beleeue, that PLATO his ATLANTICK Iland was it) as may most authentically be proued. Let any one now shew to mee what other ground can be giuen for this, but common notion? E. These (by your fauour) seeme to countenance Marchants markes, rather then the armes of Gen∣tlemen. A. I imagin'd by your smiling that you had some such conceit. But Sir (by your fauour) in these rude skores I truely see the seed of arms, for nature (like a raw Scholar) began in these to practise her notion. Neither are they of so diuerse forme from Armes, or Armories in their perfection, as an excellent peice of Architecture from the first elements of Geometry, out of which notwithstanding it rose. As for the countenance you thinke may come from these sorry liueries to Marchants oker-marks, if it be any, let them enioy it. E. Indeed they cannot giue much, for they are notes of vassallage, not of honor, therefore Armes (I hope) haue no such originall. A. As they are such notes I giue them not to you for an originall of Armes. But, if from hence you graunt, that in nature there are notes of disho∣nor, it followes indiuisibly, that in nature there are notes of honor, & then the game, and set is vp. For (as I said not long since before in this very case of Ennoblishments, and Brandings, or Embasures) Of contraries the reason is the same. Neuerthelesse, that
you may not suspect the cause bare, or barren by the thrift of my dealing vpon so spare, and thinne proofes, I will for honor thereof breifly see what the dusty priuat cabanet of my former Muses keepes in store of their Vniuersity-gleanings, ac∣cording to late promise, beginning with EVROP, and at home. In our BRITAIN the nation of the BRIGANTS (beside whatsoeuer their Ensigne∣ments else) had shields painted blew, according to the knowne — Caeruleos Scuta Brigātes▪ verse in SENECA his deification of CLAVDIVS NERO, as the GERMAN ARII (saith CORNELIVS TACITVS) had shields pain∣ted blacke. And by all antiquity it is apparent, that blew was not the colour of the BRIGANTS only, but of all the BRITANS: perhaps for that (as Ilanders) they were inuironed with the like colour'd OCEAN, so (when place shall be for such coniectures) it were not vaine to pretend that they also bare shields dis∣tinguished with markes of honor, as the TROIANS, and at TROY they did. If at least-wise it be true (as DIODORVS SICVLVS to the great glory of the BRITANS doth write) that they liued after the man∣ner of the old heroes at TROY, giuing for instance thereof their fighting out of chariots, as those De∣migods, and ILIAN worthyes did. Which gal∣lant Chariot-fights of the BRITANS, CESAR himselfe doth set forth as a forme of a battle very dreadfull, braue, and ieopardous. Blew therefore be∣ing Symbolicall to the BRITANS, and granting to them (to whom the renowned DRVIDS were pre∣ceptors, and Priests, as BARDS their Poets) which cannot bee denied to the meerest Sauages,
that is, but the power of that naturall, and infused Analogie which was spoken-of not long before, what can be more probable then that they had se∣uerall figures, or tricks of painting? The naked IN∣DIANS (though but in one colour, and vpon their bodies) had so of late, and the AGATHYRSIANS of old. Of whom though VIRGIL saith only they were painted, yet AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS showes the manner how. Poore, and silly was the deuise indeed. For their noble (saith he) had broad, and thick spotts painted on their bodies, their ig∣noble, small, and thin. How else could blew from blew (as among the BRITANS) distinguish one from another in a multitude? or black from black? as among the ARII of GERMANIE. To auoide all this, you will perhaps deny they could drawe, or trick, how rudely soeuer. GILDAS, the graue BRI∣TAN writes, that some of the old BRITISH Idols drawne vpon walls, which hee names Patriae portenta,—lineamentis deformibus. were in his time (being aboue one thousand yeares since) seene remaining. Therefore they had draw∣ing (such as it was) before their birth in CHRIST, which was with the soonest. Spelling all toge∣ther now, it seemes some-what hard to deny, that they vsed figures as well vpon their sheilds, as su∣perficies, of their bodies (and that it may bee was onely among the vulgar) to ennoble, or distinguish them-selues with, as vpon their walls to honour their Gods. Certainly, if the GERMANS, and
GALLES did (which wee shall see afterward) it were then curst heart to barre the BRITANNS. Theodore de Brye, in his Prints of VIRGINIA, giues vs two antique figured PICTS (old inhabi∣tants of BRITTAIN) a man, and a woman. Of what credit they are I know not, if they be of none, yet should a Poet stumble at Decorum to present them otherwise, for so much as gastly, and affrighting formes correspond to the male, roses, and pleasant vinets to the female. So in AMERICA the cruell Sauages (as is said) tooke appellations to them∣selues by naturall instinct from beasts of prey, their women from pleasant birds, fruites, blossomes, and like Sommer-workes. It now appeares to me that wee can suppose no otherwise of the BRITTAINS paintings. But I rather seeme to dispute then teach. This verse of OVID, Sed loca, vel gentes formatae mille figuris, though written by him, from among the TOME∣TANS, or GETES, in his banishment, seemes to con∣cerne all the barbarous, and confirmes mee in my coniecture, that the BRIGANTS, and other BRITANNS, nay all other like nations, though but vsing one colour onely (if any did) were yet in that one, —Formatae mille figuris. Neyther is there cause of wonder why the BRI∣GANTS
were famous for their blew, it being no vn∣familiar matter to haue a nation noted more for one thing then another. That IVLIVS CaeSAR, describing the BRITANS in generall, should say they did dye, or staine them-selues (for he graceth them not with the more artificiall tearme of painting) with woad, and not set downe the manner how the Noble among thē were distinguisht in that smea∣ring, or otherwise, who can maruaile? seeing he speakes not a word of the forme of their weapons, nor whether they had sheildes, or no, as commen∣ding to posterity such thinges onely, as were rare and singular in them from other nations, as this, which they vsed to appeare more terrible in battle, who were otherwise generally faire, & come∣ly with yellow locks (for so I thinke you will vnder∣stād LVCANS epithete of the BRITANS, where he saith, —Sequeretur GALLIA curtus Nobilis, et flauis sequeretur mista BRITANNIS) They as yet doe boast a TROIAN originall, which could not but afford them some-what of their an∣cestors forms, neyther are they new in that claime, or singular; for-somuch as the ARVERNOIS in NE∣RO'S time made the like challenge of a descent, be∣ing a rude people vpon the Maine of GALLIA, and of a far obscurer note then the BRITANS, of whome the same Poet sung ARVERNIQVE ausi LATIO se fingere fratres, Sanguine ab ILIACO populi—
CESAR himself grants, that the BRITANS had coin, or money of brasse, and if engrauen stamps, why not figures vppon their bodies, or bucklers? Certainly som ensignments, or other must be assigned. Other∣wise the famous CASSIVELLAVNVS, chief Comman∣der in those BRITISH warrs, should with other his associate Kings be shuffled out of the coat-cards of an Armie, all being medled together, and put as it were in rout. As if it might be thought that such, & so tall resistance, as was then made when CESAR lost LAIERIVS could bee without militarie order, ex∣ternal variations, and ensignes. The honor of the BRITANS (our predecessors in ALBION) hath made mee almost a litle eager; but not so far yet, as to ac∣cuse great CESAR of an ambition to deliuer vs the most grizly, & coursest shapes only; though glory, wee all know, was with him no ordinary Goddesse, and such would best serue his turne with the people of ROME, for the honor of his attempt, & triumph, which I will not like a POMPEIAN extenuate with Territa quaesitis ostendit terga BRITANNIS. Notwithstāding, had it pleased him but to haue de∣scribed to vs LVGOTORIX, whom he cals a noble lea∣der amōg the CANTIANS (& the rather perhaps calls so, for that he was the only BRITAN of note, which was takē in both his inuasions) though it may be he wore a glib, or bush of hair on his head, & a beard only vppon his vpper lip (a national trimm, or dif∣ference of the BRITANNS as CAESAR notes (and
was also besmeard with that blew-colouring weed, Yet some signe else, declaring his Nobility, would haue appeared which CEASAR minded not. And to deny this, hee granting them so many points of a nearer approaching to a more ciuil institution (as subordination of petty Kings to a superior, Esseds (chariots for fight, of a peculiar forme) housen built like the GALLICK, coyne, and (besides al other thinges) such Physiologers, Astronomers Cosmographers, and Wisards in Theologie, as (in
their kinde) the DRVIDS were (of which order our BRITTAIN was reputed foundresse, and then also the chief Schoole-mistres euen to the GALLS (were an vnreasonable stifnesse. The chaffe, and dregges of the more vplandish people, and such as he calls the interior, might be little different from meerest Sauages, which cannot depriue the honourabler sort of due, and ineuitable variations. Pardon vict∣orious CEASAR if hee should bee willing to en∣large his renowne by presentation of the wil∣dest formes, and omission of the Nobler, for it was no small matter (though with a preparation made, and transported in a fleete of no fewer then eight hundred saile) first of his, to shew BRITAIN (like another world) to the ROMANS, which is the honor antiquity doth vouchsafe to his attempts, and not the conquest. His stiling fowre chiefe Lords in CNTIVM with the titles of Kings, beeing repulst by the garrison of his Sea-campe only, may seeme a little to taste of the amplificatory figure, not doubting but that ROME should haue heard of it in laureated letters, and seene them with all their rude ensignes of soueraignty (now left vnremem∣bred) nor that in a priuate manner, had hee lighted vpon any of their persons, as CLAVDIVS afterward did vpon CARACTACVS. Concerning the ancient GERMANS (in whome we also speake of our renow∣ned SAXON ancestors, their most certaine proge∣ny, for which cause we likewise marshal them next, rather then the GALLS) most manifest is that place in the booke which CORNELIVS TACITVS left vnto
vs of their Manners, where, in their generall de∣scription, as a matter common to the whole DVTCH name is written of them Souta lectissimis coloribus distinguunt. The sence wherof appeares to be this, that their sheildes had Arguments; which whether consisting of plain lineary ductures, & diuisions (as now also is in vse vpon some Armories) or representations of creatures, or of whatsoeuer else, were (such as they were) peculiarly diuersifide with the light, and lust∣er of most fresh, or choycest colours. For which cause I can beleeue, that HENGIST (our Founder, & a Prince of GERMAN race) bare for ensigne an Horse both as his name did signifie, and as tradition tea∣cheth. And my opinion of the ancient GERMAN sheildes, grounding vpon TACITVS, is such, as right-wel agrees with their natural industry, & felicity in mechanical studies. Wheras, not long after, the same great author shewes, that among this martial people none were licensed, Arma sumere, till in their Folkmote, Diet, or Councell, some of the Princes, or the parties father, or kinsman had adorned him with sheild, & speare, a forward Diui∣nour would not sticke perhaps from thence to af∣firme, that (beside the order of Knighthood) the whole present vse of Armes or Armories, were de∣clared thereby; and to solder, or tacke the coniect∣ure together, would adde, that
Insignis Nobilitas, Which TACITVS in the same passage setteth downe as a cause (the other being only for his admission to bearing of Armes) for the Prince to bestow some honorable office, or command. As if the epitheton Insignis were superfluous (which is a thing hardly found in that most presse acute, & solemne Author) vnles it did carry a sence marking out the bearer for no∣ble by some peculiar ensigne, or deuise: Though it is a word which doth often signifie no more then famous, or very speciall; But had Insignis beene insignita the mist had wholy bene remoued. Surely those sheildes of the GERMANS (whither painted before they were deliuered to their bearers, or afterward vpon occasion of some merit) beeing not assumed but solemnely, & then, eyther at the Princes own hand (as when perhaps the party had no Armories, but was to receiue them of his gift) or at the hand of a father, or a kinseman (as where perhaps the right of bearing signes of honor was hereditary) it were very strange not to grant, that those sheildes, distinguisht with choisest colours (as is said al∣ready) had not some peculiar, and set deuises; as wel as, or rather then in general
Tenues, et fucatae colore tabulae Which are the wordes by the same TACITVS else∣where vsed. Many bookes might be put vpon this place (to vse a mooting phraze) but that I greatly affect breuity, so much of EVROP alone, beside the other huger partes of the world, remayning still to be ouer-viewed, and when that great flight is made, yet our ELEMENTS of ARMORIES are not begun. PLVTARCH in his MAIVS aids with many testimo∣nies at once, touching the ensignments of the CIM∣BERS, AMBRONS, TEVTONS, and the like which came to waste ITALIE. In this picture of a CIMBRIAN Pa∣uis, or Targat, found vpon ROMAN monyes, you may in bordure see a few deuises.
The most learned IVSTVS LIPSIVS, of immor∣tall memorie, hath deliuered it vpon his credit. Trust it. The shape answers VIRGILS description
of GALLICK sheildes in this his three-quarter verse —Scutis protecti corpora longis. That the barbarous (so reputed by the GREEKS, and ROMANS) wore painted armours is very ordinarily found among the old Poets, so the PHARSALIAN writer mentioneth of the LINGONS —Pictis LINGONES armis, but VIRGIL the most learned, happy, and iudicious of all ROMAN Poets in his —Picti scuta LABICI, comes to the very point and purpose of moderne Armories, being (som few consideratiōs added) the payntings of sheilds, & their argumēts. I could out of SILIVS ITALICVS giue you now a GALL, named CHRYXVS, in embossment of whose targat the sackage of ROME was gloriously pourtraid, but being onely an historicall picture I leaue it with mine Author. That which DIODORVS SICVLVS reports of the GALLS (the most probable Fore-fathers of the BRITANS) I may not omitte, as comming nea∣rest to the quicke of our purpose, for they (saith he) had sheildes ,
which whether by way of superior assignation, pri∣uate assumption, hereditary deuolution, or howso∣euer, were variously painted with some deuise pe∣culiar to the bearer. Our GREEK Maister made it in LATIN, word for word, thus: Variegata proprio modo. The SAGVNTINE in SILIVS, bare in his sheild the semblants of an hundreth snakes. His wordes are Centùm angues idem caelatum insigne ferebat. But many yeares before that Poet was borne, VIRGIL had those Centùm angues— in a sheild, which deuise, and words the other doth rather seeme to transcribe then imitate. And here, for that from SPAIN (where famous SAGVNTVM once did stand) the cutte is short out of EVROPE, wee will waft ouer into AFRICA.
The contents. 1. AMAZONS, their helmes, and sheilds called Pelts. 2. Other AFRICANS in generall, their helmes, and crests. 3. CARTHAGINERS. 4. BARCHINVS ASDRVBAL his image in a siluer sheild of great weight. 5. Antient AEGIP∣TIANS. 6. ARMES had not their original from HIEROGLYPHICS. 7. Ought to relish of HIEROGLYPICKS as wel as, or ra∣ther then Impreses. 8: PROTEVS his transfigu∣rations. 9. The antient, and moderne AFRICAN sheilds. 10. Referment to the late discoueries. 11. From AFRICK into ASIA. CHAP. 7. EVSTACE. WE are now therefore in old AFRICA. A. It is anciently written (in DIO∣DOVS) that the LYBIAN AMAZONS went armed with the scalie skinnes of ser∣pentes. If you suspect that it was for defence, not distinction, doubt you not but that the noblest La∣dies among them had the most dreadfull helmets. The AMAZONS had also a peculiar kind of round sheild called Pelta, and, we should be very strict, if allowing to them of LIBYA the like, we should deny
them distinctiue notes. CLAVDIANVS (most neat, and courtly Poet) reports in general of the AFRI∣CANS, that their caskes or helmes were of such stuffe, Serpentum gestant patulos pro casside rictus. The wordes in him sound thus much; that they arm'd their heades with the heades of those hide∣ous monsters. But I could rather suppose that they were the crests of their Nobles, & that the shutting-vp of the wearers heads in the sloughs, spoiles or cases of serpents, is but a Poeticall finenesse. STA∣TIVS (most neare imitator of incomparable VIR∣GIL) saith of the PARTHIANS Ore ferarum, Et rictu horrificant galeas — which beeing rightly mark't confirmes my con∣iecture, for it seemes they drew the skinnes flead from the heads of sauage beasts, ouer their hel∣mets, to make them appeare more terrible: For otherwise I should suppose that the scalp of a ga∣ping beast, would proue both a brittle, and vneasie head-peece, and their hides a worse. In this part of the world stood the dangerous great riuall Cit∣tie to ROME, CARTHAGE, whose Cittizens, and sub∣iects were so magnificent, and sumptuous in the matter of ensignments, as that in ASDRVBALS Campe, when hee was slaine, and the Campe was
spoild by the ROMANS, there was found an hono∣rary sheild of pure siluer, with the image of BAR∣CHINVS ASDVBAL vpon it, which (saith LIVIVS) weighed one hundreth, thirty and eight poundes. The ancient AEGYPTIANS (sharers in AFRICAN foyle) afford so great proofe for our purpose, as some learned (PIERIVS for one) haue held that wee deduce our armories from their Hieraticall figures, or sacred sculptures, though it be farre otherwise: Yet is it not to be denied that some Armories haue beene euen copyed by Hierogrammes, or coyned out of them, & armories indeed, as wel as, or rather then Impreses ought to taste of them, for that they are mute bodies only without any Mott, or Word to enspirit them. The famous transfigurations of PROTEVS King of AEGIPT, were not fained vppon other ground (witnesse all Mythologers) then his frequent shifting of crestes, and ensignes of Ma∣iesty. Nor was it singular in him, if (as SVIDAS writes) GERYON was fabled to haue three heads, for that hee wore three crestes. But the AFRICANS in generall had painted sheilds, and by a proper name called cetrae, as the AMAZONIAN were named pettae. Of these AFRICAN discoloured sheilds, the noble-borne, and thrice-honorable SILIVS sung, Versicolor contrà cetra— which sheilds, onely a litle chang'd, they at this day retaine, and engraue, or paint with sundry formes. To bee short, examine the first state, & face of
things in CONGO, and all the Prouinces of AFRICA lately discouered, and you shall easily track out among them these effects of naturall instinct con∣cerning Ensignments, one or other. The Contents. 1. Somwhat about the holy land. 2. Sir AMIAS his uerti∣cal point to inflame with loue of honour to a truly CHRISTIAN end. 3. Force of examples drawn in ASIA. 4. The BABILONIANS. 5. Their ensignes. 6. The place of the Prophet IEREMIE conce∣ning SEMIRAMIS. 7. Her armes, and name agreeing. 8. CVROPALATES of the ASSY∣RIANS ensigne. 9. XENOPHON of the PER∣SIAN. 10. Symbolicall images in holy scripture. 11. The fiercer ASIATICK nations. 12. The TVRKES ensignes. 13. The CHESELBAS, or modern PERSIAN. 14. A rare example of armes out of CHINA. 15. Sparkles of diuine essence. 16. From ASIA into AMERICA. CHAP. 8. AMIAS. PALESTINE (once gemme, and eye of ASIA) may not bee ouer-past without teares, for that in stead of the most triumphal Crosse (glory of so many crestes, and coates of right CHRISTIAN armes)
a lewd TVRKISH Ensigne standes. Which one day yet (ô God) thou wilt raze by the martiall armes of some zealous Prince, who shall beare it in the canton of his royall coat-armour for perpetuall memory of the conquest. To such a most glori∣ous enterprize the loue of honour must needs bee very auaylable, toward the kindling of which so noble, and excellent affection I wish my labours could but giue the hope of a little sparke. There∣vnto certainly shall both this our conference, and all other our like indeauors (as vnto their verticall point) aspire, there beeing no felicity, but as wee may, to seeke the glory of God. The rest of ASIA (for PALESTINE is but a very little specke) would answer the hugenesse of her comprehension with the multitude of examples fit for our purpose, but I will not surbate your at∣tention too much. The BABILONIANS (ancient Cittizens of ASSY∣RIA) walkt not (as saith HERODOTVS) without their scepters, or rods, on the tops whereof some sym∣bolicall Images, or other (as of a bird, a fish, a flow∣re, a starre or the like) were fixt, which as you may in them (beeing noted for such studies) take to bee some superstitious rite, so I could rather incline to thinke them ensignes, borne after that manner in times of peace to distinguish the honourable from the vulgar. The terrible doue in IEREMIE, whose words are Facta est terra eorum in desolationem a facie irae COLVMBAE,
is taken (as I haue heard) to be meant by SEMIRA∣MIS, Queene of that BABILON, whose symboll, or Armes (as they are in tradition) were a Doue, which also her name signifies, for SEMIRAMIS (saith ancient DIODORVS) is in the SYRIAC a Doue. It were plea∣sing but not much pertinēt here, out of one authen∣tike Author to declare that the ASSYRIANS bare a Dragon, out of another that CYRVS the PERSIAN Monarck bare a golden Eagle, and the like innume∣rable. Many prophesies of holy Scripture are full of allusions concerning the Princes, and people of ASIA, painted out vnto vs in symbolicall ima∣ges, which yet I do not say were their Armes. More for our present purpose are the ancient fiercer na∣tions of ASIA; SCYTHIANS, PARTHIANS, BACTRIANS, HIRCANS, SOGDIANS, and the like in great numbers, to whose antiquities I referre you, and those which yet retayne their whole barbarisms, as the TARTARS which are stil a puissant people. The TVRKS (a croo∣ked slip of a SCYTHIAN crabbe) haue their golden Globes, their crescents, their Colour'd Horse-hairs (a most ancient ornament for crestes) and the like ensignements, into which whether you will ac∣count the red caps, which the PERSIANS haue taken vp to weare, and of them are called in their owne tongue CHESELBAS, to distinguish them from their contrary sect in MAHVMETISM, I leaue to your selfe. Not to be any longer, but to quit ASIA (CHINA is in ASIA) looke vppon this sheild.
E. I do behold it. A My friend Maister CAMDEN, CLARENCEVX, shewed it to Mee out of MARCVS VELSERVS (a lear∣ned, and a principall Gentleman of AVGSPVRG) who deliuers it for Armories belōging to a CHI∣NOI, hauing in it for the mayne charge a Pan∣ther, and besides that, Helme, Crest, and mant∣le, in a manner resembling ours of EVROPE. At which a man may worthily wonder, for that VEL∣SERVS is plaine, that it neuer proceeded from imitation, but from wise nature, or more immediately, and truly from almighty God him∣selfe, as planting in his best mortall worke, but not in his mortall part, certaine sparkes of the diuine
inteligence to Enlumin the Microcosm. By the onely light whereof, nations most distant touch often vppon the same thinges, without hauing the least correspondence one with the other. As these of CHINA doe not onely concurre with vs in the notion of ensignement, but also in the regulari∣ty, and whole complement of Armes. Which yet were the more to be admired, if (as is constantly reported) they had not already beene before vs in our two most eminent, and principall late inuenti∣ons, Artillery, and Typography. The Contents. 1. Examples of speciall moment in AMERICA. 2. Of PARACOVSSI in BRASILIA. 3. The INGVA'S Kings of PERV, their Armes. 4. Of ACAMAPIXTLI, first king of MEXICO. 5. The MEXICAINS (once NAVATALCAS) were not from EVROP. 6. Pengwin an AME∣RICAN bird with a WELSH name. 7. Whole books of the MEXICAIN Armories. 9. The ensigne of their Cittie, and the cause why it was borne. 10. The ARTICK, and ANTARTIC worldes. 11. A strange kinde of Inlayes, and em∣bossements on sheildes. 12. The Suruey ends.
CHAP. 7. EVSTACE. EEVROPE, AFRICK, and ASIA being thus with great pleasure glanced ouer, we may now almost ferrie into AMERICA. A. AMERICA, that rude new found world, I am to tell you, af∣fordes wonderfull stuffe to our purpose: for what if som-where, there they not only haue those external distinctions, which (as I sayd) no people wants, but seeme also to haue Armes, or Armories? Sure if ANDREVV THEVET; or his cutter, de not impone, PARACOVSSI, naked King of PLATE, had such, which for the rude, and strange pretti∣nesse therof deserues here to be viewd.
The marke, or charge is PARACOVSSIES, the colours mine, the stuff of the targat, a beasts hide braced-vp with thonges to an ouall ring, or hoop. I dallie. Those therefore of PERV, and MEXICO had very Armories as IOSEPHVS ACOSTA diligently notes, and as in sundry other bookes is most ap∣parent. One, or two of a multitude I will spare you for the rarity, and at which you may iustly mar∣uayle. INGVA was the hereditary name of the PERV Kings, and the gentilitial armes of the INGVAS were a rain-bow with two snakes extended. The name also of the first MEXICAN King being ACAMAPIXTLI, and signifying an handfull of reedes in the MEXICAIN tongue (as the same ACOSTA
writes) they carried in their publike ensignes in memory of that great Prince, an Hand holding ma∣ny arrowes of reedes, as the ENGLISH version of that author hath, which I hope is faithfull, for at this present I haue no other. True it seemes to bee that the MEXICAINS were a later nation, comming from Countries very Nor∣therly (Seminary indeed of new plantations, but not of ciuil inuentions) as true also that the OTTO∣MIES, & CHICHEMECAS dwelt-there before, and by the NAVATALCAS (now MEXICAINS, whome a man by their ciuill fashions would iudge to haue beene a Colony long since out of CHINA) were displan∣ted. But for al this they cannot bee charged with the suspition of imitating vs, no print remayning
among them of an EVROPEAN originall; vnlesse, with some few, we will haue the Pen-guin (a bird with a white head, which the name in WELSH doth signifie) because it was found in AMERICA (they say with that name) vpon the first discoue∣ries, beewray such a secret, and as it were retaine possession for EVROP, which neither by booke, nor fame, nor any diligēce of our age could euer be dis∣couerd, or coniectured, their lawes, their language, their hellish rites, and all other important markes vtterly, and with one consent disclaiming. To re∣turne to our presēt matter. Ther are whole bookes (as I am very credibly informed) of the Ensignes, Symbols, or Armes of this once-noble people, therefore I wil here now only giue you the Armes of MEXICO, which had a local cause of bearing, being this. In the marishes, and euery place where MEXICO was afterward built, these NAVATALCAS found an Eagle houlding in one foote a bird, the other standing on a Cochinello tree, or TNAL, the said tree, or shrubbe growing out of a stone. This was the signe which the Oracle gaue them where to settle, and reare a citty, which should (as it was) be Queene of many nations. They did so, and for perpetuall memory aduanced the picture for their publicke ensigne.
Here we will take leaue of AMERICA, and re∣turne: For, to make farther demonstration of the vniuersality of ensignements (to conuince the natu∣ralnesse of the notion) out of those icie worldes which lye vnder eyther pole, it is meete wee stay till they bee discouered, but as little as yet they are knowne, they will not faile to concurre. So confident I am that no people which had any forme of common-weale, and that did but worship any thing what-soeuer, were it but SLATA BABA, the Idol of the goldē witch (with the Hords of hors-fed TARTAS) or a square red cloath for the Sunne (with the furr'd Sauages neare to the icie, and Hyperbo∣rean Sea,) eyther did, or could be destitute of the
notion of ensignement, and externall variation. And neyther they, nor other barbarous hauing sheildes, but are likely both to vse EMBLEMS (taking the word with LVCILIVS for Inlayes, or Marquetry) and embossments also, that you may not bee igno∣rant of their Elegancies. For they who know not how to draw lines, or temper colours, can beat grains of gold, or other glittering stuffe into them, or fixe the heades, or pawes of conquerd beasts vp∣pon them. Thus hauing in a lesse time then DRAKE, or CANDISH compast the whole terrestriall Globe, we are returned. The contents. 1. An externall signe set vpon man almost before mankinde. 2. The rainbow after the Floud. 3. Sir EVSTACE summes the suruey. 4. The lesse pro∣ued in the more. 5. Praeoccupation of some foreseen reproofes. 6. VITELLIVS his new MINER∣VA'S sheild, and PLAVTVS his epistles, fitt Armes, and study-books for whom. 7. Some princi∣pall common places of discourse belonging to the present, briefly touched. 8. The valew of heroical literature depends not vpon opinion. 9. Satisfacti∣on tendred for refusall to expatiate farther. 10. Syr EVSTACE confesseth his former doubtes cleared, but maintaines their causes were iust. 11. The Maisters short conclusion of the praemises, and Simile of painting. 12. What of Armes remaines
with art and vse. 13. Elephantine births. 14. In∣dentment for a familiar method renew'd. CHAP. 10. EVSTACE. YOu haue super-abounded (Syr AMIAS) in your performances, ha∣uing brought the whole world as it were, out of the gloom of An∣tiquity to witnesse with you not only for the vniuersal practise of rude Ensignments, but some-what also for Armo∣ries. A. Yet haue I not put you in mind of one instance of personall outward Marks, euen before NOAAHS floud, nay almost before mankind. E. May it be? A. God him selfe set a marke vpon CAIN. But you perhaps will say, that was Stigma, and not Digma, a brand, not an ornament. Whether it were or no, it valews alike much for our pur∣pose, according to the rule of contraries. And that, whose examples are drawn from God (the author of nature) is much the more in nature. The raine∣bow set in the clowds immediately after the De∣luge (from which some deriue an authority wher∣with to grace Impreses, and heroical Deuises) was indeed a signe, but of a far differēt kind from these of ours, & therfore not at al to be screw'd into our discourse for farther countenance or confirmatiō.
E. It were absolutely needlesse. For what can be more apparent, after so many most lightful demō∣strations, then that the notion of Ensignment is vni∣uersall, and consequently natural? Giue mee leaue now, as well for setling my memory, as for crow∣ning your assertion, summarely to binde vp into a garland the principall of those cul'd flowers which out of the Paradises of Antiquity, you haue strew'd the threshold, or porch of honor with. To this purpose the names of the barbarous answring the Analogie of nature in their significations, and the brands of the VIRGINIANS pointed vnto by you, suting the practise of the ROMANS, are very pertinent. In EVROP I see the azure targats of the BRITANS, and allow your well-grounded diuinati∣ons, that they had other, and those lineamentall, or figured distinctions. Much the rather, for that you haue inuincibly confirm'd vnto me, that the GALLS, and GERMANS had. The rest of proofes which troup-vp close to their quarter, and which you produce out of the shrines of EVROPEAN mo∣niments, who can but embrace? The famous CAR∣THAGENIANS rise with honour, and allowance there-vnto. Nor are the most ancient MIZRAIM, or AEGYPTIANS, second to any, and PROTEVS cannot there so disguise, and transfigure him∣selfe as to escape the vse you put him to; all AFRICANS subscribing. In spatious ASIA (where your piety tooke occasion to expresse it self) the BABILONIANS, sundry great Princes, and other ASIATICK nations make a strong squadron
for your party, not meanely flankred by the rare example out of CHINA. As for AMERICA, it exceedes all expectation in her INGVAS, and ME∣XICAINS, and I most willingly allow your coniect∣ure of barbarous Elegancies, touching Inlaies, & Embossements. The whole summe being sealed-vp with the most authentike antiquity of the marks of CAIN. In all which, this is worthily to bee accoun∣ted rare, that no example there, is so young as a thousand yeares, excepting those of the new worlds, in whose nouelty we do not only see An∣tiquities of a thousand yeares, but Antiquity it selfe. A. Your memory deales truly with you in your rehersal. But whereas our intended matter is of the Elements of armories, that is to say of such en∣signements as now are in vse, and the maine diffi∣culty lying betweene your sight, and their origi∣nall, beeing onely the doubt of the vniuersality of ensignement in generall, for bailing you from that doubt I needed not (so as I haue don) to haue made my demonstrations so much wider then the last, as to haue giuen you thē out of examples, which are in a sort of the same kind with perfect Armo∣ries. Yet I hope I shal not stand accused of excesse, or fayling in the point, it being most true that the lesse (to weet, those rude first draughts, natural es∣sayes, and ouertures of true Armories, which you (& not improperly) called elementarie to our ele∣ments) is fully proued in the more, that is to say, in
shewing honorable marks vpō sheilds; they being amōg the most perfect bodies that are made accor∣ding to Symbolical doctrine. Neuerthelesse that I may not stand accountable for wilful wast, hauing so far exceeded in my proofes (the charge which lay vpon me vrging no farther then to make plaine that Ensignements in general, of what kind soeuer, were vniuersal) that vse may be drawne from those scattered shadowes, and limbs of our elements, as by planting the eye at the true place of sight, may giue a faire, and complete body in Perspectiue, an¦swerable in all the lineaments to the Idaea which I follow. E. It is a noble vse, and the Art not common, considering that those shadowes (as you cal them) and praeceding examples are dispersed among so many worldes, and in so different ages. But why make you a sodain pause, or stand? or what may be the reason of your almost frowning silence? A. The feare least that some, seeming, and af∣fecting to seeme wise, wil censure all our diligence vaine, though imployd in the proper subiect of honour, which the most high, and noble Phyloso∣pher PLATO rightfully calleth Diuinum bonum. E. Trouble not your selfe (good Sir AMI∣AS,) for I haue found out a new MINERVA'S sheild for such Censors, which wil bee more gra∣tious to them then any coat of Armes, or poynt of Noblesse. SVETONIVS is mine Author, that in one consecrated dish, or charger (which the glut∣tonous Emperor VITELLIVS for the vast bignesse
thereof called MINERVAS shield) such strange, & costly delicacies, fetcht from the vtmost bounds of the ROMANE world, were serued-in, as that this one salad royall (or salad BELIAL, whither you will) was iudged to haue gone farre beyond his brothers feast of welcome, wherein (it is said) there were two thousand choisest fishes (wonder you Gourmôns) and seauen thousand fowles. And for the vse of their more retired studies, and pro∣foundest meditations, I could assigne those — Literatas fictiles epistolas Pice signatas — which the smart, and sauourie PLAVTVS puts in∣to the mouth of SYNCERASTVS in his POH∣NVLVS, that is to say, notable deepe pitchers, and court-iacks full of wine. A. In very faith (Sir EVSTACE) you haue found out an Armes will better please then the re∣splendent Targat of PALLAS, and such a librarie as, I dare vndertake, they had rather tosse then to bee Deipnosophists in ATHENAEVS, or glowe-wormes in the MEDICAEAN, or VATICAN, the most renowned armaries of bookes in all the world. But Epicures (O good Sir EVSTACE) are not the onely renegados to the dignities of their creation, by eschewing the naturall splendor of testified vertue, and the shine which the studies of honor do illumine the soule of man with. There
are many factions besides. Some of which might deserue to bee recall'd, but that in the compasse of life they constitute a false center, as if wisedome were alwaies to grouell with them in immoderate cares for things of present vse, & they neuer to as∣pire to her high throne with the humble seruice of all they haue; and finally, for that they maske their neglect of Armes, & of heroicke vertue it selfe (the only competent weilder of armes) vnder the good∣ly visours of accidentall debasements, such as vul∣garization, disproportion, and like mosse growne vpon them in tract of time, by a fortune not more fatally theirs, then other noble knowledges. By which preiudice they mingle sacred, & prophane, and proclaime new tables as it were, to all good∣nesse, and glory. Admit that pretious metall were dropt in into the cynders; who throws away gold for the drosse it is wrapt in? If the misteries of honor lie contemn'd in the huske, and bran of vulgarity, or of other casuall debasement, which setts foote on the necke of glory: must they to whome the protection, and profession there∣of belongs runne madd with the multitude? The holy, and most maiesticall name of GOD almighty hath falne in our daies, by manifould deuolutions of impiety, into such blasphemous abuses, as wee all of vs haue lately seene it faine to bee rescued from those indignities (or sacriledges rather) by mayne act of Parlia∣ment. Should that rule then bee the mesure of worth, in an age so blancke, and famously bare
of all heroick qualities, as, ours where should any beame, or smallest timber of the whole frame of virtue be seene to stand? should not Angels, Men, & Things detorted, or degenerated from their first institution, be so cast of? And should not so an vtter voydnesse be brought vpon humanity? Therefore the rise, or fal of mens opinions concerning things which borrow not their value by estimation, as Pearle, and Stone, but containe it in themselues, as Wisdome, & Virtue, are but a very Carpenters beuill, a false, leaden, and LESBIAN rule to mesure by, and the redy way (in constituting multitudes our iudges) to assubiect our selues to the worst tribunal of the world, meere popularity. As for the rust, or fog of contempt which sitts thick vp∣on this, & all other generous science, Honor hath long supplicated Maiesty for an hand to mount by, and cannot bee euer without it. Meane while, no iniquity of men, or times can giue from vs, to enioy the secret nourishment of noble thoughts, without imprudently slightng the present sway (though of most corrupted iudgements) or with∣out frailty contemning our selues. For we are such, and so taught, as must not like chap-men aske how the market goes, thereby to lay out our time vpon a parcell of vertue, or honor, so, as wee may in a mount-banke fashion gaine an opinion by re∣taile thereof aboue our value, but really embrace it for it selfe, and earnestly fauour, and foster it in others, that (if cause require) we may afford to our country, and to other our obligers, true offices,
and not deceiuable. As for one ordinary cauill vsed by many, concerning the vulgarization of notes of honour, that certainly doth not trouble mee, for Good (simply such) is bettered in propor∣tion to the community thereof, and how happy were the nation which had as many noble in partes, as in markes? But it is farre otherwise, God knowes, whose, and the worke of soueraigne Prin∣ces the reformation is, and not of a Satyr, wherein I haue no kind of skill, and much lesse, wil. In pre∣sent let not any suppose (for I will make a shorte turne out of morall discourse into Armorial) that I create these Elements of my selfe. For they who first skored the heauens with Mathematicall and imaginary lines, made not the heauens, nor any part of them, no more then he made speach, who first deuised Grammar; both they, and these hauing their true state, and condition of being in their seueral subiect matters, though to vs eclypst, and shadowed: Much lesse ought it bee concea∣ued, that in the farther, and finall prosecution of this affaire, I ought be tyed to quotations, where neuer Author hath gone before: seeing frequent, and filed obseruation is the only proper key to in∣large these Elements out of their Chaos, and impri∣sonment, and not variety of readings, where (for any thing is knowne to me on the contrary) all books faile. Which whether it shall happen to be imputed as an youthly ouer-hardinesse, or repu∣ted for praise-worthinesse, I must put in hazard.
The things them-selues, that is to say, innume∣rable Armories, duly, and perpetually considered, and not any Maister, haue beene the flint, and steel to hammer out this what-souer light; a Genius (with the stay, and lampe of the acuter knowled∣ges) beeing there-vnto more auaylable, then infi∣nite volumes. E. I acknowledge it, and therefore long to bee vnder saile. A. You shall immediately, as soone, as I haue taken a little farther order with you, for answe∣ring some obiections, or expectations rather, of Methodists, least not hauing discharged custome answerable to the parcels requisite in such a coc∣quet, I be laid aboord by criticall searches, or raked through the sides with their shot. Our conference therefore being of such quality as you see to weet, concerning the Elements of present and complete Armories, they will perhaps contend, that I ought not put into the deep, til I had gon farther in their pedigree, bringing it downe from those first rude draughts to the present: Which they may suppose not to be altogether the most impossible, for that the face (or remaines at least) of symbols do conti∣nually glimmer in histories, though sparingly, be∣cause the records of the proper Officers of Armes among the Ancients, are quite lost, and al sorts of learning maimd in the irrecouerable decayes of infinite volumes, which hath setled a notable dark∣nesse vpō the greater, & better part of Things, the
riches of obliuiō surmounting those of memory. They may also farther alleadge that we should pa∣rallelize our Armes with those of the HEBREVVES, GREEKS and ROMANS, hetherto of purpose by me omitted, as more exact in their institutions, then stood with the necessary proofe of the assumed proposition (best maintained by examples out of rudest nations) or at least wise shew of what na∣ture they were, & how, wherin, & when dissonant, or cōcording with the modern; they might also ex∣pect sundry other things, as logicall diuisions, and subdiuisions of symbolical notes, comparisons, or parellelisations of anciēt seales among those three politest nations with sheildes, their seueral stuff, fi∣gures, vses, with inumerable other points sufficient to moor-vp our discourse to an vnreasonable tar∣riance. To al which I answer briefly, & truly, that euery one of these beeing in a manner an whole work, & the Maisters intention, not other mens ex∣pectations, being the proper limit of voluntary un∣dertakings, I acknowledge my self to haue already trespast in the excesse, & out of this plain praeocu∣pation I pray excuse me to your self. Mary, if you as yet be entangled, or vnsatisfied in any of the dilated praemises, let me know, for I mean not to take you into the Armorists ARGO till you see the weather vnlike to ouer-cast, at least-wise in that coast which we leaue behind. E. There is no clowd in that particular horizon which you haue not clear'd my prospect frō. Ne∣uerthelesse I hold, that my scruple concerning the naturalitie, and vniuersal practise of Ensignements
was at first iust in mee, for they (as I my selfe did) who at a glympse, or inconsiderately view the present multitudes of Armories, their formal elegancies, and setled order, which all speake no∣thing but Art, would verely thinke that they were euen at the first but the worke of witte, without any spring-head to bee found for them vppon so high an ALP, as God him-selfe. A. I grant, and thinke you iustifie your selfe, very seasonably. But let no man be troubled (good Syr EVSTACE) when hee beholdes the wondrous worke of Armes, (so DAEDALEAN, and so various) raised out of that one true natural ground, as if it were not the ground, for all the lights thereof are kindled (as you see) at that one ray of vniuersal no∣tion. Which neuerthelesse to weake eyes seemes wrapt vp, or rather lost in the many foldes of Art, but will most readily appeare if thus sought. For as to imitate is generally imprest in the nature of man, so picture (deriued from that property) was yet at first (notwithstanding the naturality, and vniuersality thereof) but of that kinde onely which the GRECIANS call Monogrammos, or lineary, & af∣terward from Monogrammos spread it selfe into that which PLINIE calleth Monochroma, that is to say, from consisting of one line, to consisting of one colour, and from Monochroma did by degrees ascend to such excellence, as rather more then moulding, or imagery contended with spirit, or life it selfe, and is productiue of as many seuerall formes, as the eye, or imagination hath obiects.
Hee therefore, that by example of Picture, or of any other like flourishing inuention, which hath complement from Art, but originall from Nature, shall lift his sight ouer to the first state of things, must confesse, that the present glory, and method of Armories, no more then of those other can take away the grant of a ground, fountaine of the one and of the other. But in Armes we owe no∣thing more truly to nature then the very light of differencing worths by outward notes. The inuen∣tion, application, and disposition notwithstanding of those notes are meerly with Art, and Vse; which two mighty Powers after a very long space of time (for excellent things are of Elephantine birth) did at last with infinite labour, and like felicitie, first gather the scattred-materials, such as that vniuersall notion of ensignement had rudely in se∣uerall ages afforded, and afterward so admirablie wrought-out perfect Symbols, and absolute Ar∣mories as wee now behold. Our next steppe is into the maine of our businesse, GOD per∣mitting. E. Neuer too soone, so as you but holde the course for which at first I capitulated with you, that is to say, so meere a catechising method as if you would instruct mee how to spell the very crosse-rowe of Armes. A. Though it may seeme a great stoope from the high pitch, which contemplation lyes at to the neerer points of practise, and that the tenor you exact, will but appeare like the bare Skeleton, or
cage-worke of ribbes, and bones, before any flesh, or fashion be ouer-laid, in regard as it were of the sanguin complection, and complete body of a full discourse: Yet forsomuch as those neerer points of practise are the Lists more proper to enter a yong beginner, in the noble studie of Armo∣rie, and that the aspiring to other more mounted, and towring eminencies of speculation, compre∣hending innumerable mysteries, in any other sort then as by the due degrees of the Elementarie, compositiue, and other parts thereof, is but to cast a man vp into the winde, there to houer emptily like one of those flying, or floating paper-birds, (not made with that Arte as the Automs of DAE∣DALVS which hung aloft by meanes of equall poises) but which wee haue seene boyes raise by a string (after they are once mounted) to an incre∣dible heighth in the ayre. Therefore (presuppo∣sing with-all, that you forget not what in the be∣ginning of our conference I deliuer'd to bee my sense for the present, concerning ARMES, and GENTLEMEN) I will (according also as at first I yeelded) gratifie you with the course for which you capitulate, without fearing least my profita∣ble, and needfull plainnesse take a rubbe, or twen∣tie, at the suspition of insufficiencie. The Contents. 1. This part peeced to the beginning with repetiti∣ons concerning Armes, and Gentlemen. 2. Blazon. 3. The two first considerations. 4. The Continent
of Armories. 5. The Triangular, or SAMNITE shield ours. 6. The ancient vsuall stuffe of shields. 7. The black Princes honorarie Targat at CAN∣TERBVRIE. 8. FROISARD cited. 9. A zealous digressiō to our Prince. 10. IOHN of GAVNTS honorarie Shield in Saint PAVLES. 11. The like in antiquitie. 10. Blazon makes nothing to the present purpose. CHAP. 11. EVSTACE. I Forget not what you deliuered in the beginning, and thinke it worth the la∣bour to approue my memory vnto you therein by repetition. ARMS (speak∣ing in the vulgar, and aequiuocall extension of the word) were, you said, certaine painted, hereditable, and Armoriall markes of honor, by which Gentle∣men were distinguisht first from the vulgar, and then one from the other: and GENTLEMEN (sim∣ply, and for the present only, for it is to bee suppo∣sed that you would giue a more exquisie Idaea, did you depourtray him vnto vs in his perfection) were the bearers of such markes, or tokens. To these, if you thinke good to adde for mee the knowledge of what BLAZON is before you proceed any far∣ther, I shall seeme to haue the whole praeparatorie generalities of matter to ensue. A. BLAZON is the description of Armes, and their appurtenances, by the receiued termes, or other apt expression of things by words.
E. To blaze then is in Armory the same, which in other faculties is to describe, and BLAZON, and description are vniuocall. A. So I suppose, though some Maisters teach, that wee must not before a soueraigne Prince vse the terme (blaze) but (descriue) so as then an Ar∣morist shall not bee said to blaze, but to descriue a coate. E. What things are first now in the name of GOD, to bee considered? A. Two. The Continent and the Content. E. Are there any such terms in Armory, or do you only borrow them to expresse your selfe. A. Borrow them onely, as I shall perhaps bee enforced to do many others. Which all men that write either new things, or newly of old matters will not onely pardon, but approue. E. What do you call the Continent in Armories? A. The very same which the word importeth, and no other, that is, the shield, or contayning part of it selfe considered, without any mixture or marke. E. What forme hath the shield? A. It hath as many as Caruers, or Painters please, but this triangular
is become most vsuall, and in a sort the proper, for that the shield in generall, beeing inuented for defence of the body of man, and applied there∣vnto, carries a three-cornerd, or triquet-figure, the body of man decreasing as it were in latitude from the shoulders downeward. And as the chiefe of ROMANE historians (SALLVST) writes, that his nation borrowed their armes, and militarie wea∣pons from the SAMNITES, so was this the pecu∣liar figure of the SAMNITE sheild, as the noble Author TITVS LIVIVS PATAVINVS de∣scribes it, and giues the reason of that shaping, to bee Mobilitatis causâ. The ROMANS digrest notwithstanding from this paterne, rather vsing Oual, Imbricate, and other figures. Heere I could create a new Worke, did I
take occasion to dilate of the figures of Sheilds, which were scarse the same in any two nations. POLYBIVS, and other famous writers make it cleare, that the hides of beasts were the common couerings of sheilds, the ordinarie stuffe vnder∣neath beeing some tough wood, or other, as Sal∣low, and some-time for the more lightnesse, twiggs wouen, for so I vnderstand that of LVCAN. —nudâ iam crate fluëntes Inuadunt clypeos— Our SAXON ancestors vsed shields of skin, among whom for that the Artificer put sheep-fells to that purpose, the great ATHELSTANE King of ENG∣LAND, vtterly forbad by a lawe such deceit, as in the printed booke of SAXON lawes is extant to bee seene. With this vsage of agglewing, or fast∣ning hard tanned hides for defense, agrees their Etymologie, who deriue Scutum the LATIN of a shield, from the GREEKE word , a skinne. The Triangular (or SAMNIT) was vniuersallie among vs the antient fashion of shields for men of Armes, but not the onely. For assurance where∣of, I will delight you with two diuerse proporti∣ons, the one of an honorary belonging to the most renowned EDVVARD, Prince of WALES, the other (an honorarie also) appertaining to his third brother, King of CASTILE, and LeON, Duke of LANCASTER. The sayd victorious Princes toombe, is in the goodly Cathedral Church erect∣ed to the honor of CHRIST in CANTERBVRIE: There (beside his quilted coat-armour with halfe-sleeues,
Taberd-fashion, and his Triangular sheild, both of them painted with the royall Armories of our Kings, and differenced with siluer labels) hangs this kinde of Pauis, or Targat, curiously (for those times) embost, and painted, the Scucheon in the bosse beeing worne out, and the Armes (which it seemes were the same with his coate-armour, and not any peculiar deuise) defaced, and is altogether of the same kinde with that, vpon which (FROISARD reports) the dead body of the Lord ROBERT of DVRAS, and nephew to the Cardinall of PIER∣REGOVRT was laid, and sent vnto that Car∣dinall, from the battell of POICTIERS, where the Blacke Prince obtained a victorie, the
renowne whereof is immortall. I can hardly here containe my selfe from offring vp a duty of praise to the remembrance of this matchlesse Gentle∣man, Lambe in peace, Lion in warre, and of all the world in his time the most martiall Worthy, and most fortunate Generall. Aspire right excel∣lent HENRIE (ô let it need no expiation, that thy great Fathers most lowely subiect should thus presume) by his example (to whose Title, and Prin∣cipalitie thou art lineall successor) to things grea∣ter then the example. That as thou art the proper blossome of all the royall HENRIES, and ED∣VVARDS of this thy Fathers inheritance, so wee may in thee acknowledge the summe of all their CHRISTIAN vertues, proouing thy selfe there∣by a greater Thing then to bee the Monarch, not onely of all great BRITAINE, but of all the World. The other honorarie shield is in the most mag∣nificent Temple dedicated to the memorie of the glorious Apostle Saint PAVL in LONDON, where it hangs at the sayd Dukes Moniment, and is farre different from the first. In the curious neere view, and handling whereof, as I tooke sin∣gular delight, so was it worthy no lesse diligence, and therefore I will heere showe you both the Figure, and Fabrick.
It is very conuex toward the bearer, whether by warping through age, or as made of purpose. It hath in dimension more then three quarters of a yeard of length, & aboue halfe a yeard in breadth; next to the body is a canuas glew'd to a boord,
vpon that thin board are broad thin axicles, sli∣ces, or plates of horne, naild fast, and againe ouer them twenty and sixe thicke peeces of the like, all meeting, or centring about a round plate of the same, in the nauell of the sheild, and ouer all is a leather clozed fast to them with glew, or other holding stuffe, vppon which his Armories were painted, but now they, with the leather it self, haue very lately and very lewdly bin vtterly spoild. Now as som learned vnderstand that old GREEK adage (ment of such as are astonished at the sodain sight of a thing) of the vgly feareful figures limn'd vpon sheilds couer'd with them, so certainly in the rare fabrick hereof, their Etymus is approued, who with VARRO (the most learned ROMAN) deriue Scu∣tum from sectures, slices, or pieces, of which wee behold the strength of this massie sheild belong∣ing to the said great Prince, IOHN surnamed of GAVNT, doth consist. The like was also among the Ancient. AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS writes that IVLIANVS (before he was Emperour) in an ex∣ercise of warre at PARIS shooke his sheild so sternely, that Axiculis queis orbis erat compaginatus — the axicles, plates, or pieces of which it was com∣pact, flew abroad into the field, leauing nothing but the handle in his gripe. The figure of sheilds now vsed in painting is
(as hath bene before declared) Triangular, which we intend not to vary from. E. I vnderstand you, and know now what the Continent in Armories is, and the vsuall figure of present sheilds in painting. But what is the Con∣tent? A. You shal know before long. E. Meane you not at all to instruct mee in Blazon? A. No indeed, as well because the particulars are innumerable, and eyther now are, or will short∣ly by some other bee so taught, as little helpe will serue, but principally for that it is only conuer∣sant in descriptions of the superficiall, and mecha∣nicall parts of Armories, which set no sharpe edge vpon the witte, as hauing little in them abstract, or deepe. The contents. 1. Of beginning at the Crosse. 2. Figured in CON∣STANTINE the Great's sheild 3. A coniecture concerning our ENGLISH crosse. 4. The three legs in the Armes of the Ile of MAN, and the old GREEK coynes of SICILIA. 5. The Crosse improper to the Elementary part which deales with no Charges.
CHAP. 12. EVSTACE. HAd you beene so pleased I could tell where I would haue had you begun. A. Where? E. At the CHRISTIAN signe of the Crosse. A. So GERARD LEIGH harh done very commen∣dably, as well because we are CHRISTIANS, as also because (his discourse or booke beeing of Armes borne, & how they were to be blazed) that signe is in CHRISTIAN Armories most honorable. Nor know I a better omen to begin with, for it was an happy presage to great CONSTANTINE, who ther∣fore in the siluer bosse of his imperiall sheild, bare a Crosse, as NICETAS CONIATES writes,
the colour of which Crosse though NICETAS name not, yet was it in likelyhood of none other then of the same which is now in the flag of ENG∣LAND (red in white) where (when it was old BRI∣TAIN) him-selfe a BRITAN was borne. E. It may be thence it is that ENGLAND beares it in honor of him, casting the title erroniously vpon S. GEORG. A▪ I say not absolutely so, though it is euident (according to EVSEBIVS one of CONSTANTINE'S Bi∣shops) that it appeared to him very miraculously when it was now a litle past noone, and aboue the sunne, consisting wholy of shining light, with a GREEK sentence importing victory against MAXEN∣TIVS, and his other enimies, and that in religious, and gratefull memory therof, he bare it in his im∣perial Standard, or LABARVM, as also in like me∣mory of CHRISTE'S appearing to him in a vision the same night, he caused his monies to be ho∣nored with symbolicall characters,
as by his coyne yet extant may bee collected, be∣ing (as here you see) a stamp compounded of the two first GREEK capitals in CHRISTES name. With more vehemency of likely-hood we may affirme, that the Armories of the Ile of MANN were deriued from the semblable figure which the GRECIANS in SICILIA did long since vse vpon their coynes. E. I remember to haue seene them not without some wonder. A. The cause in them was elegant, but nothing agreeable to the Kingdome, or Ile of MANN, though som-what to the three Realms (ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND) which it respects. E. What was the cause? A. The three Legs meeting so in the center did
symbolize, or signifie the three corners, capes, or promontories of that Iland, which was therefore called TRINACRIA. E. The cause was apt indeed, and would well correspond to our Penile of ENGLAND, which is triquet or triangular. A. It would. But surely in those monyes this was also strange, that in the very iuncture of the Legs, you should sometime see a MERCVRIES head, betokening (as it seemes) the witty arts of the Ilan∣ders, somtime the head of CERES to signifie the fertility, or rape of PROSERPINE, and some-time other things. Yea, the imitation of the like in Armories to that publike deuise of legs hath crept into priuate families, for the TREMAINS (a CORNISH, or westerne house of Gentlemen) beare three armes so disposed, the hands directed toward the angles of the Sheild. But wee haue once againe almost lost our selues.
E. the time so spent is not lost, but gaind. A. As for beginning at the Crosse (which were, I yeeld, not only auspicious, but pious) wee haue a great iourney thether, because it fals not to bee handled till wee come (if wee doe come at all) to treat of Charges or Armorial bearings, and is the last part of this argument, saue the mystical which openeth the significations. The Contents. 1. The Content of Armories. 2. BRVTE. 3. The Continent, and Content explaned in MOV∣BRAY'S coat. 4. A seeming contradiction crept-out-of by the Maister. 5. Imagination, the organon here of vnderstanding. 6. Continents distingui∣shed. 7. The Bounding line or Perimeter in a coat of Armes. CHAP. 13. EVSTACE. ABout what most is your present doct∣rine conuersant? A. About the Content of Armories, and subiect of blazon. E. What (good Syr AMIAS) is the Content of Armories? A. That which it is in other things, to weet, the thing contayned. For example. In the Ar∣mories credited for BRVTE'S, by VPTON following
ARCHITRENIVS, and other, who in those dayes were so farre from making doubt of BRVTE, as that they, and hee affirme, there were eight Kings lineally from him descending, and farther, that the Lions in the Armories both of SCOTLAND, and WALES, were contriued out of this, beeing, Or, a Lion passant gardant gules. Howbeit, because wee deale vpon demonstration, which is euer of certainties, let this bee the ex∣ample.
E. Whose coate is this? A. It belonged to the noble name, and familie of MOVVBRAY, Dukes of NORFOLKE, and quartred at this day by the illustrious, and Prince∣ly house of HOVVARDS. E. Which is the Continent, and which is the Content herein? A. The Continent is left to imagination, being only so much as the Content couers, which is here the matter of the Armories, to weet, the Field, and the Lion. And you must vnderstand, once for all, that I speake not any where of an Armes, as it is onely painted on a paper, but do alwayes suppose a subiect sheild. E. You taught mee before, that the Continent
was the sheild, or thing containing, and now you say that the Field, and the Lion are the Content, which being so, then are the Content, and the Con∣tinent (because the Field containes the Lion) either confounded, or there are two Continents, one which comprehends the whole Armories, and the other which containes a part. A. My assertion is true. For the field (that is the superficies) is no part of the Continent in my meaning, but is it selfe contained, as the Lion is: And yet your auerment is not absurd, for, seuering the Charge from the Field (which here is red) you may, and that not altogether the most improper∣ly hold, that the Field is the Continent of the con∣tained body, be it Lion, or whatsoeuer else. E. I do not fully conceiue it. A. Reflect but vpon the description which I gaue you of the Continent, and there you shall learne to bring with you an abstractiue, or Ma∣thematicall consideration, for although a Shield, beeing a solid, and Geometricall body, hath in it three dimensions, yet know with-all that it hath a superficies as of it selfe, which is nothing to the making vp of Armories, because there-vpon may bee painted any thing else, and a shield of any matter what-so-euer, timber, mettal, horne, shell, hath nothing of a coate but onely potentially, and in power. E. This I apprehend. A. Let mee heere how. E. We must (Sir) by imagination seuer the Content
of Armories from the matter, or thing wherevp∣on they are, yet so, as by the beeing of Armories vpon it, the shield immediatly becomes the contai∣ning part of the whole armes. A. True, as I suppose. For let an Armes painted on a Surcoat, Tabard, or Shield be blotted out, the priuation of the Armories, makes no priuation of the Continent, though not as the Continent of Ar∣mories, but as a substance of it selfe, and if the bla∣zon of the coat be knowne, though by reason of that priuation it appeare not to the eye, yet to the intelligent it abideth, and preserues the notice both of the mater, and forme in the mind, though so I doe no more take it to bee an actuall Armes, then the dreame, or Idaea of a building is an house. E. It is cleare then that the Content of a painted armes is all that whereof the eye takes view with∣in the bounding line, whereof that line is a part. A. I say not so. For whither you thereby vnder∣stand the purfle, or visible line, which circumscribes the whole, as a perimeter, and is drawne with Pen, Penicil, or howsoeuer: or whether you only meane that inuisible, imaginarie ducture, hauing neither bredth, nor depth, nor is separable from the thing in which it is imagined, I cannot directly affirme, that it is any more a part of an Armes, then a com∣munis terminus is of that which went before, or of that which came after; or then the vnexpressable point of time which diuides the new yeare from the old, is a portion of the new, or of the old: The bounding line (in my conceit) being common
as well to the Continent, as to the Content. E. How then? A. Where the errour breeds no danger, it is best there to follow common opinion, and seeing these things are not wont to be so narrowly sifted, it is enough to take it, as it is most vsually taken. E. How is that? A. As a part of the Coate. E. Then haue we a bounding line, or perimeter, to bee added to the Content of euery Armories. A. I easily grant it to your sharpnesse. The Contents. 1. Great oddes betweene Parts, and Elements. 2. Ele∣ments of Armories what. 3. LVCRETIVS his note of Grammaticall Elements. 4. Armorial Elements foure. 5. Demonstrated in the giuen example, and infallibly holding in all. CHAP. 14. EVSTACE. THus farre we are proceeded happely. What shall I now bee to you next endebted for? A. If you call it a debt, then for that which is next in the nature of our subiect, so farre as the nature of this place will beare, which is onely to show you in generall, that the parts in the Content of armes are diuerse.
E. Vnfould that I pray, so farre as you thinke good. A. The parts in the Content of Armes are di∣uerse, but betweene the Parts, and the Elements of a body, there is great difference. For the parts of a man are the head, the neck, the armes, the hands, and so forth, and againe, those parts haue their parts, as the head hath eyes, eares, nostrils, lips, &c. and those parts haue yet againe their parts similar, and dissimilar, or (as they speake in Schooles) Homogenean, & Heterogenean: but the Elements are another thing, and common with man to all other breathing creatures in the world. It is there∣fore absolutely necessary, before wee come to en∣treat of the total, & partil, similar, & dissimilar parts of Armories, that we first deliuer the Elemental. E. What are Elements then I pray? A. The Elements of Armories are such, as into which all Armories may be resolued, as into their common principles, grounds, or beginnings. E. The Elements then are the common grounds, and beginnings of Armories. A. They are, both as the word imports, and as it signifies in other things. So syllables may bee re∣solued into letters, their Elements (of which all voices vnder heauen consist, Tantum elementa queunt permutato ordine solo) and all compounded things into their simples. E. Which then are those Elements of Armories?
A. These LINES of all sorts, simple COLOVR, or tincture, in which words I comprehend aswell the two mettals in Armes, as all armoriall colours. To which you must adde NVMBER, or rather vni∣tie (which is the fountaine of number) for to it may all Charges, whereof there is any numeration in Armes, be reduced, and lastly POSITION, that is, the manner of setting, disposing, ordering, or placing tokens of honor in their proper subiect, a Sheild. E. LINES, COLOVR, NVMBER, and POSI∣TION, are then the Elements of Armories, which in their Quadruple number are equall to the na∣turall, fire, aire, earth, and water, or to the humors in an humane body. But can you for examples sake show them to mee in the most noble coate of famous MOVVBRAY? A. Most easily, for they hold infalliblie in all. Lines, and Colour you confesse are therein appa∣rent, and in that the Lion is single, and not more then one, the Element of number is manifested, and whereas lastly he is rampant, or erected, and neither passant, couchant, yssant, or of any other sort, position is most euidently Elementall. The Contents. 1. A flitting eye sees little the more herein for seeing. 2. Lines the first Armoriall Element. 3. Why. 4. Lines in Armes, as Place is in the Physicks. 5. Of Purfles, of the word filum in antient LATIN poesie, and other Synonimas of Armoriall lines.
6. The first distribution of lines. 7. The second. 8. The third. 9. A necessarie prouision about the true vnderstanding of Armoriall lines. 10. Ma∣thematicall subtilitie in speaking of our lines auoided. 11. Armorie Queene of liberall know∣ledges. 12. As incentiue to Vertue as Statues. 13. Armes well read, fittest bookes for the noble. 14. Some Methods rather Mazes. 15. Armories, the onely remaining customarie euidences of ho∣nor. 16. The Earle of NORTHAMPTONS pie∣tie to our Souereigne Lord King IAMES at GREENEWICH Towr. 17. Blazon the least, and meanest part of Armorie. CHAP. 15. EVSTACE. THe mystical chain, in which all foure are linckt together, I cannot but ac∣knowledge, for it is (as your selfe haue said) most apparent. But doe you not purpose (good Sir AMIAS) to handle all foure seuerally? A. How else? For if I did not, you would take∣in but small store of light at this casement, and euen then also a flitting eye (howsoeuer it may idlie sooth it selfe) shall see little the more, but all shall still be to him, as it were Sub aenigmate, Or (as the very great Philosopher wrote in excuse,
or defence of him-selfe for publishing his workes) they shall remaine as if they were not published, though published. LINES therefore are the first Element of the foure, as (taken in the vulgar sense, not in the more Mathematical, and penetrating) they praecede colours in work, as that kind of draw∣ing before-said which the GREEKS called Mono∣grammos, was before colouring, as colouring it self was before light, and shadow in artificial pain∣ting, as also light, and shadow were before those things which PLINIE saith the GRECIANS call'd To∣nos and Harmoge, the former being the heightning of light, and the other the commissure, slide, or passing of colours into other colours, or by what name soeuer our modern Artists know them by. And all Painters wee see doe first make a rude draught with chalke, coale, lead or the like, before they limn a Picture, or lay a Colour. E. Notwithstanding, how I pray are Lines an Element of Armories? or why? A. Because a coat can bee no more without lines, then without colour. E. Lines then doe forme an Armes, and giue them to bee. A. Certainly. E. Is there any knowne number, or set fashion of lines required? E. You know right wel (Syr EVSTACE) how in few words to demand enough. Your question is per∣plex, and cannot bee satisfide without some dili∣gence. First therfore of Armorial Lines in general.
E. I harken curiously, therefore on I pray. A. There is nothing infinite in the workes of Art, or Nature, but there must of necessity bee li∣mits, termes, extremities, or bounds. E. Vndoubtedly. A. Which limits, or extremities are eyther vn∣derstood, & by imagination cōprehended, or made subiect to the eye by lines. Those lines are that in Armories which place is in the Physicks: Armories then, and the figures, portions, or proportions in them being artificiall bodies, or semblants of bo∣dies, must needes haue limits, bounds, or circum∣scriptions. E. The necessity is apparent. A. Nor can those limits, rightly put, bee trans∣passed, or exceeded, but the limited thing it selfe must be monstrous, and deformed, and as those ductures, or draughts of lines are shapen, so are the figures (which they circumscribe, and limit) well, or ill. E. Nothing is more euident. A. The painters of Armes do call these lines (as I think) the purfle, or perfil (which also the SPANI∣ARDS blaze, as a seueral part of the Armories) and soundes as if it were per filum (which word filum LVCRETIVS doth use for the outermost bounds, or ductures of lines in figures, or for the figures themselues; Debent nimirùm non omnibus omnia prorsùm Esse pari filo similique affecta figurâ)
They also call it quartering when they put the last hand to the work, drawing the blacke lines, which giue the shape, and lastly they some-time call it a Trick, and Armorists in other cases cal them Vm∣bratures. E. Of how many sorts are Armoriall lines? A. The doctrine of lines in armories distingui∣sheth first of their forme, and secondly of their number. E. What saith it concerning their forme? A. Armorial Lines are in their first diuision Straight, or Crooked. Againe the Straight are either Direct, or Oblique; Direct as in the first example, Oblique as
More-ouer the Oblique are either straight, or croo∣ked. The Crooked are sub-diuided infinitely, but the more vsual, and vniuersall may bee reduced to these heads, that is, circular, angular, wauing, and mixt, and briefly are all such as are not straight. But before you proceed any farther, my charity cannot forbeare to giue you here a cautel for pre∣uention of straying from my sense, and one error not met-with in the beginning, multiplies it selfe into innumerable. Therefore when we speake of Armorial Lines eyther here, or any where, I do not meane of them otherwise then as of terminations, or common limits of Armorial bodies; and when we say lines are straight▪ or crooked, of this, or that forme, I pray vnderstand that I meane the Armori∣al bodies which they terminate are such. For though Lines are the inseperable circumscriptions
of formes, or figures in sheilds, as of sheilds them∣selues, giuing them (at least-wise to our sight) to Bee, yet it is the body, or space comprehended which casts them out into the extremities, wher∣by they become their visible limits, which albeit we are enforced in flat pictures, and plaine tables to expresse by lines, yet in carued, or embossed ob∣iects of armes, no other lines are drawne then such, as the body it selfe so cut, embost, or carued, terminates our sight with, which lines shift with our station. Doubtlesse, in the Idaea, or mentall shape before it come as it were into act, by beeing painted, cut, or carued, those terminating, and tru∣ly Mathematical lines, abstractedly considered, are manifest, adhering (or inhering rather) without any possibility of separation from the conceaued Image. Whereas also the lines drawne in the former coats (for they are coats of Armes, very faire, and good, as well as examples of Lines) seem to apportion the said coats, yet are they (I meane the parted, and diuers-colour'd moities of the se∣uerall sheilds) but seuerall solid peeces, or faces of differently colour'd bodies, meeting in such a seam of separation (in my conceit of them) as necessarily produce, and present vnto vs such, or such a line. Neuerthelesse for more familiar perspicuity in teaching, I am to retain to speake as the vulgar, without daring to vse the more penetrating point of spirit, it being also not in the skil of man to draw a line (how admirably smal soeuer) without any la∣titude, such as the subtility of the Mathematicks
doth require. E. I am well satisfied. A. You shall be else for the honour of so Gent∣lemanly science, which iust Antiquity would haue enstiled Mistresse, and Queene of liberal knowled∣ges. For that in it all the faire Arts seeme to as∣semble, and euery Grace, or (as the LATINS speake) euery VENVS of inuention (not blurred with obscu∣ring commentaries) glitters there in open manner, with much significancy, ornament, and vtility. For albeit the sense be som-what abstruse, and hidden, yet, who (specially with any interest in them) can behold the renowned Armories of HOVVARD, TAL∣BOT, or the like great Worthies, who presently re∣flects not vpon the Bearers? or is not (so as instruc∣tion, or capacity want not) stirred vp thereby to virtue? Because (as it is in that most excellent Hist∣orian SALLVST) if FABIVS, if SCIPIO, & other heroick ROMANS were wont to say, that their mindes were most vehemently set on fire with noble thoughts, when they beheld the Images of their renowned ancestors, not for that the stuff, or workmanship had any such efficacie, but for that the memory of their immortal actions, reuiuing thereby, enlarged the flame of honour in couragious breasts; Then surely, as those Conquerors (for it is indeed the no∣ble temper only which can be apt to kindle at such obiects) were so stirred at the view of those dumb statues, what able man should not as fruitfully frō a coat of Armes take occasion to describe, and blaze to a yong Lord his own particular offices, &
expected habits of Noblesse? So much the rather, for that the pleasing aspect of Armories, and signes of honor in them repre∣senting some meaning or other, the spectators rea∣dily know not what, procures a delight, and so prepares the mind with a willingnesse to bee in∣structed. Why might not also the same able man repeat (vpon like occasion) the whole memo∣ries of his fore-fathers? shewing that these Armo∣ries of theirs haue these, or these Elements, & parts, were displaid in standard, banner or howsoeuer, in such a battle, such a siege, or seruice, that this or that colour, figure or deuise therein came thus, or thus, & well fitted such a person of the family, such a virtue, such a fortune in him, with innumerable other branches of discourse springing from such an opportunity, as from a root. And yet farther, if the Tutors skill would serue him to interpret the Coat it selfe, and to deliuer out of it those diuine, morall, naturall, & liberal notions, tending to shar∣pen wit, and enoble mental habits, O! how easely might he bring al Princely knowledges within the sphear of his actiuity? how easily auoid the iading of hopeful spirits with the torment, & rack of new de∣uised methods, (mazes rather) & saples documēts? E. He should greatly bind me to him that would giue me the copy of such a lecture, the bare men∣tion wherof hath so enflamed me. A. Vndoubtedly in the due time (that is, when by former necessary instructions you are enabled to conceiue) you may. Howsoeuer (as I said at first) my youth hath euer held these considerations
in Armories very worthy the study, and leisure of a free-born man, & the rather to, for that Armes are in a sort the onely remayning customary eui∣dences, or testimonies of Noblesse, now that ney∣ther Statues, Arcks, Obelisks, Tropheas, Spires nor other publike magnificent erections are in vse, neyther can bee recalled into practise by one, though most commendable, and noble example at the Towre of GREENVVICH. Our age therfore, affecting compendious waies of eternization, all testimonies, are in a manner re∣duced to this one of ARMES, or ARMORIES, which also are indeed worth them all. But if (as some ve∣ry foolishly suppose) the Termes, & vse of Blazon, which (as is already said) comprehends but the de∣scription of the mechanicall parts, were all; who would not then think but that a Nomenclator, or Musitian, that knew but the words most frequent in his owne profession, did deserue as great ap∣plause as our blazoner? which is as far from the thing (nor doth affection abuse mee herein) as signes from substances. This short excursion (Sir EVSTACE) I call mine, which pardoned, shall trusse-together all desire to exspatiate farther, and settle vs from hence-forth closely to our businesse, not onely till the intricate matter of Lines be sufficiently explaned, but til the rest of the Elements, and the whole intended ar∣gument bee discust, in proportion to the present vses. E. You doe not onely merit pardon, but many
thankes, for such a repast, giuen to vs vpon the way, and not by going out of the way. A. Which you shall the more grace, (admit we haue forsaken the Bias of our course, and run out a little) if you bee pleased to remember that our last talke was of Crooked lines. The Contents. 1. Of crooked lines. 2. They improper to Geometrie. 3. Are exemplifide. 4. VPTONS Blazons of some of our crooked lines antiquated. CHAP. 16. EVSTACE. WHat Circles, Angles, & the like, are in Geometry, I do already partly vnder∣stand; But what are they in Armorie? A. Heere are examples of the foure kindes of our crooked lines, with which Geometrie hath nothing to doe.
E. Are these their names in Armorie? A. Nothing lesse, for they haue other very
different: They are all parted per pale, or (to vse SCOHIERS word) mi-partie, that is, parted long∣wise in the midst, or perpendicularly parted, but yet seuerally affected in the partings, for which I referre you to GERARD LEIGH, and other bla∣zoners: Onely this I will note, that whereas the second partition of the foure is now blazed en∣denteé, Antiquitie (or at leastwise VPTON about two hundreth yeares since) blazed that raseè, and this which is with vs embatteled, hee called per pale en∣denteè, and not embatteled.
The Contents. 1. Another distribution of lines Armoriall. 2. Much of the doctrine of Lines, put ouer to their more pro∣per place. 3. The totum compositum of Armes. 4. A new deuision of integrall lines into Pertran∣sients, and Pertingents. 5. Saint OSVVALDS Banner. 6. Both sorts of lines described. CHAP. 17. EVSTACE. PRoceed I pray, for I vnderstand thus much. A. Lines by a second diuision are one in a coate of Armes, or more, which is a diuision, the handling whereof belongs to the Arithmetical, and Compo∣sitiue part. Therefore to set downe what sorts, and parts of lines are in Shields, and how one of them stand with the other, be altogether points of ano∣ther text, as where those Elements are made vse of, and the totum compositum (to weete a good coate of Armes, what good coate of Armes soeuer) is described, or dissected as in Anatomie. Neuerthe∣lesse for your farther light, I will not stick summa∣rily to deliuer somewhat more concerning lines Armoriall: which, first, are either Entire, and
Pertransient, or Entire and Pertingent, or parts of them. E. Which is the Entire Pertransient? A. The whole, or Entire Pertransient, is that which crosseth the middle of the Shield, and runns diametrically the longest way of her position, as heere in this example following, and such other. Heere I cannot but by occasion of this, remember what our countryman, venerable BEDE, writeth (in his History) of King OSVVALDS banner, which, saith hee, being of Gold, and Purple, was hung ouer his toombe, and (as I thinke) is the el∣dest authentick record of honourable Ensignes in that kinde among vs, and in my opinion not vn∣likely to be of this sort, partie per pale, Or and Pur∣ple, rather then of any other. This by the way.
The entire Pertingent is that which passeth from one side of the comprehended space, but not through the midst thereof, as the Entire Pertransi∣ent, which passing, or not passing through the midst, or center, is the true difference betweene the Entire of one sort, and of the other. The Contents. 1. Entire Pertingents subdistinguished. 2. Their sorts described. 3. An obscure blazon out of SCOHIER. 4. How Pertingents come to bee Pertransients. CHAP. 18. EVSTACE. HAue Entire Pertransients any other member of diuision? A. No, for they are single, pure, and immutable, fully answering in their nature to Dimetients, or Diameters: But Entire, or whole Pertingents haue, and are subdistingui∣shed in their longitude: For they runne the long∣est way of their position, or not the longest. E. Which are the Entire Pertingents that runne the longest way of their position in the Shield, without touching, or piercing the Center, and are Entire Pertingents of the first sort? A. These.
for they crosse not the midst, and yet are drawne the longest way of their position, obliquely shoo∣ting from the Angles in chiefe, and meeting in point base. Therefore both those Lines are Per∣tingents of the first kinde, and the partition it selfe is the onely one of all partitions, which toucheth all the points of the Escucheon, as you may see this doth. E. Which is the Entire Pertingent of the se∣cond sort, that shootes not forth the longest way of his position? A. That which shootes not forth to the full length of an Entire Pertingent, (as straightned by the narrow limmits of the Sheild in that place, where it is situate) can rarely bee found single in any Coate: But SCOHIER giues vs examples, as heere in a direct line, which (somewhat obscurly)
hee blazeth a Sinister, and againe of an Oblique line in this. which he (how clerckly soeuer) calleth Emmanchè
au dextrè. Both which lines are Pertingents of the second sort, entire, integral, continuous or whole, and passing withall from one side of the sheild to the other, yet not by the longest way of their position, as diameters: For if they did, then the one should bee partie per pale or Mipartie, the other Partie per bend sinister, as is most apparent, the longest waies of their positions being through the midst, or center of their comprehending spaces, the first perpendicularly, the other laterallie, as here you may behold.
The Contents. 1. The more essential differences of lines entire among themselues. 2. The quality of Pertransients. 3. The more noted properties of Pertingent lines. CHAP. 19. EVSTACE. WHat can be said more concerning this lineary element. A. Incredibly to much for this place. Let it therfore suffice in presēt, that out of the most spatious store∣housen of glorious Armes I sparingly afford you some-what, & rather as a tast then a feast. E. What then are the more noted properties of these Armorial lines? A. Your question is apt. For hauing thus in ge∣neral described the sorts of Integrals, or lines en∣tire, as wel pertransient as pertingent, it is secunda∣rily conuenient that I should instruct you a litle in those properties, wherin more essentially they dif∣fer among themselues. I wil therfore breefly shew you first the quality of lines pertransient, as those which are of most honor, & state. Pertransients (the chief of lines entire) do either touch some one An∣gle of the sheild, or touch not, none of them tou∣ching two, or more.
E. Which of the Pertransients touch? A. Or rather which do not? For as there are but foure sorts of Pertransients, armorial Dimetients, or Diameters, so the touching of an Angle, one, or other, is inseperable to all of them, excepting to one only, and to no more, for any thing I remem∣ber, which is in partie per fesse, and this Pertran∣sient (as you see) passeth in breadth of the Sheild through the vmbilick, or middle point, as an Entire Pertransient ought, yet without touching any An∣gle therof. E. What are the more noted properties (now) of lines pertingent? A. The quite contrarie propertie to the other. For as all pertransients (onely that one excepted which I haue already shewed to you) passe ye Cēter,
and touch one Angle, or other, & neuer but one, so no Pertingents doe eyther crosse the midst, or touch an Angle: But the more essential property of Pertingents is not to crosse the midst: Though in both respects there want not exceptions, there beeing a Pertingent (and but one) which crosseth the Center, as the Pile-line (a Pertingent also) tou∣cheth an Angle. The Contents. 1. Another diuision of lines entire. 2. An exemption of circular lines from that diuision. 3. A Pertin∣gent of a singular property. 5. EVCLIDS Ele∣ments not much more perplex. CHAP. 20. EVSTACE. HAue Integrals, Entire, or Whole lines, any subdiuision? A. They haue. For Integrals (such I meane as are bounded in the perimeter, or extremity of the sheild) doe eyther touch the Directly opposite parts of a Coat, or the Obliquely opposite, as the former examples partly shew. From which rule not-withstanding this arching
line doth differ, and makes a notable exception, for it terminates it selfe in the same side where it be∣gan, not withstanding it be not interrupted, but continuous, and entire. Which Arching lines are of two sorts, for they eyther touch an Angle, and touch not the Center, but withall doe terminate them-selues in the same side, according to the rule formerly giuen, or else they touch not an Angle. Of both kindes that one shall be enough to exemplifie the exception by, if it may be called an exception, which is not of the selfe-nature of which the rule is, the rule beeing ment of Straight lines onely, so as Arching lines doe rather exact a particular handling, and place.
E. What line is that which being a Pertingent partakes not with the common quality of lines Pertingent, which ought not to touch the midst in passing, nor determine in an Angle? A. Lo heere. E. What is this? A. A Line Pertingent you confesse, for that it goeth not the longest way of the position, but toucheth not the Opposite sides, and yet, (which a pure Pertingent should not doe) it crosseth the midst: And as the pile-lines (before exemplifide) balk the Center, but touch the Angle-lines, so this balks the Angles, but not ye Center. But were it set vpon the same Axel as now it hath, and extended the longest way of his position, it should one way be a partion per pale, and the other a partition per
bend. This line it-selfe is seene in a Gyron of od pieces, but neuer single, and therefore being in composition onely, I may yet demurr vppon the admittance therof, as an exception against the rule of Pertingents in generall. E. The matter of Lines in Armes doth (I see) extend it selfe far, and (as pertaking the subtilities of EVCLIDS Geometricall Elements) is inuolued, and manyfold. A. You may well say so, for that we haue al this while handled only certaine single, and more prin∣cipall Lines. The Contents. 1. Parts of lines pertransient, and pertingent. 2. Their more common causes. 3. And chief properties. 4. A line for euery day according to that of APEL∣LES.. 5. Syr EVSTACE stayd a while from analysing the premisses. 6. Casualty, & Fortune in Armories. 7. Blazon referred to blazoners. 8. Single Lines not subiect to that casualtie. 9. Double Lines diuided. 10. Parallels, Diallels, and Neuters. CHAP. 21.
E. It remayneth now that you teach me (if you please) the doctrine of the other member, or branch in your first distribution, concerning the parts of Pertransients, and Pertingents. A. The Doctrine is short, and easie, for such Lines haue one chiefe property, that they euer make an Angle in the sheild, as here: But being drawn through, they for the more part discouer them-selues to bee but parts, or begin∣nings of other Armorial bodies, by imitation, defect, or redundance. As, draw the half-lines or se∣midiameters of the first quite through the sheild, they beget this first mixt partitiō, & then (in the se∣cōd) by extending the cheuern-lines into the chief-points
partie per saltoir, is produced, as followeth. E. In this place therefore you make these semi∣diametrs to bee parts of Lines, which meeting in the Escucheon, and neere some part of the midst thereof, or in the midst it selfe, bring forth an An∣gle, or rather a quadrangular, or triangular Pro∣portion, as the place will beare. A. So as these parts of Lines entire (contrarie to the nature of Pertransients, and Pertingents) doe each of them touch his side onely of the Shield, and withal, either settle in the very midst of the Armes, or fall short thereof, or other-wise shoote by it, or lastly touch an Angle: which is a property onely seene (so farre as I remember) in a Gusset, or a Gyron, which Gyron is halfe a Cabe, or
quarter cut off by an oblique or diagonall line, as followeth. E. There is no part of this your last Paragraph, or Section, which needs not very particular de∣monstration, before I can be made capable there∣of, it hath so many foulds, for which I doubt not there will bee a time. In the meane season I per∣ceiue that this doctrine will affoord a line for euery day in the yeare, so as none need passe con∣trary to the great Painters precept, who bad no day should passe without a line. A. Heere then shall bee the period of my pre∣sent handling the Element of lines, so farre as they are Elementarie in the first degree, for you seeme weary. E. At no hand (good Sir EVSTACE) vnlesse the matter stretch it selfe no farther. But to let you vnderstand how I profit, I will drawe a Table or
Analysis of this which you haue already deliuered. A. Doe that hereafter when you come to the cloze, which now after a short straine, or two, will be presently. Now that you may vnderstand how casualty workes in all things, behold it spareth not Armoriall lines, which are cut off some-time, be∣fore they can arriue at any side of the Shield. E. Fortune (as the vulgar phrase is) which sports her selfe with the Owners, and Lords of Coate-Armours, may very wel make bold with the notes of honor which they beare: Nor abludeth it from conueniencie, that if men suffer her force in their liues, Sheilds and Armories should not claime a priuiledge aboue them. A. Of that maim'd, or truncked kinde, are this, and the like. E. What call you this?
A. Remember I protest against encroachment, but referre you for Blazon to Blazoners, the termes of that Art being of no vse in considerations such as these, which set not downe the things them∣selues as they are Armories, but by abstraction of Elements from Bodies, do giue examples as they primitiuely concurre to their making, which sub∣tilize the witte, and formalize the obiect: There∣fore to comprehend the Particulars of one nature vnder their more generall, subalterne, or other kindes, doth exact words fitte for such purposes, which wanting (as they are) must of necessitie bee deuised, and imposed, or the Arte bee lame in that point. Blazoners call that Bearing, or Charge in Armes, an Haumed, or Humet. But Single Lines are neuer subiect to this violence, or casualtie, where∣of wee spake before, but onely the double, which are either Parallel, Intersecant, or neyther. E. Which double Lines are Parallel, or fellow in Armories? A. Those which are such in other subiects, as in the Sphaere. In Armories they are these, & the like
which side one by the other without meeting ac∣cording to the true property of Parallels, which may in other wordes be called geminels or twins▪ E. Which Armorial lines are Intersecant? A. As Parallels are commonly Pertingents only, so single Intersecants are generally Pertransients, so in the former examples which I gaue you of Para∣lels, you see they are Pertingents. Intersecants be Pertransients which crosse one the other, and are these, or the like.
E. But are there some entire armorial Lines which be neyther Parallel, nor Intersecant, and yet are pairs? A. There are, as in the former example of par∣tie per pile in points you may perceiue, for there the Lines meet, and therefore are not parallel, though pairs, and yet crosse not one the other, and therefore are not intersecant, which considerati∣ons belong to the generation, or composition of Armories, and are there, not heere, to bee entrea∣ted off.
The Contents. 1. The Maister called back to english himselfe about the causes of some Armorial bodies. 2. A Can∣ton one of them. 3. A Pile another. 4. Syr EV∣STACES supposal of an abortion in Art. CHAP. 22. EVSTACE. SYr, I pray let mee call you backe to english your selfe, where tea∣ching the parts of Lines you said that the Armoriall bodies which they made were parts, or begin∣nings of other Armorial bodies, or deduced how-soeuer one out of the other. A. Your selfe wil easily be able to answer your selfe when you shall hereafter know what figures, and proportions the skil of commendable Armo∣ries doth admit. For what is a Canton but a Quar∣tar contracted, or abridged?
And this, as I take it, is an Armoriall bodie drawne from a Quarter by defect, or imitation, or both waies. E. How is one of those lesse Armorial bodies whereof you spake made by redundance? A. That may appear vnto you in a pile, as I con∣ceaue, for the pile-lines shooting on eyther side, & beyond the fesse or midle point, & meeting after∣ward together vnder the nombril, or base of the fesse, yet not extended to the lowest, or base point of the sheild, creat a new Armorial figure by redundance.
E. Of what Armoriall body seemes this a redun∣dance? A. Of a Gyron, or the like. E. It seemes to me that it may be by defect, as∣well as by redundance. For where (like nature failing of her end) these lines fall short of the lowest point of the shield, called the base, or last point, and clozing before their time beget this figure, which (otherwise) running Parallel, and equidistant from their beginning would produce a pale, so may this pile appeare, in the finall inten∣tion of failing Art, to bee a pale abortiue, or mis∣carrying. A. Sauing the honour of your wittie error the pile is an Armoriall body of it selfe.
The Contents. 1. The intended matter of Lines at an end. 2. All their sorts not regularly comprehensible. 3. The linearie premisses begun to bee recapitulated. 4. Complemental passages betweene the two Knights. 5. The Maister findes fault, and supplies the wants. 6. The soft-wax table of memory. 7. The necessary vse of certaine markes vpon the Slate, with sundry methodicall considerations alike ne∣cessarie. CHAP. 23. EVSTACE. THe matter of Lines is now, it should seeme, at an end. A. The intended mater (that is, to show how they are elementary to the lineal part of the facultie) is at an end. But these Lines of which hitherto wee haue en∣treated, are onely some of the maine, for exam∣ples sake brought hither, and which the SPANISH Herald very often blazeth by the name of Perfill
(as is said) or as wee say Purfle, Or, Argent, Sable, or so forth. E. Then belike there are more Lines of al sorts in Armories? A. There are more, & those not comprehensible within these rules. For neyther can Lyon, nor Eagle, nor Tree, nor Flowers, nor any other di∣stinct representation be exprest in Armories with∣out Lines, eyther drawne or conceaued, ac∣cording to that which wee haue heere-tofore de∣liuered. E. Shall I nowe recapitulate the poyntes of this as it were Geometricall Element of Ar∣mories? A. Very willingly, and as you go make demon∣strations vpon this Slate. E. First therefore it is plaine that Lines are a principal Element of Armories, in which they are eyther straight, or crooked. The straight are direct, or oblique, and againe, the oblique are eyther straight, or crooked. A. Thus far your memory can sustaine no re∣proach. E. Crooked are manifold, as thus, and thus, and thus. A. Hetherto the mute Slate shall witnesse with you against forgetfulnesse. E. Lines by a second diuision of yours are one, or more then one in an Armes. A. Show how.
E. O (Syr AMIAS) did you not adiourne the de∣monstration of that part to another time? and I am but your spring-water which naturally can mount no higher then the head from whence it came. A. You haue too great a memory not to bee dangerous. E. For all that you will not me thinks forbear to speak things worthy of table-books, and the next mornings meditation. A. Mean-while (for I acknowledge no such hap∣pinesse) runne ouer the rest of the lecture of lines, if you please. E. As ambitiously, assure your selfe, as if the Chair became my skill. Lines therfore, you farther said, were eyther Pertransient in the nature of diameters (and of those Pertransients you remembred no greater a number then foure) or else Pertingent, as thus, and thus. You also toucht some speciall properties of them all, handling by the way some other things, and concluding that Lines in composition (which part you did also put ouer, as more proper to bee taught in another place) were eyther parallel, in∣tersecant, or neutral. A. Here like a young Courser that hath no cer∣taine pace, you shuffle. If therfore you will render your selfe sufficient for the vnderstanding of mo∣niments Armorial, it would behoue you to spell, and conne them throughly, and often, and that you may do it with the more effect, my selfe will not
faile to giue you my best furtherance. As for the present, I will once more view the Slate, where∣vpon you haue cyphred your remembred parts of the lecture, and therein supply what is wanting, that you may haue all the passed examples toge∣ther, and in sight at once vpon one Plane, and by them (as by so many places of artificiall memory) both call them to your minde the better, and hold the depending doctrines the surer.
E. It is a singular good course, and a sure, for the soft-wax table of memory retaines not with∣out sealing, and nothing is worth attention which is not worth remembring. But why haue you noted some with Asterisks, or Starrulets? some with hands pointing? and others with trefoils slipt? A. Euery Starrulet showes a passing, or transiti∣on from one different matter to another, accord∣ing to our discourse it selfe, where were sundry branches, exceptions, and theorems. The margi∣nall hands show, that at the Escucheon to which they seuerally point, begins a generall comprehen∣sion of all the particulars of one nature, which fol∣low betweene that hand, and the next, and is a more light then in the handling was giuen. For of those Elementary Lines (and primely Elementall are none but the single) which we haue exempli∣fied, the first sort are Elementall, and considerable in regard of their forme, as straight, crooked: Those of the second degree are Lines considerable in this Element in regard of their position, or manner of placing in Escucheons, as direct, and oblique, or, as in the more, or lesse length of their ducture. The third, and last are lines considerable in regard of their pluralitie, and therefore worthely adiourned to bee discourse for the Fabrick, or compositiue part of Armes, or Armories, in which they mixe, and concurre to the enshaping of proportions and figures vpon Shields.
E. Wherefore serue the Trefoils? A. To signifie such examples as are occasional, and come in but vpon the by: As partie per pale embatteled (for so much therein as concernes the formes, or affections of lines) is comprehended within the Angular, and is not a sort of it selfe: So the two Escucheons which do immediatly follow the two Pertingents of the second sort, that is to say parts of Pertingents, are to show (as before they did show) how they become Pertransient. Yet the former diuisions hold: For all betweene hand and hand are in one praedicament of Armory, and euery Starrulet is the signe of a different mat∣ter: The exceptions, and incidencies beforesaid, being most aptly notwithstanding comprehensi∣ble vnder their seuerall heads. E. The Element of lines thus happily finished, the most beautifull Element of colours, doth next present it selfe to handling. The Contents. 1. Admired PLATO vouched for entrance into the Element of colours. 2. Why colours are elementall to Armories. 3. Armoriall colours two-fold. 4. The vulgar error of bearing in proper. 5. Seauen chiefe Armoriall colours. 6. The Maister doubt∣full how to marshall them. 7. Antiquities for the honor of White colour out of PLATO and SVETONIVS. 8. Rare scorne of humane pride out of colours, one very late of ABDELA the
Morisco Emperour. 9. National as well as perso∣nall respects in the vse of colours. 10. Two conside∣rations in the marshalling of Armorial colours. 11. IVLIVS SCALIGER bowld with ARI∣STOTLE. 12. The Armes of Doctor BAR∣TOLVS one of the first gowne-men which bare any. 13. Certaine scales of colours. 14. The diffe∣rences betweene two Authors cited in those scales, and the reason. 15. Concerning the place of Gules, and Azure. CHAP. 24. AMIAS. WHite (saith PLATO) is the fittest co∣lour for GOD. Hauing heere but na∣med PLATO, it seemes to me that I haue withall let in a great deale of light, and gracefulnesse, and therfore gladly vse that sentence of his as a garland, to adorne the entrance of this part of our discourse concerning Armorial colours. E. You haue done well, and I rise vp in honour of his memory. A. The beautifull, and vitall Element of colour is in hand. But before (eyther with PLATO, or any one) we define which colour is best, let vs not vnskilfully ouerslip the handling of such matters as ought necessarily praecede. You are therefore (as a generall rule) to re∣member
that by the word Colour, I vnderstand all sorts of colours in Armes, as well as those which are called metalls, as the rest. For gold, and siluer doe but in better stuffe expresse the tinct∣ures which they hold, and yellow hath precedence of white rather for the dignity of the metall which sets it forth, then as it is a colour, in re∣spect whereof it is not comparable to the chast, and virgin purity of white. E. Why are colours elementall to Armes? A. For that as lines giue them shape, or circum∣csription, so without Colour (as hath bene said) they neyther haue life, nor distinction. E. Hath the naturall Philosopher, who teacheth the causes, and generations of colours any em∣ployment in this subiect? A. What liberall profession hath not? but yet not in euery time, or place, and therefore not now, nor here, no more then their materials, as cerusse, lamp-black, vermilion, and the like: Because those colours are only for our turne which already haue their beeing, and are agreed vppon in common practise. E. How many Armoriall Colours are there then? A. All colours vpon occasion bee vsed in Ar∣mories, as the thing which is to bee painted doth require. Therfore all colours are armoriall in the largest sense, which you may easily perceiue in those sheildes, where the Charge being of seuerall colours (as a Peacock, a Culuer, a Cameleon, a Rain∣bow,
or the like) is set forth according to life, which as seldome, so it is of little grace in Armory, whose liking is chiefly of those which beeing principall, and Colours as it were of them-selues are withall most different one from the other. Of them (as the humors of this artificiall bodie) it is enough if we deale onely with such as are most noble, and vsuall, which are seauen. For that the bearing of things in their proper colours should be best, as it is I confesse somewhat commonly held, so is it a common errour, and but among the Commons, because those of the Vpper-house of skill know it is far otherwise, the reasons of Armes, and Nature being so different. A blew, or greene Lyon (which are as improper colours for that beast as can bee) are of better bearing then a naturall: How-beit if that vulgar conceit haue any ground, it is in the vse of the praedominant colour of a creature whose image is borne in Armories; as a golden Lyon ra∣ther then any other, because Yellow is praedomi∣nant in him. So that at most it can be said, That creature is best borne, or borne in his most dignity, which is aduanced in the praedominant colour thereof, which also I must demurre vppon, for I beleeue it not yet, and the reason will appeare elsewhere, for this is but by the way, E. Which then are the seauen chiefe Armori∣all Colours? A. I am troubled at your question, as not know∣ing which to set downe first, the order in naming
them is so diuerse, and in the march of Armes to rrespasse against true Marshalling is an errour which I am not willing to committe. To make Antiquity arbitresse of this difference will perhaps not serue, because custome (which hath domini∣on ouer matters of this kind) hath preuayled to the contrary, our whole speech being but of the chief armoriall colours. PLATO (laying White aside, as a sacred colour, and symbolicallie reserued to the seruice of powers diuine) leaues all the rest vnto vs for militarie Ensignes. Among the ROMANS it had signification of soueraignty it selfe, for (as it is in SVETONIVS) a crowne of laurel bound-vp with a label, or riband of white, and set vpon a statue of the first perpetuall Dictator IVLIVS CEA∣SAR, the Tribunes commanded the said lace, or la∣bel to be taken away, and the fellow to bee put in prison, as one who had therein gone about to erect a King, and so far as was in him proclaymed CEASAR; a matter as then high treason against the State. DOMITIAN in like sort for that his brothers sonne in law had Albatos ministros. tooke it very haynously, as if by the vse of that co∣lour were ambitiously implide a pretense, or right to share in imperial dignity, chastising it ther∣fore with HOMER'S
inferring that as many Kinges marr'd all, there ought to be but one, so that his Nieces husband meant to make one. Of these and the like were no end, and yet the present controuersie of praecedence in colours should rest vndecided.Which if any man shall despise, hee doth not know that nothing is of so smal moment (which I speake not as a matter for men to bee proud of, or wherein they haue cause to glory) which is fit for vs Mortals to contemne, whose most weighty enterprizes by a colour, a shadow, or lesse, are not seldome interuerted, or swaid, to the singular scorne both of humane wise∣dome, and of what their other force so-euer. We haue heard of a King who seeing the shippe wherein his sonne went vppon the dangerous ad∣uenture of encountring the MINOTAVR of CRETE, returne with blacke sayles, as it went forth (the co∣lours of victory beeing forgotten to be displaid, as was agreed) impatiently, and sodainly destroyd him-selfe, as supposing him to bee slaine. Fresh accidents are most forceable. Very lately in BARBARY a white skarcrow was ynough to start an Emperour from his imperiall seat, and make him to flye. Thus it hapned. In the late famous furies of that country betweene the three brethren, HAMET BOSONNE their cousin made head for him-selfe, and drew toward MAROCCO or MORVECOS the principal citty, not far from from which, ABDELA lay in camp, from whence a fellow being seen vppon an hil with a spear in his hand,
and a white linnen vpon it as a flag, the Emperour ABDELA thought HAMET BOSONNE to bee at hand with his whole force, where-vpon in al hast taking vp som of his Tents, but the greater part left stan∣ding, he fearefully ranne away: And what was this terrible apparition do you imagine? a poore MORE washing his napery, and for the speedier drying thereof vsing his speare to hang it in the sunne. Let examples passe: who sees not the naturall ef∣fect of colours? At the approach of light whose senses are not cheared? In darknesse who feeles not a kinde of horror? Haue the White of a delicate face, and the blacknesse of a NEGRO alike admit∣tance to our eye? or allowance in the minde? What innumerable affections are raised in the soule by colours, all admirers of beauty can tell, and I see not what the pride of life is more ambitious in, or studious for, witnesse the maruaylous valuations of pearle, and stone (chiefly for the various shine of their colors, their luster, or water as they cal it) ye pompe of cloathes, the ornament of building, and innumerable other: All which are vnto the blind worth nothing indeed, but to those who haue the vse of sight, a maine cause why they desire to liue and bee. Symbolical philosophy will teach vs wonders concerning these, and other maters. Who dares in TVRKIE weare greene, the colour of MA∣HOMET, but the SVLTAN him-selfe, or those of his bloud? He that had liued when red, and white in the like-colour'd roses were fatall to the royall fa∣milies
of ENGLAND, would haue beene very loath to haue encountred with his contrary colour vp∣pon disaduantage. White, and black long harra∣sed some parts of ITALIE in the famous factions of BANCI, and NERI. It was but onely a false feare which COMMINES in his eighth book writes that his FRENCH were put into by the white ban∣ner of a principall Leader of theirs, the same ha∣uing beene vsed by the MARQVES of MANTVA their enemie. The particular praeference which is gi∣uen to this, or that colour, aboue the rest by seue∣rall persons, how, or whence doth it come? That there is a nationall as well as a personal respect cannot be deny'd, and colours rather then other are vulgarly appropriated to special vses, as sym∣bolical to them, so far forth as a kinde of supersti∣tion is growne vppon the auoyding, for you shal seldome see a Bridegroome wed in yellow, or a for∣saken Louer walke in blew. To mourne in black is as nationall a custome, as for the graue, and ciuil to go therein. Who sees not what a religion there is, as it were, in the vse of colours? At a Saint GEORGES feast, a tilt, or triumph no man will usurpe his Maiesties knowne colours, yellow & red. Is there a gratious seruant in Court who will dare to mount any other Colour into his hat, then that which his Lady, and Mistresse best ap∣proues, and vseth? There is scarce any Noble per∣son who doth not affect one colour, and prefer it before another in his fansie, though him-selfe can render no reason for it.
In the marshalling of armorial colours two consi∣derations therfore I recommend vnto you: The first is as they are colours naturally, the second as they be of estimation in respect of things represen∣ted. In the first consideration white, and black are by all the more learned, agreed vppon as chiefe: So PLATO, so ARISTOTLE, so to conclude, all Phy∣siologers teach; But I teach not you with IVLIVS SCALIGER to taxe great ARISTOTLE, for saying that blacke was the priuation of white. These two colours, as they are most different, so haue they their seueral excellencies awarded, as the heads, or common parents from which all the rest are di∣stant in greater, or lesse proportion, answerable to their participation with eyther. In the second consideration, colours are to be respected as they represent other things, in which regard white hath not praecedence. This distinction is insisted vpon by the most renowned Ciuilian, BARTOLVS, in that little treatise which he lest vnto vs of Armes, and Ensignes, occasioned perhaps for that him-selfe had this coat-armour
giuen to him by the Emperour Carolus Quartus of whose priuie Councell hee was, and is the first of Gown-men whom we shall readily finde (as I be∣leeue) that had honor done vnto him in that kind, which was but in the yeare of our Lord God, MCCCXLVII. To swearue from his authority vpon greater reason, or authoritie, can carry with it the lesse note, for that hee was a Lawyer, not an Armorist, and for that him-selfe suruiued not the publication thereof, which was done by his sonne-in-law after his death, and therefore may seeme to haue wanted the last perusal. And this (for honor of the man) I thought to fore-warne, least (as may fall out) wee should in some things decline his iudgment, as not onely in marshalling the sea∣uen chiefe Armoriall colours, but in other things likewise, wherein (wee presume) his speculations were not beyond all others. Come wee now at
last to the present matter of their order, which ac∣cording to the former considerations, is among the Maisters very diuerse. E. As how? or among which of them? A. VPTON a Canon of Sarum and Wells, in his learned worke of Armes, dedicated to his Lord, and Patron HVMPHREY Duke of GLOVCES∣TER, cites them otherwise then GERARD LEIGH, who simplie hath the most, and best collections for Blazon, and (notwithstanding his Pythagora∣cisms in affecting certaine numbers, and his no good choise in matters of Antiquitie) doth best apply him-selfe to the capacitie of a learner, who is ignorant in other good letters. BOSVVELL in one place followes GERARD LEIGH, but IOHN de Scohier Beaumontois differs from them all, and other Maisters (as Sir IOHN FERNE Knight) haue their peculiar marshallings. The three first I haue thought good to comprehend in this figure of sundry scales.
E. But what say you? A. First, obserue wherein they differ, and where∣in they agree. About the place of metals there is no altercation, for all giue praecedence to gold, as to the more worthy mettall, but about the colours they varie: For VPTON assignes the third place to Azure, which LEIGH, and SCOHIER doe poste into the fourth: VPTON enstalleth gules in the fourth; LEIGH, and SCOHIER in the third: Purple, according to VPTON is fifth, but according to LEIGH and SCOHIER, seauenth.
In Vert, VPTON, and LEIGH doe accord: Sable is put last by VPTON, which LEIGH thinkes worthy to bee fifth. E. May VPTON, and LEIGH bee reconciled or no? A. The matter is to be fetcht som-what farther of, that is, you must first consider them simply, and as of themselues for colours, in which sense VPTON rather speakes, then as they are in Armories, in which sense GERARD LEIGH: and so, they two hauing their seuerall reasons, their seuerall mar∣shallings may be defended. E. How doe you consider them as they are colours? A. White certainly is in his proper nature most excellent, as being most pure and splendent. For it is plaine that Yellow hath som-what in it lesse pure, and is a degree (though yet the next degree) to white, and as for the third place which is by VPTON giuen to blew, and by LEIGH to redde, VPTON, who knew much better the reasons, and causes of colours, did see that a bright blew had more of white in it then redde had, & redde, though a very bright colour, yet participated more yellow then blew hath, yet because it hath most of the second colour, and consequently not any thing of White but secondarily, therefore did VPTON following the order of nature marshall blew third, and GE∣RARD LEIGH hauing reference to the dignitie of Yellow, as it is exprest in mettal, placed redde, where farre more learned VPTON putteth blew, which is
in the third place, as also renowned BARTOLVS, though not in respect of it selfe (as VPTON doth dispose thereof) but in regard of the aër which it figureth. The Contents. 1. Concerning the place of Purple. 2. VPTON in one respect preferred before LEIGH in the mat∣ter of colours. 3. Yellow not aduanced aboue white, in regard of it selfe. 4. Caesarean Lawyers commended. 5. Doctor BARTOLVS not diligent, nor exact in armoriall colours. In how many sorts their praecedency is considerable. 7. Sir EVSTACE spared as a learner. CHAP. 25. EVSTACE. I Am satisfide in this, so farre as con∣cernes the reconciliation, or reason of those two first Authors VPTON, and LEIGH in their first difference. The second difference is about Purple, which in VP∣TONS Obelisk, or Scale is fifth, but in LEIGHS seauenth. A. There is no doubt but that VPTON with good iudgment did marshall it so, considering his per∣swasion of their order in nature. For redde bee∣ing with him the meane, and equidistant colour
in the said order, betweene the two extreames of white, and black, what can bee more aptly placed then purple next to red? for somuch as purple hath in it a kind of deepnesse, which makes it incline to a degree of black. E. Doe you thinke that VPTON had as good reason for the other particulars in his Scale of colours? A. Altogether as good, considering his perswa∣sion of the order of colours in nature. E. Then you preferre his iudgment before LEIGHS in the first consideration, though it should seeme that euen his Scale also doth not meerly, and purely answer the said consideration, forsomuch as white, being according to nature, the most excel∣lent of colours, hath not priority of yellow, which it ought to haue, being of it selfe pondred, VPTON respecting the honour of the metall which yellow representeth, or in which it is represented, and therefore his marshalling is not simply naturall. A. Your obseruation is true, and by the leaue of Ciuilians (an order of men which rightly institu∣ted is able and worthy to gouerne the world) I will adde somewhat farther concerning BARTO∣LVS: who making his distinction of colours as we haue done, and first (which also factious me∣thodists would carpe as preposterous) declaring which colours are in his opinion most noble in respect of things which they represent, insteed of prosecuting the other member of his diuision, that is to say, insteed of showing which colours
are most noble in respect of themselues, makes some of vs doubt whether hee hath therein per∣formed any thing at all, or not confounded the se∣cond member with the formost. For comming to that point thus hee disputes, as light is most noble (saith hee) so her contrary, which is darkenesse, is most base, then in colours as they are to bee con∣sidered as of them-selues, (for that is the point) Color albus est nobilior quia magis appropinquat luci. If therefore (ô renowned BARTOLVS) white is more noble, (as you affirme) for the more nearenesse which it hath to light, then it is not in respect of it selfe more noble, but in respect of that more neerenesse (that is, in respect of ano∣ther) and so wee seeme to bee forsaken by you in this second point: For neither is light, nor dark∣nesse a colour, nor measuring causes of the dig∣nities of colours, nor was it the question which of them two was most noble, but whether this, or that colour. Yea, a curious sister might hazard all the first diuision by this, or make a fight betweene them, I meane betweene the first, and this: For if there bee but one rule of praecedence in co∣lours, as they are considerable in respect of things which they resemble, or allude vnto ac∣cording to the first diuision, then eyther white is chiefe euen in that respect, and to bee preferred before golden, purple, and a∣zure, contrary to the collection which hee makes,
or this is no apt resemblance which is brought by him of light, and darkenesse. But if there are two rules of such praecedencie, then certainly, colours as they are considerable in respect of others, are to bee considered after a double manner, euen accor∣ding to the first diuision, the one manner superior, the other inferior, and the second consideration which is of colours as they are of themselues is to bee sought out in naturall Philosophie, not in re∣semblance, nor allusions. But I may not entangle you at first with these subtilities. The Contents. 1. The Maisters great opinion of Purple. 2. The won∣derfull honor which Antiquitie had it in. 3. Con∣iectures why that colour hath now lost the praece∣dence. 4. The admirable beautie set forth by Hy∣perbole. 5. The Maisters wish for restoring it to the antient glory. 6. The two vegetous soules of Armories. CHAP. 26. EVSTACE. YOu fauour mee therein (good Sir AMIAS) therefore if you please, and that the Entrance, Qu, and Turne thereof bee yet, I would bee
glad to vnderstand somewhat concerning colours as they are in Armories. A. I affect not the maintenance of forced para∣doxes in matter concerning them, neuerthelesse before I entered farther I would gladly that pur∣ple were restored to the owne place. E. Indeed I maruayle seeing the best, and most ancient Authors speake of purple, as of an Imperi∣al, and most reserued colour, peculiar to the CEA∣SARS, and other Soueraigne Princes, how it hath lost the praecedence? A. You may wel say it was peculiar indeed, when in the phrase of IVSTINIANS CODE, the shel-fish wherein it grew is called sacer murex, and the crime of vsing it in cloak, or other garment by an imperiall edict dated at CONSTANTINOPLE equalled to treason, and the appropriation thereof to them of the bloud only, is honored therin with no mea∣ner, nor lesse holy a word thē Dedication, which yet is but according to the Analogie of the whole vse, if the colour were sacred, nay; if I forget not great∣ly, the State therein grew so precise, that to vse but guards, laces, or strings dipt with that die was ca∣pitall, though the great and glorious Emperour IVSTINIAN remitted the rigour of those Edicts made by his praedecessors. The reason why it hath lost praecedence is be∣cause we haue lost the colour it-selfe, since (as som thinke) the TVRKS haue come into possession of the fishings at TYRE, and other places where the Welks or Shel-fish grew in which purple was found, or
because though the fish bee not extinguished, yet the Art it selfe of drawing, and keeping it is vtterly perisht: For it is not (GOD knowes) that bastard die which is in Grocers turnsol, a mixture of ver∣million, and blew-bysse, or cynaber, or the colour in violets, but a most pretious, bright and admirable; which (saith PANCEROLLVS) is now to bee onely ghest at in the ITALIAN ielliflowre, & seemes not in some iudgements to bee that of the Amethist, but that of the Rubie, Pyropus or Carbuncle, or (as saith BARTOLVS) of Elementall fire, or rather of the Empyraean heauen it selfe. If the true, and TYRIAN purple were not lost, I perceiue you would not feare to aduance it in dig∣nitie aboue white and yellow, that is aboue the me∣tals in Armories, gold and siluer. A. I durst certainly. But forsomuch as those colours are in the Court of honour exempt from the name, and nature of colours, beeing the vege∣tatiue soules of Armories, and so reputed, wee put them apart as agreed vppon for the purpose of Armorie.
The Contents. 1. Of sable and white the two extremes of colours. 2. Their order in nature not the rule of their dig∣nity. 3. BARTOLVS wherein ignorant. 4. SCALIGER'S scale of colours. 5 which are the bast Armories. 6. The reason of Armes, and nature is diuerse. 7. Of the Roman Eagle. 8. The same imperial Bird with two heads found borne in-remote Antiquity. 9. The dignity of Sable. 10. Praecedence captious. 11. Reflections vppon the humors of the Time. 12. Of Azure and the place thereof. CHAP. 27. EVSTACE. OR and Argent, and their colours yellow and white beeing agreed vppon (as you say) and their places resting out of con∣trouersie, the dignity of mettal carrying it from the priority in nature, or excellēcy in that respect, seeing also that the true SIDONIAN, or TYRIAN purple is lost, though yet it retains an opiniō of royall estate, or Maiesty, what is your conceipt of the rest in the scale of colours, that is to say, Sable, Azure, Gules, & Vert,
or how-soeuer otherwise you or others please to marshal them? A. I will tell you. Nothing is more plaine (as I suppose) then that blacke is, as it were, the basis or pedestal of colours, and white the crown-point, or toppe, there being a kinde of leuitie, beside pu∣rity in the one, and an heauinesse, or obscurity in the other, white (according to books, and reason) being capable of all colours, and black contayning all. And if in this speculation we may faine a sur∣sum, and deorsum, an ascence, and descence, an as∣piring, and rest, a center and a summitie, the same must needs hold very well in black, and white, and in the relations which intermedious colours haue in their distances, and mixtures with eyther. VPTONS scale therefore (sauing in the praecedence of yellow before white for the cause before sayd) is best fitted to the order of Nature. You might aske now why the order of Nature should not also be the order of Honor, and Dignity. But if that were so then among al other incon∣gruities, sable as it is the basis, or foote of colours, so should it also bee the basest in Armories, which BARTOLVS (ignorant of Armorial speculations, for now I am compelled to go so farre) doth not stick to affirme. E. And why is not I beseech you? A. For your better vnderstanding thereof put VPTONS scale into a line, thus.
or if you will (with great learned IVLIVS SCALIGER in a philosophicall, sharpe, and clearkly manner disputing of colours) thus. E. I thinke it best. A. Grant now that there are two termes, or ex∣tremes of colours. E. It is graunted. A. Grant also that the reasons of Armes, and Nature are seueral. E. Be it so. A. Then, as in nature there is no excellencie but in extremes, and as the final cause of Armes is one principall rule of excellence in Armorie, white beeing the one extreme, black the other; More-ouer the finall cause of Armes borne open∣ly in the field, or else-where, beeing manifesta∣tion, where black for the solemne deepnesse there∣of is a colour altogether as far to bee seene, if not farther then white, for which cause also black, and
bright in composition are held the soueraigne superlatiues: our vnderstanding therefore must necessarily bee conuinced, that in the Armoriall placings of colours, sable, next to the metalls, is best, no Herald (as I take it) doubting that these the present Armories of the ROMAINE Empire are for such and other good reasons, according to Blazon, cheife. E. I could with a very good will step aside heere into a question, or two if you would allow there∣of, vpon occasion of this double-headed Bird, for that though you hold it so excellent, yet to mee (in the rudenesse of my nouiceship) it seemes monstrous and vnnaturall. A. I maruaile not if it doe: But this example
may confirme vnto you that saying which I but lately vsed, to weet, that the reasons of Armorie, and Nature are seuerall, in the one signification is lookt for, proprietie in the other. You cannot but haue heard the cause of this Bearing. The Eagle was the Ensigne of a Legion, and as you may say the Standard, vnder which many signa, or inferior (Banners wee cannot call them) but Ensignes did march, as belonging to the seuerall bands, or com∣panies of Soldiers comprehended in that Legion. The Eagle was also the Symbol, and receiued Hie∣roglyphick (so to say) or Armes of the Empire, which being diuided by the Emperour CON∣STANTINE (vpon the translation of the Imperi∣all seate from ROME to CONSTANTINOPLE) into the East, and West Empire, gaue cause (as it is in tradition) of bearing this IOVIAL bird thus augmented with the addition of a neck, and head, as looking to the two opposite coasts of the RO∣MANE world. Howbeit I do not wonder if to you it seeme vnkindly, and prodigious, hauing read in an Epistle of BEATVS RHENANVS, that some did heretofore labour the Emperour MAXIMI∣LIAN, to abolish the bearing of the double-headed Eagle for euer, as a monster, but that (as the Pro∣uerbe is) some were found wiser then some, wher∣by the sacred ROMANE Empire was preserued from being spoild by the ignorance of a few, of an Ensigne, or Symbol so renowned. I could rather wonder at this Shield,
wherein also is an Eagle like to the former, and found engrauen in the column of ANTONINVS at ROME, which column was raised long before CONSTANTINE was borne, or any such diuision of the Empire thought vppon, or thought more tol∣lerable then it was in the old common-weal to leaue old ROME for ALBA. IVSTVS LIPSIVS thinks that the soldier (for it was a priuate deuise) who bare this sheild, was of a Legion made out of two, for that two Eagles seem mixt as it were in one, nor haue I in present any better coniecture to bring, though I would hee had deliuered his conceipt what the Crowne ouer it might meane.
Neuerthelesse it should appeare, that the motion which RHENANVS speakes of, was not then first made, for the Armories of FRIDERICK the se∣cond, reuiued among the rest at WESTMINSTER and there written Emperour, haue it but with one head, and the same seemes alike antiently painted, or stained in the glasse window ouer it, and this was in the reigne of HENRY the third King of ENGLAND, about foure hundrerh yeeres past: Other take it to proceed out of the engrauers er∣rour, or that hee was onely King of ROMANS at the time of the Armories there cut, or painted, and consequently in right thereof had onely the Eagle with the single head, but afterward (the writing being more easily changed then the sculp∣ture) the Armories remaining still the same, hee had the title of Emperour added, as that which had accrewed to him after their affixation, or setting there. But I may not tolerate these or the like di∣gressions: You see therefore (contrary to Doctor BARTOLVS) the cause why Black, though the basis of colours, is not yet the basest colour, but shares with white, or hath the next roome there∣vnto. E. If you were marshall in the court of Armo∣rie, I perceiue there would bee some little alte∣ration. A. Sir, the mater of praecedence is captious, and I would bee loath to make a Grammar-warre in Heraldrie. E. Is there any cause of feare?
A. That note of a degenerous minde, is not too much mine; howbeit, no man thinkes it safe to offend many. E. Will any be offended? A. May be that some for their own Coates sakes will complaine of iniury done to their colours. E. Indeed with as much cause as a Poet may be challenged for his Idaea, by such as acknowledge their owne part of vice in a figured person. A. What may not men feare in so sickly a iudg∣ment as the worlds? But, if I should put gules after azure, what could you pick out of that? you per∣haps will answer, nothing. E. I should make that answer, for I could picke nothing out of it. A. No? were it not to embase ENGLAND, and to ouer-glorifie FRANCE, because the ENGLISH field is gules, and the FRENCH field azure? Or should I not doe wrong to Campes, and Parlia∣ments, robbing souldiers, and vpper-house men of their colour? would it not bee sayd I were mali∣cious? E. O poore construction! A. Poore indeed: But what so foolish that is not among men? But azure being the colour of the starred heauen, and showing more clearly then any of the other with either metall, and (according to BARTOL) figuring the aër, might warrant such a praeference: yet I could discouer another dange∣rous exception. E. What is that?
A. That in putting azure before gules, I should plainly preferre speculation before practise, the ciuill contemplator before the martiall comman∣der, and so renew the old Theomachie of HOMER, setting debate betweene MINERVA, and VE∣NVS, or rake out of vrnes, and cinder the antient quarrell of Cedant arma toge— which conspiracie against common quiet, I will not bee guiltie of for a colours sake. E. Then azure you could wish were fourth? A. If there be prescription to the contrary, I will not contend against custome. The Contents. 1. The great honour of Gules. 2. Of Vert, and Pur∣ple, neither of them vsuall in ENGLISH Ar∣mories. 3. The superfluous vnderstand not the value of time. 4. The iudgement of the places of colours is hard. 5. Colours in Armes to bee vn∣derstood of the best in their seuerall kinds. 6. A throne of Armoriall colours according to the Maisters conceit. 7. Why Gules hath prioritie of Azure. 8. CHAVCER, and the Lord MAN∣VVOOD for red colour in gold. 9. Why vulgar Purple is put after Vert. CHAP. 28.
EVSTACE. YOu haue beene very silent concer∣ning gules, and vert. A. They haue their Turnes, and I forget them not. Certainly the credit of gules hath worthily been very great among the ancient, and (I beleeue) more vsed then any other of the colours, excepting those of the two metalls: Witnesses hereof are all the antient lists, and rolls of Armories, in which there are scarce any two, or three together which haue it not, and this was chiefly (as among martiall Gen∣tlemen) in regard of the resemblance it had to bloud, and battle, there beeing also in it a kinde of glowing brightnesse like to fire. As for vert (in which word (as in the other of sable, azure, gules, are onely, and properly vnderstood the black, blew, and redde peculiar to Armories onely) is meant the greene vsed in armes-painting, or which ought to bee vsed, and is the very best) that is as rarely found in Coat-armours, as gules is often found: and yet Purple, aswell for the reasons beforesaid, as because (for so it seemes) the whole honor there∣of was transferred to gules, more rarely in our ENG∣LISH bearings, hachments, or notes of honor: Which is notwithstanding no disreputation to either. Vert in Armories hath alwayes had the betokning of a ioyous, youthly, fresh, & flourishing
state of bearing, and is therefore in that respect aduanced to the honour of a superlatiue, uert in or, being entituled most ioyous. I can apprehend no greater reason of the raritie, then the sterne, rough temper of the former Worlds, which de∣lighted not in amorous, or pleasant deuises, as a-symbolous to the vse of warre. E. Afford mee now I pray a Scale of colours, according to your particular opinion of their ci∣uill dignity, without regard either to custome, or nature. A. It were a curiositie of little vse, and I might doe it with as little allowance of others. For I should not therein doubt to call vp purple to the highest end of the table, setting Or, and Argent beneath, but (that wee may not seeme not to vn∣derstand the price of time) let vs bee compendi∣ous, and consider colours as they are in present Armories. E. Vouchsafe then to mee a scale which best answers both the order of nature, and the order of dignity, according to the which I may make a rule to my selfe concerning the vse of their prioritie, or posterioritie in Armories. A. Or, and Argent are yeelded vnto for the two first places, and (vpon the warrantie of such rea∣sons as you haue heard) I haue worthily restored sable to the third. The controuersies then that are, rest betweene azure, and gules, and betweene vert, and vulgar purple, and in the decision of those controuersies a doubt ariseth, which, or what shall
bee the rule to decide them by, authoritie? argu∣ments? or common opinion? All which beeing full of vncertainties, I will therefore place the seauen principall Armoriall colours, which are euery one of them vnderstood to bee the best of their seue∣rall kinds (as the brighest yellow, purest white, dee∣pest black, and so forth) vpon a throne of foure steps, according to my present conceit, and iudge∣ment of their order, leauing others notwithstand∣ing to their particular opinions, which I doe the more willingly, because I would not tire your spi∣rits in the maze of scruples, and not (were there any authentick, or set forme for ordering them) for that I would imitate the licence of the age wherein wee liue, in reiecting whatsoeuer stands not with present vse, and phantasie, and the reason of this my marshalling may partly bee gathered out of the premisses. The throne of colours is this.
Or, Argent, and Sable, admitting (in my opinion) no controuersie, I haue yeelded gules a place be∣fore azure. Not for that azure hath not more of white then gules, if the order of nature were the onely rule of Armoriall dignitie, or for that it
representeth not a nobler body then it (and that azure is borne out of white appeareth, for that white mixt there-with, doth but weaken the blew∣nesse, abating it to a watchet, and so to other de∣grees of palenesse, as the mixture beares) but therefore gules praecedes, for that true purple is lost, into all whose honors gules seemeth to suc∣ceed, is more often obserued in antient Armories then any other of the colours, participateth much of gold, or yellow, gold it selfe, aswell among the learned, as vnlearned, being not rarely called red, with the Poets, rutilum is a familiar epithete, or at∣tribure of aurum, and for our vulgar, CHAVCERS rime of Sir THOPAS, shall giue you an authori∣tie, where it is said, His shield it was of gold so red, And this common conceit made MANVVOOD Lord chiefe Baron, call golden coyne (as I haue heard reported) by an alluding by-name Ruddocks; and finally, gules therefore is suffered to praecede, for that most properly it resembleth MARS, and is most aptly appliable to martiall behoofes: That it is a childe, or neere cozen to yellow (as azure is of white) may bee manifested thus, forsomuch as to abate, and allay the fulnesse of red, we doe not see white vsed (as a colour too remote) but rather yel∣low, and that so farre-forth as some doe grinde a Chiue of Saffron with Vermillion, to make it the more pleasant, whereas white in like proportion
mixed, would dimne, and decay it, as yellow would spoile azure, and turne it greene, these in Armorial speculations seeming to be of their kinde, which in Naturall are by the learned, called And so, admitting yellow to bee the chiefe of Ar∣moriall colours for the metalls sake which repre∣senteth it, rightly is gules preferred before azure, in that it partakes so much of yellow. Lastly, I haue put vert before vulgar purple, for that vert is sim∣ply, and indeed, a colour reputed as it were of it it selfe, and comming such to vs out of his mine∣ralls, or materialls, whereas vulgar purple is not (I presume) found in any one single substance, whe∣ther minerall, or other materiall, but is made by mixture, in like sort as Orenge-tawnie is of cer∣taine quantities of yellow and redde mixt together. And this is the Table of Armoriall colours, wher∣in all respects, as well naturall, representatiue, or customary, so farre as I can presently collect, are best satisfide, which likewise I intend to follow, be∣ing thus marshalled, Or, Argent, Sable, Gules, A∣zure, Vert, and vulgar Purple. The Contents. 1. The, as it were, complections of Armories. 2. One colour cannot be an Armes. 3. Physicall disputes of colours omitted. 4. Atomies are colourlesse. 5. The old terme of Claurie in blazon. 6. Reasons
why one colour cannot be an Armes (7.) Examples to the contrary (8.) out of the Prophet NAHVM (9.) and Pearlesse VIRGIL, (10.) Of ALEXANDER Magnus (11.) AVGVSTVS CAESAR, (12.) TAMORLAN (13.) the antient banner of POR∣TVGALL, (14.) the Auriflamb of FRANCE, (15.) The old banner of ARAGON, with the me∣morable cause of redde Pallets therein. (16.) De la BRECTE vnder EDVVARD the first. (17.) The Maister easily puts by the poynt of these exeptions, (18.) of honorable Additions, (19.) Admirable modesty of old, in assuming Armories. (20.) The white Knight in IRELAND, (21.) The old banner of NAVARRE (22.) What wee are to iudge of a blancke or empty superficies (24.) No good Armo∣ries without metal. (24.) ROKESLEYS coate, (25.) Extrauagants, (26.) Metall the vegetatiue soule of Armes. (27.) Armoriall Harmony. CHAP. 29. EVSTACE. YOu haue beene bountifull to mee in this delightfull argument (wor∣thy Syr AMIAS) and greatly ope∣ned mine vnderstanding of them. A. It would require much more, euen as colours are Elementall vnto Armories. E. As how I beseech you?
A. In respect of their coniunctions one with a∣nother, by which (in proportion of the quantities of colours in those coniunctions) the, as it were, complexion of a Coate is made vppe, whereas heere the Armoriall colours are onely considered as they are single, and of themselues, and as single notes are no concords, nor proportions in musick, so single colours haue no Armoriall harmony. In which respect they neither are, nor can be in Arms, for of one colour onely no coate can consist. Wee will not heere touch at the subtilities of the Physicks concerning colours, nor dispute whither LVCRE∣TIVS his atomicall Elements, or seedes of things haue any colour, a matter by him forbidden to be credited, saying —colore caue contingas semina rerum. E. Wherefore then cannot a coate of Armes consist of one colour? A. For innumerable causes. First to maine∣taine the matter of the Elements now in hand, for if we admit such an absurdity as the subsistence of a coate, being barely a sheild of one colour (which kinde of bearing the antient Armorists called Clau∣rie, as I thinke of the clearnesse) without any o∣ther distinction, wee vtterly make voyde the whole doctrine of Armoriall Elements, at leastwise two of thē (that is to say number, & position) are decar∣ded. Then, for that a coate of Armes is an artificial distinct, & compounded body & can no more cō∣sist, or be of one color, thē a man of one Element.
And to be breife, for that a coate of one coulour is no coate at all, but a colour onely, or such as SCOHIER saith are Tables d' attentes, for the colour thereof beeing mettall, it is nothing but, as it were, all light, without shadow, or life without body, and beeing not metall but colour onely, it is all nothing but as it were shadow onely, and a soule-lesse body. E. Yet are there some examples to the cōtrary? A. Examples are not prooues, and I can call to minde some particulars, wherein this rule seemes to bee infringed after seuerall manners. In the Prophesie of NAHVM, among the bookes of ho∣ly scripture it is said, that the sheildes of the mighty were become redde, as some translate. In prophane authors, that of the ROMANE Poet (whom by IVS∣TINIANS imperiall rule, when no name is added to signifie which of the Latin Poets wee meane, can be none but incomparable VIRGIL) is wor∣thily most memorable, where HELENOR sonne to the King of MEONIA, stolne from his friends by the seruile LICYMNIA, and sent to the warres of TROY, was —parmâ inglorius albâ. ALEXANDER Magnus also (as it is in IVSTIN) in a certaine triumphant iourney of his, bestowed Shields of white-plate (Siluer-shields) vpon his Soldiers, whom he therefore called
It is farthermore in learning that AVGVSTVS CAESAR, after a victory by him obtained in the SICILIAN Sea, honoured MARCVS AGRIPPA with an azure Banner, — vexillo caeruleo. TAMORLAN the SCYTHIAN (if that bee any thing to the purpose) hung out (as some report) vpon seuerall dayes flagges of seuerall colours, Symbolicall to his designes. Wee may not in this number forget what ANDREAS RESCENDIVS is said to write, that is, that the Armes of the King∣dome of PORTVGALL, were nothing at first but a white flagge, till by occasion of a victory obtai∣ned by King ALPHONSO, against fiue Moriseo Kings, the fiue Escucheons azure were added. The celestiall auriflamb so by the FRENCH admired, was also but of one colour, a square redde Syndon Banner. What can wee doe lesse then report the Armes of ARAGON, as they were said long since to haue beene? to wit, onely, or, that is, a field, or rather a superficies or, not charged with pallets, as they now are Blazed, which hapned at such time as one of the Kings thereof dipping his fingers in the bloud of new slaine SARACENS, or (as others say) LEVVIS Emperour in the wounds of il Conde de BARCELONA, fighting on his side against the NORMANS, ennobled that yellow standard, by drawing vpon it those bloudy markes which now it hath.
Many the like examples might bee found, and I haue seene an old record in FRENCH verses, that at KARLAVAROCK in SCOTLAND in the time of King EDVVARD the first, EVMENIONS de la Brecte, (so is hee there named) bare Gules, and no more: The words are, Mais Eumenions de la Brecte, La Baniere eut toute rougecte. E. And do not all these examples which affront your proposition mooue you? A. Were their files doubled, and trebled with the like to these, they could not mooue mee, for of all these there is not one Coat of Armes, & so I haue no reason to mooue, or to remooue. For first the place in NAHVM belongs but to the description
of a dreadful conquering host there meant, and had nothing priuate but nationall to the ASSY∣RIANS. HELENOR in VIRGIL was but a no∣uice in Armes, without hauing atchieued any honorable note, and therefore his shield was White. As for ALEXAN∣DERS Argyraspides, who sees not it was a ryotous ostentation, no assigna∣tation of peculiar notes of noblesse? AGRIP∣PA'S azure Banner heere depainted,
as it was giuen him for a Symbolicall argument of man-hood shewed at sea, so was it but in the nature of other militarie graces, and signes of ser∣uice valiantly performed, and if these were yeel∣ded to bee in the nature of an Armes, then would one man be found among the old ROMANS that had a multitude of Armes giuen him as testimo∣nies of his heroick vertues, contrary to their very nature, vse, and institution, which is to bee but sin∣gle and one vnto one person, and that also to des∣send vnto posterity. Though I am not ignorant that for more honors sake an whole Coate hath been giuen to a Name as an augmentation beside the originall Coat, as that which in the quarte∣rings of the CLIFFORDS, Earles of CVMBER∣LAND is borne second,
in which notwithstanding it hath, and beares but the nature of a Chiefe, or a Canton, or the like ad∣ditions of honor in the same Armories, or Shield: No more then this empalement, which his Maie∣stie gaue to Sir IOHN RAMSEY, now Vicount HADDINGTON. The supposed flags of TAMORLAN at his lea∣guers, or sieges, were no otherwise any Coates of Armes, then at this day flaggs of truce, or bloudie colours. That the white-banner of PORTVGALL was but a symbolicall Colour, not an Armes, ap∣peares in this, for that then first it changed the in∣glorious state thereof, and came to bee Armorial, when it had those notes of honor added: As first, the said fiue Escucheons in crosse charged seue∣rally with plates in Saltoir, and afterward eight golden Castellets in a border Gules,
in remembrance (say some) of the Kingdome of the ALGARBES, wherin were so many principal cit∣ties, al annexed by conquest from the MOORES to the Crowne of PORTVGAL, or (as my worthy friend Maister CAMDEN admonished me) in respect (say others) that PORTVGAL was feudum CASTILIAE, and held thereof, the Armories of CASTILE beeing a Castle triple-towred, and of like colours with the others border, that is to say, Gold in Gules. To the famous Auriflamb of FRANCE, though recorded to haue bin sent from heauen (in a more celestiall manner thē the Ancile of anciōt ROME) as a sancti∣fied banner to lead the FRENCH hosts fortunately while they liued well, I haue nothing here to say, for that it presseth not the place with any force∣able argument, or other, which by the same reasōs with the former is not fully satisfied. The obiectiō countenanced vnder the Standard of ARAGON is
answered, & auoided as that of PORTVGAL: with∣out calling into the least doubt that the Ensigne of the one natiō was wholy yellow, & the other wholy white, til occasionally they thus became distingui∣shed with signes of Noblesse; Onely I may not ouerslip one obseruatiō for the honor of Armes: For if these two Kingdomes (which may also bee presumed to haue laid down their anciēt Ensignes, as foil'd, eclipst, & sham'd by the ouer-running of Infidels, & BARBARIANS) made such a religion (vpon comming to new heades) of taking vnto thē any deuise of Armes to distinguish them-selues by, that they had rather ingloriously aduance a single colour, then not attend an occasiō of worthily as∣suming them, O! who can ynough admire the tru∣ly ingenuous & liberall state of minds in diuine Antiquity? In the rere-gard, & as it were last hope of the battel, appears the Example of EVMENIONS de la BRECTE, which what-soeuer it meanes, cer∣tainly I deny not but that a Gentleman in exerci∣ses of Armes may vpon a priuate conceit (as de la BRECTE) not only paint his Banner & Sheild, but his whole Armor with Vermilion, or any other co∣lour, leauing off his own Coate of Armes for the time, either vpon vow, singularitie, or otherwise: And of such disguizes wee haue heard, and from thence perhaps at first descended to MAC GIBBON the title, who lately was white Knight in IRELAND, & is an hereditary by-name to that house of the GERALDINES, but could hee show no other, nor more significatiue note of honor, he would neuer among the learned bee registred a Gentleman of Armes. As de la BRECTES, so also was the
Banner of NAVARRE all Gules, & (as is written) continued such till SANCHEZ le fort, King there∣of, added those golden ornaments which now doe shine therein: But I can no more call the one, or the other a Coate of Armes, without extreame impropriety, and abuse of speech, then a plaine peece of Virgin-wax a seale, or a sheet of vnwrit∣ten paper a letter, or a maid a wife. E. So then if it fortune vs to meete with some other such examples, we are taught hereby to hold them but like PLATO his abrase tables, which are indifferently capable of any forme, till when, they are as certain embrions, rude proiections, or things in power. To induce, and settle which forme two colours are absolutly necessary, or more then two. A. Most true: and according to the receiued grounds of the knowledge, of those two colours one must be a mettall. Contrary to which grounds though there may be some examples euē in Anti∣quity, and of those specially where colour is vpon colour, yet enlumined neuerthelesse with metal in one part, or other, as in this,
borne by the name of ROKESLEY, & quartred by PAVLET, L. Marquesse of WINCHESTER, they not∣withstanding may passe like Heteroclits, and Extra∣uagants into a place by them-selues, as not triable by the general Test of Armories: For metal is their vegetatiue soule, and as no body can mooue of it selfe without life, so no Armories are proper with∣out it, or can be said to liue being destitute of that as it were vitalitie, and quickning clearnesse which from thence it borroweth. E. The number therefore of the chiefe Armori∣all colours; their order according to seuerall mar∣shallings, and your owne; how the differences are reconciliable; many other particular maters con∣cerning particular colours, and things, as I well vn∣derstand by the premisses; so in one matter which you did but touch at, I conceiue nothing except ye bare name; for thus you said, as single notes are no concords, nor proportions in Musick, so single colours haue no Armoriall harmonie. Is there then any Armoriall harmonie? A. First learne that there are elements, and so you may come to the harmonie the better, for (to answer you directly) there is such a thing, not one∣ly in marriages, or alliances of one colour with another, as they are matched in Armes (which show well, or ill, according to their distances, and degrees of lightnesse, or sadnesse) but also in the quantities, and proportions themselues, wherein they stand honored with no lesse diuersitie, then the countenance of man: Which as it is fairely
apparent in euery particular good Coate, so much the more, where multitudes stand together as in painted tables, rolls of Armes, and Liger-bookes, or Hachments, where many faire are quartred: The pleasing and wondrous varieties whereof, to such as did euer studie the secret, and reason of those concords, are not onely (as to the vnlearned) an entertainment of the eye, but a food, and musicke to the minde: The skill whereof beeing abstruse, but very demonstrable, some other greater Clearks may teach. The Contents. 1. Of the furre Ermin. 2. The strange propertie of furres in Armories. 3. Vulgar conceits about Er∣min. 4. The Coat of BRITAINE, and short Bla∣zon thereof. 5. Sir IOHN FERN'S conceit of Er∣min. 6. Of PLATO'S Hermes, and of Herma∣thenes. 7. Doctor red SMITHS fine allusion to Ermin. 8. GERARD LEIGH. 9. Sir EVSTACE reproued for Criticisme. 10. The Maisters iudg∣ment of Ermin. 11. TACITVS for it. 12. The natiue soile of Ermin, and most ancient vse there∣of in GERMANIE. 13. The Rationall soule of Armories. CHAP. 30.
EVSTACE. BEfore you altogether cease to speake of this second Element, I would bee glad to heare som-what of furres in Armories, and what they are. A. Honorable, and ancient, but because they all consist of more colours then one, and there∣fore want that simplenesse of beeing, which sin∣gle colours haue, they refuse to bee handled here, or are refused rather. The two principall furrs are Ermin, and Varie. E. Are furres neither metall, nor colour? A. It is said of the Planet MERCVRIE, that hee is affected as the celestiall bodies, with whom hee is; good with the good, and bad with the bad: So (by a kinde of Antithesis) the furres in Armes, are as metall with colour, and of the nature of colour when the rest is metall. E. You report a strange property. Princes, and great States, in Caps of honor, robes, and mantles vse Ermin, is it that which is vsed in Armories? A. I see your drift Sir EVSTACE is to make mee deale vpon a commoditie of skinnes. To sa∣tisfie you, it is the very same. E. They are commonly called polwdred Ermin, and both the white, and black in them are skin with the haires on, for I haue seene a royall satten man∣tle, the furre wherof was the whole cases of Ermin, their tail-tips (all that was black in them) not stitcht
in, but Pendent, and Dangling, and the Dukes of BRITAINE Armorick did giue (as I heare) no∣thing else for their Armes: And (to vtter all my little commodities of learning, or obseruation in this kinde at once) I must tell you also that I haue heard Pellions say that there is a counterfet sort, which notwithstanding is very rich, made of the soft white bellies of Squirrel, Mineuer, and the like, drawn-in, and powldred with little specks of black ITALIAN budge. The forme of true Ermine I haue often obserued in old cloaths of ARRAS, and the like Court-hangings, and were such as these: A. The Coate of BRITAINE in FRANCE is as you say, and (as VPTON writes) taken for Armes, because (saith hee) Ermine were much found there, commending the Coate it selfe for one of the best,
aswell for that it is of shortest Blazon (for in the word Ermin is all) is soonest made at neede, and beeing made is farthest decern'd. As cleare not∣withstanding as wee make it, all do not agree in the qualitie of the stuffe, or in this furre. For Sir IOHN FERNE (out of CASSANAEVS) saith, that they are called Hermines (aspirating the word) of Hermae, which worthily admired PLATO in his HIPPARCHVS doth say, were erected, by PISIS∣TRATVS the sonne of PHILEDONICVS, in euery three-way-leet, and Tribe of ATHENS, and engrauen with morall verses of most excellent sense: MARSILIVS FICINVS vpon this place saith, that these Hermae were certain squared stones in manner of a statue without an head, set in pub∣lick wayes, and dedicated to MERCVRIE: But they (as some more probably report) did resemble
MERCVRIES head, and were of HERMES (another name of his) called Hermae, as Hermathenae had their names from the heads of MERCVRIE, and MI∣NERVA ioyned, as their names are ioyned in the word; ATHENE signifying the same that MINERVA, as HERMES doth MERCVRIE; and these Hermae were vsed as well in the adorning of libraries, as sepul∣chers. So as in this hardy deriuation, euery spotte of Ermin in an Armes, should stand for a seuerall Herm, or shadow therof, turning thereby a painted Targat into a ROMAN Atrium, which containd the Images of Ancestors: Very pretty was that con∣ceit, which my friend Maister SEGAR, GARTER, prin∣cipall King of Armes, related to mee as Doctor RED-SMITHS, concerning Ermin: For (said he) see∣ing colours are resembled to planets, Ermin ought to bee Hermoys, of HERMES; for Quick-siluer (being so appropriated to MERCVRIE as it beares his very name) breakes into droppes, resembling Hermin in Armories: But wee that are no schollers must not (least wee should cum ratione insanire) sore so high into learning for a thing before our eyes, and palpable. GERARD LEIGH holds that the Ermin is a ltttle beast in the land of ARMONIE (so he soundes it) & is from thence denominated, so Ermin should according to him be Armin of ARMENIA; certain∣ly as I cannot controule this Etymologie, so among the RVSSES, it is not the word as it seemes, for they (If I mis-vnderstand not the booke of the RVSSE common-weal) cal them Gurnstais, so In our old English, Er∣min, signi∣fies poor, but aske Verste∣gā how that agrees with Armorial Ermin. as Ermin is plainly a word of another roote.
E. It should seeme that the propinquity of the words, Ermin, Hermae, Hermes, Armenia, gaue occa∣sion of those other opinions. Therfore I maruaile that none haue added that Ermin were called He∣remins of woods, & desert places as Heremites are. A. You must not (Sir EVSTACE) play the Censor so soon: PYTHAGORAS would haue set a fine on your head, and made you expiate for it to his goddesse Silence. The conicctures of Maisters are to be reue∣renced of beginners: And yet I hold your conceit not the most absurd: the word now vsed in Armo∣rie is Ermin, and as I thinke of the beast it selfe so called. CORNELIVS TACITVS shewes them to vs among the old GERMANS. His wordes are these: Eligunt feras, & detracta velamina spargunt macu∣lis, pellibus{que} belluarum quas exterior Oceanus & ig∣notum mare gignit. By them it is plaine that the choyce skinnes one∣ly were by those GERMANES pouldred with spots. They cull, or choose (saith the most pro∣foundly prudent Historiograper) and powder with spots, and not onely with spots but with skins, so as they pouldred those choyce skinnes with other skinnes. And this I take to be our Ermin. The place seemes also to point out their natiue soile, for by Exterior Oceanus, & ignotum mare, he meanes such countries as lye betweene GERMA∣NIE, & the Northermost sea, that is to say the huge vast Prouinces of MOSCOVIA, RVSSIA, and the rest of that icie world, whence all our excellent furres come, from euen as farre as PERMIA, which bor∣dereth on that Exterior Ocean, and vncouth Sea.
Thus farre haue you trainde mee forth to hunt the Ermin, whose skinne is not often found in ancient Armories, but in Cantons, or other additions of ho∣nor, and rewards of seruice. E. The Element of colours is then at an end, and wee are now to bee acquainted with Number, the next of foure. But before you passe the Musiue, or pleasant Mosaick worke of colours, as you haue beene very satisfactorie in furre, and royall Ermin, as in all the other, so helpe me I pray out of a spe∣ciall scruple. You said, that metall was the vege∣tous soule of Armes: Haue Armes any other soule then vegetatiue? as either sensitiue, or rationall? A. It hath a rationall soule, in a borrowed, and alluding sense, for as metall quickneth an Armes to the eye, so the reason, meaning, proportion, and apt correspondence of parts, is to Armes, as a rea∣sonable soule is to man: And now once more I must become a suter to you, that you would for∣beare to draw mee into digressions, as in the last question, which is meerely a part of Symbolicall Philosophie, and I am now content to bee thought not vnwilling to draw toward my port. The Contents. 1. Number an Element. 2. Demonstrated in a Per∣transient. 3. A diuision of Armoriall Elements. 4 Position or Place another of the Elements. 5. Demonstrated in the remooue of the same Per∣transient. 6. The rare effect of Position.
CHAP. 31. EVSTACE. NVmber, and Position, are the two re∣maining Elements, now that Lines, and Colours are discust, but why, or how come Number, and Position to bee of the Quorum in this discourse? A. As no Armories can bee without lines, and colours, (the first of which Armoriall Elements giues circumscription, the other conspicuitie) so neither can they want Number, and Position: For example: In a Coat-armour where there is but one Pertransient (which is the plainest, purest, and most primitiue bearing) as in partie per fesse, this line beeing a Pertransient, and not two, or more, but single, causeth a partition, and two colours to bee in the Coate, which otherwise should bee no Armories at all, wherein Number is most euident∣ly Elementall, yet so, as that Lines, and Colours may bee said to bee primarily such, but Number, and Position secundarily, for that Lines, & Coulours are as it were of the mater of Armories, but Number and Place are of order, and disposition. E. It is vndeniable. A. And as for Position, or the necessitie thereof, the onely drawing of the single Pertransient be∣foresaid ouer the field in trauerse, and not in bias, is the very cause why it is partie per fesse, which
line being once remooued, either vpon, or from her center, begets another nature, and blazon to the Coate. So much it concerneth to obserue how many things for their number, and in what manner for their position, they are, or ought to bee in Armes. E. What meane you by remoouing it vpon the Center? A. I meane the middle-most point of the Eschu∣cheon, from which if you lift it higher, mutation of the place, as here makes that which was a Partition to be a Chiefe, the Pertransient being turn'd by such a remooue to a Pertingent, so great power there is in position as to the purpose of Armes, which can no more Sub∣sist, or be at all without Position, then without lines, colours, or number.
The Contents. 1. A question mooued about Number, and Numera∣tion. 2. Cyphers in Armories as well as Let∣ters. 3. The more any thing is one, the more it is excellent. 4. Numbred things in Armory diui∣ded. 5. Finite which. 6. Indeffinite. 7. Infinite difference betwixt Infinite and Indefinite. 8. No∣thing Infinite in Armes. 9. Finite and Indefi∣nite subdiuided. 10. The odde number princi∣pall. 11. Euen articulate Number is best. 12. A reuersed Pyramis. 13. Which euen-digit-number is chiefe. 14. Fifteene, how the most of Finite. 15. Of the Odde and their graduation. 16. Euen not so capable of diuerse formes as Odde. 17. De∣liuered in a Rule. 18. Rare examples out of VP∣TON and the Gallery at THEOBALDS. 19. Rule defended against them. 20. Dignity thereof. CHAP. 32. EVSTACE. WHereas you say that number is an E∣lement of Armories, meane you that the figures of Arithmetick are in Armes, or the vse of Numeration onely? A. Numeration only, as one, two, or more of this or that kind, & yet the figures, or characters thēselues
may (I doe not altogether deny) bee in Coates of Armes, so well as Letters, or the like, though with little grace. E. Lead mee I pray into this other Reuestrie, or secret place of Armories. A. Vnitie is perfection, and the more any thing is one, the more it is excellent: But wee are to let that passe which concerneth excellency, and finish the mater of our Elements. Number, or rather numbred things in Armories are finite, or indefi∣nite. Finite are such whose number is certaine, as two, three, or more: Indefinite, whose number is vncertaine: Betweene which, and finite, is infinite difference. For though indefinite bee vncertaine, yet is it numerable, but nothing infinite can bee in Armes, no more then in Nature, for infinite is incomprehensible. E. How are finite, and indefinite subdiuided in their Armoriall vse? A. As they are in their owne kinde, according to which they are either euen, or odde, of which the odde are best. E. You will come within the verge of forbid∣den Magick shortly, which altogether workes vp∣on the odde. A. To the purpose (Sir EVSTACE) to the pur∣pose. Of what nature therefore, condition, or state soeuer Armories bee, whether composed of Lines onely, or filled with resemblances of things, or both, number is alwayes in vse, and makes one; Art marshalling that number. Of the euen the most
Armoriall, and harmonious is that, which decrea∣sing in euery file, or ranck one to the base point, produceth an Odde. E. Which euen number is that? A. The first, and cheif is the number of six, which (according to the description I gaue) decreaseth in euery rancke one to the base point, and produ∣ceth an Odde, imitating in Geometricall proporti∣ons, a reuersed Pyramis, as followeth, which no other articulate number can effect, for which reason also they are not vsed of them-selues in principall good Armories, but eyther with, or vppon other things. E. Why should Six bee the best of euen num∣bers? Or rather why is the Odde in the point base so requisite? A. For decency, because it falleth most aptly
with the figure of a triangular Sheild, and for that there are manifold, and worthy speculations in number, and position. E. What other euen numbers, or euen numbred things do admit the like? A. The first of digit numbers is Ten, as ensueth, which also partakes those excellencies wherof the number Six doth bost. E. What other euen number haue you obserued? A. Seldome any but Six, and Ten, vnlesse ac∣companyed with some other things, as in MEMO∣RANCIES coat, wherin with a Crosse are sixteene Eaglets: And I also thinke it a true Theorem, that no euen number is capable of those formes which diuersity of Position giues to the Odde. E. Which are the Armoriall Odde? A. One is odde, and One is onely best: next to that the Trias, Ternio, or number three, and so the rest of
the Odde to Fifteene: For I haue not obserued any thinges of one kinde in one Armes, not being se∣mi, aboue that number without some other charge or counterchange. But in some such manner you shal perhaps meet with a few; as I remember one in the Northeast window of the Cathedral church of BRISTOL, which the sacriledges committed vpon Moniments hath not defaced, and seemes both an∣cient, and honourable in the owner, for that it is there mounted among Benefactors of note, wher∣in are eighteene Lillies after a strange way, as 44.4.3.2.1. E. Which is the first of the Odde that decrea∣seth according to your description? E. The number Three, which being placed two, and one, and thereby cast out toward the Angles of the Sheild is called an Armorial Triangle.
E. Which next to the Ternio, or Three, of all the Odde decreaseth in euery ranke one to the point base? beeing that forme which seemes the most amiable, and comely comportment of things in one kinde, in one Armes. A. It seemes, and is: But from Three to Fifteene there is no number of all the Odde so happy, and that you may finde among the royall bearings of this our countrey in the Armories of the Dutchy of CORNVVAL, now a parcell of the inheritances of the Crowne. E. But why is not the euen number capable of so many formes of Position as the Odde? A. The reason belonges to the mysticall part, but I will shew it is not so capable, and giue you my rule thus: No euen number in thinges of one kind, possessing the whole field only, and alone, and
keeping all of them one state, or way, with requisite distance, can be capable of such diuersitie of formes in position, as the odde be. An euen number there∣fore cannot be disposed into a Crosse, or Saltoir, as the odde can, and is. But if the same state, or way of placing bee not maintained, then I can demonstrate in an example or two, that the number foure, being the first, & so∣ueraigne of square, or cubick numbers, may be ca∣pable of like formes as the Odde, as in the coat which NICHOLAS VPTON doth say was put vnto him at LONDON by an Herald of BRITAIN ARMORICK, or little BRITAIN, and which hath since I perceiue bin giuen to a familie in CHESHIRE, for borne it is as both by the painted tree of that County in THE∣OBALDS, as otherwise is apparent: The Coat is very rare, and of a strange inuention, to the which wee will adde for varieties sake another called TRVB∣SHAVVES
being quarterly gules and vert, foure phe∣ons argent in crosse, their points in the fesse point of the sheild E. The Coats though the number of their char∣ges be euen are very odde, & altogether such as any man would thinke were likely ynough to be excep∣tions against Rules so soone as hee saw them. But your Rule holds good against them, because they keepe not one state, position, or way. A. It doth, and yet the quality of the Charge may be such as that the rule may bee infringed in that point, as in this Bearing
E. How can you keepe it off then, from entering vpon your Rule? A. It could draw small forces after, did it enter, and no barre is commonly so general, which some particular, or other will not transcend: Yet this doth not, for when you suppose it is gotten in, it is kept off with the end of the former rule, for want of re∣quisite distance. And though in the last Armes there are indeed foure of one kind, wherein the number, and quality are great, yet beeing not dis∣pierst into the Sheild, they are but in the nature of a single Lorange, or Rhombus, which figure they produce, though placed in Crosse. E. I must therfore yet once againe entreat to know some litle cause of this effect, that is to say, why euen numbers are not so fairly capable of diffe∣rent situations as the odde?
A. The reason is plain: For the midds of the Sheild must not be empty, nor yawning, and in that respect, place things of one kind in Crosse, in Saltoir, in Fesse, or after any forme, or other of the honorable ordinaries, as in Bend, in Pale, and so forth (so as you place them armorially) and assure your selfe the euen number is excluded. If you de∣mand why the middle may not be empty, destitute or yawning? I answer, because that part being pos∣sest, all the rest may be ye rather vacāt: For the fesse-point, or millieu of the Sheild (as HIEROME BARA calls it) is the glory thereof, and dispierceth beams into euery part about, as the center, hart, or axell of all Armoriall beauties. The Contents. 1. Misteries in Armorial numbers. 2. Concords, or Discords in Armories. 3. Visible Musick. 4. Reasō must giue lawes to exāples. 5. The measuring rules of Concords, or Discords in Armories. 6. Of the number Three. 7. The causes of Armorial Beuties, Fulnesse, Distance, and Idemtity. 8. Exemplified. CHAP. 33. EVSTACE. THere are, no doubt, many excellent observations in armoriall numbers, not without misterie. A. Most true: specially in the finite.
For of them some exercise, as it were, an Antipa∣thie, or warre with faire Armories, when they only occupy the whole Field. The dual, or num∣ber of two is such. E. Is it for that discontinuance hath taken it away? or is there a reason in nature? A. In the nature of Armories there is. As the proportion, or disproportiō of distances in sound make concords or discords in Musick (whence it is that an Vnison, or Diapason, because of that proportion in the distances of notes, is called an eighth, Diapentè a fifth, Diatesseron a fourth, and so of the rest) so those, and other musicall proporti∣ōs it were not impossible to shew in Armories. In which there must not only be a proportion in the number, but also in the number with the figure of the Sheild, ye comely filling wherof with come∣ly arguments is like a full stroake wherein all the strings are sweetly toucht together: As there∣fore the duall, or number Two hauing nothing be∣tweene cannot be said to haue any distance, much lesse proportion, and for default thereof cannot decently possesse the whole Field, it is, by necessary sequel, a discord in that kind, & cannot sympathize of it self with perfectly fair Armories, vnlesse som∣what, though of a different sort, or conditiō be in∣teriected, or in company, and this as of it selfe, that is, where no other thing doth possesse the Field.
E. If you did nothing but runne diuision vpon this one ground onely, there were no musick to match it, for this is visible musick, and not onely audible. But are there not examples to infringe these, and the like considerations? A. Reason in these things must giue rules to examples, and not examples to reason. I stay not therefore at such, because the ignorance of many men hath checkt and falne vpon the breaches of rules, which to countenance with credit aboue generall grounds were absurd. I say, that Distance, Fulnesse, and Idemtitie (pardon these, and other words where the matter enforceth) are the measu∣ring rules of Concords, or Discords in Armories, which I would not haue you bee ignorant of, and therefore shall thinke it time well spent, voluntari∣ly to interpret my selfe. A Trias, Ternio, or the number of Three in Armory is second in honor to One, yet without Distance it were but a discord, as if two Croslets formee (as Blazon speakes) were in chiefe of the field, and a third in Caeur of the same, yet for want of spredding Distance it were but harsh, and nothing gracefull, for that the Armes are depriued of Fulnesse thereby, as you see.
Againe, let all three bee in chiefe, as heere, though the Coate bee warrantable, and good, as hauing requisite Distance in regard of them-selues, yet (destitute of Fulnesse in respect of the whole Shield) it faileth of complete beautie. And the
reason is strongly drawne from a finall cause of Armes, which is manifestation. The more extensi∣on therfore, or dilatation that there is of things in the Sheild, the more manifest it needs must bee, and there the dilatation is most, where euery point or angular portion of the Coate, can answer the eye with an obiect: In other bearings of that kinde there still seemes some-what wanting. E. But what imports the other thing which you call Idemtitie? A. Let things in Armories haue Distance, and the Coate Fulnesse, yet if they bee not of one sort, which state I call Idemtitie, I hold it a discord, and eclypse, let the seuerall Charges be neuer so noble, whereof you may make your eye iudge in this, and the like.
But Distance, Fulnesse, and Idemtitie are but causes of Armoriall beauties, and not elements: Therefore heere I will marke the chase, and change a side. The Contents. 1. Indefinite in Armories defined. 2. Of the terme Semi in Blazon. 3. Exemplified. 4. A second kinde of Indefinites. 5. Gerattings. 6. A third sort of Indefinites. 7. Semi, and Sans number. 8. Exemplified. CHAP. 34. EVSTACE. IT remaineth now (Sir AMIAS) that you would bee pleased to show what Indefinite is, the second part of the Arithmeticall Element of Armories. A. Indefinite, as also the word imports, is that whose number is vncertaine, and vndefined, and hath in Blazon the name of Semi, which, whether deriued from the LATINE verbe seminare, or from the word, which both of it selfe, and in com∣positions doth signifie the halfe of a thing, as in semisomnis, semissis, or the like (in the first deriua∣tions sense, for that the Charges are sowne ouer the field of the Coate as seed, and in the other, for that the halfe parts of such things appeare in the sides of the Escucheon, or in both respects, as both are true in such Armories) shall bee the
taske of curious Etymologers. The thing it selfe is as followeth, in this Coat quartered by RATCLIFF Earle of SVSSEX, as heretofore belonging to the name of MORTIMER of NORFOLK, and blazed, Or▪ semi of lillies sable. Another kind of the Indefinite there is, when be∣side the main charge, the Field is scattered ouer with other smaller thinges, which Blazoners term Gerattings, and is a bearing goodly, and ancient as in PERPOINCTS Coate.
or in any other the like, where the number, and or∣der of the Gerattings are not taught: & where the number is counted, there their order must be bla∣zed: But the vnlike rule takes place, where (without a principall Charge of another kind as in MORTI∣MER'S Armories beforesaid) thinges are semina∣ted ouer the field, and neyther set, nor blazed to be set in Orl, or other certaine order; For there no regard is taken of their number, and they are alto∣gether left to the will of Art to scatter them so in painting as may best become the superficies of Sheilds. Now as Indefinite is in Powlders, or Ge∣rattings, so is it sometime also in those Charges which represent no liuing creature, or naturall thing, as in the diminutiues of honorable ordina∣ries, whose pieces when they are not counted, as in this,
the antient Armories of the HODLESTONES, and the like, neither are they termed semi, but sans num∣ber. The famous Armories of AIMERIE de Va∣lence, antiently Earle of Pembroke, is thought also to bee of this kinde in the pieces of it, which (without declaring their number) the Sages in blazon vsed to terme Burruleè. I wil demonstrate to you both the kindes of Indefinites (semi, and sans number) in one Coate borne by the name of THORNTON, and quartred (as I remember) by the Lord LVMLEY.
An Armories very faire, and goodly, showing to you semi in the cinquefoils, sans number in the frets. The Contents. 1. Of Position, or Place. 2. Demonstrated in a little moueable Instrument. 3. Round bodies cannot bee reuerst. 4. Vse of the Armoriall Mill The rare effects of Position. 6. Sir AMIAS pitcheth down one of his Columnes.
CHAP. 35. EVSTACE. LInes, Colour, Number, thus prospe∣rously ouer-come, there onely re∣maines the Element Position, last of foure. A. Concerning Position it shall suffice (insteed of all other demonstrations) to giue you the vse, and admirable effects thereof in a little mooueable instrument of mine owne deuise. E. How doth this Mill show the vse of Position? or why haue you chosen to set round bodies therein, rather then any other of the Armoriall? A. Round bodies cannot be reuerst, & therefore in the turning no deformity can follow. The vse is briefly this. Open, or display the Instrument one way, and it produceth fiue Cinque foiles in Crosse.
Open, or display it another way, and they present fiue cinque foils in Saltoir. Mooue them clozed, and without displaying, if toward the fesse-point they tender to you
three cinquefoils in fesse: Shift their station from thence vpward into the dexter obliquity they are three cinquefoils in Bend.
Bring it about to a perpendicular position they are in pale. And yet a little farther into the sinister point, wee are lastly afforded three cinquefoils in bend sinister. Thus much for Position, the last Element of the foure: And heere (by your good fauour) I will pitch-vp one of my Columns. Deo gratias.
A Short Table of some hard words and phrases, with a few briefe notes. I Haue so nearly as I could, and euen as much as TIBERIVS CAESAR himselfe (who would not endure the word Monopoly, be∣cause it was not LATIN) auoided all ende∣nization of words: which hath mooued me in most places of my Booke to adde other more cleare, to inter∣pret by them such as may seeme to thee obscure, as thou may'st euery-where obserue: for albeit (as in my Epistle) I wish such a Reader as need not an Interpreter, yet I must not neglect such as I haue. Though there are scarce any words of mine (howsoeuer they may perhaps seeme strange) which other writers in our language haue not formerly made familiar, and those few which are not altogether so (for the which also I haue more then once askt pardon in my Booke it selfe) I haue heere for thy vses, collected, and (by conference with the learned) so farre onely interpreted, as is necessary to vnderstand my meaning in the places where I vse them: for to interprete them at large and in all their senses were to take SCAPVLA'S, or THOMASIVS offices out of their hands. My care is chiefly to haue thee know mine. FARE-WELL. A. APOSTRO∣PHE. An abrupt, or sodaine turning of our speech from one matter or person to another. Poets and Orators, are full of that vehement kinde of figure: and Strophe, and An∣tistrophe (in the GREEKE Lyricks) doe signifie other turnings, or changes of speech, and station, as wee are taught. GR. ANALOGIE.
The iust proportion, correspondence, and measure which the obiect, or subiect holds with the true reason required therein: An agreement, harmonie, or apt an∣swering of the Thing to the considerations proper therevnto. GR. ANALYSIS. A resoluing or distribution of the whole into the parts. GR. ANTITHESIS A contrary position, or an opposition. GR. AVTOMS. The word imports artificiall bodies made by DAE∣DALVS, or by any other of like skill, which moue alone, or houer of themselues in the ayre, without the support of any other thing. Such were not the Horti pensiles, or Hanging gardens of SEMIRAMIS, for they stood vpon pillars: Nor the ICARVS in OVID, or in SVETONIVS; for the one was but (as the fable of PHAETON) a picture of vn∣fortunate ambition; the other the true story of the break∣neck fall of SIMON MAGVS the Sorcerer, vnder the name of ICARVS, at ROME: Nor MAHOMET'S yron coffin at MECCA: for that (as the fame, or fable is) it hangs in the Temple, by reason of certaine proportionable quan∣tities of Load-stone which hold it vp by equall attracti∣ons. The perpetuall motion (when it is found) is such. ATOMIE. As Anatomie is a resection, or such a cutting-vp as Surgeons vse in humane bodyes at their Hall, so Ato∣mies are those things, of which, by reason of their inex∣plicable smallnesse there cannot bee any section. The LATINS call it Indiuiduum, and LVCRETIVS semen rerum: Indiuiduum, because it was so little as it could not bee parted, or diuided, and semen rerum (seed of things) for that they were (according to the conceit of EPI∣CVRVS) the common mater of all things. ARTICK. That which is of, or appertaineth to the Northern signe of the Caelestial Beare. So the ARCTICK Circle is the bound of the Cold Zone vpon Earth, and of the Nor∣thern constellations in Heauen. The whole North is de∣nominated of that imagined figure. The fable of that
Beare is famous among Poets. So the Arctick Hemi∣sphear is that halfe of the world which is betweene the North-pole, and the Aequinoctiall Line. GRE. * ANTARC∣TICK. * Contrary, or opposite to Arctick. Southern, GR. ARGO. The name of the Ship, or Argose, in which IASON sail'd to CHOLCHIS for conquest of the golden Fleece, and which by the power of Poesie is turnd to an Asterism, or a Caelestiall figure of Starres in the South-sky. The Armorists ARGO, is in my meaning, no more, but the bu∣sinesse of Armorie which is in handling, and in which Sir AMIAS is shipt, or embarked. ARRAS. Cloath of Arras, Tapistrie, or hangings wrought at the Cittie of ARRAS in ARTOIS, one of the seuenteene Prouinces, and at this present is vnder the ARCHDVKES ALBERTVS and his wife ISABELLA. B. BASIS. A word in Architecture. The bottom-part of a Co∣lumne, or Pillar, and figuratiuely the supporture, stay, ground-worke or foundation of any thing. BEVIL. Euery Carpenter can tell you what it is. Beeing a Squire, or Square of two equall pieces, and moouing vpon a ioynt, or pinne from the Angle wherein they are ioyned. C. CHAOS. OVID calls the rude, and vndigested first heape of naturall Elements, Chaos. In the Impresse, Symbol, or Deuise vpon the front of my Booke, I haue followed the common placing of the foure common Simples, and Elements; about the which, in so many Scucheons, are set the seauen chiefe Armoriall Colours, which men may obserue in the naturall Elements. In fire, yellow, redde,
and Purple: In aër; white: In water; blew: In earth, greene, and sable. The sentence is is out of some the first verses in the Metamorphosis, where it is said Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in orbe, Quem dixere CHAOS — The sense of the whole Imprese is plain. COCKET. A certificate from the customer of a Port that the par∣cels comprehended in that Certificate, or Bill haue bene customed, or haue paid custome. The word is dearly wel-knowne to Marchant-venturers. CONVEX. Conuexity is the out-side of an hollow body, as conca∣uity the inside. In a painted Globe of the world the de∣scriptions are vppon the conuexitie therof, and that face is conuex, the rest is bellie or concaue. CORYPHAE. The Chief, or principal in any kinde. GR. D DIALLELS. As Parallels are lines running one by the other without meeting, so Diallels are lines which runne one through the other, that is, do crosse, intersecate, or cutt. G.R. DIAGONAL. Is a line which passeth from one corner or one angle of a Geometrical body to another corner or angle of the same. GR. DEIPNOSO∣PHISTS. ATHENAEVS his great learned books carry that title, im∣porting a conference, discourse, or Inter-speach among wise-men at a supper. DIAMETER. EVCLYD (who best knewe) defineth it thus. The diameter of a circle, is a certain straight line drawne through the center, and of both sides bounded in the compasse of the circle, which cutts, or deuides the circle into two portions.
E. EQVIVOCAL. An Equiuocal word is that which conteyneth more sig∣nifications then one, or that which in the sense, or mea∣ning thereof doth equally extend it selfe as wel to one as to another. As the word (Armes) in our vulgar vse ther∣of doth equally signifie those parts of our body so called, or weapons, or tokens of honour, and with an aspiration (which is an ELENCK or deceit in the Accent) Harms. EMPYREAN Fierie. It is among the old Diuines taken for the Sphaere of the blessed, or the Heauen of the triumphant. F FOLKMOTE. A meeting of the people, which the LATINS called Concio, and in a more spacious word Comitia. For Concio was any auditory before, or vnto whome a speach was vsed, aswell as the speach it selfe, both which Concio signified; but Comitia did import a generall assembly of the people of ROME to make lawes &c. Or FOLKMOTE may be either. G GEMINELS. Twins, Pairs, Matches, or Likes. GOVRMONS. Great eaters; Gluttons, Norman, Gourmon, is a speach (I heare▪) by which the Normans are taxed for great fee∣ding, and gourmondize. GRAMMAR. Who knowes not that this word signifies the Art of let∣ters, and speach: Yet it is meere GREEK in the originall; but now so familiar in our tongue euen in the most vp∣landish countries as it need no Interpreter. Those who will perswade vs to turne backe to our old language for auoyding the loan of words, and phrases, may from hence learn, that vse makes all things familiar; Friuolous it is to wish (when thinges are dayly new) to
dreame of a certaine state of words, or speach; that is, That the number of ENGLISH wordes should be definite, and certaine. And what shall wee say of reuiuing old and forgotten words? That cannot auoyd obscurity but will induce it ra∣ther, our helps being fewer to vnderstand them, then the GREEK, LATIN, or other famous languages: It is our sloath which suffers so many of our owne wordes to liue onely among the Arts, and Mysteries where they are common∣ly knowne, like DVTCH coynes which are not current out of their owne Citties, or Territories▪ Industry, and Wise∣dome would that wee should not borrow till our owne store were empty, or worne bare, which is to our selues vnknowne for want of obseruation. Therefore I could wish there were a Tribunal, and Magistrate for wordes, that it might not be in euery witts-will, donare ciuitate ANGLIANA, to make wordes, phrase-free of ENG∣LAND. H HIEROGLI∣PHICKS. Hallowed Engrauements, or sacred Sculptures; as Hiera∣ticall figures are sacred figures; and Hierogramms sacred letters or writings. In all which words the mysticall cy∣phers or records of the AEGIPTIAN rites, and Philosophie, were signified to be comprised. HYPERBO∣REANS. Septentrional. Due North: Vnder the North-pole. HORD. A TARTARIAN word: and as (I thinke) doth import a Clan, Race, or Familie vnder some one Chiefe or other, which conducts the troup after their barbarous vsage from coun∣ty to country. HONORARY HORD is the whole company of so many TARTARS flit∣ting, vp and downe where they can find new feedings. That which is made for honour, more then for vse.
I IMBRICATE. Square, and bent like to a Roofe-tile, which the LATINS cal Imbrex. INLAYES. At St. OLAVES in SOVTHVVARK you shall learn among the Ioyners what Inlayes and Marquetrie meane. Inlay (as the word imports) is a laying of colour'd wood in their Wainscoat works, Bed-steds, Cupbords, Chayres and the like. L LANDSKEP. The same that Parergon, which in one word I call By-work; wherein though I render the GREEK Parergon ful∣ly, and truly, yet (for that it is not receiued in such a sense among vs) it doth not shew the thing. All that, which in a picture is not of the body, or argu∣ment thereof, is LANDSKEP, Parergon, or By-work. As in the table of our Sauiours passion; The picture of CHRIST vpon the Rood (which is the proper ENGLISH word for Crosse) the two Theeues, the blessed Virgin MARIE, and Saint IOHN, are the argument: But the Cittie JERVSALEM, the country about, the Clowdes, and the like are By-work. LAVREATED LETTERS. Leters bound about with laurell, which the ROMAN Generals sent to the Senat when their contents were victory, and conquest newly by them obtained. LABARVM. EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS in his first booke of the life of great CONSTANTINE describes this peculiar Standard very curiously. The common forme thou maist behold in the 163. page of my Elements. In the LABARVM these things are more. First the Banner was of Purple, where the pic∣tures of the Emperour and his Children were wrought in gold, and stone of wonderfull value and beauty; aboue the crosse-beam, or trauerse-staffe of the banner stood
those two first GREEKE Capitals of CHRISTE'S name which you may see in my Elements, and on the point, or toppe of the Launce, or Staffe imperiall, was aduanced a crowne of gold set with pretious stone. All in honor of his miraculous conuersion vpon the apparition of the CROSSE. Which as it consisted of shining light, and was seene abooue the Sunne, it beeing now past Noone, so there was very lately in our time seene by honorable personages, and others at Saint LEONARD'S by NEVVARKE vpon TRENT, the like figure of the Crosse aboue the Moone at night, in colour brighter then the Moone, whose paler body was betweene their sight, and the lower part of the long beame of the Crosse. M. MOTT. Is (in generall) FRENCH for (a Word) but in a restrai∣ned sense is properly now among vs the Word, or Sen∣tence applide to an Impresse, or Heroick Deuise. MYTHOLO∣LOGERS. Morall Interpreters of Poeticall Histories, or of the wise Fables of AESOP, which sort of inuention the GREEKES call an Apologus. GR. MIZRAIM. The Hebrew, or MOSAICAL name of the AEGYPTIANS, which I vse, the rather to signifie thereby those AEGYP∣TIANS that were of the oldest times. HEB. MATHEMA∣TICAL. Sciential. Mathemata are generally all sorts of liberall knowledges, but for their excellencie appropriated more specially to these foure, ARITHMETICK, MVSICK, GEO∣METRIE, ASTRONOMIE. GR. MARQVETRY See INLAY. N. NOMENCLA∣TOR. An officer among the ROMANS whose it was to call, cite, or rehearse euery one of the Senatours, Guests, &c. by their seuerall names. LAT. NEGRO. A black Moore, whom the DVTCH call a Swart, and NEGRO'S in the plural, Swarts.
O. OVAL. A figure round like an Egge, an oblong round. P. PERIMETER. The out-most line of any solid body, or other figure. The Compasse, or bounding Tract. PYTHAGO∣RACISM. In my sense is an imitation of PYTHAGORAS his super∣stitions in numbers; to the which PYTHAGORAS attribu∣ted too much. PHYSIOLO∣GERS. Naturall Philosophers; or discoursers of naturall matters. PHYSICKS. Naturall Philosophy. Naturall. The word Physitian we do vulgarly abuse (as we doe very many other) for a Leech, or Medicus, but not alto∣gether intollerably, because it is a trite, and a true saying, that Vbi desinit Philosophus incipit Medicus, where the Naturalist (for there the word Philosopher stands for a Physiologer) ends, there the Medicus begins; so as if an expert Leech must needs be expert in the Physicks (that is, in those speculations which concerne the workes of nature) the nearest word to fall with our tongue, yet not farre from the thing, was Physitian, for Medicus could not well brooke any flexion among vs. R. RENEGADO. One that renyes, or renounceth the faith, that is (in the receiued sense of the word) the CHRISTIAN faith. An Apostata: by which word the Emperour IVLIANVS for his speciall malice to CHRISTIANITIE, was surnamed. S. SAND. Here it signifies that famous place which the ROMANS by a LATIN word of the same signification called Arena, for that it (being the ground within an Amphitheater) was sanded ouer both for sure footing, and the sooner to drinke vp the bloud of men, & beasts their shed in fight for entertaintment of the people. Figuratiuely, it is taken for any subiect of Trial, as Prouince for a businesse. SYMBOL. Of all our ENGLISH words, none comes nearer to ex∣presse it, then TOKEN, so as we vnderstand thereby such a TOKEN, as in which there is alwayes some pourtraict,
figure, or image. Symbol (in my sense) is a figure, or shape which relateth to some cause, reason, qualitie, nature, or Historie, proper to this, or that Bearer, or family. To sym∣bolize, is so to beetoken, or so, and in that sort, to answer, or agree-with. Many frauds you shall read in PLAVTVS, plotted, and acted by counterfetting, and slie conueiance of these Symbols, or Tokens, wherein there was euer some image, or other. So the Symbol of AMPHITRVON in that Tragicomedie was, Sol cum quadrigis, The Sunne in his Chariot drawne with foure horse, PYRGOPOLINICES, the bragging Soldier, had his owne louely selfe with great Decorum, drawne in his Signet for a Symbol. Symbolical Philosophie therefore is that kinde of learning, and wis∣dome, which knowing the causes, and proprieties of of things naturall, and supernaturall, doth teach how to make, or to expound those mystical, and artificial bodies, called Symbols, of what kinde soeuer. SKELETON. Is that which the vulgar call an Anatomie: Skeleton is the whole Fabrick, or dry frame of humane Bones. The dry carcasse of a man, or woman, without Arteries, Mus∣cles, or other naturall appurtenances. Skeletos in GREEKE is bony, or dry as a Bone. SVRCOAT. A Coate of Armes to were ouer Armour. T. TABERD. VERSTEGAN'S words in his antient ENGLISH Alphabet are these. A Tabert, anciently a short gowne, that reached no further then to the mid-legge, In ENGLAND it is now the name onely of an Heralds Coate. THOLES. Places in Temples where Donaries, and such gifts as are presented there, be hung vp. FINIS. Erratata. In my Epistle to the Reader, for Haeroick, read Heroick. In Maister Hollands Sonnet line. 8 for thou art, read, that art. Pag. 55. l. 17. dele in p. 56. l 23. for frailty, read fraily. P. 144 the strings of Colours false placed, the highest for lowest. p. 148. The Cutter hath in the Schu∣cheon for S. put A. & for V. put O. The Coat of the Duchie of Con∣wall, is, Sable, fifteene Besants. 54.3 2.1. p. 177. for Heremins, read Eremins, & for Heremites, Eremites. p. 187. for Lorange, r. Lozange.
A TABLE OF MATTERS, THOSE PRIN∣cipally which are not in the Contents of the Chapters. A. ABstractiue considerati∣ons in Armories. pag. 79 Antiquity not the onely ar∣bitresse of Armorial co∣lours. p. 128. Antiquity in nouelty. p. 52. Armorie a Gentlemanly sci∣ence. p. 91. Armorie a word of large content. p. 6. Armories haue their certain principles. p. 3. Armoriall markes described. pag. 6. Armories very antient. p. 9. whē they grew to a perfecti∣on. p. 10. are absolute Sym∣bolicall bodyes. p. 53. Arguments in antient GER∣MAN Armories. p. 30. Armories not the meer worke of Art, p. 60. mentall, or actuall, p. 80, their notions sharpen wit. p. 91. the onely remaining euidences of Nobilitie. p. 92. Auriflamb of FRANCE. p. 166. B. Banner of CONSTANTINE'S standard. Table of words, in LABARVM. BARTOL wrote not exactly of Armorial colours. p. 139 Barbarous people, and their notes. p. 20. wore painted Armes. p. 34. Bearing in proper not the best kinde of bearing. p. 127. Beauties Armoriall. p. 193. Blazon blazed. p. 64. Black the basis of colours, p. 149. Black sailes tragicall. p. 129. Blew Shields. p. 23. Blew colour symbolicall to what. p. 131. Bodies Armorial. pag. 115. 116. 117. BRITANS painted. p. 131. lesse barbarous then CAESAR writes of them. p. 27. their Chariot-fights. p. 23. C. Censors deseruing censure. p. 53. Center of morall life. p. 55. CHRISTS Church in CAN∣TERB. shields there. p. 15. 66. CHRIST'S appearing to CON∣STANTINE. p. 73. Coates of Arms cannot con∣sist of one colour. p. 159. Colour an Element Armo∣rial.
p. 126. vital, and beau∣tifull, p 125. Colours Armoriall seauen principall. p. 127. 157. Colours without metal, a bo∣dy without soule. pa. 160. colours strangely affect the soule. p. 130. 131. A two-fold consideration of colours. p. 132. Gules and Azure examined. p. 136. Of Purple. 138. 140. 141. 153. of Sable. p. 144. of Vert. 152. captious points about colours. pag. 151. a treble respect in their marshalling. p. 157. Contraries haue the same rule. p. 22. Continent, and content in Armes what. p. 64. 70. Crosses, CHRISTIAN Sym∣bols. p. 39. 72. 73. D. Deuises heroick in HOMER not Armorial. p. 9. Descriue, a Terme of royall blazon. p. 64. Demonstration deales vpon certainties. p. 77. Diameters Armorial. p. 120 Diuinatiōs of the author. 51 Distance armorial what. 190 Discords in Armories. ibid. Diminutiues of honorable Ordinaries. p. 195. Double-headed Eagle mon∣strous in nature but not in Armes. p 146. 147. Dragons heads for helmets. p. 37. E. Eagle in the MEXICAIN En∣signe. p. 48. Elements of Armories, what. p. 82. and how many. p. 83. Elements Armorial prima∣rie, and secundany. p. 177. Elements abstract from bo∣dies. p. 112. Elementary discours in Ar∣mory concernes not char∣ges, p. 48. Empalement giuen for ho∣nor, p. 165. Empire symbolised by white colour. p. 128. Ensignements in general. 50 Ensignements there, where any Religion, or Gouern∣ment. p. 48▪ Ermin. 171▪ their true forme 172. skins of beasts. p. 175. Euen numbers in Arms. 181 Extrauagants armorial. 168 F. Fabrick of a rare shield in PAVLS. p. 69. Final cause of Armes. p. 143. Fifteene the most of odde Armorial numbers. 183. Finites in Armories. p. 180. Fingers dipt in bloud, vsed for penicills. p. 161.
Flaggs of TAMOR LANE. 165. Formes of Shields. 65. 66. 67 Foure in Armories. p. 185. Furres Armorial. p. 171. Fulnesse in Arms, what. 190 G. Gentlemen in the largest sense. p. 6. 63. GERARD LEIGH rightly iud∣ged of. p. 134. Saint GEORGES Armes for CONSTANTINE'S. p. 73. Glory, CAESARS goddesse. 27 God, first author of Armo∣ries. pag. 7. his holy name vindicated of late by Par∣lament. pag. 55. Gules familiar in Antiqui∣tie. p. 152. H. Hanging Gardens. Table of words, in AVTOMS. Harmonie Armorial p. 169. HENRY our most noble Prince. p. 68. Herms, and Hermathenes. pag. 173. Heteroclyte Armorial. 168 HODLESTONE'S Coat. p. 196. Honorarie Targats. 67. 69. Humane image on a Shield. pag. 38. I. ICARVSSES two. Table of words, in AVTOMS. Idemtitie In Armes, what. pag. 190. Ignorance falls vpon breach of rules. p. 190. Imitation no cause of En∣signements. p. 46. Improper to call a single co∣lour a Coate. p. 168. Imprese of the author ex∣pounded. Table of words in CHAOS. Indefinits Armorial. p. 180. 193. 194. 195. Inlanders of old BRITAIN sauage. p. 29. Intersecant lines in Armo∣rie. p. 114. K. Kings of COLEIN, and their Armories. p. 15. Knighthood coniecturallie in C. TACITVS. p. 30. L. Laterall Lines. p. 101. Lines an Element Armorial. p. 85. their first sorts. 87. 88. doubly considered. pag. 89. foure crooked sorts. p. 93. considered againe in their number. p. 96. and longi∣tude. p. 97. 98. Lines of most honor, and state, which. p. 102. parts of lines, p. 108. double, or two-fold lines diuided in∣to three sorts. p. 112. ex∣traregular. p. 119. Lions in the Coates of WALES. p. 77.
Lists proper to enter a lear∣ner. p. 62. Local cause of Armories. 47. Loue of honor auailable to high designes. p. 40. M MAC GIBBON, white Knight of MOVNSTER. p. 167. Marcks of Merchants. p. 22. Manifestation a finall cause of Armes. p. 192. MAHOMETS hanging Coffin. Table in AVTOMS. Many Kings marre al. 129. Marriages of colours. p. 169. Materials of Armories col∣lected by Art. p. 61. MEXICO foūded by oracle. 47 Metal without colour like a bodie without soule. p. 160. Metal the vegetatiue soule of Armes. p. 168. Middle of the sheild not to be vacant. p. 188. MOSAICK or MVSIVE works. pag. 176. MORTIMER of Norfolk. 194 Mysteries of honor not to bee contemned for the abuse. 55 N Natural Analogie. p. 17. Natures Heraldrie. p. 13. Natures Maister-peices. 12. NORTH, Seminarie of new plantations. p. 46. Notion of Ensignement na∣tural. p. 12. Number an Element Ar∣morial. p. 177. of euen, and odde. p. 185. O Obseruation the key of these Elements. p. 57. One onely BRITAN of note ta∣ken in both IVLIVS CAE∣SAR'S invasions. p. 27. Oldest Record of ENGLISH bearings. p. 97. One Armes to one man. 164. Od nūbers in Armories. 181 Outward personall Markes before NOAH. p. 50. P Paintings of AGATHYRSI∣ANS▪ p. 24. and of other rude nations. ibid. Parallels in Armorie. p. 123. Praecedency of Armorial Colours. p. 137. Praedicaments of Colours Armorial. p. 124. PERPOINCTS Coat. p. 195. Pertingent line of a rare kinde. p. 106. Pertransients only 4. p. 103. Perfection in vnity. p 180. Proportions Armorial. 189. Position an Element of Armories. p. 178. Published workes not publi∣shed, which p. 85. Q Quadruple number. p 83. Quicksiluer drops resembled by Destor SMYTH, called Doctor red SMYTH p. 177
R Rainbow, after the floud▪ 50 Rainbow in an INDIAN sheild. p: 45 Reason wherin to suspect IV∣LIVS CAESARS reports. p. 28 Reason of Armes, and na∣ture not the same. p. 143 Religion in assuming notes of honor. p. 167 Rites of AEGYPTIANS how recorded. Table, in HIERO∣GLYPHICKS. Rite of first taking Armes in GERMANIE. p 30 Rome to be left for ALBA in∣tolerable. p. 148 S Salad roial, or BELIAL. p. 54 Satyr no fit reformer of Armes. p. 57 Scale of colours according to seueral authors. p. 135 Secret fountaine of true Armories. p. 18 Semi in Armes. p. 193 SEMIRAMIS▪ her Gardens. Table of words in AVTOMS. Ship in heauen. Table of words, in ARGO. SIMON MAGVS an ICARVS. Table, in AVTOMS. Single colour constitutes no Armories. p. 155 Slate a table of recapitulati∣on. p. 123 Studies of honour enlumen the soule. p. 54 Symbolical images in Scrip∣ture. p. 41 V Vegetatiue soules of Ar∣morie. p. 142 Vert in Armories. p. 152 Virtues ualue in it self. p. 56 Vniuersality of ensignements. p. 60. Volumns decaied cause of great obscurity. p. 58. Vse of Recapitulation. p. 123. W Wainscoat workes: Table of words in INLAYES. White colour. p. 125 White capable of al colours. p. 144. symbolical to things diuine. 128 Wishes for an HOLY WARR. p. 40 Wonderful things of Arms in the INDIES. p. 42. 44. 45. Words like DVTCH coynes. Table, in GRAMMAR. Words need a Magistrate. ibid. Y Yellow haires of the BRI∣TANS. p. 26 FINIS.
