3608.5 99840416 4919
VIRGINALIA OR SPIRITVALL SONNETS in prayse of the most Glorious VIRGIN MARIE, vpon euerie seuerall Title of her Litanies of Loreto: All or most part of the principall passages therein confirmed by the euident testi∣monies of the ancient Fathers, to preuent the obiections of such, as vsually detract from her deserued prayses. By I. B. What is more noble then the Mother of God; what more glorious then she, whome Glorie hath chosen? S. Ambr. lib. 2. de Virg. Printed with Licence. 1632.
A Catalogue of such Fathers, as hereafter are alleadged; togeather with the age, they liued in. Iustinus Martyr, liued Anno Domini 150. Origenes. 130. Gregorius Neocaesariensis Thaumaturgus. 260. Methodius Tyri Episcopus. 260. Athanasius. 340. Ambrosius. 370. Ephrem Syrus. 370. Gregorius Nazianzenus. 380. Epiphanius. 380. Gregorius Nyssenus. 380. Hieronymus. 390. Ruffinus. 390. Augustinus. 400. Chrysostomus. 400. Sophronius Hierosolymitanus senior. 400. Proclus Constantinopolitanus. 430. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. 430. Petrus Chrysologus. 440. Leo Magnus. 450. Theodoretus. 450.
Concilium Calcedonense. 453. Titus Bostrensis Episcopus. 460. Basilius Seleucius. 460. Crysippus Hierosolymitanus Presbyter. 500. Fulgentius. 500. Euthymius Eremita. 540. Andreas Cretensis Episcopus. 560. Hesychius Hierosolymitanus. 580. Gregorius Magnus. 590. Eutychianus. 600. Isidorus Hispalensis. 620. Sergius Hierapolita. 640. Beda. 700. Ioannes Damascenus. 730. Alcuinus Anglus. 750. Elias Cretensis. 780. Idiota. 800. Anselmus Cantuariensis. 1080. Bernardus. 1130.
Virginalia, or, Spirituall Sonnets, in prayse of the most glorious Virgin MARIE vpon euerie seuerall Title of her Litanies of Loreto. SONNET 1. SANCTA MARIA. MARIA,Maria is interpreted Starre of the sea: and she as a remarkable starre shines brightly by the grace of a speciall priuiledge among the waues of this wauering world. &c. S. Bed. ad Euangel. in festo Annunc. Maria. glorious sea-starre; thy cleare sight Guides vs vpon the world's tempestuous waues; And through the dreadfull shades of sinn's darke night In th' port of blisse our crasie vessel saues. Thy sacred name most aptly doth inferre A bitter sea, t'expresse thy seas of greef, when thou beheldst thy Sonne, who could not erre, As faultie dye, iudg'd worser then a theef. Well art thouMaria, which is interpreted Lady or one that giueth light &c. Isidorus Hispal. de vita vel obitu Sanct. c. 48. Ladie stil'd, since by that Sonne ThouPower is giuen to her both in heaven and earth, which power is, to be able to helpe vs. S. Bernard, serm. 1. in Salue Regina. both in heauen and earth art powerfull made To ease their paines, who shall require thy ayde. Help me ô then sinn's dang'rous shelues to shunne, Giue me a feeling of my Sauiour's paynes, And let me be of those, whome thou retaines.
SONNET 2. SANCTA DEI GENITRIX. MOTHER OF GOD: ô rare prerogatiue! O glorious title! what more speciall grace Could vnto thee thy deare sonne dread God giue To shew how farre thou dostMarie by the dignitie of her election transcends all hight of a chosen creature. Greg. c. 1. l. 1. reg.  Mary excelled all women in vertue. Iustin. quest. 156. all creatures passe? ThatWho hath seene? Who hath heard the like? God, who cannot be contayned in a place, dwels in a wombe: whom the heauens doe not receave, a Virgin's wombe comprehends. Proclus Constantinop. de nas. Christi, the was truly blessed, who was greater then heauen, stronger then the earth, wider then the world. For she alone compre∣hended God, whom the world containeth not. &c. Petrus Chrysol. ser. 143. mightie Power with in the narrow folde Did of thy ne're polluted wombe remaine, Whom, whiles he doth th' all ruling scepter holde, Nor earth nor yet the heauens can contayne. Thou in the spring-tyde of thy age brought'st forth Him, (d) who before all Matter, Time, and Place, Begotten of th' eternall Father was. O be thou then, whyle we admire thy worth, A meanes vnto that Sonne not to proceede In rigour with vs for each sinnefull deede. Holie Marie  (the mother of God) who holds not so, is an heretike. Concii. Calced. Act. 5.
SONNET 3. SANCTA VIRGO VIRGINVM. VIRGIN OF VIRGINS, thou theIt was by a diuine guift giuen to our Ladie, that she the first amongst women should offer vp to God the glorious present of Virginitie Bed. ad Euangel. in Annunc. Marie The same is confirmed by S. Ildef. ser. 5. de Assumptione Marie Beda. l. 1. in Luc. c. 3. Hono. l. de eternis gaud. Rust. 3. in Cant. first did'st make The sacred vowe of spottles chastitie, Through which example manie now forsake The vaine world's frayle delights to follow thee. In the whole course of thy liues blessed race, All the perfections ofLet the Virginitie and life of Marie be as in a picture described to you, from whome as in a looking glasse the beautie of Chastitie and forme of vertue doe yeeld a glorious reflection. Ambr. l. 2. de Virg. virginitie, As in a fayre vnblemish'd looking-glasse, In their true coulours well reflected be. Yet, though a Virgin, thou a Mother wast, Whose fruitfull mayden wombe sent forth a ray Of heauenlie beames, which all Hell's errours chas'd. Daigne, Virgin-Mother, to thy Sonne to pray, That he would grant, thy great Integritie May be a salue for our Impuritie.
SONNET 4. MATER CHRISTI. MOTHER OF CHRIST; thy vertuous life deseru'd That light through thee should to vs all appeare, And that thou shouldst before all others beare, Him, who by death from death our soules preseru'd. CHRIST is the oyle powr'd out, whereby we liue, Which yeelds vs light our grieuous faults to see, Which cures our sinnefull soules, and setts vs free From Hell's dread paines, & doth new forces giue. In thee, Chaste Mother, this most sacred, pure, And soueraigne oyle, this pretious salue, did growe, And from thee to all sinne-sicke mortalls flowe. Request of him our spirituall wounds to cure, To feed our hungry soules, and foot-steps guide, That from his blessed wayes, we ne're may slide.
SONNET 5. MATER DIVINAE GRATIAE. MOTHER OF DIVINE GRACE we iustly may Stile thee, most gratious Ladie, since within Thy heauen-like womb free from all guilt of sinne The great Dispenser of all GracesIn that Virgin the treasure of all Grace was layd. &c. Greg. Neocesar. lay. Graces chief treasure rested in thy hart, What s'ere thou didst, wasWhatsoeuer was done in her, was all puritie and simpli∣citie, all grace and truth, all mercie & iustice, which looked downe from heauen. Sophronius. ser. de Assumpt. Maria apud Hieronymum. wholy Puritie, Truth, Mercie, Iustice:Grace is giuen to others but by (certain) portions, but in Marie the whole plenitude of Grace infused itself all at once. ibid. only vnto thee Full grace was giuen, t' others but in part. From thy deare Sonne, by thee vnto vs all, When for such guifts we doe our soules prepare, All graces dayly distributed are. Then let vs still, when s'ere we humbly call, Be by thee heard; n'ere let vs pray in vaine, But, when we aske for Grace, still Grace obtaine.
SONNET 6. MATER PVRISSIMA. MOTHER MOST PVRE: thou pure from any shewe Did'st euer liue of any sinnefull staine; Gainst all th' assaults of our accursed foe Thy verieThe mother of God was not so much as defiled at anie time with filthie thoughts. Elias Creten. in orat 4. Nazianz. thoughts did victorious still remaine. From actuall sinnes and from Originall, Thy soule alone, except thy Sonne's, was free; Yea the profoundest Doctours, when they fall To speake of sinne, refuse to mention thee. Thy soule and bodie now reioyn'd doWhen we speake of sinnes, we will not, for the honour of our Lord haue any question of Mary &c. Aug. de na∣tura & Gr. c. 66. shine, Next to thy greater Sonne, and much more pure Then Cherubins or other powers diuine. Endeauour, purest Mother, to procure, That, when our soules with sinnes we tainte, we may With flouds of teares wash all such spottes away. All Christendome knowes that Marie is exalted aboue all the heauens, and assuredly beleeues, that she is placed aboue the Quires of Angels. Ansel. de excell. Mari & Virg. c. 4.
SONNET 7. MATER CASTISSIMA. MOTHER MOST CHAST thou art; for thou alone Of all thy sex a virginShe conceaued a Virgin, she brought forth (her child) a Virgin. Leo magn. ser. de Nat. Domini. c. 2. didst conceaue, A pure chast Virgin broughtest forth thy sonne, A Virgin also this frayle world didst leaue. ThouAfter that Mary once conceaued and brought forth her child, she neuer bore any more, neither knewe she man, though some doting fellowes are not afrayd to say, that the Virgin hirself conceaued an other child &c. Athan. ser. in descriptione S. Mar. & Ioseph. item. Cyrill. Alexand. l. 2. de recta fide ad reginas. Ambr. de virginitate institut. c. 5. Hiero. ad c. 44. Ezech. with many more &c. neuer didst (let Hell storme, shift, and lye) After thy first-borne child a second beare; Thou still wertThe Virgin-Mother of God, purer then the beames and brightnes of the sunne. Ephr. orat. de laud. sant. Dei matris. clearer then the world's bright eye, Or all the lights which turne on euerie spheare. Thy chastitie's strong bands no strength could cutt; Thou art the gate through which but Israel's God Doth come and goe, yet still remaineth shutt. Vouchsafe, chaste Mother, to diuert the rod Of god's iust iudgements from vs, when we be Southfull to imitate thy chastitie. This is the closed Oriental gate, through which the Bishop alone comes in and goes out, yet it still remayneth shutt. Hiero. ad c. 44. Ezech.
SONNET 8. MATER INVIOLATA. MOTHER INVIOLATED;Origen writes in this sort in his Homilie 1. in diuersos. who can be A perfect mother, and yet vndefil'd? Did euer any aged woman see A maide at once and mother of a child? None but thy selfe, great Mother, thou alone Of all thy sex this title canst receaue; Thou only free from allWhat is more chaste then she, who hath brought forth a bodie without pollution of bodie? Ambr. l. 2. de Virginibus, contagion Of bodie's touch, a bodie didst conceaue. Thy spotlesThe same is both a Mother and a Virgin, neither did her Virginitie take away the child-birth, nor the child-birth dissolue her Virginitie. Greg. Nyssen. 2. in nat. Christi. chastitie did not impeach Thy wondrous child-birth, nor that birth againe Make in thy Virgin's fortresse any breach. Pray, we beseech thee, that we may refraine From each lasciuious, fond, impure desire, And to thy puritie in part aspire.
SONNET 9. MATER INTEMERATA. MOTHER VNSPOTTED, thou art Moyse'sAs in time past the bush &c. and as the 3. Children &c. or as to Daniel &c. So did this Virgin also bring forth God, yet remained vntouched &c. Origen. Hom. in diuersos. Exod. 3. bush Which flam'd indeede, but was not burn'd at all; Thou art that woman, whose blest seede should By thee, o more then blessed Virgin Marie, the diuel is ouercome and troden downe, because it is written of thee; she shall bruse thy head. Idiot. contempl. de B. Mar. c. 4. item Genesis. 3. crush The serpent's head, for to repaire our fall. As in hote fornace Israel's threeDaniel. 3. yong-men Th' Almighties prayses did vntouched sing; And asDaniel. 14. to Daniel in the lyon's den, The doore shutt Abacuc did victuals bring: So to redeeme the forfait of the tree, Thy virgin-wombe true God true Man did beare Without all touch vnto thy chastitie. Grant that we may, ô spotles Mother, feare To come before thee with a spotted, foule, A sinne-infected, vnprepared soule.
SONNET 10. MATER AMABILIS. AMIABLE MOTHER, Louelie, chast, andThou art all faire, ô my friend, and no spot is in thee. Cant. 4.7. faire Faire through the beautie of that speciall grace, And those rare vertues, which without compare Thy bounteous Sonne in thy blest soule did place. Faire through thy spotles pureThou art all faire in thy Conception made onely to this end, that thou mightest be the temple of the highest God. Idiot. contempl. de B. V. c. 2. Conception, Made for the temple of Heauens soueraigne Lord, Faire through the wondrous Generation Of th' Father's glorie, the Eternall Word. These and thy other graces do inflame Each vertuous hart so with thy sacred loue, As all praise honour, and respect thy name. Let vs not then, sweet Mother, backward proue, While in this wretched vale of teares we liue, To yeald thee that, which all the world doth giue.
SONNET 11. MATER ADMIRABILIS. ADMIRABLE MOTHER,This Virgin is truly the great wonder of the world. Chrys. hom. in Hypopauten Domini. wonder of the earth, Wondrous in thy admir'd Conception, Wondrous alike in thy most blessed Birth, Thy course of life, death, and Assumption. What is more wondrous then that thou a mayde Didst beare a childe, and yet a mayde remain'dst? Is ought more strange then that it may be saide: Thou him,Thou art the circumscription (that I may so say) of him, who cannot be circumscribed &c. Thou art the compre∣hension (or conteyner) of him, who containes and compre∣hends all things. Methodius Tyri Episcop. orat. in Hypag. Domini. whom nought could circumscribe, contain'dst? All thy discourses, nay each very thought, Much more thy deeds, most rare and wondrous were, And farre aboue our common merits wrought. Grant that thy wondrous vertues may appeare So liuely to our minds, that when we neede, We, how to liue, in them may patterns reade.
SONNET 12. MATER CREATORIS. MOTHER OF OVR CREATOVR; he, who first Did build the house, himself was borne therein; Thy purestOnly Christ did open the closed gate of the Virginall wombe; which notwithstanding allwayes remayned shutt &c. Hier. l. . aduers. Pelagianos c. 2. item Ruffin. in expl. Symb. & alij. wombe without a breach he pearc't, By whom thou hadst before created beene. He, who fills all things, to whose powerfull might All creatures bowe, thy help oftimesHe who fills heauen & earth, is become needie of thee. Method. or. in Hypag. Domini. receau'd: Thou that GREAT-ONE, great Mother, broughtst to light, WhoThou in the end of times broughtest forth him, who was conceaued before all ages. ibid. long before all ages was conceau'd. At thy most chaste Annunciation, Thou, what he had not, vnto him didst giue, Who nothing wants: his Incarnation. Grant that we may, not only while we liue, But also at our death, partakers be Of the blest fruit of this great mysterie. Thou didst lend to God his admirable Incarnation, which sometime he had not. ibid.
SONNET 13. MATER SALVATORIS. MOTHER OF OVR SAVIOVR; thou before all others Wast chosen t' beare the ransome of vs all; For which all Nations farre aboue allThou art truly blessed who alone amongst all Mothers, wast chosen to be Mother to thy Creatour. Andr. Cret. orat. in Ann. B. Virg. Mothers That euer were, thee euer blessed call. Th'Thou did'st disclose to the world the Sonne of the inuisible Father, by whom all peace is restored to vs: a hidden suretie, & an ineffable mysterie. Method. Episc. Tyri. or. in Hyp. eternall Fathers Sonne, by whom we see Our ancient foe's malicious spleene represt, That hidden, sacred, wondrous mysterie, To wretched mortals thou didst manifest. Thou art that gloriousO blessed virgin thou art a bright clowd, which brought from heauen that most cleare lightning, Christ to illuminate the world &c. Epiph. serm. de Laud. B. V. clowd, from whence did flye That radiant lightning, whose resplendent rayes Clear'd all the world, which did in darknes lye. Be thou a meanes, blessed Mother, when we praise Thy heauenly vertues, we may vices hate, And thy perfections truly imitate.
SONNET 14. VIRGO PRVDENTISSIMA. VIRGIN MOST WISE thou rightly maist be stil'd, Since thy rare wisedome did anticipate So farre thy yeares, as yet a tender child, Thy self to God thou diddest consecrate. Thou, to thy wisdome's neuer dying praise T'reach the ConceptionIs not Mary a high mountaine, who to the end shee might reach the Conception of the Eternall Word, raised vp the topp of her merits aboue all quyers of Angels, euen to the throne of the Deitie. Greg. mag. l. 1. Reg. c. 1. of th' Eternal's Sonne Did'st the high mountaine of thy merits rayse Aboue all Saints, euen to th' Almighties throne. Where likeEsther. c. 5. a prudent Hester without cease, Thou dost before thy sweet Sonne humbly pray For our poore sinn-enthralled soul's release. Obtaine, most prudent Virgin, that we may Prepare our selues a right, to tast the fruit Of this thy, till th' world end, nere ended suite. libr. de ortu Virg. apud Hieronymum.
SONNET 15. VIRGO VENERANDA. VIRGIN MOST VENERABLE, thy Royall race, Thy vertuous life, and now immortall rayes, Deserue farre better, then all humane race, Ciuill, Religious, and Coelestiall prayse. Thou art theThis alone is the bridge, by which God descended to man, Prod. Constantinop. hom. de Nat. Christi. bridge, by which God came to man; Thou art the second Adam'sThis is the spirituall paradise of the second Adam. ibid. paradise; To thee (so high a place thy merits wann) NextFor, God only excepted, thou art aboue all. Epiph. serm. de laud. B. V. vnto God, chiefe honour doth arise. Who but an Atheist will refuse to serue So great a Mistresse? who doth euery way Such supreme honour worthily deserue. O let vs then, great Virgin, while we stay In this frayle world, thy humble agents be, To moue thy greatest foes to honour thee.
SONNET 16. VIRGO PRAEDICANDA. VIRGIN MOST WORTHIE PRAISE, by much more great ThenA heauenlie and earthlie tongue, no nor the tongue of Angels, can suffise to rehearse thy praises. Epiph. Serm. de laud. B. V. men, then Saints, or Angels can explaine: For in thy blessed wombe he fix't his seat Whom all the earth's huge mast cannot sustaine. Thou the MediatrixFor she is the Mediatrix of heauen and earth, who natu∣rally accomplished the vnion. ibid. art twixt God and man; By thee whole NationsThrough Marie Nations are brought to pennance. Cyrill. Alex. hom. Ephes. in Nestor. habita. are to pennance brought; The All-creatour first with thee beganne, When he the world's desir'd Saluation wrought. Thou th' interposedHayle thou who passing as Mediatrix betwixt God and Man, procurest that the interposed wall of enmitus may at length be ouerthrowne, & earthly things ioyned to Celestiall. Basil. Selutius, or. in Annun. Dei. wall of hate did'st raise Twixt God & man; thou heauen ioyn'dst to earth; What can be greater? what more worthie praise? Aske thy deare Sonne, we may eu'n from our birth (Through these and all thy merits) ere we dye For all our sinfull courses satisfye.
SONNET 17. VIRGO POTENS. VIRGIN MOST POTENT: from that powerfull Lord, Whom dwellingShé vpon earth conceiued God dwelling in heauen. Epiph. serm. de laudibus. B. V. high in heauen thou didst conceaue Low vpon earth, thou still dost powerVid. Sancta Maria. atBy whom Diuells are put to flight, by whom the Diuell tempter fell from heauen, and by whome all creatures pos∣sessed with the rage of Idolls, are brought to the knowledge of the truth, &c. Cyr. Alex. hom. Ephes in Hest. receaue▪ To all, that craue thy ayde, thy ayde t' afford. Through thee th'InfernalBy whom Diuells are put to flight, by whom the Diuell tempter fell from heauen, and by whome all creatures pos∣sessed with the rage of Idolls, are brought to the knowledge of the truth, &c. Cyr. Alex. hom. Ephes in Hest. troupes are put to flight; Through thee curst Sathan did from heauen fall; Through thee all those, who nought adored at all But senseles Idols, now belieue a right. By thee thy Seruants well rewarded are, And also diuers, who thy powerDaureltius tom. 21. Exemplerum tit. 68. deride, Receiue by thee due payment for their pride. Grant we may haue, great Virgin, still a care To feare and reuerence thy most powerfull name, And striue in others to effect the same.
SONNET 18. VIRGO CLEMENS. VIRGIN MOST MERCIFVLL, most milde, and meeke; The ioy of euerie well-affected minde What sinner e're to thee did humblyThou art the help of those, who sinne & who are destitute of ayde: thou art the hauen of them who are troubled with a storme, the comfort of the world, & the hope of such as liue in the world. Cos. Ephr. orat. de laud. B. V. seeke Who thy assistance did not readie find? ThouThou art the help of those, who sinne & who are destitute of ayde: thou art the hauen of them who are troubled with a storme, the comfort of the world, & the hope of such as liue in the world. Cos. Ephr. orat. de laud. B. V. art the hope and comfort of vs all; Thou art a quiet hauen shut to none; To such, as penitent for mercy call, ThouReioyce o diuine refuge of reconciliation betwixt God and men. And. Cret. orat. in Annunt. B. V. by thy prayers dost reconcile thy Sonne. TheeThe world hath made thee the pledge of their faith with God. Ces. August. de SS. serm. 18. the whole world with vniforme consent, The pledge with God of their true faith hath made; Nor doth thy fauour frustrate their intent. Mercifull Virgin, let it not be said, That only we misse that, which all men haue, ButRepresse, O B. Virgin, my temptations, order my life after a pious and holie manner, and cause that by thy directions, I may attaine to heauenlie beatitude. Io. Damasc. or. 1. de Nat. Mari. guide our stepps, and foules vouchsafe to saue.
SONNET 19. VIRGO FIDELIS. VIRGIN MOST FAITHFVLL: in that vertue none Could euer neere be paralell'd with thee. Faithfull thou wert in that from perils free Thou still preseru'dst thine, and th' Almightie's Sonne. When at his passion he was left alone, Thou faithfull follow'dst to th' erected tree; Who askt' thee ere his Patronessewho hath, ô Lady, hoped in thee, and was after asha∣med? or what man hath faithfully implored thy almightie help and was euer forsaken. Surely neuer any. Eutychia∣nus in vita S. Theophili. to be, Whose wishes thou did'st frustrate? surely none. Thou still art true, still faithfull vnto all, Who faithfull aske thy aide; and oft preuents The foe's deceipts, which may our soules enthrall. Second then our good and iust intents. Direct our actions all, and doe not faile. ToDefend me, & from the eternall fire and darknes free me. Greg. Naz. in Tragedia. guarde vs, least against vs Hell preuaile.
SONNET 20. SPECVLVM IVSTITIAE. LOOkING-GLASSE OF IVSTICE: he who would Forsaking vice a vertuous course embrace, May in thySuch an one was Marie, that the life of her alone is the instruction of all men. Ambr. de Virgin. vide etiam de hacre S. Virgo Virg. life, as in a spotles glasse, The perfect shape of vertues all behold. Thou art theReioyce o mirrour, through which they, who were in the thick shades of sinne, receiuing the sunne of Iustice coming from heauen, were enlightened, And. Cret. or. in Annunc. B. V. glasse, through whose pure christall came The glorious Sunne of Iustice from the Skye, T' enlighten those who in sinne's shades did lye, And with his rayes their frozen harts inflame. No pale infernall spleene, though it repine To see thy luster, can impose one staine On thy pure splendour, but thy beames will shine. O let vs still before this glasse remaine; That, when we rise from sinn's dull sleep, we may Learne our naked soules with vertues to array.
SONNET 21. SEDES SAPIENTIAE. O SEAT OF WISEDOME: heauen's supreme Lord, Th' eternall's Wisedome, he who did beget All things of nothing, only by his word, Esteem'd theeMarie is a glorified Seate & worthie of God, which can by only the eyes of the minde be seene. Meth. in Threnis. worthie t' be his sacred seate. That heauenlieIn whom be all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge hid. Coloss 2.3. treasure, where all treasures lye Of God's high wisedome, in thee seated was; In thee he did our fraile humanitie Espouse,Reioyce, o bed chamber, in which Christ espoused humani∣tie. And. Cret. or. Ann. B. V. not press'd throughMarie excelled euery one so much that she receiued God himself the Word (very willing to be receiued) whom she comprehended citra vllam loci angustiam. Without any straitnesse of place. Hesychius Hierosol. or. 1. de Sancta Maria Deipara. straitnes of the place. Besides thou maist be called Wisedome's seate, In that great wisedomes euer flowing Well, In streames of grace, into thy Soule still fell. O doe thy Sonne (Wisedome's great throne) intreat That he would please sometimes to be our guest, And sometimes in our crasie Soules to rest.
SONNET 22. CAVSA NOSTRAE LAETITIAE. CAVSE OF OVR IOY: th' SerpentThe Serpent seduced Eue, Marie consented to Gabriel, but the seducing of Eue brought death, the consent of Mary brought life. Ioannes Chrys. ser. de Gen & interdict. ar∣bor. ad Adam. item: Life was restored by Mary, which had beene slaine by Eue. 16. did Eue seduce; Thou vnto Gabriel humbly gau'st consent; But Eue's seducing, death and discord, sent; Thy prompt obedience, life, and setled truce. She made vsThe mother of our kind brought paine into the world, the Mother of our Lord brought to the world health. Eue the authour of sinne, Mary the author of merit. Aug. de Sanctif. serm. 18. sick; thou brought vs present health; She sinne, thou merit, to the world did'st bring. She made vs weepe, thou gau'st vs cause to sing: Our soules she rob'd but thou increas'd our wealth In brief, thou art that instrumentReioyce, ô instrument of ioy, by which the sad Sentence of execration is changed into the pleasant iudgment of ioy. And. Cret. or. in Annun. B. V. of ioy, Which Eue's sad curses did to blessings turne, And makest vs (if we will) we ne're neede mourne. Help vs, we may our talents so employ, That, when we doe this house of cares forsake, We may with thee of heauenly ioyes partake.
SONNET 23. VAS SPIRITVALE, SPIRITVALL VESSELL; thou did'st so containe All spirituall riches of celestiall grace, That to the height of thy most glorious place None of thy sex ere could, e're can, attaine. Thy vessell's beautie thou did'st n'ere deface With any sinfull death-importing staine; But still thy heauenlie lustre did'st retaine And all foule soule-deforming vices chase. Which to effect thou did'st more grace obtaine, In that thou wa'st to beare so long a space The sole procurer of our spirituall gaine. Graunt we may still (ô spirituall vessel) trace Thy spotles pathes and neuer striue in vaine From th' impure stench of loathsome sinne t' refraine. No woman euer did, not euer shall obtaine so much grace as the Mother of our Lord. Tit. Bostreusis ad c. 1. Luc. There was neuer any filth, vice, or sinne in thy glorious soule. Marie receiued more grace vtterly to ouerthrow Sinne, who deserued to conceiue & bring forth him, who it is eui∣dent had no sinne. Aug. de nat. & grat. c. 36.
SONNET 24. VAS HONORABILE. HONORABLE VESSELL which th'eternall word Did for his owne, best seruice only frame, And vnto thee on eu'ry syde afforde The glitteringHayle ô cleare and beautifull vessell of God. Ephraem orat. de laud. Deiparae. luster of a heauenly flame. Thou art that pretious vessell which to man Did from the skye life-giuing MANNA beare, In thee th' Allmighty's mighty sonne began A health to all, who doe his dread name feare. Thou art that honour'd vessell whichHayle thou who art a pitt of euer liuing water. Chrysip. presb. de laud. v. Maria. contain'd Th' water of life; in thee that powerfull One, Which all thinges fills, whole & intyre remain'd. Help vs to be (most honour'd vessell) prone To vertue euer vnto vices slowe, And perfectly our imperfections knowe. Hayle full of grace which art a goulden vessell contai∣ning heauenly Manna. Epipha. Ser. de laud. Deip.
SONNET 25. VAS INSIGNE DEVOTIONIS. RENOWNED VESSELL OF DEVOTION FountaineThou art truely the most copious well of all Sanctity &c. Method. orat in Hyp. din. of Sanctity which euermore With ne're decreasing Springes of grace dost runne Weake soules to wonted vigour to restore. Thy great CREATOR byThat most gratious Creator did throwe into the flames of most feruent Charity like certaine thicke heapd beames of the sunne 16. abundant streames With out restraint infused into thee Like to the glorious Sunn's cleare-shining beames, Deuoutest flames of feruent Charity. Whose neuer-quenched heate, dispersed still Among'st vs, doth our frosen harts inflame, And our cold brest with true deuotion fill. Our dayly actions (sacred vessell) frame So that wee may deseruedly aspire, To gaine but one sparke of so great a fyer.
SONNET 26. ROSA MYSTICA. MYSTICALL ROSE, diuinely white & red, Whyte through the Candour of virginity Red through the heate of burning charity Whyte in thy spotlesse flesh, in mind still red. In following vertue's pure directiones, white; Red by thy trampling vpon vices head; Through the care thou hast of our good courses, red; And by thy loue to thy Creator, white. Thou from the Iewes, as from sharpe thornes, didst rise And through the word all banefull fumes expell, By thy rare vertues euer fragrant smell. Driue from our soules th' infectious stench of vice That wee before thy sonne may without feare Perfum'dgood perfume of Christ in euery place. with vertues at our death appeare. Mary was a Rose whyte by virginity, red by charity whyte in flech, red in mind; whyte through her following of virtue, red through her trampling on vices, whyte in pu∣rifying her affections, red in mortifying the carnall. Whyte in louing God, red in hauing compassion of her neighbour. Bernard ser. de S. Maria. Rose, which art sprung from thornes, that is, from the Iewes, & hast filled all thinges with deuine sweet odours. Io Damasc. orat. 1. de nat. B. V. Wee are the
SONNET 27. TVRRIS DAVIDICA. TOWERThy necke is as the tower of Dauid, which is built with bulwarkes: a thousand targats hang one it, all the armour of the valiant. Cant. 4. OF DAVID, as that pious king Did, for his cities strength, this tower erect, So spiritual DAVID thee to th' world did bring The holy Church (his citie) to protect. This tower prouision through the towne did spread; By thee, according vnto Natures law In humane bodies, wee, from Christ the head, As by the necke, all spirituall victualls drawe. In DAVID'S tower all warlike armes were layd; Thou still art ready, as the Church'es sheed, Our soules against all Hell's assaults to ayd. Helpe then ô least wee vnprotected yeeld, Succour the weake, & those who humbly weepe, And flye to thee, in thy tuitions keepe. Holy Mary succour the wretched, help the faint harted, comfort those who weepe, pray for the people. &c. Aug. ser. 18. de Sanctis.
SONNET 28. TVRRIS EBVRNEA. IVORIEThy necke as a tower of Iuory. Cantic. c. 7. TOWER, theThou therefore the nose of the Church art like to a tower, to wit, high in dignity & firme in grauity. Bern. sup. fal. Reg. place's dignity Which thy deare Sonne did for sole thee reserue, Which thy graue mind's ne're moued constancy, This worthy title iustly doth deserue, Thou art compar'd to purest Iuory In that fromHis Mother an immaculate Mother, an incorrupt Mother, an vntouched Mother &c. Orig. hom. 1. Diuersos. vid. Mater purissima at (a) (b) (c) &c. Regina confessorum at (6.) all, euen from the least foule staine Of eu'ry sort of sinne, thou euer free Euen from thy first giuen being did'st remaine Infinit valyes of Infernall shott Hell's cursed feenes discharg'd against thy brest, Yet neuer hope of least aduantage got. Permit vs euer when wee are opprest With fierce assaults of our ne're resting foe, That vnto thee wee may for succour goe.
SONNET 29. DOMVS AVREA. O HOVSE OF GOVLD, as wisest SALOMON Th' Allmighty's temple did with great respect Adorne with gould, so thy farr wiser sonne With gould of vertue, thee, hisReioyce ô most beautifull temple of deuine glory. Andr. Cret. Or. in Annunc. temple, deckt. Thou art that rare, then gould farr brighter, house, Where the twoThis is the shopp where the natures were vnited. Proclus Const. hom. de Natiuit. Christi. & Serg. Hierap. Or. in nat. B. V. natures both vnited were, Where ourThis is the bed-chamber in which the word espoused hu∣mane flesh. Procl. Const. hom. de Nat. Christi. & Andr. Cret. Or. in Ann. B. V. humanity Christ did espouse, And first beganne our miseries to beare. Thou art the mansion both of heauen and earth, Thou artHayle ô liuing temple of God: Hayle ô mansion both of heauen and earth. Io. Chrysost. Or. in Annuc. B. V. Gods liuing temple, hee who was Before ought was, of thee receau'd his birth. Inuite my soule vnto this glorious place, That there she may with fruitfull wonder gaze Vppon thy merits gould-surpassing rayes.
SONNET 30. FAEDERIS ARCA. ARKE OF THE COV'NANT in that (a) arke did rest The tables of God's holy testament, In thee, a farr more blest, farr richer chest The Testament's great heire was willing pent; Within that costly arke the lawes repos'd, In thee thy sonn's heauen-giuing Ghospell laye, In that was still th' Aeternall voyce inclos'd, In thee th' eternall word it self did stay. That wood wasBern. ser. de Maria. incorruptible, so thou; Earthly decaying gould did that adorne, Thou did'st all gould, which was not heauenly. scorne, SufferReioyce ô new arke of God, in which the spirit of God resteth. Arke wherein Christ our Not kept his humanity: Andr. Cret. orat. in Annunc. B. M. me then, most sacred arke, to bowe Before thee still, and with submissiue feare Thy sonn's will thence in all my actions heare. What other thing shall we say the arke to be but S. Marie? For the arke carried within the tables of the testament, but Mary did beare the heire of the testament it self, that held within it the law this the Gospell: that had the voyce of God, this the word but the arke both within and without: did glitter with the brightnesse of gold, but holy Mary shined both within & without: with the glory of virginity: that was adorned with earthly gould, this with heauenly. Ambr. tom. 3. ser. 80.
SONNET 31. IANVA CAELI. O GATE OF HEAVEN open vnto all, Who with the hammer of repentance knocke; Noe barr of malice, noe reuengfull locke ExcludeVide; Virgo fidelis at (b) such soules as with submission call. Thou artReioyce ô heauen, in which the sunne of glory shines. Andr. Cret. orat. in Ann. B. V. heauen it self, in thee's heauen's glorious Mary is made the window of heauen, because through her god sent true light to (all) ages. Fulgent. ser. de laud. B. V. gate, Through which that powerfull all reuealing eye Gods onely sonne past, when hee came to buye Our captiue soules at so extreame a rate. EueWhence death had the beginning of her entrance thence life makes herself a passage. Chr. orat. in Annunc. B. V. was the dore of death, through which to hell Diuers haue pass'd, thou art theThis woman the Mother of God is the gate of life, the foun∣taine of light, and dissolues the fault of women. Damasc. orat. 1. de Nat. B. V. gate of life, By which in heauen millions now doe dwell. Help me, blest gate to cause a pious strif Here in the world, who first amongst vs shall At this most sacred gate for entrance call.
SONNET 32. STELLA MATVTINA. O MORNING STAR, when wee this star behould Wee are forewarned of th' approaching Sonne, Thy glorious rising to the world foretold The comming of a brighter Sun, thy Sonne. The sky's most glorious star cannot compare In glitt'ring clearnes with the morning star; AlWhat is more holy then she? not the Prophets, not the Apostles not Martyres, not Patriarchs, not Fathers, not Angels, not Thrones, not Dominations, not Cherubins, not Seraphins to conclude not any other thing amongst visible or inuisible creatures can be found more great or excellent then only shee. Io. Chrys. Hom. in Hye. dom. Angels thou and greatest Saints that are In glorie, worth, and place surpassest farre. This star, though great, seemes to our eyes but small So thou with thy profoundBehould the handmaid of our Lord, be it done to me ac∣cording to thy word. Luc. 1.38. humility Didst couer stil thy glorious Sanctity. Rest in our soules bright star, and thither call The Sunne of Iustice, that his heauenly light May thence expell darkesin's Infernall night.
SONNET. 33. SALVS INFIRMORVM. HEALTH OF THE SICK, the impotent, and lame Thou oft hast heal'd, thouIustus Lipsius in dinâ Sichamiensi, siue Aspricoli impr. Antwerpia 1603. cur'd the deaf and blind: What infirme person euer humbly came To thee for help, who did not succour find? In thy chast wombe th' worlds al preseruing King? The eternall health did of our soules beginne: Thou did'st to all the greatBy this (Virgin) ô beloued, the phisician comes to those who are sick. Io. Chrisoft. pr. in Annun B. V. phisitian bringe, Who cures the world from leprosies of sinne. Thou by the vertue of that soueraigne fruit Which thou brought'st forthShee (Eue) gaue the blowe, this (Marie) heal'd it. Aug. de Sanctis ser. 18. heald'st vp the rankling soare. Which by Eues fruit empoison'd was before. Heare ô celestiall baulme, thy patients suite, That when we sinn-sick are, thou would'st be sure T' entreat thy sonne to take in hand our cure.
SONNET 34. REFVGIVM PECCATORVM. REFVGE OF SINNERS, wee when e're we haue In curre'd the iust displeasure of thy Sonne, To thy protection, there our selues to saue, As to a Sacred Sanctuarie runne. Thou pardon beggst,If a man cal vpon the name of the mother though the merits of him that cals do not deserue that hee be heard, yet the merits of the Mother make intercession that he may be heard. Ans. Cant, de excell. B. V. c. 6. and where our merits are Wholy defectiue, to entreat for grace, Thou with thy owne supplyes thy only care Is how from vs thou may'st al perils chace. Thou art the port, where wee may safely lye, Th' speedy repayrer of our wrecht estate, To thee for ayd, and saueguard all do flye. Open, blest refuge, thy compassion's gate, That when wee are with Hell's assaults opprest, Wee safe in thee may lye, and take our rest. Thou art my port, o vndefiled virgin, and present helper, lastly, I am wholy vnder thy custodie  and protection, Ephram. orat. de land. B. V.
SONNET 35. CONSOLATRIX AFFLICTORVM. O CONFORTRESSE OF AFFLICTED, thou Send's spirituallWho is the comfort of them who are afflicted: whoe is the reuenge of them, who are troubled who is the cloathing of them which are naked Entychi de poenis. S. Theophili. comfort in our miseries, Thou doest reuenge our greatest miseries, And stil thy help on al our dangers shewe. What greater comfort can we euer haue, Then t' thinke that when wee most afflicted are, Wee haue a patronesse, whose only care Is how shee may vs from all perils saue. Our soulsAll hayle, o peace ioy: and health of the world hayle the ioye of mankind, &c. Hayle the calme port and freer of them who are tossed with waues &c. Ephr. orat. de landibus B. V. craysd barke thou doest in tempests guide, Thou the disperser of our sadst annoye, Thou art the sickly worlds health, peace, and ioye, When the most dangerous troubles wee abide Doe not, ô do not thy best helpe denie, And wee'll all Hell's most powerfull power defye.
SONNET 36. AVXILIVM CHRISTIANORVM. Marye, always cherisheth Christians in her armes. Eutich. de panit. Sancti. Theph.SVCCOVR OF CHRISTIANS, who can e're expresse The infiniteOf all these see flores exempl. Ant. Dauroultij c. 2. tit. 38.39.40.41.42. & 43. helps wee all receiue from thee? From perils oft, of war thou set's vs free, And dost the furie of our foes represse. If e're we be in spirituall distresse, Wee by theeThou art the ayde of sinners, and of those who are desti∣tute of helpe. Ephrem. or, de land. B. V. help't, by thee protected bee, Thou reconcilest frends by thee we see Dispaire expel'd, thou doest our wronges redresse. At the hower of death, when our most dāgerous state Requires most succour, thou still readie art To crosse our, then most busie, hellish foe. Guide now our steps, andBe to me in this life, ô mercifull meeke, and benigne virgin a feruent protectrisse, & helper, repelling hostile attempts, & bringing me to saluation, & preseruing in the last moment of my life my miserable soule, & driuing for from it the gastly sights of diuels, but in the terrible day of iudgment freing me, from eternall damnation, & lastly making me heire to the inaccessible glorie of thy son, and gods 16. when at deaths pale gate Wee quaking stand, force thou our foe't depart, That we to heauen with thee may ioyful goe. O hope of them who despaire 16.
SONNET 37. REGINA ANGELORVM. O QVEENE OF ANGELLS, since thy blessed child, Whose death, true life did to our dead souls bring Is (al doe know it) a most powerfull thing Thou wel, and iustly mayst aSince he who was borne of the virgin is a king, a Lord, and God, therfore the mother which brought him forth is properly, and truly esteemed a queene, a lady, and mother of God, &c. Atha. m. Euang. de B. V. queene be stil'd. The highest, and most glorious Hierarchy Of Angels cannot with thy height compare; The greatest Angels, and the purest that are, Thou doest by much surpasse in purity. O how they al, in thee, thy sonne admire Who gaue thee such a place, to whose great height The great'st of them ner'e could, nor can aspire. Aske thy sweete son, that when with Hell we fight, He would vouchsafe his blessed Angels send T'helpe vs, our soules against our foes defend. O Mary higher, then the blessed of heauen, purer then the beames, and glory of the Sunne, more honorable then the Cherubins, and polyomatis. i, many eyed spirits, holyer then the Seraphins, without comparison more glorious then all the other hosts of heauen, &c. Ephrem. orat. de laud. B. V. the same sayth Epiphanius serm. de land. B. V.
SONNET 38. REGINA PATRIARCHARVM. O QVEENE OF PATRIARCKS, how this blessed troope Of fathers wisht to see thee whose chast wombe O blessed virgin, pure doue, and heauenly spouse Mary, heauen, Temple, and throne of the Diuinitie, who hast for sonne Christ shining gloriously in heauen and earth &c. Epiph. ser. de laud. B. V.The Temple, throne, & heauen should become Of the great power, to which all powers stoope. On thee their hopes, and expectations laye, All hayle o honour of all prophets, and Patriarchs &c. Andr. Cret. in An. B. V.Thou art the honor, grace, and ornament Of all their name, thouThou didst not want the purity of Angels, not the fayth of Patriarchs, not the zeale of Apostles, not the patience of Martyrs, not the sobrietie of Confessours, not the innocencie or humilitie of Virgins. Idiota. contemp. de Beata V. c. 2. not lesse eminent In the perfection of true faith then they. Thou in the whole course of thy lif's pure race Them in their owne rar'st vertues did'st excell And now in glorie doest them all surpasse. Helpe that wee may, great Queene, such thoughts expell As may against vs moue thy sons dread wrath, And shew vs how to imitate thy Faith.
SONNET 39. REGINA PROPHETARVM. O QVEENE OF PROPHETS, the art that pure white At which the words of these great Saints did ayme, How oft haue they, taught by th'alteaching spirite To thee o virgin, the Prophets giue prayse, &c. Hezych. Hier. orat. de S. Maria Deipara.Extold the glorie of thy sacred name? How oft haue they that virgin wisht to see Which theHayle armory of life, &c. hayle example of a gemme ex∣ceeding all price, hayle vine producing faire graps, &c. Chrisos. presb. de land. B. V. rare gemme, the fayrgrape bearing vine The armorie of life, the radiantHayle most bright star forth of which Christ came &c. Ephrem. orat. de land. B. V. starr should be From whence to vs Christ's heauenly beames should shine. Noe vertue they nor priuiledge enioy'd, Which on thee (as on farr aboue them all) In farr more great aboundance did not fall. Graunt, gracious queene, our time may be employd So that with these blest Saints wee euer may To all the world thy matchles worth displaye.
SONNET 40. REGINA APOSTOLORVM. QVEENE OF TH' APOSTLES, the dread King thy sonne Being by them, he most affected, slayne Thou, then the great'st on earth (thy sonne being gone) Didst Queene & Mistresse to these saynts remayne. When thou this world chang'dst for a heauenly croune, We haue receiued by ancient and most true tradition, that at the tyme of her glorious departure, all the holy Apostles who trauailed the world for the saluacion of nations lifted vp on high in a moment mett togeather at Hierusalem. &c. Euthymius Eremita Hist. Eccle. l. 3. c. 40. All, as at fun'ralls of their sou'rayne Queene, Though they before to fortaine lands are gone, Present at thy blest sepulcher were seene. Although their zeale, as by their actes appeere, Their loue of God and sanctity was great, Yet they in all, by thee surpassed were. Thy powerfull sonne, most gratious Queene, entreat That at our death we perfectly may see How they all ioy, to be surpas't by thee.
SONNET 41. REGINA MARTYRVM. O Queene of Martyrs who can e're expresse The wondrous griefe, which when thy deerest sonne To giue his seruants life gaue vp his owne, Did all the powers of thy soule oppresse? The sword of sorrow which then pearc't thy hart, Causd' thee such paines as thou mayst well compare With greatest Martyrs:Her glory is amongst martyrs. &c. Epiph. Hoer. 78. nay the great'st that are Bee farre surpast by thee, in euery part. Theyr glorie mayIf the Apostle Paule doe, truely affirme of other saynts whom the world was not worthy of, what is it fitting wee should think of the virgin mother of God, who as farre ex∣ceede all martyrs in brightnes, as doth the sonne the other starres? Basil seleucius on in Annuntiat. deipar. bee equalled to thyne As may the starres vnto th' irradiant rayes Of sol, when as he doth most clearely shine. If euer Hell death-threatning stormes doe rayse Against our constancy, thou for vs pray And th' suttle force of all such tempestes stay. Giue me the effect of my petition & my desire (o lord) the glorious virgin thy mother Marie my Lady entreating, praying, & preuailing for me with all thy saints. Amen. Aug. in medit. c. 35.
SONNET 42. REGINA CONFESSORVM. QVEENE OF CONFESSORS, thy diuine-wrought minde Was withThou didst not want any kind of vertue, o most glorious virgin, not in part but in whole &c. Idiota contēpl. de B. V. c 2. all vertues soe exactly dec't, Soe free from sinne, soe voyde of all defect, As sinnes, to thee th' world could no equall finde. Who had a more firme liuely fayth then thou? Who was more glad, more ready for that fayth To suffer paines? the cruell'st tyrant's wrath Could n'ere haue force thy constancy to bowe. The great'st Confessor neuer did excell In any vertueIn thee all vertues as well actiue, as contemplatiue mett to∣geather, and make then more admirable thee all creatu∣res. 16. which we do not see T'haue shin'd more truely, and more full in thee. Obtayne we may our soules adorne soe well With these thy vertues that when as we dye We may through thee the deuill's force defye. There neither is, nor euer was, nor will be any sport of sin∣ne in thee either Originall, or actuall, or mortall or veniall: but thou hast all grace of Naturall benefitts, spirituall gra∣ces, and celestiall guiftes, ibidem.
SONNET 43 REGINA VIRGINVM. O QVEENE OF VIRGINS, thou the gloriusThou art the ornament, crowne, & ioy of virgins. Ephraem. our. de laud. B. V. croune And chief'st grace art of that spottles state; ThyCertaine men affirme that Marie married after the birth (of our sauiour) but they haue not any means to proue it, for those sonns who weare sayd to be of Ioseph, were not borne of Marie, neither is there any scripture which makes mention of it. Orig. in Luc. homil. 7. sacred wombe to man was neuer knowne! Yet hee's thy child, whoe doeth Hell's pride abate: Thou though a mother, yet without compare Then purest virgins wast by farre more pure From the deceits of each intrapping snare: Thy thoughts, words, deedes were euer all secure: None but thy greatest sonne whose wondrous birth Did not at all thy virgin-bandsVide mater Castissima at (a). vntye, DeseruedMarie was most cleare wooll, & most renouned for virginity, & (vithous comparison) purer then all the virgins which were vnder heauen and the was such an one, and of so great excellency that she alone deserued this noe other should be closed with her, but he who was of Royall dignity. Aleuimus de Trinitate. l. 3. c. 14. in thy virgin wombe to lye. Vouchsafe (chast queene) while yet we liue on Earth, With all blest Virgins which still waite on thee, Before thy sonne our aduocate to bee.
SONNET 44. REGINA SANCTORVM OMNIVM. QVeene of all Saints, ô supreame gouernesse Next to thy sonne, of all thy sonne hath made: But onely he noe other can be sayd Soe powerfull as thy selfe, Hell's force t' represse. Thou not all women onely didstShee is holy and holyer then all Saynes: &c. Damasc. or. 2. de grmine meo &c. excell In vertue, but th' great'st saynts, yeaShee is holy and holyer then all Saynes: &c. Damasc. or. 2. de grmine meo &c. all that are: Th' Æternall thee, his mountaine, did prepare On topp of mountaines, there him selfe to dwel. In fine there is 'twix't other saynts and thee, As great a diff'rence, as betwixt the taste And smell of th' most delicious fruits that bee. Make intercession that wee may be plac't Great Queene, among these saynts with them to sing. Th' immortall prayses of thy sonne, our King. God did not choose any of the ordinary sex of women to be his mo∣ther but her, who should surpasse all women in vertue. Iustinut quest. 136. Is not Marie a high Mountayne &c. for Isayas prophecying of the most excellent dignity of this mountayne, sayth: The mountaine of our Lord shall in the latter daye: be prepared in the topp of mountaines. Suerly there was a mountaine in the top of mountaynes, because the height of Marie shin'd gloriously aboue all Saynes. Greg. mag. l. 1. Reg. c. 2. FINIS.
