4814 99846178 11128
¶ The traduction & mariage of the princesse. marriage of the princess Katherine
¶ A rēmemembraūce for the traduction of the Princesse Kateryne doughter to the right high and right myghty Prince the kinge and quene of Spayne as here in articles it dothe ensue. IN primis it is agreed that in the monethe of August or of Septembre next cōmyng the saide princesse kateryne with hir com∣pany shalbe transported god willynge in to Hampton watur / It is thought gode for asmo∣che as the shippes whiche shal passe wich hir noble persone shall mo we to come nere by iij or iiij myles vnto the kyngis porte and Towne of Southamp / ton / That the two Berkis which the kinge our so∣uereyne lorde caused tobe rigged anenst the last via / ge and arme by watir that his grace did tobe made into Scotlonde be richely apoynted and other bar∣gis and greate bootis to attende vpon the saide com¦pany be in lyke wise well arraied & well furnsshed for to bringe hir seide noble persone and them of hir company the more esely & the more assuerdly vnto the kinges towne and porte aforesaide. ¶ Item it is accordinge that in the saide ij Barkys there be sōme noble {per}sonagis of men to receyue the same pryncesse at hir Shippe. ¶ Item there be lordis spūall & tēporall appointed
to attende vpon the londynge and fyrst metyng on lande / whose names be in the rolle of the fyrste me∣tynge / And therfore letters be necessarye tobe sente vnto them for the same purpose in tyme conuenient ¶ Item there be ladyes also appoynted for to gyue their attendaunce vpon the sayde pryncesse atte hir landynge whose names be in a rolle specified / wher¦fore it is requisite that the quenes letters be sembla∣bly sente furthe vnto the same ladyes for that en∣tente. ¶ Item that a proposicyon be made at the fyrste re¦ceyuynge of the sayde pryncesse into my lorde Stu¦ardes handes by suche one as my sayde lorde shall meue the kynge to do that acte. ¶ And sithens furth with vpon the landyng of the saide pryncesse / It semeth that she & hir companye owe to entre into the charge of the kynge / his grace shulde appoynte some hede offycer and other of hys most noble householde to make hir costis and expen¦ses and the prouis you for the same. ¶ Item that these .x. persones folowynge be apoin¦ted to attende vpon my lorde Stuarde whanne he shall calle or sende for them.
∣ter to be done. Than that .xii. or .xx. gentilined with shorte tippid stauys. and .lxxx. or a. ¶. tall yomen / & likly {per}sonagis with longe tipped stauys do thoffice that vnto them in suche case apperteyneth. ¶ Item that in asmoche as syr Thomas Brandon & syr Iohn Digby be hede officers vnder the mar∣shall of Englonde / it is thought that they shulde ha¦ue the conduyt of all typped stauys foresaide / And beside those estates and other knightes that the kyn¦gys highnesse hathe appoynted to geue theire atten¦daunce vpon the sayde Duke / as in the same Rolle for the Duke of yorke apperyth. It is thought that the sayde Duke of yorkis counsell shulde beside the kynges letters doo make out the Dukys owne wri¦tyngis for that cause to suche as be and shalbe retey¦ned with his grace. ¶ By the quenes cōmaundement. ¶ Item bifore this entre into london the sayd prin¦cesse muste haue the richer lytter to syr in as it is be¦fore rehersyd & the same lytter to be with hir at croy¦don at goode houre for the same entent. ¶ By the quenes cōmaundement. ¶ Item that suche prouysyon be made by A B &c. that .iii. henxmen in side sadillis & hurnes all of one sute do followe next to the sayde lytter.
¶ Item that a faire Palfrey with a pylion richely arraied and led in houde for the saide pryncesse doo folowe next to the saide Henxmen. ¶ By the quenes cōmaundement. ¶ Item that xi palfreis all in a suyt be ordeined for suche ladies as shalbe appoynted to folow next vn∣to the pillion. ¶ Item that v Chares be ordeyned dyuersly appa¦reilled wherof one of the chieffe must be richely gar¦nysshed for the saide pryncesse / & the other iiij to ser∣ue suche ladyes as shalbe appointed to folow in or∣dre by. A.B. hauynge the charge of the seide charis ¶ Item & any other charys happyn to come beside these v before {pro}uided / than they soo to be ordred as shall accorde wyth thestatis of them that shalbe in them. ¶ The iiij metynge ¶ Item the forth attendaunce shalbe made by the Maire of London & by the citezeins of the same ly∣ke as it is agreed bitwene the saide maire & dyuers of the kinges coūsell to deuyse the maner therof wt all other solempnytes / & ceremonyes necessary for the honour of the cyte and of the feste. ¶ My lorde Stuarde. ¶ And sithen it is but .vii. smal myles bitwene the saide Croydon and the Cite of London. It is thou∣ghte
that the saide Pryncesse Katheryne shulde be streyght conueied through the high stretis of Lon∣don in suche case accustomed to the west dore of the churche of Poules there to be receyued with proces¦sion. ¶ Item and sithens this Pryncesse shalbe receiuid wyth procession at the weste doore of Poules / It is thought that the Bishoppe of london beinge in pon¦tificalibus and acompanyd with as many myters of his diosise as he can gete attende at the saide west dore there to receyue this saide pryncesse. And from thens with the quere of the churche {pro}cessionally to goo byfore hir to the hygh aulter and further to do them and there as in such case it is accustomed. ¶ By the quenes apoyntement. ¶ Item that after this Pryncesse shall haue made hir offrynge / it semeth vnto vs that a lady of greate estate assigned therto by the kynge shulde gyue hyr attendaunce vpon the saide princesse at the litel dore against the concistorie in the church that ledith into the bishop of Londons palys and so from that dore to conduyte the pryncesse into hir chambre. ¶ My lorde Stuarde. ¶ Mayster Controllor. ¶ And by cause the saide pryncesse shalbe laboured and trauayled in hir iourney. It is thouhte goode therfore and for other consideracyons that she tary at the saide bishoppis palys one hole day at the leste
before the day of the saide mariage. ¶ Item after the day of the mariage It semeth vn¦to vs that hir conueyaunce from Hampton shulde be so ordred that the Pryncesse shulde come too the Bisshoppis palys of London vpon a Thursday or ellis vpon a friday rather than otherwise too then∣tent that the day of the fest of the mariage shulde be vpon a sonday for the more solempnyte of the same ¶ Item that the maryage take begynnynge som∣what before ix at the clocke. ¶ And in asmoche as the Cardynall archebysshop of Canterbury hath taken vpon hym tobe executir officii at the maryage of the sayde Pryncesse. It is thought gode that the bisshop̄ of his prouynce / and greate abbottis lordes of the parlyament shulde in pontificali{us} gyue their attendaunce vpon hym for the more honour of the saide maryage wherfore it is necessary that the kynges letters be directed oute vnto the saide bisshoppis & abbottis to aduertise thē therof to thentent that euery of theym may be the more redy to do that vnto hym belongethe in that behalfe / and in like wyse that euery bisshoppe / and abbot lord of the {per}lyament make redy a barge or a bote to awayte vpon the kinge in his goynge to his paleys of westmynster as in another article it is ex¦pressed more at large.
¶ And bycause the prince shulde be more in a redy¦nesse It is thought accordinge that the same prince shulde lodge at the deane of poulis place the nighte before the saide mariage / and for to make his entre īto the churche before the princesse come thider whi∣che entre is deuised to be at the south dore next west warde to our lady of grace in the body of the church and with the pryncez householde seruaūtis to gyue their attendaūce and conuey hym to the haute pla∣ce to be made byforne the Consistory in the saide bo¦dy of the churche. ¶ Item that the seide Princesse kateryne goo oute at the greate gate of the Bisshoppis paleys / and ac∣companied with greate astatis of lordis and ladies she make hir entre at the grete west dore of the chur¦che and so to goo to the same haute place led wyth suche it grete estatis Bachelers that haue nat be ma¦ried as the kinge shall assigne ¶ Clerk of the werkis by the ouersight of maister Comptroller. ¶ Item for the more easy comynge of the seide prin¦cesse. It is deuised that barris shalbe made fro the seide palleis gate vnto the seide gret west dore of the churche / And from the saide grete weste dore so all alonge the churche to the quere dore of the same. ¶ Md also that the churche of Powlis be hangyd with arays ageynst the saide mariage.
¶ Item that the trompettis stonde on loft ouer the same west dore and blowe cōtynuelly after the first comynge oute of the princesse oute of the greate ga∣te of the saide paleys tyll the tyme she be in the chur¦che vpon the haute place / and than furth with whā she shalbe there the trompettis to scase. ¶ Clerke of the werkis by the ouer sighte of maister comptroller. ¶ This haute place is deuysed tobe sette in the na∣ue and body of the churche euen anenst the Consisto¦ry to thentent that the kynge and the quene may se¦cretly goo oute into the Bisshoppis paleys and see & here the Seremonyes of their marige at their plesu¦re. And for thys cause a backe dore muste be made there in the same consystory by thaduys of warke∣men which may be sone doone and at litell charge / for the saide Consystory hath ben well ouer sen by vs. ¶ Item this saide haute place in facyon is deuysed to be made like vnto an haute place at a Coronacion or semblable to the hawte place at a crystenynge of one of the kynges chyldren wyth broode and large greeys and steppis and with a gode large space all on hight on loft to thentent that the Cardinall and the mynystres of the churche necessary for that acte. And the prince and the princesse may be to gedyr &
no man aboue in the seide space all on hight on lotte than be necessary / And the Bisshoppis abbotis and other prelatis and Officers may stonde lower vp∣on the sayde steppis and of haute place / so as therby there growe none Impedyment to the sight of the people. ¶ Maister Secretery / and the Maister of the Rollis. ¶ And whan the saide Prince and princesse shal be on the saide haute place on loft and the Bannes as∣ked than some doctour of the lawe named ī the roll bringe in obieccions openly ageynst the saide Ban∣nes and mariage allegginge that the saide mariage can nat be lawfull for suche reasons as he shal exhi¦bite there supposed to be groūded in the lawe of cry stis churche. wherunto sōme other famous doctour named also in the rolle as thē maister of the Rollys and the Secretery if it so please the kinge shal reply and declare solemply the saide mariage tobe gode & effectuell in the saide lawe of crisths churche the sa∣me obieccōns made or any other to be made ageinst the same natwistandinge this dialoge and relplica / cion to be had for the more honour of the saide mary age / and though there be no cause of substaunce nor in effect why the same ought to be done. ¶ And in Case it be requysyte after the manere of
Spay: be as it is after the custome of England that sōme man shall gyue the bride. Thanke who shall gyue this pryncesse as bride. Is to be respyted vnto further knowlege be had. Who shall haue cōmissy∣on from the kinge and quene of Spayne so to doo. and ellis the mater to be remitted vnto the kynges highnesse as the cas shall require. ¶ Itē whan all shalbe fynysshed that is to be done vpon the saide haute place for the matrimony than shall the prynce and the princesse go to geder hande in hande all alonge the body of the sayde Churche streight afore hede vp to the quere and through the quere towardis the highe auter to their Places ap∣pointed there. ¶ Item as sone as the seide prince & princesse shall begynne to departe from the saide haute place than shall all the mynstrellis euery man after his faculte beinge all on hight in the vawtis of the churche do their poyntis in musike cōtynuelly as it shall come to their course / & as the prince and princesse shal be∣fore the seide highe auter / & than all the mynstrellis to sease. ¶ And to thentent that the Prynce and the Pryn¦cesses may haue alwey some place secretly to resort vnto for such casueltees may fall durynge the high masse. It is forseyne that the prince shall haue a
¶ Item the Cardynall tharchebisshop of yorke the duk of Bukyngham the lorde marques with other lordes spiritual & temporal & with abbots lordes of the parlement tobe in bargys or botes either of ther owne or elles boroed or hyred & to attende vpon the kynge quene prynce & pryncesse foresaid that day. ¶ Item besydis this {pro}uision that ther be one bar∣ge purposely deuysed & kept for such estrangers as shal come with the saide pryncesse. ¶ Item that the mayre of london the aldermen & euery crafte & felyship beynge in the clothe of theire crafte after one suete & lyuerey of the same crafte ha¦ue their barges or grete botis in like wyse apoynted as they be vsid yerely tobe whan they go for the pre¦sentment of their Mayre for to take hys othe at the kynges eschequer at westmynster. ¶ Item that the mayre and the Cite be warned at season conuement of the kynges determynacion to go to westmynster by water to the entent that they make in tyme & at gode leyser puision for their bar¦gis & for their great botys shypbotis or other for by lyklynesse it shalbe nedefull they so to doo. Sihen the bargis & botis of the lordes spiritual and tempo¦rall that were wonte to serue the sayde Cyte at the presentment of their mayre muste of necessite nowe serue for the lordes them silfe.
¶ And whan al these bargis and botis not only of the lordis spirituel and temporell / but aswell of the abbottis as of the maire and of the craftes of Lon∣don shalbe disapoynted / Than the sayde lordis ab∣bottis the mayre and the craftis forsaide / houer and attende euery man in his barge or bote for his parte vpon the kynges barge at the said beynardis castel Than all the other bargis and botis to rowe by the kynge after the kinge and aboute the kynge as the space of the riuer with thebbe or flode as gode ordre shall lede them to the tyme his grace shalbe landyd ad the greate brydge of westmynster and no barge nor bote to lande but suche as shalbe assygned / All the other to houer styll to the tyme the kynge & the lordis appoynted be landyd. And after that done al other bargis and botis not apoyntid to lande shall departe to their lodgynges with the kynges special thankes. ¶ And as Iustys Torneys and suche other Cere∣monyes it is remitted to the saide maister Cōptrol∣ler Sergeaunt of the kynges armory. ¶ Md to knowe bitwene the kynge & the byshop of london howe the bishops paleys shalbe repaired
Richard: pynson printer's device of Richard Pynson (1492-1530) with his monogram on a shield, which is held up by a girl and a boy and surmounted by a helmet
