5030 S111856 99847117 12129
A TRƲE DISCOVRSE OF ALL THE ROYAL PASSAGES, TRYVMPHS and Ceremonies, obserued at the Con∣tract and Mariage of the High and Mighty CHARLES, King of Great Britaine, and the most Excellentest of Ladies, the Lady HEN∣RIETTA MARIA of Burbon, sister to the most Christian King of FRANCE. Together with her Iourney from Paris to Bulloigne, and thence vnto Douer in England, where the KING met her, and the manner of their enterview. As also the tryumphant Solemnities which passed in their Iournies from Douer to the Citie of London, and so to Whitehall, &c. O quam te memorem virgo. — — O Dea Certe. LONDON, Printed by IOHN HAVILAND for HANNA BARRET. 1625.
A TRVE RELATION of all the Royall Passages, Tri∣umphes and Ceremonies, obserued at the Contract and Mariage of the High and mightie CHARLES, King of Great Britaine, and the most Excellentest of Ladies, the Lady HENRIETTA MARIA of Burbon, Sister to the most Christian King of France, together with Her Iourney from Paris to Bulloigne, and thence vnto Douer in England, and so to the Citie of London, &c. AMongst all the infinite blessings wherewith it hath pleased the Di∣uine Goodnesse to cloath and adorne our Nation: None is more remarkeable or glorious, then this happie and long wisht
for Vnion betweene the two great Mo∣narchies of France and Great Britaine, since by it wee haue attained to the full height of all our hopes, all our wishes, all our contentments, and beholding, as in a goodly Myrrour, the full pourtrature of all our ioyes, we finde our Kingdome fortified against the threatnings of Enuie, our throne established with the hope of a most flourishing Issue, and the hearts of all true subiects reuiued with the memo∣rie of this blessed Match, and Coniun∣ction: which may worke terror amongst our aduersaries, as oft as they heare the ioynt names of Great Britaine and France, in a chearefull manner repeated. To proceed then to those Royall Pas∣sages and triumphant Ceremonies which were performed at these great Nuptials. It is to be vnderstood that vpon Thurs∣day, being the eight of May, according to the French Computation, but the eight and twentieth of Aprill, according to our English account, the most Christian King of France, with his Queene, and
the Prince his onely Brother, and atten∣ded by my Lords the Dukes of Nemeurs and Elbeuf, the two great Marshalls of France, Mounsieur de Vitry and Bassom∣piere, With a world of other Noble-men, Ladies, Knights and Gentlemen, came forth of his Bed-chamber or Cabinet, in∣to the publique Presence Chamber, where he sent for the most Excellent Lady his Sister, who with all Solemnitie was pre∣sently brought forth by the Queene her Mother, and attended on by the Princesse of Conde, the Princesse of Countee, the Dutchesse of Guise, the Dutchesse of Cheureuse, and the Dutchesse of Elbeuf, and diuers other Ladies of State, and Maides of Honour: Her garments that day were exceeding rich and sumptuous, her Gowne being of cloth of gold, cut vpon cloth of siluer, and richly embrode∣red all ouer with Flower de Luces of gold, and chased and interlaid with Dimonds, Rubies, Pearle, and other rich Iuelrie of an inestimable valew: Her Traine was
borne vp by the young Lady of Burbon, her deare Kinswoman, and a Ladie of ex∣ceeding great beautie and wonderfull ad∣miration. After the Princesse had in reuerend and solemne wise done obeysance to the King her Brother, in which action of hu∣militie a man might haue beheld all the glorious beames of Maiestie and sweet∣nesse: there presently entred into the Chamber the Earle of Carlile, and the Earle of Holland, being both Ambassadors for his Maiestie of Great Britaine; and both so rich and sumptuously attired, that neither art nor wealth was able to exceed them. These two noble men in a most solemne and respectiue manner Deliue∣red to the King of France the Contract of Mariage, which was forthwith opened and publikely read by the Secretary of the Kings Cabinet in an high and audible voice, and then all other Couenants and agreements concluded vpon, the Con∣tract was allowed and ratified by the
Lord Chancellour, who made a congra∣tulatory speech in honour of that daies Ceremonie. Assoone as these things were perfor∣med, the two English Ambassadors with∣drew themselues into the Duke of Cheu∣reuse Chamber which was the Kings lodgings, when all accommodations ne∣cessary for them and that daies solemnitie was in goodly order prepared, here the Embassadours communicated vnto the Duke the Contract, who forthwith re∣turned againe to the King his Master, hauing the Embassadours also with him, and diuers other Noblemen of great ranke and place. The Duke was also himselfe most richly attired, and though the ground was blacke, yet was the im∣brodery of admirable value, and abun∣dance of Diamonds and other Precious stones bestowed within the same, but es∣pecially vpon the panes of his breeches and the tagges of his points, which were praised at an infinite world of treasure.
Assoone as the Duke was come before the King (after solemne reuerence done) hee presented to his Highnesse his pro∣curation, and shewed the authoritie and Commission which the King of great Britaine had giuen him, being in a certaine scedule annexed and fixt vnto the Contract, which after the King had read, hee allowed and signed also: so did the great Lady her selfe the Queene of France, and the Queene Mother, the Duke of Cheurus, to whom the proxey belonged, and both the Embassadours for England; then all things being brought to this perfection, the Cardi∣nall de la Roche Faucault attyred in all his pontificall roabes, after the custome and manner of the French Nation perfor∣med the Contract and published the af∣fiance in a most stately and reuerend manner, to the infinite ioy and con∣tentment of all the beholders, and the vnspeakeable comfort and prosperity of both the happy Kingdomes.
This Contract thus happily perfor∣med in the Kings Pallace of the Louure, forthwith our Ladies Church in Paris is chosen for the Celebration and finall conclusion of the euer-happy mariage; and that it might bee the fitter for the receipt of so great a pompe and state, it was out of hand hang'd all ouer with wonderfull rich Arras, cloth of Tissue, cloth of Gold, and cloth of Siluer; there was also in the same Church raised vp vpon goodly pillasters and gilt co∣lumbs a most rich and stately gallery or Scaffold of state, which extended from the first entry of the Archbishops house to the very Quire or vppermost end of the same Church, being a structure of such good liues, that art could not possible expresse any thing beyond it. The Pil∣lars and railes which did vnderprop this gallery were at the top couered with a very curious Purple or Violet coloured Sattin, all imbrodered and powdred ouer with golden Flower de Luces, and at the
bottomes they were ouerspread with ve∣ry fine white linnen and many burning tapers of waxe flaming about the same, so that the Church seemed like the Pal∣lace of the Sunne, described by Ouid in his second Booke of the transmutations of shapes. Through this Gallery the whole pompe and body of this Royall and vn∣matchable solemnity was to passe, which I haue thought good briefely to set downe as I receiued it from those which were Noble eye witnesses of the same. First, the perfixed day and houre for the solemnitie of this Royall and sacred Mariage being come, and the whole pompe thereof in a full readinesse, the first that marched forth were the hun∣dred Swissers of the Kings Guard all cloa∣thed in the Kings liuery of estate with their Drummes beating before and after them, the Fifes whistling, their Ensigne displayed, and all other things sutable to
a warlike preparation, for these are the Kings first, and indeede most souldier-like guard, being men of that temper and condition, that they are truely said to be borne Souldiers, liue Souldiers, and dye Souldiers. A good pretty space af∣ter them went twelue Hoboyes in the Kings liuery of Estate also, who playing vpon those loud Instruments strucke in∣to some admiration, but into all delight and pleasure. Next vnto these marcht in two ranckes eight of the Kings principall Drummes in their Liueries of Estate also, and these were said to beat their Drums with that brauery and couragiousnesse, that as it was said of Alexander, that when he heard Ionicke musicke, he would start vp, call for his sword and armour, and expresse all the passions of anger and fu∣rie, so there was not an eare that heard these, but awaked the heart to thinke of heroycall atchieuements. After these marched the Kings second Guard, consi∣sting of Frenchmen: Then came at least a
dozen Trumpets in their Liueries of E∣state also, with rich Banners containing the Kings full Coat Armour, and faire Cordans of watchet silke and gold suta∣ble to the rest in euery proportion. After these Trumpets came in a stately manner Mounsieur de Rhodes, who is the great Ma∣ster of the Ceremonies, being wonderful∣ly richly apparrelled, and at the least twen∣tie of the Kings ordinary Gentlemen at∣tending about him. Immediately after him went all the Lords, and others who were Knights of the great and renowned Order of the Holy Ghost, in the rich Roabs of their Order, and with their Palkes or Mantles of watchet veluet all, most brauely embrodered with Flower de Luces of gold, and their other garments shining with pretious stones and rich Iuel∣rie. Neare vnto these Knights went se∣uen Heralds at Armes in very rich Coats of Crimson Veluet, with the Armes of France, and all powdred ouer with gol∣den Flower de Luces. Close vnto these
Heraulds followed the two great great Marshalls of France, Mounsieur de Vitry, and Mounsieur Bassompiere; and after them came alone the Duke of Elbeuf in most sumptuous attire. Then a little di∣stance from him came (representing the Person of the Royall Bride-groome) the Duke of Cheureuse, in a sute of most rich perfumed blackecloth, cut vpon cloth of gold, and lined with rich Tissue; vpon his head he wore a Cap of cloth of gold, on which was fixed a Iewell of a most in∣estimable value, euery Diamond being so glorious, that it dazelled the eyes of all that gazed vpon it; about his body Bau∣tricke-wise he wore a wonderfull curious rich Scarffe, all embrodered ouer with Ro∣ses, and powdred with Paragon Dia∣monds, and great orient Pearle; he wore a short cloake all embrodered ouer with gold, and set with Diamonds so wonder∣full thicke and furiously, that in his mo∣uing hee seemed to burne and beare a li∣uing flame about him. After him came
the Earle of Carlile, and the Earle of Hol∣land (being the Extraordinary Embassa∣dors for the Maiestie of Great Britaine) and they were both apparrelled in white cloth of siluer, richly embrodered and in∣terchased with many pretious stones and wealthie Iuelry. Then came the King of France in his owne Person, in Royall garments of Estate, all embrodered ouer with gold and siluer, and almost couered ouer with rich Iewels, in his right hand holding the most Excellent Princesse his sister, who that day wore a Crowne of gold vpon her head, chased and set with Diamonds, and a world of other pretious stones, her Gowne was all powdred ouer with golden Flower de Luces: and on her other hand went Mounsieur the Kings Brother, wonderfull sumptuously attired, and not inferiour to any that hac place in the Royall assembly. Next vnto the King, Prince, and Royall Bride, followed the Queen Mother of France, very graue, yet richly attired: and after her came the
Queene of France, whose Gowne was all lulyeoly, embrodered ouer with gold and siluer, and set, and inchased with a world of pretious stones, Pearle, and o∣ther Iuelry; the Princesse of Conde, and the Princesse of Countee bore vp the Queenes long Traine. And after them followed the young Ladie of Montpensier, and the Countesse of Soysons, and other Ladies of the Kings bloud, in rich gownes brodered about with golden Flower de Luces. And after them the Dutchesse of Guise, the Dutchesse of Cheureuse, and the Dutchesse Elbeuf, with a world of other Ladies and Gentlewomen, which like so many faire Planets mouing in their seue∣rall orbes, made all the place like the Heauens sparkle with renowne and glo∣ry about them. After these came a lit∣tle world of Noble-men, Knights, and Gentlemen. And last of all came the Kings principall and chiefe Guard, con∣sisting onely of Stots and no other. All this royall and admired assemblie
hauing in this worthie equipage before described, aduanced themselues from the Kings Castle of the Louure to our La∣dies Church, they all made a stand at the entrie of the great porch of the Church, before which was a most stately scaffold mounted whereon to celebrate the mar∣riage, and in which place was raised a wonderfull rich and curious Canopie or vealt royall of cloth of gold richly em∣brodred, and held almost of and incom∣parable valew: to this Canopie or Vealt royall the King and Monsieur his bro∣ther conducted the Royall Bride their sister, and placing her vnder it, they there left her till some ceremonie were fini∣shed, then they resigned her vp into the hands of the Duke of Chereuse, to whom the Cardinall de la Roche Foncault came and performed all the ceremonies of marriage according to the orders of the Church, and the royall ceremonies of the French Nation, all acclamations of ho∣nour and renowne ringing about the
Church in a wonderfull manner. The ceremonies being thus finished all, the troopes and orders before rehearsed, passed in a most solemne manner vp in∣to the quire through along the gallerie, principally erected for that purpose, and going by a direct line, iust through the middest of the Church, and euery part thereof hung and adorned with won∣derfull rich cloth of Arras, being more then three quarters of gold or siluer. In the middest of the quire on both sides were placed diuers eminent and stately seates of more respect and view then any formerly repeated, on the prin∣cipall side whereof sate all my Lords the Presidents of the Parliaments of France, with their morters of gold vpon their heads, and their gownes, robes and hoods of rich scarlet all lined with Ermines, and some small degree below them sat all the Councellors of the high Courts of Par∣liament in gownes like vnto the Presi∣dents, and other things appropriated vn∣to their places.
In opposition vnto these, and in seats of like eminence, sat first alone by him∣selfe the Prouost of the Merchants of Pa∣ris, cloathed in a long roabe of Crimson and Purple, or Violet coloured Veluet, and neere vnto him the Sherifes of the Citie of Paris, and other principall Ma∣gistrates which were of especiall note both in the Citie and in the Vniuersitie. Not far from these seates, and in the quire also was mounted another scaffold or flore, being raised full three steps high, vpon which was mounted another large and goodly Canopie or Tent royall, vn∣der which the K. the Q. and the Q. mo∣ther, & Monsieur the Kings brother were placed and conducted this thereby the Duke of Cheureuse, and the two extraor∣dinarie Embassadors for the maiestie of great Brittaine, who after they had seene euerie ceremonie fitted, they withdrew themselues into the Archbishops pallace vntil the whole seruice was ended, & then they returned againe to the K. & Queene. When the formes or ceremonies of the
French deuotions were ended, and that the acclamations of the people had cary∣ed ioy to euery proceeding, then the whole troope returned, in the same forme or equipage as they came thither vnto the Archbishops pallace, where the whole Court supped, and were entertained with all the state, pompe, and magnificence that could bee deuised. During all the pompe and solemnitie of which feast, there was heard such thundring vollies of Cannon, and other great shot that the ecchoing report thereof was carried ma∣ny leagues off, and euen iudgement it selfe could not but stand amazed to see and heare the wonderfull terrors which pro∣ceeded from pleasure and reioycings. Af∣ter these infinite vollies of shot, was seene many other triumphes, as bonefires, fire∣workes, feasts, musickes of all kinds, and all sounds, dancings, maskings, & all ma∣ner of reuells, that France seemed to in∣tend nothing but the present rauishing ioy, & well; & truly may it be said of her
that then now she was neuer seene more pleasant, neuer more abundantly clothed with contentments and comforts. But here least I might be thought to gallop too swiftly ouer the glorie of this high state and magnificence, and like the dogs vpon the riuer Nilus to catch here and there a lap running, I will borrow leaue a little to speake of the powerfull state and magnificence of this hardly pa∣ralleld feast and sumptuous triumph. It is therefore first to be vnderstood that this glorious and royall feast was held in the great hall belonging to the Archbishops pallace, being a roome of wonderfull long extent, the table stretch∣ed out from the one end of the hall to the other, and being couered and adorned with wonderfull rich damaske, and the salts and other apparrell of infinite price and valew, the King of France sat in the middest of the table, and was serued by the grand Prior of France, who that day represented the person of the great Ma∣ster
of France, before him marched eight drums, foure fifes, and sixteene trumpets, besides a world of clarions, hoboyes, cor∣nets, and other loud instruments, his per∣son was accompanied with Monsieur Be∣aumont, Lord grand Steward of the kings house, and two and thirtie other inferior Stewards of his Maiesties houshold with white staues in their hands, and other en∣signes of their seuerall places. The meat was this day carried vp by the Lords, Princes, Dukes, Peeres, Mar∣shals, and Barons of France, followed by Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen of the Court, and other inferiour officers and seruants. Now touching the particular seruices of state, you shall vnderstand that Monsier Iainuilde serued this day as the Lord great Pantler of France, the Duke of Elbeufe was Cupbearer, and the Earle of Harcourt was Caruer. The Queene mother sat on the right hand of the King, and her person was attended by the Duke of Belgard principall Sewer,
the Duke of Vzias, and the Duke of Lux∣embourge. The Queene of France her∣selfe sat on the right hand of the Queene mother, and was attended by the Duke of Aluine, the Duke Brissac, and the Duke of Chaune. The Queene of great Brit∣taine sat on the Kings left hand, and was attended by the Marshall de Vittry, who serued her as great Pantler, the Marshall de Aubeterce, who serued her as Cup∣bearer, and the Marshall Bassampiere as Caruer. My Lord the Duke of Cheureuse sat next the Queene of great Brittaine, and was attended by the Lord of Roch∣fort. The Earle of Carlile, and the Earle of Holland Embassadors for the Maiesty of great Brittaine sate next the Duke of Cheureuse, and lastly Monsier the Kings brother sate neere vnto the Queene, and after him the rest of the Peeres and Prin∣ces, all which were serued and attended on in most magnificent and heroycall manner. After the solemnitie of this great
and royall feast, the King, Queenes, and Princes returned backe to the Louuer, where there was great store of Musicke, Dauncing, and Reuells, and the ioy of that daies happie and blessed vnion, de∣priued the night of her ordinarie accu∣stomed dues, so that rest was in a manner quite forgotten, and the night and day were both thought too scant and confi∣ned to expresse a ioy so strong and dy∣lated. After these ceremonies and celebrati∣ons were to the contentment of all true hearted subiects finished, the euer admi∣red and most excellent Queene of great Brittaine, after some short time of repose, with a wonderfull glorious traine of Princes, Noblemen, Ladies, and all the choicest flowres of France, tooke her hap∣pie iourney towards Bulloyne, where af∣ter some trauell, and the expence of some few daies, her Maiestie arriued with great prosperitie; for in that place lay at an∣chor the goodly fleet of great Brittaine,
readie to waft and carrie her Maiestie ouer at her owne appointment, and in the passage of this fleet, there was one thing remarkeable, as that in their depar∣ture from England the wind rose vp so full South and South-West, being the on∣ly wind which was opposite and contra∣rie to their course, that but with infinite great trouble and vexation they had power to attaine to the French shore, but being there arriued, immediatly the wind rose vp full North-East, which was like∣wise the most contrarie wind for their re∣turne that could possibly blow from any part of the Compasse, neither was the Contrariety of this winde of a meane and indifferent nature, but so violent, feirce and impatient that it was hardly possible for any Ship to liue or Continue vpon that roade, and although the necessity of their present occasion, the command and seruice to which was boūd the vttermost of there obedience, and many other tyes inforst them to vse all Art, Care and wise∣dome
still to continue in that place, yet was the impatience of the winds so great that in despight of all art or industry the goodly and tall ship called the Prince spent an anchor of aboue 30. hundred weight, the Anne, the Assurance, and all the rest of the fleete were on drift, and all hope be∣ing cut off to continue longer in that place, and they must now looke for for∣raigne safetie. But Ecce quam opportunum, behold how great and good our God is in these fatall extremities, for in the very minute of this Desperation and Discon∣tentment the Queene of great Britaine came to Bulloigne, and as if her very pre∣sence had dispeld the winde, or the sweete∣nesse of her excellent nature, had put into insensible things a sensible feeling of the Iniuries which might be done to her goodnes by the impatiencie of such stor∣my weather, presently the storme & winds ceased and the Sea became so calme and milde that not a wrinkle was to be seene vpon Neptunes face, & the windes as if
they strugled to Conduct & bring her to the place where both her royal Lords and her own wishes and the peoples longings hourely aspired and that withall ease comfort and sweetenesse, they presently rose vp so calmely and with such deli∣cate breath that Ioyning with the gentlenesse of the easie tides all so hap∣pily concurred together that not the best wish was able to out-reach the happy euent. This obseruation being taken both by her Excellent selfe, and those carefull Princes who had the charge of her Roy∣all Person, shee presently tooke her Barge vpon Sunday about ten of the clocke in the fore-noone, being the ninth of this instant Iune, according to our English computation and so came a boord a goodly and stately ship, called the Prince, being Admirall, where after a world of shouts, prayers, vowes and acclamations for the prosperitie of her happie iourney; they hoisted saile, and came that day a∣bout
six of the clocke in the after-noone vnto the Towne of Douer in England, where she was receiued with that ioy and humble respect, that neuer Queene could boast of a more generall applause. From the water shee was conducted in most stately and magnificent manner to Douer Castle, where her Highnesse reposed her selfe that night, being royally entertained both by the Towne and Countrey, and magnificently feasted and accommoda∣ted with all the delights and pleasures which the leasure of that busie affaire could giue any libertie vnto. Vpon Munday being the thirteenth of Iune, the Kings most Excellent Maiestie came vnto Douer about ten of the clocke in the fore-noone, and after little short preparation, the Queene being full of all ioyfull expectation, they met together in the Priuie Chamber, where in the first in∣counter she threw her selfe into his armes with that boundlesse and vnexpresseable affection, that vertue, modestie, and all the
perfections which can crowne the best and most excellent creature, might there haue learned the worthiest rules both of honour, true loue, and obedience; neither did shee so soone cast her selfe into his armes, as withall instantly threw downe her selfe vpon her knees before him, gi∣uing vp into his sacred protection, her life, libertie, seruice, and euerlasting obe∣dience, acknowledging her selfean Hand∣maid to his goodnesse, and that all the powers and strength both of her minde and bodie should wholly and absolutely, next vnto her God, rest euer bound to his Kingly Commandements. What tongue or pen is able to expresse that ioy where∣with he receiued her, and her deare pro∣testations, for scarsely could you say shee is now vpon her knees, when with all the tendernesses which an immaculate and vnspotted affection could expresse, hee presently tooke her vp into his armes, kist her againe, and gaue her those deare expressions of a neuer changing loue,
that the beholders might see how each o∣thers heart flew out at the windowes of their eyes, and by adeliazan enterchange lodged themselues in each others bo∣some: after these pure and vnfained caress∣ments, they fell into priuate conference, and so passed the time till dinner; which finished, the King and Queene depar∣ted from Douer, and being come out of the Towne, a gallant volley of shot was deliuered both from the Castle and ships, which continued so long and loud, that the very peale in the eccho carried backe her royall welcome vnto Callyes. Being come from the Towne of Douer, they came vpon Barrome Downe, a spatious and goodly place, where were assembled all the English Nobilitie, and many La∣dies of Honour and high place, which being ranckt according to the dignitie of their great places, and the knight Marshall with a carefull respect keeping the vulgar from intruding or doing them offence. The King and Queene in great State rode
betweene them, giuing such respect and grace to euery one of deseruing quali∣tie, that euery one stroue in their prayers and praises, to let the world vnderstand the infinitenesse of their ioy and com∣fort. From Barrome Downe the King and Queene came the same night to the Citie of Canterburie, all the wayes whereupon they rode being strewed with greene rushes, Roses, and the choisest flowers that could be gotten, and the trees loaden with people of all sorts, who with shouts and acclamations gaue them a continuall welcome. Being come neare vnto the Citie, their Highnesses were met, and receiued by the Maior, and the rest of the Citie Magistrates, and so brought within the walles, where was pronounced be∣fore them diuers learned gratulatory Ora∣tions, and such infinite preparations made of all kindes for the generall entertain∣ment, that Canterbury seemed for that lit∣tle time, a very Eden or Paradise, where
nothing was wanting that might serue ioy or delight. Master IOHN FINCH his Speech to King CHARLES at Canterbury, May 30. 1625. MOst Gratious and dread Soueraigne: Those that would keepe their spi∣rits in a iust and true temper, vse∣full for speech or action, had need of a watchfull eye vpon two principall causes of their decay, the ouer-contracting, and the too-much extending of them; where∣of the last doth most impouerish and weaken: whence it commeth, that in weightie griefes the spirits being pent vp and imprisoned, haue often the doores of vtterance shut against them: but in exces∣siue ioy, where they spread and make hast to get forth by expression, they are com∣monly scattered and lost. Both these are at this time combined
against vs, your Maiesties humblest and meanest subiects. When we remember what a glorious and good King wee haue lost. A King from his cradle to those very yeeres that are the common measure of this short line of Life, exercised in all the wisdome of well gouerning. A King that hauing ta∣ken away the wall of Separation united two puissant and military Nations redu∣ced Ireland by forren plantations, gaue this Realme a large portion of the new world, and reigned aboue twentie yeares in such peace and felicitie, as was beyond the euent of former times; for euen in the happie daies of Queene Elizabeth of famous memory, her first yeares were in∣terrupted by a Rebellion in England, and her last by a Rebellion in Ireland. A King that by his incomparable Writings, pro∣claimed himselfe true Defender of the Faith; and like Iosua, made the walles of spirituall Ierico fall downe before him. When wee but remember this (as who
can euer forget it) how are our sorrowes prest together, or who can finde any doore of speech to let his griefe forth at? Non est dolor sicut iste, There is no wo can parallel this. But when we turne our eies and hearts vpon your most excellent Maiestie, the true Heire of all his Princely Vertues, when in your Royall Person wee see all these blessings and fauours of God entai∣led vpon vs, and by this happie Coniun∣ction now descendable to all posteritie: who can draw forth the Legions of his ioy in order, or finde a language fit for the gladnesse of his heart. He that is borne a King (most Gratious Soueraigne) can hardly attaine one point of perfection in Gouernment, the know∣ledge of obeying well. A contemplation which in one act of obedience in Henry the fift, (who was one of the noblest Prin∣ces that euer swayed the Scepter of this Kingdome from the Conquest to his times, and he matched with a Daughter of France) gaue extraordinary comfort
vnto his Father, a wise and prudent King. What happinesse then hath your Maiestie sealed vs an assurance of, who hauing in all the actions of your life beene an excel∣lent Sonne to your Royall Father, can ne∣uer be other then an excellent Father to your people. On the Throne (for Hills best discouer Valleyes) Princes may with much aduantage, as in a perspectiue glasse draw the state of the Common-wealth nearer their sight; but when they descend from themselues, and grow acquainted with the hearts and affections of their sub∣iects; this is to measure the Valleyes at hand, and not at distance, and doth at once winne hope of their goodnesse, and make vs in awe of their wisdome. Such were the effects of your Maiesties Princely Iudgement, when in the last (by you made happie) Parlament, and in the Assembly preceding it, your Highnesse, Exuta purpura, forgetting you were the only Sonne of the King, became the Son of the Kingdome, and tooke vpon your selfe the cares and desires of it. (By which,
as by the balme of Gilead, our wounds were healed in time, and all of vs as much incouraged (in humble and dutifull manner) to present our iust greuances vnto you, as we are deterred from crea∣ting any such out of our owne vaine or vnmannerly fancies. Your Maiesties beames like those of the Sunne-rising were then most comfortable, now that your Maiestie is in the exaltation of your orbe, we cannot but hope to finde more benigne and serene aspects. But there is yet one ioy aboue all these and which seasons all our other blessings, your Maiesties so knowne and knowing zeale for true religion. Princes indued with morall vertues are like Diamonds, rich, but rough and vnpolished, it is the knowledge and feare of God only adds the true luster and sets them faire. This was our vnspeakable comfort, and a blessing England must neuer be vnmindfull of, when you our Sunne were in the West, and a full halfe yeares night clouded all our hearts with a feare∣full darkenesse.
Let it not (most gratious and mighty King) be registred in your Royall heart amongst the errors of this City, that your Highnesse was heere stayed in that your Iourney, (for I see they are damp at the re∣membrance of it) and humbly expect to haue their pardon sealed by one gra∣tious looke of yours. True it is, like vnskilled Astronomers, not knowing the Sunnes proper course, we had all our eyes only on the rapid motion of those times. But therein these your Maiesties faithfull subiects did but in little draw a perfect modell of the se∣cret votes and desires of your whole Kingdome, which afterwards vpon your Highnesse returne, brake forth into flames of ioy not vnacceptable vnto you. The hearty affection of your subiects is like the soule of man, all in all, and all in euery part of your Kingdome. Vouch∣safe then (most Gratious and Soueraigne Leige) as in that, so now from these your humble and faithfull subiects, the Maior, Aldermen, and whole commi∣nalty
of this City, graciously to accept that Loyall and hearty welcome which the fulnesse of ioy makes dew from all, and be not displeased, if as Iacob did the King of Kings, we haue once more stayed your Maiestie till wee might receiue a blessing from you. This City (my most gratious Soue∣raigne) hath beene the seate of Kings and in repute amongst other Cities of this Kingdome. Velut inter ignes Luna mino∣res. In King Ethelberts time aboue a thou∣sand yeares since, it was Caput imperij sui: and by his donation to Austen made the first Archbishops Sea, in which the most part of threescore and foureteene Metri∣politans haue kept their residence. Many of the Saxon Kings lie buried heere, and since the conquest Henry the Fourth, the first King of the line of Lan∣caster, and that famous Edward the black Prince, who brought almost as much sor∣row to France as your Maiestie hath now done ioy. Fuimus Troes, but by fier and consu∣mer
worse then that (Intestiue discord and dissention) it hath beene so often torne and defaced, that scarce any foot∣steps of the ancient splendor are now to be discouered. Some fauours only of your Maiesties Royall Progenitors haue kept life in it, and held it vp by the Chinne. Henry the third endowed it with ma∣ny ample priuiledges. Henry the sixt bestowed the Maioral∣tie vpon vs, from whose time downe∣wards, Dum nos aliquod nomenque decusque Gessimus, forty together of the best name and bloud in this country, beare that office heere. Edward the fourth made it a County of it selfe, seuered and distinct from the rest of Kent. Your Maiesties most Royall Father (of euer blessed and happy memory) con∣firmed all our ancient liberties and be∣stowed on vs this sword, the ensigne of Honor and Iustice. The competent distance from the Sea,
and a Riuer that with no great cost might be made nauigable, shew how na∣turall apt it is to embrace great traffique: And since it is the stayers by which all Ambassadors of forraigne Princes and strangers ascend your Imperiall chamber of London, we hope it will one day bee held not vnworthy the high thoughts of so great and glorious a King as King Charles, to make it in some sort proporti∣onable to the rest of that building. It had once a Mint in it, but this poore present, will quickly tell your Maiestie that is gone. Only as the glory of starrs is not alwayes in their magnitude, wee hope the humble Zeale with which it is offered will finde your Maiesties Grati∣ous and benigne Interpretation. The God of Dauid be euer with King Charles, and make his throne greater then the throne of his Father.
Master IOHN FINCH his Speech to King CHARLES and his Queene at Canterbury, Iune. 1. 1625. IN all Sacrifices vnder the Law, Most High and Mightie King (Most Gratious and most Illustrious Queen) two things were of Principall vse and mysterie, Fire and Salt, one taught vs the necessitie of Zeale, the other how to make that Zeale acceptable by right guiding & ordering of it: for preposterous Zeale is like an excellent Instrument well strung, but out of tune. The glory and grace now shi∣ning vpon vs from your High Maiesties, like the heauenly fire of Elias Sacrifice, hath so filled our soules with ioy and gladnesse, that our humble and heartie expressions can neuer distrust your grati∣ous acceptations, when all things con∣cur to inflame the zeale of English harts, that we could hope, or our Enemies feare.
This happie Vnion of two great and Potent Kingdoms in this so glorious and blessed Coniunction of your most Excel∣lent Maiesties, and this Regina votorum, this faire Daughter of France, whom our prayers and earnest expectations haue so long attended. Kingdomes are but E∣pitomies of the World, as families are of them, yet in good neighbours both take comfort. If we credit some remaines of Antiquity France and England haue been heretofore cōioyned by an Istmus of land, where that small channell runs that now diuides vs. Certaine it is we may say with the Poet, Hic vertex nobis semper sublimis. One Sunne serues our turne by day, and the same Pole-starre by night: At illum sub pedibus Styx atra videt manesque profundi, There be that glory of many scattered kingdomes and titles in euery part of the world one: But in this neighbourhood of hearts is yet neerer then that of habi∣tations. For kingdomes separate in affe∣ction, are like the feet of Nebuchadnez∣zers
Image, part yron, part clay, that ne∣uer mingle well. No two Nations vn∣der heauen (the Spaniards and Mores ex∣cept) giue more assurance of consangui∣nitie by the affections and dispositions of the people, then these two, both of able bodies, and fitting spirits, free and socia∣ble, of a sweetnesse not allayed with the dulnesse of some, nor blowne vp with the affected grauitie and pride of others, a fi∣ner and gentle temper, such as should be in men that were created for Cities, and not for Desarts. Both Nations military and populous, both ioyning together able to afford many armies, without the aid of auxiliary forces. France the best Caualry of the world, and what Infantrie England yeelds, Spaine can best tell. Your thrice renowned Father, Henry the Great (Most excellent Lady) knew wel, and loued well this Nation: Nor was the faithfull seruice it did him without some secret and diuine instinct that from his loynes should come; Magnae spes altera
Britanniae, a companion fit for the glorie of the Brittish Throne, as at this day to our infinite comfort wee all behold. It was the Daughter of Clotarius, King of France, that in this Citie liued and plan∣ted the Christian Faith here. From a Daughter of France came Edward the third of England, a glorious and happie Prince. By another match with the Daughter of Charles the sixt of France did our Henry the first reconcile those diffe∣rences, which the sword and warre could neuer doe betweene vs. All ages haue found happinesse in our vniting: and our dissensions neuer relished of others mis∣fortune. But if euer, now, euen now was the true period of time to summon our ancient affections to a new league, when the Chariot of Iehu driues so furiously, when our neighbours and allies are so neare danger, if not ruine, when (Oh that my tongue could not speake it, but gratiously be pleased in the day of the gladnesse of thy heart, O Queene, to be put in minde of it)
so many Royall branches of that blessed tree that now growes in Paradice, liue transplanted, nay torne away from their owne proper soyle, and still droope by the ouer-dropping of far-spreading trees whose sappe is sower and leafe balefull. The Kings of England and France haue euer ballanced the affayres of Chri∣stendome, and seuerally put weight in∣to the westerne scales, or abated them by counterpoyse as occasion of) state hath required. Now they both meete in one scale, no doubt the hand of heauen hath written Mene tekel vpon the painted wall of their opposers, numbred and weighed their strength in the ballance, and found it to light. A blessing not to haue beene hoped for, but in this happy vnion of your sacred persons, in whom (as many waters that make one great riuer) the Royall bloud of many Princes is met to make perfect your greatnesse in glory & allyance. That of England Scotland and Denmarke but one
discent of, in your sacred person (Dread so∣ueraigne) and though farther (which per∣haps doth best, for some springes runne clearest farre from their head) the bloud of Spaine also in your most excellent person (Thrice illustrious Queene) the bloud of France, Nauarre, and the grea∣test Princes of Italy in both of you, and not without some great and happy prediction (for Heauenly bodies in con∣iunction haue their glory doubled) the two Royall branches of Charlemain, and Hugh Capell are now growne into one tree. It was a Charles brought the Empire first to France, A Charles that brought it first to Spaine. Non indebita poscas Regna tuis fatis. It would ill become our ioyes to take time from yours. Be gratiously pleased (most gratious and excellent Princes) in this poore earnest, of that humble, Loyall and hearty affections, with which these graue Magistrates meete the felicity you bring vs, to take
possession of this City, our hearts, and all that is ours. And the Author of all good∣nesse, powre downe vpon you and vs, the eternity of Ioyes, that the Daughter, Sister, Spouse of Kings may be heere made the Mother of Kinges, who when you are crowned with heauenly glory may sit vpon this Throne for euer. Et na∣ti natorum, & qui nascentur abillis: to the end of all Kingdomes.
nothing was wanting that might serue ioy or delight. On Wednesday the King and Queene departed from Canterbury, and rode in the most triumphant manner that might be to Cobham Hall, finding (as before I said) all the high-waies strewed with Roses, & all maner of sweet flowers, & here at Cob∣ham they lodged al that night, where there was all plentifull entertainment, and nothing wanting that might adde any honour either to the King or Kingdome. On Thursday being the Sixteenth of Iune according to our Computation the King and Queene departed from Cobham all the waies prepared as hath been before shewed, and so in most glorious manner came to the City of Rochester where there was expectation of some stay; but the day being spent too farre they rid thorow the City, notwithstanding the Maior, Magi∣strates & Citizens of that City gaue both the King & Queene a noble & most hear∣ty welcome, and the Recorder of the City made vnto them a most learned and elo∣quent
oration, for which both the King and Queene returned back their Royall thanks and so passing away from the Ci∣ty a braue volley of shot and great Ord∣nance was deliuered from the Shippes which lay vpon the Riuer. From the City of Rochester the King and Queene came to the Towne of Grauesend, where whether it was the ig∣norance of the Pourtereeue or the ouerru∣ling power of weake (but imagined wise) Counsell, or that the preuiledge of old rusty custome, or some other knot which my weake braine is not able to vn∣tie. I know not, but most assured it is, that neither the Portereeue nor any of his bre∣thren gaue the King or Queene any en∣tertainment or tender of seruice vntill their highnesses were come into the very midst and as it were the very Center of their Towne, and there they made tender of their seruice and obedience, which was receiued withall Royall alacrity both of the King and Queene, and so they passed away in state towards the Bridge
where the Barges of State attended their approach, here they dismounted, and all the Nobilitie attending on each side of the Bridge, with a world of La∣dies and Gentlewomen: here they tooke sollemne leaue of the King and Queene, and kissed both their hands, but such was the excellent disposition of the Queene, and so royall and bountifull, her grace and fauour, that to euery La∣die that came to kisse her hand, shee bowed her selfe downe and kissed their cheekes. Assoone as the King and Queene were entred into their Barge of Estate, and had a little put off from the shoare, the Blocke-house which stan∣deth vpon the Kentish shoare first let flie all her Ordnance, and sent foorth a peale, that the Rockes and Chaulkie Cliffes resounded againe, which was no sooner finished, but immediately the Blocke-house which standeth on the Essex shore made answere with the like Musicke, and discharged all her Ordnance; so that the smoake mixing
and meeting together, made a cloud which enterposed betwixt the earth and the Sunnes brightnesse making an Euening at Noone day. After the Blocke-houses had thus dis∣charged all their Ordnance, then as the King and Queene passed along, the Shippes which lay and anchored in the way, discharged their vollies distinctly after one another; Insomuch that the vollie was hardly euer found to cease for the passage of twelue or fifteene miles together. And the neerer the King and Queene came to the Citie of London, the greater and greater still the volley increased. Lastly, a little before the King and Queene had shot the Bridge, the Tower of London let flie her Ordnance, which did so thunder and rattle in the aire, that nothing could be heard for the terror of the noice. The throng of spectatours was so great, that about two hundred being in a shippe that lay almost drie, and leaning against the Wharfe, they with their waight
and motion ouerthrew the Shippe into the Thames. And by the way during all this long passage, both the King and Queene stood publiquely in the o∣pen Barge, and not onely discouered themselues to euery honest and cheare∣full beholder, but also with all Royall affabilitie and grace distributed their fa∣uours to all those which came to ad∣mire them, so that there was not a li∣uing soule which did not in heart con∣clude and say with the Poet, Quā bene cōueniunt et in vna sede morātur Maiestas & Amor.— And thus at last the King and Queene came to the Kings Palace at White-hall, where they were receiued with all the ac∣clamations of ioy that might bee, and where I am now inforced to leaue them with this true and euer heartie prayer, that it would please God to blesse them toge∣ther with daies of the longest extent that euer made happie any mortall creature, to send them faire and flourishing Issue, and when they shall of necessitie be translated
from this life, that they may raigne with God in glory euerlasting. Amen. ¶ The Feasting of the Duke de Cheueres, and the two French Embas∣sadours, with the declaration of the Ma∣riage of the King and Queene. THe Tuesday being the 21. of Iune, the great Banquetting-house of White∣hall was prepared, and hung very richly with hangings of Silke and Gold, where at the one end of the house was placed the Chaires and Cloth of State, at the other end a sumptuous Cupbord of Plate in manner of an arch; in the middle of the house was placed one other Cupbord, not so great, but of a farre greater value, being Basons, Ewers, Cups, Salts, &c. all set with Iewels, and of Christall at the root. Then about eleuen of the clock the the King leading his Queen, accompanied with the Duke de Cheueres, and his Dut∣ches, with the two French Embassadors, with all the rest of the Nobilitie and La∣dies, as well English, as Scots and French,
in most glorious attires and brauery, and such like as neuer before hath been seene in England, so that the Iewels of the Duke de Cheueres were reported to be worth an hundred thousand pounds. The King being placed on this manner, with the Queene on his right hand, the Articles of the Marriage were read there in publique assembly, and approued by the King and the French Embassadors: After the which blessing being giuen by a Bishop, the King kissed the Queene in presence of the whole people. After which they reti∣red to the Priuie Chamber, while the din∣ner was prepared, which was brought vp; after warning giuen with Drummes and Trumpets, whereunto the King, with the Duke and the two Embassadors came, the King sate in his Chaire of Estate, the Duke at the end of the Table, with one Embassadour at either hand, where in the time of Dinner the King dranke three Healthes to the Embassadors, which was proclaimed all ouer the house, one to the King of France, one to the Queene, and
one other to the Queene Mother. Thus being feasted with three great seruices, and musicke playing all the while, they ended the Banquet at foure of the clocke, and retired backe to the Priuie Chamber, where they continued one houre, and af∣ter the King and the Queene, the Duke, and the rest of the Nobilitie, Lords and Ladies, returned, where they had dancing for the space of one houre: which being done, the Duke returned to Somerset∣house in great State, his Coach hauing eight horses, Coach-harnesse, and all be∣ing embrodered, together with three or foure score of Coaches of the richest that euer was seene in England, accompanied with diuers of the Nobilitie. FINIS.
