6290 99840924 5468
A BRIEFE DISCOVRSE DIA∣LOGVEVVISE, SHEVVING how false & dangerous their reports are, which affirme, the Spaniards intended inuasion to be, for the reestablishment of the Romish religion; for her Maiesties succors giuen to the Nether∣landers, and for Sir FRANCES DRAKES enterprise three yeares past into the VVest Indies. Imprinted at London by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blacke Friers neere Ludgate. 1590.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE CHARLES LORD HOWARD, BARON OF EFFINGHAM, Lord high Admirall of England, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of her Maiesties most hono∣rable priuie Counsell, E. Da. wisheth long life, with increase of all honor and vertue. WHO so shall duely obserue Homer describing contention (vvhom he nameth the sister of Mars,Lib. 4. Ilia. being at her birth litle, but after, though keeping her feete on the earth, yet increasing till she touch the hea∣uens vvith her head: procuring in this grouth, noises, debates, di∣scensions, teares, sighes and late repentance) vvil say, notvvithstanding that the Poet vvere blind, that he savve as farre as our time in which this foo∣lish Goddesse shaketh like a fearefull earthquake the founda∣tions both of the Ecclesiasticall and ciuill state. In considera∣tion vvhereof (right honorable Lord) and that many are moued by some aspects of contention iniuriously to report her Maiesties proceedings vvith the Spaniard (she hauing li∣ued in greater temperance then any Prince of her time) I thought meete (those rumors extenuating his ambition and auarice long preceding any act done by her Maiestie to him) to prooue that his enterprises and desire of this kingdome
vvere of longer life then her Maiesties attemptes: to the end that our people (apprehending his iniustice for piety, offe∣red against the dignitie of Kings, and equitie of nations) may, knovving the counterfeit, abide in their place of obe∣dience and dutie. This labour, though neither for matter or volume, vvorthy your honorable vievve, I notvvithstan∣ding (as bound heretofore for your L. fauors tovvards me to yeeld some agreeable seruice) humbly dedicate to your good L. vvhose noble bearing dravveth to it by a forcible povver of vertue, the hartie and good affections of all men. Take therefore my good Lord the same in good part of him, vvho prayeth to your L. increase of long health, honor and all the vertues of true Nobilitie. Your Lordships most bounden in dutie EDWARD DAVNCE.
A BRIEFE DISCOVRSE DIALOGVEVVISE SHEVVING HOWE FALSE AND DAVNGEROVS their reports are, which affirme the Spaniards intended inua∣sion to be, for the reestablishment of the Romish religion; for her Maiesties succors giuen to the Netherlanders, &c. and for Sir Frances Drakes enterprise three yeares past into the West Indies. Epoenetus, Philemon. AFTER her Maiestie had taken (though at the worst hand) the offers of the lower countryes; many, whom nothing (if not fa∣thered by them selues) can please, affirmed that she recea∣ued by that meane a sword (as the prouerbe is) annointed with honie; inferring therby not on∣ly a sweetnesse, by retaining them mingled with danger; but also, that howsoeuer she gouerned; whether by lenitie or rigor, they as a people im∣patient of order, would not be prescribed, but would either with the crabfish, being held loosly creepe forth; or hard strained with the eele slip
away: by meane whereof she might not onely liue doubtfull of them; but also for their sakes, raise a cruel and vntractable enemie against her. These things (as noting the iniurious sclaun∣ders of this time) I proposed in the presence of diuers, amongst whom there was then by occa∣sion, a gentleman of those parts named PHILE∣MON, who after long fixing his eyes on me, with such countenance as he had againe beheld the deepe wounds of his countrey newly bleeding; at last turned to the rest and said. Nothing (Gen∣tlemen) hath in this life bene dearer to me then the libertie of my countrey, the which with o∣thers, whilst I might, I endeuored to make eter∣nall: neither had we failed to effect so much, had not the ambition of strangers, meeting with our discension, brought forth the first fruicts of our miseries: since which time our prouinces haue bene so tost with the contrarie winds of fortune, that fewe could keepe their ores, or holde the sterne of gouernement: for whilst many com∣maunded, fewer hauing learned to obey, we were distracted into sundrie fauors: some as ne∣uer acquainted with the condition of libertie, preferring the title of Burgūdie, some the neigh∣bourhood of the Empire, some of France, and
others the alliance with England, each one be∣stowing their apologies, either in the conceits of Guses, Patriats, or malcontents: by meane whereof all parts in steed of our countrey sports, were so filled with tokens of warre, that no place was left for good men to bewaile this change. But when after long deliberation, we had, as wel for our vnion with you in matters of religion, as our present necessitie both of defence and inter∣course of trafficke, cast our selues into the armes of Englād: some hope remained of better speed had not the diuision of opinions for a time stayd her Maiesties laudable endeuors: during which consultation, the Duke of Parma hauing spee∣dilier deliberated, bereued vs of Antwerpe (the key of our prouinces) by which he hath since entered other townes and forts of account. And though we tooke hurt by her Maiesties cuncta∣tiō, who according to her wonted pietie, sought to reconcile our prouinces to Spaine, yet we in∣termitted not any thing that might concerne ei∣ther our ancient alliance, or duties of subiectes, but haue preferred the honor of her nation be∣fore any, as our importunat sute to be shadowed vnder her wing of iustice, and our seruice dayly attendant, haue made apparant. After which
speeches PHILEMON with his eyes full of teares turning againe towards me, said, How miserable is our time in which auarice and tyrannie keepe weight, & are higher priced then honestie? and wherein wolues quarrell with lambes for trou∣bling the streame: and the mouth, hands, and other members conspire against the belly? and herein moreouer is our sorow inexplicable, that whilst her Maiesty endeuored to haue due place among the best Princes, and we to liue in the or∣der of good subiectes, that yet both haue bene subiect to one sclaunder, farre vnmeete for her royall dignitie, our innocencie and loyaltie. To which I answered. It is true PHILEMON that ma∣nie by often lying beleeue they speake the only oracles of God, by meane whereof all good en∣terprises are either suppressed, or so obscured, that the light of honour due to them and their authors, seemes either eclipsed, or cleane put out: a practise drawen, as I thinke, from the cu∣stome of ill women, who to be lesse blamed, ac∣cuse all vertuous and chast matrons of lightnes, and herein is our disgrace the greater, in that we haue bred those birds that haue not onely peckt at our eyes, but also haue defiled their owne nest with all infamie, not fearing (though they would
seeme the louing sonnes of our countrey, and readie sacrifices for her health) to be the obli∣ged pensioners of Spaine, iniuriously repor∣ting that the motions of that kingdome, are for matter of religion, her Maiesties fauors towards your people, and her enterprise into the VVest Indies: slanders of so apparant danger, the same extenuating the precedent auarice and ambitiō of Spaine, meeting with the ill humors of our people, that I maruell those feigners should no lesse in their conuenticles lament their practise, then Cicero wondered the Aruspices could in deluding the people, forbeare laughter behol∣ding one another. To which PHILEMON; the sunne hath not beheld anie thing more vnseme∣ly then this pretence of iustice, cloked with a deepe desire of noueltie: those rumors being not onely factious, but also false, and regarding the time, full of perill and danger, as you EPOE∣NETVS, said he, may know, if you loke but as far as the emperour Charles the fift, when Granuel∣lanus in our prouinces, and Philip not long after in this realme, sought to make our golden fleece and your Lion a pray for the Egles of Austria. Then I. I am not ignorant PHILEMON of ei∣ther: for whilst all places (as with bright tropheis
of papacie) were lightened with the burnt bo∣dies of the people; Philip hoised his first saile of ambition, which as a skilfull maister he bare so lowe, that many fauored his course, and wished him the good windes of fortune, especially his wife Mary, who being perswaded by him, it wold greatly aduance her authority, were he crow∣ned and made her companion of dignity, se∣riously endeuored (not knowing howe much that ceremony would preiudice her succession) to effect his purpose. To this she was also great∣ly incited by the clergie, who to make sure their particular, by that mean, cared not to hazard the generall state of the realme. But the Lords, who by an ancient policie had greater interest in matters of gouernement, hauing more cause to regard the reputation of their houses (likely to diminish by his neighbourhood) then the Pre∣lats their momentanie dignities, withstood it as a matter dangerous, and not without common perill. This purpose being ouerthrowne by their prouidence, he taketh occasion by tumults hap∣pening about that season, to perswade his wife to new matter, seeming not only profitable, but also necessarie for both, alledging that he often departing this realme for the affaires of his own
countries, could not without danger performe the parts of a louing husband towards her, the blockhouses standing which might prohibit his returne, and the want of common fauor remai∣ning. For greater credit whereof he cited a late act then of the valorous Baron the Lord VVil∣liam Howard of Effingham high Admiral of En∣gland, who being sent to conduct him with the nauie, brought the kings ship in perill, by deliue∣ring some great shot, for that he wouldnot, as the custome is, strike saile, by which ceremo∣nie he was to acknowledge the Queenes so∣ueraigntie in these seas. I was, said PHILE∣MON, at that time in the shipping of our country with the Spanish fleete, and know that to be the onely cause why that noble Baron was after re∣moued from his romth: but proceed EPOENE∣TVS. This motion (said I, returning where I left) seeming iust, was forthwith effected: and what lets soeuer to his returne, either rased, or transla∣ted into his seuerall countries, vnder colour of furnishing him for the warres of France: so that for atchieuing his intention (hauing the fauor of his wife and Prelats) he wanted litle more then time (we being in a manner disarmed) to be made absolute, & to apply the significant posie
of the golden fleece, PRETIVM NON VILE LABORIS, to the order of our George & Gar∣ter, which perhaps (being toucht in conscience with the honorable deuice and meaning of our order, HON Y SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE) he would haue refused. These proceedings were then suspected as tending to disbranch the naturall cions to in∣graffe him selfe, which he had in nearer sort at∣tempted, had he not bene tript by the death of his wife. And notwithstanding that he had ther∣by lost many occasions of time and place, and that his pray readie to be deuoured, was by that meane taken from betweene his teeth, he yet desisted not to take occasion by the forehead, when, and wheresoeuer he met her: for which cause, and to impresse an opinion in all nations of his right to our countrey, he ioyned manie yeares after her Maiesties happie enterance to the Royall seate, the title of England with that of his own dominions: which could not be with any good meaning, or without great preiudice to her Maiestie, her heires, & lawfull successors. These things are well knowen to manie yet liuing: neither will the Spaniards by colour of the authoritie they had gotten amongst vs, deny
it as a thing vniust, considering that the limita∣tion of tyrants consisteth in things they can not get: but if these good bodies should (appealing to the fauor of malcontents) complaine they are sclandered, let vs enter into a scrutiny of times, and we shall find them charged with the muni∣tion, artillerie, and other abillements of warre, which could not be embezeled to any other end then the increase of their empire. But if they de∣nie the hauing of it, or that they had it to any such vse, I will ioyne with them in issue for both. If they had it not, let them (they running through the store of the realme) accompt how it was be∣stowed. For Henrie the eight, being one of the victorious kings of that age, & stil in action with France and Scotland, (the least of which is able to abate the high thoughts of a proud enemie) could not, in respect of his conquests, be vnfur∣nished of prouision to withstand the power of so great aduersaries. Agayne the time betweene this triumphant king, & his daughter Mary was (in regard of our expectatiō) but short, in which there was no diminution of any thing within the realme, as might appeare as well by the victo∣ries of that good king Edward, being the hope of Europe, as his bettering of the gold, and sil∣uer
coines. But how great her Maiesties charges grew by a new prouision of all thing immediat∣ly after her royall entrie, no man is ignorant, no not strangers: the dukes Memorancie and Cassi∣mer greatly praising, vpon their view only of her store in the Tower, her carefull and most wise prouidence; which they would not haue done had they knowen any part thereof not to haue bene of her Maiesties cost. Now the question is to be asked of these temperat persons (our war∣like furniture being at that time their king ma∣ried with her Maiesties sister Mary comparable with any of the greatest Princes of the west part) who eloigned the same? I must answere for them (they being occupied in hastening the fift mo∣narchie) euē they who haue vowed to make de∣solate our country, and to murder a most sacred and Christian Princesse. The seisure of armour, treasure and munition with the rasure of places defensiue vpon condi∣tions of peace; is an old stratageme, and vsed by the Turke in the times of his frēdship with them, whō he mindeth to subdue: which if any would excuse in the Spaniard as a matter impossible to his iustice: how aunswere they his vsurpation of the title of this realme, often reproued by Mai∣ster
Man, her Maiesties liger in Spaine, to the great hazard of his person, as I heard him and some of his traine affirme, before the same was laid a part. But they may replie, that hee being permitted during his abode in this kingdome by generall assent to vse that title, might without her Maiesties preiudice continue the same. But there we may, as the prouerbe is, lay a straw: for whatsoeuer is allowed by any authoritie, may be disanulled by the same: againe, the causes of any thing ceassing, the effectes of the same pro∣ceede no further: whereby may be concluded, that not onely the Princes and people of this kingdome, by whose fauors hee had that title, haue power to retract the same; but also that his wife dying without issue by him, could leaue Phillip no greater interest then she had; which was but for terme of her naturall life. These matters, say they (for that they haue made their will a law) require neither aunswere nor excuse: no more doth their bost made seuē yeares past in the duke of Parmas Camp before men of account (who by the great prudence of that honorable coūseller Sir Francis VValsing∣ham now dead, were appointed for speciall ser∣uice to that place) that they would leaue their
trade to Peru, our countrie being a shorter cut, from whence they might drawe equall treasure. At this time there was no speache of religion, neither of her Maiesties alliance with the Ne∣therlanders, or of Sir Francis Drake (who as thē had not bene in the Indies) but of their auarice, crueltie, and ambition; the effectes of which, preceded any acte done by her Maiestie, whose mildnesse of neighbourhood and contentment of state, haue exceeded the temperance of all Princes of this or anie other age. Now gentlemen, said I, consider of the Spa∣nish proceedings, which were broched in the time of papacie, and our greatest deuotion to Philip and his nation: before either the reesta∣blishment of the reformed religiō, or of her Ma∣iesties receiuing the Netherlanders, for their an∣cient alliance with her kingdome, into her saue∣gard, or anie enterprise made into the Indies by her authoritie. VVeigh moreouer the state and qualitie of iustice, which, whether she gouerneth betwene nations, or a people of one countrey, neuer im∣poseth anie law, or punisheth by the same, till of∣fences be committed:Exod. cap. 24. sect. 4. & 7. which law must then also be recieued by the generall and free consent of
nations and people. Iudge also whether his enterprises do stand with his pretence of pietie, for if he had bene (as he feigneth) deuoured with the zeale of his reli∣gion, were there not great occasions giuen him in the time of the French king Charles the ninth his brother in law and neighbour, to shew some effects of his Catholike title, Cassimer then de∣parting France twise, vpon the onely pay of the French king? Nay hath he not since then main∣tained at his charge the Dukes of GVISE and MAINE against his other brother in law Henrie the third, a deuout Romanist, and chiefe ring∣leader at the great murder in Paris? yea & which more is, hath he not consented to the murder of the said Henrie (I will not say procured it) con∣trarie to the dignity of all kings? did he after (ac∣cording to the iustice & custome of good prin∣ces) either reproue the Duke du Maine or his complices for that fact? or hath he not since thē aided the said Duke rather more openly then before, not only with treasure, but also with soul∣diers sent from the duke of Parma? To cōclude, hath not his policie bene by nourishing factions in that and our realme, to be made absolute in the west continēt of Europe & Ilands adiacent?
and hath he not for that purpose renewed his league with the Turke, who slily smiling at his madnesse, panteth to deuour him and the rest of Christendome by that meane? No man can de∣nie it, time hath proued it, & the bloud of thou∣sands crieth against it. A reformation then of Religion, or our ill neighbourhood to him, are no causes of his mo∣tions (he hauing plotted our ruine, and rasure of his Catholike alie, in his neerest friendship with both) but the auarice, crueltie, and pride of his people, which neither the penurie of Spaine can satisfie, or the Pyrene hilles, or wide Ocean can limit. Beleeue me EPOENETVS (said PHILEMON) a gentleman of good qualitie tolde me, that he heard in Rome that the cardinall named Buono compagno (called since then, Pope Gregorie) being demanded at his returne from Spain, how he liked that kingdome: answered, there were plaines of luxurie, vales of miserie, and hilles of pride. To which I answered, I am, PHILEMON, easi∣ly perswaded to beleeue you, Monsieur la Nouë a man so wel qualified that few come neere him in all the vertues, & not one goeth beyond him
in anie, confirming some part thereof. This noble gentleman composing during his captiuitie amongst the Spaniards diuerse dis∣courses both politike and martiall,Paradoxe troisiesme. notwithstan∣ding that he giueth honorable testimonie of their discipline, drawne from the great fortunes and military prudence of the Emperor Charles the fift, yet affirmeth that verie often one shall heare in their armies a new souldier but of three crownes pay the moneth, say in great maiestie (if he hath not those fauors he expecteth) that he is as good as the king: he further for proofe of their insolencie maketh this question: what will then a Captaine do, in like case, that hath bene found at assaults and battailes? He will, answe∣reth la Nouë, say I am better then the Pope. Frō this figure, may our countrimen, who are yet free, frame their argument of word and fact a∣gainst them that would make them captiue; that honorable and famous person speaking so libe∣rally of their pride in his durance. They may al∣so foresee what insolencie the great officers of Spaine would vse towards strangers, their mea∣nest companions standing amongst themselues, so much vpon their pantofles, we may be also perswaded, that they who compare with their
naturall king, will smally esteeme their friend∣ship, which trafficke the state of their countrey: vnlesse they may after maintaine that amitie which they haue gained by gold, by their water imperiall, drawne from the hardnesse of iron: many hauing bene pleased with the foule plea∣sures of some in the night, whose beauties, they haue after lothed in the day. Then PHILEMON: I would EPOENETVS that all men were (for the commō quiet) of your mind: nothing breeding a greater resolution in this sort, then to thinke they are esteemed sacred of them, by whose promises they are corrupted: as though they were of the deepest trust, which haue offended in the highest degree of trechery They are not PHILEMON, said I, tyrants (al∣though they make no semblant thereof) euer fearing those by whom they are aduanced: Phi∣lip of Macedonia allowing for his profite those that would betray their countrey, but not those that had betrayed it. And for that their greedi∣nesse is seldome satisfied, whose countrey con∣tenteth them not, it may be still doubted (no place being esteemed so deare as the place of birth and education) that their lightnesse can not be stayed by change; but rather impaired by
loosing their first faith: the iust recompence of which, amongst those that are prudent, is cha∣stisement. Vortiger could well band with this racket,Flor. Hist. he putting to death an hundred Picts at one bandy, whom he procured to kil the king Constantius. Selim the great Turke had also great skill at this game;Sans. de vitis Tur. who promising Vstarabi a phisition, ten Duckets a day during his life, to poison his father Baisit the second, did for recompence of the fact, cut of his head, saying, the phisition would no more spare him then he did his father, if anie would require him. The like Caesar Borgia the Spaniard practi∣sed with Messire Remiro Dorco, whom he only vsed in all murders, treasons, and oppressions of the people. If this were the bountie of tyrants to traitors, good kings I hope will not be behind them in iust punishments, whom they haue exceeded in due mainteining iustice: as the testimonies of Dauid that caused the Amalec to dy that bosted to haue slaine Saul;Reg. 2. cap. 1. and of good Dane Ca∣nutus, who (being companion in this kingdom with Edmond, named for his cheualry Ironside) put to death Eudricus the Saxon, who had slain
his soueraigne, to bring the whole empire into Canutus hands,Flor. Hist. do plentifully witnesse. These are, said PHILEMON, presidents of rare iustice, & most excellent to be followed of them that care to maintaine the high reputation of their calling: for according to the opinion of ci∣uilians, who affirme, that their lawes permit a gētleman to make any iniury done to one of his order, no lesse his, then if it were profered him selfe: which interest and similitude of dignitie (were it duly regarded by persons of equalitie) would greatly abate the bold offers of these di∣sturbers of gouernement: as well for that they ariue not amisse either into the handes of bad, or good Princes in regard of chastisemēt, as that wise kings may suspect, that as they many times rise, they may also fall by factious followers: to whom (in respect of their countries health) to neglect money,Adelpho. Act. 2. would be sometimes (according to the comicall Poet) a great gaine. Then I. It is most true, that where this moath of faction entereth, she eateth through the gar∣mentes of peace, whether of the long or short robe. Of this opinion was that noble gentleman Monsieur du Lant, who (being sent by the Frēch king Lewes the 12. into Italie to restore diuers
castels to the Florentins, takē from them by the Duke Valentino, and the Vitelli in the vales of Treuere and Chiana; and finding there many which bosted to be of the faction of one Mar∣zoco) greatly blamed them; alledging that if the subiectes of Fraunce should name them selues partakers with the king his Maister (though spo∣ken with dutie) they should be chastised, as such which suppose a contrarie partie in that realme against the king: an admonition worthie to be written with letters of gold in publicke places, as monuments of his singular prudence. For if the vnitie of elemēts, humors, or qualities main∣teineth the life either of bodies naturall, or po∣liticke, it cannot be, but a disagreement doth breed a resolution, spasme, or some other most daungerous infirmitie in both. Examples of an∣tiquitie neede not, we hauing too many that be moderne of our neare neighbours: amongst which these tokens of murther, IE SVIS ROYAL, and, IE SVIS GVISIAN, haue wo∣fully concluded their tragedie. For conclusion, to mainteine that the moti∣ons of Spaine issue from our actions, is to make accent vpon these wordes, I fauour the Spani∣ard; which are no lesse to be forborne thē these,
I take part with Marzoco, or I am a Guisian; all foure by implication being of one nature. In re∣gard whereof, & that all subiects are to esteeme their naturall Prince, as the Generall of God: I would that those who haue not obserued the course of times, should (with the ancient French which esteemed all things lawful their kings did in fauor of the people) humbly reuerence their Princes proceedings, as his, who standing for the publike benefite of his countrey, is alwayes blamelesse, though his pretenses (to the igno∣rant multitude) haue some shew of iniustice. For how may he that leadeth a priuate life, and ne∣uer handled publicke affaires, be able to reason in things meete, lawfull, or necessarie for go∣uernement? the true knowledge of which, draw∣ing neere the diuine prouidence, is not to be di∣sputed in the schooles of Thersites, vnlesse there be some Vlysses to moderate.Home. Lib. 2. Ilia. For who so attri∣buteth the effectes of things present, to causes next going before, may be deceaued with him who not knowing his patients infirmity, and fin∣ding neither oister shelles or the parings of ap∣ples, by which he might coniecture the sick had surfeted, but after spying a saddle vnder the bed, feared not to wager his life, that his patient had
eaten a horse: or more properly, to ascribe the hostilitie of Spaine to the iniuries of our na∣tion, is to be no lesse mad then he, who thought his phrensie happened by washing his head the day before in cold water. For nothing gentle∣men, said I, is plainer then that their naturall a∣uarice and pride, and not our iniuries, haue furi∣ously incited thē (according to their embleme of Burgundie hauing two handes with a steele and flint stricking fire, with these wordes, Ante ferit quàm flamma micet) to esteeme no law of societie, or bond of nature; whereby they may more securely oppresse all partes by violence and stealth. This hath bene touched by many, but very aptly by the expert and valiant knight Sir Ro∣ger VVilliams, who hauing serued long time in their warres, hath with quicke colours descri∣bed their crueltie towardes their faithfull serui∣tours not being of their nation. VVith these therefore that keepe no mediocritie, it is most daungerous in matter of state, to vse a way con∣sisting in a meane; the same being neither able to procure frendes or to propell a weake or fe∣ble enemie. VVhich speaches ended, PHILEMON, in the
behalfe of the rest, which seemed by their silence desirous to depart; answered; well EPOENE∣TVS, the time rather requiring to consider what we ought to doe, then what we haue done; let both our nations, to expresse the good affecti∣ons of honest men, haue in their standerds, gui∣dons and ensignes, the deuise of a souldiours match burning, with these wordes about the wreath, al fine loial: which spoken, hee and the company departed with countenances pro∣mising the accomplishment and per∣formance of great matters. FINIS.
