6351 99840931 5475
HYMNES OF ASTRAEA, IN ACROSTICKE VERSE. LONDON, Printed for I. S. 1599.
HYMNE I. Of Astraea. E arly before the day doth spring, L et vs awake my Muse, and sing; I t is no time to slumber, S o many Ioyes this time doth bring, A s time will faile to number. B ut whereto shall we bend our Layes? E uen vp to Heauen, againe to raise T he Mayde, which thence descended H ath brought againe the golden dayes, A nd all the world amended. R udenesse it selfe she doth refine, E uen like an Alchymist diuine, G rosse times of Iron turning I nto the purest forme of gold: N ot to corrupt, till heauen waxe old, A nd be refin'd with burning.
HYMNE II. To Astraea. E ternall Virgin, Goddesse true, L et me presume to sing to you. I oue, euen great loue hath leisure S ometimes to heare the vulgar crew, A nd heares them oft with pleasure. B lessed Astraea, I in part E nioy the blessings you impart, T he Peace, the milke and hony, H umanity, and ciuill Art, A richer Dower then money. R ight glad am I that now I liue, E uen in these daies whereto you giue G reat happinesse and glorie; I fafter you I should be borne, N o doubt I should my birth day scorne, A dmiring your sweete storie.
HYMNE III. To the Spring. E arth now is greene, and heauen is blew, L iuely Spring which makes all new I olly Spring doth enter, S weete young Sun-beames do subdue A ngry, aged winter. B lasts are mild, and Seas are calme, E uery medow flowes with Balme, T he earth weares all her riches, H armonious birdes sing such a Psalme A s eare and hart bewitches. R eserue (sweete Spring) this Nymph of ours E ternall garlands of thy flowers, G reene garlands neuer wasting; I n her shall last our states faire spring, N ow and for euer flourishing, A s long as heauen is lasting.
HYMNE IIII. To the moneth of May. E ach day of thine, sweete moneth of May, L oue makes a solemne holy-day: I will performe like dutie, S ince thou resemblest euery way A straea Queene of beautie. B oth you fresh beauties do partake, E ithers aspect doth Sommer make: T houghts of young Loue awaking H earts you both do cause to ake, A nd yet be pleasd with aking. R ight deare art thou, and so is shee, E uen like attractiue Sympathie, G aines vnto both like dearenesse; I weene this made Antiquitie N ame thee, Sweete May of Maiestie, A s being both like in clearenesse.
HYMNE V. To the Larke. E arly chearfull, mounting Larke, L ights gentle Vsher, mornings clarke, I n merrie Notes delighting: S tint a while thy Song, and harke, A nd learne my new Inditing. B eare vp this Hymne, to heau'n it beare, E uen vp to heau'n, and sing it there, T o heau'n each morning beare it; H aue it set to some sweete Sphere, A nd let the Angels heare it. R enownd Astraea, that great name, E xceeding great in worth and fame, G reat worth hath so renownd it, I t is Astraeas name I praise, N ow then, sweete Larke, do thou it raise, A nd in high Heauen resound it.
HYMNE VI. To the Nightingale. E uery night from Euen till Morne L oues Quirister amidde the thorne I s now so sweet a Singer, S o sweete, as for her Song I scorne A pollos voice, and finger. B ut Nightingale since you delight E uer to watch the Starrie night, T o all the Starres of heauen, H eauen neuer had a Starre so bright, A s now to earth is giuen. R oyall Astraea makes our Day E ternall with her beames, nor may G rosse darkenesse ouercome her; I now perceiue why some do write, N o countrie hath so short a night, A s England hath in sommer.
HYMNE VII. To the Rose. E ye of the garden, Queene of flowers, L oues Cuppe wherein he Nectar poures, I ngendred first of Nectar: S weete nurse-child of the Springs young howres, A nd Beauties faire Character. B est Iewell that the earth doth weare, E uen whē the braue yong Sun drawes neare, T o her hoate Loue pretending; H imselfe likewise like forme doth beare, A t rising and descending. R ose of the Queene of loue belou'd; E nglands great Kings diuinely mou'd, G aue Roses in their Banner; I t shewed that Bewties Rose indeede, N ow in this age should them succeede, A nd raigne in more sweet manner.
HYMNE VIII. To all the Princes of Europe. E urope the Earthes sweete Paradise: L et all thy Kings that would be wise, I n Politique Deuotion: S aile hither to obserue her eyes, A nd marke her heauenly motion. B raue Princes of this ciuill age, E nter into this pilgrimage: T his Saints tongue is an oracle, H er eye hath made a Prince a Page, A nd workes each day a Miracle. R aise but your lookes to her, and see E uen the true beames of Maiestie, G reat Princes, marke her duly; I fall the world you do suruey, N o forehead spreades so bright a Ray, A nd notes a Prince so truly.
HYMNE IX. To Flora. E mpresse of flowers, tell where a way L ies your sweet Court this merry May, I n Greenewich garden Allies: S ince there the heauenly powers do play, A nd haunt no other Vallies. B ewty, vertue, Maiestie, E loquent Muses, three times three, T he new fresh houres and Graces, H aue pleasure in this place to be, A boue all other Places. R oses and Lillies did them draw, E r they diuine Astraea saw; G ay flowers they sought for pleasure: I n steede of gathering crownes of flowers, N ow gather they Astraeas Dowers, A nd beare to heauen that treasure.
HYMNE X. To the moneth of September. E ach Moneth hath praise in some degree; L et May to others seeme to be I n Sense the sweetest Season; S eptember thou art best to me, A nd best dost please my reason. B ut neither for thy Corne nor Wine E xtoll I those mild dayes of thine, T hough corne and wine might praise thee; H eauen giues thee honor more diuine, A nd higher fortunes raise thee. R enownd art thou (sweet moneth) for this, E mong thy dayes her birth day is, G race, plenty, peace and honor I n one faire houre with her were borne, N ow since they still her Crowne adorne, A nd still attend vpon her.
HYMNE XI. To the Sunne. E ye of the world, fountaine of light, L ife of day, and death of night, I humbly seeke thy kindnesse: S weet, dazle not my feeble sight, A nd strike me not with blindnesse. B ehold me mildly from that face, E uen where thou now dost runne thy race, T he Spheare where now thou turnest; H auing like Phaeton chang'd thy place, A nd yet hearts onely burnest. R ed in her right cheeke thou dost rise; E xalted after in her eyes, G reat glorie there thou shewest: I n thother cheeke when thou descendest, N ew rednesse vnto it thou lendest, A nd so thy Round thou goest.
HYMNE XII. To her Picture. E xtreame was his Audacitie; L ittle his Skill that finisht thee, I am asham'd and Sorry, S o dull her counterfait should be, A nd she so full of glory. B ut here are colours red and white, E ach lyne, and each proportion right; T hese Lynes, this red, and whitenesse, H aue wanting yet a life and light, A Maiestie, and brightnesse. R ude counterfait, I then did erre, E uen now, when I would needes inferre, G reat boldnesse in thy maker: I did mistake, he was not bold; N or durst his eyes her eyes behold; A nd this made him mistake her.
HYMNE XIII. Of her Mind. E arth now adiew, my rauisht thought L ifted to heau'n, sets thee at nought; I nfinit is my longing, S ecrets of Angels to be taught, A nd things to heau'n belonging. B rought downe frō heau'n of Angels kind, E uen now do I admire her mind: T his is my contemplation, H er cleare sweet Spirit which is refind, A boue Humane Creation. R ich Sun-beame of th'aeternall light, E xcellent Soule, how shall I wright; G ood Angels make me able; I cannot see but by your eye, N or, but by your tongue, Signifie, A thing so Admirable.
HYMNE XIIII. Of the Sun-beames of her Mind. E xceeding glorious is this starre; L et vs behold her Beames a farre I n a side lyne reslected; S ight beares them not when neare they are A nd in right lines directed. B ehold her in her vertues beames, E xtending Sun-like to all Realmes; T he Sunne none viewes too nearely; H er well of goodnesse in these streames, A ppeares right well and clearely. R adiant vertues, if your light E nfeeble the best Iudgements sight, G reat splendor aboue measure I s in the minde, from whence you flow: N o wit may haue accesse to know, A nd view so bright a treasure.
HYMNE XV. Of her VVit. E ye of that mind most quicke and cleare, L ike Heau'ns eye, which from his spheare, I nto all things pryeth, S ees through all things euery where, A nd all their natures tryeth. B right Image of an Angels wit, E xceeding sharpe, and swift like it, T hings instantly discerning: H auing a Nature infinit, A nd yet increasd by learning. R ebound vpon thy selfe thy light, E nioy thine owne sweete precious sight: G iue vs but some reflection; I t is enough for vs, if wee N ow in her speech, now pollicie, A dmire thine high perfection.
HYMNE XVI. Of her will. E uer well affected will, L ouing goodnesse, Loathing ill, I nestimable Treasure: S ince such a power hath power to spill, A nd saue vs at her pleasure. B e thou our law, sweet will, and say E uen what thou wilt, we will obay T his Law, if I could reade it: H erein would I spend night and day, A nd study still to plead it. R oyall free will, and onely free, E ach other will is Slaue to thee: G lad is each will to serue thee: I n thee such Princely power is seene, N o Spirit but takes thee for her Queene, A nd thinkes she must obserue thee.
HYMNE XVII. Of her Memorie. E xcellent Iewels would you see, L ouely Ladies? come with me, I will (for loue I owe you) S hew you as rich a Treasure, A s East or West can shew you. B ehold, if you can iudge of it, E uen that great Store-house of her wit; T hat bewtifull large Table: H er memorie wherein is writ A ll Knowledge admirable. R eade this faire booke, & you shall learne E xquisite Skill if you discerne, G aine heau'n by this discerning; I n such a memorie diuine, N ature did forme the Muses nine, A nd Pallas Queene of Learning.
HYMNE XVIII. Of her Phantasie. E xquisite curiositie, L ooke on thy selfe with iudging eye, I f ought be faultie leaue it, S o delicate a phantasie A s this, will straight perceiue it. B ecause her temper is so fine, E ndewed with harmonies diuine: T herefore if discord strike it, H er true proportions do repine, A nd sadly do mislike it. R ight otherwise a pleasure sweete, E uer she takes in actions meete; G racing with smiles such meetnesse; I n her faire forehead beames appeare: N o Sommers day is halfe so cleare, A dornd with halfe that sweetnesse.
HYMNE XIX. Of the Organs of her Minde. E clipsed she is, and her bright rayes L ie vnder vailes, yet many wayes I s her faire forme reuealed; S he diuersly her selfe conueyes, A nd cannot be concealed. B y Instruments her powers appeare E xceedingly well tun'd and cleare: T his Lute is still in measure, H olds still in tune, euen like a spheare, A nd yeelds the world sweet pleasure. R esolue me, Muse, how this thing is, E uer a bodie like to this G aue heau'n to earthly creature? I am but fond this doubt to make, N o doubt the Angels bodies take, A boue our common nature.
HYMNE XX. Of the Passions of her Heart. E xamine not th'inscrutable Hart, L ight Muse of her, though she in part I mpart it to the Subiect; S earch not, although from heau'n thou art, A nd this an Heauenly obiect. B ut since she hath a hart, we know E uer some passions thence do flow, T hough euer rul'd with Honor; H er Iudgement raignes, they waite below, A nd fixe their eyes vpon her. R ectified so, they in their kind E ncrease each Vertue of her mind, G ouern'd with mild tranquillitie; I n all the Regions vnder Heau'n, N o State doth beare it selfe so euen, A nd with so sweet facilitie.
HYMNE XXI. Of th'innumerable Vertues of her Mind. E re thou proceede in this sweet paines, L earne Muse how many drops it raynes I n cold and moist December; S umme vp May flowers & Augusts graines, A nd grapes of mild September. B eare the Seassands in memorie, E arths grasses, and the starres in Skie, T he litle moares which mounted H ang, in the beames of Phoebus eye, A nd neuer can be counted. R ecount these numbers numberlesse, E re thou her vertue canst expresse, G reat wits this count will cumber, I nstruct thy selfe in numbring Schooles; N ow Courtiers vse to begge for fooles, A ll such as cannot number.
HYMNE XXII. Of her Wisedome. E gle-eyed Wisedome, lifes Loadstarre, L ooking neare on things a farre; I oues best beloued daughter, S howes to her Spirit all things that are, A s loue himselfe hath taught her. B y this straight Rule she rectifies E ach thought that in her hart doth rise: T his is her cleare true mirror H er looking glasse, wherein she spies A ll formes of Truth and Error. R ight princely Vertue, fit to raigne, E nthroniz'd in her Spirit remaine, G uiding our fortunes euer; I f we this Starre once cease to see, N o doubt our State will Ship-wrackt be, A nd torne and sunke for euer.
HYMNE XXIII. Of her Iustice. E xil'd Astraea is come againe, L o here she doth all things maintaine I n number, waight, and measure: S he rules vs with delightfull paine, A nd we obey with pleasure. B y Loue shee rules more then by Law, E uen her great mercy breedeth awe: T his is her Sword and Scepter, H erewith she hearts did euer draw, A nd this Guard euer kept her. R eward doth sit in her right hand: E ach Vertue thence takes her Garland G ather'd in Honors garden: I n her left hand (wherein should be N ought but the Sword) sits Clemencie, A nd conquers Vice with pardon.
HYMNE XXIIII. Of her Magnanimitie. E uen as her State, so is her Mind, L isted aboue the vulgar kind: I t treades proud Fortune vnder, S un-like it sits aboue the wind, A boue the stormes, and Thunder. B raue Spirit, large Heart, admiring nought E steeming each thing as it ought, T hat swelleth not, nor shrinketh: H onor is alwaies in her thought, A nd of great things she thinketh. R ocks, Pillars, and heau'ns Axel-tree, E xemplifie her Constancie; G reat changes neuer chaunge her: I n her Sexe feares are wont to rise, N ature permits, Vertue denies, A nd scornes the face of daunger.
HYMNE XXV. Of her Moderation. E mpresse of kingdomes thongh she be, L arger is her Soueraigntie, I f she her selfe do gouerne; S ubiect vnto her selfe is shee, A nd of her selfe true Soueraigne; B ewties Crowne though she do weare, E xalted into Fortunes chaire, T hron'd like the Queene of Pleasure: H er Vertues still possesse her Eare, A nd counsell her to Measure. R eason, if she incarnate were, E uen Reasons selfe could neuer beare G reatnesse with Moderation; I n her one temper still is seene, N o libertie claimes she as Queene, A nd showes no alteration.
HYMNE XXVI. To Enuie. E nuie go weepe, my Muse and I L augh thee to scorne; thy feeble Eye I s dazled with the glorie S hining in this gay poesie, A nd litle golden Storie. B ehold how my proud quil doth shed E ternall Nectar on her head: T he pompe of Coronation H ath not such power her fame to spread, A s this my admiration. R espect my Pen as free and franke, E xpecting not Reward nor Thanke; G reat wonder onely moues it; I neuer made it mercenary; N or should my Muse this burthen carie A s hyr'd, but that she loues it. FINIS.
