7153 99845460 10362
A TREATISE OF THE TRVE NATVRE AND DEFINITION of justifying faith; TOGETHER WITH A DEFENCE of the same, against the Answere of N. Baxter. By IOHN DOWNE B. in Divinity, and some∣time Fellow of EMANVEL C. in Cambridge. AVGVST. DESPIR. ET LIT. CAP. 30. Lex dicit, non concupisces; Fides dicit, Sana animam meam, quo∣niam peccavi tibi; Gratia dicit, Ecce sanus factus es, jam noli peccare, ne quid tibi deterius contingat; Sanitas dicit, Do∣mine Deus meus, clamavi ad te & sanâsti me; Liberum arbi∣trium dicit, voluntariè sacrificabo tibi; Dilectio justitiae dicit, narraverunt mihi iniusti delectationes, sed non sicut Lex tua Domine. The Law saith, thou shalt not covet; Faith saith, heale my soule, for I haue sinned against thee; Grace faith, lo thou art made whole, sin no more least a worse thing befall thee: Health saith, O Lord my God, I haue cried vnto thee and thou hast healed mee; Free-will saith, I will freely sacrifice vnto thee; Loue of iustice saith, the wicked haue shewed mee delights, but not according to thy law O Lord. OXFORD, Printed by IOHN LICHFIELD for Edward Forrest. 1635.
TO THE READER. IT is now somewhat vpward of two yeares,This must be referred to the time whē the Author writ it. since passing through the City of Bristol to∣wards the Vniuersity of Cambridge, I was by the importunity of sundry Cittizens, my very good friends, arrested there certaine daies. For no sooner was I there arrived, but presently they repaired vnto me, and like so many Iacobs began to wrestle with me,Gen 32.24.26. Rom. 1.11. Mat. 11.12. protesting they would not let me goe vnlesse I first promised to blesse them, and to bestow some spirituall gift among them. It was no small Ioy vnto mee to see the King∣dome of Heaven suffer such violence, and the people of God (like so many thirsty Harts,Psal. 42.1. braying for the rivers of wa∣ters,) & pāting after the liuing God. Wherefore I could not but with Iacobs Angel giue them leaue to prevaile,Gen. 32.28. Mat. 5.41. & yeeld so farre vnto their earnest request, that being angariated to goe but one mile, I was notwithstanding content to goe with them more then twaine, preaching (before my depar∣ture thence) divers sermons vnto them. One time among the rest I chose for my Theme that of St Paul to the Ephesians,Ephes. 6. 16. Aboue all take the shield of Faith whereby ye may quench all the fiery darts of that wicked One. Wherein because Iustifying Faith seemed to be com∣mended as the principallest peece of the Christians Pa∣noplie, & of surest proofe against all the assaults & tempta∣tions
of Satan, I held it necessary with all diligence to en∣quire what might be the true nature and definition thereof, and at length I resolued that the Act thereof was not Assu∣rance but Affiance, the Subiect not the vnderstanding, but the will; and the Obiect not present grace and future glory, but the person of the Mediator. So that I defined it, not as vulgarly it is conceiued, An assurance that we are already justified and shall be saued; but thus, An affiance vpon Christ the Mediator for justification and consequently Saluation. The occasiō mouing me to intreat of this argument was this; A certaine graue and godly Matrone of that City hauing beene a long time sore afflicted with sicknesse both in mind and body, I went vpon entreaty with other friends to visit her; and after mutuall salutation, Sister quoth I vnto her, were I Physitian for the body, I would aduise you the best I could for the health thereof: but it is not my element, and therefore I may not without great rashnesse put my selfe in∣to it: neuerthelesse if you shall please to discouer vnto me the wound of your spirit, happily I may apply such a salue thereunto, as by the blessing of God may close it vp, or at least giue some refocilation and ease vnto the anguish there∣of. My wound then, quoth she, in a word is this: I want faith; And what may be the ground, quoth I, of this perswasion? Because, quoth she, I am not assured that I am iustified and shall be saued: A weake ground, quoth I, seeing a man may haue Faith that wanteth such Assurance; how may that be, quoth she? for as hitherto I haue beene taught, Faith is no other then Assurance: then haue you beene taught amisse, quoth I: and if this be all the scruple that troubleth you, I hope ere we part to finish the cure. Thereupon I began freely to declare what I conceiued of the true nature of iustifying Faith, and proued vnto her by sundrie remonstrances that  it was not Assurance but Affiance, and with so good successe, that both she and all that were present rested there∣with much comforted and contented. Only they prayed me both for their owne confirmation, and the farther informa∣tion of others, that I would be pleased to speak of it againe in a more publike audience: wherevnto (seeing no reason to dis∣swade me) I readily condescended, and on the text aforesaid handled the matter somewhat largely.
This Sermon at least so farre as concernes the Definition of Faith was by one Mr Baxter then preacher of that City greatly distasted and disliked: in so much as by message he threatned me with open confutation thereof in the Pulpit, vnlesse I gaue him the speedier & better satisfaction; which threatning though I little feared, knowing I had built nor hay nor stubble vpon the foundation,1 Cor. 3.12.13. but such doctrines as were well able to endure the triall of the fire: yet because the Apostle chargeth to be ready alwayes to giue answere to euery man that asketh a reason of the Hope that is in vs,1 Pet. 3.15. I was eftsoones willing the best I could to satisfie him. Being therefore by the mediation of some friends brought to a par∣lie with him, I prayed him to remember that whatsoeuer I sayd in that Sermon was not barely affirmed but soundly proued, and therefore he might not in reason demaund sa∣tisfaction of me vntill himselfe had satisfied my reasons: which if he should substantially doe, I would ease him of his Pulpit-confutation, and the same tongue that broched the errour, should in the same place againe reuoke it. Then be∣gan I to presse him with this argument, If faith be Assu∣rance, then God commanding a Reprobate to beleeue, commands him also to be assured, which is absurd: where∣unto all his answere was, who art thou that disputest with God? I replied,Rom. 9.20. that I neither disputed with God nor con∣troled  his actions: but only denyed that God commands a Reprobate to be assured, for so he should command that to be beleeued for true, which nor is nor euer shall be true. Againe I argued thus, If Faith be Assurance, then whoso∣euer wanteth Assurance wanteth Faith, which to a di∣stressed soule is most vncomfortable. To this he answered that desire of Assurance is in the acceptation of God as Assu∣rance it selfe. I replyed, that Mr Perkins being vrged with the same Obiection answered in the same manner, but vnsufficiently: for if actuall Faith be necessary to iustifica∣tion, then is actuall Assurance also necessary if Faith be as∣surance: Here Mr Baxter would needs take occasion to ex∣postulate, why I should presume to define otherwise then Mr. Perkins, and so many worthy Divines had done before mee. Wherevnto I answered roundly and plainely, Socrates is deare,Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 5. and Plato is deare, but truth is farre dearer: and therefore prayed him that leauing to oppose authority vnto reason, and sounding names vnto sound proofes, hee would returne againe within the lists, and either satisfie what I had said, or giue mee leaue to proceed to the rest of my ar∣guments; But for this he craved, as then, to bee excused, pretending vrgent and instant businesse, yet offering to haue our conference adiourned vnto some other day: I told him that the time of absence (limited me from the
Col∣ledge, whereof I was then Fellow) was almost at an end; so that vnlesse I would hazard my place I might make no lon∣ger stay there: neverthelesse if he pleased I would before my departure giue him my minde in writing, and attend his answere also in writing at his better leisure: To this hee presently condescended, holding it the fittest course, and promising (if I held my word with him) within one Moneth to returne me his full answere. I assured him that for my  part I would not faile him: and therevpon embracing one the other, and giuing hand that wee would proceed as wee had begun with all peace and loue, we brake off talke at that time and departed. The second day after, according to pro∣mise, I sent him the Treatise following, Of the true nature & definition of iustifying Faith, comprizing therein with some addition whatsoeuer touching the matter in question I had more briefly deliuered in the Pulpit: and the next morning taking leaue of my friends, & commending them to the grace of God in Christ I set forward for Cambridge. The moneth being expired I looked out for my answere: for I could not thinke he would proue a bad pay-master, and breake day with me: But a moneth and a moneth and many other moneths followed after their predecessor, and all the while not a word from my Antagonist: which though in some Creditors it would haue bred suspition, yet was I con∣tent to lay hold on the better handle, and to set the best con∣struction I could vpon his ouerlong silence,Epist. Fam. l. 9. ep. 8. interpreting it as Cicero did his frend Varros forbearance, rather Diligence then Slacknes. For as Zeuxis was the longer in drawing his Pictures, because as he said vnto
Agatharchus, he painted vnto Eternity: so Mr Baxter perhaps might the more slowely come off with his answere, that in the meane season he might make it the more exact and accurate, it be∣ing seldome seene that the same thing is both hastily and exquisitely done. But while I was thus ingenuously censuring his silence, and resoluing yet further to forbeare him, re∣membring that of Cato, Soone enough if well enough: I re∣ceiued certaine aduertisement that he had erewhile broken silence, and dispersed among his friends a most bitter and contumelious Invectiue against me, contrary both to his promise that he would proceed with all peace and charity,  and the reputation of learning he so much affects, not da∣ring to send me a Copy thereof. Loth I was seeing I haue not the rule of other mens pens, that others should haue the com∣mand of my affections: yet being so vrgently & vnschollerly dealt withall, the next time I passed through the City I could not but with some indignation challenge him for it to his face: At which time how he faltered and staggered in his tale, now confidently affirming he had by a friend conueyed his answer vnto me, & by & by being contested by the party, shamefully retracting it. Pretending for excuse the losse of my paper, I appeale to them who then both saw and heard it. But this I say, that as his inconstancy and distraction be∣wrayed little friendship betwixt his heart & tongue, & ar∣gued a selfe-guiltines of a poore and sorry Reply: so the pre∣tēced losse of my paper was but a silly shift to delay me for the present, and as the euent shewes a miserable tergiuersation. For hauing a fresh offered within one moneth to send me an answere, and thereupon engaged both his credit and scholler∣ship if he were supplied with another coppy: although the next day I left one for him vnder my hand, and now not one onely but twelue monthes are since fully finished and ex∣pired, yet hath he hitherto beene to me ward as silent as mid∣night: to me ward I say, for otherwise the libell still passed vnder hand, and at euery meeting made his disciples good glee. Whereby it plainly appeareth, his meaning neuer was by an honest and christian entercourse of writing to sift out the truth: but onely by secret pamphletting to disparage me among his followers, that so himselfe might rise the higher, in the ballance of their estimation. For had he sincerely and vnfainedly purposed the maintenance of Gods truth, and the reformation of my erronious iudgment, would he thus vncharitably haue played his prizes in the dark, and to
michingly haue gone about to steale an opinion of victory? or would he not rather as became a right Champion of truth boldly haue confronted his aduersary in the field, yea though hee had beene armed with no better weapon then a fillie sling, as long as he came (for so he pretends) in the name of the Lord of Hosts? But the truth is perceiuing himselfe so farre aduanced into the battell that now without shame and confusion hee might not retreat, hee held it the safest course by writing something to make the world beleeue hee had duly performed with mee, and yet by limiting it vnto the hands of a few of his trustiest friends to depriue mee of all possibility of answering for my selfe, resting assured that my silence would be taken to proceed rather of weaknes and insufficiencie in me, then any necessitie by his cunning en∣forced vpon mee. A new kinde of policie, or of malice ra∣ther as Hierome saith vnto Ruffin,Contra Ruf∣fin. ad Pamm. & Marcell. l. 1. c. 1. to accuse of what you feare to discouer, and to write what you would haue concealed. And so warie and heedfull hath he been herein, that with all the diligence and endeauour I could vse, I could not for the space of full two twelue moneths be seized of his Answer. But at length the night-raven fell into the snare, and by the watchfulnesse of my good friends in Bristow I obtained such a
Copie thereof as with all his shifts and excuses hee cannot possibly disclaime, being indeed subscribed with his owne hand. Perhaps you may think it found me when I first receaued it, strongly forestalled and possessed with preiudice: and indeed his base and vnworthie dealing deserued no o∣ther. For how could I entertaine any indifferent conceit of that whereof the authors selfe seemed to bee ashamed? Ne∣verthelesse before I began to pervse it, so farre prevailed I over my affections, that I throughly cleered them of all par∣tialitie  and presumption, yea and grew so rigorous & vne∣quall against my selfe, that I was content to suppose I might be in error, and he happily the Physitian to cure the disease of my iudgement, resolving if I might plainely be convin∣ced to take vnto me Christian severity and recant the same. For if I may not hope in this life to aspire to the highest de∣gree of wisdome, yet would I willingly rise to some degree of modesty: that if I may not in all things say that which is not to be repented of, yet I may at least repent me of what I haue said amisse. In this temper and disposition I tooke the booke, and cast∣ing mine eye vpon the front thereof, there I found it thus inscribed.
The answer of Nath. Baxter Bachelor in Di∣vinitie and Warden of new Colledge in Yoghul to the arguments of Mr Io. Downe Bachelor in Divinitie in a controversie of justifying Faith, preached by the said Mr Downe in Bristoll. Then vnderneath, the Question thus stated M. Downe; Iustifying Faith is not assurance, per∣swasion, or firme knowledge of a mans salvatiō in Christ Iesus. M. Baxter; Iustifying Faith is an assurance and knowledge of our salvation in Christ Iesu. And lastly vnder that againe this passage of Calvin vouched,In ad Coloss. c. 1. to. 6. The Faith of the Gospell is properly called a knowledge of the grace of God: because no man ever tasted of the Go∣spell but he which knew himselfe reconciled vnto God, and apprehended his salvation offered to him in Christ. In the inscription, though it please him in such sort to stile himselfe, I thinke to make the reader beleeue that I had met with my peer at least;Horat. lib. 1. Sat. 7. and if I were a Bithus, he were no lesse then a Bacchius: yet could he not without great arrogance challenge those titles to himselfe, hauing never taken such degree in either of the Universities, and being no more Warden of Yoghul then was Captaine Stukelie Marques of Ireland,Gentil. exam. Conc. Trid. Sess. 1. or Robert Venantius in the Councel of Trent Archibishop of Armach. As touching the Question that al∣so is very defectiuely and imperfectly propounded: for nei∣ther doe J maintaine negatiuely alone that Faith is not As∣surance, but affirmatiuely also that it is Affiance. neither doth he only affirme contradictorily vnto me that it is As∣surance, but further granteth in his Answer that it inclu∣deth also my Affiance. And as for the passage of Calvin, to what end it is here prefixed vnlesse it be to preiudicate mee with the greatnesse of his authoritie, I knowe not. But as hee would hold it vnreasonable if another should vrge him therewith in the question of Ecclesiasticall Policie & con∣formitie, because himselfe is of another minde: so neither hath he any reason to presse the same vpon me in this contro∣versie wherein I professe my selfe (but with all modestie) to differ from him. These flashings, as it were, and inflammati∣ons thus appearing in the very face of his booke, made mee I confesse, somewhat stagger in my former resolution, and to doubt lest they might be symptomes of an vnsound and dis∣tempered bodie. Neverthelesse I was not so driven from my station but that I easily recovered the same againe. For fea∣ring lest as the Physiognomer was foully deceiued, iudging of Socrates only by his outward Physnomie and counte∣nance; so I also might be as much mistaken if by the front a∣lone I should make an estimate of the whole Answer: I was soone perswaded, yet further to suspend my verdict vntill I had taken a full and thorow survay thereof: Which when I had once done, then indeed began
I to be greatly abashed, and vtterly to condemne my selfe of foolish lightnesse and cre∣dulity,Mat. 7.16. that could hope so suddenly to gather Grapes of Thornes; or reape other then tares in the field of the envi∣ous  man. For whereas touching the manner I looked hee should haue followed the Apostles counsell, who adviseth to instruct with meeknesse those that are contrary minded, if God at any time will giue them repentance to acknow∣ledge the truth:2 Tim. 2.25. he as if he had to deale, not with a brother erring of infirmity, but some obstinate Heretike condemned of his owne conscience,Tit. 3.11. inflames his affections against me in as high a degree as was Nabucodonosors furnace, seven times hotter then Christian charity could haue made them: And whereas touching the matter I expected that hee who stood so much vpō tearmes of schollership, should vse nothing else but Syllogismes and necessary Demonstrations, that by pure vertue and fine force he might captiue my reason vnto the obedience of Faith: he rather like an idle declai∣mer, trusting more to the noise and multitude of his words then the strength and pregnancy of his reasons, traverseth a loofe in vnnecessary and impertinent discourses, and puffs vp his empty Answer with the breath of many frivolous & vainely affected phrases, gaining perhaps thereby applause of the vulgar and simple, but from the graue and learned no better entertainment then the Shepheards whistle. In a word,Cic. l. 1. ep. 13. ad Attic. Hist. nat. lib. 12. c. 19. as the Troglodytes (of whom Pliny reports) venture vpon the maine Ocean, withou either rudder or oare or sayle, hauing in their boats nothing but man and boldnesse: even so my adversary hazardeth himselfe vpon this deepe question, and taketh vpon him the Confutation of my Trea∣tise, vsing therein nor naturall reason, nor humanity, nor di∣vinitie, but only impudent facing, and desperate assevera∣tion.
The consideration of all which halfe perswaded me at the first not to vouchsafe it any Replication at all, but without farther ceremonie to commit it to the mercy of the Moth  or the Grocer. For how could I reply vnto it, but either I must grace it by making it seeme worthy to be confuted, or disgrace my selfe by cōfuting so vnworthy a ioy? And what should I reioine vnto it? That which is serious and of im∣portance▪ I could not, because he giues me no occasion: Re∣proch for reproch, and slander for slander? I might not, be∣cause it is vnchristian: and to answer a foole according to his folly were to proue like vnto him, as Salomon saith.Prou. 26.4. Howbeit vpon riper aduise and deliberation I held it for sundrie causes if not necessary yet very expedient and fit∣ting to shape him an answer. And first in respect of him, if it may be to expresse his audaciousnes, and to let him see that they oftentimes leap too short, who thinke to make an∣others impeachement arise for their owne reputation. For if a foole be not answered according to his folly,Prou.
26.5. he will saith Salomon, waxe wise in his owne conceit. Then se∣condly in regard of my owne selfe, and the credit of my Mi∣nistery, to wipe away the slanderous aspersions and imputa∣tions of I know not what strange opinions and dangerous intentions wrongfullie if not maliciously charged vpon me: lest if I dissemble them I bee thought to confesse them, or to approue them if I refell them not. Thirdly and lastly in re∣gard of others, and among the rest those my good friends especially who occasioned the preaching of this doctrine, partly to preserue from recidiuation such as by the comfor∣tablenesse thereof were recouered out of great distresse, and partly to preuent others from falling into the like perplexi∣tie. Although therefore I denie not but that good houres bestowed vpon so bad a subiect might haue beene more pro∣fitably employed, especially considering that by the violent struggling thereof against the rooke of truth, it hath whol∣lie turned it selfe into froth, and hath not so much as a drop  of cleere reason in it: yet notwithstanding for the reasons a∣foresaid, and that it may perfectly appeare how stedfast and vnmoued the rocke stands, and how little the stormes and tempests raised against it haue preuailed vpon it, I haue thought good to skim away the fome of Sophistrie wrought about it, and to discouer the very ground whereon it is set∣led. Which when I shall haue done, I doubt not, howsoeuer my aduersary with his tong-valiantnes and swelling words may haue made vnexperienced folke belieue that with the breath of his mouth hee is able to driue whole armies of ar∣guments before him: yet I shall approue euen to the iudge∣ment of preiudice it selfe that whatsoeuer in this windie & wordie Pamphlet he hath vented against me is vainer then vanitie it selfe.
And thus, Christian Reader, haue I at length fully ac∣quainted thee with the whole story both of the originall and progresse of this controuersie. Now it remaineth ere thou passe thy censure and sentence thereupon, that thou be plea∣sed to bestow a little paines in perusing our aduersary wri∣tings; and what thou findest in them (said or gainsaid) dili∣gently to examine, not by the deceitfull ballance of priuate opinion, but by the publicke beame of the Sanctuarie euen the Scriptures of God. For mans siluer is mingled with drosse,Esa. 1.22. and his wine is tempered with water, neither hath he receiued such a measure of the Spirit as to know all things, or to be exempted from possibility of erring: but God is light and in him is no darknesse,1 Ioh. 1.5. and truth is vnto him so necessary and essentiall as it is impossible hee should either deceiue or be deceiued, it implying contradiction with his nature. And therefore the priuilege of infallibi∣lity belonging vnto him alone, to him alone belongeth also the prerogatiue of supreme iudicature: so that whatsoeuer  he saith, is simply and absolutely to bee belieued, whereas the sayings of men are by his word to be tried and determi∣ned. This I say not to impeach the credit or estimation of a∣ny, only I would reserue vnto God the Soueraigne authori∣ty due vnto him: Which if any presume to arrogate or clai∣me vnto himselfe (as indeed the Bishop of Rome doth vn∣to his chaire, as if it were made of Irish timber, and might not endure a spider to hang his web thereon) hee is vndoub∣tedly possessed with the Spirit of Antichristian pride, and like another Lucifer vsurpeth vpon the throne of God. But they that are led by the Spirit of Christ, and haue beene reputed the worthiest instruments and ornaments in the Church, acknowledging holy Writ to be the
Standard of truth, and the only vnmoued Principle into which all Que∣stions of Faith are finally to bee resolued, boldly exact the writings of other men thereunto, and meekely submit their owne to be censured thereby. Let one S. Augustin speake for all, The disputations of men, saith he,Epist. 111. ad Fortunatian. how Catho∣licke or laudable soeuer, we ought not to esteeme as Ca∣nonicall Scripture, as if it were not lawfull (sauing the honor due vnto them) to disallow or reiect any thing in their writings, if happily wee find ought in them swar∣uing from truth. Such am I in the writings of other men, and so would I haue others to vnderstand in mee. Now therefore, to draw to a conclusion, seeing to thy vp∣right censure and arbitrement I referre my selfe, and the rule by which thou art to proceed if thou wilt pronounce righteously, is as we haue shewed, not the opinion of man, but the oracle of God; I must entreate thee that laying aside all respect of persons thou suffer not thy selfe to bee swayed ei∣ther with the multitude or greatnes of those that are con∣trary minded, but conferring cause with cause, and coun∣terpoising  reason against reason, thou giue thy iudgement of them as the weight of Diuine euidence shall incline thee. For otherwise, if like a partiall Festus, willing to doe the Iewes a pleasure,Act. 25.9. thou demand of me, Whither I will goe vp to Ierusalem and there bee iudged of these things be∣fore thee: I must roundly and peremptorily answer thee with S. Paul,V. 10.11. I stand at Caesars barre where I ought to be iudged, to the Iewes I haue done no wrong, neither may any man deliuer me vnto them, I appeale vnto Cae∣sar: But if with the same Festus better aduised by his Coun∣sell,V. 12. thou say vnto me as hee did vnto Paul, Hast thou ap∣pealed vnto Caesar? Vnto Caesar shalt thou goe: then looke what definitiue sentence soeuer thou shalt giue accor∣ding to Caesars law, I meane the sacred Scriptures, I shall as becommeth a subiect of the Kingdome humbly submit my selfe vnto it, and without further prouocation or ap∣peale quietly and peaceably rest in it. In the meane season I conclude with that holy and deuout prayer of Fulgentius, beseeching the God of all truth,De Praedest. to Mon. l. 1. that by his preuenting and pursuing mercy whatsoeuer truths we know which sauingly are to bee knowne he would teach vs, in those which already we know to be true hee would keepe vs, wherein as men we faile and are deceiued he would cor∣rect vs, in what truths we doubt of hee would confirme vs, and from false and pernicious errors he would deli∣uer vs:Eph. 4.13. that so at length wee may all meet, as the Apostle speaketh, in the vnity of Faith and knowledge of the Son of God vnto a perfect man, euen to the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ. Amen.
A TREATISE OF THE TRVE NATVRE AND DEFINITION of justifying faith;
IF it be true which Tertullian sayth, that euen in the very smallest mat∣ters regard is to bee had of Truth: surely in those weighty & profound mysteries of Religion wherein er∣rour doth so much hazard soule and saluation, nothing ought more care∣fully to be respected then the search and finding out of Truth. For as the same Father sayth,Apol. aduer. Gen. c. 46. Although Philosophers Player-like affect the truth as be∣ing ambitious of glory, yet Christians studiously follow it,  as being carefull of their Saluation. Now among the ma∣ny excellent and heauenly graces, wherewith the spirit of God beautifieth and enricheth the hearts of his E∣lect, there is no one of more either necessity vnto sal∣uation, or importance for comfort and consolation, then that of Iustifying Faith. For as by the first Act of this faith, our Iustification before God, our peace with God, our incorporation into the mysticall body of Christ Ie∣sus, our conuersion vnto God are first wrought and ef∣fected: so by the consequent continued Acts of the same Fayth, are wee (being fallen) dayly renewed, and from both totall and finall falling away safely preserued and maintained. This (cōsidered me-thinkes) no time can be better employed, nor no paines more profitably taken, then in the quest and enquiry of the true nature and de∣finition of
Iustifying Fayth. And although, I cannot de∣ny but hee may haue fayth who cannot like a Logician define it, and may haue the benefit of Iustification, by it, who cannot distinguinsh the nature of it: yet this withall I boldly auerre, that the ignorance hereof, or a confused and indistinct apprehension of it, disableth vs both from giuing and taking direct and euident comfort from it, whereas a cleare and distinct knowledge there∣of is able to satisfie and replenish with comfort any dis∣tressed or afflicted conscience. For this cause haue I vn∣dertaken (so briefly and perspicuously as I can) to set downe my opinion of the definition of Fayth, perswa∣ding my selfe I doe not, endeauouring at leastwise not to swarue from the wholesome doctrine of Christ and Gods word. From the writings and doctrine of most learned and worthy Diuines peraduenture it doth, and indeed it doth vary: to whom although as farre farre  inferior I owe all respect & reuerence, yet being Gods freeman I cannot endure to bee mans bond-man and sweare to all they say. One Paphnutius sometime in the matter of Priests marriage preuailed against a whole Counsell of most learned and godly Bishops:Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. and young Elihu may speake more oportunely & pertinently then they that are much his Ancients. Therefore as Nisus sayth in Virgill, Ne{que} hac nostris spectentur ab annis,Aeneid. l. 9. looke not how greene or how gray his head be that speaketh, but let the touch of truth try all, and what by it shall appeare to be base and counterfait, refuse and reiect; that which shall be found true and sound, approue and em∣brace. And that preiudice too strongly possesse thee not, take my protestation; that I neuer haue entertained this opinion rashly and inconsiderately, but vpon mature aduise and deliberation: nor broach it vpon a preposte∣rous humour of nouelty or ambition, to build vp mine owne credit & existimation by the ruine and disparage∣ment of so great Diuines (for this were Subulâ leonem excipere, to encounter a Lion with a bodkin, as it is in the Prouerbe) but vpon a sincere affection and de∣sire, to minister solid and found consolation to despay∣ring and perplexed minds, which (as after shall appeare) vpon this foundation may most firmely be raised. And now trusting what I say shall be weighed in the ballance not of preiudice but vpright iudgement, I leaue to pre∣face any farther and come directly to the purprose. Because I purpose not to raise my building very high I meane not to lay my foundation very deepe: & there∣fore neither will I play the Phylologer in shewing the diuers vses and acceptations of the word
or Fides, id est Faith, or quote Ciceros Fiat quod dictum est, or St. Augustines Fac quod dicis,Offic. l. 1. to doe as a man sayes, for the notation of Faith: neither will I play the Phylosopher in discoursing of Physicall or Morall or Ciuill Faith, wherein it were easie to wast much oile and paper: nor lastly will I speake of that Theologicall Faith called Mi∣raculous either in Agent or Patient, which I take to bee none other then a diuine instinct for the working of a Miracle. For albeit they who at the last day shall say Lord in thy name haue we not cast out Diuels may seeme to haue trusted in Miraculous Faith for Iustification,Mat. 7.22.23. and acknowledgement of Christ: yet notwithstanding neuer any controuersie about it hath exercised the Church of God. To deferre your expectations therefore no farther, three Faiths there seeme to be, which lay claime and title to the priuiledge of justification: giue me leaue to distin∣guish and denominate them according to their Obiects, neither be offended if I handle , and giue new termes to old matters. The first is Fides Historiae, Historicall Faith, which is an Assent of the mind vnto the truth of Gods word, and specially the Gospell. And this Faith whether it be ac∣cording to the distinction of the Scoolemen, Acquisite, gotten by much hearing and experience without illumi∣nation, or infused and reuealed by the spirit of illuminati∣on, it hath no interest in the matter of Iustification. For besides that it is absurd that so generall a Knowledge should iustify. Acquisit Faith the Diuels haue; according to that of St Iames,Iam. 2. 19. The Diuels beleeue & tremble: Infused faith the Reprobates may haue, as Balaam, Iudas, Ma∣gus. Now the Scripture is plaine that justifying faith is propper and peculiar vnto the Elect, and therefore Hi∣storicall faith cannot justifie.
The second is Fides Promissionum, Faith of promises, which is a Perswasion or Assurance that the promises of God made in Christ, to wit Iustification, Remission of sinnes, Adoption, Regeneration, and finally Election it selfe, and eternall Saluation doe particularly pertaine to me, and are mine. Now this although I deny not but in Scripture it is called faith, and that euery Saint of God both may and ought to haue this particular perswasion and Assurance, yet this I confidently deny that this per∣swasion is that which justifies a man before God; and my reasons are these. 1. If this were justifying Faith, then whosoeuer liues and dyes without this particular Assurance, he cannot be saued,Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God. But a man may be saued without it; I in∣stance in those our Brethren of Germanie, who hold that faith may finally and totally fall away, and consequently that there can be no certainty of Sal∣uation, whom yet the Church of God calleth and counteth brethren, and it were vncharitable to censure of them otherwise. Therefore, or at least∣wise probably Faith is not an Assurance. 2. That which is in time after Iustifying Faith can∣not be that faith. This is vndeniable. But this parti∣cular knowledge is in time after faith. This I proue out of 1. Ioh. 5.13. These things haue I written vnto you that beleeue in the name of the Sonne of God, that ye may know that ye haue eternall life. Behold Beleeu∣ing goes before, and Knowledge comes after: as for that which followeth in the same verse, and that yee may beleeue, I interpret it of Perseuerance & growth in Faith. Howsoeuer, beleeuing & Knowing are di∣stinguished,
and therefore are not one. 3. That which in nature comes after Iustification cannot be Iustifying faith. This appeares because Faith is the Efficient instrumentall cause of Iustifi∣cation, and euery Efficient by the rule of Logick is in nature before the Effect. But this knowledge or Assurance is in nature after iustificatiō. This I proue thus, the truth of a proposition is alwayes in nature before the knowledge of the truth: for Propositi∣ons are not therefore true because knowne so, but they are first true and then knowne so. Therefore this Proposition, I know I am iustified spoken by on that is iustified, must needs presuppose the partie before to be iustified. Therefore this knowledge of Iustification in nature following Iustification it cannot be Iustifying faith. 4. In conditionall promises there can be no Assu∣rance of the thing promised before the performance of the condition. V. G. This is a conditionall pro∣mise in the couenant of workes, doe this and thou shalt liue, life is promised, but on condition of do∣ing: and therefore vntill we haue performed the condition, we cannot, nor may not looke that God should be reciprocall and giue vs life: So in the co∣uenant of grace, iustification is promised, but vp∣on condition of faith: so sayth the Scripture, be∣leeue, and thy sinnes shall be forgiuen thee. And therefore the condition of beleeuing must first be performed before we can assure our selues our sins are forgiuen. If so, then faith going before and As∣surance following after, Assurance cannot be justi∣fying faith.
5 That from whence followeth a blasphemous ab∣surdity cannot be a truth: for from truth nought but truth can be concluded. But from this that faith is an Assurance such an absurdity doth fol∣low. What is that? That God commands a man to know an vntruth, & to assure himselfe of that which neuer shall be. For God being truth cannot com∣mand falshood to be taken for truth. Nether tell me here, for who art thou that disputest with God? for this is a ruled case in diuinity, God cānot doe things which imply contradiction, and therefore not make vntruth to be truth, or knowledge error. Now that this absurdity followes from hence thus I de∣monstrate it. God commands the Reprobate to be∣leeue: For,Ioh. 18.8.9. for vnbeleefe the world shall bee con∣demned: but no condemnation but for breach of a commandement:1 Ioh.3.4. for  Sinne is the trans∣gression of the law, and therefore they are com∣manded to beleeue. I aske you then what it is to be∣leeue? you will say, to know, to assure. Therefore God commands the Reprobates to know and bee assured. But this is a blasphemous absurdity: there∣fore is your opinion absurd which infers it. 6. That which the wicked may haue cannot be iusti∣fying faith: for it is Fides Electorum, the faith of the Elect. But the wicked may haue this perswasion, yea and many haue beene most confidently perswa∣ded that they are in the fauour of God. You will say it is no true perswasion: but I say if forme make truth they are as formally and therefore as truly perswaded of it as the godly. And therefore if the godly are therefore and for this cause iustified be∣cause
cause they are strongly perswaded that they are iu∣stified: then why should not the wicked likewise be iustified by his strong perswasion? But in truth these kind of speeches are vnreasonable and sense∣lesse, and so the opinion cannot be reasonable. These sixe reasons shall suffice for the present, al∣though many more might be added: only from hence I gather this Corollary, that if iustifying Faith be not a Knowledge or Assurance, much lesse is it a full know∣ledge or full Assurance. Nay though we should graunt it to be a knowledge, yet is it against Logick to define it by the perfection of knowledg. For as there is a strong tree so there is a brused reed: as there is a burning lamp, so there is smoking flaxe: as there is a Faith come to full age and maturity, so there is a Faith, in the nonage and minority. So therefore to de∣fine it were to exclude the weake Faith, and to make the Definition narrower and of lesse latitude then the defi∣nite. Besides it is a most discomfortable doctrine vnto a troubled mind, and leads the directest way to despera∣tion: for so the palsie hand of Faith should not receiue Christ. And were not this to quench fire with oile, and to adde Aloes to wormwood? and might not hee that thus comforteth, be counted one of Iobs miserable com∣forters? Ob. The godly are said to know and to be perswa∣ded yea the Prophet saith,Io. 3.14. Ioh. 17.3. Esa. 53.11. Heb. 11.1. By his knowledge shall my righteous seruant iustifie many, and Faith is  and , a Subsistence and Euidence. Ans. First, I graunt the godly may and ought to know: but the question is not of their duty, but what it is which iustifies them.
2 Secondly, to know, and so likewise the Verbs of Sence in the Hebrew tongue vsually signifieth not onely an act of the Minde or outward Sence, but of the Will and affection also. So in the Psalme .Psal. 1.6. Mat. 7.13. The Lord knoweth the way of the Righte∣ous, and in the Gospell Depart I know you not, and elsewhere, I will not heare, see, &c. that is, God will not so know, heare, see, &c. as in fauour to loue or approue. And so doe I interprete that of the Pro∣phet, Christ being so knowne as to bee embraced and rested vpon by the Will shall iustify many. 3 Thirdly, that Definition in the eleuenth to the He∣brewes I deny with Peter Martyr and the rest of our Diuines, to bee perfect, but rather by the E∣ffects to describe it. And as for that word Subsistence whereon you seeme to stand, take this, first that the writers of the new Testament vse words in the same sence that the Seuentie Transla∣tors doe. Secondly, that that which in Hebrew is  Expectation, that the Septuagint turne , as in Ruth :Ruth. 1.12. so that  in the Hebrewes shall not be Subsistence but expectation or desire of things that are hoped for. But of this umpliandum censeo, I pronounce nothing; only I conclude his second Faith not to be Iustifying Faith. And because you shall not count me singular or alone in this point, read M. Foxe in his booke de Christo gratis iusti∣ficante, and you shall find him earnest against this opinion. The third faith is Fides Persone or Personalis meriti, Faith of Person or of Personall merit, and of this I make
the Obiect to be Christ the Mediator meriting; the Act of it Fiducia a Rest or Deuolution, the Subiect of it the facultie of the Will and not the Vnderstanding, the next End of it Iustification, the remote End, eternall Salua∣tion. And thus I define it, a Rest of the Will vpon Christ and his merits for Iustification and consequently Salua∣tion. In which Definition: 1 That the Obiect of it, is the Person or Personall merit of Christ, the whole tenor of Scripture proues which runs thus, Hee that beleeueth in mee shall not perish,Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 14.1. Ioh. 1.12. and, Yee belieue also in me, and, As many as receiued him, to them hee gaue power to bee the Sonnes of God, that is, to them that belieued in his Name, and in six hundred places besides. But if thou wilt be further informed, see M. Foxe in the booke before quoted. 2 That the Act of it is Fiducia, Affiance, I report me to all the words vsed in the originall of the old Te∣stament, as to retire vnto,  to deuolue or Roll vpon,  to trust or put confidence in, and all the rest: and to the forme of words vsed in the new, as Credere in, Sperare in; to beleeue and hope in or vpon. 3 That it is Subiectiuely in the Will, appeares by the Act; for Fiducia, Affiance, without controuersie is in the Will: as also by the Obiect Christ which implies not a Knowledge but Fiducia or Rest. Ob. Fiducia, Affiance is Spes roborata, a confirmed Hope; therefore if you make Faith to be Fiducia, Affiance, you make it likewise to be hope, and vn∣skilfully confound two distinct vertues.
Ans. I denie Fiducia, Affiance to bee Hope, although  the Prince of Schoolemen, Thomas of Watering and his followers haue heretofore taught it. For, 1 Hope looks to the End which is Saluation; Affi∣ance, to the meanes, which is Christs personall merit. 2 The Act of Hope is expectare, to looke out for: the Act of Affiance is tuniti, to leane on, or rest vpon. 3 Hope is of things that are future; but Affiance of that which is present. So yet Faith is Fiducia, Affi∣ance: which I further confirme by S. Augustins authority, Credere est amare,In Ioh. 7. tract. 29. & amando in Deum tendere, To belieue is to loue, and by louing to moue vnto God, expounding Amare by Confidere, Loue by Affiance according to that Fathers vsuall phrase in his Tractates vpon Iohn. Ob. Faith may be both Notitia & Fiducia, Knowledge and Affiance, and so both in the Will and in the Understanding. Ans. It cannot bee, because it is impossible for one and the same Habit to bee Subiectiuely in two seuerall Faculties of so different natures: Indeed Bonauen∣ture saith, Hope is in both being Certi expectatio,In 3. Scut. ci∣tante Kemnit. loco de iustif. a certaine expectation; Expectation being in the will, certitude in the Vnderstanding. But I answer, that Certainty is the ground of diuine Hope, but no part of the nature thereof, as knowledge of a thing to be loue-worthy is the ground of loue, for Ignoti nulla cupido, no desire of that which is vn∣knowne, but not of the nature of it, and therefore as you cannot place Loue both in the Mind and Will, no more may you Hope or Faith.
Ob. If Faith bee Fiducia, Affiance, then the wicked may haue it: for Balaam desired the death of the righteous,Num. 23.10. Mat. 13.20.21. and some receiue the Word with ioy belieuing but for a time. Ans. There is a double Affiance, the one is sleight and superficiall, and grounded on no other foundation then a generall apprehension that it is good to bee saued by Christ, but leaue not their former course and embrace a new: the other is setled and ground∣ed hauing these precedents. 1 A particular knowledge of our sinfull estate, exami∣ned by the rule of Gods Word. 2 An apprehension of Gods wrath and eternall death deserued by sinne. 3 Vnfained sorrow for sinne with resolution of new life. 4 A knowledge of Christ, and here; 1 Of his sufficiencie. 2 His louing inuitation of all to rest on him for Iustification and Saluation. These foure things going before, if by the opera∣tion of Gods spirit shall afterward follow a rest vp∣on Iesus Christ for Iustification & Saluation, I pro∣nounce this Rest to bee that Act which doth iustify before God. So that these three Faiths shall bee as the three Propositions of a Categoricke Syllo∣gisme, Faith of Story being the Maior, Faith of Person or Personall merit being the Assumption, and Faith of Promises being the Conclusion, on this wise. De- Whosoeuer shall (as formerly is declared) rest vpon the merits of Christ for his Iustification and
Saluation, he shall be iustified and saued: This the Scripture affirmeth, and to acknowledge the truth thereof is Historicall Faith: ri. But I doe so rest vpon Christ; This the Conscience priuy to the sincerity of the heart assumeth, which act of Resting I tearme Iustifying Faith: j. Therefore I am iustified & shall be saued. And this is the Faith of Promise concluded of the former premisses, and is the Assurance before mentioned. To draw to a Conclusion, concerning these three Faiths I adde farther, that to the Faith of Story many doe not aspire, namely such Paynims and Gentiles to whom God hath not vouchsafed the Ministery of the Word and meanes of knowledge: yet many Reprobates doe, liuing within the compasse and territory of the Church, and remaine for all that vniustified. Vnto the Faith of Person, and that Affiance which I call sleight and superficiall, many likewise of the vessels of wrath doe attaine, but cannot goe one step farther, whereas all and euery of the Elect rest on Christ in the second man∣ner, and vpon the precedents before specified, and are thereby iustified. Vnto the Faith of promise though the children of God may come, and most do come, yet some doubtlesse partly through the strength of flesh, and mix∣ture of infidelity with their Faith, partly through the force and violence of temptation, doe not nor dare not inferre the Conclusion, and yet may be iustified. Lastly and finally, whereas Faith is distinguished into and , full Faith and little Faith, I take it that  is not to bee restrained to Faith of Promise onely, but that both are common to all three: so that a weake assent vnto the story is , a strong assent
is , a strong Affiance is , a weake Affi∣ance is , a bold and confident inference of the Conclusion is , a fearefull and timerous infe∣rence is . But yet neither of them in the first doth iustifie, although one of them of necessity must goe be∣fore Iustification, nor yet in the third, although  may and ought to follow: but in the second the least dramme of Affiance though it bee but as a graine of mu∣stard-seed doth iustifie as perfectly as the greatest quan∣tity, because it receiues all Christ, who is not capable of magis and minus, more and lesse: as a palsie hand may receiue as much though shakingly, as doth the hand of a strong man stedfastly. And thus with as much breuity as I could with a∣uoiding of obscurity, I haue deliuered my mind con∣cerning the true nature and definition of iustifying Faith: which whether wee haue or no, how easie it is to finde out, how full of sweet vse and comfort it is in comparison of the common receiued opinion not Eagles onely but Moles may see. If any notwith∣standing the euidence of my reasons shall persist in his former iudgement, suo fruatur per me iudicio, Let him abound in his owne sense: but for my selfe my word shall alwayes bee , the right is on my side. Ne∣uerthelesse if any by sound and substantiall arguments shall conuince mee, I will not proue refractary or opini∣onate,Ep. 9. ad Hier. In Retract. but according to S. Augustins counsell vnto
Hie∣rome, and his owne heroicall practice, I will , and retract all I haue said or written. For I count it a plaine token of a peruerse and illiberall mind, for a man seeing his errour whereby he was misled, rather to bend his wit for to find reason that he was not in error, and so  to bee mad with reason; then to frame his wit and will to assent and yeeld to truth being demonstrated vnto him.Hor. l. 1. ep. 6. ad Numie. But vntill that be, giue me leaue to conclude with the Poët: —Si quid nouisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; si non, his vtere mecum. If ought you know righter then here you see, Impart it friendly, els this vse with me. I. D.
A DEFENCE OF THE FORMER TREATISE OF IVSTIFYING FAITH, Against the answer of N. B. N. B. IT had been good, M. Downe, you had been aduised and warned by Diphilus in Athenaeus who said,Lib. 15. in fa∣bula cui titu∣lus . , acceptâ candelâ candela∣brum quaerebamus, we tooke the can∣dle before wee had the candlesticke; meaning that it sauoureth not of prouidence to light the one before wee bee sure of the other. Without doubt you would not then haue builded your doctrine here in this Cittie, till you had layd a good foundation for the same, euen Iesus Christ,1 Cor. 3.11. Apoc. 1. who standeth in the midst of the seuen golden Can∣dlesticks,
and is the sole foundation of the eternall verity. But such was the iudgement of God cast vpon vs for our sinnes,Mat. 18. that refusing the wholesome doctrine of his Word, and following fantasies and nouelties of our owne inuenti∣ons, we should now giue heed to lying spirits, and be led a∣way with the spirit of error. But we be to them by whom o∣ffences come: you cannot escape the hand of God except you speedily repent, and make satisfaction to this offended flock. I. D. Indeed, M. Baxter, if I haue presumed to determine a question meerly Theologicall by such principles as are heterogeneall and Improper vnto the science of Diuini∣ty: I must needs confesse I haue foully faulted, and iu∣stly deserued the blame of Improuidence you lay vpon me.Poster. l. 1. c. 7. §. 1. & 4. For it is impossible to demonstrate, saith the Phi∣losopher, passing from one kind to another: as for Arith∣metike to demonstrate a probleme or conclusion in Ge∣ometrie.Eccles. 2.14. But had your eyes been where Solomon sayth a wise mans eyes should be when you read my writing, you could not but perceiue that I had builded my do∣ctrine vpon that very same good foundation you speake of, euen Iesus Christ and his blessed word. For what∣soeuer I haue affirmed throughout that whole discourse I haue sufficiently warranted either by expresse testi∣mony of Scripture, or (which is equiualent) by nece∣ssary collection from it. Vnto your aduice therfore out of Diphilus in Athenaus I answer with the like but more sanctified words of Athanasius,Orat. contra Arrian. Loe we speake boldly out of the sacred Scriptures of holy and religious Faith, and
setting the candle as it were vpon the candlesticke doe wee thus pronounce of the nature and definition of Iustifying Faith. But put case M. Baxter I had been mistaken either in the truth of the conclusion, or in the proofes thereof, yet considering at least wise the probability of the one and the comfortablenes of the other, Charity I am sure would haue iudged the publishing thereof to haue pro∣ceeded (to vse the words of Augustin) rather from the errour of loue, then the loue of error. The more vn∣charitable are you that being not able to conuince mee of the least vntruth, ranke me notwithstanding in the num∣ber of lying spirits, and so peremptorily denounce wo and iudgement against me.1 King. 19.12. Wherein as you bewray how little you fauour of his mild spirit who chose rather to come in a still and soft voice, then in a tempest and whirlewind: so greatly are you deceiued if you thinke such causes and idle meanes either affright or affect me. No no I am not so simple to belieue that the earthquakes when moles beginne to heaue, or that thunderbolts pre∣sently flie abroad the world when euery hot braine threatens fire from heauen.Prou. 26.2. For as the bird by wandring and the swallow by flying escapeth, so the vndeserued curse shall not come, saith Solomon.Act. 4.36. And therefore vnlesse you can proue mee in deliuering this doctrine to haue beene an vnaduised Barnabas, I haue no cause to feare when you proue yourselfe but a rash and hasty Boanerges.Mar. 3.17. N. B. Your Sermon made here in Bristol Nouemb. 5. 1601.
stuffed with quirks, full of elenchs, and subtle distincti∣ons, wholly bent it selfe against the truth of God, and hath shaken the well affected minds of many, who by your So∣phismes seduced scarce know by what means they shall bee saued.Demosth. in Philip. You gaue vs Mandragor as to drinke, and vnder a sugred potion of your owne sole contriuing cast vpon vs the spirit of slumber.Aristoph. in Pluto. Was it not a bold part thus in peace to play the Lion, and rent in sunder (vnder pretence of truth) the blessed vnion of holy piety? to deliuer such new coined, strange, vncouth, and singular definitions, diuisions or distinctions of Iustifying Faith (being indeed Callida mendacia craftie vntruths)Plaut. Mostel. Athen. Dip∣nos. li. 3. Cic. pro Clu∣ent. as Apollo himselfe could by no meanes vnderstand (to vse the phrase of Antiphanes) and then to boast that scarce Archimedes could better and more liuely haue depainted his Theoremes then you iustify∣ing Faith:Theocrit. ho∣daep. then you forsooth had then against all writers old and new in one sole and sillie Sermon walking without fire in the darke delineated yea demonstrated as you say true Iustifying Faith the comfort of a Christian man. I. D. Three heinous faults you charge my Sermon withall, Vntruth in the Matter, Sophistrie in the Manner, and Breach of peace in the issue and euent: all which, if one dead flie bee sufficient to corrupt a whole Alabaster of sweet ointmēt,Eccles. 10.1. as the wiseman saith, must needs be more then enough to discredit one poore and simple Sermon.
As touching the Matter, you know that so much thereof as concernes the point in question is euery way parallell and agreeing vnto the writing I sent you: and  therfore if as you say it haue bent it selfe against the truth of God, loe here is Rhodes, according to the Prouerbe,Aesop. let vs see your leap, shew it in this and it shall be granted you in that also. Otherwise being so foullie ouerseene in charging a written tract whereof you haue taken so long aduisement and deliberation, you will hardly bee belieued in accusing a transient speech which might hap∣pily bee past your eares before your vnderstanding had leasure to apprehend it.
As for the Manner, it cannot lightly be more absurd then is your manner of quarrelling at it. For if it be so stuft with quirks, elenchs, sophismes, and subtleties, how is it that by & by you call in contempt a sillie Sermon? And if it containe such new coined, strange, vncouth, and singular definitions, diuisions, or distinctions as Apollo him∣selfe could by no meanes vnderstand, how come you to know that they are Callida mendacia, craftie vntruths, vnderstanding so readily what Apollo himselfe by no means could? Surely M. Baxter it was somewhat vnseasonable while you were chalenging me for I know not what So∣phismes and Subtleties, thus to entangle your selfe in these labyrinths and mazes of contradiction. But in truth you play right Senecas Harpaste with mee, and as she being blind herselfe,Sen. ep. 50. euer complained of the darke∣nesse of the house: so you wanting either wit or will to vnderstand tell me that I walke without fire in the darke, and impute Obscurity vnto my preaching. A vice from which I haue euer beene abhorring as they know well who are mine ordinary Auditors, or haue had experi∣ence of my courses. For as in iudgement I haue alwayes esteemed Perspicuity a principall vertue in Oratory, vt∣terly  disliking the vanity and affectation of those men who with Antony desire rather to bee admired then vn∣derstood:Sueton. Aug. c. 86. so haue I continually endeuoured to frame my practice vnto this iudgement, thinking that then I haue vsed best eloquence whē I haue spoken with the greatest euidence. If therefore, as Austin saith, I point you out with my finger the old or new moone, or some starre not so cleare which you would gladly see,De doct. Christ. Pro∣log. and your sight be so weake that it cannot reach so far as my finger, you haue no reason to be offended with me. You should rather pray God to vouch∣safe vnto you the eye salue of his spirit that you may see: I can but lend you my finger,Reu. 3.18. sight I cannot giue you. Now for the issue and euent, you say that like a potion of Mandrake it hath cast vpon you the spirit of slumber, and like a Lion hath rent in sunder the blessed vnion of ho∣ly Piety, that is in other termes hath bred in you at once both a Lethargie and frenzie, which is very neere a-kin vnto that wittie speech of the Apothecaries wife, that Pepper is hot in working and cold in operation. But tell me M. Baxter in plaine sadnesse, hath that Sermon indeed so shaken the well affected minds of many that now they scarce know by what meanes they shall be saued? For it seemeth strange to me that one sole and fillie Sermon should shake the minds of so many, and those so well affected too, and that in so important a case as the meanes of saluation: If your meaning be, as I guesse it is, that opposing the vul∣gar definition of Faith, and defining otherwise then for∣merly they conceiued of it, doubts and disputes haue growne thereupon, and consequently the interruption of your peace, and the vnion of Piety: I answer, first, that necessary doctrines must not bee suppressed, nor studi∣ous
minds depriued of wholesome instructions because of some inconueniences which may happen to follow. For as Augustin sayth, if vpon the publishing of truth offence be taken,De lib. ar. it is better to giue way to such offence then that truth be abandoned. Secondly, all the doubt and dispute that can grow vpon that Sermon is no other then this, of two definitions whether is the better, which I suppose is not to call in question the meanes of saluati∣on. And surely if euery difference in the Logicall hand∣ling of a point in Diuinity were the renting in sunder of the vnion of piety, there is no Diuine but playes the Li∣on, and deserues the same aspersion you cast vpon mee. Lastly, better is doubting of truth, then resolution in er∣ror: for doubting stirs vp seeking, and seeking hath the promise of finding,Mat. 7.7. and diuers I know vnto whom this promise euen in this particular hath graciously beene performed to the full satisfaction of their minds, and the vnspeakable comfort of their conscience, which comfort of conscience if you vnderstand by the spirit of slumber you doe no lesse then blaspheme: vnlesse you can shew that it is grounded vpon error which I know you can neuer doe. N. B. Well sith so it pleased you to trie your wit and follow your will that vpon a sole confident opinion of your sound argu∣ments, you haue bidden battell to all the learned men of Christendome, bitten famous Melancthon, honorable P. Martyr, blessed Caluin, renouned Beza, thrice honorable Grynaeus and Polanus, snapt & snarled at glorious Whi∣taker; and excellent Perkins (whom as you say you droue so
hard to the wall with your sudden arguments that hee knew not what to answer) yea all Fathers and writers both old and new for these.Theocr. . 1600. yeeres: Sith I say you would needs come barefoot to these mountaines, giue leaue I pray you to mee one of the least but the most offended in the absence of the rest, for the glory of God and the satisfying of our peo∣ple, to sift your arguments as you haue layd them downe in writing, and shape you an answer for the desence of Iustify∣ing Faith, till you grasple with other most learned mens writings which shortly you shall receiue. Wherein if your errors be spied, it was your fault so confidently to deliuer in writing vnder your hand such absurdities: praying you to remember ,Dinoloch. a∣pud Hesych. who spits in an Ants nest shall haue sore lips. I. D. De Anim. l. 3. cap. 3.It is not in our power, saith the Philosopher, to en∣tertaine what opinion we please, neither doth the mind chuse whether it will assent vnto the truth of a conclusi∣on yea or no: but simply and of the necessity of its na∣ture yeelds to that part of the contradiction whereunto by force of syllogisme it is determined. If therefore the arguments which I haue vsed in this question bee indeed as they seeme vnto me sound and necessary: you may as well chide the Sun for mouing towards the west, or the earth for resting stedfastly on her center, as me for being swayed and perswaded by them. And yet by your leaue I was not so transported with Confidence, but that I still kept my selfe within the bounds of Modesty. For al∣though it pelase you in the former section to charge me
with oasting that scarce Archimedes could better and more liuely haue painted his Theoremes then I iustifying Faith: yet was I in truth as farre from it, as you are from truth in affirming of it, submitting my selfe in all humility vnto the censure of Gods Church, and promi∣sing vpon conuiction of my error to reuerse what euer I had said. Yea but very insolently I haue bidden battell to all the learned men of Christendome, bitten, snapt, and snarled at Melancthon, Martyr &c. yea all Fathers and Writers both old and new for these 1600. yeeres.1 Sam. 17.26. Intolerable arro∣gance I confesse if your accusation be iust: for who but a presumptuous and proud Goliah would in such oppro∣brious manner defie and reuile the host of the liuing God? But tell me I beseech you what are those despi∣tefull and contumelious tearmes wherewith I haue so reproched those famous and excellent men? Nay did I in my Sermon so much as name either Melancthon, or Martyr, or Caluin, or
Beza, or Grynaus, or Pelanus, or Whitaker, or Perkins, whom yet you say I snapt and snarled at? For that you adde particularly of M. Per∣kins, as if I had boasted by my sudden arguments to haue driuen him so hard to the wall as hee knew not what to an∣swer, is but a blacke drop of your slanderous pen. The truth is this, that in a priuate conference I told you, that he being demāded, if Faith be an assurance of our present state in grace and future saluation, what comfort remai∣ned for him who not feeling this assurance thinks him∣selfe to bee without Faith and consequently in the state of damnation: his answer was (which also in his books he hath published) that desire of assurance is in the acce∣ptation of God as assurance indeed: to the which I sayd  I could no way yeeld, seeing by the couenant of Grace, actuall Faith it selfe is absolutely required vnto Iustifi∣cation, and therefore actuall assurance, if Faith bee assu∣rance. Besides this priuate speech all I haue publikely said or written is no more but this in generall, that though my opinion differ from the writings and do∣ctrine of most learned and worthy Diuines, to whom as farre inferiour I owe all respect and reuerence; yet being Gods freeman I cannot endure to bee mans Bondman and sweare to all they say. And is not this the same in effect which all our Diuines answer when they are char∣ged by the aduersary to dissent from the Fathers? Let one Whitaker speake for them all; We are, saith he, not the seruants but the Sons of the Fathers:Contrà Du∣raeum. if out of the law and from diuine authority they prescribe any thing vnto vs wee obey them as Parents: if they command ought a∣gainst the voice of the heauenly doctrine, wee say wee must harken not vnto them but God. You Iesuits like bondmen and base slaues admit without iudgement and reason all the sayings of the Fathers, fearing I thinke the gibbet or whip if yee refuse any. Now M. Baxter, say if you dare, that glorious Whitaker with the rest of our Diuines bite, and snap, and snarle at the Fathers as well as I: if you dare not, and yet I vse no other language then they doe, then are biting, and snapping, and snarling, but your owne doggish tearmes, arguing rather notorious Sycophancie in you then such barbarous inciuility in me. Well yet sith you will needs, say you, come barefoot to these mountaines giue me leae to sift your arguments and to shape you an answer for the defence of Iustifying Faith.Exod.
3.5. Sir it was reason I should pull off my shooes and come barefoot to these mountaines, because the ground on  which I was to stand is holy. Neuerthelesse in this en∣counter with you I trust you shall find my feet so well sh with the preparation of the Gospell of peace,Ephes. 6.15. that I need not care what briers or thornes soeuer you plant in my way. And therefore good leaue haue you, sift my arguments in Gods name at your pleasure, for to that very end sent I them you in writing. But I am afraid least insteed of sifting, I find from you nothing else but meere shifting, as indeed I doe not. For to some of my arguments you shape no answer at all, some you unshape and turne cleane out of the forme I set vpon them, to not one of them doe you shape so much as probable or tolerable answer. So that although you seeme very ambitious and greedie of the title, yet if you haue no better skill in sifting arguments, and shaping answers, you will hardly obtaine so high an honor as to bee stiled Defender of the Faith. Further you tell me that shortly I shall receiue the wri∣tings of other most learned men, and grasple with them. They shall bee welcome M. Baxter whensoeuer they come: for the more you are that impugne the truth, the more honorable will the victory be. But I beseech you, Sir, when will that shortly you speake of be expired? for it is now more then two yeeres since you first threatned me with them, as by the date of your writing appeareth: and yet hitherto could I neuer heare either from them or of them whether they be white or blacke. Only it seemes they are very angrie Pismires, that a man cannot spit a∣mong them without sore lips. But when I shall speake with these enemies in the gate, as the Psalmist saith, I hope they shall finde my lips so seasoned with the salt of grace, and so well prouided of an answer;Psal. 127.5. Col. 4.6. that I need not
feare if they proue a nest, I say not of Ants onely, but euen of Waspes and Hornets also. In the meane season if they bee so deeply learned as you pretend, how is it that you so hastily preuent them, and haue not the man∣ners to stay till your betters haue spoken? It is not, you say; vpon presumption of your greater learning, be∣ing one of the least but out of a greater measure of zeale, as being the most offended. But, M. Baxter, they that doe the works of Zimri, haue not lightly in them the a∣ffection of Phinees. And seeing you will needs bee the most offended, shall I say being the most offending? Certainly hauing no iust cause of offence giuen you, it is not so much either the glory of God, or the satisfaction of your people, as your own factiousnesse and vaineglo∣ry that sets you so forward in this busines, and makes you so impatient to thinke of the second place. Of a colder temper it seemes are those learned Rabbies you scarre me withall, who while you hazard your selfe in the forlorne hope, wisely prouide for their owne secu∣rity in the reerward. And as the Turke vses to marshall the basest of his nations in the front of the battell, that the enemies armes being wearied, & swords blunted vp∣on them, his ajars may find the lesse danger and e∣sistance: so these I thinke are not vnwilling that you with your wrangling a while comber and annoy mee, that hauing spent my strength vpon you, I should not be able to endure the force of their second charge. But vn∣to ish policy I oppose the old Roman wisdom,Veget. l. 1. c. 1. and as th exercising their young souldiers to skirmish and  Martiall actiuities against a post repa∣red hereby with more readines and skill to en∣counter a true enemie: so will I by trying and experi∣encing
my selfe vpon you) fit and prouide my selfe to the better entertainment vnto those learned aduersaries whensoeuer they shall please to assaile me. N. B. Your writings are well polished, and shew whence you came, and where you were bred:Plutarch. . but as smooth as they bee they cannot helpe you nor saue you from blemish, except you speedily (which I wish) snetch the new hatched Mansters. For the faire shooe helpeth no man of the Gowt. I. D.
Here, M. Baxter, you bestow vpon me once for all a few drops of your holy water sprinkle, telling me that my writings are smooth and well polished, sauouring something of the place whence I came and where I was bred: but withall remembring me (I thinke lest I should grow too proud of your praises) that though the shooe be faire, the foot is gowtie, that is, though the stile and manner of handling be Schollerly, yet the argument and matter is erronious if not hereticall. And so, as Hierome spea  you cast vpon me an honorable kind of contumely,Ep. 6 ad Pam. & Ocean. comming mee a little for some good parts, but vtterly bereauing one of the truth of Faith. Which commendati∣on also here vousafed mee in grosse, anon you rob mee of againe by retaile, allowing mee nothing but ridicu∣lous, vnlearned, and inkehorne speeches, and scarce af∣fording me skill enough to compose a Syllogisme. But the best is your iudgement is not the truest touch to trie desert by▪ and therfore whether you praise or dispraise  it no way moues me, the one cannot better me, the other cannot disparage mee. Neuerthelesse if you can plainly and directly shew that like another Ixion embracing a cloud insteed of Iuno, I meane my owne fancie insteed of Gods truth, I haue begotten thereupon these monsters (as you tearme them) of opinions: I will as you wish mee speedily snetch them,Psal. 137.9. and dash their heads against the stones that they grow not vp to the strength and sta∣ture of Giants, to the further danger and disturbance of the Church. But till then pardon mee, if I neither snetch them,1 Pet. 2.2. nor feare blemish by them: nay if as the blessed of∣spring of celestiall verity I still feed and cherish them with the sincere milke of the word that they may grow thereby to the further comforting of distressed soules,Iude 20. and building vp of the Saints in their most holy Faith. And thus much in briefe for answer to your Pro∣logue: now take wee a view also of the Disputation it selfe. Wherein if you obserue due proportion and De∣corum, as that is no other then a head without wit or braine, so this can bee no better then a body without heart and spirit. N. B. But that I may orderly proceed, I will briefely the state of the Question betwixt vs, and next shewing how it is holden by you and denyed by mee.The Quest. The Question is whe∣ther iustifyg Faith by the Church for 1600. yeeres bee rightly dfined: you deny it, I affirme it. I. D. In word you promise orderly proceeding, but indeed
you lay the foundation of Babel, and by peruerting the state of the Question disorder and confound the whole Disputation. For whereas I inquire What is the true Nature and definition of iustifying Faith, and determine that that act whereby a man stands iustified before God, is not Assurance in the Mind but Affiance in the Will: you to forestall the reader on your side, and to worke all the preiudice you can against mee, substitute insteed thereof this enuious demaund,
Whether iustifying Faith by the Church for 1600. yeeres bee rightly defined, and boldly auerre that I maintaine it negatiuely & you affir∣matiuely. How you can quit your selfe of manifest pre∣uarication herein I see not, vnles perhaps you say that al∣beit directly & in precise tearmes I affirme not so much: yet defining otherwise then the Church hitherto hath done, indirectly and by consequence I auouch no lesse; But this figleafe is not broad enough to couer your na∣kednesse. For suppose it were so, yet was it your dutie to haue retained the Question in that very forme of words I propounded it vnto you, and not in lieu of my Conclusion to place a Consectary of your owne colle∣ction. If whereas you hold that Faith is Assurance, I should state the Question thus, Whether God commaund a lie to bee beleeued as true, and then peremptorily pro∣nounce that you affirme it and I deny it, would you not think your selfe much wronged and abused? And yet this absurditie necessarily following vpon that opinion, as in my fift Argument is firmely proued: I should so doing but serue you with your owne sauce and repay you in your owne coine. How forcible therefore soeuer your Consequence may be, in this place it is very vnsea∣sonable, and with more credit should you haue perfor∣med  your promise of orderly proceeding, if you had re∣serued it thither where you meane to argue against mee. But Camels, saith Pliny, loue not to drinke till they haue troubled the water,Hist. Nat. l. 8. ca. 18. nor Sophisters to dispute till they haue clouded the Question. Neuerthelesse because you vaunt so much and so of∣ten of all the learned men of Christendome, all the Church, all the world, all Fathers, all Writers, old and new, Greeke and Latin for these 1600. yeeres: giue mee leaue in this place once for all to apply mine answer thereunto. I say therefore that it is but a vaine and idle brag full of Arrogance, Temerity, and Vntruth; Arro∣gance in that you would seeme to haue read all Authors that haue wrtten these 1600. yeeres: which if you were such a glutton of bookes, and withall had the strength of an oke and the time of Mathuselah; yet could you not by any meanes performe: Temerity in that you thinke with the countenance of one inartificiall argument, to outbraue so many sound Demonstrations grounded on Gods Word and according with right reason: Vntruth, in that you beare the world in hand as if all Writers both old and new were cleerely against me, not so much as one giuing his suffrage and voice with mee, whereas in my Treatise I haue expresly shewed the contrary.
For first touching the Negatiue, that Faith is not As∣surance, I vouched therein the authority of that reue∣rend and worthy man of God M. Foxe, whose words anon you shall heare at large: In the meane season it behooueth you, if you will bee beleeued in this point, to produce the cloud of witnesses you so much boast of, that wee may heare whether they will depose the con∣tradictory hereunto, namely that Faith is Assurance.  For howsoeuer, you say you haue no fewer then All, yet it may bee when all comes to all you will proue as ill stored of testimonies as the wise man of Athens was of shipping, who being not worth the poorest shal∣lop in the harbor, bare himselfe notwithstanding for owner of all the gallies that arriued therein. And sure∣ly hauing throughly searched your Answer to this pur∣pose, I find the nūber (by you cited) so small, that I need not much skill in Arithmetike to summe them vp: for, the totall amounts to no more then an Vnity, and all your Authors are but one Caluin, once alledged in the front thereof. Vnto whom I denie not but you might haue ioyned some other of the later Writers: but what are they to all both old and new for 1600. yeeres? For as for the ancient Fathers, not one of them (so farre as I can learne) affirmeth the iustifying act of Faith to be As∣surance: and among the Moderne it is more then mani∣fest that a good part of them flatly denyeth it. So that being backed of so few, and yet craking so loudly of All,Ter. Eunuch. act. 4. Scen. 7. you play right the glorious Souldier in the Comedie, who hauing but foure men in all the world, bestirred himselfe so busily with three of them as if hee had been mustering a whole Legion, and at length missing the fourth, gallantly demaunded where all the rest were. Againe touching the Affirmatiue, that Faith is Affi∣ance, I quoted that passage of S. Augustin, To beleeue is to loue, ad by louing to moue vnto God.In my Trea∣tise De morib. Eccl. ca.
15. Now Loue (by which that Father vsually defineth Vertue) properly is not an act of Faith, because of Charity; Charity & Faith being two different and distinct Habits.1 Cor. 13.13. And therefore by Loue you are to vnderstand generally an act of the will, it being an affection of that Facultie: as if in plainer  tearmes he should haue said, To belieue is that act of the Will whereby we moue vnto God: Which elsewhere he expresseth more clearly, saying, He that commeth vnwil∣lingly beleeueth not,In Ioh. 6. tract. 26. and he that beleeueth not commeth not: for we run not vnto Christ by walking but beleeuing; nei∣ther come we by the motion of the body, but by the wil of the heart. So that Faith being in S. Augustins iudgement an act or motion of the Will, what other can it bee then Affiance?12. q. 40. a. 2. ad 2. For, as Thomas sayth, that motion in the ap∣petite which immediately followeth Desire to obtaine that good which wee esteeme possible to be obtained, is Affiance: Adde vnto him Theophylact; Hee that with great affection beleeueth,In Marc. 11. stretcheth out his heart towards God. And what doth it? It is vnited vnto him; and the heart enflamed gathereth great certainty that it shall ob∣taine his desires. Where by the way obserue that cer∣tainty is concluded out of Faith, and therefore can no more bee Faith then the Conclusion can bee one of the Premises.Serm. de San∣cto Andr. So Barnard, To beleeue in God is to set all our hope in him. And our Diuines in the Conference of Altemburg define it by Affiance in the Heart and Will. In a word all those who seat it only or principally in the will,Colloq. Al∣temb. accord with mee. For although defining it popular∣ly they put vsually into their Descriptions, Assent vnto supernaturall verities which is an act of the mind: yet making not that, but Affiance only the proper act that iustifies, they doe in effect fully accord and agree with me. So that you see I am not driuen to so neere an exi∣gent, but vnto your one I can oppose more then you are aware of. And yet had I farre more, I would not vpon presumption, either of their number or authority, say vn∣to you,Ep.
11. inter. ep. Aug. as Hierome sometime wrote vnto Augustin, Suffer  me I pray thee to erre with such men: and sith you see I haue so many companions in error with mee, you ought to bring forth one at least that ioynes with you. For who is he that would willingly erre with whomsoeuer or how many soeuer?2 Pet. 1.19. But hauing as S. Peter speaketh a more sure word of the Prophets for my warrant, I rather conclude with that free and ingenuous answer of Augustin to Hierom, More testimonies I thinke might I easily haue found if I had read much:Epist. 19. but the Apostle Paul shall bee vnto mee in∣steed of them all, yea, aboue them all. N. B. Let vs therefore see what you affirme and wee agree to be our iustifying Faith, and how you impugne it.Fides iustifi∣cans in adultis quae sit. Iustifying Faith agreed vpon vs both as holden by the Church. We agree both in this that iustifying Faith (as we hold it and you de∣ny it) is A certaine knowledge infused into the hearts of the elect by the Holy Ghost by which they constantly agree to all things reuealed in the Word of God, and also a firme Assu∣rance whereby euery one of the Elect relieth vpon the Pro∣mises of Christ, fully resoluing that Christ with all his me∣rits are giuen to him for iustification and eternall life. Now as you deny this to bee iustifying Faith, so againe let vs see what you count iustifying Faith to bee.M. Downes iustifying Faith. Iustifying Faith is a rest of mans will vpon Christ and his merits of Iustifi∣cation and Saluation. The validity of your definition wee will view anon by Gods help: in the meane season let vs see with what engins of rare wit and solid Syllogismes you endeuour to ouerthrow the former definition of ours, consi∣sting vpon the generall Word, the causes, the effects, the pro∣per Subiect and Adiuncts or essentiall Properties.
I. D. Your second cogitations I see are wiser then the first, and now you shoot with far better aime then erewhile, missing not much of the right state of the Question. For the Definition here attributed vnto me is I confesse that which I defend, and the other assumed vnto your selfe is that also which I impugne; I meane so farre forth as it makes Knowledge the Generall Word, and Particular Assurance the Act, or as you tearme it the adiunct or es∣sentiall Propertie. For otherwise that causally it is from the Holy Ghost, subiectiuely in the elect, and effectuall vnto Iustification is not questioned by mee, but equally acknowledged of vs both. Now the validity of my definition you say you will view anon, and anon by Gods help will I farther maintaine it against you. In the meane season let vs see how skilfully you can vse your buckler hand, and ward of those arguments I obiect against you. And that the reader may more easily concerne the course of our dis∣putation, and how pertinently things are applyed: as hitherto before my Reply I haue set downe the words of your Answer, so henceforward before your Answer will I set downe the words also of the Treatise I sent you: Treatise. I will not play the Philologer in shewing the diuerse vse and acceptation of the word  or Fides, or quote Ciceros Fiat quod dictum est, or Augustins Fac quod di∣cis for the Notation of it: nor play the Philosopher in
discoursing of Physicall or Morall or Ciuill Faith, nor lastly will I speake of Theologicall Miraculous Faith. N. B. No doubt but then we are like to heare good stuffe seeing at the first entrance into the lists you refuse to bee tried by those that best knew the meaning of the things which they would expresse,Nomen quod rem notat quasi notamé nec aliter e∣nunciari res possit nisi ali∣quo nomine. Aug. de Gen. ad lit. c. 7. lib. imperfecto. Apoc. adu. Gent. c. 46. Ib. ca. 3. and therefore found out names fit to note their natures. But Tertullian could haue told you (whose words you cite in your preface though falsly) Sinominis, inquit, odium est, quis nominum reatus, quae nominum accusatio? Nisi si aut barbarum sonat vox aliqua nomi∣nis, aut infaustum, aut maledicum, aut impudicum. If you find fault with the Word wherein doth the Word offend, what can you say against it? except the Word bee barbarous, or ominous, or slanderous, or vnchast. I. D. Stumbling at the threshold they say bodes no good, and little hope doe you giue of honest and plaine dealing in the sequele, that make your beginning with so fond and shamelesse a cauill. For neither doe I refuse to be tri∣ed by those who found out the names of things, neither doe my words import any disliking of the word
or Fi∣des: only I omit to discourse of such things as are vul∣garly knowne and not greatly materiall to my purpose.Apolog. c. 2. & 3. Tertullian indeed tels mee that the Gentiles sometimes hated the very name of Christian, persecuting it with as much rigour in them that bare it as they did notorious wickednesse in others, albeit the Name neither were  barbarous, nor ominous, nor slanderous, nor vnchast. But what is this to the purpose? vnlesse you say I am growne into as deep a detestation of the word Faith, as Pagans were of the name of Christiā: which none but an infidell can doe, and no other then a Satanicall and diuellish spirit would obiect vnto mee. For as the thing signified by the Word is that most noble grace of the Spirit of God which giueth the forme and being to a Christian man: so the Word also I confesse hath from the beginning both beene sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and religiou∣sly retained in the Church to signifie the same; neither can it now without sacrilege and impiety either bee vio∣lated or disused. It is not I therefore that finde fault or am offended with the Word: it is you rather that offer open violence vnto the plainest sentence, giuing withall strong suspicion, that hauing once passed the bounds of modestie, wilfully peruerting the state of the question, you will hereafter steele your forehead and waxe rech∣lesse of saying any thing.
But I haue cited, you say, the words of Tertullian fals∣ly. Not so falsly as you haue cited him idly. For wher∣as that Father saith,Apol. c. 46. Philosophers player-like affect truth, and affecting corrupt it as being ambitious of glory: but Christians necessarily desire it, and intirely practice it as being carefull of their saluation: I report it somewhat more breefly thus, Although Philosophers player-like affect the truth as being ambitious of glory: yet Christi∣ans studiously follow it as being carefull of their Salua∣tion. So that omission of a word or twaine without any alteration of the sence, in a matter neither hindering nor furthering the cause in hand, or some such toy, as Hierome speaketh,Epist. 101. ad Pammach. is the crime you charge mee withall.  For the true meaning of the sentence I am sure I haue kept: as for the words, because I endited out of my me∣mory being then in Bristol, and vse not to cary my Li∣brary about with mee when I trauell abroad, it was easie to mistake or forget some part of them. N. B. But you knowing the very meaning of the Greeke word comming  persuasus sum vel fui,I haue beene or am perswa∣ded. whereof commeth  persuadere, to perswade, would haue stay∣ed you from condemning vs that say Faith is a full perswa∣sion: Besides the Hebrew word  comming of that which a man simply is perswaded of,Truth. and the Greeke com∣ming of the Passiue  to bee perswaded, if you would might haue stayed you from incurring this infamy, and me from this labour. It had therefore as I thinke beene much better for you to haue been Philologos then Antipistos. But let vs see how you proceed. I. D. Kemnitius a graue and learned Diuine saith that so great a matter as is the Definition of iustifying Faith is not to bee committed only vnto Grammaticall disputa∣tions:Loco de Iu∣stif. and yet so great store doe you make of one poore and naked Etymologie, as if there need no more but the knowledge thereof to decide the controuersie. For this, you say, if I would might haue stayed mee from condem∣ning you, and eased you from this labour. Let vs therefore (seeing you are so confident vpon it) trie the strength of this Achilles.
Faith, you say, in the Greeke and Hebrew comes from a word signifying to bee perswaded, Ergo Faith is a Per∣swasion. Sir I deny your Consequence. For first, euery word beares not alwayes the signification of the primi∣tiue from which it is deriued,Arist.  ca. 1. partly because the num∣ber of words being certaine and definite, but infi∣nite of things, one word of necessity must haue more then one meaning: partly by vse (which is the rule and warrant of speech) they oftentimes degenerate from their natiue and first signification into a strange and farre different meaning. So that if your kind of reasoning may passe for currant, great danger and error must needs ensue vpon it. For example, Hypostasis if wee regard the first originall thereof signifieth Substance, and so saith Hierome, all schooles of humane learning vnderstand it:Epist. 57. ad Damas. yet were it horrible blasphemie thereupon to con∣clude, Ergo in the matter of the Trinity it must signifie so too; for what mouth, saith the same Father, is so sacrile∣gious as to say there are three Substances in the Trinity? It is not therefore so much to bee marked whence a word is deriued, as what it is vsed to signifie; and if it signifie many things (as Faith doth) then must wee in∣quire in what sense it is to be taken in the present questi∣on, that so wee may build our doctrines not in the aëry sound of words, but in the vertue of the things signified, as Basil speaketh.Contra Eu∣nom. lib. 2. Againe, words (as Logicians teach vs) haue their o∣riginations sundry wayes, and among the rest from the Effects. Not to seeke far for an instance; The third ar∣gument in a Syllogisme whereby the Conclusion is proued, is by the Grecians called , that is Faith, a word as you say deriued from a verbe signifying to bee
perswaded: and yet I thinke your selfe will acknowledge that here it hath the name from the Effect, not because it is Perswasion, but for that it doth beget Perswasion. Whereupon it followeth likewise that Faith in our Que∣stion flowing from the same fountaine is not necessarily to signifie Assurance, but may well be called so because by it euery true beleeuer may gather and conclude vnto himselfe Assurance. Lastly, although the Greeke and Hebrew words whence Faith commeth signifie to bee perswaded, yet they doe not only signifie so. For  as Rabbi Kim∣hi saith implies Affiance, and in the middle voice imports as much, whence commeth Confi∣dence: and  (a word growing vpon the same root that  doth) construed with the Preposition  signi∣fieth to trust, rest, rely on. Wherefore the originall words in either language being indifferently affected vn∣to both, what reason can be rendred why faith in those languages should not as well beare the signification of Affiance as Assurance?
These reasons considered, you see at length the weak∣nesse of your Achillean argument, and how insufficient it is to perswade that Faith is a Perswasion. Withall you may perceiue that if I would I might haue beene Philologos without any hazard vnto the definition of Faith which I maintaine: and that there is no cause why either you should vpbraid mee with the odious name of Antipistos, or I feare incurring infamie for any thing hi∣therto I haue said or written. Howsoeuer, sure I am my Theologie agreeth better with true Philologie, then these virulent speeches with the rule of Charity, or (to shew by the way what a skilfull Pedant you are) your  preposterous deduction of from , the Primi∣tiue from the Deriuatiue, with the precepts of Gram∣mer. Treatise. Bee not offended if I handle , and giue new tearmes to old matters. N. B. Aristoph. in Ran. & Luci∣an. in Pseu∣dosophistâ.You are no Constable, neither haue you put on the Lions skinne to subdue vs to your commaund. I tell you Master Downe wee are offended that you giue new tearmes to old Positions, and handle them not onely  (which in this point you cannot bee permitted to doe) but also  which is vtterly intolerable. I will therefore say vnto you. With S. Hierom,Ep. ad Pam∣mach. & O∣cean. Cur post quadringintos annos docere nos niteris quod ante nesciuimus? How cōmeth it to passe that thou after 400. yeeres space goest about to teach vs that be∣fore we knew not? And so to you how dare you deale after a new manner in so waightie a thing as is Faith, opposing your iudgement to the iudgement of all the Church for these 1600. yeeres?In Praescript. Alas saith Tertullian, qui estis vos, vnde, quando? who are you, whence are you, and of what continuance?In Gen. hom. 3. lib.
3. ad Licent. But suo ipsius iudicio perijt sorex, By shewing your selfe you perish, as saith Origen and Augustin of others. Now perceiue wee that the iudgement of the whole Church cannot content you, but still you must haue one ink∣horne tearme or other of your owne to shew your itching eares. Would not or could not all the learned men of the world define iustifying Faith, and contenting themselues with the Genus and Difference satisfie you, but that you  would not onely dispute pro formâ against them (which might bee in a Scholler for triall of wit tolerable) but also publikely preach against their iudgements, and proclaime them erronious, only allowing your owne for true. I. D. Indeed, M. Baxter, it is true, I am no Constable: if I were I thinke I should finde it a very troublesome of∣fice to haue such a turbulent spirit within my iurisdicti∣on as you are. And as for the Lions skin, as you say I haue not put it on: it is you that haue ietted vp and downe along time in it, to the great scarring and affright∣ing of simple people.Aesop. But because your vntimely bray∣ing and the vnlucky appearance of your eares now be∣wray that it growes not to your backe, you must be con∣tent to bee stript of it, and to walke hereafter as you are in your owne hide. You are offended, you say, that I giue new tearmes to old positions, and handle them  after a new manner. An offence not giuen, but taken, and therefore little to bee regarded. For the Philosopher,Categ. c. 7. §. 16. though he would haue the common vse of speech to bee retained in fami∣liar conuersation: yet Artists, sayth he, haue liberty to inuent new tearmes, so as they bee proper, determined, and adequated to the thing signified.Simplic. super Praedicam. qual. Academ. Quaest. lib. 1. In regard where∣of himselfe doubted not first to vse  for that which formerly in the Concrete was called : neither was Cicero afraid with out former example to call that Qualitas which the Grecians tearmed . In a word, how many tearmes are there now frequently vsed in schooles, which vnto the ancients were vncouth and ne∣uer
heard of? It cannot therefore bee a sufficient excep∣tion to say the tearme is new, vnlesse with all you shew it is not proper enough to expresse the thing signified, which here you cannot doe, as by and by will appeare. This I thinke you saw, and thereupon very restrictiue∣ly you say that in this point I cannot bee permitted so to doe. And why I pray you not in this point as well as in others? For it hath alwayes beene the custome of the Church of God euen in the highest points of Religi∣on, partly for the clearing of those parts that are obscure and darke in them, partly for the preseruation of them a∣gainst the innouations of heretiks, to deuise new tearmes, and as Athanasius speaketh,In disp. cum Ario coram Probo Genti∣li iudice. things vnchangeably remay∣ning to change the names of things. Hence the ancient Fathers inuented the word Trinity to signify the plura∣lity of persons in one substance, Homousios to expresse the consubstantiality of the Sonne with the Father, Theo∣tokos to maintaine the personall vnion of both natures in Christ, and six hundred such like words vtterly vn∣known vnto former ages:Ibid. old matters, as the same Atha∣nasius saith,Cap. 18. receiuing new names & those new names cou∣ching vnder them no new meaning. According whereunto Vincentius Lirinensis, though he would not haue his Ti∣mothie to broach new things, yet giueth him leaue to teach the same things he hath learned after a new manner. Being therfore warrāted both by the precept & practice of the Primitiue Church I see no cause but that euen in this point also I may be permitted to vse new tearmes.
Perhaps you will say that not only the tearme where∣with it is inuested, but the matter hereof is also new: for so much your questions out of Hierome and Tertullian, and the floud of words following with not a drop of  reason in them seeme to import. Whereunto though I haue already sufficiently answered, yet now I adde by way of surplus, that many Truths lye a long time hidden in their principles, and vnheeded of the wisest, which being at length disclosed and brought to light, are not therefore new in themselues, but onely vnto vs, com∣ming newly vnto our knowledge: euen as the countrey of America is called the new world, not because it is of a latter creation then Europe, Asia, or Africa, but only because it is of a later discouery. These Conclusions vn∣till their dependency and coherence with the principles doe manifestly appeare vnto vs, it sufficeth to beleeue them implicitly and in the preparation of the Minde: but when they shall bee vnfolded out of their principles, and clearly demonstrated vnto vs by necessary deduction from them, we are bound to yeeld distinct and expresse assent vnto them. And then, as it would haue been great folly in the Spaniard to haue refused the gold and trea∣sures of the new world, because it was found out not by the old Argonauts, but by Christopher Columbus a late sailer: so would it bee great sinne in vs to disclaime and renounce the benefit of a truth, because it is made known vnto vs, not by an ancient Father, but by a man of ye∣sterday or to day.Iam. 2.1. For this were to haue the faith of God in respect of persons, as S. Iames saith, and to restraine the gift of the Spirit of Wisdome and reuelation vnto the times of our predecessors, as if they only had eyes giuen them to spie out truths, and it were impossible for vs to see what they saw, not, although wee caried the Sunne in our hands, as Lactantius speaketh. Now then (to ap∣ply this vnto the matter in hand) if the point you qua∣rell at bee not onely new vnto the present custome;De Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. c. 7. as S.
Augustin speaketh, but also contrary vnto reason and the grounds of Faith, I confesse it is erronious; and iustly may you come vpon mee with your demaunds out of Hierome and Tertullian,Ep. 23. ad Paulin. De veland. virg. cap. 1. who are you, whence, when, that after 400. yeeres you should goe about to teach vs what wee knew not before? But if it bee new only vnto vs, and not in it selfe: then doe I answer your Hierome with Hierome, Weigh not truth by time, and Tertullian with Tertullian, Nor space of times, nor patronage of persons, nor priuiledge of places may prescribe against truth. For that which is no otherwise new is true, and as the truth of God is with all reuerence and submission to bee em∣braced. Howbeit this I say not as if I would be thought to bee the first discouerer hereof, or that it had laine hid as it were in the pit of Democritus vntill this time. For that there is a Faith (whose obiect is the Person of the Mediator) was neuer yet vnknowne in the Church, but hath euer beene manifest euen from the beginning. Search the Scriptures and you shall find therein nothing more cleere then this. For (as in the treatise sent you I haue shewed) the whole tenor of them runs thus, Hee that beleeueth in mee shall not perish,Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 14.1. Ioh. 1.12. yee beleeue in God beleeue also in mee: As many as receiued him to them hee gaue power to bee the Sonnes of God, that is to them that beleeue in him &c.Rom. 3.22.26. Gal. 2.16.3.22. Phil. 3.9. Iam. 2.1. Reu. 2.13.14.12. Whereunto I adde that in sundry places it is expresly called the Faith of Iesus Christ, not because it inhereth in Christ as in a Subiect, but for that it hath relation and respect vnto Christ as vnto the right Obiect.
And that at length it appeareth, both that the matter is euery way old though the tearme bee new, and that new tearmes may bee giuen to old matters euen of this  kind, so as they bee proper determined and adequated thereunto. It remaineth onely to shew that such is the tearme which here I vse. For proofe whereof I say no more but this, that if our best Diuines haue conuenient∣ly distinguished other Faiths according to their obiects, calling one Faith of story because Scripture story, ano∣ther Faith of Promise because the Euangelicall pro∣mise, a third Faith of Miracles because miracles are the proper obiect of them: I see no reason why I may not as freely and as fitly call that Faith of Person which hath for its Obiect the Person of Iesus Christ. Neither can I conceiue if this bee an inkhorne tearme as it pleaseth your elegancy to tearme it, why Faith of Story, Faith of Promise, Faith of Miracles should not bee inkhorne-tearmes also. But you are a very nice and dainty man, you can tast no wine how old or generous soeuer, vn∣lesse the cup out of which you drinke it bee grauen by Myron or Polycletus. N. B. But this hath beene the course of all fanaticall spirits in all ages, moued with ,Phil: 1.14. selfe-loue, contention, hypocrisie, and couetousnesse,De Haeresibus ad Quodvult Deum. to con∣demne all others to set vp and stablish their owne fantasies. Read Augustine, yea see the Ecclesiasticall histories, Eu∣sebius, Sozomen, Euagrius, Dorotheus, Vincentius &c. there shall you see whereupon these Schismes in the Church began. Let mee therefore intreate you if you will needs deale in these graue causes , yet that you will deale al∣so , well, as becommeth a wise man. For otherwise you shall bewray your mind desirous of nouelties, hazard your
credit, offend the Church, yea as hee saith take vpon you to glew an egge,Diogenianus. loosing your labour, and making your selfe ridiculous to the best. I. D. What hath beene the course of fanaticall spirits in all ages, and whereupon they haue been moued to beginne their Schismes in the Church; I am not now to learne of you: neither needed you in this point so to flourish with your Greeke, or to make such a rumble with the names of Eusebius, Sozomen, Euagrius, Dorotheus, Vin∣centius and the rest. But what my inward motiues haue beene, and with what affection I haue proceeded in this businesse, God and my owne conscience are a sufficient theater: for your tongue is not the fanne of this floore. And seeing my earnest protestation in my preface can∣not perswade your vncharitable heart to entertaine a better opinion of my sincere and vpright meaning in this cause, but that you will notwithstanding reckon me in the number of fanaticall spirits, possessed with selfe-loue, contention, hypocrisie, and couetousnesse, condemning all other to set vp and stablish their owne fantasies; I appeale vnto him who alone knoweth the heart and trieth the raines,Ep. 69. ad Florent. Pu∣pian. and say vnto you in the words of S. Cyprian, These things haue I written out of a pure mind and con∣science, and with stedfast trust vpon my Lord and God. You haue my letters, I haue yours; in the day of iudgement both shall bee rehearsed before the tribunall of Christ.
Whereas you intreat mee to deale in this graue cause well, and as becommeth a wise man, surely hitherto I haue indeuoured so to doe: how well I haue performed  it I leaue vnto the censure of the Church, and specially of those vnto whom the Spirits of the Prophets are subiect. In the meane season pardon mee if I feare none of those dangers you threaten vnto mee. How your selfe will auoid them I cannot tell, for neuer was there man wrote with lesse reason and more follie. Treatise. Three Faiths there seeme to be which lay claime and title to the priuiledge of iustification; Faith of Histo∣ry, Faith of promise, and Faith of Person. The first is an assent of the mind vnto the truth of Gods Word, and specially the Gospell. And this whether it bee Acqui∣site or Infused hath no interest in the matter of iustifica∣tion. For besides that is absurd generall knowledge should iustifie— N. B. That you dare bee so bold to make such a distribution of Faith I impute it to your desire of nouelties,Eph. 4. as you say in the words last betweene vs debated. I tell you there is but one Faith, and that a true and liuely working Faith,Knowledge the begin∣ning, Appli∣cation or Ap∣prehension the Progresse, Rest the end of Faith. and this onely is iustifying Faith, and comprehendeth your three nice distinctions, and is compounded of them all con∣ioyned together, the first the beginning, the second the pro∣gresse, the third being the end. I. D. It is not desire of noueltie in mee, but loue of confu∣sion in you, that dare not haue those things distinguished
which in their natures are diuided. For distinction of that which is ambiguous,Top. 1. c. vlt. saith Aristotle, is the prime and most necessary principle both of defining and dispu∣ting well: the neglect whereof insteed of profitable rea∣soning about matters of substance, induceth fruitlesse contention and iangling about words. Now that Faith is equiuocall and needeth distinction appeares first by reason, for that it comprehendeth vnder it sometime more and sometime fewer things, is both affirmed and denied of the same persons, is a word of accident attribu∣ted to diuers Subiects not contained vnder one next Ge∣nus, as to the Elect, to Reprobates, to Diuels. Second∣ly by authority,Ser. de temp. 181. It is one thing to belieue a God, another to yeeld beliefe vnto God, another to belieue on God, saith Augustine. There is a kind of gift equiuocally called Faith, saith Oecumenius.In 1. Cor. 13. In 1. Cor. 12. Not Faith of doctrines, but Faith of miracles, saith Theophilact. There is one Faith of Pre∣cepts, another of Signes, another of Promises, saith Ber∣nard. The same among the latter writers confesseth Melancthon, Martyr, Kemnitius, Hiperius, Caluin, Vrsin, Foxe, Perkins, and who not? Nay behold Saul himselfe also among the Prophets: for besides that anon you acknowledge Faith sometime to bee spoken abu∣siuely and by an equiuocation, you doe expresly both in your margent and text affirme that there are three kinds of Faith, and approue the same distribution which here you condemne in me. For all this I tell you, say you, there is but one Faith, and that is iustifying Faith. Shall I now say vnto you as elsewhere you doe vnto mee, that you speake pure Bel∣larmine?De Iustif. l. 2. cap. 4. For indeed you vse the very language of that Iesuit. Sectaries (saith hee, vnderstanding Protestants)
are wont to distinguish three faiths, of history, of miracles, of promises: but Catholicks teach that they are one and the same Faith, and that iustifying Faith. But doth not the Apostle (in the place here quoted by you) auouch that there is but one Faith? yes verily: but thereby in the iudgement of the best Diuines hee meaneth, not that Faith whereby wee doe belieue, but that which we doe belieue: that is not the Habit but the Obiect of Faith, as if hee should more plainely say, there is but one Chri∣stian Religion. And although in regard of the variety and multitude of materiall obiects, there may seeme to bee not one but many Faiths: yet because the formall reason wherefore we doe belieue them is but one, name∣ly diuine testimony, and they are in such sort linked and woouen together that one Article cannot bee denied without the dissolution of the whole Creed, all being according to the old rule one copulatiue, it is therefore rightly and iustly called one Faith.
Finally where you say Faith comprehendeth my three nice distinctions, and is compounded of them all, I answer that such composition is altogether impossible: for Faith of Story, and Faith of Promise are in the Vnderstanding, but Faith of Person is in the Will, and it cannot be that one and the same Habit should bee subiectiuely in two seuerall faculties of so different natures. For the Habit that is for example in Peter is one in number and that which is one in number is indiuisible, and that which is indiuisible cannot bee at once in two Subiects, because as Philosophie teacheth Numeration is from the plura∣lity of Subiects. This M. Perkins saw,On the Creed. and therefore saith, Some doe place Faith partly in the Mind, partly in the Will, because it hath two parts, Knowledge & Affiance:  but it seemes not greatly to stand with reason that one par∣ticular and single Grace should bee seated in diuers parts or Faculties of the Soule. And this also you cannot bee ig∣norant was answered in my treatise vnto the same obie∣ction: which obiection I maruell how you can with modestie and credit mention, vnlesse withall you were prouided to satisfie my answer. But seeing (as Cicero saith of Hortensius) when you haue ought to say you haue not the power to hold your peace,Verrin. 3. it is an euident and strong presumption now that you say nothing, that you haue nothing to say. N. B.
Bleare not the eyes of Gods Saints with your niceties and falsities any longer, for thus you reason. No historicall Faith hath any interest in the matter of Iustification: But firmely to belieue the truth of Gods Word, and specially the Gospell is historicall Faith, Therefore firmely to belieue the truth of Gods Word and specially the Gospell hath no interest in the matter of Iustification. Good Sir I deny your Maior, which you thus endeuour to proue ab absurdo & enumeratione partium, No generall knowledge shall haue any stroke in the matter of Iustification, All historicall Faith is a generall knowledge, Therefore no historicall Faith hath any interest in the matter of iustification. Proue your Minor, which I denie, telling you moreouer that firme∣ly to consent to the truth of Gods Word in genere, and the Gospell in Specie is not a Generall knowledge, but a Speci∣all knowledge, and therefore I argue. Such a speciall knowledge of the Gospell is the beginning of Faith Iustify∣ing.Mat. 13.11. Ioh. 17.3. Mat. 16.17. But firmely to consent to the truth of Gods Word and  the Gospell is such a speciall knowledge: ex confesso. Ther∣fore firmely to consent to the truth of Gods Word and espe∣cially the Gospell is the beginning of Iustifying Faith. I. D. If you were as farre from hood-winking your owne eyes, as I am from blearing the eies of others, you might easily perceiue that now I deale against our common aduersaries the Papists, and ouerthrow the iustification of their Historicall Faith, by the chiefest arguments which Protestants vse. But you after the manner of those Gladiators called Andabatae, nor see nor care whom or what you strike: and so mildly affected are you towards mee that so you may make some probable shew of endammaging or disaduantaging mee, you reck not though through my sides you reach and wound the best Diuines of our Church, yea and the common truth which wee all maintaine.
Neither doe I vse such circumguagues, nor wiredraw my arguments into such a length as you beare vs in hand: but hauing nakedly and plainely defined what Historicall Faith is, I proue by two reasons that Faith so defined doth not iustifie, the first whereof is this, be∣cause it is absurd that so generall a Knowledge should iu∣stifie. So that your Ferio Syllogisme deserues a Ferula, and vtterly to bee cashed, as being no creature of mine, but an idle figment of your owne: and the next in Ce∣larent (for so you forme it, although indeed it bee also in Ferio, the Minor proposition and Conclusion not∣withstanding your generall notes being but particular enuntiations) is the onely Syllogisme intended by mee,  and including my first argument. The Maior whereof it seemes you grant saying nothing vnto it: and the Mi∣nor only you deny, which I cannot but wonder at, see∣ing both the Minor and Conclusion are vniuersally vouched by all the Diuines of our side. The Conclusi∣on is that Historicall Faith iustifies not: So saith Hype∣rius,De fide Hom. iustificandi. There is a certaine Historicall Faith whereby those things which are propounded in holy writ are simply belee∣ued: but yet is not applyed vnto Christ and the matter of our Saluation.Loco de Fide. The Minor is that Historicall Faith is a generall Knowledge: So sayth Kemnitius, There is a cer∣taine generall Faith which vsually is tearmed Historicall: and againe, Historicall Faith is a generall assent holding in generall that the promise of the Gospell is true. And M. Perkins,Ser. caus. c. 36. A generall Faith whereby they giue assent vnto the Gospell. Neither doe I know any one of our Diuines that either in the Conclusion or the Minor doth gainsay them. So that by the iudgement of these men, both con∣senting to Gods Word in generall, and to the Gospell in speciall, is not a Speciall but Generall Knowledge: and if the Speciality of the Gospell being but a part of the whole Scripture did specify Faith, it would follow thereupon that there are as many Speciall Faiths as there are seuerall Articles of the Creed, which were vn∣reasonable to imagine. For that Faith which assenteth vnto the Gospell is no other then that which assenteth vnto the rest of holy Scripture: and although it may principally respect that part of diuine truth, yet doth it not only respect it, nor is limited thereunto as vnto the proper adequate obiect thereof, but vniuersally exten∣deth it selfe vnto all supernaturall reuealed verities whatsoeuer. As for that Faith which our Diuines call
Speciall, is to be vnderstood of Faith of Promises wher∣by the Saints apply and appropriate them vnto them∣selues, particularly and indiuidually assuring themselues of their present iustification and future saluation. And the ignorance hereof as I ween is the cause why you turne generall into speciall and write of this matter so wildly and confusedly. This notwithstanding very peremptorily you pro∣nounce that
Historiall Faith is a speciall Knowledge, and thereupon Syllogistically inferre that it is the Begin∣ning of Iustifying Faith: to what end I wot not well, vn∣lesse it bee to proue that it doth iustify because as you conclude it is the beginning of that Faith. But whatso∣euer your intent bee, your argument I answer by distin∣guishing of the word Beginning. For if you vnderstand thereby a Pre-requisite or Preparatiue vnto iustifying Faith, you doe but fight with a shadow, for in that sence I grant the Conclusion, neither doth such a beginning of Iustifying Faith iustify. If you meane thereby that it is Iustifying Faith inchoat and in a remisser degree, then I deny your Maior, and say that such a knowledge (call it as you please generall or speciall) is not the beginning of iustifying Faith; If it were, then Diuels and Repro∣bates hauing it should haue iustifying Faith which Gods Word attributes vnto the Elect onely.Tit. 1.1. And if it bee true that Faith of person is the consummation of Iu∣stifying Faith as in the former section you say, it cannot bee that such a knowledge should bee the Beginning thereof: vnlesse you will say that Accidents may passe from one Subiect to another, which is against all Philo∣sophy. For Historicall Faith is in the Vnderstanding, and Faith of Person is in the Will: and therefore Faith  of Story beginning in the Mind can haue no subsistence elsewhere, and iustifying Faith being perfected in the Will cannot bee begunne in any other Subiect. The passages quoted in the margent though you should rack them till they rent asunder, yet will they not confesse what you alledge them for. For how I pray you hang these things together? To you it is giuen to know the my∣steries of the Kingdome of heauen; This is life euerlasting to know thee; Flesh and Bloud hath not reuealed this vnto thee but my Father, Ergo Such a knowledge is iustifying Faith begun. This is too violent astraining of Scripture, and as Volusian speaketh, is not a sucking of milke, but drawing of bloud from the dugs of the Church.Ep. 1. ad Nic. 1. As for the Minor I haue already sufficiently demonstrated the fal∣shood thereof: only it seemeth strange why you should take it as confessed. For sure I am in expresse tearmes I haue affirmed the contrary: neither can I guesse of what words you gather it, vnlesse perhaps of that I say and specially the Gospell, which were too ridiculous. For that indeed confesseth the Gospell to bee a speciall part of Gods truth, but (not determining Faith onely there∣unto) it doth in no sort specifie it, as is aboue fully pro∣ued. N. B. Historicall Faith not di∣uided from the other two kinds, but ioy∣ned with thē, is cause of Iu∣stification.Againe I would pray you to speake more learnedly, and argue soundly: For if you had said formerly, No Historicall Faith only iustifieth &c. We had been agreed. For Historica Fides est causa iustificationis non solitaria sed socia; non diuisa sed coniuncta. But speaking thus absolutely you speake vnlearnedly. Well, thus you proceed leauing your Minor naked and exposed to the mercie of the World.
I. D Agreed, quoth you? Nay hee can hardly agree with mee that is at warre with himselfe: and had I spoken ne∣uer so learnedly, and argued neuer so soundly, yet I ve∣rily belieue you would haue quarrelled at it, because I see you make contradiction of mee the onely rule of your speeches. That there is but one Faith you say it is nouelty not to grant, and that, Faith only iustifies I think you dare not deny: how is it then that in the margent forgetting your selfe you talke of three kinds of Faith, which except my Arithmetike faile mee are more then one? and ioyne fellowes with that in iustification in the body of your text, which yet you confesse doth onely iustify? But what is it that comes not within the sphere of your omnipotent Philosophie? The power of your Logicke hath already contracted Vniuersall into Speci∣all: and why then may not the subtlety of your Meta∣physicke find a plurality also in an Vnity?
But to be plaine with you, I say that Historicall Faith is so far from being a ioint cause that at all properly vnder∣stood of Iustification, but onely as I haue said a Pre-re∣quisite or Preparatiue thereunto. True it is that Faith of Person is neuer Solitary, but is euer conioyned with sundry other graces, and among the rest with Histori∣call Faith: yet are not their operations to bee confoun∣ded, because in the same person they are conioyned. Many seeds lye in my hand together, yet euery one hath his seuerall and distinct vertue: Faith of Person is neuer without Faith of Story, yet it is Faith of Person which onely iustifies. And as in the generation of man, the  Sensitiue soule goes before, and prepares a fit organ for the infusion of the Reasonable, and yet not the Sensitiue but the Reasonable only doth informe: so in the repara∣tion of man, Faith of Story proceeds, and makes way for the inducement of Faith of Person, and yet not Faith of Story but Faith of Person only doth iustifie. Now whether in speaking thus absolutely I haue spo∣ken vnlearnedly as you say or no, it skilleth not much, seeing I am sure I haue spoken truly.1 Cor. 15.9. What euer I am, by the grace of God I am, and desire so to bee vnto his glory. My want and inability I thanke God I know: yet know I no cause why in this mediocrity of knowledge and speech I should in comparison with you any whit disable my selfe. But sith as the Apostle saith, knowledge puffeth vp,1 Cor. 8.1. God grant vs both the spirit of humility, that denying our selues and all our learning, wee may be con∣tent to bee wholly captiuated vnto the obedience of the Faith of Christ. The Minor which you say I left naked and exposed to the mercy of the world was this, that Historicall Faith is a generall knowledge, which indeed in my Treatise I did forbeare to confirme, not for want of sufficient proofes, but presuming that so euident a truth would neuer haue beene denied. But now I hope it appeares by what I haue aboue said to bee so well guarded with strength of reason and approbation of the learned, that henceforward it need not feare the rigor of your oppo∣sition. Treatise.
Acquisite Faith the Diuels haue according to that of Saint Iames, The Diuels belieue and tremble: Infused  Faith the Reprobates may haue, as Balaam, Iudas, Ma∣gus. Now iustifying Faith is proper to the Elect, and therefore historicall Faith cannot iustifie. N. B. O yee noble Schollers marke this Syllogisme: I haue made your arguments hitherto for you Master Downe, and in this creeping and incroching argument tell you that you beg the matter in question. For I deny that your definition of Historicall Faith is a generall knowledge, but speciall and peculiar vnto the Elect in the beginning of their iustifying Faith, conioyned with the Application, and Resting vp∣on Christ and his merits. And to bee plaine with you I tell you it is ridiculous yea blasphemous to say that Diuels haue Faith, or that euer Balaam, Iudas, or Magus had Faith. And so telleth you M. Caluin,In Iac. 2.19. Ridiculum erit si quis Diabolos habere fidem dicat, it is ridiculous for any man to say that Diuels haue Faith: For there is but one Faith, Eph. 4. and the other is spoken , abusiuely and by an equiuocation, and is but a vulgar knowledge, or rather peculiar shew by miracles &c. as the same M. Caluin sheweth right learnedly,1 Cor. 13.2. Calu. ibid. and also telleth you, Abundé constat totam hanc disputationem de fide non haberi, it is plaine that this whole disputation Iam. 2. is not about Faith. Let this therefore serue for an answer I pray you to your first distinction of Historicall Faith, which you confound with a vulgar knowledge as appeareth before: knowing this, No man that finally contemneth this Speciall knowledge of Gods Word and specially the Gospell can be saued. For hee can neuer haue the other two kinds of Faith spoken of before, except he begin with this kind of Faith.
I. D. Surely I am very deeply beholding vnto your Ma∣stership, hauing so small skill in Logicke, that you will bee pleased to forme my arguments, and to shape them in so excellent fashion for mee. But I beseech you spare your paines where you are like to reape little thanks for your labour. Such officiousnesse in an aduersary is not without suspicion: and if you may haue the hammering of my arguments, your weakest answers I doubt not will be proofe inough against them. Leaue me therfore I pray you to the meaning of my own weapons, and looke you well vnto your owne defence; for I feare mee you will hardly bee able to auoid the danger of them. For thus I reason, That Faith which Diuels and Reprobates haue, iustifies not: Historicall Faith Diuels and Reprobates haue, Ergo Historicall Faith iustifies not. Here you see nor creeping, nor incroching, but faire and plaine dealing and such as I am well content all noble Schollers marke it. But let vs see what you reioyne hereunto. First, you say I beg the matter in Question. What matter? that Historicall Faith is a generall knowledge; but neither is that the matter now in Question, neither doe I any way beg it. For in this Syllogisme the Questi∣on is, whether Historicall Faith doe iustify, of your Que∣stion there appeares nor palme nor footstep: which yet in the former section against your negatiue I haue pro∣ued to bee most true. That which you adde if it bee not senselesse is contrary both to your selfe and vnto reason. For saying that Historicall Faith is proper and speciall vnto the Elect in the beginning of their iustifying Faith,
you plainely distinguish it from iustifying Faith, which is contrary to what you haue elsewhere said. If you still confound them and make Historicall Faith the begin∣ning of Iustifying Faith, it is as if you should say the be∣ginning of iustifying Faith, is speciall and peculiar vnto the Elect in the beginning of their iustifying Faith, which is altogether witlesse and senselesse. Lastly, to say that Historicall Faith which before was Generall and common as soone as it is conioyned with applicati∣on and Resting on Christ becomes speciall and peculi∣ar, is vtterly void of reason. For as Grace superadded vnto Nature in the Elect makes not Nature speciall and peculiar vnto them, but that still it remaines common vnto all men: so also Historicall Faith by accession of Iustifying Faith or Affiance changeth not its nature and becomes Speciall, but as it was euermore continues Ge∣nerall. Generall I say, both Obiectiuely as stretching it selfe vnto all supernaturall reuealed verities: and Subie∣ctiuely not being appropriated vnto the Elect onely, but commonly incident vnto others also. Secondly you deny the Minor, telling mee plainely that it is ridiculous yea blasphemous to say that Diuels haue Faith, or that euer Balaam, Iudas, or Magus had Faith. If I should now temper my inke with some shar∣per ingredient, and in the zeale of my affection say vnto you as the Angell sometime said vnto Satan,Iude 9.
The Lord rebuke thee, it were no more then here you iustly de∣serue. For it is not holy and learned men alone (which yet were too impudent) but euen the spirit of Wisdome and truth himselfe whom (I tremble to speake it) you charge with ridiculousnes and blasphemie. For doth not the Holy Ghost by Saint Iames in expresse tearmes say,  The Diuels belieue and tremble? and by Saint Luke, Then Simon himselfe also belieued?Iam. 2.19. Act. 8.13. and did not Balaam prophecying of Christ, and Iudas preaching Christ as∣sent vnto those truths wherewith they were illumina∣ted? And what Orthodoxe Diuine is there ancient or moderne who falling vpon this question doth not ac∣knowledge that Diuels and Reprobates doe Historical∣ly belieue?De vnico Bapt. cont. Petil. c. 10. Saint Augustine is bold and compareth the Faith of Diuels confessing Christ, Wee know thee who thou art, euen the Sonne of God, with that memorable confession of Peter, Thou art the Christ the Sonne of the liuing God. This confession, saith hee, was fruitfull vnto Peter, but pernicious vnto the Diuels, yet in both not false but true, not to bee denied but acknowledged, not to bee de∣tested but approued. And a little after hauing vouched that of Saint Iames, the Diuels belieue and tremble, and compared therewith the Faith of those who belieue the truth of God but liue wickedly, Behold, saith hee, Wee haue found out of the Church not onely certaine men, but Diuels also confessing the same Faith of one God, yet both confirmed by the Apostles rather then denied. Of the same iudgement are our latter writers, That Faith is attributed to Simon Magus,Inst. lib. 3. ca. 2. §. 10. saith Caluin, We vnderstand not with some that hee fained in words a Faith which was not in his heart, but thinke rather that being ouercome by the Ma∣iesty of the Gospell, hee did in a sort belieue and acknow∣ledge Christ to be the Author of Life and Saluation. Simon, saith Beza,In Act. 8.13. On the Creed. Ans. to Rhem. T. in Iam. 2.6. belieued with Historicall Faith. Historicall Faith, saith Perkins, is in the Diuell and his Angels. Such a Faith, saith Fulke,
as is in Diuels, namely an acknow∣ledging that there is one God, and so likewise of all the rest of the Articles of Faith to bee true, without trust or confi∣dence  in God. Finally, the whole Church of Auspurg, Whereas Saint Iames saith,Harm. Con∣fess. the Diuels belieue and trem∣ble, hee speaketh of an Historicall Faith: Now this Faith doth not iustifie; for the Diuels and the wicked are cunning in the History. Which last words I would wish you to note and obserue. For if Historicall Faith bee no other then an assent of the Mind vnto the truth of Gods Word, then Diuels and Reprobates so assenting, yea being cunning in the Story, must needs haue Historicall Faith. Adde hereunto, that if they doe not so much as Historically belieue, then the sinnes which they commit against the Gospell are onely sinnes of ignorance and not against knowledge, neither can they offend of malice, or fall into that vnpardonable sinne which is against the Holy Ghost.Mat. 12.32. Neither lastly can any bee said to haue made shipwracke of Faith, which yet the Scripture saith some haue done,1 Tim. 1.19. vnlesse perhaps you will say a man may make shipwracke of that which hee neuer had. So that now if I haue spoken ridiculously and blasphemously as you say, you see what Schoolemasters haue deceiued me, and vpon what reasons I haue been drawne into this fol∣ly and impiety: or rather the world sees what folly it is in you thus against all reason to impute blasphemy and ri∣diculousnesse vnto the truth of God, and the most glori∣ous preachers and defenders thereof. Yet Caluin, you say, telleth mee it is
ridiculous to say that Diuels haue Faith, and, it is plaine that this whole disputation Iam. 2. is not about Faith. But is it possible that Caluin should striue against the torrent of so maine authority? or like the Philosopher of whom Aristotle speaketh forget, his owne voice, and vnsay that which he had formerly said? Certainly if you wil giue him leaue to  bee the interpreter of his owne meaning you shall find hee doth not. For when hee denieth that Diuels haue Faith, and that Saint Iames there disputeth of Faith, hee vnderstandeth not Faith indefinitely, but particularly iustifying Faith. This is euident by his annotation on the twentieth verse,In Iam. 2.20. Here, saith hee, is no disputation of the cause of Iustification, whereby what other can hee meane then Iustifying Faith: And when hee saith the dispute is not about Faith, hee addeth forthwith, but of a vulgar knowledge which conioyneth a man to God no more then the sight of the Sunne lifts him to Heauen. Now what is that Faith which vnites vs vnto God, but onely Iustifying Faith? and what is this vulgar knowledge o∣ther then Historicall Faith, by which the eye of the mind sees diuine truth as that of the body sees the Sunne? Of that therefore by Caluins iudgement Saint Iames spea∣keth not,Beza in eun∣dem locum. of this hee doth. And Beza who vpon this place treadeth in Caluins steps and well knew his mea∣ning affirmeth that Saint Iames vnderstandeth not the same Faith whereby Saint Paul saith wee are iustified, but onely that whereby wee doe belieue there is a God, and that Christ is the Sonne of God, and that all things prescribed in both the testaments are true, which is in ef∣fect the very definition of Historicall Faith. But for all your praysing of Caluin, you cannot bee contented with his exposition, but you must needs haue a tricke beyond him. For whereas hee by Saint Iames his Faith vnder∣stand a vulgar knowledge, you will rather haue it to be a peculiar shew by miracles, which is the most sense∣lesse deuice that euer was imagined. For who euer drea∣med that the Question which there the Apostle dispu∣teth should bee this, Whether a peculiar shew by miracles
without works doe iustifie? And when hee saith Thou be∣leeuest there is one God, thou doest well; the Diuels be∣lieue also and tremble, what brute of Cuma or Arcadia would expound it thus, Thou hast a peculiar shew by mi∣racle, it is well, the Diuels haue a peculiar shew by miracles also and tremble? Learne therefore and know that the Faith which Diuels haue, cannot bee Faith of miracles: for miracles the Diuels can worke none, being limited within the compasse of their nature which cannot pro∣duce supernaturall effects, and neuer being ordained to bee the confirmers of Faith, to which end mi∣racles were appointed. Now then to end this point, whereas you pray this may serue for an answer vnto my first distinction of Historicall Faith, I must tell you plainly that what you cannot win by force, you are not like to get by begging; neither can I at any hand bee in∣treated to accept of friuolous and desperate speeches, for sound and substantiall answers. Whereas againe you make the ground of my error as you pretend to bee con∣founding of Historicall Faith with a vulgar knowledge, You shall by your patience giue mee leaue still to erre that error, vntill by some new-found nicetie you can di∣stinguish them, whereof I pray you let vs heare by the next. Lastly, where you wish mee to know that whoso∣euer finally contemneth Historicall Faith cannot haue the o∣ther two kinds of Faith, nor bee saued, I doe you to weet that I know it right well, but what you intend or would inferre thereon nor I nor I thinke your selfe know. Some thing was to be said to make a shew and to fill vp paper: but what and how pertinent it is, Hippoclides cares not.
Treatise. The second is Faith of Promise and is a Perswasion or Assurance that the Promises of God made in Christ, to wit iustification, remission of sinnes, adoption, regenera∣tion, finally Election it selfe and eternall saluation doe particularly pertaine vnto mee and are mine; Yet this iu∣stifies not. N. B. And I confidently hold that a firme and finall perswasion, application and assurance that the promises of God made in Christ to wit Iustification, Remission of Sinnes, Adoption, Regeneration, and Election it selfe, and eternall Saluation doe particularly belong vnto mee and are mine, is that which iustifies a man before God. You deny it, and thus you oppose. I. D. Vnto my assertion you oppose only your simple con∣tradiction, preparing your selfe immediately to answer my arguments. But because in my Treatise certaine words are promised before my reasons, whereat you ca∣uill after your confused manner in a very importune and vnfit place: I will by your leaue rectifie what you haue disturbed, and maintaine them there where my owne method first ordered them. Treatise. This Faith of Promise although I deny not but in
Scripture it is called Faith, and that euery Saint of God both may and ought to haue particular perswasion and Assurance: Yet I confidently deny that this Perswasion and Assurance is that which iustifies a Man before God. N. B. A man may bee saued by this Faith, yet this Faith is not a iustifying Faith, therefore a man may bee saued without a iustifying Faith. Whosoeuer may bee saued by this Faith, and by your third kind of Faith may bee saued by two kind of Faiths, the one iustifying, the other not iustifying, which is absurd. Yet by your confession M. Downe, a Christian ought to haue this Faith as of necessitie. Then if hee ought to haue it hee cannot bee without it, and yet may ordinarily be saued without it as you say, and so saued with∣out that which hee ought of necessity to haue to saluation: and also ought to haue that to saluation which will doe him no good to saluation because hee may bee saued without it. What absurdities and contrarieties be these? I. D. Now alas were I as cunning as Theseus himselfe, how could I winde my selfe out of these perplexities and la∣byrinths wherein you haue intangled mee? or were I as strong as Samson how could I breake in sunder these cords of absurdities and
contrarieties wherewith you haue so fast bound mee? And yet when I looke more neerely vnto the matter, mee thinks the knots are not so intricate that there needs some God from the engine, (as it is in the Prouerb), to vntie them. For as Augustin  saith, Doe but restore my words, and your calum∣niation will presently vanish. All I say is no more but this that euery Saint of God both may and ought to haue particular assurance and perswasion: you report mee to say: A man may bee saued by this assurance, and that he ought to haue it as of necessity to saluation. Be∣twixt which sayings there are as the Poet speaketh ma∣ny high hils and deep seas: and therefore what iars or discords soeuer you haue here found, is in the song of your owne setting and not of my deuising. For what mad Syllogismes are these if insteed of your imaginary proposition you restore my true assertion, and then adde vnto it your Assumption and Conclusions, thus; A man may and ought to bee assured, But Assurance is not iustifying Faith, Ergo, a man may bee saued without a Iu∣stifying Faith, Ergo, a man may bee saued by two kinds of Faith, Ergo, hee may bee saued, without that which hee ought of necessity to haue to saluation, Ergo, hee ought to haue that to saluation which will doe him no good to salua∣tion: Doe you not see that against the canons of Logick, first, you haue one tearme in the conclusion, namely may bee saued, which is not found in either of the premisses? Againe, that neither tearme of the Conclusion is in the Maior proposition? And lastly, that the Conclusion is affirmatiue notwithstanding that the Assumption is ne∣gatiue? Fie, fie that a Logicke-wright should so much ouershoot himselfe, and so shamefully transgresse his owne precepts. This infamy (to retort vpon you your owne words) had you not incurred, if you could haue abstained from peruerting my speeches, and adding vn∣to them such impudent glossems of your owne. But yet when I say a man ought to haue Assurance,
doe I not therein confesse it to bee so necessary vnto Sal∣uation that a man cannot be saued without it? Nothing lesse, and God forbid that euery ignorance or doubting of what wee ought to know, should presently exclude and barre vs from Saluation; for then no flesh possibly could bee saued. Although therefore when I say a man may bee assured I confesse a possibility, and when I say hee ought to bee assured I acknowledge a dutie: yet doth it not follow thereupon that such assurance is of absolute necessity. Necessary it may bee vnto the well-being of the Sonne of God, but not vnto his Being, as if hee could not bee a new creature without it: necessa∣ry to cheere and solace him in the way to the end, but not vnto the end it selfe, as if without it hee could not as∣pire vnto saluation. Such absolute necessity of assurance vpon paine of damnation I know none, saue onely of those truths which wee call fundamentall, among which I suppose your and my iustification and saluation are not to bee reckoned. And yet had I said (which I deny) that Assurance is necessary vnto Saluation, what inconuenience is it to say that neuerthelesse it is not necessary vnto iu∣stification? For Saluation is the End, Iustification a meane or way vnto the End, and more things are subor∣dinate vnto the end, then vnto the way: as vnto Saluati∣on both Faith and workes are necessary, but vnto Iusti∣fication Faith alone is required. And therefore also it is no absurdity to say that two Faiths are requisite vnto Saluation, as indeed Faith of Story and Faith of Person are, although but one Faith iustify which is Faith of Person. And thus much for your plaine-song: now let vs heare your descant and diuision vpon it.
N. B. Martiall. Emerepes a∣pud. Apophth. Chrysippus.Dij mentem tibi dent tuam Philaeni, God send you your right wits to see these errors and to amend them. , Ne vities Musicam said one, Corrupt not musicke, speake not contraries nor nouelties. You can∣not alwayes saile in the night but at last will bee taken, if you were as craftie as a Cuckow,Athanas. in Symb. as spake Pliny and Ari∣stotle. Wee hold in Diuinity but one Faith and not diuers in specie, and that euery Christian man is bound to haue it hauing meanes giuen him from God vpon paine of damna∣tion, and that no man can ordinarily bee saued without it. And therefore doe cast out your cobwebs, as following his counsell that said Vasis eijcias quas nectit aranea telas, knowing that your speeches endeauour to mingle water and fire together, which is impossible to doe. Neither are your forces any thing able to deceiue Gods Elect, so long time trained vp in his blessed schoole. Well may you consume your selfe as one said Comedo meipsum more Polypi,Alcaeus apud Athen. l. 7. Catull. Mat. 11. 1 Tim. 3.15. Act. 9. I eat vp my selfe like Polypus, but the Church can you not deceiue, for your sacke is full of Spiders as Catullus telleth one, Nam tui Catulli Plenus sacculus est aranearum. The Church is no reed but the pillar of truth, and there∣fore it is hard for you to spurne against it. I. D. Vnto this Rapsodie of sentences and prouerbs drawn in like
Hercules oxen, and tyed together like Samsons foxes so preposterously by the tailes, were I a Grammar-schoole-boy againe, I would quickly patch you vp an  answer in the same kinde. But now I affect not an opini∣on of learning that way, desiring as becomes a Diuine rather to bee reall then verball. If children either in age or vnderstanding bee pleased with such Pedanterie, and delight to see so many babies in your writing, I enuie it not, so long as the grauer and learneder sort rest conten∣ted and satisfied with the substance of my reasons. Only vnto that charitable prayer which you make for me out of that deuout Poet Martiall, that God would send me my wits againe,Lib. 2. Sat. 3. I know not what kinder wish to oppose then that of Horace the deuouter Poet of the two, that you which are franticke and bedlem-mad would something beare with those who are but a little discrazed and dis∣tempered. For indeed you are right twin vnto the Lu∣naticke gentleman in Horace, and as hee euery day visi∣ted the theater and there ate clapping his hands and keeping a stirreas if he saw some notable Tragedieacted before him, whereas the stage all the while was empty: so you here make much adoe, and tell mee of I know not what absurdities, contrarieties, and nouelties, and yet the ground you lay for them is in my words no where to bee found. Wherefore as Sophcles being ac∣cused of dotage read before the iudges his Ordipus Co∣loneus which he had very lately composed,Cic. de Se∣nect. and then de∣maunded of them whether it seemed the poem of a do∣tard or no: so because you charge mee as ber of my right wits and fraught with nothing else but errors and contradictions, I appeale vnto the Christian reader, praying him to peruse and ponder my treatise, and if hee please this Disputation also, and then to iudge indiffe∣rently betwixt vs whether I bee as this Festus accuseth me mad and beside my selfe, or else with Saint Paul,Act.
26.24.25.  haue spoken the words of truth and sobernes. Treatise. 1. Arg. If this were iustifying Faith, then whosoe∣uer liues and dies without this particular Assurance can∣not bee saued: sine Fide &c. without Faith it is impos∣sible to please God. But a man may bee saued without it. Ergo. N. E. I hope you meane de adultis, of men that haue meanes gi∣uen them from God to get this Assurance: for otherwise I easily agree that God may extraordinarily saue whom it pleaseth him. But doubting not of your meaning, and denying your Minor, you take vpon you to proue it, first by an instance, and next by six reasons: All which let vs see. I. D. Epist. 57.Taking me to meane de adultis, you doe no whit mistake mee: for as Augustin saith, that Infants know the things of God who know not so much as the things of men; if wee should goe about by words to demonstrate, I feare mee wee should bee iniurious euen to our very senses, endeuouring to perswade that by speech, the euidence of whose truth sur∣passeth all faculty and office of speech. Neuerthelesse be∣cause it is written without Faith no man can please God, and, the iust shall liue by his owne faith, many learned men haue hereupon conclude that Infants haue a Faith euen of their owne:Adacta Col∣loq. Mom∣pelg. Resp. de Bapt. in so much that Beza though of a different iudgement confesseth this to bee a very solid
and firme foundation, and soone after addeth, that of this matter very learned Diuines, yea and the ancient Fathers also differ in opinion; for this Question, saith he, is among the number of those wherein because wee all know many things but in part wee may vary in iudgement, and yet the foundation of orthodoxall Faith stand safe. But you take it I meane de adultis, and as I haue said you doe not mistake mee, and therefore you deny my Minor: which when you say I proue by an instance and six reasons, it seemes you passed ouer my reasons perfunctorily and without attention, or cared not to let drop of your pen at aduenture whatsoeuer came next to head. For I proue the Minor by one instance onely, and the arguments fol∣lowing are no more but fiue, and conclude not the Mi∣nor but the maine Question, to wit, that Assurance doth not iustify: The instance is this. Treatise. I instance in those our Brethren of Germany who hold that Faith may totally and finally fall away, and conse∣quently that there can bee no certainty of Saluation, whom yet the Church of God calleth and counteth Brethren, and it were vncharitable to censure of them o∣therwise. Therefore (or at leastwise probable) Faith is not an Assurance. N. B.
Whatsoeuer our Brethren of Germany hold is true, but they hold that a man may be saued without this Faith, There∣fore this position is true. O hominis acumen & argumen∣tum lepidum! What mood and figure I pray you was this  Syllogisme borne in? But proue your Maior; for we haue lear∣ned Christ otherwise then to tie our Faith vnto the opinions of any one particular Church. Yea this argument sauoureth mightily of Popery, which I thought you had beene as far from as I know you are in this point from Christs verity and Christian vnity. For why I pray you might I reason thus as you doe to proue that works doe iustify a man before God, and merit eternall life. The Church of Rome holdeth so, Ergo, the Position is true? Ob. But you will say they are no Brethren: A. I answer they bee the Church of God if wee belieue M. Caluin and M. Bunny citing this place Antichrist sitteth in the temple of God:Ep. Tract. of Pa∣cif. But hee sit∣teth at Rome, Therefore Rome is the temple of God. But I pray you let vs not bee bound to defend the errors of our Brethren, neither too hasty to discouer them. And that this opinion is an error let the whole course of the Scripture de∣clare.Da∣ri∣j Dari∣j Whosoeuer liueth byaboue4 Faithaboue5 liuethaboue3 foraboue1 eueraboue2, But the Saints of God liue for euer, Therefore they liue by Faith for euer. All the gifts of God be without repentance, Faith is the gift of God, Therefore without repentance. That which continueth vnto the end and is made perfect cannot finally fall alway,Perficiet vs{que} ad finem bo∣num Phil. 2. Fides est opus Dei. Ioh. 6. Ambr. 2. Cor. 6. Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 106. col. 513. But Faith continueth vnto the end and is made perfect, Therefore it cannot finally fall away. See what the Fathers say, Neque fides vera est si non sit perpetua, sed possit deficere, Neither is Faith true Faith except it bee perpetuall and cannot fall away. Credere ve∣rè est credere inconcussè, firmè, stabiliter, & fortiter: To belieue truly is to belieue without wauering, firmely, stedfastly, and strongly. I. D. There is a little triobolar pamphlet commonly
called Baxters Logicke, the Authour whereof I thinke you esteeme as skilfull in that Art as euer was Zeno or A∣ristotle himselfe. Though I could neuer find in my heart to loose an houre or twaine in perusing it, yet I perswade my selfe no man can better resolue you in what mood and figure this Syllogisme was borne. But if not satis∣fied herewith you will needs know my opinion also, thus I thinke without all figure it was borne in a peeuish mood. For it is farre from my thought and purpose to maintaine that Whatsoeuer our Brethren of Germany hold is true, or that Faith once infused can either finally or to∣tally fall away: and if you were not either desperately impudent, or brutishly ignorant, you would not so haue forced my words, and obtruded such vnreasonable rea∣sons vpon mee. For thus I argue, Our Brethren of Ger∣many may bee saued, yet they haue not this Assurance, Er∣go, some that haue not this Assurance may bee saued. The Maior is grounded vpon the iudgement of Charity, and the censure of Gods Church calling and counting them Brethren. Such is the iudgement of Beza, Sadeel, Iewel,Epist. 2. ad Dudith. Posnan. As∣sert. conf. in notà vnitatis. In Apol. and Defence of Apol. De Eccles. q. 5. c. 8. In thesi 5. On the Creed. Whitaker, Reinolds, Perkins, and whosoeuer is borne within the temperate zone of Christian loue, and not vnder the burning region of intemperate zeale, or frozen climate of vncharitablenesse. The Minor is thus pro∣ued, because they hold that Faith may finally and totally fall away. For whether this Position bee true or false is not materiall in this place: onely if they hold so, as que∣stionlesse they doe, then can they not bee assured, which is my Assumption. For to bee certaine of Saluation, and in possibility of damnation are incompatible and cannot stand together. These things being so, to what end take you so much
paines to shew that it is not alwayes true which some one Church holdeth, troubling the Reader with your need∣lesse Obs and Sols? and why doe you alledge so many Scriptures to proue that Faith cannot faile, a truth I ne∣uer doubted of? For herein you doe but plow the Sea-shore, and let flie at Sempronius when it was Titius that strake you. Neither is it a matter of any hardnesse or dif∣ficulty to refell the most of your arguments if I would spend time and oyle about it: for like a bungling work-man you haue marred a good cause with ill handling. For example (to giue you a little tast of your weaknes this way) that wee are not to tie our Faith vnto the opini∣ons of any particular Church you proue, because the con∣trary sauoureth mightily of Popery. And yet Popery teacheth not that a particular Church cannot erre, nay doth not define that the particular Church of Rome can∣not erre, but only alloweth that priuiledge vnto the Ca∣tholicke or Vniuersall Church. Againe, to proue that Faith cannot finally or totally fall away thus you rea∣son, Whosoeuer liueth for euer liueth by Faith, But the Saints of God liue for euer, Therefore they liue by Faith for euer. May I not now in requitall of your scoffing excla∣mation crie out O hominem obtusum & argumentum stu∣pidum? For first you conclude that the Saints liue by Faith, which is not the point in question. Secondly you haue one tearme in the Conclusion not found in the pre∣misses, namely liue by Faith for euer, and so your Syl∣logisme is a meere Paralogisme. Lastly, if to perfect vp the Syllogisme you vnderstand the Maior Propositi∣on thus, Whosoeuer liueth for euer liueth by Faith for euer, then doe I flatly deny it: for they that liue for euer liue onely in this life by Faith, in the life to come Faith cea∣seth,
and then they liue by vision, not by Faith. But I forbeare farther to examine either these or the rest of your arguments, partly because wee agree both in the generall Conclusions,Demonax a∣pud Plut. A∣poph. and partly lest I proue as wise as he, who while his fellow was milking a ram-goat, held a siue vnder to receiue the milke. N. B. But you say the German Church holdeth it: I deny it, neither can you be able to shew it, and therefore it is a great sinne thus to traduce the fame of so honorable Personages. Three and those no small lights in the Church of God I will shew which hold the contrary, and so leaue you to the Spirit of God who worke in you conuersion.In Postill. maior in Sex-ages. in E∣uang. Luc. 8. de Semine. Luther in the place before, saith, Veri auditores sunt qui Verbum Dei perpetuò retinent & fructum adferunt: They bee true be∣lieuers which hold fast alwayes the Word of God (which none can doe without Faith) and bring forth fruite. Bren∣tius speaking of time-seruers saith that they did neuer truly belieue,In idem. E∣uang. In ad Eph. c. 1. Bucer calleth that Faith which may be lost imaginem fidei & simulatam credulitotem, an image of faith and counterfait credulity. Now you haue heard these great Fathers of Germany against you, with what face can you accuse so indefinitely the Brethren of Germany of so no∣table an error? But I will stay your leisure to produce those German-Brethren. I. D.
My leisure shall you not long stay for. That many doe not perseuere but fall from grace, both Scripture and expe∣rience teacheth, saith Kemnitius.Exam. parte 1. de Iustil They that are most ele∣cted  may become Reprobates and therfore vtterly fall away, saith D. Andreas.Colloq. Mompelg. quaest. de Bapt. De gratiâ vni∣uersali p. 26. Ib. p. 30. Dauid was elected, faith Hemings, yet indeed lost the spirit, and was made guilty of eternall wrath vntill hee againe repented. And againe, As often as a sinner, saith hee, although neuer so enormious repenteth, of a vessell of dishonor and wrath, he is made a vessell of ho∣nour and mercy: as on the contrary side whosoeuer is a ves∣sell of honour and mercy, when willingly and wittingly hee fals into sinne, hee wasts his conscience, and loosing Faith becomes a vessell of wrath and dishonor. The Century-wri∣ters,Cent. 1. l. 2. ca. 4. p. 275. & l. 1. c. 4. p. 120. That Faith once conceiued may be lost and shaken out, it is plaine by sundry examples and by the sayings of Christ: and, that Faith may bee lost the Apostles both by their say∣ings, and examples doe demonstrate. Finally, the whole Church of Saxonie,Harm. conf. incon. Sax. art. 10. It is manifest that some that are re∣generate doe grieue and shake off the Holy Ghost, and are againe reiected of God, and made subiect to the wrath of God, and eternall punishment. Read Zanchie in his Miscellanies, and there shall you find how much trouble that that worthy man sustained in Germa∣ny among other things for gainsaying this point. For indeed this is one speciall Article wherein wee and the Lutherans (for them I vnderstand by Bre∣thren of Germany) doe disagree, and the ignorance thereof argues that you are little or nothing at all ac∣quainted with the controuersies that are betwixt vs and them.
But you haue great Fathers of Germany against mee, and can shew three no small lights in Gods Church which hold the contrary, euen Luther, Brentius, and Bucer. First Luther was no Lutheran, and not holding all those er∣rors which those who are called of his name defend, is  not to bee reckoned among them: yet thus saith hee,In artic. smal. cald. It is necessary to teach and know that when the Saints fall into manifest sinnes, as Dauid did, then Faith and the Holy Ghost are lost. Brentius indeed was a rigid Lutheran, and therefore it is likly hee held as the rest of his fellowes doe, for certainty I haue none hauing not his writings by mee. Neither doth the passage you alledge out of him euince the contrary; for as Excutifidians (giue me leaue so to call them) distinguish, they that haue true Faith in the trunesse of essence or existence, may yet as they say want true Faith in the trunesse of permanence or perseuerance. As for Bucer hee fals not within the com∣passe of those whom I meane by the Brethren of Ger∣many, for hee was none of those whom they call Luthe∣rans.In Miscell. And yet as hee is alledged by Zanchie and others for the Perpetuity of Faith, so is hee vouched also by the contrary side for falling away from grace, as where hee saith: They who sinne against conscience by no meanes haue a true and liuely Faith.In Colloq. Ratisb. pag. 247. But suppose these three were such Brethren as wee speake of, yet what are they to Kemnitius, D. Andreas, Hemingius, Illyricus, Wigan∣dus, Mathaeus Iudex, Basilius Faber, the whole Church of Saxony, and generally all Lutherans, who all hold as I haue affirmed? And therfore I do not as you say traduce their fame, nor accuse them wrongfully of error: they themselues haue diuulged and published it to the whole world in their books. And so my Assumption, that they haue not Assurance remaineth hitherto in his full strength and vertue. N. B. You conclude vpon the premisses thus, Therefore or at
leastwise probably this is not iustifying Faith. Dispute you positiuely, and conclude probably? Alas Master Downe, doe you preach after this manner at Cambridge to deliuer definitions by Sophistrie, when you should speake verè tru∣ly? It seemeth when you said so you were not perswaded that your doctrine was true, but determined contingently and probably with fine words to ensnare poore silly hearers. For when you say, Therefore or at leastwise probably, you doub∣ted of the Truth thereof. Surely this is not to goe recto pe∣ctore with an vpright conscience in Gods cause.Ammian. Marc. l. 17. Plutar. in col∣lect. But I hope wee shall take heed of you when you preach next, seeing you meane to tell vs the truth but only a probable tale. , A wise man will eschew your snares.Ep. ad Bos∣phor. Bis enim ad eundem lapidem impingere stulto conuenit, saith Gregorius Theologus, It is the property of fooles to stumble twice at one stone. I. D.
Why Sir is it vnlawfull to conclude otherwise then Apodictically? or is it Sophistrie to vse Dialecticall Syllogismes in matters of Diuinity? Certainly then much to blame are all those Logicians who handle To∣picall Syllogismes whose matter is contingent other where then among the Elenchs: and foully ouerseene are all writers both sacred and profane, ancient and mo∣derne, who oftentimes dispute probably, knowing that although Demonstration only doe force and constraine, yet Probability doth very much bend and incline the minde. Saint Augustin did not so lightly esteeme of Pro∣bable reasons: for Other writers, saith hee,I so read, that how much soeuer they excell in holinesse and learning,Ep. 19. ad Hieron. I doe not therfore thinke any thing to be true because they iudge  so, but because they perswade me either by those Canonicall Authors, or by probable reason not abhorring from truth. Bellarmine vpbraiding Illyricus for his Coniectures is thus answered by learned Iunius,Contrà Bell. de transl. impl. 1. c. 11. Bee not so hot I pray you against humane coniectures: In a word whether wee would modestly shew our owne opinion, or refell anothers, wee deale humanely saying it is a coniecture, but to vpbraid humane coniectures is meere inhumanity.Dan. Cham. de oecum. Pont. Nay Daniel Chamier a very learned late writer in his booke de oecu∣menico Pontifice doth professedly distinguish his argu∣ments into Scripture, Coniecture, and Testimony: and will you therefore say of him as you doe vnto mee, that hee doubted of the truth of his cause, determined to ensnare poore silly Readers, and walked not recto pectore with an vpright conscience?Reioinder to Brist. reply. But so it is (I vse the very words of D. Fulk being almost in the same tearmes cauilled with∣all by blundering Bristow) When you can say nothing a∣gainst my assertion your selfe, you would make mee vncer∣taine of it, and say that it is but a light suspicion of mine, because in one place before I come to the sound proofe of it I say it is a probable coniecture. And doth it follow therefore that I doubt of it because I offer a probable coniecture vnto other mens vnderstanding before by order of discourse I am brought to the manifest probation of it? Well yet if Probable like you not, those that follow are Necessary, and I feare mee you will bee able to say little to them that leaue this without answer, and the weaker the argument the more disgrace to bee graueld by it. But my purpose in vsing both, was for the more strength and perswasion: for as Pindar saith, It is the sur∣est and safest way in a tempestuous night to cast out of the ship two ankers.Olymp. . 6.
Treatise. 2. Arg. That which is in time after iustifying Faith cannot bee that Faith; This is vndeniable. But this Par∣ticular knowledge is in time after that Faith. This I proue out of 1 Ioh. 5.13. These things haue I written vnto you that belieue in the name of the Sonne of God, that yee may know that yee haue Eternall life. Behold Belieuing goes before and Knowledge comes after. As for that which followeth in the same verse, and that yee may belieue, I interprete it of Perseuerance and growth in Faith. Howsoeuer Belieuing and Knowing are here distinguished, and therefore are not all one. N. B. I deny your Minor: neither doth that place of S. Iohn helpe you ought as wee shall see anon. I tell you that iustify∣ing Faith is a Particular Knowledge, though in other tearmes by vs vsed, and by the Scripture set downe. So that where you say, a man first belieueth and then knoweth, wee say hee beleeueth, that is, hee particularly knoweth, appre∣hendeth, and applieth Christ to himselfe perpetually and liuely to his saluation. So that Belieuing and particular knowing himselfe to bee elected are one: and that it is this knowledge thus I argue. I. D.
Before you come to bestow a word or two vpon the Minor which you deny, you thinke it good like a cun∣ning  and subtle disputer flatly to deny the Conclusion, and peremptorily to auouch the Contradictory vnto it, & then very prodigally to wast a multitude of words in the proofe thereof. A maruelous policy I promise you vtterly disabling me from farther replying: for as much as Logicke it selfe giues no precept how a man may re∣ply vpon him who denies the Conclusion, and taking the Contradictory thereof as granted goes about there∣by to disproue the Premises. For so doe you when you say Faith is a knowledge, and therefore goes not afore knowledge: my reason being contrarily framed thus, Faith goes before knowledge, therefore is not know∣ledge. Doubtles had you not had the heart of Zenodotus,Martial. and the liuer of Crates, as the Poet saith, you could ne∣uer haue stumbled vpon so politicke a deuise. But let vs heare your reasons. N. B. What soeuer iustifieth a man is Faith:Dari∣j Esa. 53.11. But particular knowledge iustifieth a man, Therfore particular knowledge is Faith. I proue the Minor out of the Scripture, By the knowledge of himselfe, saith the Lord, shall my righte∣ous seruant justify many. Lo M. Downe here the know∣ledge of Christ iustifieth a man, and is the same in effect and working that Faith is, and therefore are they both one, which you make to bee twaine by distinction and originall. Your speech helpeth Bellarmine that saith Faith may bee rather in ignorantiá implicitâ in an ignorance couched, then in explicitâ cognitione a discouered knowledge.Tom. 3. de iustif. l. 5. c. 7.
I. D. Iud. 14.18.Seeing here you plow with my heifer (as Samson sometime said vnto the Philistines) how is it that you read not my riddle also? I meane hauing borrowed this Obiection from my Treatise, why take you not from thence the answer also? Surely that you vrge the one so eagerly, and so diligently suppresse the other, I know no cause but this you knew not how to reply vnto it: and therefore I will by your fauor repeate the same againe, vntil you find out some forcible reason to driue me from it. The verbs of vnder standing and sence in the Hebrew tongue signifie not onely the acts of them, but of the will and affections also. So Psal. 1.6. the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: And, Depart, I know you not: And I will not heare, see, &c. that is, God will not so know, heare, see, as to loue, and approue. And so may I interpret that of the Prophet, Christ being so knowne as to bee embraced and rested on by the will shall iustifie many. Adde now, that it is neither necessary nor likely your Particular know∣ledge should bee here ment: for the Obiect of the Pro∣phets knowledge is no other then Christ, but the Obiect of your knowledge is your owne selfe, or, your present state in grace and future Saluation. And what a sense∣lesse speech doe you put into the mouth of the Prophet? for by your glosse it is as if hee should say My righteous seruant by making many to know that they are already iu∣stified shall bring many vnto that which already they haue namely iustification. But Esay had in him both the Spirit of Wisdome and the Tongue of Eloquence, and there∣fore pardon me if I cannot thinke he vsed to speake non∣sense like you.
Where you say my speech helpeth Bellarmine who saith Faith may bee rather in ignorantiâ implicitâ, in an ignorance couched, then in explicitâ cognitione, a dis∣couered knowledge; First, Bellarmine hath no such words, neither I thinke did hee euer dreame of an impli∣cit or couched ignorance. Of an implicit Faith we haue often heard, and of a rude and confused apprehension the Iesuit in the place by you quoted speaketh: but an implicit ignorance was neuer yet heard of, and what meaning it may haue for my part I cannot see.De iustif. lib. 1. ca. 7. Bellar∣mines right words are these, Faith is better defined by ignorance then knowledge: which saying of his how my speech helpeth I would you had taken a little more paines to make it manifest. For, whence and how you should collect it I cannot tell, except perhaps it bee thus, I say that Faith is not a knowledge; Ergo, I say also it is an ignorance. I answer therefore secondly, that Bellarmine and I, speake not of the same Faith, for hee speaketh of Faith of Story, and I of Faith of Person: so that when I say Faith of Person is not a knowledge I cannot help him who saith Faith of Story is not a knowledge. For, as for Faith of Story you cannot bee ignorant that con∣trary vnto Bellarmine in my Treatise, I haue called it a Generall knowledge, so farre am I from defining it by ignorance with him. And yet I would haue you to know also, that when I say Faith of Story is a know∣ledge, I meane not thereby Science of Conclusions ac∣quired and gotten by demonstratiue proofe out of such principles as are of themselues knowne and euident. For how can a man by the light of naturall reason aspire to the knowledge of that which is supernaturall and aboue reason? But I vnderstand an explicit and distinct appre∣hension
of the necessary Articles of Faith, opposite vnto that brutish ignorance which Papists call implicite Faith and Blind obedience: which distinct apprehension Bel∣larmine in the place before alledged denieth necessarily to bee required vnto Faith. Farthermore I would faine know how this followes, Faith is not knowledge, Ergo, it is Ignorance: for by the same reason you may con∣clude, Faith is not Hope, Ergo, it is Despaire; or thus, Earth is not fire, Ergo, it is water, and so by your crea∣tion all things in the world shall bee one of two, fire or water.Metaph. 12. But you should remember that simple negation is positiue of nothing, and that Priuations are reduced vnto that subiect whereunto their Habits doe belong: whence it followeth that denying Faith to be in the Vn∣derstanding and so to be knowledge, I deny it also to bee Ignorance. N. B. Againe, whatsoeuer bringeth life eternall bringeth iu∣stification and is Faith: But true knowledge of Iesus Christ bringeth life eternall, Therefore true knowledge of Iesus Christ bringeth iustification and is Faith. The Minor I proue out of the Words of Christ in S. Iohn,Ioh. 17.3. Mel. & Pez. Arg. Theol. p. 3. notitia Es. 53. significat. non solum agnitionem personae & beneficiorum Christised e∣tiam fiduciam quiescentem in Christo si∣cuti & Ioh. 17. This is life e∣ternall to know thee to bee the onely true Lord, and him to bee Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent into the world. The Maior is plaine, whatsoeuer apprehendeth that last which is life Eternall, apprehendeth the former, as election and iustification &c. But the knowledge of Christ appre∣hendeth eternall life, Therefore it apprehendeth iustifica∣tion. But hence it followeth, whatsoeuer apprehendeth iu∣stification is Faith, True knowledge of Jesus Christ appre∣hendeth iustification, Therefore true knowledge of Christ
is Faith, and so consequently and conuersiuely Faith is knowledge, and this knowledge is Faith.Ioh. 19.25. Eph. 3.14.15.16.17.18. 1 Cor. 13. And by this meanes Particular knowledge commeth not in time after faith, but is Faith, and is knowledge in the beginning, & in proceeding is knowledge, and in the end is knowledge. I. D.
The Maior of your first Syllogisme that whatsoeuer bringeth life eternall bringeth iustification I deny. You say it is plaine because whatsoeuer apprehendeth the last such as is eternall life, apprehendeth the former also which is iustification. But first, what rule of Logicke allowes you thus to shift tearmes, and to turne bringing of life and iustification into apprehending life and iustification? For, howsoeuer you seeme to vse them indifferently, yet are they words of different significations: and therefore confounding them thus you make not so much the truth of the Maior plaine, as obscure the meaning thereof. Againe, chuse whether of these tearmes you please, yet is it palpably false that Whatsoeuer bringeth or apprehen∣deth the last, bringeth and apprehendeth also the former. Rhetoricke brings a man to speake eloquently which is the latter: yet it is Grammar not Rhetoricke that brings a man to speake congruè which is the former. Physicke brings a man to the faculty of curing diseases which is the latter: yet brings not to the knowledge of the nature of things; for that belongs vnto the naturall Philoso∣pher, and according to the old saying, where the Physi∣ologer ends, there the Physician begins. So also in di∣uine matters, Hope apprehends eternall life which is the latter, for it is the proper obiect about which it is occu∣pied:  it apprehendeth not iustification which is the for∣mer, for then by your rule it should bee Faith it selfe, that being faith as you say which apprehends iustificati∣on. As therfore when diuerse needles are by the Load∣stone trained one after another, the vertue of the stone moueth the first, the first the second, and so of the rest, but the third or second is no way the cause of the depen∣dency of the first: so in the concatenation of the causes of our saluation reckoned vp by the Apostle, to wit E∣lection,Rom. 8.30. Vocation, Iustification, Glorification, the for∣mer are mouers as it were vnto the latter, but not the lat∣ter vnto the former. The reason of all in a word is this, because as I haue already shewed, more is required vn∣to the maine end, then vnto the subordinate meanes: and therefore seeing saluation is the end, Iustification the meanes, not whatsoeuer is requisite vnto that is present∣ly necessary vnto this. The Minor that true knowledge of Iesus Christ bringeth eternall life, I also deny. For Particular assurance (which is the knowledge you must here vnderstand, or else you conclude not to the purpose) bringeth not eternall life, in as much as a man may be saued without it, as we haue already sufficiently proued. Neither doe the words of Christ in S. Iohn verify your Minor:Ioh.
17.3. for by knowledge there he meaneth not your particular assurance and per∣swasion by which a man knowes he is iustified & shall be saued: but such a knowledge of Christ and his Gospell as is mingled with faith, and worketh our wils to accept of Iesus Christ for our onely mediator. And this know∣ledge is said to bee eternall life, not because euery one that barely and nakedly knowes liues eternally (for as wee haue shewed Reprobates and Diuels haue Histori∣call  Faith) but partly, because no man can liue without it, partly because by it the Spirit of God worketh in the Elect that Faith by which they are iustified and so come to eternall life. But what say I vnto the Minor deliuered in other tearmes, thus, Knowledge of Christ apprehendeth eternall life? I say first, it is not the same Proposition, because the tearmes are changed, neither are they equipollent. Secondly, I grant it to bee true, whether you meane by knowledge Dogmaticall Faith or Particular assurance: for by the one doe we apprehend that there is an eternall life, by the other that wee haue speciall interest in it. Well then, if it apprehendeth eternall life doth it not fol∣low that therefore also it apprehendeth iustification? No, by no meanes: for as wee haue aboue demonstra∣ted, it is not necessary that that which apprehendeth the latter should apprehend the former also. And yet though I disallow the consequence, the consequent I readily yeeld you, that Particular knowledge apprehendeth iu∣stification: for so haue wee defined Faith of promise to be a perswasion or assurance that the promise of God made in Christ, to wit iustification, remission of sinnes, adoption, regeneration, finally, election it selfe and eternall saluati∣on doe particularly pertaine vnto mee and are mine. What gather you now of this? Ergo, say you, it is iustifying Faith. How so?
Because whatsoeuer apprehendeth iustifi∣cation is iustifying Faith. Nay contrarily whatsoeuer apprehendeth iustification it not iustifying Faith: for apprehension followeth iustification, no man apprehen∣ding himselfe to bee iustified vntill hee be iustified, but Iustifying Faith is in nature before iustification, that be∣ing the cause and this the effect. And therefore vnlesse  you will say that that which followeth is that which go∣eth before, you cannot say that that which apprehen∣deth iustification is that which iustifieth. To conclude therefore neither is Faith knowledge nor knowledge Faith, but particular knowledge for ought you haue yet said or can say commeth in time af∣ter Faith. But whereas finally you inferre that Faith is knowledge in the beginning, knowledge in proceeding, knowledge in the end, besides that the foundation vpon which it is grounded is vntrue it is cleane contrary also to that which erewhile you affirmed, that Faith is but one, compounded of my three nice distinctions, the first be∣ing the beginning, the second the progresse, the third the end. For the third is Faith of Person, and in the Will, and is by your confession there the end of Faith, yet here you say faith is knowledge in the end: which things how they can stand together I see not, vnlesse you will say that knowledge is in the Will and so confound the facul∣ties and operations of the soule. N. B. In Ioh. 1. Ep. c. 5. to. 13.The place of Saint Iohn by you cited to proue your Mi∣nor in your argument maketh nothing for you: because the Apostle speaketh of their increase of knowledge, and not of the originall begetting of knowledge, and so saith M. Caluin. I. D.
The text in the clearest tearmes that may bee distin∣guisheth betweene Belieuing and knowing, and vnto that giueth the priority before this: but your glosse con∣foundeth  their natures, and saith that the Apostle here speaketh onely of increase of knowledge. Wo to the glosse that corrupteth the text: for if this bee S. Iohns meaning, it is as if hee should say, I write vnto you that know that yee are iustified & haue eternall life, that yee may increase in knowing that yee haue eternall life, and that yee may know yee are iustified and haue eternall life, which how vnworthy it is the pen of an Apostle euery one ea∣sily seeth. But Caluin you say interpreteth the place as you doe. Bee it so: yet is it not the name of Caluin how venerable soeuer that may sway this matter. For seeing I professe to differ from him in the definition of Iustify∣ing Faith, hee defining it by knowledge, I by Affiance: you may not thinke it vnreasonable, if in this point, and the explication of such scriptures as may seeme to con∣cerne it, I desire rather to bee pressed with his reasons, then borne downe with his authority. But what saith Caluin? Because there ought to bee dayly proceedings in Faith, therefore he writes to them that belieue already, that they may more firmely, and certainly belieue. Where∣unto I willingly assent, if you apply it as
Beza in his an∣notations doth vnto the last clause of the verse, and that yee may belieue: for then the meaning without forcing or constraining the words will bee as if hee should say, I write vnto you that belieue that belieuing yee may know yee haue eternall life, & knowing the same may constantly per∣seuere and proceed on in Belieuing. For as the clouds poure downe raine to moisten the earth, and the earth moist∣ned sendeth vp vapours againe to make clouds: so like∣wise Faith begets Assurance, and Assurance being gotten doth againe confirme and strengthen faith. And thus doe the Century-writers expound this place,Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. p. 276. gathering  from it that Cetainty of Saluation is an Effect of Faith and so euidently distinguishing knowledge from Faith. Treatise. 3. Arg. That which in nature comes after iustificati∣on cannot bee iustifying Faith. This appeares because Faith is the Efficient Instrumentall cause of Iustificati∣on: and euery Efficient by the rule of Logicke is in na∣ture before the Effect. But this knowledge or assurance is in nature after Iustification, Ergo, it is not Faith. N. B. Your Minor is very false, and so proued by my former arguments. For particular knowledge and assurance of our saluation is not in nature after Faith, but is Faith and wholy infused by the Spirit of God, and begotten by hearing of the Word preached, and commeth to act by degrees accor∣ding to the measure of grace giuen of God. For it is in Habitu sometime & not in actu,Faith habitu∣all in power, actuall in the deed of belie∣uing. as when one sleepeth his beliefe is not in actu, and yet hee liueth vnto God by his faith which liueth powerfully in him though not actually. I. D.
The Maior of my Syllogisme is vndeniable, because as I haue said Faith is the cause of iustification. For as D. Fulke saith vnto Bristow excluding it from Efficient cau∣ses,Reioinder to Bristow. p. 172. Seeing Scripture often affirmeth that God worketh in vs by Faith, faith must needs be an instrumentall effici∣ent when you haue said all that you can, except you will  teach vs new Grammar and Logicke. The Minor there∣fore you say is very false, and so proued by your former arguments. But those arguments are already answe∣red, and thus I proue the Minor. For as for the rest of your idle and wilde talke touching the infusion, beget∣ting, degrees, habit, act of Faith, I willingly passe ouer, lest pursuing you in this course I seeme to run riot and play the wanton with you. Treatise. The truth of a Proposition is alwayes in nature be∣fore the knowledge of the truth: for Propositions are not therefore true, because they are knowne so, but they are first true and knowne so. Therefore this Propositi∣on, I know I am iustified, spoken by one that is iustified, must needs presuppose the partie before to be iustified. N. B. O. O. O. O. O. I. D.
What mum Master Baxtar? Hath Sigalion now in∣stantly sealed vp your lips that you cannot, or are you suddenly become a professed Pythagorean that you may not speake? For me thinkes you that haue beene so vo∣call and wastfull of your breath in so many impertinent and friuolous excursions, should not now bee so sparing and niggardly of a word or twaine vpon so necessary a point. But the truth is the argument is vnanswerable  and inuincible, and therefore you held it better to say nothing, and slily to passe it ouer, then to marre all by saying nothing to the purpose. Which course if you had also vsed in the rest of this disputation, you should haue saued this scribling labor, and I had receiued virgin pa∣per from you. And so, as Galba in the iudgement of all might haue beene thought worthy of the empire if hee had not beene Emperor:Tacit. 1. Hist. you also in the opinion of some might haue beene counted able to write if you had not written. But now that after so much loudnesse and cla∣mourousnesse you are become so dumbe and silent, it ar∣gues that though ability faile, yet will should not haue beene wanting, vnlesse the euidence of truth had per∣force made vp your mouth. And so construeing your silence to bee in this point no lesse then plaine yeelding, I passe on to the next argument. Treatise.
4. Arg. In conditionall Promises there can bee no Assurance of the thing promised before the perfor∣mance of the condition. v. g. This is a conditionall Promise in the couenant of works, Doe this and thou shalt liue, Life is promised but on condition of Doing: and therefore vntill wee haue performed the condition, wee may not looke that God should bee reciprocall and giue vs Life. Now in the Couenant of Grace, Iustifica∣tion is promised, but vpon condition of Faith: so saith the Scripture, Belieue and thy sins shall be forgiuen thee. Therefore the condition of Belieuing must first bee per∣formed before wee can assure our selues our sins are for∣giuen. If so, then Faith going before, and Assurance  following after, Assurance connot bee Iustifying Faith. N. B. I deny your Minor and say, there may bee an Assurance of Saluation in some measure, before there can bee the per∣formance of Faith actuall in the highest measure: There∣fore your Minor is vtterly false. For Faith in his true de∣fined state is a firme Assurance and Perswasion, and a firme Assurance and Perswasion is, Faith, and both the Greeke and Hebrew words signifieth Faith (before cited) doe de∣clare. Yea this Assurance is giuen vnto vs together with the hearing of the Word of God Habitualiter, and will shew it selfe Actualiter in due time, and therefore sometime is , and sometime is , the first in the begin∣ning, the next in the Lords due time, and this can neuer be , but secundùm magis or minùs shall externas vel internas exerere vires, shew forth his forces either within man or without. I. D.
To make all plaine, my argument reduced into the right forme standeth thus, That which goeth before iusti∣fication is not that which followes after iustification: But Faith goeth before iustification and Assurance followes af∣ter, Ergo, Faith is not Assurance. The Minor of this Syllogisme is that which you deny affirming it to be vt∣terly false, and you confirme it to bee so by this reason, There may bee Assurance of Saluation in some measure be∣fore there can be Performance of Faith Actuall in the high∣est measure, Ergo, Faith goeth not before Assurance, nor doth Assurance follow after Faith. The Antecedent of  which Enthymeme I grant, for as much as there may bee Assurance in this life, but not the performance of Faith actuall in the highest measure, wee here Belieuing only in part, as the Apostle saith. But if hereupon it fol∣low, Therefore Faith goeth not before Assurance, it will also follow, Faith goeth not before Charity or good works, because Charity and good works may be in some mea∣sure, before Faith actuall bee in the highest measure: or thus, The elder Sonne is not borne before the yonger, because the yonger may waxe as tall as a Pygmee be∣fore the elder bee growne to the stature of a Giant. Which Consequences if they be absurd and ridiculous, as absurd and ridiculous is it to inferre that Faith cannot bee before Assurance, because Assurance may bee in some measure before Faith bee in the highest measure. Nay farre better doth it follow from hence against your selfe that Faith is not Assurance, nor Assurance Faith. For if as you expresly say Assurance may bee in a lower measure when Faith is in a higher, how can they possi∣bly differing so in degrees but bee differing things? For although it be true that more and lesse doe not diuersify the kind, yet is it as true that the same indiuiduall quality cannot at the same time bee both intended and remitted, no more then the same string in a Lute can at once bee strained vp, and let downe, and yeeld at the same time both a base and treble sound. In the residue of this Section, you shew your selfe to bee one of those idle Oratours of whom Quintilian speaketh,Inst. Orat. l. 11. who neuer regard where the point or issue of the Question lieth, so they may besides the cause, either from the persons or out of some common place find oc∣casion of declaiming.Lib. 6. Epig. 19. Such as was
Postumus the Aduo∣cate  in Martiall, who being entertained to plead the cause of one who had three Goats stolen from him by his neighbour left the proofe of this, and fell a discour∣sing of the battell of Cannae, of the Mithridatike and Car∣thaginian wars, and other such impertinent matters. But neuer was there any offended more notoriously in this kind then you, all those speeches are nothing els but ex∣trauagances and by-matters. For I pray you, how doth it concerne my argument to talke of the origination of Faith in Greeke and Hebrew, how Assurance is giuen, how it shewes it selfe, of Oligopistie, Plerophorie, and Apostasie, of the intention and remission of it, and final∣ly of the inward and outward forces thereof? Surely,De arte Poët. as much as a Cypres-tree concernes a table of shipwrack as Horace speaketh. And therefore giue mee leaue to plucke you by the eare, and to say vnto you as did the poore Client vnto his Lawyer aboue named, Now I pray thee, Postume, say some thing at length touching my three Goats. N. B. Where it pleaseth you to make remission of sinnes a Pro∣mise vpon a Condition, I tell you with all the Church of God in all ages it is rather an encouragement to belieue assured∣ly in Christ, as if hee should say, Thy sinnes bee forgiuen thee, therefore bee of good comfort, that both the former and latter, to wit forgiuenesse of sinnes and Beliefe might bee ascribed to the mercie of God. I. D. The Minor which in the former section you denied,
namely that Faith goes before iustification and Assurance followes after, in my Treatise I thus proued, because Iu∣stification is promised vpon condition of Belieuing: and seeing in Conditionall promises there can bee no Assu∣rāce of the thing promised before the performāce of the Condition, therfore in this promise we must Belieue be∣fore we can be iustified, and be iustified before we can be assured we are iustified. Now to this you say it is rather an encouragement, then a Promise vpon condition: as if it were impossible that Promise vpon condition might bee an encouragement. Whereas me thinkes a Generall doth greatly encourage his Souldiers when he promi∣seth vnto them preferment and reward vpon condition of some peece of seruice well performed.1 Cron. 11.6. And Ioab per∣aduenture would not haue beene so forward and ventu∣rous in the battell vnlesse Dauid had promised the office of chiefe Captaine vpon condition of smiting the Iebu∣sites.
But you haue reasons for your saying more then a good many: for here like another Tertullian euery word almost you speake is a Demonstration. First all the Church of God in all ages affirmeth with you: and yet as shall plentifully appeare in the next Section, the Church of God neuer vnderstood but that Remission of sinnes was promised vpon condition of Faith. But as A∣naxagoras when hee was driuen to his shifts and could not finde out the reason of some things, was wont to say it was the doing of Nous: euen so when you haue boldly affirmed that which you can by no meanes proue, it is your manner desperately to auouch that it is the saying of the Church. Secondly, you say this speech, Belieue and thy sinnes shall bee forgiuen thee is all one with this,  Thy sinnes bee forgiuen thee, therefore bee of good comfort. Which happily wee may thinke not to be altogether so witlesse, if also you can perswade vs that a Physician saying vnto his Patient, Vse carefully the course of Phisicke I shall prescribe vnto you, and you shall surely recouer of your sicknesse, meaneth thereby no other then as if hee should say, Bee of good cheere, for thou art already reco∣uered of thy sicknesse. Lastly, by this meanes, you say both the former and the latter, to wit Forgiuenesse of sinnes and Beliefe may bee ascribed to the mercy of God. As if Promise of Remission of sinnes vpon condi∣tion of Faith were any way derogatory vnto the Mercy of God, but that both the one and the other may this notwithstanding bee ascribed thereunto. For if when God out of his soueraigne authority commaundeth to Belieue, it bee neuerthelesse of his grace that wee can and doe Belieue, according to that of S. Augustin, Giue what thou commandest, and command what thou wilt: why when out of his mercy hee promiseth Forgiuenesse if we doe Belieue, should it not bee ascribed vnto the same his mercy that we doe performe the condition and Belieue? But who knowes the salt that is in you?Eupolis. You are the onely Pericles of this age, Suada sits vpon your lips, and you alone leaue a sting behind you. For had it not been for this threefold cord of yours, I could neuer so easily haue been drawne from this truth. N. B. Farthermore where you bring for the confirmation of your Minor (to proue Iustification to bee conditionall with the Papists) this place of Math. cap. 9. v. 2.M. Downes falshood, in ci∣ting, constru∣ing and ad∣ding, to the Scripture.
, Confide fili, remissa sunt tibi peccata tua, Bee of good comfort Sonne thy sinnes bee forgiuen thee: you wrest it first to tell vs that Christ said to him, Thy sinnes be forgiuen thee if thou wilt bee of good comfort, which is false, and no part of Christs meaning, but rather the contrary, bidding the man sicke of the Palsie be of good comfort, because his sinnes (being the cause of his disease) were forgiuen him.Tom. 9. in Mat. In Mat. c. 9. This could Saint Hierome haue told you, yea Chrysostome and Master Caluin, E∣rasmus, and the Greeke Scholiast. But what may wee ex∣pect will bee the sequell of this, if you bee not hindred in your course? Well you haue a mind to doe mischiefe, but you want power as spake Plutarch to one,Harm. in Mat. 9. Archidamus Zeuxidis fili∣us in Plut. M. Downe falsly transla∣ting the Greeke text. and so I Hope shall. The second point which I challenge you in is false transla∣ting of the Greeke text, contrary to the words them∣selues, and all the world for
1600. yeares. You translate Mat. 9. v. 2. Crede fili & remittentur tibi peccata tua, Sonne belieue, and then thy sinnes shall bee forgiuen thee, when you should haue said with Saint Hierome, Ambrose, Beda, Caluin, Beza, Erasm. and the Church of England, Sonne bee of good comfort, thy sinnes bee already forgiuen thee. The Greeke word can by no meanes signifie to Belieue, but rather to bee confident or Bold, to trust to, and not to Belieue in, as Opibus confidere, Cicero, to trust to his riches, not to belieue in his riches, to assure my selfe that they shall benefit mee, not to belieue in them as my God to saue mee. Beside the Greeke word to Belieue, is farre off another name and nature. Againe by what authority doe you translate, Thy sinnes shall bee forgiuen thee, when you should say, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee? Haue you any commission in contemptum omnium Grammaticorum, to change tenses also, as you take vpon you vnder pretence  of to coine Distinctions? But I may easily spie your drift: you would needs parget your rotten cause and miserable Minor with this vntempered morter. Well, all the Schollers in our countrey will thinke the worse of  as long as they liue for this tricke.M. Downe addeth to the Scripture. But what intole∣rable impudency is this and beyond all the rest to adde the word or coniunction , &, and, to the Scripture, saying (by your commission ) Belieue Sonne and then thy sinnes shall be forgiuen thee. Quite contrary is this to your knowledge, and conscience.Apoc. 22. Bethinke you therefore what a fearefull iudgement you incurre, and craue mercy at the hand of God while you haue time, confesse your errour and cancell your commission, so shall you haue the Church your Mother, and her Children your Brethren and friends. I. D. That which in the former section you spake but lis∣pingly, here you deliuer more plainely and articularly: for there you say it is rather an encouragement, but now you affirme peremptorily they are none but Papists that hold Iustification to bee conditionall, to such extremi∣ties & straits am I driuen that I am faine to borrow aide and assistance of the common aduersary. But if I bee mistaken herein I hope I shall the more easily find par∣don, because they of whom I learned it seemed vnto me to bee no Papists, and were commonly taken for very good Protestants. Christ, saith Beza,Conf. c. 4. 9. 4. is offered vnto vs to be possessed of vs with this condition if we doe belieue in him. On that condition, saith Vrsinus,In Catechis∣moq de E∣uang. is Christs righte∣ousnesse made ours, if wee receiue it: Now that receiuing is the worke and act of Faith alone. The condition of Faith,
saith Hemingius,Syntag. de E∣uang. Art. 30. Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 4. p. 93. is required that the benefit may be appli∣ed, that is remission of sinnes. The law, say the Century-writers, hath the Promise with condition of Doing and ful∣filling it: the Gospell hath the free Promise with condition of Belieuing and receiuing it by Faith. That saith Master Foxe,De Christo gratis iustif. p. 237. 244. which properly wee inquire is for what cause or rea∣son Saluation and Pardon of sinnes is promised, whether vpon some condition or none at all: And that the Promise is made vpon no condition no man I thinke will say, where∣fore it remaines of necessity wee acknowledge some conditi∣on, and that is Faith.In Camp. 8. Rat. In the Law, saith Whitaker, the condition was hard which no man could satisfy, but Christ propounds vnto vs a more easy condition, Belieue and thou shalt bee saued.Against San∣ders cauils on the Lords supper. p. 424. De iustif. l. 1. c. 12. Ter. Eun. Act. 2. Sc. 11. Gods promises, saith Fulke, require the condition of Faith in them that shall obtaine them. Finally Cardinall Bellarmine who hitherto hath euer been estee∣med no meane Papist reports this to bee the confession of all his aduersaries, and that they cannot deny it, That remission of sinnes is promised vpon condition of Faith. But Lord what ods and difference there is betweene simple folke and intelligent persons! For vnlesse you had told it mee I had neuer knowne that Bellarmins aduer∣saries were Papists, nor that these men whom I haue na∣med had beene wolues in sheepskins. Neither did I vn∣till now vnderstand what you meant when you charged mee with Popery, and speaking pure Papist: your mea∣ning I see was, that I spake right as Beza, Vrsinus, He∣mingius, the Century-Writers, Foxe, Whitaker, Fulke, and all the rest of that ranke vse to do.
For confirmation of my Minor, and to proue Iustifi∣cation to bee conditionall, I bring, as you say, that place of Math. Be of good comfort Sonne thy sinnes bee forgiuen  thee. In handling whereof you tell mee farther, first that I wrest the text and falsifie the meaning thereof, then that I translate the Greeke falsly and contrary to the words themselues and all the world for 1600 yeeres, lastly that most impudently and quite contrary to knowledge and con∣science, I adde vnto the Scripture. Telling mee moreo∣uer that I haue a mind to doe mischiefe, but want power, that I contemne all Grammar, and parget a rotten cause with vntempered morter, and therefore must needs incurre fearefull iudgement, if in time I craue not mercy at the hand of God. Thus, Master Baxter, like Saint George a horse backe you fight with a painted dragon, and fai∣ning monsters to your selfe set vpon them with such Herculean impetuousnesse and fury, as if you would a∣maze simple people with your great puissance & powres: and then as if you had flaild to powder your true aduer∣sary as well as your imaginary and strawen enemy, you giue foorth most terrible menaces and threats, that folke henceforward may not dare to meddle with your mo∣thers sonne more. For where I pray you doe you finde this passage of S. Mathew quoted by me? and vnlesse you had resolued by falshood and forgerie to maintaine this quarrell against mee, with what face could you fa∣ther the allegation of it vpon mee? No Sir, I did not so much as dreame of that place: only I say in generall that the Scriptures make this to bee the tenor of the Euange∣licall promise Belieue and thy sinnes shall be forgiuen thee,Ioh. 3.10. little thinking that you who would bee counted a Master in Israel had beene ignorant of a doctrine so euident and fundamentall. For that so it is let these few texts bee carefully considered, Belieue in the Lord Iesus and thou shalt bee saued and thine houshold;Act. 16.31. Act. 10.23.
That through his Name  all that belieue in him shall receiue remission of sinnes: That whosoeuer belieueth in him should not perish but haue eter∣nall life:Ioh. 3.15.16. Rom. 10.9. Gal. 3.22. If thou belieue thou shalt bee saued: That the promise of Iesus Christ should bee giuen to them that be∣lieue. To these few I might easily adde six hundred mo, all which although not in precise forme of words, yet in vertue and meaning are all one with this Belieue and thy sinnes shall be forgiuen thee: and from them doe all Diuines gather that the Promise of the Gospell is not absolute but conditionall, if we Belieue as is aboue plen∣tifully declared. Which being so, you shew your selfe in this Thrasonicall and swaggering section to bee too∣too base and recreant, vtterly void both of forhead and conscience: otherwise you would not first so palpably and desperately haue belied mee, and then so impudent∣ly and vnciuilly reuell vpon mee. Though you deserue it, yet will I not cast backe the dirt you here throw at mee againe into your owne face, I shall but defile my hands in so doing: rather will I as Saint Bernard coun∣selleth; Breake the arrowes of contumely vpon the sheeld of Patience,Ser. 40. de modo benè viuendi. and hold forth the buckler of a good conscience a∣gainst the sword of your malicious tongue. But albeit I intended not, nor aimed at this place of Mathew, as being euery way vnsufficient to proue that iustification is promised vpon condition of Faith: yet is it not so abhorring from my purpose, but that it may af∣foard at least a probable proofe for my maine conclu∣sion. For. Beza in his annotations on Mark. 2.5. doth vs to wit that the word  may be translated impe∣ratiuely, thus, Be thy sinnes pardoned; as if it were in the third person plurall of the Coniunctiue mood (which Diomedes called the Mandatiue mood) for , as ,
saith Eustathius, and  is vsed by Homer for , and . The reason why it may thus be turned is, because the Scribes vnderstood Christ, as if hee himselfe had actually forgiuen the Palsie-man his sins, as appeareth in the sixt and seuenth verses, which they could not so haue conceiued if hee had onely told him that his sinnes were forgiuen him. Now if this bee the right translati∣on, what say you to this argument. The Palsie-man first belieued (for so it is said) When Iesus saw their Faith, meaning as well the Faith of the sicke man as of them that brought him) and then after Christ forgaue his sins, Ergo, Faith goes before Remission: But Assurance, as wee haue shewed, followes after Remission, Ergo, it is not Faith. But you will follow the ordinary translation. I giue you good leaue, for I take it to bee the truest: yet from thence also thus I argue, The Palsie man belieued, yet was not assured his sinnes were forgiuen him till Christ told him so much, for otherwise what needed Christ to tell him what hee knew already, Ergo, Assurance is not Faith. Treatise.
That from whence followes a blasphemous absurditie cannot bee a truth, for from truth nought but truth can bee concluded: But from this, that Faith is Assurance such an absurditie doth follow. What is that? That God commands to Belieue an vntruth, and to bee assu∣red of that which neuer shall bee. For God being truth cannot command falshood to bee taken for truth. Nei∣ther tell mee here of who art thou that disputest with God? For this is a ruled case in Diuinity, God cannot doe things which imply contradiction, and therefore not  make vntruth to bee truth, or knowledge errour. Now that this absurdity followes from thence thus I demon∣strate. God commands the Reprobate to belieue: for, for vnbeliefe the world shall bee condemned. But no condemnation but for breach of a commandement, for , and therefore they are commanded to Be∣lieue. I aske you then what it is to belieue? You will say, to know to bee assured. Therefore God commands the Reprobates to know and to bee assured. But this is a blasphemous absurdity, therefore is your opinion ab∣surd which infers it. N. B. Two things in this argument are betweene vs to be dis∣cussed: First, whether it bee a blasphemous absurdity, to hold that God commandeth a reprobate, to belieue that hee shall bee saued. You affirme it, I deny it. Secondly, whether in this point God commandeth a Reprobate to belieue an vn∣truth, when hee commandeth a reprobate to belieue and hee shall be saued. You affirme it, I deny it. I. D.
That it is a blasphemous absurdity to say that God com∣mands Reprobates to know and to bee assured, that they are already iustified and shall bee saued, I haue indeed affir∣med, and I thinke haue also sufficiently confirmed. But that God should commaund a Reprobate to belieue an vn∣truth if hee command him to belieue and hee shall bee saued, I neuer yet affirmed. What then? This that, He should command him to belieue an vntruth, if hee command him, to belieue that hee is iustified and shall bee saued. A small  difference will you say betweene And, and That. So was there betwixt Shibboleth and Sibboleth,Iude. 12.6. yet enough to discerne an enemy from a friend. For this propositi∣on, Belieue and thou shalt bee saued is Hypotheticall and Conditionall, as if it were said in other tearmes, If thou belieue thou shalt bee saued: But this, Belieue and assure thy selfe that thou shalt bee saued is Categoricall and Ab∣solute excluding all Condition. Now that God, com∣mands all both Elect and Reprobate to Belieue in the Lord Iesus, and promises vnto them Iustification and Saluation conditionally if they Belieue, I grant: but that hee commands the Reprobate absolutely to know and assure himselfe, that hee is already iustified, and shall hereafter bee saued and glorified, I constantly deny. Which yet your opinion that Faith is an Assurance ne∣cessarily infers, and therefore cannot bee true. This matter being thus cleared, let vs now bring your answers to the ballance and weigh them. N. B. First, therefore I answer,Mat. 16.15.16. God cammandeth all men to Belieue the Gospell to bee saued, and therefore the Repro∣bates. If you demaund why hee commandeth them to be∣lieue that which neuer shall be, I answer, So it pleased him: So answereth Iesus Christ the Sonne of God, Math. 11. v. 26.
Now goe, Master Downe and dispute with Iesus Christ, and tell him, that his Father deliuereth a blsphe∣mous absurdity. Search not too farre into the counsels of God, lest you bee ouerwhelmed of his Maiesty: reuerence his doctrine, if you cannot vnderstand it, for who is able to  search out the reason of his wayes and counsels, Rom. 11. seeing they bee like a great deep? I. D.
No, Master Baxter, it is not for dust and ashes to con∣tend with the Creator of all things: nor for base clay to enter disputation with so glorious a Maiestie. Whatso∣euer that eternall truth speaketh, I reuerence and adore, and dare not presume to search a higher reason of his a∣ctions then his will, knowing full well that his will is the prime rule and cause of Iustice, and therefore that it is both folly to seeke a former then the first, and impie∣ty to subiect Gods will vnto some extrinsecall director. But yet with you who (as I take it) are made of no bet∣ter moulds then my selfe, and are not exempted from those humane infirmities, whereunto the rest of your brethren are subiect, I hope I may bee bold to enter ar∣gument and to hold disputation, as in other matters, so touching this present question also. To you therefore this I say that, God doth indeed command the reprobate to belieue vnto saluation, and yet neuer shall he belieue nor bee saued. The cause hereof I know to bee Gods will, and am content with all lowlinesse and humility to say with Christ,Mat. 11.26. Euen so O Father because thy good pleasure was such. But what is this to our purpose? For it is one thing to command a Reprobate to belieue the Gospell, ano∣ther thing to command him to know and assure himselfe that hee is already iustified and shall bee saued: for to Be∣lieue the Gospell is to assent vnto an infallible truth, but to bee perswaded of the other is to yeeld to that which neither is nor euer shall bee true. You should therefore  euidently demonstrate out of the Scriptures that God commands a Reprobate so to bee assured and perswa∣ded: and then if I rested not satisfied with Gods reuealed will, you might iustly bid mee goe and dispute with Christ, and forbid to search into the counsels of God lest I be ouerwhelmed with his Maiesty. But if in Gods booke you cannot shew it, I hold it a humane fancy rather then a diuine truth: and therefore though I may not curious∣ly prie into the secrets of God, yet may I freely trie and examine the ground of mens opinions. N. B. Againe it is an vntruth that God commandeth, when he biddeth a Reprobate to belieue and hee shall bee saued. For, if hee could belieue, he should then be saued without doubt, Ioh. 11. That hee cannot belieue, the reason is, Christ hath not washed him Io. 13.8. neither hath opened his heart to belieue. So that if hee could haue belieued, hee should haue this doctrine effectuall vnto him to saluation. That he therefore could not belieue is not to bee imputed to the falsity of the doctrine, but to the hardnesse of his owne heart. I. D. The commandement of God is absolute, Belieue: the promise of Saluation is conditionall, if we Belieue, That the Promise is conditionall you denyed in your answer to the former argument: now also you deny that Belieuing is commanded. Whereby you bewray, how inexpert you are in the Word of righteousnesse, as the A∣postle speaketh: and that whereas by office you are,Heb. 5.12 13. and
concerning the time ought to be a teacher, yet haue you need your selfe to be taught the very elements of the Christian Religion. That therefore the Promise is conditionall I haue in the due place demonstrated: now that Belieuing is commanded remaineth to bee poued, or rather it is al∣ready proued, thus, No condemnation but for breach of a Commandement, Condemnation for vnbeliefe: for, for vn∣beliefe the world shall bee condemned, Ergo, Beliefe com∣manded. But this reason according to your wont you cunningly suppresse, and hauing found out a new Art of disputation, thinke it enough to scorne the premisses, and with a bold face to deny the Conclusion. Yet for your further confusion vnto necessary consequence, I adde the expresse words of Scripture, This, saith Iohn, is his commandement that wee belieue in the Name of his Sonne Iesus Christ.1 Ioh. 3.23. And vnto diuine authority I adde the humble consent of holy men of God.
Beza expoun∣deth that place of Saint Iohns Gospell,Ioh. 6.29. This is the worke of God that yee belieue in me,De gra. vni∣uer. De Praedest. & gratia. on this wise, This is that which God requireth of you that yee belieue in me. The Lord commandeth, saith Hemingius, that we belieue. To∣gether with the Promise, saith Master Perkins, is conioi∣ned the Exhortation or Commandement to Belieue, which is more generall then the Promise, because the promise be∣longs only to Belieuers, but the Cōmandement both to Belie∣uers & vnbelieuers.Harm. Conf. Sax. of remis∣sion of sins & iustif. Finally, the whole Church of Saxony thus confesseth, It is the eternall & immutable command∣ment of God, that we should belieue in the Son of God, ac∣cording to this saying (which is my very ground) the Spi∣rit shall conuince the world of sinne, because they Belieue not in mee. Nay, see the lucke of it, that which here you affirme to be an vntruth, not many lines before you haue  auowed to bee a truth saying, God commandeth all to Be∣lieue, and therefore the Reprobates. Yea doe you not in this place vnsay that which you say, saying, it is vntrue that God commandeth when hee biddeth a Reprobate to Be∣lieue? For hee that Biddeth in my vnderstanding com∣mandeth: vnlesse you that complaine of nice and subtle Distinctions in others, haue learned of late by some new-found nicetie to distinguish there where the letters and syllables onely differing, there is otherwise an i∣dentie of nature and definition. A man would wonder how you could so soone forget your selfe, but that it is commonly seene a liar hath seldome or neuer a good memory. But to proue that God commands not a Reprobate to belieue you come vpon mee with a most mighty and insoluble Enthymem. What is that I beseech you? Ma∣rie this. A Reprobate if he could belieue, he should then without doubt bee saued: Ergo, God doth not command him to Belieue. A desperate Demonstration I promise you: for by the same reason you may conclude, that God commands him not to obey the Precepts of the Morall law neither, Because if hee could keepe them he should bee saued. What you conceiue may bee the knot and sowlder as it were of this Consequence I cannot well i∣magine, vnlesse it be one of two, either this, God pro∣miseth the Reprobate hee shall bee saued if hee Belieue,
Ergo, hee commandeth him not to Belieue: or this, The Reprobate cannot belieue, Ergo, God comman∣deth him not to Belieue, for your words seeme to bee indifferent either way. If you intend the former, first, you contradict your owne selfe, for in your answer to the former argument you deny Iustification and Salua∣tion  to bee promised vpon condition of Faith. Second∣ly, euery Catechumenus and Nouice in Diuinity knowes that God vnto Commandement vsually annexeth Pro∣mise to draw on Obedience: as in the Couenant of works, first hee Commandeth, Doe this and then Pro∣miseth, if thou doe it thou shalt liue; and in the Coue∣nant of Grace also, first hee Commandeth, Be∣lieue, and then addeth the Promise, if thou belieue thou shalt bee saued. So that Promise and Com∣mandement exclude not one the other, neither doth it follow, Faith is the condition of a Promise, Ergo, it is not commanded. If you vnderstand the latter, then know that as Augustin, and Barnard, and all Diuines not infected with Pelagianisme say, God commandeth some things which man cannot doe, to the end that knowing his owne insufficiency, hee may craue of him the helpe of grace that hee may doe them. And if God doe command any supernaturall action vnto the Repro∣bate as without doubt hee doth, then doth hee also com∣mand some thing aboue his power: for being meerely naturall he cannot produce any supernaturall operation. Whereupon it followeth euidently that although a Re∣probate cannot belieue, yet neuerthelesse hee may bee commanded to Belieue.
Well, yet you will proue that a Reprobate cannot Be∣lieue. To what end? for it is not denied, and you should rather strengthen your Consequence, and proue that therefore Faith is not commanded. Notwithstanding let vs heare your reason, for it seemeth to bee very re∣markable. That hee cannot Belieue, say you, the reason is, Christ hath not washed him. If you had said as followeth, Christ hath not opened his heart to Belieue, or, it is to  bee imputed to the hardnes of his owne heart, and had stopt there, I should easily haue yeelded vnto you: but now that you say the reason is because Christ hath not washed him, I must needs tell you it is vnreasonable rea∣son, for it implies that wee are first washed and then Be∣lieue, whereas both Scripture and the analogie of Faith teach vs that we first belieue and then afterward are wa∣shed. Search the booke of God,Rom. 3.28. Act. 15.9. Rom. 3.25. and there shall you read, that wee are iustified by Faith, that the heart is purified by Faith, that God hath set forth Iesus Christ to bee a reconciliation through Faith in his Blood. Which Blood although it haue in it sufficient vertue and force to cleanse vs from the leprosie of all our sinnes, yet doth it not actually wash or purge any vnlesse it bee par∣ticularly applied and accepted by Faith. Otherwise, as Ambrose excellently speaketh, if thou belieue not, Christ descended not for thee, Christ suffered not for thee.De fide ad Gratian. Wher∣by it manifestly appeareth that Remission of sinnes is an effect or consequence of Faith, and that therefore the reason of the Reprobates vnbeliefe, is not because Christ hath not washt him, but rather the reason why Christ hath not washed him is, because hee doth not belieue, nor hath by Faith applyed the blood of Christ to him∣selfe for the remission of his sinnes. Where you adde negatiuely, that the Reprobates vnbeliefe, is not to bee imputed to the falsity of the Doctrine, whether you meane thereby either this Doctrine that God commands him to belieue, or this that it is absurd hee should command him to bee assured, I confesse indeed, that neither is the cause why the Reprobate cannot belieue: but that either of them is false, you shall neuer bee able to shew, and I haue sufficiently proued the contrary.
N. B. Ex. 14.4. Rom. 9.If you aske, who hath hardned him? I answer, God; who hath power ouer the vessels of his owne making, to shew his Iustice or mercy vpon them as pleaseth his diuine Maiesty. If you will demand the cause, why God would not giue him a fleshly heart to belieue?Ioh. 12.39.40. I answer I know not: Est enim aliqua docta ignorantia, there is a certaine learned igno∣rance, as well teacheth Master Caluin; neither can our shal∣low wits search out the cause of his doings. But this I know that it is so, and the cause thereof principally to be his good pleasure. To conclude therefore this point, this Doctrine bringeth no blasphemous absurdity, as you impurely and impiously affirme, neither is the Doctrine false or implieth contradictories, though our blind natures cannot vnder∣stand the things that bee of God. Of this matter and argu∣ment, let these places bee well weighed, and by you either answered or reuerenced. Rom. 11.23. Gal. 3.22. Act. 13.48. 2 Thess. 3.2. Mat. 13.11. Prou. 16.4. Rom. 9.1, 19, 20. and from henceforth leaue off to greeue the Spirit of God, wherewith the elect are sealed vnto the day of Redemption. I. D. This is right that Sophysticall place which Aristotle in his Topicks calleth Apagogen,Lib. 2. c. 5. See Muret. var. lect, l. 7. c. 10. that is Abduction. For whereas I goe about to proue, that God commandeth not a Reprobate to bee assured, because so doing hee should command him to belieue a manifest falshood, which implieth contradiction, and affirmeth errour to bee truth: you not knowing what answer to make vnto
the argument, deriue the attention of the Reader ano∣ther way, and runne out into the common place of Gods secret counsels, and the cause of Induration, and the Reprobates inability to belieue, discoursing too and fro of these things at pleasure, hauing no other reason for so doing but onely, because in my argument you read the word Reprobate, and that I told you, in this point you had no iust cause to say vnto mee (as in our priuate con∣ference you did) who art thou that disputeth with God? And yet as if all the while you had been in the very bow∣els of the cause, and had not wandred so much as a haires breadth from it, you conclude very soberly and sadly, Therefore this Doctrine bringeth no absurdity, neither is false, nor implyeth contradiction. But faine would I know what the Premisses are whereupon you inferre this Therefore: or whether by the rules of your Logicke you may conclude without them: Vnlesse this bee the sequele I know not what to make of it, Our shallow wits cannot search out the cause of Gods works, Ergo, wee may not thinke it absurd that God shoul command a Reprobate to belieue and assure himselfe of that which neither is nor neuer shall be true. Vaine man, proue once that God com∣mandeth so, and I will presently grant, it is not absurd to thinke so. Why dispute you so earnestly of the  why it is, when I flatly deny the that it is? And why doe you thus alwayes grate vpon the Conclusions, and make so little reckoning to answer the proofes I bring for it?
Well, not to wrestle with words any longer, nor so fruitlesly to beate the aire, because you thinke like the Cuttle-Fish to escape the net, by casting about you a fil∣thy inke of foule speeches, telling me I speak impurely &  impiously, and charging me with Presumption and Cu∣riosity, for inquiring into the Counsels of God: giue mee leaue by distinguishing matters to cleare the water which you wittingly and purposely haue pudled, and withall to let the Reader see how basely and cowardly you seeke out starting holes to shift your selfe aside from my arguments, rather then Schollerly to answer them by some conuenient solutions. Consider therefore I pray you these few Positions. 1. The secret Counsels of God are those matters which hee hath treasured vp in the closet of his owne knowledge, and doth not disclose vnto mankind: but what truth soeuer it hath pleased him in wisdome to re∣ueale vnto vs, and hath registred in his Word, is not to bee esteemed nor taken for a secret. 2. As to search into the hidden and secret Counsels of God is damnable Presumption, so not to search and inquire into his reuealed will is damnable Negligence. For as Moyses saith, The secret things belong vnto the Lord our God,Deut. 29.29. but the things reuealed vnto vs and our chil∣dren for euer.De vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 7. Whereupon Prosper, The things which God would haue hidden must not be searched, and the things which hee hath made manifest must not bee neglected, lest in them we be found vnlawfully curious, and in these dam∣nably vngratefull.
3. They therefore that painfully and diligently tra∣uell to find out such truths as are either expressed or in∣folded in the written word, are not to bee tearmed Cu∣rious but Studious. So distinguisheth Saint Augustin, Although both,De vil. cre∣dendi ca. 9. saith hee, bee carried with a great desire of knowing, yet the curious man inquireth those things which nothing concerne him, and the Studious man contrarily  inquireth those things which doe pertaine vnto him. 4. This is a reuealed truth that, There is no contra∣diction in God, and that Hee cannot doe those things which imply contradiction,2 Cor. 1.17.18.19.20. Heb. 6.18. or are repugnant vnto the nature and definition of a thing. For in God, as saith S. Paul, there is not yea and nay, but yea and Amen; nei∣ther is it possible that hee should lie, or deny himselfe, and it is rather impotency then Power so to bee able to doe, whereas contrarily,De Trin. l. 15. c. 14. as elegantly Saint Augustin saith Powerfully hath hee not power to doe this, neither is it infirmity but firmity, because that truth cannot bee false. 5. These two Propositions are contradictory, The Reprobate is iustified, The Reprobate is not iustified: and, The Reprobate shall bee saued, The Reprobate shall not bee saued. God therefore cannot make that they should be true at once. For as Saint Augustin saith,Contrà Fau∣stum Man. l. 26. c. 5. Whosoeuer saith, if God bee omnipotent, let him make that those things which haue been haue not been, sees not that he faith, if God be omnipotent, let him make that those things which are true in that they are true be false. 6. One part of the Contradiction is necessarily false namely this, The Reprobate is iustified,Rom. 8.30. The Reprobate shall bee saued: for they onely who are Predestinated vnto life, are as Saint Paul saith, effectually called, and they onely who are effectually called are iustified and shall bee glorified. And if it were possible that they should bee saued, then were there change in the vnchan∣geable decree of God which hath finally reiected them, which is impossible.
7. Hee that commands a Reprobate that is not iusti∣fied and shall neuer bee saued, to belieue that hee is iusti∣fied and shall be saued, implieth a Contradiction there∣in,  and makes Falshood to bee Truth, and Faith errour. For according to that infallible maxime, Falshood is not vnder Faith: and therefore if the Obiect bee Falshood it is not Faith which apprehendeth it for true, if it bee Faith Falshood is not the Obiect thereof. So that hee which commands that false Proposition to bee belieued, makes that to bee Faith which cannot beare the definiti∣on of Faith, and that to bee the Obiect which is not the Obiect thereof, that is as I said makes Faith to bee error, and Falshood Truth, which are contradictories. 8. God therefore neither doth nor can so com∣mand: neither is it impure or impious to affirme so much, being in the Word of God so manifestly reuealed. Impi∣ous rather and blasphemous is it to say the contrary: for it imputes impotency and weaknes vnto God, making him to say, Yea and Nay, and to auouch that for truth which is euidently false. 9. But this opinion, that Faith is an Assurance, infers this blasphemous absurdity. For as I haue shewed, God cōmands all men, euen Reprobates to belieue now to be∣lieue as you say is to bee assured of iustification and Sal∣uation, Ergo, God commands the Reprobate to be assu∣red of his Iustification and Saluation, which is absurd. 10. Absurd therefore is that opinion that Faith is Assurance which infers it. For from truth no absurdity or blasphemie but onely truth can follow. These few Positions I pray thee, Gentle Reader, consider diligent∣ly, and compare Master Baxters reply with them, and then bee iudge whether hee paint not gourds as it is in the Prouerbe, and talke cleane beside the purpose.
Those places of Scripture which you desire may bee well waighed, and then by mee either answered or reue∣renced,  I haue according to your desire duly examined, and doe from my heart adore them as being the words of the Eternall Verity: and this answer doe I giue vnto them, that not one of them touches the question in de∣bate betwixt vs.Rom. 11.23 The first telleth vs that the Iewes if they persist not in infidelity, shall againe by the power of God bee ingrafted;Gal. 3.22. the second that the Scripture hath concluded all vnder sinne, that the promise by the Faith of Iesus Christ might bee giuen to them that Belieue; both which argue against your selfe that Faith is the condition of the Pro∣mise; the third saith that as many as were ordained vnto e∣ternall life belieued;Act. 13.48. 2. Thess. 3.2. Mat. 13.11. the fourth that euery man hath not Faith; the fift that to know the mysteries of the kingdome of Heauen is giuen to some and denied to other some, by which three it is cleere, that Reprobates doe not belieue,Prou. 16.4 Rom.
9.18.19.20. but the Elect onely: the sixt affirmeth that God made the wicked for the euill day; the last that God sheweth mercy vpon whome hee will, and hardneth also whome he will, and that in this point there is no disputing with God, inti∣mating therein that there is both an Election and Repro∣bation, and that both depend vpon the good pleasure of God. But not one of them proueth that God comman∣deth a Reprobate to assure himselfe of his present iustificati∣on and future Saluation which is the matter in question: and therefore I hope I may notwithstanding them all freely conclude that as God cannot command to doe that which is vniust, because hee is iustice it selfe, so he cannot command to belieue that which is vntrue because hee is truth it selfe. Neither doe I (I trust) so conclu∣ding, grieue the Spirit of God, although perhaps there∣in I greeue your stubborne spirit, which hath (I feare me) throughout this reply too much rebelled against the  light: and therefore take heed lest you your selfe greeue the Spirit of God,Eph. 4.30. wherewith the elect are sealed vnto the day of Redemption. Treatise. Arg. 6. That which the wicked may haue, can∣not bee iustifying Faith, for it is The Faith of the E∣lect: But the wicked may haue this Perswasion, yea and many haue beene most confidently perswaded that they are in the fauour of God. You will say it is true Perswa∣sion: But I say if forme make truth, they are as formal∣ly, and therefore as truly perswaded of it as the godly. If the Godly then are therefore and for this cause iusti∣fied, because they are strongly perswaded they are Iusti∣fied, then why should not the wicked likewise bee iusti∣fied by his strong Perswasion. But in truth these kind of speeches are vnreasonable, and senselesse, and so that opinion cannot be reasonable. N. B. Many die and are saued that haue not a full Perswasion and assurance of their Saluation, yet are saued by Faith. I will answer you when you shew mee the man that so did die and was saued, and How you know that hee had at his death no full Assurance of his Saluation in Christ Iesu, and yet had Faith, and when you proue that there is at the houre of death (when the elect are made without spot or wrinkle) in the Saints of God a doubtfull Faith. I. D. That many Reprobates and wicked men are strongly
perswaded they are in the grace and fauor of God, no∣thing is more cleere and manifest.Prou. 30.12. There is a generati∣on, saith Salomon, that are cleane in their owne eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthinesse.Reu. 3.17. And the Angell of the Church of Laodicea saith of himselfe that hee is rich, and growne to great wealth, and had need of nothing:Vers. 14. Vers. 17. and yet in the iudgement of him that is Amen, the faith∣full and true witnesse, was wretched, and miserable,Inst. l. 3. c. 2. §.
11. and poore, and blind, and naked. Yea, Experience it selfe, saith Caluin, sheweth, that Reprobates sometime are affe∣cted with the like feeling almost that the elect are, that in their owne iudgement they differ nothing at all from the Elect. Such is the deceitfulnesse of mans heart, and the blindnesse of his selfe-loue, that it makes him easily o∣uerweene himselfe, and to promise peace vnto his soule when hee is in the ready way vnto destruction. You will say that the Perswasion of the Reprobate and wic∣ked, is built vpon a false and erronious ground, and ther∣fore is Presumption rather then true Assurance. For answer hereunto consider, that the Elect of God before his Iustification is but a wicked man, whence Diuines vse to call it, The Iustification of the wicked, warrant∣ed therein by that of Saint Paul,Rom. 4.5. To him that worketh not, but belieueth in him that iustifieth the wicked, his faith is imputed vnto righteousnesse.Rom. 3.28. Consider moreouer that Faith as a cause goeth before Iustification, for wee are iustified by Faith: and therefore if the Elect bee wicked before his iustification, hee must needs much more bee wicked before the first act of his Belieuing. In regard whereof Saint Augustin saith,Enar. in Ps. 311 Know thou that Faith when it was giuen thee found thee a sinner. These things being so, as without controuersie they are, I then de∣mand  of you, if Faith bee Assurance, what ground hath the Elect for his Assurance in the first Act of his Faith, more then the Reprobates and wicked haue? Certainly vnlesse you will flye with the Anabaptists vnto I know not what Enthusiasms and sudden reuelations, grounded vpon no arguments, formerly by the Holy Ghost im∣printed in the soule, you cannot possibly shew any: see∣ing before Faith they lie together in the same masse of corruption, and are alike liable vnto eternall damnation. Now vnto this argument thus enlarged and explaned, let vs see what answer you returne. When I can shew the man that died without Assurance and was saued, and how I know at his death hee had no full Perswasion, and can proue that there is at the houre of death in the Saints a Doubtfull Faith, then (you say) you will answer mee. What M. Baxter, and not till then? Sup∣pose I cannot satisfy your demands (as indeed who knoweth what is in the heart of man at the houre of his death?) shall my argument therefore for euer stand vn∣answered?Declar. of Spir. Desert. And yet M. Perkins telleth you that, When a Professor of the Gospell shall despaire at his end, men are to leaue secret iudgements vnto God, and charitably iudge the best of him▪ and hee instanceth in one M. Chambers, who in his sicknesse grieuously despaired, and cried out that hee was damned, yet, saith hee, it is not for any to note him with the blacke marke of a Reprobate. The like censure elsewhere giueth he of
Francis Spiera: Yea fur∣ther, saith hee, When a Professor of the Gospell shall make away himselfe, though it bee a fearefull case, yet still the same opinion must bee carried. So that it seemes by this learned mans iudgement (who for ought I know is not singular herein but followeth the common opinion of  other Diuines) that it is possible for a man to die in Faith and so to bee saued, and yet to die in Despaire and so without Assurance: whence it followeth necessarily that Faith is not Assurance. But this answer of yours,Antholog. l. 2, . brings mee in minde of a pretie Epigram of Nicarchus, which you may read in the Greeke anthologie. A deafe man commences sute against another deafe man, before a deafe iudge: the plaintife pleads, that the defendant owes him fiue months rent for his house, the defendant answers for himselfe that hee had been grinding at mill all night, the Iudge looking vpon them, why contend yee thus good fellowes, quoth hee? is shee not mother to you both? then keepe her both hardly. Semblable hereunto is your answer, for as if you were as blind as they were deafe, and had not eyes in your head to read my wri∣ting, when I speake of onions, as it is in the Prouerbe, you answer of garlicke, and roue the whole heauen wide from the marke you should shoot at. I say that the wic∣ked may bee strongly perswaded, and therefore Faith is not a Perswasion, you like the deafe defendant reply that you haue beene grinding at mill all night, telling mee I shall then receiue answer when I shew the man that died without Perswasion and yet was saued by Faith, and o∣ther such stuffe of the same stampe. Verily, I am perswa∣ded if old Sibyl or
Oedipus or any other that hath anci∣ently been esteemed for reading riddles should reuiue a∣gaine, yet would they not bee able with all their cun∣ning, to deuise how to accommodate and fit this answer to any part of my argument. For mine owne part I can make of it, nor fish, nor flesh nor good red herring, and therefore not troubling my selfe with your follies here I  leaue it as I found it, vnkith vnkist as they say. N. B. And in the meane time I will hasten to your Definition of Faith, which you call the third kinde of Faith and onely Iustifying Faith. I. D.
Soft and faire, no hast but good: you post away so fast vnto the Definition, that you leaue something be∣hind you vnanswered which desires and deserues your further consideration. For first I proue vnto you that Faith cannot be a full Perswasion & certaine Assurance, partly because it is not so much as Assurance, partly be∣cause such Fulnes agrees not to little Faith, and so makes the definition narrower and of lesse latitude then the de∣finite, and partly because it is a most discomfortable do∣ctrine to weake Christians, who finding this strength of Assurance wanting in themselues, may doubt whether they haue any Faith at all, if Faith bee no other then a full Assurance and firme resolution. Againe, I answer certaine obiections the chiefest you can haue against mee, and that with such generall solutions as will cut off almost any reason you can oppose vnto mee. These things being of such importance and consequence should not thus haue beene balked and husht vp in silence: for while they stand vnstirred and vntoucht you cannot rea∣sonably bee thought either fully to haue satisfied my ar∣guments, or sufficiently to haue maintained your owne cause. Out of doubt therefore it would haue been much better for your credit to haue made lesse hast, and more  good speed: for tripping away so fast, and leauing mat∣ters of such weight vtterly vnanswered, all the Schol∣lers in our Countrey (to blow backe your owne scoffe into your owne face) will thinke the worse of your haste so long as they liue for this tricke. To conclude this point, whereas there are two many faults as Simplicius saith, too vsually committed in the disputation and determination of Questions▪ it appeareth by what I haue now said that you haue hitherto grossely faulted in the former. For you doe but reiect and deny my Conclusions, without refuting the confirmations I bring for them: and so if not altogether alienate from you, yet leaue in suspence and doubt the mind euen of those who otherwise might bee of the same opinion with you. Now if you offend likewise in the second, and doe not in the remainder of your Reply, vtterly raze and o∣uerthrow the foundations of my Doctrine, but suffer them to stand vnshaken and vnmoued: you shall both leaue the thirst of your readers expectation vnquenched and vnsatisfied, and proue your selfe but a bragging and boasting Pyrgopolinices, threatning much and perfor∣ming nothing. Let vs therefore take a view hereof, and see what you haue to say against the definition which I giue to Iustifying Faith. Treatise. The third Faith is Faith of Person or Personall Merit; and of this Faith, I make the Obiect to bee Christ the Mediator meriting, the Fiducia a Rest or Deuolution, the Subiect of it, the facultie of the Will not the Vn∣derstanding, the next end of it Iustification, the remore
end eternall saluation, and I thus define it, A rest of the will vpon Christ and his merits for iustification and consequently saluation. I. D. Because you complaine anon that the word Rest which I haue made to bee the iustifying act of Faith is ambiguous, and thereupon it pleaseth you in your Ans∣wers following to take aduantage and make you mery with the Equiuocation thereof: you shall giue me leaue before I step a foot further in a few words, and a little more plainely to open my meaning touching that Act. And to this end, seeing to proue that Faith is an Affiance or Rest, I reported mee▪ in my Treatise vnto the words vsed in the originall of the old Testament, as , and the forme of words vsed in the new, as to be∣lieue in, to hope in, or as in some translations it is read to belieue on, to hope on: I will first shew that these tearmes applied vnto Christ the right Obiect of Faith, import that very Act whereby wee stand iustified before God, and secondly I will diligently inquire and search out what may bee the true, proper, and naturall meaning of these tearmes, both which being cleerely demonstra∣ted, it will manifestly appeare both what that Rest is which I make to be the iustifying Act of Faith, and how fondly and vainely you cauill and dally with the ambi∣guity thereof.
That Belieuing in or vpon importeth that Act is in it selfe so apparant, that I thinke no sober man will deny it: but because to you a man must proue that the Sunne shines thus I demonstrate it. That which is imputed for  righteousnesse, and by which wee are iustified, is the true Act of Iustifying Faith. This you cannot deny, vnlesse you will turne Papist: for our Religion will not permit you to ioyne any other companion with Faith in the matter of Iustification. But such belieuing is imputed for righteousnesse, and is that by which we are iustified: so saith the Apostle,Rom. 4.5. To him that belieueth in him that iustifieth the wicked his Faith is counted for righteous∣nesse, and againe, Wee haue belieued in Iesus Christ, that wee might bee iustified by the Faith of Christ. Adde here∣unto that whereas the same Apostle saith With the heart man belieueth vnto righteousnesse,Rom. 10.10. forthwith in the next verse hee interpreteth that Belieuing by Belieuing in, For, saith hee, the Scripture saith,V.
11. whosoeuer belie∣ueth in him shall not bee ashamed. Wherefore I conclude that so to Belieue is the Iustifying Act of Faith. So also is Hoping in or vpon, being in effect the same with Be∣lieuing in. For although Hope and Faith bee in nature two distinct Graes, and so reckoned by Saint Paul: yet seeing by reason of the neere affinity betweene them, Hope is sometime put for Faith, it may not seeme strange that to hope in, is also vsed for to belieue in. Now that Hope is sometime put for Faith appeareth by that of Saint Peter,1 Pet. 3.15. Bee ready alwayes to giue an answer to euery man that asketh you a reason of the Hope that is in you; where Hope, as Caluin saith,In eum. loc. is by a Synechdoche taken for Faith. And as manifest is it by Saint Paul that to Hope in, is no other then to Belieue in: for hauing said, That wee should bee vnto the praise of his glory who first hoped in Christ,Eph. 1.12.13. In whom also yee hoped hauing heard the Word of Truth, the Gospell of your Saluation, by and by hee ads by way of interpretation, In whom also Belie∣uing  yeee were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise. In a word, the Act of Hope properly taken is expectation or looking out for the performance or comming of a thing: but Hoping in imports Affiance or trusting on something for the performance thereof. As touching the words of the old Testament , first I find confounded with  as words of the same signification, they being after the manner of Scripture ioyned together in the same verse as equipol∣lent the one to explane and expound the other: for ex∣ample,Psal. 118.8. Psal. 37.5. It is better, saith Dauid,  to trust in the Lord  then to put confidence in man, and  Roll thy way vpon the Lord, and trust vpon him. But  it selfe is in the same manner confounded with  which construed with the Proposition  signifi∣eth to Belieue in, and is by your owne confession the very Act of iustifying Faith: for example,  they belieued not in God,Psal. 78.22. Mic. 7.5.  and trusted not in his saluation, and Be∣lieue not in a friend, trust not in a Prince. Againe that which in the old Testament is vt∣tered by one of these words, the same in the new is ex∣pressed by Belieuing in: for example,  We trust in the Name of his Holinesse saith the old Testament,Psal. 33.21. Ioh. 1.12. 1 Ioh. 3.23.5.13. Prou. 3.5. Act. 8.37. Psal. 25.2. Psal. 31.1. Rom. 10.11. Hee that belieueth in his Name saith the new; trust in the Lord with thy whole heart saith the old, If thou Be∣lieue with thy whole heart saith the new: finally, In thee O Lord  haue I trusted let mee not be con∣founded saith the old, Hee that Belieueth in him shall not bee ashamed saith the new. If you except against this last parallell, that the Apostle hath reference vnto that of Esay . Hee that Belieueth maketh not
haste, rather vnto those passages of the Psalmes aboue quoted: I answer with Beza that it is not likely,In ad Ro. 10.11. partly because the vniuersall particle, and the word in him is not to bee found in the Prophet, partly because the A∣postle saith not as the Phophet Esay doth, maketh not haste, but precisely accordeth with the words of the Pro∣phet Dauid, saying, shall not bee confounded nor ashamed. Howsoeuer, seeing in all these places the same thing is intended and meant, it is cleere that , and Belieuing in, are Synonyma, differing in name, but not in definition: and so I conclude what aboue I vn∣dertooke to demonstrate, that all these tearmes proper∣ly import the Iustifying act of Faith. In the next place are wee to inquire the right accepti∣on and signification of these words, that wee may more perfectly conceiue, what that Fiducia or Rest is, which wee haue made to bee that Act. And first  as R. Kimchi obserueth, properly and primitiuely signifieth to retire into some safe place for shelter or harbor:Iudg. 9.15. so is it vsed in sundry places,  Come, saith the bramble in the booke of Iudges, shelter or couer you vn∣der my shadow; and the Prophet Dauid in the Psalmes  I will retire mee vnder the shadow of thy wings. And hence is it, that  a Noune,Psal. 57.1. deriued from this root, signifieth a place of refuge or protection, as where Dauid saith the rocks are refuge for the conies, and Esay,Psal. 104.18. Thou hast been a for∣tresse to the poore, a fortresse to the needy in his trouble,
a refuge from the storme or inundation.Esa. 4.6. So that this word referred vnto Christ betokeneth that Act whereby wee betake our selues vnto him as vnto the on∣ly Sanctuary, where wee may bee preserued safe from  the tempest of Gods displeasure, which cannot be but by iustification from our sinnes, according to that of the Psalmist,Psal. 2.12. If his wrath burne yea but a little, blessed are all they that retire themselues to him. Vpon which place learned Iunius notes, that that retiring vnto God (which is there affirmed to be the cause of our blessednes) is no other then sincere Faith. The next word is  which signifieth to Roll: whence commeth  a Circle or Ring, and a Spheare or Wheele; because as the cube easily setleth and stayeth vpon one side, so the Sphericall and round figure is euer subiect to rolling & turning. Being ioined with the Preposition,  it signifies to Deuolue or Roll vpon a thing, either to oppresse i and beare it downe, as where Iosephs bre∣thren say, We are brought hither  to roll and cast himselfe vpon vs,Gen. 43.18. Iob. 30.14. and Iob  they roll themselues vpon mee: or to bee supported and borne vp by it, as in the place of Psalmes aboue ci∣ted,Prou. 16.3. and that of the Prouerbs, Roll thy works vpon the Lord and thy thoughts shall bee esta∣blished. Agreeable whereunto is that of the Psalmist though vsing another word  Cast thy bur∣den vpon the Lord and hee shall sustaine thee,Psal. 55.23.
hee will not suffer the righteous to bee moued for euer. This then ap∣plied vnto Christ intimates vnto vs our fleeting & vnset∣led estate, and the restlesnesse of our soules vntill wee come vnto him, according to that of Saint Augustin, Thou hast made vs for thy selfe, and our hearts are vnquiet till they rest in thee: and so imports that Act whereby being heauy loden with our sinnes, and seeking to bee eased of them, at length wee discharge our lode and rest our selues vpon him. The third word is , which  signifieth to put confidence, trust, Affiance in or vpon a thing, and as Mercer saith firmiter inniti,In the sao Pagn. firmely to leane or rest vpon a thing. Hereupon you shall often∣times find it ioyned with  properly signifying to leane on, whence also commeth  a staffe because men vse to leane on it and to support themselues by it: as for example, yee trust in fraud and stub∣bornesse, saith Esay, and leane vpon it, and againe,Esa. 30.12. Esa. 50.10. , Let him trust on the Name of the Lord, and leane vpon his God. And to this word had I speciall regard, when I defined Faith by Fiducia or Rest, as appeareth by that in my Treatise I make the Act of Fiducia, to be Inniti, to leane vpon, which yet I therefore rendred rest, because in our English translations it is vsually so turned; as for example, that of the Prophet Hanani vnto King Asa, ,2 Chron. 16.7. Vers. 8. is thus englished, Because thou hast rested vpon the King of Aram, and not rested in the Lord thy God, and againe in the next verse , Because thou didst rest vpon the Lord. So then this word in the matter of Iustificati∣on designeth that Act whereby finding that wee are weake and feeble, vnable to support our selues, we make Iesus Christ our staffe, staying and resting our selues vpon him,Psal. 18.19. according to that of Dauid  the Lord was as a staffe vnto mee. The last word is  to Belieue in, or vpon: for as for that other of Hoping in, because it may seeme to bee rather the Act of Hope then of Faith, or but Catachrestically vsed when it is put for Belieuing in, I vtterly omit it. What is it then to belieue in, or on? Let the Holy Ghost (whose phrase it is) declare his owne meaning.
Behold,  saith the Apostle Peter out of the Prophet Esay, I lay in Sion a cheefe corner-stone,1 Pet. 2.6. Esa. 28.16. chosen, and precious; and he that belieueth thereon, shall not bee ashamed. To Belieue on a stone seemeth an insolent and vnusuall speech: but it is no other then (as the Apostle expresseth himselfe) to come as liuing stones vnto the corner-stone,1 Pet. 2.4.5. and to lay and build our selues vpon it, that wee may bee made a spirituall house, which in effect is the same with that Re∣tiring and Resting wee haue aboue spoken of; as will yet farther appeare if wee compare this place with the like of the Prophet Dauid; for whereas here it is said, He that belieueth thereon shall not bee ashamed, there the Psalmist deliuereth it thus,Psal. 33.5. They that looke vnto him, and run vnto him their faces shall not bee ashamed. But if you would yet more fully and plainely vnderstand what it is to Be∣lieue in, or vpon a thing, then read and consider that most sweet and comfortable speech of Saint
Iohn in his Gospell; As many, saith hee, as receiued him, to them hee gaue power to be the Sonnes of God,Ioh. 1.12. that is to them that Belieue in his Name. Lo, to Belieue in Christ, saith the holy Apostle, is to receiue Christ: and therefore if wee may know what it is to receiue Christ, wee shall also know what it is to belieue in him. Receiuing is a word of Relation and answereth vnto Offering: for what is not offered is rather taken then receiued. To offer Christ vnto any is the Act of God onely: to receiue Christ, is the Act onely of the Elect of God. God offereth Christ vnto vs, when either outwardly by the publike preach∣ing of the Word, or inwardly by the secret knocking of his spirit, he counselleth and aduiseth vs to acknowledge that Iesus is the Mediator, and to admit of him for our Mediator. And wee againe receiue Christ so offered  vnto vs when as being conuinced and perswaded by the Word and Spirit, wee acknowledge him in generall to bee the Mediator, and admit him in particular to bee our Mediator: So that there is a double Receiuing of Christ, the one is by the Vnderstanding, the other is by the Will: Christ is receiued by the Vnderstanding when wee Belieue historically, yeelding and assenting vnto the truth of the Gospell, the summe wherof is that Iesus is the Christ; For when the Apostle saith,1 Tim. 1.15. This is a true saying and by all meanes worthy to bee receiued, that Christ Iesus came into the world to saue sinners, what can hee meane by receiuing other then assenting that it is true? and when our Sauiour saith vnto the Apostle,Act. 22.18. They will not receiue thy witnesse concerning me, what else can he vnderstand then this, that they would not giue credit vnto his testimony, concerning Redemption and Salua∣tion by Christ? This Receiuing though it bee of such absolute necessity vnto life, that no man can possibly be saued without it: yet is it not of such power and efficacy, that whosoeuer so receiueth shall infallibly bee saued. For as we haue shewed, The Diuels so belieue and trem∣ble: and many who are inlightned,Iam. 2.19. Heb. 6.4. & 10.26.
and haue receiued the knowledge of the truth, perish, notwithstanding eternal∣ly in their sinnes. Besides therefore this Receiuing of Christ by the Vnderstanding, there is a Receiuing of him also by the Will, which is done by particular appli∣cation, when in the sincerity of our hearts we accept and make choice of him alone to bee our Mediator, that is to say, to bee vnto vs a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. Wee accept him to bee our Prophet, when wee admit him to be our teacher, and absolutely submit our selues vnto his teaching. Wee accept him to bee our Priest,  when wee rest and repose our selues vpon his Sacrifice and intercession for the washing away of our sinnes. Fi∣nally, wee accept him to bee our King, when wee put our selues wholly and onely vnder his gouernment, and subiect our wils vnto his will, desiring that in all things it alone may bee done by vs. And this accepting of Christ by the Will, is that very Receiuing of him which Saint Iohn here meaneth.Ioh. 1.12. For first, whosoeuer thus accepteth of him hath without question withall be∣stowed on him the same power and prerogatiue, which hee affirmeth to bee giuen to as many as receiue him, namely to bee made the Sonnes of God. Againe, that Receiuing is vnderstood which is opposed vnto the Iewes nor Receiuing:Ioh. 1.11. for hauing said, He came vnto his owne, that is vnto the Iewes, and his owne receiued him not, immediatly it is added, But as many as receiued him, &c. How then did the Iewes not receiue him? onely in not assenting vnto this that hee was the Messias? Indeed this was the ground why sundry of them receiued him not: but their not-receiuing of him was no other then that Act of their Will, whereby they refused to submit themselues vnto him as vnto the Messias. This doth our Sauiour intimate,Ioh. 5.43. when hee saith vnto them, I am come in my Fathers Name and you receiue mee not: if another come in his owne Name, him Will you receiue, that is, him will you admit and accept for your Messias. But plainly doth hee expresse it when in the Parable hee bringeth them in, resolutely and directly saying, Wee will not haue this man raigne ouer vs: as also when hee saith vn∣to them,Luc. 19.14. Mat.
23.37. How often would I haue gathered thy children to∣gether as the hen gathereth her chickens vnder her wings, and yee would not. Besides, diuerse there were of them,  euen of the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Priests who knew right well, that hee was the Christ;Mat. 21.38. Mat. 22.30.31. for so much doe the Husbandmen themselues cōfesse in the Parable, when they say, This is the Heire: and how could our Sauiour iustly charge them with that irremissible sinne against the Holy Ghost, vnlesse they had knowne him to bee so? These then knowing him to bee the Messias, and yet not receiuing him, what can this not-receiuing be other then their will full reiecting and refusing of him a∣gainst their knowledge and against their conscience. Vp∣on all which it followeth that this being not-receiuing, receiuing opposed thereunto must needs bee that Act of the Will whereby wee accept of Christ to bee our Me∣diator, that is to say, our Prophet to instruct vs, our Priest to make atonement for vs, our King to rule and gouerne vs. And because Belieuing and Receiuing are (as we haue shewed) all one, it followeth also necessari∣ly that to Belieue in Christ is nothing else then so to ac∣cept him.
To grow therefore at length vnto an issue, you see that according to promise I haue demonstrated vnto you, first, that those tearmes both of the old and new Testament mentioned in my Treatise import that Act of Faith whereby wee stand iustified before God: second∣ly, what is the true, proper, and naturall meaning and signification of these tearmes: and that therefore thirdly by the word Rest, in my Definition I vnderstand no o∣ther thing then that which these words import and sig∣nify. Wherefore I must intreate you in the residue of your Reply to speake vnto this meaning: otherwise you shall but spend your breath in vaine, and wrestle not with mee, but with your owne shadow. Neuerthelesse if  any shall thinke it fitter insteed of the word Rest, to sub∣stitute any other of these tearmes, I forbid him not: for so doing he shall differ from mee in word onely, and not in sense. And to speake ingenuously and freely, seeing to expresse the Act of Faith speciall choice is made in the New Testament of Belieuing in, or vpon, and this a∣gaine is expounded by such Receiujng as is before des∣cribed: happily it were not amisse aboue all the rest to preferre this, and to define Faith by that Act of the Will whereby wee accept Christ to bee our Mediator for iustifi∣cation and consequently Saluation. The rather because it seemes more fully and plainely to set forth the nature of that Act by which wee are iustified, and more apt and fit to resolue many doubts which may be moued touching iustification. For as Vrsinus, a right worthy Diuine, ob∣serueth,Admonit. de lib. Concord. Faith iustifieth no otherwise then as it is an accep∣tation and application of the merit of Christ, which is the proper Act of Faith alone, and so very Faith itselfe. These things thus premised: let vs now in the Name of God proceed to the examination of what you haue replied and opposed against my definition. N. B. I answer, a man may rest his will vpon Christ and his merits, and yet bee damned for want of Sanctification, and so consequently may bee damned hauing Iustifying Faith, which is absurd, therefore is your Definition absurd. I. D.
Here, Master Baxter, and in the rest of your ans∣wers  insuing, you waue & flote vp and downe like a boat in a storme without a Pilote, answering tumultuarily what euer comes next to head, and scorning like another Cassius Seuerus to keep either in method your matter,Tacit. vel po∣tiùs Quintil. de causs. cor∣rupt. eloq. or modestie in your words. But as you lead the dance, so must I needs follow. Thus therefore you argue. No man can be damned hauing iustifying Faith, A man may be dam∣ned resting his will vpon Christ & his merits, Ergo, Resting of the will vpon Christ and his merits is not iustifying Faith: The Maior I grant, the Minor thus you con∣firme, Hee that wanteth sanctification may bee damned, A man resting his will vpon Christ and his merits may want sanctification, Ergo, a man resting his will vpon Christ and his merits may be damned. The Maior againe I grant, if you vnderstand it either thus, Hee that finally wanteth sanctification shall bee damned, or thus, Hee that wanteth present sanctification is for the present in the state of dam∣nation: for otherwise the Elect vntill their effectuall vo∣cation want sanctification, and yet shall neuer actually be damned. The Minor you barely affirme but confirme not: thinking it as it seemes proofe inough if you say it and subscribe thereunto Witnesse our selfe: vnto this ar∣gument therefore I answer two things.
First, that you are a very vnkind and vngratefull man that hauing now the third or fourth time borowed argu∣ments of me to serue your need, haue not the good man∣ners to say mee God a mercy for it, or to acknowledge to whom you haue beene beholding. For in my Trea∣tise thus I obiected against my selfe, If Faith be Affiance then the wicked may haue it: for Balaam desired to die the death of the Righteous, and some receiue the Word with ioy belieuing for a time. And vnto this obiection in the same  Treatise I gaue a sufficient and full solution, distinguish∣ing betweene that Affiance which is sleight and superfi∣ciall, and that which is setled and grounded, as there you may read more at large, for thither I referre you. But because,Hecub. act. 2. as Euripides saith, the same speech spoken by diuerse persons is not alike entertained: peraduenture this answer would be better accepted if you might haue it from the mouth of greater authority. Read then M. Perkins exposition of the Creed, whereupon the first word I Belieue hee intreats of the nature of Faith, and you shall find in effect the same obiection in like manner answered, and distinction made betweene the fleeting mo∣tions & desires of them who liue still in their sins & after the course of the world & the Desire of reconciliation that comes from a bruzed heart, & brings with it alwayes re∣formation & amendment of life. This solution howsoe∣uer now you haue cunningly dissembled, yet I must pray you the next time not to ouerslip it: for otherwise you shall bee counted but a miching disputer, and no whit at all disaduantage your aduersary, fighting against him with no better weapon then a rusty sword both edge and point rebated. Secondly, I answer vnto your Minor negatiuely, de∣nying that such Resting of the will vpon Christ and his merits, as wee haue described, and in the definition vn∣derstand, can at any time bee separated from Sanctifica∣tion. For besides that it is contrary vnto your owne Po∣sitions, as anon in the due place shall bee obserued: it is also flatly repugnant vnto the rules of holy Scripture. For doth not the Scripture pronounce them all, Blessed, that retire themselues vnto the Lord?Psal. 2.12. Psal. 25.2. Psal.
125.1. that they shall not bee ashamed that put their trust in him? that they shall be  like vnto mount Sion which can neuer bee remoued, but standeth fast for euermore?2 Chron. 16▪ 8.9. that to rest vpon the Lord is to bee of a perfect heart? Finally, doth it not affirme that whosoeuer receiueth Christ and belieueth in him,Ioh. 1.12. Rom. 4.5. Ioh. 3.36. 1 Ioh. 5.1. Rom. 8.1.14. is the Son of God, is iustified before God, hath euerlasting life, is borne of God, is led by the Spirit of God, and walketh not after the flesh, but after the Spirit? vnlesse therefore vt∣terly stripping your selfe of all modesty you will put on the forehead of an harlot, and say that all these things may bee affirmed of the Vnsanctified man: how can you possibly auouch that a man resting his will vpon Christ, retiring vnto him, trusting on him, belieuing in him, and accepting of him to bee his Mediator, can be without san∣ctification, and for want thereof bee damned eternally? Nay, whosoeuer accepteth Iesus Christ for his Mediator, submitteth himselfe as wee haue shewed not onely vnto his Prophecy and Priesthood, but also vnto his King∣dome: and if hee submit himselfe vnto his Kingdome, that is vnto his rule and gouernment, how can hee bee Vnsanctified? for the Vnsanctified man subiecteth him∣selfe vnto the Flesh, and not vnto the Spirit of Christ:Act.
15.9. where by the way you may obserue, defining Faith in this sort, how and after what manner it purifieth the heart, and begetteth in vs sanctity and newnesse of life: whereas defining it by Assurance as you doe, it doth not readily appeare how such Assurance can bee the princi∣ple and reason of our Sanctification. True it is that As∣surance may bee vnto vs a strong motiue to proceed on in Sanctification and holynesse of life: but it is so farre from causing it, that it is rather caused by it. For by our holy life and conuersation as by the fruites, doe wee ne∣cessarily gather that Faith which is the cause thereof is  in vs, and so grow to an Assurance of our Iustification and present state in grace. In regard whereof Saint Peter, as it is in the vulgar translation and some Greeke copies, commandeth by good works to make our calling and electi∣on sure.2 Pet. 1.10. And although in sundry copies and translations By good works is omitted: yet the addition thereof misliketh not Beza,In loc. praed. Ibid. and Fulke confesseth that the circum∣stance of the place doth of necessity require, that good works bee vnderstood though they bee not expressed in the text. On the other side if you define Faith with mee to bee that Act whereby wee accept and make choice of Christ to bee our Mediator, that is to say, our Prophet, Priest, and King: who seeth not that this Faith working in vs a free and voluntary subiection vnto the Kingdom of Christ, is the very purifier of our hearts, and the cause of all our holy studies and indeuours? whence al∣so it appeareth what the reason is why our Sauiour vnto belieuing in the Sonne opposeth Disobedience vnto him when hee saith,Ioh. 3.36. Hee that belieueth in the Sonne hath euer∣lasting life: and hee that obeyeth not the Sonne shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him: namely be∣cause as Acceptation of him to bee our King is the root of all Obedience, so the reiection and refusall of him to bee our King is the very source of all Rebellion and Dis∣obedience. N. B. Your Genus is, that Faith iustifying is a Rest, which is false; when you speake more learnedly I will deigne you far∣ther answer.
I. D. That Rest is not the Genus of Iustifying Faith I easi∣ly grant you: for as appeares manifestly in my Treatise, I make Affiance, or which is all one Rest, to bee the Act or Forme of Faith, and not the Genus thereof. If I had thought it fitting to haue troubled the Definition there∣with, I was not so ignorant but I could haue called it either an infused grace, or a gratious habit, or a Theo∣logicall vertue: but because the Philosopher taught me that Habits are sufficiently defined by their Acts in refe∣rence vnto their proper Obiects, I held it needlesse to ex∣presse it. But suppose I had made it to be the right Genus, how doe you disproue it? Forsooth it is sufficient for such a Pythagoras as you are to say it is false: & an inexpiable wrong would it be to demand a reason of your sayings. Onely you adde,Plut. in vitâ Alex. that when I shall speake more learnedly you will deigne me farther answer. Brauely againe spo∣ken, and Alexander-like: for neither would hee being a King contend with any but Kings, neither may you be∣ing so transcendent for your learning, and surmounting the most of men as farre as the Sun doth the lesser lights, without impeachment of honour vouchsafe disputati∣on with any but your Peers, much lesse with such a one as is scarce to bee found in any Predicament. Yet seeing the Sunne so surpassing in glory is no way enuious of his light, but imparteth bountifully of his beames to the en∣lightning of the rest of the starres: it may please you al∣so (with whom wisdome must liue and dye)Ioh. 12.2. out of your benignity to send forth some influence of your learning
vpon mee, that I may more cleerely discerne at least in this question betweene truth and that which is onely seeming so. N. B. Shew mee for your warrant one place of Scripture that so tearmeth it, any one Father of the Church, old or new, for these 1600. yeeres, Greeks or Latins, that will auouch it, and I will yeeld to your Genus. The Hebrew word for Faith, and the Greek word (whereof you haue heard before) doe vtterly condemne you, they both signifying a perswasion and an Assurance, and neuer a Rest. I maruell you will teach the Holy Ghost to speake, and the Church now to vnderstand what Faith is, and that by such a woodden Definition which may rather moue to choller then consent. I. D.
If by denying vnto mee the warrant of Scriptures, of Fathers old and new, Greeke and Latin, for 1600. yeeres and of the Greeke and Hebrew words for Faith, you intend to proue that Affiance or Rest is not the Genus of Faith, it shall without more a-doo bee yeelded vnto you: for as appeares in the former section I make it to bee not the Genus but the Act or Forme thereof. But if you would thereby perswade that Rest or Affiance is not the Act of Faith, I must tell you that these reasons are cleane out of date, and that you doe too much abuse your Readers patience setting againe before him these Coleworts now more then twice sodden. For both in the beginning of this disputation, and in the last section saue two before this I haue throughly scanned & cleered  this businesse; shewing that I am so farre from teaching the Holy Ghost to speake, and the Church to vnderstand what Faith is, as you vnchristianly lay vnto my charge, that I vse no other tearme, but that which the Spirit of God hath in Scripture sanctified to this purpose, and the Holy Church hath euer spoken and vsed. But because I am loth to pester my paper with so many Tautologies and needles repetitions as you vse to doe, thither must I entreate the courteous Reader to repaire for satisfa∣ction. In the meane season, seeing both by expresse testi∣mony of Scripture, and cleere euidence of reason I haue warranted euery part of my definition, and yet you without disprouing the weakest of my proofes taunting∣ly call it a woodden Definition: you must pardon mee if I tell you plainely that this wood-kinde of answering deserues to bee reformed with a little woodden corre∣ction. But where you say my Definition may rather moue to choler then consent, a man would thinke reading this your answer, that either your principles were so in∣curably hurt, or your braine dam'd and ram'd vp with such a deale of dull and tough flegme, that it were as ea∣sy almost to remoue a mountaine as to moue you either to the one or the other. And yet indeed I find you of a cleene contrary complexion, euen the most pettish and waspish gentleman that euer I met withall, euery small & petty occasion stirs your choler, and works you pre∣sently out of temper. But because I see it is your impo∣tency & disease I beare with you the more, praying you notwithstanding to haue as much patience as you may, if at times for the purging of this humor I play the Phy∣sician and minister some small quantity of rheubarb vn∣to you.
N. B. For alas, Master Downe, what Rest can a man haue vpon Christ without Assurance to bee saued by his death and Passion and knowledge of his Lord and Sauiour. A full assurance therefore as a cause, worketh Rest vpon Christ as an effect, and is therefore the Generall word in the Defini∣tion of Iustifying Faith. I. D. Your argument if I mistake not standeth thus, That which is an Effect of Assurance cannot be the Act of Faith, But Resting vpon Christ is an Effect of Assurance, Ergo, it cannot bee the Act of Faith. I distinguish of Assurance, for it is either of the generall proposition, or of the Spe∣ciall and indiuiduall; of the Generall when wee are as∣sured that, Whosoeuer Belieueth on Christ shall bee iusti∣fied and saued, of the Speciall when wee are certainly perswaded that We are iustified and shall bee saued. If you meane the former, then I deny the Maior: for such Hi∣storicall Assurance is a necessary pre-requisite vnto Iusti∣fying Faith, and is the cause without which wee cannot belieue on Christ, and therefore that which is such an ef∣fect of Assurance may bee the Act of Faith. If you vnder∣stand the latter, then doe I grant the Maior: for if such Assurance be (as I haue demonstratiuely proued) it selfe the Effect of Faith, it is more then manifest that, That which is an effect of such Assurance cannot bee the Act of Faith. But then I deny the Minor, that
Resting vpon Christ, is an effect of such assurance: affirming that con∣trarily  Resting vpon Christ is the cause of such Assu∣rance, and Assurance is the Effect of that Resting.
But, what rest, say you, can a man haue vpon Christ, without Assurance to be saued by his Death & Passion? Surely vnlesse wee know his Death and Passion to bee the onely meanes of saluation, wee cannot rest vpon him for it: but to say, that a man cannot rest vpon him for saluation, vnlesse hee know that hee is already transla∣ted from death to life, is a most vnreasonable and sense∣lesse speech, as if a man might not trust vnto his friend to doe something for him, vntill he were sure, it is alrea∣dy done. If you be so sandblind in this present case that you cannot see how Rest may goe before Assurance, yet I hope your sight is not so much decayed but you may perceiue it through a paire of spectacles. Put case then that a skilfull and welknowne Physician should of∣fer freely to cure the diseases of such as are sicke vpon condition they receiue Physicke of no other, but put themselues wholly & absolutely into his hands: doe you thinke it absurd to become his patient, or that you can∣not repose your selfe vpon his skill to bee cured by him, vnlesse you be first assured that the cure is already done? Nay rather if you know well, that your health is perfe∣ctly recouered, you cannot rely vpon him, for that whereof you are fully possessed. Iesus Christ the Arch-physician of our soules, as hee is knowne to bee all-suffi∣cient, and euery way able to heale our maladies, so doth hee louingly inuite all those that are heauy loden to come vnto him, promising to refresh them all vpon con∣dition, that renouncing themselues and all others they set their whole Affiance on him for the remission of their sinnes. And dare you now make question how a man  may betake himselfe into the hands of Christ, vntill he know that his sinnes bee already pardoned? Nay rather when wee know the debt is paid, and that according to the old rule sinnes once remitted neuer returne againe, we remaine thankefull for that which is past, and continue our Affiance on him for discharge of that which is to come. For (to obserue this by the way) wee may not thinke that in the first act of our conuersion and iustifica∣tion we receiue actuall pardon of all our sinnes past, pre∣sent, and to come, as some, and those of no meane marke haue rashly and vnaduisedly taught: for sinnes past on∣ly are then actually forgiuen, and sinnes to come onely in the destination and purpose of God. But neither doth God actually pardon the iustified man, nor the iusti∣fied man actually receiue pardon for his sinnes, vn∣till hee haue actually committed them, and renewed his Faith and Repentance for them. Neither let any man thinke that I speake this out of mine owne head, and without ground: for I am strongly backed herein by the warrant of Scripture, the euidence of reason, and the testimony of worthy men. By the warrant of Scripture: for that teacheth onely remission of sinnes past; so saith Saint Paul in expresse tearmes,Rom. 3.25.
God hath set forth Iesus Christ to bee a reconciliation through faith in his bloud, to declare his righteousnesse by the forgiuenesse of the sinnes that are passed: By the euidence of reason, for if future sinnes as well as sinnes past bee actually remitted in our conuersion and first acceptation into grace, what need of Repentance, what need of Prayer that God would for∣giue vs our trespasses? To repent and craue pon of that whereof wee are not guilty, and which wee neuer committed, is palpable folly: and as great folly is it by  Repentance and prayer to demand that of God which wee say wee are sure hee hath long agoe bestowed vpon vs: Finally, by the testimony of worthy men; for Par∣don, saith Origen, is of sinnes past not future: Repentance,In ad Rom. 3. De acerbè Iudicantib. Miscell. lib. 3. pa. 97. saith Gregory Nyssen, is the dissolution and destruction of sinnes past. It is confessed by all truly godly and learned, saith Hierome, Zanchie, that the Saints to obtaine new re∣mission for a new sinne haue need of a new act of Faith and Repentance, according to that saying so rise in Scripture, that by Faith men are iustified and haue their sinnes remit∣ted: which when it is spoken of them that are come to yeeres of discretion, is alwayes to be vnderstood of A∣ctuall Faith, that is of the Act of Faith.De praedest. & grat. Lastly Master Perkins, when a Faithfull man grieuously sinneth, the sinne is indeed remitted in the destination of God: yet no remission is actually either giuen by God, or recei∣ued by man vntill hee repent. Nay if hee should neuer repent (which yet is impossible) hee should (as guilty of eternall death euen for this one sin) be damned: for there is no new remission of any new sinne without a new act of Faith and Repentance. But inough of this point in this place though it bee of great importance, because it is but by the way: only hence I gather that seeing Faith goeth before and Assurance necessarily commeth after remission, that Faith is not Assurance. N. B. I had rather say Faith were a labour then a Rest: for it seeketh continually by sanctification and holy loue to bring both body and soule vnto eternall rest, and then Faith cea∣seth when eternall pacification and rest is wrought in man.
I. D. Thus you reason, Faith is a labour, Rest is not a la∣bour,
Ergo, Faith is not a Rest. The Maior you proue thus, That which worketh rest is a labour, But Faith worketh rest and ceaseth when rest is wrought, Ergo, Faith is a labour. The Minor you leaue naked and with∣out proofe, supposing I thinke that no man vnlesse bereft of his fiue wits would deny it, and hold that Rest is a la∣bour. Let vs therefore briefly examine them both. The Maior of your second Syllogisme precisely and literal∣ly vnderstood is not true: for that which worketh is the Agent or Labourer, and the Labourer cannot bee the Action or Labour. Whereupon it followeth, If that which worketh bee not a labour, And Faith as you as∣sume worke, that therefore Faith is not a labor which is contradictory vnto the Maior of your first Syllogysme. And yet as I grant not vnto you that Faith is a labour, so neither dare I peremptorily deny it: only I blame you for speaking so confusedly where it was necessary to vse distinction. Know therefore that Faith as all other qua∣lities whether acquired or infused may bee considered two wayes, either in the first act, (as Schooles vse to speake) or in the second. The first act is the very habit of Faith inhering and sticking in the soule: the second is the immediate and proper operation and action thereof. If then you vnderstand Faith in the first Act, and as it is an Habit, it is not a labour, but is imprinted in vs by the Holy Ghost, to the end that when oportunity is offered, and duty requireth, wee may by vertue thereof more sweetly, readily, and easily worke, and labour. And so  far is it from being a labor it selfe, that oftentimes it lieth as it were idle & asleep doing nothing at all vntill it please the Spirit of God to stirre vp our wils, and to quicken the sparke hee hath put in vs, inabling vs thereby to coope∣rate with him. But if you vnderstand Faith in the second Act, and as it is in operation and action, then may you iustly call it a labour: for as our Sauiour saith,Ioh. 6.29. to belieue in him whom the Father hath sent is a Worke which God requireth vs to doe, in regard whereof the Apostle Paul calleth it the Worke of Faith.1 Thess. 1.3. And because Faith iustifieth, not as it is in the first, but in the second act, that is not as it is an Habit, but as it is in action, accepting and applying vnto vs Christ and his merits, hence is it, saith Bucer, that Protestants vsually define it by a motion.De iustific. Let the Maior therefore in this sense bee granted vnto you. The Minor which you thinke to bee so cocksure I flatly deny, confidently affirming that Rest is a labour: prouided, you vnderstand no other Rest then that which in my Treatise I haue expressed and declared. For if by Rest you meane Quiet, such Rest without all question is not Labour: for it is the end of labour, and a cessation from it, and therefore well did you say that, when eter∣nall rest is wrought, then the labour of Faith ceaseth. But you cannot bee ignorant, that by Rest I vnderstand not Quiet, but Affiance, in as much as I render the Latin word Fiducia by it, and make the Act thereof to bee Inniti, which (as I haue shewed in some of our English translations) is oftentimes turned by Resting and Staying vpon. And this Rest, that is, this Relying, this Repo∣sing, this Trusting or Belieuing on Christ, is not a Quiet, but a motion or operation, and therefore a labour. True it is that whosoeuer commeth vnto Christ, and setteth
his whole Affiance vpon him, shall thereby finde refresh∣ment and Quiet vnto his soule: yet neuerthelesse it is ap∣parant that Affiance it selfe, is an act or motion of the Will, and not a Quiet, euen as the inclination of a mans selfe vpon his staffe, or the laying of him downe vpon his bed is an action of the body. In a word remember what a little before I haue deliuered to cleare this tearme from all ambiguity, and take it in the same sense which there I giue vnto it, and vnlesse you will say▪ that light is darknesse you cannot but confesse that such rest is a la∣bour, and so that notwithstanding this argument, Faith may be a Rest. But now giue mee leaue to take vp the weapon which you are forced to lay downe, and to trie whether a blow therewith from my arme will pearce any deeper: for thus I retort your owne reason against you. Faith is rather a labour then a rest, Assurance is not so, but rather a rest then a labour, Ergo, Faith is not Assurance. The Maior is your owne, and you may not deny it. The Minor I proue thus,
Intellection or knowledge, saith Aristotle, is more like vnto rest and quiet then vnto motion: for although the mind while it is inquiring & seeking for knowledge is euer in motion and so laboureth, yet when the Habit of knowledge is once acquired and gotten, then is there no farther motion of the vnderstanding thereunto, but a sweet rest and Quiet therein. Whereupon saith the same Philosopher, By the quieting & setling of the soule, doth a man become intelligent and wise, meaning by Quiet, as Iulius Scaliger expoundeth him,Exerc. in Card. 307. 13. nothing else but the assent of the minde. I assume, But Assurance is such in∣tellection or knowledge, for it is an habituall assent vnto this truth, that wee are in the present state of grace and  shall infallibly bee saued. Wherefore I conclude that Assurance is rather a rest or quiet then a labour: whence also it farther followeth that Faith, being as you con∣fesse rather a labour, then a rest, cannot be Assurance. Againe, Faith, you say, ceaseth when eternall pacifi∣cation and rest is wrought. I grant: for the Obiect of Faith, as the Apostle saith, are things which are not seene, whereupon Saint Augustin elegantly,Heb. 11.1. Si vides non est Fides, Beholding is not Belieuing. As therefore while we liue here in these earthly tabernacles, and are absent from the Lord, wee walke not by Sight, but by Faith: so when wee shall be clothed vpon,2. Cor. 5.4.7. Vers. 4. and morta∣lity shall bee swallowed vp of life, then shall wee walke not by Faith, but by Sight. Neither is the ceasing of Faith any losse or disaduantage, but an exchange for the better, namely vision: for Seeing vnto Belieuing is, as the full brightnesse of the Sunne is to the glimmering light of a candle. I assume then, But Assurance ceaseth not when eternall pacification and rest is wrought: for then the certainty of our Election, of our adoption, of our ac∣ceptation into grace, and finally of our Saluation is so farre from ceasing, that it is by so much the more con∣firmed vnto vs, as intuitiue apprehension and the sight of the eye is more infallible then heare-say or seeing by reflexion. I conclude therefore out of your owne prin∣ciples, that Faith ceasing, and Assurance not ceasing, Faith is not Assurance. But as touching Affiance or Re∣sting vpon the mediation of Christ for iustification and Saluation, it is euident that that ceaseth when wee shall haue obtained eternall rest and pacification. For being perfectly quitted of our sinnes, and in full possession of Saluation, how can wee farther set out Affiance vpon
him for it? Especially seeing hee shall then cease to bee vnto vs a Mediator of Redemption and Reconciliation, in regard whereof only hee is the Obiect of Affiance or Iustifying Faith, and shall bee vnto vs no otherwise then he is vnto the Elect Angels, a Mediatour of Conseruati∣on to confirme & preserue vs eternally in the most bles∣sed state of glory. For neither shall hee Prophecy any more vnto vs by the ministry of the Gospell, nor pro∣pitiate for vs by the sacrifice of his death and Passion, nor gouerne vs by the scepter of his word as here hee doth:1 Cor. 15.24. but in this respect shall hee deliuer vp the King∣dome vnto his Father, and the Godhead in the holy Tri∣nity shall without all meanes bee immediately vnto vs all in all. N. B. Rest therefore in Christ is the Effect of Faith, and Faith is the cause of Rest: and so consequently Faith is not Rest, nor Rest is not Faith. I. D.
If, say you, Faith bee the cause of Rest, and Rest bee the Effect of Faith, then is not Faith Rest nor Rest Faith. This I yeeld you. But Faith is the cause of Rest and Rest is the effect of Faith. How proue you this? It seemeth by the illatiue particle: Therefore that you referre vs for this vnto some former premisses. What then haue you formerly said? That a full assurance as a cause worketh rest vpon Christ as an effect. But neither is Assurance Faith, and I haue sufficiently proued that Assurance is not the cause of Rest, nor Rest an effect of Assurance. Againe,  you say that Faith worketh eternall rest and peace. But how doth this follow, Faith is the cause of eternall quiet and resting from our labours in the Kingdome of Hea∣uen, Ergo, it is the cause of Affiance and Resting vpon Christ here in this life? for it is not necessary that that which causeth the one, should also cause the other. But if in your Conclusion when you say Faith is not a Rest, you meane it is not that eternall rest, what is that to mee who define not Faith by such a Rest? So then your therefore either concluding beside the Question, or be∣ing inferred vpon no Premisses, deserueth of mee no answer at all. Yet to take away all scruple, let vs see what may be said for it. Bellarmine to proue that Affiance is an Effect of Faith,De iustif. lib. 1. cap. 6. and consequently not Faith, alledgeth and vrgeth three passages of Scripture: but withall I must tell you, that if hee dispute to the purpose, hee must meane by Affiance, no other then confident Perswasion or Assurance. For his aduersaries, as himselfe there saith, defining Faith by Affiance, vnderstand thereby that Speciall Faith, whereby euery one applying to himselfe the diuine Pro∣mise, belieueth or rather confidently trusteth that all his sins are forgiuen him by Christ. So that if (as he ought) hee argue vnto the meaning of his aduersaries, hee con∣cludeth not against my Affiance, but onely against your Perswasion or Assurance. Neuerthelesse let vs examine those places seuerally and particularly. The first is that of the Apostle to the Ephesians,Eph.
3.12. In whom wee haue bold∣nesse and entrance with confidence by the Faith of him: whence it followeth, saith hee, if confidence or Affi∣ance be by Faith, that Faith is not Affiance but the cause thereof: for otherwise the sense would bee, we haue en∣trance  with confidence by confidence, which is absurd. To this I answer, first that  or Confidence of∣tentimes signifieth Perswasion or Assurance, being de∣riued of a verbe that signifieth firmely to be Perswaded, as where the Apostle saith,Rom. 2.19. , thou strongly perswadest thy selfe that thou art a guide of the blind;Phil. 1.25. and againe, , this am I well assu∣red of: and therefore it is not necessary here to vnder∣stand it of my Affiance. Secondly, grant that by  this Affiance is meant, yet doth it not follow that it is an effect of Iustifying Faith, seeing by faith not Iustifying but Historicall Faith may bee vnderstood, which is the meanes by which wee grow vnto Affiance. Lastly, let it be farther yeelded, that both, by  Affiance, and by iustifying Faith are meant; yet may Affiance this notwithstanding bee that Faith, neither will any such absurdity ensue thereon. For as when you say, wee are assured by Faith you would thinke your selfe wronged if I should inferre thereupon that Faith is not Assurance but the cause thereof, or that otherwise the sense would bee wee are assured by assurance: so when the Apostle saith in Affiance by Faith, why should he not also count himselfe as much abused if you gather from hence that Faith is not Affiance but the cause thereof, or that else the speech would be absurd, as if hee should say in Affi∣ance by Affiance. The reason of all in a word is, because this forme of words may import that Affiance is the next and immediate Act of Iustifying Faith. The second place is that saying of our Sauiour vnto the woman dis∣eased with an issue of blood,Mat. 9.22.
Bee confident daughter, thy Faith hath saued thee: where saith hee, Faith is againe in like sort distinguished from Affiance; for the woman  is moued to conceiue and entertaine Affiance who was already healed by Faith. To this I answer, that the word which our Sauiour vseth to the woman is  which signifieth to be bold or couragious, whence com∣meth  Boldnes, courage,Exerc. 317.4. which as Iulius Scaliger saith, is the motion of Fortitude vnto some worke, and is opposed vnto Timerousnesse or Fearefulnesse. Nei∣ther was it without speciall reason that our Sauiour chose that word rather then any other: for finding that vertue proceeded from him, and demanding who had touched him,Luc. 8.47. the woman seeing that shee could con∣ceale it came vnto him trembling, and fell at his feet, and declared what shee had done, whereupon hee said vnto her,  Tremble not Daughter, nor be dis∣may'd, but cheere vp and bee of good courage, for I assure thee thy Faith hath saued thee, goe thy way in Peace. Now this Boldnesse or courage I confesse is an effect of Faith, nay oftentimes an effect of the effect of Faith, namely Hope: for as Despaire of victory causeth Fearefulnesse and deiection of Spirit, so contrariwise Hope of victory maketh a man to bee bold and confident. But vnlesse you can proue that this Boldnesse is the same with my Affiance (which with all your skill you can neuer doe, they being of so different natures) you can neuer con∣clude from hence that Affiance is an effect of Faith. The third and last place is that of the same Apostle vnto Ti∣mothy, They which minister well shall get vnto themselues a good degree and much affiance in the Faith which is in Christ: where, saith hee,1 Tim. 3.13. Affiance is said to be acquired and gotten by Faith, because Faith may bee without such Affiance. Whereunto I answer that the word vsed in the originall is , which no way signifieth Affi∣ance,  but libertie and freedome of speech, whether wee vtter our mind vnto God by prayer, as where the Apo∣stle saith,Heb. 4.16. Let vs come with boldnesse and freedome of Speech vnto the Throne of grace, or make profession of our Faith before men, as where the same Apostle saith, Cast not away  your free profession,Heb. 10.35. as Beza translateth it: And because this li∣bertie and freedome proceedeth from the testimony of a good conscience, and assurance of the loue and fa∣uour of God:Heb. 3.6. therefore is it sometimes vsed for Assu∣rance, as where the Apostle saith, Whose house wee are if wee hold fast  that confidence and reioycing of Hope vnto the end, meaning by Confidence saith Beza that most worthy effect of Faith whereby wee crye Ab∣ba Father:Prou. 28.1. and sometimes for that Lion-like boldnesse which Salomon saith, alwayes attendeth a good con∣science, and so doth the same Beza in this present place of Timothy vnderstand it.Heb. 3.6. vi∣de annot. Tremel. ad Heb. 4.16. And hence it is that the Sy∣riacke oftentimes rendreth this word by Retection or Reuelation of the face, because a good conscience lifteth vp the head, and boldly sheweth the face: where∣as a guiltie minde hangeth downe the head, and (as one confounded and ashamed) dares not looke either God or man in the face. So then seeing this is the right sense and meaning of this word in this place, and it is in no place found to signifie my Affiance you cannot with any probability hence conclude that such Affiance is the Effect of Faith, and not Faith. Vnto these three passages thus vouched by Bellarmine,Heb. 11.1. Col. 2.2. & Ro. 4.21. Rom. 5.1. Ro. 14.17.5.2. you may if you please adde sundry others of the like nature, as namely those which attribute vnto Faith, Subsistence of things hoped for, eui∣dence of things not seene, Plerophorie or fulnesse of Assu∣rance,
Peace with God, Ioy in the Holy Ghost, Spirituall glorying and boasting, obsignation by the Spirit,Eph. 1.13. Mat. 11.29. and final∣ly, Tranquillity and quietnesse of the soule: all which I cannot but acknowledge to bee the fruits and effects of ustifying Faith. But yet I deny that either they all, or any of them haue the same definition with that Affiance which I haue made to bee the proper Act of that Faith. And therefore to end this discourse, whereunto not the force of your Conclusion (which being barely affirmed might as easily haue beene reiected) but onely the sin∣cere desire I haue to leaue nothing vnsatisfied, drew me: I still pronounce that for any thing hitherto hath beene said, Iustifying Faith is an Affiance. Yet before I proceed any farther, I must bee so bold as to plucke you by the eare, and to call to your remem∣brance what erewhile you said, namely that a man may rest his will vpon Christ and his merits and yet bee damned. Which how it may agree with that which here you say that Rest on Christ is an effect of iustifying Faith, I can∣not (such is my blindnesse) see. For it seemeth that where the effects of Iustifying Faith are, there iustifying Faith also is: whereupon it followeth that either this Resting on Christ cannot be in those that are to be dam∣ned, because they want Iustifying Faith to worke this effect in them, or that a man may bee damned hauing Iustifying Faith together with the effects thereof in him which by your owne confession is absurd, or lastly that this Resting vpon Christ is not a fruit or effect of Iustifying Faith which is diametrally opposite vnto your Conclusion. I beseech you Sir, let vs at your leasure heare from you how either these strange Paradoxes may be verified, or these seeming contradictions reconciled.
N. B. Besides this word Rest is ambiguous, and may bee taken in ill part, and may bee in many negligent and carelesse Christians which euery day and for euery sinne bring Christ to the Crosse, and say wee will rest vpon Christ, and in the meane time worke nothing worthy of the Name of a Chri∣stian, but rather wallow in all kind of filthinesse. And in this sense onely doe I say a man may bee damned with such a Rest vpon Christ. I speake this to preuent your captious cauils. It is fit for you therefore that take vpon you to see more then euer any learned man saw before your time to be∣ware of all equiuocations and words doubtfull. I. D. That the word Rest is ambiguous I saw well inough, and therefore in my Treatise carefully distinguished the equiuocation thereof, where if you marked it not, you must blame your owne ouersight and not my Vnwari∣nesse. For two kinds of Resting vpon Christ, I said there were, the one Sleight and Superficiall, the other Setled and well grounded, and this Setled and grounded Affiance I made to bee the Act of Iustifying Faith, as there you may read more at large. Now you, to preuent captious cauils, tell me, that when you say, a man may bee dam∣ned notwithstanding his Resting vpon Christ, you vnder∣stand it of that which may bee in many negligent and care∣lesse Christians, that is to say of Sleight and superficiall Affiance onely. Wherein you shew your selfe too too both ridiculous and idle: ridiculous in saying, you speake
this to preuent my captious cauils, whereas indeed this very captious cauill of yours was in my Treatise as ap∣peareth so manifestly preuented by mee: Idle, in arguing from sleight and superficiall Affiance vnto that which is Setled and Grounded on this manner (for so in effect you confesse,) Sleight Affiance may bee in the Damned, Ergo, setled Affiance is not Iustifying Faith, as if you should say, An asse may haue a shadow, Ergo, the Body of a man is not a solid substance. And thus, to requite you with your owne Prouerbe, you perish like the rat by bewray∣ing your selfe: for hauing vrged this argument now twice against mee and that with such confidence as if it alone were sufficient to batter downe the bulwarke of my Definition, at length you tell ys very grauely and sadly that it is but paper shot which hitherto you haue discharged, and that all the breaches you haue made may easily bee repaired by distinguishing an equiuoca∣tion.
Where you say I take vpon mee to see more then euer any learned man saw before my time, it hath beene already sufficiently answered both in my Treatise & in this De∣fence thereof. Neuerthelesse because you harpe so often vpon this string, this I adde, that (vnlesse you can demon∣strate that it is impossible for a man of meane parts, and gifts to see and obserue that which men of greater lear∣ning and deeper vnderstanding haue not obserued) I know no reason why a man may not without taxation of modesty take vpon him in some things to see that which others haue not seene before him. It is true that a Giant by reason of his tallnesse must needs see farther then a dwarfe or one that is but of a meane stature: yet if you place a dwarfe aloft vpon the shoulders of a giant,  hee shall then bee able to see farther then the Giant him∣selfe can. I am I confesse, not vnto your seeming onely, but in very deed a dwarfe as it were in Diuinity, euen the least and meanest often thousand; and those our Prede∣cessors hauing beene so eminently and incomparably qualified with all kind of graces and endowments, are as it were Giants in comparison of vs. And therefore it would bee intolerable both pride to thinke and impu∣dence to say that of my selfe I could see as farre into the mysteries of Religion as they could. But now being ad∣uanced as it were vpon their shoulders, and hauing the benefit of all those volumes which they wrote, and in them of all whatsoeuer they knew: why should it seeme strange that something comes within the compasse of my ken which they though eagle-sighted perceiued not? And yet by your fauour, Sir, I take no such matter vpon mee, or if I seeme to doe so, I hope I doe it with all modestie, and it can bee no more then this that out of such Premises as they haue taught mee, I gather a Con∣clusion which they attended not. N. B. For I tell you this, if Master Perkins whom you say you blanked with your rare cunning dispute were desirous to sift this Genus or word Rest, you shall hardly perswade mee that hee will take it for any other then the effect of true Iustify∣ing Faith. I. D. Neither is it your vaine surmising what Master Per∣kins would say; Neither his expresse and direct saying,
that may be the decider of this controuersie. How well that worthy man deserued of the Church of God, wherein hee was like another Baptist both a shining and a burning torch,Ioh. 5.35. I cannot bee ignorant who knew him so well: and very vngratefull were I if I should not ac∣knowledge to haue receiued a good part of that little skill I haue in my profession from his mouth hauing beene for sundry yeeres his ordinary auditor. Yet be∣cause hee was not a Peter, or a Paul, nor so preserued from error by the Spirit of truth, that hee could mistake in nothing: I hope I may, without arrogance, and with reseruation of due reuerence & honor vnto his worth in some points dissent from him. And if you may seat Faith both in the vnderstanding and the will, notwithstanding that M. Perkins place it only in the vnderstanding,On the Creed. affir∣ming that it scarce standeth with reason that one single grace should inhere in two distinct faculties: why may not I take the same liberty vnto my selfe, and define Iu∣stifying Faith by Affiance, although M. Perkins would take it for no other then the Effect of Iustifying Faith? for so indeed hee doth, and I deny not, but freely con∣fesse, that vpon the reasons aboue rendred, I doe in this point altogether differ from him. Neither yet did I say, that I blanked him with my rare and cunning disputes, for this is but the renewing of your old slander, the vanity of which I haue already detected. Onely it seemes that your best wine is wel-nie spent, seeing now you serue your guests with these dregs: and that you are driuen to a very narrow strait, when you are faine to arme against me such base calumniations and fictions of your owne braine.
N. B. When you send me to Master Foxe in his Booke de Chri∣sto gratis justificante, without citing the place where, or the words what, of mee your speech deserueth none answer: but this I dare vndertake, you abuse the writings of so re∣uerend a man. I. D. The authority of Master Foxe was not vouched by me, to iustify my Definition, that Faith is Affiance, but to ouerthrow yours, who affirme that Faith is Assu∣rance: and therefore was placed as was fitting, after those arguments which I vrged against you. Neuerthe∣lesse here it pleaseth you after your desultory and disor∣derly manner of disputing in a very vndue place to giue answer vnto it. And the reason why with such violence you hale it hither as I guesse, is this, that not appearing where it should it may seeme to giue no euidence at all a∣gainst your Assurance, and being ordered where it should not it may seeme to bee but idly alledged as be∣ing of no force to maintaine my Affiance. But yet let vs see what exceptions you take to eleuate this autho∣rity. Because I cite not the place where, nor the words what, my speech, you say, deserues no answer. I wisse, M. Bax∣ter, that booke is not of such bulke but that perusing the titles of each Chapter you might soone haue found out the places by me intended: and you know that the sche∣dule I sent you, being endited at Bristoll, where I was farre from my bookes, I could not possibly referre
you vnto the very page and line, as otherwise I would haue done. But now because I haue the booke at hand, I will set you downe his direct words, and quote you the page where you may read them, and then leaue you to bee iudge your selfe, whether as you charge mee I a∣buse the writings of that reuerend man, or hee agree with mee in this, that Faith is not Assurance.Foxe. Master Foxe therefore in his booke de Christo gratis iustificante, pag. 246.saith thus, My iudgement and opinion is that this confidence of mercy, and certainty of Saluation promi∣sed is a thing which ought to bee very neerely conioined with Faith, and which euery one ought necessarily to apply vnto himselfe: yet being most applied is not that which onely by it selfe properly and absolutely dischargeth vs of our sinnes, and iustifies before God, but that there is some o∣ther thing propounded in the Gospell, which in nature go∣eth before this certainty, and iustifieth before God. For Faith vpon the Person of the Sonne of God, whereby wee are first reconciled vnto God necessarily goes before. A∣gaine pag. 253. Although, saith hee, certainty and assu∣rance of diuine grace (which it selfe is sometime commen∣ded vnder the name of Faith) bee very neerely ioined with Faith, yet this assurance doth not properly import the cause of iustifying, but receiueth it being brought, neither work∣eth iustification, but is rather wrought by it, and maketh them certaine, who by the Faith of Christ are iustified, but it selfe iustifieth not. And yet againe pag. 255. If the que∣stion bee of the cause which properly iustifieth from sinne, I answer it is that Faith not whereby wee belieue, that wee are iustified, but whereby wee belieue in Christ the Sonne of God. Thus M. Foxe, and thus by M. Foxe, it appea∣reth as I affirmed, that in this point I am not singular and alone.
Yet to preuent captious cauils, you may bee pleased to vnderstand that the Latin word vsed by Master Foxe, to wit Fiducia, I haue in my translation englished Con∣fidence and Assurance; not that I was afraid lest rendring it Affiance, hee might seeme to exclude my affiance al∣so from the Definition of Faith, for had hee done so, it were nothing to mee, hauing shewed that hee denies Faith to be Assurance, which was all I there affirmed of him: but because, if you marke his words attentiuely, you shall find that by Fiducia, hee vnderstands not Affi∣ance, but confident Perswasion or Assurance, for hee doth euer confound it with Certainty, and expresly de∣fines it to bee that whereby wee are assured of our iusti∣fication by Christ. So doth Melancthon also, and Kem∣nitius, and many others, vnderstanding by Fiducia, a firme Perswasion that our sinnes are certainly remitted by the propitiation of Christ, and all the benefits of the promise of grace giuen, communicated, and applyed vn∣to vs. So that vnlesse I would haue depraued my au∣thors meaning, I could not translate otherwise then I haue done. N. B. Now thinke not that I hold, that a man ordinarily saued may be saued without relying vpon Christ Iesus: for I hold the cleane contrary, viz. that true Iustifying Faith assuring a man in spirituall knowledge of his owne saluation in Iesus Christ, worketh and causeth a sweet rest and reposing of the whole soule vpon Christ and his Merits. But I deny that this Rest is Faith, or this Faith Rest, no more then the tree can be the fruite, or the fruite the tree.
I. D. That no man can ordinarily bee saued without Rely∣ing vpon Christ I grant, for according to my definiti∣on, this Relying vpon Christ, is Iustifying Faith: but that this Resting vpon Christ, is vnto Faith, as the fruite is to the tree, proue it sufficiently, and in Gods Name take the victory. But you must not thinke, that affir∣ming is prouing, or facing arguing: and very meanely doe you conceiue of your Readers iudgement, if you thinke, that your weake asseuerations can more preuaile with them then the strength of my reasons. For if by Rest you vnderstand, as you should, not Quiet and peace of Conscience which I confesse is not complete with∣out Assurance, but that Affiance by which wee stay our selues vpon Christ, accepting him to bee our Mediator in such sort as is aboue described: I haue both plainely and soundly demonstrated, that Faith is such a Rest, and such a Rest Faith, and not the fruite of Faith. N. B. And to be plaine with you, when you say Iustifying Faith is not a Knowledge or an Assurance,Tom. 3. de Iustif. ca. 7. you speake pure Bellar∣mine, as appeareth in his Booke de iustificatione. I pray you therefore though you mislike M. Perkins, turne not pure Papist. I. D. And to bee plaine with you also, if your kind of rea∣soning may passe for currant, when you say, Iustifying
Faith is not a Rest or Affiance, you speake pure Bellar∣mine:Cap. 5.6.9. for in the same Booke by you quoted, as hee de∣nieth Faith to bee Assurance, so hee denieth it also to be Affiance. I pray you therefore though you mislike my Definition yet turne not pure Papist. But, Master Bax∣ter, you mistake the matter very much if you thinke all is Popish or erronious whatsoeuer either a member of the Church of Rome, or the whole Church of Rome holdeth: for by this rule wee should with the Arrians of Poleland, renounce the very Faith of the Trinity as a branch of Antichrists Religion, of whom it is reported, that therefore and for this reason, specially they hold the Pope to bee the misticall beast spoken of in the Reue∣lation, and his triple Crowne a visible marke thereof, because hee maintaineth the doctrine of the Trinity. As therefore erewhile you said vnto mee, Let vs not be bound to defend the errors of our Brethren, so say I now vnto you, Let vs not bee bound to reiect the truths of our aduer∣saries. For truth is Gods wheresoeuer it bee found, though it were in the mouth of him who is the father of lies: and if Ticonius the Donatist speake with better reason then Cyprian an orthodox father,Retract. lib. 2. ca. 18. S. Augustin will not sticke therein, to preferre the Hereticke before him that is Catholike. But notwithstanding all this, I would haue you to know, that all the agreement betweene mee and Bellarmine is onely in this what Faith is not: for in question what it is we differ the whole heauen one from another, he defining it by Assent vnto diuine truths, I by Affiance on the person of Christ.
N. B. Now, Master Downe, to make an end, and returne to my other affaires from whence you haue vnkindly drawne mee, I pray you read a few Positions to the which oppose what you can. I. D. What your affaires are I am not well acquainted withall: but what they should bee I wot full well. A∣mong the rest maintenance of Gods truth, and conuin∣cing of contrary errors are both by the rule of Christia∣nity in generall, and the office of the Ministry which you haue taken vpon you in particular required of you. Wherein if you bee sure, that all this while you haue beene employed, you discredit your action exceedingly when you say you are vnkindly drawne from your other affaires vnto it.Plut. Apophth. Remember you not what the woman replied vnto Philip of Macedon denying to heare her sute, because he was not at leisure? Hast thou not, quoth shee, leisure to bee a King? So say I vnto you, either doe the worke if you will bee a Minister of Christs Gospell, or else bee no Minister if you bee vnwilling to doe the worke.
To what end you should offer vnto me these Positions following, requiring mee to oppose what I can against them, I cannot well coniecture: for what stuffe haue you here brought vs besides that which either is already sufficiently answered, or whereof there is no question at all betwixt vs? And therefore I see no cause why I should vouchsafe to bestow any time or labour about them.  Neuertheles to satisfy your request a word or two touching them. N. B. True Iustify∣ing Faith de∣fined.1. Iustifying Faith, is an assured knowledge, or know∣ing assurance, by the which euery one of the elected relieth vpon the Promises of the mercy of God in Christ Iesus, firmely holding that Christ and eternall life together with all the merits of Christ, are giuen to him to righteousnesse and eternall saluation. Fides vnica & indiuidua spe∣cie. Haec Fides differt nume∣ro & gradu.2. There is but one onely speciall iustifying Faith. 3. This Faith differeth in number and degree. 4. It is manifest there bee so many seuerall Faiths in number, as there bee seuerall persons elected. 5. One man is not saued by another mans Faith. Mat. 26.74.75. & 17.17. Mat. 9.24.6. This Faith differeth in degrees, small in one man, and mighty in another, Mat. 13.23. & 14.31. Act. 2.8. ca. 4. Mat. 15.28. Fides imper∣fecta; Ad resisten∣dum tamen diabolo suffi∣ciens & quare.7. The greatest Faith in this life is imperfect. 1 Cor. 13.9. & 12. 8. Though it bee small and infirme, yet it is sufficient to resist the Diuell, by reason of the prayers and promises of Christ. 2 Cor. 5.1. Esa. 53.11. Causa effici∣ens material.9. This Knowledge or Faith (for they bee conuertible Ioh. 17.3.) passeth all vnderstanding Eph. 3.14. &c. 10. The Efficient cause of this Faith, is the Spirit of God. 11. The instrumentall ordinary cause, is the preaching sincerely of the Word of God. 12. God may worke extraordinarily Faith in the Elect without preaching by his Spirit.Obiectum Fi∣dei in genere & specie. 13. The obiect of Faith in generality is the whole
Word of God, in speciality the promises of God in Christ and his Merits. 14. The formall cause is a confident relation to all the Word of God, and certainty of saluation.Formalis. 15. The finall cause subordinate,Finis subordi∣natus, sum∣mus. is the saluation of the Elect, the chiefest end is the celebration of the mercy and iustice of God. 16. The effects are concerning God, our selues,Effecta. our neighbour: God, in truly seruing him; our selues, in wholy resting vpon him; our neighbour, in truly louing him. 17. The subiect where Faith resteth is the heart,Subiectum in quo residet Fides. Adiuncta duo. the vnderstanding, and the will of man. 18. The properties are two, first, that Faith bee aliue and not dead; secondly, that it bee perpetuall. I. D. The first, the thirteenth, and the foureteenth, I whol∣ly and absolutely deny, hauing fully proued, against the first, that Faith is not a Knowledge or Assurance; against the thirteenth, that the onely proper Obiect of Faith is the Person of the Mediator, and against the foureteenth, that the Forme thereof is Affiance and not any such Re∣lation or Certainty. The ninth, sixteenth, and seuen∣teenth in part I deny: the ninth, where you make Faith and Knowledge to bee conuertible which I haue proued to haue different natures and Definitions; the sixteenth where you affirme Resting vpon Christ to bee an effect of Faith, which I haue demonstrated to bee the Forme and proper Act of Faith; the seuenteenth, where you say that the subiect of Faith is both the Vnderstanding and the Will, against which I haue shewed, that it is impos∣sible
for one and the same Habit to be subiectiuely in two seuerall faculties of the Soule. The rest of your Positi∣ons (sauing the inconuenience of some tearmes, and set∣ting a fauourable construction vpon them) I acknow∣ledge to bee true; and because, as the Apostle speaketh, I can doe nothing against the truth, but for the truth, therefore I oppose them not, but readily and willingly yeeld and subscribe vnto them.
But, Master Baxter, in all this long discourse of Faith, hauing spoken so carefully of the Definition of Faith, of the vnity of it in kind, and difference of it in number and degree, of the imperfection, sufficiencie, efficient, principall and instrumentall, of the obiect both in gene∣rall and speciall, of the forme, and end both Subordi∣nate and Highest, finally of the Effects, Subiects, and adiuncts thereof: in all this long discourse, I say, how is it that wee heare not so much as a word of Iustificati∣on, which notwithstanding is the immediate and proper Effect of Faith? Immediate, because it is the first fruite and benefit that springeth of it, and commeth before Adoption and Sanctification: proper, because it is the Act of Faith onely, and not of any other Grace which iustifies a man before God. Whether it were of negli∣gence, or of policy, that you haue omitted so materiall and necessary a point, I cannot say. If of negligence, it deserues a seuere chastisement: if of policy, it was I think you foresaw what a dangerous consequence would fol∣low thereupon. For if you had placed Iustification (as needs you must haue done if you had mentioned it) a∣mong the Effects of Faith, the Reader possibly might haue reasoned thus, If iustification be an Effect of Faith and so follow after Faith, then cannot Assurance of Iu∣stification  bee Faith, because it is an effect of Iustificati∣on and followes after: for it is necessary that a man bee iustified, before hee can bee assured that hee is iustified. And thus you had cast away your whole pot of broth,2 King. 4.39. if you had not warily kept this Coloquintida out of it. But vpon what ground soeuer you haue forborne to speake of this point, I will by your leaue supply this defect, and in a word or two shew you in what sense I affirme that Affiance iustifies, and deny it of Assurance: for in some sort Assurance also may bee said to iustifie.
Iustification is a law-tearme, and is opposed vnto Condemnation. As therefore Condemnation is the sen∣tence of a iudge pronouncing a man to be guilty, and de∣liuering him ouer to bee punished: so is Iustification al∣so the sentence of a iudge, but absoluing and acquitting a man both from crime and punishment. Now there are three barres at which all men are arraigned, and three Iudges, who at their seuerall barres either iustify vs, or condemne vs, that is to say, the barre of God, the barre of Conscience, and the barre of Men. If wee bee con∣demned at all these barres, and by all these Iudges, wee are of all creatures the most miserable: if wee bee absol∣ued at them all, and by them all, of all men wee be the most blessed. Againe, if Men acquit vs, what booteth it, if our owne Conscience condemne vs? and if our Conscience acquit vs, what auaileth it, if God con∣demne vs? for who can deliuer the prey out of the pawes of that Lion? On the contrary side, if men condemne vs, it mattereth not, so as our Conscience doe absolue vs: and if our Conscience also doe condemne vs, yet happy are we, if God absolue vs, for God is greater then our Conscience. What that is,1 Ioh. 3.20. for which sentence of  Condemnation passeth vpon vs at any of these bars there is no question, for it is well knowne to bee sinne: sinne I say which is so indeed, or at least is so in appearance. For although nothing appeare vnto God otherwise then it is, so that there can bee no error in his iudgement: yet our owne consciences and other men may easily bee de∣ceiued and mistaken, and so without cause oftentimes pronounce sentence of Condemnation. What then is that by which wee are iustifyed and absolued from our sins, and the punishment of death due vnto them? Surely, that which is contrary vnto sinne, euen Righteousnesse. What Righteousnesse?Phil.
3.9. for, as the Apostle distinguish∣eth, there is a Righteousnesse which is of the law, and there is a righteousnesse which is of Faith: by the for∣mer, shall no flesh liuing bee iustified, by the latter eue∣ry one that Belieueth is iustified. God iustifieth vs at his barre when hee seeth our Faith, that by firme Affiance wee rest and rely our selues vpon Christ to bee our Me∣diator, accepting him to bee our Prophet, Priest, and King: for then according vnto promise doth hee accept the Passiue obedience of Christ to satisfy for our sinnes past, and imputeth vnto vs his Actiue obedience to sup∣ply the want of that perfect legall righteousnesse which should be in vs. Our Conscience iustifies vs at his barre, when it is perswaded that God hath already iustified vs: for as long as it is perswaded that God condemneth, it cannot acquit vs. If the perswasion of the Conscience be built vpon a sandy and deceitfull foundation, it is rather vaine presumption then true assurance, and the iudge∣ment that it giueth is erronious: but if it bee grounded vpon infallible euidence, euen the testimony of the Spi∣rit of God,Rom. 8.16. witnessing with our spirits that wee are the  sons of God, then is the Assurance sound and certaine, and the sentence pronounced thereupon iust and right∣full,Phil. 4.7. whence presently ariseth in our soules such vncon∣ceiuable peace as passeth all vnderstanding, and such du∣rable ioy as nothing can take from vs. Finally, Men iu∣stify vs at their barre also,Ioh. 16.22. Mat. 5.16. when our light so shineth be∣fore them, that they see our good works, which are the fruits of Faith and a good Conscience, and thereby are moued to glorify our Heauenly Father: as being per∣swaded in the iudgement of Charity that they are in∣deed as they seeme to bee, euen iustified before God, and borne againe of water and the Holy Ghost. This iudgement because it is built vpon probability onely, and not vpon certainty (for who knowes whether the out∣ward appearance come from the inward holynesse or hollownesse of the heart, but onely the heart it selfe, and God which made it?) May therefore bee erronious, and though proceeding from Charity, yet in the meane season swaruing from verity. If then when Men iustify vs, our owne Consciences tell vs, that they pronounce a wrong sentence, and absolue the guilty: the comfort that growes vnto vs thereby is no better then a cup of cold water is vnto a man sicke of a burning feuer, or then the Sardonian laughter which makes the face seeme to grin, while the deadly poison is searching through eue∣ry veine, and seazing vpon the very heart. But if wee bee well assured that the sentence is iust and true, and that they are not deceiued therein, although it bee not the end wee aymed at, nor the Crowne wee looked for, yet is it a sweet and amiable companion of holy life, pu∣blickely testifying vnto our great comfort that God hath been glorified by vs, our profession honoured, and
others inuited if not gained vnto Christ. And thus much haue I thought good in regard of your silence to speake I hope not impertinently, at least wise not vnprofitably of Iustification: the summe whereof is that Affiance iu∣stifies before God, Assurance before Consience, works before Men. So that I doe not simply deny either that Assurance is Faith (for in my Treatise I acknowledge that the Scripture sometime calleth it Faith) or that it iustifieth (for I confesse it iustifieth at the barre of Con∣science) onely I deny it to bee that Faith which iustifies before God, affirming that Faith to bee no other then Affiance. N. B. Thus, Master Downe, you haue, what you haue so much, so earnestly, so bitterly, and contumeliously wrested from mee in writing, sith that you haue refused to defend your Doctrine preached here by Disputation. I. D. Indeed, Master Baxter, when I vnderstood by the aduertisements of sundry my good friends in Bristoll, that you had not onely drawne vp an Answer against me full of reprochfull and disgracefull speeches, but had al∣so dispersed it abroad into the hands of diuers Burgesses of that City, thereby to discredit both mee, and the Do∣ctrine which I preached among them, without vouch∣safing after a whole twelue months space to send mee a copie thereof according vnto promise: true it is that as soone as the next oportunity was affoarded mee, I could not forbeare to chalenge you for this vnchristian and
vnschollerly dealing, and to let you know the iust indig∣nation and disdaine I conceiued thereat. Besides that once, did I neuer either by word or writing sollicit you in this matter: and then earnest perhaps and vehement I might bee in expostulating with you, but Bitter and Contumelious I am sure I was not, and for proofe there∣of I referre mee vnto the testimonie of those who were then present with vs. But whether earnest and vehement, or Bitter and Contumelious, Answer from you by no meanes could I wrest any. And that now I haue obtai∣ned a Copie thereof, thanks vnto those my good friends who neuer left following vpon the sent of the Foxe vn∣till they surprized him for me, and not vnto you who desired and laboured nothing more then to keep it from mee. Of all men you liked not it should light into my hands, and yet of all men me it most concerned, and vn∣to mee was onely promised. And so after the Parthian manner you fight flying, and as Caesar said of the Scythi∣ans make it more difficult to finde you then to foile you. Well yet I refused, you say, to defend the Doctrine I preached by disputation. First, the course which former∣ly we had agreed and resolued vpon was Writing: and therefore I saw no reason why I should yeeld to haue the cause remoued from a higher vnto an inferiour Court, from Writing vnto Disputation. For as a late learned writer saith,
Writings are more solid, peaceable,Dan. Cha∣mier Ep. ad Egnat. Ar∣mand. and cer∣taine, then is present speech: for more solid must those things needs bee which are meditated then which are sud∣denly; spoken, more peaceable then those things which are done in the tumult, and while the minds of the Disputants are with present vehemence inflamed; more certaine,  for writings remaine, and words are winged and fly away, and writings easily conuince the impudence of them that would corrupt them, which speaking cannot so well doe. And although in quicke writing there bee without que∣stion more aduisednesse then in present speaking, yet doth Saint Hierome excuse his hasty commentary vpon Saint Mathews Gospell,Proaem. com∣ment. in Math. promising a more absolute worke, that you may know, saith hee, What ods there is betweene the boldnesse of sudden enditing, and the dili∣gence of well-studied writing. Secondly, as the Apostle Saint Paul answered the Serieants that were sent vnto him from the gouernours of Philippi,Act. 16.37. After that they haue beaten vs openly vncondemned which are Romans, they haue cast vs into Prison, and now would they put vs out priuily? Nay verily, but let them come and bring vs out: so say I vnto you, after you haue in a more publicke manner traduced and wronged mee, scattering through the whole City a most slanderous inuectiue and libell a∣gainst mee, doe you thinke now by a priuate and cham∣ber-disputation to content mee? Nay verily, this plai∣ster is too narrow for the wound, and open wrong re∣quires open satisfaction. Lastly, howsoeuer you pre∣tend that you set not pen to paper vntill I had refused your chalenge of disputation, the Reader may bee plea∣sed to vnderstand that it is cleane contrary. And there∣fore as I cannot but impute your deniall to impart vnto mee what in writing you had opposed against mee, to the distrust you had either in your cause, or in your owne sufficiency: so now, hauing scribled away so much precious time, and sacrificed so much paper to Cloacina, that suddenly you apprehend a disputation, I assure my selfe it was but a sleight deuised vpon the present to shift  mee off, and to rid your selfe from me, whose residence you knew to bee elsewhere, and who at that time was to take vp a nights lodging with you. Or if you meant sincerely and vnfainedly, doublesse it was confidence you had either in the boldnesse of your forehead vnca∣pable of the purple tincture of modesty, or in the vnskil∣fulnes of those who were like to be our Auditors & Mo∣derators, who as I take it haue more skill in Marchan∣dize and trafficking, then in Demonstration or Dialecti∣call Syllogismes. For otherwise wee had beene vpon e∣quall ground in either of the Vniuersities, I suppose you would haue beene better aduised ere you had made that challenge vnto mee. N. B. I pray God it may worke in you a willing mind to embrace Peace and Brotherly loue, without the which wee can neuer see God. Bristol. Iuly 27. 1602. I. D. It is impossible that vnto a man of vnderstanding any benefit or profit should accrew by reprehension, vnlesse it may appeare vnto him by some euident remonstrance that that which is reproued in him bee faulty and erro∣nious, and that also hee bee guilty thereof. For they that thinke themselues to bee in health, will hardly be drawne to take Physicke:In Pastore. and then shall we better correct them that are wayward, saith Gregory, when those things which they belieue to bee well done, wee demonstrate to bee euill. Whereas therefore it pleaseth you here in the con∣clusion
and closing vp of your Answer, to charge mee with a most Vnpeaceable and Vncharitable disposition, praying God it may worke in me a willing mind to embrace peace and brotherly loue: you may not thinke that this can any way affect or moue mee, vnlesse first you shew that I am guilty of this crime, and beare a mind so auerse and abhorring from Peace and Charity, as you pre∣tend, which I am sure hitherto you neither haue done nor can doe. For though you haue carefully searched euery corner of my Treatise, and ransackt euery letter and syllable thereof with as much greedinesse as euer Laban did Iacobs stuffe to find his Idols therein;Gen. 31.33. yet haue you not found any thing sauouring other then of Peace and Loue, or if you haue, why doe you not, as Iacob said vnto his Vncle, put it here before your brethren & my brethren,Vers.
37. that they may iudge betweene vs both? You will say perhaps that in broaching this erronious do∣ctrine touching the Definition of Faith, I plainely be∣wrayed a seditious spirit, and that I intended the inter∣ruption of Peace and dissolution of loue. But neither is it necessary that whosoeuer deliuereth an error should presently haue such a seditious intention, for then what writer almost either ancient or late but is guilty of that impiety? Neither is the doctrine errronious, but sound and good, and now plentifully proued so to bee by this Defence thereof against your Answer. So that this ac∣cusation of yours, is altogether vniust, and grounded vpon no truth at all. Suppose neuerthelesse it were iust, and that you had found your Idols, I meane both Fal∣shood and Faction in my writing: is it possible thinke you that such an Answer as this is, either of it selfe, or sanctified by your Prayer, may be effectuall to reclaime  mee from mine errour, or to worke mee vnto a more peaceable mind? Certainly it is impossible. For what is it of it selfe other then a fardle of vanities? And what promise haue you in Gods word that vpon your prayer you shall bee able to open the eyes of the blind by daw∣bing them ouer with clay, or to still the raging of the sea by sending forth more stormes and tempests vpon it? And that such is your Answer, and such the course you haue taken therein, although this Defence haue already made it as cleere as the noone-day: yet must I intreat your patience before I dismisse you in a word or two, to trauerse it ouer againe, and in a briefe Synopsis as it were to set before you the very spirit and quintessence there∣of, that if it be possible you may see your nakednesse,Gen. 3.10. and be ashamed. First, it is your manner like the Schollers of
Theodorus to receiue with the left hand that which I offer with the right, that is to wrest and peruert my plainest words,Plutarch. . and to make them speake not that which I intend, but what you conceiue is fittest for you to descant vpon. For ex∣ample where I say, I will not speake of the notation, or di∣uerse acceptions of the word Faith: you turne it another way saying I refuse, and accuse, and find fault with them. Againe where I argue thus, It is very probable, that many are saued without Assurance, because our bre∣thren of Germany hold a man cannot bee assured of Salua∣tion: you make me reason thus, Whatsoeuer our brethren of Germany hold is true. And againe where I affirme that the Saint of God both may bee assured and ought to bee assured: you report mee to say that hee ought to have it as of necessity to saluation. And yet againe where I say God should command a reprobate to believe an vntruth if hee  command him to belieue that hee shall bee saued: you re∣late it as if I had sayd, God should command a reprobate to belieue an vntruth if hee command him to belieue, and hee shall bee saued. These and sundry other sentences in like sort doe you misconster and wilfully depraue: vn∣lesse perhaps your ignorance bee so grosse and palpable that you could not picke the right sense out of the plain∣est tearmes that possibly could bee vsed. But nothing is well spoken,Terent. Pigh. Hierar. lib. 3. cap. 3. saith the Poet, which by ill relating a Syco∣phant may not peruert: and if some bee growne to that height of impiety as to make holy writ it selfe a nose of waxe, and to vary the sence thereof, according to the al∣teration and change of time, I may not thinke it much, if the speeches of so meane a one as I am be as hardly vsed, and feele the racke of sinister interpretation also. One∣ly as Diogenes being informed that some derided him,Plutarch. . they deride not mee, quoth hee: so say I, while you oppose your selfe; not vnto the meaning naturally bred in my words, but vnto a forraine sense by you brought vnto them, you strike not mee but your owne fancies, and like a distracted Aiax fall a murthering of poore cattell insteed of Vlysses and his companions. Secondly, it is your guise vpon euery small occasion, and sometime none at all to shake hands and bid fare∣well vnto the matter in question, and to runne out into many idle and impertinent discourses before you returne to it againe.In arte Poet. Not much vnlike the foolish Poet in Ho∣race, who professing to sing the fortune of Priamus and the famous warre of Troy, by and by spends all his art and skill in describing the groue and altar of Dia∣na, or of some Crystall riuer hastning about the pleasant and
delightfull medowes. Of this sort is that purple patch in answer to my first argument, where you spend a whole side of paper to proue that which I neuer denied, That Faith can neither finally nor totally fall away: and tedious collation you make vpon that of Matthew, Sonne bee of good comfort thy sinnes bee forgiuen thee, a place which I neuer alledged so much as in my dreame: and finally, that vnnecessary excursion into the common place of Election, and Reprobation, and Gods absolute will, which makes no more to the answering of my fift argument, then an axe to the opening of a locke, or a key to the cleauing of wood, as it is in the Prouerbe. These extra∣uagances and outtopes seeme to mee very strong pre∣sumptions that though you could say but little to the purpose,Epist. yet your itching tongue had rather talke idly then say nothing. But a wise man, as Hierome saith, before hee speaketh considereth many things, not onely what but also when, and where, and will bee sure that it bee both true in regard of substance, and pertinent in regard of circumstance. For as a word oportunely spoken is,Prou. 25.11. as Salomon saith, Like an aple of gold with pictures of siluer; so a word vttered vnseasonably and out of due place are like Iewels and goldrings sticking in the noses and lips of the barbarous Indians, and rather deforming then becomming them. Thirdly, it is another tricke of yours, in matters vn∣necessary and of no moment to bee as loud as Stentor, but in things that very much presse you and call for satis∣faction, to bee as mute as one possessed with a dumbe spirit. For example, in answer to my threefold distin∣ction of Faith, I tell you, say you,
iustifying Faith com∣prehends your three nice distinctions: but whereas I  proue the contrary, because it is impossible for one and the same habit to be subiectiuely in seuerall faculties, to this you say not so much as gry. Againe, whereas in my third argument I assume, that assurance in nature comes after iustification, you deny it: but the proofe I bring for it, because the truth of a Proposition is in nature before the knowledge of it, and that therefore Iustification goes before assurance, you passe ouer very slily, and say not one word vnto it. Furthermore, whereas I frame this obie∣ction against my selfe, By the knowledge of himselfe shall my righteous seruant iustify many, Ergo, Faith is a know∣ledge, and this Affiance may bee in the wicked, Ergo, Faith is not Affiance: you can bee well content to bor∣row them from mee, and to dart backe as it were my owne arguments against mee, but close vp your eyes not daring to behold the answers wherewith I assoiled them,Gen. 29.17. as if you had beene a tender-eyed Leah, and had met with an Obiect ouer-bright for you. It may be you learned this policy of Antony,Cicl. l. 2. de orat. who held it the safest and surest course for an Oratour, when hee meeteth with a knotty peece and is vnprouided of a fit wedge for it, to passe it ouer with silence, and say nothing. But if, as Ca∣to defineth, and Quintilian largely maintaineth, an O∣ratour bee a good man skilfull to speake in causes:Instit. Orator. l. 12. c. 1. I assure you hee will much disdaine such base and dishonest shif∣ting, as no way fitting with his owne goodnesse, or be∣comming the defence of a good cause. And howsoe∣uer in a continued Oration, because the mind can hardly so diuide it selfe, as at once to reflect vpon what is alrea∣dy spoken, and to attend what is presently said, and bee imminent and instant vpon what followeth to bee sayd, many things may soone bee forgotten and scape vnob∣serued
by the Anditors: yet may not the like bee hoped for in a written tract, specially when it shall fall into the hand of an aduersary, for hauing leasure and time in∣ough to peruse it ouer againe and againe, hee will bee sure to sift and examine euery sentence and syllable with such curiosity, that such palpable omissions as these can∣not possibly passe vnheeded by him. But your trust was that this writing of yours, being entrusted vnto a few of your friends onely, should neuer come to bee so seuere∣ly scanned by me. Otherwise had you had but the least dramme of wit or shame, either you would neuer haue set pen to paper, knowing how vnable you were to an∣swer, or you would not thus haue playd the Abce-boy, and when you met with a hard word which you could not read, thinke it enough to skip it ouer. Fourthly, as if the old Comedy, or Cartrailing were againe reuiued and allowed, you lode mee euery foot with most bitter reproches and contumelious tearmes.Xenoph. Sympos. And as cunning Cockmasters (distrusting the weaknesse of their Cocks) feed them with garlicke that yet they may annoy their aduersaries with the rancknesse of their breath: so you seeing by pure strength of reason you were very vnlikely to preuaile against mee, you thought yet with the stincking breath of slanderous and oppro∣brious speeches to molest and trouble mee. For I pray you, are not these the principall flowers of your Rheto∣ricke? Quirks, Elenchs, Sophismes, Crafty lies, silly Ser∣mon, Monsters, Antipistos, you are no Constable, Incke-horne-tearmes, Itching-eares, Fanaticall spirits, Selfe-loue, Contention, Hypocrisie, Desire of nouelties, Niceties, Fal∣sities, Vnlearned, Ridiculous, Blasphemous, Hominis acu∣men, your arguments sauour mightily of Popery, your sacke
is full of spiders, you haue a minde to doe mischiefe, Intole∣rable impudence, you incurre fearefull iudgement, you grieue Gods Spirit, captious cauils, Pure Bellarmine, Pure Papist, and six hundred other like phrases wherewith e∣uery page yea line almost is farced and stuffed, so that a man may sooner rid Augias stable then your An∣swer of them. Certainly, the fountaine cannot be sweet whose streames are so vnsauoury, and the stomacke must needs bee full of many rotten and corrupt humours that sendeth forth such a pestilent and noisome breath. But it seemes by the date of your writing it was towards dog-dayes when you endited it, and you hoped to pre∣uent a burning feuer or some such dangerous sicknesse by discharging your stomacke of so much filthy choler. It had been no hard matter to haue come euen with you in the same kind, and to vexe you with requiting like for like: saue onely that I considered, not so much what you deserue, as what best becomes him who pleads the cause of truth. For truth should bee maintained with the spirit of truth and sobernesse.Herodot. Po∣lyhimn. It is the nature indeed of reprochfull speeches, as Syagrius the Spartan said, to stirre, prouoke a man vnto wrath: yet ought it not so to pre∣uaile vpon a wise man as to moue him inordinately or vn∣decently to reply. Enuy may haue taught you to speake euill, and a good conscience hath taught mee to con∣temne euill speeches: you will needs bee lord of your tongue, and I will bee as much lord of my eares. And yet if sometimes I sprinckle a little salt vpon you, or to fret away some of your ranke flesh apply smarting cor∣rosiues vnto you,Publ. Mim. you must remember, it is the intem∣perance of the Patient that makes the Physician cruell, and according to the old saying, they that rashly speake what
they should not, must sometime for punishment heare what they would not. Fiftly and lastly, it is your fashion not so much to care what you say, as how loudly you cry: hoping I thinke that as C. Marius sometime said,Valer. Max. l. 5. c. 2. that Lawes could not bee heard in time of warre because of the clattering of armour, so neither should the voice of truth bee heard in this dispute by reason of your vociferation and cla∣morousnesse. For thus you come vpon mee, How dare you deale thus, That you dare bee so bold, with what face can you accuse, I tell you there is but one faith, I tell you it is ridiculous and blasphemous, I tell you Faith is a know∣ledge, I tell you the promise is not conditionall, O hominis acumen & argumentum lepidum, O yee noble Schollers, Wo vnto you, You cannot escape Gods hand, Quite contra∣ry is this to your knowledge and conscience, Goe dispute with Iesus Christ and tell him his Father deliuereth a blas∣phemous absurdity, All Fathers, all Writers, old and new, Greeke and Latin for 1600. yeeres, besides many other such peremptory and confident speeches.Instit. Orator. l 6. c. 5. Quintilian thought it scarce worthy to bee remembred in his Insti∣tutions, that his Orator bee not turbulent and tumultu∣ous as are they who are vnlettered and therefore I mar∣uell how you who would bee counted as wise as Thales, could forget your selfe so much as to imitate base barri∣sters and pettifoggers. Saue only,Declam. 18. as the same Quintilian saith, it was necessary to auouch with as much conten∣tion of voice as might bee, that which otherwise you could not proue: that what affirmation it could not haue from truth, it might receiue from your manner of speaking. But Vanity, saith Saint Augustin,De ciuit. Dei l. 5. c. 27. is wonder∣full talkatiue, yet is not therefore so powerfull as verity,
for if shee list shee can also bee lowder then verity. For the shallower the brooke the more the murmure, and the emptier the caske the greater the sound. And therefore I would wish the Reader not to bee terrified with Tor∣rents,Enar. in Ps. 57. as Saint Augustin speaketh, whose waters make a noise for a time, but presently will cease and cannot long continue. For doubtlesse if they of the hot and dry coun∣treyes of Tema and Sabaea repaire hither in hope to sa∣tisfy and quench their thirst,Iob. 6.19.20. they shall, as Iob saith, re∣turne confounded and ashamed, because their brother hath deceiued them as a brooke, and as the rising of ri∣uers which suddenly are dryed vp and faile out of their places. Iudg. 16.17.These, Master Baxter, are the Topicall places whence all your arguments are deduced, and if I may so say, the fiue locks wherein your chiefest strength lyeth. What impressions they may haue made in the minds of simple people I cannot tell.Plaut. Paen. & Hor. l. 1. Ep. 7. Perhaps they that cannot discerne betweene Conicall and true gold, will bee content to re∣ceiue Lupins insteed of currant money, and sounding words for sound proofes. And indeed it is the manner of the vnskilfull vulgar, though reiected and refused as most incompetent, yet to beare themselues as iudges in euery cause how weighty soeuer, and without taking a∣ny knowledge at all of the right issue, to pronounce him ouercome that holds his peace, and him to haue answe∣red that hath not held his peace, the controuersie to bee doubtfull or undecidable if both parties haue sayd alike much; whither side speakes with more reason neither doe they attend, and if they doe yet can they not vnder∣stand. And because Vanity,De ciuit. Dei l. 5. c. 27. as wee haue obserued out of Saint Augustin, is euermore talkatiue then verity, and
hee seemeth vnto them to haue spoken best who hath said most; therefore doe they for the most part giue sen∣tence against the truth for vaine talking. But howsoeuer simple and ignorant people may iudge, sure I am they that are wise and learned, will esteeme the course you haue taken rather preiudiciall then any way auaileable vnto your cause. For should a man, as Iob saith,Iob. 13.7. talke deceitfully for Gods cause? or is the strength of truth so empaired that shee can no longer stand but by such wrie and sinister meanes? Nay verily but shee is still of so noble and hautie a nature that shee scorneth to haue her conquests empeached by so base and dishonorable suc∣cors. Deprauing of the aduersaries words and meaning, impertinent digressions, dissembling of his reasons, and answers, vnchristian reuelling and reproaching, and tu∣multuous hoobubs and outcries, are the vsuall weapons of those who resolue to fight in vnrighteous quarels. But truth being pure and simple will not, and standing firme vpon her owne base needs not, and because fal∣shood hath no subsistence but only by her, cannot bee assisted and supported by such vniust and fraudulent po∣licies. Although therefore as I haue said these meanes may bee forcible inough to seduce and beguile simple people, yet they that are wise and iudicious know that naked truth neuer comes disguised, either in a Wolues or Foxes case: but prudently discerning and separating be∣twixt passionate speeches and found reasons, Rhetori∣call flourishes and Logicall demonstrations, vnnecessa∣ry circumstances and substantiall matter, iudge alwayes of controuersies not by what is confidently said and af∣firmed, but by what is reasonable alledged and proued. And whosoeuer thou bee Christian Reader, that art in  this sort affected and qualified,Deut. 33.8. Exod. 28.30. Mal. 2.7. especially if thou bee the man of Gods mercies, vpon whose heart the Lords Vrim and Thummim are set, whose lips preserue knowledge, and at whose mouth the Law is to bee sought, because thou art the Angell of the Lord of Hosts: to thee, and to thy vp∣right and vnpartiall censure doe I most humbly submit my selfe, and my whole proceedings in this cause. If thou approue,Ps. 141.5. it shall the more confirme and settle mee in the truth: if thou reproue, it shall not breake my head, but bee vnto mee a most soueraigne and pretious oint∣ment. Iudge therefore betweene vs both indifferently and freely, and the Lord giue thee a right iudgement in all things. 2 Tim. 2.7.And thus, Master Baxter, haue you at length my whole and entire Apologie, not importunately and vio∣lently wrested from mee, as you say your Answer was from you, but voluntarily of mine owne accord endi∣ted for the information and satisfaction of those who earnestly expect the issue of this combat. Whereby the prudent and discreet Reader, and I hope your selfe also may perceiue how small cause you had so vnseasonably to sing your Paean in your Prologue, and to trumpet out victory before you were entred in the lists. If for all this as yet you rest vnsatisfied, the fault is your owne and not mine:Eurip. for I cannot, as Euripides saith, fill him that is not staunch, powring wise sayings into a man that is not wise. And yet it may bee your Conscience and inward man are fully satisfied although ambition and vaine glory cause you to dissemble it. If without all paraphrase and circumlocution I call a spade a spade, and giue the right name vnto euery thing, I beseech you, beare a little with the ingenuity of my nature,Plut. Apophth. wee Macedonians are some∣what
rude. And yet I would haue you know that it is not so much your ignorance as your insolency which I inueigh against. For,Yuo Vilio∣mar. in Rob. Tit. as a late learned Humanist writ∣eth, There is no mortall man but is in some degree, tainted with ignorance, and this contagion haue wee drawne from mortality it selfe: for man when hee erreth, erreth because hee is a man, and to vpbraid error in man is to reproch euen mortality in selfe. Which if you had seriously and duly considered, either you would not with such petulancy haue beene caried against the errors you imagine to be in mee, or at least you would haue remembred your selfe also to be a man. But seeing you count your selfe the only wise-man, and others, as the Poet speaketh,Homer. to fly about like shadowes: you may not thinke it hard, if being both ignorant and insolent, you be admo∣nished of the one, and chastised for the other.
OF THE FAITH OF INFANTS, AND HOW THEY ARE Iustified and Saued. By the late Reuerend and Learned Diuine Master Iohn Downe, Bachelour of Diuinity, and sometimes Fellow of Emanuell Colledge in Cambridge. OXFORD, Prinred by IOHN LICHFIELD, for EDWARD FORREST, Anno Domini M.DC.XXXV.
OF THE FAITH OF INFANTS, AND HOW THEY ARE Iustified and Saued. THat Christian Infants haue a particular Faith of their owne, is generally affirmed both by Papists and Luthe∣rans: yet with some diffe∣rence,De Bapt. l. 1. c. 10. as Bellarmine wri∣teth. For Papists hold that they haue onely Habituall Faith, and that it (together with Hope and Charity) is infused into them in the Sa∣crament of Baptisme: but the
Lutherans, saith he, attri∣bute vnto them Actuall Faith, or something like there∣unto.  Wherein it may be the Cardinall doth them some wrong.Field Append. part. 2. §. 1. For it is obserued by some Diuines, that they constantly deny Children to haue any actuall apprehen∣sion of Gods mercies, or that they feele in themselues any such motions of Faith. Whereupon it must needs follow; that their meaning is not to attribute vnto them Actuall Faith, but a kind of Habituall Faith onely, or that seed, root and Habit, whence Actuall motions in due time doe flow. But bee their opinion herein whatsoeuer it will bee, sure I am that both Lutheran and Papist agree in this, that Infants haue a particular Faith of their owne. The principall reasons that they alledge for proofe hereof are these.Heb. 11.6. Infants please God: but without Faith, it is impossible to please him.Mat. 19.14. The Kingdome of God be∣longs vnto them: Which yet the Scriptures say cannot be attained without Faith. The Word of God euery where maketh particular Faith a necessary meanes vnto Iustification and Saluation, as where the Prophet saith, The iust man shall liue by his Faith:Hab. 2.4. but Infants are iusti∣fied before God, and being iustified cannot but bee sa∣ued.Matt 18.6. Mar. 9.36. Luc. 1.41. Nay Christ himselfe expresly saith that they doe belieue. And Iohn the Baptist in the very wombe of his Mother was filled with the Holy Ghost, and sprang at the salutation of the Blessed Virgin. Other arguments they vse, but they are all of the like nature, and notwith∣standing them all, I cannot bee perswaded that Infants while they are such, haue any Faith of their owne either Actuall or Habituall. And these among sundry others are my chiefest reasons.
Deut. 1.39.First, the Scripture in plaine tearmes affirmeth, that they haue no knowledge at all, either of good or euill:  and that they cannot so much as discerne betweene the right and the left hand. If so,Ion. 4.11. how can they who con∣ceiue not of things naturall, vnderstand those things that are heauenly and aboue the pitch of nature? To this ef∣fect Saint Augustin,Epist. 57. Scire diuina paruulos qui nec huma∣na adhuc norint, si verbis velimus ostendere, vereorne ip∣sis sensibus nostris facere videamur iniuriàm, quando ilo∣quendo fuadere studemus, vbi omnes vires officium{que} ser∣monis superet euidentia veritatis: that is, If wee should goe about to demonstrate with words that Children know the things of God, who as yet know not the things of men, I feare wee should offer wrong euen to our very senses endeuouring to perswade by speech that, the euidence of the truth whereof far exceeds all power and office of speech. Secondly, when Infants are presented at the holy Font, and either sprinkled with the water of Baptisme, or dipped therein: how chanceth it that they so much dislike thereof, testifying their dislike by their crying and other motion of the body? Certainly, had they actuall Faith, they would endure all with much patience and cheerefulnesse, and neuer bewray so much aduerse∣nesse and discontent. But if in doing so they goe against their knowledge, the Sacrament must needs bee so frre from auailing them to the washing away of Originall guilt, that by their reluctation they rather contract a further guilt of Actuall sinne, which I suppose none ex∣cept he be too too vncharitable will imagine of them. Thirdly, if they haue Faith, why are they not after their initiation by Baptisme, forthwith admitted vnto holy Communion? In the time of Saint Augustin, and
Innocent the first, it was the practice of the Church so to  doe: and it continued, as some write, for the space of sixe hundred yeeres, downe vnto the times of Ludouicus Pius, and Lotharius. But why is that custome now growne out of vse, and why are Children barred from the Eucharist, if they belieue as well as elder people? Nay why are they not rather admitted then those of ri∣per yeeres? For Infants haue not so much as euill thoughts in them: but these by reason of their longer life haue made themselues guilty of many euill deeds be∣sides. Fourthly, Faith, as Saint Paul witnesseth, commeth by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God preached. But Infants heare not, neither by the eare, nor by any other way proportionable thereunto: or if they doe, yet they vnderstand not what they heare. For did they vnder∣stand, I presume they would harken more attentiuely vnto what is said, then we see they doe. Wherefore not hearing, neither doe they belieue. If you say, they be∣lieue by an inward Hearing: then is that Faith wrought either by Ordinary or Extraordinary meanes. Not by Extraordinary meanes, for it is done euery day and houre. By Ordinary therefore. If so, then haue wee a double manner of working Faith, and both of them Or∣dinary: the one by Inward Hearing in Infants only, the other by Inward and Outward also in those that are Adul∣ti, which is a meere nouelty in the Church of God. Fiftly, how commeth it to passe, if Children haue Faith, that among so many millions of them as haue beene in the world, not so much as one of them when they come to riper yeares, giueth any testimony of his Faith vntill hee bee farther taught and informed? If a child borne of Christian parents, and entred into the vi∣sible
Church by Baptisme, shall afterwards while hee is yet in his tender yeeres fall into the hands of Infidels or Turks, (as the more the pitie many thousands of them haue done, and the whole band of Ianizars), they say, consists of no other: doth hee not readily receiue that religion, which is first instilled into him, without once dreaming of the Christian Faith? Which yet how it should bee, hauing from his first infancy beene seasoned and sanctified with the Christian Faith, cannot easily be conceiued or imagined. Sixtly, tell mee, doe all that haue receiued Faith in their infancy loose it againe when they come to bee of more yeeres? It seemeth so, if then they receiued it: for otherwise, why are they put to their Catechisme, and taught the elements of Faith againe? But this were a ve∣ry strange course: For how should they loose it? vn∣lesse perhaps God secretly steale that from them which earst he gaue them: which to say, is very derogatory to the bounty of God, who neuer withdraweth grace once giuen, vntill man by abusing it haue deserued to loose it. Not loosing it therefore, and yet learning it when they come to yeeres of capacity, It is a plaine argument they neuer receiued it in their Infancy. Seuenthly and lastly, there is not the least Habit, ei∣ther acquired by custome, or infused from aboue but maketh a man more apt and prone vnto their proper a∣ctions. For example, whosoeuer is possessed of the ver∣tues of Iustice, Temperance, Liberality, Fortitude, will readily doe iustly, temperatly, liberally, valiantly: it be∣ing the nature of
Habits to facilitate Actions. Tell mee then, are the Children of Christians when they come first to be instructed more capable of Christian Religion,  or more inclinable to holy actions, then the Children of Infidels? Experience tels vs they are not, but are as waxe indifferently flexible any way. It is absurd therefore and void of reason to place in Infants the Habit of Faith, which yet inclines them no more to the Acts of Faith, then those that are without it. Now hauing thus briefly demonstrated that Infants haue neither Actuall nor Habituall Faith: it followeth in the next place to answer the contrary arguments aboue set downe. And first where it is said, that Faith is a ne∣cessary meanes vnto Iustification and Saluation, in as much as none can please God or liue without it: I answer in a word, it is to bee vnderstood not of Infants; But de Adultis of those that are of riper yeeres, vnto whom alone Faith is necessary. These cannot please God, nor liue, nor bee iustified and saued without a particular Faith of their owne: but Infants by reason of their in∣capacity through the indulgence of God may. Adde hereunto, that according to the Tenent of our Diuines, it is not the Habit but the Act of Faith that doth iustify: in regard whereof they define it by a Motion of the Will grounded vpon an assent of the Mind vnto the truth of the Gospell. Vnlesse therefore, you grant vnto Infants such a motion both of the Mind and Will, which Papists expresly deny, and Lutherans seeme to stagger at, nei∣ther can they bee iustified by Actuall Faith, hauing none. And seeing without it the Habit auailes nothing at all, as being an idle Faith: I see not to what end the Habit should bee infused. And if it bee to no end, neither is it infused. For if Nature doe not, much lesse doth God a∣ny thing in vaine. To that of our Sauiour where hee seemeth expresly to
affirme that Little-ones belieue: I answer first, that those Little-ones are not Infants properly, but such men as re∣semble little Children in holy Innocence & Simplicity: in regard whereof they are elsewhere called by Christ , that is Infants. Secondly,Mat. 11.25. grant it that Children bee also meant, yet not such Children as are infants, but growne to some stature and capacity. For although the Child whom Christ tooke in his armes, be called , a little Child: yet was hee both a follower and hearer of Christ, and such a one as in some measure could vn∣derstand, such as were those  little Children to whom Saint Iohn thought it not vnfit to write.1 Ioh. 2.14. For as the text saith, hee was one that came of himselfe being called: and farther, hee was capable of scandall and of∣fence which questionlesse is not incident vnto Infants. Lastly, to the example of Iohn the Baptist,Ep. 57. I answer with Saint Augustin, Nec quod factum est in Iohanne con∣temno, nec inde regulam quid sentiendun sit de paruulis figo: immò id in illo mirabiliter praedico, quia in alijs non inuenio: Neither doe I contemne, saith hee, that which was done in Iohn, neither doe I from thence frame a rule what wee are to thinke of little-ones: yea I acknow∣ledge it to bee marueilous in him, because I find it not in others. Moreouer, it is not said of him Credidit in vtero, he belieued in the wombe, but only exultauit, he sprang in the wombe: & this exultation or Springing, diuinitùs facta est in Infante, non humanitùs ab Infante, was done by the power of God in the Infant, and not by any hu∣mane power of the Infant Or if vse of reason and will, were so hastned vnto him as hee did belieue, in miraculis habendum est diuinae potentiae, non ad humanae trahendum est exemplar naturae: it is to bee reckoned among the mi∣racles
of Gods power, and not to be drawne into an ex∣ample of human nature. And thus much of reasons both for and against the Faith of Infants. Now I know it will here farther bee demanded, if In∣fants haue neither Actuall nor Habituall Faith of their owne, how then and by what meanes are they Iustified and Saued? For it is mercilesse, and against all Diuinity to exclude them from either. Whereunto I answer in the words of Bernard,Epist. 77. Saluantur & ipsi per fidem, non ta∣men suam, sed alienam: they are also saued by Faith, yet not their owne Faith but anothers. Anothers? Will you say: this seemeth very strange. Heare then what the same Bernard yet further addeth, Dignum est & ad Dei spectat dignitatem, vt quibus fidem aetas denegat pro∣priam, gratia concedat prodesse alienam: It is fit and be∣longs vnto the dignity of God, that to whom age de∣nies a proper Faith of their owne, grace should yeeld them the benefit of anothers Faith. And againe, Nec e∣nim omnipotent is iustitia propriam ab his putat exigendam fidem, quos nouit propriam nullam habere culpam: for nei∣ther doth the iustice of God Almighty thinke that a pro∣per Faith is to bee required of those, whom he knowes to haue no proper fault of their owne. In which words of Bernard, two excellent reasons are rendred, why the Faith of another through the grace and indulgence of God should bee auailable vnto them: the first because their Jnfancy denies vnto them a proper Faith of their owne, the second because besides that
Originall Corrup∣tion traduced into them from their parents without their knowledge or consent, they haue no other sinne of their owne. Can they not then by reason of their tender yeeres haue a Faith of their owne? It befits the goodnes  of God that they bee holpen by the Faith of another. Haue they no proper and particular sinne of their owne▪ Neither doth God thinke it agreeable with his iustice to exact of them a proper and particular Faith of their owne. Infants then are holpen by anothers Faith. Whose Faith will you say? The Faith of the Parents, as also of the Church, who is the common mother of vs all, and in whose wombe as it were they are conceiued & borne. This of old was Saint Augustins sentence, and this all sound Diuines haue agreeably with the Scripture euer held. Onely it may be demanded how and in what sort the Parents Faith auaileth them. Whereunto I answer, not by particular applying of Christs merits and obedi∣ence vnto them (for this is done onely by a mans owne Faith vnto himselfe) but by bringing them within the compasse of the Couenant of Grace. Thus; The Co∣uenant was made not with Abraham onely,Gen. 17.19. Act. 2.39. but with his seed also: and the Promise, saith Saint Peter, was giuen both to the Parents and to the Children. The Parents therefore by Faith apprehending this Promise and Co∣uenant, by their Faith interest their Children also there∣unto. For as it is in ciuill negotiations, the bargaine that the Father maketh for himselfe & his Children is firme and good, although the Children bee not present at the bargaine-making, nor vnderstand what is done: euen so in this spirituall Couenant and contract with God, the Parents Act is sufficient force to confederate their Chil∣dren also, and to giue them a right vnto all the benefits of the Couenant. And as I conceiue, this is imputed vnto them in lieu of all those Acts and Habits which other∣wise are required in those that are Adulti. How farther
the Holy Ghost worketh in them is a deepe and inscru∣table secret, Et de occultis non iudicat Ecclesia, the Church is no iudge of things that are hidden. Onely I affirme that by the Faith of the Parents the Children are made a holy seed, and members of Christs body. But what if one of the Parents bee an Infidell? What if either of them, or both be notorious hypocrites or openly sinnefull, hauing not in them true Iustifying Faith? are the Children therefore, without the compasse of the Couenant, and vniustified before God? I answer, No: For first, if but one of the Parents belieue, yet are the Children holy.1. Cor. 7.14. So saith Saint Paul, The vnbelieuing husband is sanctified by the belieuing wife, and the vnbe∣lieuing wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your Children vncleane, but now are they holy. Againe, though neither of the Parents belieue with iustifying Faith, yet being in the Church by the profession of Christian Re∣ligion, their Children are within the Couenant. For first, the Soule that sinneth it shall die:Ezech. 18.20. the sonne shall not beare the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father beare the iniquity of the Sonne. So that the impiety of the Pa∣rents preiudiceth not the Child that is borne in the Church. Secondly, by Parents are to bee vnderstood not those alone of whom Children are immediatly be∣gotten and borne: but their Progenitors and Ancestors also who feared God and liued in the Church, though many generations before. For God made not his Coue∣nant with Abraham and his immediate seed onely, but with all his seed after them in their generations:Gen.
17.7. Ex. 20. and promiseth to shew mercy to the thousandth generation of them that loue him and keep his Commandments. Whence it followeth, that these are as it were a root vnto all their  posterity borne in the Church: and therefore,Rom. 11.16. if the root be holy, so are the branches also, saith Saint Paul. Lastly, bee the next Parents whatsoeuer they will bee, yet their Children being borne in the Church, the Church is their Mother, and the Faith and piety of the Church intere∣steth all such as are borne in her vnto the Couenant. And thus you see how Children are iustified and Saued by anothers Faith. If Children, may not those that are Adulti so bee iu∣stified and saued also? No verily. For as the Prophet saith, The iust man shall liue suâ fide, not by anothers,Hab. 2.4. but by his owne Faith. And hence is it, that in the Lords prayer we are taught to say Our Father, but in the Creed, I belieue: because Prayer is an Act of Charity extending it selfe vnto the good of others also, but Belieuing is an Act of Faith, onely benefiting a mans selfe. Can the cloths that another weares, warme mee? or the meat another eates, nourish mee? or the potion another re∣ceiues, cure mee? or the soule that is in another man quicken mee? Nor more can the Faith of another man iustify or saue mee. As one man shall not beare anothers fault, sed anima quae peccat ipsa morietur, the soule that sinneth it shall die: so shall not one man bee acquitted for anothers Faith, sed anima quae credit ipsa saluabitur, the soule that belieueth it shall bee saued. Saluation eue∣ry where in Scripture is promised to him who himselfe belieueth; and damnation is euery where threatned to him that belieueth not so. And he belieueth not so, who hath not a Faith of his owne. Yea but if Adams sinne bee imputed vnto vs for Con∣demnation, and the Obedience of Christ for
Iustification: why may not anothers Faith also bee imputed for Sal∣uation?  The case is not alike, for they were publicke persons and stood in our steed: but so doe not others. In the Couenant of works Adam was our Head: and there∣fore his sinne is counted the common act of all those that were in his loines. In the Couenant of Grace, Christ is our Head: and therefore his Obedience is esteemed the common Obedience of all those who are vnited vnto him by Faith. Others are not our Heads, nor represent our persons: in regard whereof neither can their Act bee ac∣counted ours. It will further bee obiected that Christ forgaue the palsie-sicke man his sinnes for the Faith of them that brought him:Luc. 5.20. and so, as Thomas saith both Ambrose and one Iohn a Bishop vnderstand it.Caten. in cum loc. But Saint Chrysostome otherwise, and that more rightly, vnder∣standing it both of the sicke mans Faith and theirs who brought him. For our Sauiour intending to bestow a double benefit vpon him namely the cure both of body and soule: this could not bee effected but by the inter∣uention of his owne Faith, but the other might by the Faith of those that presented him. So wee read that the Centurions seruant,Mat. 8.13. & 15.28. and the woman of Canaans daughter were healed, the one for his Masters, the other for her Mothers Faith. And who knowes not that vnbelieuers oftentimes temporally fare the better for the sake of the Faithfull. Saint Ambrose therefore imputing the remissi∣on of sinnes vnto the Faith of others, must bee vnder∣stood with a graine of Salt, as they say, that one mans Faith may obtaine Faith vnto another, and so conse∣quently by the interuention thereof Iustification also: as did the Faith of S. Steuen (as some suppose) vnto S. Paul, and the teares of Monica vnto her Sonne Augustin. Thus those that are Adulti must haue a Faith of their owne.
And why I pray you more then Infants? The reason is euident. For first those that are Adulti are capable of Faith, so are not Infants: and therefore reason would that they should haue a Faith of their owne, though these bee holpen by the Faith of another. Againe, they that are growne to riper yeeres haue in them more dead∣ly diseases then Infants: and so need more remedies then these. Infants indeed are borne in Originall corrup∣tion propagated vnto them from Adam: but of Actuall sinnes they are not guilty, neither are they defiled with the fruites of that bitter root. And therefore vnto them sufficeth thorow the gracious Couenant of God the Pa∣rents Faith. But to those that are Adulti, who are stai∣ned not onely with Originall sne, but also with ma∣ny Actuall transgressions by themselues committed in thought, word and deed, it is requisite that by a parti∣cular Faith of their owne they apprehend the merits and obedience of Christ for their Iustification and Saluation. In a word, anothers Faith, as is aboue said, may by di∣uine dispensation and indulgence suffice to him who hath onely sinned in another: but to him who himselfe hath sinned, not anothers but his owne particular Faith is ne∣cessary. Now, to conclude all with a little application, seeing all these things are so, first, wee haue here the great pri∣uiledge and prerogatiue of Christian Children aboue o∣thers. For by vertue of the Couenant they are a holy seed, haue right to the promises, and the Kingdome of Heauen belongeth vnto them. Hence is it that anciently vnder the law they were Circumcized, and now vnder the Gospell are admitted vnto
Baptisme, the seale of the Couenant of grace. In so much, that whosoeuer of them  depart this life in their infancy and tender yeeres, vn∣doubtedly they are all and euery one of them saued. What should let? Can they that are holy perish? Will God fayle of his Word to those that haue right to the promises? Shall they to whom the Kingdome of Hea∣uen belongeth bee excluded from it? Originall sinne is pardoned them in the Couenant, and washed away in the lauer of regeneration; other sinne they haue none to hin∣der them, and therefore without doubt so soone as they die their innocent soules are by the holy Angels of God transported into Abrahams bosome. Neither let any man thinke that herein I stand single, and by my selfe, for thus a reuerend Bishop also of this Church; I pray what did antiquity teach? that young Children Baptized are deliuered from Originall sinne?Carleton. ag. Montag. Wee teach the same, and doubt not but if they die before they come to the practice of actuall sinne, they shall bee saued. And our Diuines in the Councell of Dort,Synod. Dord. Infantes ante vsum rationis morientes electi: Infants dying before the vse of reason are ele∣cted.Tom. 1. Hom. 2. p. 1. And the booke of Homilies, Infants being baptized and dying in their infancy, are by this Sacrifice washed from sinne, brought into Gods fauour, made his children and in∣heritors of the Kingdome of Heauen. More I could name, but these may suffice to let you know how vnlikely it is that should bee Arminianisme (for so hath this opinion rashly beene censured of some) which the Church of England, and the professed enemies of Arminians hold. But what? are none saued but onely the Children of Christians? Or doe you condemne all the rest vniuersal∣ly vnto the pit of Hell?Iun. de nat. & grat. 28. I will tell you what as graue and learned a Diuine as any this age hath yeelded holdeth.
Hee doubteth not but that many of the Children of Infi∣dels are saued, partly by vertue of the Couenant, and partly by Gods election. By vertue of the Couenant, in as much as they are descended of such Ancestors as haue apprehended the Couenant, although their succession haue afterwards suffered some interruption. By Electi∣on, because God hath not barred himselfe from power and right to communicate grace euen to those whose Ancestors pertained not to the Couenant. For if hee call those Adulti into the Couenant who before were not of it: why may hee not in like manner if hee please chuse Infants also? Finally, as hee belieueth all that are in the Couenant, and that are elected, to bee saued: so in Cha∣rity hee presumeth all that dye in their Infancy rather to bee saued then shut out of the Kingdome of Heauen. For my part, I will answer no otherwise then in the words of Saint Paul,1 Cor. 5.12.13. What haue I to doe to iudge them that are without? Doe yee not iudge them that are within? But God iudgeth them that are without. And so to his righteous iudgement I leaue them.
Againe, here haue wee double comfort for all Chri∣stian Parents. And first, in the birth of their Children: seeing they are holy and belong vnto the Couenant of Grace. True it is the Scripture saith,Psal. 51.7. Eph. 2.3. they are conceiued and borne in sinne, and so the Children of Wrath: but you are to know that they represent a double person, one of a Sonne of Adam, the other of one ingrafted into Christ. As they are the Sonnes of Adam they are bone sinfull; as ingrafted into Christ, freed from sinne. Secondly, in their death: for they may bee assured by Faith that they are translated into those ioyes, which eye hath not seene, nor eare euer heard, nor hath euer entred into the heart  of man. Of elder people they can but hope it in Chari∣ty: of these they haue infallible certainty. If they liue vnto more yeeres, who knoweth but wickednesse may al∣ter their vnderstanding,Sap. 4.11. or deceit beguile their mind, as the wise man saith? But now being preuented by death, they are quickly passed this vale of misery, and haue soone ended their painfull pilgrimage, and are possessed of the place of eternall rest and happynesse. If any thing will drie vp the teares, or stint the sighs and cries and la∣mentations of Parents for the losse of their tender In∣fants, this is it: especially if they consider withall, that themselues vnder God haue beene the meanes of bring∣ing them within the Couenant, and procuring vnto them their euerlasting Saluation. Thirdly, Parents may hence learne that a necessity is laid vpon them to present their Children vnto the holy Font, so soone as conueniently they may. For seeing by their birth they are interested vnto the Couenant, the seale of the Couenant must not in any case be sleighted or neglected. What though Baptisme be not absolutely ne∣cessary vnto them? yet is it necessary for Parents to giue it them conditionally, if it may bee had. If it cannot bee had, the Vow and Desire of the Parents is sufficient: nei∣ther doth the bare want of Baptisme without any of his or their default, exclude the Child from Saluation. For if a iust and honest man would, much more will God performe his Word and Couenant, although the seale be not set thereunto. But if it may bee had, there is Necessi∣tas praecepti, a necessity laid by Gods commandement vpon all those that are Filij praecepti the Sonnes of the commandement. Those Sonnes all men are when they are grown to be Adulti; and therefore if then they neglect
to be baptized, they deserue for their contempt to bee cut off and to bee eternally condemned. But Infants while such are none of these Sonnes, as being both vn∣capable of the precept, and vnable to offer themselues vnto the Sacrament: whence followeth that the com∣mandement taketh hold onely of the Parents, and those that haue the care of them. So that although the Child dying vnbaptized may bee free from danger: yet those that neglect to present him vnto Baptisme shall bee damned for breach of Gods commandement. Le Pa∣rents therefore by all meanes bee carefull to performe this duty: and if by reason of weakenesse or some other impediment it cannot bee done publickely, rather then left vndone, let it bee done priuatly. Wise men, and a∣mongst the rest M. Caluin would haue it so: yea the Church of England requireth it, prescribing a forme of Priuate Baptisme, in case of necessity, and commanding that what is priuatly done be by the Minister publickely made knowne in the Congregation. An order heretofore too much neglected, God grant henceforward it may be better obserued. Finally and lastly, seeing euery one that is Adultus must of necessity haue a Faith of his owne, first it is the duty of Parents by all meanes to worke Faith in their Children when they are capable thereof: that as they haue beene instruments to traduce Originall sinne vnto them to their perdition, so they may againe repaire in them the image of God to their eternall saluation. Se∣condly, let euery one looke to himselfe, and see that hee haue Faith, for it is in vaine to trust to the Faith of ano∣ther. The righteousnesse of Christ indeed is a cloke large enough to couer the sinnes of all men: but the Faith of
another man is little enough for himselfe, I cannot co∣uer my nakednesse with it. They were but foolish vir∣gins that said, Giue vs of your oile, for our lamps are out: and fitly were they answered by the wise virgins, Wee feare there will not bee enough for vs and you, but goe yee rather to them that sell and buy for your selues. Let Papists blaspheme and say, they can supererogate and more then satisfy for their sinnes, and that one man may for a price buy out of the Popes treasury the Surplus of another mans merits: yet am I sure the oile of another mans lampe will not serue my turne, nor procure mee fauour to enter with the bridegroome. God grant me there∣fore wisdome euen while it is called to day, to get mee oile in my owne lampe.
NOT CONSENT OF FATHERS BVT SCRIPTVRE THE GROVND OF FAITH. Written by the occasion of a conference had with Mr. Bayly, by the late Reuerend and Learned Diuine, Master Iohn Downe, Bachelour of Diuinity, and sometimes Fellow of Emanuell Colledge in Cambridge. OXFORD, Printed by IOHN LICHFIELD, for EDWARD FORREST, Anno Domini M.DC.XXXV.
NOT CONSENT OF FATHERS BVT SCRIPTVRE THE GROVND OF FAITH. LOVING and Reuerend M. Bayly, I acknowledge my selfe much endebted vnto you, both for my kind entertainment, and the peaceable
Conference I had with you. Would you but vouchsafe to visit my poore Cottage, I should readily en∣deauour to satisfy some part of the debt, if not with like entertainment, yet with equall  welcome. The residue I know not how better to dis∣charge, then by pursuing my first intention; that is, by labouring to reduce you backe into the bosome of that Church, out of which with such danger to your soule, scandall to the brethren, and vnkindnesse to her you haue withdrawne your selfe. And to this end might I haue obtained from you in writing, as at our parting I entrea∣ted, what those speciall Motiues were which had wrought in you this sudden change: I would haue strai∣ned my selfe by writing also to haue giuen them the best satisfaction. But seeing for reasons best knowne to your selfe, and into which I list not further to inquire, you held it not fit as then to yeeld so farre vnto mee: I haue thought good for the present to reflect vpon some pas∣sages of our Conference, specially that ground whereon you then stood so much, and vpon which you plainely professed that you would aduenture your Faith. It may please you therefore to remember that being demaunded a reason of your departure, you pretended that in reading the ancient Fathers you had met with sundry Bugbeares, which so scared and affrighted you, that vnlesse you would resist the light of
Conscience, and hazard your eternall saluation, you could not chuse but bee swayed by them. Whereunto it being replied, that happily those Bugbeares were but Scarcrowes, and that you should haue taken a safer and surer course, if you had resolued your Faith into Scriptures, nothing being sufficient to beare vp so weighty a peece but onely di∣uine testimony: your answer was that vpon Scripture you relyed, howbeit, because it is obscure and subiect to manifold constructions, vpon Scripture vnderstood according to the interpretation and doctrine of the Fa∣thers,  nothing doubting but that as long as you held the Faith of them whom wee verily belieue to bee saued, your selfe could neuer perish through misbeliefe. In which answer, howsoeuer in word you seeme to attri∣bute some force and vertue to the Scriptures, yet in truth you doe but cancell them and make them of none effect. For if the Scriptures lie rather in the Sense then in the Letter, and the Sense by reason of the darknesse and ambiguity of them, bee not to bee found in them∣selues, but elsewhere out of them, in the writings of the Fathers: it followeth clearely that in your account Paul and Peter and Iames and Iohn and the other Pen-men of holy writ are no better then Cyphers, vnlesse Cyrill and Ambrose and Hierome and Augustin and the rest of that ranke as digit numbers vouchsafe to adde some value and signification vnto them. So that now by your fauor this must bee my taske briefly and plainely to demon∣strate, that hauing remoued your Faith from the autho∣rity of Scripture vpon the exposition of the Fathers, you haue built quite beside the rocke, and layd your foundation vpon the sand.
But take this protestation first, that wee neither dis∣esteeme nor despise the Fathers, as by Priests and Ie∣suites wee are ordinarily slandered: but contrarywise, with all duty wee rise vp to their gray haires, and reue∣rence their venerable antiquity. Withall wee acknow∣ledge that they were in their times excellent ornaments and lights of the Church, endued not onely with singu∣lar knowledge in the mystery of Faith, but also with ad∣mirable sanctity and vprightnesse of life. Whereby, in all their combats and bickerins with Hereticks, they maintained the truth of God so wisely and couragiously,  that they euer remained more then conquerors. And now as they haue left behind them a pretious name a∣mong the Saints so wee doubt not but their soules are bound vp in the bundle of life, and enioy the blessed: making vision of God for euermore. Such books of theirs as are come to our hands we esteeme as rich trea∣sures, and value them aboue gold. Them doe wee search and peruse with all diligence: bee it spoken without of∣fence, no Papists more. Yet can wee not through∣out them meet with those terrible
Bugbears you so much complain of: rather wee wonder how you could misse all those good Angels so frequently appearing in them to comfirme and settle you in your first Faith. For I wil bee bold to say, notwithstanding all the brags and crakes of that side, that the Fathers are ours not yours: or if they bee yours in any thing, it is in the pettiest and smallest matters, for in the maine and great questions controuerted between vs, they are expresly for vs and against you, as hereafter God willing shall in part ap∣peare. Vpon confidence whereof, whensoeuer wee were summond and called vnto the Fathers by you, wee ne∣uer refused their triall, but euer haue beene ready to ad∣uenture all vpon their verdict. The chalenge of that fa∣mous Prelate,Ser. at Pauls Crosse. Doctor Iewell Bishop of Salisbury, is yet fresh in memory, that if any learned man of our aduersa∣ries, or if all the learned men that bee aliue, be able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholicke Do∣ctor or Father, or out of any old generall Councell, or out of the holy Scriptures of God, or any one example of the Pri∣mitiue Church, whereby it may clearly and plainly be pro∣ued, that there was any priuate Masse in the whole world at that time for the space of sixe hundred yeares after  Christ, and so foorth in seuen and twenty seuerall arti∣cles, hee would bee content to yeeld and to subscribe.Reply to Har∣dings Ans. This chalenge as that renowned Bishop in his life-time made good himselfe against his aduersary Master Harding: so was it neuer yet retracted by any of vs, but hath stoutly beene maintained by sundry succeeding champions. Heare one for all. That, sayth worthy Whitaker,Con. Camp. tat. 5. which Iewell most truly and constantly vttered that day when hee appealed to the antiquity of sixe hundred yeeres, and offe∣red vnto you that if you could bring foorth but one sentence cleere and euident, out of any Father or Councell, he would not refuse to yeeld the victory vnto you: the same doe we all professe, we all promise the same, we will not shrinke from our word. Thus you see how wee reiect not the Fathers, as you would beare the world in hand, but triumph ra∣ther in the testimony they giue vs, and in our Apologies and Defences alledge them plentifully against you.
Howbeit neither doe wee nor dare wee make Gods of them, or equall them with the holy Apostles, as if they were infallible and could not erre. Clouen tongues ne∣uer sate vpon them, as they did vpon these: neither did the Spirit of God so guide and direct their pens, but that sometimes they might faile, and write amisse. Had they had infallibility of iudgement, safely might wee build our Faith vpon them: but this they vtterly disclaime, acknowledging it to bee the peculiar priuiledge of the Apostles. And so far are they from making themselues Masters of our Faith, that they require vs to iudge and censure of their writings by the Scripture which is the rule of Faith. Neither would they haue vs to tie our selues vnto their authority more then they tyed them∣selues vnto the authority of others but freely to accept  or refuse as wee see iust cause.Hom. 13. in 2. Cor. I pray and beseech you all, saith Chrysostome, that leauing this and that mans opinion, you will search all these things out of the Scripture.In Euseb. hist. l. 7. c. 24. Let it bee commended, saith Dionysius of Alexandria, and with∣out enuy assented vnto which is rightly spoken: but if any thing bee vnsoundly written, let that bee looked into and corrected.Epist. 62. I know I my selfe, saith Hierome, esteeme of the Apostles in one sort, and of other Writers in another: that the first alwayes speake truth, and the latter as men doe in some things erre.De Trinit. l. 3. c. 1. In all my writings, saith Saint Augustin, I desire not only a godly Reader, but also a free corrector: yet as I would haue the Reader addicted vnto mee, so nei∣ther would I haue a corrector addicted to himselfe.De lib. arb. l. 2. c. 32. And a∣gaine, I am not bound to the authority of this man, mea∣ning Cyprian, but I examine his saying by the authority of Scripture, and what agreeth therewith I receiue with his commendation: what agreeth not, by his leaue I refuse. And yet againe,Epist. 111. ad Fortunat. Neither are wee to esteeme the disputations of any men although Catholicke and praise worthy as the Ca∣nonicall Scriptures, that wee may not sauing the honour which is due to those men dislike and reiect something in their writings, if happily wee find them to haue thought o∣therwise then the truth either by others or our selues through Gods help vnderstood. Such am I in the wri∣tings of others, and such would I haue the vnderstanders of mine to bee.Epist. 19. ad Hieron. Finally, I, saith the same Saint Augustin, confesse vnto your charity, that I haue learned to yeeld vnto those books of Scripture alone, which now are called Cano∣nicall, this reuerence and honor, that I most firmely belieue no Author of them to haue erred any thing in writing: And if I find any thing in their writings which seemeth contra∣ry to truth, I will not sticke to say, that either, the copie is
faulty, or the translator apprehended not what is spoken, or I vnderstand it not. But others I so read, that how much soeuer they excell in holynesse and learning, I thinke it not therefore true because they thought so, but because either by those Canonicall Authors, or by probable reason not ab∣horring from truth they were able to perswade mee. Thus the Fathers: whose steps if wee tread in, and whose counsell if wee follow, and not taking vp euery thing vpon trust, but examining them by the touchstone of truth, I hope wee are rather to bee commended then blamed. And reason: for neither were the Fathers more then men, neither are wee of this age lesse then men. And I wonder, why we may not iudge of the sayings of those, who are but men as well as our selues. What? haue wee not reasonable soules as well as they? are we not endued with the same faculty of vnderstanding and discoursing? haue wee not still the same helps both of nature and art which they had? Or when they died, did the Holy Ghost also giue vp the ghost with them? or doth hee deny to assist these latter times with his enlightning grace as hee did the former?Ioh. 16.13. Certainly the Spirit that leadeth into all truth is yet, and euer shall bee amongst vs vnto the end of the world. And as before the writings of the Fa∣thers were, hee directed his Church vnto the true sence of Scripture: so now I doubt not but if all whatsoeuer they haue written were vtterly lost, he would still guide vs therein as hee did them. And verily vnlesse wee will bee too vnthankfull wee cannot but confesse, that as age through Gods bounty hath had more meanes then those heretofore: so through his blessing it hath made further proceedings also in the knowledge of Scripture. For be∣sides
that wee haue whatsoeuer helps they had, we haue ouer and aboue the benefit of all their works, together with much skilfulnes in the Originall of the old Testa∣ment, which most of them wanted, and of the new also, wherewith some were but little acquainted. In regard whereof whosoeuer shall duly compare the ancient Commentaries with those of latter times, must needs bee either weake in iudgement, or obstinate in preiudice if hee preferre not these. Your owne men ingenuously acknowledge so much.Art. 18. cont. Luther. It cannot bee vnknowne to any, saith Fisher B. of Rochester, that there are many things as well in other Scriptures as the Gospels now more cleerely discussed and throughly vnderstood then in ancient times: namely because the Ancients had not the yce broken vnto them, or because their age sufficed not exactly to sound the whole sea of Scripture.In Rom. 5. disp. 51. And
Salmeron, God hath not giuen to all men all, that euery age might enioy some truths which the former knew not. Euery age hath euer ascribed much to antiquity: yet this wee auouch, the yonger the Doctors the cleerer sighted. And Dominicus Bannes, Jt is not necessary that the more remote the Church is from the Apostles times, the lesse perfect knowledge of the mysterie of Faith should bee therein: because after the Apostles time there were not the most learned in the Church which had dexterity in vnderstanding the matters of Faith. Wee are not therefore enwrapped in the more darknesse, for that in respect of time wee are more distant from Christ: but rather the Doctors of these latter times being godly, and treading in the steps of the ancient Fathers haue attained more expresse vnderstanding in some things then they had. For they are like children standing on the shoulders of Gi∣ants, who being lifted by the talnesse of Giants, no maruell  if they see further then they themselues.In Luc. 10. This similitude Stella also vseth to the same purpose, God forbid, saith he that I should condemne what such and so many wise men haue with one accord affirmed yet wee know well that Pig∣mies set on the shoulders of Giants, see further then the Gi∣ants themselues doe. Thus they. Whereby you see the Fathers haue no prerogatiue aboue vs, because they were before vs: but wee rather haue the aduantage be∣cause wee come after them. In a word, bee they what∣soeuer you will, their seruants wee are not, but their fel∣low seruants: sent from God with the same commissi∣on, to the same end, and with the same promises that they were. Neither doth their authority more bind vs in that they are our predecessors, then our authority shall bind them who many ages hereafter may be our succes∣sors. But draw we a little closer. The ancient Fathers say you, are the ground of your Faith. What? seuerally and single by themselues? 12. I sup∣pose no: for there is not one of them, as your owne side confesseth, but hath his error, and I presume you would bee loth to follow them therein. The Fathers therefore, either all iointly, or the more part of them agreeing in one. So Canus,Loc. lib. 7. c. 3. What the greater part of the Fathers iudgeth, that wee professe to bee of the Catholicke Faith. So Salmeron also,In 1. Ioh. 3. disp. 25. When all or almost all Fathers agree in one, it is an ineuitable argumēt. And Gregory of Valentia, It is infallibly true which they deliuer with one consent,Anal. l. 8. c. 8. ea an infallible rule iudging. And
Onuphrius,Prim. Pap. p. 1. c. 6. It is rash and foo∣lish and terrible rashnesse to goe against a sense giuen by the Fathers for the vnderstanding of the Scriptures. And fi∣nally the Councell of Trent, which peremptorily charg∣eth, that no man dare to interprete the Scriptures against  the vnanimous consent of the Fathers. This then vndoub∣tedly being your assertion, as euery way according with the Tenet of the Church of Rome, let vs in Gods name trie the strength thereof, and see with what security and safety a man may aduenture his Faith, and consequently his eternall saluation vpon this ground. And first, whosoeuer will stedfastly repose his Faith vpon consent of Fathers, had need be right well assured which are the authenticall writings of the Fathers. For if these bee doubtfull and vncertaine, the whole frame raised vpon them must of necessity shake and totter. Now, that there are bookes more then a good many which in their forefronts are inscribed and entitled vnto the Fathers, yet in truth are meerely suppositious and a∣pocryphall, I know you cannot bee ignorant. Nor Ori∣gen, nor Athanasius, nor Basil, nor Chrysostome, nor Cy∣ril, nor Tertullian, nor Cyprian, nor Ambrose, nor Hie∣rme, nor Augustin, nor any one almost of all the Fa∣thers, but hath suffered notorious wrong in this kind, hauing base brats and misbegotten bastards fathered vpon him. Which also is so cleere and manifest, that Pos∣seuin, and Salmeron, and Maldonat, and Baronius, and Bellarmine, and all the rest of that side, though too fre∣quently they make vse of such refuse stuffe, yet euery where in their writings are constrained to acknowledge so much.Biblioth. l.
4. But amongst the rest Sixtus Senensis especial∣ly, who purposely recording the works of all the Fa∣thers, taketh vpon him to demonstrate as much in euery one of them, as in his Catalogue hee passeth from one Father to another. So that indeed it would bee but an idle wasting both of oile and time if I should spend ma∣ny words in proofe of that which is denied of none: and  therefore I forbeare further to trouble you with parti∣cularity. Only, because in our Conference you so con∣fidently affirmed that Dionysius the Areopagite, euen he who was Saint Pauls conuert and Scholler, was the right Author of all those books that are now extant vn∣der his name: I must entreat you to haue a little pati∣ence, while I maintaine against you the negatiue which I then held, and for which I stand still engaged vnto you. That this Denise is but a counterfait, but Diuines proue by sundry vnanswerable arguments: I will not vrge them all, but cull out the choicest. Omitting there∣fore the Stile sauouring more of three hundred yeeres after, then those Apostolicall times, and his curious spe∣culations in the secrets of heauen, as if hee had beene surueyer thereof, or had taken a muster of all the hea∣uenly hoste of the blessed. Spirits therein, whereas Saint Paul himselfe though hee had beene rauished vp into the third heauen, euen into the Paradise of God,2 Cor. 12.3.4. yet return∣ing backe neyther durst nor did vtter any such thing, and lastly that hee talken so familiarly of Churches and Chancels and Monks and diuers other orders and ceremonies which are well knowne to be of a much lat∣ter date: omitting I say these and the like obiections, al∣though perhaps not so easy to bee answered, consider with mee I beseech you these few reasons following. First, if these were the books of that Den which was Saint Pauls Scholler; how commeth it to passe that nei∣ther Eusebius in his Ecclesiasticall history, nor
Ierome, nor Gennadui purposely writing Catalogues of all the fa∣mous Writers before them, nor Origen, nor Chrysostom nor any ancient Father, so farre as I can learne, maketh  any mention of them, vntill Gregory the Great, who li∣ued about 600.Hom. 34. de 10. dragm. yeares after Christ, and speaketh very doubtfully of them too? For as for Athanasius whom you affirmed to quote him, I suppose you meant him in his Questions out of the old and new Testament, where∣in hee cites his Mystica Theologia. But neither was this booke of Denis knowne in the time of Athanasius, nor did Athanasius himselfe write that,Biblioth. l. 4. as your Sixtus Se∣nensis thinketh. For had hee written it, would hee, thinke you, haue vouched his owne authority, and that with such arrogance vnder the name of Great Athanasi∣us? or could hee haue mentioned Gregory Nazianzen, who flourished so long after his decease? I trow no: yet hee doth both.Quest. 23. 117. 129. Act. 17. 34. Ib. 16.3. &c. Secondly, it is well knowne that S. Paul was the man that conuerted Denis, and that before his comming to Athens, Timothy had beene entertained by him, and in his company had trauelled ouer many coun∣treyes, and grew so intimate and deere vnto him that he both counted and called him his Son.1 Tim. 1.2. & 2. c. 1.2. Which being so, it cannot reasonably bee imagined that the true Denis would proue either so vngratefull or so presumptuous as this counterfait sheweth himselfe to bee vngratefull, in that forgetting Saint Paul, he euer speakes of one Hie∣rotheus, in obscure man in comparison as of his Master: presumptuous, for that as if hee were a Father to Timo∣thy as well as Saint Paul hee calleth him his Sonne, not∣withstanding hee were farre more fit to bee his disciple. Thirdly,Diuin. nom. c. 5. Strom. l. 8. this Denis citeth Clemens the Philosopher, not Clemens of Rome as some would haue it, but of Alexan∣dria: for in him the very passage quoted by Denis is to bee found.Deuin. nom. c. 4. And yet this Clemens liued two hundred yeeres after Christ. Hee citeth also these words out of
Ignatius, My loue is crucified, as if hee had beene present at his Martyrdome:Memod. and yet the true Dionysius suffered vnder Domitian, whereas Ignatius both wrote his Epi∣stle, and was martyred some good while after him vn∣der Trajan. Hee further citeth the Gospell and Reuelati∣on of Saint Iohn, as if they had a long time beene parcels of holy Scripture: howbeit if wee may belieue history, both those books were written but a little before Saint Iohns death, and fourteen yeeres after the death of Dio∣nysius. And yet againe, in an Epistle to Polycarpus hee speaketh vnto him as vnto a reuerend Bishop and Do∣ctour. Neuerthelesse Dionysius himselfe suffered in France in the yeere of our Lord ninety sixe, as Writers testify, but Polycarpus in the yeere one hundred sixty sixe, and of his age eighty sixe so that at the death of Dionysius, Polycarpus could be but a stripling, and about sixteene yeeres old. Fourthly, according to the Pro∣uerbe, the Rat perisheth by bewraying himselfe: for speak∣ing of Infants, and why they are baptized, thus he saith,Hier. Eccl. c. 7. Hereof wee say those things which our diuine Masters be∣ing instructed by the old tradition haue brought vnto vs. In which words ere hee was aware hee hath discouered that nor Paul nor any other of the Apostles could be his Masters: for it is both vntrue and absurd to say, that the holy Apostles were instructed in the point of Christian Baptisme by the old tradition. Lastly, this Denis writeth that himselfe together with Timothy and Hierotheus were present at the departure and funerall of the Blessed Virgin Mother.Ep. ad Tim. Now story saith that shee liued three∣score and three yeeres, being fifteen yeeres of age when she bare Christ; whereunto if yee adde thirty three yeeres of Christs life, and fifteen more to make up her full age,
it will appeare that shee dyed eight and forty yeeres af∣ter her Sonnes birth, and fifteen after his Ascension. But on the other side it plainely appeareth, that Denis Arco∣pagite was not conuerted vnto the Christian Faith till the eighteenth yeere after the ascension, one and fifty yeeres after Christs birth. Our Diuines gather it thus. The Scripture witnesseth that Saint Paul was not called till Christ was ascended.Reinold in Conc. 8. d. 2. Act. 9.5. Gal. 1.18. Act. 9.26. Gal. 1.21. Act. 13.4. Gal. 2.1. Act. 15.4. Act. 16.1. Being called, hee stayed three yeeres in Damascus and Arabia before hee came to Ieru∣salem. Thence he went into the coasts of Syria and Ci∣licia and the Countreyes thereabout. And fourteen yeeres after hee came to Ierusalem againe with Barnabas to the Councell. From the Councell hee went to Derbe and Lystra, Where hee receiued Timothy. And hauing trauelled through Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia, Macedonia, hee came at last to Athens,Act. 17.34. where hee conuerted Denys. So that it must needs bee about eighteen, or at the least seuenteen yeeres after Christs Ascension before Saint Denys know Christ. All which duely considered, it is euident that the Blessed Virgin dyed if not three full yeeres, yet more then two before the conuersion of De∣nys: and consequently that he could not be one of those Brethren who were present at her death and funerall. Whence also it followeth ineuitably, that the Authour of that booke cannot possibly be this Denys. This argu∣ment being pressed by that renowmed Reinolds vpon Iohn Hart,Confer. c. 8. d. 2. hee confessed ingenuously that hee knew not how to accord it. And these or the like reasons haue so preuailed with sundry of your owne side, that they haue beene forced some to doubt of him, others vtterly to disclaime him from being the true Denys.Praef. in Probl. Alex. Aphrod. Theodorus Caza affirmeth those books of the Hierarchy to be none
of Denys the Athenians.In Act. 17. Ibid. Erasmus also professeth him∣selfe to be of the same mind. And Laurentius Valla saith, that the learnedest men of his time entitled one Apolli∣narius vnto them. Cardinall Cajetan not onely saith it,In Act. 17. but also sheweth how vnlikely it is that hee who wrote of the Names of God, and of the Heauenly and Eccle∣siasticall Hierarchy should bee this Denys.In Act. 17. Erasmus fur∣ther reporteth that one William Groin, an incomparable man both in Diuinity, and all other humane learning be∣ginning his Lectures in Pauls Church in London, vpon the books of the Heauenly Hierarchy, maintained with great vehemence that it was the worke of Denys the Ar∣opagite, wondring at the impudence of them that denied it. But before he had past halfe way into the worke, he grew to be of another opinion, and freely confessed that it seemed to bee none of this Denysses. Finally,Biblioth. l. 2. L. 6. a. 22.9. Sixtus Senensis, although hee professe himselfe to thinke other∣wise, yet hee acknowledgeth that not onely Cajetan, but diuers others also doubt much whether those books bee his whose name they beare. And thus hue I at length fully disengaged my selfe as touching this Dionysius, hauing with many vnanswerable arguments maintained the Negatiue I vndertooke against you: which if reason may preuaile with you, are I am sure sufficient to con∣uince you; if not, yet sufficient to make you stagger. But let vs returne into the lists againe, and resume the argu∣ment which we began to vrge. Many Counterfaits there are passing vp and downe, and masking themselues vnder the names of ancient Fa∣thers. This is confessed of all hands. I demaund then, what infallible rule you haue whereby to discerne, and that without mistaking, which of them are spurious, and
which legitimate. Neither blame mee for demaunding so much, seeing your selues are not afraid to aske vs, how we discerne the Gospell of S. Matthew to be Ca∣nonicall rather then that of Nicodemus. Whereunto if I should answer with you, that the Church hath resolued vpon the Canon of Scripture: can you returne the like answer vnto my demand that the Church hath agreed vpon a Canon for the Fathers also? If you cannot, as I know you neither can nor will, what further security I pray haue you? Is it your owne iudgement? But I haue already shewed you, both in Dionysius Areopagita, and Athanasius, how much that hath deceiued you. And not to flatter you, I suppose you haue not so throughly at∣tended and studied this point, but that many other of these Counterfaits by bearing the name of the Fathers, may bee entertained by you as the very Fathers them∣selues. Is it then the iudgement of other learned men? Alas they are distracted among themselues, and one ad∣mitteth him whom another reiecteth. For example, the Constitutions of Clemens,De author. Le. l. 2. c. 11. Hist. tom. 2. p. 15. Enchir. tract. de Euch. De Euchar. l. 2. c. 9. In 1. Tim. 3. De Euchar. l. 2. c. 14. Of Purg. l. 9. L. 4. in. Hier. saith Stapleton, is a booke full of of Apostolicall spirit: yet saith Baronius, it is reckoned among these that are Apocryphall. Againe, Echius vouch∣eth Cypriide Caena Domni for Transubstantiaon: but Bellarmine denieth that booke to bee Cyprians. The Ie∣suites of Rhenes also cite the Commentaries of Ambrose vpon the Epistles for the Popes supremacie: yet Bellar∣mine holdeth it was neither written by Ambrose, nor any Catholicke Cardinall Allen alledgeth Hierome on the Prouerbs for Purgatory: but Sixtus Senensis denies those Commentaries to be Hieromes.Tom. 4. d. 45. S. 1. n. 30. Finally, for I will only giue you a tast, Snares quoteth Augustin ad fratres in erome for Suffrages: but the Censors of Louan tell him
plainely that it is a counterfait booke. Besides this, if you will needs trust the iudgement of others herein, per∣haps when you thinke you heare a Father speake you may bee pitifully deceiued. For whether it bee out of ignorance, or retchlesnesse, or set purpose to beguile, I cannot tell: but sure I am it is most vsuall and ordinary in all Popish writers to quote for Fathers those that are not Fathers and of ancient credit, but I know not what Foundlings and Changelings borne in Fairie land, and yesterday or three dayes agoe brought amongst vs. What adooe keepeth Master Harding with his Amphi∣lochius, Abdias, Leontius, Martialis, Hippolytus, Simeon Metaphrastes, and other such knights of the poste? What a rumble doe others make with the Epistles of Clemens, Euaristus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Anicetus, Soter, Calix∣tus, Vrbanus, Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus and the like, the barbarousnesse of whose stile bewrayes, that they were written rather by some illeterate clerke then lear∣ned Bishop. But aboue all I cannot sufficiently wonder at Doctor Bristow, and the whole Colledge of Rhemes,Def. of Allen. Purg. In Pref. & in Ioh. 10.29. & Heb. 10.26. who knowing that of the twelue books which Cyril of Alexandria wrote vpon Iohn, foure are perished, name∣ly the fift, sixt, seuenth, and eigth, and that one
Iodocus Clichtoueus a mushrom of yesternight supplied them out of his owne braine: yet cite these books of Clichtoueus againe and againe, and that vnder the name of Saint Cyril himselfe. And this you may please to bee aduertised of by way of Caueat also, because, as it seemed in our Conference, you often read Saint Cyril and peruse him. To vrge this point no further I conclude, seeing you are not any way infallibly certaine which are the writings of the Fathers, which not, and the ground of Faith must be  that which is infallibly certaine, you cannot safely build vpon consent of Fathers, vnlesse you will build vpon vn∣certainty. But suppose there were no doubt at all of their wri∣tings, which they bee: yet you cannot with any securi∣ty rest vpon them, vnlesse you are in like manner cer∣taine, that after so many ages they still retaine their na∣tiue purity, and are come to your hands without any corruption. But such certainty you can haue none: for all the world knowes how shamefully the Fathers haue beene abused, and how intolerably corrupted, and that both of old and of late also.Cap. 23. De Christo l. 1. c. 10. L. 4. tit. Orig. Vincentius Lirinensis saith, that diuers of the ancients thought, the works of Origen had beene miserably depraued, Bellarmine sayth, it is very credible many blasphemies were inserted into them by Hereticks. And Sixtus Senensis, that they had defiled all his works with innumerable Heresies.Id. ib. tit. Leo. Pope Leo much grieued that his Epistles had beene polluted with the vnwashen hands of Hereticks. And the Recognitions of Clemens were by them also corrupted,Id. tit. Clem. Id. ibid. l. 2. sayth Ruffin. It is manifest also, saith Sixtus Senensis, that the Canons of the Apostles were contaminated by the Nicolaitans.Tit. Iohan. Chrysost. And, the imperfect worke of Chrysostome vpon Mathew, a∣bounds with sundry strange monsters of Heretiks. The same Sixtus further sayth,Praefat. in l. 5. that Pamphilus Martyr, Eu∣sebius Caesariens, Didymus, and Ruffinus much complai∣ned, that very many writings not only of
Clemens, Dio∣nysius, Origen, and Athanasius, but of other noble Do∣ctors also were pitifully handled by Heretiks.Pref in Basil. de Sp. S. Erasmus not onely complaines that many things were foysted in by others into the middle of treatises, as namely of A∣thanasius, Chrysostome, Hierome, Basil, others: but ex∣presly  affirmeth that the Friers are they who haue cor∣rupted the Fathers. Not so expresly Ludouicus vines,In Ciuit. Dei l. 22. c. 8. yet couertly hee insinuates as much, In this chapter of Augustin, saith he, many things are added by those who with their polluted hands haue defiled the writings of great Authors. Euen of late Pamelius, although eight other written copies failed him, yet bashed not vpon the sole authority of one blind Cambron copie, to insert into Cy∣prian, de vnitate Ecclesiae, these words, He that forsaketh the chaire of Peter on which the Church is founded, doth hee hope himselfe to be in the Church? Which glosseme not∣withstanding it bee not to bee found nor in Alopecius his print, nor in that of Heruagius, or Langlier, or Crinitus, or Gryphius, or Manutius, or any other,Part. 1. p. 89. no not in any other written copie, as our learned Bilson sheweth: yet because it seemeth to make much for the authority of the See of Rome, it must of necessity bee clapt into the text. Whereas contrarily, if all the Copies of the Imper∣fect worke vpon Mathew haue in them these words, In which not the true Body of Christ, but the Sacrament of his Body is contained; because it maketh strongly against Transubstantiation, it must needs bee inforced (for so it pleaseth. Bellarmins grace) by some Scholler of Beren∣garius.De Euchar. l. 2. c. 22. And as the Fathers haue been not a little wronged by way of addition, so I feare mee they haue receiued much iniury also by way of Subtraction.Ep. dedic. Yee haue taken order, saith Sixtus Senensis vnto Pope Pius the fift, that all the works of Catholicke writers, and specially the anci∣ent Fathers should bee purged and corrected. In Cyprians works printed at Rome by Manutius, the letter of Firmi∣lianus B. of
Caesaria is left out. Why? but because hee is in somewhat quicke against Steuen B. of Rome. In  regard whereof saith Pamelius, it had beene more wis∣dome if it neuer had beene set out. The works of Am∣brose also set foorth by Frelonius at Lions were before the printing of them razed by two Friers. This Fr. Iu∣nius saw with his eyes, and the Corrector of the presse complayned of it, professing hee would buy any other print rather then that. You must needs bee very deafe, for all the world rings of it, if you haue not heard of the late order taken amongst you for the purging of books at the next reprinting of them: namely that what∣soeuer is to be found whether in the Epistle Dedicatory, or Preface, or Margent, or Tables, or Annotations, or in the Text of the worke it selfe, any way seeming to make either against them, or for vs, be wholy cut off, and left our in the next edition. Then which I thinke there was neuer a more base and beggerly shift vsed. Neither doth it argue other then the badnesse of your cause, and the distrust you haue of it: for truth and a good cause would much disdaine to bee supported by so vniust, and dishonest meanes. Yet is this policy now a principall pillar of your Religion, and hath of late yeeres beene carefully executed. Witnesse those, Expurgatorie Indi∣ces which giue direction to the Ouerseers of this busi∣nesse, what is to bee altered, which to be added, and what to bee defalked and spunged out: of which fiue are pu∣blished to the world, one printed in Flanders, a second in Spayne, a third in Portugal, a fourth in
Naples, a fift in Rome. What others there be lurking in secret and not yet come to light I know not. Witnesse also the writings of Cardinall Cajetan, Polydor Virgil, Andreas Masius, Fe∣ras, Ludouicus Vines, Erasmus, Beatus Rhenanus, and innumerable others which haue already passed this Pur∣gatory,  and are not set forth pitifully mangled and dis∣membred. But to leaue this, suppose the Fathers haue not been so shamefully entreated, as I haue shewed: yet would I pray you to answer mee these two questions, the first, whether you bee assured of this consent by your own reading, or else belieue it vpon the report of others: the second, if you haue read them all your owne selfe, whether you haue read them in a translation, or in their owne originall language. To the first of these two que∣stions, I presume you neither can nor will answer that you haue read them all your selfe: for I know you nei∣ther haue them all, nor haue you had sufficient either time or strength to peruse them all, vnlesse happily your body bee made of yron, and you haue reached vnto the yeares of Methuselah. What then? will you trust the allegations of other men? Take heed what you doe, for so you may soone bee deceiued. For example,Doct. Princ. l. 6. c. 14. Staple∣ton to proue that Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, but
Peter both of Iewes and Gentiles,In Gal. alledgeth these words of Ambrose, Hee nameth Peter alone and compa∣reth him to himselfe, because hee had receiued the Primacy to build the Church, that himselfe likewise is chosen to haue the Primacy of building the Churches of the Gentiles: yet so that Peter preached vnto the Gentiles also. Here your Doctor stops, and Iohn Hart taking it vp vpon trust, vrg∣eth it against Reynolds as a strong testimony: whereas Ambrose, if yee curtall not his words, saith cleane other∣wise, thus, yet so that Peter also preached to the Gentiles if it were needfull, and Paul to the Iewes. Many mo such falsifications might I easily produce out of your wri∣ters: but let vs rather heare how themselues censure one another. Antony Augustin Archbishop of Tarracon desi∣ring  in a booke written to that purpose that Gratian might bee purged,De emend. Grat. l. 1. di∣al. 1. saith, His faults are so many that they cannot bee reckoned in one day. For hee alledgeth false Au∣thors ascribing words to Gregory, Ambrose, Augustin no where to bee found in them: and produceth true Authors, but so as oft times he bringeth in contrary sentences. Cumel saith that the testimony of Hierome is by Molina,Disp. Var. to. 3. p. 126. Pag. 124. Suares, and others fraudulently cited: and that Suares alledging Chrysostome, cuts off that which immediatly goes before and followes after,Defens. p. 324. because hee saw Chrysostome fauoured not his opinion at all. It is no rare thing, saith Iohannes Marsilius, for his illustrious Lordship, meaning Bellar∣mine, to cite Authors for an opinion, whereas they affirme the plaine contrary.Pag. 289. And againe, It grieueth mee to see things imputed vnto holy Fathers, the contrary whereof they affirme.Ib. p. 357. Finally saith the foresayd Marsilius touch∣ing Cardinall Baronius, I haue heard that as hee hath taken a liberty to mend the Fathers, Canons, and Historians, so he will correct the Councels after his manner, and for ne purpose, and to assume vnto himselfe a licence , which God forbid. And thus you see euen by your owne men how dangerous it is to trust them in their allegati∣ons. As fo second question, I thinke you will con∣fesse (pardon ee if I thinke amisse) that you haue not skill enough with vnderstanding to read the Greeke Fa∣thers in their Original, but are faine to trust vnto Trans∣lations. But I beseech you doe not Translators many times what through ignorance, or neglicence, or wilful∣nesse mistake and peruert the meaning of their Author?L. 2. c. 1. Ruffinus translated the Ecclesiasticall history of Eusebius, and in it this passage of Clemens, that
Peter, Iames, and Iohn, although Christ preferred them almost before all, yet  they tooke not the honour of Primacy to themselues, but or∣dained Iames who was surnamed Iust Bishop of the Apo∣stles. A shrewd testimony for the Primacy of Iames a∣gainst that of Peter: but the error is in the translation, the Greeke Eusebius hauing not Bishop of the Apostles, but Bishop of Hierusalem. Yet Marianus Scotus citeth the same out of Methodius iust according to Ruffins tran∣slation, from whence perhaps it was taken.Hist. l. 2. c. 23. Eusebius himselfe in expresse tearmes affirmeth the Epistle of S. Iames to be Spurious: but your Chrystopherson renders it so as if he had meant that not himselfe but some others in the Church had so esteemed it in former times. And lastly, not to stand longer vpon this point, that very trans∣lation of Cyrillus Alexandrinus which you haue, made by Trapezuntius, you haue little reason much to trust vnto. For as Bonauentura Vulcanius sheweth,Praef. & Ann. it is a ve∣ry disorderly one, wherein many things are omitted, much is added of his owne, and much peruersly transla∣ted. To conclude therefore, seeing the writings of the Fathers haue so many wayes and so notoriously beene a∣bused, by addition, by subtraction, by alteration, by misquotation, by mistranslation: it followeth that infal∣lible certainty from them you can haue none, and so consequently that you cannot safely build your Faith vpon them.
To proceed, the Scriptures you say are obscure and ambiguous, and therefore you may not rest vpon them saue onely as they are expounded of the Fathers. If so, then if the Fathers also bee obscure and ambiguous, nei∣ther may you rest your Faith vpon them. Now certain∣ly the Fathers are as darke and doubtfull as the Scrip∣ture. If you thinke otherwise, doe but read the works  of Tertullian and Arnobius, and let me afterward know your minde. For my part I see no reason why the Scrip∣ture should bee more subiect to diuersity of interpreta∣tions according to the difference of times, as Cardinall Cusan impiously affirmeth,Ep. 2. & 7. Cont. Whit. l. 2. p. 45. and
Duraeus the Iesuit impu∣dently defendeth; then the writings of the Fathers. What? doe wee not vouch the Fathers on both sides? are we not as confident vpon them as you? whence com∣meth this, I beseech you, if they bee so cleere that no doubt can bee made of them? And why doe you pro∣fesse in your Flemish Expurgatorie Index, that in ancient Catholike Writers, yee tolerate many errors, yee extenu∣ate and excuse them, and often deny them by deuising some shift, and faining a sence vnto them when they are opposed against you? What need I say, all these tricks and fetches if there bee no obscurity in them? If literall and Gram∣maticall construction may cary it, the Fathers are dire∣ctly ours: and wee suppose they ment as they wrote, neither can you make any shew of answer, vnlesse you fall to expound the meaning of them. And so as you re∣moue your Faith from the letter of the Scripture vnto the exposition of the Fathers: so must you of force re∣moue the same againe from the letter of the Fathers vn∣to some other tribunall to determine the sence and mea∣ning thereof. Giue mee leaue to declare this by some few examples. That Faith only iustifies, Origen, Cypri∣an, Eusebius Caesariensis, Hilary, Basil, Chrysostome, Am∣brose, Augustin, Cyril, Primasius, Hesychius, Gennadius, Oecumenius, in expresse tearmes affirme, agreeing there∣in with vs: whose words I will not fayle to produce whensoeuer you shall require. Against hauing of I∣mages in Churches, and the Adoration of them, wee  haue the precise words not onely of Lactantius and Epi∣phanius and other Fathers seuerally,Epist. ad Ioh. Hicrosol. but nineteene Bi∣shops together in the Councell of Eliberis, and of the whole Councell of Frankford vnder Charles the Great. Against the Bishop of Romes supremacy wee haue the plaine resolution of Pope Gregory,Lib. 6. ep. 30. that he is the forerun∣ner of Antichrist whosoeuer desires to bee called Vniuersall Bishop. And of the Generall Councell of Chalcedon,Act. 16. gi∣uing to the Bishop of Constantinople equall priuiledges with the Bishop of Rome. And of two hundred & seuen∣teene Bishops in the sixt Councell of Carthage, among whom were Saint Augustin, Prosper, Gresians, and many other worthy Fathers, all decreeing that the Pope of Rome thenceforward should haue no authority ouer the African Churches. Finally, against Transubstantiation thus writeth Gelasius, himselfe a Bishop of Rome,De dab. nat. con. Euych. The Sa∣craments of the Body and Bloud of CHRIST which we receiue is a diuine thing, wherefore by them wee are made partakers of the diuine nature, and yet the substance of bread and wine ceaseth not to bee. Thus also Theodoret,Dial. 1. Hee who hath called meat and drinke that which naturally is his body, and after cals himselfe a Vine, he himselfe hath honoured the visible signes with the name of his Body and Bloud, hauing not changed their nature, but hauing added grace vnto nature. And againe,Dial. 10. The signes mysticall change not their nature after consecration, for they re∣maine in their first substance, figure and forme.Hom. 11. Chysostom likewise, if hee bee the Authour of the imperfect worke on Math. In the sacred vessels there is not the true Body of CHRIST, but the mystery of his Body. And Saint Augustin, The Lord doubted not to say; This is my Body,Con. Adi∣mant. c. 12. when he gaue the signe of his Body. Thus the Fathers in
these few points neither is it hard to shew the like con∣sent in the rest. What? Will you now subscribe vnto their words? yea being taken in the right sense. But who shall iudge of the on vnderstand them one way, we another. Shall  learned Rabbies of your side? Fic, that were too partiall: and they so enterfere in their answers that they cut and hew one the other miserably. Reuerend Bishop Morton hath demonstrated this at large.Preambleng. Mitigator. Take one of his examples. The Councell of Bbe∣ris forbiddeth the hauing of Images in Churches,Do Imagin. l. 2. c. 9. and A∣doration of them. Of Images representing Gods nature, faith Andrads. No, saith Bellarmine, for such were not then in vse. For feare test Gentiles should thinke Christi∣ans warshipped them idolatrously, saith Sanders. But the reason of the Canon agreeth not much with this exposi∣tion, saith Bellarmine. Because Christians seemed to wor∣ship those Images as Gods,Ibid. saith Alen Cope. But this exposition is not agreeable to the Canon, saith Bllr∣mine. Lest in time of persecution they should bee made a scorne and contempt vnto infidels, saith Sanders, Allen, Turrian,De adorat. l. 2. d. 5. c. 2. n. 131. and Bellarmine. But this exposition agreeth not with the intention of the Canon, saith Vasques. Lest by the decay of the wals they might loose their lustre, saith the same Vasques.Ib. n. 132. The Councell was but prouinciall, and neuer confirmed by the Pope,Ib. n. 121. Bell. Imag. l. 2. c. 36. Bin. de Conc. in hunc Can. Biblioth. l. 5. ann. 247. say diuerse of late, be∣ing oppressed with the obiection. But Baronius and Bi∣nius affirme that it was a lawfull Councell and free from errour. And whatsoeuer the occasion of the prohibition was, this is sure, The Councell of Eliberis did absolutely forbid the worship of images, saith Sixtus Senensis. What say you now to this language of
Babel? Can you gather any certainty for your Faith out of such confusion?  Certainly you cannot. And if many Fathers laying their heads together in a generall Councell, may euen in then decrees of Faith vse inconuenient speech either by su∣perfluity of temes, or disorderly placing them, and the like; so that no much the words, as the se is to bee regarded;De Concil. l. 2. c. 12. as your Bellarmine affirmeth you rede any reason why some few of them writing funderly, one from another, may not also faile in their tearmes, and thereby leaue the Readers mind in suspence and douth what their true meaning should bee? The very Sy of Trent hath not spoken so plainely, but that it hath left scruples in the mind of some. And yet, Good God, faith Campian, what variety of Nations,Rat. 4. what choice of Bi∣shops out of the whole world, what Maiesty of King and States, what marow of Diuines, what holynesse, what teares, what fasting, what flowers of Vniuersities, what tongues, what subtilty, what industry, what infinite read∣ing, what richesse of vertues and studies replenished that more then humane Sanctuary. All which notwith∣standing Bellarmine and Sixtus Senensis accord not in the meaning of the third Session touching the number of the Canonicall books.De verb. Dei l. 1. c. 7. For Bellarmine thinks that the seuen last chapters of Hester following after the tenth are by the Councell admitted into the Canon,Biblioth. l. 1. & 8. but Sixtus think∣eth no. Neither yet are Bellarmine and Ambrose Catha∣rin agreed about the eleuenth Canon of the seuenth Ses∣sion concerning the necessity of the Priests intention to make a Sacrament, the one affirming it;De Sacram. in gen. l. 1. c. 27. Opusc. de in∣tent. minist. Ib. de laps. & pecc. or. c. 6. the other deny∣ing it. Nor lastly, are they resolued of the Councels mind touching Originall sinne, Catharin, who had beene in the Councell a great stickler,Bell. de amis. grat. l. 5. c. 1▪ defining it onely by the Imputation of Adams sinne, others affirming it to
be more then so, and that vpon the words of the Coun∣cell too. I could easily instance in sundry other points: but these are enough to let you see, that the Oracles of Loxia went more perplexe, then the Decrees of this Trident conuenticle. Whether they were framed so of purpose, or no, I cannot tell; many shrewdly suspect it. Sure I am, it hath beene so farre from stinting of quarels, that in many things it hath beene and still is the matter and fewell of contention. Howsoeuer, seeing the Fathers oftentimes write so darkly and ambiguously, that there is great doubt made not onely betweene you and vs, but amongst your chiefest Doctors also, what their right meaning should bee: I conclude, and that ac∣cording to your own rule, that Consent of Fathers can∣not bee a sufficient ground to build vpon. But what if the more part of Fathers consent in error, euen in those points which the Church of Rome herselfe condemneth? Will you not then freely confesse that such Consent is not so firme and sure a ground as you tooke it to bee? Doubtlesse you will, vnlesse you be too too wilfull and obstinate in your opinion. Let vs there∣fore a little examine this point. That Christ after the first Resurrection shall liue with his elect hereupon earth for a thousand yeeres in all peace and happynesse vntill the second Resurrection, is the error of the Millenaries, and iustly condemned by the Church of Rome. Yet Pa∣pias Saint Iohn the Apostles auditor,Sixt. Senens. l. 5. ann. 233. & 6. ann. 347. Apollinarius, Irena∣us, Tertullianus, Victorinus Pitabionensis, Lactantius, Seuerus Sulpitius, Iustin Martyr, and a great multitude of other Catholicke men were of the
me opinion, all being deceiued by misunderstanding that in the Reuela∣tion, And they shall raigne with him a thousand yeeres. S.  Augustin speaketh very tenderly of it,De ciuit. Dei l. 20. c. 7. In Ier. l. 4. calling it neither error not heresy, himselfe hauing sometimes held it. And Hierome durst not condemne it, because so many Church-men and Martyrs had said it. That the soules of iust men after their dissolution see not the face of God vntill the day of iudgement, is an error and condemned by the Church of Rome. Yet the Liturgie fathered vpon Saint Iames, Irenaeus, Iustin, Tertullian, Clemens Roma∣nus, Origen, Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, Prudentius, Ambrose, Chrysostome, the Authour of the Vnperfect worke on Mathew, Augustin, Theodoret, Arethas, Oecu∣menius, Theophylact, Ethymius, Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, and Bernard, held the same, whose particular words Sixtus Senensis recordeth in his Library.Lib. 6. annot. 345. Stapl. de auth. Sc. l. 1. c. . I am not ignorant how Sixtus there laboureth to excuse them but others of his pewfellowes find their words so preg∣nant that they can by no meanes salue them. That the thrice blessed Virgin Mary was conceiued in Originall Sinne, the Church of Rome holdeth to bee an error:3. d. 117. n. 148. for not onely the vnskilfull vulgar, but the Doctors and Diuines, and all Catholiks with one consent fight for the Immaculate Conception, saith Vasques. And why hath your Church by her authority commanded the feast of r Conception to bee celebrated, vnlesse shee were con∣ceiued without sinne?De consecr. d. 4. Firmissime n. 11. Yet Cardinall
Turrcremata af∣firmes, that all the Doctors in a manner maintaine the contrary, and that hee had gathered together the testi∣monies of three hundred to that effect, noting the very places and words wherein they affirme it,Part. 1. q. 1. d. 5. And Domini∣cus Bannes saith, that it is the generall consent of the holy Doctors, that shee was conceiued in sinne: and yet the con∣trary is held in the Church, to bee not onely probable, but  very godly. That Angels and the Soules of men are bo∣dily,Actione. 5. visible, and circumscriptible, is an error, and con∣demned by the Church of Rome. Yet three hundred Fa∣thers, such as they were, and fifty vpon the head of them, in the second Councell of Nice, auouch it, and alledge the authority of Basil surnamed the Great, Blessed Atha∣nasius, Methodius, and their followers for it. If any shall say, it was the opinion onely of Iohn B. of Thessalonica, and not of the whole Councell: I answer, that what Iohn said, Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople, forth∣with confirmed, and the whole Synod immediatly an∣swered, So it is my Lord. And this is so cleere, that Bartholmew Carranza notes it as an errour in them,Epit. Conc. ad cum loc. Ep. 215. De Eccl. dog. c. 11. & 12. and contrary vnto the Lateran Councell: yet addes withall that Saint Augustin was of the same mind. But leauing other their errors, I come without further delay to dis∣charge that obligation, wherein I stand bound to proue, that the Fathers for a time generally held it necessary for all, euen young Infants, to bee partakers of the Eucha∣rist,Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. can. 4. or they could not bee saued: which you know the Church of Rome alloweth not, but condemneth as an error. Eccl. hier. c. 2. p. 3.First your Denys, hee that goeth vnder the name of Areopagita, after hee hath recited other ceremonies in the administration of Baptisme, at length, saith hee, the Priest cals the partie Baptized to the most holy Eucharist, and giues the Communion vnto him. And lest you should vnderstand this of them that are baptized being Adul∣ti,Id. 7. c. 3. elsewhere he speaketh more plainely thus, That chil∣dren who cannot yet vnderstand diuine things should bee made partakers of holy Baptisme, and of the mysticall signes of the most holy Communion, may perhaps seeme
ridiculous to profane men,De lapsis. if the Auditors when Bishops teach such Heauenly things bee not fit. Saint Cyprian re∣ports a story of a certaine Infant mayde, who had not yet age enough to tell what wrong another had done her, how when the Deacon had offered the holy chalice vnto her, and shee refused, hee powred it into her mouth.Ibid. And a little after, Will not those Infants, saith hee, when the day of iudgement shall come, say, wee haue done nothing, neither forsaking the meat and cup of the Lord haue wee of our owne accord hastned to these profane contagions: the perfidiousnesse of others hath ouerthrowne vs, our Parents are our murtherers. Innocent the first B. of Rome,Ep. ad Patr. conc. Milou. That which your Brotherhood, saith hee, affirmeth them to preach, namely that little ones may obtaine the reward of eternall life without the grace of Baptisme is very foolish: for vnlesse they eat the flesh of the Sonne of man and drinke his blood, they cannot haue life in them.Con. Iul. Pel. l. 1. c. 2. Of this Innocen∣tius S. Augustin saith, how hee defined, that little ones vn∣lesse they did eat the flesh of the Sonne of man, they could by no meanes haue life in them. Now I beseech you durst a∣ny man at that time hold otherwise then the head of the Church (for so you count the Pope to bee) had defi∣ned? But let vs heare Saint Augustin himselfe. Verily,Con. duas Ep. Pel. l. 1. c. 22. saith he, Christ is the Sauiour of little ones also, and vnlesse they bee redeemed by him, they must perish: because with∣out his flesh and blood they cannot haue life. And againe, Wherefore they also, as I haue said,Ad vital. Ep. 107.
if they die in that ten∣der age, shall certainly bee iudged, according to the things they haue done by the Body, namely during that time while they liued in the body, when by the heart and mouth of them that bare them they belieued or not belieued, when they were baptized or not baptized, when they ate the flesh of  Christ, or not ate it, when also they dranke his bloud or not dranke it according to these things I say which they haue done by the body, not those which they would haue done had they liued longer here shall they bee iudged. And yet a∣gaine,De pec. mer. & remiss. l. 1. c. 20. Away therefore now with doubting, Let vs heare the Lord and not the suspicions and coniectures of men, let vs I say heare the Lord speaking this not of the Sacrament of Baptisme, but of the Sacrament of his holy Table, to which none lawfully approcheth but hee that is Baptized, Vnlesse you eat my Flesh and drinke my Blood you shall haue no life in you. What seeke wee further? What will they bee able to answer hereunto, vnlesse obstinacy doe stretch their striuing sinewes against the constancy of euident truth? Will any dare to say this also, that this saying be∣longs not vnto little ones, or that they may haue life in them without the participation of this Body and Blood, be∣cause hee saith not, hee that eateth not, as of Baptisme, hee that is not borne againe, but thus, If yee eat not, as speaking to them who were able to heare and vnderstand which cer∣tainly little ones cannot? But hee that saith so, marketh not that vnlesse this saying hold all, that they cannot haue life without the Body and Blood of the Sonne of Man, euen the elder age also will make little reckoning of it. And yet once more againe,Ib. c. 24. The Carthaginian Christians ex∣cellently call Baptisme no other then Saluation, and the Sa∣crament of the Body of Christ no other then Life. Whence but from an ancient and as J thinke Apostolicall tradition, by which the Churches of Christ hold as ingrafied into them that without Baptisme and the participation of the Lords Table no man can come not onely to the Kingdome of God, but neither to saluation nor life eternall. And this being thus proued, by and by he concludes, If therefore  as so many and so pregnant diuine testimonies witnesse with ioint consent, no man may hope either for saluation or eter∣nall life without Baptisme and the Body and Blood of the Lord, in vaine doe they promise it to little ones without them. Thus Augustin: where by the way obserue how hee affirmeth this his opinion to bee the Tenet of all the Churches of Christ. To whom I adde lastly the eleuenth Councell of Toledo,Can. 11. If any faithfull man being constrained by any ineuitable infirmity shall cast vp the Eucharist which hee hath receiued, let him in no case bee subiect to Ecclesiasticall condemnation. Likewise let not the censure of any condemne them, who either in the time of their in∣fancy shall doe the same, or in the alienation of their mind, seeming to bee ignorant of what they doe.In Ioh. 6.53. In Tertull. de cor. mill. This error tou∣ching the necessity of the Eucharist to Infants continued in the Church a long time, euen about sixe hundred yeeres, as your Maldonat saith. And Beatus Rhenanus obserueth out of the Rituall books called Agendae, that the custome of ministring the Communion to Infants was still in vse vnto the times of Ludouicus Pius and Lo∣tharius, that is, towards nine hundred yeeres after Christ. Against all this I know not what can be said, vnlesse per∣haps, that it might bee a generall custome, but not a ge∣nerall opinion. and so indeed some of your men turne it off, and the Councell of
Trent saith, that as those holy Fathers had probable cause of their doing according to the reason of the time, so without controuersie must we belieue that they did it not vpon necessity of saluation. But first, this is a question not of Faith but of Fact, namely what those Fathers did belieue in this point: and in a matter of Fact your selues confesse a Councell may bee decei∣ued. Secondly, the sayings aboue related are so plaine  and expresse as none can bee more: so that it must needs bee extreme madnesse to yeeld vnto this consequent, the Councell of Trent, that is, a few men of yesterday say so, and therefore though Pope Innocent, and Augustin, and other of the ancient Fathers say the contrary of themselues, yet must wee not belieue them. Thirdly, the very Text of Scripture which they alledged to proue, their opinion, vnderstanding it of the Eucharist as they did, manifestly argues they held a necessity of it to In∣fants, Vnlesse you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drinke his blood yee shall not haue life in you. Lastly, you are to know that the Fathers brought in this of the Eucharist against the Pelagians to proue the necessity of Baptisme, thus, None can bee saued without partaking of the holy Communion: None may partake of the holy Commu∣munion except hee bee Baptized, Ergo, none can bee saued except hee bee Baptized. The Assumption they tooke for granted: the Maior they warranted by the a∣foresaid text. So that the Conclusion must of necessity fall to the ground, and Baptisme cannot bee necessary vnlesse the Eucharist also bee necessary. And thus haue I discharged this obligation also, and haue made good my promise vnto you as touching this point. From which together with the other particulars aboue men∣tioned, I conclude, that the Fathers haue generally er∣red, and consequently that Consent of Fathers cannot bee a ground of Faith, vnlesse you will consent with them in error.
Which will yet further appeare, if you will please to take notice that your own men orderly reiect them not∣withstanding their Consent. For why should they doe thus after so many vaunts and brags, if they thought the  more part of them could not erre? Yet that so they doe,Loc. l. 7. c. 1. n. 1. Rom. 5. learne by these few examples. Canus saith that from that place of the Apostle, In whom haue all sinned, all the holy Fathers with one mouth affirme the Blessed Virgin to haue beene conceiued in Originall sinne, as namely Chrysostome, Eusebius, Remigius, Ambrose, Augustin, Bernard, Bede, Anselme, Erardus Martyr, S. Antony, Bonauenture, Aquinas, Vincentius, Damascenus, Hugo de sancto Victore. Yet, saith hee, though there were no Au∣thor to stand against them the argument drawne from consent of all the Fathers is but weake, and the contrary opinion is more probably and piously defended. Salmeron al∣so beeing hardly beset with the same army of Fathers in the same point, quits himselfe like a man thus,In Rom. 5. d. 51. To this multitude of Doctors we oppose another multitude, to driue out one naile with another: his meaning is, the learned men of these latter times against the Ancient Fathers. Michael Medina confesseth that Hierome, Ambrose,De Sacr. hom. orig. l. 1. c. 5. Au∣gustin, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Occu∣menius, and Theophylact, to whom hee might haue ad∣ded diuers others, that I say they held there was no dif∣ference betweene a Presbyter and a Bishop: yet hee re∣iecteth it as the opinion of the Heretike Aërius. That Christ is the true Shepheard mentioned in the tenth of Iohn, Augustin, Chrysostome, Hierome, Caesarius, Cyril, Theodoret, Aponius, Gregorius Rom. Anastasius Sinaita, Prosper, Theophylact, Euthymius, Rupertus, Cyprian, Leontius, Eucherius Lugd. Bede, Bernard, Anselme Can∣tear. Liranus, and many others affirme: yet,Antid. Huang. in Ioh. 10. saith Staple∣ton, the Pope is vnderstood thereby. All the Ancient Fa∣thers in a manner, as Gregory Nazianzen, Origen, Atha∣nasius, the Author of the imperfect worke on Mathew,
Saint Ambrose,Antiq. Iud. l. 3. c. 4. De Decal. & de legg. spec. Saint Hierome, and generally all the an∣cient Hebrewes, as both Iosephus and Philo testifie, diui∣ded the Decalogue as wee doe, making the first table to consist of foure Commandements concerning Gods worship, and that against Images to bee the second: your Church notwithstanding to couer her spirituall fornica∣tions, and the sacrilegious razing of that Commande∣ment out of your Prayer-books and Catechismes, goes against all antiquity, diuiding the first table onely into three Commandements,Quaest. 71. in Exod. and cutting the tenth into two, hauing no other colour for it but onely one Augustins single authority. To bee breefe, In the exposition of this verse,In Psal. 31. saith Tolet, nor the Greeks, nor the Latins, nor they who follow the Hebrewes, seeme to mee to speake perfectly. So almost all expound,In Mat. 19.11. In Mat. 16.18. saith Maldonat, with whom I cannot agree. And againe, The meaning of these words of Christ seemes not to bee that which all bring, whom I remember to haue read, except Hilary. And yet againe, The opinions of the Fathers touching this sentence are diuerse, but to speake freely I rest in none of them.In Mat. 11.11. & 13. In Ioh. 6.62. And, All the Fathers almost so expound, but their interpretation seemeth not to me fit enough. And lastly, Thus I expound it, and although I haue no Author for this exposition, yet I approue it rather then that of Augustin and the rest, albeit most probable be∣cause if more crosseth the meaning of the Caluinists. Which last clause I would pray you well to consider: for by it, not Consent of Fathers, but crossing of Caluinists is the rule of truth. O impudence! O perfidiousnesse! to boast and bragge so much of Fathers, and yet in truth to make so little reckoning of them. But to let you see how the world is cheated by these Impostors, heare a little fur∣ther.
If at any time, saith Cardinall Cajetan,Proaem. in lib. Moysis. yee meet with a sence agreeing with the text, although swarning from the streame of the Doctors, let the Reader shew himselfe an in∣different Censor, neither let any detest it for this cause, be∣cause it disagreeth from the ancient Doctors. For God hath not tyed the exposition of the Scripture vnto the sences of the ancient Doctors: otherwise all hope would bee taken from vs of expounding the Scripture. This saying of Ca∣jetan is I confesse reproued by some of your men: yet is hee defended by Andradius, who also saith,Defens. fid. Trid. l. . We may for∣sake all the sences of the Fathers, and bring a new vnlike vnto theirs, and, the Fathers spake not oracles when they expounded the Scripture. Maldonat is very peremptory, Whatsoeuer many ancient Fathers haue thought,Sum. q. 12. 2. 4. whether it bee true Matrimony after a vow, the contrary is now true. And Duraeus,Con. Whitel. p. 140. The Fathers are not counted Fathers when they either write or teach of their owne, and what they haue not receiued from the Church.p. 1. pa. 75. And Dominicus Bannes, The more part of Doctors if some few bee against them make no infallible argument in matters of Faith.De iurisd. p. 4. Dr Marta also, The common opinion of Doctors is not to bee regarded, when another contrary opinion fauoureth the power of the keyes and the iurisdiction of the Church.De vorb. Dei l. 3. c. 10. Like∣wise
Bellarmine, The Fathers expound the Scriptures not as Iudges but as Doctors: now not to this but that authori∣ty is required. And,De conc. In expounding the Scripture the Ca∣tholike Church doth not alway and in all things follow the Fathers. The writings of the Fathers are no rules and haue no authority to bind vs.In Rom. 14. Finally Tom teltroth Cornelius Mus, To speake freely I would yeeld more credence to one chiefe Bishop in those things which concerne the mysteries of Faith, then a thousand Augustins, Hieromes, or Grego∣ries.  And thus as a right learned writer saith,Reinol. Conf. c. 2. d. 2. you vse the Fathers as Marchants are wont to vse their counters. Sometime they stand with you for pence, sometime for pounds, as they bee next and readiest at hand to make vp your accounts. So that I cannot but maruell, how you dare to make that the ground of your Faith, which the learnedst of your side so ordinarily reiect as an vnsure foundation to build vpon. Shall I tell you, M. Bayly? you haue been fouly gul∣led and beguiled by your new Masters. For notwith∣standing all this faire pretence of Fathers: yet in the end, not Consent of Fathers, but the authority of the present Church must bee your surest anchorhold. So saith Gregory de Valentia, a man well seene in the Romish mysteries,Tom. in Thom. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 7. §. 3. De Sacram. l. 2. c. 25. Neither the holy Scripture, nor yet tradition alone, if yee separate from it the present authority in the Church, is that infallible authority, and mistresse of Faith. So Bellarmine also, The firmity of all ancient Councels and Doctrines depends vpon the authority of the present Church. And this reason they render, because without the authority of the present Church yee can neuer haue infallible certainty, either of Scripture, or Councels, or Traditions, which they bee, or what is the true meaning of them. So that now you must of force remoue your Faith from the ancient Fathers, and rest it vpon the pre∣sent Church. But what? are you now more safe then you were before? Neuer a whit, vnlesse you may fur∣ther bee resolued, what is the present Church. For it is taken three seuerall wayes by you: and is either the Church essentiall consisting of all Catholicks whatsoe∣uer,Prier. in Luth. tom. 1. fund.
. or Representatiue of Bishops in a Coūcell, or Virtu∣all the Pope who is head of the Church. Now which of  these three must you pitch vpon? The first. So say some. But the most part of this Church is the Vulgar who are not comprehensiue of those matters which are contro∣uerted: neither is it possible for you to gather the voices of such a diuided and dispersed body. Others therefore direct you to the second: But what? to a Councell with the Pope or without the Pope? For here is such confu∣sion of tongues, and part taking of each side, that I feare you will hardly find any rest for the sole of your foote this way. Howbeit, if the most voices of the new cut now adayes may sway it, not a Councell without the Pope, but the Pope, whether with a Councell or with∣out it, it mattereth not much,Tom. 3. p. 24. must bee the iudge and ground of Faith. In this question, saith Gregory de Va∣lentia, by the Church wee meant the Roman Bishops: in whom resides the full authority of the Church when hee pleases to determine matters of Faith, whether hee doe it with a Councell or without. And Greiser,Def. Bellarm. 10. 1. p. 1450. b.
when wee af∣firme the Church to bee iudge of all controuersies of Faith, by the Church wee vnderstand the B. of Rome, who for the time being gouernes the ship of the militant Church. And Albertin, I say that besides the first verity, there is an in∣fallible rule, liuing and endued with reason, such as is the Church: and this rule liuing and endued with reason is the chiefe B. of Rome. So that,Tom. 1. dis. 44. Sect. 1. the Popes determination is the truth, saith Suares, and were it contrary to the sayings of all the Saints, yet were it to bee preferred afore them: nay if an Angell from Heauen were opposed against him, the Popes determination were to bee preferred. By all which you see, that as you haue once already remoued your Faith from the ancient Fathers to your Mother the pre∣sent Church: so must you bee faine now againe to re∣moue  it from your mother the present Church, vnto your holy Father the present Pope. But besides that it is altogether vnprobable that the Spirit of Truth should bee chained vnto the chaire of those men, who many of them haue beene monsters rather then men, and not on∣ly Heretiks, but very Atheists and Infidels: I would willingly learne why the Pope is so seldome in the hu∣mour to decide controuersies. Why haue wee not from him an exact Commentary on the Bible that wee need no longer stand in doubt of the meaning thereof? And why doth hee not stint the deadly fo-hood that now is on foot betweene the Iesuites and Dominicans? But sup∣pose hee bee both able and ready to resolue: what? must I trauell from England so farre as Rome for resolution? and when I am arriued before him, hath hee clouen tongues sitting vpon him to speake vnto mee in the lan∣guage I vnderstand? Or if I vnderstand him, how am I assured that speaking to mee hee intendeth to teach the whole Church? for otherwise hee may erre, as Bellar∣mine shewes Innocent the eighth did,De Rom. Pont. l. 4. c. 14. permitting the Nor∣wegians to celebrate the sacrifice of the Masse without wine. Shall I tell you a mystery? Whatsoeuer your Priests and Iesuits prate either of Fathers, or Church, or Pope, yet to an ordinary man who cannot of himselfe be resolued by them, the authority of his Diocesan is suffi∣cient, yea and hee merits by belieuing it although what hee teach bee false. This perhaps may seeme strange to you,L. 3. d.
25. q. v. art. 1. yet thus saith Gabriel Biel, If a simple and vnlearned man heare his Prelate preach any thing contrary to the Faith, thinking that what his Prelate hath so preached is be∣lieued by the Church,Instr. Sacer. l. 4. c. 3. such a one not only not sinneth, but by belieuing that which is false meriteth. And Tolet, Againe if  a Countrey-man belieue his Bishop propounding some here∣ticall Doctrine about the Articles, he meriteth by belieuing although it be an error: because hee is bound to belieue vn∣till it manifestly appeare that it is against the Church. O immortall God, if this bee true, how easy a thing is it for a Papist to bee saued? Onely belieue what your Prelate or Curate telleth you, and you shall not need to trouble your selfe further: for whether it be true or false, sound doctrine or heresy, you are out of danger, nay it is me∣ritorious to belieue it. Alas, alas that poore simple peo∣ple should bee so miserably cheated and seduced. God I hope will ere long open their eyes to see these impo∣stures, and by the light of his word guide their feet in a surer way. In the meane season giue me leaue to summe vp all what I haue hitherto sayd, and thereupon to in∣ferre the Conclusion first intended. Seeing therefore, as wee haue now fully demonstrated, the Fathers were but men as wee are, neither hauing the Promise, nor assu∣ming vnto themselues the Priuiledge of Infallibility a∣boue vs: seeing secondly, many Counterfaits are set forth vnder the names of the Fathers, which the best of your side cannot so readily discerne, and which they or∣dinarily alledge in euery controuersie betwixt vs for au∣thenticall Fathers: seeing thirdly, the writings of the Fathers are pitifully corrupted and adulterated by Here∣ticks and others, and that sundry wayes, by Addition, Substraction, Alteration, Misquotation, and False trans∣lation: seeing fourthly, the sayings of the Fathers are so ambiguous and obscure, that not onely we and you one against another, but your owne side also among them∣selues are distracted and diuided touching the sence and meaning of them: seeing fiftly, the more part of the
Fathers sometime consent in errour, yea and such errors as the present Church of Rome condemneth with Ana∣thema: seeing sixtly, the most learned of your side make no scruple to reiect the Fathers whensoeuer they con∣sent against them, and warrant their so doing with di∣uerse reasons: seeing lastly, they make not Consent of Fathers, but the authority of the present Church, that is to say, the Pope for the time being, to bee the onely In∣fallible iudge of Controuersies: seeing I say all these things are vndoubtedly so, I will not bee afraid to con∣clude, that the pretended Consent of Fathers is too weake and deceitfull a ground for a man with security to build his Faith vpon. For whereas you say that beleeuing as the Fathers did, if they bee saued (as doubtlesse they are) you can∣not miscary: take heed lest this proue but a broken reed, and deceiue you in the end. For first, if for the reasons aboue set down, you cannot be infallibly certaine which are the true Fathers, and what is their right meaning: how can you bee infallibly certaine that you belieue as they did? Againe, doe you thinke it safe to hold all their errors also? and because they are not condemned for them, that you shall escape condemnation in like man∣ner beleeuing them?Cont. Haer. c. 10. Heare then what Vincentius Li∣rinensis saith, O wonderfull change of things, saith hee! the Authors of the same opinion are iudged Catholicks, and the followers Heretiks: the Masters are absolued, and the Schollers condemned: the Writers of the books shall bee the Sonnes of the Kingdome, and Hell shall keep those that maintaine them. For who doubts but blessed Cyprian the light of Bishops and holy Martyrs, together with the rest of his Collegues shall raigne for euer with Christ? Contra∣rily
who is so impious as to deny, that the Donatists and the rest of that pestilent crew, who vnder the authority of that Councell presume to rebaptize, shall burne for euermore with the Diuell? Thus hee: whereby you see how dan∣gerous it is to beleeue euen as the best haue done before vs, vnlesse wee haue better warrant then so for our do∣ing. Lastly, suppose the Fathers consenting erred not, yet are you neuer the safer. For the strength of Faith exceeds not the strength of the testimony, nor the strength of the testimony the Veracity of the Wit∣nesse. Now the Veracity of the Fathers is but the Vera∣city of men, and the Veracity of men is imperfect and inconstant, euer leauing roome for that word of truth All men are lyers. Whence it followeth that your Faith being grounded only on the Veracity of men, is no bet∣ter then an Acquisite and Humane Faith. Whereby though you belieue all that the Fathers did, yet not be∣lieuing as they did, they may bee saued and you perish. For they building vpon diuine testimony belieued with a Diuine Faith, and therefore, Sauing: but you relying on humane authority belieue onely with an Acquisite and Humane Faith which saueth not, no not although the things you belieue thereby are true. For an Acquisite Faith the diuels themselues may haue and yet are dam∣ned. Wherefore it being as you see so dangerous and vn∣safe to trust in man, and as the Prophet speaketh, to make flesh your arme: let mee entreat you euen in the bowels of Iesus Christ, to take vnto you Christian seuerity, and with all speed to returne your Faith backe againe vpon the rocke, from which so rashly and vnaduisedly you re∣moued it. Remember I beseech you how S. Augustin,
in a controuersy betwixt him and Hierome touching S. Peters dissimulation, hauing eleuated the authority of foure of those seuen Fathers which were vrged against him, and not being able to oppose three to the other three remaining,Epist. 19. quitteth himselfe thus, When saith he, I seeke a third, that I also may oppose three to three, verily I suppose I might easily find him, if I had read much: how∣beit to mee the Apostle Paul shall bee insteed of all, yea and aboue them all. To him I flie, to him I appeale, of him I aske and demand, &c. In like manner doe you also, and in Gods name let your finall appeale bee made vnto the holy Scriptures, as vnto the supreme iudge in all questi∣ons of Faith.Catech. 4. Theod. l. 1. c. 7. For as Cyril B. of Ierusalem, saith, The se∣curity of our Faith ariseth from the demonstration of the holy Scripture: and, the resolution of those things we seeke for, must bee taken out of the diuine inspired Scripture, saith Constantin in his oration to the Bishops of the Ni∣cen Councell.Con. Herm. De bon. vid. c. 1. Orat. de ijs q. adeunt. Hie∣rosol. Hom. 13. in 2. Cor. Epist. 112. ad Paulin. And reason; for the Scriptures are the rule of Faith, as Tertullian and Augustin say. A straight and inflexible rule, as Gregory Nyssen saith. A most ex∣quisite rule and exact square and ballance to trie all things by, saith Chrysostome. In regard whereof saith Saint Au∣gustin, If a matter bee grounded on the euident authority of holy Scripture, such I say as the Church calleth Canoni∣call, it is without all doubt to bee belieued: but as touching other witnesses and testimonies, vpon whose credit a thing is vrged vpon vs to bee belieued, thou majest lawfully ei∣ther credit or not credit them, as thou perceiuest them to deserue or not to deserue credit.Con. Parmen. l. 5. And Optatus B. of Mile∣nis, you affirme, wee deny: betweene your yea and our nay, the soules of the people wauer and stagger. Let no man be∣lieue either you or vs: Wee are all contentious men. Wee
must seeke out iudges. If Christians, both sides cannot yeeld them, and part taking would hinder truth. Wee must seeke for a iudge without. If a Pagan, hee knowes not the mysteries of Christianity: if a Iew, hee is an enemie to Christian Baptisme. Therefore vpon earth no iudgment touching this matter can bee found. Wee must seeke a iudge from heauen. But why knocke wee at heauen seeing herein the Gospell wee haue his will and testament. With these Fathers your owne men accord. The holy do∣ctrine, saith Thomas of Aquin,Sum. p. 1. q. 1. a. 8. ad. 2. vseth such authorities (of profane writers) as forraine and probable arguments: but the authorities of Canonicall Scripture it vseth ar∣guing properly and necessarily, and the authorities of the Doctors of the Church, as disputing indeed properly, yet onely probably. For our Faith relyeth on that reuelation which was made to the Apostles and Prophets who wrote the Canonicall books:De verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 2. but not on reuelation made to other Doctors, if any such haue beene. And Bellarmin, The sa∣cred Scripture is the rule of Faith most safe and certaine: and God hath taught vs by corporall letters which wee may see and read what he would haue vs belieue concerning him. And Stapleton,Del. con. Whit. l. 2. De rat. Con. l. 2. c. 19. The diuine Scriptures alone yeeld infalli∣ble testimony and such as is meerely diuine. And Persius also, The authority of no Saint is of infallible truth: for S. Augustin giues that honour onely to the sacred Scripture. But why vouch I human authority hauing diuine? God himselfe by the Prophet summons vs vnto the law and to the testimony,Esa. 8.20. affirming that if any speake not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.Ioh.
5.39. Our Sa∣uiour Christ commandeth to search the Scriptures as which testify of him, and wherein eternall life is to bee had.Luc. 16.3 Abraham referred the rich gluttons brethren to  Moses and the Prophets assuring himselfe that if they refused to heare them, neither would they be perswaded though one rose from the dead. The holy Apostle Paul chargeth vs not to presume aboue that which is written:1. Cor. 4.6. in as much as the Scriptures are able to make vs wise vnto saluation through the Faith that is in Christ Iesus,2. Tim. 3.15.16.17. and are profitable for doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse, that the man of God may bee perfect,Luc. 1.3.4. throughly furnished vnto all good works. To what end did Saint Luke write his Gospell? was it not that we might know the certainty of those things wherein wee are instructed.Phil. 3.1. This saith Saint Paul, is a very safe course. And hence was it that the Bereans searched the Scripture so carefully,Act. 17.11. that they might bee fully assured of those things which were taught thē. We haue a more sure word of Prophecy,2. Pet. 1.19. saith Saint Peter, whereunto yee doe well that yee take heed as vnto a light that shineth in a darke place, vntill the day dawne, and the day starre arise in your hearts. But S. Paul is yet more peremptory, Though we, saith hee,Gal. 1.8. or an Angell from heauen preach any other Gospell vnto you then that which wee haue preached vnto you, let him bee accursed.Contra Haer. c. 12. What is it, saith Vincentius Lirinensis, that hee saith, though wee? Why not rather, though I? His meaning is, though Peter, though Andrew, though Iohn, yea though the whole Colledge of Apostles preach vnto you otherwise then wee haue preached, let him bee anathema. A fearefull straine, for the maintenance of the first Faith neither to spare himselfe, nor his fellow Apostles. It is but a little. Although, saith hee, an Angell from heauen preach otherwise then wee haue preached vnto you, let him bee Anathema. It sufficed not for the preseruation of the Faith once deliuered to mention the nature of humane
condition, vnlesse he comprehended Angelicall excellen∣cy also. Though, saith hee wee or an Angell from heauen. Thus you see that the Faith which was first deliuered, and is now contained in the Scripture, is the soueraigne rule and iudge of all the doctrines both of men and An∣gels. For whatsoeuer the Apostles preached, the same is written, as Irenaeus testifieth.Lib. 3. c. 2. Whereupon Saint Au∣gustin, As touching Christ, or his Church,Cont. Petil. l. 3. c. 6. or any other thing pertaining to our Faith or life, I will not say, if wee, who are no way to bee compared with him that said, Though wee, but as it is added, if an Angell from heauen preach vn∣to you otherWise then what yee haue receiued in the Legall and Euangelicall Scriptures, let him be accursed.
Happily you will say, the Scripture is indeed the rule of Faith, and the law of the Church, but not the Iudge; or if Iudge, yet but a mute and dumbe Iudge: and if there bee not some externall, visible, audible, infallible, vnerring Iudge to interpret Scriptures, and to stint all controuersies, there will neuer bee an end of quarels, nei∣ther will there euer bee peace and vnity in the Church. Indeed, the name of vnity and peace is a goodly thing, and a finall end of all controuersies, might it bee had, were much to bee wished for. But I feare the Church will not bee so happy, so long as it dwelleth in taber∣nacles, and is militant here on earth.2. Cor. 11.18.19. Otherwise the ho∣ly Apostle would neuer haue written thus to the Corin∣thians, I heare that there bee diuisions among you, and I partly belieue it: For there must bee also heresies among you, that they which are approued may be made manifest a∣mong you. And the generall experience of former ages confirmeth the same, wherein God continually hath ex∣ercized his Church, either with the fire of persecutions,  that it might appeare who they are that loue him more then the present world: or with the tempests of contra∣ry doctrines, that it might bee knowne who are chaffe, and who wheat, who sound in the Faith, and who not. Besides this, mee thinks the facilnesse and easinesse of the way which your new Masters prescribe vnto you, should make you much to suspect the goodnesse of it. For whereas it is the good pleasure of God that all men should carefully & diligently studie the holy Scriptures,Psal. 1.2. & 119. reading them, and meditating in them night and day, to the end they may grow rich in all knowledge and vnderstanding: you by your rule may spare all this paines, and though you sit still, take your ease, and fold your hands, yet if you belieue whatsoeuer your exter∣nall human iudge shall dictate vnto you, you are safe and cannot miscarry. Now among simple and vnlettered Papists who is this Iudge, but some Priest or Iesuite? for other Iudge I am sure they meet with none. A plau∣sible course I confesse to many, specially those that are idle and loth to take paines, or weake and dare not trust their owne iudgement, or superstitious and thinke they merit much by their blind obedience vnto their teach∣ers. But how plausible soeuer it may seeme to flesh and blood, sure I am it is too broad to bee the narrow way that leadeth vnto life: and the Kingdome of Heauen will neuer be attained, vnlesse it suffer more violence then so. I adde further, it is too presumptuous to tie Diuine Pro∣uidence vnto humane policy, and for man first to deuise what in his wisdome seemeth fittest, and then to resolue that therefore God hath ordered it so. Yet this is the course your side ordinarily holdeth: you loue rather to giue lawes vnto God, then to take lawes from him, and  in this particular, to prescribe what meanes God should appoint to settle vs in the knowledge of his truth, rather then to vse the meanes which hee himselfe hath to that end appointed. If you thinke this too hard a censure, be it knowne vnto you that Bellarmine the Prince of Iesuits reasoneth so. God, saith hee,De verb. Dei. l. 3. c. 9. was not ignorant that many difficulties concerning the Faith would rise vp in the Church: hee ought therefore to prouide some Iudge for the Church. What Iudge? Such a one doubtlesse as by his sole authority and sentence must bee able to resolue all difficulties. Which for as much as neither Scripture, no any secular Prince can doe: therefore it must needs bee the Prince of Ecclesiasticall, that is, the Pope. See I be∣seech you how peruersly and preposterously they deale with you: first they take vpon them to direct God wh what he should doe, or else forsooth he shall not be pro∣uident and discreet enough, and then thrust their owne fancy vpon you as a point of Faith, that God hath done it. But to answer this yet a little more fully, I affirme three things. First, that holy Scripture knowes not, se∣condly, that the ancient Fathers acknowledge not, third∣ly, that as long as wee haue the Scripture there needs not any such standing humane Iudge in the Church, as you dreame of. As touching the first, if you know any passage of Scripture wherein God hath authorized such a Iudge as you dreame of, I require you to shew it, for my part I know none. Expresse Scripture I am sure you cannot shew: deductions and consequences by your owne rule I haue no reason to admit. For example, if for proofe hereof you vrge that of our Sauiour to S.
Pe∣ter, I haue prayed for thee that thy Faith faile not:Luc. 22.32. I would  demand who shall bee iudge of the meaning of these words? for I heare that Christ hath prayed for Saint Peter, but I heare not that hee hath prayed for the Pope, that his Faith fayle not: and I know Saint Peter was firme and constant in the faith vnto his liues end, but it seemes by Ecclesiasticall Hystory that sundry Popes haue made shipwracke of the Faith, and become Hereticks. If there be no Iudge to determine this doubt, why doe you thrust such a Iudge vpon vs? If there bee, who is hee? you will say, the Pope. Then thus you rea∣son, Christ prayed for S. Peter that his Faith might not faile, by S. Peter the Pope also is vnderstood, and this appeares because the Pope saith so: therefore neither can the Popes Faith faile and consequently he is the or∣dinary infallible Iudge of the Church More briefly thus, the Pope is that Iudge, because the Pope will haue it so. Nominate what other Iudge soeuer you list, and what other Text besides you please, and the argument is still the same, too weake to persuade what you intend, vnlesse by some new priuiledge out of any premisses you may conclude what you will. In a word, search the Scriptures throughout, and you shall finde the Ministe∣ry and seruice of men established to bring vs to the Faith: but an infallible humane magistery and Lordship to command Faith, it knowes none. That prerogatiue Royall it reserues onely vnto Christ himselfe. Neither doe the ancient Fathers acknowledge any such Iudge, which is the second point. If they doe, point I pray to the place, for hitherto it hath beene vn∣knowne. Many and sharp bickerings had those ancients with diuers and sundry Heretiks, as Arius, Macedoni∣us, Eutyches, Nestorius, and the like: yet neuer did they
either obiect vnto them that they wanted an infallible Iudge, as you doe vnto vs, or conuent them before the tribunall of such a Iudge, which doubtlesse had beene a readier way then disputation to stop their mouths, had there been such a soueraigne Officer in the Church. Sun∣dry and manifold are the writings of the ancient Fathers touching the Christian Faith, of which some also were purposely written to instruct vs in all the doctrines of our religion: and is it not strange that such men, in such books, remembring carefully all other points, should forget so maine and principall a point as this is? Nay more then this, Tertullian long agoe wrote a booke of Prescriptions or Fore-pleadings against Hereticks: Saint Augustin also wrote foure books of Christian Doctrine, wherein his direct intent is to prescribe rules how to vnderstand and interpret Scripture: And Vincentius Li∣tinensis also hath written a short Commonitory for the Antiquity and Verity of the Catholike Faith against the profane nouelties of all Heresies. If these Fathers had acknowledged this your imaginary Iudge, how com∣meth it to passe that they no where mention him in these books? For certainly here was the proper place, and they could not without extreame supinity and negli∣gence omit him, had they knowne such a one: such a one I say, as vpon whom the security of Faith, and vni∣ty of the Church dependeth. But this deep silence of theirs, and that in so due a place, and of matter so impor∣tant, euidently argues that they neuer were acquainted therewith, and that it is but an Idole of these latter times.
Now if neither Scripture nor Fathers know such a Iudge, I hope I may bee bold to inferre that the Church  needs him not, which is the third point. For I trow this is both a safer and sounder kind of reasoning then that of yours, Such a Iudge wee conceiue to bee necessary, There∣fore such a one hath God ordained. But to cleere this point also, I affirme that the Scriptures by themselues, through Gods blessing vpon our endeauour, is a sufficient out∣ward meanes to bring vs to saluation: and therefore there is no necessity of your externall Iudge. The Con∣sequence is plaine and euident: the Antecedent thus I proue, because all whatsoeuer is necessary to saluation is so cleerely and manifestly deliuered in them, euen to the capacity of vulgar and ordinary men, that if they will either read or heare it read vnto them, they cannot but know and vnderstand it. This I could easily shew in euery particular and fundamentall point, but that I should hold you too long.Ps. 19.8.9. Ps. 119.105.130. Only if it bee not so, tell me, why doth the Holy Ghost say, that they giue wisedome to the simple, and light to the eyes? that they are a lanterne to our feete and a light vnto our paths? that the entrance into them sheweth light, and giueth vnderstanding to the simple?2. Pet. 1.19. And why doth the holy Apostle S. Peter tearme them a light shining in a darke place? Neither is it to bee neglected, that all this is meant of the Scripturs of the old Testament:Ioh.
20.31. which if they bee so lightsome, how bright and cleere are they of the new? These things are written, saith Saint Iohn, to the end yee might beleeue that Iesus is the Christ the Sonne of God,Rom. 15.4. and that beleeuing yee might haue life through his Name. And Saint Paul, The things that are written, are written for our instruction. Now if the Scriptures in things necessary be so obscure and hard to vnderstand, either it is because the Holy Ghost could not write more plainely, or because he would not. That  hee could not, no man will say: that hee would not, crosseth the end of his writing, which was, as is aboue said, to instruct in the Faith, and to bring vs vnto life. But that God by writing obscurely, and yet com∣manding vs to search, should either intend to mocke vs, or faile of his owne end, cannot bee imagined without notable impiety. Heare what the Fathers say.Dial. cum. Tryph. Iustin Martyr, Harken to the things which I shall report from the holy Scriptures, which Scriptures need not to bee expoun∣ded, but onely heard. Clemens of Alexandria,Exhort. ad. Ethnic. Heare yee that are farre off, heare yee that are nigh: the Word is hid∣den from none, it is a common light, it shineth vnto all men, there is no Cimmerian darkenesse in it, let vs hasten to saluation, to regeneration. Chrysostome,In. 2. Thess. hom. 3. All things ne∣cessary are cleere and plaine in the Scriptures, so that were it not through our owne negligence wee should not need Ho∣milies and Sermons. Augustin,Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. In those things which are plainely set downe in the Scripture, are found all those things which containe Faith and Manners of life, to wit, Hope and Charity. And Bernard,Ser. in illud. Sap. Iustum deduxit. The wayes of the Lord are straight, faire, full, and plaine wayes. Straight without error, because they lead vnto life: faire without filth be∣cause they teach cleannesse: full for multitude, because all the world is within Christs net: plaine without difficulty, because they yeeld sweetnesse.Biblioth. l. 6. ann. 152. Hereunto your owne men agree. Sixtus Senensis diuideth the Scripture into two parts, granting that the one is cleere and euident, contai∣ning the
first and highest principles of things that are to be belieued, and the chiefe precepts of good life, and examples easy to bee knowne, such as are some morall sentences, and certaine holy Histories,Anal. i. p. 100. profitable for the ordering of man∣ners. And Gregory of Valentia, Such verities concerning  our Faith as are absolutely and necessarily to bee knowne and belieued of all men, are in a manner plainely taught in the Scriptures themselues. Thus all things necessary to saluation are so plainely set downe in Scripture, that at least wise for the determination of them your externall Humane Iudge needeth not. Yea but neither are all satisfied with these plaine pla∣ces, neither are all places of Scripture plaine. True. Yet haue you no reason to doubt of that which is plaine, be∣cause some through frowardnesse will not vnderstand: no more then you haue of the snow whether it be white, because Anaxagoras thought that it was blacke. If no∣thing can be certaine but that which is vnquestioned, we must all turne Scepticks, and neuer beleeue any thing. For as in Philosophy, so in Diuinity, there is nothing al∣most so absurd, but one or other hath held: and what dis∣pute there is euen about this Iudge of yours, and the last resolution of Faith, you cannot bee ignorant. As for those darker places, if you vnderstand them not, yet as∣senting vnto the plainer you are without danger, seeing in those plainer, as wee haue shewed, all things necessa∣ry are comprehended. Neither is their darkenesse so great, but that without your torch-bearer they may bee enlightned.In Esa. 19. For as Hierome saith, It is the order of the Scripture after hard things to set downe things that are plaine, and what is first spoken in Parables, afterward to deliuer in cleere tearmes.Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 6. And
Augustin, There is nothing almost among those obscurities, but in other places one may find it most plainely deliuered.In. 2. Cor. hom. 9. And Chrysostome, The Scripture euery where when it speaketh any thing obscure∣ly, interpreteth it selfe againe in another place. So the rest. And hence they gather, that Scripture is to bee in∣terpreted  by Scripture, and the doubtfull places by those that are more certaine, as appeareth in their writings: but specially by Saint Augustin in his books of Christi∣an Doctrine, purposely by him written to demonstrate as much. According to this precept was their continuall practice, and what interpretation they found agreeing with plaine Scripture and the particular circumstances of the text, that they admitted as true: but what they iudged to swarue from it, that they reiected as con∣trary to the Analogie of Faith, and the Principles of our Religion. Which course if wee also take (and this course wee ought to take, vnlesse wee thinke that God is not the best interpreter of his owne words) we cannot, at leastwise dangerously erre in our interpretations: and we may boldly refuse those as false which we find contrary vnto this Analogie of Faith. For example, These words of Christ, This is my Body, wee vnderstand thus, This Bread is Sacramentally my Body: you thus, This Bread is turned or transubstantiated into my Body. The question now is, whether is the truer in∣terpretation yours or ours. Let vs trie it by this rule. Your owne Scotus and Cameracensis thinke that opinion which holdeth the substance of bread and wine to remaine,4 d. l. 11. q. 3. lit. F. Quaest. in. 4. q. 6. a. 2. Lit. to bee the more probable and reasonable opinion, yea and in all appearance more agreeable with the words of institution.De Euchar. l. 3. c.
23. In regard whereof saith Bellarmine, It may iustly be doub∣ted whether the text bee cleere enough to inforce it (tran∣substantiation) seeing most learned and witty men, such as Scotus was, haue thought the contrary. So that in these mens iudgement the likelyhood is on our side, and you haue great reason to doubt of your exposition. Besides this, the Analogy of Faith teacheth vs, that Christs Bo∣dy  is a true Body like vnto ours: but that Body which you fancy to be in the Eucharist is not like vnto our bo∣dies. For in this Body there is no distance of one part from another, as of eye from eye, and head from feet, neither hath it any dimensiue quantity, and is all both in Heauen and here on earth in the Sacrament at once, yet not in the middle region betweene, nor separated from himselfe: but nothing of this can bee affirmed of our bodies, or of any other organicall body. And if you say that you conceiue of Christs Body in the Sacrament as of a glorified Body, the plaine Scripture is against you, that when Christ spake these words, This is my Body, his Body was yet vncrucified and vnglorified. Your ex∣position therefore crossing the Analogy cannot possibly bee good. As for ours thus we shew it. The text plaine∣ly saith, that our blessed Sauiour in his last supper tooke Bread, blessed it, brake it, and gaue it vnto his disciples saying, This is my Body. What? This bread. But this Proposition, This Bread is my Body, literally and pro∣perly is not true: therefore is it figuratiuely to be vnder∣stood. How so? Thus. I looke into plaine Scripture, and there I find that as the Euangelists call it Bread be∣fore Consecration, so Saint Paul cals it Bread after Con∣secration.1. Cor.
11.26. Ib. v. 27. Ib. v. 28. As often, saith he, as yee shall eat this Bread, and, Whosoeuer shall eat this Bread vnworthily, and, Let a man examine himselfe, and so eat of this Bread. Whence I conclude that the Bread is not changed, but remaineth still Bread. Then I consider further that our Sauiour now institutes a Sacrament, and that in Sacramentall actions Sacramentall phrases are vsuall, and the outward signe is called by the name of the thing signified: as in the old Testament,Gen. 7.10. Circumcision is called the Couenant, and  the Lambe the Passeouer, and in the new,Ex. 12.11. the Cup is cal∣led the new Testament or couenant. Whereupon I in∣ferre, there being no reason to the contrary,Luc. 22.20. that these words in like manner are to bee interpreted, This is my Body, that is, This Bread is Sacramentally my Body, or the Sacramentall signe of my Body. And thus you see by clearing this one passage, how other darker places also may receiue light from those that are plainer. You will say, this is to build vpon Consequences, wherein it is possible to bee deceiued. Whereunto I answer three things, first, that whatsoeuer may bee deduced out of the Word of God by euident Consequence is certaine, euen by the certainty of Faith;Bell. de Iust. l. 3. c. 8. and this your owne greatest clarks doe grant. Secondly, to banish Conse∣quences from Diuinity, is to banish the vse of right rea∣son and discourse also: and that religion must needs bee driuen to narrow shifts, which cannot subsist vnlesse men turne fooles or beasts. Thirdly, the necessity of a Consequence doth not any way depend vpon the person of him that inferreth it, but onely vpon the mutuall re∣lation and strait coniunction betweene the premisses and it: so that by him who desires to bee satisfied in the truth, not the person of him that deduceth it, but the Consequence it selfe is to bee looked too, whether it bee rightly deduced or no. But who shall iudge that will you say? Indeed if you stand resolued vtterly to renounce all the helps and directions both of reason and art, nor will yeeld to any Consequence of Scripture how cleere and euident soeuer, but will only rely on the mouth and sen∣tence of your humane externall Iudge: I confesse I am at Dulkarnon, to vse Chaucers phrase, and you are past my skill infallibly to perswade you. But if, as wee haue
shewed, nor Scripture nor Fathers acknowledge such a Iudge, if all whatsoeuer is necessary to saluation bee so plainely laid downe in Scripture as a man of meane ca∣pacity may vnderstand it, if what is more obscurely de∣liuered in one place is more plainely expressed in ano∣ther, if God haue appointed that out of the plainer pla∣ces wee should with study and industrie picke the mea∣ning of those that are harder, if hee haue promised that those that aske shall haue, those that seeke shall find, and to those that knocke it shall bee opened, if finally though wee misse the true meaning of those harder places, yet firmely adhering vnto the plainer, wee are safe and out of danger: then certainely the readiest and surest way to to interpret Scripture is by Scripture, and there is no o∣ther way to determine controuersies and to satisfy the conscience but onely this. If any notwithstanding this list still to bee contentious,1. Cor. 11. Wee, saith S. Paul haue no such custome, nor the Churches of God. The rule it selfe is infallible and al-sufficient: if wee either through igno∣rance cannot, or through negligence doe not vse it as we ought, the fault is not in God, but in our selues, neither doth hee faile in his prouidence, but wee in our dutie. Performe wee our duty obediently, and hee will per∣forme his promise faithfully. In necessaries hee will ne∣uer faile: if in other things all be not of one mind, yet let vs still proceed by the same rule, and instruct one ano∣ther in the spirit of meeknesse, and God will reueale that also in due time.
And now, M. Bayly, you haue what I intended for the present: it remaines that you peruse it attentiuely. The summe is. The Fathers may be Ministers by whom you belieue, but their Consent is no ground of Faith. Your  externall humane Iudge is but a Chimera of mans braine, and not an Officer of Gods making. The onely al-sufficient infallible outward rule of Faith is Scripture in the plainer places, which places also must interpret the difficulter. Besides this albeit there may be a iurisdi∣ction in the Church to order and controll the outer man yet to satisfy the Conscience and inner man there is no authority but this. Which things being so, let me en∣treat you, and that in the bowels of Iesus Christ, to re∣member from whence you are fallen and to cast about yet againe, and by this rule to examine your new Faith. It is not necessary for a man to be an Euclid or some cun∣ning
Mathematician to trie by a straight rule whether a line be straight or no. But you are a Scholler and a Mi∣nister, and should bee able skilfully to apply the rule your selfe. To trust anothers application of it for you, and that in the point of saluation, is not Christian mode∣stie, but meere childishnesse, and foolish credulity. Re∣member what Lactantius saith, It behoueth a man,Div. Instit. l. 2. c. 8. special∣ly in that thing wherein the state of our life consisteth, to trust himselfe, and to rely vpon his own iudgement and vn∣derstanding for finding out & examining the truth, rather then belieuing anothers errors to be deceiued, as if himselfe were void of reason. God hath giuen to all men some portion of wisedome, whereby they may both find out what they haue not heard, and examine what they haue heard. This gift of God, this Wisdome I meane, and illumination of Gods Spirit, vse I beseech you to the glory of the do∣nour, and the building of your selfe vp in your most ho∣ly Faith. This you shall doe, if shaking off this blind be∣liefe of the dictates and decrees of men, you simply and absolutely yeeld all credence to God alone & his word,  and to men no otherwise then vnder God, and for God. For as the same Lactantius saith, with whose words I conclude, Wisdome and Religion are so neerely ioyned to∣gether,Ib. l. 4. c. 4. & 1. c. 1. that they may not bee seuered one from the other: in so much as neither any religion is to bee embraced with∣out wisdome, nor any wisdome to be approued without reli∣gion. The Lord giue you a cleane heart, and renew with∣in you a right Spirit: so prayeth for you from the bot∣tome of his heart, Your vnfained friend and louing brother IOHN DOWNE.
OF SITTING AND KNEELING AT THE COMMVNION.
VNTO the schedule you sent mee, contayning your best reasons for Sitting against Kneeling, I here returne you this short answer. Your end doubtlesse was by strength of argument to withdraw mee from conformity in Knee∣ling: my intent is, by dis∣couering the weaknesse of your arguments, to worke you from singularity in Sitting. The issue I leaue vn∣to God: yet I trust that as my persuasion and ex∣ample this last Easter, as you know, reduced diuers, so my Reply through the blessing of God may also re∣claime  you. God grant that being brethren, and children of one common mother: wee may with one accord ob∣serue her orders, and honor her authority. Your writing first maintaines sitting, then opposes kneeling. Of sitting you affirme thus, Wee ought to sit at the receiuing of the Elements of the Lords Supper. In which Proposition I doubt of one tearme, and suspect another. The tearme I doubt of is this, Wee ought to sit, namely what you meane thereby. For if either the na∣ture of the Phrase, or the Conclusion of your third Syl∣logisme may determine it, then is it equiualent vnto this, We must sit, & imports a necessity of sitting, or that sit∣ting is the only lawful I gesture. But if we iudge thereof by the probable intention of the two first Syllogismes, then the meaning thereof seemes to bee no more then this, We may sit, or sitting is a lawfull gesture. In which sence now vnderstand you this Proposition? In the first? Then I deny it, and say Sitting is not the onely lawfull ge∣sture. In the second? Then I answer two things. First you haue ill exprest your selfe, vsing words that beare not your meaning: for Wee ought, imports a necessary duty, and Wee may, free choice and liberty. Secondly I distinguish. For if you vnderstand it Absolutely and Sim∣ply in it selfe, then I grant Wee may sit, for sitting is in∣different and so there shall bee no controuersie betwixt vs. But if you vnderstand it respectiuely and with regard vnto the Canons and constitutions of the Church, then I say wee may not sit: for the Church, vnto whom wee owe obedience, hath ordained otherwise.
Againe, I suspect those words, at the receiuing of the Elements of the Lords Supper: for why doe you not say rather, at the receiuing of the Body and Blood of our Lord  and Sauiour Iesus Christ? especially seeing this is the nobler part of the Sacrament, and the Elements are but shadowes of this substance. Was it, lest sitting might seeme too perfunctory, and kneeling neuer a whit too reuerent for so sacred an action? If so, then are you guil∣ty of no small fault, thus to sleight the holy Sacrament for so poore an aduantage. But perhaps it was done out of simplicity, rather then cunning. Howbeit taking vp∣on you to play the Logician and to dispute Syllogistical∣ly, you ought to haue been more wary of your tearmes. And so I passe vnto your arguments, the first whereof is thus framed. 1 A comely gesture ought to be vsed. 1 Cor. 14.40. Sitting is a comely gesture; (for the affection of ioy must then bee stirred vp, with which it agrees. Mar. 14.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Ergo, sitting ought to bee vsed. This is rather a Paralogisme then Syllogisme: for the Propositions are indefinite, and of no quantity, and out of such Propositions nothing can Logically bee conclu∣ded. But I will help to rectify your Syllogisme, if first I may know what you would conclude. The Conclusion must needs bee one of two, either this, Wee may sit, or this, Wee must sit. Would you conclude, Wee may sit, in the sence aboue denied? (for so you ought), Then must it thus bee formed, Any comely gesture may be vsed notwithstanding the Churches ordinance: sitting is a come∣ly gesture: Ergo, sitting may bee vsed notwithstanding the Churches ordinance. But so the Maior is vntrue. For Magistrates haue authority to order things indifferent, as
they find it expedient, to auoid confusion, and to settle an vniformity: and wee are bound not onely for feare, but also for Conscience to obey.Rom. 13.5. Neither doth the pas∣sage you quote for proofe of your Maior, euince the contrary. For Saint Paul commanding that all things bee done decently, permitteth not euery one to vse his liberty as hee listeth,In. 1. Cor. 14.40. but setteth bounds vnto vs rather, as Cal∣uin saith & establisheth the lawfull orders of the Church: seeing it cannot bee decent to affront authority, and doe as we please. But it may bee you would conclude that wee must sit, or that sitting is the onely lawfull gesture. Then must your argument bee thus framed, A comely gesture onely is to bee vsed: sitting onely is comely: Ergo, sitting onely is to bee vsed. The Maior whereof I grant, and acknowledge to bee sufficiently prooued; but I deny the Minor. For if sitting bee the onely comely gesture, then is not onely the Church of England to bee condemned for kneeling, but sundry other reformed Churches also for standing, yea our Sauiour himselfe with all his Apostles, who (as in due place shall bee demonstrated) sate not: to say no∣thing, that it is your singular opinion, and that the man cannot bee named who held the same before you, or holds it besides you. For as for your reason, that sitting agrees with the af∣fection of ioy, which then must bee stirred vp, it is a very strange and vnreasonable one. For first, bee it that ioy must then bee stirred vp: so must humility, reuerence, thankfulnesse also. And therefore if sitting beecomely because it agreeth with the one: Kneeling also is comely, because it agreeth with the other. Againe, suppose that sitting agree with Ioy: so doth leaping, dancing, exulta∣tion
also. Why then if Sitting by vertue of this agree∣ment be comely, are not the rest in like manner comely? Lastly, that Sitting is the embleme of Rest and that such posture of the body is fit for study, counsell, meditation, I haue often heard: and so much is meant by those old sayings, The Romans conquer by sitting, and By sitting men become wise. But how it agreeth with the affection of ioy, neither doe you shew it, neither can you: and there∣fore I leaue it as a fancy, vnkith vnkist, as they say, and passe to your second argument, which you conceiue in this forme. 2 Gesture according to order must be vsed. 1 Cor. 14.40. Sitting is an orderly gesture: for Christ and his Apo∣stles sate, so did the Iewes also eating the Passeouer. Ergo Sitting must bee vsed. This argument is euery way twin vnto the former, and in a manner needs no other answer then is already giuen. Neuerthelesse, for fuller satisfaction let vs exa∣mine both the Propositions. The Maior being rightly vnderstood I grant: for no gesture may be vsed but that which is orderly, it being the Apostles expresse com∣mandement in the place by you alledged, that all things bee done decently and according vnto order. I say, being rightly vnderstood: for there is a double Order, the one Intrinsecall & in the things thēselues, the other Externall & vnto vs. The former is that habitude, disposition, or cor∣respōdence which one thing naturally hath vnto another: in regard whereof it may also be called a Physicall order or an order of Nature. The latter is that which is made so vnto vs, being prescribed by lawfull authority: in res∣pect
whereof it may further bee tearmed, a morall order, or an order of Prudence. Now if you vnderstand your Maior thus, No gesture must be vsed but that which is at least one of these two wayes orderly, you vnderstand it aright: for so is S. Pauls meaning, and in that sence it is granted vnto you. But if you vnderstand it thus, that a∣ny gesture which is in it selfe orderly may indifferently bee vsed by any, albeit the Church haue for orders sake among many such chosen out, and authorized one only: then doe you misunderstand it, and it is denied you: for S. Paul both here and elsewhere plainely declares him∣selfe to bee a great enemy vnto all such Anarchicall dis∣order and confusion. Your Minor is, that Sitting is an orderlie gesture. Whereunto I answere, that it is so indeed in it selfe, there being a naturall aptnes and fitnes in it to be vsed at the receiving of the Sacrament yet is it not in this sence the only orderlie gesture: for Standing and Kneeling are so also, and may put in for a place as well as Sitting. Neither is it unto us orderlie, because publick authority hath commanded Kneeling onely, which to disobey, is, as S. Paul saith, to resist the ordinance of God. Nor doth the example and practice of Christ and his Apostles, and the Iewes proue the contrary. For the gesture they vsed, as it was orderly in it selfe, so was it generally received and approved by the Church at that time: but among us not Sitting but Kneeling is the gesture that is allowed and enioyned.
But if, this notwithstanding, you will needs have that gesture orderly unto us now which Christ and his A∣postles, vsed, because it was at that time orderlie, unto them: then know their gesture was not Sitting, and you  bewray your selfe to bee but a bad Antiquary in affir∣ming it. For as all story testifieth, it was the manner of those times and long before, at meales to lie on their beds, leaning on their elbowes, and supporting themsel∣ues with pillowes. And hereunto agree the words which the Euangelists vse to expresse their gesture: for  in Mathew and Marke, and  in Luke and Iohn, im∣port no other then lying at the table. Neither can you otherwise vnderstand that which is said of him whom Christ loued, that at supper hee lay or leaned on Iesus breast, vnles it be by this gesture. Wherfore you must of force either quit Sitting, and vrge vpon vs a necessity of lying: or acknowledge that Sitting may not bee or∣derly vnto us, though anciently vnto Christ and his Apostles it were so. Your third and last argument is. 3. If sitting bee the only warranted gesture by Gods word, then it ought only to be vsed. But it is the only warranted gesture: for it only was vsed by the Iewes at the Passeover, and by Christ & his Apostles at his Supper. Ergo sitting only is to be vsed. That the word written (for so you meane) is the on∣ly warrant of all actions, is more then you will euer be able to proue. For the law of nature written in the hart, and the light of reason are sufficient warrants for many things. Otherwise, how could the Gentiles which had not the law written, be as S. Paul saith a law vnto them∣selves? and how could their consciences either accuse them for breaking the law, or excuse them for doing thereafter? Neither do I herein derogate ought from
Scripture: only I yeeld vnto Reason that which is her due. They are both from God, and both are to be our directors: the one in those things that fall within the compasse of nature, the other in those things that are a∣boue nature. In things supernaturall Scripture is the on∣ly warrant, Reason being therein starkblind: In things Morall it is the safest warrant, Reason therein being but dimsighted. But to make Scripture the only warrant in all things without exception, is to put out the sight of Reason, and to make it starke blind in euery thing. Scrip∣ture I confesse is perfect, but as a creature perfect in its kinde. Whatsoeuer is necessarie vnto that end whereto it was ordained,2. Tim. 3.15. namely to make the man of God wise vnto Saluation, it containeth abundantlie, and with Ter∣tullian,Contra. Her∣mog. c. 22. I adore the fulnes thereof. Other things if it war∣rant not, it no way impeacheth the perfection thereof, because they are impertinent and make not vnto the end thereof. The sequele therefore of your Maior is not good, and it is absurd and idle, in things not necessary to saluation to argue, from authority of Scripture nega∣tiuely, it saith not so Ergo it is not so. But supposing the Consequence of your Maior to be good, how proue you the Minor, that Sitting is onely warranted by Gods word? Forsooth, because it onely was vsed by the Iewes at the Passeouer, and by Christ and his Apostles at his Supper. First I haue sufficiently demon∣strated aboue, that they sate not: and therefore Sitting is so farre from being only warranted, that by your rule it is not warranted at all. Secondly, grant they sate, yet it followes not thereupon that Sitting only is warranted. For as for the Iewes,Ex. 124
11. neither do their Ceremonies con∣cerne us, and at the first it seemes they stood. For they  were commanded to eat the Passeouer, with their loines girt, their shoos on their feet, & their staues in their hands,v. 25. and in hast: and, as they were commanded, so they did. As touching Christ and his Apostles,(Supposing they sate.) their act indeed sufficiently proues that Sitting is in it selfe, and was vnto them lawfull, seing the wisedome of Christ otherwise, would not haue vsed it: but that it is the onely lawfull gesture it cannot possibly prooue. If it could, by the same reason it would follow that the Eucharist is only to bee administred at euening and after supper, because Christ then administred it. For they are both circumstances, and not essentiall: & idem jus Titio quod Sejo, there is the same reason of both. You will yet happily demand, why wee make not Christs gesture a precedent for ours? are we wiser then Christ? And I againe demand of you, why you lie not on your beds as Christ did: know you what is conue∣nient better then he? your answer I suppose will be, that Christs gesture, was that which ordinarily they then v∣sed at meales: and Sitting is that which ordinarily they now vse. And I answer, because wee receiue not the Sa∣crament with our meales, as Christ and his Apostles first did, therefore do we not vse the gesture of meales. The cause of the gesture being taken away, the gesture it selfe may bee changed also. The Iewes at the first are the Passeouer standing, as wee haue shewed, to signifie their hastie departure out of Egypt: but being now safely escaped thence, they alter that gesture,Cap. 8. Cap. 74. and our Sauiour by his practice approues their so doeing. The Councels of
Laodicea, and of Trullo forbidding Agapas, that is, the loue feasts, with which they were wont to receive the Communion, forbad also accubitus sternere to lie any  more in the Churches vpon their beds. So that in the wisdome of the Churches of both Testaments, such circumstances may iustly bee varied as the causes or rea∣sons of them doe vary. And thus of your arguments for sitting: now let vs take a view also of your reasons against Kneeling. They are in number foure, all as you thinke demonstratiue, and out of necessary premisses concluding, that we may at no hand Kneele. The first is this: 1 If Kneeling ought to bee vsed, then it is conuenient. But it is not conuenient. 2 Chron. 6.13. Dan. 6.11. Ergo, it is not to be vsed. The Maior of this Syllogisme is Hypotheticall or
Con∣ditionall, the Consequence whereof is grounded vpon this Categoricall, or simple Proposition, Nothing ought to be vsed but that which is conuenient.Rom. 3.8. Whereunto I answer, first, as we may not doe euill that good may come of it: so neither may we forbeare that good which is cōman∣ded vs for any euill or inconuenience that may follow thereof. Secondly, in things indifferent which are nei∣ther good nor euill, if they bee not ordered by authori∣ty, but are still arbitrary and left vnto our choice, then as wee may vse them because they are lawfull, so may wee not vse them when they proue inexpedient. The rule of charity must ouerrule vs in this case. But if once they bee ordered by publicke authority, then necessity is laid vpon vs, and wee must conforme our selues vnto order notwithstanding any pretended inconuenience. The rule of loyalty must sway with vs in this case. Bee it then that Kneeling is inconuenient; it was the fault of our supe∣riors  to command i. Now it is commanded, and it is our duty to obey them. If it bee inconuenient to Kneele: it is more inconuenient to disobey, and for not Kneeling to bee barred from the Sacrament. The sequele there∣fore of your Maior is not good, and I require you to proue it. The Assumption is, Kneeling is not conuenient. I deny it. You proue it by two places of Scripture, which testi∣fy that Salomon & Daniel kneeled when they prayed. The weaknesse of which proofe that you may the more rea∣dily perceiue, I reduce it into forme, thus. That gesture which is vsed in prayer, is not conuenient at the Sacrament. But Kneeling is a gesture vsed in Prayer. Ergo, it is in∣conuenient at the Sacrament. The Minor whereof I grant: but I deny the Maior as being too palpably ab∣surd. For first, neuer man yet dreamed that Kneeling is proper quarto modo vnto it, and may not bee vsed in any other action. Secondly, then may wee neither sit nor stand at the Sacrament,1 King. 19.4. because Elias prayed sitting and the Publican standing:Luc. 18.13. yea happily no gesture is left for the Sacrament, seeing Prayer hath ingrost them all be∣fore hand. Lastly, for as much as at the time of recei∣uing our affections are to bee aduanced and lifted vp vnto God in prayer and thankesgiuing: it must needs be by your owne rule, that Kneeling is a gesture euery way conuenient for it. Your second argument is, 2 No will-worship may bee vsed. Mat. 15.9. Kneeling is will-worship: for Pope Honorius first de∣vised it. Acts & Mon. pag. 1390. Ergo, Kneeling may not bee vsed. To yeeld vnto God that Worship which he himselfe
hath reuealed and prescribed, is an Act of true Religion: but to obtrude and thrust vpon him a Worship forged and deuised of our selues, is meere superstition. The one hee rigourously exacteth of vs, the other hee expresly forbiddeth.Ex. 15.38.39. In the law, God commandeth the Iewes to make them fringes in the borders of their garments, and to put a blew ribband vpon it throughout their genera∣tions, that yee may looke vpon it, saith he, and remember all the Commandements of the Lord to doe them: and that yee seeke not after your owne heart, and your owne eyes after which yee vse to goe a whoaring. In the Prophets, he often∣times vpbraideth them with their owne inuentions, and disdainfully saith vnto them, Who hath required these things at your hands? And in the new Testament, our Sauiour in the place by you quoted,Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.23. seuerely taxeth the Pharisees, for teaching their owne fantasies, and placing the worship of God in the obseruation of mens precepts: and Saint Paul to the Colossians in plaine tearmes con∣demneth , Wil-worship, notwithstāding what∣soeuer shew of Wisdome or humility it carry with it. All which considered, I yeeld you your Maior as true, No Wil-worship may be vsed. Your Assumption that Kneeling is Wil-worship I de∣ny: telling you further that you doe intolerable wrong vnto the Church of
England, charging her with so grosse a Superstition. For the world knoweth, and you must needs be a great stranger in Israel if you be ignorant, that the Gouernors of our Church presse not their cere∣monies vpon the consciences of men, as if they were in themselues necessary and not indifferent: neither place a∣ny part of Religion or diuine worship in them. This they leaue vnto that Man of sin, who challengeth power vnto  himselfe, as to create new articles of faith, so to prescribe new formes of Worship also. That their intent is not Wil-worship, but order & vniformity, they haue often∣times published, if I may so say, with sound of trumpet: which if you haue not heard, it is extreme deafenes: if you haue heard, and yet will not bee satisfied, to say no more, it proceeds of meere wilfulnes and frowardnesse. Howbeit to proue your Minor you affirme that Pope Honorius first deuised it.Cap. Sanc, de celeb Miss. It is true indeed that Honorius the third decreed, that Priests should often teach their people, reuerently to bow thēselues at the Eleuation of the Hoste when Masse is said, and when the Priest carries it to one that is sicke, and I deny not but thereby he intē∣ded the Adoration of the Hoste. But you should know that it is one thing to receiue the Communion Kneeling, another thing to Kneele at the Eleuation when there is no Receiuing. This Honorius decreed, not that, for ought I can learne. Nay further, what that gesture was which succeeded accubitus, lying on beds, whether it were kneeling, or standing, or sitting, I suppose he who is well acquainted with Ecclesiasticall Story can hardly determine, much lesse you whose reading therein pas∣seth not beyond the booke of Martyrs. Let euery one herein abound in his owne sence: I for my part thinke it was Kneeling rather then any other, because it is a ge∣sture of most reuerence.Lib. 4. c. 8. Hospinian a learned man who wrote the story of this Sacrament, hath these words, This Sacrament ought to bee handled with great Religion and reuerence, according to the custome of euery Church, with decent apparell, temperate behauiour, soberly, religi∣ously, the head bare, the knees bent, and other such like free ceremonies. And this reuerence or honour I doubt not but
some of the Fathers aboue cited vnderstood by the word A∣doration. For to Adore sometime signifieth, as all know, externall reuerence and veneration exhibited by bodily ge∣stures and speech vnto a thing, as when the knees are bent, the body is bowed, the head vncouered, the hands lifted vp, &c. Thus far Hospinian, by whose iudgement Kneeling in all likely-hood was vsed long before Honorius liued, or the Reall Presence was dreamed of. Howsoeuer, it is meere foppery to imagine that a thing in it selfe lawfull once abused to a bad end, can neuer recouer its right a∣gaine and bee lawfully vsed: and then taking this for granted, to preiudice our reuerent receiuing by Romish practice and superstition. I conclude therefore this point with that excellent saying of Origen,Hom. 5. in Euang. when thou receiuest that holy meat and incorruptible banket, when thou enioyest that Bread and Cup of life, and eatest and drinkest the Bo∣dy and Bloud of the Lord, then the Lord entreth vnder thy roofe. Thou therefore humbling thy selfe, imitate the Cen∣turion and say, Lord I am not worthy that thou shouldst come vnder my roofe. The third argument. 3 All shew of euill must bee eschewed. 1. Thess. 5.22. Kneeling is a shew of euill, as of Bread worship. Ergo, Kneeling must bee eschewed. First I interprete the Maior. Saint Pauls words in the place by you quoted are these, : which may bee rendred thus, Abstaine from all kind of euill. For the word signifieth kinde: and in this sence the
Syriacke translation vnderstandeth it. And interpreting it thus, the Maior is vniuersally and with∣out exception true: for no euill whatsoeuer, being in∣trinsecally  and formally so, may in any case bee done. Besides this exposition there is another more generally approued, Abstaine from all shew of euill or euill shew. For as euill it selfe must bee refrained that God bee not offended nor our Consciences disquieted: so must shew of euill also bee auoided, that wee scandall not our bro∣ther, nor discredit our profession. But in this sence the Maior is not vniuersally and without exception true. For first, it holds not in necessary duties commanded by God, nor in things indifferent ordered by man. For the substance must not bee neglected because of a shadow: nor wee fall into the reall euils of Disobedience and Dis∣loyalty, to auoid the shew of euill. Againe it holds not in Imaginary shewes, such as are without ground fanci∣ed in the sicke braines of humorous and malecontented people: but such onely as indeed carry with them a shrewd presumption of that euill whereof it is a shew. And thus the Maior is granted vnto you, in the former sence absolutely and simply, in the latter respectiuely with these restrictions and limitations. Now to the Minor I answere, first Kneeling is not formally euill, but of an indifferent and middle nature, neither good nor euill: and therefore is not forbidden by the former interpretation, Abstaine from all kind of euill. Secondly, I denie it to bee a shew of euill. For whe∣reof? Of Bread worship you say. How so, seing we are neither Transubstantiators nor Consubstantiators, and haue long since openly before all men disclaimed both Eleuation & Adtion? And to whom? To Papist or Protestant? Certainly neither: for the one condemnes vs for not adoring, and the other suspects vs not for a∣doring. So that the
Shew of Breadworship lieth not in our  Kneeling, but in your Imagination. Which if it be a suf∣ficient reason to barre vs from Kneeling, I must entreat you for the same reason to abstaine from Sitting:See Tertull. de orat. c. 12. for I can easily imagine in it a shew of euill, namely of Sleigh∣ting and Contemning the Sacrament. Nay I must pray you to sit still and do nothing: for what is it wherein a man may not fancie some euill shew or other? Lastly, suppose Kneeling haue the shew you speake of, yet is it not to be forborne, because it is in the number of those things that are excepted from the generall rule. For it is commanded by authority, and to receiue the Commu∣nion is a necessary duty which among us without Knee∣ling cannot bee done. Now as I haue said, to auoid see∣ming euill we may not be euill, and for feare of a shadow loose the substance, I meane the benefit and comfort of the Sacrament. And thus your argument drawen from the shew of euill proues as you see but the shew of an ar∣gument. I come to the last reason. 4 If we may kneele to Bread and wine, much more may We kneele to Angels. But wee may not kneele to Angels. Rev. 19.10. Ergo wee may not kneele to bread and wine. This is that Fallacie which Logicians call Ignorance of the Elench, when that is concluded which is not in que∣stion. For our Question is, Whether we may kneele at the receauing of the Sacrament: but your Conclusion is wee may not kneele to Bread and Wine. Neither shall there bee any quarell betweene vs about this point: for we readily grant it you, acknowledging further that your argument
from the greater to the lesse sufficiently euinceth it. For if we may not fall downe to adore an Angell, much lesse may we do so to bread and wine. And as we may not, so wee do not. Our Kneeling is not intended unto bread and wine, but vnto God who in the Sacrament offereth vnto vs the blessed body and bloud of his sonne, who is God also, and to bee worshipped of vs for euermore. You might therefore well haue forborne this argument which neither preiudiceth vs, nor aduantageth your selfe any whit at all: or if you haue any other meaning, you should haue better exprest it. For my part I cannot guesse what it should bee, nor will I trouble my braine in seeking it. Happily your selfe know not what you would. And thus haue I though breefly, yet fully answered all your reasons. It now remaineth, that either you pro∣duce sounder arguments then yet you haue giuen vs, or adde more vigor and strength vnto these: or (because I feare you can do neither) that considering the weaknes of those reeds whereon you haue hitherto leaned, hence forward you trust them no more. It can bee no disgrace vnto you to bee ouercome of Truth: neither is it leuity or inconstancy vpon sight of your errour to change both your opinion and practice. Take therefore vnto you Christian seuerity, and ingenuously reuoke what you haue held or done amisse: so shall you giue glorie vnto God, and God shall honour you in the sight of all his Saints. But if, notwithstanding all that hath beene said, you meane still to persist in your error, and will not bee persuaded although you be perswaded: I feare lest after straining at these gnats, you fall to swallowing downe of Camels, and proceed from dislike of a few
indifferent ceremonies, vnto flat schisme and separation. which God forbid for his mercies sake. Amen. See T de ora
HOW S. PAVL AND S. IAMES ARE TO BEE reconciled in the matter of IVSTIFICATION. YOV demand how Saint Paul teaching Iustification by Faith onely without the Works of the Law,Ro. 5.20.28. Gal. 2.16. Iam. 2.24. and Saint Iames affir∣ming that of Works a man is iustified and not of Faith only, may bee reconciled. I will en∣deuour to giue you the best sa∣tisfaction I can in a few Pro∣positions. 1 Scripture being the Word of God who is truth and whose promises are not yea and nay,2. Cor. 1.17.18.19.20. but yea and A∣men, although sometime there may seeme contrariety in it, yet reall difference and repugnancy there can bee
none, truth euer agreeing and neuer contradicting it selfe. 2 Paul therefore and Iames being inspired by the same spirit must needs conspire in the same truth: al∣though the one exclude Works from Faith in the mat∣ter of Iustification, the other include Works together with Faith. 3 The readiest way to reconcile this seeming contra∣diction is to obserue carefully the Occasions whereupon they were moued to deliuer these doctrines, and to di∣stinguish the Equiuocation and diuers vse of these two words Iustification and Faith. For if there bee the same meaning in both, and no ambiguity in either of these tearmes, it cannot bee auoided but they must of neces∣sity crosse one the other. 4 Saint Pauls occasion was this. Hee saw with what eagernesse & contention certaine Iewes maintained,Act. 15.1. that vnlesse the law of Moses were kept and obserued toge∣ther with the Gospell, there could bee no Iustification: and that thereby mans Works were either substituted in the roome of, or yoked together with Faith, to the great preiudice of Gods free Grace.Ro. 2.24. And therefore against these he proues by the testimony of the Law & the Pro∣phets, that we are Iustified by Faith in Christ freely with∣out the works of the Law. 5 Hereupon some there were, who like spiders suck∣ing venome out of the wholsomest flowers, so interpre∣ted this comfortable doctrine, as if it skilled not whe∣ther they practized good works, and led a godly & ver∣tuous life, so as they did belieue. And against this sort of men the Apostle Saint Iames thought it necessary to oppose himselfe.
6 So that Saint Iames doth not dispute against Saint Paul, but for the right meaning of S. Paul against those that depraued and wrested his doctrine to a wrong sence. Paul so defending Iustification by Faith without Works, as hee denies not the necessary practice of them, but on∣ly denies the power of Iustification vnto them: Iames so establishing good Works, not as giuing them force to make a man acceptable and iust in the sight of Gods iu∣stice, but onely disabling that Faith from hauing any power to Iustify vs, which is not accompanied with them. 7 And thus Saint Augustin vnderstandeth it. When,De fide & o∣per. l. 1. c. 14. saith he, the Apostle saith, that a man is iustified by Faith without the Works of the Law, hee meaneth not that Faith being receiued and professed; the works of Iustice should bee contemned: but that euery one should know that he may be iustified by Faith, although the works of the law goe not before. For they follow him that is iustified, but goe not be∣fore him that is to bee iustified. And againe,83. quaest. q. 16. When as Paul speakes of the good works of Abraham which accom∣panied his Faith, it is manifest that by the example of A∣braham he doth not so teach that a man is iustified by Faith without works, that if hee doe belieue it concernes him not to worke well: but to to this end rather, that no man should thinke that by the merit of his former good Works he hath attained the gift of iustification which is by Faith. 8 As the consideration of the different occasions which moued these two Apostles to speake so different∣ly doth in part cleere this question: so will it yet bee more euident if wee know the seuerall acceptions and vses of these words Iustification and Faith, and in what sence either Apostle vnderstands them.
9 Iustification vsually in the Scripture phrase signifi∣eth, not to make iust by infusing the quality of Iustice in∣to the soule,2. King. 15.4. Deut. 25.1. Psal. 81.3. Prov. 17.15. Mat. 12.37. Ro. 8.33.34. but to pronounce and declare to be iust: being indeed a Law-terme, and drawne from ciuill Courts of iudicature, and is opposed to Condemnation. And this is so cleere, that Tolet a Iesuite confesseth it most fre∣quently so to signify in Scripture: Pineda, Vega, and Salmeron three great Papists acknowledge it in this sence to be vsed by S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, where hee disputeth purposely of Iustification. 10 Now there is a double tribunall where wee are to bee iudged, one is Gods, the other Mans: and there∣fore God is sayd to Iustify, and Man also. God when he acquits a sinner from his sinnes for the merit of his Son Christ: Man when seeing our good works (which are the fruites and testimonies of our grace with God) out of the iudgement of Charity hee accounts vs the Sonnes of God. Of the former Saint Paul speakes, of the latter S. Iames. S. Paul enquireth how wee are made lust before God, namely by Faith: S. James how it may appeare vnto men that wee are Iust, namely by Works. Faith is the principle of Existence by which we are Iust: Works of Knowledge by which we are knowne to be Iust. Iac. 2.10. In id cap.11 That Saint Iames vnderstandeth such a Declara∣tiue Iustification is plaine by that he saith. Shew mee thy Faith by thy Works? And Thomas of Aquin affirmeth, that Workes following Faith are not said to Iustify, as Iustification is an infusion of iustice but as it is an ex∣ercise or declaration or perfection of Faith. 12 Concerning the word Faith, sometimes it signi∣fieth that sanctifying grace of Gods spirit whereby wee
beleeue in or on God, that is, put all our affiance vpon God in Christ for Iustification and Saluation: some∣times a naked assent or agreeing to all the truths con∣tained in the Scripture, specially such as are Euangeli∣call. That is only of the Elect: this the Diuels haue. That either hath works following it, as in Abraham: or is great in child of works, ready to trauell and bring forth if God giue time, as in the theefe on the crosse. This many times is without works, and therefore dead and spiritles. Of that S. Paul speaketh: of this S. Iames. That sole but not solitary iustifies: this being solitary iustifies not. 13 In a word, S. Paul speaks of the cause of Iustifica∣tion: S. Iames of the Effect. S. Paul descends from the Cause to the Effect: S. Iames ascends from the Effects to the Cause. S. Paul resolues how wee may bee iustified: S. Iames how wee may bee knowne to bee iustified. S. Paul excludes works as being no Cause of Iustification: S. Iames requires works as fruites of Iustification. S. Paul denies works to go before them that are to bee iu∣stified: S. Iames affirmeth that they follow him that is iustified. 14 Others distinguish, and reconcile them thus. Iu∣stification is sometime vnderstood without implying Sanctification, sometime as it implyeth also Sanctifica∣tion with it. In the former sence S. Paul taketh it, when hee proueth that a man is iustified by Faith without works: S. Iames in the latter, when he concludeth that a man is iustified by works and not by Faith only. And this I suppose to be a very sound interpretation. 15 Howsoeuer, that Faith alone without the works of the Law in the sence aboue deliuered doth iustifie,
these ancient Fathers auouch together with us, Origen, Cyprian, Eusebius Caesariensis, Hilarie, Basil, Chrysostome, Ambrose, Augustin, Cyril, Primasius, Hesychius, Genna∣dius, Oecumenius, whose direct and expresse words I can at any time produce. Nay these late Papists also (least it should be thought that none but Protestants hold it) the Canons of Collein, the authors of the booke offered by Caesar vnto the Protestant Collocutors in the assemblie of Ratisbon, Pighius, Cassander, Stapulensis, Peraldus, Ferus, and others who count themselues as good Catholiks as they that hold otherwise. 16 And this only Faith is so sure an anchor of our soules, and such fountaine of true comfort both, in life and death, that Charles the fift, Steuen Gardiner, Sir Christopher Blunt, and sundrie others durst not at their death trust vnto their works, but vnto Faith in Christ only. And Cardinal Bellarmin after a long disputation touching the merit of works is faine to conclude, that because of the vncertenty of our owne iustice, and the danger of vaineglory, the Safest course is to repose all our affiance in the only mercy and goodnes of God. So that in his iudgement wee Protestants haue chosen the Safest course: & I for my part will neuer trust my soule vnto them who leauing so safe a course, meane to ha∣zard it through a more dangerous way.
OF THE AVTHORS AND AVTHORITY OF THE CREED, AND WHY IT IS CALLED a Symbole.
THE inscription of the Creed seemes to father it on the holy Apostles, calling it the Symbole of the Apostles. So doe almost all the Fa∣thers of the fourth age after Christ and downeward, af∣firming that the Apostles hauing receiued the Holy Ghost at Ierusalem, and be∣ing now ready to disperse themselues into all parts of the world to preach the  Gospell, thought it good before their parting to com∣pile this Symbole, that it might serue as a pledge of their vnity in the Faith, and a canon for their doctrine and teaching. Yea some of them proceed so farre as particu∣larly to set downe what article was made by what Apo∣stle: whereof see Augustin in his hundred and fifteenth Sermon de tempore. Now although it bee very hard for mee to sway against the streame of so maine authority: yet can I not but doubt thereof,Paraphr. in Mat. Praef. and confesse with Eras∣mus I know not who made the Creed, especially hauing so great probabilities (for demonstrations I dare not call them) that it should not bee done by the twelue Apo∣stles. For first, were it compiled by them, is it likely that Saint Luke writing the history of their Acts, would haue omitted so principall a matter? Sundry other things of farre lesse consequence hee hath carefully recorded: but of this so important and weighty a businesse hee makes not so much as one word mention, which certainly hee would neuer haue failed to doe, had they done so. Adde hereunto that not one of the ancient Fathers who liued within the three first Centuries of Christ speake of any such thing in any of their writings: and yet they should best know it whose times were neerest vnto the Apo∣stles. This deep silence both of Saint Luke and all those ancient Doctors, make it vnto mee more then probable that the Apostles neuer composed it. Secondly, as the silence of these worthies, so the very language of the Creed conuinceth it to bee yonger then the Apostles. For the word Catholike vsed in the Creed was not knowne in their time. Can any man thinke that the Church should then bee called Catholike when it
was not Catholike? For when they say this Creed was compiled, the Church was scarce begunne among the Iewes, and the Apostles had no where as yet preached the Gospell among the Gentils. But heare the expresse words of Pacianus Bishop of Barcilona, Sed sub Apostolis,Ad Sympro∣nian Epist. 1. inquies, nemo Catholicus vocabatur. Esto, sic fuerit. Vel illud indulge, cum post Apostolos haereses extitissent, diuer∣sis{que} nominibus columbam Dei at{que} Reginam lacerare per partes & scindere niterentur: nonne cognomen suum plebs Apostolica postulabat, quo incorrupti populi distingueret vnitatem, neintemeratam Dei virginem error aliquorum per membra laceraret? In the Apostles times, you will say, no man was called Catholicke. Bee it so. Yet by your leaue when after the Apostles heresies were risen vp, and by diuersity of names they laboured to rent and teare in peeces the done and queene of God: was it not requisite that those which were Apostolike should haue a sirname of their owne, whereby the vnity of those that are vncorrupt might bee distinguished, and the error of none might rent in peeces the immaculate virgin of God? Thus hee. Against which if it bee obiected, that the E∣pistles of Iames, Peter, Iohn, and Iude are called Catho∣licke: I answer, the Inscriptions and Subscriptions of the Epistles are not Apostolicall, but added to them by some other, and sometime vntruly. Neither is there any reason they should bee so stiled aboue the rest. For nei∣ther is the doctrine contained in them more Catholicke then of all the other Epistles, neither were they written to all the Iewes, more then the Epistle to the Hebrewes, neither were they all written to all Catholicks, for the se∣cond and third of
Iohn were sent vnto priuate persons onely, and all the rest as vniuersally concerne all Ca∣tholicks  as these few tearmed Catholicke doe. I con∣clude therefore, the word Catholicke being latter then the Apostles, so must the Creed bee also which vses it. Thirdly, the different relation of the story bewrayes the vncertainty of it: for they giue not all the same arti∣cle vnto the same Apostle. Some marshall them iust as S. Luke doth in the first of the Acts: others thus, Peter, Andrew, Iohn, Iames the elder, Thomas, Iames the young∣er, Bartlemew, Mathew, Simon, Iude, Mathias. Againe, some of them attribute vnto Peter part onely of the first article, I belieue in God the Father almighty, and vnto Iohn the other part Maker of Heauen and Earth. But o∣thers attribute the whole article vnto Peter, and giue an∣other vnto Iohn. The like may bee obserued in other ar∣ticles. If then they bee certaine of the tradition, why doe they differ thus in their reports? If they differ thus one from another, who can bee certaine of the traditi∣on. Fourthly, if the Creed both for matter & forme were from the Apostles, and they deliuered it precisely in those words in which we now haue it, why is it not pla∣ced in the Canon of Scripture? Certainly in the Church although it euer haue been much esteemed, yet was it ne∣uer counted Canonicall. Neither hath it been preserued so safe from addition, detraction, mutation, as the rest of the Scriptures always haue been. For euen in the ancient∣est times we find great variety in it. Ruffin writing a iust comment on it, omits that clause Maker of Heauen and Earth. And who knowes not how many there are who relating this Creed leaue out the article of Christ des∣cending into hell?De Christi anima. c. 6 Euen Bellarmin himselfe, confesseth
that it was not found anciently in all Creeds: and hee voucheth for it Irenaeus, Origen, Tertullian, and Augustin though fiue times he expoūd it, and finally the Creed of the Roman Church also as Ruffin witnesseth vnto whom if hee had been so pleased, he might haue added a whole armie of others, whom for breuities sake I omit. Fi∣nally the ancient Doctors were so farre from equalling it with Scripture, that they appealed from it thereunto as to an higher authority.Catech. 4. Cyril plainely affirmeth that wee may not beleeue the Creed without Scripture.Biblioth. sanc. Patr. tom. 9. And Paschasius against Macedonius shrowding himselfe vn∣der some words of the Creed, appealeth vnto the Cano∣nicall Scripture, for that of it, saith hee, the text of the Creed dependeth. Which had they thought it had been from the Apostles in such forme and as now we haue it, without question they neuer would haue done.
Fiftly, the reason which they assigne why they compo∣sed this Creed, discouers the vanity thereof. What was that? That it might be forsooth vnto the Apostles a canon & rule, according to which they should square and con∣forme their preaching. What vnto the Apostles to whom Christ promised his blessed Spirit that should lead them into all truth? And that himselfe would put into their mouths a ready answer vpon all occasions, so that they should not need to bethinke themselues what to say? Could they possibly doubt lest any difference or discord should grow among them in matter of Faith, who were so guided by the Spirit of truth and vnity that they could not in any point either erre themselues, or lead any other into error? Surely, so to thinke, derogateth much from the truth of Christ, and imputeth much weaknesse vnto the Spirit of God, and detracteth from the certainty of  our Faith which dependeth on their preaching. So that for this cause it is vnlikely they made this Creed, at least∣wise to this end. De Symb. ad Cat. l. 1. c. 1.Lastly, Saint Augustin saith thus (not that false Augu∣stin vpon whom those Sermons de tempore are fathered, and whose authority is vsually alledged to warrant this legend, but the true S. Augustin saith) Illa verba (Symboli) qua audiuistis per Scripturas sparsa sunt, & inde collecta, & ad vnum redacta: those words of the Creed which you haue heard, are dispersed through the Scriptures, and be∣ing gathered from thence, are reduced into one. With him agreeth Paschasius,De Spirit. Sanct. c. 1. De sacris omninò voluminibus quae sunt credenda sumamus, de quorum fonte symboli ipsius series deriuata consistit: Let vs take out of the sacred vo∣lumes what things wee are to belieue, out of which foun∣taine the order of the Creed is deriued.Centur. 1. l. 2. c. 4. And Marcellus a Bishop in a letter to Iulius Bishop of Rome professeth hauing rehearsed the words of the Creed, Se hanc fidem ex Scripturis accepisse, & a maioribus secundum Deum ac∣cepisse, & candem in Ecclesiâ Dei praedicare: that he re∣ceiued this Faith out of the Scriptures, and next after God from his ancestors, and that hee preached it in the Church of God. If then, as these Fathers affirme, the Creed bee gathered out of the Scriptures, how can the Apostles bee authors thereof? For out of the old Testa∣ment they could not gather that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, or that hee suffered vnder Pontius Pilate. And as for the new, many of the Apostles were dead before all was written, and Iames before any was written: besides that no part of it was written when the Creed was compiled, if it bee true which the legend saith. And these are the reasons for which it seemeth vnto me more
then probable that the Apostles were neuer Authors of this Creed. If it be so will some say, why doth it then beare the Apostles name? I answere, because, as out of S. Augu∣stin and others we haue shewed, the matter therein con∣tayned is perfectly agreeable with the Apostles writings and was collected out of them. Moreouer, Apostolicall is a terme extended by writers vnto the first three hun∣dred years after Christ. Haet sola fides, saith Damasus,Ep. 5. quae Nicaeae Apostolorum authoritate fundata est, perpetua est firmitate seruanda: this only Faith which was esta∣blished at Nice by the authority of the Apostles, is fir∣mely and perpetually to be held. So Scythianus and Te∣rebinthus are said to haue liued temporibus Apostolorum in the time of the Apostles,Epiph. Haer. 66. who yet liued in Aurelians time, towards three hundred years after Christ. And I∣sidor distinguishing betweene Apostles and the First A∣postles, saith that Apostles continued downe vntill Pope Syluester, and that the times before the great Councell of Nice were Apostolicall. Although therefore the first Apostles were not the founders of this Creed: yet those succeeding Apostles were, of whom it may be called the Apostles Creed. These things being so, let it bee obserued thereupon, first how friuolously Papists cauill and quarell with vs, affirming that wee hold not the Faith of the Creed be∣cause we question it whether the Apostles were authors of it or no. As if to doubt of the author were to doubt of the truth of the matter: or as if all those Ancients reiec∣ted the epistle to the Hebrewes for Apocryphall, which were not resolued who wrote it, whether Paul, or Bar∣nabas, or Luke, or Clemens. Secondly, how weaklie
Popish traditions are supported by the tradition of this Creed. For not being the Apostles, how can it be a tra∣dition of the Apostles? or if it be a tradition of theirs, yet is it such a tradition as is written & contayned in Scrip∣ture: and such wee willingly receiue. Let them proue the rest of their pretended traditions to be such, and we will readily embrace them also. But returne wee to our purpose. This Creed by whomsoeuer it was made is intituled a Symbol: the reason whereof we are now to in∣quire. To let passe those barbarous and iocular notati∣ons which ignorant Monks haue giuen of it, lest rela∣ting them I should both spend time, & defile my paper: some deriue it from  signifying as they say a shote or reckoning,Ruff. Symb. Aug. ser. de tem. 115. for that the Apostles meeting together to compile it, did each conferre his article as it were his symbole for defraying of this heauenly banket. But first the Apostles, as we haue declared, neuer compiled this Creed. Secondly, if they compiled it, yet, as Antonius Nebrisensis saith,Quinquag. c. 40. it is neither credible nor likely that each of them conferred his particle: seeing in those things that are constituted and decreed by many, it is not the manner for euery one seuerally to put his word or saying into it, but for all iointly to agree vpon the whole. Adde hereunto, that if it were so, men would neuer haue diuided the Creed as they haue done, some into seuen articles, because of the seuen gifts of the holy ghost, very many others into fourteen: but onely into twelue, according to the number of the Apostles, who dictated each of them his article. Lastly, not  but  signifieth a shote, as the learned know, neither can it bee shewed to bee otherwise in any
Greeke writer.  Indeed in Latine writers yee shall sometimes find Sym∣bolum so vsed: yet that it is found so in any skilfull Cri∣ticks impute it to the ignorance of Notaries, and by the warrant of the best Manuscripts restore the Feminine Symbola into the roome thereof. Others fetch it from Symbolum signifying a Pledge or token and first such a pledge whereby persons espoused bind themselues to bee faithfull and true one vnto ano∣ther: because likewise in our spirituall espousals with Christ, as he giues vnto vs his blessed spirit as an earnest of his constant loue to vs, so wee returne backe againe the profession of our faith as a firme pledge of our loy∣alty and subiection to him. This reason caries good likelyhood and proportion with it. So doth also the next, when it signifieth tesseram hospitalem, such a token as Cities were wont to giue vnto their friends, that shew∣ing it they might find friendly entertainment in confe∣derate townes: or such as one friend was wont to giue vnto an other to the like end. Which how it fits the a∣mitie and frienship betweene Christ & vs, who sees not? Neuerthelesse I rather thinke it is so called from as it signifieth a watchword. For the Primitiue Church seemeth much to haue beene delighted with mi∣litare terms: I suppose because in Scripture Christians are so often compared vnto souldiers. And hence it is that the Church is distinguished into Militant and Tri∣umphant, that Heathen are called Pagans in opposition vnto souldiers, that the two mysteries of the Church are termed Sacraments, a word importing that oath of obe∣dience which souldiers take vnto their Generals. In like manner may the Creed be called a Symbole, because it is as a watchword by which true Orthodoxe Christians
many discerne one from the other. Painims, Iewes, Turks, and Hereticks. Heerwith agreeth Maximus Taurinensis, Symbolum tessera est & signaculum quo inter fideles per∣fidosque secernitur:Hom. de trad. Symb. the Symbole is a watchword or marke by which Faithfull and Faithles men are discerned. And Ambrose,De voland. Virg. l. 3. Symbolum cordis signaculum est, & nostrae mili∣tiae sacramentum: the Symbole is the seale of the heart, and the sacrament of our warfare.In Symb. And Ruffin, Nequa doli surreptio fiat, symbola discreta unusquisque dux suis militibus tradit, quae Latine vel signa vel indicia nomi∣nantur, ut si forte occurrerit quis de quo dubitetur, inter∣rogatus symbolum prodat si sit hostis an socius: lest there should be any surreption or deceit, euery captaine de∣liuereth vnto his Souldiers a distinct watchword, that if they meet with any of whom they doubt, by demanding the watchward they may discouer whether hee bee a friend or an enimy. And this hee accommodateth vnto the present purpose. Now seing the Gentiles were wont to giue for their watchword the names of some of their Gods,Xenoph paed. l. 3. & 7. Pausan. l. 10. Suet. Calig. c. 18. as , Minerua, Iupi∣ter, and the like: what fitter Symbole could Christians haue, then their Faith in the holy & indiuiduall Trinity? And thus much of the title of the Creed: proceed wee yet further.
Besides this Creed there are diuers others verie anci∣ent, both Generall of the whole Church, such as are those foure famous ones of Nice, of Ephesus, of Con∣stantinople, of Chalcedon: and Particular, either of seue∣rall Churches, or of priuate men, among which that of Athanasius is most renowned. All which though in forme of words they vary, yet for substance are all one, there being,Eph. 4.5. as S. Paul saith, but vna fides, one faith. Nei∣ther  yet was this number of Creeds needles or endles. For when heresies began to encrease and preuaile, the Church thought it necessary to set forth some short Confessions, by which the people as by a touchstone might discerne the gold of Orthodoxe truth from the copper of errors and heresies. Saith S. Hilarie, Nihil mirum videri debet, fratres charissimi, quod tam fre∣quenter exponi fides caeptae sint: necessitatem hanc furor haereticus imponit: you ought not to maruell much, be∣loued brethren, that nowadayes Creeds are so frequent∣ly set forth: the fury of hereticks hath layd this neces∣sity vpon vs. Thus against Arius denying the diuinity of Christ was the Nicene Creed framed: against Ma∣cedonius and Eudoxius denying the Deity of the holy Ghost, and his proceeding from the Father and the Sonne; the Constantinopolitane: against Nestorius de∣nying the vnion of both natures of Christ in one person, the Ephesine: against Eutyches confounding both na∣tures, and swallowing vp the humane, in the diuine, that of Chalcedon. Thus of late the reformed Churches to quit themselues of the vniust imputations of heresie and apostasie wherewith they were charged, haue beene for∣ced sundrie times to set forth seuerall Confessions of their Faith, all which, or most of which are recorded in the harmonie of Confessions. Scurrilous therefore is that taunt of Papists, who for this cause terme vs Con∣fessionists. For what haue we done herein, whereunto their slanderous criminations haue not compelled vs? what, whereof we haue, not example from the Primi∣ue Church? Nay, what whereof we haue not Gods ex∣presse commandement,1 Pet. 3.16. charging vs to bee ready on euery occasion to render an account of the Hope that is in vs?
But yet among all the ancient Creeds, this of the A∣postles, hath euer beene counted of greatest authority, and ought still so to bee counted. Among the ancient Creeds I say: for the Scripture is peerles, and equall au∣thority with it neither may it chalenge vnto it selfe, nei∣ther did any of the ancient Fathers giue it, as aboue wee haue touched. For although the substance and matter of the Creed be diuine and perfectly according with the Scripture, yet for forme and order of words it is hu∣mane: whereas the Scripture both for substance and circumstance, matter and forme and all is no way hu∣mane, but wholly and entirely diuine. The greater the blasphemie of Rhemish Iesuites auouching this Creed to be the Rule whereby all the writings of the new Testa∣ment are to be tried,In Ro. 12.6. and approued: whereas contrarily the Scripture out of which the Creed is collected, is the only Rule by which both it and all other Creeds are to bee examined. Howbeit the second place, as it is its due, so we willingly yeeld vnto it. First in regard of the antiquity thereof, because of all other it is the eldest. Secondly, for the perfection and fulnes thereof, there being no one article of absolute necessity vnto Saluation, which is not either in expresse tearmes or impliedly and in its principles contayned therein. Thirdly and lastly, because it hath had the vniuersall approbation of all Churches, in all times, both ancient and moderne. The ancient Fathers giue vnto it most honorable and magni∣ficent titles. They call it, the key of Faith, the rule of Faith, the foundation of Faith, the summe of Faith, the forme of Faith, the body of Faith, the rule of truth, the sa∣crament of humane saluation, the mysterie of religion, the character of the Church, and the like. On it they commen∣ted
rather then on any other Creed: vnto it all others were conformed, so as they seeme to be but expositions of it. Finally, it was their manner neuer to admit any that was adultus either to the Sacrament of Baptisme, or to the holy Eucharist without making confession of his Faith by rehearsing this Creed. In like manner, all the re∣formed Churches with all reuerence and duty receiue it: they vse it in their publick Liturgies, and expound it in their Catechismes. The more malitious is the slander of Gregorie Martin and others,Disc. of Eng. trans. c. 12. who shame not to say that we hold not the Christian Faith of the articles of the Creed. Yea, saith another of vs, they haue no faith nor religion,Tho. Wright. Att. they are infidels, they beleeue not the holy Catholick Church, the communion of Saints, the remission of sins, that Christ is the sonne of God, or that he descended into Hell. And as if these had not yet said enough,Credo Calui∣niscq. another o∣pening his mouth as wide as Hel affirmeth our Creed to bee this, I beleeue in the Diuell the tormentor helmighty corrupter of heauen & earth. And in not-Iesus-not-Christ the only stepsonne degenerate, who was spoiled of his glory by the holy Ghost, and borne of Mary no Virgin &c. To all which I answer Increpet te Dominus, the Lord rebuke thee Satan. If they haue called our master Belzebub, it can be no disgrace to vs to suffer the same reproch. The more in∣credible things they charge vs withall, the lesse are themselues beleeued, and the more credit do wee gaine vnto our profession. All what is contayned in holy writ, in this Creed of the Apostles, in that of Nice and Atha∣nasius wee firmely and entirely beleeue. Let Hell and Antichrist and all the brood of Papists burst with ma∣lice and enuy: yet this and no other Faith do wee hold and teach.
A SHORT CATECHISME. QVaest. Who placed you here in this World? Ans. God the maker and Gouernour of all things. Q. Wherefore did hee place you here? A. To serue and glorify him. Q. How will he be serued? A. By doing his holy Will and Commandements. Q. What Commandments hath hee giuen you? A. The ten Commandements of the Morall law. Q. Repeat them vnto me. A. Heare Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which &c. Q. What duties doth God require of you in this law? A. Two: to loue God aboue all, and my neighbour as my selfe. Q. Haue you done this perfectly? A. No, neither yet can I, nor any man els. Q. Why can you not? A. Because all are conceiued and borne in sinne. Q. How commeth that to passe? A. By the fall of our first parents. Q. Had you obeyed the law what had beene the reward? A. Life euerlasting.
Q. What is the punishment of Disobedience? A. Euerlasting death. Q. Your case then it seemes is very miserable. A. Very miserable vnlesse God bee mercifull in Iesus Christ. Q. What is Iesus Christ? A. The Eternall Sonne of GOD made Man. Q. Wherefore was he made Man? A. To die for mans sin and to reconcile him vnto GOD. Q. Are all men reconciled by him? A. No, but true belieuers onely. Q. Who are true Belieuers? A. They who by faith accept him for their only Medi∣atour and Sauiour. Q. How is this Faith wrought? A. By the preaching of the Gospell. Q. What is the summe of the Gospell? A. It is contained in the Apostles Creed. Q. Repeat the same vnto me. A. I Belieue in God the Father Almighty, maker &c. Q. How may we know that we haue true Faith? A. By the fruites thereof. Q. What are the fruites of Faith? A. New Obedience and Repentance. Q. What is new Obedience? A. A sincere practice of holynesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of my life. Q. Can you doe this perfectly? A. No: but if I striue vnto perfection God in grace ac∣cepteth it. Q. But what if you fall into sinne againe? A. I am to rise againe by speedy repentance:
Q. What call you repentance? A. A hearty sorrow for sinne with the amendement thereof. Q. You say it must bee speedy: tell mee wherefore? A. Because if I bee preuented by death I perish eternal∣ly. Q. What is the benefit of Repentance? A. Forgiuenesse of sinnes, with recouery of Gods fa∣uour. Q. You haue told mee how Faith is wrought, and how it may bee discerned: tell me now how it must be nourished and preserued. A. By the vse of the Sacraments and Prayer. Q. What is a Sacrament? A. A seale of the Couenant of grace. Q. What things are required in a Sacrament? A. Two things, a signe and a thing signified. Q. How many Sacraments are there? A. Two, Baptisme and the Lords Supper. Q. What is Baptisme? A. The Sacrament whereby wee are admitted into the Church of Christ. Q. What is the outward Signe of Baptisme? A. The sprinkling of Water vpon the Body. Q. What is the thing signified? A. The washing away of sinne by the Blood of Christ. Q. What is the Lords Supper? A The Sacrament of our spirituall nourishment and preseruation vnto eternall life. Q. What is the outward signe in the Lords Supper? A. Bread and Wine. Q. What is the thing signified?
A. The Body of Christ broken, and his Blood shed for our Redemption. Q. What is Prayer? A. An humble intreating of God for all the good things wee stand in need of. Q. After what manner must we pray? A. As we are taught in the Lords prayer. Q. Repeate the same vnto me? A. Our Father which art in Heauen, hallowed &c. Q. What is the effect of Prayer? A. The obtayning of our requests. Q. Doth euery one obtaine that prayeth? A. No, but hee onely that asketh in faith, and in the Name of Christ. Q. What remaineth to bee done when we haue obtained our suites? A. Wee are to returne vnto God the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing. Instructions for preparation vnto the holy COMMVNION. Q. I see you are desirous with the rest of Gods people to bee admitted to the holy Communion: tell me for what cause are you so desirous thereof? A. I am desirous thereof for two causes. First, that I may discharge my duty to God, who commandeth mee to receiue so often as conueniently I may: se∣condly that I may reap the benefit & comfort which God hath promised vnto mee thereby.
Q. What benefit or comfort hath God promised vnto you thereby? A. That as by Baptisme my first incorporation into the mysticall Body of Christ is already sealed vp vnto me: so by this holy Sacrament my continuall nourish∣ment and preseruation in the same Body shall like∣wise be sealed vp vnto me. Q. But doe all reape this benefit that receiue this Sacra∣ment? A. No, but the worthy receiuer only: for they that re∣ceiue vnworthily, eat and drinke to themselues their owne damnation. Q. What things are necessarily required vnto worthy Re∣ceiuing? A. Two things: sufficient knowledge in the vnderstand∣ing, and sanctifying grace in the heart. Q. What knowledge count you sufficient? A. A knowledge of the law sentencing vnto death for sinne: secondly, a knowledge of the Gospell promi∣sing euerlasting life vpon condition of Faith and true repentance: thirdly a knowledge of the Sacraments, and principally of the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per. Q. What knowledge is required touching the Lords Sup∣per?
A. That the sensible signes vsed therein haue spirituall significations: and therefore as the Minister hauing blessed the bread and wine, breaketh the one and pou∣reth out the other, and I receiuing them into my hands conuey them into my Body for the nourishmēt there∣of: so God the Father hauing predestinated his Son to be our Mediator and Redeemer hath giuen his Bo∣dy  to bee broken and his Blood to be shed for vs, that wee receiuing the same by Faith may thereby be nou∣rished both bodies and soules vnto euerlasting life. Q. But what sanctifying graces are required in the heart? A. First true and vnfained repentance for sinne: second∣ly a liuely Faith vpon the merits of Christ for remis∣sion of sinne: thirdly sincere loue and charity with our brethren: fourthly, renewed Faith and repentance for our new sins, and renewed loue in regard of our new breaches with our brethren. Q. Well then I see you know with what knowledge and grace you ought to bee furnished before you can worthily receiue: tell me now how must you behaue your selfe du∣ring the time of administring this Sacrament? A. With feare and reuerence as in the presence of God who seeth the very secret of my heart: and therefore banishing out of my mind all earthly and imperti∣nent thoughts, I am onely and wholly to attend this heauenly action. Q. And when you haue receiued, what duty remaineth to be performed? A. First, I am humbly to thanke Almighty God who hath vouchsafed to receiue mee as a guest at his holy Table: secondly, I am to pray vnto God that pardo∣ning my want of due preparation and all other my in∣firmities hee would blesse this holy Sacrament to the nourishment of my soule: thirdly, I am carefully to vse all other meanes ordained by God whereby I may still grow forward in grace till I come to be a perfect man in Christ. If yee know these things, blessed are yee if yee doe them. FINIS.
Peccatum formaliter & propriè non esse infi∣nitum, exercitatio aduersus N. Probatur. 1 FInitae Essentiae finita est Potentia: finitae Potentiae fi∣nita est Operatio. At Peccatum Operatio est finitae Essentiae, Creatura nimirum rationalis, Ergo, & finitae Potentiae. Quarè & ipsum finitum est. 2. Gratia Dei non est potentior Infinito: Infinito enim nihil infinitius. Sed potentior est Peccato: tollit enim ip∣sum & abolet. Ergo Peccatum non est infinitum. 3. Vnum infinitum non est alio mains: quod enim minus est ideò quia minus est non est Infinitum. At Peccatum v∣num alio maius est & grauius: Imparitatem enim Pecca∣torum negare Stoicismus est. Ergò omne Peccatum non est Infinitum. 4. Omnes ad vnum Orthodoxi Theologi tenent, Nullum esse Summum malum: Sequeretur enim alioqui duo esse prima rerum Principia, Bonum & Malum, quae Manichaeo∣rum haeresis est. Ergò omne Peccatum non est Infinitum.
5. Peccatum consideratur aut ut. obliquitas, aut cum Acti∣one. At neutro modo Infinitum est. Non ut Actio: prosecta namque â finito ut dictum est, finita sit necesse est. Non vt Obliquitas, sic enim nihil est: Non Entis autem non est accidens, nec igitur accidit ei esse Infinito. Adde quòd  non omnia aequè, sed unum alio a Scopo propiùs aberret: quare nec omnia infinito interuallo. Obiicitur. 1. Theologos omnes asserere Peccatum esse Infinitum: v∣trumque enim & Legislatorem Deum & Legem Dei, quae utraque Infinita sunt, Peccato violari. Respondeo. 1. Eos qui sic loquuntur affirmare, Peccatum Obiectiuè, id est Materialiter infinitum esse, non formaliter. 2. Quamuis peccatum infinitam laedat Maiestatem, non tamen infinito modo: alioqui quouis peccato Deus aequè offenderetur, quod absurdum est. 3. Non vt Deus sic lex Dei infinita: Si esset, utique & Deus esset, qui solus est infinitus. Filius quidem Dei verbum increatum est: at Lex creatum: non ergò vt il∣lud infinitum. Replicatur. Lex infinita est, 1. Quia à Deo infinito condita est. 2. Quia perfecta est. Psal. 19. Respondeo. 1. Primum illud non sequi: Non enim quod ab Infinito est, id continuò est Infinitum. A finito nil nisi finitum procedit: ab infinito vtrum{que} & finitum & infinitum. Alioqui mundus hic, immò puluisculus quilibet aut a∣tomus, cum à Deo sit, infinitus esset.
2. Neque Secundum si vox illa Persecta vniuocè intelli∣gatur. Distinguo ergò, Perfectum vel absolutè dici, vel in suo genere. Absolutè, cui nihil deest quod in aliquo genere perfectum est: & sic solus Deus Perfectus est, in quo vno omnes omnium perfectiones eminentissimo modo aggregantor, proptereaque etiam solus simpliciter & proprie Infinitus est. In suo genere, cui nihil deest quod ad suum genus pertinet: & sic quidem Lex Perfecta est, nec quicquam in eâ desideratur quod ad Legis naturam  & ingenium spectat. At interim quod sic Perfectum est non simpliciter & propriè infinitum est. 2. Poena Peccati est Infinita: Ergò & Peccatum ipsum. Nisi enim Poena Peccato analoga sit, Deus iniustus est, quod horrendum dictu. Respondeo. 1. Si Poena Peccati sit infinita, perperàm docent Theologi Deum, vt vltrà Condignum remuneratur, ita punire citrà condignum. 2. Paena non est infinita, tum quia Creatura, diuinae{que} irae extrinsecum effectum: tum quia non omnes pares, ideo∣que nec omnes infinitae. Replicatur. Aeterna est, Ergò & Infinitae. Respondeo. 1. Non disputari de infinitate Durationis sed grauitatis: quare nihil hoc ad Andromacham. 2. Nego propriè aeternam esse, sed aeuiternam: incepisse e∣nim quamuis desitura non sit, ideoque nec propriè infi∣nitam. 3. Peccatum in Electis ne paenas quidem aeuiternas lucre: quare saltem in illis peccata non esse infinita. In reprobis iustum est ut nunquam careant supplicio, quia nunquam voluerunt carere peccato. 3 Passio Christi vtroque modo infinita est & mole & duratione: Ergò & peccatum cuius paenas Christus pro nobis luit. Respondeo. 1. Non sequi: maioris enim illa meriti propter dignitatem personae, quàm mille peccatorum myriades demeriti. 2. Passio Christi mole finita fuit: creatura enim, creatura etiam natura quâ patiebatur.
3. Nego duratione aeuiternam, nedum aeternam fuisse. Quî pote? Nisi fortè triginta quatuor plàs minùs anni, in quibus solis  fuit, pro totâ aeternitate censeri pos∣sint. Replicatur. At propter dignitatem Personae aeternae,  Paena fuit etiam aeterna. Respondetur. 1. Verba perplexa, & nequid grauiùs dicam  quo∣rum si haec mens & sententia sit, Passionem Christi tem∣poralem propter dignitatem personae aeternae, passioni no∣strae aeternae etiam ad assem aquiualere, tria dico. 1. Aliter dictum oportuisse: nec enim hunc sensum verba praese ferre. 2. Hinc sequi Paenant Christi temporalem duntaxat, non aeternam fuisse. 3. Ideo Christum paenas aeternas non passum, quia peccata Electorum pro quibus passus est non futura erant aeter∣na: quippe, per gratiam diuinam interpellanda & inter∣rumpenda. 2. Siquid aliud haec verba sibi volunt, quaeratur Sibyllae aut somniorum coniector aliquis: Mihi diuinari nec li∣bet nec vacat. 4. At quid frequentius in sacris concionibus scriptisque Theologicis, quàm Peccatum infinitum, Panam infini∣tam &c. Respondeo. 1. Non omnia ab omnibus propriè dici, praesertim in de∣megorijs & homilijs ad populum: sed pleraque tropicè & , adrei magnitudinem indicandam. 2. Intelligendi sunt de Peccato non formaliter, sed materi∣aliter & obiectiuè loqui, vt suprà dictum est: quia Pec∣cato Maiestas infinita violatur. 3. Distinguo, Rem omnem considerari vel vt quiddam Ens, vel secundum propriam suam rationem. Vt Ens, finita est res omnis creata. Secundum rationem suam propriam infinita dici potest, si quicquid ad se pertine∣re ullo modo potest non limitata, nec secundùm mensu∣ram habeat. Sic lucem Solis infinitam dicimus, non quidem secundùm suum Esse, sed secundùm rationem
lucis: quia habet quicquid ad communem rationem lucis pertinere potest. Pari ratione, Peccatum, Poena, Passio, priori modo proculdubiò finita sunt: infinita secundo, si vllo modo infinita sunt, hoc est, secundùm quid, non propriè & simpliciter, quod in thesi affirmatur. Quod etiam non de omni Peccato aut Paenâ intelligendum est, sed fortasse de Peccato in Spiritum Sanctum, aut saltem illo Diaboli: deque paenâ Gehennae intensissimâ.
OF CHOICE OF MEATS AND ABSTINENCE. I Will endeauour to satisfy your de∣maund the best I can, and to resolue you in the question of choice of Meats and Abstinence: but briefly and in few words. It may please you therefore to remember. 1. That all Meats in regard of their nature and creation are good. For of euery thing that was created God himselfe singularly and seuerally auoucheth that it was good,Gen. 1.4.10.12.18.21.25.31. 2. Tim. 4.3.4. and of all iointly and colle∣ctiuely that they were exceeding good. In particular of Meats, S. Paul affirmeth that they are good, and created to bee receiued with thankesgiuing. 2.2. Tim. 4.1. They that say the contrary are charged by Saint Paul to hold a doctrine of Diuels. And iustly were the Manichaeans, Tatiani and Encratitae, for maintaining that some Meats are of a polluted and vncleane nature, euer accounted and condemned as Heretiks in the Church of God. 3. God who is the Creator of Meats, and soueraigne Lord of all things, hath full and absolute power ouer the
Meats, and may restraine the vse of any kind of them at his pleasure. Which when it appeareth he hath done, the Conscience is ou ute obedience and ab∣stinence from meats so Leuit. 11.4 While therefore the Cniall part of the law remained in force, wherein nds of Meats were interdicted vnto the Iewes, partly to distinguish them thereby from other nations, partly to figure out the Churches election and separation from the rest of the world: it had beene a breach of Religion and a great sin to put no difference between meat and meat, but to haue vsed them all indifferently. 5 By the comming of Christ the shadowes of the law are vanished, and the distinction of meats is vtterly abolished and taken away: as appeareth by the vision of the Sheet shewed vnto Peter, and the voice that said vn∣to him.Act. 10.11.15. The things that God hath purified pollute thou not. And the free vse or non-vse of them is a part of that Christian liberty which Christ by his blood hath pur∣chased vnto vs,Rom. 14.14.20. Tit. 1.15. Gal. 5.1. who vnto the cleane, as the Apostle saith,) hath made all things cleane. 6 In this Liberty so deerely bought we are comman∣ded to stand fast, and not to suffer our selues againe to be entangled with the yoke of bondage. We entangle our sel∣ues if now we place any holynes or religion in absti∣nence from some kind of meats, or if we abstaine to the end wee may satisfy for our sins, or thereby merit vnto our selues euerlasting life.1. Cor. 8.8. For Meat, as S. Paul saith, maketh vs not acceptable vnto God: and againe, The Kingdome of God is not meate or drinke but righteousnes and peace and ioy in the holy Ghost.Rom. 14.17. Heb. 13.9. And yet againe, It is a good thing that the hart bee stablished with grace and not
with meats which haue not profited them that haue beene occupied therein. 7. The Church of Rome therefore commanding ab∣stinence from some kinds of meats to the same ends, and as a part of diuine worship, is guilty of horrible sacri∣ledge and cruell tyranny. For she robbeth the Church of her Liberty: and imposeth vpon her that heauy yoke, which Christ himselfe had taken off her necke. To what end hath Christ freed our consciences, if Rome may a∣gaine enthrall them? and how easie a matter is it to a∣uoid punishment and to win heauen if abstinence from flesh and egges will worke it? 8. As wee must stand fast in this libertie, so must we take heed that we abuse not our Liberty, making it, as S. Peter speaketh a cloake for our naughtines, or,2. Pet. 2.16. Gal. 5.13. 1. Cor. 10.23. as S. Paul saith, vsing it as an occasion to the flesh. For though all things, that is, all indifferent things, bee lawfull, yet are they not alwayes expedient: and therefore are not al∣wayes indifferently to bee vsed or not vsed, but as they are conuenient, and wee find them tend either to edifi∣cation or destruction. 9. They are conuenient and destroy not when they are regulated and guided by Charity, Temperance, Piety, and Loyalty. First by Charity.1. Cor. 8.9. Rom. 14.15. V. 20.21. For wee may not by eat∣ing giue occasion of falling to them that are weake. So do∣ing, wee should not walke charitably, but destroy with our meats him for whom Christ died. Though all things be pure, yet is it euill to eat with offence. When wee so sin against the Brethren and wound their weake conscience, we sinne against Christ.1. Cor. 8.13.14. Wherefore S. Paul resolued rather then by eating he would offend his brother he would not eat flesh while the world standeth.
10. Secondly, by Temperance and Sobriety. For re∣pletion and fulnesse nourish in vs our inordinate lusts, and make vs like pampered horses grow head-strong and vnruly.Rom. 13.13. Wee may not therefore abuse our liberty vnto surfetting and drunkennesse: yea if wee find that some meats or drinks, though not excessiuely taken, doe in∣flame our lusts, wee must abstaine. And this was the cause,2. Cor. 6.6. as I suppose, why the Apostle Saint Paul knits these two together, in Fasting, in Chastity. For accor∣ding to the old saying, Sine Cerere & Baccho friget Ve∣nus, without bread and wine venery and lust waxeth cold. 11. And here I cannot but wonder at the vanity and peruersnesse of Romanists, who for the subduing and ta∣ming of the flesh, at times forbid the eating of flesh, but in the meane season giue leaue to feed on all sorts of fishes, marmelades, and conserues, and to drinke the strongest and choicest wines, which without question prouoke and stirre vp lust as well as flesh. As if to eat a bit of course flesh vpon a prohibited day were gluttony: but to cram our selues with all other delicates were ab∣stinence and fasting. O blindnesse! O stupidity! 12 Thirdly by Piety and Religion. For although Ab∣stinence as Hierome saith, bee not in it selfe a vertue, nor any part of Diuine worship, yet is it an instrument, help, and furtherance thereunto. And therefore if wee would humble ourselues by repentance, or pray vnto God with feruency for the auerting of dangers imminent, or cala∣mities incumbent vpon vs: we are then by fasting to te∣stify our humiliation, and to quicken our deuotion, as wee read the faithfull both vnder the Law and Gospell were euer wont to doe.
13. Lastly by Loialtie and Dutifull subiection. For if the Magistrate, either for a publick ciuill good shall at times forbid the vse of some meats, as of flesh on fri∣dayes, saturdayes, emberweeks, lent, and the like, or for the pacifying of Gods wrath in the common calamity of the state, shall command a generall Fast: wee are ac∣cordingly to abstaine,Rom. 13.6. and to yeeld obedience vnto the Magistrate, not only for feare, but also for Conscience sake. 14. Thus then first you haue Libertie by Christ to eate of all kind of meats: secondly, you are bound to stand fast in your Liberty and not to put your selfe vn∣der bondage againe: thirdly, you may not wantonlie a∣buse you liberty by doing such things as are inconueni∣ent, and hurt rather then edifie: lastly, our vse thereof must be moderated and directed by Charity, Temperance, Piety and Loyalty. This if you know, and thus if you doe, you cannot erre nor doe amisse. 15. Which that you may both know and doe you are to pray him that is the donor and giuer of all good things, to make you both wise and prudent. Wise in the knowledge and practice of whatsoeuer is of absolute ne∣nessity vnto saluation: prudent in the discretion and right vse of things indifferent. This God grant you for his Christs sake. Amen.
AN ANSWER VNTO CERTAINE REASONS FOR SEPARATION.
I Could haue wished withall my hart that in this particular I might haue proued a false prophet: and that my feares concer∣ning you, though they were not without cause, yet might haue been without effect. But now I plainly perceiue that my words were no lesse then oracle, and what I feared is accordingly come to passe. For, as I foretold you, from strayning at gnats, you are fallen to swallowing of Camels: that is, from scrupu∣lousnes and nicenes in Kneeling at the Communion, and other such like indifferent ceremonies, you haue head-longly cast your selfe into the gulfe of Schisme and Se∣paration. In regard whereof, hauing heretofore in the matter of Kneeling bestowed my labour in vaine vpon you, I feare, now that you are thus farre proceeded, and setled as it were on your lees, I shall much lesse preuayle with you. Neuertheles, because it pleased you to send me in writing the reasons of your Separation, promising to returne with all speed if they were sufficiently answe∣red:  I may not, vnlesse I will betray the truth, and faile in the duties of Charity, refuse to take a little further paines with you. Here therefore I send you this short, and, as I conceiue, full answer: the perusall whereof I leaue vnto you, the censure vnto Gods Church, and the issue vnto God himselfe. Whom I humbly beseech of his goodnesse eftsoones to reduce you. Two grounds you say there are whereon you haue built your Separation: the first whereof you lay downe in these tearmes, That the Hierarchie and Ministrie of Arch-bishops, Lord Bishops, &c. and Priests may not bee set ouer the Church of Christ, nor retained therein. From whence, as I vnderstand it, you would argue and con∣clude thus. Where are such Church Officers as may not bee set ouer nor retained in the Church, there is no true visible Church, and consequently Separation must bee made from it. But here in England are such Church Officers, as Arch-bi∣shops, Bishops &c. and Priests. Ergo, here in England is no true visible Church, and con∣sequently Separation must bee made from it. To this argument thus formed I answer, first by de∣nying the Maior Proposition: which in that you goe not about to proue, you commit that fault in reasoning which Logicians call Petitionem Principij, taking that for granted which is most questioned. For suppose that Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests were superfluous of∣ficers, yet it is not euery superfluity in a Church that takes away the nature and essence thereof: and euen they who mislike the present Church gouernement, doe not
all of them, as you Separatists doe, inferre thereupon a nullity, but onely a corruption or aberration in the Church. It would haue beene much more to the pur∣pose, if you could haue demonstrated that the Church of England is defectiue in such officers as are essentiall, and without which a Church cannot be. Here therefore I must entreat you either to acknowledge your rashnesse, or else to bestow a little more paines in the proofe of that which without euidence of reason will neuer be yeelded you. Againe I deny the Minor Proposition, affirming con∣trarily that Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests are law∣full Church-Officers, and may bee both set ouer and re∣tained in the Church. For I hope you vnderstand these tearmes not cauillingly and equiuocally, but according to the meaning and definition of the Church of Eng∣land. Otherwise you shall but iangle about words, and bewray that you haue more desire to picke quarels, then ability to iustify your Separation. But you endeauour to fortify your Minor by twelue reasons supplying in the tale if ought bee wanting in the weight. Let vs exa∣mine them seuerally. The first is this.
1 No Antichristian ministrie may bee set ouer the Church of Christ, nor retained therein.2. Thes. 2.3.4.11.12. Ro. 14.9 10. with Ex. 4.5. Deut. 7.26. Ps. 119.21.128. But the Ministrie of Arch-bishops, Lord-Bishops & Priests is Antichristian, because the Churches of Antichrist cannot bee compleate, if they haue not this Prelacy, as ap∣peareth by the Popes Canons and Pontificall, and by their Church-Constitution. Therefore they are not to bee set ouer the Church of Christ, nor retained therein. What meane you by the word Antichristian? For al∣though I know well what properly it signifies, yet I doubt much what you vnderstand thereby: it being your manner either through negligence or ignorance too of∣ten to speake improperly. If you vnderstand it proper∣ly, and as you ought, for that which is against Christ and his ordinance, or, as your men sometimes expresse themselues, which is a speciall part of Antichrists apo∣stasie, then I yeeld you your Maior, and confesse that no such Ministrie may bee set ouer the Church nor re∣tained therein. But if you meane thereby either that which was first instituted and deuized by Antichrist, or that which being formerly instituted is vsed and appro∣ued in the Church of Antichrist, then I deny the Maior. For first, euery thing (by Antichrist ordained) is not pre∣sently vnlawfull and Antichristian, no more then euery act of a tyrant is vniust and tyrannous. How many good and wholesome lawes were enacted vnder the raigne of
Richard the third, who yet was a most bloody and cru∣ell tyrant? Neither were they afterward repealed by succeeding Kings, but stand still in force notwithstanding  his tyranny: for they proceeded from him non quà ty∣rannus, not as hee was a tyrant, but as hee was a wise and politicke gouernour. In like manner, not euery thing ordained by Antichrist is foorthwith to bee reiected, but onely that which hee doth quà Antichristus, as hee is Antichrist, and is meerely Antichristian. It is a great folly to refuse good counsell because it is giuen by an euill man. Wise men will consider non quis sed quid, not so much who doth a thing, as what is done. For as truth is Gods in whose mouth soeuer it bee found: so is good also whosoeuer bee the Author thereof. Againe, if those things whereof Antichrist is the first founder bee not therefore by and by vnlawfull, much lesse are those things so, which being of a former institution are onely vsed and obserued by him. Were it otherwise, how many ordinances of God himselfe, and wholesome con∣stitutions of the primitiue Church would proue vnlaw∣full being still retained in Popery? This Maior you endeauour to fortify with sundry pas∣sages of Scripture. But as Cassius of old was wont to say, Cui bono? to what end? For if you would proue it in the sense granted you, they are alledged needlesly: if in the sense denied, friuolously; and to speake the truth euery way vainely and impertinently, as the very reading of them will manifest to any one that will but take the paines to peruse them. But this is the manner of your men to paint your margents with multitude of quotati∣ons nothing to the purpose: whereas one allegation di∣rectly concluding is more then a hundred demonstrati∣ons, as being the words of the first and infallible verity. What you intend hereby I wot not, whether to amuse the Reader and ouerwhelme him with your numbers, or
to win you credit and estimation with the vulgar, as if you were the onely skilfull Text-men. But sure I am that such sleighting of Scripture is no lesse then the ta∣king of Gods Name in vaine: which whosoeuer doth, the Lord professeth he will not hold him guiltlesse. Scrip∣ture is not made nor appointed for pompe and shew, but for conquest and victory. To the Minor Proposition I answer negatiuely, The ministrie of Arch-bishops, Lord-Bishops, and Priests is not Antichristian, whether you vnderstand it as first inuen∣ted by Antichrist, or against Christ. That it is not of Antichrists inuention is as cleere as the Sunne. For first Priests are of diuine institution, being no other then those Presbyters or Pastors, to whom the administration of the Word and Sacraments is committed, and who are ordained by Christ for the building vp of his Church vnto the end of the world. The Priests of the Church of Rome indeed are of Antichrists founding, whose office is to sacrifice and offer vp Christ himselfe in the Masse vnto his Father both for the quicke and the dead. But our Priests haue nothing common with them saue the name onely: their idolatry wee detest and abhorre, al∣though wee retaine the name. Theirs are Masse-Priests, ours are Preaching or Ministring Priests. Neither let the name offend you: for notwithstanding Papists haue a∣bused it to signifie a Sacrificer, yet properly it doth not so, being originally deriued from Presbyter, neither a∣mong vs is it now so vnderstood. To say nothing that the anciēt Fathers (who I presume were not Antichristi∣an) vsually call the Ministers of the Gospell Sacerdotes, Priests. As therefore you cannot without great absurdi∣ty reason from the name to the thing, thus,
your Mini∣sters  are called Priests, Ergo, your Ministrie is Antichri∣stian: so neither can you without greater absurdity sepa∣rate your selfe from the thing because of the name, and because our Ministers are called Priests withdraw your selfe from our Ministrie. Secondly, Arch-bishops and Bishops if they be not of diuine institution, yet were they some Centuries of yeeres before euer Antichrist appeared in the world, as all antiquity and Ecclesiasticall Story testifieth. That most famous first generall Councell of Nice assembled by Constantin the Great about the yeere of our Lord 327 not onely approueth them, but also affirmeth that the Church anciently and long before that time had been gouerned by them. Epiphanius &
Augustin both reckon Aerius among the number of Hereticks, for denying the then-receiued and allowed distinction between a Bishop and a Presbyter. But to speake my mind plainely, I am for my part perswaded, that the superiority of Bishops ouer the Ministers was of Apostolicall institution. Those Angels to whom Saint Iohn in the second and third of the Reuelation is commanded to write, what other were they then the Bishops of those Churches of Asia? In E∣phesus, one of those seuen Churches, it is reported by S. Luke that there were many Presbyters, and I doubt not but it was so in other of the Churches also: howbeit the Apostle writeth vnto one onely whom hee calleth the Angell, as being singular and eminent aboue the rest. And the ancient story of the Church recordeth the par∣ticular Bishops of euery one of those Churches together with their successors for a long time. So that Bishops being in the Apostles time, and successiuely continued in the Primitiue Church, without any contradiction either  of the Apostles themselues or any other, yea rather with their approbation and allowance, as appeareth by those seuen Epistles vnto the seuen Angels, and all the writings of the ancient Fathers: how can it bee imagined but that Bishops and their superiority ouer others was of Apo∣stolicall institution? Now if Priests or Pastors (for as wee haue sayd, in substance they be all one) were ordained by God him∣selfe, and Bishops deriue their pedigree also from the ho∣ly Apostles of God: it followeth by necessary conse∣quence, that as our Ministery is not from Antichrist, so neither is it against Christ. Were it against Christ, it would be either because he hath forbidden it, or for that it destroyeth rather then edifieth the Church. But it is no where forbidden. If it bee, shew the place, and wee yeeld. Neither doth it hinder the edification of the Church. For first it is the office both of Bishops & Priests to preach the Gospell of Christ, and to administer his holy Sacraments. Secondly, the aduancement of one Presbyter aboue the rest, was for the preuention of Schisme. For when Factions began to arise in the Church, some saying I am of Paul, others I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas: then, sayth Hierom, was it decreed through the whole world, that one being chosen from among the Pres∣byters should be set ouer the rest. Who being so prefer∣red, his duty is to ouersee the rest of his brethren, that they carefully discharge the office imposed vpon them, and frame their liues according to the worthines of their calling: All which I am sure furthereth the building of the Church, so farre is it from destroying: so that nor Priests nor Bishops, whether yee regard their offices, or the end of their ordination, can be sayd to be against Christ.
Peraduenture (for I would willingly let nothing passe vnanswered) there lies a mistery in the word Lord-Bi∣shops, and you intend that they are the more Antichri∣stian for that they are so called. Surely if they should ambitiously affect the title of Lord,Mat. 23. as the Pharisees som∣times did the title of Rabbi, it were great pride and vani∣ty in them: and if they should , Lord it, and as it were domineere ouer the flock of Christ as if the in∣heritance were theirs, it would be intollerable presump∣tion & tyranny. But, that a title of honour may be giuen vnto Bishops in regard of their honorable place and cal∣ling, as there is no reason to the contrary, so it must needs proceed from much enuie or frowardnesse to de∣ny.Gen. 31.35. 1 King. 18.7.13. Let it not bee displeasing in the eyes of my Lord, saith Rahel to her Father. Art not thou my Lord Elias? And againe, Was it not told my Lord what I did when Iezebel flew the Prophets of the Lord, said good Obadiah vnto the Prophet? If Laban because he was a naturall Father vnto Rahel, and
Eliah, because hee was a Prophet might iustly bee so stiled: why may not Bishops also, who are the spirituall Fathers, and Prophets, yea and Angels of the Church?Luc. 22.25.26. you will say, our Sauiour expresly forbid∣deth them to bee called Gratious Lords. I deny it. For although it pleased the translator so to render the origi∣nall word , because anciently it was a title of ho∣nour giuen vnto Princes: yet doth it not properly signi∣fy so, but Benefactors, or Wel-doers. Neuerthelesse suppose it so signified, yet is it not simply the title, but the ambitious affectation of the title which Christ dislik∣eth.Act. 10.38. If a man imitating Iesus Christ should goe about  doing good, were it a sinne trow you to giue him his deserued name and to call him  a wel-doer?  Had it been simply vnlawfull for a Minister to be called Lord, would Paul and Silas haue admitted it, and not rather haue reprehended the keeper of the prison saying vnto them, My Lords,Act. 16.30. what ought I to doe that I may bee saued? Our Sauiour Christ saith vnto his disciples, Bee not yee called Masters, Bee not yee called Doctors:Mat. 23.8.10. and yet among you some Ministers are called Doctors, and all Masters. So that it appeareth by your owne practice, that the name of Lord maketh not Bishops Antichristian, but as wee haue said, it is the affecting of the name which is forbidden. And thus you see your Minor is no way true. Notwithstanding you endeauour to proue it thus,
Be∣cause the Churches of Antichrist cannot be compleate with∣out this Prelacy, as appeareth, you say, by the Popes Ca∣nons, and Pontificall, and by their Church-constitutions. A seely and sory argument. For first, the Ministrie of the Church of England is so farre from being a comple∣ment of the Churches of Antichrist, that the Church of Rome doth Anathematize and accurse it, esteeming vs (right as you doe) to bee no Church at all because wee want their Ministry. Againe, may not I with as good reason as you argue thus? The state and Kingdome of Antichrist cannot be compleate without the authority of Ciuill Magistrates: Ergo, Ciuill Magistrates are Anti∣christian. If this kinde of reasoning bee not good, nei∣ther is yours; for they are both of one mould. Lastly An∣tichristianity being a Mysterie, and not an Heathnish or Turkish opposition vnto Christ, it cannot be compleate except it retaine many of Christs ordinances, which therefore I trust you will not say to bee Antichristian. A lie cannot subsist but vpon truth, nor euill but in good:  nor Antichrists hypocrisie but vpon the Religion and discipline of Christ. And thus haue I fully answered your first argument: whereon I haue been the longer be∣cause it is the Basis and ground as it were of all the rest, and the answer thereunto will in a manner serue them all, or the most part of them. Your second argument is this. 2 Because it cannot be approued by the testament of Christ, as the Ministrie had in his Church may and ought to bee.Eph. 4.11.12. 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6.28.29. Ro. 12.7.8. 1. Tim. 3. & 5.3.9.17. & 6.13.14. And if such (as could not proue by their genealo∣gie that they were of Aaron) were deposed from their Mi∣nistrie under Moses LawEzr. 2.62.63. Heb. 3.2.3. & 2.1.2.3. & 12.25., much more should such bee now deposed, as haue not their offices warranted by Christs Testament.
If wee reduce your argument into forme it is this, That Ministrie which cannot bee approued by the Testa∣ment of Christ is not to bee allowed in the Church. But the Ministrie of the Church of England cannot bee approued by the Testament of Christ. Ergo, it is not to bee allowed in the Church. The Minor which you might be sure we would deny, you haue left naked to the wide world without proofe: the Maior which you saw wee could not well deny, you endeauour to fortifie with a double reason. Let it be supposed then that it is denied how proue you it? First, The Ministerie had in the Church may and ought to bee so approued. How doth this appeare? By the places quoted in the margent? Nothing lesse: They approue indeed certaine officers in the Church: but af∣firme not that euery officer ought to bee so approued. Secondly, if, say you, such as could not deriue their ge∣nealogy from Aaron were deposed, much more are they to be  deposed who cannot warrant their offices by Christs Testa∣ment. A poore argument God wot. For in the law there was an expresse commandment that none might execute the Priests office but hee that was of the linage of Aaron: but that no office might bee admitted nor retained in the Church vnlesse it were so commanded, I find no where in Scripture. Wherefore to argue thus, Nothing that is against Gods Word may bee allowed, Ergo, nor any thing that is not commanded, is a plaine Non sequitur, and it fol∣lowes not. Thus you see, if a man were so disposed, how easie it is to quarell with your Maior, which yet simply I deny not. Briefly therefore to cleare all, I distinguish of these tearmes, Approued and Warranted by the Word. A thing may bee said to bee warranted or approued by the Word two wayes, both when it is commanded, and when it is not forbidden: for things neither commanded nor forbidden, are indifferent, and subiect vnto the Churches power. Hereupon thus I answer, if you meane it in the former sence only, then proue your Maior that what is not by commandment approued is vnlawfull: if in the latter then I grant you the Maior, that whatsoeuer is forbidden is vnlawfull. But withall I deny the Minor, that Archbishops, Bishops, Priests are forbidden, requi∣ring you to proue it, which I know you can neuer doe. For as touching so much of their dutie as is common to them all, to wit, the preaching of the Word, and the ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, they are all Pastors and Teachers, and so warranted in the Texts by you quoted: but in regard of preeminence and superiority one aboue another Bishops are no other then were the Angels of the seuen Churches, as wee haue aboue demonstrated.
Howsoeuer, if Bishops bee not commanded, yet are they not forbidden: and their office making not against edification, but for it rather, it cannot being ordained by the Church but be lawfull. Your third argument. 3 Because the Church is the Spouse, Kingdome and Body of Christ, and therefore may not haue Antichrists Hie∣rarchie and ministrie set ouer it, or retained in it. For what concord hath Christ with Beliall? Antichrists Hierarchie and Ministrie may not beset o∣uer the Church nor retained in it. Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, are Antichrists Hierarchie and Ministrie. Ergo, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, may not bee set ouer the Church nor retained in it. The Maior of this Syllogisme you are very carefull to maintaine, because the Church is the Spouse, the Kingdome, the Body of Christ: as al∣so because there can bee no concord betwixt Christ and Belial. But to what end all this? and with such a stirre to proue that which no man gainsayes? for wee confesse Christs Kingdome may not be gouerned by Antichrists policie. You should rather haue laboured to strengthen the Minor, that Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests are Anti∣christs Hierarchie and Ministrie: for you might be well assured wee would neuer yeeld you that vnlesse by strength of reason you constrained vs. Here therefore against the rule of Logicke againe you beg the princi∣pall matter in question, taking for granted that those of∣fices are meerely Antichristian. But you must proue it, and not looke that whatsoeuer you fancie to be true, o∣thers vpon your bare word must presently belieue and
take to bee true. See the answer to the first argument. I proceed to the fourth. 4 If when a King substituteth Iudges, Iustices &c. no sub∣iects may either refuse to bee gouerned by these, or set o∣uer themselues officers of other Kingdomes, as the Ro∣man tribunes &c. how can it be lawfull for any Christi∣ans? &c.
It is an old saying that Symbolical diuinitie is no argumēt of proofe: and that Similitudes serue rather to illustrate and cleare a mans meaning, then to proue and conuince the vnderstanding. In regard whereof if I had so pleased, I might well haue sleighted this fourth reason, and not haue vouchsafed it any answere at all. For what is it o∣ther then a bare and naked Similitude? neuertheles for further satisfaction let vs trie the strength thereof. Two things you auouch, first that Christians may not refuse to bee gouerned by those officers which Christ hath set ouer them: secondly, that Christians may not set ouer them∣selues officers of Antichrists kingdome. The former I confesse is true, but nothing to the purpose. For we re∣iect not the officers ordained by Christ, nor refuse to be gouerned by them. If we doe, so haue all Churches also done, downe from S. Iohns time vnto this present age. within which compasse you cānot name any one Church at any time moulded after your platforme: and I am sure all orthodoxall Churches haue euer beene gouerned by the same officers that ours is. Whence it followeth that if for want of such a Politie and such Officers as you dreame of we haue in England no true Church: neither hath there beene for certaine hundred of yeares aboue a  thousand any true Church through the whole world. Which how it can agree with the word of God affirm∣ing that of his kingdome there shall be none end, I can∣not conceiue. For by your reckoning the kingdome of Christ ceased soone after the departure of the Apostles, and suffered an interruption of about fourteen hundred yeares vntill Browne and Barrow began to play the Schis∣matickes. The second Proposition I acknowledge also to be true but withall denie that we haue set ouer our selues any Antichristian or forraigne Officers. For as we haue aboue both sayd and shewed, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests are of diuine institution: and now I further adde that they were first bred in the kingdome of Christ, and not taken from any other kingdome. your assertion to the contra∣ry without due proofe argues that you build to your selfe castles in the aire, and haue no ground for your pre∣sumption. Your fift argument followeth. 5. Because the Church being Christs spouse, kingdome, and body must haue his Ministrie set and kept in it, and no other. And if no man can make a finger or the least mem∣ber of a naturall humane body, or adde any other limme thereto without deformity then God hath created, and can much lesse giue life to any such counterfait member of his owne making: how is it possible that he can set vp another Ministrie?
1. Cor. 12.12.20 27.28.The argument is thus to bee formed, The Ministrie of Christ and no other is to be set ouer and kept in the Church. The Ministrie of Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests is not Christs. Ergo, it is not to be set ouer nor kept in the Church.  The Maior I grant confessing that no office may bee al∣lowed in the Church but that which is from Christ, ey∣ther immediately, or mediatly, that is, from those vn∣to whose wisdome and discretion hee hath delegated some part of his authority to order many things in the Church. For as the Church may not alter that Ministry which Christ hath setled to continue for euer: so may shee by vertue of her delegate authority ordaine such of∣fices as are not forbidden, and tend to edification. And being so ordeined they are though not immediatly, yet mediately from Christ. Neither yet doth the Church so doing presume to make (as you say) either a finger, or any other member or limme that is essentiall vnto the body, much lesse to giue life thereunto: but onely to prouide a gloue as it were for the finger, or a sute of ap∣parell for the body the better to preserue it in life. The Minor that the Ministrie of Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests is not of Christ, I deny, affirming the cleane contrary, that they are those Pastors and Angels autho∣rized and allowed by Christ in his word. It is the great∣est vanity and idlenesse that can bee in disputing, onely with boldnesse to affirme that which is denied, and neuer to endeauour the proofe thereof: which yet is your so∣lemne fault almost in euery argument. Your sixt reason. 6 Because Christians are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,1. Cor. 3.16.17. 2. Cor. 6.16. 2. Thes. 2.4. Col. 2.18. Act. 20.17.28. and their consciences wrought vpon by Ministrie in the Church: and therefore may not be defiled by the Hierar∣chie of Arch-bishops &c. whom the Holy Ghost neuer made Ouerseers.
The argument in forme stands thus, Those offices that  defile the Temples of the Holy Ghost and consciences of men may not bee set ouer nor retained in the Church. But the Hierarchie of Arch-bishops, Bishops, and Priests defiles the Temples of the Holy Ghost and consciences of men. Ergo, the Hierarchie of Arch-bishops, Bishops, and Priests may not bee set ouer nor retained in the Church. The Maior wee readily yeeld you: but how proue you the Minor, that these Officers defile the Conscience? Forsooth be∣cause the Holy Ghost hath not made them Ouerseers. And how proue you this againe? Because the Pastors of Ephesus were made such Ouerseers. An Herculean argu∣ment I promise you. For what letteth but that hee that made the Pastors of Ephesus Ouerseers, hath made the Pastors of England Ouerseers also? Alas, alas that vpon such friuolous and toying reasons so dangerous and offensiue Schismes should be made. And take heed how you quench or grieue the Spirit of God, who if you haue in you any measure of knowledge or sparke of grace, hath wrought it in you by our Ministrie. For preaching which is the ordinary meanes to beget faith, I suppose you haue not had elsewhere: and it is no lesse then blasphemie to call the working of Gods Spirit by his Holy Word vpon the soules of men, the defiling of the Conscience. The seuenth argument.
7 Because Christ alone is the Head of the Church in whom all fulnesse of power dwelleth,Eph. 1.22.23.4.11.16. Col. 1.18.19.2.8.9.10.18.19.1. Cor. 12.4.5.6.12.27.28. 1. Tim. 3. & 5.8.6.13.14. Rev. 11.13.18.8.14.8.17. &. 18. & 19. and from whom alone the Church receiueth her life and power, so as none may bee subiect to any power or head in Religion, saue onely to him. And therefore no Ministers or Officers in the Church are to bee set vp or retained who deriue not their power and functions from Christ, which the former doe not: and therefore they are not &c. but to bee abandoned as enemies of Christs soueraigne authority, and making their hearers and submitters to them guilty of high trea∣son against our Lord Christ Iesus. It is true, there is but one Head of the Church from whom shee receiueth life and Power: yet are there also vnder Christ gouernors in the Church, who by vertue of that power which they haue receiued from him may ordaine many things touching the well gouernment thereof, and to submit our selues thereunto is not to bee subiect to another power or head, but to the ordinance of Christ himselfe. But it is false that Bishops deriue not their power and function from Christ, as we haue already manifestly proued. If you haue any thing to the con∣trary, I hope wee shall heare of it another time: for hi∣therto you haue onely said, but shewed nothing. As for those words, that Bishops are to bee abandoned as enemies of Christs soueraigne authority &c. they sauour more of passion then reason, and deserue rather to bee pitied then answered. The eigth argument.
1. Cor. 18.27.28. Eph. 4.11.12.13.8 Because God onely must haue this preeminence to dispose the members euery one of them in the body of the Church at his owne pleasure: so as either it must bee shewed that God hath placed the Hierarchie of Arch-bishops, Bishops, Priests, or they are not to bee set vp or retained or ap∣proued. We haue satisfyed you in this already, if happily you will bee satisfied. For wee haue shewed, first that the Ministrie of Arch-bishops, Bishops and Priests is of di∣uine and Apostolicall institution: and secondly, if the superiority of Bishops bee not immediatly from God, yet being not forbidden, and tending to edification, the Church vnder God hath power to ordaine them. Here∣unto wee expect your answer. The ninth argument. Mat. 22.25.26. Ep. 4.8.11.12. Ps. 68.18. Ro. 14.23. Heb. 11.16.9 Because none can of Faith ioyne vnto the Hierarchie a∣foresaid, because they are not warranted by the Word, being not from Heauen but from the earth. The Ministrie aforesaid is warranted by Gods Word, as wee haue oftentimes said, and so is from Heauen not from earth: and therefore you may of Faith ioyne vnto it. Had it not been a plant of Gods owne setting, doubt∣lesse it would haue beene rooted out of the Church long since, and not haue continued fifteen hundred yeeres to∣gether. The tenth argument.
10 Because none can submit vnto or haue spirituall commu∣nion with the Hierarchie and Ministrie aforesaid,Rev. 14.9.10.11. but hee shall worship the Beast and his image, spoken of in the Reuelation, and receiue his marke in his forehead or hand: and so make himselfe subiect to the wrath of God. This argument though differing in words, yet in sence and meaning is all one with the first. For how can it bee conceiued that they who submit themselues vnto our Ministrie worship, as you say, the Beast and his Image, vnlesse it be for that it is Antichristian? For auoiding of Tautologie therefore, I referre you vnto the answer of that argument, where I plainely demonstrate that it is Christian not Antichristian: so that in communicating with it, there can bee no danger either of worshipping the Beasts-image, or receiuing his marke, or incurring the wrath of God. But whereas you talke of worship∣ping the Beast, you much mistake the matter. For by the Beast is vnderstood not Antichrist but the Roman Empire whereof the State of Antichrist is the image. Neither can you shew,Rev. 18.4.5.6 2. Cor. 16.17.18. Ioh. 10.5. Num. 16.1.26.40.18.4.5. Ezeh 44.7.18.4.5. Mat. 15.13. Es. 11.4. &. 13. &. 14. Ier. 15. &. 50. &. 51.2. Thes. 2.3.4.8. Rev. 14.6.7.8. &. 17. &. 18. &. 19. if our Ministrie were Antichri∣stian, how by retaining it wee should worship the Ro∣man Empire. The eleuenth argument. 11 Because all are straitly bound and charged by the Lord to depart from and witnesse against the aforesaid Prelacy and Priest-hood being a strange Ministrie, and such as is opposed against and exalted aboue the holy ordinance and Ministrie of Christ, and shall be abolished by him ap∣pearing in the light and power of the Gospell.
Our Ministrie neither is a strange Ministrie, nor op∣posed  or exalted aboue Christs Ministrie, but Christs owne Ministrie, as now once againe I tell you: and therefore no man is charged either to depart from it, or to witnesse against it. But you are a strange dispu∣ter, who so peremptorily affirme that which hath euer beene denied, and neuer goe about to proue it. As for that you say our Ministrie shall bee abolished by Christ appearing in the light and power of the Gospell, it be∣wrayes what you desire should bee, but is no certaine Oracle of what indeed shall be. Sure I am our Ministrie hath subsisted this fifteen hundred yeeres, and the light and power of the Gospell hitherto hath not abolished it, but it hath still published and propagated the Gospell. Happily when the Church shall cease to be militant, and Christ shall deliuer vp the Kingdome to his Father, that God may be all in all, this ministrie shall haue an end. But till then, Credat Iudaeus Apella, Non ego, let Brownists and Barowists belieue it, not I. Your obstinate begging of the principall matter in question conuinceth you to bee but a bad disputant, and this rash and vnaduised predi∣ction now dubbeth you for a false Prophet also. The last argument. 2. King. 23.5. Ps. 101. Pro. 16.10.11.12.25.2. 5 Rev. 17.16. Deu. 17.18.19.20. Ro. 12.7.8. Eph. 4.11.12.13. 1. Tim. 3. &. 5.9.17.6.13.1412 Because it is the dutie and in the power of Princes to suppresse and root out of their dominions all false Mi∣nistries: and therefore these as well s Abbots, Friers, Nuns, Cardinals, &c. Whereas it is not in their power, or of any vnder Heauen to abolish the offices giuen by Christ to his Church. Here againe you take for granted that our Ministrie is but a false Ministrie, and that Arch-bishops, Bishops,
and Priests are no lesse Antichristian then Abbots, Friers, Nuns, Cardinals, which is euer denied but neuer confirmed by you. Vaine man, proue our Ministrie to bee false, and wee will grant it is to be rooted out: other∣wise outfacing and desperate asseueration will not serue the turne. And thus haue I briefly examined all your twelue rea∣sons whereby you goe about to proue the Minor of your principall Syllogisme, namely that our Church-officers Arch-bishops, Bishops and Priests are not to be set ouer nor retained in the Church. Whereupon I in∣ferre, seeing your Maior is barely affirmed being vn∣true, and your Minor so weakly and insufficiently pro∣ued: you haue not as yet soundly concluded the lawful∣nesse and necessity of your separation. Let vs proceed to the second ground which you cōceiue in these words, A true visible Church is a company of people called and se∣parated from the world by the Word of God,Act. 2.39.19.9. Ro. 1.6.7.10.14.15.16. Iob. 17.14.20. Ezek. 36.38. Phil. 1.5. Act. 2.41:42.47.11.21.24.13.4.34. Ro. 12.5. 2. Cor. 9.13. Ps. 110.13. Es. 14.1.44.5.60.8. Zach. 4.6.8.21.22.23. and ioyned to∣gether by voluntary profession of the Faith of Christ in the Fellowship of the Gospell. Out of which if I mistake not you would conclude the iustnes of your separation thus. Where there is not a company of people called and separated from the world and ioyned together as aboue, there is not a true visible Church, and consequently Separation ought to be made from it. But in England there is not a company of people so called and separated from the world, and so ioined together. Ergo, in England there is not a true visible Church, and consequently separation ought to bee made from it. I distinguish of the middle tearme Called: for there is
a double calling, the one is Gratiae oblatae, where by God onely inuites men vnto Christ, and offers them Grace, the other Gratiae inditae & infusae, whereby hee not only offers but infuseth grace also into them. The former Calling maketh not a man of the Church: for hee that is no otherwise called, answereth not by Faith, nor com∣meth vnto Christ, but remaineth still in infidelity, and so is vtterly excluded out of the Church. Of the latter Calling I distinguish againe, for it is either that where∣by hee bestoweth vpon man Faith of Doctrine, or that whereby ouer and aboue hee giues them Iustification together with true Sanctification. Faith of Doctrine is either a Partiall or an Entire Faith: a Partiall Faith whereby part onely of the Christian verity is held, or an Entire Faith by which the whole sauing truth is belie∣ued and professed: And this againe either in Vnity or in Schisme, in Vnity with other Churches of God, or in Schisme with Separation from them. Now all these and eueryone of them are of the Christian Church: for they are neither Gentiles, nor Iewes, nor Turks, being by the calling of grace brought to the profession of the Chri∣stian Religion. But yet among them there is exceeding great difference: for they that hold the entire truth of Christ are of that Christian Church, which is called Oxthodoxall: they that hold it in part onely, are of that Christian Church which is Hereticall. They that en∣tirely hold the truth in Vnity with other Churches of God, are of that Christian Orthodoxall Church which is Catholicke: they that hold the same whole truth in Separation from them are of that Christian Orthodo∣xall Church which is Schismaticall. And such is the Church of Brownists to which you haue adioyned your  selfe. But they who hold the whole truth of Christ not onely in Vnity but also in Sincerity, being truly iustified by Faith and Sanctified in the lauour of Regeneration, they I say are of that Christian Orthodoxall Catholicke Church which is Inuisible and knowne only vnto God. For although both the persons and profession of those that are thus called, be visible, and may by outward sense bee discerned, whereby in the eye of Charity they are to bee counted Gods elect people: yet the inward truth and sincerity of the heart is to vs inuisible, and seene of none but onely him who trieth the heart and raines, and so alone knoweth who are his.
These distinctions thus promised I come at length to answer your Syllogisme, and demand of you which of these Callings it is that you meane. If the last, whereby wee haue receiued entirely to belieue the whole truth of Christ, and that not onely in Vnity, but also in Since∣rity and with a sanctified heart: then I deny the Maior, for it is not the Visible but the Inuisible Church alone that cōsists of such members. Neither can such a Visible Church bee found vpon the face of the earth: for here corne and cockle, chaffe and wheat, Saints and hypo∣chrits are mingled together, neither can you affirme o∣ther of that Church whereunto now you associate your selfe. If you meane any other of the Callings aboue mentioned, or all of them besides this last, then I deny your Minor. For here in England wee are a company of people to whom not onely grace hath beene offered, but who also haue receiued grace to belieue the truth of Christ, and therefore are not Infidels but of the Church of Christ. Againe we haue receiued to belieue the whole truth, and therefore are an Oxthodoxall not an Hereti∣call  Church. Lastly, wee hold the whole truth of God in Unity with other Churches, and amongst vs there are thousands also who professe the same with sincere and sanctified hearts, and therefore wee are not a Schis∣maticall as you are, but a true Catholicke Church. This Minor thus denied you goe not about to strengthen with so much as one argument, and yet hither should you haue bent all your forces. About the Maior you bestow a little more paines, endeuouring to fortify it with sixe reasons: which although they bee to little purpose, yet to giue you the more satisfaction, let vs briefly examine them. And first that which is in order first. 1. Cor. 12.27. Exod. 19.5.6. 1. Cor. 14.33. 1. Tim. 3.15. Mat. 13.24.31. Psal. 46.4.5.80.1. 1. Pet. 2.5.9. Rev. 1.11.12.13.20.1. Because a true visible Church is the body of Christ, a Kingdome of Priests, a Church of Saints, the houshold of God, the Kingdome of heauen, the Citie of God, the sheep of the Lord, a chosen generation, a golden Candle∣stick &c. These titles properly belong vnto the inuisible Church consisting of those who are effectually called by sauing grace. And when they are said & affirmed of any visible Church, you must vnderstand that the denomination is in regard of the better part thereof, namely those Saints who haue receiued the spirit of adoption, the earnest penny of their euerlasting inheritance, not that no euill men are mixed with them. In Corinth and Galatia as there were many holy and faithfull seruants of God, so were there many lewd and vngodly men also: for it is well knowen that they were much pestered both with error in doctrine, and corruption in manners. And yet the Apostle S. Paul neuer sticketh at it to acknowledge
them visible Churches: which I am sure he would not haue done, had he thought that the mixture of bad and good in the same society did nullify a Church. Nay ra∣ther if he had beene of your humour he would haue ad∣uized a separation. 1. How should it els haue Christ for the Prophet, Priest,Heb. 3.1.2.3. & 5, 6.9. &. 12.28. Mat. 28.18.19.20. Ps. 110.1.4.1. Pet. 2.4.5.25. Act. 2.41.47. Eph. 1.22.23.2.19.22. & King thereof? or how should men know where to ioine and become members of the body of Christ, with assurance to haue him their head? &c. It is the Inuisible Church, the Church of the first borne, as S. Paul calleth it, whose names are enrolled in heauen,Heb. 12.23. vnto which Christ properly and vniuocally is a Prophet, Priest, and King. For he is a Head in such manner vnto those only who are knit together with him in the same mysticall body by the vnity of the same spirit, and to whom hee communicateth from himselfe the sweet in∣fluence of life, sense, motion, euen grace for grace,Ioh. 1.16. as S. Iohn speaketh. Is he not then a Head also of the visible Church? yes, as it is a Church: it is a Church equiuo∣cally, and so is Christ the Head thereof. For hypocrits and wicked men mingled with the good are not mem∣bers of Christ, as Ambrose saith, but of the diuell, and therefore Christ properly is not their Head, Head, and Body being Correlatiues. Who are Elected and by true Iustifying Faith are ingrafted into Christs body you may charitably iudge, but cannot certenly know: for God only knoweth who are his. Neuertheles where you see a Society of men professing entirely and in vnity the truth of Christ, ioine your selfe vnto them, knowing that they are a Christian orthodoxall Catholick Church.
And assure your selfe that there are among them sundry who are the deare Saints of God and professe the truth in sincerity and vprightnes of heart also: which if you shall do together with them, you need not doubt but you shall haue Christ to be your head. Mat. 28.18.19.20. 2. Cor. 6.17.18. Lev. 26.11.12. Ps. 46.4.5. Es. 59.20.21. Ez. 37.27.28. & 48.35.3. How should it els haue assurance of the promises & seales of Gods Couenant, presence, and blessing to belong and appertaine vnto them? The promises of Christ are proclaimed in such mixed companies vnto all on condition of faith & repentance, though actually performed vnto those only who actu∣ally haue performed the condition by repenting and be∣leeuing. And to these the Seales of the Couenant of grace, the presence of God, & his blessings do appertaine also. If then you would bee assured that both the promises & seales belong vnto you, ioine your selfe to such com∣panies, and performe the condition with them, and the Spirit of adoption will certifie and assure you thereof. If you will not, you must seek out of the world, or hang e∣uer in doubt: for in the world there are none but such companies. Act. 2.41.42.47.11.21.24.18.27. Mat. 18.17.20. 1. Cor. 5.4.5.12.13. Ps. 149.9.4. How els should it haue or vse the power of Christ to re∣ceiue in members ioyning vnto them, or to cast out such as are obstinate offenders?
It is true there is a power giuen by Christ vnto the Church o receiue into their Society such as professe the entire Faith of Christ in Vnity: but whether they pro∣fesse the same in sincerity also, that the Church cannot  tell, and yet receiues them. Againe shee hath power to censure and cast out obstinate offenders: but yet hereby it appeares that the Church visible is a mingled cōpany, and that offenders are to bee accounted members there∣of vntill by a legall proceeding they be cut off. Suppose that the Church grow remisse in denouncing offenders, and tolerate them too much: this argues that corrupti∣on is crept into the Church, not that is no Church. 5. Because that euery Church as they haue Communion with Christ, and are one body with him:1. Cor. 10.16.17. Hag. 2.12.14. 1. Cor. 5.6. Num. 19.13.20.22. & 5.2.3. Heb. 12.15. so haue they Communion also one with another, and are all one body: and by communion with open wicked retained among them are all defiled. The members of euery Church haue (I grant) both V∣nion and Communion one with another: the Christian Church in the Christian Faith, the Orthodoxall Church in the entire Christian Faith, the Catholicke Church in the entire Christian Faith with Vnity, the Inuisible Church in the entire Christian Faith with Unity and Sanctity. This last Vnion and Communion is onely a∣mong the Saints: the former may bee both betweene good and bad. That if you speake of, you speake not of a Visible Church; and so nothing to the purpose: this if you speake of, you speake vntruly, as wee haue shewed.
Moreouer, to say that the toleration or presence of open wicked sinners in the Church defiles either the godly or the holy things of the godly, is to make the sin of the wicked more powerfull to hinder the descent of heauenly blessings, then Christs loue and vnion with vs is auayleable to conuay them vnto vs. And then was  Christ much to blame, who suffered the Sacrament euen at the first institution to be polluted with Iudas presence. But you should consider that priuate conuersation is one thing, and publicke Church-meetings another; which you ignorantly confounding beguile your selfe. Priuat∣ly you may refuse at pleasure to conuerse with the wic∣ked: in publike assemblies you cannot auoid them. That is in your owne power, but to remoue them thence is in the Magistrats only. Ps. 84.10. Cant. 16.7. Os. 2.2.19.20. 2. Cor. 6.15. Reu. 1.11.12.20.17.1.5.6 How else should a true and visible Church bee truly and rightly distinguished from all false Churches?
Here at length haue you discouered vnto vs the very ground of your errour, in that you cannot see how a true visible Church can bee distinguished from a false, if no∣torious offenders bee suffered to haue any communion therein. Learne then that true and false Churches are differenced by hauing or wanting the forme and essence of a Church. The Christian Church is discerned from Heathnish, Iewish, Turkish congregations by the Christian Faith; an Orthodoxe Church from an Here∣ticall by an entire Faith: a Catholicke from a Schisma∣ticall by an entire Faith held in Unity: and the Inuisible Church from all other by the Sanctity of euery mem∣ber: but this is knowne to God onely, the rest may bee discerned by man also. You ought therefore to put a difference between a Corrupt Church and a false Church. A false Church wanteth the essence and therefore is no Church: a corrupt Church wanteth onely the purity it should haue, yet hauing the essence it is a Church. Which if you had well considered you would not haue condem∣ned  our Church (if yet so corrupt as you weene) for no Church, vnlesse you would also say a sicke man were no man: much lesse would you haue rent your selfe from it. And thus you see your second ground failes you also, and that you haue not demonstrated that sound mem∣bers are to separate themselues from the communion of the whole body because of a few rotten mēbers. Now therfore except you haue stronger arguments then here you haue sent me, or can adde more strength and ver∣tue to these: I must intreate you to remember your pro∣mise that if it could appeare by euident remonstrance that your grounds were sandy & deceitfull, you would retire your selfe into the bosome of that Church out of which you haue so scandalously withdrawne your selfe. Which if you shall sincerely doe, you shall both quit your selfe of the fearfull sin of Schisme into which you are fallen, and reunite yourselfe vnto as glorious a Church, as I verily beleeue hath beene since the Apo∣stolicall and Primitiue times. Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent. Reuel. 2.5.
OF VOWES AND SPECIALLY THAT OF VIRGINITY. YOVR desire to bee resolued touching the vow of Virginity or Single life, both how law∣full it is, & how farre it bindes. I will endeauour to satisfie you as breefly and plainly as I can: first shewing you what is the nature and definition of a vow in generall, and then applying it vnto your particular question for the more easie and fuller determination thereof. 1. A vow rightly defined is a promise made vnto God of things lawfull, by such as haue power so to doe, thereby to testify their affection and duty towards him. This short definition containing the whole and entire nature of a lawfull Vow, I will for your better vnderstanding vn∣fold in the seuerall parts thereof.
2. I call it a Promise not a Purpose: for a Purpose being only an inclination of the minde to do something,  binds not vnto performance, and is alterable without sin: But a Promise comprehendeth both a Purpose and Obligation also, binding the Conscience vnto perfor∣mance: absolutely, if the forme of the Promise be ab∣solute, conditionally if conditionall. 3. And this promise whether it be internally concei∣ued in the heart or externally vttered by the mouth, it is all one vnto God, who vnderstandeth as well the lan∣guage of the one as of the other. Yet as in Praying so in Vowing speech is not vnprofitable, the solemnity there∣of both more inwardly affecting our selues, and by ex∣ample more edifying others. 4. The Party to whom Vowes are to bee directed is God only: for it is a part of diuine worship, and enioy∣ned in the third commandement. A part of diuine wor∣ship I say simply if it bee of things commanded, if of things indifferent accidentally only, inasmuch as it is referred to the worship of God, and therefore cannot without sacriledge be giuen to any creature. 5.Theol. Pract. comp. tract. 2. c. 8. art. 33. How then can the Popish Church vowing vnto Saints quit herselfe of notorious Idolatrie? specially seing by the confession of Molanus a principall champi∣on of hers, a Vow is an act of latria, that is of such wor∣ship as is due vnto God. Neither can she cloake her Su∣perstition, with any shew of Scripture:De cult. Sanct. c. 9. for Bellarmin himselfe freely acknowledgeth, that when the holy Scrip∣tures were written, the custome of vowing vnto Saints was not yet begun. 6. The matter of a vow is things lawfull, whether they be necessary as being commanded, or arbitrary as being neither forbidden nor commanded. For that du∣ties commanded may be vowed appeareth euen by the
vow in Baptisme.In Psal. 46. And although vertues, as Chrysostom saith, be due vnto God albeit they be not promised: yet what letteth but what God bindeth vs vnto by precept, we by vow as by a new knot may also bind our selues vnto. De Monach. c. 19.7. Bellarmin indeed is bold and affirmeth that it is the common opinion of Diuines, that the Promise in Bap∣tisme is not properly a vow:Instit. Mor. l. 11. c. 14. but Azorius his fellow. Iesuite can tell him otherwise, that the ancient Diuines together with the Master of the Sentences seeme to thinke that Bap∣tisme is a vow properly and truly so called. 8. That things of an indifferent and middle nature may also be Vowed is granted of all hands, God hauing permitted vnto the Church and members thereof iudge∣ment and dispensation of them. Yet this must be vnder∣stood with caution: for seeing as Saint Paul saith, those things that are lawfull are not alwayes expedient, and things otherwise lawfull may in regard of circumstance become vnlawfull, those indifferent things that are inue∣sted with such circumstances cease during the while to be the matter of a Vow. 9. Iustly therefore are excluded from being the mat∣ter of a Uow, first all such actions as are in their owne nature euill, next such as hinder a greater good, then those that crosse the generall Vow made in Baptisme, farther such as are impossible and out of our power, moreouer such as are friuolous and vnprofitable, finally those things that are naturally necessary, and if there be any other besides of the like quality.
10. I adde farther by such as haue power so to doe: for none may Vow but they who by their vocation haue liberty thereunto. Now this vocation in regard of things commanded extendeth vniuersally vnto all, and there∣fore  it is free for euery man to vow them. But in respect of things indifferent it stretcheth not so farre: For first they who by reason of age or distemper haue not the vse of reason or iudgment, secondly they who are vnder the authority, and iurisdiction of others, hauing not power of themselues because of their calling may not nor can∣not lawfully vow without the consent and good liking of their superiors.Num. 30. 11. This condemnes the impious practice of Popish Friers, who inueigle yong youths from the obedience of their parents, and without their consents intangle them in the vow of Monasticall life, treading directly in the steps of their Great-grand-father Eustathius, against whose wicked doctrine the Councell of Gangra thus de∣creed,Can. 16. If any children shall forsake their Parents especially being faithfull vpon occasion of Religion thinking it iust so to doe, and shall not rather performe due honor vnto them, reuerencing euen this in them that they are faithfull let them be accursed. 12. Finally the End of a Vow is partly to testify our affection to God, as namely our thankfulnesse for benefits receiued: and partly our duty in carefulnesse to preuent sinne, and to preserue and increase Gods graces in vs. In a word it serues as an instrument or helping meanes to further our obedience to Gods Lawes. And because the End it selfe is of greater importance then the meanes conducing vnto the End, surely Obedience must needs bee better then Sacrifice, that is, then the Vow which fitteth only vnto it.
13. The Romish Church therefore teaching that vowes are of greater perfection in this life, and deserue an higher degree of glory in the next, then the very works  of the Morall law, cannot be excused of manifest blas∣phemie.Comment. in Mat. 19. Which it seemes Cardinal Cajetan also saw when he said, that Christ prescribeth no vow to him that will obtaine perfection of life: because the obtaining of perfection consisteth not in the bonds of vowes but in the works themselues. 14. This being the true nature and definition of a vow, I conclude as touching the Obligation or bond thereof, that euery vow thus made vnto God, in such Forme, of such Matter, by such Persons, to such End, as wee haue said, bindeth the Conscience vnto perfor∣mance: in so much as the breach thereof is no lesse then mortall sin, and very dishonorable vnto God. For if lawfull promises are to bee held with men, much more with God.Psal. 15. And if we bee slack to pay them hee will surely require them of us, and so should it be sin vnto us. Deut. 23.21.15. But what if a man haue rashly vowed that which is vnlawfull? Surely in such a case it is better to retract the vow, then by keeping it to adde sin vnto sin. For a vow, saith the Canon, may not be the bond of iniquity: and excellently to this purpose counselleth Philo the Iew,De leg. spec. Let such a one therefore abstaine, saith he, and humbly entreat God of his Clemency to pardon the vnaduised rash∣nes wherby he was so headlongly carried to sweare: for to double the offence when thou mayst discharge thy selfe of the one halfe, is extreame madnes, and scarcely euer cu∣rable. 16. Now let vs apply what hath beene said vnto the particular vow of virginity, or single life. And first whereas nothing may be the Matter of a vow but that which is lawfull, and things lawfull are of two sorts, ey∣ther simply and morally good, or arbitrary and indif∣ferent:
surely Virginity cannot be ranked in the first or∣der. For to vse no other then Gersons reasons,P. 3. de Con∣sil. Euang. & stat. perfect. Morall vertues are commanded, and are not destroyed but by vice, and being lost may bee recouered by repentance. But Virginity is no where commanded, and is destroy∣ed by Matrimony which is no sinne (although Pope Sy∣ricius heretically call it vncleannesse and pollution of the flesh) and being lost cannot possibly be recouered. And therefore howsoeuer it may giue a kind of luster and grace vnto vertue, yet vertue it can be none. 17. Hereupon it followeth that Virginity and Ma∣riage are not in themselues acceptable vnto God one more then another, but that it is the mind which rightly vseth both the one and the other which is pleasing vnto him: and that they are rather diuers sorts of life, then differences or degrees of liuing better or worse. Special∣ly, seeing as Gregory Nazianzen saith,In laud Basil. A man may in ma∣riage attaine as great glory of vertue as in Virginity or single life. In a word it is onely a matter of indifferen∣cie. 10. And being indifferēt, although in it selfe to be law∣full and free, yet (according to the nature of indifferent things) circumstance may alter the lawfulnesse and free∣dome of it vnto particular persons. As namely to those who want either the Calling, or the Gift: the Gift by which they know themselues able to containe, the Cal∣ling by which they are in their owne power, and to dis∣pose of themselues for their state of life. 19. That euery one hath not the Calling because it is euident; I will spare labour to proue it. That euery one hath not the gift, our Sauiour Christ himselfe witnesseth saying,Mat.
19 1.12. All men cannot receiue this saying but they to whom  it is giuen, and againe, Hee that is able to receiue this let him receiue it:1. Cor. 7.7.9. and Saint Paul, Euery man hath his pro∣per gift of God, and if hee cannot containe. Whereupon Saint Hierome,Contr. Iouin. l. 1. If all could bee Virgins our Lord Christ would neuer haue said, Hee that can receiue it, let him re∣ceiue it:Contr. Iulian. l. 5. c. 10. otherwise as Saint Augustin saith, Hee might haue said, All receiue not this saying but they that will, if it be true which they say. 20. Now they that want the Calling and yet Vow so, transgresse the fift Commandement withdrawing their obedience from their superiors in those things wherein they owe obedience.Ep. 199. In regard whereof S. Au∣gustin sharply reproueth Editia for Vowing continency without her husbands consent. And they that want the Gift so doing intolerably abuse, and in most presump∣tuous manner tempt the Diuine Maiesty, promising vn∣to him impossibilities, or which they are not assured they can performe. So that vnto those which either want liberty by reason of the Calling, or ability in res∣pect of the Gift, such a Vow is vtterly vnlawfull. 21. But perhaps you will say, the Gift may bee ob∣tained by Fasting and Prayer, Christ himselfe hauing thus promised, Aske and you shall haue. First grant it bee so, yet is it very preposterous first to vow, and then to seeke for the Gift:Pro. 20.25. for as Salomon saith, It is a snare for a man after the vow to make inquirie. Otherwise I deny not but a man may vow Continence if hee be already as∣sured of the Gift, and that he can containe.
22. Neither doth it follow that euery one which by Prayer seeketh the Gift shall obtaine it. For the promise is to bee vnderstood of those necessary gifts without which there is no saluation, and not of those extraordi∣nary  & peculiar gifts, the want of which no way hinde∣reth saluation. Those if we aske in Faith wee shall surely obtaine: these if we aske we haue no assurāce to obtaine,In carm. de rebus suis & decalam ani∣mae suae. Ad Eustoch. de custod. virg. because wee may bee saued without them. Surely Gre∣gory Nazianzen much complayneth of the inordinate boyling of his lusts in his old age, which he had happi∣ly repressed in his youth. And Hierome also confesseth that notwithstanding hee had beene the companion of scorpions and wild beasts in the wildernesse, notwith∣standing his face was pale with fasting, his body cold, and his flesh dead, yet the fires & heats of lust still were burning in him. 23. But saith Doctor Bishop, Continency is neces∣sary to saluation vnto all those that haue Vowed it: for the breach of the Vow is dishonour vnto God, and dam∣nation vnto themselues, and therefore being necessary, wee shall vsing the meanes assuredly obtaine it. This is right to subiect the prouidence of God in the dispensati∣on of these peculiar gifts vnto our temerity and rashnes. I beseech you, if a man haue vowed to prophesie, or to speake with strange tongues, or to worke miracles, must God needs bestow those gifts vpon him vpon his im∣portunate suite, least otherwise hee should breake his vow, and hazard his saluation? 24. Nay rather let such a one humbly repent and beg pardon for his rashnesse, that hee hath so vnaduised∣ly entangled himselfe in such a desperate snare: and let him in the Name of God vse the remedy which God hath appointed; that is as Saint Paul saith, to marrie, For saith he, If they cannot containe, let them marrie:1. Cor. 7.9. for it is better to marrie then to burne. 25. This indeed, they say, is good and wholesome
counsell for others: but as for Votaries, it is a greater sinne,Sleid. com. l. 4. saith Cardinall Campegius, for them to marrie then to keep many whores at home. A Priest marrying, saith Coster, sinneth more grieuously then if hee keep a Concubine.Euch. c. 15. Both are euill to marry and to burne, saith Bellarmine, but the worse of the two is to marry. Thus you see, hauing once past the bounds of modestie, how egregiously impudent and shamelesse they are growne. l. 1. ep. 11.26. But of a farre different opinion was Cyprian, If they who haue dedicated themselues to Christ cannot or will not perseuere, it is better for them to marrie, then through wantonnesse to fall into the fire.Haer. 61. A∣postolii. And Epiphanius, Better is it for a man that is fallen from his course of virgi∣nity or single life, publickely according to the law to take a wife vnto him, and a long time to repent him of falling from virginity, and so to be restored into the Church againe, and not dayly to bee wounded with secret darts, by the wicked∣nesse which the Diuell bringeth vpon him. Thus the Church vseth to teach and with these medicines shee healeth. The same is the counsell both of Hierome and Augustin. 27. And what madnesse is it for a man hauing in∣considerately vowed that which he cannot performe, not to remedy himselfe by marriage which is the ordi∣nance of God, but by fornication, whoredome, and vn∣naturall Sodomitrie, which are the works of the Diuell? Is not this with the old Giants furiously to warre against God himselfe? And what barbarous cruelty is it so to tyrannize ouer the Consciences of men in regard of their vnauoidable infirmities, that either they must inwardly burne in the scortching flames of filthy lust, or quench∣ing them with the sins of fornication or adultery or that which is worse thrust themselues headlong into the vn∣quenchable
fire of Hell? But were it not for this do∣ctrine of Diuels wee should want one principall argu∣ment to proue that Church to be Antichristian. 28. Which Antichrist, together with his Diuellish doctrines, as thou hast already begun to consume with the blast of thy mouth: so Come Lord Iesu come quickly, that thou maist finally also abolish them with the bright∣nesse of thy comming. In the meane season of thy good∣nesse either grant vs the Gift, or sanctifie the meanes vn∣to vs, that keeping our selues cleane both in body and soule, wee may bee presented vnto thee as pure and vn∣spotted Virgins in the last day. Amen.
A LETTER. INsteed of a few words which I pro∣mised to write you, I haue here sent this little treatise, which if you dili∣gently read and peruse, it will more fully informe and resolue you then I should haue done. Neuerthelesse, that I may in some sort discharge my promise, and not altogether faile your expectation, in few words thus. I would wish you diligently to remem∣ber that to bee grieued and troubled for sinne is a neces∣sary duty, and that it ought to be so. For as in the poole of Bethesda there could bee no cure wrought vntill the Angell had troubled the water: so neither is there any remission of sinnes and healing of the soule, vntill by the worke of Gods Spirit the heart bee bruzed and broken. When such an Angell as Peter was, shall by his power∣full preaching haue pricked the Conscience, and made men both to see their sinne, and to feele the misery there∣of: then and not before doe they crie out, Men and Bre∣thren what shall wee doe? Sorrow for sinne is a blessed sorrow. A broken and contrite spirit God neuer yet despised. Those, and those alone who feele the heauy
loade and burden of their sinnes doth Christ inuite vnto him, and vnto them doth hee promise refreshment. Hee that oftentimes watered his couch with his teares, and as oftentasted the sweet consolations of Gods blessed Spi∣rit, hath out of his experience seriously affirmed that whosoeuer soweth in teares shall surely reap in ioy, and a day of reioycing shall euer succeed the night of mourn∣ing. And to speake the truth, sorrow was made for no∣thing but for sinne. A potion is made onely for that dis∣ease which it is able to cure: and sorrow for that onely which it is able to remedie. Losse of friends, health, wealth and the like were neuer yet recouered with weep∣ing: but the teares of true repentance haue euer cleansed the soule from sinne, and purchased both pardon and fa∣uour from God. Sorrow therefore was made onely for sinne. Mourne then in Gods name for your sinnes: but yet take heed you mourne not as those that are without hope. You cannot doe a greater wrong vnto the infinite mercy of God, and the inualuable merits of Christ your Sauiour, then to thinke them lesse then your sinnes or demerits. If Satan suggest any such thing vnto you, spare him not, but tell him hee lies: for Gods goodnes cannot bee outreached by mans wickednesse, and where sinne doth abound, grace doth much more abound. If your sinnes were as red as scarlet, yet vpon your true re∣pentance God both can and will make you as white as snow: And of your repentance you cannot well make doubt, there being in you, as you haue confessed vnto mee, both hearty sorrow for sinnes past, and vnfained resolution of amendement for the time to come, which are the two essentiall parts of true repentance. Yea but you haue committed that sinne which is vnto death and  can neuer bee forgiuen nor in this nor in the next world. If so, to what end doe you seeke vnto mee for comfort? And why doe I wast paper in writing vnto you? But vp∣on what ground haue you entertayned this conceit? Forsooth you haue often sworne and forsworne against your knowledge. I will not extenuate your sin: it is I confesse grieuous and fearefull, neither would I willing∣ly hinder you from a long pennance in sackcloth and a∣shes for the same. Howbeit I would aduise you to steere right betweene these two dangerous gulfes: for as you must not make mole-hils of mountaines, nor frailties of furies, so neither must you of euery sinne, though other∣wise heinous and enormious make that vnpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. It is not often swearing or cur∣sing, no nor forswearing or periury and the like, which God neither can nor will forgiue. For then what should become of that worthy Apostle Saint Peter, who for∣swore his Lord and Sauiour, euen against his Con∣science, and that not once but thrice, with most horrible execration and cursing? you haue not sinned in so high a nature as Peter did, neuerthelesse now that Christ look∣eth backe vpon you as hee did on him, touching your heart with consideration of what you haue done, I giue you good leaue to goe foorth with him and to weep as bitterly as you can. But despaire not of pardon, nor count it the sinne against the Holy Ghost, for so did not hee. That sinne is no lesse then a wilfull, malicious, and obstinate denying of the foundation, namely that Iesus is the Mediator and Redeemer of the world. It is a totall apostasie from the Faith, when the whole man reuolteth from the whole Christian Religion wholly, with an ob∣stinate resolution neuer to returne to it any more. This  sinne I know you are farre from, and you dare not say you haue committed it. Neither is it possible for him that is guilty thereof to doe as you now a long time haue done, that is to mourne and lament for his sinnes. His stubborne and reprobate heart is not so tender, but be∣ing past all sorrow and feeling rather reioyceth in his desperate and malicious obstinacy. More I might write, but let this little booke I send you bee insteed thereof. It remayneth that henceforward you play the valiant soul∣dier of Christ, and suffer not your selfe any longer to be led by passion, but onely by the rules and directions of Gods blessed Word. For my part I will not cease to pray vnto the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ for you, that this pricke may be eftsoones taken from you: or if for you further exercise and triall hee delay you a little longer, that yet your Faith may settle and rest vpon that ans∣wer which God gaue vnto Paul be∣ing in the like case, My grace is sufficient for thee. Fare∣well.
THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY IS TRVLY Deipara, the Mother of GOD.
THIS Proposition either in expresse or equiualent tear∣mes hath euer been held by all Orthodoxe writers both ancient and moderne: spe∣cially those who haue liued since Nestorius broached the contrary heresie. This Nestorius about foure hun∣dred yeeres after Christ was Patriarch of Constanti∣nople, who when his Chaplaine Anastasius had publickly taught, that the blessed Virgin Mary ought not to bee called the Mother of God, was so farre, saith Socrates,  from checking in him these blasphemies against Christ,L. 7. c. 32. that hee maintained him in it, and reiected himselfe the word Deipara,Euagr. l. 1. c. 7. or Mother of God. Wherefore hee was banished into the Ile Oasis: where hee died miserably, hauing his accursed tongue eaten out with wormes. But as I say the Church of God hath euer held and defended the contrary, which I proue by vnanswerable reasons. And. Can. 1.First by generall Councels. In the Councell of Ephe∣sus it was thus decreed. Whosoeuer confesseth not the holy Virgin to bee Genitricem Dei, the Mother of God, let him bee anathema. The Councell of Chalcedon confirmed the same,Act. 5. ratifying the Acts of the Ephesine Councell. And the fift Councell of Constantinople thus defines, If any say the glorious Virgin Mary is not truely but abusiuely Genitrix Dei, that is, the Mother of God, let him bee Anathema or accursed. Secondly, by ancient Fathers both before and since Nestorius,In ad Rom. who all stile her Deiparam, the Mother of God. Origen largely discourses, and renders many reasons why shee should bee so called. Eusebius Pamphili saith, that the Empresse Helena honored Deiparae partum,In vita Con∣stantini. the birth of the Mother of God. Cyrill of Alexandria presi∣dent in the foresaid Councell of Ephesus in his Anathe∣matismes sent to Nestorius saith that Marie genuit,In Conc. Eph. car∣nally begat him that was made flesh, euen the Word of God: and anathematizeth them that deny her to bee Genitri∣cem Dei,Epist. 1. ad. Chelid. the Mother of God. Gregory Nazianzen, If any belieue not the Virgin Mary to be Genitricem Dei, the Mother of God,Ep. 97. ad Leon. Aug.
let him bee separated from God. Leo, Ac∣cursed bee Nestorius, who belieued not the Blessed Virgin to bee Dei Genitricem, the Mother of God. Iohn Cassian,  It is not lawfull to say Christ and not God is borne of Mary.L. 2. de. Incar. Prosper of Aquitani, The Virgin Mary bare Christ who is God of Heauen. Hesychius,L. 1. com. in. Lev. 2. Therefore to note the Natiui∣ty of Christ; the Sacrifice is said to bee baked in an ouen, to wit in the Wombe Genitricis Dei, of the Mother of God. Augustin, Mary therefore begat,Cont. Faelic. c. 12. and begat not the Sonne of God. She begat him when Christ was borne of her according to the flesh: Shee begat him not when the Sonne without beginning issued from the Father. Vincentius Lirinensis, Anathema to Nestorius denying God to bee borne of the Virgin. Many more Fathers I could easily alledge,Ca 21. but I presume one Decade of such witnesses is euidence suf∣ficient. Thirdly, by latter writers of the reformed Churches,Inst. l. 2. c. 14. §. 4. who maintaine the same Faith of the Fathers. Caluin, We are to abhorre the Heresie of Nestorius, that was, that Ma∣ry is not the Mother of God. Againe, Hee that is the Sonne of God, the same is the Sonne of Mary. Beza,Referr. Scr. The Church hath rightly defined against Nestorius,In Luc. 1.35. that Mary should be called , the Mother of God. Peter Martyr, Wee confesse that the Sonne of God is borne of the Blessed Vir∣gin, neither doubt wee to call Mary ,Dial. de Corp. Christ. loc.
the Mother of God. Sadeel, Iustly was Nestorius condemned, denying the holy Virgin to bee Deiparam, the Mother of God, seeing our ancestors haue constantly defended that Mary is  the Mother of God,De ver. hum. nat. Christ. though not the Mother of the Diuini∣ty. Danaeus,In Aug. de haer. c. 91. Part. l. 1. It is manifest that Mary may and ought to bee called  the Mother of God. Polanus, It is right∣ly said of Christ that hee is God borne of the Virgin.Loco de Christ. Buca∣nus placeth among doctrines repugnant to diuine truth this of Nestorius, that Mary is not  the Mother of God. Tilenus, The Blessed Virgin is truly called  the  Mother of God.Synt. de Nat. Christ. n. 19. Ser. c. 18. On Creed. Perkins, Hence Mary is called  the Mother of God though shee be not the Mother of the Deity. And, Shee must bee held to bee the Mother of the whole Christ God and Man: and therefore the ancient Church hath called her the Mother of God, yet not the Mother of the Godhead.Praemonit. Finally the great Defendor of the ancient Catholicke and Apostolicke Faith King IAMES, I ac∣knowledge her to bee the Mother of God, seeing in Iesus Christ the humane nature cannot bee separated from the Deity. Fourthly, by the Creed of the Apostles so vniuersal∣ly receiued of all Churches: wherein all true Christi∣ans professe, that they belieue in Iesus Christ, the onely begotten Sonne of the Father, and that he was conceiued of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary. If the e∣ternall sonne of God were borne of the blessed Virgin, then must shee needs bee the Mother of God. The Creed therefore of the Councell of Chalcedon thus expoundeth and openeth it, Borne of the Blessed Virgin and  Mo∣ther of God. Neither may wee thinke that the holy Church of Christ hath vnaduisedly or rashly beléeued this doctrine: but vpon firme and vnmoueable grounds both of Scrip∣ture and the analogie of Faith. For first Scripture eui∣dently teacheth it. That holy thing which shall bee borne of thee, shall bee called the Sonne of God, saith the Angell Gabriel: and Elizabeth, whence commeth thus that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? By which place saith Beza, it is expresly manifest against Nestorius that Mary is
the Mother of God. Againe, if Mary bee the Mother of Iesus Christ, and Christ be God, it follow∣eth of necessity that she must be the Mother of God. Nay  doth not the Prophet directly say that the child borne vnto us is the mighty God? In a word,Esa. 9.6. it will not I trust be denied, but that Mary is the Mother of him that was Crucified, that died, that shed his bloud, that was seene with the eye, and felt with the hand.1. Cor. 2.8. Phil. 2.8. Act. 20. 1. Ioh. 1.2. But it was the Lord of glory that was Crucified, that was obedient to the death, that shed his bloud: it was the Lord of life that was both seene and felt. And therefore is Mary also the Mother of the Lord of glory, the Mother of the Lord of life, the Mother of him that is equall with God, and consequently God, seeing none is equall vnto God but God. As Scripture, so the Analogie of Faith also confir∣meth it. For no reason can be rendred why Mary should not be the Mother of God, but eyther because Christ is not God, or because the humanity was the subject of Conception and Birth before it was assumpted by the Word, or lastly because the Humanity was neuer as∣sumpted into the Vnity of the same Person, but remay∣ned a distinct person by it selfe: all which were the damnable blasphemies and heresies of Arius, Photinus, and Nestorius, the first of Arius, the second of Photinus, the third of Nestorius. Therefore contrarywise I argue thus, If Christ bee God, and the Humanity were at the first creation thereof preuented from subsisting in it selfe, and neuer had subsistence but in the Word, so as both Natures constitute one onely
Hypostasis or Person: certenly there cannot bee two Sonnes, one of God, and another of Mary, but the Sonne of God must needs be the Sonne of Mary, and so Mary be the Mother of the Sonne of God. And as by reason of this Hypostaticall vnion Christ himselfe doubted not to say, The Sonne of Man came  downe from heauen: so the same analogie and proportion of Faith requires vs to say, The Sonne of God is borne of the Virgin Mary, which as Vincentius Lirinensis saith, is most catholickly beleeued, and most impiously denied. Much more might be added hereunto: but to them that iudge of persons by the Faith this is too much, and en∣ough euen to them that iudge of Faith by Persons. Only from hence I inferre first that Titius confounding Papists in open pulpit for calling the blessed Virgin Deiparam, the Mother of God, either knew not what he said, and so proued himselfe but a nouice in Diuinity: or if he spake aduisedly and out of iudgement, it was no lesse then pro∣fessed heresy. Secondly that I disapprouing Titius there∣in, cannot iustly bee taxed of tricks or niceties or spirit of contradiction, vnlesse together with mee, Councels, Fa∣thers, Protestants, the Apostolicall and Chalcedonian Creed, Scripture and the Analogie of Faith, vndergoe the same censure. Lastly, that as Seneca (otherwise an excellent Moralist) spake very irregularly when hee said Drun∣kennes would sooner be commended in Cato, then Cato con∣demned for his Drunkennes: so you (though els I per∣swade my selfe a sound and Orthodoxe Christian) much swarued from the rule of Piety and Faith, when you chose rather to excuse Nestorianisme in Titius, then with me to condemne him for it. And all least some who haue ouer prodigally bestowed transcendent and immoderate prayses vpon him, should seeme eyther too weake in iudgement, or too strong in passion.
M. ANTONIVS MVRETVS his Institution for Children translated. MY Sonne while you are young These precepts learne of mee: Beare them in mind not on your tongue, And let them practiz'd bee. First see you serue and feare The God of heauen aboue: Then Parents deere, and such as beare The roome of Parents loue. To lie count it great shame: What thereby can you gaine? If you haue err'd confesse the same, So grace you may obtaine. Seeke learning greedily: Then learning what more sweet? By it you may most readily With wealth and honor meet.
If any shall you chide When you haue faulty been, Thanke him therefore and then take heed He chide you not agen. The man that speakes you faire Count him not straight your friend: He hates the child that doth him spare When as he doth offend. Who once hath you deceiu'd With flattring words and faine: He when occasion is perceiu'd Will you deceiue againe. If you be wise nor none, Nor euery one belieue: You loose your credit by the one, Th'other will you deceiue. If sin you should commit, Or in your mind should plot: God who sees all things seeth it, Though man perceiue it not. To none but friends well tride, Your secrecies reueale: And what you would haue others hide, First you your selfe conceale. Fixe not your eye on things, Uncomly to be done:
By wanton sights young tenderlings Soone take infection. Refraine and turne your eare From filthy ribaldrie: Such as delight therein forbeare To keepe them company. Vnpleasant if the root Of studie seeme to you: Yet doubtles sweet & wholesome fruite In time from thence will grow. If you in play delight, That pleasure soone decayes: If in your booke, the benefit Thereof remaines alwayes. If rest bee moderate, Health it and strength doth breed: But duls the spirits and doth rebate Wits edge if it exceed. Whiles others good you seeke, Good to your selfe you gaine: Vnlesse you louing be and meeke, Loue can you not obtaine. Wonder not when you see, How wicked men doe thriue: God will at length reuenged bee, Though he a while repriue.
If rest you seeke and ease, Spare you no paines in youth: For after labour quietnes With dignity insueth. Looke often in your glasse, And beauty if you finde, Beware you doe it not deface With vices of the minde. But if therein you see, Your selfe deform'd and foule: Let that defect supplied be With vertues of the soule. Doe not what you would dread To doe if men did see: And let your selfe to you insteed Of many a witnesse be. To shew you much should heare, And few should be your words: Nature to you a double eare, And but one tongue affoords. Haue care you oft behold, What you would safe should bee: Theeues seldome are with those things bold Which oft the eye doth see. Slouth fawnes at first and fleeres, But euer ends in shame,
Industrie rigorous first appeares, But breeds immortall fame. Or tast no wine, or it With store of water drench: For youth in wine to take delight Is fire with fire to quench. Let your lookes modest be, Your speech courteous and kinde: So doing shall you easily Much loue and frendship finde. In your desires let not Wealth more then vertue sway: Vertue by wealth cannot be got, But wealth by vertue may. What so you learne that striue To hold fast in your mind: Else draw you water in a siue And vainly beat the wind. Vndiscreet anger flee: Then wrath what fouler vice? What moues thereto great praise will be To you if you despise. Elms high on mountaines plac't With storms are often beat: Whose fury shrubs doe seldome tast That low in vales are set.
So at the great mans gate Great dangers doe attend: But euer to the meane estate, The heauens more safety send. A few words seasonably If children speake is fit: The one doth argue modesty, The other argues wit. The way to honest fame, Would you faine learne of me? 'Tis this, be you in truth the same You would be thought to be. Who feares his Masters charge The rod he needs not feare: Who that contemnes and runs at large The smart of this must beare. Thrice happy child that growes In vertue more then yeeres: Deserued prayse each one bestowes On him aboue his peers. On him they look, to him They wish all happines: But none vouchsafeth speech to them That rust in idlenes. Them all men doe despise, The vulgar them deide:
Their parents scarce with patient eyes Their presence can abide. Sin hurts not then alone When we the same commit: For vse of sin makes vs more prone And apt againe to it. What so is good pursue, If hard at first it seeme, Yet after vse and practice due, You easie will it deeme. The good turne you receiue Extoll you and confesse: What you haue done giue others leaue To praise, make you it lesse. When with vtility Honesty cannot stand: You may not doubt but honesty Must haue the vpperhand. And thus to you my child These few rules I commend: Which well obseru'd strange fruite will yeeld Vnto you in the end. Meane while that God aboue Whose mighty word and will What euer is doth rule and moue Blesse your endeuours still.
Whom early in the morne When you your bed forsake, And late at night when you returne Sweet sleep againe to take. Meekly vpon your knee With humble vowes attend: So pregnancy of wit will he And health of body send. Yea better things then these Will he vnto you spare: Only refer all to his praise Both what you haue and are. To my Daughter E. D. Written on her Bible. Sith you my child the child of wrath were borne, From sinful flesh deriuing sinfull staine: Into Gods fauour can you not returne, If of the spirit you be not borne againe. None are new borne but of immortall seed: That seed immortall is this word of truth. By it next vnder God I trust to breed, Your second birth who bred your former ruth. This will in you subdue each sinfull lust, Your mind enlighten, and your hart create
Pious to God, towards your neighbour iust And to your selfe sober and temperate. This season will your greener yeares with grace: And crowne your head when you haue run your race. A Prayer. MY sins o Lord haue me unworthy made To licke the crums that from thy table fall; My guilty soule dares not for comfort call, That Now through famishment my strength doth fade: But thou dear Lord that vaild in mortall flesh For mans offence on bitter crosse didst bleed: With bread of life my starued soule refresh. My soule doth thirst like to the parched ground, And humors moist are turnd to summers drought: Thy burning wrath this inward heat hath wrought, And feare of Hell my conscience doth confound. But lord thou art an euerlasting well, Whence purest streames of liuing waters flow: O quench the flames wherein my hart doth glow, And on thy banks let me for euer dwell. Through stranger countries harborles I stray, From Paradise exild, my natiue land: And angrie Cherubin with burning brand Of my returne doth intercept the way. Thou art the way sweet Iesu thou the dore, Yet harborles wast in a manger borne: O let my soule faint, weary, and forlorne,
By thee reenter, then retire no more, Ah who is me, for opened are mine eyes, And now with shame my naked shame I see: My soule abasht faine would thy presence flee And sory figleaues to her shame applies. But Lord thy wardrobes store can nere be spent, And whitest rayment thou doest sell for nought: O let the robe of iustice foorth be brought, Therwith t'inuest this thriftles penitent. My soule, o Lord, is fild with strange disease, And cruell theeues haue wounded me so sore, That nought but wound I am and bloudy gore, And on my life eternall death doth seize. But Lord thou art that good Samaritan, The skilfulst leach to salue a wounded hart: O let thy precious balms soone ease my smart, And dying soule preserue from endles bane. In deepest dongeon comfortles I lie, Ne of my debt can pay the lightest graine: My Iailour Satan is, my sin the Chaine, And bound with sin who can the bonds vnty. But thou deare Lord hast broke the gates of Hel, And with thy dearest bloud our debts doest pay: O cancel thou my bonds my debts defray, And from my hart all seruile feare expell. Pinde, thirstie, exild, naked, sick, in iaile, Feed, quench, returne, couer, recouer, baile.
A Hymne vnto Christ. LVte awake, Why sleepest thou so long? Come let vs musick make, And chant some holy song. My heart and voice shall with thy strings accord, To sing the prayse of Christ my King and Lord. Brightest beame, Of brightest glory bred: The euerlasting streame, From purest fountaine shed. The light, the life, true God, chiefe good thou art. And of thy good to each wight doest impart. Then thou wast When time was not begun, Without thee nothing past, By thee all things were done. The earth, the sea, the aire, the heauens aboue, By thee doth stand, doth flow, doth breath, doe moue. God thou art, Yet didst our nature take, Enduring bitter smart, A peace for vs to make. Thy Crosse, thy Wounds, thy Blood, thy Death, thy graue, Our sinfull soules from endlesse death doe saue.
Glorifide Thou now in heauen doest raigne, And for thy Saints prouide A place there to remaine, Where King is three in one, and one in three, Law perfect loue, and tearme eternity. Lachrymae. IF by sighs, or teares, or cries, I could discharge the weight of griefe, Which on my soule so heauy lies, Soone would I find releefe. My sad heart would vapour sighs, Mine eyes would streame foorth flouds of teares, My voice with shrikes and dolefull cries Would vent mine inward feares. But my soule too deep is wounded, Nor can my troubled sprite By sighs, or tears, or cries be lightened Of those sorrowes me affright. Shallow are those foords that murmure, Sleight sorrowes soone complaine: My heart, mine eyes, my voice astonied are With extreame disease and paine. Thus my woes emprizned in my breast. Still on me tyrannize: Happy, happy whose cares are blest With sighs, with teares, with cryes.
Once deare Lord vnworthy mee With gracious eyes thou didst respect: Thou shewdst me ioyes that none can see But Saints in Christ elect. Now alas why doest thou frowne? Why doest thou gnash thy teeth at me? From highest blisse why am I throwne To lowest misery. Shall thy wrath exceed thy mercy? Can pitie cruell proue? Shall death and hell, and flames that neuer die Seize whom thou sometime didst loue? Ah sweet Iesu bee my Iesu, Though sin my soule haue slaine, Thy wine, thy oile, thy balme may life renue, And close vp my wounds againe. Why then am I with despaire possest Sith hope and grace I see? Kill me, kill me yet will I rest My stedfast faith on thee. The Spouse of Christ longing for, and reioycing in her mar∣riage with him. COme returne, hast away, O thou whom my soule doth loue: Lo thy spouse night and day Longs to rest with thee aboue, While thou tariest all too long,
Cruell tyrants me oppresse, And triumph in my sad distresse: Come therefore auenge my wrong, Ease my hart brimfull of greefe, O hast thee Lord and bring releefe. Welcome ioy, farwell woe Hither lo he speeds a maine, Swift as hart, swift as roe, Skipping high on Bethers plaine. Nightly shades are fled and gone, And now dawnes that blessed day, That weds me to my loue for aye. Now my foes lament and mone, Iustly doomd to darkest Hell, But I with Christ in heauen shall dwell. An Euening Prayer. O Holy and eternall light Defend vs now this darksome night: Grant inward peace to troubled heart, To wearied sense sweet sleep impart. Whilst heauy eyes sleeps comfort take, O let our soules still on thee wake. Let thy right hand keep and protect From sleep of sin thy Saints elect. When sleep of death shall close our eyes, O let our soules ascend the skies.
Meane while fraile flesh shall rest from strife, Till death bee swallowed vp of life. A Soule distracted betweene Hope and Feare. HAte I deserue and yet for loue I sue, I beg for life and yet death is my due Worthy I am that thou shouldst me reiect, And yet I claime the crowne of thine elect. Alas how may so bold a sute be heard? And sinfull wretch obtaine a Saints reward? Nay shall I not thy kindled wrath inflame Crauing all good deseruing nought but shame? Sin bids me feare yet still I hope for grace; Grace bids me hope, yet still I feare disgrace: While feare doth hope and hope doth feare restraine 'Twixt feare and hope my heart is rent in twaine. Wilt thou sweet Iesus plead my cause for me? Alas my bare estate affoords no fee: Yet if in forme of poore to thee I flie, Thy word is past thou canst me not deny. Thee then mine aduocate I entertaine, By thee an easy sute I shall obtaine: So double comfort shall my heart enioy Of present grace and hope of future ioy.
Hope of Pardon. SHould I O Lord excuse or cloake my sin? Are thine eyes so dim that thou canst not see Can guilty soule thy gracious fauour win? Or by righteous doome iust reputed be? Thy crystall eyes my secret thoughts behold, Yea thou knowst them long ere they be conceiued: Thou art not man to be corrupt with gold, Not by vaine excuse canst thou be deceiued. Yet will I not despaire to gaine Pardon for my great offences, Though iustice doome eternall paine, With iustice mercy still dispences. When shall I then to those high ioyes aspire Which in heauen aboue thou reserust for me? Mount vp my soule with wings of high desire, Till thou heauen enioy what ioy can there be. On barren earth sin is the seed we sow, And the crop we reape is but sorrowes gaine: And if sometime from sin short pleasures grow, Sinfull pleasures end in the eternall paine. Then sith on earth we reape no graine But short ioyes long sorrowes bringing: O let me liue where Angels raigne, Then endles Alleluiah singing.
The Epicure and Christian. Time doth haste, Life as a shadow flies: Breath as a vapor soone doth wast, And none returns that dies, Come let vs banish woes, And liue while life doth last: Crowne we our heads with budding rose And of each pleasure tast. What though precise fooles do vs blame Shall wee forgoe content? Pleasure is substance, vertue name, And life will soone be spent. Time shall cease, Archangels tromp shall sing: Death shall his prisoners all release, And them to iudgement bring. Then shall these sinfull ioyes To endles wayling turne: And they that scorned vertues choice In brimstone flames shall burne. Then they that erst fond Stoicks Shall wisedomes children proue: When they among the Saints esteemed Shall raigne with Christ aboue.
A Sinners appeale from Iustice to Mercy. AY me from me my wonted ioyes are fled, And saddest greefe on my poore hart hath seazd: Thy mortall sting ô sin this wo hath bred, And dreadfull wrath of my deare Lord displeased. I see his sword vpreard me to confound, And guilty soule attends her deadly wound. Oh then my soule where canst thou rest secure? Where wilt thou flie from his reuenging ire? If vp heauen, there enters nought impure, If downe to hell, there flames eternall fire. Nor deepest sea, nor shade of darkest night Can secret thee from his al-seeing spright. Yet from thy selfe thy selfe a refuge art When from thy iustice to thy grace we flie: O gracious Lord to thee my pensiue heart With teares of true remorse for grace doth crie. Thy mercy Lord my soule from death may saue: O rid my dying soule from lowest graue. A Caroll for the Natiuity. A Wonder strange this day was wrought, Exceeding mans and Angels thought: Though domb haue spoke, and blind haue seene, And they reuiu'd who dead haue beene,
Yet neuer vertue like to this Whereby was wrought mans endlesse blisse. Behold then and amazed stand, This is the finger of Gods hand: A virgin pure without mans aide, Hath borne a child yet still a maide: Which babe this day began to be, Yet was from all eternity. A King of Kings, and yet a thrall, Possessing nought, yet Lord of all: Creator, yet a creature, Light of the world, and yet obscure: Most beauteous, and yet without forme, Ador'd of Angels, yet a worme. Omnipotent, yet fraile and weake, Th' eternall Word, yet could not speake: Most quiet calme, yet without rest, The food of Saints, yet suckt the brest, Embracing all, yet but a span, Immortall life, yet mortall man. Man, yet in God subsisting aye, God, yet confined to case of clay: Both God and man 'twixt both to treat, And firmest league 'twixt them to set. That mercy might with iustice meet, And peace and truth each other greet.
O blessed dame whose lips might kisse, whose paps did nurse this babe of blisse! O blessed babe whose ioyfull birth, Hath chang'd our sighs to tunes of mirth! Who now thy sweets may tast and proue, By faith on earth, in heauen by loue. Christ comforting a distressed soule. SIgh no more soule, oh sigh no more, Despaire not thou thus euer, Thy God hath grace for thee in store, His mercy faileth neuer. Then sigh not so, Let sorrowes go, Sing in the highest Hosanna, And change thy dolefull sounds of woe Into Halleluiah. Manifold are thy sins I know, And deep in crimson died, Yet whiter shalt thou bee then snow, In my blood purified. Then sigh not so, &c. Heauen against thee shut by sin Haue I for thee vnlocked, Since thou so kindly letst me in, When at thy heart I knocked, Then sigh not so, &c.
Come to me, lo thy Sauiour cryes, Thou canst not be refused, For neuer did I yet despise A broken heart and bruised. Then sigh not so, &c. There in peace shalt thou liue and raigne, And neuer more be sory, Aboue the measure of thy paine Shall bee thy weight of glory. Then sigh not so, Let sorrowes go, Sing in the highest Hosanna, And change thy dolefull sounds of woe Into Halleluiah. THE FIRST PSALME. BLessed yea thrice blest are they That lewd counsels haue not traced: Nor haue stood in sinners way, Nor in scorners chaire are placed. But in Gods lawes they delight, Them they study day and night. These like trees stand euermore By the riuers freshly springing: Pleasant fruit in plenteous store
Duly in their season bringing. Neuer shall their leafe decay, What they doe shall prosper aye. But the wicked are like dust To and fro with tempest driuen: Neither shall they with the iust Stand when iudgement shall be giuen. For God knowes the iust mans way, And them stroyes that from him stray. Psalme. 12. SIth on earth all friends doe faile, Prouing faythlesse and vnkind, Sith now euery where preuaile Flattring lips and double mind, Lord send help from heauen aboue, Who alone art perfect loue. But these false dissembling tongues God eftsoones will root them out; Those that triumph in their wrongs, Vttering proud words and stout, Who shall curb our tongues say they, Ours they are and they shall sways. For when once the poore doth crie, And to God his vowes addresse: Now, saith God, arise will I, Him to saue, them to represse.
God whose word is siluer tride, And in seuen fires puri fide. Lord performe as thou hast said, Saue and keep thine heritage: Help the poore so much dismaid From this lewd and sinfull age, Which base men doth highest raise, And to vice giues vertues praise. Psalme. 13. LOrd how long wilt thou delay? Shall I neuer comfort find? Can thine endlesse grace decay? Or thy kindnesse proue vnkind? Why then hidest thou thy face, Carelesse of my care and griefe? Why withholdest thou thy grace, And deniest me due reliefe? Shall my fruitlesse counsels still Thus torment my troubled sprite? Shall my foes triumph at will, While thy terros me affright? Heare O Lord behold my plight, Speedy help of thee I craue: Light my dim decayed sight, That I sleep not in the graue. Lest my foes with proud disdaine Boast as if they did preuaile:
Ioying in my saddest paine, When my feeble steps doe faile. But I ioy and hope alwayes On thy grace and sauing health, And my heart shall sing thee praise, Th' only worker of my wealth. Psalme. 23. HOw can I lacke what may content, My boundlesse greedy heart? Sith thou O Al-sufficient My carefull shepheard art. When I on tender grasse haue fed Thou foldst me safe and sure: And when I thirst thou doest me lead To streames Chrystalline pure. Thou doest my wandring soule reclaime When from thee I doe stray: And thou my steps euen for thy name Doest guide in righteous way. Were I to passe through shade of death No danger would I feare: Thy rod thy crooke me comforteth. Thy help is alwayes neere. Thou hast a plenteous table spred For me before my foe: With pretious balme thou dew'st my head,
My bowle doth ouer flow. And while I liue thy bounteous grace Shall neuer me forsake: But euer in thy dwelling place Will I my dwelling make. Psalme. 119. Beth. HOw shall a young man prone to ill Clense his vnruly and vnbridled way▪ If that he learne to know thy will, And from thy sacred lawes goe not astray. Thee haue I sought with perfect heart In whom doth rest my full content: O let me neuer from thee part, Nor erre from thy commandement. Thy words deep in my heart are bid, That from thy precepts I may neuer swerue: O gracious Lord as thou hast bid Teach me thy Precepts euer to obserue. Thy righteous iudgements and thy wayes which of thy grace to me thou doest bewray. My lips created for thy praise Shall neuer cease to publish night nor day. My hearts desire and whole delight Vpon thy statutes fixed are: No worldly treasure in my sight May with thy precepts once compare. As on the lodestar of my life So on thy lawes my stedfast eyes are set:
And in my thoughts they are so rise That I thy precepts neuer can forget. Psalme. 125. THey whose hopes are mounted high, Rais'd with wings of faith and loue, Stormie tempest, thundring skie, Trembling earth can neuer moue. They though hell against them band, Stedfast like Mount Sion stand. As about Ierusalem Mighty hils aduanced are: So doth God inuiron them That on him rely their care. He from danger doth protect And secure his Saints elect. Though a while fierce tyrants prey On Christs flocke with furious rage, Their proud scepter shall not sway Alwayes on his heritage: Lest forlorne and in contempt, Sinfull counsels they attempt. Lord let them thy bounty tast That are pure and poore in sprite Whose wrie steps writ paths haue trac't. Range them with the hypocrite: That the chaffe purg'd from the graine Israel may in peace remaine.
Psalme. 130. OVt of the deep O Lord, to thee I crie, Giue eare and heare the voice of my complaint: If thou seuerely marke iniquity, Who can be cleere and free from sinfull taint? But mercy Lord with thee remaines in store, That men may feare thee and thy name adore. On thee I wait and on thy righteous word, More then the morning watch for dawning day. Let Israel likewise trust in the Lord, With him redemption and much grace doth sway. And though his sins in number passe the sand: He shall redeeme him with his mighty hand. Psalme. 131. LOrd thou know'st who hast me tride, That my heart swels not with pride: I looke not high, nor doe I stretch My thoughts too far beyond my reach. Haue I not like weaned child Euermore beene meeke and mild? Yea sure I haue my selfe demean'd Like infant from his mother wean'd. Israel doe thou likewise, Learne in meeke and humble guise
Like babe new weaned from the brest Still on thy God thy hopes to rest. Psalme. 133. O Come behold what thing it is, How good, how sweet, how full of blisse, When discords and dissensions cease, And brethren loue and liue in peace. Much like the pretious oyle that's shed Vpon the high Priests sacred head: Which dewes his beard and thence doth raigne Downe on his holy vestments traine. Much like the pleasant morning dewes Which Hermons fertile top renewes: Or that which fals on Sions hill, And doth her horne with plenty fill. O blessed they that can agree To dwell in peace and vnity? For there the Lord giues euermore Both happy life and plenteous store. FINIS.
