7185 99849917 15090
THE LAMBES SPOVSE Or The Heauenly Bride. A theologicall discourse, wher∣in the contract betwixt Christ and the Church; the preparation against the mariage; and the solemnization it selfe, and the exclu∣sion of hypocrites and temporizers, is plain∣ly and profitably, with the par∣ticular vses, set forth. Wherevnto is annexed an exact pre∣paratiue to the Lords Supper. By T. D. Minister of the word of God Imprinted at London by G. Eld, dwelling in Fleete- lane, at the signe of the Printers Presse, 1608.
To the Worshipfull company of Drapers in Couentry, his very good be∣nefactors, peace and prosperitie. IF wee duly and diligently as we ought (men, brethren & fa∣thers,) consi∣der & obserue, Gods vnspeake∣able mercy & goodnesse towards our English nation; not onely in the fruition and continuance of such vncomparable peace and prosperitie aboue other countries and king domes, and in the exqui∣site and excellent knowledge of liberall Artes and the learned lan∣guages: but also (and that most
eminently) in the pure and pub∣like preaching of Christ his bles∣sed Gospell, in so many places and parishes. Wee cannot but iudge and acknowledge our selues to be highly beloued, and admirably blessed of Almighty God. But contrariwise, if wee marke and take notice of the merueilous abuses of our peace and prospe∣ritie, the exceeding contempt of Artes and good learning, and (that, which most aggrauateth our iudgement) the generall neg∣lect of piety, and the horrible hy∣pocrisie of many in the profession of sincere religion, and withall call to remembrance the sundrie and fearefull (if not ominous,) warnings and iudgements that God hath inflicted vpon vs in these few last yeares, wee then haue iust cause to feare, that God
hath reserued vs to some more dangerous plagues, and that hee will by degrees strip and depriue vs of all his mercies. Wherefore least wee should take ouer-much offence at the prophanesse and hypocrisie of the mvltitude, and hereby faile and shrinke in our holy courses and exercises of godlinesse, or else should deceiue our owne soules, because wee re∣teine an outward forme and pro∣fession of holinesse, and because our outward tranquillitie & hap∣pinesse yet continueth: two points and conclusions must heedfully be considered of vs. First, that the number of sincere Christians and vndissembling Gospellers, is very rare: they are in comparison of them that perish, but a remnant, a gleaning after the haruest or vin∣tage, a small flock, one of a Tribe,
and two of a Citie. The truth of this assertion most euidently ap∣peareth in the time of any gene∣rall Apostacie and persecution, 1. Reg. 19. 14. Apoc. 12. ver. 5. and 6. and chapt. 13. ver. 7. and 8. and shall be made manifest to all the world, at Christ his second com∣ming, when he shal scarcely finde sauing faith vpon the earth. Luke. 18. ver. 7. 8. Therfore we may not define and measure the truth of religion by the esteeme and prac∣tise of the erring multitude, but wee must make Gods word the onely rule and touchstone of our faith and life. Secondly, for the auoiding and preuenting of hy∣pocrisie, which maketh vs odious both to God and men, wee must not so much (in a curious humor) desire to know strange mysteries, as to know that which most con∣cerneth
vs, and to make a good vse and apply of our knowledge. Againe, wee must in all our acti∣ons and profession of religion, propound to our selues no sini∣ster ends. As for example, wee must not intend gaine but god∣linesse, not credit amongst men (onely) but the glorie of God; not policie, but piety, and not the aduancing of our outward state, but the amendment of our liues, and the saluation of our soules; and hereby we shall nota∣bly and vnfallibly distinguish our selues from all hypocrites what∣soeuer. Lastly, we must with the woman in the Apocalips, cloath our selues with the sunne of righ∣teousnesse, and tread the Moone, that is, all changeable and transi∣torie things vnder our feete, and wee must with the wise Virgins,
whiles it is the time of grace, and the day of saluation, prouide our selues of the oyle of true saith, get the garment of true holinesse and keepe it vndefiled; and in hope and patience waite long, and wish for, the second comming of Christ, when the mariage shall be eternally solemnized betweene the Bridegroome and vs in the highest heauens. This doing we shall be happy and blessed here in hope and beginning, and after this mortall life ended, in act and perfection. And because, next vnto the sacred ministery of the word, and the spirituall exercises of Christians, the publishing of sound and elaborate treatises, are a singular helpe and furtherance herevnto, I, (in the mediocritie of my skill) for the direction of those that be well disposed, haue
compiled and framed this small worke. Moreouer, because the argument of it so fitteth your af∣fections, being (generally) men of religion and conscience, & in∣strumēts of good, & because your liberal kindnesse & long continu∣ed beneficence hath bin so amply extended to me, I doe most hum∣bly and deuoutly dedicate it vnto you all; most submissiuely, be∣seeching you courteoussy to ac∣cept of it, and to vse it for your edification and comfort. In assu∣red expectation whereof, I here take my leaue. The GOD of heauen, and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, remember in goodnesse all your kindnesses shewed to his house, and vnto so many of his seruants, fill you with all wisedome and spirituall vnderstanding, make
you fruitefull in all good workes, prosper you in this world, and make you euerlastingly blessed in the world to come. Amen. Couentry. Ianu. 1608. Your worships in all duty to command, Thomas Drâx.
Venerabili & Doctis∣simo viro Domino Hintono sacrae Theologiae Doctori, Couentriae Ar∣chidiacono & Michaelis ec∣clesiae pastori vigilantissimo, . CVm totum & bene∣ficentissimū Maece∣natum meorum or∣dinem, iustissimis de causis, compellare & salutare ausus sim; non committendum putaui, vt te (vir verè obseruande) meum ingularem Patronum & perueterem a∣micum praeterirem. Malo igitur importunus quàm ingratus videri, & libelluli vestibulo (licet menùs decorè) aliquid adiicere, quaém de officio meo tan∣tillum imminuere. Huc addatur etiam, quòd argumenti vsus & praestantia, tua magna in ecclesia, existimatio & autho∣ritas, & tui iudicii non tam exquisiti quàm candidi expectatio, me (alioqui
b invitum) ad te alloqudum, aiciunt inutant. Quocirca  etiam digni∣ti, id{que}, meritissimo▪ has meas quales∣cun{que} comne tationes, consecrodedico{que}. e ideo subiectissimè & demisissimè ro, vt eas in optimam partem interpreteris, tuam{que} erga me beneuolentim retineas & confirmes. Sed de tuae propitiae volun∣tatis propensione nequaquam dubitans & quia molestus esse nolim, hc sanè dicendi, at te diligendi finem numquam faco. Christus opt: Max: pastorum princeps, te quàm diutissimè valentem & vigentem conserue,  sacrum miisterium prosperet, tuam ecclesiasticam praefectu∣ram dirigat, te{que} tandem summa & san∣cta senectute confectum, in sempiternae betitudinis portum & paradisum per∣ducat. Couentriae, Ian. 1. 1608. Tuae dignitatis studi∣osissimus Thomas Drâx.
The Lambes Spouse, or the Heauenly Bride. Math. 25. 10. And they that were ready went with him to the wedding, and the gate was shut. OVr Sauiour Christ the onely head & Brde-groome of the Church, ha∣uing in the for∣mer part of this allegorie, vnder the metaphoricall & borrowed termes of Wise Virgins, that were inwardly called, furnished with sauing faith and godlinesse, and watchfully expected his comming: and vnder the appella∣tion of Foolsh virgins, that were hypo∣crites and temporizers, called onely outwardly, and contenting themselues with the outward profession and blaze
of faith and godlinesse, the pith and substance whereof they wanted, des∣cribed and depainted vnto vs the estate and condition of the visible Church, (wherein amongst the beleeuers are intermingled hypocrits, and onely see∣ming Christians) he doth in this tenth verse set downe their contrary euents and iudgements: for the Wise Virgins, the sincere and vndissembling Christi∣ans went with Christ to the wedding, that is, they were receiued into heaven, & vnto the immediate fellowship & pre∣sence of Christ, but the foolish virgins, voide and destitute of iustifying faith and inward holinesse, were shut out, that is, debarred from entring into the kingdome of heauen, and consequent∣ly adiudged and cast into hell. Where∣vpon our Sauiour exhorteth all men to watch, and carefully to waite for his comming to iudgement: least being vnready at his comming, they be shut out from the heauenly marriage: vn∣to which dutie they are so much more to attend, because that they know not
the day, nor the houre wherein hee will come; Thus much of the dependance and order of the text. Now according to the difference and diuersity of persons, viz. the wise virgins, and the foolish, their diuers and different euents and iudgements, are to be obserued and handled. In the wise virgins, three heads or points are to be considered First their contract with Christ (in these words) wise virgins. Secondly, their readinesse and fitnesse therevnto in these termes, they that were ready. Lastly, the con∣summation of the marriage in these words, Went with him to the wedding. Of all these points I will speake in or∣der, and afterwards (God assisting) pro∣ceed to propound and handle the most different estate & iudgment of the foo∣lish virgins. In the cōtract diuers points are contained. As first, that there is such a contract betwixt Christ and his Church. Secondly, the forme & nature of it. Thirdly the benefits & preroga∣tiues of it: lastly the vses of the doctrin.
Touching the contract, that there is such a contract betweene Christ and the Church, it is plaine and demon∣strable by sundry places of Scripture. The Lord by the ministery of Esaias the Prophet, whom he sent vnto Eze∣chies to comfort him and his people against the blasphemies and threat∣ning speeches of railing Rabsaketh, the seruant of the King of Assur thus sti∣leth and saluteth the Church. This is the word that the Lord hath against him. The virgin, the daughter of Syon hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorne; the daughter of Ierusalem hath shaken her head at thee, Isay. 57. 22. The Church is distinguished and adorned with the title of Virgin. Because shee was consecrated and espoused to God alone, and his true worship; as a virgin to her onely bridegroome or husband. Likewise Psal. 45. 10. Hearken O daughter and consider & incline thine eare, &c. So shall the King haue plea∣sure in thy beauty for hee is thy Lord and worship thou him. Heere Solomon
representeth Christ, and King Pharaoes daughter that was married to him, the Church of the Gentiles espoused and affianced to Christ. Thirdly the Lord by Hosea speaketh; I will marry thee vnto me for euer, I will marry thee vnto mee in faithfulnesse. Hos. 2. 19. 20. In the Canticls, the Church by force of this contract maketh claime to Christ, saying; My beloued is mine, and I am his, &c. Cant. 2. 16. Paul shewing his vnfeigned affection to the Corinthians, who in part (missed by false Apostles) began without cause to distaste him, maketh this protestation. I am iealous ouer you with a godly iealousie, for I haue prepared you for one husband to present you as a pure virgin to Christ. 2. Cor. 11. 2. In the Apocalyps the Church is called Virgins that are not defiled with women, Apoc. 14. 4. and the Lambes Wife or Brid. Chap. 19. 7. and Chap. 21. 2▪ All these places euince and de∣mostrate a spirituall coniunction and contract betweene Christ and the elect. Lastly, not to dwell long vpon
authorities, Saint Iohn most notably & manifestly in the allegorie of the Vine and the branches, Iohn. 15. 1. 2. 3. 4. shadoweth and setteth out vnto vs, the nature of the coniunction, for as the Vine doth yeeld and communi∣cate life and nourishment to the bran∣ches, and the branches receiue and par∣take it from the Vine: so Christ the noble Vine, that hath life in himselfe, and of himselfe, and that is full of grace and truth, doth infuse and com∣municate spirituall life, comfort and grace vnto his seuerall members; and the Church being ingrafted into him, draweth and receiueth the same from him by the hand and instrument of faith. Whereas therefore the true Church of God, consisting aswell of marryed persons as vnmarried, yea for the grea∣test part in all times and ages of those that bee marryed; thus the holye scriptures, and experience and prac∣tise of all pure and holye Churches doe testifie; is in respect of their sound
faith onely, and firme hope in Christ, and sincere loue; stiled by the name of Virgins: it serueth to check and condemne the error of the Church of Rome, who from these and like places of Scripture taketh occasion, and would needs prooue, that virginitie and single life, is a state in it selfe farre more holy and acceptable before God thē mariage, yea that it is meritorious and a type of the perfection of eter∣nall life▪ and here-vpon they forbid their Bishoppes, Ptiests, Deacons, Monkes, Iesuits, &c. to marry, tolle∣rating notwithstanding and allowing the Stewes, concubines, hatlots, and all manner of vncleannesse. They vrge and commend Virginity, with as much conscience and equity, as the theefe doth truth, the drunken man sobriety, and the glutton abstinence. For it is notoriously knowne to the world, not onely what vnchaste hearts they carry, and in what lusts they burne; but how filthily they liue, that amongst the rest would be accounted the most holy & exquisite.
But briefly to refute their error, wee thus prooue, that virginity is not a state more holy in it selfe before God then marriage, much lesse meritorious. First God in the old Testament, and Christ in the New, allowed and permitted marriage to Priests, Prophets, Patri∣akes, Apostles, Euangelists and Mini∣sters▪ aswell as any others. If there had beene any vnholinesse in their marri∣age, or virginity estate for them, so in∣comparably better or more necessary, God in his wisedome would haue o∣therwise ordered it. Secondly, marri∣age is honorable in all men, it hath his chastity, it is for the comfort of man, the medicine of incontinence, the meane to preserue the world, and the seminary of the faithfull, therefore in it selfe not inferiour to a single life. Thirdly, if single life were so holy and meritorious a state before GOD, as they would make it, then all vnmarri∣ed persons should be so. But the exam∣ples of Absolon, Adoniah, & Iudas, &c. euince the contrarye. Secondly, it
should bee without the least taint of concupiscence. Thirdly, the Scriptures would auerre and auouch it. Fourthly, albeit virginity and single life in times of generall persecution be more to be wished, and more conuenient then marriage; yet then Paul rather wish∣eth that all men in respect of the time present were such, then commandeth and inioyneth them. 1. Cor. 7. 7. For he leauerh them to their liberties▪ And this occurrence of affliction and trou∣ble, seemeth to bee a principall cause why Bishops & Ministers so sparingly were married in the Primitiue church, for some 200 yeares after the Apostles decease. Lastly, I conclude with Saint Augustine; Melius est humile coniugi∣um, quàm superba virginitas. Secondly, in that the true Church is called by the name of Virgin,2. Obser. in re∣spect of her sound faith, and pure af∣fection to Christ: wee are first admo∣nished hereby to beware of, and to shunne, as the very plague or poison of our soules, the dangerous and dam∣nable
errous and heresies of al Papists, Turkes Anabaptists, Schismatikes, P∣gans &. For these like a gangrene & cankar eate into & corrupt our soules, they put out the light of our vnder∣standing and wound the vitall parts of spirituall life. Mathew 6. 23. 2. Pet. 2. vers. 2. 3. Apoc. 13. verse 7. and 8. 2. Thessa 2. vers. 9 and 10. Secondly wee must entirely and vn∣fainedly loue Christ. Ioh 21. Hee must be our loue as Ignatius saith , that is that Christ his loue was crucified: he alone must haue our hearts. Pro. 23. ver. 26. We must account al things but losse and dung in comparison of gayning him Phil. 3. 8. Hee is the pretious mar∣garite or pearle, wee must sell all that we haue to purchase it. Mat. 13. 46. Fi∣nally our loue or affection to Christ, his word and Sacraments must bee so feruent, so fiy and so vehement that no water should quench it, nor the floudes drowne it, and we should greatly con∣temne al substāce in respect of it. Cant. 8, 6, 7.
This meeteth with those that haue a forme and shew of godlines;Vse. yet they would serue God and Mammon, two cōtrary maisters if they be worldlings, or if they be licentious, they are . 1. louers of pleasures more then God. Wherfore let vs auoide all hipocrisie and loue Christ sincerely, for as Christ himselfe is simple & sin∣cere in his nature, and in his promises, loue and workes, towards vs, so let vs labor in some good conformity to be∣haue and carry our selues to him. And thus much touching the first branch viz. that there is such a contract and of the vses of it. 2. The second point to be considered in this spiritual cōtract or vnion, is the definition, nature and forme of it. This contract therfore is that mistical & spiritual, yet real & substantial vnion & coniunction between Christ and the Church, whereby they are made one flesh, and by special compact & consent haue right & interest one in another, yea & abide and dwel one in an other.
In the clearing and manifestation hereof▪ three particulars are to bee handled, first that this coniunction is onely spirituall, not naturall, or carnall. Secondly, that it is reall and substan∣tiall, and lastly the order and manner of it is to be touched. It is mysticall and spirituall, first be∣cause the persons betweene whom it is made, viz. Christ (as man) and the Church militant, are farre distant in place, and therefore it cannot bee any naturall or carnall coniunction. Secondly, because the meanes and manner of working it are spirituall, it needs must be spirituall also. Now it is wrought & effected not by nerues, bonds, inews, as this naturall con∣iunction betweene the body and the soule is caused, but by the spirit of Christ, which he sendeth from heauen into vs; and by our faith, stirred vp by his spirit, whereby we send it vp againe to him: so that this coniunction must needs bee as spirituall, so relatiue and mutuall. First therefore that Christ
sendeth his spirit into vs, and that the same spirit that dwelleth in his man∣hood, and filleth it with all graces aboue measure, is deriued thence and dwelleth in all the true members, rai∣sing vp and working in vs faith and strength whereby we apprehend him▪ loue whereby wee affect him, and all other graces needfull for euery mans saluation, it is pregnantly prooued by these places of scripture following▪ and the like. Hee giueth vs of his spirit and hereby wee know that he dwelleth in vs and we in him, Iohn 4. 14. God hath sent forth the spirit of his sonne into our hearts which crieth Abba father Gal. 46. Lastly the church is the habi∣tation of God. Eph. 2. 22. and the temple of God. 1. Cor. 6. 19. Secondly our faith ascendeth vp to Christ. Acts. 7. 56. doth incorporate vs into him. Ephes. 3. 12. 17. and hereby wee both liue and dwell in him, Galath. 2. 20. But this our faith is spirituall and in∣uisible, for wee walke by faith and not by sight, 2. Cor. 5. 6. And faith is the
ground of things that are hoped for, and the euidence of things which are not seene. Heb. 11. 1. 2. Obiect. But some perhaps will ob∣iect, that wee feed vpon Christ in the Sacrament, we indeed eate his flesh & drinke his bloud. Iohn. 6. 55. 56. Ergo our vnion is not spirituall. &c. Ans. Albeit, wee really, corporally and substantially receiue, partake of, and eare the elements and outward signes, namely the bread & the wine, according to Christs institution in me∣mory and representation of his body broken and his bloud shed, and yet wee receiue and feede vpon Christ by faith. For not euery one that eateth the bread and drinketh the wine in the Lords supper doth feede vpon Christ, but onely the true beleeuers; who feed of him both in the Sacramēt and also out the Sacrament as may ap∣peare. Ioh. 6. 17. 51. Secondly as the Fathers in the time of the Law did all eate the same spiri∣tual meate (that we do) and drinke the
same spirituall drinke, but they did it onely by faith, which apprehendeth things to come as present, (for Christ was not then incarnate, much lesse was he dead,) euen so we receiue and par∣take of Christ, that is spiritually by faith and not carnally and substantial∣lye, as the Papists imagine. 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4. Thirdly Christ is now in heauen & there contayned,Ioh, 6. 26. and his body there glorified, therfore cannot he be eaten carnally, corporally, substantially, for hee is many millions of miles distant hence. Secondly His body is impassible & not subiect to any such indignities. Thirdly then Iudas and all reprobate and wicked men who receiue the Sacrament of Christs body and bloud, should bee saued, for they that eate of the bread of life liue for euer. Ioh. 5. 57. They that eate his flesh & drinke his bloud dwell in him & he in them. vers. 56. But they doe not feede vpon the bodie and bloud of Christ be∣cause they want the mouth and
stomack of faith, to receiue and digest it. Iohn. 6. 63. Lastly, the elements of bread and wine retaine both their names and natures, euen after the words of con∣secration, as is perspicuous and eui∣dent by the Scripture. 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28. 29. And herevnto accord the an∣cient Fathers, as Augustine, Theodoret, Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostome, yea and some of later times among the Papists, as Gelaius and Bertram. Ergo. Christ is not there bodily pre∣sent, neither is the bread and wine conuerted substantially and really into his body and bloud, therefore as the absurd doctrine of transubstantiation is an inuention of later times, and here ouerthrowne: so must it needs also follow that our coniunction with him in this mortalitie must needs bee alto∣ther spirituall. The second thing to be considered in the diffinition, is, that albeit this contract and vnion is not feigned, supposed, imagined, or by touching
and commixion: yet it is a true, a reall and a substantiall vnion, for wee are substantially vnited to him; our body, to his body, our soule to his soule, and our whole person to his whole person, so that we are flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones. Eph. 5. 30. And as Adams whole person was really and substantially coupled with the whole person of Eue. So is it be∣twixt Christ and the Church. He is the head and we the members, hee is the husband, and we the wife. Now in that this contract and v∣nion is reall and substantiall,Obs. it is also indissoluble and eternall. For first the Lord saith by Hosea (as I haue before mentioned,) I will marry thee vnto mee for euer. Secondly Christ his power is infinite, and none can take any out of his hands, Iohn. 10. 28. Thirdly, his loue is constant, whom hee loueth hee loueth to the end. Iohn 13. 3. Fourth∣ly the sauing graces of his spirit, the proper endowments of his elect, are without repentance and irreuocable.
Rom. 11. 29. Fiftly Christ is an effectual and con∣tinuall mediator vnto God his Hea∣uenly Father for them. Luke. 22. 32. Heb. 7. 25. Lastly if any true and liuely mem∣ber of Christs body should bee lost, then either Christ should want either power, loue, or wisdome, to preserue and saue it, but hee wanteth none of them: or els his body should be may∣med and vnperfect, which can neuer bee, for it is his fulnesse. Ephesians. 1. 23. and hee will in the life to come make it vnto himselfe a glorious Church Without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. Eph. 5. 27. Vse. Therefore let euery man trie by the touch-stone of Gods word, whether he feele the spirit of God in lightning and renuing him, and faith purging his heart, and firmely ap∣prehending and applying Christ with∣all his benefits vnto himselfe, if hee finde himselfe in this estate let him thanke GOD and by the continuall
and serious vse of the worde, Sacra∣ments, prayer and practise of good workes, maintaine and confirme it, for doubtlesse hee is a true member of IESVS CHRIST, ingrafted into him, and shall thus continue for euer. For these are not the workes of flesh and bloud, and meere Na∣ture, but of the Spirit of GOD and grace. The third thing in the deffinition to be explained is the Order of the v∣nion, touching which wee are to note that the Church is first vnited vnto the body and flesh of CHRIST. Se∣condly to his soule, and lastly to his God-head, and so to his whole per∣son: and therefore the Scriptures commonly speake of first, & propound Christs humanity vnto vs and after∣ward his deity. Rom. 1. verse 3. and 4. Chap. 9. ver. 5. and 6. The reason herof is, because we can∣not bee vnited vnto his deity but by his flesh, wherin hee wrought our re∣demption, for the humane Nature
of Christ is as it were a doore to let vs into the communion of his deitie, and the conduict pipe of deity to conuey and deriue it vnto vs. And as in the sacraments, the true-beleeuers doe by the outward signes and symboles as by instruments receiue the thing signified viz, Christ and his merits: so they also by the meanes of his humanity, are made partakers of his God-head, and so are vnited vnto him. The third thing to be considered in this: contract, is the rare and royall be∣nefits and prerogatiues, that hereby flowe and redound vnto vs. First wee haue from Christ, and from his merits and sufferings, the foundation and be∣ginning of our new birth and being: he is the roote, and wee are the plants, he the Vine and wee the branches: of his fulnesse we all receiue grace for grace: finally, we are in him, who is made vnto vs of God, wisedome and righteousnesse, sanctification and redemption, Ioh. 15. 2. Iohn. 1. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Ier. 2. 5. 6. Secondly, we being contracted vnto
Christ our head and husband, are in∣teressed in and partakers of all his roy∣alties and benefits so far forth as may be, (the proportion and difference be∣weene the husband and the wife bet∣ing retained) for from the fountaine of his God-head and conduit of his hu∣manity, are deriued vnto us, his righ∣teousnes; santification, triumph, glory. From Christ wee haue, redemption through his blood, euen remission of our sinnes according to his rich grace, by his sufferings we are reed and deliuered from the guilt of our sinnes and the feare of condemnation, & by his obedi∣ece to the Law imputed to vs we are accepted as iust before God and fit for eternall life. 2. Cor. 5. 19. 21. Apoc. 12. 1, Now what an vnspeakable benefit is remission of sinnes, which sinne draw∣eth vpon vs all temporall and eternall plagues & can be by noe other meanes obtained then by our coniunction with him Psal. 32. 1. 2. Thirdly communicating with Christ in the vnion of nature, we also (in some
proportion and similitude are parta∣kers of his propheticall, priestly, and Kingly Office. We are made prophets to confesse him and to teach and com∣fort others, Priests to mortyfie sinne, to suffer for Christ, to offer sacrifices of praise & thankesgiuing vnto him, and to consecrate our selues, soules and bo∣dies wholy vnto him. Rom 8. 39. Apo. 1. 6. 1. Peter. 1. 9. Wee are Kings to fight against the world, the flesh, and the Deuill, and by faith in him to ouercome them. 1. Iohn. 4. 5. And here wee receiue that right in whole, and dominion in part which we wholy lost in Adam. Math. 19. 28. 1. Cor. 6. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 4. 5. Fourthly all Plagues, Aduersities, Crosses, Punishments, are made but only temporary and fatherly correc∣tions vnto vs, tending to our correc∣tion, and not our destruction, and they are medicines to cure our infir∣mities and not meanes to increase our miseries. Heb. 12. 6. 10. 11. Pro. 3. 11. Apoc. 3. 19.
Fiftly wee haue all the Angells of GOD in this life for our good to at∣tend vpon vs and to defend vs. Heb. 1. 14. 2. Kings. 6. 16. 17. Psal. 34 7. And in the life to come, especially by reason of this neere and admirable coniunc∣tion with Christ our head and hus∣band, and because we are made kings to rule with him, we are & shalbe supe∣rior to the Angels, for there is no such coniunction betwixt his nature and theirs as betweene his and ours, nei∣ther shall they raigne as Kings with him in the life to come as the Saints shall; Apoca. 2 verse. 26. and Chap. 3. verse. 21. Sixtly Satan cannot indite and condemne vs, for as no man can sue the wife in the lawe, the husband liuing and not giuing his consent▪ Soe CHRIST our husband liuing and alwaies iustifying vs, who shall condemne vs? Romans 8. 33. 34. or who shall seperate vs from his loue? verse. 35.
Lastly when the husband, especially being a mighty Monarch is highly of∣fended, the wife may and hath free ac∣cesse vnto him when none other can or may haue the like liberty; So may and hath the true Church free accese vnto Christ by praier when the wick∣ed are debarred from him, and cannot or dare not approch neere to him. Thus much of the benefits and priuileges. Now in the last place follow the ma∣nifold vses of this contract and vnion. 1. Vse. First seeing our vnion with Christ is Reall and substantiall and con∣tinueth for euer, (for we are made one flesh with him, bone of his bones and flesh of his flesh) Heb. 2. 14. Eph. 5. 30. Ergo he still (albeit he be glorified) re∣teineth the essentiall parts of a true hu∣maine body, the quality is onely alte∣red, but the substance and dimentions remaine, for otherwise we could haue no fellowshippe with him, and so the foundation of all our comfort should
be rased and ruinated. And therefore here is condemned the absurd and grosse errour of them that defie Christs humanity by making it infinite, omni∣potent & knowing al things, and ours only finite and circumscribed in power place and knowledge, whereas be∣tweene that which is finite, and that which is infinite there can be no such vnion and substantiall coniunction. Secondly we must labour & endeuor alwaies to continue in this vnion and communion with Christ, and not de∣parte an haires breadth from him; for remayning and abiding in Christ wee finde all comfort, refreshment and peace; and being out of him we runne head-long into all euill; for euen the Godly themselues, being out of it, and the efficacy of it but alittle, feele themselues as it were tormented with a flame of fire. Psalm. 77. 2. 3. Iob. 6. verse. 1. 2. 3. Wherefore we must beware of and shunne all Idolatry, errour, atheisme, fornication, vncleanesse, drunkenesse,
schisme, and all other raigning sinnes whereby we dissolue and cut in sunder this vnion. Thirdly by reason of this misticall and straite coniunction betwixt Christ and the Church, hee hath a simpathy and feeling of all their wants and miseries, & though now he be exalted to the highest degree of glory in hea∣uen yet doth he in nothing (as world∣ly men in their exaltation vsually for∣get & neglect their old & poore friends & acquaintance) remit and abate of his care and compassion towardes his poore and afflicted members in earth, but hee succoureth them in all their extremities, imputeth and rewardeth any good done vnto them as done to himselfe, and censureth and reuengeth the wrongs and indignities offered them as done to his owne person. Hence wee learne diuers lessons and duties. First we in all our afflictions and necessities must flee vnto him and to the throne of grace, in con∣fidence and assurance of faith, and
wee shall find rest vnto our soules and helpe in time of need. Math. 11. 26. Heb. 4. 16. For as Philo said to the Iewes his country men, when he could find no fauour with Caius the Ro∣maine Emperour) Vbi deficit humanum praesidium, ibi necesse est inciperem diui∣nū auxilium, that is, where mans helpe fayleth, there Gods must needs begin. Secondly wee must doe all possible good to Gods Saints, wee must com∣fort his bowells, shew them all kind∣nesse, and supply their wants, for then are we liuely and feeling mem∣bers, and Christ will take notice of all the comfort wee yeeld them, and re∣ward and regard it both in this life & in the life to come, bee the offices of charity neuer so meane so they be vn∣fained, Mat. 25. 35. 36. 40. Luk. 21. 34 Thirdly me must take heed that we neuer grieue, wrong, vexe, and perse∣cute Gods deere seruants and saints; for then wee doe but fight against God, kick against the pricks, touch the apple of GODS owne eye. Zacha. 2. 8.
grieue hi: spirit, and procure to our selues many Iudgments, and if we are and continue in the number of open & professed enemies we besides tem∣porall plagues most iustly, draw vpon our selues eternall vengeance. The last vse is, that being ioynd and united to Christ the fountaine of all good workes, we wust contend and en∣deuour to conforme our selues to his example and bring forth timely and plentifull fruits of piety, charity, and iustice. Phil. 1. 11. Tit. 2. 14 Psal. 13. The second section. They that were ready. NOw (as order requireth) we are to treat and dispute of the fitnesse & preparation that ought to be in the true Church of Christ and is required of hem against his second comming: For as these wise Virgins were before-hand prepared in faith, grounded on∣ly vpon the scriptures and relying vp∣on
Christs only merits, in feruent loue and sincere affection to Christ, and in hearty desire and earnest expectation of his comming: so must we also, if we would be assured of our contract and vnion which Christ in this life, and en∣ioy his glorious presence and haue perfect fellowshippe with him in the world to come; trimme prepare and make ready our selues against the so∣lemnization of the marriage: and therefore it is said in the Apocalyps; the marriage of the Lambe is come and the bride hath made her selfe ready. Apo. 19. 7. And so they are presented as a chast Virgin vnto one husband Iesus Christ. The truth and necessity of this prepa∣ration is plainely and plentifully set forth in the scriptures, whether we rspect Christ as the princypall and in∣ward trimmer of the Bride, or the mi∣nisters of the word as his agents and instruments, or the Bide her selfe, as the proper subiect of it. First Christ trimmeth his spouse the Church, and
therfore the holy company of his elect are sayd to come downe from heauen, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her hus∣band. Apoc. 21. 2. that is, purged from all corruption, GOD through Christ doth make vs meete to bee partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. Col. 7. 12. Christ sanctifieth & clenseth his Church by the Washing of water through the word, that he may make it vn∣to himselfe a glorious Church, without spot or wrinckle &c. Eph. 5, 26, and 27. The graces that Christ bestoweth vp∣on her are as chaines to adorne her, as Myrrh, Incense and the spices of the Merchants to persume her, as Purple and Skarletto clothe her, & as pretious Iewels to beautifie & enrich her, final∣ly shee as Queene standeth, at his right hand in a vesture of the gold of Ophir, Psalme 45, vers. 9. More particularly Christ trimmeth and prepareth his spouse. First by offe∣ring and affording vnto her the means and ministery of grace and saluati∣on, as the Preaching of the worde,
Ephesians 4, 11, 12, 13. the seale of the Sacraments. Mathew 28, 19. 1. Corinthi. 1, 23, 24, 25, 26. Herevnto may be added troubles, crosses, and af∣flictions, which albeit in their owne nature they bee euils and plagues for sinne, yet the quality and property be∣ing altered by Christ his death; they are made meanes to humble vs, medi∣cines to purge vs, sowre sauce to make vs to relish better the Heauenly foode of our soules, bridles to curbe and restraine vs from sinne, and spirituall directers to guide vs to the Kingdome of hea∣uen. Secondly Christ trimmeth his spouse by the continual and effectual in wor∣king and efficacy of his blessed Spirit. For without this all the outward meanes should bee onelie for conuict∣ment of men, and for their more iust condemnation, and not for conuersion or consolation) for by it hee alone gi∣ueth the encrease. 1. Cor. 3. hereby he epeneth mēs vnderstanding to vnderstād the scriptures, Lu. 24. ve. 32. he openeth
their hearts (as hee did Lydias) to at∣tend vnto good doctrine. Acts 16. ver, 14, he cōuerteth their hearts as he did the heart of Cornelius: & all that heard the words with him. Ac. 10. ve. 44, here∣by he leadeth them into all truth. Iohn 16. 13, he dwelleth in them. 1. Cor. 3. 16, he regenerateth them. Ioh. 3. 5. &. 8 finally he comforteth & strengtheneth them. Ioh. 16. 8, in that he is the prin∣cipall in trimming and preparing the Church his spouse, and that vnlesse hee giue grace and successe al other meanes (albeit neuer so good & holy) be vaine and frustrate, it must teach ernestly and continually by praier, to desire and en∣treat the Lord, to prepare vs: to make vs meet for his kindome, and to make the ministery of his word and Sacra∣ments, and all other good means pro∣fitable and effectual vnto vs, & herein wee must say with the Church in the Cantikles, arise O North and come O South, and blowe on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: and (then) let my beloued come to his garden, and eate
his pleasat fruite. Cātickles 4. v. the 16. The instrumentall trimmers, adorners of the Bride are specially and most sin∣gularly, the ministers and Preachers of the word. For these doe with Paul la∣bour to present their congregation as a chast Virgin vnto one hul band lesus Christ 2. cor. vers 1. 2. They haue the ministery and embassie of reconciliati∣on committed vnto them. 2. cor. 5. ver. 18. They are the Preachers of faith & repentance Mark. 1. ver. 15. Math. 3 2. Act. 26. 20. They haue the keyes and authority subordinatly vnder Christ to binde and to loose, to remit and to retaine. Mat. 16. 19. Ioh. 20. ver. 23. fi∣nally they are the outward organes & meanes of illumination, conuersion and saluation as may appeare. Act. 26. 18. 1. Tim. 4. 16. 1. cor. 1. 21. Hence it is that Philip must teach and conuert the Enuch. Act. 8. 35. Ananias, Paul: Paul Lidia; and Peter Cornelius. Act. 9. 10. 11. Act. 16. 14. Act. 10. ver. 7. and 3. 4 The vse hereof is to teach in no wise to neglect, despise or distast the Prea∣ching
of the worde, and other Holie meanes of our Saluation (as many and most do vpon the perill of their owne saluation) but vse them with all care, reuerence diligence and constancy. And therefore what a shame is it for most men, yea what an occasion to aggrauate their condemnation that they will for supplie and obteyning of earthlie foode, prouision and ad∣uancement, trudge, and trauaile farre and neere, almost to euetie market and faire, and in the meane time neg∣lect the foode of their Soule: suffer it to pine, and to perrish, they are more churlish to it then Nabal was to Da∣uid: more without compassion then the rich glutton was to Lazarus, and more hard hearted and mercilesse then the Iayler to innocent Paul and Sylas, who put them into the dungeon or in∣ner prison, and locked their feete fast in the stocks. Act. 16. 24.
And thus much of the principall preparer of the Bride, and al∣so of the instrumen∣tall. Thirdly the subiect or person that is thus prepared of Christ and his mi∣nisters, that is also as a voluntary and vnderstanding creature, by remouing the bar and incumbrances of infideli∣ty, idolatry and impenitency: and by vsing and frequenting all the holie meanes of begetting, confirming and increasing the sauing graces and gifts of God: is this spouse of Christ, the Church, the elect, the beleeuers, and (in a worde) all that desire and seeke to be saued. For these are often and continually warned and perswaded in the Scriptures: to watch, Marke 13. verse 35, 36. to bee sober, and to watch vnto prayer, 1. Peter 4, 7. and to haue feruent Charity a∣mongst themselues. verse 8. to repent.
Act. 17. ver. 30. to purge themselues. 1. Iohn. 3. 3. to put on the brest-plate of faith and loue 1. Theff. 5. 8. and hope of saluation for an helmet, ibidem. to be∣ware of surfeting, dronkennes and the cares of the world Luke. 21. 34. to waile yea sigh & mourne for the redemption of their bodies. Rom. 8. vers 20. 21. 22. 23. To vse the world and all things there∣of, as though they vsed them not, 1. Cor. 7. 27. to feare God and giue glo∣ry to him Apo. 14. vers. 7. to make an eccho and cry with the Bride in the Apocalyps, come euen, so come Lord Ie∣sus Apoc. 22. vers. 14. & 20. and lastly at the discerning of the neere approch of Christ by the accomplishment of the last signes such as are the ruine of Romish Babilon, the conuersion of the nation of the Iewes in the kingdome and countries into which they are dis∣persed, the roaring of the Seas and waters &c. reioysingly to looke and lit vp our heads because our (full) re∣demption draweth neare Luke. 21. verse. 28. Apoc. 19. 7. This espoused virgin or
Bride therefore, must of necessity be∣ing stirred vp and assisted by the spirit of GOD, and hauing the meanes of grace so abundantly ministred vnto her, get the wedding garment (of faith and holines) Math. 22. vers. 11. 12. 12, make her selfe ready Apoc. 19. verse. 7. to desire to bee disolued and to be with Christ Phil. 1. 23. and to ende∣uour to be acceptable to him. 2. Cor. 5. Reasons and arguments further to induce and perswade her hereunto are these first the transceudent and incom∣parable dignity and maiesty of the per¦son, to whom she is contracted, and to whome, she is to bee married, and that is Iesus Christ, the Kings sonne, the King of Kings: and Lord of Lords: the naturall heire of heauen and earth; the mighty Iehoua: the euerlasting fa∣ther he that hath all power in heauen and earth; and God hath so he ighly exalted him at his right hand and giuuen him a name aboue all names, that at the name of IESVS should euery knee bow of things in heauen, of things in earth,
and things vnder the earth, Philip. 2. vers. 9. 10. Wherefore if King Pharaoes Daughter being wedded to earthlye Salomon, must hearken vnto him, con∣sider and incline her eare. Yea forget her own people, & her Fathers house; Psa. 45.Psa. 45. 10. verse 10. how much more must euery good Christian, espoused & affianced to the heauenlye Salomon IESVS CHRIST our Sauiour, performe these duties. And if the Maides and Virgins that went in by course and appointment to great King Ahashuerash, that raig∣ned from India vnto Aethiopia, ouer a hundred and twenty seauen Pro∣uinces, Hester. 1. verse. 1. were be∣fore hand sixe moneths, purified with Oyle of Myrrhe, and sixe moneths with sweete odours, Hester. 2. vers. 12. So much more must the members of the Church, before they shall or can en∣ioy CHRIST IESVS his presence in glorye; not for a fewe dayes or mo∣neths;
but all the dayes of their life, they must purge, sweeten, and pre∣pare them-selues; for hee alone is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and no power or Maestie in earth can compare with him. And by our coniunction and marriage with him, wee shall bee exempted and freed from all euills what-so-euer, and pos∣sessed with all good things vnspeak∣ably for euer-more. Secondly, by the strange iudge∣ments of Almighty GOD, especially in the foure or fiue yeares last past, whether generall, or more particu∣lar, wee ought, as by so many voyces and signes of our omnipotent GOD preaching from heauen vnto vs (and almost at the end of the world) teach∣ing and exhorting men to seious re∣pentance, and to bee mooued and stirred vp more speedily, and speci∣ally to prepare our selues to meete GOD in the waye, wee must sub∣mit and humble our selues before him,
forsake our sinnes, giue glory to him; and entreateth him by prayer and by repentance, to quench the fire of his begun wrath and indignation. For it is an vndoubted truth, that if to all our other sinnes there be adioyned security and deadnesse of heart, that punish∣ments from God are both hastned and doubled: and the remouall and cea∣sing of one plague, is nothing else but the occasioning and beginning of an∣other, as we may read in Exod. against Pharao and the Aegyptians,Chap. 8. 9. 10. 11. in the 4. of Amos against the Israelites, and in the 15. 16. 17. chapters of Iohns Apocalips against▪ Antichrist, and the experience of former and later times in many countries doth verifie it. Herevpon Gods destroying Angell; and his kil∣ling Arrowe, the consuming pestilence hath (not long sithence) destroyed so many thousands in this Iland, and yet is not ceased. All the foure Elements which otherwise would fight for vs, haue beene armed against vs; First the ayre, partly by his often Eclipses por∣tending
perhapps the eclipting and darkning of the glory and soundnesse of the truth, and other temporall euils, partly by prodigious and vnvsuall stormes and tempests, giuing warning of the wrath to come. Secondly the fire by consuming and burning so many houses and habitations within these few yeares: seemeth to presage eyther the fire of the last iudgement, or else some fearefull and strange euent. Thirdly the Seas and waters in diuers parts of the kingdome, haue most horribly roared, swelled, broken their banckes; and encroached vpon the maine land, and firme continent, so terrified the people the beholders, and done so much harme. Adde here∣vnto the vnwonted, sudden, and won∣derfull invndations of Riuers and Brookes, as though like vnto the men of the olde world wee all deser∣ued to bee drowned. Lastly the earth by his moouing and shaking sensibly perceiued in many places, hath decla∣red the Lord to bee angrie,Psal. 18. 7. and seemeth
to proclaime against vs that wee are vnworthy to liue vpon it, wee must generally and particularly returne vn∣to him, by vnfained repentance; and then they shall bee but fatherly cor∣rections, and gentle warnings vnto vs. But if wee persist and insist in our sinne and securitie, then let vs be∣ware and feare least they bee but the beginning of (further) euills. And euen Herodotus an heathen histo∣rian diuinely speaketh: Cùm Deus pu∣niturus est gentem vel vrbens, prodigiis id priùs solet significare. That is, when God will punish a Nation or Cittie, he vseth to giue significatiō of it by prodi∣gies▪ & this doth the destructiō of Icru∣salem and the dispersion of the nation of the Iewes, witnesse and warrant plainely vnto vs. Thirdly, the approaching and neer∣nesse of the day of the LORD, must bee a Trumpet to fore-warne and waken vs, and as the voyce of thun∣der to terrifie vs from our securitie, and to compell vs to watch and pray,
that wee may bee accompted wor∣thy to escape all these things that shall come, and that wee may stand before the sonne of man. Luk. 22. verse 36. Signes and fore-runners of our Sa∣uiour IESVS CHRISTS second comming already fulfilled, are these, not onely the destruction of Ierusa∣lem, and the Temple of GOD ma∣nye hundred yeares agoe accompli∣shed, but more specially, the disco∣uerie, reuealing, and the decaye of the Romish Antichrist, that false Pro∣phet, and King of the Locusts, with∣in this foure score and sixteene yeares last expired. 2. Thessalon. 2. verse. 8. Apoc. 17. verse. 16. and his ruine and the ouerthrowe and vtter desolation of his Babylon and Metropolis sure∣lie is at hand, as the Scriptures fore∣shew it to come to passe. Apoc. 18. verse. 8. For their sinnes of Idolatry, of filthy and abhominable liuing, of the bloud-shed of so many millions of GODS elected saints, of most horrible and vnmatchable conspira∣cies
and treasons against Christian Kings and states, as their most exe∣crable and damnable plot of powder treason, wherein they purposed at one blowe to haue blowne vp and destroi∣ed, both our most excellent and migh∣tie Soueraigne, the most hopefull Prince Henry, together with all the honorable personages, and the state of the kingdome there assembled, doe to their publike and eternall shame, (amongst infinite other their villa∣nies) demonstrate, are (as it were) come to the full: and GOD hath (in part) and will remember their ini∣quitye. Adde herevnto their shamelesse cor∣rupting and mangling of the writings and volumes, both of the ancient Fathers, and also later writers, yea those of their owne faction, as Ianse∣nius, Ferus, Bertram, &c. togither with the burning of so many olde copies: both of the ancient and also of the later writers of their owne, that in ought made against them.
Lastly, their late, yet most lewd, lying, sophisticall and hellish doctrine of Aequiuocation, shifting euasions, and mentall reseruations, when they are called into question before ciuill Ma∣gistrates, doth by their Bookes and practise euince. A third signe, already in great mea∣sure fulfilled, is the aboundance and shamelesse defence of sinne, deadnesse, & dulnesse of heart, whereby men are neither sensitiue of their sinnes, nor aware of Gods iudgements; and want of true faith on the earth; as may bee discerned by so much Atheisme and Hypocrisie,Luk. 18. 8. so little inuocation of Gods name, so horrible and vsuall Blasphe∣mie, and such vile practises of iniustice and oppression: wherefore CHRIST that sitteth on the lowde, must needes shortly thrust in his Sickle and reape: for the Grapes of sinne, and the harest of iniquitie is ripe. A fourth and dreadfull signe and fore-runner of the last iudgement: are strange Meteors, Comets, new, or
blazing starres which haue beene euidently seene and noted,Luke 21. ver. 11. as anno Christi,Math. 4. 7. 1572. and anno 1577. many Countries and kingdomes, beyond the Seas anno 1604 and 1605. a∣bout the beginning of October in 17. degrees of Sagittarius shinyng forth gloriously after the sunne set∣ting; in figure and colour not vn∣like vnto that which thirtie and two yeares agoe was seene in Cas∣siopeia, without beard our tayle, rounde, pure and bright, so that ma∣nie of the learned thought it to bee Venus Starre and the most excel∣lent Astronomers, in the beginning of it, tooke it also for the euening Starre: Keckermanus, Disp. Philos. Extraord. pag. 373. and 406. adde herevnto a late Comet appearing Northwest, 1607. Vse. 1. The noting, seeing and con∣templation of these and the like fearefull and ominous signes and occurrences, should driue and drawe
to feare almightie GOD,Isa. 47. 13 and 14. and stand in awe of him, that causeth and send∣eth them; as Lodowicke the first Em∣perour the Father of Charles the great answered one Edmund and As∣trologer, that abusing wordes of Scripture, exhorted him not to feare the Comete which hee then sawe: let vs not feare the Comete sayth hee, but the creator of it, and let vs praise his clemencie, who doth vouchsafe by such iudgements to remember vs of, and to reprooue vs, for out dulnesse and sluggish∣nesse. Secondly let vs (taking also as à praesagium and forerunner of the last daie) bee aduertised and induced heereby to prepare our Lampes, to furnish the Oyle and to make rea∣die for our Lord IESVS CHRIST at his comming, that we may goe with him vnto the marriage and enter into his ioye. Amen.
Thirdly the consideration of infinite losse, detriment and torment that will follow (if wee doe not in this life, the time of grace and reconciliation pre∣pare our selues) must driue and com∣pell vs herevnto, for they shalbe ex∣cluded out of Heauen, and bee punni∣shed with euerlasting perdition, form the presence of the Lord, and from the glorie of his power. 2. Thess. 1. 9. and the shall haue their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. Apoc. 21, ver. 8, and the smoke of their torment shal ascende euermore and they shall haue no rest day nor night, Apoc. 14. vers. 11. Wherefore if the former argument cannot like an heauenly Adamant and Loadstone drawe vs to preparation, (as this Argument is most effectuall & preualent with the regenerate,) yet let the threatning of damnation, like a terrible thunderclap, or a great peale of ordinance rowse & awake vs from sinne, and driue and enforce vs to make our selues ready. And if the feare hereof in very Reprobates, can worke
so far forth as to compel Simon Magus to desire Peter, and Iohn to pray to the Lord for him, that none of the things that they had spoken might come vpon him, Act. 8. 24. and when Paule dispu∣ted of Iudgment, it could make Faelax to tremble. Act. 24. 26. much more must it preuaile with those that make a better profession, and waite for eter∣nall redemption. Lastly our Sauiour Christ, and Paul &c. by this argument endeuoured to awaken the secure. Mathew 23. 33. 2. cor. 5. 11. And thus much in generall of the person that is to be prepared and to prpare her selfe. Now that we may proceede more orderly in this point, and the reader may take the more benefite, and pro∣fit by it. We are first to propound the principall heads of this preparation, and Secondly the proper and set time of it. The principall heads are these
foure, faith in Christ; Secondly purity and innocency of life. Thirdly the du∣ties of charity and good workes, and lastly a feruent desire, and huely hope in the patient expectation of the con∣sumation of the marriage. The first head is faith, which is no∣thing els but a perswasion of the fauour of GOD towardes vs in Christ, or as Saint Paul to the He∣brewes defineth it, the  or substance of things hoped for, it is called a substance, not for that in very deede it doth subsist, and hath a∣beeing, but because it doth present, and as it were set before our eyes that which is promised by GOD. Hebrewes 11. 1. Apoc. 1, 8. and it is that is a demonstration of things not seene; the worde signifieth properly a conuin∣cing of the conscience, for faith doth so conuince him that doubteth hee can doubt no more, not otherwise then if hee sawe them with his bodily eyes, and herevnto is to bee referred
that saying of Christ. Thomas because thou hast seene thou hast eleeued, but blessed are they that haue not seene, and (yet) haue beleeued. Ioh. 20. 29. Ther∣fore sayth that giueth vs an assurance of the accomplishment of Gods pro∣mises, whether corporall, or spiritu∣all, temporall, and eternall, must needs bee the first, and the principall part of this preparation: this is the entry dore whereby wee are admitted vnto God, and into his house. Ephe. 3, 12. without this it is impossible to please God for hee that commeth vnto God must beleeue Hebre. 11, 5. and what soeuer is not of faith (that is done in a consciona∣ble knowledge of Gods will) is sinne Ro. 14. 23. faith is the eye of the body, if the eye be single id est the faith sincere, thēal the body shal be light: but if the eye be darke id est the faith corrupt, & vnsound, then the whole body is dark, so that neither hand, foote &c. can ex∣ecute and performe his function. This faith is the stomach of the Soule to attract, digest, and conuert into good
bloud, and norishment, the Heauenly food of Gods word, & if it either want appetite, to desire, power to digest, or strength to retaine &c. the whole bo∣dy must needes by degrees languish, and decay: finally it is the roote, founda∣tion, and the instrumentall cause of our iustification, regeneration, victory ouer sinne, and satan, peace of conscience, and eternall saluation. col. 2. 5. 6. Ephe. 6. 16. Act. 15, 9. 1. Iohn. 5. 4. Rom. 5. 1. Mar 16. 16. Ioe. 3. 15. 16. Thus wee see by the properties, ef∣fects, and vses of faith it is necessary, & there can bee no preparation accepta∣ble to God without it; wherefore if we want it, wee must vse the meanes to get, and obtaie it: and if wee finde our selues possessed with it, wee must then preserue, cherish and norish this holy flame with the knowledg of Gods word, with the vse of the Sacra∣ments, by conference, by meditation, by prayer, by practise of good workes, and by hope, expecting, and waiting for the ende of it, euen the saluation
of our soules. For first our faith through the frequency and violence of temp∣tations, is often fore assaulted and weakened, and therefore it had neede be repayred and confirmed. Secondly onely that faith that vsual∣ly doth growe and encrease, is the sa∣uing, and liuely faith, and shall neuer be extinct, for defect of oile; nor pine away by any spirituall consumption, but continueth firme, and vnmoue∣able, and obtaineth the promises Eph. 4. 11. 12. 13. Lastly if faith haue not (as before specified) his continuall supply of food, it will faile as the wine did at the mari∣age in Cana of Galil, if it be not no∣rished, and preserued, it will wither like the corne sowen in the stony ground for want of moisture, and it wilbe lost as we see how it was in the foolish virgins at the Bride groomes comming, and that argued that it was not true faith in existence; but onely in apparence, and that it was rather an opinion then a deepe impression: for
otherwise the faith of Peter, and so of Gods elect, shall not faile, and the gifts of God (namely that directly concerne saluation) are without repentance. Luk 22. 32. Rom. 11. 19. neuer extinct, or taken away. But that neither with the igno∣rant, nor with the hypocrites, nor yet with the Papists and other here∣tikes wee content, and deceiue our selues with a mocke faith▪ an historicall and temporary faith, or with a crackt, and erronious faith, insteed of that which is sauing, and iustifying, we must found and search our soules, whether wee bee Orthodoxe, and vncorrupt in the principles of faith, whether we rest wholy vpon the right obiect, whether it be ioyned with particuler applicati∣on, and lastly whether we discerne and find in our selues the inward & outward signes, and euidences of it, for then vn∣doubtedly wee haue that faith that iu∣stifieth the sinner, purgeth the heart, engrafteth vs into Christ, and saueth our soules. But of these, and the like
particulers briefely, and in order. Principles and foundations of faith are these, preaching of the word of God, is the ordinary and principall meanes of saluation. Rom. 10 14. Christ is both God and Man in one person, per∣fect GOD and perfect man: man to suffer and dye, and satisfie for sinne in our nature that had offended, and God to support his humanitie, to giue effi∣cacie and power to his doctrine and miracles, and to adde infinite merite and desert to all his actions, and suf∣ferings. Thirdly, onely faith is the hand and instrument to apprehend, and apply CHRIST vnto vs with all his blessing, and so to iustifie vs. Faith is like the eye, which albeit in the acte, and vertue of seeing, it is alone: yet not solitarye and alone in the bodye, but ioyned to other parts: so faith, albeit it alone iustifieth vs before GOD, yet it is not solita∣rie, and alone, but alwayes according to the proportion of it accompanied
with holy life and good workes. Gal. 5. verse. 6. There are onely two Sacraments which Christ instituted, and left vnto the Church, Baptisme the sacrament of our new birth, and entrance into chri∣stianity, the outward signe whereof is Water: and the Lords Supper, the sa∣crament of our growth and perfect nourishment, and encrease in Christi∣anity, the outward signes and matter whereof are Bread and Wine, remai∣ning both Bread and Wine for sub∣stance, both in the sacramentall vse of them, and afterwards as Paul maketh it manifest. 1. Cor. 11. 26. 27. That no man performe and fulfill the lawe, and therfore no man is to hope and looke for righteousnesse and saluation by that obedience which hee sheweth to the lawe, Rom. 8. 3. Gal. 2. 15. 16. That we cannot make satisfaction to God for the least of our sinnes, but that Christ alone hath most fully, and onely performed it. 1. Pet. 2. 24. Apoc. 1. 5. 6. That the saluation, of all that beleeue
is certaine and infallible, not onely in Gods decree, but also to themselues, Rom. 8. 38. Heb. 10. 22. and therefore that the opinion of the Papists is wic∣ked, which make faith vncertaine, and so holde our saluation to bee doubt∣full. That all doctrine necessary to sal∣uation is contained in the Scriptures, so that nothing is either to be added to it, or detracted from it, Deut. 4. 2. Apoc. 22. 18. 19. Gal. 1. 8. That the knowledge of the Scrip∣tures are necessary for all sorts of peo∣ple for their saluation, and therefore that they ought to read them, that they may thereby learne and vnder∣stand, what God would haue them to beleeue, and doe, Iohn. 5. 39. Mar. 12. 24. Math, 22. 29. That God alone is to be adored of vs, and that no part of diuine wor∣ship is to bee giuen vnto any creature, Math. 4. 10. That holinesse of life, & good workes as effects, and consequents of faith,
and the way wherein wee should walke, Ephes. 2. 10. is necessarily required of all that will be saued, Hebr. 12. That the Sacraments are onelye signes and seales of righteousnesse, and not causes of saluation, and there∣fore our saluation doth not so depend vpon them, that they that want them must needs bee damned, whereas our saluation consisteth onely in Christ his merits, Marc. 16. 16. which none can dispoile and dismantle vs of. That Christ his body was but once conceiued of the substance of the Vir∣gin Mary, and cannot bee made of any other matter, and that CHRIST hath onely one body, and therefore it is not made of Wheate bread (as the Papists say it is dayly) for it is not the seede of Dauid, and bread is not the flesh of the Virgin. That the humaine nature of Christ is now onely resident, and contained in heauen, and therefore it is not to be adored in earth, Acts. 3.
That the whole force, vertue, and efficacie of our saluation, and redemp∣tion, is in the onely, and once offered sacrifice of CHRIST, Heb. 10. 12. 14. and that this sacrifice could bee offered of none but Christ, who was to be a Priest for euer. Lastly (to omit diuers other arti∣cles, which bee more plaine, and con∣fessed) it is a foundation of faith, to know, beleeue, and hold, that then im∣mediatly after the dissolution from the body, the soules of the righteous are carryed by the Angels into hea∣uen,Luke. 16. vers. 22. and the soules of the wicked and impenitent, are carryed by the diuill into hell: and that the same bodyes with all their perfect partes, and de∣mensions shall for substance bee raised vp by CHRIST at the day of iudg∣ment, Iob. 19. 25. 26. Of this maine and principall article many are igno∣rant, or at least not iuditiously and soundly perswaded, as may appeare by the examinatiō of the ignorant people
both in their sicknesse, and otherwise. These heads, & foundations viz. they that shall either with Atheists deny al, or with the Church of Rome deny, or by consequence ouerthrowe most of them, or with the common, or vulgar protestant bee ignorant of them; can∣not possibly (for the time present) haue true faith, for faith can no more then a temple, a house, or any other edifice bee without his many grounds, and foundation. Wherefore if we erre, or bee ignorant in these, or in the like principles of faith, let vs by diligent hearing of the word, reading of the Scriptures, and Orthodoxe bookes, by consulting the Godly learned, and by earnest prayer to GOD for illumina∣tion and vnderstanding, seeke to bee better informed, and resolued. The second point to bee conside∣red, is whether Christ with his onely merites, and obedience bee the onely Obiect of our faith, so that in matter of saluation wee vtterly disclame, and renounce all other feined merites, sa∣tisfactions,
intercessions of men, and Angells, for Christ alone is our perfect redeemer, and mediator. Act. 4. 12. Heb. 7, 25. Phi. 3. The third point, whether our faith doe not onely rest in abare and naked knowledge, and history of Christ, (as the fayth of the deuills, and reprobates doth) but also apply, and appropriate Christ, yea and enclose (as it were) him, and all his merits vnto them∣selues, and their owne saluation: for as without vse, and application of the weapon there is no defence, or anoy∣ance: without vse, and application of medicine no cure, without vse, and ap∣plie of meate and drinke, no continu∣ance of life, without putting on of ap∣parell no warmth, or hiding of our vn∣seemly partes, without acceptance, and perticuler acknowledgement of the Kings generall pardon, there is no forgiuenesse: so vnlesse we apply and appropriate Christ with all his obedi∣ence, and merites vnto our selues wee haue no comfort; helpe, and benefit by
him wee do ebut beate the ayre, run at randome, and shoote at the rouers. Wherefore to conclude this point, wee must say with Dauid, O Lord my strength and my redeemer,Psal. 19. 14. Iob. 20. ve. 21. and with Thomas the Apostle, My Lord and my God, and with the Church in the Can∣ticles my welbeloued is mine, and I am his. Cant. 2. 16. Fourthly we are a little to consider, & take a view of some pregnant, & re∣markable signes, and effectes of true faith, whereby (as by certaine trusty in∣telligencers) we may be informed, and certified whether we haue true fayth, or not. First it is one signe of a beleeuer to ioyne, and associate himselfe to those assemblies and those people wherein, and amongst whom the true, & sincere worship of God is professed, and esta∣blished: for in the 2. of the Acts of the Apostles it is sayd the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be saued. Act. 2. 47. And it is a note of perdition for a man to forsake the holy
assemblys, & so to withdraw himselfe and his faith from GOD. Hebrewes. 10. 25. and 39. Thomas absenting himselfe from the Apostles and their fellowship but some eight daies, or there abouts was so hardned in vnbeleife that he would not beleeue the testimony, and asseue∣ration of the rest of the Apostles that told him that Christ was risen, except hee might see the print of the nailes,Ioh. 26. ver. 25. and put his finger into the print of them, and put his hand into his side, and had not CHRIST beene so mercifull vnto him, as to condescend to his infirmitie, and withall to molliie his heart hee had perished in his obstinacie. What then is to bee sayd of them that seldome, that neg∣ligently, yea that neuer come in∣to GODS Chamber of presence to heare the blessed Preaching of his word, and to pertake of the Heaunly Manna of the Sacraments, surely they are in a most dangerous and des∣perate case.
A second note of faith is, constant∣ly, wisely, and boldly to confesse and maintaine the doctrine of saluation, and all the foundations of fayth when we are therevnto called: For we must beleeue with the heart, and confesse with the mouth. Rom. 10. 10. We must haue Christ his name written in our forheads. Apoc. 14. 1. Wee though we liue wheresathan hath his throne, must keepe Christs name and not deny the faith. Apoc. 2. 13. Whereso  it stand∣eth vs vpon to looke to our selues, and to beeware that wee bee not daunted with scoffes, and slaunders, terrified with feare of trouble, and persecution, seduced with flattery, ouercome, with false perswasions, and corrupted with offer of profit, and preferment. For if wee bee ashamed of Christ our good Lord, Maister, and Redeemer, he wilbe ashamed of vs, if wee deny him, hee will deny vs before his Heauenly Fa∣ther, and all the Holy Angells: and contrarywise if wee confesse, and ho∣nour him before men, hee wil confesse
and honour vs. Finally wee are (then onely) made partakers of Christ if wee keepe sure vnto the end , id est, the beginning of our as∣surance, (or wherby we are vpholden.) Heb. 3. 14. A third euidence of fayth is to shew and make knowne our dislike, and ha∣tred of errour, and false doctrine, yea to set, and oppose our selues against it, so farre forth as our calling will warrant. Thus Dauid professeth that hee hateth all false waies. Psal. 119. 104. and 128. Thus Paul being at Athens, and seeing the Citty  id est that is addicted to Idolatry, it is sayd that the Spirit in him was prouoked to indignation. Acts. 17. 16. and thus the Angell of the Church of Ephesus is commended, because hee could not forbeare them that were euill, because hee did exa∣mine the alse Apostles & found them out. Apoc. 2. 2.
A , and that a more inward, and inallible note of faith is with E∣zechias, Dauid, Iob, Anna, Gedeon, and others to beleeue, and depend vpon God, euen then when wee haue (for the present) no feeling, and when in trouble we see no meane of deliue∣rance, for this is a demonstration that we rely wholy, and only on his helpe, and therefore is most acceptable to his maiesty, yea, if God in our see∣ming, and apprehension should wound vs, bee an enemy vnto vs, write bitter things against vs, yea, and kill vs, yet must wee trust in him. 2. Chro. 32. 31. 32. Isay. 38. ver. 2. 3. Psalm 77. 7. 8. 9. Iob. 13. vers. 15. 1. Sam. ver. 15. udg. 6. 13. 2. Sam. 15. 26. For God many times leaueth his Children without sense, and feeling of present comfort, & that partly to bring them to repentance for sinnes past. Iob. 13. 26. partly to make them knowe themselues for the time present. Deut. 13. 2. 3. partly to preuēt sinnes in time to come. 2. Cor. 12. 7. 8.
A fourth, note is the gift, & practise of prayer, or the inuocation of Gods name in the only mediation of Christ, for this is a speciall character, and note of an elect of God, whereby he is dis∣cerned from an Infidell, or reprobate, and is knowne to bee one of Gods Children. Rom. 10. 14. 1. Cer. 1. 3, 2. Tim. 1. 19. and contrariwise it is a brand of an Infidell, or an Atheist neuer to pray. Ieremy 10, 25. Psalme 14, 4. But that wee bee not decei∣ued herein, for ignorant people may mutter ouer, and say by rote certayne prayers, and the hipocrite, may make a goodly shew, certaine rules must bee obserued and heeded. First that our praiers bee made in knowledge of Gods will, otherwise they are not made in ayth, and so can∣not please God. Rom. 14, ver. 4. Secondly that in priuate we pray not so much by prescript for me, as accor∣ding to the present sense, & feeling of our owne wants, & imperfections cra∣uing the supply of them.
Thirdly, that it doe not consist in a few words of course, but bee enlarged as time, and our present necessities oc∣casion vs. 1. Sam. 1. vers. 15. Fourthly, that the matter and sub∣iect of our prayers bee chiefely, and in the first place, the aduancement of Gods Gospell and kingdome, the re∣mission of our owne sinnes, and the saluation of our soules, and then in the second place to pray for temporalls, and outward things, but alwayes con∣ditionally, and with subiecting our wills to Gods will. Math. 26. ver. 39. Fistly, it must not be only for a brunt vpon a sudden motion, or onely in time of great trouble, but daily, and continually, for thus are wee taught to pray incessantly, and neuer to giue ouer vntill God grant our requests. 1. Thes. 5▪ Luke. 18 7 Sixtly, wee must pray in humilitie, and in vnfained loue to God and men, for the proud mans prayer God reiec∣teth, Luke 18. vers. 14. and the mali∣tious mans prayer, and sacrifice is
abhominable. Lastly, (not to be tedi∣ous,) wee must not pray onely for our selues, and kindred as carnall men (in their manner) sometimes doe, but for the whole church of God vpon earth, and for euery state and condition of Christians, as Kings, Counsellers, Ru∣lers, Iudges, Magistrates, the reuerend Prelates, Pastors, Preachers, Ministers, commons, and most earnestly and compassionately, for those whom wee know afflicted, hated, persecuted for the truth, and Gospels sake, or for any good cause whatsoeuer, or where-so∣euer. If thou finde all these signes of faith, or most of them in thy selfc, be thank∣full to GOD for them, and which of them thou feelest, and perceiuest thy selfe to bee destitute of, in part, or whole, seeke for the obtaining of it, and if thou bee wholy voyde of them, then it is high time, whiles opportuni∣tie serueth, to labour to procure them by all holy meanes. Looke therefore to the maine chance, get and nourish
faith, and thou canst▪ not perish: but want, or neglect thou it, and thou canst not bee saued, I am horum mauis accipe. To the former notes, and testimo∣nies of faith, may very well be added puritie, and innocencie of life, and a liuely hope of eternall glory, for these are certaine and infallible notes of faith, and peculiar effects of it, but of these I purpose to treate distinctly, and more at large in the two next points of preparation, wherof these are bran∣ches. And thus much of faith, the foundations obiect, application, and notes of it. The second principall head in this preparation, is puritie, and innocencie of life and conuersation. This is a nota∣ble and peculier worke, and declarati∣on of faith, and it proceedeth, as na∣turally from it, as the beames from the sunne, the waters from the foun∣taine, and the fruites in their season from the fruitfull tree, herevpon faih
is said to purifie the heart, Acts. 15. 9. faith, and repentance are both prea∣ched together, and so ought to bee practised, Mark. 1. 15. The necessitie of this holinesse, and innocencie appeareth plainely: with∣out holinesse, no man shall see God. Heb. 12. 4. except Christ washe vs wee haue no part with him, ohn. 13. 8. except a man bee borne of water, and the holye Ghost, hee shall neuer enter into the kingdome of heauen. Iohn. 3. 5. Finally no vncleane thing shall enter into the heauenly Cittie, neither whatsoeuer wor∣keth abhomination, or lyes, Apoc. 21. 27. Likewise innocencie and harmlesse simplicitie is a cognizance and badge of them that are prepared for Gods kingdome; for they must bee innocent as Doues, Math. 10. 16. harmelesse as yong children, Mat. 18. 3. without guile in their mouthes, Psalm. 32. 2▪ suffering wrong rather then offering it, and dooing no man iniurye, but labour∣ing to doe good to all men; and no maruaile, for beeing borne a new
and cast into a new molde, wee must operari secundum formam renouatam, according to our new nature, so must be our actions; and if wee bee rightly regenerate, the effects that doe retaine the similitude of the cause, must needs entertaine some correspondencie with it. Secondly, Christ Iesus the vnspot∣ted Lambe of GOD, will neuer marry with the Church, vntill shee bee first washed and sanctified, Ephes. 5. 26. 27. and they onely that haue not defiled their garments, idest, corrupted their conscience with grosse and grieuous sinnes, shall walke with Christ in white, Apoc. 3. vers. 4. Thirdly, being contracted, and in∣grafted into Christ, that is, holinesse it selfe, we must not walke after the flesh, but after the spirit, Rom. 8. 1, wee must be conformable vnto Christ his death by mortification, and to his resurrecti∣on, by newnesse of life, or else wee are no liuely members of his body, but dead and rotren flesh. It is an axiome
in Philosophy, quo quid propinquius bo∣noeo melius, Aristo. 3. Top. wherefore if we be in Christ, and contracted to him, wee must needs be better, for wee are not onely neere him, but of him, and he in vs, and we in him. And that our holinesse and innocencie of life bee not rather in the flowre, then in the fruite, and in pompe more then in proofe, we must sce that it be constant, and encrease;  as wee continually, partly by ordinary slips, and infirmi∣ties, and partly by spirituall conflicts, & combates, receiue some losse, foiles, decayes; so must we dayly endeuour to strengthen our selues, to repaire our decayes, and to mend our garments, and to regaine, and recouer our losses, And as generatio vnius est corruptio al∣terius, so wee must see how by the en∣gendering of holynesse, sinne doth decrease; for as one kingdome can∣not endure two Kings, so the king∣dome of Christ cannot consort with the dominion of Satan.
Wherefore we must not please, and content ourselues with the out-ward shew of holinesse, or deceiue our selues with the opinion that men may con∣ceiue of vs, out-ward shewes are like Sodome Apples, goodly in colour, and appearance, but if a man crush, and open them, they are nothing but powder, or ashes, and as for mens opinion of vs, it is no certaine eui∣dence of our inward holines, for Hipocrisie is spunne with so fine a , that it can deceiue the most Godly, and iudicious (at least for a long time) in the world, thus Dauid was deceiued in Achitophell his amiliar and counsellor, the Apos∣tles in Iudas, and the whole Church in Nicolas, one of the seauen Deacons. Secondly wee must not onely bee innocent our selues, and holy, and here-vpon thinke wee may endure filthy speach, horrible blasphemye of GODS sacred name, false im∣putations laide vppon iust men, o∣pen drunckennesse, and notorious
profanesse in others; but we must (if wee haue any dramme, or sparke of grace in vs, or any partickle of zeale for God,) rebuke them, and shew our hatred, offence, and opposition against them. Eph. 5. 11. Herein our loue to God, our hatred of euill, our strength, and resolution in Godlines is euident∣ly discryed, and discouered Luke. 23. 41. Act. 14. ver. 14.. Thirdly wee must beware, and shunne ill company and fellowship; for if wee bee not armed with spe∣ciall grace, and also most chary how wee come into their company, they will soone infect, coole, and corrupt vs. They are as the pestilent vapor to the apt and open body, as fire to the tynder, as pitch to the hands, as Dalila to Sampson, and as Iesabel to Achab; they are so ready and for∣cyble by their ill president, and perswasions to infect, and our na∣ture soe weake, and impotent to resist if it bee not alwayes assisted with speciall grace, and the spirir of
God, that the Holiest, the Wisest, the Strongest haue hereby soone beene defiled, and polluted, how much more those that either haue very little grace, or none at all, and that make no con∣science, and choise of their company. The third head, or principall part in preparation is Charity, and the Fruites, and effects of it, charity, or loue is the fulfilling of the lawe. Rom. 13. 10. it is the bond of perfection. Colo. 3. 14. For it knitteth, and bindeth all other ver∣tues together, that they be not dissol∣ued, and it prefereth them; this chari∣tie dependeth vpon the loue of God, and cannot bee in any hethen, the sha∣dow of all other vertues (besides this) may bee in Pagans, as pity, bountie, modestie, patience &c. but not this, & this doth vnite, and ioyne all the members of the Church together. Fi∣nally without this, if wee haue all o∣ther rare perfections yet before GOD wee are nothing. Cor. 13. 2. Charity is in respect of the eternity of it grea∣ter, yea preferred before sayth, and
hope. 1. Cor. 13, 13. for sayth, and hope determine with this life, but loue abi∣deth for euer. Againe in respect of the obiect, and the visibility of it, it is greater then ei∣ther sayth, or hope, for fayth, and hope haue for their obiect only GOD, and Christ, but loue extendeth it selfe to God, and man. Rom. 8. 25. fayth is in it selfe inuisible, but loue, and charity perspicuous, and apparant. Iac. 2. 16. 18. this charity, and loue is not onely in tongue, in promises, and in affecti∣on, and welwishing to men, but also in truth and indeede, as 1. Iohn. 3. 18. Charity is bountifull and seeketh not her owne. 1. Cor. 13, 4, 5. it is communicati∣uum sui, that is, imparteth that which she hath to others, and here that prin∣ciple of Philosophy is verified, bonum quo communius eo melius; the more common it is the more comfortable. It doth not (as many of our inclosers) im∣pale, imparke, and hedge in the com∣mon groundes, and fields to her pri∣uate vse, to the weakening of the
State, and the ruinating of the Com∣munalty, but like a fountaine, sendeth, and streameth forth her waters vnto o∣thers, shee is so farre (as it is to be fea∣red many practise) from appropriating to her selfe in part, or in whole the poore mens stocke, and collection-mo∣ny gathered, and giuen for building, or repaireing of Churches, or Townes, that haue beene consumed by fire, that she liberally giueth of her owne. But (to ende this point) the practise whereof should neuer ende. As faith worketh by charity, so there are cer∣taine particulers wherin her Offices are most conspicuous, and obseruable. First we must bee lights, and lamps to others by our examples, and not looke who will begin first, as Mathew 5. 16. 2. Cor. 9. 2. Secondly when our brother offen∣deth, we must in charity, and discreti∣on admonish him, and not to suffer him to perish in his sinne (as many do) rather deridyng him, then directing him, Mat. 18. 15.
Thirdly, wee must exhort, and per∣swade others to Godlines, and good workes, Heb. 3, 13. Fourthly we must by Simpathy, and fellow-feeling, & es∣pecially by words of Scripture rightly vnderstood▪ and well applied, comfort, and cheere the afflicted. 1. Thessa. 5, 14, and therefore wee must not post, and put off, all to the minister, as though it cōcerned not vs at all. Fiftly we must pray for others, and especially for their conuersion, and saluation. 1. Timot. 2. 1 2. and that both publikly, and priuate∣ly. And lastly euery man must accor∣ding to his ability, & other mens wants and necessities willingly & seasonably impart of his worldly goodes for their releife, Acts. 2. 21. 2. Corinthi. 8. Galla. 6. 10. 1 Iohn. 3, 16. This is the touchstone of many, and most mens religion in these last and worst dayes, for herein they are most fauty and defectiue, but let them that will not doe good with their tempo∣ralls, beware least they for omission heereof, iustly bee condemned
with the two rich worldling, in Luke Chapter 12. 17. 19. and Chapter 16. 24, and with infinite others at the day of Iudgement. Mathew 23. 42. 43. 45. The last point, and branch of the preparation is hope, desire, and expecta∣tion of the marriage, and the glorie, and ioye of it, and herevpon it is that hope is called the Anker of the Soule, sure, and steadfast, to stay, and sustaine vs in all stormes, and tempestes of temptations, Hebre. 6. 19. yea the king∣dome of Heauen, which wee waite for, is called, A blessed hope. Titus. 2, 13. this hope of eternall glorie), is a notable meanes to stirre vp men to purge, and reforme themselues. 2. Iohn 2. 3. with the expectation of which blisse, wee must comfort one another. 1. Thesalonians 4, 17. and wee must both in temporall, and spiri∣tually tryalls not growe impatient, as the rebellious Iewes that could not expect, and stay for Moyses fortie
daies, but would needes in the meane time play the Idolators; but with the woman of Canaan, after a first, second, and third repulse hope still Mat. 15. 27. 28, we must with the Creeple, in Iohn sometime before wee be cured waite thirty eight yeares. Ioh. 5. 5. 7. Wee must with Abraham against hope, be∣leeue vnder hope, Romans 4, 8. And as the Iewes patiently (many of them) waited in hope of the accomplish∣ment of Gods promises many yeares, both their deliuerance out of Egipts tirranny, and afterwards out of Babi∣lons captiuitie, yea and expected, and desired many hundred yeares the In∣carnation of Christ before that they in their posterity enioyed it: so must we also tarry the Lords leasure, in pa∣tience, and in hope fustaine our soules. Psal. 37, and waite all the daies of our pilgrimage vntill Christ come vnto vs by death, or the last iudgement, for our full, and finall redemption. Shall the husbandman waite for the pre∣tious fruite of the earth, and haue
long patience vntill hee receiue the first, and the latter raine, and shall not wee bee much more patient, and settle our hearts, seeing the com∣ming of the LORD i so neere. Iam. 57, 8. To this hope wee must annexe, and adioyne an earnest desire, and ardent prayer; as for the accom∣plishment of other promises, so spe∣cially for the second comming of our LORD and Sauiour IESVS CHRIST. Hence it is that wee are tought to pray thy Kingdome come, Mathew 6, 10 to hasten vnto the day of the comming of GOD, 2 Peter 3, 12. to desire to bee cloathed with immor∣talitie, yea, to sih for it. 2. Cointhi. 5. 9 We must say come LORD IE∣SVS, come quicklie, Apoc. 22. 19. 20. How long LORD IESVS, how long? Apoc. 6. 10. 11. Wee must with the creatures  that is care∣fully, and desirously looke for. Romans 8. 19. as hee that out of a prison
grate, or casement, putteth forth his head to behold a farre off him that is expected. Reasons in briefe to kindle and en∣crease this hope, and desire of this so∣lemnization, and perect coniunction with Christ, are especially foure: First the example, and feruent desire of the creatures, who albeit they be sin-lesse, yet because mans sinne hath corrup∣ted them, and doth continually per∣uert and abuse them; they in their kinde feruently desire to bee freed from this bondage, and to bee restored into the glorious librtie of Gods chil∣dren; much more wee that haue re∣ceiued the first fruites of the spirit must long and looke for a farre more glorious estate. Roman. 8. 19. 21. 22. 23. Secondly, the infinite miseries, trou∣bles, persecutions of the world, and the vanitie, ticklish and sickle estate, and mortality of all things herein con∣tained, must stirre vp our hearts desire, and expectation of full redemption,
and glorification, Phil. 3. 20. Heb. 13. 13. 2. Cor. 4. 8. 9, 17. Collos. 3. 1. 2. 3. to this purpose doth the triumphant Church in heauen, (in a generall sort) desire the end of the world, that the Lord may iudge, and auenge their bloud that was shed vpon the earth, Apoc. 6. vers. 10. A third reason, and that more prin∣cipall, is that an end may bee put to all sinne, and wee may haue perfect victo∣rie ouer it, yea, and treade downe Sa∣tan vnder our feete; for then we shall be deliuered frō all the relicks, stumps, roots, and remainders of sinne. 1. Cor. 15. 55. 56. Rom. 16. 20. Apoc. 3. 4. and 19. 8. Whereas in this mortalitie, wee dayly, and euery moment, sinne against, and offend our GOD, breake all his commandements, and prouoke his an∣ger, and pull downe many iudgements vpon vs. Rom. 7. 17. 18. 19. and 23 24. Gala. 5. 17. yea all our obedience, and our best actions, are tainted with sinne, and so vnperfect, Isa. 63. Tit. 3. 5. 1. Cor. 13. 10. 11,
Lastly, the fruition and enioyment of Christ his glorious presence, and perfect fellowship, must be a forcible, and effectuall meanes to confirme our hope & enflame our desire, Phil. 1. 23. Hebr. 11. 25. 27. for here is the banquet that neuer endeth, the mariage that lasteth for euer, the triumph that is perpetuall, the absence and remouall of all euill, and the presence and pos∣session of all good; but hereof wee must speake more at large in the third generall section. Here,Vse. 1. by this doctrine are condem∣ned all Sadduces, Athests, Nulli-fidians, and Scorners of Christs comming, who because they walke by sense, and not by faith, by reason, and not by Scrip∣ture, and follow their owne lusts; and will not bee ruled by the line of Gods word, deny, and deride the doctrine of the resurrection, Christs second com∣ming, heauen, and hell, as 2. Pet. 3. 3. 4. 2. Tim. 2. 17. 18. Secondly,Vse. 2. here are reproued, and conuinced all Epicures, Libertines, loose∣liuers,
and all worldlings, and voluptu∣ous persons, who albeit they in worde deny not any Article of faith, as the former did, and doe; yet they denie the power of all religion in their hearts, and so liue as though there were neither God nor diuell, heauen or hell, louing riches more then re∣ligion, and pleasures more then pietie. 2. Timot. 3. 45. Vse. 3. Thirdly wee shall by obser∣uing and noting the measure & quan∣titie of our hope, and desire of Christs comming, &c. iudge of, and discerne the quantitie of our faith; for these being necessary effects of faith, if they be great and liuely so is our faith, and if they bee weake or dead, so is our faith; for the tree is knowne by the fruites, and the cause by the vndoub∣ted and proper effects of it; And thus much of preparation, and the princi∣pall parts of it. Now we are to come to treat of the speciall opportunitie, and time when, both this generall, and particuler pre∣paration
is to be made, & that is onely the present time, and this present life, whiles the day, the light, and the truth lasteth, and while the meanes, and mi∣nistery of grace, reconciliation, and sal∣uation are offered, and continue, Titus 2. 10. Gal. 6. 10. Ioh. 9. 4. Ioh. 12. 35. 36. 2. Cor. 61. before our hearts be harde∣ned with the long custome of sinne, and so they become vncurable, Hebr. 3. 13. Acts. 28. 27. whilest Crist knocketh at the doore of our hearts. 3. 20. before the night commeth. Iohn. 9. 4. and the doore bee shut, Luke. 13. 25. for in the graue, in death, and hell, noe praysing of GOD, and no time of repentance, and reconciliation, as Isay. 38. Luke. 16. 24. 25. the Bride must trimme her selfe in this life. Apo. 19 7. Now must the wedding garment bee prouided, Math. 22. 11. this life is the time of grace, for the ministerie of re∣coneiliation is onely here. 2. Cor. 5. 18. 1. Cor. 15. 24. and 28. Ephes. 4. 11. 12. 13. for at the daye of iudgement
it shall wholy cease. Lastly, Christ for∣giueth sinnes (onely) in earth, Luk. 5. 24. and the Apostles, and so the mini∣sters of the word in al ages succeeding them, binde and loose, retaine, and remit sinnes in earth, Math. 16. 19. Iohn. 20. 23. wherefore we must seeke the Lord hiles he may be found, and in the sixe dayes of this life, prouide vs of the heauenly Manna, that wee may keepe with him an euerlasting Sabboth in the highest heauens. Here is ouer-throwne that vile and damnble doctrine of the Popish pur∣gatorie, who imagine, and teach that the soules of many are temporallye tormented in Purgatorie flames, and that they may bee eased and released of their torments, by the prayers and intercessions and satisfactions of the liuing, and specially by the pardons of the beast, I meane not Nebuchadnezar transformed for seauen yeares into a beast, but the Pope eternized for one; whereas first, this late coyned doctine is iniurious and derogatorie to Christ
his all-sufficient satisfaction, who dyed (onely) once to put away sinne, Heb. 9. 26. Hebr. 7. 25. and in all places of scripture, merite, satisfaction, and re∣demption, is onely ascribed to his bloud, to his stripes, to his sufferings, both in soule immediatly, and also in body ioyntly and apart, &c. Secondly, he that beleeueth is saued,Vse. 1. and he that beleeueth not is cōndemned already, viz. in the decree, and by the word of God▪ Iohn. 3. 8. Thirdly, who-so-euer repenteth not, and beleeueth not, dy∣eth in his sinnes, and so vndoubtedly perisheth, Iohn. 8. 21. Ezechi. 18, 24. Luke 13. 3. 5. Fourthly, the rich glutton making intercession to Abraham in behalfe of his fiue bretheren found no fauour, but receiued a iust repulse & reproofe, Luke. 16. 29. 31. Fiftly, Dauid whiles the child borne in adultery liued, prayed for his life, but as soone as it was dead, then hee ceased paying, and fasting for it, for hee knew it would not auayle.
2. Sam. 12. verse. 22. 23. Lastly, the penitent theee that suffered with Christ, and neuer had done good, vpon his serious repen∣tance, and firme faith, albeit wrought miraculously at the last houre, had a promise made him to bee that same daye with CHRIST in Paradice, Luke 23. 43. which Saint Paul enter∣preteth to be the third heauen. 2. Cor. 12. 3. 4. beeing compared together. Now if any man had gone to purga∣torie fire, and should there be further prged and prepared, no doubt he had beene one, sed haec hactenus de questuo∣sissima papistarum fabula. Vse. 2. Secondly, seeing that there is no libertie, and peace of conscience vntill men repent, Prou. 18 14. and no actuall pardon, and that the time to repent, ad prepare our selues, is onely this life, which is short, momentary, & transitory, and wherein, the children dye as well as the ancient, yong-men as well as the olde, the strong and lu∣stie, as soone, and as sodenly, as the
weake, it must learne, and schoole vs in no wise to deferre our repentance, and time of preparing our selues, but to begin betimes, and to hold on to the last breath. For first we are bound,1. Reason. and comman∣ded to serue God in spirit, and trueth, and that all the dayes of our life, Luk. 1. 74. 75 ergo, we must not put and post of all to old age, not knowing whether we shall euer liue to it, or not. Secondly our iourney to heauen be∣ing long,2. Reason. the preparation great, and the time very short and vncertaine, we must bee wise, and redeeme it, and re∣pent when we may. Thirdly, we must with Salomon, Io∣sias, Timothy, Ioseph, and others, serue God in the dayes of youth, and in the floure of our age, when our memory is most apt and firme, our vnderstanding most sharpe, our sences most liuely, & we may best lay the foundation of an holy and comfortable old age, thus are we commanded and exhorted, Eccles. 13, 1. Psal. 119. 9. Psal. 78. 6. 7. and it is
their greate commendation. Tit. 1. 4. 2. Tim. 1. 5. 2. Epist. Ioh. 4. 1. Ioh. 2. 12. 13, 14. Whereas otherwise they that neglect, and omit to reconcile them∣selues vnto God in their best time, & in the daies of their child-hood, and youth grow in time senceles, and bru∣tish, and hard hearted, and are iustly forsaken of God in their old, and im∣potent age, that had no care, and con∣science to feare, obey, and serue him in their youth. Thirdly it is seldome, and rarely seene, that men that haue liued all their life, and spent all their golden dayes (as they call them) in superstiti∣on, sinne, and vanity, should vndoubt∣edly turne vnto God in their old age. It is more wonderous then vsuall, and there are onely some examples of it in Scriptures to keepe the aged from dispaire, but they are very fewe and rare, that we should not (as most doe) presume to much of it. Lastly of all ages, olde age (if it bee not before rooted, and grounded in
fayth, in loue, and in the practise of Godlinesse) is of all ages the most vn∣apt, and vntoward, to performe these duties, to begin, and lay the foundati∣on of repentance, and to make it ready for Christ. Wee may in this case in some sorte say, Can a man bee (new) borne when he is old, can he enter into his Mothers wombe againe, and bee borne, Iohn 3. 4. not being ignorant, and mis∣vnderstanding the doctrine of rege∣neration, as Nicodemus; but onely in another sense affirming that time to be the most vnfit. And there is suffi∣cient reason for it; for in olde age the memory decayeth, the strength fay∣leth, the senses are infeebled and wast, then are the euill daies of sorrow, and labour, of payne, and aches, then the daies, and yeares approch, when men shal say that they haue no pleasure in them. Ecclesi. 12, 1, 2. then sathan is most e∣gar, and busie, knowing right well, that then he must loose all, or gaine all, wherefore let vs with the wise Vir∣gins prepare our selues whiles wee
haue time, let vs walke in the light whiles the light shineth, and seeke the Lord whilst wee may finde him. Isay▪ 55. 6. 7. Which GOD grant. A men. The third Section. Then, they that were ready &c. IN these wordes the solemnization, and consumation of the mariage be∣twixt Christ, and the wise Virgins, (or true Church) is contrayned, and it doth deuide it selfe into foure partes, viz. First what this solemnization is. Secondly the place where; Thirdly, the priuidges and prerogatiues of it. Lastly, the vse, and application of it. The soemnization, or consummation of the marriage is the glorious, and perfect state of the elect after the re∣surrection, when they in the highest Heaues shall with their eyes behold CHRIST, haue fellowshippe and
liue with him, and raigne with him for euermore, being perfectly confor∣mable vnto him, and to his will, both in body, and soule. Phil. 1. 23. Mat. 25. 34. 1. Thess. 4. 17. Apo. 7. 15. 17. 21. 2. 3. 4. Iohn. 17. 21. In this description two points are to be explained and expoū∣ded, first the dignity, and comfort of this communion, and coniunction with Christ in glory. Secōdly the perfestion, and glorification of the Bride, and Vir∣gin both in soule, and body. First touching the coniunction, and marriage, and the excellency of it, the continuall sight▪ & company of Christ, the Sonne of right cousnesse and foun∣taine, of all fellicie, shall minister per∣petuall, and vnspeakeable ioy and comfort to all Gods Saints, for they shal no more walke by faith, (as in this life) but by sight: they shall no more darkely behold GOD in the glasse, and ministery of the worde, or in the spectakle of the creatures, but see him face, to face, they shall in the Imperiall, and Maiestical
Court, and Pallace of Heauen see God, as he is. 1. Ioh. 3, 2. 1. Cor. 13, 12 namely they shall so farre forth be∣hold Gods Maiesty, and the perfection of his glory, as a finite creature, albe∣it glorified, is capable off; they shall see him as hee is, but not how infinite hee is▪ 1. Timo. 6. 16. And as for Christ Iesus their redeemer, husband, and head, they shall (as Iob speaketh,) see him with these same, and no other eyes, Iob. 19. 25. 26. They shall follow him wheresoeuer hee goeth. Apoc. 14. 4▪ they shall see his face, and his name shalbe in their for-head, Apoc. 22. 4. Finally the tabernacle of GOD shalbe with them, and hee will dwell with them, and they shalbe his people, and GOD himselfe shalbe their GOD with them, Apoc. 22. 3. Now if the sight, salutation, and company of man, and Wife, Father, and Children, Kinsfolke, and acquaintance, friends and welwilers, that are farre distant, and haue beene long absent one from another, bee so admirably gratefull
and so wonderfully delightsome, how much more desirable, maruelous, and vneffable will the continuall sight, and fruition of GOD the Father,2. Cor. 12 Christ the Sonne our redeemer, and the Ho∣ly Ghost our comforter bee vnto vs in the Parliament, and Throne of Hea∣uen? And if Moyses that onely talked, and had conference with GOD in the Mount but fortie dayes, was so glorious in his face, at his discent, and returne, that the Children of Israell could not, or durst not behold it,Exo. 3. 4. ver. 3. 5. how much more vnspeakably Maiesticall, and glorious shall they bee that haue fellowish, (not as sinners with GOD on earth for a fewe dayes) but as per∣fectly sanctified in the Pallace of Hea∣uen for euermore? Herevnto in the second place, I may well adioyne the mutuall, ioyfull, and vnutterable communion with all Angells, Archangels, Patriarks, Prophets, Fathers, Apostles, Euange∣lists, Confessors, Martirs, and all the true Saintes of GOD, of all de∣grees
for euermore, who, by how many degrees, and in how many properties, especially in knowledge, in Holinesse, and loue, they exceede, and excell all mortall creatures: so much more rare, and incredible comfort shal they by their mutuall fel∣lowshippe, communicate one to ano∣ther. They shall not be ignorant one of another, nor strange, and suspected one to another, much lesse, false, and hollow; as in this worlde, partly by reason of ignorance, partly by reason of hypocrisie, and partly by reason of humane infirmities it commeth often∣times to passe, but they shalbe all one, in will, and consent, liuing, and louing together in perfect harmony of con∣corde, and charity. Vse. The consideration hereof must cause vs to shun, decline, and abhor ill, and contagious company, (what in vs lyeth) and to haue our hearts, and mindes inflamed, and possessed with a longing desire to bee dissolued, in the time appointed, and to enioy the
most blessed fellowshippe of GOD, of the Lambe, and of all the Saints, and Angels in glory for euermore. The second partickle to bee made lightsome, and vnfolded is, the perfec∣tion, of the glorified soule, and the body. Touching the soules iust and per∣fect men, they now after their disso∣lution from the body, are replenished with infinite ioye, and triumph in the Heauenly Ierusalem. Luke. 16. 25. Hebre. 12, 22, 23. Math. 25. 21. 23. but their ioye shalbe much more encrea∣sed, when the soules shalbe reunited to their bodies, Phil. 3. 20. and when the whole number of GODS elect Saints are accomplished, and come in, Apoc. 6. 10. 11. Heere they shall in Quires, and companies, mutually, and eternally magnifie, and praise the Lord (as afterwards I will more fully shew (when I come to speake of the rest of their prerogatiues. Secondly in the minde, & vnderstād∣ing their shalbe no error, ignorance, dulnes, but cleere iudgemēt & perfect
wisedome, 1. Cor. 13. 12. for wee shall be in perfect light, and the wisdome of GOD shall manifest it selfe vnto vs: secondly in the will and affections, there shall bee no extasie or distemper, but perfect righteousnesse, integritie, perfect loue of God, and his saints, ad Angels, and absolute conformity to Gods will. Lastly the body it shall be a bright, glorious, beautifull, strong, nim∣ble, perfect, and inorrupt instrument, ha∣bitation, and receptacle of the glorified soule. It shall be so bright and glorious, that it shall shine forth as the sunne, and shall send forth beames of light, Math. 13. 43. It shall rise a glorious bo∣die, 1. Cor. 15. 43. It shall bee like to Christ his body, ergo, no doubt most glorious, Phil▪ 3. 20. Some glimpse, taste, and representation hereof, wee haue in the transfiguration of Christ, whose garment was white and glist∣red▪ Luke. 9. 29. it was very white as snowe, so white as no Fuller can make vpon the earth, Marke, 9. 3. In Moses and Elias that appeared to our Sauiour
in glory, Luke 9. 31. and in the sundry and glorious apparitions of Angels in the old, and in the beginning of the new Testament. It shall bee a strong body, for it shall rise againe in power, and not in weakenesse, as 1. Cor. 15. 43. It shall be a nimble body, as well able by the proper forme of it, to ascend, as to descend, as may be collected out of 1. Thes 4. 17. Math. 22. 30. Phil. 3. 20. compared together; It shall bee a beautifull and goodly body, because it is and shall be a vessell of honour, as Rom 9 33. Lastly, it shall bee perfect, and incorrupt, because as there is no fault, defect and deformitie in it, so it shall be a spirituall body, 1. Cor. 15. 44. spirituall, not because the substance shall bee changed, for glorification taketh nor away the trueth, and de∣mensions of a naturall body, but be∣cause it needeth none of these out∣ward and earthly supplyes, and helpes of meate, drinke, apparell, sleepe, rest, mariage, Phisick, light, &c. for Christ shall bee in steed of all these vnto it, and
supply all. 1. Cor. 15. Vse. 1. The first vse that ariseth from the consideration and meditation of the body and soule ioyntly glorified is, a notable comfort for Gods chil∣dren, that for the time present, liue obscurely, and in great contempt, in no regarde and reputation, traduced and troubled in euery place, for they shall see the Lord, & haue immediate fellowship with him, and shall shine as the sunne in a cleare skie. Vse. 2. In any bodily defect, weake∣nesse, sicknesse, ache, paine, vlcers, de∣formitie, lamenesse, and maimednesse, we are not to be discontent, and offen∣ded, but endure them patiently; For first they are but fatherly corrections, and trials, Heb. 12. 7. and 8. Secondly they are but temporary. Thirdly, the dearest and holyest of Gods children, are as well subiect to them, and beare their portion in them as much as any, yea much more then other, Psal. 73. vers. 5. & 15. Lastly, they shall be taken all away, and eternall glory, and per∣fection
shall succeed in their place. And thus much of the explanation, and description of the mariage: what it is. The fourth Section. THe priuiledges and prerogatiues of this mariage, remaine to bee consi∣dered, and they are principally foure: first a perpetuall and solemne sabboth, which the saints of God shall inuiola∣bly obserue in singing the new song of their redemption, Apoc. 14. 3. they with one voyce and heart shall singe, and acknowledge that Christ hath re∣deemed them to God by his bloud out of euery kindered, and tongue, and people, and nation, Apoc. 5. 9. and hath made them vnto their God, Kings, and Priests, and in the 7. chap. 10. 11. 12. they shall found forth this , or thankes∣giuing: and they cried saying, saluati∣on commeth of our God that sitteth vpon the throne, and the lambe, and they shall fall before the throne on their faces,
and worship God saying, Amen, praise, and glory, and wisdome, and thankes, and honour, and power, and might, be vnto our God for euermore, Amen. Finally their voice shalbe like the voice of great aters and as the vyoce of strong thun∣der, saying halleluia, our Lord GOD all mighty hath raigned, Apoc. 19. 6. more-heareof may read, Isai. 66. 22. Apo. 21. 3. Apoc. 11. 17. but this Sabboth shalbe without peculier Preist, for all shalbe preists vnto God, it shalbe without Temple, or Ceremonies, for God, and the Lambe are the Temple of it, and shall supply these occasious. Wherefore seeing that there is an eternall rest in Heauen, and that our Sabboth, which according to Christ his institution, the Apostles practise, & the custome of the vinuersal Church, we keepe the first day of the weeke in memory, and honour of Christs resur∣rection, is a tipe, and representation of it, it must reach vs to obserue it, both incorruptly touching the out-ward forme, and spiritually touching the
the inward disposition of our mindes, and hearts, or els we shall neuer keepe it in heauen, for God will neuer ho∣nour vs in Heauen Luke. 9. 26. vnles we honour him in earth, and neuer perfect vs in heauen, vnlesse by the workes of sanctification wee begin it heare, Apoc. 20. 6. 7. The second priuiledge, and prero∣gatiue is the actuall, and eternall in∣heritance, and possessing of the new heauen and the new earth, part of the dowry, & ioynter of the Saints. 1. Pet. 1. 4. Apo. 5. 10. 2. Pet. 3. 13. Rom. 8. 21. 22. Math. 5. Now whether they shall sometimes by locall motion, and bodily presence, (albeit some new, and learned writers out of the. Apoc. 5. 10. and Apo. 21. 8. 2. Pet. 3. 13. before named, and from the nature of a glorified body that can both, ascend, and discend at his plea∣sure, doe collect, and would conclud it) or which is more probable, and likely by vision, and heauenly contemplation, and noe absurdite, for if Saint Steuen being on earth and hauing noe doubt
his eyes, for the present clarified, looked vp into Heauen, and saw Christ sitting on the right hand of God. Act. 7. ver. 56. why may not a glorified body by his glorified eyes, and the aire, and skye, being also purified looke downe from Heauen, and contemplate the Earth &c. But because this poynt is difficult, and the knowledg of it, is ra∣ther coniecturall then certaine, wee must bee content to bee ignorant of it, vntell the day, when all secrets shalbe made manifest; and let vs in the meane time make some vse of the point as most may concerne vs; Here is matter of consolatiō for poore Christians, that either neuer actually possessed any worldly goods, lands, or liuings, as Lazarus, and others, or haue beene with the religious Hebrewes, by the enimies of the truth dispoiled, and depriued of them, Heb. 10. 34. or els by the men of the earth, whose portion is (as it is to be feared) in most, or ma∣ny of them (only) in this life, and that enclose, and hedge in, al to themselues
and their proper vses, vnmercifully turning men out of home, house, and liuing; well let them possesse, their soules in patience, and in faith, and hope, apprehend and waite for it, for they shall one day inherite the new Heauen, and the new Earth, they shall haue roome enough, and larg demaines when their enimies repi∣ning at it, shall remaine foreuer excluded, and excomunicated from them, and it. The third preuiledge is that the Godly then compleatly, and per∣fectly, and  shalbe all kings, preists, Prophets, Apoc. 5. 10. and so partake of Christ his dignity, and of∣fices, As Kings they shall raigne with Christ, and triumph ouer Satan, and all the wicked, yea, and treade them vnder their feete Rom 6. 20. Mal. 4. 3. As Preists they shall eternally praise God, and the Lambe for the redemp∣tion of his people. &c. and perfectly o∣bey his will Apoc. 22. 3. And as Prophets they shal (as far forth
as is possible for a finite, and circum∣scriptible creature) knowe GOD, and see him, and exquisitely vnderstand all things that shall concerne their felici∣tie. 1. Ioh. 3. 3. 2. Cor. 12. Vse. Wherefore if euer wee looke, and hope to be Kings, Priests, and Pro∣phets in Heauen, let vs as spiritually, so conscionably practise these offices in earth: for the practise of them in this life, and in the life to come differ not in essence, and substance, but onely in place, and degrees, let vs then as Kings rule, and raigne ouer ur affections, and desires, and gouerne our familyes (like so many little Churches) in the feare of GOD. Let vs as Priests consecrate our selues, soules, and bo∣dies to Christ, and his worship, and seruice, and pray continually to GOD in behalfe of our selues, and our do∣mestiques. Lastly, let vs as Prophets, labour to bee rich in the knowledge, and vnderstanding of Gods will, and so (to our vtmost power, and skill) im∣part, it (as occasion, and our calling
shall require) vnto others, especially to those of our owne family. Gen. 18, ver. 17. 18. The fourth priuiledge of the Saints in glory is their glorious, and perpetuall triumph, and perfect victory o∣uer sinne, death, hell, satan, and his an∣gels, and all the reprobate whatsoeuer. Sinne, and death, and hell shalbe a bolished, and cease foreuer. 1. Cor. 15. 55. 56. 57. & in respect of the God∣ly bee destroied, as Apoc. 20. 14. Anti∣christ, and his members shall no more assaulte, and persecute vs, for the beast, and the false Prophet shall be cast aliue into the lake of fire burning with brimstone, Apoc. 19. 20. and all the members, and worshippers of the beast shall drinke of the pure wrath, and ee tormented in fire, and brim∣stone before the Holy Angels, and be∣fore the Lambe. Apoc. 14. 10, 11. they shall goe forth, and looke vpon the Carcases of the men that haue trans∣gressed, Isa. 66. 24. Finally the Saints shall treade downe sathan, and all their enemies vnder their feete,
Rom. 16. 20. and shall stand before the Throne, and before the Lambe cloathed with long white robes, (Uiz. of purity, and inocency,) and hauing palmes, (in signification of victory) in their hands. Apoc. 7. 9. Vse. Wherefore the due conside∣ration of this last prerogatiue, as also of the former must kindle, and worke in vs, an earnest, and continuall ex∣pectation, and longing after our full, and finall redemption, and per∣fect glorification. The dutifull wife should not so long, and looke for the returne of her husband, farre, and long time absent, the husband∣man so hope, and waite for the har∣uest; the Mariner the hauen, the wayfaring-man, his iorneyes ende, the woman in trauell her deliue∣rance, the Captiue his liberty, as wee should wish, and waite for, pray for, and expect the time of the marriage, and our consumation. Vse. If wee would bee perfect con∣querers, and raigne, and triumph with
Christ in Heauen, we must in earth take his part against the mighty. Iudg. 5. 23. We must vnder the condut of our generall Christ Iesus our Heauenly Michaell, as his Angels, and souldiers, fight against the dragon, and his An∣gells, and wee shall ouercome by the bloud of the Lambe, and by the worde of his testimony, and by not louing our liues vnto death. Apoc. 12. 7. 11. Fi∣nally wee must put on the whole ar∣mour of GOD; fayth, hope, consci∣ence, confession, and profession of the truth, righteousnesse, and the sworde of the Spirit which is the worde of GOD, Ephesi. 6. 13. And wee must pray con∣stantly with all manner of prayer, and supplications in the Spirit for our selues, and for all Saints. &c. And by the right vse, and continuall hand∣ling of these, wee shall crucifie the flesh with the affectons, and lustes thereof. Gallathians. 5. 24, wee shal∣be able to resist in the euill day, and hauing finished all things to stand fast, and wee shall ouercome sathan▪
and all his batteries, and temptations; and then after all our fight, contention and victory ended, wee shall in the life to come, eate of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradice of GOD, Apoc. 2. 17. we shall eate of the hidden Manna, Apoc. 2. 17. wee shall haue power ouer nations, vers. 26. wee shall bee cloathed with white araye, and our name neuer put out of the Booke of life, Chap. 35. wee shall be pillers in Gods house, and goe out no more, 16, 12. And to conclude, we shall sit with Christ in his Throne, euen as he sitteth with his Father in his throne, Apoc. 3. 21. which God at length fulfill, and accomplish in vs, for his most deerely beloued sonnes sake, Iesus Christ our onely, and all-sufficient redeemer, and medi∣ator, Amen. NOw we are briefly to consider the place where this marriage shalbe solemnized, and all this glory, ioy, and priuileges eternally possessed, & com∣municated vnto vs. The place therfore
is the highest heauens, the throne of GOD, and the Lambe, the heauenly Hierusalem, the Cittie of the liuing God, Paradise, the seates, and habita∣tions of the saints, & Angels, the wed∣ding chamber: and finally, the new heauen & the new earth. This blessed heauen is a place in respect of substance subiect to no change, and corruption, in respect of quantity, and extent farre exceeding other places, and of suffici∣ent capacitie to receiue all the elect of God; in respect of qualities, it is of all places most bright, most glorious, most pleasant: finally it is such a place wher∣in no euill can be feared, and no good can be wanting, and in which GOD doth offer himselfe to bee seene of men and Angels face to face; and the humanitie of CHRIST more glo∣rious then the Sunne▪ shall bee seene, and bee beheld with vs, euen with our bodily eyes. Apoc. 21. the whole Chapter, and Chapter 22 from the first verse to the sixt verse, Hebrew. 11. Iohn. 14.
Wherfore fat be it from vs; that vainly looking for a visible Church heere without all spot, or wrinckle in order, and maner, and seeing, and finding it not, proudly, vnthankfully, rashly, and without cause to deuide, and seperate our selues (as is the maner of Schisma∣tickes) frō the Church of God, which notwithstāding al other defects, whe∣ther in doctrine that is not fundamen∣tal or policy. yet firmely and purely re∣taineth the scūd Preaching of Aposto∣licall doctrine, pure inuocation of Gods name in Christ, and right vse of the two Sacraments, Baptisme, and the Lords supper, for these notes are essentiall, substantiall, and of the life of the Church, other things are out∣ward, accidentall, and circumstantial, and rather of the comelinesse, well beeing, and ornament, then, of the simple necessity, and essence of the Church, yet it were to be much wished that the defects were supplied, abuses remoued, & corruptions taken away, but it must bee done by thē who haue
lawfull authority▪ & in order without tumult, and rashnes, and repugnance, cause, and sound ground, In the meane time, it is the dutie of priuate persons to take the benefit of the word, and sa∣cramēts with thankesgiuing, least God for their vnthākefulnes in time take it away, and to pray for the amendment of that which is amisse, and patiently expecting it, in the interim to walke in their seuerall callings with diligence, and conscience. Vse. 2. Seeing all blisse, felicitie, and euer-during happinesse is onely in hea∣uen, and not in earth▪ wee must not rest in these temporall and transitorie things of honour, wealth, preferment, beauty, buildings, credit pleasure, de∣lights, recreations, outward peace, and prosperitie, neither must wee thinke that true felicitie and happi∣nesse consisteth herein; for first all these are vncertaine, and transitorie, as the grasse, vapor, flower, shaddow, they are like Ionas his gourde of one dayes continuance, and are like Reeds,
or rotten posts fayling, and causing them to fall that leane vpon them. Secondly they are rather (by rea∣son of our corrupt nature) fnares, baits, and traps to deceiue, and hurt vs (as infinite, examples euince) thē simp∣ly meanes, and instruments of our se∣licity, and faluation. Thirdly they cannot saue our soules, and make vs blessed before GOD, as Solomon acknowledged when hee cal∣led them all vanity of vanities, but this worke is proper onely to grace, and GODS speciall mercy in Christ. Fourthly, they are no especiall, and proper endowments of Gods, Church, and Children, (though sometimes they in good sort enioy them, and pertake of them) for the wicked com∣monly possesse them in farre greater measure then the Godly who are ra∣ther rich in minde, and in grace, then in these externall, and perishable pro∣fits, honours, and pleasures. Where∣fore wee must eleuate our hearts, and mindes farre aboue these earthly, and
momentary things, and seeke the things aboue; wee must get vs vp into the mountaine of deuine contempla∣tion, and by the eyes of true fayth, be∣hold▪ and view our Country the Hea∣uenly Canaan: we haue no abiding Ci∣tie here, wherefore we must seeke one to come hauing a foundation,Heb. 11. verse. whose builder, and maker is GOD. And as for these worldly, and outward things wee must onely vse them so farre forth as they are lawfull, and are helpes vnto vs for the furthering of of our Iorney, & the aduancement of Godlinesse, and no otherwise; for els it is better that they should perish then wee; and it is farre bet∣ter that wee should alienate▪ and withdrawe our mindes, and affecti∣ons from them, then that they should seperate vs from GOD (as they doe the most) and depriue vs of the kingdome of Heauen; and in this case if they were as deere, and ne∣cessary vnto vs, as our eyes, handes, feete, yea Fathers, and Mothers, yet
we must cut them off, and hate them. And thus much touching the place. The fourth and the last branche, is the manifold vses and applications of this doctrine of the heauenly mari∣age; first by consideration hereof, wee must be stirred vp, and doe our vtmost endeuour to mortifie, and ouercome all worldly desires, and earthly plea∣sures; for otherwise we cannot addict and wedde our selues to these, and withall truely prepare our selues for the comming of Christ: for touching riches, and worldly cares, there is such an antipathy, an opposition betweene them and grace, that the one cannot consist without the other: for as the eye cannot at one instant, beholde heauen and earth, euen so a man can∣not serue GOD and the world to∣gether, they are so aduerse and con∣trarie; And as those places where gold and siluer growe, are in all other respects most barraine, and fruitlesse,
so where the loue of money, riches, and the world doe beare swaye, and preuaile, there true zeale, and sincere godlinesse can neuer▪ bee found; and as touching pleasures, they are the matter, and fewell of euill desires, they are honey mixt with poyson, and they are as Haw-thornes, and bryers, which albeit some-times they beare goodly leaues, and flowers; yet if a man gripe them hard, they will pricke and wound him; wherefore it standeth vs vpon to be wary of them, and when wee vse them, to vse them charily and moderately. Vse. 2. Secondly, wee must learne hence to bee forward, and constant in well-doing, and still to repaire our ruines, and prepare our selues vntill the last breath; for hee onely that continueth (in godlinesse, and pati∣ence) to the end, hee shall bee sa∣ued, hee that is found watching and wakefull at his maisters comming, shall be blessed, Luk. 12. 36. 37. and he
that fainteth not in weldoing shall in due time reape Math. 24. 13. Luke. 12. 38. Gal. 6. 9. Otherwise we, if we faile neuer so prosperously, and sinke at the Hauen mouth; if we trauell di∣rectly to Heauen, and turne backe al∣most at our iorneyes end; if wee doe God good and faithfull seruice in our youth, and afterwards proue faithles, and prefidious in our elder yeares; and finally if we begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh all our former ende∣uours labours, and sufferings are to noe purpose, all our righteousnes shal be for∣gotten, and we shall die in the sinnes and transgressns that we haue committed, Eze. 18. 24. Wherefore if the hope of Ransomming worke patience in the captiue, assurance of liberty, and free∣dome constant labour, and faithfulnes in the prenrise▪ and seruant; and expec∣tation of victory, and spoile, constant resolution, and valowrous courage in the souldier: why should not much more the certaine, and vndoubed hope, and assurance of this happines,
and eternall coniunction with Christ make, & moue vs to be constant, & vn∣moueable in all duty of piety, charity, & Iustice, knowing that our workes are not in vaine in the Lord 1. Cor. 15. 58. Vse 3. Thirdly the assured expecta∣tion of this Heauenly, and glorious vnion must teach vs with the patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martirs, Confessors and with all the Saints of God both of former, and also of later time to endure and vnder goe all sicknesses, trials, af∣flictions, losses, contempts, and perse∣cutions ioyfully, and patiently, Heb. 11. 25. 2. Cor. 4. 16. 17. 18. and Heb. 11. 8. 9. For first they are but momentary, and neuer beyond the date, and terme of this life, secondly Christs yoake is easie and his bu then light▪ Mat. 11. 31. & he wil lay vpon his no greater bur∣den, then he will make them able to beare. 1. Cor. 10. 13. But will giue idest an issue, and euasion with the temptation. Lastly GOD will re∣compence, and reward these tempo∣rary, and transitory euills, and suffe∣rings
with an infinite waight of glory in all his Saints. 2. Cor. 4. 17. 18. Vse. Fourthly the vse of this doctrine serueth notably to mollifie, and miti∣gate the sorrowes of death, and all the paines, and pangs of it, for the stinge of it, (viz. eternall condemnation,) is taken away. 1. Cor. 15. ver. 55. 56. Se∣condly it is not a plague vnto vs, but onely a temporary correction, nay a narrow wicket, or gate to intromit, and send vs forthwith into the posses∣sion of eternall life. Apoc. 14. 13. for if wee bee loosed then we goe straitly to the Lord. Phil. 1. 23. if wee remoue hence wee dwell with the Lord, & are married vnto him. 2. Cor. 5. 8. and (to end the poynt) wee rest from all the labours of this life; and our workes (First the rewarde of them in mercy, and fauour) follow, and attend vpon vs as an honourable guard. Apoc. 14. 13. Wherfore let vs not feare death & dā∣nation, but let vs arme our selues with faith, & hope, & let vs often, & seriously meditate vpon the life to come, & the
glory of it, and wee shall (when the time is come) be willing to die, & die with much comfort, and assurance. Lastly (amongst many other vses) wee must not mourne vnmeasurably for our friends, and kinsfolkes, or any other that liue, and die in the Lord, for they are with God, & in perfect blisse. And as any man will rather reioyce, then sorrow, if his sonne, daughter, friend, kinsman bee happely, worship∣fully, honourably, preferred in mar∣riage, albeit hee is otherwise to want their ordinary company, and pre∣sence, so should wee rather reioyce that they now are perfited, and most honourably, and gloriously wedded to Iesus Christ, their King, and head, then mourne as they that haue no hope. It is indeede lawfull, and fit to mourne, for nature, and religion war∣ranteth it, but it must bee in measure, and for our sinnes that haue depri∣ued vs of them, & for that the Church feeleth and findeth the losse of them,
then for any priuate and carnall re∣spect, and herein notwithstanding wee must submit our wills to Gods will, and rather labour to imsitate their excellent and manifold vertues, then to lament immoderately, or ouer-long for their departure; but alas the world knoweth not, nor acknowledgeth good, and godly men. The righteous, and mercifull men, (as wee haue had lamentable experience within these few yeares) of all rancks and callings, dye, they are taken away from the euill, and rest in peace, and no man considereth it in heart, or vnderstandeth it. Isa. 57. 1. and therefore because the world mak∣eth no more account of them, and is not worthy of them, GOD most iust∣ly depriueth them of their presence and comfort. And thus much of the solemnization, and the priuiledges and vses of it.
The fourth part of the deuision. And the gate was shut. NOw wee are come to speake and treate of the last branche, and part of the distribution, namely the contra∣ry euent▪ in respect of the foolish Vir∣gins; for they hauing onely common graces, and a temporall faith, which failes in time of necessitie, and temp∣tation, and seeking for supply when the time was past, were by the Bride∣groome Christ repelled, and put by from entring into the wedding cham∣ber, and kingdome of heauen. In the vnfolding and explication whereof, diuerse particulers are to bee discus∣sed; As first, who shutteth the gate▪ Secondly, when it is shut; Thirdlye, who are shut out: Fourthly, the condi∣tion, and miserable estate of them thus excluded. Lastly, the enerall applicati∣on and vse of the doctrine.
The person that excludeth them, that indeed first excluded him, be∣cause they did not, nor would not re∣ceiue him into their heart, is Christ, the bridegroome, the Sonne of God, and the iudge of the world: he is the porter by whom, and through faith in whom all the beleeuers enter in, and finde pasture, Iohn. 10. 9. hee is the Prince of shepheards, as and the Bishop of our soules, that properly, and by his owne power, bindeth and looseth, retaineth, and re∣mitteth. For that which his Ministers doe subordinately, and ministerially, that doth hee absolutely and as cause and principall. Iohn 20. 22. 23. Math. 16. 19. hee alone hath the Keye of Dauid which openeth, and no man shutteth, and shutteth, and no man openeth, so that hee hath right pow∣er, and authoritie, to receiue in, or put out whome hee will, Apoc. 3. 7. they that kisse him, beleeue in and obey him, shall bee saued and glo∣rified, Psalm▪ 2. 12. Marke. 16. 16.
Hebr. 5. 9. and they that sinne against him, hurt their owne soule, they that hate him loue death. Prou. 8. 35. they that will not haue him to raigne ouer them, are his enimies, and shalbe slaine before his face, Luke. 19. verse. 27. and they that eyther by open persecuti∣on: or else by infidelitie, and by con∣tempt, scorne, or impenitencie fall on this stone shall bee broken, and on whom soeuer of them it shall fall, it will grinde him to powder. Luke. 21. 44. The vse of this doctrine is two-fold, First it condemneth and ouer-throw∣eth the vsurped, false, and forged au∣thoritie of the Romish Antichrist, who will needes bee Christs Vicar generall on earth, and blasphemouslie assumeth vnto himselfe the Keyes of Heauen and Hell, as though it were in his power to saue, pardon, or to re∣taine, and condemne whome hee would: whereas first hee cannot bee Christs vicar, for Christ in the spiritu∣all regiment, and gouernment of the
Church, is with it to the ende of the world. Math. 18. ver. 19. 20. and is present by his power, aud deitie in eue∣ry place, Math. 28. 19. 20. and there∣fore needeth no substitute to supplie his Roome. Secondly, the holy Ghost is Christs deputy, and vicee∣rent, for hee is in euery place, and en∣lighteneth, guideth, sanctifeth, and gouerneth the Church, and so neither doth, nor can the man of Rome, saue himselfe from death, diseases, much lesse, from the bottomlesse pit, from whence hee came,Act. 1. 25. and whe∣ther hee must needes goe (with∣all our consents) as udas to his place. Thirdly in respect of order, and publicke administration the Christi∣an Magistrate may with much bet∣ter right, and equity bee called the Vicar of CHRIST in gouerning the people according to the worde of GOD. And in this sense, Eleuthe∣rius Bishoppe of Rome writing to Lu∣cius King of the Brittaines calleth
him Christs Vicar: for by Christ Kings raigne, and Princes decree ius∣tice. Pro. 8. ver. 15. and 16. And as for the Authoritie of binding, and loosing, the Ministers of the true Church, (wherein the Pope hath no more right, then the Pirate in the true ownershippe) haue onely a Ministery of reconciliation and a ministery of binding, and loo∣sing, but the inwarde operation, and working of the Holie Ghost in the heart, is Principall, and belong∣eth to CHRIST IESVS alone. Luke. 24. 45. Act. 16. 14. So in censuring, admonishing, suspending, excommunicating, exhorting, threat∣ning, and in all other Ecclesiasticall Offices CHRIST hath no depu∣tie, but onely instruments that doe witnesse, and testifie his will accor∣ding to the rule of Scriptures, but the whole entire action is personall, and proper to him alone, and vtter∣ly ouerthroweth, the feigned, and counterfaite supremacie of the Romish
Pirate, and Prelate. Vse. If wee would not haue Christ at the day of iudgement to disclaime, and exclude vs as hee did the foolish Virgins, wee must not by infideli∣tie, and impenitencie debare him out of our hearts, but by a liuely fayth let, and receiue him into them, and en∣tertaine, and feast him with loue, reue∣rence, amendment of life, obedience, and the like graces of the Spirit; for CHRIST dwelleth in our hearts, if we beleeue,Apoc. 316. he knocketh at our hearts often by his worde, by his Spirit, by his mercies, and by his iudgementes, and if wee assent vnto him, and by fayth admit into the Chamber of our hearts, he will dwell with vs, yea dine, and suppe with vs, and supply all our wants. Apoc. 3. 20. Wherefore let vs not (as the Church in the Cantikles) suffer CHRIST our beloued to remaine without, hauing his head full of dewe, and his lockes with the drops of the night,
because forthwith wee would not a∣rise, and dresse vs, nor defile our feete. Cantickels 5. 2. and 3. or put our selues to any payne, or trouble, but let vs let open vnto him by yeeld∣ing vnto the truth, and by beeing amended by his admonitions, so shall wee bee CHRIST IESVS his possession, his peculier people, and a temple for him, and his Spi∣rit to dwell in; otherwise if wee suffer any one sinne, whether of Idolatrie or of infidelitie, or of world∣linesse, or of filtie liuing, or of grosse ignorance, or any raigning, and dominering sinne that is vn∣felt, and vnresisted, to sway vs, and tyrannizc ouer vs, wee driue, and bannish IESVS CHRIST not so much out of our coastes, as the Gergesites did. Mathew. 12. 45. as out of the Castle, and pallace of our heartes, and admit sathan our deadly enemie in his Roome, and steade.
Thus much of the first part, namey the person who shutteth. The second branch, is the time when the gate is shut, viz▪ when all meanes, and occasions of comming vnto sal∣uation are taken away▪ and when the time of grace, repentance, and recon∣ciliation is past, which is, when this life is ended, Luke. 16. 23. 24. 25. 26. 28. 29.  the iche glutton in hell, desiring and seeking vnto Abraham, that hee would send Lazarus, whom hee had neglected and contemned, to yeelde him the least comfort, hee could not obtaine it, and when he de∣sired that Lazarus might bee sent to his fathers hose, to aduise and warne his fiue brethren that they should not come into that place of torment, hee speedeth not in his preposterous and vnlawfull suite, but his brethren are referred, and remtted vnto the interpreters of Moses and the Prophets. Againe, the dead do not praise the Lord, neither doth the dust giue thankes vnto him,
or declare his trueth, Isay. 38. 18. Se∣condly, at the day of the Lord (for as death leaueth men, whether peni∣tent, or impenitent, so the last iudge∣ment findeth, and iudgeth them, and no otherwise) it is no time of recon∣ciliation, and of obtaining mercy, as the example of the fiue foolish. Vir∣gins, and of those that Luke, 13. 25. cryed, Lord, open vnto vs, when the doore was shut, and could not be ad∣mitted, and intromitted, doth plainly proue, and demonstrate. The reason hereof is, because the Lord in his mercie and grace, doth in this life, to those especially that be in, and of the visible church offer, and tender the meanes of faith, repen∣tance, grace, mercy, and forgiuenesse of all their sinnes, by the holy mi∣nistery of the worde, and Sacraments, as 2. Cor. 6. 2. Titus. 2, 10. 11. 12. Iohn 12. 35. Iohn 4. 9. Isay. 55. 67. Gala. 6. 10. Prouer. 1. 24. 25. 26. and be∣cause the wicked are temporizers, eyther vtterlye and totally dispise, and
contemne it, as Luke 14. 18. 19. 20. or else they come onely in shew, and content themselues with a naked pro∣fession, and some outward reformati∣on, wanting the hand, and firme grap∣ple of true faith, that firmeth, appre∣hendeth, claspeth, and applyeth Christ to their eternall saluation, Hebr. 4. 2. and also destitute of inward reforma∣tion and holinesse, comming (I say) without the wedding garment of faith, and sanctification, they are found detected by Christ, conuinced of hy∣pocrisie, bound hand and foote, and cast into vtter darkenesse, where is wee∣ping and gnashing of teeth, Math. 22. 11. 12. 13. Vse. The vse hereof is first to shew the vilenesse, and vanitie of the doctrine of Popish purgatory (where∣of I spake at large before (and there∣fore a word now shall suffice) it is a vile doctrine, because it detracteth from, yea and maketh frustrate the
all-sufficient death, and purgation of Iesus Christ. Hebrew. 7. 25. It is vaine and false, for as there are but two sorts of persons, elect, or reprobate, Sheepe, or Goates, good or euill, and as men dye eyther in the estate of grace (as all the elect doe) or else in he estate of damnation (as doe all the reprobate and impenitent) so are there but two places in the scriptures appointed for them, after this life, viz. heauen, and hell, therefore no purgatory, or third place, Iohn. 5. 29. Apoc. 14. 13. wherefore seeing there is no such purgatorie after this life, nor no meanes left to relieue, or re∣lease them: therefore all prayer of the liuing for the dead, is simplye vnlawfull, for first it is against the rule of faith, videliz. the worde of GOD, and therefore must of necessi∣tie be sinne. Secondlie, it is against the rule of charitie, that should alwayes iudge the best of the dead, and not perswade
themseues the dead, are in torments where-of they haue noe certaine ground, or knowledge. Vse. The second, and last vse is to teach vs not to stay for companions in the way to eternall life, Iohn. 13. 24. for so wee may perish together, nor to deferre, or put of our conuersion from day to day Math. 24 48. 49. 50. 51. least either by death, or the last iudgement we be suddenly surprised, and ouertaken, and accordingly iudg∣ed, and condemned, 1. The. 5. 2. Thus much of the time. The third branch, and member of the diuision, is the persons, and parties that are shut out: viz. the foolish vir∣gins, idest, those that did not prouide for the time to come, because they did carelessely please them-selues in their wants, and so passed by the time of mutuall communication and they contemned the helps that were offered vnto them, and therefore they are deseruedly derided for their
folly, and doe suffer the Iust pu∣nishment of their negligence, and brutishnes. Hence wee learne that it sufficeth not to carry onely the shining lamps of externall profession, to haue a∣sight, or tast of Gods mercies (with∣out sound feeling of them, and no∣rishment by them) Hebr. 6. 4. Mat. 13. 20. or to haue onely an externall ho∣lines amongst men, as these foolish Virgins (noe doubt) had, for if a man haue noe more then this, hee can∣not goe beyond a reprobate in Chris∣tianity, and all these temporall, and common graces will faile a man in the time of temptation, in the day of death, and at the Last iudgement as Hebre. 6. 4. 1. Iohn. 2. 19. But true fayth whereby wee are iustified, and sanctified before GOD neuer fai∣leth, Luke. 22. 32. and all the (sauing) guifts of GOD are without repen∣tance. Rom. 11. 29. and GOD will remember their sinnes, and iniqui∣ties
noe more, Heb. 10. 17. therfore hee will neuer take his grace whol∣ly from them; wherefore let vs not content our selues with a bare know∣ledge, and historicall faith, but turne this temporary faith into a true, and sauing faith; and let not the strang∣nes, or rarenes of diuine misteryes onely, or principally moue, and enduce vs to the profession of reli∣gion, for so may Simon Magus, and the Athenians bee Christians, neither let gaining, or retaining of worldly wealth, peace, prosperity, friendship, and dignity, or credit bee our inducements, or perswa∣tions to Christianity, for these things are vncertaine, and when these ends faile (as they doe oft) then their profession, religion, and temporary fayth and obedience determineth, wherefore let the ends of our fayth, profession, and religion be only the loue of GOD and the zeale of his glory, the delight in the truth, the obedience of his will, and a care∣full,
and constant desire of saluation; and that wee may know that our faith is not temporary, and histori∣call, but sound, and sauing, let vs try and examine it by these rules follow∣ing, first that wee bee humbled in our hearts for our sinnes, Isai. 51. 17. and that wee haue a Godly sorrow for them 2. Cor. 7. 10. Secondly that wee bee perswaded that our sinnes be pardonable, for otherwise wee shall dispaire as Caine did Gen. 4. 13. Thirdly wee must sincerely desire the meanes of saluation, such as faith, repentance, mortification, and recon∣ciliation are: fourthly wee must pray for nothing in the earth so much, so earnestly, and so continually as for the forgiuenesse of our knowne and vnknowne sinnes: fiftly wee must labour, and endeuour in all our ac∣tions to approue and commend our selues rather vnto GOD, then vn∣to men: lastly whether by experi∣ence, and continuall obseruation,
of Gods fauour, goodnesse, and merci∣full prouidence towardes vs, wee at∣tayne vnto the strength, ripenesse, and full measure of fayth. Rom. 5. 4. 5, Psal. 23. 6. 1. Sam. 17. 34. 35, 36. If wee finde these things in our selues, wee haue true fayth, and shall ne∣uer perish, but if wee want them ei∣ther in part, or in whole let vs seeke betimes to procure, and so to encrease them. And thus much of the persons. The fourth branch, and part is the state, and condition of the foolish Vir∣gins at the comming of the Bride-grome, and that is contayned in these wordes viz. And the gate was shut, and heere two principall poynts are to bee marked, and attended. First from what they are excluded, viz. from the fauourable, and comfortable presence of Christ, and from the glory of Hea∣uen. Secondly into what place and companie they are remitted, and reserued, viz. to hell, where they shalbe tormented with the diuill, and his Angells in the lake that
burneth with fire, and brimstone for∣euermore. Touching their exclusion from the glorious and blessed fellowshippe of Christ, what a torment is this, and how doth it greeue, and gall them to thinke, and consider of it? Surely it cannot bee imagined, much lesse liue∣ly expressed; It is at this day a great part of the diuills torment to remem∣ber from how great glorie, and excel∣lency hee is irrecouerably fallen. Now that they, and all the reprobate are eternally seperate from the com∣pany of CHRIST it is apparent, 2. Thess. 1. 9. Math. 25. 41. Luk. 13. 27. Apo. 22. 11. What a greuious, and vnspeakable torment this is, we may by the helpes, and occurrences of outward things, and examples in the world consider. Of a wife for her offences excluded, and deuorced from her louing, and honorable husband, and so from all maintenance, and comfort; of a ser∣uant imprysoned as Onesimus for
playing the theefe against his good, and gratious master: of Absolon two whole yeares banished from his Fa∣thers sight, and presence: and of a subiect in great grace, fauour, place, and familiaritie with his ghtie, and gratious Soueraigne, and after∣ward exiled, degraded, imprisoned, and disgraced foreuer. How much more fearefull, horrible, and vncom∣fortable is it to bee excommunica∣ted and seperated not for a small time, but for euer, and euer from the presence, and fauour of CHRIST who is the summe of all grace, and fauour, and the fountaine of all hap∣pinesse, and felicity. Thus much of the first point▪ name∣ly from what they are ex∣cluded. Secondly touching the proper, and peculier place of vnspeakable torment, which from the foundati∣on of the worlde is appointed for them, it is hell, or a place of eter∣nall,
and vnvtterable payne farre re∣mote, and distant from the highest Heauen; and as sundrie both anci∣ent, and latter Deuines probablie thinke, and collect out of the Scrip∣tures as. Deutronomy 32. 22. Isay▪ 30. 33. Nomber 16. 30. 33. Prouerbes 15. Psalme 86. 13. Psalme 30. 6. Philip 2. 10. Luke. 8. 31. and (though this poynt is more curious then pro∣fitable, and more conecturall then certainely knowne where it is) that it is in some place vnder the earth. And to signifie, and set forth the Nature, and terror of it, it's cal∣led hell, the bottomlesse pit. Apoc. 9. 10, the lake that burneth with fire, and brimstone, a prison. 1. Pet. 3. 19. a place of darknesse. 2. Pet. 2. 4. euerlast∣ing destruction. 2. Thessalo. 1. 9. a place without, Apoc. 22. 15. vnquencha∣ble fire. Marke. 9. 43, Mathew, 3. verse 12. The vse of the place is to con∣uince all Atheistes that denie it, and
all that say there is no other hell, but a mans conscience, but they one day (if they continue their errors and mad∣nesse) shall finde and feele that there is an hell; and if their conscience some∣time terrifie them for their wicked∣nesse here, let them assure themselues that this is to them but the flashings, and beginnings of hell fire. Thirdly, if they will not beleeue the Scriptures and word of God, yet in that they be∣leeue, and are conuinced by many meanes, that there are diuels, let them beware that they bee not lead blind∣folded by Sathan into hell, and there feele the eternall torment of that which here they neither feele, nor ac∣knowledge, and bee most deseruedly depriued of that glory and ioy, where∣of they neuer in this life would take notice. Now touching the paines, and pu∣nishments, tortures, and torments of the damned, wee are to consider, and handle them first generally, and then more specially, and seuerally.
First in generall they are vnspeake∣able and intollerable; secondly, end∣lesse, and eternall. That they are intollerable and vn∣sufferable, these Scriptures following doe aboundantly testifie and affirme; The great day of his wrath is come, and who can withstand it, Apoc. 6. 17. there is said to be wailing and gnash∣ing of teeth, Math. 22. there torment is shadowed forth vnder the borrow∣ed and metaphoricall termes (of such things as be most subiect to our sence, and fearefull in our apprehension) of fire, brimstone, the worme of consci∣ence that neuer dieth, vtter darknesse; And if the enimies of the truth in this life vpon the sence, and apprehension of the heauy waight of Gods iudge∣ment against them,Apoc. 6. 9. shall seeke death, and shall not finde it, and shall desire to dye, and death shall flee from them; how much more shall this come to passe, when the full vyoles of Gods▪ wrath shall bee fi∣nally powred out vppon them, and when they shall drinke the pure wine
of his wrath Apoc. 9. 6. Apoc. 14. 10. Rom. 2. 4 Psal. 74. 10. Luke. 16▪ 24. 25. Touching the eternitie, and euer-lastingnesse of their paynes, and tor∣tures both in soule, and bodie, both playne places of Scripture▪ and sound arguments thence collected aboun∣dantly euince and testifie. First the paynes and punnishments are called euerlasting fire, Mathew 25. 41. the worme that neuer dieth. Isa 66. 24. the smoake of their tor∣ments doth ascend euermore, they haue no rest day, nor night. Apoc. 14. 11. and they shalbe punnished with euerlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glorie of his power, as 2. Thessal. 1. 9. so that when as many Millions of yeares bee expired, as there bee motes in the sunne, droppes of water in the Ocean sea▪ sands vpon the sea shoare, creatures vpon the earth: and when so many yeares shall be accomplished, as all Arithmetitians can number all their life long; yet their torments shall haue
no end, nor ease, but begin againe a fresh. Now the reasons why their tor∣mēts shal be eternal are these: First the ioyes of heauen are eternall, Math. 25. 46▪ and therefore the paines of the damned are eternall also, for contrari∣orum contraria sunt consequenta: Se∣condly GOD whom the reprobates haue offended, and contemned is an euerlasting maiestie, and the chiefe and eternall good▪ and therefore the punish∣ment of the sinne committed against him is eternall, for sinne committed against the infinite maiestie, is infinite. Thirdly, if the reprobates liued here for euer, they would sinne for euer, and being in hell they cannot praise God. Psal. 30. 9. but hate, repine, and mur∣mur against him.Obiect. But God is merciful, and therefore hee will at length end their torments▪ or at least ease them. First they dispised Gods mercy in this life when it was offered them,Ans. and therby haue made thēselues altogither vnworthy of it. Secondly they shalbe punished more gently then they haue
desued. Mathew. 11. 22. for GOD could much more haue aggrauated, and encreased the quantity of their torments. And thus much in generall of the paines of the damned. Now let vs come to some particu∣lers. First in their faces, and counte∣nances there shalbe shame, and con∣fusion for euermore, Dan. 1. 8 9. 7, and for this cause the reprobates are cal∣led the vessels of dishonour. 2. Tim. 1. 20. Rom. 9. 21. for then all their secrete sinnes shalbe layd open, and discoue∣red. 1. Cor. 4. 5. and their conscience bringing them alwayes fresh into their rememberance shall alwaies vxe, and torment them. Isa. 66. 24. Mark. 9. 44. and wee gather this pun∣nishment by the contrary estate of the Godly at Christ his comming. 1. Ioh. 2. 28. for they shalbe bold, and not asha∣med. Now if many men in this life for auoyding and preuenting of open
shame, and punishment, doe not onely hide, but also make away themselues, in what horror, & vexation thinke we they shalbe in, when they shall suffer full and euerlasting shame, and punish∣ment? Secondly, they vpon the perfect sense of their infinite sinnes, and vpon the full apprehension of Gods infinite indignation, shall euerlastingly dispaire, and shall alwayes desire to dye, and shall not dye, Apoc. 9. 6. Thirdly, in their minds and wils be∣ing vnspeakeably infected, and posses∣sed with enuie, and malice, they on the one part seeing themselues depriued of so infinite glory, and plunged into so endlesse miseries, by reason of their sinnes and offences, and on the other side, either by present sight and view, as some diuines collect out of Luk. 13. 28. Luke. 16. 23. Apoc. 14. 10. or else (which is an vndoubted truth) by kee∣ping in fresh and perpetuall memory, the absolute and glorious estate, & glo∣rification of the godly at the last day, obseruing and perceiuing the godly
whom they in their life time so scor∣ned, abused, wronged, persecuted to be so vnconceaueably blessed, shall be tormented and vexed with an vncre∣dible enuie, Isa. 66. 23. 24. Psal. 85. 10. 11. Luk. 16. 23. We haue some instance hereof in proud Hamon that cursed Agagite that could in no wise endure the exaltation of Mordocheus, but it was a sword to his heart, and a vexati∣on to his conscience. And if the enui∣ous in this life repine, yea, and pine a∣way at the felicitie and fauours of o∣thers, how much more will they then enuy, when they themselues shalbe in∣comparably more miserable, and the godly vnspeakably more blessed. Fourthly, the reprobate shalbe as wel tormented in their bodies, which haue bin the vessels & instruments of sinne, and iniquity, as in their soules, for as their bodies shalbe darke, inglorious, and deformed, contrary vnto the glory of the elect: so shall they be tormen∣ted not with any materiall fire, for thē the worme of conscience, the carcases
of the slaine, and the metaphoricall speeches, especially in the Apoc. 22. 23 that describe and delineate vnto vs the ioy and glory of heauen should be lit∣terally vnderstood, which is very ab∣surd to thinke, but with that which is equiualent, yea farre more extreame, namely the full, and finall wrath of God ceazing and inuading the soule and body, as appeareth, Apoc. 14. 10. They shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pre wine that is powred into the cup of his wrath, and shalbe tor∣mented in fire & brimston before the holy Angels, and before the Lambe for euer∣more, they shall drinke vp the dregs of Gods wrath, which is their portion to drinke, Psal. 74. 10. & Psal. 11. 6. Lastly because they must in soule & body suf∣fer the vnsupportable indignation of the Lord, are called, and so indeed are, vessels of wrath prepared to destruction.Rom. 9. 22 Now if the anger of a Lion, of a Beare robbed of her whelps, much more of a mighty Monarch be so pernicious and dāgerous, how much more incōparable
then is the wrath and indignation of the Almighty and the most iust Lord, who is to his enimies a consuming fire, Hebr. 12. 29. and whose wrath burneth vnto the bottome of hell. Deut. 32. 22. God giue vs grace by our godly feare, true repentance, and sound obedience in this life, to preuent it, Amen. Thus much of the generall and particuler punishment of those that are excluded. The last point, and part to be hand∣led, and wherewith we will conclude the whole treatise, is the manifold, and wholsome vses that we are to make of this doctrine: first therfore the serious consideration, and meditation of the state, & paines of the damned, must be a forcible motiue to diswade and re∣claime vs from committing sinne, and iniquitie for feare, of falling into the same condemnation. Chrysostome in his 13. Homilie, or sermon vpon the Ro∣maines, saith well to this purpose; Vti∣nam (inquit) vbi{que} de Gehenna disserere∣tur, non enim sinet in Gehennam incidere, Gehennae meminisse, &c. that is, would
to God euery man would speake of hel; for to remember hell, will not suffer a man to fall into hell; for if the due consideration of seuere humane lawes that shall be duly executed, doe keepe the most vnruly from offending, much more will the serious consideration of the paines of hell (if men haue grace to thinke on them) reforme & amend men, Ide. 23. Secondly the Preachers & Ministers of the word of God, when they see & perceiue the deadnesse, dul∣nesse, and impenitencie of the hearers▪ must labour by laying open the multi∣tude, and torments of the damned, to draw men to feare God, and to repent their sinnes. Math▪ 23. 33. Heb. 10. 27. Apoc. 14. 9. 10. 11. The third vse is to teach vs not to be enuious against the wicked, nor to re∣pine at their temporall dominion, and prosperitie: for first, neither they, nor their pompe nor prosperity shall con∣tinue long, but perish suddainly. Psal. 73. 18. 19. 20. Psal. 37. 12. Secondly, they haue (for the most part) their
portion in this life, Psal. 17. 14. Lastly, their damnation is iust, & sleepeth not, 2. Pt. 2. 3. wherefore wee must rather commisserate and pitty them, yea, and pray God to conuert them, for in so do∣ing we shall please God, discharge our owne duties, & perhaps in the end, be a meanes to win, and reclaime them. Fourthly & lastly, finding in our selues by due examination, that God hath de∣liuered vs from so great condemnati∣on and made vs heires, in hope of eter∣nall life, we must continually, and from our hearts giue all glory & praise vnto God, Apoc. 5. 9. 10. Col. 1. 12. 13. 14. and hereby bee stirred vp to be stedfast, vn∣moueable, aboundant alwayes in the worke of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. 57. 58. Now the Lord God, the fountaine of mercies, and the father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, grant wee may performe these duties, and continue constant like pillars in his loue, and seruice to the end, for his beloued sonnes sake Iesus Christ our onely redeemer, and mediator, Amen.
AN APPENDIX or necessary addition, touching the doctrine, na∣ture and vse of the Sa∣craments, propounded in plaine and profitable Questions, and Answeres, very requisite and comfortable for eue∣ry Christian to know.
TO THE VVOR shipfull, Learned and Religious Gentleman, maister Thomas Gibbs of Watergaull Esquier: Thomas Draxe wisheth encrease of grace and of all prosperity, and for a mo∣nument of his loue and duetifull affection, consecrateth this small adioynder fol∣lowing.
The Doctrine, nature and vse of the Sacraments. Qu. WHat signiieth this word S∣ments? An. A ouldiers oath made to his Captaine whereby he is sworne to be true to and consecrated to the eruice of the generall, and from that original signification it is drawne by the com∣mon consent of the Church, to signifie the Holy Sales of Gods mercie. For as the souldier by his oth administred and taken, bindeth himselfe to the ser∣uice of his generall▪ so wee by the vse of the Sacraments binde our selues to God and to his worship. Qu▪ What is a Sacrament? Ans. An outward igne or eale or∣dayned of God, to confirme our fayth in the crtenty of our redemption, and to signifie and seale vnto vs the graces and benefits that lowe thence. Gen. 17. 11. Rom. 4. Qu. What are the endes of Sacra∣ments in generall?
An. First and princially to confirme our faith in the promises of grace, and to be seales and pledges thereof vnto vs. 1 Cor. 10. 16. Rom. 6. 3. Gal. 3. 2. 6. Secondly to distinguish vs from all Infidells and Atheists whatsoeuer. Thirdly to preserue the remem∣brance and memory of Christ his be∣nefits. Exod. 12. 14. Luk. 22. ver. 19. Lastly to bind & vnite vs more firm∣ly to God, and his seruice, and to one another. Qu. Are the Sacraments necessary to saluation? Ans. Yes, for first God in his wise∣dome and mercy hath instituted them to that end, and hath also commaun∣ded them to be vsed. Secondly by the refusall and contempt of them, we de∣clare our selues to bee none of Christs desciples, of whome these Sacraments are badges. Thirdly (during this mor∣tality) we are weake infaith & ful of in∣firmities & therfore haue need of thē. Qu. But are the Sacraments so simp∣ly and absolutely needfull to salation
that hee that wanteth them cannot bee saued? An. No, for first, not the want but the contempt of them damneth. Se∣condly the Israelits in the Wildernesse wanted them 40. yeares, but were not therefore condemned, & the theife vp∣on the Crosse was saued, albeit neuer baptized Luke. 23. Lastly damnation is denounced to the vnbeleeuer and impenitent person, and not to haue that (without his owne defaute) is de∣priued of the Sacraments. Qu. Then grace and remission of sinnes is not inherent, in, annexed and tied so to the Sacraments, that whosoeuer vseth them should by his very act of receiuing, be partaker of it? An. No, for first, it is the proper worke of God to confer grace, albeit (ordina∣rily) by the means. Secondly the Sacra∣ments are signes & seales of grace, but not causes therof. Thirdly their nature and substance is not changed; therfore they cannot of themselues conferre grace.
Lastly, Achitphell, Simon Magus, Iudas, were Partakers of the Sacra∣ments, yet because they wanted faith, they receued no good by them, for here, in regard of vs faith is all in all Heb. 4 ver. 2. Qu. If there be no grace contained and inherent in the Sacraments, why are the signes and the things signified called so often in Scripture by one and the same name? Exo. 12. 11. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Math. 26. 28. 1. Cor. 11. 24. Ans. They are often times thus na∣med, onely to shew the straite vnion and neere coniunction, that is be∣twixt the signes and the things signi∣fied in the beleeuers, for at what time they in faith receiue the signes, God by his spirit conferreth the things signi∣fied. Qu. What difference is there betwixt the word Preached and the Sacraments? Ans. Frst the word preached is only audible and propounded to the eares, but the sacraments are sensible, and offered & subiect to the sense of see∣ing,
fasting, handling. Secondly, grace is offered in the word more generally, but in the Sa∣crament more particularly. Thirdly the word is preached both to beleeuers and vnbeleeuers, but the sacraments, (especialy that of the Lords supper) are communicated to those that beleeue, or (at least) thus pro∣bably iudged. Forthly, the word is of force towards faith and saluation without, or before that the Sacraments bee receiued; as may appeare in Abraham, Gen. The Enuch Act. 8. Corn. Act. 10. ve. 2. 3. and 44. 45. but the sacrament without the word is of no validity, I meane the words of Institution. Qu. How are Sacraments deuided? A. Into Sacraments of the old Tes∣tament & Sacraments of the New. Qu. What is a Sacrament of the old Testament? A. That which was instituted & orda∣ned of God for the faithfull before Christs in carnation.
Qu. Of How many sortes was it? Ans. Of two sortes, ordinary and extraordinary. Q what were their ordinary Sacramēts. An. Circumcision and the passouer. Qu. What is Circumcision? An. An ordinary Sacrament of the old Testament whereby by reason of the cutting off & circumcizing of the foreskin the premise of grace, that is, of redemption & sanctification in the Messias to come was signified and sealed. Gen. 7. ver. 11. & 12. Rom. 4. 11. Qu▪ What is the Passeouer? An. An ordinary Sacrament of the old Testament, whereby, by the eating of a Lambe, the beleeuers were put in mind of their deliuerance out of Egypt and especially were confirmed concer∣ning their redemption from the power of Satan sinne and death, to be perfor∣med by Christ that was then to come. Qu. What were the extraordinary Sa∣craments of the old Testament. An. Those that were not so solem∣ly repeated, of this sort was the arke,
wherein Noe and his family were pre∣serued in the time of the deluge; and hereby was signified & sealed our pre∣seruation from eternall damnation, by Christ, 1. Pe. 3. 3. & 20. Such like Sacra∣ments were the baptisme of the cloud & of the sea 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. likewise the eating of Manna & the drinking of the water flowing out of the rocke, ibid vers. 3. and 4. Q. what are the Sacraments of the new Testament? A. Those which Christ the mediator of mankind being now exhibited did in∣stitute & ordaine for his that beeeued Q▪ what & how many are these sacramēts? Ans. Onely two, Baptisme and the Lords supper. Q. What difference is there betweene the Sacraments of the old Testament and of the new that succeede them. Ans. They are both the same alto∣gether in substance, or in respect of the thing signified; for as the sub∣stance of the word was the same in the time of the old Testament and
of the New, so also the substance of the Sacraments, & this is made plaine by diuers places of Scripture. ebr. 13. 8. Collo. 2. ver. 11. 1. Cor. 5. 11. Qu. How then do they differ? Ans. Only in certaine circumstan∣ces and accidents, as for example. First they differ in the externall signe or ele∣ment. Secondly in number, for they were more in number, but these few. Thirdly in manner of signification, for they signified Christ to come, and ther∣fore were more darke, but these Christ presented and exhibited, and therefore more plaine and easie. Lastly they dif∣fer in time and person, for the Sacra∣ments of the old Testament were pro∣per to the Iewes, and lasted onely vnto the comming of the Messias, but the Sacraments of the new Testament are common both to Iewes, Gentiles & doe continue vnto the worlds end. Qu. How many things are wee to consider in a Sacrament? Answ. Three, first the outwarde signe or matter. Secondly the thing
signified. Thirdly the forme, order and analogy between the signe & the thing signified. Qu. VVhat is the signe? An. The outward or sensible matter which is the substance, & the externall actons cōuersant about the sacramēt, which is the accidentall circumstance. Q▪ What are the things signifyed by thē? Ans. Christ with all his mercies and sauing graces. Q▪ VVhat is the forme of a Sacrament? An. The relation, order or proporti∣on that is betwixt the signe and the thing signified? Q What is Baptisme? A. The sacrament of our new Birth, or of our first admittance, or entrance into the Church, or Christianity▪ Rom. 4. 11. Math. 28. 19. Qu. To whom doth Baptisme belong? A. To al beleeuers, & to their childrē. Qu. Are inants then to be Baptised, es∣pecially seeing that the scripture maketh no expresse mention thereof? A. Yes vndoubtedly, for first there is such an affinity betweene Circumcisi∣on & Baptisme that succeedeth it; that
by what reason the children of the Iewes were circumcized, by the same may the children of Christians be bap∣tized. Secondly the commission that Christ graue to his Apostles, comman∣ding them to baptisze all nations, was general and made no exception of In∣fants. Thirdly the Apostles baptized whole families. Ac. 16, 15. 1 Cor. 1. 16, 1 & therfore in al likelihood Infants that are a part of thē. Lastly the grace, pro∣mise, & the thing signified belong to Infāts, therfore the outward signe also. Q. How often is a man to be Baptized? An. Only once. For as it is sufficient to be once ingrafted into the Church & once borne, so it sufficeth to bee but once baptized. Secondly there is but one baptisme. Ephe 4. Lastly circumsiti∣on was but once administred & there∣fore baptisme in like manner. Qu. What is the outward signe or ele∣ment in Baptisme? Answ. Water onely, and no signes or matter els. Que. VVhat is the thing signifyed by Baptisme?
Answ. First the purging and washing away of our sinnes by the sprinkling of the bloud of Christ. Secondly our regeneration or sanctification to eter∣nall life. Titus 3, 5. Rom. 3. verse 25. Q. VVhat is the forme of Baptisme? An. The diuing, dipping or baptizing of the Infant & with water by the Mi∣nister into the name of the Father, the Sonne & the Holy Ghost. Mat. 28, 29. Qu. VVhat gather you hence? Ans. A double & solemne couenant, First in regard of God the Father to re∣ceiue the party baptized into his fauor, of God the Sonne to redeeme him, & of God the holy Ghost to regenerate him. Secondly of the party baptized who here solemnely promiseth to ac∣knowledge, inuocate & worship God alone, and withall to renounce the world, the flesh and the diuell. Q. What vse are we to make of baptisme? An. First when we are tēpted to com∣mit any sin, we must for the preueting of it, call to ourremembrance, our so∣lemne vow made in baptisme. Secodly
we must dayly labour to feele and dis∣cerne in our selues the proper effect & frute of Baptisme, namely the power of Christs death mortifying sinne, and the power of his resurrection quick∣ning and renewing vs. And thus much of sacraments in generall, and of Baptisme, in particuler. Qu. VVHat is the Lords supper? An. A sacrament of our spirituall norrishment growth and preseruation in Christianity. Qu. Who instituted it? Ans. The Lord Iesus. Qu. When? Ans. At supper time. Qu. Why at that time? An. Because at that euening began the day of the passouer, and Christ be∣ing forthwith to be apprehēded, could not defer it to the next morning. Qu. Why did the Church change the time of the administration of it? Ans. The time is but an externall
accident, which is in the Churches li∣berty to reteine or alter. Secondly the reason why they changed it vnto the morning was the preuention of drun∣kennesse, gluttony or the like abuses that in processe of time crept in. Qu. What are the outward signes or elements in the sacrament? Ans. Bread and Wine. Qu. Why are there two signes in the Lords supper? Answ. For two endes. First more liuely and fully to set forth Christ his passion. Secondly to signifie and seale vnto vs, our full and perfect norrish∣ment and saluation in Christ. Que. What doth the breaking of the bread signifie? An. The body of Christ bruized and crucified for vs. Qu. VVhat doth the powring out of tht wine signifie? An. The bloud of Christ shed for the remission of our sinnes. Qu. Then we neede no Popish images pictures, crucifixes and to represent vnto
vnto vs Christs passion? An. No, For the death and passion of Christs holy Scriptures, and also in this Sacrament (especially) is described, set forth and depainted liuely before our eyes. And as for the Papists▪ lying vanities, they are flat idolatrous and we abho and detest them. Qu. What is the thing signfied b this Sacrament? An. Christ Iesus and all his merits and blessings. Q. what is the forme of this Sacramēt? An. The order & relation betweene bread & the wine & the thing signifi∣ed, in the administration and vse of this sacrament? Qu. Explaine and shew vnto me the or∣der, analogie and proportion betweene the signes and the thing signified? An. Thus it appeareth, as the bread and wine haue force and efficacy to norish and strenthen the body: so the body & blood of Christ, together with al the benifits that flow frō his death & passion, doe inwardly norish & streng∣then
a beleeuer vnto eternall life. Qu. Are the Bread and Wine in the vse of the Sacrament things really exis∣ting, or but only outward shewes & appa∣rēts (as the Church of Rome imagineth?) An. They doe really exist and re∣taine their former substance & nature: for first (according to the infallible rule in Philosophy) no accidents can subsist without their subiects to whome they are tyed. Secondly the Apostle Paul in the whole discourse of the Sacrament, mentioneth the expresse words of bread and wine▪ 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28. Qu. How then and wherein differeth the bread and wine in the sacrament from common bread and wine? A. Not in nature & substance, but on∣ly in end vse & significatiō. For in com∣mon vse they serue only to the nourish∣ment of the body, but in the sacramē∣tal vse to the norishing of the soule, se∣condly before they were without sig∣nification & relation, but in the Sacra∣ment they signifie Christs body▪ and blood.
Q. Then the elemenss of bread & wine are not transsubstantiated or turned into the very body and bloud of Christ? A. No, for first it is a spiritual foode & therfore spiritually to be eaten and receiued by aith. Secondly the hold∣ing of this absurd opinion ouerthrow∣eth the articles of Christs Incarnation & ascension, for if he was borne of the Virgin Mary, then not made of bread, & if he be ascended into Heauen and there contained vnto the ende of the world, then he is not corporally presēt & much lesse made of bread. Thirdly it destroyeth the very nature and forme of a Sacrament, which consisteth in the relation & respect that is betwixt the signe and the thing signified. Fourthly the bread in time will mould, and the wine turne into vinegar, ergo there is no such conuersion. Lastly (to omit ma∣ny other arguments) if there were any such transubstantiation, the very re∣probates as Iudas should truly feede on the body & bloud of Christ and so should bee saued but this is flat against scripture.
Qu. If there be no such reall conuersion of the bread & wine into Christ his body & bloud, why thē are the vnworthy recei∣uers guilty of the body & bloud of Christ? Ans. First, because they wanting faith, which is the eie, mouth, an stomack of the soule; discerne not this mysticall bread and wine from common bread and wine, but come vnto it as vnto a prophane banquet. Secondly, because they by their infidelity and wicked hearts abuse and prophane these holy seales and pictures; and therefore are guilty of high treason before God, euē as he that rendeth, abuseth and tram∣pleth vpon the kings image or broad eale, is guilty of treason before men. Qu. How then is the bread and wine to be receiued? Ans. Reuerently and by faith. Qu. How by faith? Ans. By beleeuing that, as verily as I receiue the bread and wine, so spiritu∣ally I receiue and feed vpon Christ his body and bloud For faith maketh that present to the oule, that is in place far
distant. And as the eye of a man doth by his sight touch the starres though many thousands of miles distant: so doth faith mount vp into Heauen & so apprehend and feede on Christ. Act. 7, verse 55. Q. What is fayth? Answ. A perswasion of Gods fauour and mercy in Christ. Que. Who are worthy Communicants or receiuers? An. They only that firmly beleeue in Christ▪ hunger and thirst after him, tru∣ly repent them of their sinnes, and are thankfull for the great worke of their redemption. Qu. But the faithfull themselues, (as we haue the Apostles themselues for in∣stances) labour of many doubts, wants, in∣firmities, relesses, ergo no man is worthy to commnicate? Ans. First the Lords supper is a medi∣cine to the weake & fainting soule, & therfore wee are as well to purifie our hearts in it, as to bring pure hearts to it. Secondly al (notwithstāding al their other ignorances and infirmities) in
whom sinne raigneth not, and that come to the Lords Supper without guile and hypocrisie, are worthy in Gods acceptation. Q. VVho then are vnworthy receiuers? Ans. All that are grosely ignorant, all Infidels, Atheists, Hypocrites, Here∣ticks, Schismatiques, and (in a word) all impenitent and prophane persons. Qu. VVhat danger do these incurre? Ans. If they repent ot, besides tem∣porall plagues, they incurre eternall condemnation. Q. May not an elect and a true belee∣uer, sometime receiue vnworthy? Ans. Yes. Qu. How then doth e escape eternall condemnation? Ans. First, his person is accepted with God, & therefore being once in Christ he cāneuer perish. Rom. 8. 1. Ioh. 10. 27▪ Secōdly he is temporally chastised for his vnworthy receiuing, as the Corin∣thians were, but all his sinnes are par∣doned & the gilt of them taken away. Q May not a true Christian with a safe conscience communicate there where
is knowe to bee present some open and vile offenders. Ans. Yes, if he do not consent vnto their sinne or approoue of it, for it is not his fault, and another mans badnes must not make him to refuse the Man∣na of his soule. Secondly, the Prophets themselues and others, obserued the sacrifices and feasts with those that were most wic∣ked; yea Christ himselfe kept the Pas∣ouer amongst the wicked ewes. Qu. What benefit and comfort hath a right receiuer by the Lords Supper? Ans. First, a confirmation of faith in the promise of grace, and in his com∣munion with Christ▪ Secondly a reui∣uing of the death and passion of Christ and the benefits that proceed thence, in his memory. Thirdly, a more firme and neere vnion with the members of Christ. Lastly, a most certaine hope of the life to come. 1. Cor. 11. 26. Qu. What must a man do that h may be a worthy receiuer? Ans. He is to performe three seuerall
duties. First before he communice: se∣condly in the time of communicating; and thirdly after that hee hath com∣municated. Qu. VVhat must a man doe before he communicate? Ans. Hee must trie and examine himselfe. Qu. Is it not sufficient that his pastor or minister examine him and approue of him? Ans. No for albeit it be a good and necessary duty, yet it sufficeth not, for first hee may deceiue the Minister, but he is better knowne to himselfe. Secondly hee must liue by his owne faith, and answer for his owne sinnes, wherefore it concerneth him neerely to looke to himselfe. Qu. VVherein must a man examine himselfe? Ans. In foure things. First whether hee know God, know the fall of man, and the maner of his restitution by Christ. Secondly in his faith, namely whether hee desire, apprehend and
receiue Christ, as he is described in the scriptures, and exhibited in the Sacra∣ments. Thirdly in repentance, viz. whether he repent of all his knowne sinnes, and haue a care and resolution to do those things that please God, Math 3. 17. Lastly in charity, whether hee loue good men, and wis well euen to his enimies, and seeke daily to reconcile himselfe vnto his neighbour, whom he hath wronged or offended. Mat. 5. 25. Q. VVhat is the duty of a worthy re∣ceiuer in the very art and time of the re∣ceiuing of the Sacrament? Ans. He must reuerently behaue him∣selfe, ponder the great mercies of God vouchsafed him, & by the eyes of faith so behold and contemplate all the sto∣rie of Christ his passion, as if with his eyes he saw him hanging on the crosse and crucified, and his bloud dropping out of his vaines. Qu. How oft must a man receiue the Sacrament? Ans. Very often, for so the Apostle
willeth, 1. Corinth. 11. so the primitiue Church practised, and euer neede the often vse of it. Q. VVhat duty must a man performe after the receiuing of the Sacrament? Ans. Hee must praise the Lord, and giue him thankes for the wonderfull worke of his redemption, and for all the meanes therevnto belonging. Secondly, hee must bee occasioned hence, more constantlye to prosesse Christ, and more entirely to loue his children and seruants. FINIS. Deo Tri-vno laus & gloria. Si Christum bene scis satis est si caetera nescis.
