A215 12924960 95504
An ACCOUNT OF Mr. Francis Charlton's Surrendring himself to the BISHOP of OXFORD, As also a Copy of the LETTER Sent by the Bishop to Madam Charlton, touching the same; dated the 2d of August, 1683. ON Wednesday the 1st of August, 1683. As Mr. Francis Charlton was upon the Road com∣ing to Oxford from the Western parts of England, one Mr. Herbert a Justice of the Peace of Oxford∣shire meeting him on the Road, fancy'd he knew his Face, and riding up to him asked if his Name was not Mr. Charlton, which he not readily owning Mr. Herbert told him that was certainly his Name, and he being in the Kings Declaration he must carry him before a Justice of Peace, for tho himself was one, yet it was not proper for him to take his Examination. Then Mr. Charlton owning his Name told Mr. Herbert that he was going to Surrender himself to the Bishop of Oxford, to which Mr. Herbert answered that he must give him leave to wait upon him thither, which Mr. Charlton agreeing to, they went together to his Lordship the Bishop of Oxford, where being come Mr. Herbert gave his Lordship an Account
of what passed upon the Road as aforesaid: And Mr. Charlton acquainted his Lordship of his in∣tention of Surrendring himself to his Lordship. Then Mr. Herbert taking his leave of his Lord∣ship left Mr. Charlton in his Lordships custody. The same Night his Lordship sent the Letter an∣nex'd to Mr. Charlton's Lady in London, as also an∣other Letter to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, and upon his Lordship recieving an answer from Mr. Secretary, Mr. Charlton was brought Guarded on Saturday to Windsor, and on the same day he was brought to London. A Copy of the Bishops of Oxfords LETTER to Mrs. Charlton, August the 2d 1683. Madam, YOUR Husband Mr. Charlton, having for some time withdrawn himself, came hither Yesterday, and desird me to signify to the Secretary Sir Leoline Jenkins, that he had put himself into my hands; which accordingly I have done. Mr. Charlton being appre∣hensive what reports may be spread, and of the trouble that might be occasioned thereby, desired me to give you this plain Account and to assure you of his Health and Confi∣dence in his Innocence. He does farther desire you not to be angry with his Son that he did not signify these Intenti∣ons to you beforehand, he being Oblig'd by absolute Com∣mand to the contrary. Indeed I think this course which oury Husband has taken, is so much to his Reputation that I can not think it matter of trouble to your self, or any of your, or his Friends. I remain. Madam, Your most Humble Servant, Jo. Oxon. London, Printed by G. C. in Thams-street over against Baynar'ds Castle. 1683.
