A478 12093281 53925
THE YOUNG SOULDIER'S DESIRE ANSWERED: OR, A PIECE OF Military Discipline, Wherein is shewed, DISTANCES, FACINGS, DOUBLINGS, COUNTER-MARCHES, and WHEELINGS. WITH Some FIRINGS both Offensive and Defensive against an Enemy. By EDWARD ADAMS. At his pleasure, any person may practise this Art with a Set of Cotuses privately at home; which will prepare him for a greater Exercise in a Field, or other publick place. LONDON: Printed for John Evans, at the Marygold in Perpool-lane; and are to be sold by William Jacob, at the black Swan in Holborn; and by the Author in Shore-ditch. 1678.
To his very Worthy and much Respected Friend, Mr. JOHN EVANS, Captain of a Company of Train'd-bands, under the Right Honourable The Earl of CRAVEN; EDWARD ADAMS wisheth long Health, and everlasting Felicity. Sir, ONe of the Duties that belongeth unto a Chri∣stian, is Charity, and Friendship is very near a kin unto her; and that proceeds from a good Nature. As the free and generous Spring, that issueth forth it self for the good and refreshment of all Creatures; so good Nature is never wanting for to help and assist, especially where it beareth friendly Respects. I being sensible of your good disposition, by reason that I have received from you many Favours; and knowing your inclination unto the Art of War, am emboldened to dedicate this small Twig or Branch of Martial Discipline unto your favourable and friendly Protection, which will be unto it as Varnish is unto dull Painting, a means to make it beautiful and splendant; and an∣swer the request and desire of your obliged E. A.
To the DILIGENT READER, AND INDUSTRIOUS PRACTITIONER. AS it is said of the Sea, that though it branch it self into Gulphs, Creeks, and other smaller partitions; yet those are not the main Ocean, but a part of it: So this small Tract is not the Body of Martial Discipline, but a Limb or part thereof. And as Sea-men cannot comprehend the Sea at one or two Voyages, neither can young Souldiers be Masters of the Military Art by one or two Exercises: But both Sea∣men and Souldiers must practise with patience and diligence, and in time they may attain much to their satisfaction. That you may thus do, is the hearty desire of him that is willing to serve you to the best of his power. E. A. Licensed January 1. 1677/8. Roger L'Estrange.
The YOUNG SOULDIER'S Desire ANSWERED. A Leading with 16 Men, containing eight Pike∣men and eight Musqueteers, as followeth, Viz. We will suppose that the men are compleatly ar∣med, and also furnished with Officers: that is, a Lieu∣tenant, Ensigne, and two Serjeants, and also with a Drum or Drums. Let the Serjeants draw up the men in this form first: Observing that they make the best men File-lea∣ders; the second best, Bringers up; the third, half File-leaders; and the fourth, Bringers up of the Front half Files: and likewise the best File-leaders place on the right, and the second best on the left; and so the rest, giving unto them dignity according to their worth, as well Pikes as Musquets. The Body being drawn up, it is convenient to have the Colours conveyed to the Body. First, Form the Body as followeth. Command. Bringers up, double the Front inwards:
The Bringers up of the right half of the Body incline to the Left; and the Bringers up of the left half of the Body incline to the Right, and pass through the Interval up into the Front: and the lest of the half Files gra∣tually after the other, while they have evened the Front and the Body. And they will be in this form, as followeth. The eldest Serjeant he commands the two inmost Files of Pikes to advance their Pikes, and he ad∣vances his Halberd, and with the Drum or Drums Troops to the place where the Ensigne and the Colours are, as thus:In the mean time the other Serjeant he closes the Body. The Colours being furled up, the Ensigne he advances them, and commands the Pikes to open outwards, and passes through in the Interval, the Drum in the rear of him, and commands the Pikes to wheel inwards after him, and so troops to the Body; the Serjeant brings up the Rear, as thus: Whilst the Ensigne is trooping to the Body, the Serjeant that is with the Body he commands them to open from the middle to double Distance, to make an Interval for the Pikes to march into their places. When the Ensigne is come up, he commands the Pikes to wheel outwards and march into their places.
Then the Company will be compleated both with Officers and Souldiers, as followeth. C for Captain. L for Lieutenant. E for Ensigne. S for Serjeant. D for Drum. P for Pike. M for Musquet. Next, reduce them as they were at first; then proceed to Exercise. Command. Every even File from both Flanks, double the depth of the odde. Every even File from both Flanks, face about. That is, those that are faced, the first man mar∣ches into his place, and so the rest successively. I do use the word Stand in the Exercise very often; for it is very convenient: For you are not to stand until you perform the Word of Command. And when you are commanded to perform any thing, either in Distances, or Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, or in Wheelings, and have perfor∣med that, and are commanded to stand, then you are to stand, and not before. That is, to 3 foot di∣stance between File and and File. Files, open from the right to Order. Stand. Files, open from the right to open Order. That is, 6 foot distance from File and File. That is, to 12 foot di∣stance between File and File. Stand. Files, open from the middle to double distance. Stand.
Ranks, open forward to Order. Stand. So you may command both Ranks and Files to Open to Double double Distances, the which is 24 foot. Ranks, open backwards to open Order. Stand. Ranks, open from the middle to double Distance. Stand To reduce the Body. Files, close to the middle to Order. Stand. Ranks, close to the middle to Order. That is, a Foot and a half between File and File, and Rank and Rank. Stand. Both Ranks and Files, close to the middle to your close Order. Stand. Face all to the right. To your Leader all. Face all to the left. To your Leader all. Face all to the right about. Note, in all Facings ei∣to the right or to the left, to command the Pike-men to advance their Pikes, and the Musqueteers to poise their Musquets, and turn their Bodies with their Arms on their left Heel onely. To your Leader all. Face all to the left about. To your Leader all. Every even File from the right, face to the right about. And as you are now faced, march all while you are clear of your selves. Stand. Face all about, march and close. Stand. To your Leader all. Every even File from the left, face to the left a∣bout. As you are now faced, march all while you are clear of your selves. Stand.
Face all about, march, and close. Stand. To your Leader all. Every even Rank from the rear, face to the right. And every even Rank from the Front, face to the left. As you are now faced, march all while you are clear of your selves. Stand. Face all about, march, and close. Stand. To your Leader all. Every even rank from the front, face to the right. And every even Rank from the Rear, face to the left. As you are now faced, march all while you are clear of your selves. Stand. Face all about, march, and close. Stand. To your Leader all. Face outwards, and march while you are clear of your selves. Stand. Face all about, march, and close. Stand. To your Leader all. So many paces as you please. Rear half Files, face about; and as you are now faced, march. Stand. Face all about, march, and close. Stand. To your Leader all. The  first Ranks, stand. The  last Ranks, face about. So many paces as you please. The two inmost Ranks, face outwards. As you are now faced, march. Stand.
Face all about, march, and close. Stand. To your Leader all. The Angles are the four Corners of the Body. Face to the four Angles. As you are now faced, march. Stand. To your Leader all. The Division on the right in the Front, face to the left. The Division on the left in the Front, face a∣bout. That is, all the Divisions move at once, and leaving their own ground, each Di∣vision marches into his predecessors ground. The Division on the left in the Rear, face to the right. As you are now faced, march all, and pos∣sess each others ground. Stand. As before. Face all to the left, and march. Stand. As before. Face all to the left, and march. Stand. As before. Face all to the left, and march. Stand. To your Leader all. Before you proceed any farther, command both Ranks and Files in each Division to open to open Order. The two Divisions in the Front, face about. That is, each Division marches through its oppo∣site Division in the Inter∣val that is between File and File. The Divisions in the Front, and the Divisions in the Rear, march, and interchange ground. Stand. To your Leader all. The two Divisions on the right, to the left. The two Divisions on the left, face to the right.
As before. As you are now faced, march, and inter∣change ground. Stand. To your Leader all. The two Divisions in the Front, face about. As before. The Divisions in the Front, and the Divisions in the Rear, march, and interchange ground. Stand. To your Leader all. The Divisions on the right, face to the left. The Divisions on the left, face to the right. As before. As you are now faced, march, and inter∣change ground. Stand. To your Leader all. That is, to the middle of the Body. Face all to the Center, march, and close to Or∣der. To your Leader all. Rear half Files of Musqueteers, face about: Pikes stand. Musqueteers, as you are now faced, march while you are clear of the Pikes. Stand. To your Leader all. And this Figure following is produced. Musqueteers, face inwards. And Pikes, face outwards.
So many paces as you see convenient. As you are now faced, march all. Stand. To your Leader all. And also this figure following is produced. The Division of Musqueteers in the Front, face about. And the Rear half Files of Pikes, face about. So many paces as you see convenient. As you are now faced, march all. Stand. To your Leader all. This following figure is produced. Musqueteers, face outwards. And Pikes, face inwards. So many paces as you see convenient. As you are now faced, march all. Stand. To your Leader all.
And it makes this figure following. The two inmost Ranks of Musqueteers, face inwards. The Front half Files of the Front-division of Pikes, and the Rear half Files of the Rear-division of Pikes, face outwards; the rest stand. So many paces as you see convenient. Those that are now faced, march. Stand. To your Leader all. To reduce the Body again. The Division of Musqueteers in the Center, face to the four Angles. And each Division of Pikes, face to the Center. As you are now faced, march all, and close to Order. To your Leader all.
Remember, before you proceed to Doubling of Ranks or Files, that you open them to Order or double Distances, as you finde occasion. That is, every even File from the right to place it self into the odd to the right. That is, every even Rank from the front places it self into the odde to the right. Files, to the right double. Ranks, to the right double. As before the Files and Ranks placed to the right, these place them∣selves to the left. Files, to the left double. Ranks, to the left double. And place your selves as before. Files, double outwards. Ranks, double outwards. Files, double inwards. The Rear half Files incline to the right and march, in that Interval that is on the right of them into the Front. Ranks, double inwards. Half Files, double your Front to the right. Every even File from the left faces about; or the half Files that doubled to face about and march into their places. Every even File from the left, double the depth of the odde. Every even File from the left, face about. As before you inclined to the right, now you must incline to the left. Half Files, double your Front to the left. Every even File from the right, dou∣bleEvery even File from the right faces about, and march and place them∣selves as before. the depth of the odde. Every even File from the right, faceThe Rear half Files of the right half Ranks, or of the right of the Bo∣dy, inclines to the right, and marches into the Front. about. Half Files, double your Front out∣ward. And the Rear half Files of the left half Ranks, or of the left of the Body, inclines to the left, and marches into the Front. Every even File from the middle, dou∣bleEvery even File from the middle fa∣ces about, and march into their places. the depth of the odde. Every even File from the middle, face about.
As before they inclin'd to the right and left outwards, now they must in∣cline to the right and left inwards. Half Files, double your Front in∣wards. Every even File from both Flanks, face about, and march into your places. Every even File from both Flanks, double the depth of the odde. Every even File from both Flanks, face about. The Bringers up of every File first in∣cline to the right into the Interval on the right of him, and the immediate man after him, and so the rest, and march into the front. Bringers up, double your Front to the right. Every even File from the left, dou∣ble the depth of the odde, placingThat is, the first man in their march places himself into his place, and so the rest after one another. themselves behinde their present Lea∣ders. Every even File from the left, face about. Now the Bringers up incline to the left, and march into the Front, as be∣fore. Bringers up, double your Front to the left. The first man march, and the rest after him, and place themselves as be∣fore. Every even File from the right, dou∣ble the depth of the odde, placing themselves behinde their present Lea∣ders. Every even File from the right, face about. Bringers up, and the rest, march, and incline as before. Bringers up, double your Front out∣wards. March, and place your selves as be∣fore. Every even File from the middle, double the depth of the odde, placing themselves behind their present Leader. Every even File from the middle, face about. Bringers up, double your Front in∣wards. Every even File from both Flanks, double the depth of the odde, placing themselves behind their present Leaders. Every even File from both Flanks, face about. The first Rank opens, and makes an Interval for the second Rank to march in: then the first Rank opens again, and leaves an Interval for the next Rank to march in: and so the rest. Ranks, rank entire into the middle of the Front: the first Rank, open from the middle.
These 4 inmost Files are but 4 single men; but they represent Files; there∣fore they are called Files. The four inmost Files, march and so the rest by fours successively. Stand. Stand straight after your Leader. At their present standing they are proper Files; but when they are fa∣ced to the right, then they are Ranks accidental. Files, file entire into the midst of the right Flank. Face all to the right. Stand. To your Leader all. The four inmost men of this File, march to the right, and so the rest byAs before in the Front. fours successively. Face all to the right. Stand. To your Leader all. As before you performed it in the Front, so now in the same manner per∣form in the Rear. Ranks, rank entire in the middle of the Rear. Face all about. The first Rank, open from the midst. To your Leader all. As before in the Front, so now in the Rear. The four inmost Files, march, and so the rest by fours successively. Stand. To your Leader all. As before to the right Flank. Files, file entire into the midst of the left Flank. Stand. To your Leader all. As before you performed it to the right, now in the same manner to the left. The four inmost men of this File, march to the left, and so the rest by fours successively. Face all to the left. Stand. To your Leader all. When the Front half files have faced outwards, and march'd, and left an Interval, then the Rear half files march into that Interval up to the Front. Rear half Files, double your Front half Files inwards entire. Front half Files, face outwards.
The 4 inmost Files march forwards while they are clear of the Rear half files; then the Rear half files face inwards and close. The four inmost Files, double your two outmost Files on each Flank en∣tire, advancing. The Front half files face to the right, and march while they are clear of the Rear half files; then face to the right again, and march to the Rear. Front half Files, double your Rear half Files entire on the right. Stand. To your Leader all. When the left half ranks have faced outwards and march, then the right half ranks march into the Interval up to the left through the Interval while they are clear of the left half ranks: then the left half ranks face inwards, and close. Right half Ranks, double your left half Ranks entire on the left. Face all to the left. Then left half Ranks, face outwards, and march. Stand. To your Leader all. The left half ranks face about, and march while they are clear of the right half ranks; then face to the left, and place themselves in the Rear of the right half Ranks. Left half Ranks, double the depth of your right half Ranks entire, retiring. Stand. To your Leader all. As before you doubled your Front half files with your Rear half files, in the same manner double your Rear half files with your Front half files. Front half Files, double your Rear half Files inwards entire. Face all about. Rear half Files, face outwards. Stand. To your Leader all. Before the four inmost files doubl'd the two outmost files on each Flank advan∣cing, that is, to the Front; now you double your two outmost files retiring, that is, to the Rear. The four inmost Files, double the depth of the two outmost Files on each Flank entire, retiring. Face all about. Stand. To your Leader all. Rear half files, face to the left, and march while you are clear of the Front half files; then face them to the right, and march up to the Front. Rear half Files, double your Front half Files entire on the left. Stand. To your Leader all. Perform this in the same manner as you did when right half ranks doubled the left half ranks entire on the left. Left half Ranks, double your right half Ranks entire on the right. Face all to the right.
Right half Ranks, face outwards, and march. Stand. To your Leader all. The right half ranks march forwards while they are clear of the left half ranks; then face them to the left, and march to the left while they are even with the left Flank. Right half Ranks, double the depth of your left half Ranks entire, advan∣cing. Stand. To your Leader all. The Rear half files face outwards, and march while they are clear of the Front half files; then face them to the Front and march up to the Front. Rear half files, double your Front half files by division. The four inmost files face about, and march while they are clear of the rest; then face them outwards, and march, and even both Flanks. The four inmost Files, double the depth of the two outmost Files on each Flank by division, retiring. Stand. To your Leader all. The Front half files face outwards, and march while they are clear of the rest; then face them to the Rear, and march down to the Rear. The Front half files, double the Rear half files by division. Stand. To your Leader all. The four inmost files much while they are clear of the red; then face them outwards, and march, and even both Flanks. The four inmost Files, double the depth of the two outmost Files on each Flank by division, advancing. Stand. The two inmost ranks face outwards, and march while they are clear of the rest; then face them outwards again, and march▪ and even Front and Rear. To your Leader all. The two inmost Ranks, double the first and last Ranks by division. Stand. The Rear half files of the two out∣most files face about, and the Front half files of the two outmost files, and Rear half files of the two outmost files march while they are clear of the rest; then the fear inmost files face outwards and march, and even both Flanks. To your Leader all. The four inmost Files, double the two outmost Files on each Flank in∣wards by division. Stand. To your Leader all. The first and last ranks face outwards and march while they are clear of the rest; then face them in, and march, and close. The first and last Rank, double the two inmost Ranks by division. To your Leader all.
The Rear half files of the four in∣most files face about. Both Front half files and Rear half files of the four inmost files march while they are clear of the rest; then face them outwards, and march, and even both Flanks. The four inmost Files, double the depth of the two outmost Files on each Flank by division. Stand. To your Leader all. Each File-leader turns off to his right hand into the Interval on the right of them, and the second rank moves up in∣to the ground of the first and turns off, and so the rest, and keeps moving while the File-leaders are marched down in∣to the Rear. Files, countermarch to the right, maintaining ground. Stand. To your Leader all. Face them all to the right, and turn off to the right, and keep moving while the present File-leaders have marched up to the left Flank. Ranks, countermarch to the right, maintaining ground. Stand. To your Leader all. As before you performed it to the right, so now in the same manner to the left. Files, countermarch to the left, main∣taining ground. Stand. To your Leader all. As before to the right, so now to the left. Ranks, countermarch to the left, main∣taining ground. As before when you did countermarch maintaining ground, the first turn'd▪ off, and the second Rank possess'd the ground of the first, and so the rest; now the first rank turn and march down, and the rest stand, and do not turn and move while their present Leaders are past them. Stand. To your Leader all. Files, countermarch to the left, losing ground. Stand. To your Leader all. Ranks, contermarch to the left losing ground As before.. Stand. To your Leader all. As before to the left, so now to the right. Files, countermarch to the right, losing ground. Stand. To your Leader all.
As before. Ranks, countermarch to the right, losing ground. The Rear half files face about; the Front half files turn off to the right, and the Rear half files turn off to the left; and both keep marching while the File-leaders and bringers up move in the midst of the Body. Stand. To your Leader all. The Body faces outwards; the right half ranks turn off to the right, and the left half ranks turn off to the left, and keep moving while the right hand men and left hand men meet in the midst of the Body. Countermarch Front and Rear into the midst. To your Leader all. Countermarch both Flanks into the midst. To your Leader all. Front half files face about; Front half files turn off to the right, and Rear half files turn off to the left. Countermarch from the midst into Front and Rear. To your Leader all. The Body faces inward; the right half ranks turn off to the right, and the left half ranks turn off to the left. Countermarch from the midst into both Flanks. The Body faces outwards, and both Flanks turn off to the right, and pass through each other, while the right Flank possesses the ground of the left Flank and the left Flank the ground of the right Flank. To your Leader all. Countermarch both Flanks to the right, and change ground. Face outwards. To your Leader all. Rear half files face about, and both turn off to the right, and possess each others ground. Countermarch Front and Rear to the right, and change ground. Rear half Files, face about. To your Leader all. As before you performed to the right, so now to the left, observing that you face the Body outwards. Countermarch both Flanks to the left, and change ground. Face outwards. To your Leader all. As before to the right, now to the left, observing that you face the Rear half files about. Countermarch Front and Rear to the left, and change ground. Rear half Files, face about. To your Leader all.
That is, the first rank stands, the next rank moves forwards, and place them∣selves before the first; and so the rest, while every rank hath performed it. Face all to the right. The first Rank stand, the rest pass through on the right, and place them∣selves before their present Leaders. To your Leader all. Face all about. The first Rank stand, the rest pass through on the left, and place them∣selvesAs before to the right, now to the left. before their present Leaders. To your Leader all. Face all to the left. The first Rank stand, the rest pass through on the right, and place them∣selvesAs before. before their present Leaders. To your Leader all. The first Rank stand, the rest pass through on the left, and place them∣selvesAs before. before their present Leaders. Stand. Observe, that before you countermarch either Ranks or Files, that you open them to open Order. As thus: Files, countermarch to the right. Files, open from the midst to open Order. And Ranks, close forwards to close Order. Ranks, countermarch to the left. Ranks, open from the midst to open Order. And Files, close to the midst to close Order. The last Rank, stand. The rest, face about.
And each File pass through on the right, and wheel about to the left, and place your selves behinde the last Rank; each man place himself behinde his pre∣sent Leader. The outmost File on the right, face to the left. The rest, face to the right. And each File pass through on the right, and wheel about to the left, and place yourselves behinde your right∣hand men: Each man place himself be∣hinde his present Leader. To your Leader all. The outmost File on the left, face to the right. The rest, face to the left. And each File pass through on the right, and wheel about to the left, and place yourselves behinde your left-hand men: Each man place himself behinde his present Leader. To your Leader all. The first Rank, face about. And each File pass through on the right, and wheel about to the left, and place your selves behinde the first Rank: Each man place himself behinde his pre∣sent Leader. That is, wheel the right half ranks to the left, and the left half ranks to the right, while the right and left half ranks face each other. To your Leader all. Wheel the Front into the midst. To your Leader all. Face the Body all about, and wheel the right and left half ranks as before. Wheel the Rear into the midst. To your Leader all. Face all to the right, and wheel as before. Wheel into the midst of the right Flank. To your Leader all.
Face all to the left, and wheel as before. Wheel into the midst of the left Flank. To your Leader all. Rear half files, face about, and wheel Front and Rear half files as before. Wheel Front and Rear into the midst. To your Leader all. Face the Body outwards, and wheel both Flanks as before. Wheel both Flanks into the midst. That is, wheel the right half ranks to the left, and the left half ranks to the right, while they are even a breast, and march down into the Rear. To your Leader all. Wheel the Front inwards into the Rear. To your Leader all. Face all to the right, and wheel them as before into the left Flank. Wheel the right Flank inwards into the left. To your Leader all. Face all about, and wheel them as before inwards up into the Front. Wheel the Rear inwards into the Front. To your Leader all. Face all to the left, and wheel them as before into the right Flank. Wheel the left Flank inwards into the right. To your Leader all. Wheel off the right half ranks to the right, and the left half ranks to the left down to the Rear. Wheel off the Front by division. To your Leader all. Face all to the right, and wheel them to the right and left outwards up to the left Flank. Wheel off the right Flank by divi∣sion. To your Leader all. Face all about, and wheel them off to the right and left outwards up into the Front. Wheel off the Rear by division. To your Leader all. Face all to the left, and wheel them to the right and left outwards up in∣to the right Flank. Wheel off the left Flank by divi∣sion. To your Leader all. Rear half files, face about, wheel off to the right and left outward up to the Front on the outside of each Flank. Wheel off the Rear half Files by division, and double your Front half Files on each Flank. The 2 outmost Files on each Flank, stand; the 4 inmost move forwards; the right half wheel to the right, and the left half wheel to the left, while the file-leaders of the 4 inmost files face the 2 outmost files on each Flank. Front half Files, stand. Wheel off the four inmost Files by di∣vision, and double the depth of the out∣most Files on each Flank, advancing. To your Leader all.
Rear half files stand, the Front half files wheel off outwards down into the Roar. Wheel off the Front half Files by division, and double the Rear half Files on each Flank. The two outmost files on each Flank stand: the four inmost files face a∣bout, and wheel off to the right and left outwards, and place themselves in the Rear of the two outmost files on each Flank. To your Leader all. Wheel off the four inmost Files by division, and double the depth of the outmost Files on each Flank, retiring. Wheel off the right half Ranks to theThat is, to place them in the Rear of the left half ranks. right about, and double the depth of the left half Ranks, retiring. The left half Rank, stand. That is, to wheel them off to the right down to the Rear, on the right of the Rear half files. Wheel off the Front half Files to the right about, and double the Rear half Files on the right. To your Leader all. That is, to place them in the Front of the right half ranks. Wheel off the left half Ranks to the right about, and double the depth of the right half Ranks, advancing. To your Leader all. Rear half files face about, and wheel them off to the right up to the Front, on the left of the Front half files. Wheel off the Rear half Files to the right about, and double the Front half Files on the left. Ranks and Files, close to the midst to close Order. That is, wheel them altogether to the right, while the Front is where the right Flank was. Wheel the Battle to the right. Wheel the Battle to the right. And to wheel the Battle to the right again, is to wheel the Front where the Rear was. Wheel the Battle to the right about. Wheel the Battle to the left. Wheeling the Battle to the right a∣bout, is to its proper Front as it was at first. Wheel the Battle to the left. Wheel the Battle to the left about. And the wheeling the Battle to the left, or to the left about, is in the same manner. Stand. Files, open from the midst to Order. Ranks, open from the midst to Order. Stand. To your Leader all.
NOw it is convenient for to march the Body in a Long March. But before you march, I will shew you the several Parts of the Body which were Commanded be∣fore in the Exercise, by these Figures follow∣ing. A File is reckoned from the Front to the Rear, containing 4, or 6, or 8 Men, as there is occasion; and that is called Depth-ways. A Rank is rekoned from the right to the left, containing 4, 6, 8, 10, or 20 Men, or more; and that is called Breadth-ways. The Rear half Files. The Front half Files. The right half Ranks. The left half Ranks.
The Rear half files of right half ranks. The Rear half files of left half ranks. The Front half files of right half ranks. The Front half files of left half ranks. These are the proper and necessary Parts of the Body. So now we will proceed to perform the long March, with the places of the Officers accor∣ding to their Dignity, and their Words of Command unto the Division that each of them doth lead. Also before you march, form the Body in this form as followeth. Bringers up, double the Front inwards. Files, open from the midst to Order. Ranks, open from the midst to open Order, Stand. To your Leader all. The Captain. This Division of Musqueteers on the right, poise your Musquets and march; shoulder as you march. The Ensigne. These two Files of Pikes, or this Division of Pikes on the right, ad∣vance your Pikes and march; shoul∣der as you march. The eldest Ser∣jeant. This Division of Pikes, advance your Pikes and march; shoulder as you march. The youngest Serjeant. This Division, poise your Mus∣quets and march; shoulder as you march.
The Lieutenant standing on the left of the Bo∣dy, and seeing the Divisions drawn forth and marching, he places himself in the Rear of all C for Captain. L for Lieutenant. E for Ensigne. S for Serjeant. D for Drum. p for Pike. m for Musquet. . The Long march. The Captain may, if he pleases, before he mar∣ches, command the Pikes to advance their Pikes, and the Musqueteers to poise their Mus∣quets, and shoulder all; and each Officer say to his Division, This Division, march. Having marched sufficiently, draw them up into a Body again. When the Captain findes it convenient to have the Company drawn up, he makes a stand, and commands the Drummer to beat a Troop; and at the same time the Captain advances his Leading∣staff, or half Pike, as a signe to the Officers for to draw up their Divisions. The successive Officer is to draw up his Di∣vision on the left of the precedent Division, either by marching or trooping.
First command, Mus∣queteers, make ready all; that is, prime, charge, cock, and guard. The Company being drawn up, let us make some Firings, and after them lodge the Colours, and retire unto our Quarters. While the Serjeants are leading their files to fire them, the Captain closes the Body. Fire by Forlorns, File-ways. The inmost File of Musqueteers on each Flank, move. When the first rank has fired, they wheel off to the right and left, and place themselves in the Rear of their own files; and when they are all fired, each Ser∣jeant wheel off his file, and place them on the outside of their own Flanks; then draw forth the inmost files again, and fire them, and wheel them, and place them as before; and so the rest, until all the Mus∣queteers have fired. To each of these Files there is a Serjeant to lead them forth, and to fire them. Fire by Forlorn, rank-ways. Musqueteers, make all ready.
The inmost File of Musqueteers on each Flank, move. Rank inwards. When they have fired, wheel them off to the right and left, and on the out∣side of their own Flanks. Then draw forth the inmost files again, and rank them, and fire, and wheel, and place them as before; and so the rest. Musqueteers, make all ready. The inmost File of Musqueteers on each Flank, move clear of the Pikes, and stand close inwards. Each Division of Musqueteers, move 6, 8, or 10 paces. Stand. The first rank of each Division, fire, and fall in the Rear of them, and the rest move, and main∣tain their ground; in that manner fire them all over. Musqueteers, make all ready. The Division in the Front, stand; the rest move forwards 6, 8, or 10 paces. Stand. The first rank of each Division, fire, and fall in the Rear, maintaining their ground, as before. Musqueteers, make all ready▪
The Divisions in the Front, stand. The rest, move forwards, and even the Front. Stand. Fire the first rank, and wheel them off, and flank the Pikes; and so the rest. Reduced. Every even file from both Flanks, face about, and place themselves be∣hinde their present Lea∣ders. Every even File from both Flanks, double the depth of the odde. Pikes in the Front, port. The last Ranks, face about. The first and last Rank, wheel inwards. To your Leader all. Before you fire, com∣mand the Musqueteers on the left to face about. Musqueteers in the Front, fire, and wheel off to the left. And each Division wheel off to the The Musqueteers in the Rear, face to the right.left at the same time, and possess each others ground. When they have all fired, Command: To your Leader all
Musqueteers, make all ready. The Division in the Front, stand. The Division in the Rear, face about. The Division on the right, face to the right. The Division on the left, face to the left, and port your Pikes. Fire them all together. This is called a square firing. To your Leader all. The Division on each Flank, face to the Cen∣ter. The Musqueteers in Front and Rear, face out∣wards. Reduced. As you are now faced, march, and close. To your Leader all. Firings against Horse. Musqueteers, make all ready, port your Pikes. The File leaders of Musqueteers, move, and place your selves before the Pikes: The rest, move up and maintain their ground. Fire the Musqueteers in the Front; when they have fired, wheel them off outwards, and fall in the Rear of their own files. And the File-leaders again move, and place themselves before the Pikes; fire, wheel, and place themselves as before▪ and so the rest, till they have all fired.
Reduced. Musqueteers, make all ready; port your Pikes. File-leaders of Musqueteers, move, and place your selves before the Pikes: The rest, move upNow fire the Musque∣teers in the Front, and the File-leaders on each flank. When they have fired, wheel them off outwards, and fall in the rear of their own files. and maintain their ground. Observe, the Musque∣teers in the Front wheel off first; and the File-leaders on the Flanks wheel in the Rear of them; and the rest per∣form the like, till they have all fired. Reduced. Musqueteers, make all ready; port your Pikes. Front half Files of Musqueteers, move, and place your selves before the Pikes: The rest, move up and maintain their ground. Musqueteers in the Front, rank inwards. Fire the Musqueteers in the Front all together. When they have fired, wheel them off outwards, and place them in the rear of the Pikes; and the rest do the like.
And they will be in this Form. Musqueteers, make all ready; and port your Pikes. The first Rank of Musqueteers face to the right, and wheel off to the left, and place themselves on the Front of the Pikes. The Musqueteers in the Front, fire, and wheel off to the left, and place themselves in the Rear. While these are a firing and wheeling off, the o∣ther Serjeant leads out the first Rank again, and fires, and wheels, and pla∣ces them in the Rear: and in the same manner the rest. Musqueteers, make all ready; port your Pikes. The first Rank of Musqueteers move, as be∣fore, and place themselves in the front of the Pikes. Fire, and stand.
The next first Rank move, and place them∣selves in the Front. Fire, and fall in the Rear of them that fired before; and so every Rank move, and place them∣selves in the Front: fire, and fall in the Rear of the Musqueteers in the Front. Musqueteers, make all ready. Ranks, double inwards. Port your Pikes. The first rank fire, and wheel off outwards, and flank the Pikes: and the other rank fire, and wheel off, and place themselves on the outside of each Flank. Then the Body will be in this form following. But not reduced. To reduce the Body. Ranks, open forwards to double distance. The Musqueteers on the right, face to the left. Musqueteers on the left, face to the right. Pass through the Body, and change ground. The Musqueteers on the right, advancing. The Musqueteers on the left, retiring. To your Leader all.
Ranks, close forwards to open Order. Reduced. Stand. If the Captain pleases, he may march them a∣gain, as he sees convenient. Then draw the Company up into a Body, and close Ranks and Files to the midst, to close Or∣der. And if he has any thing to communicate unto his Souldiers, to do it there at the Head of the Company. To lodge the Colours. Advance your Pikes, and move. The Captain, he advances his Leading-staff; and the Lieutenant, his Partizan; and the En∣signe, he furls up the Colours, and carries them advanced also at the head of the Stand of Pikes: And so troop all together to the place where the Colours are to be lodged, as followeth: In the mean time, the Serjeant forms the Mus∣queteers, either in a Body, or in a Rank, to make a Volley at the lodging of the Colours. Then all are discharged to retire to their Quarters. FINIS.
