B1277 12318058 59413
The Glorious Kingdom of Christ, Described and clearly Vindicated, Against the bold Asserters of a Future Calling and Reign of the Jews, and 1000 years before the Conflagration. And the Asserters of the 1000 years Kingdom after the Conflagration. Opening the Promise of the New Heaven and Earth, and the Everlastingness of Christ's Kingdom, against their debasing it, who confine it to 1000 years, which with the Lord is but as One day. Answering Mr. Tho. Beverley, who imposed this Task, by his oft and earnest Challenges of all the Doctors and Pastors, and his Censure of Dissenters as Semi-Sadduces of the Apostasie, in his Twelve Principles and Catechisms, &c. By RICHARD BAXTER, whose Comfort is only the Hope of that Kingdom. 2 Peter 3. 13. We according to his Promise look for New Hea∣vens and a New Earth, wherein dwelleth Righteousness. (Af∣ter the Conflagration.) LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden, for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower end of Cheapside. 1691.
To Mr. Increase Mather, the Learned and Pious Rector of the New-England Colledge (now in London.) Worthy Sir, WHen it befalleth me to differ from men more judicious, it is not because I have a greater esteem of my Intellect than of theirs, but because that which to me seemeth Evidence constraineth me. And when I publish that seeming Evidence, it is not in expectation that any receive it, save those that by impartial deliberate thoughts, discerning it, are con∣vinced by it. I therefore craved your censure of these Papers, because I found that you had long and laboriously studied the Controversie, and were confident of much of that which I write against: I have read no man that hath handled it with so much Learning and Mo∣deration as you have done: And therefore I knew no man fitter, if I err, to detect my Errours. And as your Candour is rather for my publishing, than suppressing these Papers; so truly I am so far from disliking a true Confutation of this (or any Errour that I shall pub∣lish) that I therefore direct these lines to you, to intreat you, to write (whether I be alive or dead) your Reasons against any mo∣mentous or dangerous Errour which you shall here find: That as we thus friendly consent to such a Collision, or rather Communication, as may kindle some further sparks of light, the Readers may be helpt by comparing all, the better to find out the truth. Seeing the chief Writers for the Millennium are Conformists, (and men of greatest Learning and Piety among them) as Jos. Mede, Dr. More, Dr. Twisse, (then conformable) Dr. Cressoner, Mr. Beverley, Mr. J. M. &c. I hope they will not take it for scan∣dalous in you and me herein to differ. You have partly relieved me against some Accusations of Singu∣larity, when you tell your Readers (in the Preface to your English Mystery) that so many think the Thousand years past already, viz. That Aretius, Bilney, Wickleffe, Walter Brute, Benno Cardin, &c. thought that the time began at the Birth of Christ. That Viegas, Pererius, Augustine, Primasius, Beda, An∣dreas, thought it began at the Passion of Christ: That Junius, Pareus, Dent, Broughton, Bibliander, Usher, thought it be∣gan at the Destruction of the Jewish State: And that even Brightman, Majer, Forbes, Willet, Gerhard, Guild, Cart∣wright, as well as Alcaser Castiglius, begin it at Constantines
Inthronization; which is as the same with John Fox (Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 111.) Grotius, Hamond, and many others that begin it at the Fall of Maxentius, or Licinius, or at Constan∣tines Edict for Christians, from whence to the Ottoman Empire say they was just a Thousand years: And that the Conversion of the Jews will not be till the present state of this World be near its end, you hold with Beda, Estius, Acosta, Stella, Zanchy, Per∣kins, Vossius, Finnus. And page 20. you believe that the 1290 years in Dan. are past long ago, as you say, Arnold. de Villa nova, The Author of the Problem Mr. Stevens, Mede, Alsted, Lud. Capellus, Dr. Twisse (to whom I may add many more.) Though you are plain, that the Thousand years are not before the Conflagration, and that Antichrist shall not be finally destroy∣ed till then (though Rome shall) and that a Thousand years will be but a part, a morning of the last great day, in which the Just only shall rise, and that the evening will be the time of the rising of the unjust to destruction, and the space that is till Christ give up the Kingdom, &c.] Yet because oft-times you joyn the Jews earthly Monarchy so obscurely with the Resurrection, without mentioning the intervening Conflagration, I intreat you in your next to make your self therein more intelligible: And give some proof that the wicked shall not be raised nor judged till after the Thousand years, (neither those dead before, nor those found alive at the Conflagra∣tion: seeing many words of Christ and Paul seem plainly to assert a common Judgment, of Sheep and Goats, just and unjust, at the same time of Christs coming. As to my Opinion, that Pagan Rome was Babylon, I have so much to say for it, as must not here be repeated: If that cast away my reputation with any or many, let it go: He is unworthy of reputa∣tion that cannot give it up for Truth. The Revelation hath much plain and easie to them that read it without prejudice (who I doubt are few.) I only fix on so much, and leave the rest to wiser men, with∣out dishonouring of their Judgments, so be it they give not up our Cause to the Papists, by laying it upon things doubtful or untrue, while we have sure and plain proof enough against them. Your unworthy Fellow-servant, RICH. BAXTER. London, Decemb. 19. 1690.
THE CONTENTS. Chap. I. THE Kingdom of Christ as described in the Scripture. Chap. II. An Answer to Mr. Tho. Beverleys Twelve Prin∣ciples, and much of his Catechism of the Millennium, necessitated by his many provocations, and challenge to all the Doctors and Pastors of the Church, and his censure of Dissenters as Semi-Sadduces of the Apostasie. His first Principle examined. Of delivering up the King∣dom to the Father. Christs Kingdom began before the (disputed) Thousand years, proved. His Enemies much subdued before. What is meant by Giving up the Kingdom? The longer continuance of Christs Kingdom, proved. Of Christs be∣ing subject to the Father. And God All in All. Whether it be true that Christ was eternally a Man, having an eternal Kingdom as Man; but not as the Son of Man after the Millennium? Whether out Union with God and Christ, Joh. 17. be that Then God shall be All in All as before the World began? Whe∣ther we were in God before the World began, and how? The tendency of this Doctrine. Of Mr. T. B's ambi∣guous Language. His 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th and 6th Principles. The 7th Principle. That those found on Earth shall be pre∣sently caught up at the Lords Coming, and not stay a Thousand years after; proved fully: And the limitation of a Thousand years confuted.
The 8th Principle. The Thousand years further confuted. The 9th Principle more of the Giving up the Kingdom. The 10th, 11th and 12th Principles. Of the Fifth Monar∣chy, &c. More of Mr. B's. Ambiguities. Chap. III. Of those Millenaries that place the Thousand years Reign before the Conflagration. Chap. IV. That the Ten Tribes will never be found and called, if they never were so heretofore. Chap. V. The Ten Tribes were not lost nor extinct, proved. Chap. VI. What Conversion the Twelve Tribes have alrea∣dy had? Chap. VII. Whether there be any Jerusalem Monarchy of Jews, or any further Conversion of them, more than of other men promised by God? The pretended proofs ex∣amined. Chap. VIII. Reasons for the Negative humbly offered to Tryal. And some Objections answered. Chap. IX. Of the New Earth; what is certain, and what uncertain?
Chap. I. The Kingdom of Christ, as described by the S. Scriptures. BEing by Mr. T. Beverleys importunate requests and challenges, and his heavy Accusation of Dissenters from him as Semi-Sadduces of the Apostasie, urged to give an account of the Reasons of my dissent from Him and others of the Millenary Judgment, it is meet that I first tell him what I take for the true Scripture Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ, which I am to defend. Premising my desire to the Reader, that he will first read as presupposed Truth, the Judicious Treatise of my dear Brother Mr. John Corbet, of The Kingdom of God with Men: And Cluverus his Arguments against the Millennium. I. GOD made Man in his own Image (Natural,Gen. 1. 26, 27. & 9. 6. Mo∣ral,1 Cor. 11. 7. and of Supereminence) in Wisdom, Righteousness, and true Holiness;Col. 3. 10. to know, love, and obey his Creator: There∣fore they err that say, Adam had no Spiritual Holiness, and did no Act of Holiness and Obedience before his Fall: For else he had lived in great and constant sin: For it could be no better for him, not to esteem God to be the chief Good, and amiable Object; or not to Love him whom he knew to be the best; or not to serve and obey him whom he knew to be his Creator. In this state God was to Govern him as a righteous Sub∣ject, by the Law which obliged him to Personal, Perfect, Per∣petual Obedience; revealed partly by the Creation, and partly by express prohibitions and commands. II. Upon Mans Fall and Forfeiture,Gen. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16. GOD first pro∣nouncing part of the penalty which he would inflict,Eccles. 7. 29. decla∣red his Decree so far to forgive the rest of the penalty,Hos. 13. 9. as to reprieve and yet continue his faln Creature;Exod. 34. 7. and to give them a Redeemer that should overcome the Serpent that had overcome Man,Psal. 86. 5. and to make him the Captain of Salva∣tion,Mat. 28. 19. and to put faln Man, and all things, and power into his hand, for the accomplishing of this Recovering work,
for the glorifying of his Love and Mercy thereby. The eternal , the Second Person in the Trinity, being de∣signed to this great undertaking. III. Whether this Eternal Word,Deut. 29. 29. did first unite it self to the Prime Being of the Creation?Joh. 3. 5 6, 7. And whe∣ther that Prime Being was the Universal Soul of the World,This is written with relation to the Writings of Mr. Sterry, Dr. More. Mr. . Tur∣ner, Mr. Beverley, &c. which I would not be too peremptory in my opposing. or there were any such Uni∣versal Soul,Rom. 11. 33. save God that is more than a Soul,Jo 5. 9. & 40 & 41. & 42. or it be not universal, but yet of the highest Created Species, of the World. and had any causality in the creation or production of the rest of the World? and whether it (and the World, as Aristotle thought) was (except revolutions and alterations) an eternal Effect of an eternal first Cause, and many such cases about the Original of Souls, are questions that God having not clearly decided by Natu∣ral or Scripture Light, I cannot peremptorily decide, but am lost in difficulties when I attempt it. IV. Till the Incarnation of Christ,Exod. 34. 6, 7, 8. the World was Go∣verned by God, as the God of Mercy and Redemption; by a Regiment of Grace;Gen. 3. 15. which may be called the Kingdom of Christ,Prov. 1. & 3. & 8. as Christ was the undertaker of future Redemp∣tion:Rom. 2. 4, 7. And the World being all under a pardoning Law of Grace,Heb. 11. 26. that alloweth Repentance on hope of Mercy; God dealt with none upon the meer terms of the Law of Perfe∣ction or Innocence; which ceased cessante capacitate subdito∣rum: Be innocent and live, or sin and die, is not the Law that any are judged by. V. God that first made this Law of Grace to Faln Man∣kind in Adam and Eve,Gen. 9. renewed it to all in Noah. VI. Abraham pleasing God above others by Faith and full Obedience,Gen. 22. 15. & 26. 5, 24. God chose him to be the Father of a Peculiar People,Rom. 4. 3, 9. promising him that his Seed should be multiplied into an eminent Policy,Gal. 3. 8, 24. and that the Saviour Incarnate should be of his Seed,Heb. 11. 8, 17. in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed:Jam. 2. 23. Not ending the Law of Grace to the rest of the World, but priviledging Abrahams Seed with the state of peculiarity. VI. By Moses God brought Abrahams Seed into the pro∣mised Political State, and gave them a Law to be a Rule to
their Political Governours,Moses, the Pro¦phets and Christ Mat. 5. attest all this. when to punish, and in what sort and degree: And God being their Absolute Soveraign, and their Government a Theocracy, he reserved to him∣self the Power of Legislation in all the necessary parts, and the choice of their Chief Rulers under him. And what the Magistrate failed to punish according to his Law, he would punish himself. This Law was but the Rule of their Obe∣dience, supposing them Believers of the Promise to Abraham, justified by Faith: But the carnal Jews were so taken up with the outward Ceremonies and Works, that they lost the understanding of that Justifying Promise, and the very use of all the Types and Ceremonies, and thought to be Justified by the bare Works or doing of what the Law required of them as their duty. And because God had not done so by any other Nation, they were proud of their Law, and yet only outwardly obeyed it. VIII. In the fulness of Time the Messiah came Incarnate (after 4000 years) And then that which before was only in Decree,Mat. 3. 15. & 5. 17. became a Law of Mediation or Redemption,Gal. 4. 4, 5. or a Covenant between the Father and the Son in Flesh;Heb. 4. 15. & 9. 14. Christ being obliged in Habit,1 Pet. 1. 19. Act and Suffering, to do all imposed for the Recovery of Man,Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. and for this was to be King and Lord of all, and having finished his undertaken work, to reign for ever as God-Man with the Glorified recovered So∣ciety as his reward in Heaven for ever.Mat. 28. 19. And all power to this End was given to him,John 17. 3, 4. and all Judgment or Govern∣ment committed to him,John 5. 22, 23, 26, 27. to be exercised on lapsed Man for Recovery, the Father judging no man, as meer Creator of Innocent Man, till this work is done. IX. When Christ Incarnate came the King came from Heaven,Luke 19. 34. and therefore John Preached that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand,Jo. 18. 37. and Christ first preached that it was come and was among them;Rev. 17. 14. that is,Jo. 1. 49. The King promised from Heaven to Rule the World for their Salvation.Col. 1. 13. And when he had first wrought Miracles enough to prove it,Mat. 12. 28. & 21. 43. that Faith might not be precarious,Mar. 1. 15. and built upon his bare affir∣mation,Luke 7. 28. & 9. 27. & 10. 9. & 11. 20. & 13. 18, 19, &c. & 17. 20, 21. & 21. 31. 22. 16, 18. he openly claimed first the Kingdom of Judea, as of the Line of David, and caused the people to applaud him with Hosanna's.
But being to Redeem us as a Sacrifice by his Blood, and to Conquer Death, and confirm his Gospel, by Dying and Rising again, he oft foretold all this to his Disciples, and the rejecting of him by the Jews,Rom. 14. 17, 18. and their Nations, Cities and Temples ruin for it, and his purpose to cease the Mo∣saical Politie,Rev. 12. 10. and to make his Church more Great and Catholick by the Calling of the Gentiles;Mat. 10. 7. especially the Roman Empire. X. At his Resurrection he took more solemn possession of his Kingly Government.Mat. 28. 19. And first Commissioned the Twelve Apostles whom he had before made Preachers to the Jews,Mark 16. 16, 17. to continue their Ministry to them (in a num∣ber related to the Twelve Tribes) till Persecution should expel them,Mat. 23. 37. and then to do their best to make all Nations (as such) his Disciples,Rom. 11. 20, 23, 24, 25, 26. Baptizing them (as the Entrance into his Kingdom) into the Name of the Father,Rev. 11. 15. the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and there teaching them to observe all his Commands delivered to those Apostles, and promising to be with them to the End of the World. XI. By this and more it appeareth that a great triumphant Kingdom on Earth,Rev. 11. 17. & 19. 6. and National Churches, which are no∣thing but Christian Kingdoms, was at first in Christs Inten∣tion, though the Embrio and Infancy anteceding, it was to be first in Execution: For he commanded the Discipling of Nations, and would have gathered Jerusalem, and not cut them off, nor taken the Kingdom of God from them, but for their unbelief.Acts 1. 25. And the number of Twelve was by Matthias to be made up,Mar. 28. 20. to shew their relation to the Jews National Church State, till Persecution drove them to the Gentiles, and then Paul and Barnabas were added. The Apostles have Successors in all the parts of their Office, which is to be continued to the End, but not in the parts that were extraordinary, peculiar and temporary. XII. Christ by the Holy Ghost (which he promised to send to be his powerful Agent) propagated a holy Genera∣tion,John 14. 16, 26. & 15. 26. & 16. 17. and by his Messengers Preaching (his Resurrection and Kingdom especially) and the Miracles which they wrought,Acts 2. 37, 38. & 21. 20. he confirmed his Gospel;Rev. 7. And Converted quick∣ly many Myriads of the Jews, and after far greater numbers of the Gentiles: Thus preparing materials or subjects for his
more visible Kingdom of Power on Earth; Himself reign∣ing over all in Heaven. XIII. That his Subjects might know the Nature and Terms of his Covenant and Government (which was to bring them to a Heavenly Kingdom) he not only requi∣red their Covenant-Consent to forsake the Flesh and this World,Luke 14. and the Devil,Rom. 8. 29. for that Eternal Life which he had promised them,Rom. 8. 17. but he was pleased to put them on the actu∣al exercise of this agreement,1 Thes. 2. 5. & 2 Thes. 1. 6. 11. and to try their sincerity,2 Tim. 2. 12. & 3. 12. by putting them often upon Sufferings and Martyrdom:Rev. 2. 10. And therein he exercised his Heavenly Power, in strengthening them, and making them more than Conquerors, while they went as Sheep to the slaughter; to the honour of their Lord and Faith, and the confusion of their Persecutors. XIV. Yet did he so over-power the Spirits of the Pagan Persecutors, that of Forty Emperors, there were at most but ten that persecuted them; so that in this Captivity and Wil∣derness state by their liberty their numbers so increased that they became a considerable party in their Dominions and Armies. XV. Of all these Persecutors,The Roman History is the full proof of this. the Cruellest were Nero, Domitian, Maximinus and Decius, but far above all, the last, who were seven together (Dioclesian, Max. Herculius, Max. Galerius, Max. Daya, Severus, Licinius, Maxentius, (and Constantius not wholly innocent) The cruelty of their Tor∣mentors, and the great numbers Tormented and Martyred, is frightful even to read: By all which Christ shewed his Heavenly Power, in the terrible punishment of all their Per∣secutors: First in the dreadful destruction of the cursed part of the Jews; who were by Vespasian and Titus so destroy∣ed that 110000 of them were killed, and about 700000 Cap∣tivated: And their State, City and Temple overthrown, and saith Origen and Chrysostom, it is certain that they shall never (that is, the Infidels) return to that Land. And afterwards by Trajan and Adrian, in revenge of the Murders of Barcocheba an Antichrist, near as many more were killed; which must needs leave the Infidels few in so small a Land, when London is supposed not to have near one Million of Inhabitants.
And as to the great Pagan Empire,The Revelati∣on and the Roman Histo∣ry compared, prove this, and expound each other. (the greatest that ever the World had) Christ rode on the White Horse a∣gainst them Conquering, and executed on them all the Plagues gradually numbered in the Apocalypse, the Seals, the Trumpets, the Vials, till he had utterly overcome them and all their Confederates: He dealt so severely with them, that of Forty Emperors there were scarce ten or seven that died without Murder a natural death: But they were still in Bloody Wars with other Nations, and with one ano∣ther, so that [The Beast that was, and Is not, and yet Is,] became a fit description of their State: As notably suited to Domitian at first, and to Dioclesian, Herculius, and their Fellows at last, so all along to the ordinary Succession: To day there was an Emperor; the next day he was kill'd, and there was None; And yet another presently succeeded him, and so there is one again; The Soldiers selling the Empire to him that would give most for it, or was likest to advance them. How dreadful a destruction did Christ by one Constantine bring on the seven Heads and ten Horns at last, in a very little time. So that Heaven and Earth triumphed with Joyful Praise that Babylon was fallen, and the Kingdoms of the World were become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and he had taken to himself his great Power and had reigned, and was setting up the New Jerusalem (as a Fifth Monarchy) the Embrio of the Coelestial Jerusalem in its visible Reigning Power. I am none of those that will secure Papal Rome from an answer∣able Name, and Guilt, and Fate: But he that will con∣vince me that Pagan Rome was not the Babylon there meant, or that it is not fallen, must first convince me that he is of more credible Authority than the Apocalypse. XVI. O how great a change was it for poor Christi∣ans throughout all the Empire,Read Eusibius Eccl. Hist. L. 8. & Rev. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, & 19. And the Prophets that proclaim it a great de∣liverance to the Israelites, to have their Mountains again Inhabited, and their Cities Built. to be brought from Scorn and Torments, and the Martyrdom of many Thousands, after 294 years Captivity, to be suddenly made Freemen, to celebrate Christs Worship in the most Solemn Assem∣blies, and to be made Lords of their Persecuting, Captivating, Idolatrous Enemies, lately so great that no Nations could
stand before them. Who did the Godly desire should be in Power, rather their Bishops that came newly out of the Furnace of Tryal? O what a change! O what a joyful day! And shall the success of the Devil, that quickly sow∣ed the Tares of Covetousness, Pride and Contention among the Clergy and Laity, tempt us to undervalue Gods great mercy to his Church which Angels and Saints gave him so much praise for. Emperours also had their odious Crimes; even Constantine killed his Eldest Son Crispus, and after his Step-mother for accusing him, and banished Athanasius: Shall we therefore be unthankful for a Christian Empire, which was Christs own Visible Kingdom? Theodosius killed the Thessalonians: Arcadius banished holy Chrysostom-Theodosius the second, a Saint, was called an Eu∣tychian, and so of others. David committed Murder and Adultery: Solomon was a Monster of Lust and Voluptuous∣ness, and at last of Revolt to favour Idols; yet were they the peculiar Kings of Gods peculiar People; and few better followed them. All this sheweth that Christ all this while Reigned, and left it not wholly to the Resurrection, to make his Enemies his footstool. XVII. It is not unlikely that this delivered,Mr. Potter, and many Protestant expositors  Rev. 20. 21, 22. to speak of the Church on Earth. exalted state of the Church (though after corrupted by Temptation to Pride) was the New Jerusalem in the Embrio, of which Con∣stantinople was the Capital Seat, as the Porch or Infancy of the heavenly City of God, and that one as the Infant Heir, and the other as the Possessor of the Inheritance, is described in Rev. 20. 21. 22. But of this more fully elsewhere. XVIII. The Dragon being bound up a Thousand years from the Churches deliverance (from Constantines Edict to the Ottoman Empire) the Church after grew corrupted: And Papal Rome imitated Pagan Rome,Rev. 20. 5, 6, 7, 9. though under more plausible names and pretences, and exceeded them in Cruelty. And Mahomet the Eastern Antichrist, compassed and con∣quered Constantinople the holy City; and Christs revenge on Gog and Magog, the Turk and Tartarian (with the rest of the Infidel World) are yet to come, and therefore dark. XIX. At the end of this World,2 Pet. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. which shall be burnt with fire, God will make a New Heaven and Earth; in
which shall dwell righteousness without sin. And all things shall be restored,Rom. 8. 19, 20, 21. and the Creature delivered from the bon∣dage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. How God will people this New Earth, he hath not told us; whether by Creation, as by Adam, or by Transmi∣gration: Nor yet how long it shall continue, unless for ever as part of the endless Kingdom.Fully proved after, Mat. 25. Scripture giveth us no confinement of it to a Thousand years, but the con∣trary. XX. Christs Glorious Appearance and Judgment, will be both the triumphant concluding parts of the Kingdom of Re∣demption, and Grace, which he will deliver up when his Recovering work is done: And the beginning of the King∣dom of Glory: In which, as his Reward, he will for ever in Humane Nature be glorified, as the Mediator of Fruition, as he was of Acquisition; and that in the Heavens. His coming in the Air is not there to Reign a Thousand years, but presently to Judge the World, as in Matth. 25. he de∣scribeth it: And to confine his Kingdom in Humane Na∣ture, and ours with him to a Thousand years, and confine it to the Air, and the survivers on Earth, is a fiction full of contradictions, dishonourable to Christ and his Kingdom, uncomfortable to his Church. XXI. There is but one Thousand years mentioned in Scripture, from whence they can fetch the least shew for their limitation; and that is only in Rev. 20. But it is most evident that the Thousand years there mentioned was to be before the Conflagration, and New Earth, and the Re∣surrection: For it was to be before Satan was loosed, and before Gog and Magog, and their numberless Armies as∣saulted the Holy City; and before the fire from God came on them. And the Paradise restored State of the New Earth, in which dwelleth Righteousness, is not consistent with so much wickedness of the Inhabitants, and Satans Power over the Nations: Nor with a Laodicean Lukewarmness, and danger of being spued out. They therefore that well ex∣pect a Thousand years Reign before the Resurrection, have no pretence to expect another Millennium after. XXII. To expect a Thousand years, and that after the Fall of Papal Rome, before the Resurrection, is a supposition
that this World will endure a far longer time than Chri∣stians have hitherto believed: And that the great Sabba∣tism is to be before the New Earth: And what a Sab∣batism that will be, the description of Gog and Magog, and of their Laodicea, may tell you: Far unlike a Paradise state, when all things shall be restored, and the groaning Creation be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. XXIII. They that assign this Thousand years on this side the Conflagration and Resurrection, for the setting up a Fifth Monarchy of the Converted Jews at Jerusalem, are the grossest feigners of all the rest. Well did Jerom say, That the Millenaries fetch their Errour from the Jews, and would set up Judaism by it. (He that dwelt so long at Bethlehem knew the Jews Opinions.) For (to pass by what else is after to be said) Their very Fiction is a contra∣diction. Were our Jews converted, they would in less than a Hundred years be no longer a Jewish Nation: For their state of peculiarity with the Mosaical Policy is abo∣lished by Christ, and must never be restored: And they must and would marry with Gentile Christians, and fall into the Catholick Church as Rivers into the Sea, and lose the name of Jews: So did their converted Prede∣cessors. XXIV. And seeing it is not like that our now Infidel Jews are one to a hundred of the Posterity of the first be∣lieving Jews that have been propagated these sixteen hun∣dred years, why should a glorious Monarchy be set up of this self-cursed Remnant, excluding all the first-fruits, both the sealed, Rev. 7. and all since? But if the Posterity of all those old holy Jews were now sought for, to be sent to Jerusalem, not one man of them would be found and known; (of which more after.) XXV. It is a marvel that the great disagreement of the Millenaries among themselves, yet hindereth not their seem∣ing Concord, while they can but cry up the Thousand years Reign, though most of them know not what the words mean. Some of them say, The Thousand years are on Earth; and some say, They are only of the Souls of the Martyrs and Confessors in Heaven: Some say, They are
both in Heaven, or in the Air, and on Earth at once. Some say, That they shall be a Jewish Monarchy at Jeru∣salem; and some, That it shall be of the Godly all over the World. Some say, Christ will Reign there visibly in his Humane Nature: Others, That he will only some∣time appear, as he did after his Resurrection: And some, That he will Rule there only by Reforming Christian Princes. Some hold but one Thousand years, and some two, (one being after the other.) Some hold two New Jerusalems, and some but one. Some say, That the Day of Judgment is the Thousand years (and yet that Scrip∣ture hath not told us how long Christ will be Judging us.) And some, That it is only the Beginning and the End of the Thousand years, that the Judgment will take up, and the rest will be in other Government. Some think that Execution on Men and Devils will be but that Thou∣sand years; which some decry. Some think that the first Resurrection, is from an Aereal Vehicle or Body into an Ethereal; and others that it is from earthly dust to a hea∣venly body by transmutation of Elements: And others that it is to be a Paradise body, like Adams before he sinned. Other differences seem almost reconciled to some, by the bare name of a Thousand years Reign. XXVI. It is a far more glorious Christian Monarchy which Christ by Constantine set up, than most of the Mil∣lenaries give any probability of. 1. It was a Deliverance from the cruellest Persecution. 2. And from the Dragons most potent Empire. 3. A Deliverance of all Christians as well as of Jews. 4. Without confinement to the narrow Land of Israel. 5. A setting up of a National-Provincial Church in Judea. 6. With the great Charges of promoting it, by New Churches, Monasteries, Bibles, Bishops! What could he do more? The knowledge of what hath been done long ago, would have prevented many mens expectation of the same. XXVII. If it prove that their Millennial Doctrine, and the Calling of the Jews, prove a meer mistake, it will not be so small as should suspend our detection of it. Because it is an adding to Gods Word, and fathering on him many untruths, and so a taking of his name in vain; and a cor∣rupting
of his Worship while we preach, write and pray for that which we ought not (further than we must pray for the Conversion of all sorts of men) and a turning of mens Zeal to promote untruths, and corrupt mens minds. XXVIII. We find it so easie to possess men with a fer∣vent Zeal for the Millenary Opinion, and so hard to make them zealous in holy Love to God and Man, and in a hea∣venly conversation, as may make us suspicious that both sorts of Zeal have not the same original: I am not willing to name some tremendous Instances of men nearly known to me, hereabout. XXIX. Our worthy Brother that hath more Learnedly opened that Cause than any else that ever I read, by mode∣ration hath brought the difference into so narrow a com∣pass (in his Diatriba de signo filii hominis) that except, 1. The Calling of the Jews, 2. And the Extending of the Day of Judgment to a Thousand years, and that the general Resur∣rection and Judgment of the wicked, shall begin after the Thousand years are expired, there remaineth to great and weighty disagreement of such with the Judgment of the Churches. XXX. Seeing we ascribe to Christs Kingdom so much more than they that we oppose, why should they be thought to extol his Kingdom more than we? 1. Is not Eternity longer than a Thousand years? 2. And Heaven a more glorious state than the Air? 3. And a New Earth inhabi∣ted only by the righteous, better than one that is Laodicean, or that hath such Enemies of Saints as Gog and Magog? 4. And this New Earth either everlasting, or of undeter∣mined time, better than one but of a Thousand years du∣ration, which is but with the Lord as One day, and about a sixth part as durable as this corrupted World, that is un∣der sin and curse? Is this Doctrine, or the other, more ho∣nourable to Christ, and more comfortable to Believers, and more evident in the Word of God?
Chap. II. An unwilling Answer to Mr. Tho. Beverleys Twelve Principles, and his Catechism of the Millen∣nium; necessitated by his many provocations of many Ministers, and me by name, and his Challenge of all the Doctors and Pastors of the Church, and his Censure of the Denyers of that Millenary Reign, as SEMI∣SADDUCES OF THE APOSTASIE. § 1. Reverend and truly beloved Brother, I Take it for no wonder that great and many disagree∣ments in matters of Religion are among us, while in Professions of less Mystery (Law, Policy, Physicks, Medi∣cine, &c.) there are so many; that [so many men, so ma∣ny minds] hath so long been a Proverb: And in such to∣lerable cases as much endanger not Church and Souls, few men are more for mutual forbearance and charitable con∣struction than I am: Therefore the Millennial Opinion I have never been a censorious opposer of, while men kept up Peace and Charity with it. But the case lately is altered, and is made a matter of necessary Zeal, as part of the Creed and the Lords Prayer, if not essential to the Gospel and Christianity: And very many of the Antinomian, and Separating Opinion, that least understand it, lay much of their Religion on it: And the just honour of many Conformists, of the most peaceable Principles otherwise promoteth it; such as Mr. Jos. Mede. Dr. H. More, Dr. Cressoner, your self, Mr. M. Author of the Midnight Cry, Mr.R. M. the Publisher (most pious men both) and many others. And we must not now be suffered to be silent, but must answer your provocations, or be grosly guilty of the evil that will follow your success. § 2. The Millenary Opinion was indeed early received by some followers of Papias: But the universal opposition of the Christian Church that hath exploded it ever since, tells us that it was a singular Opinion: And is he a humble man that now calleth the Christian Church for sixteen hun∣dred years, and all those Learned and Holy Divines of England, and other Reformed Churches, that differ from
your conceit, by the name of [SEMI-SADDVCES OF THE APOSTASIE.] Bear with my freedom. Is it humility that so loudly challengeth all the Pastors and Doctors of the Churches to answer you? Have you answered all them? or so much as one Cluverus alone, or James Calvert whom you promised me to answer? Was it humility that cast a Glove for an Answer to two or three trifling Fallacies about the Pagan Babylon, when I had given you an Answer to them long before, and you modestly sent it back without a Con∣futation? I have had long by me, as a Learner, some humble Queries to you, and no Bookseller will Print them, because they say men look on you as diseased with prophesying Self conceit, and will not read a Confutation. Your Leader Dr. More saith, That the Papists not an∣swering my Books against them, is, because they despise them, as unworthy of an answer. May not your case be much the same? Men have greater matters to mind, than to trouble themselves with you and me, or answering our Challenges. § 3. But I come to your Chain of Principles: And 1. It's a half and fallacious description of Christs Kingdom, to say it is his As the Son of Man. There be millions of Sons of Men that have no such Kingdom. It is his Kingdom as God-man, the Redeemer and Recovering Mediator. This Kingdom is to him as the Eternal Word, and the Son of Man in one person of a Redeemer. And because you confessed to me, that if you err, the misunderstanding of The Delivering up the Kingdom to the Father, that God may be All in All] is your , I will first prove that you grosly err in this your foun∣dation. § 4. 2. You say oft, that Christs Kingdom begins at the Millennium, as if he had none before: And you di∣stinguish not the several Gradations of his Kingdom, as from the Conception and Embryo to its maturity: As it began in the Promise to Adam, and renewed to Noah, and proceeded to the Covenant of Peculiarity, made to Abraham and his Seed, settled in a Common-wealth by Moses, renewed to David: And as it came from Heaven
in the Person of the Incarnate Messiah, shewing his Kingly Power by his Miracles and Doctrines, and in his Transfi∣guration, and acknowledged by Hosanna's, and owned to the death before the Roman Judge. Nor his entrance on the more open exercise of it, by his Resurrection, Ascen∣sion, and sending down his Paraclete the Holy Spirit, and by it in his commissioned Apostles and Witnesses, con∣vincing and converting the World. You take little notice of his going forth conquering on the White Horse, as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and calling all the Fowls of the Air to eat the flesh of Kings and Captains, and his utter subversion of Pagan Babylon, taking to himself his great Power and Reigning, when Heaven and Earth tri∣umphed, with joy, that the Kingdoms of the World were made the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and Christ set up Christian Princes as his Officers representing him to Rule as in his name (as his Ministers do in Preach∣ing in his name.) If you say that these things were not done, your unthank∣ful slander of Providence and the Revelation, is confuted by the whole stream of the Roman and Church History: What more will be done hereafter is a further question. The fulness of the Gentiles then came in. And is all this no Kingdom and Reign of Christ? § 5. Compare Christs words of his Kingdom and yours, Matth. 12. 28. The Kingdom of God is come unto you. Matth. 21. 43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruit thereof. Luk. 11. 20. No doubt the Kingdom of God is come upon you. Luk. 9. 27. There are some here that shall not taste of death, till they see the Kingdom of God come in power. Luk. 17. 21. The Kingdom of God is among you (or within you.) Matth. 13. Likeneth the Kingdom of Heaven to a Sower, to a grain of Mustard-seed, to a Treasure hid, to rich Pearls sought, to a little Leaven, to a Fishers Net, to a field of Corn and Tares, Luk. 19. 12, 15. When Christ ascended, he then received for himself a Kingdom, before he came to Judgment, Joh. 5. 22. The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all Judgment to the Son. Matth. 28. 19. All power in Heaven and Earth is given me. Joh. 17. 2, 3. All things are delivered to him. Luk. 23. 42.
He that prayed Christ to remember him when he came in his Kingdom, was told that he should be in Paradise with him that day. § 6. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are now in the King∣dom of God, and others shall sit down there with them. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Laza∣rus was in Abraham's bosom: Moses and Elias appeared with Christ on the Mount of Glory: And Enoch was translated. Christ is not in Heaven alone without any com∣pany but Angels: And if Moses and Elias be there, more are there, to make the superiour part of his Kingdom. He hath there a nobler Reign now, than is exercised in this dark, distracted World, that is drowned in wickedness, and torn by mutual Enmity and Malice. It would not else have been better for Paul to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Those that follow him, shall be where he is, Joh. 12. 26. We live, because he liveth, as branches in him the Vine. § 7. Either this World is Governed now by God, or not: If not, he is not a God to it; or Kings are more to it than God: If yea, it is by Christ that he governeth it. Are there any Divine Laws, or not? If there be, they are Christs Laws, and the Execution is Christs Execution of them. And sure the exercise of Legislation, Judgment, Protection, Rewards and Punishments, are the exercise of Kingly Government. You deny Christ, if you deny him to be King: Will you not obey him as King, till the Trumpet sound, and he come to the final Judgment? § 8. But where is the present Kingdom of Christ, more gloriously described than in the Prophecies which you call your self the Humble Reader of? and especially in the Apoca∣lypse (if it be not you only that understand it?) It would swell this writing to name all the Texts that expresly assert it. Isa. 9. 6, 7. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no End; upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to stablish it with Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever. Is this only at the Millennium.
He is a Prince and a Saviour to give repentance and remission of sin. God hath made him Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 16. To be Lord is to be King: To deny this is to say that we owe him no obedience, and is Apostacy indeed. How could he make us Kings and Priests to God, if he were not King himself? even a Priest after the order of Melchizedeck, and a Prophet raised up like Moses that was King in Jeshurun. But enough of this to real Christians. §. 9. But what is all this to you? Do you deny it? 1. If you do not, it is not Christs Kingdom, but the Consummation of his Kingdom, and his Glorious appearing in it that is to be∣gin at Judgment after the Conflagration. 2. But it is your words and not your thoughts that are published in Print, and if you have written contrary to your Heart, recant it, and pity them that you deceived. In your Catechism of the Millennium you say, pag 5. Q. When doth Christs King∣dom begin? Ans. It begins at the Coming and Appearance of Christ, and at the Resurrection of his Saints at his Coming and Appearance.] And page 6. The Apostle without any other mention of his Kingdom saith, He must reign till he hath put all his Enemies under his feet. Now when did this reign begin but at his Coming? Or where did the Apostle give any intima∣tion of his reigning but at his Coming? And when he comes and descends, and no longer sits at the Right Hand of God, then God first maketh his Enemies his Footstool: Not when he sits, but when he comes: And then he begins to reign.—His Kingdom and the Resurrection of his Saints begin together.] § 10. I confess this Doctrine well agreeth with Doctor More's Life of Tryal in the Air, and Mr. Mede's Conclusion that our Salvation is not ascertained to us till the Resurre∣ction: Indeed it maketh all our Preaching, and Religion in this life of little moment, in comparison of that which is after both Death and Resurrection: For if Christ Reign not till then, he maketh no Laws till then; He bindeth us to no obedience to him till then; He punisheth no sin till then; He setteth up no Magistrates till then, to be Go∣verning Officers in his Kingdom: He executeth no Disci∣pline in the Churches as King▪ O how have Independents and Presbyterians been deceived then, who have lamented the neglect or suppression of Christs Kingly Government in
the Church! It is then under his Thousand years Govern∣ment that men must obey to secure their Salvation. § 11. But the contrary is fully evident by the Effects. 1. What new Laws he will make in the Air, you must prove: But we can prove that he made Laws for Govern∣ment on Earth: 2. Else the World hath had no King or Government of God: 3. Nor no authorized Prince or Pa∣stor. 4. All Saints can say that he giveth Rewards on Earth to Believers. 5. And he is the Protector of his Church. 6. He here is known by the Judgments which he executeth, and maketh his Enemies his footstool, though their final Fall be at the last. Did he not in that Kingly glory de∣scribed by John, execute all those Plagues on Pagan Rome, and its Beast, which are gradually described in the Seals, the Trumpets and the Vials till it fell? If you say that all this is meant of Papal Rome, sure I am, it was done first on Pagan Rome: And you that tell us how shortly Turk and Pope shall fall, sure take it to be before the Resurrection! And doth not Christ then make his Enemies his footstool by his Kingly Power? 12. What it is for Christ to subdue his Enemies, must be known by his Office and Undertaking, which is to overcome Satan, and to save his People from their sins. And did he not conquer Satan as a Tempter, and triumph even on the Cross? And doth he not conquer the Dominion of sin in all his Members? Is he not mortifying them in us day by day? And is not this treading down his Enemies? And is he not taking off the Curse, the fruit of sin? These are Christs Ene∣mies, because they are ours; even the diseases which he came to cure? § 13. Is it not unreconcileable self-contradiction, for you to extol the Doctrine of Dr. Crisp, who saith, That we are so fully saved by Christ, even before Conversion, that we have no sin, it being none of ours, but his; nor can any sin hurt us (much less other mens) nor any penalty befal us, nor any place left for any duty to do us the least good; and yet that Christ our Saviour, subdueth not his Enemies be∣fore the Resurrection? Yea your self assert, that we are Righteous by Gods Es∣sential Righteousness, and that as our only Justification and
Holiness: And yet doth not Christ tread down his Enemies? Hath he trod down in you, no Pride, no Lust, no Errour, no Injustice? Doth he not tread down greater Enemies than Turkish Swords, or Papal Inquisitions in every Soul that he converteth? When we fight not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places? And when we are but killed, and counted as Sheep to the slaughter, in all this we are more than Conquerours, and need not fear them that kill the body. § 14. Rev. 5. 12, 13. The numberless Host of Heaven cry, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power and riches, and wisdom and strength, and honour and glory, and blessing, (and is not that a Kingdom? and is it not till the Resurrection?) And every creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and ho∣nour, and glory, and power be to him that sitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.] This is before the Re∣surrection. § 15. Rev. 12. 7. If Michael be not Christ, he is Christs Servant. And there was War in Heaven, and Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels, and prevailed not; neither was there place found any more in Heaven. And the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent called, the Devil and Satan, who deceiveth the whole World: He was cast out into the Earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. And I heard a voice saying in Heaven, Now is come salvation and strength, and the King∣dom of our God, and the Power of his Christ, for the accuser of our Brethren is cast down, who accused them before our God day and night: And they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the Death: Therefore rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them: Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea; For the Devil is come down to you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.] He may make his own Faith, that will affirm, that this describeth no Kingdom of Christ, or no Conquest of his Enemies; or that all this is after the Resurrection, or yet to come, and none of it yet fulfilled.
§ 16. Rev. 14. 7, 8. Fear God, and give Glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is come.—Babylon is faln, is faln,] This is a Judgment and a treading down Enemies before the final Judgment: And so is the Reaping and the Wine-press mentioned, ver. 13. to the end. § 17. Were all the seven Vials poured out after the Re∣surrection? c. 16. Or were there no treading down of the Enemies of King Jesus? Ch. 17. 12, 14. The Beast and his ten Kings make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.] This is a Conquest before the Resurrection. Ch. 18. Is yet more full herein, about all the Fall and Plagues of Babylon: Over whom Heaven and Earth are cal∣led to rejoyce. And it was certainly before the Resurrection, that the Kingdoms of the World are said to become the Kingdoms of Christ. And the three last Chapters describing the Glory of the delivered Church on Earth, as representing the heavenly Glory, is yet the fullest proof of all. § 18. By all this it is evident, that you call that Christs Kingdom as begun, which is but his Kingdom in triumph and maturity, as if a man were no man till he is at full Age. But it is your not distinguishing the Kingdom of Mediatorial Re∣demption, recovery and acquisition, from the Kingdom of Me∣diatorial Glory and Fruition, that is, the Errour that corrupt∣eth all your confident discourses. The Office of our Re∣deemer is to Recover sinful man to God, and restore him to purity, from sin, and all the curse or punishment for sin; yea and to advance him to a more perfect and confirmed state. And Christs Reward for this, is the everlasting Joy that was set before him, in the fruition of the Divine Complacency, and in the perfect and glorious Headship to his perfected glo∣rified Church for ever. Let us consider, 1. Which of these is Given up to the Father; And 2. What Giving up to the Father is; And 3. When it is done. § 19. 1. The first all grant is to be Given up: The King∣dom of Recovery; but not the Kingdom of Fruition: That of Grace, not that of Glory.
As a Prince commissioned to be General for the redu∣ction of Revolted Rebels, brings them down by degrees, and having slain some, and reduced the rest, he giveth up his Commission, and is General no more; for his work is done. But he hath after the promised Reward and Honour, and may under the King, rule them as recovered. Or as a Physician that hath an Hospital or infected City to cure, giveth up that work when it is perfectly finished: So Christ giveth up the Kingdom of Redemption when he hath done that work. 2. But this Giving up is no deposing of Christ, nor is he less, but more gloriously King than be∣fore. Nor is God the Father any more King than before. It's no diminution to Christs Royalty, nor any addition to the Fathers. I shall prove this before I go further. § 20. 1. By comparing this Text with Joh. 5. 22. The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all Judgment to the Son:] And yet the Father Governeth no less than he did be∣fore, and is not deposed by giving up all Government to the Son: Only the quality of the Subject, and the terms of his Government are altered. Creation is in Scripture eminent∣ly ascribed to the Father, and Redemption to the Son. The Father as Creator Governed Man in his Integrity, to pre∣serve and perfect him: Man being faln into sin and misery, the Son as Redeemer Governeth Man as a Physician his Pa∣tients, in order to his cure. The Father now judgeth no Man as sinless according to the Law of Innocency, but hath committed the Government of all to the Son as his Admi∣nistrator and Physician, in order to their cure. This is but altering the way of Government. And it is the Subjects of the Kingdom that are called The Kingdom, who are now restored, and delivered up to the Father, without blemish, spot or wrinkle, that he may henceforth Govern them as a perfectly healed People, according to the Law of Per∣fection. The Father now judgeth no less by the Son, than before in another way. § 21. 2. I prove the continuance of the Kingdom of the Son, in the way of Fruition and Glory, by the Promise here∣of made to him by the Father. The Covenant of Media∣tion, hath Obligations laid on the Son, and Promises of a
glorious Kingdom, as merited by his performance of his part. And doth his performance dispossess him of his pro∣mised Reward, when it was the condition of his Title to it? It's tedious to cite all Texts that prove it. § 22. 3. The Promises are made to Christ, that his King∣dom shall be an everlasting Kingdom, and have no end: And therefore ceaseth not by the delivery mentioned. And though the Hebrew word commonly translated [for ever] oft signifie but a long time, or many Generations; yet in the Texts intimated, there is no reason for such a limitation. If God say, that of his Kingdom there shall be no end, let the deniers prove their denial. § 23. 4. Christ hath promised to make them that over∣come, Pillars in his Temple, and they shall go out no more; which he could not perform if he go out himself, or lose his Kingly Power. And he saith, That the Children of God and the Resur∣rection are equal to the Angels, and die no more: And sure he can make their state no more durable than his own. And it is called Life Eternal which we shall possess: And shall Christ have less than we? § 24. 5. Christs Humane Nature will be perpetuated, and therefore so will his glorious Kingdom. No Text speak∣eth of his ceasing to be Man; but many contrary. And who should then presume to assert it? I know Smeckfeldius held, that Christ ceased to be Man as soon as he entred Heaven: But the Church called it a Heresie. As on Earth he was to be Man like us in flesh, so in Heaven where flesh and blood cannot enter; yet he will make our vile bodies like to his glorious body. § 25. 6. The state of Reward is an Advancement, and not a Diminution, as to us, so to Christ, Phil. 2. 9, 10. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and things under the Earth, and that every Tongue should confess that Jesus is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. § 26. 7. Christ hath promised us that we shall be with him where he is, and prayed that we may there behold his glory; which is plainly to say, that when he hath been the
Mediator of Redemption, he will be the Mediator of Frui∣tion; that is, that we shall see Gods Glory as shining to us in the glorified Humanity of Christ: For as we shall have Bodies in Heaven as well as Souls; so our Bodies will have a suitable Medium of Communion with God. § 27. 8. If Christs Humane Nature should cease its Glo∣ry, ours by the same reason would do so too. But that is contrary to the hopes of Faith. § 28. 9. Angels Glory and Being is perpetuated: And therefore Christs Humane Kingdom and Glory, who is above them, will not cease. § 29. 10. There is Executive Government by Christ to be exercised after the supposed Thousand years: Therefore he shall Reign after to perform it. The Redeemed Believers must be Rewarded to Eternity, and he must save to the utmost all that come to God by him: He must continue and perpetuate their Reward and Happiness: For they must live as his Members, because he liveth: And I doubt not but if you are for ending Christs Kingdom after a Thousand years, you will be for the ending of ours. And he hath his Enemies to punish longer than a Thou∣sand years, Luk. 19. 27. And I believe that you are for end∣ing their punishment then, if you would end Christs King∣dom then, Rev. 6. 16. It is the Wrath of the Lamb that is to be executed on the Enemies of the Lamb: It was against him and his Grace that they sinned; and it is he that com∣eth in flaming fire to execute Judgment on all that know not God, and obey not the Gospel. And doth punishment end with your Thousand years? The very nature of the glory of the Glorified Body of Christ, is to live as Branches in him the Vine: Our Life is hid with Christ in God: And if his Kingdom be given up, all our life and security is also given up. The same cause must continue that began, the Reward of Believers (in whom Christ will be admired more than a Thousand years) and the punishment of Unbe∣lievers. The Kingdom of Glory therefore continueth when the Restoring Kingdom hath done its work. § 30. 11. The Devil hath reigned by Gods penal per∣mission, over this sinful World as to the far greatest part,
about 6000 years within 314, And shall Christ reign but one thousand? Prove it before you affirm it. § 31. 12. How frivolous is your reason from Gods being All in All? What do you think those words do mean? It's neither any Addition to God, nor any Exclusion of Christ: But Gods Governing Mankind as fully recovered according to the Law of his perfect Nature, and without any more Medicinal recovering Grace; and his filling them with the Grace and Joy of his inhabiting Complacence. 1. It cannot mean that God in Essence is nearer the Crea∣ture than before. For in him we Live and Move, and Be. He is All in All now as the God of Nature. 2. It cannot mean that God will be more the Cause of Grace or Glory, for Christs ceasing to be a Cause. For God is no less a Cause when he useth second Causes, than if he used none. 3. It can no more be an Exclusion of Christ from being a Cause of our heavenly Communion with God, than an Exclusion of all second Causes from their Office: And if all second Causes be excluded, and there be no Cause but God, there will be no Being but God, and this is but to reduce the World into God or Nothing; which you must not feign unproved. § 32.  being plural cannot mean that God will End all things, and so be Nothing in any thing, but Him∣self: All things in All signifieth the Existence of those All things. And shall not Christ and his Kingdom then Exist? Not in its Paradise or Heavenly State? § 33. Can it possibly mean any more than Of Him, and Through Him, and To Him are All Things? And so they are now, Rom. 11. 36. Or that he is Above All, and through All, and in us All: And so he is now, Eph. 4. 6. And that he worketh All in All: And so he doth still, 1 Cor. 12. 6. And that he filleth All in All: And so he doth still, Eph. 1. 23. Even Christ is said to Be All in All, Col. 3. 11. And shall he cease to be so. He is appointed Heir of All things, he upholdeth All things by the Word of his Power. For whom are All things, and by whom are All things? Heb. 1. 1, 3. & 2. 10. And why must he be deposed? By him are all things, 1 Cor. 8. 6. God gathereth All things in One in Christ, Eph.
1. 10. Who filleth All things, Eph. 4. 10. till we come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, to the measure of the Stature of the fulness of Christ, ver. 13. We are growing toward this before the Resurrection. And if then we attain it, must it endure but a Thousand years? The perfection of the Church of Christ, is not like that of Fleshly Bodies, that when they are at the top of Age, go downwards again; Nor Apples and Pears, that when they are mellow soon rot. § 34. Obj. But Christ must then be subject to the Father. Ans. And was he not always subject to him (in his Huma∣nity?) He tells us oft that he doth not his own will, but the will of him that sent him. The Father worketh, and he work∣eth. He were not the true Christ if, as Man, he were not subject to God: But Paul saith not that Then he begins to be subject to the Father: But that he shall still be so. When his War is over, and he hath done his work as General, or Conquering Redeemer, he shall be still as Man, a Subject to God, and Glorified as the Reward of his Redemption, and be the Glorified Head and King of his Glorified redeemed Kingdom. § 35. I suppose you will say that Christ and his Saints shall not die, nor be deposed, but have such a Glory in which God shall be All in All. Ans. Very good; who denyeth that God is or will be All in All? But the doubt is, whether Christ shall be ever the less Christ, or King? Or the Church ever the less his King∣dom at the End of a Thousand years? I forget not your di∣stinction of Christ as Man, and as the Son of Man. You con∣fess that Christ shall be Man for ever, but not as the Son of Man: That is, as Dr. More, and you, and John Turner say, He is an Eternal Man, or Life, and hath say you, and Dr. M. an Eternal Body, Flesh and Blood, from whence you plead for Transubstantiation. Ans. You could scarce speak to a Man that hath been more tempted to follow you in such intimations, as embolden Reason to be too presumptuous; and I confess that the insi∣nuated Opinions of Peter Sterry, Dr. More, and J. Turner, and you, do strongly flatter emboldened Reason: But I take
it but for a Temptation, while Scripture is against it, as well as the judgment of the Universal Church. When Paul tells us that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, I must in Charity suppose that by Flesh and Blood Eternal, Dr. More and others, mean (not properly but Catachristically) the Natura Mentalis, or the Intellectual Nature, which they suppose to be the same in Christ, An∣gels and Men. It is not improbable that the highest of Creatures, is in order of Nature, a prior effect of the Divine production be∣fore the lower. Whether this shall be called an Emanation or a Creation you are not agreed. Nor whether this prime Created Na∣ture, be Vniversal Life, and Vniversal Matter, and so be the Soul and Body of the World, considered as before modal Mutations; or whether it be only some nobler sort of Spirit and Matter that is made before the more ignoble, and per∣haps maketh the rest. But it is concluded that Christ is the Life or Spirit and se∣cond Person in the Trinity, and the Holy Ghost the Matter, and so the third Person: And that Christ, the Soul, and the Holy Ghost the Matter, are one; which some call A Crea∣ture, and some call God, and some both. Peter Sterry's is the plainest way, that the Divine Nature first produceth and uniteth it self to the Universal Intellectual Nature, which is Christ the first Creature, including the Holy Ghost: And that this first Intellectual Nature, uniteth it self at the Incar∣nation to the Humane Nature: And so that Christ hath three Natures. 1. Divine. 2. Superangelical Created. 3. Hu∣mane. But still it is unresolved whether the prime Created Na∣ture, be a Soul to the Incarnate Body, or Christ took both Soul and Body of Man, besides the first Mental Nature. Apollinarius was for the Godhead being instead of a Soul. Now you come and tell us that [The Eternal Word in Humane Nature hath a Kingdom throughout Eternity, but not as the Son of Man, but as the Eternal Word: The Glory in which Christ is seen with his Saints, being the Glory which he had with the Father before the World began: Of the same Na∣ture wherein he is now at the right Hand of God till he appears:
And the Union in that Eternal State is by God to God, by the Word to the Father; so the Son as Man is subject, and God All in All. Catech. p. 21. It seems by the high expressions of God, who is purest Spirit, being All in All, and by the Lake of the Second Death, and even the New Heaven and New Earth after the Thousand years flying away, there is no bodily or material nature con∣tinued, no not of the Sons glorious body, who is then subject, nor of the Saints. Ans. Scripture having declared no such thing, no such thing can be supposed, but that Christ and his Saints shall be in bodies. So high expressions can fit no state but of God All in All; even as he was before the foundation of the World All in All, and to which state our Lords words so much refer, Joh. 17. When all the Saints are thus One with God in Christ, then he is thus All in All, as before the World began. Though this Kingdom of Christ be so holy, so heavenly, so pure, so much of God in it—yet because it is the Kingdom of the Man Christ Jesus, and of his Saints in a Visible Crea∣ted Glory, and not the highest Union to God All in All, Christ gives this last declaration of the Name, that is, of the Nature and Glory of God; He freely delivereth up this his Kingdom, and the Son as in Humane Nature suffers most willingly that Glory of himself, and of his Saints, to be swallowed up by God All in All, and unites them with himself to the Father, as he is the Eternal Word, and so they are with him for ever, behold∣ing the Glory which he had with the Father before the World was, which is the highest instance of Self-denial of all Created Glory, and giving up all to God All in All that could be given, Joh. 17. 5. § 36. Here you do but confound mens minds with ma∣ny things at the best unproved. 1. That Christ was an Eter∣nal Man; (of which your Transubstantiation-Book hath more.) 2. That his Eternal Manhood is so distinct from his being the Son of Man, that he hath a twofold Manhood; one from Eternity, and one at his Incarnation. 3. That Christs Kingdom as the Son of Man, that is, in his Manhood which he had by Incarnation, endureth but a Thousand years. 4. That the Manhood of his Saints which they had by Ge∣neration, also ceaseth after the Thousand years. 5. Yet Christ
and they shall have material Bodies after, even in Christs eternal Body. 6. That this giving up of the Kingdom after a Thousand years, is the greatest Self-denial in the World, as if it were a loss or diminution of the Glory of Christ and Saints. 7. That when all the Saints are thus One in Christ with God, then God is All in All, as before the foundation of the World. 8. That this is the Unity meant in Joh. 17. 24. 9. That this is glorifying Christ with the Glory he had be∣fore the World began, Joh. 17. 5. And not that God would glorifie him as the Son of Man, by advancing his Humane Nature, to its participation in the Glory which the Divine Nature had from Eternity. 10. Yet you tell me by word of mouth, that you believe the Individuation of the Saints in this united state. The Metaphor of [swallowing up in God] you may make true or false as you shall expound it, which till then signifieth nothing. § 37. Short-sighted men may reverence this the more, by how much the less they understand it: But they that will make sense of it must see, that it is to lead us to Hea∣then Philosophy as a higher Light than Christ and Scripture, and to introduce the Pythagorean Opinion of the Transmi∣gration of Souls, and the Platonists and Stoicks Revolution, and Averrhois his Universal Soul, and to make God or Christ Divisible, and with Origen, to make the future Rewards and Punishments temporary. § 38. 1. If Christ as a Man, or Life, or Spirit, was Eternal, it was as God, or as a Creature. As God he was not Man, nor Body. If you say that he was the second Hypostasis as , and the Holy Ghost the third as Matter, (as Dr. More and J. Turner) then either you mean Vniversal, or Particular Life and Matter: If Universal, you make the World to be God, and make him Divisible: If Particular, you make God a part of the World: And so you do if you make him but the Soul of the World. § 39. 2. If the Saints were in God before the World be∣gan, accordingly all things were eternally in God; and that will bring in Aristotles Eternity of the World, which indeed meer Reason might take for probable. § 40. Either you mean that we were in God only as in Potentia Creatoris, and that is not to be in him, but only to say
that he was able to make us: For existere est esse extra Cau∣sas Efficientes. Or else that we did actually exist: (which those hold that are for Souls Prae existence, or worse.) And we did exist in God, either as being God himself, or Creatures, or Effects of God. If we were God from Eternity, we are God still: If as Effects or Creatures, then either as Parts of one common Soul and body of the World (or of the Humane Species,) or as so many Individuals. If it be said that we were but Parts of one Soul or Body, it will infer that we are so still, and that these parts are as the Rivers and Springs from the Sea in continual Revolution: Or if we are fixed Indi∣viduals, God kept us not idle from Eternity (or prae-existent.) None can think that God from all Eternity (or since) kept all the Souls that are to be embodied to the end of the World, in a sleepy state till Bodies were generated for them. If you say that they lived in God as pure Spirits without Bodies, what then did the Prime Matter, which some of you call the third Hypostasis in the Trinity? We see that God put Souls into Bodies in this World: And can you prove that he never did so before from all Eternity? And when you have said, that Christ and Saints shall be swallowed up in God, and have no more Kingdom as Sons of men, but be in God as before the World began, do you mean that they shall continue so to all Eternity, and never revolve into Bodies more? When God hath shewed us that he hath delighted in embodied Souls these five thousand six hundred ninety years, will you feign that he never did so before, nor ever will do so again? § 41. I conclude, 1. That there is no rational issue of your Doctrine to be expected, but a Pythagorean, or Plato∣nick Revolution or Transmigration of Souls, from one Uni∣versal Soul into many particulars, as the Sea floweth into Springs, and they into Rivers, and they into the Sea again, and so round: Or as one Sun illuminating the Air, lighteth many Candles, (by a burning-glass or by flames,) being indi∣viduated only by the oily matter, but not divided from the common Element of Fire. 2. And that all this is but to confound men partly with falshoods, and partly with uncertainties; when the plain Doctrine of Christ is a more quieting way. God hath kept
us so dark about the Beginning or Prae-existence, and the manner of his producing Souls, yea and of the manner of their operation in their separated state, that to be confident beyond his Scripture-Revelation, is but to be ignorant of our Igno∣rance, and to venture to take Gods name in vain. But we know that God breathed into Man that breath of Life, and so made him a Living Soul, and said, Increase and multiply; and that the Spirit goeth to God that gave it, and we shall be with Christ in Paradise, and that he will receive our departing Spirits, and that it's best to be with him. § 42. And now I see not what you can make of Gods being All-in-All, more that at this day he is, and more than that he shall Govern Man again as sinless and fully restored, without any further Redemption or Recovering Govern∣ment; but that you pervert the Text to countenance your pretended abbreviation of Christs Reign to a Thousand years. All things are now in him, and of him, and to him. Nothing can be added to All. But I am not able to discern why you speak so much in Equivocals and Generals, that cannot pos∣sibly afford the Reader a determined sense. If you are un∣willing to be understood, your Opinions are not of the Light. If you understand not your own words, how should others understand them? No man can tell whether you infer from Gods being All in All, the Deification of All things, or their Annihilation, or the dissolving of all Bodies compound, and the Deifying on∣ly of the spiritual part. You say Catech. p. 14. [It is the ultimate end, and last result of All things. And (Creatures below being capable of this Vnion, as All which have no understanding are annihilated. And Creatures of understanding, Angels and Men, can be no other than miserable in the loss of this Vnion.] But are Christ the Son of Man and his Saints miserable till the end of the Thousand years? So p. 15. [In order to the Vnion of All Created Beings of Vnderstanding, to God all in all.] (What, Devils and all Damned Men!) The Eternal Word far above Angels became lower than Angels by becoming Man, and so comprehended the whole Created Intellectual nature, that he might be the Head
of the whole in their Vnion to God: And that in Him they might All be reconciled to God with the whole inferiour Crea∣tion: Which having served the Glory of the Creator by Jesus Christ, they fly back into their former State of NOTHING in themselves, but indeed are returned into the Divine Immensity, and Angels and Men be Vnited to God for ever. Eph. 1. 10. Col. 1. 20. Here we have Anihilation and Nothingness in themselves, and yet [indeed are returned into the Divine Immensity. And so that which is Nothing in it self hath a Being in God! What can this mean but that the Creatures were once all God him∣self, till he gave them a Self-being, which he taketh away, and then they are God again, not only their Individuation, but their Creature-Being ceasing. All things are still in God, and his Immensity: But if they have no Being in them∣selves there will be Nothing but God: But will they so con∣tinue? And will God from Eternity to Eternity have no Created Being save for Seven Thousand years (or days?) And indeed is the whole understanding (and inferiour) Nature, Devils and Men, thus reconciled? And is God  when there is no  nothing but Himself in Unity: Is he In that which is not? I have been so long on your first Proposition as being your Foundation: There is a Kingdom of Recovering Grace of Christ Incarnate, and Glorified, delivered up when he hath done that work, which the Kingdom of Glory succeedeth, where God as All in All shall be Glorified in the perfection of Christ God-Man and his Glorified Saints. This is agreed and granted you. Principle II. Answered. § 1. No Text of Scripture saith that the Kingdom of Grace or Redemption begins at Christs Coming to Judgment: But that then it Endeth in the Triumph of the Redeemer, and his Entering upon his Kingdom of Fruition in the full Glorified Church, 2 Tim. 4. 1. saith no more: His Appear∣ing there is for Judgment, which presupposeth Mans final keeping or breaking of Christs precedent Ruling Laws. It
is his Triumphant ending of the Kingdom which he had, and the Entrance of that of Glory. Principle III. Answered. § 1. No doubt but Christ will reign with and in his Saints. § 2. But that the full number shall be made up then is your own word. At his Coming you hold the number will not be full: For you say Catech. pag. 4. They shall propagate a holy Seed in such abundance, as to recompence with a much more to the Glory of the second Adam, Rom. 5. for the few that are saved within the World of the first Adam.] And all these were not in Being at Christs Coming. Nor can you prove that the New Earth, and all Genera∣tion shall end with a Thousand years. Principle IV. Answered. § 1. Your supposition that they are not presently caught up (yea till the end of a Thousand years) is your Forgery. 2. The Equality of Christs Love and Grace to All his Saints] is also your own Doctrine, not Christs. For tho ex parte Dei who operateth per essentiam, there is no inequality or differ∣ence, yet in the Effects and the Relative extrinsick Denomina∣tions of God from those Effects, there is great difference. All have not equal Grace, nor equally improve their Talents, nor are Rulers of ten Cities, nor as the Apostles sit on Twelve Thrones judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel. Though you say Catech. p. 3. [None of the Saints can be perfected, the one without the other.] If that be true, either those on Earth that you liken to Adam in Paradise are as perfect as those in the New Heaven, or those in Heaven as imperfect as those on Earth. (And no wonder, when you place them but in the Air where evil Spirits dwell now, Catech. p. 12.) But Christ saith the Children of the Resurrection neither Marry nor are given in Marriage, but are like the Angels; And you say on Earth they shall be getting Children abundantly
a Thousand years; if you take that for no note of imperfecti∣on, it seems Christ did. Principle V. Answered. § 1. What could you have said more strongly against your self? Death is subdued or swallowed up in Victory when the Redeemed die no more. None of them die after Christs first day of Judgment at his appearing? Are they dying all the Thousand years? I cannot imagine what reasonable an∣swer you can give to this Text and Argument! If you say that there are Devils and wicked Men to be put to death all the Thousand years, can you prove that they were the Redeemed that Christ came to deliver from death? or yet that some of them are damned in the beginning, and some not till the end of the Thousand years? Or if their death shall endure no longer than the Thousand years? If you say that the Saints on Earth, have Natures Mortal, though they shall not die; I answer, you have written that they are in the Kingdom of Glory, and equal in Love and Grace, and perfect, as those above. And if death be not subdued when Men are secured from it by Christ and the possession of promised Immortality, its a doubt whether it be overcome at all: For none are above a posse mori but God, because the Being of all Creatures dependeth meerly on his will: The suspension of his support would end all Created Being: In which sense it is that Arnobius cont. Gentes asserteth the Souls Mortality. If Christ must be the Conqueror of Death, when will he Conquer, if not when Men die no more? Is it after he hath given up his Power and King∣dom? Principle VI. Answered. § 1. This is but your further owning your own full Con∣futation.
Principle VII. Answered. § 1. This poor shift is answered above: Do you not say, Those alive are in the same Glorious Kingdom? and that none are perfect till all are perfect? And have those in the Air any more assurance that they shall not die, than Gods Love, and Will, and Promise, and their Union in Christ? 2. But why is not at least the Heavenly, or Airy Kingdom given up at first? 3. Was not death Conquered to the Person of Christ, after his Resurrection, though he was at his Ascension to be taken up? And is not death Conquered to those on Earth that have the foresaid security to ascend and never to die? This shifting is meer violence to the Text. 4. But I will prove that the Apostle tells us that the Catching up will be presently; And your words of [Christ first, and then those that sleep in him] have no more strength than this Inference [If Paul telling us of the difference in Order of time between Christs Resurrection and the End of the World, be signified by that word , after, then we may suppose that  signifieth no sudden change of the living at the Coming of Christ.] Ans. I deny the Conse∣quence: The matter of fact tells us of a sixteen hundred years distance in one, and the Text proveth a suddenness in the o∣ther. The distance between Christs Rising and his Coming to Judgment are so notoriously revealed, that Paul need not say, It will not be the same moment. But here (if you believe not your self instead of Gods Word) the contrary is so plain as confuteth all your devised frame. § 2. I. (Supposing that I need not confute to you the two false readings reproved by Jerom, Augustine, &c.) 1 Cor. 15. 51. saith, [We shall all be changed [] what could be spoken plainer? At the Change joyned with the Resurrection, it will be in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, and (which is unanswer∣able) at the last Trumpet. That the said Trumpets sound is at Christs Coming is evident, Matth. 24. 30, 31. They shall
see the Son of Man Coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory: And he shall send his Angels, with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect, from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. And 1 Thes. 4. 16. The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, &c.] If you will feign two Trumps, one at the beginning and the other at the end of the Thousand years, you will do it by so gross an addition and contradiction of Gods Word, as that I hope few will believe you: Nor yet if you feign that the Trumpet will not sound till the end of the Thousand years: For the Trumpet soundeth at the same time that Christ Com∣eth with his Angels, and that the dead are raised, and the Elect gathered. At this sound will be the change in a moment. § 3. II. The Text saith expresly that we shall be caught up together with them.] And that none may feign it to speak but of a simultas of Company and not of Time, the words are placed so as to confute it. [] we shall with them be caught up: Not a Thousand years after them. § 4. III. The Verb ] rapiemur, suddenly caught up as by force, seemeth purposely put to signifie the simultaneous speed. § 5. IV. The end of this Rapture is, not at a Thousand years end to go dwell in the Air, or with the Lord, but to meet the Lord in the Air, which is supposed to be at his Com∣ing, . The whole context, 1 Thes. 4. and 1 Cor. 15. implyeth this meeting him to be at his Com∣ing. § 6. V. It is said to be to meet him in the Air. But no Bible but yours doth say that Christ shall dwell a Thousand years in the Air. And you your self say that at the end of the Thousand years he shall give up his Airy Humane Kingdom: And when he hath removed his dwelling the Inhabitants of the Earthly Paradise will come too late. § 7. VI. It is said that when we meet him we shall for ever be with the Lord: That is, The same Lord, that we meet, which is Christ God and Man, and in the State and Kingdom
where we meet him; and not only come to him at a Thousand years end, when he hath changed his Humanity, Kingdom and Place. § 8. VII. Ver. 15. The we are left as reserved to the Coming of the Lord] plainly imply that we are kept for that time to meet him at his Coming, and not only a Thousand years after. § 9. VIII. 1 Cor. 15. 52. Again expresly joineth the sound of the Trumpet, the Resurrection, and our Change to∣gether, [For the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed, that is, when the Trumpet soundeth, and the dead are raised. § 10. IX. Matth 24. Christ tells us that He will gather his Elect from the four Winds, when he cometh with his An∣gels, and the Trumpet soundeth: But those found alive on Earth, cannot be excluded from the number of the Elect that are at or under the four Winds: Therefore they shall then be gathered to him. § 11. X. The living shall be caught up when Death the last Enemy is subdued: But that will be at Christs Trium∣phant Coming, and the Resurrection: For after that there will be no more death as an Enemy. If you would deny this (as aforesaid) because in the New Earth the Blessed are Mortal in possibility of Nature, I answer, that Paradise pos∣sibility (were it true) is none of the Curse for Sin, and therefore not the Enemy to be subdued. § 12. XI. The Saints shall be caught up when the day and work of Judgment Cometh: But that will be at Christs Coming, and the Resurrection: As he himself and many a plain Text of Scripture tell us, (too much to cite.) And whereas you feign a Judgment day of a Thousand years, taking Judgment for Government, Christ otherwise expound∣eth himself, and tells how the Judgment will proceed by Exploration and Sentence, Mat. 25. &c. And Government in general containeth Legislation, Judg∣ment and Execution: You tell us not a word what Legisla∣tion will be in the Air the Thousand years. And for Judg∣ment in special, will Christ be a Thousand years in Explora∣tion and Sentence? Will the wicked so long be untryed and uncondemned, or the Faithful so long unjustified, or by Sen∣tence
judged to Salvation? Doth not Christ Mat. 25. con∣tradict this? VViil their case be so long undecided? If you mean that Execution will be that Thousand years, can you prove that the Damned shall suffer no longer? Nor the Blessed any longer reign with Christ? O make not a New Gospel, Heaven and Hell! § 13. XII. The Saints will be taken up when the King∣dom is delivered up to the Father, and God is All In All: But that will be at Christ Triumphant Coming and Judgment at the Resurrection. For it signifieth no more but that Sin and Curse shall all be cast out, and all that rebelled against God be Conquered, and all Christs Recovering work per∣formed, and God again Rule Man as Innocent according to the Law of his perfect Nature: This will be then fi∣nished. You say that those on Earth shall be in a Paradise State, and those in the Air will not be worse: And then Christs Coming in Triumph delivereth up the Kingdom to the Fa∣ther, that his and Christs Kingdom of Glory and Fruition may succeed. § 14. XIII. When Paul was opening to them the Myste∣ry of Christs Kingdom, if he had talkt thus of being caught up in a moment of time, at the last Trump to meet the Lord, and never told them a word of a Thousand years between the Trumpet and being caught up, it must be because he knew it not, or was not willing that we should know it: But nei∣ther of these could be true in a matter of so great moment, when it was that Coming of Christ that he was satisfying them about. And I will learn from you, nothing that Paul knew not. § 15. XIV. I have proved before how copiously Christ openeth the nature of his own Kingdom in many Parables; and how he maketh his Enemies his Footstool, Conquering Satan, Sin and Enemies, and how the Revelation openeth his Conquest of the Roman Empire: And he shall destroy the Man of Sin with the Breath of his Mouth, and the Brightness of his Coming. Therefore he hath not left this to be done the Thousand years after his Coming. § 16. XV. Peter tells us that [the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night: in which the Heavens shall pass a∣way
with a great noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat.] But a Thousand years is not such a sudden surprize: Nor will Heaven and Earth be a Thousand years burning. § 17. XVI. The Earth and the Works therein shall be burnt up; and all these things be dissolved. 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. Therefore the Bodies of those then alive would be burnt and dissolved were they not first taken up. To say as you do, that God would keep them in the Fire unburnt as he did the three, Dan. 3. is to make and obtrude on us a Gospel of your own. § 18. XVII. You think Gog and Magog shall live after the Conflagration, who shall cover the Earth: And shall all their Bodies too be unburnt in the Fire, that dissolveth all these things on Earth? Is this any Word of God? § 19. XVIII. You that think Men live each one the whole Thousand years, and generate so abundantly as to recom∣pense with a much more for the few that were saved under the first Adam, can by no reasonable imagination find room on Earth, for the numberless Off-spring of a Thousand years, to dwell all at once here: And the numberless followers of Gog and Magog also to dwell with them. They must not be so unrighteous as to dispossess the wicked of their dwellings; And for one year after all is burnt up, they may be in want. § 20. XIX. It is incredible that your description of Earth for the Thousand years can leave Gog and Magog in their Hostility unconvinced: For to see Men live a Thousand years in the sight of Christ and all the Saints in the Air, one would think should convince them: Or if Men are chan∣ged before at the common Age of Men, to see so many Mil∣lions caught up to Heaven without Death or Burial, sure would make them afraid of fighting against such. § 21. XX. There is not one word of God that confineth Christs Kingdom to a Thousand years; and what are you that you should presume to do it? It hath continued much above a Thousand years already. If you alledge 2 Pet. 3. One day with the Lord is as a Thousand years, and a Thousand as one day, which speaketh only a∣gainst doubting, because of the delay of Christs Coming, as if this told us how long he should reign when he is Come,
this would but confirm us that your Doctrine is meerly of your self. The Thousand years in Rev. 20. is the same with that of the Womans being in the Wilderness, and the Dra∣gons being bound, which is plainly on this side the Confla∣gration. And indeed is presently after the fall of Pagan Rome. For that Pagan Rome was not Babylon, or that it is not faln, I will not believe though you should swear it, or cast the Glove in Challenge to dispute it. § 22. XXI. Gog and Magog, and all their Hosts are to be in the end of the Thousand years: But they are to be be∣fore the Conflagration and Coming of Christ: Therefore the Conflagration and Coming of Christ is to be after the Thou∣sand years. In the New Earth will dwell Righteousness, that is, only Righteousness, and in a Paradise state: But that is inconsistent with a numberless power of malignant E∣nemies that shall compass the Holy City. § 23. XXII. You make a strange Exposition of John, as if he wrote to five of the Asian Churches as in one World, and to Laodicea the seventh in another when this is burnt up and Christ come. § 24. XXIII. When you have almost equalled the New Earth with Heaven, you debase it by making it a Laodicean Church, which for Lukewarmness God threatneth to spew out, and to take away their Candlestick? Is this the Paradise World of Righteousness? § 25. XXIV. You make two New Jerusalem's when Scripture speaketh but of one after Christs Coming: One you take to be in the Air, and the other on Earth: Though one Society may be in both, one Vrbs or material City can∣not; such as is described Rev. 21. and 22. § 26. XXV. You feign two Conflagrations: One to Burn the World, and another after to Burn Gog and Magog and their Followers over the Earth. § 27. XXVI. You groundlesly dishonour the Kingdom of Christ by confining it to a Thousand years, which God hath promised shall have no End. § 28. XXVII. You dishonour Christ and his Kingdom by bringing him from his Fathers Right Hand in Heaven, and placing him and his Saints a Thousand years in the Air, where you say wicked Spirits now dwell, and where Dr. H.
More saith, Good and Bad dwell in an Aerial Vehicle till they are advanced to an Etherial: Yea where you say De∣vils and Damned Men now dwell with Christ; And where Christ must exercise the greatest self-denial in leaving that lower Station. § 29. XXVIII. You make Christs Kingdom to be a humbling loss to the Saints above, while you take them down into the Air for a Thousand years, from the Heavenly state where you say they were in God, where Christ is at his Right Hand, as they shall be at last; or else you will make that Everlasting Union their loss. § 30. XXIX. Either you also bring down the Angels from their Glory to dwell in the Air, or else you separate them from Christ and the Saints in the Air with him. § 31. XXX. When God hath already continued the old sinful World under the Curse almost six Thousand years, you by Fiction confine the New purified World wherein dwell∣eth Righteousness to a Thousand years, and call this the Sab∣batism. As if our Rest must be so much shorter than Sin and Labour? When yet there will be no Sin to provoke God to destroy the New World. Principle VIII. Answered. § 1. How frivolous is your arguing from the name of a Monarchy: God is ever the absolute Monarch: But if you mean a Humane Visible Monarchy, and suppose he must so vi∣sibly Rule the Earth, you do but beg the question. A Monarch of all the World, none ever was, and therefore four such never were. But if by a Monarchy you meant, the greatest Visible Empire on Earth, so the Fifth Monarchy was set up by Constantinople, which differs far more from the Pagan Ro∣man Monarchy, than that did from the Grecian or Assyrian: And it was Christs Visible Monarchy Reigning by his Vice-Roys, the Kingdoms being now said to be his Kingdoms. This was the true Visible Fifth Monarchy: And the Turks are the Sixth Monarchy, the renewed Reign of the captiva∣ted Dragon, let loose after a Thousand years.
§ 2. But your fiction that the Scripture assigns a Thou∣sand years to Christs Reign after the Resurrection is worse than frivolous; a meer forgery; I answered it before. If Peter quiet mens over-hasty expectation of Christs coming, by telling them that a Thousand years time is as nothing to the Eternal Infinite God; shall a man pretend skill in Pro∣phecy, and tell us, that he meaneth that Christs Reign after the Resurrection is measured and meant by this Thousand years, and is as nothing to the Eternal God. And I have proved to you that the Thousand years in the Revelation, speaketh of no such thing, but of what is done before the Resurrection. For 1. Those Thousand years are most likely to signifie an undetermined time, and mean no more than a Long time; as Mr. Durham and Cluverus most incline to think (and ma∣ny others.) But 2. Granting the contrary, it plainly speaketh of a time presently following the feasting of the Fowls of Heaven with the flesh of Kings and Captains, and the Fall of the Pagan Babylon. And not only Grotius, but John Fox and many others tell us, that it is the just time between the Fall of Pagan Rome, and the beginning of the Ottoman Empire; which was about 1300 years. 3. And this Thousand years is before the suppression of wickedness in the World, while Gog and Magog are in the four quarters of the Earth, in number as the Sand of the Sea; that shall go upon the breadth of the Earth, and com∣pass the Camp of the Saints, the beloved City: And before the fire that cometh down to devour them. And most cer∣tainly all this is not in the New Earth, wherein dwelleth Righteousness: So that this Thousand years seemeth to sig∣nifie but 1. That Apostles and Martyrs go to Heaven, 2. And leave their Names and Doctrine honourable on Earth; 3. And that the surviving Confessors shall rise from their persecuted state, to triumph with Christ in their deliverance and supe∣riority on Earth; 4. And that this sudden Exaltation is a fit representation of the Glory that they shall have perpetually in Heaven. Let any sober man judge whether this one only mention of a Thousand years in a hard Prophecy, Rev. 20. under the
expository circumstances now named, will warrant a man to Preach a new Gospel and Kingdom of Christ to the World, without any proof from all the plain words of Christ himself and his Apostles, and directly against them. He that well considereth Prophetical Language, will think that Articles of Faith should be founded on plainer words. When we read in Ezekiel, that Egypt shall have no Inhabi∣tant for forty years, that Tyrus shall be no more inhabited, that Babylon, and the Land of Babylon shall be no more inha∣bited, and abundance the like, we shall the better under∣stand the Apocalypse, whose very words are much taken out of the Prophets. 5. The Devil and the false Prophet are cast into the Lake of fire after the destruction of Gog and Magog, and after the Thousand years: But sure they are cast into the Lake at the Resurrection: For if they stay uncondemned a Thousand years after that, I know not what Christs coming to Judg∣ment signifieth: Sure it is not the date of their Execution; for they are to be tormented for ever and ever: And must they be unsentenced a Thousand years? 6. And the Resurrection is described as coming after all this: The Earth and Sea giving up their dead, and the dead judged out of the Books, &c. 7. And Ch. 21. The New Heaven and New Earth com∣eth after this Thousand years, and the destruction of the Enemies; and the New Jerusalem coming down from God: And there are yet Kings of the Earth that are to bring their Glory into it: And there are Nations to be healed with the Leaves of the Tree of Life; which made Mr. Potter and many others conclude, that it is the glory of the Church on Earth, that the 21, and 22 Chapters describe: Though it is most probable that it is but as a representation of the hea∣venly Glory: But the Thousand years is plainly ended before the Resurrection. 8. The plain meaning that (Though the Old Serpent will still be a Tempting Deceiver, both without the Church and within, yet) as a Dragon or Babylonish Conqueror and Captivater, he shall be bound up for a Thousand years after the Churches delivery from the Pagan Captivity: And so he was. And yet the Text tells us, that all that while the
Earth had Nations of Enemies that at last were by that Dra∣gon drawn to assault the Church again. Here is not a word of a Thousand years New Earth in which dwelleth Righte∣ousness, and that after the Conflagration and Resurrection. The New Earth is mentioned with no such limitation: That's all the device of presuming imagination. Principle IX. Answered. § 1. The Recovering Victorious Gracious Kingdom, is ended in the glorions triumph of his Appearing and Judg∣ment, and his glorious Kingdom of Fruition then beginneth: That all his Kingdom then beginneth, is a falshood largely confuted by Christs own mouth. And as false is it that the Kingdom of Recovery or Grace, is not given up till a Thousand years after the Resurrection. That this is before the Kingdom of Eternity, is false in any proper sense. If you mean a Kingdom from Eternity without beginning, you should prove that ever there was such: Your bare naming it so is no proof. If there were no men from Eternity, then there was no Kingdom of men. If you mean that which shall endure to Eternity, so will Christs glorious Kingdom as Man over Men. For many and many Scriptures tell us, it hath no end, and is everlasting: And he that accuseth others of Semi-Sadduceism of the Apostasie, should consider, whether denying the Kingdom of Christ and his Saints in glorified Humanity, as soon as a Thousand years (as one day) are ended, be not liker Sadduceism and Apostasie, than our be∣lieving the everlastingness of it. § 2. When your own presumption hath defined it to be a Thousand years, you may as boldly assign its time and place. But I have proved that the Scripture confuteth your time, and that a moment, and the twinkling of an eye, and the last Trump, sounding, is not a Thousand years: And therefore no such space as the whole Kingdoms duration, between the Re∣surrection and the living caught up. § 3. Paul saith, Phil. 3. 19, 20. that the Saviour that we look for from Heaven, shall change our vile Bodies, and make them like to his Glorious Body: He speaketh not as
you of four Bodies and three Changes. 1. A Natural sin∣ful Body turned into a Paradise Body. 2. And that (called Vile) turned into a Glorious Body. 3. And that ceasing left to a Divine Eternal Body. 3. I have oft told you that the Paradise Body or Morta∣lity, is none of the Curse or Enemy to be subdued. Principle X. Answered. § 1. We have better thoughts of the New Heaven and Earth than you have; we expect both to be of longer conti∣nuance than a Thousand years. § 2. That it is the Saints remaining that dwell on the New Earth a Thousand years before they are caught up, is your word, and not Gods, that I can find. God can reple∣nish that New Earth as he did this, or how else he please. Principle XI. Answered. § 1. Whatever they are Called you confess that the wick∣ed Rise: And that they are not cast into the Lake of Fire till the last of the Thousand years, is only your word. If they have a Thousand years Life of further tryal, why may they not repent and scape. Principle XII. Answered. § 1. The Fifth Monarchy is Christs whole Kingdom, 1. As he preparatorily Governed by the Word, Miracles and Spirit. 2. As he visibly Set up and Ruled by the Christian Emperours and Kings. 3. As he at last entereth on the King∣dom of Glory and Fruition. Your Fiction of another is but your own word. And now I have done what in the Enterance and Conclu∣sion you provokingly Challenge all Persons believing the Scriptures to do, and shew that while you say you Boast in the Word of God, and not in your self, it is by giving us your
own word, not only for Gods Word, but against it. The Lord heal and forgive our weakness, and the ignorance of our ignorance. It greatly hindereth the Edification of your Readers, that you so much use terms General and Equivocal, that unexplain∣ed signifie nothing: And so every Book needeth another to Expound it, and that may as much need another. Some think this is because you would not be understood, your Do∣ctrine being not able to bear the Light. Others think it is because you understand not your self, and therefore cannot speak intelligibly, confused Notions having but confused Ex∣pressions. The instances are more than I will recite. As e. g. You place Christs Kingdom so often in his and his Saints Appearance, as no Reader can discern, but you mean such Ap∣pearance to Mans visive Faculty in these Fleshly Bodies, as if now in Heaven Christ and Angels, and the Spirits of the Just did not Appear to one another, because they appear not to us: As if the Intuition of Spirits and Spiritual Bodies, were not a more eminent discerning than our Eye-sight: Sure there is a more noble sight, than that of Mortals. So no Man can tell by your phrase of [swallowing up in God] and that Christ was from Eternity, and shall be to Eternity, the Word and Man imbodied, whether you mean that he was an Individual Man distinct from any others, or the Univer∣sal Soul of the World imbodied in Matter: And by your talk of our being One in God, as we were before the World began, none can tell whether you mean that we were Exis∣tent, or only in Potentia Creatoris? And if Existent whether we were God or parts of God, or individual Souls made from Eternity for future Bodies, and kept till those Bodies were made: And whether kept in Revolution from Body to Body? Or how? And whether we shall have a future Revolu∣tion. So your Doctrine of the Hell of the Devils and the Damn∣ed, can tell no Man whether you think that after the Thou∣sand years they shall not be as dead, under meer privation, since you say, Catech. p. 5. and 22. It is a state of deprivation of Glory, and casting into the Lake of Fire, signifieth, final and utter
cessation of all action; And that they shall not appear but be un∣seen, &c. And if they have no Action, they have no sinful Action, no Self-accusation, no Intellection, no Malice nor Revenge, nor Hatred of God and Goodness. So your Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ; I cannot be∣lieve you so notorious an Infidel, as to deny Christs Kingdom in Heaven and Earth, till the Resurrection: And yet your words expresly say, that his Kingdom then beginneth: and that this Apostle mentioneth none till then. And in your Late Great Revolution, Epist. in the end, you say, [His Monarchy shall then (1697) begin its Succession, though the Glorious Investiture shall not be till Seventy five years after.] Can any but a Prophet that is inspired to Expound you, tell what you mean by abundance such passages? What is the difference between the Beginning of the Succession and the Glo∣rious Investiture? What is the Succession? Doth it begin the Thousand years or not? Doth the Succession begin Seventy five years before the Investiture? Is not the Investiture Christs Glorious Appearance? Your Writings make it plain, that you are a good Man of deep thoughts, faln into a fond esteem of your new unripe Conceptions, and rapt up thereby into a diseased Conceited∣ness, and how you will be able to bear it when providence and experience have confuted you in 1697 I know not: But I am the more bold to foretel your failing, by my perswasion that your Exposition of the Revelation which you take for granted, is a meer mistake from the Beginning almost to the End. And wonder not that no body writeth to confute you For Men love not to trouble themselves with Convincing e∣very single Man of his Errours. And the Reasons why I do attempt it is because by the Seduction of some of my Friends, and the general Inclination of the Antinomian, Anabaptist and Separating Party, to this conceit of the Thousand years Kingdom, and by the Midnight Cry published by Mr. R. M. and preached by Mr. J. M. Men of very great Piety, whom I highly value as any Conformists I know, I understand that your Opinion that formerly was tolerable as confined to a few conceited good Men, is now becoming a great Article of
their Faith and Religion: Especially since I see that in all your professed extraordinary Humility, you brand all that dissent from you as Semi-Sadducees of the Apostacy, and earnestly Challenge and provoke all Pastors and Doctors to answer you; and maintain (though you Conform) that Gods Word knoweth not a Clergy. Chap. III. Of the other Sect of the Millenaries that place the Thousand years Reign before the Conflagration. §. 1. THis was the Elder Sect: But Dr. More, and Mr. Be∣verley, and Dr. Cressoner, and other late Writers, being more searching, did perceive that this way would not hold, nor by it could they countenance their Doctrine from Rev. 20. the only Text that mentioneth a Thousand years Reign (misunderstood.) § 2. They agree that, 1. There will be a Thousand years Reign on Earth: 2. That the Jews shall be called, and make a glorious part of this Kingdom: 3. That the Ten Tribes now lost, shall be found, and be part of the Kingdom: 4. That Turk and Pope shall fall before this: 5. That at last Gog and Magog shall gather in War against this New Jerusalem: 6. That fire from Heaven shall consume these Enemies. § 3. But they agree not, 1. Of the state of the Church with Christ above all this time. 2. Nor whether there be one or two New Jerusalems (one above, and one below.) 3. Nor whether Christ shall Reign on Earth visibly in his Humane Nature, or only by a holy Magistracy and Ministry? 4. Nor whether all or most of the Jews shall go dwell at the Old Jerusalem, or Judea, or stay in the several Countries where they live? 5. Nor how far the Princes and Nations among whom they live shall be converted with them? 6. Nor by what means the Jews shall be converted? 7. Nor how long it will be in doing? 8. Nor how the Princes under whom they live will dismiss or use them? 9. Nor how they shall af∣ter all become a Laodicea, and fuel fit for the Conflagration? 10. Nor whether that fire that burneth the Earth and Heaven, and that which burneth Gog and Magog, make one or two
Conflagrations? 11. Nor how far Christs Kingdom ceaseth at the end of the Thousand years? § 4. As to both Sects, I know no more that I have further to do for their full confutation, but I. To give a better Pa∣raphrase of the Revelation than their feigned suppositions con∣tain: And that I have done in a Book not yet Printed. II. To prove that the Ten Tribes were but part of them carried away by Salmanasser, and that they were in Cyrus Do∣minions, and had leave as well as the Two Tribes to return if they were willing: And that Galilee and other parts of Israel as much owned Christ as the Two Tribes, at least: And the Twelve Tribes made up the Converts that were the Ru∣diments of the Christian Churches: And that it was to the Twelve that James, Peter, and Paul to the Hebrews wrote: And it was the Twelve that the 144000 Rev. 7. were sealed out of, so expresly distinguished from the innumerable Gen∣tile Christians, as may confute the Expositors, that make them to signifie the Gentile Ministry. III. To prove that at the Fall of the Pagan Empire, the Fulness of the Gentiles came in, as meant Rom. 11. and all Israel saved: That near three Millions of the Jews that were cursed Infidels, being killed and ruined by Titus, Trajan and Adrian (out of a Countrey not so big as half England) and the Christians escaping, the Christian part remained the main Body of the Nation: And marrying with Gentile Christians, and forsaking Moses Law, lost the name of Jews, which re∣mained only with the Off-spring of the scattered Infidels. That Constantine made Judea one of the most famous Na∣tional-Provincial Churches in the World, for Honours, Temples, Monasteries and Bishops, no Jews being forbidden there to dwell. And that God hath promised no further Con∣version of the cursed remnant of the Infidel Jews, than of any other Infidel Nations: And therefore all Christians should not in ignorance of all this, corrupt their Prayers, and Sermons, and Religion, with fathering on God such Promi∣ses of the Jews Conversion as he never made, lest they be found guilty of adding to his Word, and taking his Name in vain, and scandalous depraving the Christian Faith. Nor should they by ignorance unthankfully deny the performance of Gods Promises, of the Fall of the Pagan Empire and Ba∣bylon,
and so much of the Fifth Monarchy, and New Jerusa∣lem, and Conversion of the Jews, as certain History puts us past doubt is already past. The performance of this, to avoid prolixity, I shall but briefly give you as followeth. Chap. IV. That the Ten Tribes of Israel, will never be found and called, if they never were so heretofore. § 1. THose that are for a Jewish Monarchy, or their ge∣neral Conversion, commonly hold that the Ten Tribes carried away by Salmanasser, are lost, and never yet restored. Whether this be true, we shall see anon. But if it were true, it would follow, that they never will be found and called, and consequently that they will be no part of the Converted Jews. § 2. The proof is evident: Because the Accident suppo∣seth a Subject: That which is not, hath no Accident. There are no such Ten Tribes unknown and uncalled existent in the World. None will say that any such are known: And that's enough to prove them unknown, and if unknown, not in being. For 1. If the Infidel part of the Two Tribes be as many as such think, how much more numerous must all the Poste∣rity of the Ten Tribes be? 2. And Navigations, Travelling, and Merchandize, and Embassies, have acquainted Men with so much of the Earth, as tells us that they are not known in any known part of the World: And were they Existent they could not be un∣known. Benjamin's Itinerary that feigneth a discovery of them, proveth it self fabulous, and is so accounted commonly by sober learned Men. And dreaming that they are in America is no proof. § 3. Learned Mr. Sam. Lee, well describeth many of the places to which they were transplanted, and very learnedly stretcheth his Wit to conjecture that they are in Tartary: But 1. There is not any probability given us by him that
ever they were thither removed, [at least any notable num∣ber.] 2. And though Tartary be large, and not all fully known to us, yet so much is discovered by Historians and Tra∣vellers, as may acquaint us that there is extant no Society of known and professed Jews; they being all Heathens and Ma∣hometans, save an inconsiderable sprinkling of Christians: And Scythia hath been so anciently peopled, that even to the Potent Roman Empire, they were the most Invincible Ene∣mies; And the Wars of Tamerlane made them known to much of the World. And if they were there, and Marrying with Scythians have lost the Name of Jews, they are unreco∣verably Extinct. And so cannot be called as Jews, being now no Jews. It is become a Natural Impossiblity. Chap. V. That the Ten Tribes were not lost, or Ex∣tinct. § 1. 1. THis is so clear by abundance of Prophesies in Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, Hosea, that it would be tedious to recite them; viz. That Judah and Israel were to be again made one Kingdom, as two Sticks made one Stick, and David their King to reign over them: If this was not fulfilled, the Prophesie would fail, which must not be imagined: For (as is aforesaid) if it be not fulfilled, they being now extinct, and not existent, it never can be ful∣filled. § 2. 2. There is no probability (as Mr. Mather hath well noted in his Diatriba) that all or most of the common people were transplanted; but only the Rulers, and Rich, and Mi∣litary and Leading Men. For 1. Considering how many Millions that small Land maintained, it is improbable that so great a multitude could be so far Ruled by an Army, or that they should soon find vacant Habitations, and Victuals for them. 2. And it is more unlikely that Salmanasser should find so many of his Subjects to send into their places, and that all those should be willing of a removal into so small a Land. 3. And it is known that no such thing hath been done by Conquerours in any other Land. Nebuchadnezzar took from
Jerusalem none but the Princes, Nobles, Priests, Rich Men, Souldiers, and Men fit for his Militia, and Smiths, and Car∣penters, &c. But he left the common people to Manure the Land: Otherwise they would lose all their Tribute, and the Fruit of the Ground. In all the Conquests made by the Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Egyptians, the Saracens, the Turks, the Tar∣tarians by Tamerlane, there hath no such thing been done, as the transplanting of the most of the common Inhabitants. Indeed the beggarly Goths, and Vandals, Ostrogaths and Hemli, &c. came with their Wives and Children sometimes, resolving to possess or die: But what was a hundred thou∣sand of such to all Italy when they possest it; or to all Spain, or all France, or Africk, in comparison of the Inhabitants whom they subdued and mastered? In England how few were the Romans, yea or the Saxons, or the Danes, or the Normans, in comparison of the Britains that were brought in subjection unto them? It was but the Great men, and Rich, and Military, and some fearful people that fled from their Armies, that fled into Wales. As Mr. Tho. Jones in his Hearts Soveraignty hath truly proved, the main Body of this Nation called English, is of the Brittish Bllod (it's like many hundred to one) though the Language fol∣lowed the ruling part. § 3. 3. It is evident that All the Twelve Tribes were in the Dominion of Cyrus, when he sent the Jews to repair the Temple and City: The Two Tribes at Babylon where he made Darius King, and the Ten in his Hereditary Dominions and his Conquests, as Mr. Calvet in his Naphthali hath shew∣ed; and as will appear by the Topography of the places named in Scripture, to which they were carried, Learnedly opened by Mr. Lee, abating his conceit of Tartary. And it is evident that Cyrus meant not to confine the grant of his free return to the Two Tribes: But those that were not willing to return he did not compel: And most had possession by that time of wider and fatter Habitations. Ezra 1. Cyrus made no question of their liberty to dwell in Judea: But it was Gods House at Jerusalem that God charged him to Build, for which end he saith, ver. 3. [Who is among you of all his people, his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem which
is in Judah, and Build the House of the Lord God of Israel (he is the God) which is at Jerusalem. And whosoever remaineth in any place where he Sojourneth, let the Men of his place lift him up with Silver, and with Gold, and with Goods, and with Beasts, &c. Were the Ten Tribes none of the people of the God of Israel? I must not swell this Book too big: Let the Reader that is willing to understand, peruse Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, and Daniel, with Haggai, and Zechariah, and consider the Grants of Darius, and Artaxerxes, and the vast number of Jews still remaining abroad in the persecution of Haman, and he will find that it was not for want of Liberty to return that so ma∣ny stayed behind, but because the avoided returning as a Suffering: And multitudes that had a Zeal for Jerusalem, settled in Egypt at Alexandria, that thence they might three times a year come to the Temple, without too much loss and cost. § 4. 4. In Christs time the Habitations of the Ten Tribes was of the same Religion with those at Jerusalem: And went thither to the Feasts; and submitted to their Priests and Ceremonies; Christ lived from his Childhood still in Galilee: At Nazareth and Capernaum, where Peter, Andrew, James and John lived: That is, close by the Ford of Jordan, by which is the passage to Egypt: There he had far more Followers than about Jerusalem: Thence went his supposed Father, and Brethren ordinarily to the Feasts at Jerusalem: Zechary and Elizabeth, many Levites, Scribes and Pharisees dwell in the Countrey of the Ten Tribes: Though Samaria about the place of Worship, by Customs kept up some Animosity a∣gainst Jerusalem, yet the Woman, John 4. could say, When the Messiah cometh he will tell us all things: And is not this the Christ: And what place so generally received the Gospel when Philip preached to them? It was not for nothing that the Christians were so long called Galileans. But this and more shall next be proved.
Chap. VI. What Conversion the Twelve Tribes have al∣ready had? § 2. 1. AS is aforesaid, The Saviour himself (and his Apostles) chose his abode on Earth among them; and calleth them the lost Sheep of the house of Israel; and the Children whose Bread must not be given to Dogs: They were the Circumcision to whom he was a Minister: He ordinarily Preached in their Synagogues, and there wrought most of his Miracles: It was they that cryed him as King with Hosanna's: It was they that followed him to the Cross; and it was in Galilee where on a Mountain he appointed them to meet him after his Resurrection. § 2. 2. He appointed (not two, but) Twelve Apostles, and 70 Disciples, as suited to the Twelve Tribes and their Sanedrim, to shew what Form of Government he assigned them, and for whom, and he sent his Apostles to the Twelve Tribes of Israel. § 3. 3. The chief success of their Preaching was on the Samaritans and others of the Ten Tribes; and such of them as came up to the Feasts. § 4. 4. There were three thousand at once converted of the Jews; after made five thousand; and soon after many Myriads of Jews believed (at least many thousands.) § 5. 5. These became the Mother-Church, and the Law went out of Zion, and so all Nations were blest in Abrahams Seed, and Christ became a Light to the Gentiles, and the Glory of his People Israel: The scattered Jews of the Twelve Tribes through much of the Empire, were the Sta∣mina or Rudiments of the Gentile Churches: The Apostles first Preached in their Synagogues, and the converted Gen∣tiles were added to their Converts. § 6. 6. The Epistle to the Hebr was written to all the Hebrew Christians, and not to Two Tribes only; and implieth the great success of the Gospel on them. § 7. 7. Peter directeth his Epistle to all the Strangers scattered through Pontus, Asia, Galatia, Phrygia, &c. and magnifieth their Grace.
§ 8. 8. James directeth his Epistle to the Twelve Tribes, that are scatter'd abroad: And it is evident that he writeth to them as Christians. § 9. 9. The seventh Chapter of the Revelations expresly nameth the Twelve Tribes, of which One Hundred and Forty four Thousand were Sealed, Twelve Thousand of each Tribe (meaning a great number) that were to be preserved from the Destruction that was to be executed on their Enemies. The boldness of those Expositors who give us their own Revelation instead of Christs, is palpable: who tell us that by these One Hundred and For∣ty four Thousand is meant all the Reformed that are saved from the destruction to be executed on the Papists? What words can we desire God to use more plain, that Men may not pervert? 1. God speaketh of Jews, and they say he meaneth Gentiles. 2. God nameth the Tribes, and they exclude them. 3. They are called [The First Fruits] of the Church:Rev. 14. . And they say, It meaneth the last. 4. The num∣berless Gentile Christians that with them partaked of the pre∣servation, are by way of distinction mentioned in the next words: Yet these Commentators say, That the Gentiles are meant by the Twelve Tribes. 5. The Prophesie is put in the beginning before the Trumpets or Vials, even before all the Judgments that were to come on Infidel Jews and Ro∣mans; yet do they bring it down towards the end of the World, or after the Fall of Pagan Rome. § 10. 10. It was some considerable time before the Jew∣ish Christians could be satisfied to let go their Priviledge of Peculiarity and Mosaick Policy, and to Embody on equal Terms with the Gentiles in the Catholick Church, and to Marry with Gentile Christians: And all that time Dr. Ham∣mond, and Grotius, and others say, They had in the great Cities one Church of Jews and one of Gentiles; which also difference of Language would require; and so had two Bi∣shops in a City: And Peter for the Circumcision, and Paul for the Uncircumcision, were the Roots of the Jewish and Gentile Miracle-working Ministry, which I suppose were the Two Witnesses mentioned in the Revelation; For whoever they were they may be known by the Promise, Mark 16. 17, 18. In my Name shall they cast out Devils, they shall
speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, they shall lay Hands on the sick, and they shall recover.] Our Reformers pretended not to Miracles. § 11. 11. At the Wars of Vespasian and Titus against the Jews, One Million and One Hundred Thousand were kill'd, and Seven Hundred Thousand carried into Captivity; and the Christians fore-warned by Christ, got out of the City and escaped. And in Trajan's days a Madness seized on the Infidel Jews, and they rose up and Murdered many score Thousands of the Roman Subjects: And after Barchocheba proclaimed himself the Messiah, Murdered so many more as amounted to an Hundred Thousands: VVhereupon Trajan and Adrian in Revenge kill'd between One and Two Milli∣ons of these Rebel Jews, still sparing the Christians. After all this, the Infidel Jews could have but a small number left: All London hath not near a Million. By which it appeareth that the main Body of the Jews preserved, were the Christi∣ans, to whom the Cursed part were few. § 12. 12. The Converted Jews fell into the Catholick Church, and Married with Gentile Christians, and so ere long lost the name of Jews, and became unknown. So that the scattered Relicks now called Jews are but the Off-spring of the Self-cursed Rabble that were scattered after the aforesaid slaughter of them. § 13. 13. In Constantine's Reign the Jews had as much Liberty and Invitation to be Christians as any others: And Judea was not only made a National-Provincial Church, but was more honoured for Christs sake than any Nation no greater, save the Imperial Seat. There were more Churches Built, and more Monasteries, and more Bishops, than else∣where, in so small a compass: No Jew was forbidden there to live. No Countrey so honoured: The Devout People from Rome and many Countreys went thither, some on Pil∣grimage, and some to dwell: Thence they fetcht what Re∣licks they could get in remembrance of Christ. There at Bethlehem Jerom lived while he wrote and studied much of his Works. § 14. 14. Since then in all Ages some of the Infidel Re∣licks have been converted: Whether the History of the dis∣pute
between Gregentius and Herbanus, and the miraculous Conversion of them by Christs Appearance be true or no, (which few judicious Men believe) in all Ages many Jews have been Baptized, and some proved excellent Divines. § 15. 15. When all the Ten Kingdoms that had been Tributary or Subject to the Pagan Empire, so quickly fol∣lowed the success of Constantine and the Christian Arms, and turned against the Pagan Idolatry, it is utterly incredible that multitudes of the Infidel Jews did not the same. No one Nation turned all at once: And no one National Church under Heaven were all (that I say not the most) sincerely holy Christians: The visible Church still consisted mostly of temporizing Men, that came in to Christianity for worldly Interest, over-awed by Christian Power: Till it came to this, the Christians were a persecuted party, and no National Church. And the unbelieving Jews were not like to be so free from the Love of the Flesh and VVorld, as not to do as others did. Christ Riding victoriously on the VVhite Horse, and Conquering his Enemies, brought the Nations to Submission, after he had by the Word and Martyrdom purified to himself a holy Generation. As all the Revelation fully telleth us. Therefore if Judea was not made a Na∣tional Church, no other Nation was made such. Zonaras saith that many hired by Money turned Christians, Two Hundred Thousand turned Christians for fear in their Troubles at Toledo in Spain (whither they were long before sent.) And Forty Fryars were sent to instruct them. Af∣ter that Ferrerius converted many. Read but the Chrono∣logical Tables of my worthy Friend Mr. Fr. Tallents, and you shall find, how they were hated, hunted and destroyed, in Spain, France, and almost all Christians Nations, except Rome, and how many turned seeming Christians for fear.
Chap, VII. Whether there be any Jerusalem Monarchy of Jews, or any further Conversion of them, more than of other Men, promised by God? § 1. I know of no such Promise in Gods Word, but I find it in many Books of Men, and I hear of it in the Prayers and Sermons of many Men, so good, and of so good repute, that divers of my Friends disswade me from so much as giving my Reasons against it, lest I lose my Re∣putation with such Men, and lest I occasion a Division by contradicting them. And is it come to that? Must our Con∣cord be held on such humane, loose and unsound terms? Is this savouring the things of God, or of Men? If it be proved an Errour, taking Gods Name in vain, polluting Sacred Worship, and adding to the Word of God, must we by si∣lence promote a Concord in it? I only humbly propose the Reasons of my dissent to the tryal of wiser Men. § 2. 1. It belongeth to the Affirmers to produce their proofs: But I can find no Text cited by them, that to a so∣ber search hath any such proof. 1. As to the many Texts of the Prophets of the uniting of Judah and Israel under David their King, and the Jews re∣possessing their own Land, and the Subjection of their Ene∣mies, and the Neighbour Nations to them, and the great Slaughters of Gog and Magog in their Land, &c. 1. Let the Grandeur of Prophetical stile he allowed for, and this com∣pared with the Prophecies against Babylon, Tyre, Sion, Moab, Edom, &c. 2. Read the whole Text, and you will find most express passages, that cannot be applyed to any such time and use as this in question, but plainly speak of their return from Cap∣tivity, and their following state. It would too much swell my Book to try and vindicate all the particular Texts Mr. James Calvert, having already done it in his Naphthali, yet unanswered. 3. Confound not the Immediate Sense of the Prophesie, with the remote, and set not one against the other, the se∣veral
parts and degrees that make up the whole. Many Pro∣phesies in the Psalms are spoken immediately of David, but as he was a Type of Christ, in whom they were though re∣motely yet chiefly fulfilled. The Prophesies of the honour of the Jews, and their Re∣storation, had divers degrees of fulfilling. 1. They were primarily fulfilled in the return from Captivity, and the Power that followed under Zorubbabel and the Maccabees. 2. They were further fulfilled by the Coming of the Messiah, of the Seed of Abraham and David, in whom all the Nations of the Earth are blessed. 3. They were further fulfilled at Christs Resurrection, Ascension, and Effusion of the Holy Ghost, and the many Thousands of them Converted; And their spreading the Gospel over the Gentile World. 4. It was yet more fulfilled when Dominion was given to Christi∣ans, and the fulness of the Gentiles brought in all Israel, and settled a National Church in Judea, and put all their Ene∣mies in subjection to the Catholick Church of Jewish and Gentile Christians, reconciled in one Body, the partition Wall being broken down 5. It will be yet more fulfilled in the New Heaven and Earth; under the Gospel there is neither Circumcision not Uncircumcision, but Christ is All and in All: How much more in the New World? He that would promise to redeem Christians from Turk∣ish Captivity, and restore them to their own Land, and pros∣per and honour them there if they will obey him, must not be thought to confound the several benefits and degrees of this Promise: He that will lead you into an upper Chamber, includeth every step of the Stairs that you ascend; and the promise of helping you up the first step, includeth not the last, but tendeth to it, and if you obey will lead you fur∣ther. 4. Read the Book of the Maccabees, and other History, that you may not be ignorant of what is already done: For instance, How the great Ruine of Gog and Magog (so Hy∣perbolically set out) was fulfilled on the Syrian and Grae∣cian Armies, (of which see the Assembly Mens Annota∣tions.) § 3. II. Their next seeming proof is from Rom. 11. of which I have proved how much is fulfilled already; besides
which I find no more there promised, than to all the Church in the New World. 1. God cast not away the fore-known Elect, v. 1, 2, to 11. 2. Through their Fall and Infidelity, persecuting the Chri∣stians from among them, the Gospel came to the Gentiles, v. 12. 3. It was but some of the Branches that were broken off, v. 17. 4. As the casting away of them was the converting and re∣conciling of the Pagan World; so their receiving was as a Resurrection of life from the dead, v. 15. 5. The Converted Gentiles were but grafted in among them, and partakers with them, (and not without them) of the fatness of the Olive, v. 17. 6. Not the Root, but the some Branches that were broken off, was that we might be grafted in, v. 19. It was chiefly the Priests, and Rulers, and the self-cursed Rabble that fol∣lowed them, and yet some Priests and Pharisees were con∣verted. 7. If they continue not in Gods Goodness, the Gentiles al∣so shall be broken off, v. 22. So much of conditionality is in the Promise: And yet there is more Scripture to expect that the Gentiles shall not be broken off, than that there shall be any more National Conversion of the Jews. 8. The promise of restoring the broken Branches is, If they continue not in unbelief, v. 23. 9. Yet here is a Prophecy that the Jews shall be eminently replanted, v. 24. and not for ever left in general unbelief. 10. It was but blindness in part that happened to those some, till the fulness of the Gentiles came in: Which must either mean, till the Empire of the Roman World fell into the Christians hands: Or else till all the Gentiles were con∣verted that ever shall be: This last cannot be the meaning, for then it would not be till the end of the World; there∣fore it must be the former, which is long fulfilled, v. 25. 11. So all Israel were saved, that is, 1. All the Israel of God, the believing Children of Abraham (for all are not Israel that are of Israel,) gathered into one Catholick Body. 2. And so many of Natural Israel as to make not only one of the two Witnesses and Olive Trees, but also a formed National ho∣noured Church-Society.
12. When to drive away the Gospel to the Gentiles some were left in unbelief: The Elect part were they that were beloved for their Father Abrahams sake, (much more for Christs sake,) v. 28. 13. As it was from them that the Gentiles had the Gospel; so it was from the Gentiles mercy that the restored Body of the Jews obtained mercy, being by the Christian Emperors and Princes restored and honoured, v. 29, 30. 14. God left the Rulers and many others in unbelief, that he might recover (not each single person, but) a Political Body and Power to the Nation as he did, v. 32. As Alexan∣der Severus gave the Infidel Jews power to chuse them a Go∣vernour of their own (under him) the Christian Emperors did for the Christian Jews much more. 15. Thus is Gods Goodness and Severity glorified: And what word in that Chapter proper to the Jews is not ful∣filled? § 4. As to the Texts that mention the Restitution of all things, the Creatures groaning to be delivered from the bon∣dage of corruption, drinking the fruit of the Vine new, and such like; what word is in all this that respecteth the Jews more than the Gentiles, or that may not be performed in the New World, unlimited to Jews, or to a Thousand years? § 5. The same I say of the Lords Prayer, Let thy King∣dom come, &c. which long made me hope for better days on this same Earth: But this saith nothing more of the Jews than of the Heathens. And who can here find any limitation of this Kingdom to a Thousand years? All the Word that tells us what to pray for, doth not tell us what in this World we shall obtain. I doubt not but we may pray for Jews and all men, but that proveth not all shall be con∣verted and saved: We may have hope of many Individual Jews, when we have no promise of a National further Resti∣tution of the many more than of any others.
Chap. VIII. Reasons for the Negative humbly offered to Tryal. § 1. I. THat which is done already according to Promise, we must not take for undone, or expect to be done again. But the Calling of the Jews is done already ac∣cording to Promise: Ergo, &c. I hinted this oft before; I will not shun repetition where the cause requireth it. 1. It is granted that the Catholick Church is called The New Jerusalem, so far as it is short of the other World: But the Catholick Church, and therein the Jewish Nation, was more gloriously set up by the Christian Empire, than the Mil∣lenaries, can reasonably expect or plead for: 1. What are a few Rabble Jews, such as are among us, to the great, rich, victorious Roman Empire, the greatest that ever was on Earth, which turned Christian in the Regent part, and shortly in the commonest Profession? What an Empire would the Jews of England, Spain, Portugal, Turky, &c. make? 2. Constantinople was then called not only New-Rome, but New-Sion: And how greatly did it excel Jerusalem in spa∣ciousness, riches, power and glory? 3. How small and barren a spot was Judea, (like our Wales) in comparison of the Roman Christian Empire, in Eu∣rope, Asia, and Africa? Like the Isle of Man to England. 4. How great a Protection had the Jews under Constantine, and following Emperours, above what they had even after their Restoration from Captivity, from Zorobabel and the Maccabees to the end of their Policy. 5. What could they now desire for their return more than they then had? What greater liberty, or encouragement, or help? An excess of Honour was put on their Countrey, and on all that would come into the Christian Church. 6. What better Plantation of Religion can be expected in Judea, than was when the Emperours built them Temples, and devout people travelled thither, and dwelt there, and bought them Bibles, and built them Religious Houses, and set over them Pastors, and Bishops, and A. Bishops, and a Pa∣triarch,
one of the five in the Empire? And their National Church honourably united to the Catholick? What outward honour can they expect more? All Protestants note it as the wicked Superstition of the Popes, that they were so set on the honouring of Jerusalem and Judea, called The Holy Land, that they forced Emperours, and Kings (of France and England, &c.) at vast charges to go fight for it, to the loss of 100000 men. § 2. Obj. But Judea was not all planted with Jews, but with a mixt people. Ans. 1. And must all that now possess it be robbed of their Habitations and Estates, to make room for our Jews? 2. There were no Jews restrained from going thither that desired it: And would you have them forced, or sent thither with a Pass? 3. Those that would not go thither had better en∣couragement where they dwelt. § 3. Obj. But it was not the main Body of the Nation that was converted and restored. Ans. 1. I have given great probability that it was the far greatest part, so many of the Rebels had been before de∣stroyed. 2. There was no Heathen Nation where the grea∣ter number presently turned Christians, till Power and In∣terest prevailed with them: Even till the days of Alari∣cus and Theodorick thousands were Heathens in Christian Rome. And holy Chrysostom in his days in the glory of Constanti∣nople, reckoned but of a hundred thousand Christians, besides Separatists and Hereticks, the rest being Heathens and Jews; shall we therefore say that such were no National Churches, that is, Christian Kingdoms? § 4. Obj. But while their Governours were set over them by others, and not chosen by themselves, they could not be called Jewish National Churches. Ans. 1. Their Pastors were chosen by themselves, what∣ever the Souldiers and Magistrates were. The Inhabitant Christians Jews and Gentiles chose them. 2. Their submis∣sion and consent might make them Churches of Jews. 3. But I confess they were not, nor ever must be, Churches of Jews separate from the Gentiles, or otherwise than as parts of the Catholick United Church. It seems you take not the Jews for converted, till they become separated from the Catho∣lick Church, and claim their old peculiarity. Of which more anon.
§ 5. II. The Doctrine of the Jews Conversion as in∣ferring a Policy or Monarchy of Jews as such, is a con∣tradiction, and therefore impossible. Is there any room then for any further dispute of it? When there are no Jews, there cannot possibly be any Kingdom or Common-wealth of Jews: But were the self-cursed Progeny converted, they would be no Jews imme∣diately in a Religious sense, nor within sixty or eighty years in a natural sense. 1. A Converted Jew joyneth himself to the Catholick Church, and knoweth that this is his advancement, above the old separate state of Peculiarity, and knoweth that Moses Law and Policy is ended; and that if he turn to that Law, he falls from Grace, and if he be (Jewishly) Circumcised, Christ shall profit him nothing: Therefore he is no more a Jew in Religion. 2. And being a Catholick Christian, he will marry with Gentile Catholicks, and not confine Marriage to those of his own Nation, to keep up the separation. And so with∣in a short time there would be no Natural Jews. For instance; If A marry B, a Gentile Christian, their Children will be but half Jews: If their Children marry Gentile Christians, their Children will be but a quarter Jews: And if those marry Gentile Christians, their Children will be but an eighth part of Jewish Race; that is, no Jews at all: Thus it is faln out with the Progeny of all their converted Ance∣stors. I have since I was twenty four years Old, lived in the house with the Mother of the Grandmother of the Grand∣father of some now living. And if I have seen between 24 and 76 so many Generations, in how short a time would Converted Jews be no Jews? § 6. III. And the desire of such a Jewish Conversion, State and Kingdom, or Church, as should continue them in a Jewish Line and Peculiarity, distinct from the Catholick mixed Church, is a wickedness, and contrary to the very na∣ture of Christianity, and the Kingdom and Design of Christ: For Christ came to take down the Partition Wall, Middle Wall, and make of two one new man, even both one, (no longer two:) Here is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, but
Christ is All, and in All, of whom the whole Family in Hea∣ven and Earth is named, and will have all to grow up to one perfect man, Eph. 2. & 3. & 4. Col. 3. Will Christ now turn against his own uniting Design and Kingdom, and set up Moses again and his Policy? § 7. Obj. But we do not hold that he shall set up Moses Ce∣remonial Law, or Worship. Answ. Nor if you are Christians, should you say, that he will turn again the one United Body into two, and by restoring the carnal Peculiarity, to set up again the Wall of Separation? § 8. Obj. But if English, French, Spaniards, &c. may be still distinct, why may not Jews and Gentiles? Ans. Because One is but accidentally and mutably, from the difference of Countreys and Habitation, and of Lan∣guage, and Trading, and Government, which Christ came not to unite: But the other is on pretence of a Religious Trust on a Divine Gift of Peculiarity, setting them up above the rest of the Church, which Christ came to take down, and tendeth to Church Divisions. § 9. IV. So hardly were the first Converted Jews taken off their conceit of Peculiarity, and acknowledging Catholick Equality of the Gentiles, and such doleful Heresies and Breaches were made by this Pride, that it is not safe tempt∣ing them to it again. § 10. V. It seemeth a Carnal Imputation of the most Holy God; as if he made under the Gospel so great an ac∣count of one sort of People by their peculiar Birth-priviledge, above all the rest of the World. When Paul tells us that All Believers are Abrahams Children, and that he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, nor that Circumcision which is of the flesh. And the Jews are so far from being of any better nature or desert than other men, that the Infidel part have ever since their self-cursing and obdurateness in unbe∣lief, been found in all Nations to be the most covetous, treacherous, and sottish sort of People: Much unprepared for so great a change. § 11. VI. Either All the Off-spring of the Jews shall be partakers of this pretended Priviledge and Monarchy, or only the Off-spring of those that continued Infidels till the change.
But neither of these can be true. 1. The Off-spring of all that have been converted for fourteen hundred years after Christ, cannot possibly now be made any parts of a Jewish Monarchy or State: Because they are all unknown, and are now no Jews: And so that it is impossible. 2. And to advance only the present profligate Generation, to a separate Monarchy, excluding all the Off-spring of the Converts of all former Ages, looks so strangely, that the affir∣mers had need to bring good proof of it, considering the diffe∣rence of quality and number, that the least and worst part shall be chiefly advanced. § 12. VII. Either in this Jewish advancement, all the rest of the Godly through the World shall be as much ad∣vanced, or the Jews alone. If all the Godly, they being I hope a Thousand to one Jew, why should it be called a Jew∣ish Jerusalem or Monarchy? Then sure, this New Jerusalem must be setled in all Kingdoms, where the Godly dwell: And shall they every where be Lords? If it be only for the Jews, can any but a Jew believe it? That the Off-spring of the scattered, cursed, sottish Enemies of Christ, shall be so much preferred before all the Godly through the World? § 13. VIII. Either all the Nations of Heathens, Maho∣metans, Papists, and Ungodly-Ones, shall be Converted, with the Jews, or not: If yea, it will be a New and Hap∣py World indeed: A Blessed Change will be made on Kings, and Parliaments, and Lords, and Rich Men, and Poor: And there will be as many Miracles as Men, when all those shall be made wise and holy, that we cannot now with twen∣ty years preaching prevail with to be Men, and to cease ma∣lignity, and bestial Lusts: Sure God will not Burn such a Blessed World, and bury so many Millions of Miracles in the Flames. But if it be only the Jews, that are miraculously Conver∣ted, it must be a Miracle that must cause the malignant Princes and People, Heathens, Mahometans, Greeks, Pa∣pists and Carnal Protestants, either to become Subjects to these poor Jews where they dwell, or to help or permit their Transportation to Jerusalem, and then to be subject to them there: If this must be their Fate, why do we not ac∣quaint our selves with those few cursed Enemies of Christ,
that live in London, in Wapping, or elsewhere near us, and honour them, and beg their favour against the time of their Reign. Oliver Cromwell appointed a Solemn dispute before him, whether the Jews (for Money) should have a Tole∣ration, and when that good Man Dr. Tho. Goodwin, and some other godly Independents had spoken much for it, Matthew Newcomen (that holy Man) so opened the wickedness of turning loose a Cursed Generation to tempt a Nation to In∣fidelity, that is already too much inclined thereto, as turned the Scales, and put an end to that deliberation. §14. IX. Either the feigned Conversion of these Jews will be before the burning of the World, or after: But nei∣ther before nor after: Therefore not at all. 1. If it be Before, either it will be the Thousand years Reign, or some part of the Thousand years Reign, or be∣ffore it all. If it be the Thousand years Reign, then 1. The World must last yet a Thousand year after the Jews Conversion: Which few believe. 2. And then there will be no Thou∣sand years Reign after the Conflagration, which our chief Millenaries will not endure: For there is but One Thousand years Reign looked for by them. 3. And then the New Je∣rusalem state shall have the numberless Enemies of the Ar∣mies of Gog and Magog: And shall fall to a Laodicean Luke∣warmness: What! After so many Millions of Mira∣cles? 2. But if they say it will be After the burning of the World, that is before disproved: For the Thousand years are past before that Conflagration. Gog and Magog, and the numberless Enemies will not survive the Burning, nor live in the New Earth, wherein dwelleth Righteousness. 3. And if they say that it will be but some part of the Thousand years, or a short time before the Conflagration. 1. The Thousand years will not be divided, part before the Burning, and part in the next World. 2. And so short a Reign of the Jews, as shall end before the Thousand years, and Burning, will not answer the glorious preparation of so many Millions of Miracles, nor the Doctrine of their so speedy Apostasie after, as to prepare for the Incendium.
§15. X. The Miracles must be so many and great, that must go to the feigned Conversion and Exaltation of these Jews, that it will be a great and heinous crime to impose them on God by presumptuous Fiction, if the Truth of them be not proved; 1. As to the number of Converts. 2. Their present unfitness. 3. Their scattered distance. 4. Their Servitude in all Nations. 5. The feigned way of their Conversion. 6. The state of their feigned Exalta∣tion. All these must be so full of Miracles, that will a thousand-fold exceed all the Miracles that ever Christ did on Earth, or his Apostles after him. And God keepeth so con∣stant a tenor in his Established Order of working by means and subordinate Causes, as that we must have good proof before we say that he will do all this. Tell us not what God can do, when our Question is, what he will do. God can en∣lighten the World without the Sun, or make all the frame of Heaven and Earth to change their course: God can con∣vert Turk and Pope, and all the Heathens in the World, and all the bloody Princes and Souldiers, to morrow. But do not therefore say that He will do it. When the Devil tempted Christ to shew his power by a Miracle, he saith, It is written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. God hath appointed a quite contrary way for mens Con∣version, Rom. 10. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they Preach unless they be sent? Christ ascended on high to give gifts and offices to men, for this end, Apostles, Pro∣phets, Teachers, to gather and edifie his Church. Christ tells us of no way but the Lord of the Harvest to send forth La∣bourers, and the Messengers to go into the high-ways and hedges, and compel them to come in: And the Sowers to go forth to sow that Word, which is the regenerating Seed. Though Christ would speak to Paul from Heaven, it was to send him to Ananias. And though an Angel appear to Cor∣nelius, it is to send him to Peter to be taught. Though Mi∣racles affright the Jailor, Act. 16. it is to ask Paul and Silas, what he must do to be saved. And by what warrant shall we say that Christ will for millions quite change this his ap∣pointed way?
§ 16. 1. As to the number, it must be ten thousands of Miracles that a number so great should be thus changed all at once, or near it, throughout the World: And yet that a number so small in comparison of all others, should become a Monarchy, and Gog and Magog be so friendly to them, as to permit and help them, as Cyrus did the Jews, in their re∣moval, and afterward be subject to them. § 17. 2. They are now a more sottish Generation, full of Malice against Christ, and Cruelty to Christians where they dare shew it; sordidly worldly and covetous: They live among Christians, and all our endeavours, converse and examples scarce converteth in this Kingdom, three in an Age. Bear with me you that talk so zealously for the Jews Conversion and Kingdom, while I ask you, How many in London have you converted in your lives? Yea▪ How many have you laboured with by Instruction and Ar∣gument to convert them, while you have prayed for their Conversion, and censoriously disputed against us that doubted of your Opinion? § 18. 3. They are scattered over the most of the Earth, being every where a hated and despised people. And shall Preachers be sent to them in all Lands at once? Shall Preachers so quickly be made, when no Countrey have enough for their needful work at home? And shall they quickly learn and speak all the Languages of the Countreys where the Jews are? (For Hebrew alone will not do the work.) And shall all Jews on Earth, get toge∣ther to Jerusalem? Will they be Rich enough to bear the charge of their Transplantation? Or enough cured of the love of Riches, to leave their Trades and Wealth behind them? § 19. Obj. We hold not that they shall all be converted or dignified, but enough to possess Jerusalem and Reign there: Say some, The Tartarians may do it. Ans. It seems then it is but the Popes old Zeal, to re∣cover the Holy Land: But what's this to the Conversion of the Jews? Were they converted when Godfrey and others recovered it? The Tartarians taking Jerusalem, will not prove the Conversion of one Jew, that now is taken for a Tartarian.
§ 20▪ 4. They are in such servitude in all Nations, and so contemned a People among them, as must prove it a Mi∣racle for them to remove so far, to power. § 21. 5. The feigned means of their Conversion is mil∣lions of Miracles. 1. The New Opinion is, that Christ shall do it by ap∣pearing in the Air as he did to Saul. O take heed what you impose on Christ! That appearance of Christ was seen but by a very few in one place: And the words heard by none but Saul himself. Shall Christ in the Air be seen at once in Persia, Greece, Rome, Portugal, and all Nations where there be Jews? (And yet these good men are against the Lutheran Vbiquitarians!) And shall Christ Preach to them in the Air, and his voice be heard throughout the World, a thousand times further than the Thunder? And how will they know that it is Christ? when on Earth they would not know him; but imputed his Miracles to Beelzebub? And will the bare sight of Christ, make millions of ig∣norant sots presently understand all the Essentials of Reli∣gion, yea and become eminently wise and holy, when we can scarce teach an ignorant one now to understand the Ca∣techism or Creed in many years? I doubt many Mille∣naries have some such Servants and Children in their own houses. 2. Some say that Elias shall come and Convert them? A Jewish Dream: And how will they know that he is Elias? As they knew John Baptist to be Elias! If you say, as Peter did on the Mount, I say, that was by Inspiration, or by Christs telling him that it was Elias. Shall they have either of these? And where shall Elias preach to them? Is he also ubiqui∣tary? If he preach in Spain, shall they hear him in Portugal? Or if in Holland, or Rome, shall they hear him in England? If he preach at Stepney, shall they bear him at Westminster, at Tarmouth, at Norwich, and all over the Land, and over all the World at once? Or must he stay long enough to go over all the Earth? If one Man can do so much why have ma∣ny thousands done so little on the Jews to this day?
3. If you say, God will raise up and send forth Ministers enough, that will be yet a greater Miracle: To give so ma∣ny Skill, VVill and Zeal? To cause them to speak with all the Languages of the Nations? When the Jesuits at Japan, Congo, and China, after many years Learning their Tongues, do but set the Nations in a Laughter, to hear their mispro∣nunciation, as Maffeius, Varenlus, and others tell us. And who will furnish so many Thousand new inspired Preachers, with Money to carry them through all the VVorld? And procure them free passage through Enemies Lands? 4. But the last answer I expect is, that nothing is difficult where God will work, and Grace shall make one sight of Christ, to Convert them all. I answer, If you lay all on the Miraculous Inspirations of God, that can do it without seeing Christ, and without preaching; As God made the World with a Word: He can so make every Infant a Doctor, that they not stay as Christ, to encrease in Stature and Wisdom. But if you feign him to purpose or promise this, take heed lest he will not hold you guiltless for taking his Name in vain. This Creating Inspiration of sudden Wis∣dom, Faith and Holiness, into so many Thousands over the World at once, will be a greater Miracle, yea Milli∣ons of Miracles, than ever Christ did: And is quite contrary to the Word of God. § 22. 6. The feigned Exaltation of them by a Jerusalem Monarchy is also a devised Miracle: That these scattered people by such means, should get to Jerusalem, and become a Grand Monarchy, and that in a place so uncapable, and that never was such, no not in David's days. § 23. XI. Another reason against this Jewish Monar∣chy at Jerusalem is, that instead of an Exaltation, it would be a Banishment to the Jews. Judea being like our Wales, or not so big as half England, and a Countrey (though flowing with Milk and Honey in comparison of the Arabian Wilderness, yet) very full of Mountains, Rocks, and De∣serts, and oft infested with Famines. So that could they bear their charges thither, I believe that the Jews in Portu∣gal, Constantinople, Rome, and Thessalonica alone, would take it for as sad a Banishment to be sent to Judea, as all England
would do to be sent to Jamaica, yea or Barbadoes. If you say that God can feed them by Manna, or by An∣gels, or Ravens, or make all the Neighbours Countreys, (Egypt, Mesopotamia, &c.) feed them; take heed of impo∣sing upon God. § 24. XII. God in Scripture hath given us another de∣scription of the Two New Jerusalems, the Infantile and the Perfect, that on Earth, and that on Heaven, more Glorious and Desireable than the Jewish feigned one: Therefore we should not obscure the Glory of them by such a Fiction. As Satan fighteth against the Spirit by a false Spirit, and against the Church by a false Church, and against the Ministry by a false Ministry, and against Unity by false Unity, so doth he against the Kingdom of Christ, and the New Jeru∣salem by a Counterfeit. 1. As the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman Mo∣narchies were the four mentioned in Daniel; so there have been since a fifth and a sixth. By a Monarchy now is meant only the Greatest on Earth known to the Church. The fifth was the Christian Empire, whose Chief Seat was Constantinople, called New Rome, and New Sion. I am not ignorant what is said against this by Heddeggerus and many others: That is not to be disputed in this narrow Room. The sixth Monarchy visibly is the Turks, with the Tar∣tarian Unity, Gog and Magog. The seventh, the Sabba∣tical and Perfect Monarchy is that of Christ in the New Heaven, and New Earth, wherein dwelleth Righteousness, after the Burning of this World: By debasing Fiction con∣fined to a Thousand years, and Christs own Kingdom also so confined, whereas this wicked World hath already lasted Six Thousand years within Three Hundred and Ten. This vilifying of Christs Glorious Kingdom is by blind Zeal now made the exalting of it, by many deceived and de∣ceiving Men.
Chap. IX. Of the New Earth. § 25. COncerning the New Earth we must content our selves with what God hath revealed, and not search into the unrevealed things. 1. It is revealed that it will be the Restitution of all things; that in it shall dwell Righteousness; that the whole Creation groaneth to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; that it will be a Paradise State; that Christ shall Reign over it; that no Glorified Saints shall lose any of their part in Heaven by it; that there will be no death, nor mi∣sery: Therefore there will be no Gog and Magog, and num∣berless Armies of the wicked: For there entereth nothing that is defiled: It will be a State of Communion with Hea∣ven. Angels and Men will have familiar Converse: Christ shall be joyfully known among them as their Saviour and King: Neither Christ nor the Saints will lay by the Hu∣mane Nature or Body, but their Bodies will be so far re∣fined as shall be suitable to the condition of the New refined World: This much is certain. But these things following are uncertain. 1. How much of the Old Earth God will use in the constitution of the New. Whether only the Surface of the Earth shall be Burnt, and the Things and Works thereon, or also the Interiour parts dissolved into a Chaos: As it is uncertain to us whether the Chaos at the present Earths Creation, was the Relicks of a former World: We are not certain whether there was any former World; Though to con∣jecturing Reason it seems improbable that God who de∣lighteth in his Works, and will continue a VVorld to Eter∣nity, should from all Eternity have nothing but Himself, till Six days ago (Six Thousand years.) But this will in∣fer Aristotle's Eternity of the Universe (except mutations of alterable compositions) that the VVorld is an Eternal Effect of an Eternal Cause; and Gassendus his Indefiniteness (he meaneth Infiniteness) of the VVorld, and the old
Opinion that God and the VVorld are but One, as Soul and Body: By which they resolve the Grand difficulties that God is not Pars Entitatis, which were to be Imperfect and so no God, the Entity of the World and God being more than of either alone, if the VVorld have any real En∣tity. 2. It is uncertain how God will people this New Earth: Some think as he did this Earth by Adam and Eve. Some think, by a Creation of many at once. Some think by a Transplantation from some other Orb: Some think as Dr. H. More, that except a few rare Saints or Martyrs, all go hence but into an Aerial Vehicle, and may thence without loss be made Inhabitants of the New Earth. And some think that those that are found alive, shall live in the Fire and after, and some that they shall be caught up from the Fire, and Judg'd, and sent hither again. 3. It is uncertain whether there shall be any Generation on the New Earth: Mr. Beverley saith, They shall multiply so as to compensate with a [much more] for the Jewness of the saved▪ under the first Adam] and each shall live the Thousand years: But Christ saith that the Children of the Resurrection neither Marry nor are given in Marriage, but are like the Angels, and die no more. The doubt is then, whether he call only those in Heaven, and not those on the New Earth, the Children of the Resurrection. 4. It is uncertain whether there shall be any stated visi∣ble presence of Christ here, or that only he shall appear as in Heaven, as the Sun doth by its Light; or only some∣times be seen as he was after his Resurrection. And so of the Angels. 5. Its uncertain whether the New Earth shall have any End or Change, or shall be Everlasting. It's certain that the Thousand years Rev. 20. are before it in this Life, but of its Duration God hath said nothing to us. 6. It's uncertain how much of the Old Heaven shall be Burnt: Though it's likely it will be only so much as was Cursed for Sin. 7. It's uncertain whether there will be any removal to a higher VVorld, and each Person live his Thousand years, and then as Henoch and Elias be translated, and so on to
following Generations; or each Person continue here for ever. 8. It's uncertain whether Devils shall be permitted here to be Tempters, or all Temptations be cast out. § 26. It will be no disparagement to Christ to Rule the Restored Earth as well as Heaven. Nor to Saints or Angels to be Governours under him. VVere the Sun Intellectual it would be no grief to it to be a Benefactor by its Influence to Earth: For it is no dishonour to God Himself, to Com∣municate all to the Creature that it hath. There may be here such Subjects as God promised Apostles and Saints that they shall Judge. If by Faith in Christ God dwell in us by Love, and we in Him, and we have in us that Kingdom of Grace, we shall have our Part in the future Kingdom, though we understand not many difficulties about it. For Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Decemb. 10. 1690. A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Parkburst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. CAtholick Theology. Folio. The Saints Everlasting Rest; or a Treatise of the Bles∣sed State of the Saints in their Enjoyment of God in Glory 4to. The English Nonconformity, as under King Charles II. and King James II. Truly Stated and Argued. 4to. The Life of Faith in every State. 4to. Alderman  Funeral Sermon. 4to. A Key for Catholicks to open the Juglings of the Jesuits. The first part of answering all their common Sophisms: The second against the Soveraignty and necessity of General Coun∣cils. 4to. Naked Popery: Answering Mr. Hutchinson. 4to. Which is the True Church▪ A full Answer to his Reply; proving that the General Councils and the Popes Primacy were but in one Empire. 4to.
The History of Bishops and their Councils abridged, and of the Popes. 4to. A full Treatise of Episcopacy, shewing what Episcopacy we own and what is in the English Diocesan frame, for which we dare not swear never to endeavour any alteration of it, in our places. 4to. A Search for the English Schismatick; comparing the Ca∣noneers and Nonconformists. 4to An Answer to Mr. Dodwell and Dr. Sherlock, consisting an Vniversal-Humane Church Soveraignty, Aristocratical and Mo∣narchical, as Church-Tyranny and Popery; and defending Dr. Iz. Barrows excellent Treatise. 4to. Catholick Communion defended against both Extremes. Moral Prognostications, what shall befal the Church till their Concord, &c. Full and easie satisfaction, which is the True Religion: Transubstantiation shamed. 8vo. All  by Mr. R. Baxter. A Hundred Select Sermons on several Texts, of Fifty on the Old Testament, and Fifty on the New. Folio. The True Prophecies and Prognostications of Michael No∣strodamus, Physician to Henry the Second, Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth, Kings of France, and one of the Best Astronomers that ever were. Folio. Sixty one Sermons, Preached mostly on publick occasions, whereof five formerly Printed by Adam Littleton, D. D. Rector of Chelsea in Middlesex, Folio. A Discourse of the Saving Grace of God by the late Reve∣rend and Learned David Clarkson, Minister of the Gospel. 8vo. The Vision of the Wheels seen by the Prophet Ezekiel; Opened and Applied: Partly at the Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet, and partly at Stepney, on January 31. 1689 being the Day of Solemn Thanksgiving to God for the great Deli∣verance of this Kingdom from Popery and Slavery, by his then Highness the most Illustrious Prince of Orange: Whom God raised up to be the glorious Instrument thereof. By Matth. Mead Pastor of a Church of Christ at Stepney. 8vo. FINIS.
