B1623 12001686 52231
THE Present STATE OF THE UNIVERSE, Or an ACCOUNT of I. The Rise, Births, Names, Matches, Children, and near Allies of all the present Chief Princes of the World. II. Their Coats of Arms, Motto's, Devises, Liveries, Religions, and Languages. III. The Names of their Chief Towns, with some Computation of the Houses and Inhabitants. Their Chief Seats of Pleasure, and other Remarkable things in their Dominions. IV. Their Revenues. To which Are added some other Curious Remarks; as also an Account of Common-Wealths, relating to the foregoing Heads. Parvula sic totum pervisit pupula Mundum. LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randall Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. 1694. Presented to R. Hooke by his Worthy Friend the Author. July 4. 1694.
To the HONOURABLE CHARLES COTTINGTON, Esquire. SIR, HIstory being much the Study of a Gentleman, I have presum'd a Dedication of these few Praeludia, relating to it, to your self. Not but your own Reading, Conversation and Travels may have already furnished you with far more, and more accurate Particulars in this kind, than my poor Essays may afford? but what I have written is chiefly intended for your hopeful Offspring; to whom I conceived a brief Idea of the World in this kind, relating to those chief Potentates under whose Dominion, God, at present, has put it, might be of use for initiating their Understandings, till being come to more mature years, their own Studies and Observations in Travels, may inure them to well digested Thoughts, concerning the va∣rious Governments of the World, whereby they may be rendered serviceable to the Nation in which they live. It's well known how Eminent for Parts and Services to this Nation, the late Lord Cottington, your Uncle,
was: whose Family, a few years since, being reduced in the Male-Line, only to your self; you see Provi∣dence by vouchsafing you three flourishing. Branches of Male-Issue, has given you good Hopes, and a fair Prospect of a long Continuance of it. And as the many Favours I have received from you, have highly engaged me to wish Prosperity to it; so whenever any thing shall be suggested to my Understanding whereby I may be a Mean to promote it, it shall most readily be put in Exe∣cution by, Sir, Your most Obliged Kinsman, and most Humble Servant, John Beaumont, Jun.
THE Present STATE OF THE UNIVERSE, &c. The House of Austria. THE Illustrious House of Austria, having the largest ex∣tent of Dominions among the European Princes, I have thought fit to begin with that. This House owes its Original to the Earls of Habsburg; whom a late Writer derives from the Counts of Mount Aventine, of the ancient Perleonian Family; which was formerly of the greatest Repute and Authority of any in Rome; and had its seat on Mount Aven∣tine. Albertus Dives Anicius Perleonius, a person Descended of the said Family, was driven out of Rome, An. 1144. by the Ar∣naldistick Hereticks, together with his Brother Rudolph, in de∣fence of the Roman See. Whereupon he travelled into Switzer∣land, and there married the Daughter of Wernerus, last Earl of Habsburg, of the Anician Perleonian Race. This Albertus Dives Anicius was Great Grandfather to Rudolph the fourth Earl of Habsburg, the first German Emperour of the Anician Perleonian Family. This Rudolph the first, was the Common Father of the Au∣strian Family, born May 1. 1218. He was elected Emperour An. 1273. by the unanimous consent of the Princes of the Em∣pire, and crowned the same year at Aix la Chapelle, and at a Diet held at Ausburg An. 1282. he had Austria settled on his eldest Son Albert (who was first Duke of Austria) and Schwaben on Ru∣dolph, his youngest Son. Philip the first, descended from Albert,
was born An. 1478. and An. 1496. he married the Princess Johan∣na, eldest Daughter and Heiress to his Catholick Majesty, Fer∣dinand of Spain; in whose right, he immediately became possest of the Kingdoms of Castile and Arragon. He had for his Sons Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand the first; betwixt which two Princes, there was a division made of the Pro∣vinces, when the House of Austria became likewise divided into the Spanish and German Lines. The Spanish Line. I. THE Author of the Spanish Line was Charles the fifth, born at Ghent, in Flanders, An. 1500. At fourteen years of Age he had the Government of the Netherlands given him. At sixteen he was Crowned King of Spain. At nineteen elected Emperour, and Crowned the year following at Aix la Chappelle. He annexed the Duchy of Milain to his House for ever. He concluded a Peace with the Protestants at Passaw, An. 1552, and three years after he Abdicated his Government, leaving the Em∣pire to his Brother Ferdinand, and the Kingdom of Spain, with the Low Countries, and its other dependencies to his Son Philip, Great Grandfather to the present King of Spain, Charles the Second, who was born Nov. 6. 1661, and on the 21. of December following was Christened Carolus-Joachimus-Josephus-Antonius-Leonardus. He succeeded in the Kingdom at the death of his Father Philip the Fourth; who died Sept. 17. 1665. and in the year 1675, being entred on the fifteenth year of his Age, he took on him the Government of his Estates; whereas during his minority, the supream Government was under the Regency of the Queen his Mother, named Mary-Anne, Daughter of the Emperour Fer∣dinand the Fourth, and is now Dowager of Spain. She was born Oct, 12. 1631. and married to Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, Nov. 7. 1649. This King, Aug. 31. An. 1679. espoused the Princess Mary-Louise of Orleans, eldest Daughter to Philip, Duke of Orleans, by the Princess Henrietta-Maria, youngest Daughter to our late King Charles the First. The Prince of Conde espoused her in the Chappel of the House of Fontainebleau, in the name of the King of Spain; and the Marriage was Consummated Nov. 19. of
the said year 1679, near Burgos, in Old Castile. She was born March 7. 1662. And this Queen dying without Issue An. 1689. he the same year married Maria-Anna, Daughter of Philip-William, Duke of Newburg, and Elector Palatine, the present Queen, born Oct. 28. 1667. II. For Arms, he bears Quarterly: the first Quarter Counter-Quartered: in the first and fourth Gules, a Castle triple towered Or, each with three Battlements, bordered Azure, Purfled Sable, for Castile. In the second and third Argent, a Lion Gules, Crowned Langued and armed Or, for Leon. In the second great Quarter, Or, four great Pallets Gules, for Aragon. Party Or, four Pallets also Gules, betwixt two Flanches Argent, charg'd with as many Eagles Sable, membred, becked and crowned Azure, for Arragon and Sicily. These two great Quarters grafted in Base, Argent, a Pomegranate Verte, stalked and leav'd of the same, open and seeded Gules, for Granada. On the whole Argent, five Escutcheons Azure, placed crosswise, each charg'd with five Besants Argent, placed in Saltier, for Portugal. The Shield bordered Gules, with seven Towers Or, three in Chief, two in Fesse, and two toward the Base, for Algarve. In the third great Quarter, Gules, a Fesse Argent, for Austria, Coupé and supported by Ancient Burgundy, which is, bendy of six pieces Or and Azure, bordered Gules. In the fourth great Quarter, Azure, semé of Flower de Luces Or, with a border Compone Argent and Gules, for Modern Burgundy. Coupe Or. supported Sable, a Lion Or, for Brabant. These two great Quarters charged with an Escutcheon Or, and a Lion Sable, arm'd and langued Gules, for Flanders. Party Or, an Eagle Sable, for Anvers, the Capital City of the Holy Empire. For Crest, a Crown trefoiled Or, rais'd with eight Diadems, or Semicircles terminating in a Mond Or; which is the Crest of Spain. The Collar of the Order of the Golden Fleece encom∣passes the Shield, and on the sides of it stand the two Pillars of Hercules, viz. on each side one, with this Motto, Plus ultra. The foresaid Order was refus'd by Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, as having been founded by a Duke, who was Vassal to the Crown of France, viz. Philip, surnamed, the Good, Duke of Burgundy, who Instituted it at Bruges, An. 1429. It may be worth notice that the Arms of Castile and Leon are the first, which have been born Quartered.
The Ordinary Device of some Kings of Spain, has been this, Omnes Contra nos, & nos Contra Omnes. The Title of the Most Catholick King, was given by Pope Alexander the Sixth to Ferdinand the Fifth, and his Successors, for having rooted out of Spain the Moors and Sarracens. You may also note that the eldest Sons of the Kings of Spain are called Princes of the Asturias; as those of the German Em∣perors, Arch Dukes of Austria. Those of the Kings of England, Princes of Wales. Those of the Kings of Portugal, Princes of Al∣garves. Those of the Dukes of Savoy, Princes of Piemont, &c. The King of Spain's Livery is of a Yellow colour. His Majesty Professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Spanish Language. III. Madrid, situate in New Castile, having been the place of Residence of the Kings of Spain, since the time of Philip the Second, is become, from a Village, to be the most populous Town of all Spain. The Houses are built of Brick, and the greatest part four Stories high, all having Iron Balcones. All the upper Rooms in the Town belong to the King, who is al∣lowed for them. There are in it several Publick Edifices very beauti∣ful; among others the famous Square for the Bull Feast. This Town is about the bigness of Bristol, and is kept very nastily, the filth and excrements lying in the Streets; tho on this account excusable; because the Inhabitants who drink Well Water there, are fearful to sink necessary Conveniencies, left the Waters should be tainted thereby. About seven Miles North from Madrid is seated the Escurial, or Monastery of S. Lawrence, built by King Philip the Second. Its a Structure so splendid, magnificent and sumptuous, that some think no Building in times past, or at present comparable to it. The front towards the West is adorned with three stately Gates, the middlemost whereof leads into a most magnificent Temple, and a Monastery, in which are one hundred and fifty Monks of the Order of S. Hierom, and a College. That on the right Hand opens into divers Offices, belonging to the Monastery. That on the left, into Schools and Out-houses belonging to the Col∣lege. At the four Corners there are four Turrets of excellent Workmanship, and for hight Majestical. Towards the North is the Kings Palace. On the South parts divers beautiful and sum∣ptuous Galleries, and on the East part sundry Walks and Gardens, very pleasing and delightful. It contains in all thirty seven
Court and Cloisters, Eleven thousand Windows, Eight hundred Pillars, and is indeed a most noble Structure. There are in it Seven Communities, seven Priors, and a Grand Prior. The Revenue is above Thirty thousand Crowns per annum; and there is a Library in it, containing above Eighteen thousand Books, and among them a great many Arabick Manuscripts. Toledo is the Capital City of New Castile, being situate near the midst of Spain, on the River Tagus. Its about Four Miles in compass, and is well fortified and beautified with a good number of stately Edifices; and by reason of its situation in the midst of Spain, its well inhabited both by Nobility, Merchants and Scholars, be∣side such Soldiers and their Officers who are continually garrison'd in it. Its also honored with the See of an Archbishop, who is the Metropolitan of Spain, and President for the most part, of the Inquisition, having a Revenue of Three hundred thousand Crowns per annum, and Seventeen other Towns under his Jurisdiction, both in Spirituals and Temporals. Granada is the Capital City of the Kingdom call'd by that name, whose whole Circuit is said to be Seven Miles; it having contain'd in the time of the Moors Two hundred thousand Souls, and where the Houses of the best sort are, for the most part, built of Free stone, with delicate and artificial Masonry, shew∣ing their Magnificence. Sevil, the Capital City of Andalusia, in the Kingdom of Cor∣duba, is look'd upon by some to be the fairest City of all Spain. It is in compass six Miles, divided into two parts by the River Bae∣tis, on which its seated; but joined together by a strong and beau∣tiful Bridge; the whole environed with beautiful Walls, and a∣dorned with many magnificent and stately Buildings; as Palaces, Churches and Monasteries. It has a flourishing University, adorned with a goodly Library, furnished by Diego, the Son of Christopher Co∣lumbus the first Founder of it, with Twelve thousand Volumes in several Languages, gathered together with extraordinary Care and Charge, and endowed with a fair Revenue, for the Maintenance and Enlargement of it. Its also a Town particularly famous for Traffick, here being the publick Emporeum of Spain for Wines, Oils, and Commodities brought from the Indies, and other Foreign Parts. So much concerning the Towns of greatest Note in Spain. The King of Spain has likewise in Italy the City of Milain, be∣ing the fairest and biggest City of all Lombardy, containing Seven
Miles in compass, and Two hundred thousand People. Its seat∣ed betwixt the Rivers Ticinus and Addua, which run hard by it to the great Conveniency of the Inhabitants, both for having things brought to them at cheap Rates, and for vending and dispersing their Manufactures, which are of great esteem in most parts of the World. It flourishes in all Riches, and in the Beauty of its Edifices, both publick and private; but three especially commend∣ed for their Magnificence; the Castle, the Hospital, and the Cathedral. Its fortified with Walls, Ramparts, and deep Trenches, and the Castle in it is so strong, that its judg'd impregnable. The Trade is so great, that private Shops there equal publick Store∣houses of other Places, and the People are so rich, that the Wife of every Mechanick goes in her Silks and Taffaties. The King of Spain has also in Italy the City of Naples, which is the Capital of that Kingdom, and contains Seven Miles in compass. It's honoured with the Seat of a Viceroy, and the continual Resort, if not constant Residence of most of the great Men of the Realm; which makes the private Buildings to be very graceful, and the publick stately; and it had increased much more in Buildings, if the King had not forbidden it by his special Edict; and this partly at the persuasion of his Noblemen, who fear'd, that if there were not such a Restraint, their Vassals would forsake the Country to inhabit here, so to enjoy the Pri∣vileges and Exemptions of the Royal City; but principally upon Jealousie, and point of State, the better to prevent all Revolts and Mutinies, which in most populous Cities are of greatest danger. In the Account of Masaniello's Rebellion at Naples, Ann. 1647, published by the Lord Alexander Giraffi, we find that in Naples, at that time were above Six hundred thousand Souls: for he there says, that Masaniello, on the Fourth Day of his Rebel∣lion, had One hundred and fifty thousand Men bearing Arms under him, besides Boys and Women. Now allowing as many Women in the City as Men, it makes Three hundred thousand, and allowing all under Sixteen Years of Age in the City to equal in number the Men and Women, it makes Six hundred thousand, not counting decrepid persons, which make a Sixth Part of Mankind, nor all those persons who adhering to the Viceroy, never followed Masaniello. Scarce any Country of Europe may be pre∣ferred before the Kingdom of Naples for its Beauty, and excellen∣cy of its Soil, and its great plenty of generous Wines, Fruits and Corn, or what else may afford Delight and Pleasure.
I may add in the last place, that besides Brussels in the Low-Countries, a well peopled Town Four Miles in compass, and Ghent, the greatest City of all the Netherlands, the Birth place of Charles the Fifth, who finding the Inhabitants inclined to Sedi∣tion, built there the first Cittadel, which was built in Europe: the King of Spain has two considerable Towns in America. In the Southern Division of it, Lima was of later years the chief Town (but since ruined by an Earthquake) tho formerly Cusco was the chief Town, this being the ancient Seat Royal of the Ingas, or Peruvian Emperors, (the word Inga signifying an Emperor, as Capa Inga, by which name they sometimes called them, the only Emperor) who, the more to beautifie this City, commanded every one of the Nobility to build here a Palace for their conti∣nual Abode. The Emperor's Palace, now defaced, was seated on a lofty Mountain, and built of such huge and massy Stones, that the Spaniards thought it rather to have been the Work of Devils than of Men The spacious Market-place there has been always esteemed as the greatest and most regular found in any Town of America: its Figure is square, and at its Angles, it gives an opening to four great Roads, tending in a streight Line towards the four principal parts of the World, and to the most considerable Provinces of the Empire of Peru, made by the Ingas of a vast length and breadth with a most incredible Charge and Pains for the use of their Subjects. To say a little of the Rise of the Pe∣ruvian Monarchs, Heylin tells us, that the Peruvians were gene∣rally governed by the Chief of their Tribes, as in all Countries else, where neither the Arms of Foreigners, nor the Ambition of some few of the Natives had diminished any thing of those na∣tural Rights; nor subject to any one Supreme, till these later times, the Ingas of Peru growing into their Greatness but a little before their Fall. Their Territory at first was not above Five or Six Leagues in compass, situate in that part of the Country where Cusco now stands. They were oppos'd at their first Encroach∣ments by their Neighbours, and had not prevail'd to their Great∣ness, had they not used the Policy (however they got it) which has been used by many in these parts of the World, in Imitation of the Truth, conveyed down to us by Moses and the Prophets, from Noah and the Patriarchs. For the Ingas gave out that their Family had not only been the Seminary from which Mankind came, but the Authors of that Religion also, which was then in
use; particularly that the whole Earth had been destroyed by a De∣luge, except only seven persons, who had hid themselves in a Cave, called Paticambo, where having liv'd in safety till the Fury of the Waters had been asswaged, they came abroad at last, and repeopled the Country. That Viracocha the Creator, and great God of Na∣ture, had appear'd to one of them, and taught him how, and with what Rites he would be worshipped; which Rites were afterwards received over all Peru: and finally, that the same Viracocha had appeared lately to the Chief of their Family, assuring him, that he would aid him with invisible Forces against all their Enemies. This soon gained Belief among those Barbarians, and drew many to take part with the Ingas, whereby they became victorious. This is supposed to have happened Four hundred years before the Spaniards put an end to this flourishing Kingdom, an. 1533, within which time they had brought all the Country, which we now call Peru, and many of the adjacent Provinces under their Dominion. The Ingas were much reverenced by their Sub∣jects, and so faithfully served, that never any of their Subjects were found guilty of Treason: nor wanted they good Arts whereby to indear their Subjects, to keep them out of leisure to foment new Factions. The way of Indearment was by the fair and satisfactory Distribution of the Spoils gotten in the Wars, whether Lands or Goods; all which they divided into three parts, allotting the first unto the Service of the Gods; the second for the maintenance of the King, his Court, and Nobles; the third to the relief of the common People. When there was no Cause of Wars, they kept the People busied in Works of Magnificence, as building of Palaces in every one of the conquered Provinces, which served not only as Forts to assure the Conquest, but were employed as Store Houses to lay up Provisions to be distributed among the People in times of Dearth. But that which was the Work of greatest Trouble, and chiefest Use, was the Cross-ways that they made all over the Country, the one upon the Moun∣tains, the other on the Plains, extending Five hundred Leagues in length; a Work to be preferred before any of Rome and Egypt: for they were forced to raise the Ground in many places to the height of the Mountains, and to lay the Mountains level with the flattest Plains, to cut through some Rocks, and underprop others that were ruinous, to make even such Ways as were uneasie, and support the Precipices, and in the Plains to
vanquish so many Difficulties, as the uncertain Foundation of a sandy Country must needs carry with it. And for the Nobility, the Inga did not only command them to reside in Cusco, to be as∣sured of their persons, but caused them to have their Children brought up there, that they might serve as Hostages for their Fa∣thers Loyalty. They ordered also that all such as repaired to Cusco, the Imperial City, should be attired according to their own Country Fashion, so to prevent those Leagues and Associations, which otherwise, without any Notice, or Observation, might be made amongst them; and many such politick Institutions were by them devis'd. As for the Names of the Ingas of Peru, Mango-Capac descended of the chief of the first seven Families, was the first who laid the Foundation of this puissant Monarchy. The Fourteenth Inga of this Race was Atabaliba, who was vanquished and taken Prisoner by Francisco Pizarro, the Spanish Commander at Caxamalca, in the Country of Lima; where, tho he gave him for a Ransom of his Life and Liberty, an House piled up on all sides with Gold and Silver, valued (as some say) at ten Millions of Crowns, yet they slew him at last; in whose place Pizarro substituted his second Brother, called Mango-Capac the Second, who was the Fif∣teenth Inga, and who, after many Vicissicudes of Fortune, was at last slain in the City of Cusco, and so the Kingdom of the Ingas began and ended in a Prince of the same Name, as it has happened to many Estates. Armorial Ensigns, for the Distinction of Persons, being a thing of common notion, among Mankind, have been found, in some sort, from all Antiquity in all Nations, more or less; and the Gentilitial Arms of the Ingas of Peru, on their first Dis∣covery, were found to be, a Field Argent, charged with a Rainbow proper, betwixt two Snakes extended, also proper. As to the Forces and Revenues of these Ingas, doubtless they were exceeding great; for tho (as Heylin says) we find no par∣ticular Musters, which they made of their Men, nor what great Armies they drew with them into the Field, yet by their great Successes, and many Victories, we may conclude them to have been Masters of great Bands of Men, and skilful in the Arts of Conduct; nor can we otherwise conjecture at the Greatness of their yearly Revenues, but by the Greatness of their Treasure, so infinite and almost incredible, that all the Vessels of the King's
House, his Table and Kitchen were of Gold and Silver. Sta∣tues of Giants in the Wardrobe, together with the Resemblance in proportion and bigness of all the Beasts, Birds, Trees, Plants, and Fishes, which were found in that Kingdom, of the purest Gold: Ropes, Budgets, Troughs, Chests, all of Gold or Silver, Billets of Gold, piled up together, as if they had been Billets of Wood, cut out for the Fire, three Houses full of Pieces of Silver: all which besides infinite of other Treasures fell into the Hands of a few poor Spaniards. In the Northern Division of America, called Mexicana, the King of Spain has Mexico, the chief City of all America. It was formerly situate in Lakes and Islands, and built on Piles like Venice, every where interlaced with the pleasant Currents of fresh and Salt Waters, and carrying a Face of more Civil Govern∣ment than any of America, tho nothing, if compared with Eu∣rope. But the Town being destroyed by Cortez, its now built on firm Land, on the Edge of the Salt Lake, and bordering on a large and spacious Plain. Its in compass six Miles, and contains six thousand Houses of the Spaniards, and sixty thousand of In∣dians. The Inhabitants are so very rich, that generally the Merchants, Tradesmen, and Artificers go in greater State, and more splendid Equipage, than any People elswhere of the like condition. The Inhabitants of that Country were governed by the Chief of their Tribes till the year 1322, that Acamapitzli was elected the first King; who with his Successors encroach'd upon their Neighbours, till the year 1502, when Montezuma, the Second came to be their tenth King, who, who in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign was subdued by Cortez, and the City was taken, sacked and burnt by the Spaniards, assisted by many Confederates of that Country, August 13. 1521, it being in the time of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. The Kings of Mexico are said to have worn a Crown, resem∣bling that which is now used by the Dukes of Venice. And the Name of the first Mexican King being Acamapitzli, which in the Mexican Tongue signifies an handful of Reeds (as Acosta writes) they carried in their publick Ensigns, in memory of that great Prince, An Hand grasping many Arrows of Reeds: and the pe∣culiar Arms of Mexico are, a Field Argent, charged with an Eagle Proper, holding in his Right Foot a Bird, the other standing on a Cochinele Tree, proper; growing out of a Stone.
The Revenues of the Kings of Mexico are thought to have been almost infinite, raised out of all Commodities, and paid in kind, whether natural or artificial only; the King participating of the Fruits of all Mens Labours, and sharing with them in their Wealth, some paying in Cups full of Powder of Gold, of two handfuls apiece, some Diamonds and Beads of Gold; Plates of Gold of three quarters of a yard long, and four Fingers broad, Turquois Stones, Golden Targets, rich Feathers, Pictures, &c. not to mention things of inferior Value; all which in such a wealthy and large Estate, must needs afford him a Revenue e∣qual to the greatest Monarchs. IV. The Revenues of the King of Spain, which ordinarily arise out of his Estates, are computed to be nine millions of Crowns yearly, viz. four from his Dominions in Italy, three from the West-Indies, and two from his Kingdoms of Spain. He receives besides yearly the Revenues of all the Masterships of the great Orders of his Kingdom, which amount to an hundred and fifty thousand pounds of yearly Rents, beside the opportunity of preferring Servants of the greatest merit. Moreover the Free Gifts and Contributions of his Subjects, and his Usualties, and ex∣traordinary ways of raising Monies, supply him with vast Sums: and nevertheless this King is not counted to be rich in Treasure; his Expences being very great in keeping Forts and Garrisons in many parts of his Estates, and in maintaining Frontier Places, and an Armada for conducting his Plate-Fleet, &c. Its obser∣vable that the Kingdom of Spain, according to the least Compu∣tation, is said to be five hundred miles in compass more than France, and nevertheless France is esteem'd to contain near double the number of Inhabitants; which has been occasion'd by the Extirpation of the Jews and Moors, and by sending out yearly so many of their Subjects to Foreign Plantations, &c. they acting herein contrary to the Romans, who finding nothing more ne∣cessary for great and important Enterprizes than multitudes of Men, employed all their Studies to increase their Numbers, by Marriages, Colonies, and such helps, making their conquered Enemies free Denisons of their Commonwealth; by which means the number of the Roman Citizens became so great, that Rome could not be ruined by any Forces but its own.
The German Line of the House of Austria. I. AS Charles the Fifth, eldest Son to Philip the First, was Author of the Spanish Line of the House of Austria, so his Brother Ferdinand was Author of the German Line. He was born in Spain, 1503. Crowned King of Hungary and Bohemia in the Right of his Empress Anne, Daughter to Uladislaus, King of Hungary, 1527, Elected King of the Romans, anno. 1531, and Emperor, 1556; from whom is descended Leopold the Sixth, but first Emperor of the Name, and Four∣teenth Emperor of Germany, who was Born Jun. 9. anno 1640; he was Christened Leopoldus-Ignatius-Franciscus-Balthazar-Josephus-Felicianus. He was nominated King of Hungary at Presburg, Jun. 27. 1655; King of Bohemia at Prague, Aug. 2. 1656: Elect∣ed King of the Romans at Francfort, on the Main, Jun. 18. 1658, and Crowned Emperor Jul. 22. of the same year, in the same Town; having been Elected on the eleventh, where the three Ecclesiastical Electors rendred themselves, the others sent their Ambassadors; as also the French King, the King of Spain and others. He had, for a first Wife, Margarida-Maria-Teresa of Austria, Daughter to Philip the Fourth King of Spain, and Sister to the late Queen of France. He espoused her by proxy at Madrid, A∣pril 12. 1663, and she died March 20. 1673. He had by her two Sons and two Daughters, but three of these Children died very young; there remaining only one Daughter living, named Maria-Antonia-Josepha-Rosatia-Petronilla, who was born Jan. 18. 1669: and married to Maximilian-Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, ann. 1685, or 86. He has had, for a second Wife, Claudia Felicitas, Archduchess of Inspurc, Daughter to the Arch-Duke Ferdinand: whom the Emperor espoused, Oct. 15. in the same year that his first Em∣press died, viz. ann. 1673. And this Empress died April 8. ann. 1676. She had two Daughters by the Emperor, but both short-lived.
For a third choice, the Emperour married Jan. 6. An. 1677. Maria-Magdalena-Teresa-Eleonora, Countess Palatine of Neuburg, she being the eldest Daughter of Philip-William, Duke of Neuburg, and Elector Palatine. She was born Jan. 6. 1655. Crowned Queen of Hungary, in the Town of Oldenburg, Decemb. 9. 1681. And the Emperour has the following Issue by her. 1. Josephus-Jacobus Ignatius-Joannes-Antonius-Eustachius, who was born July 16. Old Stile, An. 1678. and is stiled Arch-Duke of Austria, at whose birth the Duchess of Newburg carried the Em∣press, her Daughter, a Bed and a Cradle of Silver. He was Crown'd King of Hungary An. 1688. and chosen King of the Romans An. 1689. 2. Maria-Elizabetha-Licia-Teresa-Josepha, born December 13. 1680. 3. Maria-Anna Josepha-Antonina-Regina, born Sept. 17. 1683. 4. Maria-Teresa, born Aug. 22. 1684. 5. Carolus-Franciscus-Josephus-Wenceslaus-Balthasar-Joannes-Anto∣nius Ignatius, born Oct. 1. 1685. 6. Maria-Josepha-Collecta-Antonia, born March 6. Old Stile 1687. 7. Anna-Josepha-Antonina-Magdalena-Gabriele, born March 28. 1689. Old Stile. The Emperour has but one Sister living, named Eleanora-Maria-Josepha, born May 21. 1653, and An. 1670, she was married to Michael Wisnowitski, the late King of Poland, elected upon King Casimirs Resignation of that Crown. Since his decease, An. 1678. she was married to the famous Charles, Duke of Lorain, whom its conceived she had married before, if he had been chosen King of Poland, as he stood for it, with Wisnowitski, upon the Election. II. For Armorial Ensigns the Emperour bears Quarterly. 1. Bar∣wise, Argent and Gules, of eight pieces, for Hungary. 2. Argent, a Lion Gules, the Tail noued, and passed in Saltier, crowned, langed, and armed, Or, for Bohemia. 3. Gules, a Fesse Argent, for Austria. Party, and bendwise, Argent and Azure, a border Gules for Ancient Burgundy. 4. Quarterly, in the first and last, Gules a Castle tripple towered Or-purfled Sable, for Castile. In the second and third Argent, a Lion Purple, for Leon. The Shield crested with an Imperial Crown, closed, and raised in the shape of a Miter, having betwixt the two points a Diadem surmounted with a Globe and Cross, Or. The Diadem represents the Empire,
and of the two Points, one denotes Denmark, and the other Bohemia. This Shield, which is environed with a Coller of the Or∣der of the Golden Fleece, is placed on the Brest of an Eagle, dis∣played Sable, in a Feld Or, Diadem'd, membred and becked Gules; holding a naked Sword in the right Talon, and a Scepter in the left: the two Heads signifie (as some judge) the Eastern and Western Empires. The Motto is, Uno avulso non deficit alter. This Emperours peculiar Devise is, Pax & salus Europae. His Livery is of a Yellow colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High Dutch Language. III. Vienna, seated on the River Danubius in Austria, and not much differing from the Latitude of Paris, is the Capital City of the Hereditary Countries belonging to the Emperour, which are Austria and Bohemia, Hungary being Elective: and its the ordi∣nary place of Residence of their Imperial Majesties. Its the strongest Town of the Empire, and one of the fairest. The Ditch of it is large and very deep; into which also they can let the River; tho it be commonly kept dry, lest they should incom∣mode their deep Cellars. The whole compass, taking in the Suburbs, makes a very large Circuit; but the City itself which is walled in, may be about three Miles in Circumference; as po∣pulous for the bigness of the place, as most great Cities. There are in it Turks, Tartars, Italians, Grecians, Transylvanians, Scla∣vonians, Hungarians, Croatians, Spaniards, French, Germans, Po∣landers, &c. all in their proper Habits, a pretty diversified object to behold. There is a Bridge in it made by the crossing of two Streets at equal Angles, the ground of one Street being as high as the tops of the Houses of the other, so that to continue it, they were forced to build a Bridge, or Arch in the lower Street, to let the upper to pass over it. The City is fairly built of Stone, and well paved: many Houses are of six Stories high, and are somewhat flat Rooft, after the Italian manner: each private House has such store of Cellarage for all occasions, that, as much of the City seems to be underground, as is above it: the Cellars being very deep, sometimes four Cellars, one under another: they are archt, and have two pair of Stairs to descend into them: some have an open place in the middle of each Roof, to let the Air in and out from the Street, somewhat after the manner of the Mines. At the entrance over the Gate of the Imperial Palace are set in Capital Letters, the five Vowels A. E. I. O. U. which by
some are interpreted thus. Austriae Est Imperare Orbi Universo. The Front of one of the Jesuits Colleges opens into a fair Piazza, in the middle whereof stands a large high Composite Column, of Copper, upon a white Stone, with four Angels with Escut∣cheons, and on the top the Blessed Virgin; Inscriptions also, in which the Emperour Dedicates Austria unto her Patronage. Tho the Spire of Landshute in Bavaria be accounted the highest in Germany, and that of Strasburg the neatest and fairest, yet that of Vienna is the largest and strongest. Its accounted above four hundred sixty five Foot high; being about half way up three hundred thirty eight Steps, in a Chamber, or Room of it there is a Clock, whose Case being made of Wood, was in part burnt down by Lightning, and therefore there is Water alwaies kept in this place to extinguish the Fire, if any should again hap∣pen, and a Man continually Watches in the place where the Bells hang. No place abounds more with Musicians than Vienna, be∣cause the Emperour delights in it, Composing well himself. They are there of opinion that the number and vallue of the Books in the Emperours Library yield to none, but rather excel any other Library in Europe. There can scarce be a more admirable Colle∣ction than the Manuscripts in part of the first Chamber, of He∣brew, Syriack, Arabick, Turcick, Armenian, Aethiopick, and Chi∣nese Books. The choicest Books in the famous Library of Buda, belonging to King Matthias Corvinus, Son to Hunniades, are now in it: and the Emperour has a right to have two Coppies of all Books printed in Germany. Prague, situate on the River Muldaw, is the Metropolis of Bo∣hemia, and haply the greatest Town of the Empire, it consisting of three Towns, named, the Old, the New, and the Lesser, each having their several Customs, Laws and Magistrates. This City is rather large than fair, the Streets being in Winter very dirty, and of ill smell in Summer: the Buildings, for the most part of Clay and Timber clapt together without Art, and as little beauty. Its thought that there are more Jews in it than in any other Town of Europe, some counting near Ten thousand. Presburg, while the Turk had Buda, was the chief City of the Kingdom of Hungary, and the Imperial Crown was there kept. Buda is nobly seated, on the Banks of the greatest River of Europe, where it runs in one entire Stream, the City rising up by degrees to the top of Hills, affording from most Streets of the
Town a prospect of twenty Miles, or more, on the other side of the Danube, as far as a Mans Eye can reach, which, with the view of Peste, and the long Bridge of Boats, and the beautiful fruitful Country about it, makes it extreamly delightful, and was the Royal Seat of the Hungarian Kings and Queens, till Solyman the Magnificent entred it, Aug. 3. 1541. The natural Baths of Buda are esteemed the noblest of Europe, both for their large and hot Springs, and for the magnificence of their Buildings. The Turks bathe much, and tho little curious in most of their private Houses, yet are they very sumptuous in their publick Buildings, as their Chars, or Caravansaras, Mosches, Bridges and Baths declare. In Buda there are eight Baths; that called of the green Pillars, tho now they are red, is impregnated with a petrifying Juice, which discerns itself on the sides of the Bath, upon the Spouts and other places, and makes a grey Stone. The exhalation of the Bath, reverberated by the Cupula, by the Irons extended from one Column to another, and by the Capitals of the Pillars, forms long Stones like Icicles, which hang to all those places. One Bath there has a white Water of a sulphureous smell, and if mony be rubbed betwixt the Fingers half a minute, while the hot Water falls from a Spout, it gilds it. The hottest Bath there has neither colour, smell, nor tast differing from common Water, and deposes no sediment; only the sides of the Bath are green, and have a fungous substance all over. Hamburg is the chief City of Holsatia; Munster of Westphalia; Erford of the Landgraviate of Thuningia; Ausburg of Suabia; Francfort, on the Oder, of the New Marca of Brandenburg; Vis∣burg of Franconia; Brunswick of the Duchy of the Lower Saxony; Inspure of those that belong to the Count of Tirolis; Bremen of its Duchy. IV. The Revenues of the Empire are esteemed by Bolerus Seven millions of Crowns yearly; tho the Tribute paid by the Free, or Imperial Cities, being in number about sixty, amount only to 1500 l. per ann. The Princes also, and Free Cities are bound to aid the Emperour in the time of War against the Turk with Three thousand five hundred eighty five Horse, and Sixteen thousand Foot; which he may Challenge without troubling the Diets for it; but all this is but a small addition to his own Estates.
The Duke of Lorain being nearly Allied to, and having his de∣pendance on the Emperour, I think it proper for me to speak of him here. 1. A late Writer says, Antiquity gives us not the least reason to doubt, but the Family of Lorain had the same Original with those of Austria, Wirtenburg and Baden: for Gerhard of the Ancient Landgraves of Alsatia (the Old Family of Lorain, descended from Charlemayne being extinct) was Created Duke of Lorain, by the Emperour Henry the Third An. 1048. from whom this Duke is descended. The late famous Duke of Lorain, Carolus Leopoldus-Nicolaus-Sextus, was born in April, An. 1643. and having been married to the Queen Dowager of Poland, as its said before, he has left be∣hind him the following Children, born at Inspure, in the Princi∣pality of Tyrolis. 1. Leopoldus-Josephus-Carolus-Agapetus-Hyacynthus, the present Duke, born Sept. 11. An. 1679. 2. Josephus-Joannes-Antonius-Ignatius-Felicissimus, born Nov. 24. 1680. 3. Ferdinandus-Josephus-Philippus-Romanus-Laurentius, born Aug. 17. 1683. 4. Josephus-Innocentius-Emanuel-Felicianus-Constantinus, born Oct. 20. 1. 85. 5. Franciscus-Antonius-Josephus-Maria-Ambrosius-Nicolaus, born Dec. 8. 1689. New Stile. Charles the Fourth, Duke of Lorain, the present Dukes Great Uncle, was deprived of his Estates for some years by the present French King, and was reinvested in them, March 3. An. 1661, after that he had demolished the Fortifications of Nancy, and (as a French Writer says) this Restauration was on Condition that the Duke should quit all Leagues, Intelligences, Associations and Practises with any Prince whatsoever; which having not per∣formed, he was disposest again: and since (as the same Writer tells us) Duke Charles quitted to the Most Christian King, the Property and Sovereignty of his Duchies of Lorain and Bar, which are united to the Crown of France for ever. 2. The Dukal and Sovereign House of Lorain contains many Escutcheons, over all Or, a Bend Gules, charged with three Ale∣rions Argent. These Princes bear also in their Arms the Cross of Hierusalem: the last Duke possest of this Duchy, to shew he was
an Absolute Prince, and that he held his Estates by no other Tenure but God, and the Sword, gave for his Devise an armed Hand, issuing, as it were from Heaven, and grasping a Sword, with this Motto, Fecit Potentiam in brachio suo. The Dukes Livery is of a yellow colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High Dutch Language. 3. The Capital City lately belonging to the Dukes of Lorain, was Nancy; not great, but of a pleasant and commodious situation, well watered by the River Meurte. 4. The Revenues of the last Duke possest of his Estates, are said to have been Seven hundred thousand Crowns yearly, whereof Two hundred thousand arose from the Customs of Salt, made in the Country, and the other Five hundred thousand from the Coronet Lands. The Imperial, or Hans Towns. I. THE Free or Hans Towns are to the number of about sixty. They are called Imperial, because they owe homage to the Emperour. They are called Hans Towns, haply because the Assembly, which is held among them, for deliberating together, in the old German Language is called Hansa. Their Body has two Voices at the Diets. II. They have for Arms, an Eagle. III. The Capital Hans Towns are Lubec, Collein, Brunswick, and Dantzick. The Archives of all the Confederate Towns are at Lubec, which is the Capital of all the Hans League, and has the right of assembling all the others, with the advice of the five next neighbouring Towns of the Association. There is not a City in the northern parts of Germany, which can equalise this, for the beauty and uniformity of the Houses, which are all built of Brick; the pleasant Gardens, fair Streets, delightful Walks without the Walls, &c. The whole is in Compass about six Miles. The Empire contains above Three hundred Principalities, and Lordships. Its divided into Ten Circles, Austria, Bavaria, Sua∣bia, Alsatia, or the Upper Rhine; the Electorate, or the Lower Rhine, Westphalia, Upper Saxony, Lower Saxony, Franconia, and Burgundy. Alsatia and Burgundy are now in the French Pos∣session.
These Circles Compose the General Diets of the Empire, where all affairs are determined. The first body is that of the Electors. The second is that of the other Princes, be they Seculars, or Ecclesiastical. The third is that of the Free, Franc, or Imperial Towns. Among the many Sovereign Princes of Germany, who are Feu∣datory to the Empire, the principal are the eight Electors, who have power to choose by their Suffrages the Emperours of Ger∣many; and their younger Sons take place in Germany of the other Princes. Three of these Electors are Church-men, viz. The Arch-Bishops of Mentz, Triers, and Collin. Five are Layicks, viz. The King of Bohemia, the Duke of Bavaria, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg, the Count Palatine of the Rhine. The Elector of Mentz. I. ANselmus-Franciscus-Fredericus, of Ingelheim, Arch-Bishop of Mentz, Prince and Elector of the Empire, great Chancellour of Germany, and Legate of course to the See of Rome, was elected Nov. 17. 1679. being then forty five years of Age. Before his Election he was Arch-Priest of Mentz, and Governour of Erfort. He is the seventy first Arch-Bishop of Mentz, forty Bishops having preceded them. II. The Arms of his Electorship, are a Wheel Or, in a Field Gules, and over it an Electoral Cap. The Wheel is born in Re∣membrance of the first Elector of this Church, who being the Son of a Car-man, kept always (through humility) a Wheel in his Chamber, to mind him of his Extraction. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High Dutch Language. III. Mentz, seated on the River Maenus, or the Maine, and Aschaffenburg are the ordinary places of his Residence; and he has thirteen Suffragans. Gustavus Adolphus, after he took Mentz, had there with him, at one time, six chief Princes of the Empire, twelve Ambassa∣dors of Kings, States, Electors, and Princes, besides Dukes and Lords, and the Martial men of his own Army. In this City,
Maud, Daughter of our King Henry the First, was married to the Emperour Henry the Fourth, and Crowned Empress. Here also the Art of Printing was invented, or perfected at least, and made fit for use. An. 745. Boniface, an Arch Bishop of Mentz, believing that there were no Antipodes, accus'd of Heresie before Pope Zacchary, whose Legate he was, Vigilius Bishop of Saltsburgh, because he had publickly taught and writ the contrary; and he caus'd Vigi∣lius to be condemned, alledging that S. Austin, S. John Chrysostom, and others of the Fathers of the Church never believed it. Zac∣chary writ, on this occasion, two Letters to Boniface, which are inserted in the General sum of the Councels IV. This Arch-Bishoprick brings ordinarily to its Arch-Bishop 6 or 700000 Crowns of annual Rent. Treves or Triers. I. John-Hugo de Dorsbec, Arch-Bishop of Treves, and Bishop of Spire, Prince and Elector of the Empire, Governour of Prumb, and Provost of Weifenberg was chosen Arch-Bishop and Elector An.  he Stiles himself Great Chancellour of the Gaules, and of the Kingdom of Arles, belonging to the Empire, and is the 101 Prelate of Treves. II. He bears for Arms His Livery is of a  colour; he professes the Roman Reli∣gion, and uses the High Dutch Language. III. He resides at Wilich, tho Treves be his principal City, and is seated in an Air so cloudy, and subject to Rains, that its called Cloaca Planetarum. This City is said to be the most ancient of Eu∣rope, and built one hundred and fifty years before Rome. IV. Its said that the Revenue of this Arch-Bishoprick may amount yearly to 11 or 1200000 Livres.
Cologne. I. PRince Clement of Bavaria, Arch Bishop and Elector of Cologne, Bishop of Ratisbone and Freising, Prince and Ele∣ctor of the Empire, Great Chancellour for the Empire through∣out Italy, and Legate by his place to the See of Rome, was born Dec. 5. An. 1671. and Elected Arch-Bishop and Elector July 14. 1688; being the 81. Prelate of this See. II. His Arms are those of the House of Bavaria, which I shall set down beneath. The Arms of the Archbishoprick are, a Cross Sable in a Field Argent. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High Dutch Lan∣guage. III. Bona, on the Rhine, is the ordinary place of his Residence. Cologne, being about five Miles in Compass, is a considerable Town, and the Germans say, Qui non vidit Coloniam, non vidit Ger∣maniam. Its Arms are, three Crowns Or, with this Motto, Colonia fidelis Romanae Ecclesiae filia. When the Arch-Bishop comes there, he cannot stay above three days together, without leave of the Burgomasters (this being a Confederate Town) and the number of the persons which he brings with him, is limited. This Town is one of the largest in Germany, and the whole Town is so full of Convents, Churches, Churchmen, and Reliques, that its not un∣deservedly stiled, the Rome of Germany. The Arch-Bishops Palace at Bona is said to be one of the fairest in all Germany. IV. The Revenues of this Arch-Bishoprick are about 6 or 700000 Crowns per annum. Bavaria. HEnricus Leo, Duke of Bavaria and Saxony being proscribed, and outed of his Territories by the Emperour Frederick Bar∣barossa: Otho Earl of Wittelsbach and Schyre, was created Duke of Bavaria by the said Emperour An. 1180. and had both the Ba∣varias, as well Upper, as Lower granted him for ever.
Otho the Second, Grand-Son to the former, married Agnes, sole Daughter and Heiress to Henry the Younger, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and by reason thereof, obtained of the Emperour Frederick the Second, the Investiture of that Palatinate together with the Electoral Dignity▪ An. 1227. I. From him is Descended Maximilianus-Maria-Emanuel-Cajeta∣nus-Ludovicus-Franciscus-Ignatius-Antonina-Faelix-Nicolaus-Pius, the present Count Palatine of the Upper Palatinate, Duke of Ba∣varia, Prince and Elector of the Empire, Steward to the Impe∣rial House, and first of the Secular Electors, born Jun. 11. 1662. he succeeded his Father May 16. 1679. and An. 1685 he mar∣ried Anna-Maria-Josepha, the only Daughter of Leopold, the pre∣sent Emperour, by his first Empress, the Princess Margarida-Maria-Teresa of Austria, Daughter of Philip the Fourth, King of Spain. The Duchess was born Jan. 18. An. 1669. and had a Son by the Duke, May 1. An. 1689. but he died the same year. The Duke has a Brother named Josephus-Clementius-Cajetanus-Franciscus-Antoninus-Gasper-Melchior-Balthasar-Joannes-Baptista-Nicolaus, the present Elector of Cologne, beforementioned. He has also a Sister, named Violanta-Beatrix, born Jan. 23. An. 1673. and married to Gaston, eldest Son and Heir to the present Duke of Tuscany. An. 1688. II. His Arms are three Escutcheons joyn'd together, the first Sable, a Lion Crown'd Or, which belongs to the Palatinate. The second Fusilè in Bend Argent and Azure, in twenty one pieces, which belongs to Bavaria. The third Gules, with an Imperial Globe, Or, which belongs to the Electorate. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High Dutch Language. III. Saltsburg was formerly the Capital City of this Country; at present it is Munchen, seated on the River Isar, where the Ele∣ctor Resides. Its in a very sweet and delightful Soil, among Ponds and Groves, daintily interlac'd with pretty Rivulets, and embellisht with many excellent Gardens, that of the Elector be∣ing extraordinary. Norinberg is the fairest City in the Upper Palatinate, and per∣haps of all Germany: of figure it is Square, environ'd with a tripple Wall of eight Miles in Circuit. The Houses are most of Free-stone, and six or seven Stories high; and divers of them painted on the outside, and adorn'd with gilded Balls on the top.
At Altorff, near this Town, in the Anatomy-School, is the Ske∣leton of a Bear bigger than an Horse. If the Bavarian Branch fails, the Palatinate Family are to re∣enter into the ancient Electorship, and the other newly erected is to be abolished. SAXONY. ALbert the Third, Elector of Saxony, descended of the Family of Anhalt, coming to an unexpected and accidental end, being without issue, ann. 1422, Frederick the Warlike, Marquess of Misnia and Landgrave of Thuringia, Son to Frederick the Sttong, was invested in the Electoral Dignity, by the Emperor Sigismond, ann. 1425, from whom is descended I. Joannes-Georgius the Third, the present Duke of Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia, Marquess of Misnia, Grand Marshal of the Empire, Prince and Elector, who was born▪ June 20. 1647, and succeeded his Father, Aug. 22. 1680. and in Sept. 1663, he espoused the Princess Anna Sophia, eldest Sister to the present King of Denmark; but the Marriage was not consummated till Octob. 9. 1666, she was born ann. 1647, and he has had by her two Sons. 1. Joannes-Georgius the Fourth, Heir apparent, born Octob. 17. ann. 1668. 2. Frederick-Augustus, born May 12. 1670. The Duke has no Brother nor Sister living, but there are forty two Princes of the House of Saxony alive. II. His Arms are quarterly. In the first, Upper Saxony. In the second, Thuringia. In the third, Misnia. In the fourth, Lower Saxony. Over all the Electorate bears Barwise of six pieces, Or and Sable, a Bend verte. His Livery is of a  Colour. He professes the Protestant Religion, according to the Doctrine of Luther, and uses the High-Dutch Language. III. Dresden, seated on the fides of the River Albis, by which it is divided into the Old Town and the New, join'd into one by a Bridge eight hundred paces in length, is the ordinary place of Residence of this Elector: the Country round about it being very rich and pleasant. When the first Stone was laid to build the Walls of this Town, there was placed in the Earth a Silver Cup
gilded, a Book of the Laws, and another of Coins, and three Glasses filled with Wine. Magdeburg is the greatest Town of the Country, but possess'd by the Marquess of Brandenburgh, by virtue of the Treaty at Mun∣ster. The first Turnament in Germany opened at Magdeburg, 635, by the Emperor Henry, surnamed the Fowler. These Pastimes were afterwards deposed upon the emulation they caused between the Princes and Nobility: or haply, on consideration that many brave Men lost their Lives in these Encounters: for at Darmstadt, an. 1403, at the twenty third Turnament which was held in Ger∣many, the Gentlemen of Franconia, and those of Hesse, drew so much Blood of each other, that there remain'd dead on the place seventeen of the former, and nine of the latter. Wittenberg, seated on the Elb, whose chief Beauty lies in one chief Street, extending the whole length of the City; in former times was the Seat of the Duke-Elector; till the Electoral Dignity was conferred on the House of Meissen; who liking better their own Country, kept their Court at Dresden, but so that Wittenberg is still acknowledg'd for the Head City of the Electorate. IV. This Electors ordinary and extraordinary Revenues may amount to eight millions of Livers yearly. It arises out of his Silver Mines, Imposts laid upon Beer, the Tenths of all sorts of Increase, as of Corn, Wine, &c. Salt-Houses and the like. BRANDENBURG. THAT the Family of Brandenburg is descended from the Counts of Zollern in Schawben is not to be doubted; but from whence these Counts drew their Extraction, does not so well appear. Their opinion seems to be best, which gives them the same original with the Guelphi; yet so as not entirely to ex∣clude the Colonnas, a Family of an Italian Extraction also. In the Catalogue of these Counts, we find Conrade the First, who flou∣rished about the middle of the twelfth Century, and married Anne of Vokburg, sole Heiress of the last Burgrave of Nurenburg, whereupon he obtained of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, to be himself invested in that Burgraviate. From him was descended Frederick the Sixth, the first Elector of Brandenburg, of the Fa∣mily of Zollern. This Frederick was born ann. 1372, and served
the Emperor Sigismond in his Wars, by whom, in regard of his great merit, he was constituted Vicar or Warden of the Marc, ann. 1411. Afterwards at a Diet held at Constance, ann. 1415. he ob∣tained the Electoral Dignity of the said Emperor, with the gene∣ral consent of the other Electors, together with the Marquisate of Brandenburg, paying down in consideration thereof four hun∣dred thousand Hungarian Shillings. The Investiture was after∣ward solemnly performed in Apr. ann. 1417, &c. From him is descended. I. Frederick III. the present Marquess of Brandenburg, great Chamberlain of the Empire, and Elector, Duke of Prussia, &c. born at Nine of the Clock in the Morning, July 1. anno 1657, he succeeded his Father, Apr. 29. 1688, Old Style: and on the 23d. of August, ann. 1679, he married Elizabetha Henrica, Sister to the present Landtgrave of Hesse: she died July 27. 1683, leav∣ing one only Daughter, nam'd Louisa-Dorothea-Sophia, born Sept. 19. 1680. Since the Decease of this Electress, in the following year, viz. 1684. Oct. 6. he married the Princess Sophia-Charlotta, Daughter to Ernestus-Augustus, the present Bishop of Osenburg, and Duke of Brunswick and Hanover. She was born Oct. 20. 1668, the Duke has had by her two Sons, but only one living, viz. Frederick-William, born at two of the clock in the Afternoon, Aug. 4. 1688. This Elector has four Brothers, and two Sisters living, but his Father's Issue by a second Ventre, viz. 1. Philip-William, born in May, 1669. 2. Maria Amalia, born Nov. 16. 1670: and first married, ann. 1687, to Charles, eldest Son and Heir apparent to the present Duke of Meckleburg-Gustrow; and after his Decease (which hap∣pened March 15. 1688,) to Maurice-William, Duke of Saxony and Administrator of Naumburg, June 26. 1689. 3. Albert-Frederick, born Jan. 14. 1672. 4. Charles-Philip, born Dec. 26. 1672. 5. Elizabeth-Sophia, born March 26. 1674. 6. Charles, or Christian-Lewis, born at four of the clock in the Afternoon, May 14. or 17. 1677. Note that there are fourteen Princes of the House of Branden∣burg alive. II. The Duke bears divers Quarterings, containing several Al∣liances and Principalities, over all Azure, a Scepter in Pale, Or,
which belongs to the Electorship: a triple Helm, and a triple Crest: he has moreover in his Arms, a Lion, an Eagle crown'd, and a Griffin, the Shield is componé, and contonué. His Livery is of a blue Colour. He professes the Protestant Religion according to the Doctrine of Calvin, and uses the High Dutch Language. III. Brandenburg, seated on the River Havel, is the Capital City of the Marquisate, to which it gives the Name. His Electo∣ral Highness resides ordinarily at Berlin, Spandaw, Posdam. Berlin is the greatest Town of the Marquisate, being seated on the River Suevus; its as big as Montpellier or Beziers in France. Magdeburg, belonging to this Elector, was formerly the Metro∣politan City of Germany; but scarce half built again since it was sack'd by Tilly, and 36000 persons put to the Sword, and de∣stroyed. IV. His ordinary and extraordinary Revenues are computed to be eleven, or twelve, and some say, fourteen millions of Livers. His Territories and Forces are the greatest in Germany next the Emperors: and his Court is Royal, and the second fairest. This Prince may go on his own Land from the Low Countries, so far as into Poland and Curland. The Elector Palatine. THE Palatine and Bavarian Families are known to have had one Rise, viz. from Otho Earl of Wittlesbach and Schyre, (as its said before in Bavaria) who was created Duke of Bavaria by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, ann. 1180, and had both the Ba∣varias, as well Upper as Lower, granted him for ever. His Grandson Otho the Second (as 'tis said before) married Agnes sole Daughter and Heiress to Henry the younger, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and by reason thereof obtained of the Emperor Fre∣derick the Second, the Investiture of that Palatinate, together with the Electoral Dignity, ann. 1227. his eldest Son was Lewis the Severe, born Apr. 13. 1229, who left two Sons, viz. Rudolph, an. 1274, who succeeded his Father Lewis in the Palatinate and E∣lectoral Dignity, and was Author of the Rudolphine Line of the Palatinate Family. 2. Lewis, who was Author of the Bavarian Line of the said Family. From the forementioned Rudolph is de∣scended,
Joannes-Gulielmus-Josephus, the present Elector Palatine, and Duke of Newburg, grand Treasurer of the Imperial House, who was born at Dusseldorp, Apr. 19. 1650: and married at Newstadt in Austria, Octob. 25, new style, 1678, the Princess Maria-Anna-Josepha, Daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand the Fourth, by E∣leanor Gonzaga, Daughter of Charles Duke of Mantua, his third Wife. This Electress was born ann. 1658. She was brought to bed of a Son, but stillborn, ann. 1683: and ann. 1686, she mis∣carried a second time, and continuing indisposed, died three years after at Vienna, viz. Apr. 7. 1689. The Elector succeeded his Father, ann. 1690: and his first Wife being dead, he married a Daughter of Cosmo, the Third, great Duke of Tuscany, ann. 1691. This Elector has six Brothers, and six Sisters living, born in this order. 1. Eleonora-Magdalena-Teresa, Empress of Germany, born Jan. 6. 1655. 2. Ludovicus-Antonius, Greast Master of the Teutonick Order, born at Dusseldorp, July 9. 1660. 3. Carolus-Philippus. born Nov. 4. 1661: and married at Ber∣lin, July 24. 168 to Louise Charlotta de Ratzeville; Lewis, Marquess of Brandenburg's Widow. 4. Alexander-Sigismundus, Dean of Ausburg, and President of the Chapter of Constance, born at Neuburg, Apr. 16. 1663. 5. Franciscus Ludovicus, born at Neuburg, July 24. 1664: and elected Bishop of Breslaw, Jan. 30. 1683. 6. Fredericus Gulielmus, born at Dusseldorp, July 20. 1665. 7 Maria-Sophia-Elizabetha, born Aug. 16. 1666: and married ann. 1687, to Peter King of Portugal. 8▪ Maria-Anna, born at Dusseldorp, Oct. 28. 1667, and affi∣anc'd to Charles the Second King of Spain, Aug. 28. 1689, whose Queen she now is. 9. Philippus Gulielmus-Augustus, born Nov. 18. 1688. 10. Dorothea-Sophia, born July 12. 1670. 11 Hedewig-Elizabetha Amalia, born July 18. 1673. 12 Leopoldina Eleanora-Sophia, born May 27. 1679. II. The Arms of Charles Count Palatine of the Rhine, this E∣lector's Predecessor in the Electorate, who deceased May 16. 1685, were Quartelry. In the first and fourth Sable, a Lion Or, crown'd, arm'd and langued Gules. In the second and third,
Lozengys Argent and Azure, of one and twenty pieces, with a Mond Or, which belongs to the Electorate. The Elector's Li∣very is of a  Colour, and he professes the Roman Religion, and uses the High▪ Dutch Language. III. Heidelberg is the Capital Town of the Electorate, seated on the River Neccar. On the Town House is a Clock with di∣vers motions, and when the Clock strikes, an old Man puts off his Hat, a Cock crows, and shakes his Wings, Soldiers fight with each other, &c. In a great Building there, in the Elector Palatines Palace joining to the Cellars, the great Vessel, holding two hundred Tuns, is famous. Ann. 1661 (as Dr. Brown has observed in the Account of his Travels) about an hundred English came up the Rhine, and by the permission of the Elector, settled themselves a few miles from Heidelberg, living all together, Men, Women and Children in one House, and having a Community of many things; they are of a peculiar Religion, calling themselves Christian-Jews, and one Mr. Poole, formerly living in Norwich, was their Head. They cut not their Beards, and observe many other Ceremonies and Duties, which they either think themselves obliged to by some expressions in the Old Testament, or from some new Exposition of their Teachers. Manheim, seated on the Confluence of the Rhine and Neccar, is the Defence of all the Country, there is in it a very fair Pa∣lace, where the Elector Charles ordinarily resided. IV. The Elector Charles, beside his own Estates, inherited five hundred thousand Livres of yearly Rent after the Death of the Palatine of Simmeren, Uncle to Charles-Lewis his Father, and formerly his Tutor. Philip William, Father to the present Elector, after the Decease of Charles Elector Palatine, which happened ann. 1685, became possessed of the Electorate, by virtue of the Instrument of Peace at Osnabrug; but since was thrown out by the French King, anno 1688, and tho he had recovered many places in it, ann. 1689, by the assistance of the Confederates, yet he continued at Neuburg.
Of the Family of Brunswick and Lunenburg, from which the new made Elector of Hanover is descended. THE Family of Brunswick and Lunenburg, for its great An∣tiquity, seems to bear the Bell, in a manner, from all the rest. It owes its original to the ancient Welffs; of whom see in Spen∣cer's Sylloge Genealogica. Henry the Lion, descended from these, Duke of Bavaria and Saxony, and Successor to his Father, ann. 1139, may be properly looked upon as the common Father of all the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg; tho falling into disgrace with the Emperor Barbarossa, he was proscribed, and so lost all his Dominions, except the Districts of Brunswick and Lunenburg: he married Maud, Daughter of Henry the Second, King of England, and had by her three Sons and two Daughters. Otho their youngest Son, born ann. 1204 the other Brothers dying without Issue-male, was created the first Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburg, by the Emperor Frederick the Second. From him the present Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg are descended: for Ernestus the Seventh Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburg, who died anno 1546, left, among other Children, two Sons, Augustus and William, of whom the first was Author of the new Line of Brunswick Wolfembuttel, whose Sons Rudolphus Augustus, and An∣tonius Ulricus now live together in joint Authority: and the other, viz. William, being Author of the Line of Brunswick-Lunenburg-Hanover, whose Grandson Ernestus-Augustus, Bishop of Osenburg, is now Duke of Brunswick Lunenburg-Hanover, He was born No∣vemb. 10. 1629: and ann. 1658 he married the Lady Sophia, Daughter to Frederick the Fifth, Elector Palatine, and King of Bohemia, born Oct. 13. 1630. This Duke is lately made a new Elector of the Empire. There Children are, I. Georgius-Ludovicus, Prince Hereditary, born May 28. 1660, and on Nov. 21. 1682 he married his Cousin German Sophia Do∣rothea, only Daughter of his late Uncle, George-William, Duke of Zell: she was born Sept. 15. 1666. He has Issue by her 1. Georgius-Augustus, born Oct. 30. 1683. 2. Gulielmus-Ernestus born 1685. 2. Fredericus-Augustus, born Octob. 3. 1661: who died in Hun∣gary, 1689.
3. Maximilianus-Gulielmus, born Dec. 14. 1666. He died in the Morea. 4. Sophia Charlotta, born Octob. 20. 1668, and married to Fre∣derick the Third, the present Elector of Brandenburg, Oct. 6. 1684, by whom she has one Prince alive, named Fredericus Gulielmus, born Aug. 4. 1688. 5. Carolus-Philippus, born Oct. 13. or 23. 1669. he died in Hun∣gary, ann. 1690. 6. Christianus, born Sept. 29. 1671. 7 Ernestus Augustus, born Sept. 17. 1674. There are other Princes in Germany of the Houses of Hesse, Meckleburg, Wirtenburg, Baden, Anhalt, Saxon-Lawenburg, &c▪ but I give an account only of the Electoral Houses, omitting the rest. FRANCE. 1. HUGH the Great, Duke of France, Burgundy and Aquitain, Marquess of Orleans, and Earl of Paris, died in the year 956. His eldest Son Hugh Capet, upon the Death of Lewis the Slothful, last King of France, of the Race of Charlemagne, was by the unanimous consent of the Peers of France inaugurated King of that Kingdom, ann. 987, from whom is descended Lewis the Fourteenth, the present King of that Kingdom, born at St. Germains, Sept. 5. new style, 1638. Of the several Branch∣es of the Line of Hugh Capet, he is descended in a direct Line from Robert, Count of Clermont, and Lord of Bourbon, youngest Son of Lewis the Ninth, who died of the Plague, at the Siege of Tunis, ann. 1270. The Surname of Bourbon is derived to the present French King from the said Robert: King Henry the Fourth, his Grandfather, being the first King of France, of the said Sur∣name, who having first professed himself of the Roman Religion, whereas before he had been a Protestant, was crown'd King of France, ann. 1594. The present King succeeded his Father, ann. 1642, or 3, and Sept. 7. 1651. he was declared Major: for by a Sanction put forth by King Charles the Fifth, surnamed the Wise, who came to the Crown of France, ann. 1364: the eldest Sons of France, were for the future, to be declared of Age at fourteen years old, and fit to be crown'd, and govern: he was crown'd at
Rheims by the Archbishop of that See, Jun. 7. 1654, and Jun. 9. 1660, he was married at St. John de Luz, to Maria-Teresa, Daughter to Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, by his first Wife, the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to Henry the Fourth, King of France. She died July 30. 1683, by whom the King has only one Son now living, namely, Lewis the Fifteenth, surnam'd the Hardy, the present Dolphin, born Nov. 1. 1661; and March 7. 1680, was married to the Ele∣ctoral Princess of Bavaria, Maria-Anna Victoria-Christina, Daugh∣ter to Ferdinandus-Maria, the late Elector of Bavaria. The Con∣tract was signed at Munic, Dec. 30. 1679. She since died ann. 1690. The Dolphin has Issue by her three Sons, viz. 1. Lewis, Duke of Burgundy, born at Versailles Aug. 6. at twen∣ty minutes past ten of the Clock in the Evening, ann. 1682. 2. Philip, Duke of Anjou, born Nov. 9. 1683. 3. Gaston, Duke of Berry, born Aug. 31. 1686. Concerning the Dolphin, note that he is so called, because Humbert the Second, Earl of Dolphiné, descended of the Blood Royal of France, seeing himself destitute of Issue, made over the Province of Dolphiné, an. 1358, to Philip de Valois, the then King of France, for forty thousand Florins, and on condition, that, for the future, the eldest Son of France should still be styl'd, The Dolphin. And Charles the Fifth above-mentioned, surnamed, The Wise, who came to the Crown of France, ann. 1364, was the First, who in his Father's Life-time was styled, The Dolphin. Now, besides the Dolphin, the present King of France has se∣veral natural Children, viz. 1. Maria▪ Anna de Bourbon, born ann. 1666, and married anno 1680 to Lewis de Bourbon, Prince de Conti. 2. Lewis de Bourbon, Duke of Vermandois, born ann. 1667, su∣preme Intendant of the Marine. He died ann. 1683. These two were born him by Aolisia-Frances de la Beaume, la Blanche de la Valiere, Duchess of Vaujour, and Peeress of France, Daughter to Lawrence de la Valiere. She is now a Carmelite Nun, by the name of Sister Aloisia de Misericordiâ. 3. Ludovicus-Augustus de Bourbon, Duke of Maine, born ann. 1670, and made legitimate three years after, viz. 1673. 4. Ludovicus-Caesar de Bourbon, Count of Vexin, born ann. 1672. He died 1683.
5. Aloisia-Frances de Bourbon, Mademoiselle de Nantes, born An. 1673. and married An. 1685. to Lewis, Duke of Bourbon. 6. Aloisia-Maria-Anna, deceased An. 1681. 7. Ludovicus▪Alexander de Bourbon, Count of Toulouse, born An. 1678. Legitimated An. 1681: Intendant of the Marine. 8. Frances-Maria de Bourbon, Mademoiselle de Blois, born An. 1681. These six were born him by Frances Athanasia de Roche▪Cho∣vart, Gabriel Prince de Mortemars Daughter, and Wife to Henry-Lewis Paidallan, Marquess of. Montespan. The French King has only one Brother, viz. Philip, Duke of Orleans, born Sept. 1. An. 1640. He espoused for his first Wife, the Princess Henrietta-Maria, youngest Daughter to our late King Charles the First. She was born at Exeter, Jun. 16. 1644, and died An. 1670. He had by her four Children, viz. 1. Maria-Aloisia, born March 27. 1662. and married Nov. 17. 1679. to Charles the Second, King of Spain. She died without Issue by him An. 1689. 2. Philip, who died an Infant. 3. Another Daughter, not named. 4. Anna-Maria, born Aug. 27. 1669. and Apr. 9. 1684. married to Victor Amadeus the Second, the present Duke of Savoy. The next year after the forementioned Duchess of Orleans died An. 1671. The Duke married Elizabeth Charlotta, Daugh∣ter to Charles-Lewis, Elector Palatine, who was born in May 1652. The Espousals were celebrated at Metz, Nov. 26. of the said year, he has Issue by her, 1. Philip, Duke of Chartres, born Aug. 2. 1671. 2. Elizabetha-Charlotta, Mademoiselle de Chartres, born Sept. 13. 1676. The Princes of the Blood. BEing to name the Princes of the Blood, I shall shew withal, how they are descended and allied to the King of France. Robert the Fifth, Count of Clermont, and Lord of Bourbon, youngest Son to King Lewis the Ninth (as mentioned before) was the person, in whom the Line of Hugh Capet is continued in the Crown of France. Charles Duke of Vendôme, lineally
descended from him, was born An. 1489. And left among other Children, two Sons, viz. Anthony, the eldest who was Duke of Vendôme, and King of Navarr, Great Grandfather to the present King of France. 2. Lewis, Prince of Conde, Great Grandfather to the present Prince of Conde, Henry-Julius de Bourbon, born Jul. 29. 1643. formerly stiled Duke D'Enghien, and now, since his Fathers death, Prince of Conde. He was married Dec. 11. 1667. to the Princess Anne, Daughter to Edward Prince Palatine of the Rhine, who was born July 23. 1647. and is since deceased, but he has by her the following Issue. 1. Maria-Teresa, Mademoiselle de Bourbon, born 1666. 2. Lewis de Bourbon, Duke D'Enghien born 1668. and married 1685. to Aloisia-Frances, Natural Daughter to the King of France by Madam de Montespan, who was born 1673. 3. Maria-Anna, Mademoiselle de Monmorency, born 1675. 4. Anna-Maria Victoria, Mademoiselle D'Enghien, born 1676. 5. Aloisia-Benedicta, Mademoiselle de Conde, born 1678. The Prince of Conde had also a Brother, viz. Armand, Prince de Conti, born 1629. married to Anna-Maria de Monmorency, Car∣dinal Mazarines Neice, by the Sister 1659. Deceased 1666, leaving behind him two Sons, viz. 1. Lewis de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, born 1661. and in 1680 he married Anna-Maria de Bourbon, the Kings Natural Daughter, by Madam de la Valiere, who was made Legitimate. He died without Issue An. 1685. 2. Francis-Lewis de Bourbon, the now Prince of Conti, born, 1664, or 8. Besides these Princes of the Blood, the King has also three Cousin Germans living; Daughters to his Uncle Gaston-John-Baptist, late Duke of Orleans. 1. Anna-Maria, Duchess of Montpensier, born An. 1627. un∣married. 2. Margarita-Aloisia, born An. 1645. and married An. 1661. to Cosmus the Third, Great Duke of Tuscany. 3. Isabella, born, An. 1649, and married An. 1667. to Joseph-Lewis, Duke of Guise, She is now a Widow. Note, That tho this King of France be but the twenty sixth King inclusively of the Line of Hugh Capet, yet he is the sixty first▪King of France: for there preeceded twenty one Kings of
the Race of Merovius, and thirteen Kings of the Race of Char∣lemagne, before the Line of Hugh Capet came in. II. For Arms, he bears Azure, three Flower de Luces Or, two in Chief, and one in Base; the Escutcheon is environed with the Collars of the Orders of S. Michael, and the Holy Ghost: It has for Crest, an Helmet Or, entirely open, thereon a Crown Clos'd after the manner of an Imperial Crown, with eight Inarched Rayes, topt with a double Flower de Luce. The Sup∣porters are two Angels habited as Levites; the whole under a Pavilion Royal, semè of France, lin'd Ermines, with these words. Ex omnibus floribus elegi mihi Lilium. Lilia neque laborant, neque nent. These words, The Lilies do not Spin (as a late French Writer tells us) import, that the Flower de Luces, which represent the Crown of France never fall to the Distaff, and that the Female Sex cannot inherit, according to the Salique Law. The same Custom having prevailed among the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Persians, Chi∣neses, Turks, Tartars, and Parthians: tho the Daughters have sometimes succeeded in England, Spain, Sicily, Sueden, &c. The King of France pretending likewise a right to Navarre, bears also for that Kingdom, Gules, a Carbuncle noued Or; which having a resemblance to Chains of Gold, is Blazon'd by some, Chains of Gold Interlac'd, parted into Orbes, Pales, Fesses, Counterbands or Saltiers. The King of France's Device is, Consiliis Armisque Potens, or also this, Nec pluribus Impar. Note, That the Arms of France in the days of Pharamond, and his three Successors, were Gules three Crowns Or. Clovis the Great altered them to Azure, semè of Flower de Luces Or, and Charles the Sixth, who came to the Crown, An. 1380, reduc'd the Lilies, in his Coat of Arms, to three. The Kings Livery is of a blew colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the French Language. III. Paris is the Capital City of France, which has the plea∣sant River Seine running thro the midst of it. I shall speak con∣cerning the extent, and number of the Houses and Inhabitants of this, and other Cities when I come to speak of London; wherefore I shall pass by these things at present. As for his chief Seats of pleasure, the chief is that noble Seat at Versailles, four Leagues South of Paris, of which there being
a full and clear description extant in English, as also of the Seat of Monsieur at S. Clou, and of the Treasury of S. Denis, I shall say nothing here of them. He has also the noble Seats of Fontainbleau, and S. Germains, beside the Louvre at Paris, cele∣brated by that famous Distich Non Orbis Gentem, non Urbem Gens habet ullam, Urbsve domum, Dominum nec habet ulla parem, 4. The Revenues of the King of France are said to amount to eleven millions of Pounds Sterling; being above the fifth part of the Revenues of that Kingdom; and the French averr France to contain fifty thousand Parishes. The House of England. I. WIlliam, Duke of Normandy, surnamed the Con∣queror, under the pretence that King Edward the Confessor, his Cousin, who died without Issue An. 1065. Son of King Ethelred, by his Queen Emma, had by his last Will and Testament, transferred the Kingdom to him, made a Descent into England, An. 1067. and having slain King Harold in Battle, the then usurping King there, after King Edwards death; was by the unanimous con∣sent of the Peerage of England Crowned King. Now, when King William the Conqueror's youngest Son, Henry, upon the death of his elder Brother, William the Second, who had succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, came to the Crown, which was An▪ 1087. He married Matilda, or Maud, Daughter of Malcolm the Third, King of Scotland, by Margaret, the Si∣ster of Edgar Atheling, right Heir of Edward the Confessor, as be∣ing descended from King Edmund Ironside, half Brother to King Edward the Confessor, by their common Father, King Ethelred, and Grandfather to the abovenamed Edgar Atheling and Margaret. And the said King Henry the First had by his Wife Matilda, or Maud, a Son, who was cast away at Sea; and a Daughter, named Maud also, the only Legitimate Issue that survived him,
born An. 1104. She was married first to the Emperour Henry the Fourth, who had no Issue by her; and after his death, to Geoffry Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, by whom she had a Son, nam'd Henry the Second. Now, King Henry the First, his Son being dead, seeing this Daughter his only Legitimate Issue, call'd a Parliament An. 1133. in which all the Lords of the Land, took an Oath to be true to his Daughter Maud the Empress, and her Heirs, and acknowledge them as right Inheritors of the Crown. And tho Stephen, Earl of Bologne and Montagne, Son of Stephen, Earl of Blois, by Adela, third Daughter of the Conquerour, was set up to the Crown, by the working of Henry his Brother, Bishop of Winchester, after the death of King Henry the First, against the undoubted right of the said Empress; yet at length, seeing his Children dead before him, he secur'd the Succession to her Son Henry the Second, who was Crown'd An. 1155. And from this Henry the Second, in whom the Saxon Line was restored, is Descended, James the Second, of the Royal House of the Stuarts, late King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, &c. who was born Oct. 14. 1633. His Majesty Espoused, for his first Wife the Lady Ann, Daughter to the late Edward, Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, &c. She died before he came to the Crown, and brought him Issue, four Sons and four Daughters, but all dying young, except two surviving Daughters. The eldest is the Lady Mary, born Apr. 30. 1662. and was married to William Henry, Prince of Orange, in London, at S. James's Nov. 14. 1677. The said Prince being born on the 14. of the same month, New Stile, 1650, and restor'd to his Hereditary Dignity in the United Provinces An. 1672. concern∣ing whom I shall say more beneath. The second is the Lady Ann, born Feb. 6▪ 1664. And July 28. 1683. was Espoused to George Prince of Denmark, only Bro∣ther to the present King of that Kingdom, he was born An. 1653. or, 1. he has had Issue by his Princess, 1. William, Duke of Gloucester, born in July. 1689. and three Children more, viz. the Lady Mary, the Lady Ann, and another Princess, who died in their Infancy. His Majesty Nov. 21. 1673. took for his second Wife, the La∣dy Mary-Eleanor-Beatrix D'Este, late Queen of England, still
living, who was born Sept. 25. 1658. being youngest Sister to Francisco D'Este the present Duke of Modena and Regio, &c. She was Crowned with his Majesty April 23. 1685. And his Majesty has had by her two Daughters and a Son, who all died young, before the year 1688. And, as some say, he has had a Son and a Daughter by her since, still living. Their Majesties reside at present, at S. Germains, in France, and profess the Roman Re∣ligion. His Majesty has Natural Issue by Madam Churchil, two Sons and two Daughters, all living in France. The Sons go by the name of Fitz-James. The eldest is Duke of Berwick, the youngest is stiled Grand Prior of Ireland. The eldest Daughter was married to the late Lord Waldegrave, by whom he has Issue two Sons. The other Daughter is unmarried. Now, as for William Henry of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, and now stiled William the Third, King of Great Britain, &c. who married the Lady Mary, eldest Daughter to King James as a∣bove. They were Proclaim'd King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, the Executive Power in him, Feb. 14. 1689. Proclaim'd King and Queen of Scotland, April 11. of the same year. His Majesty has, as yet, no Issue by his Queen. Now, as to the Rise of the House of Nassaw and Orange, as it concerns King William, I shall not seek to retrieve its Original; but its certain it flourisht in the ninth Century, and I shall only take notice, that from Walram and Otto, Sons of Henry, surnam'd the Rich, Earl of Nassau, sprang two Capital Lines, viz. that of Idstein, afterwards call'd Sarepont from Walram; and that of Dillenburg, which now enjoys the Principality, from Otto, and therefore we shall confine ourselves singly to this. Now, John the Third, who was the eighth of his Family Li∣neally descended from the said Otto inclusively, had two Sons, viz. Henry, and William the Elder. Henry was born An. 148. and from him the Principality of Orange Descended to King William. As for William the Elder, Brother to Henry, he had a Son call'd John, who dwelt in the Castle of Dillenburg, and had twenty five Children, of whom I shall note only four, viz. John, George, Ernestus-Casimire, and John-Lewis; for from them sprang the several Lines of Siegen, Dillenburg, Diezen, and Hademar; on each of which the Emperour Ferdinand the Third, in the Diet of Ra∣tisbone,
March 3. 1654. conferr'd the honour of having a Voice, and Seat among the Princes of the Empire. As for a farther Genealogical account of these Families, it may be had else∣where. To the Royal Family of England I must add Donna Catharina, Infanta of Portugal, Queen Dowager of England, born at Villa Vicosa in Portugal, Nov. 14. Old Stile, An. 1638. and Espoused at Portsmouth by his late Majesty King Charles the Second, in the month of May, An. 1662. She being only Sister to Don Pedro of the House of Braganza, the present King of that Kingdom. She resides at present at Lisbon, in Portugal. Her original Jointure some settled by King Charles was 40000 l. per annum, to which considerable additions have been since made. Their Majesties have two Uncles living in England, viz. the Earls of Clarendon and Rochester. The Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royal of England, that are not excluded from the Succession of the Crown, by the late Act of Parliament. I. PRincess Ann of Denmark, afore▪ mention'd. II. The Duke of Glocester, of whom also see before. III. Sophia, Duchess of Hanover, Daughter to Frederick the Fifth, Elector, and King of Bohemia. Married to the Duke, An. 1658. Her Children. 1. George-Lewis, born May 28. 1660. Who Nov. 1. 1682. Married Sophia-Dorothea, only Daughter to the Duke of Zel, by whom he has, (1.) George-Augustus, born Oct. 30. 1683. (2.) William-Ernestus, born, An. 1685. 2. Christian, born Sept. 29. 1671. 3. Ernestus-Augustus, born Sept. 17. 1674. 4. Sophia-Charlotta, born Octob. 20. 1668. and married to Fre∣derick the Third, the present Elector of Brandenburg, Octob. 16. 1684. by whom he has had two Princes, but only one living, viz. Frederick-William, born Aug. 4. 1688.
The other Princes and Princesses that are Roman Catholicks. I. ANna▪ Maria, the present Duchess of Savoy, Daughter to the Duke of Orleans by Henrietta-Maria, youngest Daughter of Charles I. born Aug. 27. 1669. Her Children. 1. Maria-Adelheid, or Adetherd, born Dec. 6. 1685. 2. Another Princess, born Aug. 30. 1688. II. ELizabeth-Charlotta, the present Duchess of Orleans, Daugh∣ter to Charles-Lewis, Elector Palatine. Her Children. 1. Philip, Duke of Chartres, born Aug. 2. 1631. 2. Elizabeth▪ Charlotte, Mademoiselle de Chartres, born Sept. 13. 1676. III. ANN, the present Princess of Conde, Daughter to Ed∣ward, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and Grandchild to the King of Bohemia, born July 23. 1647. Her Children. 1. Maria-Teresa de Bourbon, born 1666. 2. Lewis de Bourbon, Duke D'Enghien, born, 1668. 3. Maria Anna de Monmorency, born 1675. 4. Anna Maria-Victoria, D'Enghien, born 1676. 5. Aloisia Benedicta de Conde, born 1678. IV. TWO Daughters of Benedicta-Henrietta-Philippina, Duchess of Hanover, Daughter to Edward Count Palatine, and Grandchild to the King of Bohemia. 1. Charlotta-Felicitas, born March 8. 1671. 2. Welhelmina-Amalia, born Apr. 26. 1673▪
The Princes of the House of Nassau are to be found in the Genealogies of the Princes of the Empire. II. The Sovereign Ensigns Armorial of the King of England are as follows. In the first place he bears Azure, three Flower de Luces Or, for the Regal Arms of France, quartered with the Imperial Ensigns of England; which are Gules, three Lions Pas∣sant Guardant, in Pale, Or. In the second place, within a double Tressure, Counter-flowred-de-Lys, Or; a▪ Lion Rampant Gules, for the Regal Arms of Scotland. In the third place, Azure, an Irish Harp Or▪ stringed Argent, for the Royal Ensigns of Ireland. In the fourth place, as in the first; all within the Garter, the chief Ensign of that most honourable Order, on which is writ∣ten this Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense. Above the same an Helmet, answering to his Majesties Sovereign Jurisdiction: upon the same a rich Mantle of Cloth of Gold, doubled Ermine, adorn'd with an Imperial Crown, and Surmounted for a Crest by a Lion Passant Guardant, Crown'd with the Like; supported by a Lion Guardant Or, Crown'd as the former, and an Unicorn Argent, Gorg'd with a Crown▪ thereto a Chain affixt, passing betwixt his forelegs, and reflexed over his Back Or: both stand∣ing on a Compartment, plac'd underneath, and in the Table of the Compartment, is his Majesties Royal Motto, Dieu & mon Droit. King William, as Earl of Nassau, bears Quarterly, 1. Azure a Lion Or, armed Gules. 2. Or, a Lion Leopard, Gules armed and crown'd Azure. 3. Gules, a Fesse Argent. 4. Gules, two Leopards Or, armed and membred as the first. As Prince of Orange, he bears Quarterly. 1. Gules, a Bend Or. 2. An Hun∣ters Horn Azure, stringed Gules. The third as, &c. over all an Escutcheon of Pretence Checquy Or, and Azure. More briefly thus, quarterly, Chalons and Aurange, under an Escutcheon of Geneva. His Motto is Je maintiendray. His Majesties Livery is a Red Colour, before his coming to the Crown it was blew. He Professes the Protestant Religion according to the Church of England, and uses now the English Language. Note that as Charles the Fifth, who came to the Crown of France, An. 1364. was the first, who in his Fathers life time, was stiled the Dolphin. So Edward the Second, Son of Edward the First, King of England, was the first Prince of Wales, so created An. 1300, to gratifie the Welchmen: his Father Edward
the First having slain in Battel Leoline, the last of the Welsh Princes, and united Wales to the Crown of England. And per∣haps it was in imitation of this that the Donor of Dolphine, would have the eldest Son of France stiled the Dolphin. The Title of Prince of Wales in the eldest Son of England having preceeded the other for many years. The particular Cognizance of a Prince of Wales is a Plumb of Feathers, with this Motto, Ich-Dien, that is, I serve. III. London, seated on the famous navigable River Thames, is the Capital City of England, and the undoubted most famous Emporium, and (for ought appears,) the greatest and most consi∣derable City of the Universe. For as to Pequin, in China, the only City to be brought in competition, which by some is ima∣gined to be greater, we have no account of it fit to reason upon. The late ingenious Sir William Petty, having critically examined the capaciousness and populosity of London, and its other ad∣vantages, and compared them with the other chief Cities of Eu∣rope, according to what accounts could be gotten of them, has accurately made out the following particulars, viz. that there are contained in London 696000 Inhabitants, and 105315 Houses. Paris 488000 and 23223 Houses. Amsterdam 187000 Venice 134000 Rome 125000 Dublin 69000 and 6400 Houses. Bristol 48000 and 5307 Houses. Rouen 66000 and about a third bigger than Bristol. Lyons 100000   Tholouse 90000   From the foregoing particulars, he makes the following Ob∣servations. 1. That the people of Paris, Rome and Rouen, make but 679000, or 19000 less than the 696000 of London alone. 2. That the people of the two English Emporiums, viz. London and Bristol, make 744000, or more than Paris, Amsterdam, and Rouen, these being in all but 741000.
3. That the same two English Cities seem equivalent to Paris, Rouen, Lyons, Thoulose, these making in all but 744000. 4. That the King of Englands three Cities, viz. London, Dublin and Bristol, containing 813000 people, exceed Paris, Amsterdam and Venice, containg 809000 people. 5. That of the four great Emporiums, London, Amsterdam, Ve∣nice, and Rouen, London alone is near double to the other three, viz. above 7, to 4. for the other three make but 387000, London 696000. Sir William Petty farther makes out that the people of London are as many as those of Holland in their twenty eight walled Cities, and Towns, and in their Dorps and Villages, or at least above two thirds of the same. He compares London with Paris in several particulars; in all which he shews London to exceed the other, viz. 1. In the goodness of the Hospitals. 2. In the cleanly, and more convenient way of living. 3. In the richness of the People, the number of the Servants and greatness of Equipage. 4. In the preference of the River Thames, to the River Seine, both in pleasantness and navigableness, the wholesomness of its water; and the Bridge of London being the most considerable of all Europe. 5. In the shipping and Foreign Trade, London therein incom∣parably exceeding both Paris and Rouen: the City of Bristol ap∣pearing by good estimate of its Trade and Customs, as consider∣able, as Rouen. 6. In the richness of the Lawyers Chambers, those of Londen being worth 140000 l. Sterling. 7. In the wholesomness of the Air. 8. In the cheapness, and less stowage of Fuel. 9. In the cheapness of all the most necessary sorts of Food, and the greater variety and plenty of all sorts of Drinks. 10. In the Churches, nothing at Paris being so great as S. Pauls has been, and is like to be; nor so beautiful as King Henry the Seventh's Chapel. As to the ground upon which Paris stands in respect of London, he says Paris is said to be an Oval of three English Miles long, and 2½ broad, the Area whereof contains but 5½ square Miles. Now tho▪ London, measured from Lime▪ house to the end of Tuttlestreet,
from East to West, is above seven Miles and an half; and from the farthest end of Blackmanstreet in Southwark, to the end of S. Leonard Shoreditch is 2500 Geometrical paces, or two Miles and an half, yet he says, upon a Medium, London is seven Miles long, and 1¼ broad, which makes an Area of near nine square Miles; which proportion of 5½ to nine differs little from that of 13 to 23. Its worthy of Observation, that before the Restauration of Monarchy in England, An. 1660. the people of Paris were more than those of London and Dublin, put together: whereas now the people of London are more than those of Paris, Rome and Rouen. The foremention'd Author also makes out by a rational com∣putation, that Rome in Nero's time, seems not to have been above half as big again as London now is; and that now London is near six times as great as the present Rome, wherein are 119000 souls besides Jews, which he computes at 6000. I know not whether Edinburg, the Metropolis of Scotland may deserve noting. Its extended from East to West, on a rising ground, a Mile in length, or somewhat more; and its about three Miles in compass. The Houses are generally six or seven Stories high, and its greatly peopled according to its bigness, several Fa∣milies living in each House. His Majesties chief Seats of pleasure in England, are Windsor Castle, and Hampton-Court. IV. The Revenues settled on the late King Charles the Second, by Parliament, on his Restauration were 120000 l. per annum, which since has been considerably augmented, so that his present Majesty has near two millions per annum. And we know that in case of a War, or the like (as at present) the Kings of England, with a concurrence of their Parliaments, are able to raise sums great enough to deal with any Prince or Potentate what∣soever.
HOLLAND. KIng William being Great Stat Holder for Amsterdam, I have thought fit to subjoin an account of Holland here. I. The Seven Provinces, which united themselves at Utrech, An. 1579. are generally known by the name of Holland: tho Zealand was the first Province which set it self at Liberty. The motives which oblig'd these Provinces to depart from the Domi∣nion of Spain, were, 1. Because Spanish Garrisons were kept in the Low Countries to the discontent of all the Orders. 2. The Imposition of the tenth penny on all Merchandises. 3. The fear of the Spanish Inquisition, which enraged them, it being more Politick than Christian, for keeping in awe the Nobles, and great Persons of the Country. 4. The Infraction of their Priviledges. 5. The cruelty of Ferdinando-Alvarez of Toledo, Duke of Alba, joyn'd with his haughtiness, and contempt of Persons. 6. The endeavours for an alteration of Religion. Now, the Princes of Orange, of the House of Nassau, have been the Councel, Support, and Glory of these Provinces. As to the present Prince, see England. II. The States Arms are, Or, a Lion Gules, holding with one Paw a Cutleas, and with the other a bundle of seven Arrows, closely bound together, by allusion to the seven Confederate Pro∣vinces, with this Motto. Concordia res parvae crescunt. The States Livery is of a red colour. They profess the Prote∣stant Religion, according to the Doctrine of Calvin, and use the Low Dutch Tongue. III. Amsterdam is the most considerable City of all Holland, the Houses are generally built of Brick, and its built on Piles like Venice. As to what proportion in bigness this City bears to London, I have no exact account; but upon comparing the Bills of Mor∣tality in both, the Burials of the latter, vastly exceed those of the former. For An. 1685. the Burials of London were 23222. and
those of Amsterdam 6245. From whence, and the difference of Air, its probable that the people of London are quadruple to those of Amsterdam. Dr. Brown having taken a view of this City in his Travels, before London was rebuilt, gives this handsom account of it. Amsterdam for Riches, Trade, Shipping, fair Streets, and pleasant Habitations, scarce yields to any other City of the World, its seated on the River Ye. An. 1470 it was wall'd about with a Brick Wall, to defend it against the Citizens of Utrecht. The Arms of it are three Crosses on a Pale, with an Imperial Crown over all; the last given them by Maximilian the Emperour. Of late years this City is mightily increaced; and encompast with a new Wall, and fortified after the modern way. And the whole Town being in a low marshy ground, the water is let in thro all the considerable Streets, and its all built upon Piles, or high Firr-Trees, driven down perpendicularly so close together, that no∣thing can be forc'd in betwixt them This supports the greatest buildings, where no bottom is. For the Foundation of one Tower, or Steeple alone, there were ramm'd into the ground 6334 great Trees. The Town House is the noblest building in all these Coun∣tries: a Pile of free Stone one hundred and ten paces in Front, larger than the magnificent Church of S. Peters at Rome; and eighty one paces deep, or on the sides. On the top of it stands Atlas, or Columbus, holding a Globe on his Shoulders made of Copper, of about ten Foot diameter; which is as large, perhaps, as any Globe, or Ball whatsoever, imploy'd in this Ornamental use. The Draw-Bridges at Amsterdam part in the middle, and a Vessel, tho under Sail, may pass them without the help of any one on shore; for the Mast Head, or break water of the Ship bearing against the Bridge, in the middle, opens it. So far Dr. Brown. Harlem also, in Holland is a Town of a large extent and the Hague is one of the fairest Villages in Europe; it containing above four thousand Houses. Its remarkable that the whole compass of the Province of Hol∣land is but one hundred and eighty Miles, no part thereof being distant from the Sea above three hours journey, and yet it con∣tains twenty three wall'd Towns, and four hundred Villages. From the Steeple of the Town of Gorcham, in this Province, a man may behold twenty two wall'd Towns, beside a great num∣ber of Villages. And the Town of Utrech, situate within the
Province of that name, is so miraculously seated among wall'd Towns, that a man may go from thence in one day to any of fifty wall'd Towns, or Cities, thence equally distant, or to any one of twenty six Towns to Dinner, and come home to Bed. King Williams Pallace, at Houstlardike, built by Frederick-Henry of Nassau, is esteem'd the most beautiful and stately of the seventeen Provinces. IV. The Publick Revenues of the Netherlands, coming all out of the Subjects Purses, are computed to be seven millions of pounds Sterling. In a Book Compos'd by a Dutchman, Entituled, The Depths of Spain, the City of Amsterdam, is said to have daily above fifty thousand Livers of Rent in Customs, Assizes and Imposts. The House of Denmark. 1. THE Danes have had their peculiar Kings for many Ages past, whom Historians generally distinguish by eight Periods. The seventh of these Periods was that of the Suenonidae, or English Danes, so call'd from Sueno, or Swaine Ethrick. This Family ended An. 1448, upon the death of the last of them without Issue. And the Danes elected Adolph, Earl of Holstein for their King; but he modestly declin'd it, and earnestly recommended to their Choice, Christian, Count Oldenburg, his Sisters Son; who was thereupon elected, and Crown'd King by the unanimous consent of all the Nobility. As for the Original of the Family of Ol∣denburg, its too far buried in Antiquity, for Historians to clear it; however they say that toward the end of the tenth Century, one Otho was Earl of Oldenburg, who had a certain wonderful Horn given him by a Spirit, or Apparition, which is to be seen to this day in the Castle of Oldenburg. Of this Family the present King of Denmark is descended, tho the Monarchy continued Elective, till the time of his Father Frederick the Third, who was elected King of Denmark and Norway, An. 1648. in whose Reign the Constitution of the Government was altered, and the Monarchy was made Hereditary.
Christian the Fifth, of the House of Oldenburg, present King of Denmark, Norway, the Vandals, Goths, &c. was born Apr. 18. 1646. Own'd Heir of the Crown of Denmark, Jun. 12. 1650. ascended the Throne after the death of his Father, which hap∣pened Feb. 19. 1670. Crown'd at Fredericksburg, June 17. 1671. He espous'd, May 18. 1667. Charlotta-Amalia, Daughter to Wil∣liam the Sixth, Landtgrave of Hesse: she having been born, Apr. 27. 1650. He has Issue by her living; 1. Frederick, born Oct. 21. 1671. 2. Christian, born Oct. 18. or March 25. 1675. 3. Sophia-Hedewig, born Aug. 28. 1677. 4. Christiana-Charlotta, born Jan. 18. or 28. 1674. 5. Charles, born Oct. 25. 1680. or 82. 6. William, born 1684. The King of Denmark has but one Brother, viz. Prince George, of whom see in England. His Sisters are as follows. 1. Anna-Sophia, married to the Elector of Saxony, of whom see in Saxony. 2. Frederica Amalia, born 1648. and married An. 1667. to Christian-Albert Duke of Sleswick, or Gottorp, who was born Feb. 3. 1641. 3. Wilhelmina-Ernestina, born 1650. the now Relict of Charles, late Elector Palatine. 4. Ulrica-Eleanora, born 1656, and married to Charles the Ele∣venth, the present King of Sueden, May 16. 1680. Note, That King Frederick the Third, beside these Children, left a Natural Son, Ubrick-Frederick, Count of Guldenlow, the now Governour of Norway, who by a certain Noble Lady, is Father of Woldemar, Baron of Lowenthal, a Colonel in the Danish Forces. Afterwards he took to Wife Antonia-Augusta, Daughter to Anthony, Count Oldenburg, An. 1677. by whom he has many Children, and among the rest Fredericus-Christianus. The present King of Denmark has also several Natural Children by the Countess of Samsee. To give an account of the chief Princes of the several Branches of the Royal House of Denmark; you must note that they are divided into two Capital Lines, viz. The Dukal Line of Holstein, and the Dukal Line of Sleswick, or Gottorp.
As for the Ducal Line of Holstein,, John, Brother to Frederick the Second, King of Denmark, and Son to King Christian the Third who came to the Crown, ann. 1537, was the first Proge∣nitor of it: who being twice married, became the Father of a numerous Issue, which spread it self into the four Branches of Sunderburg, Norburg, Glucksburg and Ploen. The present Duke of Holstein in Sunderburg, is Christian Adolph, born ann. 1641, and now lives at Frantzhagen, in Sax-Lawen∣burg (which was his Wive's Portion) together with his Son, Prince Leopold Christian, born 1678. There are of this Branch besides, seventeen Princes alive. The present Duke of Norburg is Christian-Augustus, born 1639. The present Duke of Glucksburg, is Christianus, born 1627, who lives in the Castle of Glucksburg, with his three Sons, Philip-Ernestus, born 1673. Joachim-Adolph, born 1679, and Christian-Augustus, born 1681. The present Duke of Ploen is Joannes Adolphus, born 1634, and married ann. 1674 to Dorothea Sophia, eldest Daughter to Rudol∣phus-Augustus, Duke of Wolfembuttel, who was born Jan. 28. 1653. He has Issue by her two Sons living, viz. Adolphus-Augustus, born 1680, and Joannes-Ulricus, born 1684. His youngest Brother Joachimus Ernestus, born 1637, is General of the Spanish Horse in the Netherlands. As for the Ducal Line of Sleswick, or Gottorp, the Author of it was Adolphus, youngest Son to King Frederick the First, born ann. 1526. The present Duke is Christian-Albert, born Feb. 3. 1641; and married 1667 to Frederica Amalia, second Sister to the present King of Denmark, who was born 1648 He has Issue by her. 1. Sophia-Amalia, born 1670. 2. Frederick born 1671. 3. Christianus-Augustus, born 1673. 4. Maria-Elizabetha, born 1678. II. The Shield of the Kings of Denmark, is charged with many Marks of Possessions, Pretensions, and Alliances. He bears party of three, and Coupé of two, which make twelve Quarters. In the first Or, Semé of Hearts Gules, with three Lions passant∣guardant, placed one over the other, Azure, crowned, langued, and arm'd of the first, which belongs to Denmark. 2. Gules, a Lion Rampant, crowned and armed Or, holding a Battle-Ax Ar∣gent,
hilted of the second, for the Kingdom of Norway. 3. Gules, a Lion passant-guardant, Or, on nine Hearts of the same, in Fesse, for Gothland. 4. Gules, a Dragon crown'd Or, for Schonen. 5. Azure, three Crowns Or, for Sweden. 6. Gules, a Paschal Lamb, Argent, supporting a little Flag of the same, marked with a Cross, Gules, for Gutland. 7. Or, two Lions passant∣guardant, Azure, for Sleswick. 8. Gules, a Fish crown'd Argent for Iceland. On these eight Quarters is a great Cross Argent, which is the ancient Devise of the Kingdom, since the Conversion of these People to the Faith of Christ. On the Center of this Cross are placed the Arms of Dithmarsh, which are Gules, a Cava∣lier arm'd Argent. In the ninth great Quarter, Gules, a Nettle Leaf spread at breadth, and charged in the midst with a little Escutcheon, the whole Argent, for Holstein. 10. Gules, a Swan Argent gorged with a Crown Or, for Stormaria. 11. Gules, two Fesses Or, for Delmenhorst. 12. Gules, a Cross Pattee and Argent, and Fitchee at the Foot, for Oldenburg. This Shield is environed with a Collar of the Order of the Elephant, and bears for Crest a Crown flowered, raised with eight Diadems, which terminate in a Mond Or. The Motto to his Devise, on the Reverse of his Medals, is, Pietas & Justitia coronant. His Livery is of a Red Colour. He professes the Protestant Religion according to the Doctrine of Luther, and uses the Danish Lan∣guage, which is a Dialect of the High-Dutch. III. Haffen, or Hafnia, by the Dutch called Copenhagen, or the Haven of Merchants, seated near the Sea, in Seland, the great∣est Island of the Baltick, lying near the main Land of Scaudia, is the chief City of Denmark, and one of the best Ports, and most frequented of the Northern Seas. Its of an orbicular form, the Houses, for the most part, built of Clay and Timber, tho there are many beautiful Edifices among them: its commended for a spacious Market-place, and has in it a Palace-Royal, built of Free-stone, in form of a Quadrangle, but of no great Beauty or Magnificence. Some say it to be near as large as Amsterdam, but not so full of Inhabitants. Near Elsenore, a Village much frequented by Seamen, as their Ships pass by the Sound, is seated the strong and magnificent Castle of Cronenburg, built with incredible Charge and Pains by King Frederick the Second: the Foundation of it being laid on huge Stones sunk into the Sea, and so fastened together, that no
Storm or Tempest, how violent soever, is able to shake it; well fortified, as well as founded, and mix'd of a Palace and a Fort, being since the first building of it, the most constant Residence of the Kings of Denmark; who from hence may easily discern each Ship which sails through the Sound. By the Commodity of this and the opposite Castle, the King secures his Customs, and greatly strengthens his Estate; the Castles being so near, and the Streight so narrow, that by the addition of some few Ships, he may keep the greatest Navy that is from passing by him. A little South of the Castle of Cronenburg, is an Island called Ween, a Dutch mile in length, but not quite so broad: it was given by King Frederick the Second to the famous Astronomer Tycho-Brahe, that living retired from all but his own Family, he might, with more conveniency attend his Books There is in this Island the Castle Uranopolis, or Urenburg, where the greatest part of his Mathematical Instruments are preserved in safety. The said King Frederick the Second, built also for a place of Pleasure, Fredericksburg, among Woods of Beech trees, where the King has a fine House and a little Park. In this Kingdom are the Knights of St. Mary, or of the Order of the Elephant, instituted by King Frederick the Second. As in England, the Knights of the Garter: in France, the Knights of the Holy Ghost: in Spain, the Knights of the Golden Fleece: in Portugal, the Knights of the Sancta Crusada: in Tuscany, those of St. Ste∣phen: in Poland, the Knights of the White Eagle, &c. This King has a Throne made all of Sea-Unicorns Horns. Dronthein, seated on the River Nider, is the chief Town of the Kingdom of Norway. The Cathedral Church there is the largest of any in those Northern Countries. The Viceroy of Norway ordinarily resides at Bergen. The Revenues of the King consists in Imposts laid on Ships, which pass through the Sound; of which he is said to take one per Cent. on the Merchandises. Sometimes there pass three hun∣dred Vessels in a day, from several Ports through this Streight, which makes the Tribute considerable. He has also a Revenue of Crown-Lands, and a great yearly Toll, made of the Cattle which pass into Germany; as also of the Fish, transported into other Countries; yet its conceived, that the Treasures of this King are not very great; partly because there is no other impor∣tant Commodity but Fish, to draw Merchants thither, and partly,
that there is not any one Town of any great Traffick in all his Realms for the entertaining of Commerce. The House of Sweden. ABout the beginning of the last Century, the Nobility of Sweden growing weary of the Tyranny of Christian the Second, King of Denmark, elected Gustavus, Son of Eric of Wasa à Grypsholm, first Governour, then Duke, and last of all ann. 1523, King of Sweden, Gothland, the Vandals, Nordland, Finland, &c. and from him is descended, Charles the Eleventh, of the House Palatine of the Deux ponts, the present King, born Dec. 24. 1655, whose Father dying while he was but five years of Age, the Government of his Person and Kingdom were committed to ihe Queen his Mother, and five great Senators of Sweden, viz. to Count de Brahe, who was Grand Bailieffe, Couut Wrangel, who was Constable, Count de Stembock, who was Admiral, Count de la Gardie, a French Man by Birth, who was Chancellor, and the Baron de Bond, who was Treasurer. He was declared Major, Dec. 24. 1673. The Con∣tract of Marriage of this King, and of the Princess Ulrica-Elea∣nora-Sabina, youngest Sister to the present King of Denmark, was signed at Copenhagen, May 7. 1680: and on the sixteenth of the same Month, it was consummated at Schutturup. On the fourth of December following the Queen made her publick and solemn En∣trance at Stockholm, where she was crowned Queen the next day. She was born anno 1656, and has Issue living by the King. 1. Hedewig-Sophia, born Jun. 26. 1681. 2. Charles, the Hereditary Prince, born Jun. 17. 1682. 3. Ulrica-Eleanora, born Jan. 21. 1688. The present King of Sweden has one natural Brother, Count Gustavus Carlson. II. He bears quarterly. In the first and fourth Azure, three Crowns Or, two in Chief, and one in Base, for Sweden. In the second and third, Barry, Argent, and Azure, a Lion Or, crown∣ed Gules, for Finland. On the whole, quarterly, in the first and fourth Sable, a Lion Or, crown'd, arm'd, and langued Gules,
for the Palatinate of the Rhine. In the second and third, Fuzele in Bend, Argent and Azure of twenty one pieces, for Bavaria. The Crest is a Royal Crown, garnished with eight small Flowers, and closed by as many demy Circles, terminating in a Mond Or, which is the Crest of Sweden. The Supporters are two Lions Or, crown'd with the same. His Livery is of a blue Colour. He professes the Protestant Religion according to the Doctrine of Luther, and has many Calvinists in his Dominions. He uses the Swedish Language, which is a Dialect of the High-Dutch. III. Stockholm is the Capital City of Sweden, and the usual place of the King's Residence: its a noted and well traded Port, and very strong; being situate in Marshes, and built on Piles like Venice; most of the Houses are covered with Copper. The Castle of this City is conceived to be one of the strongest Holds in the World; fortified with four hundred Brass Pieces; many of which are double Cannon. The Artillery of Sweden is so great, that its said, they have above eight thousand Brass Pieces of Can∣non. Heylin counts in all the Kingdom of Sweden but one thousand four hundred and seventeen Parishes, but many of them have a thousand or eight hundred Families, the People being dispersed in Forests, and other places, where they have store of Timber to build them Houses, and store of Pasturage for their Cattle, which is the reason they have not so many great Towns, nor so well inhabited, as usual in far lesser Countries. IV. The Revenues are very great, they arising first from Church Lands taken to the Crown. Secondly, from Mines. Thirdly, from the Tenths of all Increase, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Fish, Oxen, and the like Commodities. Fourthly, from Customs im∣posed on Merchandises, paid in all Haven-Towns for all Com∣modities imported and exported. He has also Contributions, and Power of imposing Tax in time of War, as occasion may re∣quire.
The House of Portugal. I. TOward the latter end of the eleventh Century, Alphonso the Sixth, King of Castile, had very frequent and bloody Wars with the Moors, in which a certain Prince, named Henry, descended (as some say) from the House of Burgundy (as o∣thers) from that of Lorain, was chiefly signalized for his Va∣lour, and good Services to the Crown. King Alphonso in reward of this Merit, gave him Portugal, then lately recovered from the Moors, under the Title of an Earldom, together with his Daugh∣ter Teresa to Wife; yet with this condition, that he should con∣tinue a Vassal to Castile. This Prince's Son was Alphonso the First, who throwing off the Spanish Yoke, and having subdued several petty Kings of the Moors, caused himself to be proclaim∣ed King of Portugal in the year 1139. His great Grandson Al∣phonso the Third, King of Portugal, had Algarve given him in Dowry with his Queen, the Princess Beatrix, Daughter of Al∣phonso the Tenth, King of Castile, whence the eldest Son of Portugal is always called Prince of Algarve. Of this Family the present King of Portugal is descended. Indeed Philip the Se∣cond, King of Spain, on some pretences, made himself Master of the Kingdom of Portugal by Force of Arms, ann. 1580, but 'twas again lost by his Grandson ann. 1640; for the Portuguese, actually rejecting the Spanish Yoke, elected John, Duke of Bra∣ganza, descended, as above, to be their King; in whose Line the Kingdom continues. What particularly contributed to the Re∣nunciation the Portuguese made to the King of Spain, ann. 1640, was the permission that King gave to others beside themselves to trade to the East Indies; and the Tax he imposed of the fifth peny on all their Merchandizes, and other Revenues. Its re∣markable, that the Deliberation of shaking off the Spanish Yoak, was kept private above a year betwixt two hundred persons. Don Pedro, of the House of Braganza, King of Portugal and Al∣garve, was born 1648. His elder Brother, Don Alphonso the Sixth, King of Portugal, &c. ann. 1667, married the Lady Mary-Frances Elizabeth, or Isabella, Daughter to Charles Amadeus of Savoy, Duke
of Nemours. She was born June the Twenty first, 1648. and after sixteen months living with Don Alphonso, she obtained a Declaration of Nullity of her Marriage with him, re∣tired to a Cloister. And ann. 1669, Don Alphonso was deposed, as judged incapable either of a second Marriage, or of the Go∣vernment, and sent the year following to the Tercera Island, where he died in the year 1683. Now the present King upon his Brother Alphonso's being deposed, was presently declared Prince Regent, and after his death King of Portugal; and by a Dipensa∣tion, from the Pope, married his Sister-in-Law abovementioned. The Cardinal Deacon, Louis de Vendôme, in quality of universal Legat, à Latere, gave them the Dispensation under Pope Clement the Ninth. Abbot Bon-Filz, the Secretary to the Legation, has set forth the particulars, and the Conferences he had with his Holiness, at the end of the Transaction. The King had by this Queen a Daughter, named Mary Eliza∣beth, who was born ann. 1669, and died ann. 1690. And the Queen her self dying Dec. 27. 1683. the King. ann. 1687 took to Wife the Lady Mary-Sophia-Elizabeth, Daughter of Philip-William, Elector Palatine, who was born Aug. 6. 1666, and Aug. 30. 1688, was brought to Bed of a young Prince, who died Sept. 3. in the same year. And in Octob. 1689, she was brought to Bed of another Prince, named John, Prince of Bresil. The King of Portugal has but one Sister living, viz. Donna-Catharina, the Queen Dowager of England, concerning whom, see in the Head of England. II. He bears Argent, five Escutcheons Azure, placed Cross∣wise, each charged with as many Besants of the first, placed in Saltier, and pointed Sable for Portugal. The Shield bordered Gules, charged with seven Towers Or, three in Chief, and two in each Flanch. The Crest is a Crown Or, which is the Crest of Portugal. Under the two Flanches and the Base of the Shield ap∣pear the Ends of two Crosses, the first Flower de luc'd Verte, which is for the Order of Avis. The second Pattee Gules, which is for the Order of Christ. The five Escutcheons were born in memory of five Kings, whom Alphonso the first King, slew at the Battel of Obrique, ann. 1139. The Border with the Towers or Castles were added by Alphonso the Third, on his Investiture into the Kingdom of Algarve, by Alphonso the Tenth of Castile ann. 1257, whose Daughter Beatrix he then married, and so con∣ceived
himself to have some Relation to the Arms of that King∣dom. This King's Livery is of a Green Colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Portuguese Language, which is a Dialect of the Spanish. III. Lisbon, seated on the River Tagus, is the Capital City of the Kingdom, and the place where his Majesty keeps his Court. Its seven miles in compass, and contains above thirty Parishes, and above thirty thousand Houses. The Portuguese have this Proverb, He that has not seen Lisbon, has not seen a fine thing. The Build∣ings are neat and elegant, and there are seventy six Turrets or Towers on the City Wall, and twenty two Gates towards the Sea shore, &c. Its the Staple for the Commodities for all the Kingdom, and thought to be worth more than the whole Realm besides: and doubtless the Revenues which accrue to the King from hence, and from his Foreign Plantations are very con∣siderable. ITALY. The Papacy. I. INnocent the Twelfth, the present Pope was born at Naples in March ann. 1615: elected Pope, July 12. ann. 1671, he is Son to Prince Minerbino, of the Family of Pignato: the chief whereof is the Duke of Terra Nova, a Grandee of Spain. II. Having not the particular Arms of the present Popes Family by me, I can here only say, that the Popes for a Crest to their Gentilitial Arms are wont to put the Arms of the Popedom, which are as follow. The Papal Escutcheon is Gules, and consists of a long Cap, or Head-piece Or, surmounted with a Cross pearled and garnished with three Royal Crowns: with the two Keys of S. Pe∣ter, placed in Saltier. Boniface the Eighth was the first that wore the Tiara, with a double Crown, and Urban the Fifth made it in the Form of a Cap, adorned with a triple Circle of Gold, for some Mystery contained in it. Its called the Regnum because it denotes the Dignity and Power of Priest and Emperor. The
late Pope's Devise was, Innocens manibus & mundo corde. The Popes Livery is of a Red Colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language. III. His ordinary place of Residence is the famous City of Rome, seated on the River Tiber, it being about eleven miles in compass; tho much of the Ground is there taken up in Garden∣age, and the like. As to the Computation of the People of Rome, I have already given an account of them, in the Head of England, where I speak of London; but for a farther satisfaction, take the following exact account of them, as it lately stood for ten years together, given to a very ingenious English Gentleman, at Rome, by the Abbot Nazzari, then Author of the Giornali de Litteroati, and as I hear, now Keeper of the Vatican. In the year 1672 they numbered— 121064 In 73 — 120945 In 74 — 121726 In 75 — 131912 In 76 — 128507 In 77 — 125701 In 78 — 116287 In 79 — 126128 In 80 — 121031 In 81 — 115722 Flavius Blondus, in his Ninth Book of his Roma Triumphans, has this great Expression of the ancient Roman Grandeur, viz. There were at Rome in ancient times, not only twenty thousand, but many more of Citizens, far surpassing all the Citizens of our present Towns in the Splendor, Curiosity and Luxury of their Houses, Furniture, and all manner of Accommodations for their Families. The Cupula of S. Peter's Church at Rome is the greatest of the World; it being one hundred and fifty Foot Diameter. That on the Cathedral of Florence is next to it in Greatness. The Vatican Library also at Rome is counted the greatest, and best furnished with Manuscripts of any in the World. Before S. Peter's Church at Rome, there is an Obelisk, erected on a Basis and Pedestal, twenty six Foot in height: the Obelisk it self being eighty Foot high. The Urn which held the Ashes of
Julius Caesar was formerly raised on the point of it; now it is a Cross. The Obelisk consists of one entire Stone, which by good Computation is said to weigh four hundred Tuns, which, perhaps, is the greatest Weight, in one Bulk, raised by the Art of Man. The ordinary Revenues of the Papacy, arising out of Land-Rents, Imposts on Commodities, and Sale of Offices, Boterus makes to be better than two millions of Crowns yearly: but the extraordinary and spiritual to be far beyond. SAVOY. I. THO the Dukes of Savoy may not be improperly referred to Germany, and contained in the Upper Circle of the Rhine: yet because they are possessed of all Piemont in Italy, as also of many places in France, I think it more convenient to treat of them here. Now, this Family is justly to be numbered amongst those of greatest Antiquity, since little that is certain can be spoke of its original by reason thereof. This nevertheless is without dispute, that Beraldus, Marquess of Italy, Earl of Savoy and Maurienne, flourished in the beginning of the eleventh Century, from whom is descended Victor-Amadeus-Francis, the present Duke of Savoy, born May 17. 1666: he succeeded his Father Jun. 12. 1675: and the Dutchess Regent, his Mother, deposed the Regency into his Hands, ann. 1680. And Apr. 9. 1684, he married Mademoi∣selle de Valois, named Anna-Maria, the second and youngest Daughter to Philip, Duke of Orleans, by the Princess Henrietta-Maria, youngest Daughter to Charles the First, King of England. By whom he has Issue. 1. Maria-Adelheid, or Adelherd, born Dec. 6. 1685. 2. Another Princess, born Aug. 30. new Style, 1688.
The Princes of the Blood of Savoy. I. CHarles Emanuel, the fiest Duke of Savoy, and King of Cyprus, great Grandfather to the present Duke of Savoy, was born Jan. 12. 1562, who marrying Catharine Michaelis, of the House of Austria, Daughter to Philip the Second, King of Spain, left Issue by her several Children, but only two survived to propagate the Family, viz. Victor-Amadeus the First, Grandfather to the pre∣sent Duke; and his younger Brother Thomas-Francis Prince of Ca∣rignan, who, Jan. 22. 1624, married Mary of Bourbon, Daughter to Charles, Count of Soissons, by whom he had Issue, 1. Charlotta-Christina, who died young. 2. Aloisia-Christina, born August 1. 1627, and married to Fer∣dinand Maximilian, Marquess of Baden, ann. 1653. She is now a Widow without Issue living. 3. Emanuel-Philibert-Amadeus of Savoy, Prince of Carignan, born Aug. 6. 1628, he was both deaf and dumb, and so wholly unfit for Business of State: yet ann. 1648 he was married to Ca∣tharine d'Este, Prince Borsus's Daughter, by whom he has no Issue living. Thomas-Francis had four Sons more, but all dead, without Issue, except Eugenius-Maurice of Savoy, Count of Soissons, who was born May the third, 1635, and died Jan. 7. 1673. On Feb. 20. 1657, he married Olympia, Daughter of Michael-Laurence of by Cardinal Mazarine's Sister, whom he left a Widow, and by her the following Issue living; 1. Lewis-Thomas, Count of Soissons, born Dec. 15. 1657, his Princess's name is Urania de la Cropte, Daughter to the Noble Ba∣ron de Beauvois, whom he married December 17. 1682. 2. Philip, born 1659. 3. Francis-Eugenius, born 1665. 4. Maria-Joanna-Baptista, born. Jan. 1666. 5. Aloisia-Philiberta, born Nov. 22. 1667. The Duke of Savoy's Mother, the Duchess Dowager of Savoy, is still living. Her name is Maria-Joanna-Baptista, Daughter to Charles-Amadeus, Duke of Nemours. II. This Duke bears Gules, a Cross Argent; this Coat being given to Amadeus the Great, by the Knights of Rhodes, ann. 1315,
with these Letters, in lieu of a Motto. F. E. R. T. that is, Forti∣tudo Ejus Rhodum Tenuit. The occasion was, that Amadeus the Fifth, Surnamed the Great, forc'd Mahomet the Second, Em∣perour of the Turks, to raise his Siege at that time, from before the City of Rhodes. The said Cross, is the Cross of S. John of Hierusalem, whose Knights, at that time, were Owners of Rhodes; whereas before the Arms of the House of Savoy were, Or, an Eagle displayed with two Heads, Sable, arm'd Gules, supporting in Fesse an Escutcheon of Saxony; that is, Barwise of six pieces, Sable and Or, a Bend flower'd, Verte; a Coat belonging to the Emperous of the House of Saxony, from whom the first Earls of Savoy deriv'd it. They bear also the Arms of the Kingdom of Cyprus, which Crown gives the Title of Royal Highness. His Li∣very is of a Red Colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language. III. Turin, seated on the River Po, in the Plain of Piemont, is the chief City of his Principality, he there usually keeping his Court; his new Palace there being one of the faiest of Italy. Adjoyning to it, is a Park of the Dukes, watered with the Du∣ria, Sture, and Po, six Miles in Circuit, full of Woods, Lakes, and pleasant Fountains, which make it one of the sweetest situ∣ations in Europe. Chambery, seated on the Banks of the River L' Arch, is the principal City of the Dukedom of Savoy, where the Duke keeps his Court, when he is on this side the Alps. The number of the people of the Principality of Piemont and Savoy computed to∣gether, is thought to be 800000. IV. The Ordinary Revenues of this Dukedom (taking in Pie∣mont) are said to be above a Million of Crowns per annum: but his Extraordinary so Great, that Duke Charles-Emanuel, during the Wars with Henry the Fourth, in a very few years, drew out of Piemont only, eleven Millions of Crowns, beside the charge they were put to in Quartering the Soldiers.
TUSCANY. I. COsmo de Medices, a Citizen, and whose Ancestors were Merchants, was elected Prince by the Populace of Flo∣rence, An. 1434. But Piero, or Peter de Medices, his Grandson, having, without the Senators knowledge, entred into a League with the French King, Charles the Eighth, was ejected by the Flo∣rentines; who enjoy'd their ancient Liberty till 1512. That Ferdi∣nand, the Catholick King restor'd the Medicean Family: which nevertheless, in the year 1529. was again expell'd by the Floren∣tines: and altho the Emperour, Charles the Fifth, seized on the City, and made Alexander de Medices, who had married his Na∣tural Daughter Margaret, their Governour, yet he being slain, the Populace made choice of his Kinsman, Cosmo de Medices. This Cosmo, commonly call'd the First, was declar'd King of Tuscany by Pope Paul the Fifth, An. 1569. But upon the Emperor Maximilian the Second's much opposing it, he laid by the Title of King, and took that of Great Duke of Tuscany. And this man was Great Great Grandfather to the present. Cosmo the Third, Great Duke of Tuscany, born 1642. succeeded his Father 1670. and married by Proxy April 19. 1661, the Prin∣cess Louise-Margaret of Orleans, Daughter to the late Gaston of France, Duke of Orleans, and of the deceased Margaret of Lorain, by whom he has Issue, 1. Prince Gaston, born An.  and married An. 1688. to the Princess Violanta-Beatrix, only Sister to the present Elector of Ba∣varia. 2. The Princess  born  and married to the present Elector Palatine, An. 1691. II. His Arms are, Or, five Roundles, Gules, two, two, and one, and one in chief Azure, charg'd with three Flower de Luces, Or. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Roman Re∣ligion, and uses the Tuscan Language. III. Florence is the Capital City of the whole State, and the place of aboad of the Great Duke; who resides there in a Palace, on the Model of which Luxemburg, at Paris, was built. This City is counted six Miles in compass, and is said to have in it 90000 souls. The City Piza, belonging also to this Duke, is
five Miles in compass, but has not a third part of the Inha∣bitants of the other. His Revenues, as a French Author says, are conceiv'd to be a Million and an half of Ducats yearly: of which 600000 Crowns are raised yearly out of the Dominion of the City of Florence, 150000 more, out of that of Sienna. The Customs arising out of the Port of Legorn amount yearly to 130000 Ducats. The Toll of the Mill-Stones only 160000. That of Salt, Mines, and Iron falls not short of the latter. In all, a Million and 20000 Ducats. He has also his Stock going amongst the Bankers; and Trades as much as any in the way of Merchandizing: he uses also to buy up almost all the Corn, which is brought into the Country, out of other parts, and to sell it again at his own price; forbidding any to be sold, till all his be vended. The rest is made up by Excise upon all Commodities, even unto Herbs and Sallets. A late German Author says thus of him. His power may be guest at by his yearly Revenues, which are estimated at 1800000 shillings. MANTUA. I. THE Family of the Dukes of Mantua is deriv'd from one Hugo, who married one of the Gonzagas, a Family of a Noble Extraction in Lombardy, which was the reason that his Son Gerhard, who was invested in Mantua, by his Cousin Adel∣bert, An. 1009, as an immediate Feudatory of the Empire, took on him the name of Gonzaga. Aloisius, or Lewis Gonzaga was the eleventh in descent from Gerhard, and created Captain of Man∣tua by the Emperour Charles the Fourth, An. 1329. which Title continued in the Family till John-Francis, his Great Great Grand∣son, was created the first Marquess of Mantua, by the Emperour Sigismond, An. 1433. whose Great Grandson Frederick the Second, was created the first Duke of Mantua, by the Emperour Charles the Fifth, An. 1530. whose Great Great Grandson is Charles the Third, present Duke of Mantua, of the House of Gonzaga, born  succeeded his Father An. 1637. and has married Isabella Clara, Daughter to Leopold the Fifth, Arch-Duke of Austria, but has no Issue by her.
II. His Arms are Argent, a Crosse Pattee Gules betwixt four Eagles Sable, membred of the second, under an Escutcheon in Fesse, charg'd Quarterly with Gules, a Lion Rampant Or, and three Bars Sable. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language. III. His chief City and place of Residence is Mantua, seated on the River Sarca, being very large, strong and pleasant. Its said to have been built by Oenus, the Son of Manto, the Prophetess, Daughter to Tyresias; and is esteem'd more ancient than Rome by 670 years. The Dukes, to take their pleasure on the Lakes and Rivers near this City, have a Barge, call'd the Bucentaure, five Stories high, and capable of receiving two hundred persons (whence it took the name) furnisht very richly, both for State and Pleasure. The Dukes Palace in the City of Mantua is very fair and stately; but far short, for the pleasures and delights thereof, of his Palace at Mirmirollo, five Miles from the City: which, tho it be of a low Roof, after the manner of ancient buildings, yet its very richly furnisht, and adorn'd with very beautiful Gardens, fit to lodge and gratifie any Prince whatsoever. IV. His Revenues amount to about 500000 Ducats yearly. The House of Modena. I. A Late French Author says that the ancient House of Brunswick in Germany, and of Modena are of the same Stock, and justi∣fie their descent for almost 800 years. A late German Genealogist derives the Pedigree of Modena thus. The Dukes of Modena are descended from the Ancient Marquesses d' Este, whose common Father was Hugo, Lord of Padua, and Marquess of Este. A∣mong the Descendants of this Lord, we find one Borsus, who was created Duke of Modena by the Emperour Frederick the Third, and of Ferrara by Pope Paul the Second. He was succeeded by his Brother, Hercules the First, who died An. 1505. From him is descended, Franscisco d' Este, the present Duke of Modena and Regio, Prince of Carpi and Corregio, Marquess d' Este and Rovigni, &c. born An. 1656. and married a Princess out of the Family of the Barbarini.
He has a Brother living, viz. Almericus, Prince of Modena, Cardinal d' Este, born He has also a Sister living, viz. Maria-Eleanora-Beatrix, born Sept. 25. 1658. and married to our late King James, An. 1673. She now lives in France. II. His Arms are Palewise, of three pieces. First, Party per Fesse in a Chief Or, an Eagle display'd Sable, membred, becked and crown'd Gules, and in Base Azure, three Flower de Luces Or; within a Border indented Or and Gules. Secondly, Gules, two Keys in Saltier, one Or, the other Argent, charg'd in Fesse with an Escutcheon of Pretence, Azure; supporting an Eagle of the Third, membred and crown'd of the Second. Over all, in Chief, a Papal Crown Or, garnisht with sundry Gems, Azure and Purple. The third as the first Counter plac'd. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language. III. Modena is the Capital City of the Duchy of that name, and the ordinary place of Residence of its Duke. IV. If this State be but small, it is good: but the particular Re∣venue is not known to me. Parma and Placentia. I. THE Dukes of Parma and Placentia owe their Original to the Ancient Line of the Farneses in Italy, from whence Pope Paul the Third (otherwise Alexander de Farnese) was de∣scended; who An. 1545. Created his Natural Son, Peter-Aloisius de Farnese, Duke of Parma and Placentia, from whom is de∣scended, Rainutius, the Second, present Duke of Parma and Placentia, born  and April 29. 1660, he married, Margaretha Jo∣land, Daughter to Victor Amadeus, Duke of Savoy, who died An. 1663. After which he took to Wife, Isabella d' Este Sister to the present Duke of Modena, who likewise is since dead. He has but one Son, viz. Odoardus the Third. II. He bears Or, six Flower de Luces, Azure. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Language.
III. Parma, seated on a River of the same name, is the Capi∣tal City of the Duchy, and the ordinary place of Residence of its Duke. The Fields about this City are excellent Pasturage, and yield great plenty of famous Cheese, call'd Parmesan. IV. His Revenue VENICE. I. LOuis-Contareni, Knight and Procurator, after having been employ'd in four Embassies, was chosen Duke of Venice, Aug. 29. 1676. and crown'd with the usual Solemnities. The Dukes of Venice have a Custom of espousing the Ocean yearly, the occasion of it being thus. While Sebastiano Ziani was Duke there, Pope Alexander the Third, driven from the Pontifical Dignity, by Frederick Barbarossa, came to the Venetians for re∣lief; who sent Ambassadors to Frederick in his behalf. Frederick receiving the Overtures of the Ambassadors concerning Pope Alexander, with anger and threats, unless he were deliver'd to him; afterward sent his Son Otho with 75 Gallies against the Venetians; which being met by Ziani's Fleet, were routed; forty eight being taken; and among others the Royal Galley, and two others sunk: and Otho was brought Prisoner to Venice, and divers other great Persons. As soon as Ziani came on shore, the Pope, after he had Congratulated his Victory, presented him a Gold Ring, and said, Take Ziani this Ring, and give it the Sea, obliging it thereby unto thee; which both yourself and Successors shall for ever henceforth do yearly on this day, that Posterity may know, you have in times past, by right of War, purchac'd the entire Dominion over it, making it subject unto you, as a Woman is to her Husband. And ever since after any new Duke is Chosen, he is carried to the entrance of the Gulf in the Bucentaure (a Vessel of State) with the Senate, and chief of the Town, where, after some Ceremonies perform'd by the Bishop, he Espouses the Sea, and casts a Gold Ring into it, as a Pledge of Marriage. The same Ceremony being also annually perform'd. The Office of Duke holds during life. This State is Aristocra∣tical, and is the sole Sovereign and Independent Republick of Italy, the others owning the Pope, or the Emperour.
II. The Arms of Venice are, Azure, a Lion winged, Sejant Or, holding under one of his Paws a Book cover'd, Argent. The Dukes Livery is of a  colour. And the Republick professes the Roman Religion, and uses the Italian Tongue. It has a Pa∣triarch residing at Venice; the Signior Sagredo being chosen to it Nov. 29. 1678. This Patriarch has under him the four Bishops of the Duchy of Venice, and all the Archbishops and Bishops of Dal∣matia, over whom he has the Authority but of Primate. When the Pope writes to this Republick, he uses this Superscription, or Addresse. Alla nostra Charissima Sorella, la Serenissima Republica di Venetia. III. The City of Venice stands at the end of the Adriatick Gulf on seventy two Islets, joyn'd together by above one hundred and fifty Bridges, all built of one Arch, beside the Communica∣tion they have by an infinite number of Gondolo's, or little Boats, very neatly built, and cover'd over with Cloth, so that the Passen∣gers may go unseen and without the molestation of Sun, Wind, or Rain. The Compass of the whole aggregate body of Islets is said to be eight Miles, it containing within it seventy two Parishes, the Houses being built on Piles; and the City stands invested to so great a distance with Lakes and Marshes, that its said to be impossible to be taken, but by an Army that can stretch in compass one hundred and fifty Miles. Venice has been Inde∣pendant above 1200 years; it having lasted longer under one form of Goverment than any Republick in the World. The number of its Inhabitants has been computed by some to be above 200000 but a special account of them being taken by Authority about sixteen years since, when the City abounded with such as return'd from Candia, then surrendred to the Turks, the number of souls was found to be but 134000. There are two vast Columns erected in the Market Place at Ve∣nice, betwixt which are their publick Executions, the occasion of their Erection I conceive to be this. When the Venetians had beaten Barbarossa's Fleet, and taken his Son Otho, with others Prisoners; Barbarossa was fain to come to Venice, and cast himself at the Pope's Feet, and beg his Par∣don; and its said by some (tho, perhaps, overstraining the mat∣ter) that the Pope then set his Foot on his Neck, and caused a Deacon of his to sing, super Aspidem & Basiliscum ambulabis, &c.
Now its observable that it was in the same Sebastiano Ziani's time, who beat Barbarossa's Fleet, that those Pillars were erected: for in his time there were brought out of Greece (some say from Constantinople) in Ships of burthen, call'd Carracks, three vast Columns: one of which, at unshipping, brake the Cables and other Engines, and fell into the Sea, where it remains: the other two are those erected, having a space left betwixt them, and on the top of one of them is set a guilded Lion, with open Wings, which is the badge of St. Mark, their Patrone: and on the other the Figure of S. Theodore, the Martyr, holding his Lance and Shield, with a Dragon under his Feet. Whence its probable that the Venetians, by setting up the monumental Pillar, having S. Theodore on its top, with a Dragon under his Feet, would de∣note Barbarossa's submission to the Pope, caus'd by them: and that by the Column with the winged Lion on it, they would re∣present their own Naval Force. IV. Tho it be conceiv'd that the standing Revenues of the State of Venice are but four Millions of Ducats yearly, yet they have many other ways to advance their Treasury, by laying new Im∣posts on Commodities, as they see occasion; which must arise to vast sums, in so extraordinary a place of Trade. Beside there is nothing which the people Eat or Drink, for which they pay not something to the Publick-Treasury: and moreover the poorest Labourer pays his Pole mony. Whence its credibly affirm'd that the Christians live better under the Turk, than under the Vene∣tians. GENOA. I. THE Sieur Antonio Passano was chosen Dogue of Genoa, with the ordinary Ceremonies, Jul. 16. 1677. He has for his ordinary Guard five hundred Germans. His Office is Triennial. He Governs the State assisted with eight Senators; but in Matters of great Weight, they are subordinate to the General Council, con∣sisting of four hundred Senators. His Palace stands in the midst of the Town, adorn'd with an high Tower, whose front appears very Antique. They are under the Protection of the King of Spain. Genoa was under the Government of several Princes, till the year 1528, that Andrew Doria establisht there the Form of
Government observ'd to this day, which is Aristocratical. There is seen in the Town the Statue of Andrew Doria, mounted on an Horse of Cast Copper, with this Inscription on the Pedestal, Liberator Populi. II. The Arms are, Argent, a Cross Gules, with a Crown clos'd, by reason of the Island of Corsica belonging to it, which has the Title of Kingdom; the Supporters are two Griffins, Or. The Livery is of a  colour. They profess the Roman Religion, and use the Italian Language. Innocent the Third made it an Archbishoprick. The present Archbishop is Father Giulio-Vin∣cenzo Gentile, a Dominican, who was nominated to it, at the be∣ginning of the year 1681. III. The Capital City bears the name of the Republick, and is seated on the Sea Coast, being incompast with double Walls. The Italians call it the Jewel of Italy, and stile it the Proud, by reason of the stateliness of the Buildings, both of the Churches, and Nobles Houses. Its in Compass about six Miles, and of an Orbicular form. We find in the London Gazette of the twelf of June 1684, that Genoa within its outmost Walls, contains 25000 Houses. IV. The Revenue of this Republick (beside the Treasury of S. George, which is very Rich, and manag'd as a distinct Body from the Publick by its own Officers) amounts to 430000 Crowns per annum. RAGUSA. I. THE Dogue of this Republick has the Government but for a month. II. It has for Arms, the Image of the Virgin Mary. The Li very is of a  colour. It professes the Roman Religion, and has the Title of an Archbishoprick: and uses the Italian Language. III. The chief City is Ragusa, seated in Dalmatia, on the Gulf of Venice, and is inclos'd within the State of the Venetians. IV. Its Trade into divers Countries makes it rich: it being a Magazine of Merchandises, which come from Turky, and the Turks make use of those of Ragusa to procure from Europe, what Wares and Merchandises they have need of.
LUCA. I. THE Republick of Luca lies in Tuscany, under the Protection of the House of Austria. A Magistrate call'd the Gonfa∣lonere, assisted by a certain number of Citizens, Governs the State: the former being chang'd every month, and the latter every six months. II. The Arms are Azure, a Bend Or, on which is written, Li∣bertas, betwixt two Cottices, Or. The Livery is of a colour. It professes the Roman Religion, and its Bishop owns none but the Pope: he has right to the Pallium, and causes the Cross to be carried before him. Cardinal Spinosa was nominated to this Bishoprick some years since. III. The City of Luca, situate on the River Serchius, is about three Miles in Compass, and contains about 24000 Inhabitants. Its call'd the Industrious, by reason of the Politeness and Skill of its people in making divers Stuffs: and because it has yielded great Men in Painting, Architecture, Sculpture, and in all kinds of Arts. IV. The Revenue of this Republick is 80000 Crowns per annum, arising from their Silks, Wines, Stuffs of Cloth of Gold, preci∣ous Marble Quarries, and famous Olive Groves. SWITZERLAND. I. THE Switzers conceiving themselves opprest by the House of Austria, had long thoughts of shaking off the Yoke, and in the year 1307. Verner Stauffacher of Switz, Walter Furst of Uren, and Arnold Melch∣tal of Underwal, form'd a design for effecting it. An. 1308. these three Cantons entred into a League Offensive and Defensive on this account, and by surprize made themselves Masters of all the Forts which kept them in awe; by taking an occasion to carry New years Gifts to the Governours, on New-years-day, according to Custom. Switz gave its name to the whole Nation, because
it was the first of the three, which propos'd the Confederacy. Lucern joyn'd with them, An. 1332. Zurich, 1351. Glaris and Zug, 1352. Bern 1353. Friburg and Soloturn 1481. Basil and Schaffaussen, 1501. Apenzel, 1513. To range these Cantons according to their Rank and Place, and not considering the time of their Confederacy, they stand thus. Zurick, Bern, Lucern, Uren, Switz, Underwal, Zug, Glaris, Basil, Friburg, Soloturn, Schaffhaussen, Apenzel. These Cantons have all their peculiar Coats of Arms, which may be seen elsewhere: and of them Zurich, Bern, Basil and Schaffhaussen, profess Calvinism. Glaris and Apenzal profess both the Roman Religion and Calvi∣nism. The others profess the Roman Religion. When Berthol the Fifth, Duke of Zeringham, caus'd the Town of Bern to be built An. 1140. He slew a Bear which came to devour him; whence the Duke call'd this place Bern, which in the German Language signifies a Bear. And since the first Foun∣dation of it, the Inhabitants have always kept Bears there, in a great Pit, by the Gate of the Town, for a Remembrance. The Canton of Bern is almost of as great extent as all the other Twelve, and of greater strength. The Town is considerable, and neatly built with Freestone. The City of Lucern is one of the largest, and most pleasant of Switzerland. The Pope keeps his Nuncio there for all the Catho∣lick Cantons, and the King of Spain his Ambassador for the six Cantons of his Alliance; which are Lucern, Uren, Switz, Under∣wal, Zug, and Friburg. The Town of Basil has the greatest Trade, and is the most peopled and the pleasantest of all Switzerland. The Town of Soloturn is very beautiful: the French King keeps there his Ambassador, and many other Foreign Princes ordinarily Reside there. The Switzers hold every year at Basil, the General Assemblies of all the Country. When they assemble separately, the Catho∣licks take for the place of their Congress Lucern, and the Prote∣stants Arau, on the River Aur. All the Cantons are as many Republicks, which are Govern'd by their Burgomasters, or Avoiers, their Government being Demo∣cratical. The Cantons which have no Towns, call their Magi∣strates Landanes, instead of Burgomasters.
The Switzers have several Towns and States confederate with them, viz. The Abbot and Town of S. Gal. Four Bishops, viz. of Sion, Basil, Constance, and Croired. The Towns of Neuchatel, Valengen, Nuenberg, Biel, Geneva, Mulhausen in Alsatia, Rotwel in Suabia, beyond the Danube. They have also many Prefectures, that is, such little Parcels and Additaments, as have accrued to their State, and are subject to their Authority, either by Gift, Purchase, or Chance of War. The Principal Prefecture is the Town of Baden, taking its name from the Baths there; and is the place of meeting for the Coun∣cel of State of all the Confederates. The Grizons also are Con∣federate with the Switzers; and of those there are three Divisi∣ons. I. The Grey League, so call'd because the Inhabitants wear a Grey Scarf. 2. The League of the House of God, so call'd because it was the proper Patrimony of the Bishop and Church of Chur. 3. The League of the Ten Commonalties. All these Confederates are able, on occasion, readily to set forth an Army of sixty thousand Men. The Republick of Geneva. I. THIS Republick professes Calvinism. An. 1679. Mass was said in the City of Geneva, with leave; at the House of Sieur Chauvigny, the French Kings Resident there; which had not been done, since the year 1535. That Calvinism was there Establisht by a Decree of the Senate. II. Geneva gives for Arms, Party Or, and Gules, the fist has a demy Eagle display'd Sable, the second a Key Argent, with this devise. Post Tenebras Lux. The Romanists say the words are misplac'd, and that it ought to be, Post Lucem tenebra. III. The City of Geneva is situate on the Lake Lemanus, the River Rhone passing thro the lower part of it. The buildings are fair and of Freestone; the Compass of the whole City being about two Miles, in which there are suppos'd to be about 16 or 17000 souls. Munster calls it Mirae voluptatis Urbem. Its allied with the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland; and in two or three hours it advertises all the Canton of Bern to come to its succour
with 50, or 60000 Men; who may come on the Lake a day after the Signal; which consists in lighted Torches, set from Tower to Tower. Its Govern'd by twenty five Senators, who follow the written Law. Beside this Councel of twenty five, they have one of sixty, and another of two hundred. POLAND. I. POland, from the year 694, that Lochus of Croatia was the first Duke, has been Govern'd by Dukes Palatines, Kings and Dukes again, till the year 1295, that Pri∣mislaus, surnam'd Posthumus, Duke of Posna, again assum'd the name of King, which continued ever since to his Suc∣cessors of the same Family, till the year 1574. Henry, Duke of Anjou, Son to Henry the Second, King of France, was chosen on the death of Sigismund-Augustus, who was the first Stranger to the Blood. John the Third, of the Illustrious Family of Sobieski is the pre∣sent King of Poland, &c. Elected King March 20. 1674. being before Senator, Grand Marshal and Generalissimo of the Armies of the Crown: he made his solemn entrance at Cracow, Jan. 3. 1676. and was crown'd there on the second of February following, by the Bishop of that place, call'd Olzaski. He married, before his coming to the Crown, a French Lady, nam'd Maria Casimire de la Grange, Daughter to Henry de la Grange, Knight, Marquess of Arquien, Lord of Beaumont, Master of the Camp of a Regi∣ment of Cavalry, and Captain Colonel of the hundred Switzers of the Guard of the late Monsieur, Duke of Orleans. This Prin∣cess was crown'd on the same day with her Husband, and has brought him many Children. 1. Prince James, born An.  and An. 1691. he married Hedewig-Elizabetha-Amalia, youngest Daughter save one to Philip-William, Duke of Neuburg, and Elector Palatine. 2. Prince Alexander, born about the year 70. 3. John, born An. 4. Casimire, born An. 5. Leopold, born An.
6. The Princess Louise▪ Adelaia, born Oct. 3. 1677. held at the Font of Baptism by the Palatine of Russia, for his late Majesty Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, &c. This Princess was Baptised with the Water of the River Jordan, whereof the King her Father▪ just before her birth, had been presented with a Pot full, as also with many other rarities from Asia. II. As King of Poland, he bears Quarterly▪ In the First and Fourth, Gules, an Eagle Argent, crown'd, membred and becked Or, for Poland. In the Second and Third, Gules, a Cavalier arm'd Argent, holding a Sword with the Right Hand, of the same; and a Shied Azure, in the Left; charg'd with a Cross, Or, with double Cross-Barrs, his Horse barded Azure, and nail'd Or, for Lithuania. On the whole Azure a Buckler Or, for Sobieski. For a Crest, a Crown rais'd with eight small Flowers, and clos'd with eight Semicircles, terminating in a Mond Or; which is the Crest of Poland. The Shield environ'd with the Orders of France. The general Motto of the Kings of Poland, is, Habent sua sydera Reges. His Livery is of a Blew Colour. He professes the Roman Religion, but Greeks, Protestants and other Sects are there tolerated. He uses the Poland Longuage, wich is a Dialect of the Sclavonian. III. Warsaw, seated on the River Vistula, is most frequented, best traded, and the Capital City of the Kingdom; honour'd, for the most part, with the Kings Court, the holding of all Publick business of Peace and War. Cracow, seated on the same River, is little inferiour to the former, the Buildings here being fairer than elsewhere in Poland, of Freestone, and four Stories high; but, for the most part, cover'd with Shingles, or Tiles of Wood. IV. The Revenues of this King are computed to be 600000 Crowns per annum, drawn chiefly out of Salt-works, near Cra∣cow; and from Mines of Copper, Lead, Tin, and Silver: from the fishing Trade in Prussia, and the Tribute of the Jews. His Daughters are provided for at the Publick Charge; and for the most part, the expence of his Houshold defray'd. In time of War he is inabled by the Diets to lay Impositions and Taxes on the people. In Poland its an affront to call a Man Cossack; as in Italy, Ca∣labrian; in Germany, Switzer; in Spain, Galician; in Sueden, Fin∣lander; in France, Norman; in England, Welchman, &c.
Russia, or Moscovy. I. THE first Great Duke of Moscovy, who shook off the Tartarian bondage, was nam'd John, who Reign'd a∣bout the year 1500. Since him the Government has gone partly by Election, and partly by Succession. The last Elected was Michael Fredrowitz, Son of Theodore, the Patriarch of Mosco, and Grandfather to the present Czars. He was Elected An. 1615, and settled this vast Empire, and manag'd it in a more constant way of Peace, with the Turk, Tartar, Polo∣nian, and Swethlander, than any of his Predecessors had done be∣fore him. At present there are two Brothers that Reign jointly, as Czars, Great Dukes, or Emperours of Moscovy. The eldest is nam'd Iwan-Alexeewich, born about the year 1667. and has married the Daughter of one Soltikows, a Polander. The other is nam'd Peter Alexeewich, born about the year 1670. Upon the death of the late Czar, the elder of these came to the Crown, but by reason of his Natural Defects, being judg'd by a great party of the Em∣pire, unfit to Govern, they would have Depos'd him, and set up the younger Brother: but the former being upheld by a good Interest, after much stir, they came to this accommodation, that they should Reign joyntly. II. The Great Seal of Moscovy is, an Eagle displaied Sable, in a Field Or, bearing on its Brest a Shield, the Field being Gules, charg'd with a S. George Argent, holding a Launce, with which he kills a Dragon. Betwixt the Heads of the Eagle are three Crowns plac'd one over the other, which are said to signifie Moscovy, and the two Kingdoms of Cassan and Astracan. They say it was the Tyrant Iwann Basileewich, who first made use of these Arms, to raise a belief that he was descended from the Ancient Roman Em∣perours, the word Czar, signifying Caesar. Heylin makes the Arms of Moscovy, Sable, a Portal Open of two Leaves, and as many degrees Or. His Livery is of a Yellow Colour. He is of the Greek Church, and the Moscovites have a Bible translated from the Greek, and printed in their own Tongue, which is the Sclavonian, in the Moscovite Characters.
III. Moscow, seated on the River of the same name, is the Capital City, and Imperial Seat. Few Cities in the World have suffer'd so much by Fire. An. 1571. the Tartars burnt it, and in it 80000 per∣sons, it being then 12 Miles in Compass, and containing 41500 Families and Houses; and above 1500 Convents, Churches and Chapels. It keeps its Compass still, but the number of Houses is not restor'd, they not extending above five Miles. An. 1611. the Polanders burnt it: and An. 1676. the Fire hapning by acci∣dent, held on for three weeks, and burnt, as its said, 5000 Houses. This Town is apt to Fires, because the Houses of the Common People are generally built of Wood, with Mortar, mixt with Straw, and done over with Lime, brought from Smo∣lensko, and are cover'd with Boards and Barks of Trees, having sometimes Turffs laid on them: and Fires would happen oftner there, but that Soldiers and Guards are appointed to take care of it. The Churches and Houses of the Persons of Quality are built with Stone or Brick, and some of the chief Churches are cover'd with gilt Copper, or Tin, and have many Globes of the same Metal on them, so that the Prospect of Moscow is very beautiful. There is a Bell rais'd on a Tower of Moscow, which weighs above one hundred seventy six Tuns. Two hundred Tuns of Metal were allow'd for making it. Its twenty four Foot in hight, the Clapper is twenty one Foot in length, and weighs above seven Tuns. IV. Its said that this Duke has more Lands than all the Dukes of Europe beside: and his Government being Tyrannical, so that he has the free and absolute disposal of his Subjects Lives and For∣tunes, he makes his Revenues what he pleases. But beside the ex∣traordinary ways of oppressing his Subjects, which he often makes use of, he has many ordinary ways for amassing Treasures, viz. By Forestalling Homebred Commodities, and Engrossing the Foreign, selling them at what price he lists, and hindring others from▪ Trade till all his are sold. By provision of Rent, Corn, and Victuals, rais'd, in some years to 20000 Marks Sterling. Cu∣stoms on Merchandize to 800000. Poll-mony to 400000. Rent, Wood, and Hey to 30000, &c.
Tartaria Precopensis, or the Lesser Tartary. I. ITS probable that upon the breaking of the great Empire of the Tartars into pieces, upon the death of Tamerlane, which hapned An. 1402. The Precopenses or European Tartars submitted to a Prince of their own Nation, un∣der the Power and Government of whose Successors they still continue. The name of the present Cham of the Lesser Tartary, or of the Crim Tartar, is Nuradin Kiery. He has a Wife, call'd the Chamine and four Children, to all whom the Emperour of Ger∣many sent Presents some years since. He is call'd the Crim Tar∣tar from the Town of Crim; the Ancient Seat of the Chams, and at that time the fairest and greatest of the Country, situate in the midst thereof, and fortified with a strong Castle; and for the hight of the Walls, and depth of the Ditch esteem'd Impregnable. The Country is also call'd Tartaria Precopensis from Precopia, a chief Town thereof. II. He bears Or, three Grissins Sable, arm'd Gules. His Livery is of a  colour. The Religion there most Embrac'd and Countenanc'd is that of Mahomet, mingled with some few of their old Principles of Christianity: for they confess that Christ shall be Judge both of the Quick and Dead, in the day of Judg∣ment; and punish ose that speak irreverently of him: which makes great store of Grecian and Armenian Christians dwell a∣mong them. The Language which they speak is their own Tar∣tarian; but intermixt, with much of the Arabick, and Turkish Tongues, and when they write they use either Chaldean, or Ara∣bick Characters. III. A late French Writer tells us, he resides at Baccasarium, which stands in the midst of his Countries; perhaps the same with Crim, before mention'd. But the Court of the Great Cham in the Summer time makes a moveable City, built upon Wheel-Houses, and Transported from one place to another, as occasion serves; which Houses at every station, are orderly dispos'd of into Streets and Lanes, and by the Tartars are called Agara,
or a Town of Carts. They remove also their droves of Cattle up and down with them. Within these Territories there is a Town call'd Capha; but it belongs wholly to the Turk, he keeping there a Governour. It was taken from the Genoeses, An. 1475. Its six or seven Miles about, being, in a manner, wholly inhabited by Christians. The Greeks have twelve Churches there. The Ar∣menians thirty two, and the Romanists one, Dedicated to S. Peter. The Town is of great Trade. IV. The Revenues of this Prince are uncertain, his Subjects having but little mony, and living most upon Bartering of their Cattle: beside what he has in Lands and Customs, and five thousand five hundred Ducats yearly, which he receives from the Great Turk, he has the tenth of all Spoils which are gotten in the Wars. The Male-Line of the Ottoman House failing, these Chams are to succeed, upon an Agreement made betwixt the two Emperours. TURKY. I. THE Turks, who anciently inhabited about the Fens of Maeotis, liv'd a poor and contemptible Nation, till Mahomet, the Sultan of Persian, Rebelling a∣gainst his Lord and Master, the Caliph of Babylon, call'd these Turks to his aid, and by their help obtain'd a signal Vi∣ctory: after which they desired their Wages, and a fair dismissi∣on, which he refusing, they thereupon, under the Conduct of Tangrolipix, their chief Leader, assaulted the Persians; and in their second Fight, overthrew and slew the Sultan himself; and Tangrolipix was by both Armies proclaim'd Sultan, or King of Persia, about the year 1030. There were at that time among the Turks, two noted Tribes, the Selzuccian, and the Oguzian, of the former Tribe the foremention'd Tangrolipix was the Head; but this Line be∣ing at length all worn out, one Ottoman, chief of the Ogu∣zian Tribe, from small beginnings, warring against the Christians possest himself at length of the City of Nice, not long before, the Imperial Seat of the Greek Emperours. And An. 1300. took
on him the Title of Sultan; and from this Ottoman inclusively, seven Sultans of the same Race Reign'd; still increasing their Dominions, to the year 1450. when Mahomet the Second, surnam'd the Great, and first Emperour of the Turks, Conquer'd the two Empires, of Constantinople, and Trapezund, twelve Kingdoms, and two hundred Cities: from whom the present Emperour of the Turks, being the fifteenth inclusively of the same Race, is descended. His Name is Achmet, proclaim'd Emperour June 22. 1691. upon the death of his Brother Solyman. II. He bears, Verte, a Crescent Argent, crested with a Turbant, charg'd with three black Plumes of Herons Quils, with this Motto, Donec totum Impleat Orbem. His Standards have the name of God, and sometimes that of Mahomet, written on them, in Arabick Characters: beside these there is a Great Standard of the Empire, and the Took, or the Horse-Tail. The Great Standard of the Empire is like a sort of Ensign, or Colours of a Company: its carefully kept in the Seraglio, be∣cause they say, the Legislator Mahomet has made the Impression of his Hand on it. The Took, or Horse-Tail is carried on an half Pike, in memory of a Bacha, who, when those under his Command had lost their Great Standard, cut off an Horse-Tail with his Semiter, and fastn'd it to an half Pike, held it up, and Rallied his Men, and defeated the Enemy. I know not whether this Horse-Tail may not relate to the Horse-Tail of the famous Captain Sertorius; who to teach his Men that the stress of War lay in unity, shew'd them an Horse-Tail, from which it was easie for any Man to draw out the Hairs one by one, but that no Man could draw them out when joyn'd together. The Grand Signior carries in his Turbant three Plumes made of Herons Feathers; but if he sends the Grand Visier to the Army, he takes out one, and puts it in the Visiers Turbant, for a mark of the Authority he gives him. The Mahometans go by a Lunar Calculation in their Calendars, and this is the reason why those Worshippers cause the Crescent, or Figure of the New Moon to be set on the spires of their Moschs, or Megids, as we the Cock or Vane, &c. on ours. They set it also upon their Ships instead of the Heathens Castor and Pollux. Indeed its the general Cognizance of the Grand Signiory, and its common to the Persian with the Turk.
The ancient Arms of the Eastern Empire were, Mars, a Cross Sol betwixt four Greek Beta's, of the second. The four Beta's signifying, , that is to say, Rex Regum, Regnans Regibus. The Grand Seignior's Livery is of a Green Colour. He professes the Mahometan Religion; and the better sort of Turks use the Sclavonian Language, which being originally the Tartarian, bor∣rowed from the Persians, their Words of State; from the Arabick, their Words of Religion; from the Grecians, their Words or Terms of War; from the Italians, their Terms of Navigation. III. Constantinople, by the Turks called Stamboul, is the Capital City of the Ottoman Empire, and indisputably the finest Port of Europe. Its about nine (Heylin says eighteen miles) in compass, taking in the Seraglio, and has twenty two Gates, and contains, as Boterus says, seven hundred thousand Souls. The Ground it stands on consists of seven little Hills, like that of ancient Rome; thus all the Houses being of different Elevations, are advanta∣geously seen from the Fields, and Sea, and appear very beautiful: but the inside of it does not answer the Beauty of this Prospect: for the streets are narrow, and run winding; the Houses are or∣dinarily built of Wood, whence there often happen Fires, and they are but of two stories high. Its remarkable, that this City was taken by Mahomet, the Se∣cond of the Name, and eleventh Emperor of the Turks, ann. 1453, on Tuesday, being the twenty seventh day of May, and the third day of Whitsontide, a day which is kept Festival in Ho∣nor of the Holy Ghost, whom the Greeks, from the time of their Patriarch Photius, who lived about the year 860, had denied to proceed from the Son of God, drawing all the Oriental Church to this Error, in which they have still continued. The Temple of S. Sophia, in Constantinople, now converted to a Mosque, for Beau∣ty and the Elegancy of the Building, is thought to exceed all the Fabricks in the World; concerning which a Greek Historian thus pathetically delivers himself. The most splendid and august Temple of S. Sophia, is the Church of my God, a terrestrial Pa∣radise; which I believe the Seraphims themselves with admiration admire; and if God vouchsafes to refide in Works, rendered as polite as possible, by the Hands of Men, certainly he resides here, or no where. This Church being divinely built, the Or∣nament of the whole Earth, most gloriously shines like another
Sun, and celestial Giant, &c. When the Emperor Justinian, who had bestowed seventeen years in finishing it, entred it first with the Patriarch Euthymius, he gave God thanks, that by his assistance he had compleated so admirable a Work, and said: Vici te Solomo. And on a Pedestal in the midst of the Imperial Foun∣tain, before the Church, he caused to be placed the Statue of So∣lomon as gazing on it, and holding his Finger on his Mouth, as owning himself far exceeded by this Structure of the new Hie∣rusalem. But however this Temple is adorned, its but a Trifle, if compared in bigness with the ancient Temple at Hierusalem. There is a pleasant story in Glycas relating to this Edifice. When Justinian undertook to build it, he bought several Houses near the place where he intended the Building, which, People, willing to promote the Work, sold him at a reasonable value. But there was one Man, who by no means would part with his House, notwithstanding any Offers made him by the Empe∣ror; whereat the Emperor was much troubled. A Magistrate of the Town understanding this, and well knowing the Genius of the Man, and that he was greatly delighted in seeing Feats of Chivalry, at a time when a Turnament was to be held, clapped this Man into custody; whereupon he cryed out that the Empe∣ror should have what he pleased, so he might have freedom to see the sight; and parted with his House accordingly. The Palace of the Seraglio contains three Courts, one within another, the Buildings yielding unto those of France and Italy, for the neat contrivances, but far surpassing them for cost and curiousness. The Grand Seignior has many other considerable Cities; the chief is Grand Cairo in Egypt, which is eight miles in compass, and being viewed from a high place, it presents a most delightful prospect; the Mosques being built of various Colours, and very beautious, and the other Houses, tho but two stories high, ha∣ving generally their Roofs raised with Turrets for Coverings, and being all surrounded with Palm Trees and Gardens. Alexandria also in Egypt, has been a considerable Town, be∣longing to the Grand Seignior: its at present full of Ruins, and but poorly inhabited; the cause is imputed to the illness of the Air, during the Months of July, August, September and October; which is thought to proceed from this, that the greatest part of the Houses are built on solid Vaults, which serve as Cisterns to
keep the Waters of Nilus, whence the Air becomes corrupted and inclines to Diseases. He has also the City of Babylon, in Chaldea, not the ancient Babylon, but another City, going by that name, situate forty miles more North; maintained chiefly at present by the Trade of A∣leppo, and being seven miles in compass. IV. The Turkish Empire being of so vast an extent in three parts of the World, viz. Africa, Asia, and the better part of Eu∣rope, must of necessity yield an immense Treasure: a certain Author says he has under him seventy Kingdoms, and three Em∣pires. The Revenues consist chiefly in Tributes raised on the People, and in Customs, and these are paid for the most part in Silver. As for the Gold which is raised, it proceeds from four Sources, whereof two are foreign, and two of the Country. One of the first is the Trade of the English, French, Dutch, Ita∣lians, Moscovites, and Polanders, who bring Ducats from their Countries. The other is their annual Tribute of the Cham of the Lesser Tartary, the Princes of Transylvania, Moldavia, Vala∣chia, the Republick of Ragusa, and a part of Mingrelia and of Russia ought to pay the Grand Seignior in Gold, which amounts to considerable Sums. One of the two Sources of the Country is the Spoils of the Bacha's, all their Monies, which for the most part is Gold, coming to the Grand Seignior at their Deaths: the other the Revenue of Egypt, which amounts yearly to twelve millions of Livres. Beside this yearly Income, the Turk has a secret Treasure, consisting of such stores of Gold, as have been laid up by the Ottoman Princes; and in this private Treasury when Ibrahim, this Emperor's  came to the Crown, there were four thousand Bags of Gold, each containing 15000 Ducats, of Gold, or thirty thousand Crowns, which Summ makes three hundred and sixty millions of Livres. Some have affirm'd the Grand Seignior to be Proprietor of all the Lands under his Dominions, and that Fathers do not leave the Succession to their Children, which is a great mistake; for the right of inheriting according to the degrees of Blood is not only granted the Turks, but likewise to the Greeks, they paying the Grand Seignior only about three per Cent. at each change of Heir.
PERSIA. I. HIstorians make eight Dynastyes of Persian Kings. The fifth of these Dynastyes was begun in the person of Tangrolipix, the first Persian King of the Turkish Race, ann. 1020, who is mentioned by me in my foregoing Account of Turky. This Race failing, the sixth Dyna∣sty began in Haalon, made King of Persia by Occata, the Great Cham of Tartary, ann. 1260. This Tartarian Dynasty ended also in Persia with the Race of Tamerlane; and the seventh Dynasty of the Turcoman, or Armenian Race began in Ussan Cassanes, ann. 1472, he being the Son of one of those poor Armenian Princes, dispossessed by Bajazet the First, Emperor of the Turks, and re∣stored by Tamerlane, who grew at length to that power, that he overthrew in a pitched Field Zeuzes, the last of the Tartarian Race, and slew him. This Dynasty of the Turcoman or Armenian Race continued till 1496, that Alanat, the last King of it was overthrown and slain by Hysmael, one of the Sophian Race and Faction. The Quarrel and Occasion was thus. Mahomet the Impostor, and first Emperor of the Saracens, by his last Will and Testament bequeathed the Succession of that E∣state to Haly, his near Kinsman, and Husband to Fatima his el∣dest Daughter: but Abudezar, Haumar, and Osman, three power∣ful Men, and the chief Commanders of the Army in the time of Mahomet, successively followed one another in the supreme Dignity. After their Deaths Hali enjoyed that Honor for a little while, supplanted first, and afterwards vanquished by Muhavias, a great Man of War, who succeeded in it, and to secure himself, slew Hasen, or Ossan, the Son of Hali, and eleven of his Sons, a twelfth escaping, called Musa Ceredine, from whom Hysmael Sophi abovementioned, was lineally descended, who, after his Victory, and being crowned King, or Shaw of Persia, altered the Form of Religion, making Hali and himself the sole Successors of Maho∣met, and condemning Abudezar, Haumar, and Osman with the Turks, as Rebels, and Schismaticks. Hence proceeded the
Bloody Wars betwixt them and the Turks; the Persians burning whatsoever Book they found concerning those three; and the Turks holding it more meritorious to kill one Persian, than seven∣ty Christians. This Hysmael Sophi was the Founder of this eighth Dynasty of the Persian Kings, ann. 1505, from whom is descended, Cha Soliman, the present King of Persia, at his coming to the Crown called Cha Sophi; he came to be King, ann. 1665, his Father great Cha Abas then dying, himself at that time being thirty five years of Age. Its a remarkable Passage concerning the change of this King's Name, and his being twice crown'd, which was on this occasion. It happened some time after his being crowned, that he grew indisposed in his Health, and his Physician had tried several me∣thods on him without success; whereupon the King's Mother growing impatient, fell severely on the Physician, and charged him for being either Fool or Traitor, that he did not cure the King. The Doctor finding himself so hardly put to it, had no way to shift himself but by charging the Fault on the Stars and the Astrologers; and told her, if the King languished, and could not recover a perfect health, it proceeded not from any Failure in him, or his Medicines, but for that the Astrologers had not taken the Aspect of a fortunate Constellation at the time of his Coronation. The Physician was back'd by all his Friends at Court, and particularly by one of the King's Astrologers, who had a secret hatred against the Prince of the Astrologers, who had been appointed to observe the favourable hour for the King's Coronation; and the former made out the mistake astrologically to the Grandees of the Court; so that the King and Queen Mo∣ther were possessed of the truth of what the Physician had aver∣red. The chief Astrologer seeing how things went, was forced, for fear of drawing on him somewhat worse, not only to forbear contradiction, but withal to applaud what was said; and upon this second Inauguration, the King changed his name, as is said before, which was judged unfortunate to the State; and he began (as he thought) to find himself better afterward. Note that the word Cha, in the Persian Tongue, signifies King, and that tho many call all the Kings of Persia, Sohpies, some mo∣dern Accounts say it is an Error so to do, and that Sophi is a proper name, or rather a name of the Religion of Hali; it sig∣nifying wise and knowing in the Law.
II. Concerning this King's Arms, there are various opinions. According to his Picture, to be seen in many places, there is a Sun Or, in a Field Azure. According to some ancient Books of Heraldry, the Kings of Persia have a white Banner, charged with an Eagle displayed and crowned Or. Another Author assures us they give the Cressent, as the Turkish Emperors, with this diffe∣rence, that there is an Hand added to it. Others maintain that beside their bearing the Cressent, they cause it to be carried be∣fore them, when they walk in Ceremony, and that all Mahome∣tan Kings have the Cressent in their Arms, and that Blazon and Coats of Arms are not much used in those Countries, but that in lieu, they make use of some Marks. Another says they bear Or with a Dragon Gules, and another says Or, with a Buffalo's Head Sable. Others say they give the Sun and Moon; and others a rising Sun on the back of a Lion with a Cressent: and in truth this is their Emblem and Hieroglyphick, and the Armenians, Sub∣jects to the Persian, that are at Paris, say, that these are the Arms of this Crown, and our Merchants at London, who have lived in Persia many years, affirm this to be the great Seal of the King of Persia. His Livery is of a  Colour. He professes the Ma∣hometan Religion according to the Doctrine of Hali, the Turks following that of Osman, and he uses the Persian Language, which is not limited within the Provinces of the Persian Empire, but used also in the Court and Camp of the Great Mogul, and some parts of Zagathay: and where its not vulgarly spoken, its studied and understood by persons of the more eminent sort, as the Latin, by the Gentry of these Western parts; so that he that has this Lan∣guage, may travel over all the East without an Interpreter. III. Hispaan, seated on the River Senderut, is the Capital City of Persia, and the ordinary place of Residence of the Kings. The Town and Suburbs are almost of as great extent as Paris; but the number of the Inhabitants is much lesser. The greatest part of the Houses there are but of one story, or two, at most; they are built of Bricks, only dryed in the Sun, and ge∣nerally they have flat Roofs (as generally in the East) and have Terasses on the tops. The Fronts facing the Streets are very mean, and the Mens Apartments are very neat: as for those of the Women, Strangers are no ways permitted to see them. Each considerable House has a Garden belonging to it, where they do not now suffer the great number of Plane Trees to grow, which
formerly made the Town, at a distance, seem like a Forest. The streets are narrow, oblique, and very dark; because for the greatest part, they have Arches made on each side of them, for walking dry. They are not paved, wherefore the Dirt is very troublesome in the Winter, and the Dust in the Summer. The Town-Walls are only of Earth. He has a Seat of Pleasure at Tawgebawt; its of no great Re∣ceipt; but for the Cost and Ornaments of it, and for the De∣lightfulness of the Gardens, adjoining to it, not yielding to any in this large Empire; and for Grotto's, Ecchoes, Labyrinths, and other Excellencies of Arts, perhaps not fellowed in the World; especially considering that it stands in the midst of a Sandy De∣sert. IV. Pontier, a late French Writer, tells us that the King of Persia has fifteen millions of Crowns, annual Rent. His Revenues a∣rise from the Fishery of Pearls, found on his Coasts,, from the Mines of the old and new Rocks of Turky Stones, from the Cu∣stoms and the Sale of all sorts of Merchandizes, which pay pro∣portionably to the price they are sold at. And each publick Hall built for the Entertainment of Travellers pays the King a Tribute. The Government of the King of Persia, tho it be despoti∣cal and severe, has a great deal less of the Tyrant in it, than any other of the Mahometan Kings, or Princes; these cherishing their Brethren, maintaining Nobility amongst them, and encouraging Industry; which makes them to be better served than the Turk or Tartar, to both whom they are far inferior both in Power and Treasure. Their Officers of State, and Men of principal Em∣ployment, for the most part, are Eunuchs (as generally in all Empires of the East) such persons being thought most trusty, be∣cause abstracted from the Obligation of Wife and Children, they study more the Prince's Service, than their own Advan¦tages.
Grand Tartary and China I. THE Chronicles of China tell us of three hundred and forty Kings, which for the space of 4000 years there Reign'd, and that the Country being without Rule or settled Government before, was first reduc'd into Or∣der by one Vitey, by whom the people were instructed in Physick, Astrology, Divination, the Arts of Tillage, Shipping, &c. Of this Kings Race there are said to have been two hundred and seventeen Kings, who held the State 2257 years. The last of them was Tzaintzon, who being ill Neighbour'd by the Scy∣thians (not yet call'd Tartars) is said to have built that vast Wall, extended four hundred Leagues in length, parting Tartary from China, having at the end of every League a strong Rampart, or Bulwark, continually Garrizon'd, and well furnish'd with all war∣like Necessaries. This Wall in reality is only a continuation made good of a Chain of Mountains, dividing the two Countries; there being a Work of the like Nature, tho not for the same use, in the Kingdom of Peru in America; of which I have given an account before. Now this King Tzaintzon being slain by some of his Subjects, who found themselves burthen'd and wasted with this Work, the Race of these Kings ended; and then several Princes of Chinese Families held the Government one after ano∣ther, and afterwards several Tartar Princes; China being Con∣quer'd by the Tartars, and made a Province by them, till about the year 1269; when a Chinese, nam'd Hugh, a mean Person, but of great Courage, rais'd to himself a strong Party, and drove the Tartars out of all, and was Crown'd Emperour of China; taking to himself the name of Hungus (by some Writers com∣monly call'd Hombu) that is a famous Warrior, and gave to his Children and their Posterity the name of the Taingian Family, from whom the last King of China, call'd Zunchius was descended, and under whom China was again Conquer'd by the Tartars, and continues under their subjection.
To give an account of the rise of the Tartars, it was as fol∣lows. East Tartary contains many Regions, Govern'd formerly by distinct Governours; and among those Regions, there were six of chiefest Note; whereof one was nam'd Tartar, giving name to the Tartars, which was divided among five Tribes, each Govern'd by its Chief, as its commonly among barbarous Na∣tions, tho all of them were subordinate to an higher Power, be∣ing opprest by a King of Tenduc, another of the six chief Regions, so call'd. But at length one Cingi, a Chief of one of the said five Tribes, first with the force of his own Tribe, subdued the other four Tribes, and afterward the King of Tenduc him∣self: and then took on him the Title of Cham, or Emperour, about the year 1162. And this was the first step by which this base and beggarly Nation, began their Empire and Sovereignty; whereas before they liv'd like Beasts, having neither Letters, Faith, nor dwelling but in Tents, nor any thing befitting Men. Some write that Cingis before he joyn'd Battle with the King of Tenduc consulted with his Diviners and Astrologers of the Success, who taking a green Reed, cleft it asunder, and on one piece writ the name of Cingis, and on the other the name of the King of Tenduc, and plac'd them not far asunder, and then fell to read∣ing their Charms and Conjurations; whereupon the Reeds fell a fighting, in the sight of the whole Army, the Reed of Cingis overcoming the other, whereby they foretold the joyful News of Victory to the Tartars; which accordinly hapned. But whe∣ther this seems not a Story contriv'd in imitation of the Rod of Moses, and those of Pharao's Magicians, I leave it to Considera∣tion. From the foresaid Cingis, the present Cham, or Emperour of Grand Tartary and China is descended. The most famous of all the Chams of Tartary was the Great Tamerlane, who Reign'd about the year 1370. he being thought to have subdued more Provinces in his life time than the Romans had done in eight hundred years. Dying he divided his Empire among his Chil∣dren, viz. Persia to Mizra Charock, his fourth Son, Zagathy to another, &c. The account of the present Emperour of the Asiatick Tartars and of China stands thus. An. 1644. a Chinese call'd Lycungus re∣volted against the Emperour of China call'd Zunchius, defeated many of his Generals and surpriz'd the Town of Peking. The Emperour for fear of falling into the Hands of the Rebels, ran
into the Garden of his Palace, and seeing himself pursued, hung himself to a Tree. Some time before, he had sent a consider∣able Army against the Tartars, who had made some Incursions into China: Usungus, who commanded it, hearing all what had past, sent to desire the Tartars to joyn with him, and to march together against the Rebels. Zungteus the King of the Tartars accepted the proposition, and came to him with eighty thousand Horse, which were followed by above two hundred thousand Foot. As soon as the Tartars saw themselves the stronger, they made Usangus and his Troops to shave themselves like the Tar∣tars, and went straight to Peking, which Lycungus had forsaken, af∣ter having pillag'd it of all the Treasures of the Emperours of China. Zungteus the King of the Tartars died on the way, and left but one Son, six years of Age. The Tartars own'd him for their Emperour, and after having Crown'd him second Em∣perour of China by the name of Zunchius, they pursued their Enterprize under the Conduct of Amavangus, his Uncle and Tutor; and in seven years they perfected the Conquest of almost the whole Empire, and defeated many Princes of the Royal House; who had been Crown'd in different Provinces. This Em∣perour Zunchius died Feb. 6. 1661. and had for Successor his Son, only eight years of Age. He ordered dying that his Mother and Grandmother should have the care of his Education till he were Major; and that the State should be Govern'd by four Manda∣rins, or great Lords of the Tartars. He was call'd then Haei, but since he has ascended the Throne, he has caus'd himself to be call'd Yunchi. He Reigned peaceably till the beginning of the year 1674, that the foremention'd Usangus, seeing the Desola∣tion of his Country, and being in some power, as being Viceroy of Quansi, now let his Hair grow like the Chineses, and endea∣vour'd to shake off the Tartar Yoke, making himself Master in a little time of four great Provinces, on the western part of China, and drawing to his side the Viceroys of Foquien and Can∣ton, who commanded on the East and South. But these three could not long agree, so that the two last submitted themselves again to the Tartars; and Usangus now stands only on a defen∣sive War, being Master of the Provinces of Quansi and Hu∣quan, where the Chineses keep still some remainder of their first Grandeur.
II Pontier says that this Emperour bears, Or, an Owl Sable, for Tartary; and that, as King of China he bears, Argent, three Blackamoors Heads, plac'd in front, their bust vested Gules. Another says the Kings of China have for Blazon, two Dragons, and that the Ancient Kings of China had a kind of Crown. That now the Tartar Kings that command there, have for their Royal mark, a sort of Cap, compast about with a Circle of Ivory, and terminating in a point, with a kind of Tower, Or; on the top of which there are many Pearls, and among them one as big as a Pidgeons Egg: these Pearls being the sole mark of the Royalty, none of the Kings of China, how absolute soever they may be, daring to wear them on their Caps. The Ancient Motto of the Emperours of Tartary, engrav'd in their Seals was this. Deus in Caelo & Chiukuth Cham in Terra, Dei fortitudo, & omnium homi∣num Imperator. This Emperous Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Mahometan Religion, and uses the Chinese and Tartarian Languages. III. Manesson Mallet, in his late description of the Universe, says that the little knowledge Men have had of the Eastern part of Tartary, which is on the North of China, has occasion'd the Errour of many persons, who have taken Chambalu and Peking for two different Towns: the greatest part of Geographers having made Chambalu the Capital City of Cathai, which they believ'd to be one of the chief Countries of Tartary; but since we have seen the relation of the Voyage of the Dutch to China, and that of Father Kircher, it has no longer been doubted, but that Cathai was the northern part of China, and that the Town of Peking was that which the Saracens, and Moscovites call Cham∣balu, that is, the Court or City of the King, the name of Peking signifying the same in the Chinese Language. This City is said to be of a vast extent, but we have not any account thereof to rely on, but its generally agreed that the Houses, for the most part, are but of one Story; and the Sreets being not pav'd, so troublesom a dust is rais'd by the Wind in the Summer, that it forces those who have not Portative Chairs, to cover their Faces with a Linnen Cloth, reaching to their Girdles, thro which they may see without being seen; and the Dirt makes the Streets al∣together as offensive in the Winter. In this City, as they say, the King has a Pallace of great Magnificence and Curiosity.
Nanking is the next chief City of China, and not inferiour to the former, only in the number of Inhabitants, which, by rea∣son of the Kings Residence at Peking, is there greater. The Houses of the chief Merchants are very well built, and of ma∣ny Stories. They compute in it a Million of Inhabitants, with∣out comprising a Garrison of forty thousand Men, kept there by the Tartars, under the Command of the Lieutenant General, of the Southern Provinces, who resides there. There are several accounts of the vast numbers of Cities, Towns, Villages, Houses and Inhabitants of China, as also of their incredible numbers of Shipping, concerning all which we want more perfect ac∣counts to rely on. IV. Its said that the Kings of China have ordinarily had an yearly Revenue of above one hundred and fifty Millions of Crowns. His Revenues, as Cham of Tartary may be what he lists himself, he being the absolute Lord of all the Subject has, without any thing he can call his own. But that which ordi∣narily accrues to him is the Tenth of the Wooll, Silk, Hemp, Corn and Cattle: and he draws into his own Hands all the Gold and Silver which is brought into the Country; and which he causes to be melted, and preserv'd in his Treasury; imposing on his people instead of mony, in some places, Cockleshells, others a black Coin, made of the Bark of Trees, with his stamp on it: and he keeps to himself the whole Trade of Pearl fishing, which no Man, upon pain of death, dares fish for, but by leave from him.
INDIA. I. THE Emperour of India, call'd the Great Mogul, or King of Indostan, is nam'd Aureng-Zebe, which in the Indian Language signifies The Ornament of the Throne. He is call'd the Mogul, by reason of his descent from the Mongul Tartars, one of the five great Tribes, or Nations mention'd in the foregoing Head, into which that people was divided, deriv'd Originally from the Great Tamer∣lane. The present Emperour began to Reign An. 1660, after the cruel Deaths which he made his own Father and Brothers to suf∣fer, he being the third, of four Sons of that Prince. He has many Children, and his eldest Son is call'd Sultan Mahmond. II. The Armorial Shield of India is, Argent, semè with Besants, Or, his Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Mahome∣tan Religion, which has been long Embrac'd by the Tartars, from whom they were originally descended: and he uses the Scythian or Tartarian Language, from which the Turks (a Scythian people) differ but in Dialect, and a sprinkling of the Persian intermixt with it. III. The City where he keeps his Court is call'd Agra. He formerly resided at Lahor. Agra is esteem'd twice as great as Hispaan. The Houses of the Persons of Quality are Magnifi∣cent tho they are but of one Story, or two at most, and are environ'd with very high Walls, to keep their Wives from being seen. IV. This King has an infinite Treasure in Gold and pretious Stones. His yearly Revenue is said to be fifty Millions of Crowns; and he is Heir to every Mans Estate, that is worth an having; the Persons and Purses of his Subjects being at his sole disposal, so that he may amass what Treasures, and raise what Forces for War he pleases.
Decan and Cambaia. I. THE name of the King of Decan and Cambaia is Idalcansi, or Idalschaa. II. He bears Verte, encompast with a Collar of large precious Stones. His Livery is of a  colour. He professes the Ma∣hometan Religion, and uses the  Language. III. His chief Cities are Decan and Visapore, tho he resides or∣dinarily at Danoger. There is much talk of a great Canon, he has in his Artillery. He has in his Country an Hill, encompast with an high Wall, and kept by a strong Garrison, because of the great store of Diamonds, and other Precious Stones, which are dug out of it. An. 150, the Portugueses took from a Prince of Decan the Island and Town of Goa, which they have since made the Capital of their East India Conquests. Golchonda and Orixa. I. THE King of Golchonda and Orixa is call'd Cha John. II. He professes the Mahometan Religion. III. His Capital City is Golchonda, which is very fair and strong. All the Merchants Lodge in the Suburbs, and the Kings Officers, and persons of Quality, in the Town. IV. This Prince has in his Estates, a very rich Mine of Dia∣monds. CALICUT. I. THE name of the King of Calicut, is, Zamorin. II. He professes the Mahometan Religion. III. His Capital City, and the ordinary place of his Residence is Calicut: It is in length extended upon the Sea shore three Miles, and a Mile in breadth, containing about six thousand Houses, but mean and low built, few of them exceeding the height of a Man on Horseback, the Soil being so hollow and full of water, that it is not capable of a Foundation for an heavier building,
and for that cause unwall'd; so that Merchants Houses are here valued but at twenty Crowns, those of the Common sort, no more than ten: yet it is of great Trading. The Portuguese forc'd a Foundation on the shore there for a strong Castle, but were so put to it by the King of Calicut, that they were fain to demolish it, and to quit their Posts. The Priests or Bramans there were yellow clothing, because they think this colour Con∣secrated to God, by reason of its resemblance to the Sun and to Gold. PEGU. THE Kingdom of Pegu, and the Town of its name, are now almost ruin'd. Siriangh is at present the most considerable Town of the Kingdom, and the ordinary place of the Kings Residence. Pegu was once the chief City, and was very famous, having round about it a Moat, in which Crocodiles were kept, to keep people from surprising the Town. The people of Pegu have white Elephants in great Veneration, and think they draw on them a Benediction, and that their false Prophet Xaca was Metamorphoz'd into that Animal. This King is a Pagan. SIAM. I. THE present King of Siam is about forty years of Age. II. He is a Pagan, tho the people of Siam are gener∣ally Adiaphorists; that is to say, all Religions are indifferent to to them, because they believe them all good; wherefore they tolerate them all, so they may consist with the Laws of their State. III. The Capital City is Siam; its said to be one of the finest a Man can look on. The buildings are of an admirable Stru∣cture; and the Temples, Monasteries, and gilded Towers ap∣pear so rich and beautiful that they surpass all may be imagin'd of most stately.
JAPAN. I. POntier tells us the Emperour of Japan's name is Xogun, or Taico. Mallet says its Quane. II. According to the Relation of the Ambassadors of the Dutch East-India Company, sent to this Emperour, his Arms are, Or, with six Stars Argent, in an Oval Shield, and bordered with little Points of Gold. Mallet says he bears Sable, with three Tre∣foils Argent. He is a Pagan. III. Meaco was formerly the Capital City of Japan, while the Emperours there resided; but since he has left it, it is not so con∣siderable, tho it contains still above one hundred thousand Houses, the most part built of Carpenters Work, as being less subject to be shaken with Earthquakes, which are there very frequent. In this City is a most magnificent Palace, in which the Dairy, or Chief Priest resides. Yedo is now the Capital City, the Em∣perour there residing. The Houses are generally built of Clay, and cover'd with Wood, that the moisture might not prove of∣fensive. The great Mens Palaces are numerous, and of a magni∣ficent Structure. There is one Street in the Town near four Leagues in length. The Emperours Palace there is one of the most beautiful of Japan. The Temple of Amida in Yedo is very stately. IV. This Country is very Fertile in Corn, Beasts, Wild-Fowl, Pearls, Mines of Gold, and Silver, and others. Rice a∣lone, as its said, brings this Emperour yearly two Millions of Crowns.
TONQUIN. I. THE present King of Tonquin is about fifty five years of Age. II. He is a Pagan; and when a King is there newly elected, the number of Beasts, sent to be Sacrifis'd in the Temples of their false Gods is said to be one hundred thousand. III. The Capital City is Checo. Tonquin is judg'd almost in equal extent with France. The Tonquineses say that the whole Kingdom contains above twenty thousand Cities and Towns; and many more there would be, but that many of the people choose rather to live on the Water, than on the Land, so that the greatest part of their Rivers is cover'd with Boats, which serve them instead of Houses. IV. The chief Riches of Tonquin, which yield a great Revenue to the King, consists in the great quantities of Silks, which are there worn by Rich and Poor; and in their Musk and Lignum Aloes, of which there is some worth one thousand Crowns the pound, according to its goodness and oiliness, tho there is some not worth above 3 l. it being dry. The Names and Ages of some other East-India Princes. THE old Sultan of Bantam, nam'd Abdul Fete, if now living, is about sixty years of Age. His Son, Sultan, Annum-Cas∣sar, Abdull-Massar is aged thirty seven years. Sasnum, Emperour of Java, vulgarly call'd the Mandarin, is aged about forty years. Sultan, Annum-Abdull-Negara, King of Jambee is aged about forty five years. Sultan, Rutterro, King of Cherriboam, aged about thirty nine years. Sultan, Adisbull-Abdull-Isphew, King of Macasser, aged about forty four years. Raja Pallacca, King of the Buggesses, the High Land of Ma∣casser, aged about fifty seven years. The King of Ceilon, now about eighty six years of Age.
MOROCCO and FEZ. I. NOT to go farther for the Rise of the Emperors of Fez and Morocco, a Family of them, called the Marine Fa∣mily, begun in Jacob Ben-Joseph, ann. 1270, who held their Residence at Fez, as the first Seat of their Em∣pire; Morocco being then governed by an Under-King; and the rest of the Provinces of the Kingdom cantoned into several States. Now it happened about the year 1508, that Mahomet Ben Amet, a Native of Dora, in the farther Numidia, pretending a Descent from their Prophet Mahomet, caused himself to be called Xeriffe, a Name by which the Kindred and Successors of that Impostor used to call themselves: and being a poor Hermite only (which sort of pre∣tended Saints have often imposed on this People) plotted to make his Sons the chief Princes of Mauritania. To this end he sent them to Meccha, whence they returned with such an opinion of Sanctity, that Mahomet, the then King of Fez, made Amet, the elder of them, Governor of the famous College of Amado∣rach, and the youngest, called Mahomet, Tutor to his Children. In those days the Portuguese greatly infested the Provinces of the Realm of Morocco; to repress whose Insolences, Mahomet and Amet obtained Commissions, tho much opposed therein by Mu∣ley, the King's Brother, who told him, that under colour of Re∣ligion, they might quickly raise themselves to a power, and how unsafe it was to trust an arm'd Hypocrisie. But this Counsel was rejected, and they being furnished with an Army, defeated Lopez Barriga, Commander of the Portugal Forces, under King Emanuel, and compelled that King to abandon all his Footing there: and they subdued Duccata, Sus, and Hea, three Provinces of the Realm of Morocco, entered that City, poisoned the Tribu∣tary King, and salute Amet King thereof, by the name of Xeriffe of Morocco, investing Mahomet, the other Brother in the King∣dom of Sus. During these Successes the King of Fez died, and his Successor, named Amet, an improvident young Prince, con∣firms his quondam Tutors in their new Estates, conditionally they should hold of him in Chief, and pay him the accustomed Tri∣butes.
Amet denied both Tribute and Superiority to the King of Fez, whom he overthrew in a set Field, and was himself after∣wards vanquished and dispossessed of his Kingdom (upon some quarrel breaking out) by his Brother Mahomet, King of Sus, who having got the Kingdom of Morocco, united Fez unto it also, by the vanquishment of Amet, the King thereof, who at last was slain by the Turks of his Guard. From this Mahomet is de∣scended, Ismael Muley, or Muler her, Brother to the late King of Taffi∣lette, by the Mother-side, present Emperor of Barbary and Mo∣rocco, King of Fez, Susa, and Taffilette, being about forty years of Age. II. He bears for Arms, three Wheels Argent. He professes the Mahometan Religion, and styles himself Xeriffe, of the Race of Mahomet: Xeriffe signifying an illustrious and sacred person. The Language spoken at present in most of the Maritime Towns of Barbary, except those of Fez and Morocco, is the Arabick. In those two Kingdoms, and most part of the Country Villages, the Punick, or Old African, the ancient Languages of the Coun∣try is spoken. The Punick in all places where anciently the Car∣thaginians were of any power: the African (whatsoever it was) in the parts of Mauritania, not subject to them. III. The two Capital Cities are Fez and Morocco, the latter was reckoned once amongst the greatest Cities of the World, at what time it was said to contain one hundred thousand Families; but by the Depredations of the Barbarians, and the removal of the Seat Royal to Fez, its hardly a third part so big as formerly. The Castle there is very large and strong; on a Tower whereof stand three Globes made of pure Gold, prized at six hundred thousand Livres. There is no City in all Barbary which equals Fez in Greatness, Beauty, and Number of Inhabitants. Some count in it twenty eight thousand Housholds, and seven hundred Mosques, the chief of which is Carnven, being a mile and an half in compass; the Roof is large and high raised; its one hundred and fifty yards in length, and eighty in breadth: there is a College called Amadorach, a most curious and delicate Building; it has three Cloisters of admirable Beauty, supported with eight square Pillars of divers Colours; the Roof is curiously carved, and the Arches of Mosaick Work of Gold and Azure. The Gates are of Brass finely wrought, and the Doors of the private Chambers
are of inlaid Work. This College cost the Founder three hun∣dred and eighty thousand Crowns. There are about one hun∣dred hot Baths, well built, with four Halls to each, and certain Galleries without, where they put off their Cloaths when they go to bath themselves. IV. As for his Revenues, he is absolute Lord of the whole E∣state, and of his Subjects Goods and Bodies. He has the Tenth, and First Fruits of all Fruits, Corn and Cattle, tho many times contented in the Name of the First Fruits, with one in twenty. He receives the fifth part of a Ducat, for every Acre of Land throughout his Dominions, the other four parts for every Fire, and as much for every Head, above fifteen years of Age. Of Merchandize he receives of every Native two in the hundred; of every Alien, ten; and has a large Impost upon every Mill. When any of his greater Officers or Judges die; he is sole Heir of all their Goods, and yet advances great Sums, by the Sale of those Offices. And upon extraordinary Occasions he levies what Taxes he pleases, but commonly he is pretty moderate in them. HABESSINIA. I. THE Emperors of the Habissins, and Kings of Upper Aethiopia, pretend to be descended from Solomon and Magueda, (or Nizaule, as Josephus names her) the Queen of the South, or of Sheba. The name of the present Emperor is Malec Saghedus. The genuine style of an E∣pistle written by him to the Pope, was thus, Libellus Epistolae à Malec Saghedo, Rege Regum Aethiopiae, perveniat ad Sanctum Pa∣triarcham Romanum. II. The Arms of this King are usually said to be the same with those of the Tribe of Judah, viz. a Lion Rampant, in a Field Or, with this Motto, Vicit Leo de Tribu Judah▪ But others say his Arms to be, Luna, a cross Portate Mars, charged with a Cruci∣fix, Sol, betwixt two Scourges of the Second. He professes the Christian Religion, but is a Schismatick, and owns the Patriarch of Alexandria. He uses the Aethiopick Language, which is a Dia∣lect of the Hebrew, but the Dialect there used by the Persons of Quality, and the Learned, is the Amarick.
III. He has scarce any considerable Town, People living there most in Tents. IV. His Revenues are not in Ready Mony, but consist of the natural Products of his Country, by an even way of Tribute: some pay Gold; others Horses, Cows, Oxen, Sheep, Bread, Corn, Ox-hides, and Garments, &c. MONOMOTOPA. I. THE King of this Country was baptized with his his whole Court, by one Gonsalvo, a Jesuit, by the name of Sebastian, that being the name of the then King of Portugal, ann. 1560: but he caused the said Gonsalvo to be put to death afterwards, at the solicitation of four Mahometans, whom in the end he also caused to be slain. II. His Arms are Azure, two bearded Arrows in Pale, Or. Some give him a Dart and a Pickax. III. His Capital City is Monomotopa; the Houses are made of Wood and Earth, bound together with a sort of Bitumen: they are but two stories, and are covered with Straw, or Branches of Trees; the tops are raised like a Tent; they are contrived to lie open after such a manner, as to be refreshed by the Winds, which reign according to the diversity of the Seasons: all their Fronts resemble each other, and are painted with divers Colours, and embelished with many Figures: they mix certain Gums with those Colours, which make them resist the Injuries of the Weather. The Emperor's Palace is not without its Beauty. CONGO. I. IN the Reign of John the Second, King of Portugal, ann. 1490, the Discovery and Conversion of the Kingdom of Congo happened; the then King there being Christened John, from whom the present King is descended; and continues of the Roman Religion, according to a Relation given by the Capucins, ann. 1665.
II. His Arms are Gules, a Cross Argent, cantoned with four Escutcheons of the same, each charged with five Roundles Sable, placed in Saltier. These Arms having been formerly given one of the Kings of Congo by Don Alphonso, King of Portugal. Others say these Arms, in their beginning were Gules, a Cross flowered Argent, charged in the midst with an Escutcheon Azure, charged with five Besants Argent, placed in Saltier, within a Border A∣zure, charged in each Angle with two Cockle-Shells, Or. O∣thers say his Arms are Mars, five Swords meeting in Base, Sol; which Coat was taken by Alphonso, the Second Christian King of Congo, because in the Battel which he fought against Panse Aquitine, he and his Soldiers saw, (or fancied they saw) such a Number of shining Swords, hanging in the Air, with their Points turned directly upon the Enemy. III. His chief Town is S. Salvador, which is of large extent, and well peopled: the Houses are built with Wood and Branch∣es of Trees, bound together with a little Earth, mixed with Lime. IV. The only Money of this Kingdom is Cockle-Shells, tho the King has great Treasures from Mines of Silver and other Metals, from the Sale of Slaves, from Elephants Teeth, &c. FINIS.
Advertisement to the READER. AS to the Account here given concerning the Chief Princes of the World, and the several Heads relating to them, I well know that the last year, a small Book was printed in 120▪ relating to the first Head of mine, viz. The Births and Names of the Chief European Princes. I know also that, a few years since, a Book was set forth, in Latin, by a German Writer, giving a Genealogical Account of the Chief Princes of Europe, which Book was translated into English, and publish'd also the last year. But it cannot be said that I transcribe from these: for its well known to many Gentlemen in London, that the year before Mr. Gadbury set forth the Births of some European Princes, in his Almanack, I had a Col∣lection of them ready for the Press. Indeed, as for what Princes have been born since that time, I have now and then made use of those Books, tho their Births are also to be found in our Gazettes. And as to the Rise of the European Princes, I have generally fol∣lowed the said German Author, tho I only briefly intimate the Rise and Descent of each Prince in his direct Line, and do not deduce an entire Genealogical Series of them, according to the several Branches of their Families, as he has done. As to the Blazon of the Princes Coats of Arms, and some other particulas in the Work, I have chiefly followed two French Writers in them, viz. Manesson Mallet, in his Geographie Universelle, and Gedeon Pontier, in his Cabinet des Gran▪ As to the greatness and Populosity of Cities, I have chiefly used Sir William Petty's Account of them, and some things I have taken from Dr. Brown's Account of his Travels, relating to them. And as for other Matters, I have us'd several Authors, according as things have occur'd to me in my Reading, and inserted what I have otherwise receiv'd by information. Upon the whole, I conceive a brief view of the World, according to the Heads set down by me, may be grateful and usefully instructive to Gentlemen; tho I cannot  them with that accurateness, or rendred them , as a second Edition set forth by me, or some other industrous Hand hereafter may afford. FINIS.
