B5721 99827759 32182
The Three VVorthy Butchers of the North: I weep, I wail, and travel much in pain, Now all my youthful Days are past, they'l never come again; Once I was a Man, but now alas I am none, For all my Companions are from me fled and gone. To a pleasant New Tune. Did you never hear of worthy Butchers three, And how they spent their days in mirth and jollity, there was Kitson, Wilson, & Johnson, mark me what I say, They took 300 pounds worth of Goods upon a day. When as the day of payment began for to draw near, Their money to their Creditors intended for to bear; And riding upon Blankly-lane as fast as they cou'd trig Be merry my hearts, said Johnson, let us sing up a jig. With a hey down, down, with a down derry dee, God bless all true men out of Thieves company. Riding then on Blankly-lane as fast as they could hie, Be merry my hearts, said Johnson,; I hear a woman cry; O help, help, help, O help, or else I dye, O help me some good Christians for my torments they draw nigh. O hark, O hark, said Johnson, I hear a woman cry, Sure I came of a woman, and shall I see her dye? No ride on neighbor Iohnson, now Kitson he did say, For that is some lewd woman will cast us all away. If you had but rid on this way as oft as we have done, You would have heard this cry before, & now let us be gone, Then Iohn. whipt into the wood with all his might & main, Whereas he found the woman with cords fast ty'd in twain With cords was ty'd in twain, & hand & foot was bound, And found her there stark naked, with her hair pin'd to the ground. Alas, said Iohnson, what man hath us'd thee so, He came not of a woman that would work a womans woe: Hast thou no lewd Company now Iohnson he did say, Forhere we are come to save thy life, thou mayst cast us all away. No I have no lewd company the woman she did say, Three Ruffians came riding by, and rob'd me by the way; They took my cloaths from me, & hand and foot me bound & left me here in woful sort, with my hair pin'd to the ground so Iohnson he whipt out his sword with all his might & main And presently the womans cords, Iohnson he cut in twain, A Shirt out of his Cloak-bag presently plucked he, And put it on the woman to cover her secresie. I have neither wife nor Children, Iohnson he did say, And thou shalt be the Lady of all till death take life away: Iohnson being a loving man, and bore a careful mind, He put his Cloak about her to keep her from the wind. Straight upon horse-back presently got he, And they rode all out of the wood, and rid on gallantly: Riding then on Blankly-lane as fast as they could trig, Be merry my hearts, said Iohnson, let us sing up a Jigg; With a hey down down, with a hey down derry dee, What if here were 10 thieves so we are true Men three. Riding then on Blankly-lane as fast as they could hye, be merry my hearts, said Iohnson, the land end draweth nigh The woman hearing him say so, presently by and by, She put her finger to her ear, and gave a squeaking cry. Ten Thieves then with weapons drawn in hand, They step'd before Iohnson, and quickly bid him stand; What is it so, said Iohnson, since 'twill no better be, I vow that some or you shall dye before I killed be: Stand fast, fight men, see that ye be not idle, For I vow his hand shall off that lays hold on my Bridle. Alas, said Kitson, to fight o heart No more have I said Wilson, in faith : Here is three hundred , And you shall have it all, and lets The Second part, to the same Tune. VVhat is it so, said Iohnson Fight men, and be free, And stand but at my back, keep the back blows from me? Stand fast, Fight men, Fight me and be free, And by the help of God we shall win the Victory. Five of these Thieves and the woman they did go To Kitson and to Wilson, and bound them fast in woe: As these 10 thieves play before him, & play'd upon the ground For Iohnson had 5 Pistols with bullets charged sound; VVith Bullets charged sound, presently he let fly, Till Five of these Thieves upon the ground did lye. Put up, said the other Five, put up without delay, For if that he gets charged, he will kill us all this day. Fight on, said the VVoman, Fight on I say to ye, For if you Five don't kill him, I vow your Priest to be. so Iohnson he whipt out his Sword with all his might & main, And play'd about him gallantly till 3 more of them were slain, Put up, said the other two, put up without delay, For if that we continue fight, he'l kill us all this day. Fight on, said the woman, Fight on I say to ye, For if you two don't kill him, I vow your Priest to be; As these 2 thieves play'd before him, alas he did not mind, For presently the VVoman knock'd him down behind; Oh wicked woman, wickedly hast thou done, thou hast kill'd the bravest Butcher that ever England won, For had but my fellows, had they prov'd true to me, they were cowards, said the woman, & as cowards they shall dye. Two of these thieves and the woman they did go To Kitson and to Wilson where they lay bound in woe: A Club into her hand, as she got all the gains, went to Kitson & to Wilson & dasht out both their brains. How this murder was discovered, list and you shall hear, It was by a silly Shepherd hid in the Hedge for fear; A Gentleman and his man as they came riding by, Seeing this woful murder straight sent forth hue and cry, I but do whate're they could, taken they could not be, For they got Ship at Yarmouth, and so went over Sea; This is the trick of thieves when they have Murder done, when they have commited roguery, full fast away they run. God bless our royal K. & Queen, & send them long to reign In health, wealth & prosperity, true Justice to maintain, God bless all true men that travel by Land or Sea, And keep all true men out of Thieves Company. Paul Burges, FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, in West-smithfield.
