B586 12012163 52435
A BRIEFE TREATISE CONCERNING THE REGULATING OF PRINTING. Humbly presented to the PARLIAMENT of England. By WILLIAM BALL, Esq. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1651.
A BRIEFE TREATISE CONCERNING The Regulating of Printing. AMongst many temporall Benefits which Divine Bounty hath in severall ages manifested to man∣kinde, the invention of the Mystery, or Art of Printing may rightly be acknowledged one of the greatest, as an exact and exquisite Instrument, open∣ing to the understanding, not onely all naturall Sciences, but even supernaturall Mysteries; by the meanes whereof the mindes of men have been endowed with many excellent gifts. Yet even as the best
things have been abused, so hath this be∣neficiall Art been notoriously depraved by vaine, contentious, and seditious Per∣sons; to the greatconfusion' of Doctrinall Tenets, and Disturbance of State-Affairs: For prevention (as much as may be) of so dangerous extravagancies, the most regular Christian Potencies (or Re∣publicks) and Illustrious Potentates have thought fit to comprehend the liberty of Printing, (even as of Coyning) within the sphere of their severall Powers: Where∣in (amongst others) the late Q. Elizabeth, and her successors have (not without ma∣ture deliberation, and sage presidents in this point) been most vigilant, well per∣ceiving that the Eye of understanding might be subject to be deceived by erroneous principles in Print, as may the bodily Eye by counterfeit Coyne; In Regard whereof they propagated wholsome Orders, and Decrees for the Regulating of Printing, and Printers; which rightly considered, cannot be defaced, no not blemished by the notion of Tyranny. Moreover it is
an Axiom of State, that, Acta legitima Ty∣rannorum & Hostium Reipublicae rata esse oportere. [Bodin. de Republicâ, L. I. c. 5.] The lawfull Acts of Tyrants, even of (over-Lording) enemies ought to be ob∣served in a Common-wealth: so that admitting Oppression, or Tyranny in some Trans-actions of these Later Prin∣ces, yet their prudent, and just Ordinan∣ces are not to be Rejected, but rather (mutatis mutandis) to be carefully con∣served. Wherefore with all humble submission to the High Representative of this Nati∣tion, I have tendred these subsequent Proposalls and clauses concerning the Regulating of Printing, and Printers, un∣to their grave Considerations, and cen∣sures; part whereof I have collected out of former Ordinances, and have partly proposed somewhat of mine owne; as hereafter ensueth.
I. That no person or persons whatsoe∣ver Print, or cause to be Printed any of∣fensive Bookes, Pamphlets, Papers, or Ballads to the Derogation of this pre∣sent Government, or seditious distur∣bance of this Common-wealth, or of any Dominion, Member, or Corpora∣tion thereof, nor shall sell, or dispose of any such Bookes, Pamphlets, Papers, or Ballads, upon Paine that he, or they so offending shall forfeit for every such Booke, &c. the summe of 10l. The one halfe to the use of the Common-wealth, the other to the party discovering the same, and suffer such farther punishment as the Demerit of the Offence, or Offen∣ces shall deserve.
II. That no person or persons whatsoever shall Print, or cause to be Printed any Booke or Pamphlet whatsoever, unlesse such Booke or Pamphlet, and all, and every the Titles, Epistles, Prefaces, Pro∣ems, Preambles, Introductions, Dedi∣cations, Tables, and all other matters, and things thereunto annexed, or there∣with imprinted shall be first lawfully Li∣ensed, and Authorised by such Person, or Persons as the Parliament of England shall in their wisdomes constitute, and appoint; and that all, and every such Book, or Pamphlet be also first entred into the Register Book of the Company of Stationers; upon Paine that every Printer offending therein shall be hereaf∣ter for ever disenabled to exercise the Art, and Mystery of Printing, and suffer imprisonment by the space of one whole yeare: provided that this extend not to the Printers of the Parliament of Eng∣land,
and Councell of State, for or touch∣ing any Booke which they shall Com∣mand, or allow of. III. That all the Books concerning Divini∣ty, Phylosophy, and Poetry shall be Printed by speciall Allowance of the Chaplaines in ordinary to the Councell of State, or by one of them; And in case of no such Chaplaines in being, then by three Divines for that purpose appoyn∣ted, or by one of them; All Books of State Affaires, and History (except Di∣urnalls) to be licenced by the Secretary of State, with two more of the Councell of State joyned unto him, or by one of them: All Books concerning Law to be Licenced by the Lords Commissioners of the greate Seale, Lord cheif Justices, Master of the Rolls, or by one of them; All Books touching Phisicke to be Li∣cenced by three of the Colledge of Phi∣sitians appointed for that purpose, or by
one of them; All Books of Mathema∣ticks to be Licenced be three professed Mathematicians, being appoynted there∣into, or by one of them; All Books of Military Discipline to be Licenced by three of the Councell of War, or other∣wise of the Grand Committee for the Militia, or by one of them; All Books of Heraldry to be Licenced by the Prin∣cipall Herald at Armes with two other Authorized Heralds joyned unto him, or by one of them; All Books concerning forraigne Languages to be allowed by three Linguists for that purpose appoyn∣ted or by one of them. Provided that the Chancellors or Vice-Chancellors of the Universities shall Licence onely such Booke, or Books that are to be Printed within the Limitts of the Universities Respectively, but not in LONDON or else-where, not med∣ling with Books of Common Law, mat∣ters of State, Military Discipline and He∣raldry.
IV. That every Person, or Persons which are, or shall be appoynted, or Authori∣zed to Licence Books, shall have two se∣verall Copies entirely written; one of which Copies shall be kept in a Publicke Office, or Registrie for that purpose to be appoynted, the which Copy every such Person, or Persons who shall Respective∣ly allow of, or licence for Printing shall send into the said Office, or Registry testi∣fied under his, or their hands, to the end that he or they may be secured, that the Copy so licensed by him, or them, is not altered without his or their privity; the other Copy Licensed shall remaine in his hands whose Copy it is; and all Stati∣oners, and Printers that shall Print, or cause to be imprinted any Copy, or Co∣pies whatsoever differently from this Rule, to incurre the penalties contained in the second clause.
V. That every Merchant of Books, or Per∣son, or Persons whatsoever who shall Im∣port any Book, or Books from beyond the Seas into this Common-wealth of England, shall before he, or they deliver, cause to be delivered forth any such Book, or Books out of his, or their nds, or expose them to sale, deliver n a true Catalogue in writing of all and every such Book, and Books unto the Master of the Office, or Registrie for Co∣pies aforesaid; upon paine of forfeiture, and Confiscation of all, and every such Book and Books, and twenty shillings fine for every such Book delivered forth, or exposed to sale; the one half to the use of the Common-wealth, the other to the Party discovering the same.
VI. That no Merchant of Books, or Per∣son, or Persons whatsoever shall import or cause to be imported from beyond the Seas any offensive or scandalous Books Pamphlets, Papers, Portraitures, or Ballads into any part of this Common-wealth of England, upon incurring the penalties contained in the first clause. VII. That no Person, or Persons whatsoe∣ver shall within the Precincts, and Do∣minions of this Common-wealth, or els∣where Imprint, or cause to be imprinted, or shall Import or cause to be imported into this Common-wealth of England, or any part thereof, any Copy, Book, or Books, or part of any Copy, Book, or Books Printed beyond the Seas, or els∣where, which the Company of Statio∣ners, or any other Person, or Persons
have, or shall have Right unto by Order or entrance in their Register-Book; or otherwise by speciall Order of Parlia∣ment, or by Letters-Patent, being un∣lled by this present Parliament; nor shall binde, stitch, or expose to sale any such Book, or Books, upon paine of for∣feiture all the said Books, and twenty shillings fine for every such Book, to be led by Writ, or Action, Bill, &c. by the Person, or Persons aggrieved. VIII. That every Person who shall hereafter Print, or cause to be printed any Books, Ballads, Charts, Portraictures, or other thing, or things whatsoever, shall there∣unto, or thereon set his, and their owne name, or names; as also the Name, or names of the Author, or Authors, Ma∣ker, or Makers of the same; and by, or for whom any such Book, or other thing is, or shall be printed, upon payne of forfeitute of all such Books, &c. And
having his, or their Presses, Letters, and other Instruments for Printing to be ut∣terly defaced, and made unserviceable and twenty shillings fine for every such Book, &c. The one half to the use of the Common-wealth, the other to the Party discovering the same. IX. That no person, or persons whatsoever shall Print or cause to be Printed, forge put, or counterfeit, in or upon any Book or Bookes, &c. the name, title, marke or vinnet of the Company of Stationers or of any particular person, or persons which hath, or shall have lawfull Priviledge, Authority, or Allowance to Print the same, without consent of the said Company, or of the Party, or Parties which shall be so priviledged, and Au∣thorized, first had, and obtained, upon paine of incurring the Penalty in the se∣venth clause.
X. That no Tradesmen, Shop-keepers, or any other person or persons whatsoever, not being a free Stationer of the City of London, or not having served 7. years ap∣prentice to the trade of Book-seller, Printer, or Book-binder, shall within the City, or Suburbs of London, receive, take, or buy, to barter, sell againe, exchange, or doe away any Bibles, Testaments, Prim∣mers, Psalm-books, Almanacks, or other Book, or Books whatsoever, upon paine if forfeiture of all such Books, and twen∣ty shillings fine for every such book, to be by Writ, or Action, Bill, &c. by the person, or persons aggrieved. XI. That no Stranger, or Forreigner what∣soever, be suffered to bring in for sale, barter, or rent, here, any book or books printed beyond the Seas, in any Lan∣guage
whatsoever, either by themselves, or their secret Factors; except such onely as be free Stationers of London, and such as have been brought up in that professi∣on, upon paine of confiscation of all such Books so imported, and twenty shillings fine for every such Booke to be sued by writ, or Action, &c. by the Master, and Wardens of the Company of the Stati∣oners. XII. And for as much as there may be great abuse committed by Searchers, and other Officers of the Customes by seizure of Books, who (as I have heard credibly reported) seize English Bibles, Testa∣ments, & other Books, Printed in Holland, and in other parts beyond the Seas very erroniously, to the dangerous introducti∣on of severall Heresies within this Com∣mon-wealth, and great Injury to such, to whom of right the Copies or Origi∣nalls of such Bookes belong; and after
such seizure (having as it is said first en∣acted custome in Grosse) vent, and dis∣perse the said Bibles, Testaments, and Bookes, in England, Ireland, and other Dominions of this Common-wealth: for prevention whereof, no Searcher, nor other Officer of the Customes or excise whatsoever shall hereafter seize on any Books (if discovered before he first ac∣quaint the Master of the Office, or Regi∣strie for Copies aforesaid, together with the Master, and Wardens of the Com∣pany of Stationers, (upon pain of forfei∣ture of his, or their Places, and Imprison∣ment) who shall have Power to accom∣pany such Searchers, and Officers of the Customes; and shall forthwith upon discovery, take a true Catalogue of such Bookes, and present it to the Honourable Councell of State: And to prevent the farther venting, and dispersing of such er∣ronious Bibles, Testaments, and other Bookes as aforesaid, after notice given unto the Honourable Councell of State, the said Master of the Office, or Registrie
for Copies, together with the Master, and Wardens, of the Company of the Stationers, or some of them, shall cut, or cause to be cut into waste paper, or o∣therwise utterly deface the said English Bibles, Testaments, and other Bookes printed in Holland, and in other parts be∣yond the Seas, and deliver the said waste paper, or defaced Bookes, to such to whom of right the Copies, or Originalls doe belong. XIII. Moreover for farther prevention of Importation, venting, and dispersing of Seditious, Schismaticall, and Offensive Bookes, as well as of the Bookes afore∣said; That no Driefats, Sacks, Maunds, Chests, or Fardells of Bookes whatsoe∣ver Imported into this Common-wealth be permitted by any Officers of the Cu∣stome or Excize, to be opened or con∣veyed away before notice given unto the Master of the Office, or Registry for Copies,
and also to the Master, and Wardens of the Company of Stationers (upon paine of such Officer, or Officers forfeiture of his, or their Places, and Imprisonment. And the said Master of the Office, or Re∣gistrie for Copies, as also the Master and Wardens of the Company of the Statio∣ners shall have Power to accompany the Searchers and other Officers of the Cu∣stoms, and excise within 48. houres after such notice given (Sabbath-Dayes, and dayes of publick Thanksgiving, and of Humiliation being excepted out of the sayd 48. houres) and shall also have Po∣wer to seize on all Seditious, Schismati∣call, and offensive Books, and forthwith take a true Catalogue of such Books, and present it to the Councell of State; and after that carry the said bookes into the Stationers Hall, there to remaine in safe custody, untill farther order taken by the Councell of State; And the said Master, and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers, if they cannot per∣forme the same by themselves, shall have
Power to depute and nominate from time to time, sufficient persons in his, or their stead provided that at all times one of the said Masters or Wardens be pre∣sent at every search: And the said Ma∣ster of the Office, or Registrie for Copies, and the Master, and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers, shall have power to appoint some convenient place where searches shall be made; and if the said Master of the Office, or Registrie for Copies, Master, and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers shall neg∣lect, or omit on their parts any thing, or Duty which they ought to performe herein, they shall incurre such penalty as the Councell of State (upon Informati∣on of such their neglect, or offence shall in their wisdomes thinke fit, be it by fine, or Imprisonment.
XIV. That no person, or persons within the City of London, liberties thereof, or else∣where, shall erect, or cause to be erected any Presse, or Printing house, or shall demise, let, or suffer to be held, or used any House, Vault, Seller, or other roome whatsoever to, or by any persons for a Printing house, or place to print in, un∣lesse he, or they who shall demise, let, or suffer the same to be used, shall first give notice to the Masters, and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers of such Demise, or suffering to work, or print, upon paine of forfeiture of 20l. for every such offence, the one halfe to the use of the Common-wealth, the other to the party discovering the same. XV. And for the better discovering of printing in corners without Licence, the
Master, and Wardens of the Company of Stationers, or such whom they shall depute and trust, shall have Power, and Authority, to search what houses, shops, vaults, and rooms (and at what time they shall thinke fit) especially Printing houses, and to view what is in Printing, and to call for the Licence to see whether it be Licenced or no, and if not, to seize upon so much as is printed, together with the Presses, and all Instruments for print∣ing, and to carry the offenders before the Councell of State, or the L. President thereof for the time being, to take such farther order therein, as they shall in their wisdomes see cause. XVI. That no Joyner, Carpenter, or other person shall make any printing presse, nor Smith shall forge any Iron-worke for a printing presse, nor Founder cast any letters for any person, or persons whatsoever, nor shall any person or per∣sons
bring in from any parts beyond the any letters founded, or cast, nor buy any such letters for printing, unlesse he, they respectively shall first acquaint the said Master, and Wardens, or some of them for whom the said Presse, Iron∣works, or Letters are to be made, forg∣ed, or cast; upon paine of Imprisonment, and such farther penalty as the Councell of State shall think fit. XVII. Whereas the multitude of printers is greatly increased by the late licencious and by-printing of unlicenced pam∣phlets, and other seditious and imper∣tinent books, and papers, to the great scandall of this Common-wealth, and their owne disgrace, ignominy, and want of good, and sufficient employment, and maintenance; for present remedy where∣of, the Printers attempt a cure as bad, or worse then the disease, by petitioning the Honourable Committee for regulating
of Printing, that they would be pleased to report to the High Represen∣tative of this Nation, that the said Prin∣ters, might be made a Fraternity, or Company distinct from the Stationers; against, and in opposition of such their not only unsound, but even dangerous Petition, and desires, I have thought fit to insert these ensuing Reasons, viz. That Printing being of great concern∣ment, and of important consequence, by meanes whereof this Common-wealth may either enjoy benefit, or receive no∣torious detriment; Printers therefore ought to have some carefull, and exact supervisors over them, even as Apothe∣caries (who have the Colledge of Phy∣sitians, and Doctors of Physique over them, not only to prescribe, but also to peruse their Medicines) lest the first poyson the mindes of the People by erro∣nious principles in print; as may the last their bodies, by evil Medicines, and also by self compliance in case they should be a Fraternity, or Company distinct
the Stationers) Print undecently, , and as they please according to ter, and Paper (as do some Printers Amsterdam and Geneva) to the dis∣our of this Common-wealth, dis∣ent to the people, and pre-purposed iment of the Stationers whom they aligne, and inveigh against, and would regard of their present pressures occa∣ned by themselves) undermine by spe∣ous pretences: who notwithstanding chiefly the men which this Common-Wealth can subordinately intrust (in re∣spect of their skill, abilities and long continued industry that waies) to super∣ise the Art and Mistery of Printing, and Printers. And if they should say that e Apothecaries seperated themselves om the Grocers, and became a Com∣pany distinct, and why may not the Printers doe the like? I answere, that the case is not alike, for the Apothecaries sell for the major part compounds for Medicaments, and the Grocers simples for Nutriment, being things of a distinct
nature, and quality; but the Printers, Book-binders, and Stationers make, and sell nothing but a booke, &c. Howev the Apothecaries are subject to the Dctors of Physique as aforesaid, and if the printers should exempt themselves from the Stationers, there would be non found, who might subordinately Regulate, and reforme such abuses, and disorders which those Innovating, an meane undertakers may in all probabi∣lity from time to time commit. XVIII. Moreover it is a Maxime of Policy, as well as of Philosophy, that Frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per paciora; modo ita bene fiat: That thing is in vaine done by more, which may be done by lesse, in case it may be as well accom∣plished: The Regulating of Printing, and Printers, may, not onely for the welfare of the Publique, but even for the good of themselves (if not exorbitant in
their desires) be subbordinately perfor∣l by the Stationers, without any crea∣l or making the Printers a distinct company. If the number of the Prin∣ting houses in London were stinted, and l of them suffered to be without the lties of the Citty of London. If the number of Printing presses were litted. If the number of Apprentices were also lited. If the Master and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers take good l, that Journeymen-Printers (who are l of the Company of Stationers) of lest behaviour, and able in the Art or sterie of Printing, be employed and on worke; and in case such Journey∣men Printers are in want of worke, Ap∣prentices to be removed from such em∣ployments as any Journeymen-Printers good behaviour shall offer themselves o. Lastly, if the Printers themselves will subject to the good Orders and Con∣stitutions
of the Company of Statione concerning all which (as also the pri of usefull Books) I conceive the Mas Wardens, and other able and experieced Stationers, are the fittest men to consulted with. XIX. But it may be greatly suspected, th the Bible, Testament, and some of t Stationers Copies and Originalls, a the Baits which thc Printers wou catch, or compasse: As touching t Bible, I take it to be a book of so hig consequence, wherein the Mysteries Salvation are contained, that it ought be regularly, and exactly, and not commnicatively printed, lest in a Book of so hig importance, not onely dangerous Error but even pernicious Heresies be imprinte and propagated, and the Book it self be als undecently Printed in Letter, and Paper And for as much as Propriety (rightly considered is) Relatio Legalis cujuslibet
Temporale, A legall Relation of ny one to a Temporall good; I con∣ive the sole Printing of the Bible, and estament, with Power of Restraint in o∣thers, to be of Right the Propriety of one MATHEW BARKER, Cittizen and Stationer of LONDON, in Re∣gard that his Father paid for the Amen∣ed or Corrected Translation of the Bible 00.l. by reason whereof the Transla∣ted Copy did of right belong to him, and his Assignes; yet for the better carrying n of so Important a Work, and the Re∣gulating of an Impression of so great con∣ernment, in the fourteenth yeare of ing James his Reigne, he continued Letters Patents granted to Robert his Sonne; since when in the yeare of our Lord 1635. for the farther carrying on, & Regulating of the said Important Im∣pression, there hath beene payed by Ma∣thew Barker aforesaid 600 l. for a Rever∣sionary Patent. If it be said, that Mathew Barker his Father made, or might have made bene∣fit
enough by his sole Impression of the Bible, &c. For the costs, and charges which he was at for the amended, or corrected Translation thereof, so that Mathew Barker himself neede not have a farther benefit thereby: I answere, so doth every one of the Stationers who purcha∣seth a Copy, or Copies make benefit enough thereby, and yet he enjoyeth such Copy, or Copies for himself, and his Assignes, and so ought to do, or else any other might invade his Right: so also every one who purchaseth Land at the valuation of 18. or 20. yeares Reve∣new, be it more, or lesse; make at or a∣bout the determination of such time suf∣ficient benefit for his purchase, yet there is no Law, nor any reason that himself, his Heires, or Assignes should be exclu∣ded, or debarred of the Remainder, &c. That were to Nul all Law, violate all Right. And certainely according to e∣quity (if not Law) Mathew Barker ought to succeede his Father in the sole printing of the Bible, &c. both in regard of his
thers costs & charges; as also i respect his owne Patent Purchased dearely e∣ough, in regard it was for Reversion. But it may be some will say, that di∣rs may make benefit by Printing of the ble, and Testament, whereas if Mathew rker enjoy the sole Printing thereof, himself will also enjoy the sole benefit thereby for him, or his Assignes: to the which I answere, the same may be obje∣cted against Miles Flesher, and his Part∣ners, sole Printers of all Law-Books a∣gainst John Fl sole Printer of all Acts for this present Parliament; against Dugard sole Printer for the Coun∣cell of State, against Richard Cotes, sole ter of all Acts, Proclamations, and her matters for the City of London▪ a∣gainst the University-Printers of Oxford, and Cambridge, who enjoy also the prin∣ting of the Bible by Patent; against the Company of the Stationers them∣selves who enjoy by Patent four severall Books, viz. The Psalter, Psalmes, Primmer, and Almanack; yea this may
be objected against very many Statio∣nr, and some Printers, who notwith∣standing ought not thereupon to be de∣prived, or debarred of their rights; for it is, and ought to be held a Maxime in Law, and Equity, as in Divinity, that not any shall  had, that good may cme there∣of, and consequently not to violate any one of his Propriety, or right, that thereby some or any benefit may accrew to others: moreover all well Regulated Politics (especially Republiques) doe con the partick Right of every Per∣s Individually, so farre at such Right ppeseth not the Generall Good, and there∣by preserve the Generall Good, without vi∣ing ones particular Right unjustly, indirectly, according to which Rule, neither Mathew Barker, nor other the Stationer, or Printers nominated ought to be debarred, or deprived any their Original, or Copies. If any one should object (as lately a Stationer did unto my selfe) that the Bible cannot properly be called a Copy,
cause it i the written Word of God: hough, such objection be frivolous, such I answers, that the severall nslations thereof are properly copies, the singing, or Mered Psalmes belonging to the Company of the aforesaid, Ers his Latine Translation of the Testament, and many others of the like nature. XX. Peradventuee some greedy, and it may be needy Printers, and Stationers, will not be satisfied with Reason, unlesse they may against reasonable equity, in∣wade other mens Proprieties, and Rights. ut I hope the High Representative of this Nation, at what time they shall in their wisdomes thinke fit to passe an Act, or Acts for the Regulating of Printing, will therein by expresse Provisoes con∣firm, and ratifie not onely the propriety of Mathew Barker aforesaid, for him, and his Assignes, but all such other Propriety
and Proprieties which belong to the Company of the Stationers, to every free Stationer respectively; whereby the Prudent care of the Parliament will sup∣presse Licencious Incroachments upon many considerable Copies, and avoyd therein future debate and controversy. WILLIAM BALL.
rtaine Additionall Answers to such Objections, as may perad∣venture be made. I. IF it should be said that the Penalties which I have proposed are too great, and also that Penalty left to discr∣, in some cases may seeme Rigor. swer, that Abuses are seldome re∣formed without great Penalties; and in as great Detriment may ensue to Common-wealth by scandalous, and Printing, as may by counter∣it and debased Coyning, The Penal∣ty for the one, ought in some measure to aequalize the Penalty of the other: And Penalty in some cases left to the Discre∣tion of grave Personages is not Rigor, Terror, which may be regu∣ by Naturall Equity.
II. If it should be said that the Commissi∣oners of the Great Seale, Judges of the Law, Secratary of State, and some o∣thers whom I have nominated for Li∣cencing of Bookes, may in Regard of their great, and weighty Affaires want and  Books, &c. I answer, that every one of the said Persons and  who shall have po∣wer to  may have power to en∣ and depute  provided themselves will be responsible for the which such  shall Commit; and tha such Deputie set their owne and the  for whom they such Bookes▪ &c. which they shall Licence. III. it should be said, That requiring double Copies, and an Office for Regi∣stry
thereof would be vexatious, &c. I , that the abuses to Licensers, as to Authors have been so great, (as selfe, amongst others can testifie in a Booke of mine owne) that no safer can be found; moreover why should those things which appertaine to the be kept upon Record, as are many that appertaine meerely to Lively∣od▪ and whether men write for the Glory of Almighty God, and good of thers (which ought to be the chiefe ) or the profit of themselves, let them take so much paines as to write the subject twice, or otherwise spare their paines for once. And if it should be said, that by that meanes fewer bookes will me into the Presse, I answer, not the merous multitude of Bookes, but the solid validity of them will benefit a Common-wealth. William Ball.
