B6252 12389081 60949
THE COMPLEAT Ship-Wright. Plainly and Demonstratively Teaching the Proportions used by Experi∣enced Ship-Wrights, according to their Custome of Building; both Geome∣trically and Arithmetically performed. To which is added, Certain Propositions in Geometry, the use of a Diagonall SCALE, to draw a Draught, with the Making, Graduating, or Marking of a Bend of Moulds, and ordering of the same. The Extra∣ction of the Square Root, with a Table of Squares. Also, a way of Rowing of Ships, by heaving at the Capstane, usefull in any Ship becalm'd; with other things usefull in that ART. By EDMUND BUSHNELL Ship-Wright. LONDON, Printed by W. Leybourn for George Hurlock, and are to be sold at his Shop at Magnus Church corner in Thames-Street, neer London-Bridge, 1664.
TO THE READER. Friendly Reader, THe Matter contained in this Treatise, is written onely for the good and profit of my Countrymen, who are still in that capacity that once I my self was; that is, igno∣rant of what they should know in their Trades, and desire Instruction; not that I presume to teach those long experienced Ship-Wrights, whose actions hath declared their Abilities to the whole World, in their Building of so Gallant, and Serviceable a Fleet of Ships, as at present his Majesty, the King of England, is furnished withall, no King having the like, either for Offence, or Defence: yet their knowledge they desire to keep to themselves, or at least among so small a number as they can; for although some of them have many Servants, and by Indenture
(I suppose) bound to Teach them all alike the same Art and Mystery that he himself useth; Yet it may be he may Teach some one, and the rest must be kept ignorant, so that those Ship Wrights, although bred by such knowing Men, yet they are able to teach their Servants nothing, more then to Hew, or Dub, to Fay a Piece when it is Moulded to his place assigned, or the like: but if occasion require, that the greatest part of these Men, by be∣ing Carpenters of Ships, or the like, may be remo∣ved from England to Virginia, or New-England, or the like Countryes, where Timber is plenty for their use, yet through their ignorance, they durst not undertake such a Work: For their sakes I have written this Book, wherein the Reader shall finde instructions sufficient for Moulding of any Ship, or Vessell whatever, with the Masting of them, drawing of Draughts, and all in a very plain and exact Method, which I am confident will be un∣derstood by the meanest capacities, if they can but read English, and have the benefit of a little A∣rithmetick as Adition, Substraction, Multiplica∣tion, Division: be diligent, and I shall be thereby incouraged, if need be, to help thee farther in the Art. Farewell, Thy Friend, Edmund Bushnell.
THE CONTENTS. Ch. I. OF Geometricall Problemes Page 1 Ch. II Of your SCALE Page 4 Ch. III Concerning the drawing your Draught upon Paper Page 6 Ch. IV. Shewing, how to sweep out the Bend of Moulds upon a Flat Page 9 Ch. V. The Description of the Rising Lines aftward on, and forward on; with the Narrowing Lines, and Lines of Breadth: As also the Narrowing of Lines at the top of the Timbers Page 12 Ch. VI. Shewing the Making and graduating, or marking of the Bend of Molds Page 15 Ch. VII. Arithmetically shewing how to frame the body of a Ship by Segments of Circles: being a true way to exa∣mine the truth of a Bow Page 22 Ch. VIII. How to Extract the Square Rooot Page 31 Ch. IX. A Description of the Table of Squares Page 39 Ch. X. Shewing, how to hang a rising line by severall sweeps, to make it rounder aftward, then at the beginning of of the same Page 53
Ch. XI. Concerning Measuring of Ships Page 59 Ch. XII. Concerning the Masts of Ships Page 62 Ch. XIII. Concerning Rowing of Ships, when they are be∣calmed. Page 65 Advertisement. IF any Gentleman, studious in the Mathema∣ticks, have, or shall have occasion for In∣struments thereunto belonging, they may be furnished with all sorts, usefull both for Sea or Land, either in Brass, or Wood, by Wal∣ter Hayes, at the Cross-Daggers in Moore-Fields, next door to the Popes-Head Tavern; where they may have all sorts of Maps, Globes, and Mathematicall Paper, Carpenters Rules, Post and Pocket-Dyalls for any Latitude, Steel Let∣ters, Figures, Signes, Planets, or Aspects, at rea∣sonable Rates. ERRATA. PAge 7, Line 9, Read Halses 8 16 come not fowl 8 21 faied 11 2 at f or G 12 23 afore 13 2 afore 13 19 aftward 14 15 L o 14 28 / 15 25 dele off 16 7 Sirmarks 18 none, that 18 11 at the top 19 2 stick 20 29 you hw to 22 5 make a 23 3 & 5 3/5 54 16 12 foot 57 1 two last numbers.
Books Printed and Sold by George Hurlock, at Mag∣nus Church-Corner in Thames-Street, neer London Bridge. SEamans Kalender, or Ephimerides of the Sun, Moon, and certain of the most notable fixed Stars, &c. Norwoods Doctrine of Triangles, with Logarithmes, lately printed, ex∣actly corrected, and much inlarged by the Author himself. Norwoods Epi∣tomy, applyed to plain and Mercators sailing Norwoods Sea mans Practice, containing a Fundamentall Probleme in Navigation, experimentally verified. Safeguard of Saylors, or Great Rutter, by Ro. Norman. Sea mans secrets. A Table of Gauging all manner of Vessels, by Jo. Goodwin. Path-way to per∣fect sailing, by Richard Poltar▪ Pitiscus his Doctrine of Triangles, with Canons. Navigator by Cap. Charles Saltonstal, newly printed, with additions, shewing the Deceipts of the plain Charts used in our time, and a way to prove the projection of any Plain Chart. Dary's description and use of a Vniversall Quadrant. Seamans Dictionary, or the Exposition and Demonstration of all the parts and things belonging to a ship▪ together with an Explanation of all the Termes and Phrases used in the practique part of Navigation, by Sir Hen∣ry Manwarring. Exact Tables of Naturall and Artificial Sincs, Tangents, Secants and Lo∣garithms, and an Institution Mathematicall, containing their constructions and use in the solution of all Triangles Plain and Spherical, and the application thereof in Astronomy, Dialling, and Navigation. Seamans Glass, now newly published, with the addition of many propositi∣ons in Navigation, Astronomy, and Dialling, not before printed. The Compleat Canoneer, shewing the principles and grounds of the Art of Gunnery, as also several Fire-Works for Sea and Land. The Advancement of the Art of Navigation, or Sea-mans Canon of Tri∣angles, shewing by a new Canon of Sines, Tangents, and Secants, how to re∣solve all Cases of right lined Triangles, onely by looking into the Tables, without any Calculation. Particularly applyed to all the three kindes of Say∣ling, viz. by the Plain Chart, Mercators Chart, by a Great Circle; and to the Art of Surveying. Trigonometria Brittannica, or the Doctrine of Triangles, in folio, exhibiting the Logarithms of all numbers, from one to a hundred thousand, and the Sines and Tangents to the hundred part of a Degree, with Mr. Gellibrands Do∣ctrine of Triangles, faithfully translated from the Latin Copy. The Sector on a Quadrant, containing the Description and use of three
general Quadrants, accommodated for the ready finding the Hour and Azi∣muth universally in the equal Limbe. The Compleat Modellist, shewing how to raise the Model of any Ship or Vessel, either in proportion, or out of proportion▪ and to find the length and bigoss of every Rope, in all Vessels exactly, with the weight of their An∣chors and Cables. There is a new Book▪ called the Pilots Sea-Mirror, which is a Compendium of the largest Wagoner, or the lightning Sea-Collumbe; Containing all Di∣stances or thwart Courses of the Eastern, Northern, and Western Navigations, with a general Tide Table, for every day, and the Change and Full of the Moon exactly for eight years, also Courses and Distances throughout the Straights. Printed for George Hurlock, at Magnus Church Corner, by London Bridge. The Saints Anchor-hold in all stormes and Tempests, Published for the support and comfort of Gods people in all times of Trial, by John Davenport Pastor of the Church in New-Haven in New-Ingland. There will shortly be made publick a Book, Intituled, The Mariners Compass Rectifled, containing, First, a Table shewing the hour of the day, the Sun be∣ing upon any point of the Compass. Secondly, Tables of the Suns rising and setting. Thirdly, Tables shewing the points of the Compass, that the Sun and Stars rise and set with. Fourthly, Tables of Amplitudes; all which Tables are Calculated from the Equinoctial, to 60 degrees of Latitude, with Tables of Latitudes and Longitudes, after a new order, with the description and use of all those Instruments that are in use in the Art of Navigation, either for Operation or Observation.
THE COMPLEAT Ship-wright. CHAP. 1. Of Geometricall Problemes. BEfore we proceed to draw the Draught of any Ship or Vessel, it will be necessary to be acquainted with some terms in Geometry: as to know what a Point and a Line mean∣eth, which every Book treating of Geome∣try plainly teacheth, and therefore we shall passe that by, supposing that none will endeavour to study the Art of a Ship-wright, that is ignorant of these things; and therefore leaving these Definitions, I will proceed to some Geometrical Problemes necessary to this Art.
PROB. 1. How to draw a Parallel Line. PArallel lines are such lines as are equidistant one from another in all parts, and are thus drawn. Draw a line of what length you please, (according to your occasion) as the line A B, then open the com∣passes to what distance you pleas, or as your occasions require, and set one foot of the compasses▪ towards one end of the given line, as at A, with the other foot make a piece of an arch of a circle, over or under the given line, as the arch C, keeping the compasses then at the same distance, make such another arch towards the other end of the line, setting one foot in B, and with the other describe the arch D, then laying a Ruler to the outside of these two arches, so that it may exactly touch them, draw the line C D, which will be parallel to the given line A B, or equidistant, for so signifieth the word Parallel, to be of e∣qual distance. PROBL. 2. How to erect a Perpendicular, from a point in a right line given. LEt there be a point given in the line A B, as the point C, whereon to raise a perpendicular. Set one foot of the compasses in the given point C, and open them to what distance you please, as to the point E, make a little mark at E, and keeping the compasses at the
same distance, turn them about, and make a mark at the point F, in the line A B: Then remove the compasses to one of those marks at E or F, and seting one foot fast therein, as at the point F, open the other foot wider, and therewith draw a small arch over the point C, as the arch D, then keeping the compasses at the same distance, remove them to E, and seting one foot in E, with the other foot draw another little arch, so as to crosse the former arch in the point D, through the crossing of these two arches A D, draw a line to the given point C, as the line D C, which shall be perpendicular to the line A B. Diverse other wayes there are to raise a perpendicular, which I shall leave to the farther practice of such as desire diversity of wayes, and proceed to the rai∣sing of a Perpendicular on the end of a line. PROBL. 3. To raise a Perpendicular on the end of a line. DRaw a line at pleasure, or according to your worke, as the line A B: On the end thereof as at B, set one foot of the Compasses, and open them to what widenesse you please, as to C, and keeping fast one foot at B, pitch one foot by adventure in C, then keeping one foot of the compasses in C, and at the same distance, remove the foot that was in B, to the point D in the line A B: then (keeping the com∣passes stil at the same distance) lay a ruler to the points D and
C, & with your compasses set off the distance from C to E: Lastly, draw the line E B, which will be perpendicular or square to the end of the given line A B. There are other wayes to effect this, which I shall leave to farther practice of the learner, this being the properest for our purpose. PROB. 4. From a Point given, to let fall a Perpendicular upon a Line given. FRom the point C, let it be required to let fall a perpen∣dicular upon the line A B, proceed thus: Fix one foot of the compasses in the point C, and open them to a greater distance then just to the line A B, and make with the same extent the two marks E and F, in the given line A B, then divide the distance betweene the two points E and F into two equall parts in the point D, then lay a Ruler to the given point C, and to the point D, and draw the line C D, which will be perpendicular to the given line A B. CHAP. II. Of your SCALE. BEing perfect in the raising and letting fall of perpen∣diculars, and in the drawing of Parallel lines, you may proceed to draught: but first I will unfold unto
you the use of a Diagonall Scale of Inches and Feet, whose use is to represent a foot measure, or a Rule so small, that a Ship of 100 foot by the Keel, may be demon∣strated on a common sheet of pa∣per, really and truly to be so ma∣ny foot long, and so many foot broad, of such a depth, and of such a height between the Decks. And therein, the first thing to be considered is, the length of the platform, and of the Vessel you intend to demonstrate, to the end you may make your Scale as large as you can, because the lar∣ger the Scale is, the larger will the draught be, and so the measure of the demonstration will be the larger, and more easie to unfold. The Scale adjoyning consisteth (as you see) of 12 feet in all, 11 thereof are marked with figures downwards, beginning at 1, 2, 3, 4 and so to 11: the first at the top is sub-divided into inches by di∣agonal lines, as the distance be∣tween the first line of the Scale and the first diagonal line is one inch, the second is 2, and the third 3 inches, and so to Six. The way to demonstrate the Scale, you see, is very easie: Draw Seven lines parallel to each other, and of what length you please, to retain what number of Feet you please, then beginning at the top, set off with the compasses
the length of your Feet both allow and aloft, then draw lines thwart the parallel lines, to every foot of the Scale, and set numbers to them, beginning at the second foot 1, and to the third 2, to the fourth 3, and so forward, leav∣ing the first Foot to be divided into Inches by the Diago∣nall lines, as you see in the foregoing Scale. CHAP. III. Concerning the drawing your Draught upon Paper. HAving fitted your Scale ready, draw a line to repre∣sent the Keele of the Ship, as you see in the draught following of 60 foot long by the Keele, and 20 foot broad: the streight line that representeth the Keele is marked with A B. Then draw a line underneath of equall length to signifie the bottome of the Keele. Then next you may proceed to the Stern-post, as the line A C will sig∣nifie the foreside or the inside thereof, racking the one quarter of his length aft, and for the length of the Stern-post it must be directed to the built of the Ship, as whether she be to be a deep Ship or a shallow Ship, so that the draught of the water ought to be respected first, and then the lying of the Ports for the convenience of Ordnance, for that the upper transome of the Buttock, commonly is just under the Gun-Room ports, to the upper edge of the said transome we understand the length of the Stern-post, although if the Stern-post were continued to the height of the Tiller, and another Transome fard there for the Tiller to run on, it would steady the quarters of the Vessel very much, and do good service.
The Stern-post being drawn, we may proceed to draw the Stem, which in the following Draught is not so much racked as was the old proportion of England, which was the whole breadth of the Ship, for then it should be 20 foot, but it is no more then 15 foot, just ¾ of the breadth, for too much racke with the Stem doth a great deale of damage to any Ship, if we consider that in this small Vessel, had we given 5 foot more Racke, all the weight of the Ships Head, and Boltspreet, Foremast, Manger, Halsps, Brest-hooks aloft, had been so much farther forward, where there would have been want of Bodie to lift it, so that it must of neces∣sity be detriment to the Vessel when she saileth against a head sea, and a great strain to her. Now it will be very good to spend as much of this racke as we can under the water, for it will help the Ship to keepe a good Winde, by giving her something more Body in the water. Next draw the Water-line, in the following draught sig∣nified by the pricked line; it is drawn to 9 foot height afore, and to 10 foot height abaft from the upper edge of the Keele, and higher abaft then afore, for the most Ships saile by the Sterne, and also for that the Guns should lie something higher abaft then afore from the water. Then proceed to hanging of the Waals, and here you see the lower Waalle drawne from the head of the Sterne-post, to signifie that it should lie against the end of the Transome, that the Transome Knees might be bolted to the Waals without board to one foot and an halfe under the Water∣line, a little before the middle of the Water line, and at 9 foot high on the Stem, and the next Waale parallel to the lower Waale, one foot and an half asunder, so that the upper Waale will lie just at the waters edge, in the mid-ships, the upper edge of the Gun-deck will lie one foot aboye the water line abaft, and halfe a foot above water on the Stem;
so then letting the lower sell of the Ports be two foot from the Gun-decks▪ the lower edge of the Ports wil be three foot from the water abaft, and two foot and an halfe afore, in the middle of the Gun-deck 2 foot 9 inches, sufficient for so small a Vessel, a greater Vessel would require to have the Guns something farther from the water, then if another Waale be required, first set off the Ports in their places, that the Waale may ly above the Ports, or else he would be cut with the ports in pieces, the upper Deck with height respecting the bignesse of the Ship, having respect to not o∣ver building small Ships, to damage their bearing of Sail. Then for the Head, the length of the Knee would be two thirds of the breadth, so then the Knee of the Head in this Draught will be 12 foot 8 inches long, and for his place, as low as conveniently he can, provided that the Rails of the Head, fall not fowl of the hashols, because that in placing of the Knee low, giveth room to round the Head, and steeve it to content: The place of the Knee will be at, or very neer, the upper Waal, the upper edge of the Knee against the upper edge of the uper harping, which will be very well for the lower Cheeks of the head to be faced against, for by that means they wil be clear of any Seame to avoid Leak∣ings, and will very well bolt the end of the harping, if a Brest-hook be fastned also within board against them, will very well fasten all together. Then for the steeving of him, and rounding the Knee, a regard must be had to the lying of the Boltspreet, leaving room enough for the Lyon and Scrowl under the Boltsprit. Then▪ for the rounding of the Rails, round them most at the after ends. For the heights between Decks and Steeridge, Cabine, Fore-Castle, those heights are commonly mentioned in contract by the Master or Owners building.
Place this Draught at Page 8 cross-section of a ship's hull
CHAP. IV. Shewing, how to sweepe out the Bend of Moulds upon a Flat. FIrst, draw a line, as the line AB, then in the mid∣dle thereof, as at the point C, raise a perpendi∣cular, as is the line CM, perpendicular to the line AB; then set off the halfe breadth, on either side, at the Points AB, and draw the two lines IA, and KB, parallels to CD, signifying the breadth of the Vessell 20 foot; then draw the two lines EF, and HG, signifying the breadth of the Floare thwart Ships, 8 Foot, more then one third part of the breadth, which was formerly an old Proportion; so that according to that it should have been but 6 Foot 8 Inches. Herein any may do as they please, give more or less; my judgment is, rather more then less: for, that it maketh a Vessell to carry more in Burden, and I con∣ceive it may, if it be well ended forward, it will not damage the Sayling: I also think, it doth stiffen a Ves∣sell on this account. Our English Vessells have been used to have their breadth lying at the height of the Halfe Breadth, then observing 1/3 breadth for the length of the Floare Thwart Ships, it maketh the Vessells Bo∣dy to be very neare a Circle, as is a Cask, which cau∣seth such Vessells to be easie to slew in the Water; yet I would not exceed neither, or run into extreams here∣in, but if I were to make a Vessell stiff, I would that
the Halfe Breadth be more then the draught of Water, which causeth that the Body be stronger in the Wa∣ter, and will not Slew so easily. Now to sweep out the Sides under Water, I draw the Diagonall lines DA, and DB; then I divide the Diagonall lines into 9 parts, and set off 2 of them from the Corners A and B, to the points e, then I set off the Dead Rising, which is 4 Inches, one Inch to a Foot, for halfe the breadth represented in the Figure above, by the little line paral∣lel to FG: from which Dead Rising, take with the Compasses the Distance that will draw a piece of an Arch from  to , and so as one foot of the Compas∣ses
stand in the line EF, and exactly touch the points at the Dead-Rising, at f or g, and touch also the points e, over which point falls at ⊙, in EF, or ⊙ in HG, wherewith I describe the Arch e F, or e G, which is by the Scale in the Draught 4 Foot 8 Inches: then for the other part of the Side upwards, seek for a Point in the breadth line IK, at which, if one foot of the Compasses be set, and the other foot opened to the Extreame Breadth, will also draw, or signifie an Arch to meet with the other Lower Arch, on the Diagonall line at e, which is at the points ⊙ and ⊙; thus the point ⊙, between D and K, neere H, Sweepeth the contrary Side I e, and so the point ⊙, between DI, neere E, Sweepeth the contrary side at K, extend the same Sweepe also above the Breadth line above Wa∣ter 3 or 4 Foot, the length of this Sweepe is 12 Foot 9 Inches: then set off the Tumbling Home, at the Height of the two first Haanses, at the Maine Mast and Foarcastle, 2 foot of a side; then draw a line from the said 2 Foot of Narrowing, at the points o v, till it break off on the back of the Sweep, on either side. This kinde of Demonstration I conceive most suitable to our following discourse of Arithmeticall Work, I could have cited other wayes, but I Judge this way suffici∣ent.
CHAP. V. The Description of the Rising Lines aftward on, and forward on; with the Narrowing Lines, and Lines of Breadth: As al∣so the Narrowing Lines at the top of the Timbers. DRaw a Hanging line on the Draught, from the Keele, from the middle of the Keele to the height of the Water line, on the Post which will be the Rising line, as the line DE; this line DE is supposed to be sweept, or drawn by a Semidiameter of a Circle, extended on a Perpendicular raised at the point E, for if it be shorter then such a Semidiameter of the true Cir∣cle, it will make a fuller line then it should be, and so must not be so long, or else it will make a breach at the beginning of the line; this, if the Centre be supposed to be Abaft such a Perpendicular, that should draw a Rising line Abaft, I say, that it will shorten the Rising line, and make it fuller then it should be; or then if it be farther forward, it will be straighter then a Circle, and also be a breach at the beginning of the Rising line; therefore it should be a Circle, I say, whose Semidiame∣ter will be on the Perpendicular line, at the beginning of any such Rising line, on the Heele, either Afoare, or
Abaft, and the like ought to be for all other crooked lines, as the narrowing lines Abaft, or Afoare, or at the Narrowing of the Floare, or other Circular lines, as Hanging of Waals, and the like; the way whereof I shall describe, to finde the lengths of all such Sweeps by Arithmetick; as also the true Rising, Narrowing of any Timber, according to exact peeces of Circles, very usefull for the setting of Bows, to trie whether they hang to a true Sweepe or no: I shall demonstrate it, I say, in the following discourse, and in this place end what I intend to say. For Demonstration then, At ¾ of the Keele forward I draw a Rising line forward to the height of the Water line, forward on the Stemm, as you see the line op; and the little line, between these two lines, parallel to the inside of the Keele, marked Eo, is the dead rising 4 inches high, as in the bend of Moulds it is parallel to FG, the height of the breadth from the Mid-Ship forward is the lower Edge of the upper Waale; but afterward on it is the pricked line, between the Water line and the lower Waale, on the Post, which runneth forward to the edge of the Waale, and hath Figures set to it, to signifie the places of the Timbers marked 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, to 15; as you see answers to the Figures on the Keele: and the Letters set to forward on, signifie the places of the Timbers forward, marked ABCD to L, in the middle of the Vessel: the places marked with a Cipher signifie the Flats, which have onely Dead rising, although they ought to have, some of them, something more Dead rising then each other; and those that have least, to be placed in the middle of the rest, that so there be no Clings in the Buldge, but that it have also a little Hang∣ing
in it, it will seeme the fairer: Then I draw a straight line, parallel to the bottome of the Keele, as is the line FG, parallel to the line AB, the Keele, and distant 10 foot by the Scale, which is the halfe breadth of the Vessell; for this line signifieth a line stretched from the middle of the Sterne-Post to the middle of the Stem, called by Ship-wrightes, a Ram-line: Parallel to this Middle line I draw another line straight, marked nm, and is 4 foot asunder from the Middle line, to signifie the halfe length of the Floare thwartships, as in the Bend of Moulds EF is distant from DC 4 Foote: then I draw a Crooked line Abaft, within this line nm, to signifie the narrowing of the Floare, to bring, or forme the Vessels way Abast, as you see the line ik; Abaft and Afoare it is represented by the line lo: then here in this Draught I draw a Sweepe, or a piece of a Circle, from the point G, the marke of the Timber G, on the Keele, to the halfe breadth of the Stemm, to the point G on the Stemm, signifying the Sweep of the Harping, and is Sweept by the breadth of the Ves∣sell 20 Foot; the piece of the Pricked Circle Abaft at the Starne, which is drawn by a Centre on the line FG, is the length of the Transom thwart the Starne, as is the Arch FS, the length whereof is 8 Foot, which doubled is 16 Foot, for the whole length: which is ⅘ of the breadth 20 Foot, the length of the Sweepe that sweepeth it is the length of the Starnpost to the bot∣tome of the Keele 14 Foot ⅓, then the Crooked line, from the end of the Transom, or from the point S, and toucheth the Keele at the point p: this Arch Sp, is the narrowing line Abaft at the breadth, and the Crooked pricked line within the Keele, marked with TR, is a
Rising line, to order a hollow Moulde by the Timbers, are placed at 2 Foot Timber and Roome, as you may see by the Scale, the line drawne from the Poope to the Foar-Castle, marked by the letters VW, is a line signifying the breadth of the Vessell, at the top of the side, from the top of the Poope to the Fore-Ca∣stle, the top of the Poop is in breadth 10 Foot, halfe the breadth at the beame; the use of this line is in ordering of the Moulds, to stedy the Head of the Top-Timber Mould, to find his breadth aloft. CHAP. VI. Shewing the Making and gradua∣ting, or marking of the Bend of Molds. REpaire to some House that hath some Roome or other broad enough to demonstrate the breadth of the Vessell, and height enough for the top of the Poope in the length of the Roome; or else if you cannot finde such a Roome convenient, lay boards together, or planks, that may be large enough for your business, as in the following Scheame you see; First, a long square made for the breadth of the Vessell, as in the following Figure IABK: then make the Moulds by their Sweepes, and make Sirmarks to them for the laying of them together in their true places, off first the Mould, for the Floare being made, you may make a Sirmarke by the line EF, on the head of the
Floare Mould, and another on the foot of the Navill Timber Mould, at the same place, to signifie, that those two marks put together, they are in their true places, and will compare so when any Timbers are Molded by them: those Sirmarks must also be marked off on the Timbers, and so in putting the Timbers up in the frame, a regard being had to compare Sirmarks with Hir∣marks, each Timber will finde his own place, and come to his own breadth, and give the Vessell that forme as∣signed her by your Draught, if it be wrought by it, and so for all the other Moulds. In making your Moulds, that they may be smaller and smaller upwards, and not all of a bigness, you may measure the depth of the Side in the Mid Ships Cir∣cular, as it goeth from the Keele to the top of the Side, as here the Side, as it Roundeth, is 26 foot, and in depth at the Rounheads, or at the end of the Floare, is one Foot, as m m; and at the other end, at the head of the Timber is but halfe a Foot, as at n n, so then draw∣ing two lines, as the lines n m, represents the diminish∣ing of the Moulds in thickness upwards, as those two lines representeth; as if you would finde the thickness of the Timbers at the breadth, take your 2 Foot Rule, and measure the length from the end of the Floare at the point F to I, at the breadth in the crooked body, and it is 11 Foot 9 Inches, signified at the Sirmarks there, those two lines shew the thickness to be 9 Inches; and so thick ought the Moulds to be at the breadth of the Vessell. By this Proportion the Moulds being made and Sir∣marked to the body of the Vessell, and that they must be marked, or ordered, to finde the decrease of her bulks
body in the Midships, and to come to her way Abast, that the Water may pass to her Rudder to make her Stere, repaire to the Draught, and first set off her Risings thus; Example, We will begin at Timber 3 Abast, and his Rising is 7 inches: therefore draw a line pa∣rallel
to the Base, or Ground line F G, as the line 3 3; 7▪ Inches, from it then take the narrowing of the Floare with the Compasses off 3 also, and it is here 4 Inches, shewed by the little Spot, or Cross, in the Rising line 3 3, then seeking for the Narrowing at the breadth for Timber 3, there is none that sheweth that she keep∣eth the same breadth at 3 still, 20 Foot, but seek for the height of the breadth, and it will lie higher at 3, then in the Midships, by 6 Inches, signified by the little marke in the line A I, a little above I, at the point 3; then for the breadth at top of the Side, finde that at the point 3, in the line V W, drawn to that end, and you will finde that it is narrower there by 2 Foot 7 Inches, then at the breadth, or Tumbleth Home, so much at the height, 24 Foot signified by an Occult dark line, drawn from the top of the Poope to the Foarcastle, to order▪ the height of the Head of the Toptimber Mould, an∣swering to the Narrowing of the same, at the line V W; and this point for 3 falls at the little Cross Marke 3, in the upper part of the figure: For the next Example we will set off on our Platforme the rising narrowings of Timber 6, and 6 risth from the Keele 1 foot 7 inches, as you see the parallel▪ line 6 6 for breadth, the same still at the breadth, but the height of the breadth is high∣er by one foot, then at the Midship, signified by the mark at 6, in the line; at the breadth, the Tumbling home, 1 foot▪ 7 inches and a halfe, at the height of 25 foot 4 inchos, at the point 6, and so proceed of all the rest, be∣ginning at one till you come aft▪ to the fashion Pieces; when you have set off all the heights of Risings, nar∣rowings of the Floare, narrowings of the Breadth, height of the Breadth, at the Breadth of the Vessel,
and also of the Head of the Toptimber: Then at each point of the Floare, still in a Naile, or a Gimblet, or some such thing, as suppose we begin here at 3, stick one in the Midship line at 3, another in the little Cross, at the narrowing of the Floare at 3; another at the height of the Breadth at 3; another at the little cross, at the head of the Toptimber for 3; then if you have a lower Futtocke Mould, and an upper futtocke Mould, otherwise a navell Timber Mould, and a futtocke Mould, naile them together with small Nailes, and lay the Sirmarks of the floare Mould, and futtock Mould to the Gimblet that sticketh at the shortning of the floare; for by this meanes the floare Mould and futtock Mould is hauled downward: then make a mark at the cross, in the Midship line C D, setting to the marke of 3 for Timber 3, which will be the shortning of the Floare; then be sure the Navell Timber Moulds touch the Gimblet at the breadth, and at the narrowing of the floare, keeping the lower Sirmark thereto; and make a marke on the Futtocke Mould, at the upper Gimblet, for the rising alow lifteth up the Moulds high∣er; and if there be any Crossing at the foot of the Navell Timber, and Head of the Floare Mould, marke it, and set to the marke 3 to it, that you may know to lay them together again, and keeping the Futtocke Mould fast, lay to the Toptimber Moulde the breadth Sirmarke of the Toptimber Moulde, to the Gimblet at the breadth, so have you no more Sirmarkes on the Toptimber Moulde but one, and guide the head of him till a line stretched from the Cross, at the head of the Toptimber, till it compareth with the right part of the Toptimber Mould, then regard the Crossing of the
foot of the Toptimber Mould, and the back of the futtocke, and marke it, setting to the proper Marke 3 to it, that laying those markes together again, they may finde their own places again, so having finished for this Roome 3, take up the Moulds, and remove the Gimblets to the next, as to 6, here in our Example, and stick the Gimblets at all the markes of 6, then lay down the Mouldes again, laying down the floare Moulde to the Sirmarke of 6, on the narrowing of 6, and to the Gimblet, sticking on the Midship line of D C, and right on the same line, at the crossing, make a marke on the floare Mould, which will be the nar∣rowing of the floare; then lay down the futtocke Mould, the Sirmarke on the foot to the Gimblet, on the narrowing of the floare, and keeping the Mold to touch the Gimblets at both places, make a marke for the breadth Sirmarke at 6, on the futtoke Mould, and set to 6; then lay down the Toptimber Mould, the breadth Sirmarke thereof to the Gimblet, sticking at the height of the breadth, that the backside of the up∣er end may randge faire, by a right line from the cross at the uper end of the Toptimber at 6, by the back of the Toptimber Mould, a straight line may compare therewith▪ then keeping fast the Mouldes so till you have marked the crossing of the foot of the Toptim∣ber Mould, by the back of the futtocke, marke it on the foot of the Toptimber Mould, and set to the marke of 6, so that when you are in any other place, as in the Woods a hewing of a Frame, where you to every place his Timber, you may be able to lay your Moulde together, and moulde it according to your Draught: We will lay down the taking of one bend of Timbers
moreafte, where the breadth is narrowed, as at Tim∣ber 13, take his rising off, and measure it by the Scale, and it will be 6 foot 8 inches, which set off on your Plat-forme, and draw thereto a Parallel line, to the Ground line A B, as is the line 13 13, then take off the narrowing of the floare, as at 13, it is 2 foot 2 in∣ches; set that off on the line 13, from the line E F, as at the little cross thereon, then take off the narrowing of the Breadth at 13, and it will be 8 inches; draw therewith a little parallel line, parallel to I O, as is the parallel line 13 13, then seek the height of the breadth, as at 13, it will be from the uper edge of the Keele 12 foot 3 inches, and crosses the parallel line, at the low∣er end of it, just then for the tumbling of the Top∣timber it will be 3 foot 3 inches, and at the height of 27 foot 7 inches, at the little Cross 13: Now for the order of the hollow Mould, the little round piece of an Arch, in the Scegg of the Vessell, as it were, take off all the Risings, and mark them on the Rising Staffe, on one edge, that they may be known from the other Ri∣sings; as here, for Timber 13, take off the hollow Ri∣sing, which will be at 1 foot 10 inches, set it off on the rising Staff, at 1 foot 10 inches from one end, and the use of it will be in Moulding, set off the height of this hol∣low Rising on the middle line of the Timber, when the Mouldes are laid to pass, and strike a line from this Ri∣sing, on the middle line, untill it breakoff on the back of the Moulds, then lay the hollow Mould to the low∣er part of the britch of the Timber, and at the halfe breadth of the Keele, and so bear in the other end till it just touch the streightline, made by the hollow Rising, and the back of the Moulds, and this mouldeth the
lower part, or britch of the Timber, and bringeth in the hollow very faire; the same orders may be obser∣ved afoare, as abaft, on the other side of the Moulds, and marked with letters, to be known from them abaft: Then for the height of your Waals, you may marke a marke at every third or fourth Timbers, which you re∣solve to make frame Timbers; I say, you may make a marke at every third or fourth Timber, for the height of the upper edge, or lower edge of the Waale, and so bring on the Waale fair by those markes on the one side, and with a level finde the height of the other side by the former. Now I have briefly touched the Demonstration of a Ship, by Projection, I shall now come to an Arithmeticall way, farr surpassing any Demonstration for exactness. CHAP. VII. Arithmetically shewing how to frame the body of a Ship by Segments of Circles: being a true way to examine the truth of a Bow. LEt A B represent the length of a Rising line 12 foot long, or 144 inches, the height whereof let be B C, 5 foot, or 60 inches, to finde the side D E, or D A, the radius of the circle A C, whereto A D is the Semidia∣meter; multiply the side A B 144 in∣ches in it self, and so cometh 20736, which sum di∣vide 144 144 576 576 144 20736
by the side B C, the height of the rising 60 inches, and so cometh 345, and 36/60, which is abreviated 3; unto this 345 / must be added again the height of the Rising, the side B e, 60, which make 405 3 of an inch, which is the whole Diameter of the Circle, the half whereof is 202 1/ inches, and something more, near /4, therefore we will avoide the fraction, and account it 203▪ inches, or 16 foot 11 inches, which is the length of the Sweep, or the side D E, and so in all other Sweeps given whatsoever; the Rule is generall, and holds true in all things: as to finde the Sweepe at once, that will round any Beame, or other piece of Timber that is to be Sweept; remembring, that if it be a Beame, you are to finde the Sweepe you take but the half of his length. 23(3 20736(345 6000 66 Example, As if the Beame be 30 foot in length, and to round one foot, you must Work by 15, the halfe length of the Beame; and turne 15 foot into inches, by multiplying 15 by 12, so cometh 180 inches: re∣member the length of the Rising line, if it be to finde the Sweepe, it must be multiplied by it selfe, or the halfe length of the Timber must be Multiplied in it selfe, as 180 by 180, so cometh 32400, which must be divided by 12 the rounding, cometh in the quotient 2700, to which must be added the 12 again, the rounding of the piece, and so it is 2712 the whole Circle, the halfe of this 2712 is 1356 for the length of the Sweep, and so in all other matters where the Sweepe is requi∣red: This I read in Mr. Gunters Book, where he calls it the halfe Chord, being given, and the Versed fine, to finde the Diameter, and Semidiameter of the circle thereto be∣longing:
Now this half Chord in our Work is the length of the Rising line, and the height of the Rising on the Post is that in our Work, which he represents by the name of the Versed sine, where remember to multiply the length of the Rising line by itself, if it be a Rising line, and divide by the height of the Rising, and to the di∣vision add again the height of the Rising, so have you alwayes the whole Circle, divide it by 2, so have you the length of the Sweepe. Example in the Draught foregoing. Where the length of the Rising line is from the point E, to the point i, 32 foot; and half the height thereof is the line D i, 10 foot: turne both Summs into inches, as 32 foot multiplyed by 12 produ∣ceth, adding the ½ foot 6 inches, 390 inches length for the Rising line: then turn the height of the Rising into in∣ches, as 10 foot multiplied by 12, pro∣duceth 120 inches, from which 4 in∣ches must be substracted, because of the dead Rising is 4 inches, so then the height is 116 inches: Now multiply the length 390 inches by it self, 390 maketh 152100. 390 390 000 3510 1170 152100 This Multiplication of the summ 152100, must be divided by 116 in∣ches, the height of the Rising, and so cometh in the quotient of the de∣vision 1311 inches; unto this 1311 inches, must be added the 116 inches, the height of the Rising 116/1427, and it maketh 1427, which is the whole 112 3323 46344 152100 (1311 116666 0111 11
Circle: divide it by 2, to finde the half of it, so have you in the quotient 713 inches ½ inch for the length of the Sweep, which divided by 12, to bring it into feet, maketh 59 feet, 5 inches and a halfe, and so for all other Circular lines whatever, when the length is known, and the rounding of them also known; as for the hanging of Waals, the height of them known in the Midships from the Keele, sub∣stracted from the height, at the Post, and that will be the hanging of them, which is the same with the height of the Rising line on the Post, in the Arithmeticall Work, and is the same with the Versed sine in Geometry; these I think Examples sufficient, to signifie the Construction of this way of Working by Sweepes. 1 1427 (713 222 It followeth now that I shew the manner of finding the Risings of Timbers by Arithmetick also. To finde the Rising of the line F E, in the Figure foregoing. The Sweepe being first found to be as before 203 in∣ches, as the side D E signifieth, then there is known the side E G, 108 inches; now these two sides being given, we are to finde the third side D G, so here is made a right Angled Triangle, two sides thereof are given to finde a third, which to do, proceed thus; Mul∣tiply the two sides given by themselves, and substract the Multiplication of the shortest side, from the Mul∣tiplication made of the other sides, and extract the square Root of the remainder, so have you the third side sought for.
Example in the following Triangle. Having the side D C, 12 foot, which is 144 inches▪ and the side A C, 10 foot, otherwise 120 inches; to finde the side D A, multiply the sides given, in themselves, which is called squaring of them: as, multiply the side D C, 144 inches, by 144 inches, so cometh 20736. Then multiply the other side A C 120 also by it self, so cometh in the quotient 14400, which must be substracted from the o∣ther Multiplication, as you see, so cometh in the quotient 6336, from which the greatest square must be extracted, cal∣led extraction of the square root, 144 144 576 576 144 20736 120 120 000 240 120 14400 20736 14400 6336
which is 79 inches, and almost another by the Fraction, that is 6 foot, and very near 8 inches. 1 595 147 63(79 14 Note, These Demonstrations, this and the former, are laid down by the first Scale, made to shew the Demonstration of a Scale in this Book, at the beginning. Another Example. So in the last Figure foregoing but one, the side D E, 203 inches, which squared, or multiplied in it self, is 41209. 203 203 609 000 406 41209 Then the other side G E, 108, multi∣plied in it selfe, which is squaring of it, is 12664, as you see. 108 108 864 000 168 11664 Which substracted from the other mul∣tiplication, as 11664 substracted from 41209, resteth 29545, the square Root ex∣tracted from it, or the side of the greatest square that can be taken from the substra∣ction being found, is 171, and ¾; which 171 ¾, substracted from 203, the length of the Sweepe for one side, is al∣wayes the length of the Sweepe, resteth 31 inches ¼, for the Rising of the line E F, and the like for any other Rising. 41209 11664 29545 (3 156(08 29549(7 .2. 34
Another Example. As at the place K I, the Rising thereof is required, the side D I is as D E, 203 inches. Note, The length of the Sweepe being found, al∣wayes is one of the sides, in the finding the Rising of any Timber, and is alwayes one of the numbers, which when you have squared, note in a piece of Paper by it self, where you may al∣wayes see what it is, so that in the finding of Risings, after the Sweepe is found, all you have to do, is to know how many feet, or inches, the Timber you seek for is removed from the beginning, or foot of the Rising line, which is the second side, and in this third Example it is 11 foot, or 132 inches K I, from the foot of the line A, which squared, is 17424, which must be substracted from the square made of Radius, which in the other example is 41209, and so resteth 23775, from which extract the side of the Square therein contained, and it is 154 inches and ¼, which sub∣stracted from the length of the Sweep, leaveth 48 inches for the Rising, and ¾ inches, or 4 foot, and ¾ of an inch, and so much is the Rising of the said Timber. 132 132 264 396 132 17424 41209 17424 23775 10 132(69 23785(154 .2.0. 3 One Example in the Draught, The length of that Sweepe we found heretofore to be 713 inches, then we
will seek to finde the Rising for Timber 13, standing aft from the point E, or foot of the Rising line 324 in∣ches, these are the given Sides; then proceed; square the Semidiameter of the Sweepe 713, so it maketh squared 508363; then square the distance of the Tim∣ber 13, which is 324, and it maketh 104976; these substracted from the former figures, resteth 403387, the square Root thereof is 635 ¼, nearest, which sub∣stracted from the Radius 713, resteth 77 inches and ¼, that is 6 foot 5 inches, which with 4 inches Dead Ri∣sing, is 6 foot 9 inches ¼; and so much is the Rising of Timber 13 from the Keele. I suppose these Examples are sufficient to illustrate the truth and plainness of this Arithmeticall Work, for the truth of it; it hath this to say for it self, that it is the very exact truth it self: The great Objection may be, that many know not the way to Extract the Square Root, and therefore cannot attaine to this Work, by reason of that let, or hinderance. To this I Answer, There are many Books that will instruct thee in it, that thou mayest buy, or borrow; but to answer thee better, I will briefly shew thee the man∣ner of Extracting the Square, not doubting but thou canst performe Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, and Division already.
CHAP. VIII. How to Extract the Square Root. KNow then that a square number hath its sides equall every way, as are the sides of 4, repre∣sented by ∷ pricks; and you see that every way of all the 4 sides it containeth 2, and so 2 times 2, make 4, which is the squaring of a number, so you see ⋮⋮⋮ 9 pricks is a square, or 9 is a square number, whose side is 3, and 3 times 3 make 9, but 2 times 3 is not a square number, as you see :::, being but 2 one way, and the other way 3, that make but 6; so then all the numbers between 4 and 9, are not square numbers: by the like reason, a square, made of the Next square number 4 is 16, for 4 times 4 is 16, as by the Pricks you may see it repre∣sented here, every of the 4 sides con∣taining 4, make a squared number of 16, and all the numbers that are between 9 and 16, as 2 times 4, or 3 times 4, are not squares, but have a fraction annexed to them; so also any number betwen 16 and 25, are not squares, as 4 times 5, or 2 times 5, or 3 times 5, these are not square numbers, but 5 times 5 is a squared number, and ma∣keth 25, where note, that to square a number, and to extract the square root, is two different things; for when we say, to square a number, is to multiply it in it self, or by it itselfe; or
when we say, or speake of a number squared, it is a number multiplied in it self, but to extract the square Root, is to finde the side of the square in a number gi∣ven, or the extracted square Root is the square Root found in any given number. Thus you may conceive of the Squares of 6, for 6 times 6 make 36; 7 times 7 make 49; 8 times 8 make 64; 9 times 9 make 81; 10 times 10 make 100: there is all the squares made of the 9 Figures, ex∣pressed by this little Table annexed, as against each Figure is the square made of them, as 2 times 2 is 4, so is 4 a∣gainst 2, as you see. 1 1 2 4 3 9 4 16 5 25 6 36 7 49 8 64 9 81 10 100 Now to extract the square Root from greater numbers, as from 144 proceed thus, write downe the summe given, as followeth, and make a quo∣tient on the right hand, as you see, then set pricks under every other figure beginning at the right hand, and set pricks towards the left hand, under every other figure, so in this number 144, consisting of 3 figures, there is 2 pricks, and so many figures must the quotient consist of; then begin at the left hand of the summ, and say, or enquire for the greatest square in the figure, or figures, over the first prick, at the left hand, which here is but 1, therefore you can take but 1, for 1 is alwayes the Square, or Cube of 1, therefore write 1 in the quotient, and substract that 1 from the 1 over the left hand prick, 144 ( . . 0 144 (1 . .
and Cancell it, nothing remainining, write a Cipher over it, as you see, so have you one figure of the quoti∣ent, then double your figure found in the quotient, as 2 times 1 is 2; write that 2 under the figure between the next prickes, which is the Divisor for the second figure, then say, how many times 2 can I have in 4, over the Divisor, I say 2, therefore I write 2 in the quotient, saying, 2 times 2 is 4, which substract from the 4 over head, Cancell the Divisor, and the 4 over head, and write a Cipher over it, then square the last figure found in the quo∣tient, saying, 2 times 2 is 4, which substract from the 4 over the prick, and so resteth 0, therefore cancell the 4, and write Ciphers over head, signifying, that the number given to finde the roote of, is a just square number, the roote or side is 12, the proofe hereof is by Multiplication of the quotient in it self, as 12 by 12 make 144, which, if it be the same with the summ gi∣ven to be Extracted, it is rightly done▪ if it do not a∣gree, it is not true. 000 144 (12 .2. Example of another Summ. Let 625 be given to finde the Square Root of it, write down the summ, make a quotient, and set pricks under every other figure; then enquire for the greatest square in the figure, over the pricke, at the left hand; I say, 2 is the greatest square can be taken: for 3 times 3 is 9, and here the figure is but 6; so I write 2 in the quotient, and square it, saying, 2 times 2 is 4, taken from 6, so resteth 2; I cancell the 6, and write 2 2 625 (2 . .
over it, as you see, then double the fi∣gure in the quotient, saying, 2 times 2 is 4; this 4 is the second Divisor, I write it between the two next pricks, and say, how many times 4, can I have in 22, and I finde 5 times; for 5 times 4 is 20, taken from 22, the figures over 4, so resteth 2; therefore I write 5 in the quotient, and saying, 5 times 4 make 20▪ therefore I cancell the 4 Divisor, and the 22, and write 2 overhead, then square the last figure found, 5 by 5 make 25, taken from 25 over head▪ resteth nothing, so the number given is a square number. 2 625 (2 .4. 22 625 (25 .4. 22 625 (25 .4. A Summ of 5476, given to finde the nearest Square Root in it, write down the Summ, and make a quotient and prick underneath, as afore shew∣ed; say, What is the greatest Square in the figures over the left hand prick? and I finde it to be 7, for 7 times 7 make 49, but 8 times 8 make 64, 10 too much, there∣fore I write 7 in the quotient, and take 7 times 7, that is 49 from 54, so resteth 5, which I write over the prick, and Cancell the 5 and the 4; then I double the figure in the quotient, which maketh 14, for the Divisor, I write the first figure of the Divisor, if there be more then 1 under the figure, be∣tween the two next pricks, and all the other figures, in their places, toward the left hand; then inquire how many times can 1 be taken from 5, overhead, and I finde it may be taken 4 times; I write therefore 4▪ 5 5476 (7 . . 1 51 5476 (74 . . 14
in the quotient, and say, 4 times 1 is 4, from 5; so rest∣eth 1: I Cancell the 1 and the 5, and write 1 over the 5, then I say, 4 times 4 make 16, from 17 resteth 1: I Cancell the 4 Divisor, and write 1 over 7, and Cancell the other 1 and the 7; then I square the last figure found, for so it must be at every prick, 4 times 4 make 16, which I substract from the 16 over the last prick, and so I see no∣thing remaineth, that sheweth the sum given, to be a just square summ. 10 510 5476 (74 . . 14 Example of another Summ. As if 528563 be given to finde the greatest side of the Square therein, I write down the Summ, as followeth, and make the quotient, and set the pricks under every other figure, as you see; and seeing there is 3 pricks, it telleth, that there must be 3 figures in the quotient, then beginning at the figures over the left hand pricke, I take the greatest square in 52, and I finde it 7, for 7 times 7 make 49; therefore I write down 7 in the quotient, and Sub∣stract 49 from 52, so resteth 3, there∣fore Cancell the 52, and write 3 over the 2, as you see; then double the quotient 7, it ma∣keth 14, for a new Divisor, which write down, the first figure thereof, under the figure between the two next pricks, namely 4 under 8, and the other figure of the Divisor one place far∣ther to the left hand, under the 3, as you see; then take the Divisor 1 as many times as you can, from the fi∣gure 3 528563 (7 . . . 3 528563 (7 . . . 14
3 over head, so as that after the Division be made, there may be the square of the last figure of the quoti∣ent, taken from the figures over the next prick, as I can take 1 but 2 times from 2, therefore I write 2 in the quotient, and Cancell the Divisor 1, saying, 2 times 1 is 2, from 3; so resteth 1: I Cancell the figure 3 also, and write 1 overhead, as you see: then 2 times 4 is 8, from 8 over head resteth nothing; therefore I Cancell the se∣cond figure of the Divisor, 4 and 8, and write a Cipher over 8, as you see; then the next place being a prick, I must square the last figure found, say∣ing, 2 times 2 make 4, from 5; the figure over the prick resteth 1, as you see; therefore I Cancell the 5, and write 1 over it, as you see, and here is a fraction of 101. 1 30 528563 (72 14 1 301 528563 (72 14 Then for a new Divisor, Double the quotient 72, and it makes 144, which is a new Divisor, the first fi∣gure thereof write under the figure between the next pricks, as the first 4 under 6, in the summ; and the other figures towards the left hand, in the order as you see: then, how many times 1 in 10 over head, and I see I cannot take 8 times, for that there will not be left to take out the other figures from, nor for the square of the last figure, which if it were 8, would be 64 from the figure over the pricke, therefore I take but 7, for by a light examination I see that will doe, there∣fore I write down 7 in the quotient, and proceed to the 1 301 528563 (727 14 4 14
Division, thus, 7 times 1 is 7, from 10 over head remaineth 3, which I write down, and Cancell the 10, as you see; then 7 times 4 is 28, from 31 over head, so remaineth 3, which I also write down, and Cancell the 31; then again, 7 times 4, the other figure of the Di∣visor, is also 28, which taken from 36 over head, resteth 8, which I write down over 6, and so Cancell the 36, and then the Summ standeth as you see. 13 301 528563 (727 14 4 14 133 301 528563 (727 14 4 14 133 3018 528563 (727 14 4 14 133(3 5308 (4 528563 (727 14 4 14 Then lastly, square the last figure of the quotient, 7 times 7 make 49, taken from 83, the figures over the prick, resteth 34, as a fraction, and the Summ is finished: But in regard here is a fraction, by that it tells you, that the Summ given was no square num∣ber; and the greatest square therein is 727, the proofe is by Multiplication adding in the fraction thus, 727 Mul∣tiplied by 727, make 528529, then adding in the fra∣ction of 34, maketh it 528563, the just Summ gi∣ven. But some may Object, and say, That this is a very tedi∣ous way of Work, and will take up a great deale of time; It is true, it is more labour then demonstration, but the truth of it might very well plead for patience to Work it, but it is not necessary you performe all the parts by it, that is, in every particular: as the exact hanging of the Waal at every Timber, but it may suffice
at every third or fourth Timber, to finde the hanging of the Waals, onely the Risings alow, afoare and abaft, I would work to every Timber there. But to make it more briefe, here followeth a Ta∣ble that the numbers are therein contrived to the same purpose, to avoide the tedious Extraction of the Root, and onely use Addition and Substraction, onely being but a very little difference between the finding the Ri∣sings by this Table, and by the Draught, for in this kinde of Arithmeticall Work, it mattereth not, whether or no there be any Draught drawn at all, or no, if the buil∣der onely note in his Book the length by the Keele, and the breadth at the Beame, the Racke of the Stem, Racke of the Post, depth of the Water, to Sayle in depth of the Hould, height of the Waals abaft, afoare, at the Midships, and all the remarkable things to be noted, he may be able to Build a Vessell, and never draw a Draught at all, and yet affirm his Worke to be absolutely true, according to Art, and a great deale more exact then by Draught: I shall in few words shew you the use of the Table, and so conclude.
CHAP. IX. A Description of the Table of Squares. TO save the Practitioner a labour of Extracting of Roots, for here they are ready done to thy hand of purpose, and all the use of Arithmetick required is onely Substraction, as Example in the Figure of the Sweep foregoing, being found to be 203 inches, as you saw it found before, which is, I say, alwayes one side of the Triangle, made of the side DI, then know∣ing the length of I, 132 inches, which is the distance of the point, of which the Rising is sought at; seek in the Tables, under the Title of inches, at the head of the Tables, for 132, you will finde it in the second Page, and the twelfth line; and right against it, in the same line, under the next Title of Squares, you have 17424, the square made of 132, which Substract from the Square made of 203, which is 41209, which is found in the second Page of the Tables, and the third line: Now the other number 17424, Substracted from 41209, so resteth 23775; seek the number nearest to it in the Ta∣ble, under the Title of Squares, which you will finde in the second Page, 34 line, you finde not just the same number, for in stead of 23775, you finde 23716 too little by 59, and the Root answering thereto, is in the same line, under the Title of inches, towards the left
hand, which is 154; now if you take the next square lower to the left hand 35 line, it is 24025, 250 too much, so you may see it is nearer to the 34th line, because there it was too little but by 59, so that you may see it will be ¾ of an inch less then the number of inches, belonging to the 35th line, and about ¼ of an inch more then the numbers in the 34th line; so that you see it is answered, the third side D 0 is 154, and ¼ of an inch, which Substracted from the whole Sweep 203, leaveth 48¾ inches for the Rising, so you have no need of extraction of the Rootes by these Ta∣bles, it is already done to your hand; the Columne that is between the inches and the squares, and written feet in∣ches in the head, is to shew you, how may feet, and inches of the foot any number of inches is; as here, the number 203 inches sought, and found in the Tables, in the second page, and third line, just against it, in the same line, between that and the squares, is 16—11, shewing that it is 16 feet and 11 inches; or if the square were given, as 41209, found at the second page, and third line, next toward the left hand, you have 16 foot, 11 inches; and if you seek for it in inches, in the third Columne toward the left hand, and the same line, you have 203 inches: Thus is it very ready to reduce inches into foot measure, or feet into inches. Another Example. In the same figure, to finde the Rising at the point F, the sweep being 203 inches, as before is said, is alwayes one side, throughout the whole Work of the same Ri∣sing line is 41209, as is found in the second page, the
third line; the other fide from the point A to F, is 9 foot, or 108 inches, whose square is 11664, found in the first page, and the 28th line; now sub∣stract the square made of the side A F, 11664, from the square of the side D E, so remain∣eth 29545 41209 11664 29545 Seek in the Table of squares for that number, and I finde in the second page, and 12 line, and the sixth Co∣lumne, 29584, the nearest number to it, yet it is a little too much near the ¼ of an inch; and toward the left hand in the same line, the next Column under the title feet inch, you finde 14; 4 signifying that to be 14 foot, 4 inches: and in one Columne more to the left hand, and the same line, you see under the Title of inches 172 over the head you tituled inches, which must be subracted from 203 inch, so re∣maineth 3 inches for the Rising of F E, which is 2 foot, 7 inches, as in the first page of the Table, and the 31 line. 203 172 031 These few Examples I think may be sufficient to shew the use of the following Tables of squares, the benefit where of may be very great, for such as shall make use of the same: If any desire the finding of the Fractions of these squares, when he findeth not his just figures in the squares, let him do thus, substract the Figures under his number, from the Figures above his number, which shall be the denominator, then these Figures given, sub∣stracted, from which the next squares less, shall be the denominator to that Fraction. As for Example, In the foregoing figures, after substra∣ction, should have been 29553; the nearest agreeing in the Tables, is 29584, the next lesser square number in the Table is 29241, which is more a great deale too lit∣tle,
then the other is too great; then substract the lesser square number 29241, from 29584, and so resteth 343, which must be the deno∣minator, then again substract the true number given, 29553, the next lesser square number in the Table is 29241, which must be sub∣stracted, I say, from the true number given, 29553, and so resteth after substraction 312, which is the Numera∣tor to the Fraction, and must be thus written,  so then the number belonging to 29584, is 171 inches, and 312/343 parts of an inch, which being abreviated, is something more then ¼ of one inch, and not full ⅞ of one inch. 29584 29241 343 Thus he that pleaseth may finde the rising of any Timber, or narrowing of any place by these Tables and the help of Substraction, exactly to any Circle whatsoe∣ver, but it may suffice, that a Man, going to his Tables, may see which square his figures have greatest affinity with, and may estimate the difference near enough, with∣out seeking for the fraction, which will be easily known by much practise herein. HEre followeth a Table of Square Roots, ready Ex∣tracted, from one Inch to 1300 Inches, which is to 108 foot▪ and 4 Inches, and it is thus contraved, That from one Inch, to 840 Inches, all the Inches are reduced into Feet and Inches▪ for the ease and help of Workmen, who alway take their Measures by Feet and Inches; but from thence to the end of the table you have the Inches onely, and the Squares thereof against them as the Titles over every Page do make appear.
A Table of Square Roots. Inch Feet Inches Squares 1   1 1 2   2 4 3   3 9 4   4 16 5   5 25 6   6 36 7   7 49 8   8 64 9   9 81 10   10 100 11   11 121 12 1 00 144 13 1 1 169 14 1 2 196 15 1 3 225 16 1 4 256 17 1 5 289 18 1 6 324 19 1 7 361 20 1 8 400 21 1 9 441 22 1 10 484 23 1 11 529 24 2 00 576 25 2 01 625 26 2 2 676 27 2 3 729 28 2 4 784 29 2 5 841 30 2 6 900 31 2 7 961 32 2 8 1024 33 2 9 1089 34 2 10 1156 35 2 11 1225 36 3 00 1296 37 3 1 1369 38 3 2 1444 39 3 3 1521 40 3 4 1600 41 3 5 161 42 3 6 1764 43 3 7 1849 44 3 8 1936 45 3 9 2025 46 3 10 2116 47 3 11 2209 48 4 00 2304 49 4 1 2401 50 4 2 2500 51 4 3 2601 52 4 4 2704 53 4 5 2809 54 4 6 2916 55 4 7 3025 56 4 8 3136 57 4 9 3249 58 4 10 3364 59 4 11 3481 60 5 00 3600 61 5 1 3721 62 5 2 3844 63 5 3 3964 64 5 4 4096 65 5 5 4225 66 5 6 4356 67 5 7 4489 68 5 8 4624 69 5 9 4761 70 5 10 4900 71 5 11 5041 72 6 00 5184 73 6 1 5329 74 6 2 5476 75 6 3 5625 76 6 4 5776 77 6 5 5929 78 6 6 6084 79 6 7 6241 80 6 8 6400 81 6 9 6561 82 6 10 6724 83 6 11 6889 84 7 00 7056 85 7 1 7225 86 7 2 7396 87 7 3 7569 88 7 4 7744 89 7 5 7921 90 7 6 800 91 7 7 881 92 7 8 8464 93 7 9 8649 94 7 10 8836 95 7 11 9025 96 8 0 9226 97 8 1 9409 98 8 2 9604 99 8 3 9801 100 8 4 10000 101 8 5 10201 102 8 6 10404 103 8 7 10609 104 8 8 10816 105 8 9 11025 106 8 10 11236 107 8 11 11449 108 9 0 11664 109 9 1 11881 110 9 2 12100 111 9 3 12321 112 9 4 12544 113 9 5 12769 114 9 6 12996 115 9 7 13225 116 9 8 13456 117 9 9 13689 118 9 10 13924 219 9 11 14162 120 10 0 14400
121 10 1 14641 122 10 2 14884 123 10 3 15229 124 10 4 15376 125 10 5 15625 126 10 6 15876 127 10 7 16029 128 10 8 16384 129 10 9 16641 130 10 10 16900 131 10 11 17161 132 11 00 17424 133 11 1 17689 134 11 2 17956 135 11 3 18225 136 11 4 18496 137 11 5 18769 138 11 6 19044 139 11 7 19321 140 11 8 19600 141 11 9 19881 142 11 10 20164 143 11 11 20449 144 12 00 20736 145 12 01 21025 146 12 2 22416 147 12 3 21609 148 12 4 21904 149 12 5 22201 150 12 6 22500 151 12 7 22801 152 12 8 23104 153 12 9 23409 154 12 10 23716 155 12 11 24025 156 13 00 24336 157 13 1 24649 158 13 2 24964 159 13 3 25381 160 13 4 25600 161 13 5 25921 162 13 6 26244 163 13 7 26569 164 13 8 26956 165 13 9 27225 166 13 10 27556 167 13 11 27889 168 14 00 28224 169 14 1 28561 170 14 2 28900 171 14 3 29241 172 14 4 29584 173 14 5 29929 174 14 6 30276 175 14 7 30625 176 14 8 31076 177 14 9 31329 178 14 10 31684 179 14 11 32041 180 15 00 32400 181 15 1 32761 182 15 2 33124 183 15 3 33489 184 15 4 33856 185 15 5 34025 186 15 6 34596 187 15 7 34969 188 15 8 35344 189 15 9 35721 190 15 10 36100 191 15 11 36481 192 16 00 36864 193 16 1 37249 194 16 2 37636 195 16 3 38025 196 16 4 38416 197 16 5 38809 198 16 6 39204 199 16 7 39601 200 16 8 40000 201 16 9 40401 202 16 10 40844 203 16 11 41209 204 17 00 41616 205 17 1 42025 206 17 2 42436 207 17 3 42849 208 17 4 43264 209 17 5 43681 210 17 6 44100 211 17 7 44521 212 17 8 44944 213 17 9 45369 214 17 10 45796 215 17 11 46224 216 18 0 46656 217 18 1 47089 218 18 2 47524 219 18 3 47961 220 18 4 48400 221 18 5 48841 222 18 6 49284 223 18 7 49729 224 18 8 50176 225 18 9 50625 226 18 10 51076 227 18 11 51529 228 19 0 51984 229 19 1 52441 230 19 2 52900 231 19 3 53361 232 19 4 53824 233 19 5 54289 234 19 6 54656 235 19 7 55225 236 19 8 55696 237 19 9 56069 238 19 10 56644 239 19 11 57121 240 20 0 57600
241 20 1 58081 242 20 2 58564 243 20 3 59049 244 20 4 59536 245 20 5 60025 246 20 6 60516 247 20 7 61009 248 20 8 61504 249 20 9 62001 250 20 10 62500 251 20 11 63001 252 21 0 63504 253 21 1 64009 254 21 2 64516 255 21 3 65025 256 21 4 65536 257 21 5 66049 258 21 6 66564 259 21 7 67081 260 21 8 67600 261 21 9 68121 262 21 10 68644 263 21 11 69169 264 22 0 69596 265 22 1 70425 266 22 2 70756 267 22 3 71289 268 22 4 71824 269 22 5 72361 270 22 6 72900 271 22 7 73441 272 22 8 73984 273 22 9 74529 274 32 10 75076 275 22 11 75575 276 23 0 76176 277 23 1 76729 278 23 2 77284 279 23 3 77841 280 23 4 78400 281 23 5 78961 282 23 6 79524 283 23 7 80089 284 23 8 80656 285 23 9 81225 286 23 10 81796 287 23 11 82369 288 24 0 82944 289 24 1 83521 290 24 2 84100 291 24 3 84681 292 24 4 85264 293 24 5 85849 294 24 6 86436 295 24 7 87025 296 24 8 87616 297 24 9 88209 298 24 10 88804 299 24 11 89401 200 25 0 90000 301 25 1 90601 302 25 2 91204 303 25 3 91809 304 25 4 92416 305 25 5 93025 306 25 6 93636 307 25 7 94241 308 25 8 94864 309 25 9 95481 310 25 10 96100 311 25 11 96721 312 26 0 97344 313 26 1 97969 314 26 2 98596 315 26 3 99225 316 26 4 99856 317 26 5 100489 318 26 6 101124 319 26 7 101761 320 26 8 102400 321 26 9 103041 322 26 10 103684 323 26 11 104329 324 27 0 104976 325 27 1 105625 326 27 2 106276 327 27 3 106929 328 27 4 107584 329 27 5 108241 330 27 6 108900 331 27 7 109561 332 27 8 110224 333 27 9 110889 334 27 10 111556 335 27 11 112225 336 28 0 112896 337 28 1 113569 338 28 2 114244 339 28 3 114921 340 28 4 115600 341 28 5 116281 342 28 6 116964 343 28 7 117349 344 28 8 118336 345 28 9 119025 346 28 10 119716 347 28 11 120409 348 29 0 121104 349 29 1 121801 350 29 2 122505 351 29 3 123206 352 29 4 123909 353 29 5 124604 354 29 6 125311 355 29 7 126025 356 29 8 126736 357 29 9 127449 358 29 10 128164 359 29 11 128881 360 30 0 129600
361 30 1 130321 362 30 2 131044 363 30 3 131779 364 30 4 132496 365 30 5 133225 366 30 6 133956 367 30 7 134689 368 30 8 135424 369 30 9 136161 370 30 10 136900 371 30 11 137640 372 31 0 138384 373 31 1 139129 374 31 2 139876 375 31 3 140625 376 41 4 141676 377 31 5 142129 378 31 6 142984 379 31 7 143641 380 31 8 144400 381 31 9 145161 382 31 10 145924 383 31 11 146689 384 32 0 147456 385 32 1 148225 386 32 2 149006 387 32 3 149769 388 32 4 150544 389 32 5 151321 390 32 6 152210 391 32 7 152831 392 32 8 153664 393 32 9 15444 394 32 10 155236 395 32 11 156025 396 33 0 156816 397 33 1 157609 398 33 2 158104 399 33 3 159201 400 33 4 160000 401 33 5 160801 402 33 6 161604 403 33 7 162409 404 33 8 163216 405 33 9 164025 406 33 10 164836 407 33 11 165649 408 34 0 166464 409 34 1 167281 410 34 2 168100 411 34 3 168921 412 34 4 169744 413 34 5 170569 414 34 6 171396 415 34 7 172225 416 34 8 173056 417 34 9 173889 418 34 10 17474 419 34 11 175561 420 35 0 176400 421 35 1 177241 422 35 2 178084 423 35 3 178959 424 35 4 17977 425 35 5 180625 426 35 6 181476 427 35 7 182329 428 35 8 183184 429 35 9 184041 430 35 10 184900 431 35 11 185761 432 36 0 186624 433 36 1 187789 434 36 2 18856 435 36 3 18985 436 36 4 190096 437 36 5 190960 438 36 6 191044 439 36 7 192721 440 36 8 193600 441 36 9 194481 442 36 10 195364 443 36 11 196249 444 37 0 197136 445 37 1 198025 446 37 2 198916 447 37 3 199809 448 37 4 200704 449 37 5 201601 450 37 6 202509 451 37 7 203401 452 37 8 204304 453 37 9 20590 454 37 10 206116 455 37 11 20705 456 38 0 207936 457 38 1 208849 458 38 2 20964 459 38 3 210681 460 38 4 21160 461 38 5 212521 462 38 6 213444 463 38 7 214369 464 38 8 215296 465 38 9 21625 466 38 10 217156 467 38 11 218089 468 39 0 219024 469 39 1 219961 470 39 2 2200 471 39 3 221841 472 39 4 222784 473 39 5 223729 474 39 6 224676 475 39 7 225625 476 39 8 226576 477 39 9 227429 478 39 10 228484 479 39 11 229141 480 40 0 2304
481 40 1 231361 482 40 2 232324 483 40 3 233289 484 40 4 234216 485 40 5 235225 486 40 6 236196 487 40 7 23769 488 40 8 238144 489 40 9 239121 490 40 10 240100 491 40 11 240981 492 41 0 24204 493 41 1 243049 494 41 2 244036 495 41 3 245025 496 41 4 246016 497 41 5 246509 498 41 6 247004 499 41 7 249001 500 41 8 250000 501 41 9 251001 502 41 10 252004 503 41 11 253009 504 42 0 254016 505 42 1 255025 506 42 2 256036 507 42 3 257049 508 42 4 258064 509 42 5 269081 510 42 6 260100 511 42 7 261121 512 42 8 262144 513 42 9 363169 514 42 10 264196 515 42 11 265225 516 43 0 266256 517 43 1 267289 518 43 2 268324 519 43 3 269361 520 43 4 270400 521 43 5 271441 522 43 6 272448 523 43 7 273529 524 43 8 274576 525 43 9 275625 526 43 10 276676 527 43 11 27779 528 44 0 278784 529 44 1 28041 530 44 2 280900 531 44 3 281961 532 44 4 28424 533 44 5 28709 534 44 6 285156 535 44 7 286225 536 44 8 287296 537 44 9 288369 538 44 10 290444 539 44 11 290521 540 45 0 291600 541 45 1 292681 542 45 2 293764 543 45 3 294849 544 45 4 295936 545 45 5 297025 546 45 6 298016 547 45 7 299209 548 45 8 300304 549 45 9 301401 550 45 10 302500 551 45 11 303601 552 46 0 304704 553 46 1 305809 554 46 2 306916 555 46 3 308025 556 46 4 309136 557 46 5 31049 558 46 6 311364 559 46 7 312481 560 46 8 313600 561 46 9 314721 562 46 10 315844 563 46 11 316969 564 47 0 318096 565 47 1 319225 566 47 2 320356 567 47 3 321489 568 47 4 322624 569 47 5 323761 570 47 6 324900 571 47 7 326041 572 47 8 327184 573 47 9 328329 574 47 10 330276 575 47 11 330625 576 48 0 331776 577 48 1 332929 578 48 2 384048 579 48 3 335241 580 48 4 336400 581 48 5 337561 582 48 6 338724 583 48 7 340089 584 48 8 341056 585 48 9 34225 586 48 10 343396 587 48 11 344669 588 49 0 345744 589 49 1 346921 590 49 2 348100 591 49 3 349281 592 49 4 350464 593 49 5 351649 594 49 6 352836 595 49 7 353925 596 49 8 354216 597 49 9 355409 598 49 10 35604 599 49 11 358801 600 50 0 360000
601 50 1 361201 602 50 2 362404 603 50 3 363609 604 50 4 364816 605 50 5 366025 606 50 6 367236 607 50 7 368449 608 50 8 369664 609 50 9 370881 610 50 10 372100 611 50 11 373321 612 51 0 374544 613 51 1 375769 614 51 2 376996 615 51 3 378225 616 51 4 379456 617 51 5 380689 618 51 6 381924 619 51 7 383161 620 51 8 384400 621 51 9 385641 622 51 10 386884 623 51 11 388129 624 52 0 389376 625 52 1 390625 626 52 2 391876 627 52 3 393129 628 52 4 394384 629 52 5 395641 630 52 6 396900 631 52 7 398161 632 52 8 399424 633 52 9 400489 634 52 10 401956 635 52 11 403225 636 53 0 404496 637 53 1 405769 638 53 2 407044 639 53 3 408321 640 53 4 409600 641 53 5 410881 642 53 6 412164 643 53 7 413449 644 53 8 414736 645 53 9 416025 646 53 10 417316 647 53 11 418609 648 54 0 429904 649 54 1 421201 650 54 2 422500 651 54 3 423801 652 54 4 425104 653 54 5 426403 654 54 6 427716 655 54 7 429025 656 54 8 430336 657 54 9 431449 658 54 10 432969 659 54 11 434181 660 55 0 435600 661 55 1 436921 662 55 2 438244 663 55 3 439569 664 55 4 440896 665 55 5 442225 666 55 6 443556 667 55 7 444889 668 55 8 446224 669 55 9 447561 670 55 10 448900 671 55 11 450241 672 56 0 451544 673 56 1 452829 674 56 2 454276 675 56 3 455625 676 56 4 456976 677 56 5 458329 678 56 6 459684 679 56 7 461041 680 56 8 462400 681 56 9 463761 682 56 10 465124 683 56 11 466489 684 57 0 467856 685 57 1 469225 686 57 2 470596 687 57 3 471939 688 57 4 473344 689 57 5 475721 690 57 6 476700 691 57 7 477841 692 57 8 478864 693 57 9 480269 694 57 10 481636 695 57 11 482825 696 58 0 484416 697 58 1 485809 698 58 2 487204 699 58 3 488601 700 58 4 490000 701 58 5 491401 702 58 6 492804 703 58 7 494209 704 58 8 495616 705 58 9 497025 706 58 10 498436 707 58 11 498849 708 59 0 501264 709 59 1 502681 710 59 2 504100 711 59 3 505521 712 59 4 506944 713 59 5 508669 714 59 6 509796 715 59 7 511225 716 59 8 512656 717 59 9 514089 718 59 10 515824 719 59 11 516961 720 60 0 518400
721 60 1 519841 722 60 2 521284 723 60 3 522729 724 60 4 524176 725 60 5 525625 726 60 6 526976 727 60 7 528529 728 60 8 529984 729 60 9 521421 730 60 10 522900 731 60 11 524361 732 61 0 535844 733 61 1 537289 734 61 2 538656 735 61 3 540225 736 61 4 541696 737 61 5 543169 738 61 6 544644 739 61 7 546031 740 61 8 547600 741 61 9 549081 742 61 10 550564 743 61 11 552049 744 62 0 553436 745 62 1 555025 746 62 2 556516 747 62 3 558009 748 62 4 559504 749 62 5 561001 750 62 6 562500 751 62 7 564001 752 62 8 565504 753 62 9 567009 754 62 10 568516 755 62 11 570025 756 63 0 571536 757 63 1 573049 758 63 2 574564 759 63 3 576081 760 63 4 577600 761 63 5 579121 762 63 6 580644 763 63 7 582169 764 63 8 583696 765 63 9 585225 766 63 10 586756 767 63 11 588289 768 64 0 589824 769 64 1 591361 770 64 2 592900 771 64 3 594441 772 64 4 595984 773 64 5 597529 774 64 6 599076 775 64 7 600625 776 64 8 602176 777 64 9 604729 778 64 10 606284 779 64 11 607841 780 65 0 608400 781 65 1 609961 782 65 2 611524 783 95 3 613099 784 65 4 614656 785 65 5 616225 786 65 6 617796 787 65 7 619369 788 65 8 620944 789 65 9 622521 790 65 10 624100 791 65 11 625681 792 66 0 627964 793 66 1 628849 794 66 2 630466 795 66 3 632125 796 66 4 633616 797 66 5 635209 798 66 6 637404 799 66 7 638401 800 66 8 801 66 9 641601 802 66 10 642204 803 66 11 644809 804 67 0 646416 805 67 1 648025 806 67 2 649836 807 67 3 651249 808 67 4 652864 809 67 5 654481 810 67 6 656100 811 67 7 657721 812 67 8 659344 813 67 9 660969 814 67 10 662596 815 67 11 664225 816 68 0 665856 817 68 1 667429 818 68 2 669124 819 68 3 671771 820 68 4 672400 821 68 5 674041 822 68 6 675684 823 68 7 677329 824 68 8 678976 825 68 9 680625 826 68 10 682276 827 68 11 684129 828 69 0 685584 829 69 1 688241 830 69 2 688900 831 69 3 689661 832 69 4 692224 833 69 5 693889 834 69 6 695556 835 69 7 697225 836 69 1 698896 837 69 9 700569 838 69 10 702244 839 69 11 703921
Inch Squares 841 707281 842 708964 843 710649 844 711336 845 714025 846 715716 847 717309 848 719004 849 720801 850 722500 851 72401 852 725904 853 727609 854 729216 855 721025 856 732736 857 734449 858 736164 859 737681 860 739600 861 741321 862 743044 863 744769 864 746396 865 748225 866 749956 867 753689 868 753824 869 755161 870 756900 871 758641 872 760384 873 762129 874 763776 875 765625 876 767376 877 769129 878 770884 879 772641 880 774400 881 777161 882 777924 883 779589 884 781456 885 783225 886 784996 887 786769 888 788544 889 790321 890 792100 891 793081 892 795664 893 797449 894 799236 895 801025 896 802816 897 804609 898 805904 899 808201 900 810000 901 811801 902 813604 903 815400 904 817216 905 819025 906 820836 907 822649 908 824464 909 826281 910 828100 911 829921 912 831741 913 833569 914 835369 915 837225 916 839056 917 840789 918 842724 919 844561 920 846400 921 847241 922 850084 923 851929 924 853746 925 855625 926 857476 927 859329 928 86184 929 863041 930 864900 931 866761 932 868624 933 870489 934 872356 935 874225 936 876096 937 877869 938 879844 939 881721 940 883600 941 885481 942 886364 943 889249 944 881136 945 893025 946 894916 947 896809 948 898704 949 900601 950 902500 951 904401 952 906304 953 908209 954 910016 955 912025 956 913936 957 915849 958 917764 959 919681 960 921600 961 923521 962 926444 963 928369 964 929296 965 931225 966 933256 967 935089 968 937024 969 939961 970 940900 971 942741 972 944784 973 946729 974 948676 975 950625 976 952576 977 954529 978 956484 979 958441 980 960400 981 962361 982 964324 983 96689 984 968256 985 970225 986 972196 987 974169 988 976144 989 978121 990 980100 991 982081 992 984064 993 986049 994 988036 995 990025 996 992016 997 994009 998 996004 999 998001 1000 1000000
1001 1002001 1002 1004004 1003 1006009 1004 1008016 1005 1010025 1006 1012036 1007 1014049 1008 1016064 1009 1018081 1010 1020100 1011 1022121 1012 1024104 1013 1026196 1014 1028196 1015 1030225 1016 1032256 1017 1034289 1018 1036324 1019 1038361 1020 1040400 1021 1042441 1022 1044484 1023 1046529 1024 1048576 1025 1050625 1026 1052676 1027 1054729 1028 1056784 1029 1058841 1030 1060900 1031 1060961 1032 1065024 1033 1067089 1034 1069156 1035 1071225 1036 1073296 1037 1075369 1038 1077444 1039 1079521 1040 1081600 1041 1082681 1042 1085764 1043 108749 1044 1089936 1045 1092025 1046 1094116 1047 1096209 1048 1098304 1049 1100401 1050 1102550 1051 1104601 1052 1106704 1053 1108809 1054 1110916 1055 1113025 1056 1115136 1057 1117249 1058 1119364 1059 1120489 1060 1123600 1061 1125721 1062 1127844 1063 1129969 1064 1132096 1065 1134225 1066 1136358 1067 1138489 1068 1140624 1069 1142761 1070 1144900 1071 1147041 1072 1149184 1073 1151329 1074 1153476 1075 1155625 1076 1157976 1077 1159929 1078 1162074 1079 1164241 1080 1166400 1081 1168561 1082 1170724 1083 1172889 1084 1175056 1085 1177225 1086 1179396 1087 1181569 1088 1183744 1089 1185921 1090 1188100 1091 1190281 1092 1192464 1093 1194649 1094 1196836 1095 1199025 1096 1201216 1097 1203409 1098 1205604 1099 1207801 1100 1210000 1101 1212201 1102 1214404 1103 1216609 1104 1218816 1105 1221025 1106 1223396 1107 1225449 1108 1227664 1109 1229881 1110 1232100 1111 1234321 1112 1236544 1113 1238769 1114 1240969 1115 1242625 1116 1245459 1117 1247689 1118 1249924 1119 1252161 1120 1254400 1121 125641 1122 1258884 1123 1261029 1124 1263376 1125 1265625 1126 1267876 1127 1270029 1128 1272384 1129 1274641 1130 1276900 1131 1279161 1132 1281426 1133 1283689 1134 1285956 1135 1288225 1136 1287496 1137 1292769 1138 1294094 1139 1297321 1140 1299640 1141 1301881 1142 1304164 1143 1306449 1144 1308736 1145 1311025 1146 1313316 1147 1315509 1148 1317904 1149 1320201 1150 1322500 1151 1324801 1152 1327104 1153 1329409 1154 1331716 1155 1334025 1156 1336336 1157 1338649 1158 1340964 1159 1343381 1160 1345600
1161 1347921 1162 1350244 1163 1352569 1164 1354396 1165 1357225 1166 1358556 1167 1361689 1168 1364124 1169 1366921 1170 1368900 1171 1371240 1172 1373584 1173 1375929 1174 1378276 1175 1380625 1176 1382979 1177 1383329 1178 1387284 1179 1390041 1180 1392400 1181 1394761 1182 1397124 1183 1399489 1184 1401856 1185 1404225 1186 1406606 1187 1408904 1188 1411124 1189 1413711 1190 1416100 1191 1418481 1192 1420864 1193 1423249 1194 1425639 1195 1428025 1196 1430416 1197 1432809 1198 1435204 1199 1437601 1200 1440000 1201 1442401 1202 1444804 1203 1447209 1204 1449616 1205 1452025 1206 1454436 1207 1456849 1208 1459264 1209 1461681 1210 1464100 1211 1466521 1212 1468944 1213 1471369 1214 1473796 1215 1476225 1216 1478656 1217 1480989 1218 1483924 1219 1485961 1220 1488400 1221 1490841 1222 1493244 1223 1495729 1224 1498246 1225 1500125 1226 1503076 1227 1505529 1228 1507984 1229 1510441 1230 1512900 1231 1515361 1232 1517824 1233 1520289 1234 1522656 1235 1525225 1236 1527696 1237 1530169 1238 1334244 1239 1535121 1240 1537600 1241 154001 1242 1542564 1243 1545049 1244 1547536 1245 1550025 1246 1552516 1247 1555009 1248 1557504 1249 1560001 1250 1562500 1251 1565001 1252 1567504 1253 1570009 1254 1572416 1255 1575025 1256 1577536 1257 1580049 1258 1582564 1259 1585081 1260 1587600 1261 1590121 1262 1592644 1263 1595169 1264 1597706 1265 1600225 1266 1602756 1267 1605289 1268 1607824 1269 1609361 1270 1612900 1271 1615441 1272 1617984 1273 1620529 1274 1622076 1275 1625625 1276 1628176 1277 1530729 1278 1633464 1279 1635841 1280 1638400 1281 1640961 1282 1643524 1283 1645989 1284 1645656 1285 1651225 1286 1653796 1287 1656369 1288 1658944 1289 1661521 1290 1664100 1291 1666681 1292 1669264 1293 1671849 1294 1674336 1295 1677025 1296 1679616 1297 1682209 1298 1683804 1299 1687401 1300 1690000
CHAP. XI. Shewing, how to Hang a Rising line by severall Sweeps, to make it rounder aftward, then at the be∣ginning of the same. IF any be desirous to have a Rising line rounder aft∣ward then it is at the foar part of it, they must proceed thus; first Work by the Sweep that they would have first, and then begin again, and finde the other Sweep, that they would have the roundest; An Example of this will make it more plain, as in the following Figure will appear. Let D E represent the length of a Rising line E I, the height thereof 8 foot, on the after end thereof; first I finde the Sweep that Sweepeth it, by Multiplying of 20 foot the length, which is 240 inches: for if you look in the Tables, under the Title of Feet-Inches, for 20 feet, you will see in the next Columne, toward the left hand, 240, over head is written Inches, signifying, that in 20 feet is 240 inches; and just against it, and in the same line, toward the right hand, under the Title of Squares, you will see written 57600, signifying, that the square of 240 is 57600, these numbers you will finde in the second Page of the Tables, and the last line, the seventh, eighth, and ninth Columns.
This squared number 57600, made by the Multiplication of D E, 240 in∣ches, must be divided by the height of the Rising line assigned E I, 8 foot, or 96 inches, so remaineth in the quotient 600, to which must be added the height of the Rising, as is afore taught, and they make 696, which is the Diameter of the whole Circle: the half thereof is 348 inches, which is 29 foot, as you may see by dividing it by 12; or else, if you turne to the Tables, and seek under the Title of In∣ches for 348, you will see in the same line, toward the left hand, 29 feet, which you will finde in the third Page, and the 28th line, the seventh and eighth Co∣lumn; then I Work by that Sweep to 3/5 of the length of the Rising line, or 12 foot of the same, at the point C it is represented, at which point I seek the Rising C B, I seek in the Table for the Square made of 144, and I finde it in the second Page, 24 line, at the first Columne; and toward the right hand, under the Title of Squares, I finde 20736, which is the Square made of 144: then I seek for the Square made of the Sweep, or side A B, 348 inches, and I finde it in the Tables to be 121104, from this 121104 I Substract the other Square, made of the side D C, 144 being 20736, and there remaineth 100368, whose Root I finde in the Tables, in the third Page, and the 37th line, and the sixth Columne, 100489, which is too much by neare 121; but the other number afore it being much more too little, the number answering hereunto is 316 inches, and near ¼, Substracted from 348, the whole side lea∣veth 31 inches ¼, or two foot 7 inches ¼ for the Ri∣sing, 0 30 57600 (600 9666 89 121104 20736 100368
at the point C: Now to make a rounder Sweep aftward on, or at the other end of the line, as from B to F, which runeth higher up, or Roundeth more, as from I to F: Here will be something more of trou∣ble to finde the Sweep that shall exactly touch the two points assigned, as from B to F▪ then to finde the former Sweep. Now the Demonstration wil shew it to be thus.
Let B and F be the two points to which the Sweep is confined to touch; draw a streight line from B to F, as you see, and so you have a Right lined Triangle, made of the sides B H, the length of the line to be swept by the second Sweep, and the side H F, the height of the same, together with the Subtending side B F; then a streight line drawn from the middle of the side B F, and perpendicular, or square, to the same line B F, and extended, till it touch the side D A, the place where it toucheth shall be the Centre of the same Sweep, as is the line G H, passing through the middle of the side B F, at the point O, which to finde Arithmetically, pro∣ceed thus; finde first the length of the side B F, as be∣fore is taught, of two sides of a Right Angled Tri∣angle given, to finde the third side, which will be found to be 134 ½ inches, the halfe whereof is 67 inches, ¼ from B to O, then if a perpendicular be let fall from O to the line B H, it will cut that Base line also in halves, as at the point P, being 48 inches: then again, finde the side O H, and that will be, in this Example, equall to the side B O, but in other cases it may not so fall out: So then, those two sides being known, as the side O H, 67, ½ inches, and the side P H, 48 inches, and the whole length of the side K H, 240 inches, you may then Work by the Rule of Three, saying, if 48, the side P H, give 67 ½ inch, for the side O H, what will 240 give, for the side K H, as thus; If 48 give 67 ½, what will 240 240 2 67 144 1680 4640 1440 16080 (335   48888 16880 44
If you Multiply the two first numbers together, and divide by the first number, you will beget in the quotient 335, for the length of the whole side G H. I here neglected the ½ inch in this Multiplication, for the ½ inch should have been Multiplied into the 240, by adding to the Summ 16080, 120, the halfe of 240, and it maketh 16200, which divided by 48, maketh 337 ⅓ inches for the whole side G H; So then, these two sides being found, find the side G K, thus, as before is taught, look in the Table of Squares for the Square made of the side 337, and it will be 113569, from which Substract the Square made of 240, the other side, being 57600, there resteth 55969, as you may see, for that number sought for in the Tables, and you find the nearest number to it, to be 56069, and the roote of it to be 237, for the side G K, to which must be added the Rising of the point C B, or K D, which is all one, and is as we found it before to be, 31 ¼ in∣ches, added to 237, maketh 268 ¼ inches, or 22 foot 4 inches; shewing, that at 22 foot 4 in∣ches, from the point D, towords G, will be the point where the Centre of the Rounder Circle ought to stand: Then again, you have the side G K, found as before, to be 237, and the side K B 144, and if you work as is taught before, but remember, that if the longest side be sought for, as is now in the last side sought for, G B being the longest side, you must add the squares made of the other two sides together, and the square of those two Summs shall be the longest side G B, 277 inches, that is 23 feet, 1 inch, which is the length of the second Sweep: and so have you the length of the Sweep. The same order you may observe to round your Sweep as often as you please. 113569 57600 55969 237 31 ¼ 268 ¼ If any have knowledge of the Doctrine of Triangles, it may be found more readier, that I leave to those that know the use thereof.
Note also, that when you seek for any number in the Tables, take heed that you minde the number of Figures you seek for, to agree in number with those that directeth you to seek for them. As for Example, In the other figures abovementioned, 55969, they are in number 5, by their places, as you see; then repairing to the Table, I finde 559504, but telling the Figures, I see that they are in number 6, but should be but 5: therefore this number, represented in the seventh Page; and the 28th line, and third Columne, is not the place I seek for, then I turne toward the beginning of the Table, till I see that the Columnes of Squares contain but 5 figures, and there seek the nearest number agreeing to 55969, and in the second Page, 37th line, last Column, I finde 56069, the nearest agreeing to it, which is the place answering to the other directory figures. Note also, That the Example of finding the Sweep afore∣going, is laid down by the small Scale of the Draught, by which you may trie it for your better directions. And in that Table you may see that any farther then 70 foot, being the end of the seventh Page, I have not menti∣oned the Feet and Inches belonging to the number of Inches, but have left it out because they are of little use any further, because that will reach farr enough for the length of any Rising line of any Ship whatever: If any be desirous to convert any of the following numbers into inches, he may do it by Dividing by 12. Thus I think I have spoken enough to the Ingenuous, concerning the singular use of the Tables, or of this way of Working by Segments o Circles.
CHAP. XII. Concerning Measuring of Ships. 60 20 1200 10 120100 I Shall say something concerning it; the Shipwrights have to themselves a custome of measuring at London, or on the River of Thames thus, they multiply the length of the Keel into the bredth of the Ship, at the broa∣dest place, taken from outside to outside, and the product of that by the half bredth, this second product of the mul∣tiplication they divide by 94 or sometimes 100, and ac∣cording to that division, the quotient thereof; they are paid for so many Tuns; as suppose in the former draught being in length 60 foot and 20 foot broad, 60, being multiplyed by 20, the bredth, produce 1200, that 1200 being again multiplied by 10, the half bredth produce 12000, if you divide by 100, you need do no more than cut off the two last figures toward the right hand, which shall be the answer and rendreth the Ship to be 120 Tuns, but if you divide the sum 12000 by 94, you wil have 127 2/3 of a Tun very neer, but this cannot be the true a∣bility of the ship to carry or lift, because two ships by this rule of equall breadth and length shall be of equall burthen, notwithstanding the fulness or sharpness of those Vessels, which may differ them very much, or the one ship may have more timber than the other in her building, & so shall carry less than the other: But the true way of measure must be by measure of the body and bulk of the ship underwater, for if one ship be longer in the floor than another of the same bredth and length, she shall be more in burthen than the
other; as a Flemish ship shall carry more than a French or Italian Vessell of the same length and bredth; Therefore I say the measure of the ship being known by measuring her, as a piece of timber may be measured of the same form, to the draught of water assigned her, the weight of the same body of the same water that the ship swimmeth in shall be the exact weight of the ship; and all things therein; load∣ing, rigging, victuals included therein: then if the ship be measured to her light mark as she will swim at being lan∣ched, the weight of so much water being taken or substrac∣ted from the weight of the water when she is laden, the residue shall be the weight that must load her, or her abili∣ty of carrying, called her burden, by this means you may know the weight of the ship light, and what she will car∣ry to every foot of water assigned to her, which cannot be done by no general rules in Arithmetick because of their great irregularity, according to the differing minds of Shipwrights; you may if you please first measure the content of the Keel and Post and Stem-rudder, all of it that is without the Plank, and under the water line, and note it by it self, then measure the body of the ship in the Midships, made by the square made of the multiplying of the depth of the water line, and the bredth, then you may find; the content of the want by the circular part of the ship under water, being narrower downward, and substract this from the whole content of the squared body of the depth of the Water-line and bredth of the ship, and this shall be the solid content of that part of the ship, I mean in solid foot measure of 1728 inches to the foot, then proceed to the fore part or the after part of the ship, and to 3 or 4 Timbers more, find the mean bredth at the narrowing aloft at the water-line, and alow at the floor and the mean depth, and measure that piece of
the ship, as I told you of the middle part of the Ship, and so measure the whole Ship by pieces and add them toge∣ther, and so many feet as it maketh, so many feet of water shall be the weight of the said ship; and the reason may be considered thus; there is a ponderosity in warer, but there is a greater in the ayre, onely to the heaviest of things; and there is a ponderosity in water it self, but not so much as in other things more solid as in Iron: Suppose a Gun or an Anchor of Iron, it sinketh in the water, but yet it is not so heavy in the water as in the ayre, by the weight of so much water as shall make a body of the same water equal to the body of the Gun or Anchor in magnitude; which weight substracted from the weight of the Iron bo∣dy weighed in the ayre, and so much must be the weight of it in the water. Again, if a body be lighter in weight, than water of the same bigness, it hath an ability of lifting in the water, and can lift or carry so much as is that difference, as a piece of cork or wood of firr-trees, being lighter than water, it swimmeth on the face of the water, and refuseth to be de∣pressed without more weight added to it. Thus a ship being a concave body, is made capable of lifting according to the greatness or littleness of this con∣cavity, respect being had to the greatness of the Timber put into it, or the nature of it, all which maketh a ship swim deeper or lighter in the water. I have proved by the Thames water, that fresh Water is lighter then salt water, so then salt water being heavier than fresh, causeth that a ship swimmeth deeper in the fresh water than in salt. I shall not need to say any thing more concerning the mesauring, for it will be understood by those that have any
Judgment in the mesuring of triangles, the matter it self be∣ing but a nicity rather than usefll: I only touched it to shew those that are so curious minded, which way they may ac∣complish their desires; I shall forbear to give examples, because it will much increase my Treatise, and augment the Price, which might prove more prejudicial to youngmen than advantagious. CHAP. XIII. Concerning the Masts of Ships. FRom the length and bredth is gained the Mainmasts length, and all the other Masts as wel as yards, is deri∣ved from thence, and there is different proceedings in this case, according to the largeness of the Ships, thus, the main Masts of small Ships to be three times as long as the Ship is in bredth; as a ship of 20 foot broad, by the same rule must have a Mast of 60 foot long. Others for greater Ships, add the bredth to the length, and to that the half bredth, which some they divide by 5, and the quotient is the number of yards, as a ship 114 foot long and 34 foot in bredth, as the bredth added to the length, and the half bredth added together, make 165, that divided by 5, yields 33, and so many yards is the length to be of that Mast, the fore-mast must be a yard shorter at the head, that is to say besides the height of the step, which commonly in most ships the step of the fore-mast standeth higher from the bottom of the ship than the step of the Main-mast; the foremast must be shorter by that difference, and one yard more, or the bigness of the ship considered, 4 foot shorter at the head, or besides the difference below, 114 34 17 165 10 165 (33 55 The Top-masts two thirds of the length of the lower Masts.
The Main-yard to be 2/ and /22 of the Main-mast, as in the Mast aforementioned of 60 foot long, two thirds of 60 is 40, and the 2/12 of 60 is 5, added to 40 make 45, for the length of the main yard. The foreyard to be 6/7 of the Main-Yard, as the Main∣yard being 45 foot, divide 45 by 7, so cometh 6 in the quo∣tient, and a fraction remaining of 3, signifying 3/7, so that the 1/7 of 45 will be 6 and 3/7, you must take 6 times so much, a 6 times 6 makes 36, and if you take 6 times 3/7 make 18/7, that is, two whole numbers, and 4/7 remaining, which ad∣ded to 36, make 38, and 4/7 of a foot for the length of the fore-yard. The Top-sail Yards must be half the length of the lower Yards, the Mizne Yard usualy is made of equal length with the fore-yard, the Crosjack yard, of equal length with the Main top-sail yard, and the mizen Top-sail yard to be half the length of the Crosjack yard. The mizen Mast to be of the length of the Main-top mast from the upper Decks, and so much longer as is the height of the ship between Deck, the Boltspreete to be of length equal to the fore-mast from the upper Deck of the Fore-castle upwards. For the bigness of these Masts, to a yard in length, ¾ of an inch, or else ¼ of an inch to the foot, and so of yards like∣wise, only the Boltspreet somthing bigger, would be the better if he be made as big as the fore-mast. The Spritsail yard in length / of the Boltspreete, the Spritsail to psail yard as of the rest, to be 1/2 the spritsail yard, the mizen yard in bigness, but / inch to a yard: And di∣recting my discourse to Young-men that desire instructi∣ons, I will avoid troubling of them as neer as I can with Arithmetick, therefore I will shew them the sweeping out of Mast and Yards, for the filling up their Quarters accor∣ding
to circles. Thus, make a half circle equal▪ in diamiter to the bigness of the Mast, in the partners, or if it be a Topmast, equal to his bigness in the Cap; as suppose for to make a Mast 60 foot in length, then by the former directions ¼ of an inch for his bigness to a foot, rendreth him to be 15 inches thorow, but for a Main-mast it is alwaies better that they be made bigger, to everie 6 inches ad ½ of an inch more, so then this Mast will be 16 ¼ inches, I make a sweep of 16 ¼ inches, as from A to B, supposing the feet of the small scale, to be inches, draw, the Sweep or Arch A C B, 15 inches from A to B, than at the Centre draw a line perpendicular to A B, as from D to C, divide the perpendicular into four equal parts, with the compasses, & set off 3 of them, on the perpen∣dicular from D to E, and through that point draw a line pa∣rallel to A B, as is the line f g, which shall be the bignesse of the Mast at the Hounds, then middle the space between D & E as at h, and draw the line i k, which shall be the big∣ness of the Mast at the middle, then two other lines drawn again through the middle between D h & another between h E, shall be the bigness of the Mast in the quarters, so then take off from the sweep, the bigness at each place from the midle line D C, to the arch, & in like māner middle the mast
from the Partners to the Hounds, and quarter it, and strike a middle line from end to end, and at each place set off the thickness given you by your Sweep, for the length of the Heads of the Masts, you may allow to every foot 1 inch ¼ of an inch from the head to the uper part of the Crostrees, the length of the Trestle trees to be 1/3 of the Ships breadth, and in depth halfe the thickness of the Head, at the Hounds, and for the thickness, halfe the thickness of the Head, at the very end of the Head of the Mast, for yards you may draw the Sweep of them to their bigness at the Slings, and let the ends of them be but one third of the bigness in the Slings, accordingly draw your sweep, and fill him out in the quarters, according to the Circle, which I shall leave now to your practice, hoping, what I have spoken shall be well taken of the ignorant, who desire instructions. CHAP. XIV. Concerning Rowing of Ships, when they are becalm'd. I Have here invented a meanes of Rowing of a Ship, by the heaving at the Capstane, where will be many benefits; First, of a greater purchase of strength, for it is evident, that 10 Men at a Capstane shall heave a Ship a Head, when 30 Men shall not Haall her a Head by hand, nay 50; neither shall they be so soon tired, for that Owers are a great weariness to the Armes, beside a double motion of the body, as when the stroak is fetched, to way down the Ower, that the blade may be elivated out of the Water, where it must be kept so, untill another
stroak be fetched, and then great strength put to the Ower by the Armes, or else heavy bodies, will not be moved: beside, if you have never so many Owers as you can put, they all fetch their stroak at once, but when Rowed by hand, one is likely to fetch a stroak before another, so that much of the strength is lost by a disagreement in the la∣bour: But to proceed to the description of this inven∣tion. Let the two lines, C D, and C D, represent the sides of the Ship, 16 foot broad, as is the line C C, 16 foot long, by the Scale of the Draught; and let the two long squares, d d, and d d, represent the two Bitt-pins, with the Cross-piece of, let the Black, between the two Bit-pins, represent a Roule, or Windless, with a Surdge in the mid∣dle, as is the Surdge of a Crab, or Capstane; in the two ends of this Roule let there be placed two Winches, as you may see represented by Cranks, a and a; let there be made a hollow place in the Head of the Bit-pins for these two Winches to rest in, that they may turne round in them, and bide in them: then let there be two pieces of Timber, equall in length, to the space of the Ship you would have filled with Oares, represented by the two black lists, marked b b, and b b; then let there be fitted two small pieces, made of good Ashe, or some good strong Wood, of equall length as is the two black Lists, n L, m L, fastned into the pieces of the frame, as at the points L and L, by a Boult, but so, that they may play on that Boult, and the other ends must be with a Hoale made in the ends, put over the handles of the Cranks, at n and m, then in the two long pieces for the frame let the Oares be fixed, as at the points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, of each side of the Ship representing 7 Oares of a side, they may be fastned in the Frame, by a Mortis made therein, and a Tenent on the Oar, made to go slack, in that the Oar may play, and have liber∣ty
to fetch a Stroak, in the middle whereof must be placed a Iron bolt, to fasten him, and keep the Oar from launch∣ing in and out, and on the Roughtre, or side of the Ship▪ as in C D and C D, must be placed Thoule pins to each Oare, as in Boats that Row; then must you have a Halser splised together, in manner of a Viall, that must take two or three turnes about the Roule, in the Surdge, as you may imagine, at the middle of the Black Roule, or notch therein, and pass from thence to the Capstane, with two or three turnes there also; then this Viall also, reeved thorough some other Blocks, as in manner of Snach block, and these blocks placed between the Capstane and the Roule, you may thereby increase that purchase so, as that it may heave very easie, and with great strength, so as to be able to Row a Ship a Head in a calme, or in little winde, two, threee or four leagues, a watch or more, according as the Ingine shall be better or worse fitted; for if you marke in the Figure of the Work, and suppose the Viall Reeved, and by heaving of the Capstane, shall turne the Roule, as the Crankes goeth round, it shall carrie with it about, and then the small pieces shall cause the frame to pass forward to and again, to fetch a stroake with the Oares. FINIS.
