C2321 R35847 15565227 103813
His Maiesties Gracious ANSVVER, To the Proposition of both Houses of Parliament for Ireland, sent the 24. of February, 1641. With Newes from NOTTINGHAM, BEING The Copie of a Letter sent from a man of good quallity there re∣siding, to a Merchant of London, Febru∣ary, 18. 1641. WHEREUNTO Is added the Copie of a Letter sent from the Lord Digbie to Colonell Lunsford, and by mistake of the bearer, delivered to one Mr. Langford in Covent Garden, And so by him discovered London, Printed for J. T. 1641.
A Copie of a Letter sent from a Gentleman of good worth in Nottingham, to a Merchant of worth and Quality li∣ving in London. Worthy Sir, HAving the opportunity of this bearer a Gentleman my neare Neighbour, I could not let him passe without a sa∣lute in a line or twaine, hoping of your health and welfare with the rest of your Family; as thanks be to God, mine are herein, at this present. For Newes I doe earnestly desire you to impart such of probability, as shall come to your hearing, besee∣ching the Almighty God, to guide and direct all pro∣ceedings in that Honourable and High Court of Par∣liament, to his glory, and the content and happinesse of all his Majesties Kingdomes. I desire much to heare how the Papist Rebels proceed in Ireland, for we have too many ill-affected Papists amongst us here in our Countrey. And for our Castle of Nottingham, it was of late in the custody of one Mr. Traford a Papist, whereby great jealousies were in most mens minds raised, for
for the Castle is a place of a most impregnable strength, and Scituated upon a Rocke, with infinite store of Vaults and hollow Caves underground, able to receive infinite store of men, and horses, with all o∣ther furnitures of Ammunition for Warre, which the Governours of the Towne taking into their considera∣tion, caused a very strong guard and watch to be kept about it night and day, in which posture it stands yet, Messengers bein sent up to the Honourable House of Parliament, there is a Vault in the Castle called Mortimers Hole, which is wide and very spacious, and a great disnce from thence. Another Cave cal∣led Mortime watering-place, in all which places it is supposed above two thousand men with Horses and Furniture may be kept and concealed. The suspition of all which was much more increa∣sed by a Rumour of great quantities of meate killed by Mr. Trafords appointment against Christmas, with a great many of Beefes, Muttons, and Hogs, he him∣selfe being a neere Gentleman, and keeping ordinarily but a small Retinue of Servants about him, since the Officers of the Towne have taken that strict Course of watching and warding about the Castle, he hath removed his dwelling into a Lodge of a Parke neere adjoyning, where he keepes very privately, and some suppose he is gone away from thence secretly, we are so distracted at these occasions here about us, that no man almost (for feare of treacheries, and Plots from the Papists) dares goe to the Church without his Pistoll, and sword by his side, I beseech God that Peace and quietnesse may be setled amongst us.
Sr. I desire to heare from you what is newes, and of the Ite ssage concerning our Country-man Sir Iohn iron, who we heard was chosen Lievtenant of the Tower, and also what newes concerning the Bishops, here is expectation dayly of new furnishing, and recti∣fying all the strong Holds of our Countrie. Sir. I am sorry J have beene so tedious in my re∣lation, which J feare hath a little troubled your patience, but I trust you ake all in good part, and so I take my leave, nd rest. Your ever assured friend till death, J. T. Nottingham this 14. day of February, 1641.
The true Copie of a Letter sent from the Lord George Digbie to Col. Lunsford. Most worthy and noble Colonell. YOur fidelity & constancy have bound me unto you, and although our de∣signe tooke no btter effect, I shall with the lesse value, or prize your Reall disposition. For I am none of those men, who by the successe in their proceedings, and who thinke none deserving, but those whose actions are crowned with happy and prosperous event, and so measure the event, and not the cuse. Let us not be discouraged because our Ad∣versaries have given check unto our proceedings, but let us play our game valiantly and discreetly, and I am confidnt, that if we can but keepe them from giving of us check mate, the game will be ours. Our power is daily encreased and strengthened in Ireland, and I am certaine, that had we as much opportunity as strength, we might obtaine our desires here in England, but we must waite and expect for our best advantage, and not be like your too hasty Mothers, who whilest they doe too much hasten the birth of their issue, they bring forth abortives. Patience will mature and produce what rashnesse and too much hast would otherwise de∣stroy
and ruinate. We have yet done nothing that we need feare, onely that our Adversaries as yet are the stronger, if to be Loyall and faithfull to his Majesty be culpable, we must plead guilty, who yet have done nothing, but what was for the secuity of his Crowne and Priviledge, if it be demaded why I have absented my selfe, I shall not be wanting of sufficient reason for their satisfaction. Let me vnderstand from your owne hand the condition of the times, as soon as I arrive you shall have intelligence of it, I could wish you with me, but I hope and am almost confident, that you are se∣cure, where you now abide, for they have not any pow∣er for what hath yet been enterprized any way to pu∣nish, or question, nothing being acted either against the King or Common-wealth. Bee carefull in your carriage and discourse, for you have many which daily lye in waite to entrap you; But I shall not need to counsell you any further, but for the present, take my leave, and rest. Your faithfull friend. George Digbie. From the Downes aboard the 10. Whelpe, Febru∣ary, 20. 1641.
HIS MAJESTIES GRACIOUS Answer, To the Proposition of both Houses of Parlia∣ment for Ireland, sent the 24. of February, 1641. HIs Majesty being Glad to receive any proposition that may repaire the Calamity of his distressed King∣dome of Jreland especially when it may bee with∣out burthen or Imposition, nd for the ease of his good Subjects of this Kingdome, hath graciously considered the Overture made by both Houses of Parliament to that purpose, and returnes this Answere. That as he hath offered and is still ready to venture his own Royall person for the recovery of that Kingdome, if this Par∣liament shall advse him therevnto, so he will not deny to con∣tribute any other assistance he can to that Service, by parting with any profit or advantage of his owne there, And therefore (relying upon the wisedome of this Parliament) doth con∣sent to every proposition now made to him, without taking time to exmine whether this course may not retard the redu∣cing of tht Kingdome, by exasperating the Rebells, and ren∣dring them desperate of being received into Grace, if they shall returne to their obedence. And his Majesty will be ready to give his Royall assent to all such Bills as shall be tendred vnto him by his Parliament for the confirmation of every particular of this proposition. FINIS.
