C3404 15565519 103831
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION For Recalling and Prohibiting Sea-men from the Services of Forreign Princes and States. CHARLES R. WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty hath been advertised, That great numbers of Mariners, and other Sea-faring men, His Majesties natural born Subjects, have betaken themselves to the Services of Forreign Princes and States, to the great Dis-service of His Majesty and their Na∣tive Countreys; and whereby His said Majestie and His Realms are unfur∣nished of men of their sort and calling, if there shall be cause to use them: Therefore, for redress thereof at present, and preventing the like for the fu∣ture, The Kings most Excellent Majesty by this His Royal Proclamation, with the Advice of the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Coun∣cil, doth Will and streightly Charge and Command, all and singular Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Sea-men, Shipwrights, and other Sea-faring men whatsoever and wheresover, be∣ing His Majesties natural born Subjects, who are in the Service of any Forreign Prince or State, or do serve in any Forreign Ships or Vessels, That forthwith they do withdraw themselves, and depart from such Forreign Services, and return home to their Native Countreys and lawful Vo∣cations. And further His Majesty doth hereby prohibit and forbid all and singular Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Sea-men, Shipwrights, and other Sea-faring men whatsoever, being His Majesties natural born Subjects, from Entering themselves. And doth hereby streightly Charge and Command them, and every of them, from henceforth to forbear to enter themselves into pay, or otherwise betake themselves to the Service of any Forreign Princes or States, or to serve in any Forreign Vessel or Ship, without Licence had and obtained in that behalf. To all which His Majesty doth, and will expect due obedience and conformity: And doth hereby Publish and De∣clare, That the Offenders to the contrary, shall not only incur His Majesties just displeasure, but be proceeded against for their contempt according to the utmost severities of Law. And fur∣ther, His Majesty doth hereby Authorize and Command all and every the Captains, Masters, and other Officers, serving and imployed in any of His Majesties Ships or Vessels at Sea, to stop and make stay of all and every such Person and Persons as shall endeavour to Transport or Enter themselves into the Service of any Forreign Prince or State, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this His Majesties Royal Proclamation; And also to Seize upon, take, and bring away, all such Mariners, Sea-men, and other Persons aforesaid, as shall be found to be Imployed or Serving in any Ships or Vessels, of, or belonging to any Forreign Prince or State, or to any Merchant, or other Person or Persons, other than to His Majesty or His Subjects. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 30th day of May, 1664. in the Sixteenth year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1664.
