C3312 08100950 40847
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION For a THANKSGIVING for the late VICTORY BY His Majesties Naval Forces. CHARLES R. WHereas it hath pleased Almighty God in his late Providence towards Vs and Our People, to manifest at once the glory both of his Power and Mercy, in giving Vs a happy Victory over Our Adversaries at Sea, filling the hearts of Vs and Our People as full of joy and thankfulness, as becomes so transcen∣dent a Mercy; We cannot upon the due consideration hereof, but with all humility admire and adore the mercy and goodness of God in this his signal manifestation thereof; and We look upon it as an invitation from Heaven to Vs and all Our People unto most entire thankfulness for the same. And to the end some Solemn time may be set apart for the public performance of this Duty; and that We and all Our Subjects in England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, may pay Our just tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, We do hereby Publish and Declare, and also strictly Charge and Command, That Tuesday the Twentieth day of this instant June be set apart and observed as a day of Publick Thanksgiving in the Cities of London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and other places adjacent. And that Tuesday the Fourth of July next, the like be kept and duely observed through the rest of this whole Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales. And for the more orderly performance thereof, We by the advice of Our Reverend Bishops, have directed to be Composed, Printed and Published, the Forms of such Prayers and publick Thanksgivings, as We have thought fit to be used in all Churches and places at these publick Meetings; and have given charge to Our Bishops to disperse the same throughout the whole Kingdom. And We do also direct and appoint, That this Our Proclamation be publickly read in all Churches and Chappels, on some Lords-day precedent to the said days of Thanksgi∣ving hereby appointed, to the end that notice may be taken thereof, and due thanks and praise may upon the said days be offered up unto Almighty God; And that humble supplications be poured out before him for his continual assistance, and improvement of this and all his mercies to the honour of his great Name, and the peace and benefit of Vs and Our People; Willing and strictly Commanding all persons within Our said Realm and Dominions, with all sobriety, re∣verence, and thankfulness to observe this day, as becomes so solemn an occasion. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourteenth day of June, 1665. in the Seventeenth year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty 1665.
