C3470 18241463 107253
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehension of John Lockier, Timothy Butler, Thomas Blood, commonly called Captain Blood, John Mason, and others. CHARLES R. WHereas We have been informed, That the said John Lockier, Timothy But∣ler, and Captain Blood, with several other persons did lately in a most ri∣otous and Rebellious manner, at Darrington near Went-Bridge in the County of York, violently set upon and assault the Guard intrusted with the care of Conducting one John Mason, a Prisoner for Treason, from Our Tower of London to Our City of York, in order to his Tryal there; and they having killed and desperately wounded several of the said Guard, and others, did Rescue and carry away the said Mason, and do lurk in secret places, and not submit themselves to Iustice; We therefore have thought fit (with the advice of Our Privy Council) to publish this Our Royal Proclamation, And do hereby straitly Charge and Command all and singular Lords Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Iustices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffs, and other Our Officers, Mini∣sters, and Subjects whatsoever, to be diligent, and use their best endeavours to Search for and Apprehend the said Lockier, Butler, Blood, and Mason, and all others who were any way instrumental in the said Rescue or Escape, in all places whatsoever; and up∣on the Apprehension of all or any the said persons, to cause them to be safely conveyed to the Goal of the City or County where they shall be so Apprehended, and forth∣with to give notice thereof to one of Our Principal Secretaries of State; that such further course may be taken, as We with the advice of Our Council shall direct. And We do hereby further Declare, That One hundred pounds Sterling shall be given and paid by Vs to any person or persons, as a recompence for their good Service, who shall Apprehend and bring in the said Lockier, Butler, Blood, and Mason, or any of them, or any other who were their accomplices in the said Rescue. And We do further De∣clare and Publish, That if any person or persons willingly or knowingly, shall directly or indirectly conceal or harbour the said Offenders, or any of them, or shall not upon all lawful and just occasions, use his or their best endeavours for their discovery and appre∣hension, aswell by giving due advertisement thereof to Our Officers, as by all other good means, We will (as there is just cause) proceed against them that shall so neg∣lect this Our Command, with all severity. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighth day of August 1667. In the Nineteenth year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.
